 Hormonal gain control of a medial preoptic area social reward 
circuit
Jenna A. McHenry1, James M. Otis1, Mark A. Rossi1, J. Elliott Robinson2, Oksana Kosyk1, 
Noah W. Miller1, Zoe A. McElligott1,3, Evgeny A. Budygin1,4,5, David R. Rubinow1, and 
Garret D. Stuber1,2,3,6,7,#
1Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
2Neuroscience Curriculum, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
3Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
4Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC
5Institute of Translational Biomedicine St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia
6Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC
7Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
Abstract
Neural networks that control reproduction must integrate social and hormonal signals, tune 
motivation, and invigorate social interactions. However, the neurocircuit mechanisms for these 
processes remain unresolved. The medial preoptic area (mPOA), an essential node for social 
behaviors and is comprised of molecularly-diverse neurons with widespread projections. Here, we 
identify a steroid-responsive subset of neurotensin (Nts) expressing mPOA neurons that interface 
with the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to form a socially-engaged reward circuit. Using in vivo 2-
photon imaging in female mice, we show that mPOANts neurons preferentially encode attractive 
male cues compared to non-social appetitive stimuli. Ovarian hormone signals regulate both the 
physiological and cue encoding properties of these cells. Furthermore, optogenetic stimulation of 
mPOANts-VTA circuitry promotes rewarding phenotypes, social approach, and striatal dopamine 
release. Collectively, these data demonstrate that steroid-sensitive mPOA neurons encode 
ethologically-relevant stimuli and co-opt midbrain reward circuits to promote prosocial behavior 
critical for species survival.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
#Address correspondence to: Garret D. Stuber, Ph.D., Associate Professor, Departments of Psychiatry & Cell Biology and 
Physiology, Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Tel: +1 (919) 843-7140, Fax: +1 (919) 966-1050, 
gstuber@med.unc.edu. 
Author Contributions
JAM and GDS designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. JMO and JER performed physiology 
recordings. EAB performed FSCV recordings. MAR wrote codes for in vivo imaging data analysis. OK and ZAM performed in situ 
hybridization. NWM assisted with tissue processing. JAM performed all surgeries, behavioral assays, 2-photon and confocal imaging 
experiments. DRR and GDS supervised the project.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 March ; 20(3): 449–458. doi:10.1038/nn.4487.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Prosocial behaviors, such as mating and parenting, are innately rewarding across mammals 
and require complex neural computations to decipher social signals and promote actions that 
facilitate offspring and species survival1–3. Social communication strategies are often 
species-specific and social cues (e.g., from a potential mate or the infant) are transmitted 
through multiple sensory modalities to facilitate social interactions3,4. Further, internal 
circulating gonadal steroids, including estradiol in females, change as a function of 
reproductive status and alter the processing of social cues to bias animals towards social 
incentives and facilitate reproductive behaviors4–7. However, the neural mechanisms by 
which social and hormonal signals recruit neurocircuits to adjust motivational states for 
reproductive behaviors over competing needs remain poorly understood.
The medial preoptic area (mPOA) is a functionally and chemically conserved node of the 
social behavior network8 that is essential for reproductive behavior in all vertebrate species 
studied3,4,9. Further, the mPOA contains many steroid receptor containing neurons, receives 
social information from multiple sensory modalities, and has widespread projections 
throughout the brain, including the ventral tegmental area (VTA)3,4,6,7. While mPOA-VTA 
projections are necessary for the expression of reproductive behaviors, it is unknown 
whether mPOA circuits that encode social and hormonal signals convey positive valence and 
orchestrate the appetitive and reinforcing aspects of these behaviors. Since VTA dopamine 
neurons provide incentive salience signals to direct motivation for a variety of needs 
essential for survival10,11, we predict that neurons in these two brain regions interface to 
form a socially-engaged reward circuit.
Here, we targeted a molecularly-defined VTA-projecting population of mPOA neurons that 
express the gene neurotensin (Nts) and examined their endogenous cue-encoding dynamics 
and behavioral circuit properties under social and hormonal contexts. Previous studies have 
been unable to chronically record in vivo neural activity from molecularly-defined mPOA 
neurons. To circumvent these challenges, we implemented in vivo deep-brain calcium (Ca2+) 
imaging using 2-photon microscopy in head-fixed, awake female mice and reliably detect 
Ca2+ signals from the same neurons over many days with single-neuron, cell-type precision. 
Using this approach, we compare the activity dynamics of individual mPOANts neurons in 
response to different types of attractive odor cues and track social odor responses across 
hormonal states. We also perform ex vivo slice electrophysiology and Ca2+ imaging to 
identify physiological relationships between reproductive steroids and mPOANts cell 
excitability. Lastly, we utilize in vivo behavioral optogenetics to characterize mPOA-VTANts 
circuitry under social, hormonal, and reward-seeking contexts and in conjunction with fast-
scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) to detect mPOA-VTANts-evoked dopamine release in the 
ventral striatum.
Results
Identification of a molecularly-defined population of steroid-responsive mPOA-VTA 
neurons
Since diverse cell types have been reported in VTA-projecting mPOA neurons12,13 and 
molecular subsets of mPOA populations putatively regulate different types or aspects of 
McHenry et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 social behaviors14, we first sought to identify a molecularly-defined population of steroid-
responsive mPOA-VTA projecting neurons. The gene encoding for the peptide Nts is 
prominently expressed in the mPOA4 and in other hypothalamic regions has been shown to 
promote reward-seeking through VTA projections15. Here, injections of retrogradely 
transported beads into the VTA of female mice resulted in substantial labeling of mPOA 
neurons, with 96% of Nts-labeled cells co-expressed with VTA beads (Fig.1a,b). This 
subpopulation comprised 35% of al mPOA-VTA projecting neurons (Fig.1a,b). Further, 21% 
of Nts mPOA neurons co-expressed mRNA for the estrogen receptor α/1 (ESR1) and 
galanin (Gal) (Fig.1c–g), which the latter cell population was recently shown to govern 
parental behaviors in mice14. Another 63% contained mRNA for ESR1 but not Gal, and only 
3% expressed Gal but not ESR1 (Fig.1c–g). While the majority of Nts cells expressed ESR1 
(84%) (Fig.1c–g and S1c,d), this appeared to be a subpopulation of all mPOA ESR1 cells.
Previous studies in female rodents indicate that Nts mPOA expression peaks in proestrus and 
is enhanced by estradiol16–18. We extended these findings to show that 95% of Nts mPOA 
cells co-expressed the gene for vesicular GABA transporter (Vgat), and 18% of these also 
had low to moderate levels of vesicular glutamate transporter (Vglut2), and only 5% 
expressed Vglut2 alone (Fig.S2a–h). These proportions did not vary as a function of the 
hormonal state, however administration of estradiol in ovariectomized females increased 
both mPOA Nts and Vgat mRNA expression intensity compared with vehicle-treated 
controls (Fig. S2d–h). Collectively, these data indicate that Nts-containing mPOA neurons 
comprise a subpopulation of putative GABAergic neurons that project to the VTA, largely 
express ESR1 steroid receptors, and are responsive to gonadal steroid changes.
mPOA-VTANts neurons dynamically encode social odor cues
Next, we monitored the endogenous activity dynamics of mPOANts neurons in response to 
innately attractive social odor cues using in vivo 2-photon Ca2+ imaging with single-neuron 
and cell-type precision, in awake female mice. Here, a Cre-inducible virus coding for the 
fluorescent Ca2+ indicator, GCaMP6s19, was injected into the mPOA (mPOANts::GCaMP6s) 
of Nts-IRES-Cre mice20, which co-expressed Cre in Nts-containing mPOA neurons (Fig. 
S3a–e). Dual Ca2+ imaging and whole-cell patch clamp recordings first established that 
increasing current injections produced increasing amounts of Ca2+ mediated fluorescence 
changes in mPOANts::GCaMP6s neurons (Fig. S4a–c), indicating that GCaMP6s fluorescence 
correlated with evoked action potentials and can thus serve as a proxy for neural activity. To 
visualize Ca2+ activity in vivo, we gained optical access to this deep brain region through a 
Gradient Refractive Index (GRIN) lens implanted directly above mPOANts::GCaMP6s neurons 
and applied a head-ring for subsequent 2-photon imaging (Fig.S4d–f and Fig.2a). Following 
recovery and time to permit for GCaMP6 expression, mPOANts::GCaMP6s neurons from 
female mice in proestrus were imaged during multiple time-locked, automated trials where 
vaporized social odors were presented (Fig.2a). Intact male urine served as an attractive 
social cue with reproductive relevance and ovariectomized female urine served as a 
conspecific urine control; both odor types were innately attractive to female mice (Fig.S5a–
g). Ca2+ dynamics were reliably detected in individual mPOANts::GCaMP6s cells with single-
neuron precision (Fig.2b,c, Fig.S4d–f, and Video 1) and we identified a subset of individual 
mPOANts neurons that were preferentially excited by male odor (Fig.2b–d and Video 2). 
McHenry et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Across all animals tested, a greater proportion of mPOANts::GCaMP6s cells were excited by 
male odor (37%) compared with female odor (8%) (Fig.2d). Moreover, a direct odor-type 
comparison of cells that were significantly excited by male odor revealed that male-excited 
cells were relatively less responsive to female odor (Fig.2e). These data illustrate that a large 
portion of mPOANts neurons dynamically encode social odor cues, with subsets 
preferentially responding to reproductively-relevant male signals.
mPOANts neurons encode reproductive male cues in a steroid-gated manner
Gonadal steroids, including estradiol, can enhance the processing of reproductive social 
signals, promote mate attraction5,21, and differentially regulate mPOA neuronal activity in 
vivo22,23 (which could reflect differences in cell types or steroid receptor expression). We 
next evaluated whether ovarian steroids influence social cue-encoding dynamics, by tracking 
odor-evoked Ca2+ activity from the same mPOANts::GCaMP6s neurons before and after 
steroid-priming in ovariectomized females, over days (Fig.3a). In a separate cohort of 
ovariectomized females, steroid priming of estradiol approximately 5 hours before testing 
enhanced behavioral attraction to male urine and this behavioral response was sustained 
following a second injection of progesterone (a steroid regimen known to induce sexual 
receptivity), compared with vehicle treatment (Fig.S6a–e and Fig. 3a,b). Using this priming 
schedule for imaging, we detected Ca2+ dynamics from the same neurons across repeated 
imaging sessions separated by days and identified individual cells that encoded male odor 
only after steroid replacement (Fig.3a). The amplitude and proportion of cells excited by 
male odor increased following estradiol replacement and was sustained following 
progesterone administration, compared with vehicle treatment (Fig.3e–f and S6f,g). In 
contrast, female odor presentation excited a smaller proportion of cells following either 
treatment (Fig.3f and S6h). Together, this indicates that mPOANts neurons adjust their male 
odor encoding properties in response to changes in ovarian steroids and that these cells 
integrate changes in external and internal context that shift activity patterns.
mPOANts encoding comparison of social and nonsocial attractive odor cues
While mPOANts neurons encoded attractive social cues, it remained unclear whether this 
was restricted to social signals or generalized to nonsocial forms of appetitive odors. Peanut 
oil is a robustly attractive, nonsocial, food-related odor24 and we confirmed that female mice 
are behaviorally attracted to this stimulus following prior exposure in the home cage 
(Fig.S5a–g). Then, we imaged odor-evoked mPOANts::GCaMP6s Ca2+ responses in primed 
females during multiple distinct odor trials of social and nonsocial attractive odors. 
Specifically, we compared neuronal responses to urine odor from intact males, urine odor 
from intact females, and peanut oil odor (after home cage exposure) (Fig.4a,b). Individual 
neurons were excited by male urine and/or female urine, but these cells were largely 
unresponsive to or inhibited by peanut oil odor presentation (Fig.4a–c). Further, a greater 
proportion of neurons were excited by male urine odor (28%) compared to intact female 
urine odor (8%) or peanut oil odor (10%) (Fig.4d). These single-neuron comparisons 
demonstrate that distinct forms of attractive stimuli can recruit largely non-overlapping 
mPOANts neuron ensembles, and that social versus nonsocial appetitive cue encoding is 
dissociable at the individual neuron level.
McHenry et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Steroids enhance neuronal excitability in mPOANts neurons
Ovarian steroids not only altered the odor-encoding dynamics (Fig. 3), but also the basal and 
physiological properties of mPOANts neurons. Imaging spontaneous Ca2+ activity dynamics 
in intact cycling females across two days of the estrous cycle revealed that individual 
mPOANts neurons adjusted their spontaneous activity dynamics across hormonal states, 
specifically, showing enhanced Ca2+ activity on the afternoon of proestrus (when estradiol 
levels peak25) compared to the afternoon of estrus (Fig.S6i–l) and following estradiol-
priming in ovariectomized females compared with vehicle (Fig.5a–d). To explore potential 
underlying physiological mechanisms, we performed ex vivo patch-clamp and fluorescent 
recordings from mPOANts neurons. We found that estradiol-priming increased the number of 
evoked action potentials (Fig.5e–f) and resulted in larger Ca2+ signals (Fig.S4a–c), 
compared with controls. mPOANts neurons also showed reduced action potential half-width 
and an increase in A-type K+ channel conductance following estradiol replacement (Fig.5g–
h). This suggests that estradiol controls mPOANts excitability, at least in part by increasing 
the function of delayed rectifier K+ channels, which rapidly repolarize the neurons to allow 
high frequency action potential generation. Collectively, these data illustrate how estradiol 
enhances the intrinsic excitability of mPOANts neurons that might permit for enhanced 
sensitivity to appetitive cues.
Stimulation of mPOANts-VTA neurons promotes reward and ventral striatal dopamine 
release in a steroid-responsive manner
Appetitive cues excited mPOANts neurons and we next tested whether optogenetic activation 
of these neurons would convey positive valance signals and reinforce behavioral actions. We 
targeted mPOANts neurons with the light-gated cation channel, channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2-
eYFP), and implanted optical fibers above the mPOA to permit for optogenetic stimulation 
(Fig. 6a–c). Intact female mice were tested for reward-related phenotypes across all four 
stages of the estrous cycle, as assessed by vaginal lavage26 (Fig. S7a). We observed that 
females readily nose poked to receive photostimulation of mPOANts::ChR2 neurons at 
multiple stimulation frequencies, and the number of nose pokes varied across the estrous 
cycle with the greatest number displayed in proestrus (Fig. 6d,e, Fig. S7b,c and Video 3). 
Photostimulation also produced a real-time place preference in mPOANts::ChR2 females 
across all four stages of the estrous cycle, but with cyclical changes in the magnitude of 
preference that were also higher in proestrus (Fig. 6f–h and Video 4). To test for potential 
sex differences in the rewarding effects of mPOANts stimulation, a cohort of males were 
tested under the same parameters. In contrast to females, photostimulation produced a more 
consistent real-time place preference across four consecutive days in mPOANts::ChR2 males, 
compared with mPOANts::eYFP controls (Fig. 6i,j). In addition, photostimulation enhanced 
movement velocity in both male and females (Fig.S7d,e). We confirmed that this approach 
resulted in the activation of mPOANts neurons, as photostimulation induced Fos expression 
in mPOANts::ChR2 mice but not mPOANts::eYFP controls (Fig.S8a–c). Collectively, these data 
demonstrate that stimulation of mPOANts neurons produces reinforcement in both sexes.
Although mPOANts neurons promoted reward-related phenotypes that varied in magnitude 
across the estrous cycle, it remained unclear whether steroids directly modulated these 
effects, and how these cells orchestrate the output of motivated behavior through recruitment 
McHenry et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of downstream circuit targets. mPOANts::ChR2 assisted anterograde neuroanatomical tracing 
revealed dense fiber expression in the VTA from these cells (Fig. 7a), consistent with the 
identification of mPOANts cells as VTA-projecting neurons (Fig.1a,b). We then targeted 
optogenetic stimulation to either the mPOANts cell bodies or mPOANts-VTA fibers before 
and after steroid-priming (estradiol and estradiol-progesterone) in ovariectomized female 
mice (Fig. 7a). Photostimulation of mPOANts cell bodies or mPOANts-VTA fibers induced a 
modest real-time place preference in mice that was substantially amplified following 
estradiol replacement, but not after repeated stimulation under vehicle conditions (Fig.7c 
and S9a). Interestingly, this steroid-priming regimen of estradiol followed by progesterone, 
known to induce sexual receptivity27, resulted in a sustained increase in the reward effects of 
mPOANts::ChR2 stimulation for many consecutive weeks (Fig.S9a).
To determine whether activation of the mPOANts-VTA pathway evoked mesolimbic 
dopamine release, we employed in vivo fast-scan cyclic voltammetry in anesthetized females 
and recorded dopamine release in the NAc (Fig. 7c). Photostimulation of mPOANts-VTA 
fibers evoked dopamine release in the NAc that was greater in estradiol-primed females 
compared with controls (Fig. 7c–e). Together, these data indicate that mPOANts neurons 
promote rewarding phenotypes through interactions with mesolimbic dopaminergic circuits 
in the VTA. Further, these behavioral outputs as well as their physiological dopamine 
correlates were magnified in steroid-primed females; functionally identifying a molecularly-
defined steroid-responsive reward pathway.
Optogenetic modulation of mPOANts neurons regulates social attraction
We next examined whether mPOANts neurons and their projections to the VTA are involved 
in social approach behavior toward a reproductive social stimulus. We measured attraction 
and preference for an intact male versus ovariectomized female stimulus in a social 
investigation assay, during alternating time epochs of photostimulation (see methods and 
Fig.8a). Time epochs were selected over proximity or zone related photostimulation 
parameters, since activation of this circuit reinforces behavior and could condition responses 
that might not be socially driven. Testing was conducted in the same females and males used 
as above (Fig.S9a–d). Photostimulation of mPOANts::ChR2 neurons or the mPOA-
VTANts::ChR2 pathway enhanced male preference and increased the amount of time spent in 
the male social interaction zone, only in ChR2-expressing females previously treated with 
steroids (Fig.8b–e and Video 5). In males, photostimulation of mPOANts::ChR2 enhanced 
female preference and increased the amount of time spent in the female social interaction 
zone (Fig.S9b–d). Together, these data suggest that mPOANts neurons direct behavior toward 
opposite-sex conspecifics in both sexes to drive social attraction toward a potential mate.
Since steroids act to promote mate attraction in females21,28, we next tested whether 
endogenous activity of mPOANts neurons is required for sex-specific approach behavior in 
the presence of steroid-priming. Here, mPOANts neurons were targeted to express the 
inhibitory light gated chloride pump, halorhodopsin (NpHR), or control (eYFP) in 
ovariectomized female mice. Steroid-priming plus mating was necessary to first naturally 
elicit a male preference phenotype (Fig.S9e) as others have found21,29. Photoinhibition in 
steroid-primed (estradiol-progesterone) mPOANts::NpHR females impaired male preference 
McHenry et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and reduced male but not female investigation (Fig.8f–h and Fig.S9f). Since mate approach 
is facilitated by hormones and chemosensory cues21, we also tested male odor preference in 
steroid-primed females (Fig.8i) and found that photoinhibition of mPOANts::NpHR neurons 
impaired behavioral preference for male urine (Fig.8j,k). It is unlikely that optogenetic 
modulation of these cells produced aversive effects that impaired social investigation, since 
photoinhibition did not produce a real-time place aversion in the presence or absence of 
steroid-priming (Fig.S9g). Finally, optogenetic modulation of mPOANts neurons did not 
affect palatable food consumption, although mPOANts::ChR2 stimulation increased food zone 
approach bouts (Fig. S10a–o). This is in line with our in vivo imaging data, indicating that 
some mPOANts neurons are excited by food-related odors, versus male or female social 
odors (Fig. 4). Together, these experiments indicate that steroids enhance mPOANts neuronal 
function to facilitate approach behavior towards attractive social and nonsocial stimuli.
Discussion
Historically the mPOA has been considered an evolutionarily conserved region for social 
behaviors and homeostatic functions3,8. However, it has remained unclear whether mPOA 
circuitry orchestrates the appetitive and reinforcing aspects of social and non-social 
motivated behavior. Here, we provide evidence that mPOA-VTANts neurons covey positive 
valence signals, reinforce behavioral actions, and regulates ventral striatal dopamine release. 
It seems likely that mPOA-VTANts fibers may directly inhibit VTA GABAergic neurons to 
promote motivation, given that the majority of mPOANts neurons project to the VTA, that 
these neurons are almost exclusively Vgat positive, and that VTA GABAergic neurons 
inhibit VTA dopamine neurons30–33. Thus, we speculate that activation of mPOA-VTANts 
fibers produces ventral striatal dopamine release via disinhibition of VTA dopamine 
neurons. Consistent with this, GABAergic VTA inputs, such as those from the lateral 
hypothalamus and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), largely act to inhibit VTA 
GABA neurons to evoke dopamine release and promote reward-related behaviors34,35.
While we found that most mPOANts neurons project to the VTA, this comprised roughly a 
third of all mPOA-VTA projecting neurons (though viral targeting and retrograde tracing 
does not label every Nts or VTA projecting neuron). This suggests that other molecularly-
defined mPOA subsets may have different encoding and behavioral properties compared to 
those described here. In the neighboring vBNST, GABAergic and glutamatergic VTA-
projecting neurons differentially control rewarding and aversive motivational states, 
respectively34. Here, mPOA-VTANts stimulation promoted not only rewarding phenotypes, 
but also approach behavior toward an opposite-sex conspecific. Molecularly defined VTA-
projection neurons might control distinct types of motivated behaviors (e.g., social, feeding, 
aversion), as well as different aspects of those behaviors (e.g., appetitive vs. consummatory). 
Using in vivo Ca2+ imaging, we found that some mPOANts neurons were engaged by 
multiple types of social stimuli but were unresponsive to appetitive non-social odor, and vice 
versa. This suggests that social versus nonsocial appetitive stimuli might recruit different 
neural ensembles within this mPOA reward circuit, and it is largely unclear whether 
different types of rewards are processed through distinct pathways within reward systems. In 
addition to distinctions between which neurons were excited, we observed variance in the 
magnitude of excitation in response to different odors within the same neurons. Different 
McHenry et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 types of appetitive stimuli produced varying degrees of mPOA-VTANts circuit activation, 
with opposite-sex stimuli being the most potent activator, which might serve to promote and 
reinforce reproductive behaviors essential for species survival.
While male odor was the most robust modulator of mPOANts neural activity, is it is 
unknown whether this circuit is biased towards reproductive stimuli restricted to mating or if 
this extends to other forms of social stimuli relevant to offspring and species survival, such 
as infant cues. Here, a subset of mPOANts neurons co-expressed Gal, which has previously 
served as a marker for mPOA neurons essential for parental behaviors in both male and 
female mice14. Maternal functions also require mPOA-VTA circuits4,6, but it is unknown 
whether the motivational aspects of mating and parenting share a common mPOA-VTA 
pathway that is appropriately tuned by hormonal profiles and social/reproductive experience 
or if there are distinct pathways for different social behaviors. Steroids including estrogen 
influence peptide hormones4, which influence mating and infant care through actions in the 
mPOA, putatively on VTA-projecting neurons4,6. Thus, a number of hormone/peptide and 
experience-induced changes could modify and tune this pathway in a context-specific 
manner. Mating and parenting induce distinct mPOA Fos activation patterns in male mice14, 
which could reflect the diversity of sensory and motoric aspects associated with different 
types of social interactions. Here, we restricted our imaging to different types of social and 
nonsocial odors, in order to rigorously differentiate between distinct salient stimuli 
processed through the same sensory modality. While less naturalistic, we used automated 
time-locked odor delivery in head-fixed mice to avoid movement interference, control the 
proximity and timing of the odor stimulus (rather than the mouse controlling it), and to allow 
for multiple trials to ensure consistency. Since females were more innately attracted to male 
odor stimuli over female stimuli, and male odor presentation produced the greatest activation 
of mPOANts neurons, this could reflect a bias towards the most motivating stimulus and/or 
relate to a male-specific sensory detection. In the present optogenetic tests, an opposite-sex 
behavioral preference was also detected, though it is possible that stimulation of this 
pathway might drive social approach towards other forms of social or same-sex stimuli in 
the absence of a competing potential mate. It also remains unknown which sensory or 
chemical components associated with detecting male odor were driving activation of this 
pathway. Compared with female urine, intact male urine contains a different profile of 
gonadal steroids21 and male-specific pheromone proteins including major urinary proteins, 
such as Darcin36, that promote mate attraction in female rodents. Future studies should 
utilize in vivo chronic imaging approaches from molecular and projection specific mPOA 
populations under a range of social and hormonal sex-specific contexts and following social 
experience.
The incentive value of particular stimulus is dependent on a number of internal physiological 
factors (e.g., hormonal levels and the homeostatic state of the animal) that are in constant 
flux. Here, mPOANts neurons adjusted their basal and evoked-odor activity dynamics across 
hormonal states. Multiple chemosensory inputs converge in the mPOA7,37, and our studies 
indicate that steroids prime social odor-sensing neurons to be more responsive to male 
signals. Estrogens can increase sensitivity to both chemosensory and auditory male cues21 
and estrogen replacement in ovariectomized females decreases detection thresholds for male 
urinary odor38. A recent study used ex vivo Ca2+ imaging in female mice to reveal that 
McHenry et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vomeronasal sensory neurons detect attractive male pheromones in a steroid-sensitive 
manner39. Thus, steroids could be altering the processing of male stimuli at the multiple 
sites within the social brain network, through a number of mechanisms, which can be clearly 
delineated in future studies.
Our in situ data and other studies40 show that mPOANts neurons contain estradiol receptors 
(ESR1). Steroids including estradiol can induce slower genomic actions through binding of 
nuclear steroid receptors that act as transcription factors to promote or repress gene 
expression in the hypothalamus41. Here, estradiol enhanced Nts and VGat mRNA in mPOA 
neurons, though since the Nts promoter lacks palindromic estrogen response elements, 
estradiol likely increased Nts mPOA expression through a PKA-dependent signaling 
pathway, as others have found18. Estradiol can also exert rapid non-genomic actions through 
acting at membrane-bound receptors or ion-channels, that stimulate intracellular signaling 
pathways and can increase or decrease cell excitability42,43. Indeed, we showed that 
estradiol enhanced the intrinsic excitability of mPOANts neurons in part by increasing 
delayed rectifier K+ channel conductance, thus preventing action potential amplitude 
attenuation and failure. In agreement with our slice data, estradiol-priming prior to imaging 
enhanced Ca2+ dynamics, which were characterized by elevated event amplitude and 
duration. Since, steroids were administered hours and days prior to preparing tissue for slice 
electrophysiological recordings or examining behavioral and neuronal encoding, this time 
frame permits for slower genomic actions that alter the expression of genes, receptors, or ion 
channels. It is also possible that prior in vivo estradiol altered the expression of K+ channels 
as seen in the arcuate nucleus44, and/or that ex vivo estradiol in the bath, for 
electrophysiological recordings, directly affected K+ channel activity42.
Apart from estradiol, a number of other steroid and peptide hormones could also orchestrate 
the activity of this circuit in male and females. Here, estradiol was sufficient to enhance 
responsiveness to male odor cues and amplify the rewarding effects of mPOA-VTANts 
photoactivation and dopamine release in the ventral striatum. In line with our findings, other 
studies identified that mPOA-VTA projections from the mPOA contain estrogen receptors 
(membrane-bound and nuclear) and estradiol administration restricted to the mPOA 
enhanced drug-induced ventral striatal dopamine release12,13. Estradiol can also increase 
expression of progesterone receptors and these steroids act in combination to induce sexual 
receptivity in rodents45. However, we did not disentangle between contributing effects of 
estradiol and progesterone or identify which types of receptors were mediating the observed 
outcomes. Future studies should identify how different hormones and their underlying 
mechanisms influence the processing of social and nonsocial salient signals by mPOA 
neurons.
Conclusions
Here, we implement a multifaceted approach in order to disentangle in vivo neural encoding 
properties and circuit functions modulated by different hormonal contexts. Further, these 
studies suggest that neural networks excited by social signals are embedded within valence-
processing circuits and can directly orchestrate motivational states. While many studies have 
used in vivo circuit strategies to study social or motivated behaviors, our understanding of 
McHenry et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 how positive and negative valence circuits are intertwined with social networks is in its 
infancy. Our future studies will continue to use circuit strategies in conjunction with in vivo 
imaging to resolve whether precise neurons encode with reward-type specificity and whether 
the same networks integrate not only different types of rewarding stimuli, but also aversive 
signals that could underlie complex interactions between stress, social functioning, and 
reward-related deficits.
Collectively, these studies demonstrate how hormonal signals fine-tune neural circuit 
dynamics at key reproductive network nodes to translate sensory input into socially-directed 
motivated behavior essential for species survival. Uncovering neural circuits that function to 
bridge social and reward processing will provide important insights for social and affective 
disorders. Moreover, while steroid-mediated shifts in neural processing are generally 
adaptive for reproductive strategies, such actions can destabilize mood in some women46,47 
and contribute to hormonal and sex-related influences in drug addiction48,49. Further 
elucidation of steroid-sensitive circuits that control motivational states may provide novel 
therapeutic targets for sex-biased psychiatric and reproductive mood disorders.
Online methods
Animals and Surgeries
Subjects—Nts-IRES-Cre mice1 were maintained and Nts-Cre or wild type littermate mice 
were group housed according to sex (20–30g; 6–9 weeks old) until surgery or behavioral 
testing. Mice were maintained on a reverse 12-hr light cycle (lights off at 07:00) with ad 
libitum access to food and water. All procedures were conducted in accordance with the 
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, as adopted by the NIH, and with 
approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC).
Subject history—All wild-type animals were randomly assigned to groups. In cases of 
experiments with transgenic mice, groups requiring the presence or absence of Cre were 
determined by the genotype of the mouse and then randomly distributed. Animals were 
naïve to experimental testing before being assigned to a study. Optogenetic behavioral 
modulation experiments were conducted with the following cohorts of animals and tested 
under specified assays. Intact females for optogenetic activation were tested across the 
estrous cycle for the real-time place preference and optical self-stimulation. Intact males for 
optogenetic activation were tested for real-time place preference and social approach 
behavior. Ovariectomzied females for optogenetic activation were tested for real-time place 
preference, social approach assay, and high-fat diet assay. Ovariectomzied females for 
optogenetic inhibition were tested for real-time place preference, social approach assay, 
high-fat diet assay, and odor preference.
General procedures—For all surgeries descried below, mice were anesthetized with 0.8–
1.5% isoflurane mixed with pure oxygen (1 L/min) and placed within a stereotactic frame 
(David Kopf Instruments) and all surgical instruments and materials were sterilized. 
Ophthalmic ointment (Akorn) and a topical anesthetic (2% Lidocaine; Akorn) were applied 
during surgeries, and subcutaneous injections of sterile saline (0.9% NaCl in water) were 
McHenry et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 administered to prevent dehydration. Following surgeries, mice received acetaminophen in 
their drinking water for two days and were monitored for 7 days or until full recovery.
Viral Constructs—Cre-inducible AAV5-EF1α-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP; 4.3×1012 
infectious units/mL, AAV5-EF1α-DIO-eYFP; 6.0×1012 infectious units/mL, and AAV5-
EF1α-DIO-eNpHR3.0-eYFP; 6.0×1012, AAVdj-EF1α-DIO-GCaMP6s; 3.1×1012 infectious 
units/mL; were packaged by the UNC vector core and delivered stereotaxically in the mPOA 
of anesthetized mice.
Viral and Optogenetic Surgery—For all virus surgeries for optogenetics, slice 
physiology, or anatomical tracing, animals were anesthetized and treated as described above. 
Bilateral injections of Cre-inducible virus (500 nl/side) was administered at a 10° angle into 
the mPOA (relative to bregma: AP, +0.15 mm; ML, ± 1.30 mm; DV, −5.10 mm). For 
retrograde anatomical tracing, Red Retrobeads (Lumafluor) were bilaterally injected (300 nl/
side) at a 10° angle into the VTA (relative to bregma: AP, −3.12 mm; ML, ± 1.30 mm; DV, 
−5.0 mm). For optogenetic surgeries, custom-made chronic optical fibers2 were also 
implanted bilateral at a 10° angle ~0.50 mm above the mPOA or VTA target site relative to 
the coordinates listed above. For behavioral experiments targeting optogenetic stimulation to 
the mPOA or VTA the same mice were used and fibers were implanted in both regions. 
Following surgery, we allowed sufficient time for viral infection and transgene expression. 
The time course between viral injections and the start of experiments was 4 – 6 weeks for 
optogenetic cell body manipulations and ex vivo slice physiology and 7 – 8 weeks for 
optogenetic terminal manipulations.
GRIN Lens Surgery—For deep-brain in vivo two-photon calcium (Ca2+) imaging 
experiments, animals were anesthetized as described above and the cre-inducible genetically 
encoded Ca2+ indicator GCaMP6s3, was unilaterally injected into the mPOA (500 nl at 2 D-
V axes; relative to bregma: AP, +0.05 mm; ML, ± 0.25 mm; DV, −4.95 and −5.15 mm). 
Prior to injections, the craniotomy site was carefully prepared and tissue aspirated within 
minimal bleeding4. Then a gradient-refractive index (GRIN) lens (7.3 mm length, 0.6 mm 
diameter, Inscopix GLP-0673) was slowly stereotaxically lowered to a location directly 
above the mPOA at different coordinates than the viral injection site (relative to bregma AP, 
+0.10 mm; ML, ± 0.35 mm; DV, −4.75 mm) to avoid placing the lens in the immediate area 
of the injection track that typically exhibits autofluorescence that could interfere with 
imaging. Lastly, a custom-made ring (stainless steel; 5 mm ID, 11 mm OD) was attached to 
the skull during surgery to allow for subsequent head fixation (see Figure 5a). Animals were 
monitored for GCaMP6 expression 4 weeks after surgery using 2-photon microscopy as 
described below and only those with dynamic GCaMP6 expression in at least 50 cells and 
absent of autofluorescence were used for imaging experiments.
Ovariectomy and hormone replacement—Females were anesthetized as described 
above and ovariectomized through bilateral flank incisions. The ovary was located in a fat 
pad just beneath the muscles and using forceps, the periovarian fat was gently grasped to lift 
and exteriorize the ovary. The uterine horn was then returned into the abdomen and the 
process repeated on the other side. The muscle of the posterior abdominal wall was then 
McHenry et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sutured and the exterior skin incision closed with sterile surgical staples. Mice were 
monitored daily following surgery and staples were removed a week later. Females 
recovered for at least 10 days prior to testing. Estradiol was administered at 10 μg and 
progesterone at 500 μg in 0.05 ml of sesame oil delivery s.c. and 48 hours apart since this 
regimen referred to as steroid priming has been shown to induce sexual receptivity and these 
levels of estradiol are comparable to physiological proestrus peak levels5–7. Vehicle 
injections consisted of 0.05 ml of sesame oil. Behavioral testing or physiological recordings 
were all conducted approximately 4–5 hours after the injection.
Estrous cycle monitoring
Female mice are spontaneous ovulators and typically have a 4–6 day estrous cycle that 
consists of four stages – proestrus, estrus, diestrus I/metestrus, and diestrus/II. Mice were 
habituated to handling and vaginal smears prior to the behavioral experiments. Before 09:00 
hours, mice were swabbed daily regardless of behavioral testing to check for consistent 
cycling8,9 and underwent behavioral testing in the afternoon between 1300 – 1700 hours. 
Using a disposable pipette, a small volume of physiological sterile saline was placed near 
the opening of the vagina and 100 ul of saline was flushed in four repetitions without 
insertion to avoid pseudopregnancy. The smear was displaced onto a glass slide and 
immediately examined under a brightfield microscope at 20×. The identification of estrous 
stages was based on characteristic cell type appearance observed and the density of each cell 
type in the vaginal secretion. Estrous stage was identified by changes in cell type across the 
cycle that reflects circulating gonadal steroids. Note that “estrus” does not refer to 
“behavioral estrus” or the state of being sexually receptive. Females were only tested for 
behavior on days when a clear smear was visible and the cycle stage could easily be 
identified. In cases where a smear was unclear or an animal did not resume the anticipated 
estrous stage following optogenetic or behavioral stimulation, the animal was not tested until 
resuming consistent estrous cycling.
Behavioral Optogenetics
General Procedures for Light Delivery—Prior to behavioral testing, animals were 
habituated to handling and patch cable tethering in their home cage for at least four 
habituation sessions lasting ~10 minutes. For optogenetic manipulations, light ~10 mW from 
diode pumped solid-state lasers (473 nm or 532 nm) was delivered through custom-made 
patch cables attached to the implanted chronic fibers on animals’ head as described 
previously10,11. For photoactivation, 473 nm light was pulsed at 20 Hz with a pulse width of 
5 ms. For photoinhibition experiments, 532 nm light was constantly delivered. Animals were 
able to freely move within the testing chambers with little hindrance and all behavioral 
testing was conducted under red incandescent lighting between 13:00 and 18:00 hours. For 
each behavioral assay, Ethovision or MedPC software and Arduino microcontrollers were 
used to control light delivery parameters through a TTL pulse.
Behavioral testing: schedule relative to hormone contexts—For intact cycling 
experiments, females were not run more than twice a week, to avoid disruption of the natural 
cycle. Females were smeared in the morning and behavior was tested in the afternoon as 
described above (Estrous cycle monitoring). For all hormone manipulation experiments in 
McHenry et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ovariectomzied females, animals were tested ~4–5 hours after injections as described above 
(Surgery - Ovariectomy and hormone replacement.).
Behavioral Testing: reward and feeding assays—For real-time place preference 
testing, subjects controlled the amount of light stimulation as determined by their center 
point location within the testing area in 20 min sessions. For optical self-stimulation, 
animals were given access to an active and inactive port and could nose poke to receive 
optical stimulation over a 30 min test period. For additional details on these behavioral 
assays see10. For optogenetic manipulation during a free-feeding assay, animals were given 
access to a high-fat food and consumption measured as previously described12,13.
Behavioral Testing: social and odor preference assays—For optogenetic 
manipulations during a social preference assay, subjects were placed in a standard 3-
chamber social choice arena14 but instead two social stimuli were used in our paradigm (see 
Figure 8a). Stimulus mice were previously habituated to the holding chambers for at least 3 
days prior to experimental testing. For female test subjects a wild type intact adult male or 
ovariectomized female stimulus mouse was placed into each of the social interaction holding 
chambers. For male test subjects, a hormone-primed ovariectomized female or adult male 
was used. Subjects were first habituated to the area in the absence of light delivery or social 
stimuli and screened for any innate side preference to the area. Light delivery occurred in 
alternating 5 min epochs for a total of 20 min. For NpHR cohorts, hormone-primed females 
were first mated in their home-cage to induce a male preference prior to behavioral testing. 
Since we observed reinforcing properties in response mPOANts stimulation, we used 
optogenetic modulation parameters that were not time-locked to occur with social proximity, 
since pairing could artificially condition and reinforce approach behavior.
For odor preference testing, subjects were placed into a rectangular arena and testing lasted 
for 20 min with light delivery alternated in 5 min epochs. Subjects were first habituated to 
the area for 10 min and screened for any innate side preference. Then, two square blocks 
placed on opposite walls of the arena tightly held either a cotton swab containing urine or 
physiological saline (60 ul per swab). See Figure 8i for graphical depiction. Wild type 
stimulus mice were habituated to a chamber containing a wire mesh floor without bedding 
and a drip pan for the collection of fresh mouse urine. Urine was pooled from 4 group 
housed male mice and 1 single housed adult male, since male urine contains female-
attracting proteins (e.g. Darcin15) which are variable in expression across mice and can be 
influenced by social environment16. Female urine was pooled from 5 ovariectomized group-
housed females. Peanut oil was used at full strength and (60 ul per swab) during testing. 
Peanut oil was first applied to a piece of food in the homecage the day prior to behavioral 
testing or imaging odor-evoked responses.
Behavioral Analysis—All behavioral experiments were recorded live with a video 
camera and PC equipped with live tracking software (Noldus, Ethovision XT). Automated 
measures of movement (velocity and distance) and the frequency and duration of time spent 
in each designated zone of the area was generated based on live tracking Ethovision software 
and calculated with respect to light condition. Preference indices for social or food stimuli 
McHenry et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were computed based on these metrics as previously described17. Food consumption was 
manually scored with assisted software (Noldus, Observer).
Two-photon in vivo Calcium Imaging
Head-fixed Imaging—To visualize Ca2+ dynamics in vivo, GCaMP6s was expressed in 
mPOANts neurons and a GRIN lens implanted to gain optical access to this deep brain region 
as described above (see Lens Surgery). Mice were habituated to head-fixation for at least 4 
non-consecutive days with increasing time intervals (5 – 30 min) and then two-photon 
microscopy was used to visualize activity dynamics of mPOANts neurons in vivo. The last 
habituation session occurred in conjunction with two-photon imaging to select a particular 
field of view (FOV) by adjusting the imaging plane (z-axis) to select a different group of 
cells across multiple FOVs within each subject. Multiple FOVs were collected for baseline / 
spontaneous imaging sessions and a single FOV with the most cells was chosen for stimulus 
odor-evoked imaging sessions (to avoid time confounds).
Imaging: schedule relative to hormone contexts—Females were not imaged more 
than twice a week, to avoid disruption of the natural cycle. Females were smeared in the 
morning (see Estrous cycle monitoring) and imaging was conducted in the afternoon as 
described above. For all hormone manipulation experiments in ovariectomzied females, 
mice were imaged ~4–5 hours after injections as described above (for more hormone details 
see Surgery - Ovariectomy and hormone replacement.).
Spontaneous Ca2+ Activity—To examine spontaneous Ca2+ events across hormonal 
states, females were smeared (intact females) or injected (ovariectomized females) before 
09:00 hours and mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells imaged in vivo ~4 hrs later. Baseline scans from 
each FOV were acquired for 10 min at 5 Hz as described below.
Odor-evoked Ca2+ Activity—For odorant delivery, fresh urine was collected using the 
same 5 male or female animals that were group-housed and urine was pooled together (see 
Behavioral Optogenetic Methods), since there are individual differences in the amount of 
proteins in male urine that attract the female mice. Urine was collected from the same 
stimulus mice were used across all imaging studies to ensure consistency within and 
between mice. Mouse urine from each sex or peanut oil was added to a chamber and 
vaporized through an airflow tank similar to room air and flowed out through a mask placed 
in front of but not touching the animal’s snout and a vacuum line on the adjacent side to 
remove any residual odor. Specifically, 160 ul of Urine diluted in dipropylene glycol was 
placed into a small chamber and odorants were delivered using a custom-made olfactometer. 
Medical air (2L/min) served as positive pressure that led to a mask situated in front of the 
subject’s snout with a vacuum line to help remove any residual odor (See Fig. 2a). To time 
odorant delivery during imaging, a microcontroller was programmed to initiate imaging and 
trigger a solenoid that switched from air to the odor tank. During each imaging session, two-
photon scanning was triggered for each trial 10 s before odorant delivery, and a 40 s video 
was collected for each trial. Each odorant trial was delivered in 6–7 repetitions with a 2–3-
min inter-trial interval to avoid odor habituation.
McHenry et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Two-photon Imaging acquisition—A two-photon Olympus microscope (FVMPE-RS) 
was equipped with the following: a hybrid scanning core set with galvanometers and fast 
resonant scanners (allows up to 30Hz frame-rate acquisition; set to 5 Hz), GaAsP-PMT 
photo detectors with adjustable voltage, gain, and offset, a long working distance 20× air 
objective designed for optical transmission at infrared and visible wavelengths (Olympus, 
LCPLN20XIR, 0.45NA, 8.3mm WD), a software-controlled modular XY stage loaded on a 
manual z-deck, and a tunable Mai-Tai Deep See laser with dispersion compensation (Spectra 
Physics, laser set to 955nm, ~100fs pulse width) with automated four-axis alignment. Data 
were both acquired and processed using a computer equipped with FluoView (Olympus, 
FV1200) software. For all sessions, time series images of mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells were 
collected using the resonant scanner at 30Hz with 6 frame on the fly frame averaging, which 
permits for final image acquisition at 5Hz. Software acquisition settings were optimized for 
each subject and set within the following range; Laser intensity: less than ~50 mW, PMT 
voltage: 650–675, Gain: 1.5, Offset: 2, Scan Size: 512 × 512, Zoom 1–1.5, Aspect Ratio: 
1:1. For chronic imaging experiments the same FOV was acquired under the same imaging 
parameters and software acquisition settings across all days for comparison.
Data extraction and analysis—Following acquisition, data were exported as a tiff series 
and motion corrected using a planar hidden Markov model (SIMA v1.3;18) and regions of 
interest (ROIs) were hand drawn around each cell or dendrite on the standard deviation 
projection tiff image of the motion-corrected video using ImageJ. For chronic imaging 
experiments, the same ROI series file was loaded onto the tiff image and individual ROIs 
were adjusted to ensure proper alignment with each cell and only cells that could be reliably 
identified at the same FOV were included in subsequent analysis. Next, normalized calcium 
signals were then extracted from the ROIs using the SIMA objects and motion corrected 
imaging video and all subsequent analyses were conducted using freely-available Python 
packages (SIMA, numpy, scipy, pandas, seaborn). All analysis code can be found at 
www.gitub.com/stuberlab.
Event detection—For each ROI, extracted fluorescence intensity time series data were 
independently z-scored and then smoothed with a 3-frame rolling mean. Using the 
normalized and smoothed time series data, calcium transients were defined as events if the 
transient magnitude exceeded 1 standard deviation for at least 5 frames (1 s). The start and 
end of each event were defined as the points at which the normalized signal crossed the 1 
standard deviation threshold, and the duration of each event was calculated using these 
boundaries. The peak amplitude was the maximum normalized intensity value within each 
event. For the rare instances in which acquisition started or ended during an ongoing calcium 
event, that event was removed from all subsequent analyses.
Detecting Odor-evoked Responses—Analyses were performed on SIMA-corrected 
fluorescence intensity time series data. For each ROI and each trial, normalized intensity 
values were calculated by dividing each value by the mean intensity of the baseline epoch 
(10 s immediately preceding odor presentation). Cell responsivity was assessed for each cell 
using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test across 6–7 trials per session. Mean baseline 
fluorescence was compared to the mean fluorescence during the odor epoch. Excited ROIs 
McHenry et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were those in which the odor response was significantly (p < 0.05) greater than baseline, and 
inhibited ROIs were those in which the odor response was significantly (p < 0.05) lower than 
baseline. The number of trials was consistent for each experiment (Fig. 2: 6 trials, Fig. 3 and 
4: 7 trials) and all odor trials were included in the analysis for all subjects and all ROIs.
in vivo Fast-scan Cyclic Voltammetry
Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) experiments were conducted using method described 
in previous studies19,20. Briefly, mice were anesthetized and placed in a stereotaxic frame. A 
craniotomy was done above the nucleus accumbens (AP, +1.0 mm; ML, 1.0 mm) and the 
VTA (AP, −3.1 mm; ML, 0.3 mm). An Ag/AgCl reference electrode was implanted in the 
contralateral forebrain. An optical fiber (200 μm) was placed for the activation of ChR2-
expressing VTA neurons (DV, from −4.0 to −4.6 mm). A carbon fiber electrode (~100 μm in 
length, 6 μm diameter) for voltammetric recordings was then lowered into the nucleus 
accumbens (DV, from −4.0 to −4.6 mm) in 0.2 mm intervals. Voltammetric measurements 
were made every 100 ms by application of a triangle waveform (−0.4 V to +1.3 V to −0.4 V 
vs. Ag/AgCl, at 400 V/s) to the carbon fiber electrode. Dopamine release was evoked by 
optical activation mPOA to VTA fibers using a 60 pulse-stimulation (5 ms single pulse 
duration) at 20 Hz. Therefore, optical stimulation of ChR2-expressing VTA fibers was 
applied for 3 s starting 5 s after the onset of the voltammetric recording. Recorded 
voltammetric signals showed an oxidation peak at +0.65 V and a reduction peak at −0.2 V 
(vs. Ag/AgCl reference), as well as characteristic cyclic voltammograms, ensuring that the 
released chemical was dopamine. Carbon fiber electrodes were calibrated in vitro with 
known concentrations of dopamine (1.0 and 5.0 μM). Calibrations were done in duplicate 
and the average value for the current at the peak oxidation potential was used to normalize in 
vivo signals to dopamine concentration. All voltammetry data were collected and analyzed 
using TarHeel CV software.
Patch-clamp electrophysiology
Mice were anesthetized with pentobarbital (50 mg/kg) before transcardial perfusion with 
ice-cold sucrose cutting solution containing the following (in mM): 225 sucrose, 119 NaCl, 
1.0 NaH2P04, 4.9 MgCl2, 0.1 CaCl2, 26.2 NaHCO3, 1.25 glucose, 305 mOsm. Brains were 
then rapidly removed, and coronal sections 300 μm thick were taken using a vibratome 
(Leica, VT 1200). Sections were then incubated in aCSF (32°C) containing the following (in 
mM): 119 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.0 NaH2P04, 1.3 MgCl, 2.5 CaCl2, 26.2 NaHCO3, 15 glucose, 
305 mOsm. After an hour of recovery, slices were constantly perfused with aCSF (32°C) and 
visualized using differential interference contrast through a 40× water-immersion objective 
mounted on an upright microscope (Olympus BX51WI). Whole-cell recordings were 
obtained using borosilicate pipettes (3–5 MΩ) back-filled with internal solution containing 
the following (in mM): 130 K gluconate, 10 KCl, 10 HEPES, 10 EGTA, 2 MgCl2, 2 ATP, 
0.2 GTP (pH 7.35, 270–285 mOsm).
We performed whole-cell current-clamp recordings of fluorescently-labeled mPOANTS:eYFP 
neurons or mPOANTS:GCaMP6s neurons to characterize the intrinsic excitability of mPOANTS 
neurons ex vivo21. During recordings, cells were held through slow polarization at −70mV 
to control for differences in resting membrane potential between neurons. Next, we 
McHenry et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measured rheobase (the minimum amount of current required for an action potential to fire) 
by applying a series of short depolarizing sweeps (50ms) at +5pA steps (starting at 0pA) 
until the recorded neuron fired an action potential. Next, action potential firing was 
examined by applying a series of 800ms depolarizing sweeps from 0 to 160pA (+10pA steps 
for excitability recordings, +20pA steps GCaMP6s recordings). For GCaMP6s experiments, 
during patch-clamp recordings we simultaneously recorded GCaMP6s fluorescence through 
a microscope-mounted camera (OptiMos, QImaging) using imaging software 
(MicroManager, ImageJ). Videos were subsequently motion-corrected if necessary, and data 
were extracted using ImageJ.
We also performed whole-cell voltage clamp recordings of fluorescently-labeled 
mPOANTS:eYFP neurons to measure K+ channel conductance ex vivo. Recordings were 
performed in the presence of the voltage-gated sodium channel antagonist tetrodotoxin 
(500nM), the nonselective voltage-gated potassium channel antagonist 4-aminopyradine (20 
uM), and the GABAA receptor antagonist picrotoxin (100 uM). During recordings, cells 
were held at −80mV before 100ms depolarization (0 to 110mV, +10mV steps). A-type 
potassium current was then quantified by dividing the slower current deflections by the fast 
capacitive transient (pA/pF). For all patch-clamp experiments, data acquisition occurred at 1 
kHz sampling rate through a MultiClamp 700B amplifier connected to a Digidata 1440A 
digitizer (Molecular Devices). Data were quantified using event analysis in Clampfit 10.3 
(Molecular Devices).
FSCV and patch clamp recordings and in situ: schedule relative to hormone 
contexts—For all experiments, ovariectomzied females were given an initial dose of 
estradiol or vehicle 48 prior to a second dose and were euthanized ~4–5 hours after the last 
injections as described above (Surgery - Ovariectomy and hormone replacement.). This 
schedule was used to allow ample time for both genomic and non-genomic steroid 
actions22,23 and was used in prior physiology studies24,25. For patch clamp experiments, 1 
uM of estradiol was also applied to the bath solution for brain slices from mice previously 
treated with estradiol in vivo.
Fluorescent in situ Hybridization
Tissue was processed using in situ hybridization to detect mRNA for Nts, Vgat (Slc32a1), 
and Vglut2 (Slc17a6). Mice were briefly anesthetized with 3.5 – 4.0% isoflurane mixed with 
pure oxygen (1L/min), rapidly decapitated and brains rapidly extracted and flash frozen on 
dry ice. 18-μm thick cryostat coronal sections were collected under RNAse-free conditions, 
fixed in 4% PFA for 15 min at 4°C, dehydrated in serial concentrations of ethanol (50%–
100%), and processed according to the protocol provided in the RNAscope kit (Advanced 
Cell Diagnostics. INC, Cat. 320 293). Sections were hybridized with the following mixed 
probes; Nts (Mm-Nts, Cat. 420441), Vgat (Mm-Slc32a1, Cat. 319191), and Vglut2 (Mm-
Slc17a6-C2, 319171), for 2 h at 40°C and following amplification, sections were 
counterstained with DAPI. For Nts and Cre, were performed in situ using the Affymetrix 
View RNA 2-Plex Tissue Assay Kit with custom probes for Nts (Mouse NM024435, Cat. 
VB1-16908) and Cre (Vector, HQ335171 Cat.designed by Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA).
McHenry et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Immunohistochemistry and Histology
To evaluate optically evoked Fos, mice received 10 min of photostimulation in the home 
cage (473 nm, 20 Hz at 3 s) and were euthanized an hour later. Mice were euthanized with 
pentobarbital (50 mg/kg, i.p.) and transcardially perfused with 0.01M phosphate buffered 
saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Tissue was post-fixed overnight at 
4°C in PFA and cyroprotected in 30% sucrose in PBS and 40-μm thick cryostat coronal 
sections were collected. To examine Fos induction, immunohistochemistry was carried out 
using the following antibodies: c-Fos primary raised in goat (Santa Cruz, cat# SC-52g, 1:500 
over night at 4°C) and secondary (Jackson Immuno, donkey anti-goat 647 2 hours at room 
temperature) and processed as previously described. For TH staining TH primary raised in 
sheep was used (Pel-Freeze, cat#PG0101-150, 1:500 over night at 4°C). Tissue slices were 
slide mounted, DAPI counterstained, and coverslipped for subsequent confocal microscopy. 
For all other optogenetic behavioral cohorts and anatomical tracing experiments, mice were 
euthanized and tissue prepared as described (with the exception of IHC) for verification of 
viral expression and fiber placement. For in situ cohorts examining the effects of estrogen-
induced Nts mRNA the tissue was processed in duplicate and the same pattern was observed 
upon replication. For verification of viral expression, all subjects were included in analyses 
unless post-hoc examination of tissue did not confirm the expected viral expression (e.g., 
ChR2, eYFP). This was the case for 2 mice and these subjects were removed from the 
analyses because the procedure is not valid without the proper viral expression. This 
exclusion criteria was established prior to conducting any of the present studies.
Confocal Microscopy
Images were captured with a confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 780, Germany) and Zen 
software with a 20× air and 40× or 63× oil objective. Software settings were optimized for 
each experiment, but generally z-stacks were collected in less than 1 μm increments 
throughout the z-axis and the maximum intensity projection tiled image was used for 
representative or quantification purposes.
Protein and mRNA Quantification
For quantification of mPOA cells expressing Fos protein or Nts mRNA, an experimenter 
blind to the treatment group manually tagged cells using Image J and the Image J Cell 
Counter Plug-in. For quantification of mRNA intensity, an experimenter blind to the 
treatment condition drew ROIs of the same size around each cell within a single focal plane 
on the DAPI layer. Then intensity of mRNA expression within each ROI was automatically 
generated in Image J. These values were then used to determine if intensity crossed a 
threshold that designated the cell as positive for the gene of interest (e.g. Nts) and whether 
Nts positive cells co-expressed Vgat or Vglut2.
Experimental blinding
In all experiments, data were analyzed in an automated unbiased manner by a computer. For 
in vivo imaging and physiology data, Software or custom written Python codes were used to 
automate data analysis. The investigator was not blind to within group drug treatment, as it 
was necessary to administer the appropriate drug (e.g., hormone or vehicle) with respect to 
McHenry et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 day or subject. The experimenter was also not blind to the odor treatment, as it was 
necessary to delivery the appropriate odor.
Statistics
The number of biological replicates in each experiment was at least 3 mice per group for 
anatomy, 4 – 8 mice per group for in vivo imaging or physiology, and between 5 – 7 mice 
per group for behavior. These numbers were chosen based on that used in previous 
experiments10,13. In addition, for behavioral experiments optogenetic stimulation or 
inhibition was alternated in repeated time epochs to ensure consistency in behavioral 
responses. For in vivo imaging experiments, odor was delivered in multiple trials for the 
same reason and in addition at least 50 neurons were recorded from each mouse, thus for 
these experiments 4 biological replicates yielded a large sample of data with consistent 
responses across mice and cells.
For experiments with hormone or light conditions Two-Way ANOVA’s were conducted with 
Bonferroni Post-hoc analyses. For anatomy experiments and AUC for FSCV Unpaired 
Student’s t-tests were conducted. For cumulative frequency distributions Kolmogorov-
Smirov tests were conducted. For in vivo imaging a Wilcoxon paired t-test compared cell 
responses between odors or treatments. In all statistical measures a p value < 0.05 was 
considered statistically significant. To calculate behavioral preference indices, calculations 
were used based on prior studies17 where the amount of time spent investigating the 
stimulant of interest (e.g. opposite-sex odor or social stimulus) and the control side (e.g. 
control odor, saline or same-sex social stimulus) were scored using Noldus and the 
Preference Index (Δt/Σt) for the stimulus was calculated as follows:
Data availability
All custom codes have been made publically available at a GitHub repository affiliated with 
Stuber Lab group and this manuscript title (www.github.com/stuberlab). The data that 
support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Stuber lab for their helpful discussion and support. We thank Spencer Smith for advice on two-photon 
imaging, the UNC vector core for viral packaging, and the UNC Neuroscience Center Microscopy Core especially 
V. Ghukasyan for his helpful training and assistance (P30 NS045892). We thank K. Deisseroth for viral constructs 
(Stanford University). We thank L. Tarantino and S. Schoenrock for their input and assistance with hormone 
manipulation procedures. We thank K. Schilling-Scrivo, L. Eckman, J. Rodriguez, and G. Tipton for technical 
assistance and R. Ung for assistance with coding. JAM was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health 
(T32-MH093315), JMO was supported by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (F32-DA041184), ZAM was 
McHenry et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 supported by ABMRF and NIAAA (K01 AA020911) and JER was supported by NIAAA (F30AA021312). This 
study was supported by funds from the Foundation of Hope, the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation, the 
Simons Foundation, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (R01 DA032750 and R01 DA038168) (GDS), the 
Department of Psychiatry at UNC-CH, and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (AA022449) 
(EAB).
References
1. Anderson DJ, Adolphs R. A framework for studying emotions across species. Cell. 2014; 157:187–
200. [PubMed: 24679535] 
2. Yang T, Shah NM. Molecular and neural control of sexually dimorphic social behaviors. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol. 2016; 38:89–95. [PubMed: 27162162] 
3. Dulac C, O’Connell LA, Wu Z. Neural control of maternal and paternal behaviors. Science. 2014; 
345:765–770. [PubMed: 25124430] 
4. McHenry JA, Rubinow DR, Stuber GD. Maternally responsive neurons in the bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis and medial preoptic area: Putative circuits for regulating anxiety and reward. Front 
Neuroendocrinol. 2015; 38:65–72. [PubMed: 25910426] 
5. Yoest KE, Cummings JA, Becker JB. Estradiol, dopamine and motivation. Cent Nerv Syst Agents 
Med Chem. 2014; 14:83–89. [PubMed: 25540977] 
6. Rilling JK, Young LJ. The biology of mammalian parenting and its effect on offspring social 
development. Science. 2014; 345:771–776. [PubMed: 25124431] 
7. Petrulis A. Chemosignals and hormones in the neural control of mammalian sexual behavior. Front 
Neuroendocrinol. 2013; 34:255–267. [PubMed: 23911848] 
8. O’Connell LA, Hofmann HA. Evolution of a vertebrate social decision-making network. Science. 
2012; 336:1154–1157. [PubMed: 22654056] 
9. Hull EM, Dominguez JM. Sexual behavior in male rodents. Horm Behav. 2007; 52:45–55. 
[PubMed: 17499249] 
10. Bromberg-Martin ES, Matsumoto M, Hikosaka O. Dopamine in motivational control: rewarding, 
aversive, and alerting. Neuron. 2010; 68:815–834. [PubMed: 21144997] 
11. Berridge KC. The debate over dopamine’s role in reward: the case for incentive salience. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2007; 191:391–431. [PubMed: 17072591] 
12. Tobiansky DJ, et al. Estradiol in the Preoptic Area Regulates the Dopaminergic Response to 
Cocaine in the Nucleus Accumbens. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015; doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.360
13. Tobiansky DJ, et al. The medial preoptic area modulates cocaine-induced activity in female rats. 
Behav Neurosci. 2013; 127:293–302. [PubMed: 23565937] 
14. Wu Z, Autry AE, Bergan JF, Watabe-Uchida M, Dulac CG. Galanin neurons in the medial preoptic 
area govern parental behaviour. Nature. 2014; 509:325–330. [PubMed: 24828191] 
15. Kempadoo KA, et al. Hypothalamic neurotensin projections promote reward by enhancing 
glutamate transmission in the VTA. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:7618–7626. [PubMed: 23637156] 
16. Alexander MJ, et al. Estrogen induces neurotensin/neuromedin N messenger ribonucleic acid in a 
preoptic nucleus essential for the preovulatory surge of luteinizing hormone in the rat. 
Endocrinology. 1989; 125:2111–2117. [PubMed: 2791980] 
17. Smith MJ, Wise PM. Neurotensin gene expression increases during proestrus in the rostral medial 
preoptic nucleus: potential for direct communication with gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
neurons. Endocrinology. 2001; 142:3006–3013. [PubMed: 11416022] 
18. Watters JJ, Dorsa DM. Transcriptional effects of estrogen on neuronal neurotensin gene expression 
involve cAMP/protein kinase A-dependent signaling mechanisms. J Neurosci. 1998; 18:6672–
6680. [PubMed: 9712639] 
19. Chen TW, et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature. 2013; 
499:295–300. [PubMed: 23868258] 
20. Leinninger GM, et al. Leptin action via neurotensin neurons controls orexin, the mesolimbic 
dopamine system and energy balance. Cell Metab. 2011; 14:313–323. [PubMed: 21907138] 
21. Asaba A, Hattori T, Mogi K, Kikusui T. Sexual attractiveness of male chemicals and vocalizations 
in mice. Front Neurosci. 2014; 8:231. [PubMed: 25140125] 
McHenry et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Bueno J, Pfaff DW. Single unit recording in hypothalamus and preoptic area of estrogen-treated 
and untreated ovariectomized female rats. Brain Res. 1976; 101:67–78. [PubMed: 1244221] 
23. Yagi K. Changes in firing rates of single preoptic and hypothalamic units following an intravenous 
administration of estrogen in the castrated female rat. Brain Res. 1973; 53:343–352. [PubMed: 
4706033] 
24. Root CM, Denny CA, Hen R, Axel R. The participation of cortical amygdala in innate, odour-
driven behaviour. Nature. 2014; 515:269–273. [PubMed: 25383519] 
25. Hori T, Ide M, Miyake T. Ovarian estrogen secretion during the estrous cycle and under the 
influence of exogenous gonadotropins in rats. Endocrinol Jpn. 1968; 15:215–222. [PubMed: 
5755227] 
26. Caligioni CS. Assessing reproductive status/stages in mice. Curr Protoc Neurosci. 2009 Appendix 
4, Appendix 4I. 
27. Edwards DA. Induction of estrus in female mice: Estrogen-progesterone interactions. Hormones 
and Behavior. 1970; 1:299–304.
28. Stowers L, Liberles SD. State-dependent responses to sex pheromones in mouse. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol. 2016; 38:74–79. [PubMed: 27093585] 
29. Caroom D, Bronson FH. Responsiveness of female mice to preputial attractant: effects of sexual 
experience and ovarian hormones. Physiol Behav. 1971; 7:659–662. [PubMed: 5164357] 
30. Tan KR, et al. GABA neurons of the VTA drive conditioned place aversion. Neuron. 2012; 
73:1173–1183. [PubMed: 22445344] 
31. van Zessen R, Phillips JL, Budygin EA, Stuber GD. Activation of VTA GABA neurons disrupts 
reward consumption. Neuron. 2012; 73:1184–1194. [PubMed: 22445345] 
32. Nieh EH, et al. Inhibitory Input from the Lateral Hypothalamus to the Ventral Tegmental Area 
Disinhibits Dopamine Neurons and Promotes Behavioral Activation. Neuron. 2016; doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2016.04.035
33. Stuber GD, Wise RA. Lateral hypothalamic circuits for feeding and reward. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 
19:198–205. [PubMed: 26814589] 
34. Jennings JH, et al. Distinct extended amygdala circuits for divergent motivational states. Nature. 
2013; 496:224–228. [PubMed: 23515155] 
35. Nieh EH, et al. Decoding Neural Circuits that Control Compulsive Sucrose Seeking. Cell. 2015; 
160:528–541. [PubMed: 25635460] 
36. Phelan MM, et al. The structure, stability and pheromone binding of the male mouse protein sex 
pheromone darcin. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e108415. [PubMed: 25279835] 
37. Dhungel S, Urakawa S, Kondo Y, Sakuma Y. Olfactory preference in the male rat depends on 
multiple chemosensory inputs converging on the preoptic area. Horm Behav. 2011; 59:193–199. 
[PubMed: 21094648] 
38. Sorwell KG, Wesson DW, Baum MJ. Sexually dimorphic enhancement by estradiol of male urinary 
odor detection thresholds in mice. Behav Neurosci. 2008; 122:788–793. [PubMed: 18729632] 
39. Dey S, et al. Cyclic Regulation of Sensory Perception by a Female Hormone Alters Behavior. Cell. 
2015; 161:1334–1344. [PubMed: 26046438] 
40. Herbison AE, Theodosis DT. Neurotensin-lmmunoreactive Neurons in the Rat Medial Preoptic 
Area are Oestrogen-Receptive. J Neuroendocrinol. 1991; 3:587–589. [PubMed: 19215527] 
41. Rønnekleiv OK, Kelly MJ. Diversity of ovarian steroid signaling in the hypothalamus. Front 
Neuroendocrinol. 2005; 26:65–84. [PubMed: 16009409] 
42. Kow LM, Pfaff DW. Rapid estrogen actions on ion channels: A survey in search for mechanisms. 
Steroids. 2016; 111:46–53. [PubMed: 26939826] 
43. Pfaff D, Waters E, Khan Q, Zhang X, Numan M. Minireview: estrogen receptor-initiated 
mechanisms causal to mammalian reproductive behaviors. Endocrinology. 2011; 152:1209–1217. 
[PubMed: 21325045] 
44. Roepke TA, Malyala A, Bosch MA, Kelly MJ, Rønnekleiv OK. Estrogen regulation of genes 
important for K+ channel signaling in the arcuate nucleus. Endocrinology. 2007; 148:4937–4951. 
[PubMed: 17595223] 
McHenry et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Micevych P, Sinchak K. Temporal and concentration-dependent effects of oestradiol on neural 
pathways mediating sexual receptivity. J Neuroendocrinol. 2013; 25:1012–1023. [PubMed: 
24028299] 
46. Schmidt PJ, Rubinow DR. Sex hormones and mood in the perimenopause. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2009; 1179:70–85. [PubMed: 19906233] 
47. Schiller CE, Johnson SL, Abate AC, Rubinow DR, Schmidt PJ. Reproductive Steroid Regulation of 
Mood and Behavior. Compr Physiol. 2016; 6:1135–1160. [PubMed: 27347888] 
48. Becker JB, Hu M. Sex differences in drug abuse. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. 2008; 29:36–
47. [PubMed: 17904621] 
49. Lüscher C. The Emergence of a Circuit Model for Addiction. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2016; doi: 
10.1146/annurev-neuro-070815-013920
Online Methods References
1. Leinninger GM, et al. Leptin Acts via Leptin Receptor-Expressing Lateral Hypothalamic Neurons to 
Modulate the Mesolimbic Dopamine System and Suppress Feeding. Cell Metabolism. 2009; 10:89–
98. [PubMed: 19656487] 
2. Sparta DR, et al. Construction of implantable optical fibers for long-term optogenetic manipulation 
of neural circuits. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:12–23.
3. Chen TW, et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature. 2013; 
499:295–300. [PubMed: 23868258] 
4. Resendez SL, et al. Visualization of cortical, subcortical and deep brain neural circuit dynamics 
during naturalistic mammalian behavior with head-mounted microscopes and chronically implanted 
lenses. Nat Protoc. 2016; 11:566–597. [PubMed: 26914316] 
5. Edwards DA. Induction of estrus in female mice: Estrogen-progesterone interactions. Hormones and 
Behavior. 1970; 1:299–304.
6. Powers JB. Hormonal control of sexual receptivity during the estrous cycle of the rat. Physiol Behav. 
1970; 5:831–835. [PubMed: 5535480] 
7. Thompson ML, Edwards DA. Experiential and strain determinants of the estrogen-progesterone 
induction of sexual receptivity in spayed female mice. Hormones and Behavior. 1971; 2:299–305.
8. Byers SL, Wiles MV, Dunn SL, Taft RA. Mouse estrous cycle identification tool and images. PLoS 
ONE. 2012; 7:e35538. [PubMed: 22514749] 
9. Caligioni CS. Assessing reproductive status/stages in mice. Curr Protoc Neurosci. 2009 Appendix 4, 
Appendix 4I. 
10. Jennings JH, et al. Distinct extended amygdala circuits for divergent motivational states. Nature. 
2013; 496:224–228. [PubMed: 23515155] 
11. Sparta DR, et al. Construction of implantable optical fibers for long-term optogenetic manipulation 
of neural circuits. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:12–23.
12. Jennings JH, Rizzi G, Stamatakis AM, Ung RL, Stuber GD. The inhibitory circuit architecture of 
the lateral hypothalamus orchestrates feeding. Science. 2013; 341:1517–1521. [PubMed: 
24072922] 
13. Jennings JH, et al. Visualizing hypothalamic network dynamics for appetitive and consummatory 
behaviors. Cell. 2015; 160:516–527. [PubMed: 25635459] 
14. Dölen G, Darvishzadeh A, Huang KW, Malenka RC. Social reward requires coordinated activity of 
nucleus accumbens oxytocin and serotonin. Nature. 2013; 501:179–184. [PubMed: 24025838] 
15. Phelan MM, et al. The structure, stability and pheromone binding of the male mouse protein sex 
pheromone darcin. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e108415. [PubMed: 25279835] 
16. Kaur AW, et al. Murine pheromone proteins constitute a context-dependent combinatorial code 
governing multiple social behaviors. Cell. 2014; 157:676–688. [PubMed: 24766811] 
17. Dey S, et al. Cyclic Regulation of Sensory Perception by a Female Hormone Alters Behavior. Cell. 
2015; 161:1334–1344. [PubMed: 26046438] 
18. Kaifosh P, Zaremba JD, Danielson NB, Losonczy A. SIMA: Python software for analysis of 
dynamic fluorescence imaging data. Front Neuroinform. 2014; 8:80. [PubMed: 25295002] 
McHenry et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Tsai HC, et al. Phasic firing in dopaminergic neurons is sufficient for behavioral conditioning. 
Science. 2009; 324:1080–1084. [PubMed: 19389999] 
20. van Zessen R, Phillips JL, Budygin EA, Stuber GD. Activation of VTA GABA neurons disrupts 
reward consumption. Neuron. 2012; 73:1184–1194. [PubMed: 22445345] 
21. Otis JM, Dashew KB, Mueller D. Neurobiological dissociation of retrieval and reconsolidation of 
cocaine-associated memory. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:1271–1281a. [PubMed: 23325262] 
22. Pfaff D, Waters E, Khan Q, Zhang X, Numan M. Minireview: estrogen receptor-initiated 
mechanisms causal to mammalian reproductive behaviors. Endocrinology. 2011; 152:1209–1217. 
[PubMed: 21325045] 
23. Kow LM, Pfaff DW. Rapid estrogen actions on ion channels: A survey in search for mechanisms. 
Steroids. 2016; 111:46–53. [PubMed: 26939826] 
24. Woolley CS. Acute effects of estrogen on neuronal physiology. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2007; 47:657–680. [PubMed: 16918306] 
25. Oberlander JG, Woolley CS. 17β-Estradiol Acutely Potentiates Glutamatergic Synaptic 
Transmission in the Hippocampus through Distinct Mechanisms in Males and Females. J 
Neurosci. 2016; 36:2677–2690. [PubMed: 26937008] 
McHenry et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Identification of a molecularly-defined population of steroid-responsive mPOA-VTA 
neurons. (a) Confocal images represent mPOANts::eYFP (teal) and Retrobead aggregates 
from the VTA (magenta). mPOA: medial preoptic area, VTA: ventral tegmental area; Nts: 
neurotensin, eYFP: enhanced yellow fluorescent protein, D: dorsal, V: ventral, M: medial, L: 
lateral. Left scale bar, 100 μm, right scale bar 20 μm. (b) Schematic illustrates mPOANts 
projections to the VTA and pie chart shows the percentage of mPOA neurons that contain 
VTA Retrobeads and/or Nts-eYFP. (c) Confocal image of Nts mRNA. BNST: bed nucleus of 
the stria terminalis; AC: anterior commissure, Scale bar: 100 μm. (d) Confocal image of 
ESR1 mRNA. ESR1: estrogen receptor 1/α gene. (e) Confocal image of Gal mRNA. Gal: 
galanin gene. (f) Overlay of Nts, ESR1, and Gal mRNA in the mPOA. Scale bar 60 μm. (g) 
Pie chart illustrates the percentage of ESR1 and Gal overlap within Nts positive cells.
McHenry et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
mPOANts neurons dynamically encode social odor cues. (a) Top: schematic of in vivo Ca2+ 
imaging in mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells in head-fixed mice in conjunction with delivery of 
vaporized mouse urine. GRIN, gradient refractive index lens. Bottom: females had a higher 
behavioral preference index for male urine over female urine (error bars, ± s.e.m., paired t-
test, t17 = 4.215, P = 0.0006, n = 9–10 mice). (b) Top: representative mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells 
acquired from two-photon imaging (scale bars cannot be accurately provided, as two-photon 
recording through a GRIN lens distorts the imaging plane). Middle: each row of the heat plot 
represents the Ca2+ response of an individual mPOANts::GCaMP6 neuron during each male 
(top) or female (bottom) trial of odor delivery. Vertical axis: normalized Ca2+ fluorescence 
(F/FAVG). Bottom: Ca2+ trace from the same neuron averaged across the 6 male or female 
odor trials. (c) Each row of the heat plot depicts the Ca2+ response of an individual 
mPOANts::GCaMP6 neuron averaged across the 6 male (left plot) or female (right plot) odor 
trials. Heat plots are indexed in the same order for odor type comparison and cells were 
sorted by male odor response (n = 153 cells combined across 4 mice). (d) Pie charts show 
the percentage of mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells significantly excited or inhibited by male or 
female odors (Wilcoxon t-test, all P < 0.05, n = 153 cells combined across 4 mice). (e) Ca2+ 
traces averaged across male or female trials from mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells significantly 
excited by male odor (error bands, ± s.e.m.; paired t-test, t56 = 4.89, P < 0.0001, n = 57 cells 
combined across 4 mice).
McHenry et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
mPOANts neurons encode reproductive male cues in a steroid-gated manner. (a) Top: 
schematic illustrating chronic Ca2+ imaging in mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells on separate hormone-
treated days. Bottom: ovariectomized females had a higher behavioral preference for male 
urine following estradiol (blue) compared to vehicle (black) (error bars, ± s.e.m., paired t-
test, t5 = 5.85, P = 0.0021, n = 6 mice). (b) Top: each row of the heat plot represents the 
Ca2+ response during each male odor trial from an individual mPOANts::GCaMP6 cell imaged 
across treatment days. Vertical axis: normalized Ca2+ fluorescence (F/FAVG). Scale bar, 10 s. 
Bottom: Ca2+ traces from the same neuron averaged across the 7 male odor trials. Scale bar: 
x, 10 s; y, 30% ÆF/F. Veh, vehicle oil; E2, estradiol. (c) Each row of the heat plot depicts 
the Ca2+ response of an individual mPOANts::GCaMP6 cell averaged across male odor trials 
and imaged after vehicle (left plot) or estradiol (right plot). Heat plots are indexed in the 
same order for comparison and cells were sorted by male odor response following estradiol 
replacement. Scale bar, 10 s (n = 230 cells combined across 4 mice). (d) Averaged Ca2+ 
traces from mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells significantly excited by male odor after estradiol 
compared to their response after vehicle. Scale bar: x, 10 s; y, 20% ÆF/F (gray shading 
represents ± s.e.m., paired t-test, t49 = 8.98, P < 0.0001, n = 51 cells combined across 4 
mice). (e) Pie charts represent the percent of cells significantly excited (green) or inhibited 
(blue) by male odor by treatment (Wilcoxon t-test, all P < 0.05, n = 230 cells combined 
across 4 mice). (f) Pie charts represent the percent of cells significantly excited (green) or 
inhibited (blue) by female odor by treatment (Wilcoxon t-test, all P < 0.05, n = 230 cells 
combined across 4 mice).
McHenry et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
mPOANts encoding comparison of social and nonsocial odor cues. (a) Spatial map of cell 
outlines in response to distinct odor cues. Mask displays binary odor response of cells 
excited by male odor (blue), female odor (pink), both male and female odor (yellow), non-
social peanut oil odor (orange), all odors (purple), or none of the odors (white). (b) Example 
Ca2+ trace from 3 neurons indicated by arrows in the spatial map. Traces were averaged 
across 7 odor trials for male urine, female urine, or peanut oil. (c) Each row of the heat plot 
depicts the Ca2+ response of an individual mPOANts::GCaMP6 neuron averaged across male 
(left plot), female (middle plot), or peanut (right) odor trials. Heat plots are indexed in the 
same order for comparison and cells were sorted by male odor response. Scale bar; 10 s (n = 
155 cells combined across 3 mice). PN: peanut oil. (d) Pie charts show the percentage of 
mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells significantly excited or inhibited by male, female, or peanut odors 
(Wilcoxon t-test, all p values < 0.05, n = 155 cells combined across 3 mice).
McHenry et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Estradiol enhances neuronal excitability in mPOANts neurons. (a) Two-photon image of the 
same mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells imaged after vehicle or estradiol priming. (b) Example Ca2+ 
traces showing normalized fluorescence F/F0 of GCaMP6s Ca2+ dynamics from the same 
mPOANts::GCaMP6 on different treatment days. Pre, vehicle 1 week before estradiol 
replacement; E2 prime, 5 h after estradiol; post, vehicle 1 week after estradiol (b–d). Scale 
bar: x, 20 s; y, 20% ÆF/F. (c) mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells displayed Ca2+ events longer in 
duration after estradiol treatment (bars are means; data points, individual cells; repeated-
measures (RM) ANOVA, F2,252 = 35.46, P < 0.0001, n = 143 cells combined across 4 mice). 
(d) mPOANts::GCaMP6 cells displayed Ca2+ events higher in amplitude after estradiol 
treatment (error bars, ± s.e.m., RM one-way ANOVA, F2,252 = 17.32, P < 0.0001, n = 143 
cells combined across 4 mice). (e) Example traces of current-clamp recordings in 
mPOANts::eYFP cells from ovariectomized mice by treatment. Scale bars: x, 200 ms; y, 25 
mV. In e–g, black represents vehicle; blue, estradiol. (f) mPOANts::eYFP cells from estradiol-
treated mice have more evoked action potentials with increasing current (error bars, ± s.e.m.; 
two-way ANOVA, interaction F16,240 = 32.40, P < 0.0001, vehicle: n = 8 cells, E2: n = 9 
cells; 3 mice per group). (g) Inset: representative action potential from recordings in a 
mPOANts::eYFP cell by treatment. Scale bars: x, 2 ms, y, 25 mV. Correlation plot: 
mPOANts::eYFP cells from estradiol-treated mice were correlated with a decrease in spike 
half-width (error bars, ± s.e.m., Pearson R2 = 0.53, P = 0.0010, vehicle: n = 8 cells, E2: n = 9 
cells, 3 mice per group). (h) Inset: Example traces of A-type isolated potassium channel 
recordings in mPOANts::eYFP cells by treatment. Scale bars: x, 25 ms; y, 2.5 nA. Graph: A-
type potassium current conductance is greater in mPOANts::eYFP cells treated with estradiol 
(error bars, ± s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA, interaction F11,308 = 5.88, P < 0.0001, vehicle: n = 
13 cells, E2: n = 17 cells, vehicle: 2 mice; E2: 3 mice).
McHenry et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Stimulation of mPOANts neurons is reinforcing in both sexes. (a) Schematic depicting viral 
and optogenetic approach for stimulation of mPOANts neurons. (b) Confocal image of 
mPOANts ChR2-eYFP expression (green) and DAPI (blue). vBNST: ventral bed nucleus of 
the stria terminalis, AC: anterior commissure, OX: optic chiasm, D: dorsal, V: ventral, M: 
medial, L: lateral; scale bar, 200 ìm. (c) Confocal image of mPOANts ChR2-eYFP (green) 
and DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 20 ìm. (d) Cumulative nose poke performed for self-stimulation 
in each stage of the estrous cycle from a representative mPOANts::ChR2 female mouse. P: 
proestrus, E: estrus, DI: metestrus, DII: diestrus. (e) mPOANts::ChR2 female mice readily 
nosepoke in the active port to obtain photostimulation and mPOANts::eYFP controls do not. 
mPOANts::ChR2 females poke more in proestrus compared to all other stages (error bars, ± 
s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, interaction F3,27 = 12.70, P < 0.0001, ChR2 n = 5, eYFP = 6 
mice). Individual data points are shown as gray lines. (f) Color heat maps illustrating the 
spatial location in the real-time place preference for a representative mPOANts::ChR2 female 
and mPOANts::eYFP control mouse in proestrus. (g) mPOANts::ChR2 female mice spent 
significantly more time in the photostimulation side of the chamber in all stages compared to 
mPOANts::eYFP females and had a higher preference in proestrus compared to estrus and 
metestrus (error bars, ± s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, interaction F3,30 = 9.44, P = 0.0002, ChR2 
n = 5, eYFP = 7 mice). (h) mPOANts::ChR2 female mice spent significantly more time in the 
photostimulation side of the chamber compared to the non-photostimulation side in all 
stages of the cycle (error bars, ± s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, interaction F3,24 = 15.2, P < 
0.0001, ChR2 n = 5, eYFP = 5 mice). (i) mPOANts::ChR2 males spent significantly more time 
McHenry et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in the stimulation side of the chamber compared to mPOANts::eYFP controls, with no effect 
of day (error bars, ± s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, group effect, F1,9 = 63.1, P < 0.0001, n = 5–6 
mice per group). (j) mPOANts::ChR2 male mice spent significantly more time in the 
photostimulation side of the chamber compare to the non-photostimulation on all 4 d (error 
bars, ± s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, group effect F1,8 = 92.75, P < 0.0001, n = 5 mice per 
group).
McHenry et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Stimulation of mPOA–VTANts neurons is reinforcing and evokes striatal dopamine release. 
(a) Top: optogenetic stimulation targeted at mPOANts::ChR2 neurons or mPOA–VTANts::ChR2 
projecting fibers. Bottom: confocal image of mPOA–VTANts::ChR2 projecting fibers (green) 
and TH expression (magenta) in the VTA. TH: tyrosine hydroxylase, D: dorsal, V: ventral, 
M: medial, L: lateral. Left scale bar, 200 ìm. Right scale bar, 20 ìm. (b) mPOA::ChR2 and 
mPOA–VTANts::ChR2 mice spent more time on the photostimulation side of the chamber, 
and this was amplified following estradiol priming compared with that in vehicle controls 
(error bars, ± s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA, interaction F4,24 = 7.04, P = 0.0007, n = 5 or 6 mice 
per group). (c) Schematic depicting optogenetic targeting of mPOA–VTANts::ChR2 projecting 
fibers in conjunction with fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) to detect dopamine release 
in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) of the ventral striatum. (d) Photostimulation mPOA–
VTANts::ChR2 projecting fibers increased dopamine concentrations in the ventral striatum, 
and concentrations were higher in estradiol-treated mice (error limits, ± s.e.m., two-way 
ANOVA, interaction F149,1490 = 1.42 P = 0.0012, n = 6 mice per group). Blue bar indicates 
optical stimulation (3 s, 20 Hz). Inset: average background-subtracted cyclic 
voltammograms demonstrating characteristic oxidation and reduction peak potentials that 
identify dopamine. (e) Estradiol treatment resulted in a higher area under the curve 
(increased dopamine concentrations) during photostimulation of mPOA–VTANTS:ChR2-eYFP 
fibers. (error bars, ± s.e.m.; unpaired t-test, t5.971 = 3.328, P = 0.016, n = 6 mice per group).
McHenry et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. 
Optogenetic modulation of mPOANts neurons regulates social attraction. (a) Schematic 
illustrating the social preference test for an adult male or female conspecific, tested during 
alternating periods of light delivery. (b) Representative color heat maps displaying the 
spatial location of a steroid-primed mPOANts::ChR2 female and steroid-primed 
mPOANts::eYFP control mouse in the social preference test. (c) Photoactivation enhanced 
male preference in mPOA::ChR2 and mPOA–VTANts::ChR2 mice previously primed with 
steroids (error bars, ± s.e.m.; one-way ANOVA, F4,21 = 6.82, P = 0.0011, n = 5 or 6 mice per 
McHenry et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 group). Colors and key legends are shown in e for c–e. Asterisk denotes mice that received 
prior but not recent estradiol and progesterone priming. (d) Photoactivation increased the 
amount of time spent in the male zone in mPOA::ChR2 and mPOA–VTANts::ChR2 mice 
previously primed with steroids (error bars, ± s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA, interaction F4,21 = 
6.35, P = 0.0016, n = 5 or 6 mice per group). (e) Photoactivation did not increase the amount 
of time spent in the female zone (error bars, ± s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, interaction F4,21 = 
1.33, P = 0.29, eYFP n = 6, ChR2 n = 5). (f) Representative color heat maps displaying the 
spatial location of a steroid-primed mPOANts::NpHR female and steroid-primed 
mPOANts::eYFP control mouse in the social preference test. (g) Steroid-primed 
mPOANts::NpHR females had a lower male preference during light delivery, compared to 
steroid-primed mPOANts::eYFP controls (error bars, ± s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA, interaction 
F1,12 = 7.15, P = 0.02, n = 7 mice per group). (h) Steroid-primed mPOANts::NpHR females 
spent less time in the male interaction zone during light delivery, compared to steroid-
primed mPOANts::eYFP controls (error bars, ± s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, interaction F1,12 = 
9.8, P = 0.009, n = 7 per mice group). (i) Illustration of a behavioral odor preference assay 
comparing the animal’s time in the zone containing male urine or saline. (j) Steroid-primed 
mPOANts::NpHR females spent less time in the male odor zone during light delivery, 
compared to steroid-primed mPOANts::eYFP controls (error bars, ± s.e.m., two-way ANOVA, 
laser effect F3,33 = 6.05, P = 0.0021, n = 7 mice per group). (k) Photoinhibition decreased 
the preference index for male odor in mPOANts::NpHR females (error bars, ± s.e.m., unpaired 
t-test, t11 = 8.30, P < 0.0001, n = 6–7 mice per group). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
McHenry et al.
Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
