 Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 97(5), 2017, pp. 1623–1628
doi:10.4269/ajtmh.17-0396
Copyright © 2017 by The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
Human Intestinal Parasite Burden and Poor Sanitation in Rural Alabama
Megan L. McKenna,1† Shannon McAtee,1† Patricia E. Bryan,1 Rebecca Jeun,1 Tabitha Ward,1 Jacob Kraus,1 Maria E. Bottazzi,1
Peter J. Hotez,1 Catherine C. Flowers,2 and Rojelio Mejia1*
1Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 2Alabama Center for
Rural Enterprise, Montgomery, Alabama
Abstract.
Hookworm infection affects 430 million people worldwide, causing iron deficiency, impaired cognitive
development, and stunting in children. Because of the environmental conditions needed for the hookworm life-cycle, this
parasite is endemic to resource-limited countries. Necator americanus was endemic in the southern United States before
improvement of sewage disposal systems and eradication programs. With continued poverty, poor sanitation, and an
environment suitable for the hookworm life-cycle in some regions of the southern United States, a current prevalence
study using modern molecular diagnostics is warranted. Lowndes County, Alabama, was chosen as the study site given
previous high hookworm burdens, degree of poverty, and use of open-sewage systems. Participants were interviewed,
and stool, serum, and soil samples were tested for nine intestinal parasites using a multiparallel quantitative real-time PCR
(qPCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. We found that, among 24 households, 42.4% reported exposure to
raw sewage within their home, and from 55 stool samples, 19 (34.5%) tested positive for N. americanus, four (7.3%) for
Strongyloides stercoralis, and one (1.8%) for Entamoeba histolytica. Stool tested positive for N. americanus contained low
levels of parasite DNA (geometric mean 0.0302 fg/μL). Soil studies detected one (2.9%) Cryptosporidium species, and
Toxocara serology assay detected one (5.2%) positive in this population. Individuals living in this high-risk environment
within the United States continue to have stool samples positive for N. americanus. Gastrointestinal parasites known to be
endemic to developing countries are identifiable in American poverty regions, and areas with lower disease burden are
more likely to be identified by using qPCR.
INTRODUCTION
Intestinal parasitic infections have a significant impact on
health outcomes and morbidity in adults and children world-
wide, ranging from diarrhea and stunting in children to im-
paired cognitive development from iron deficiency anemia.1
Globally, approximately 430 million people are infected with
hookworm (Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator ameri-
canus).2 Among those infected with intestinal nematodes,
hookworm infections are associated with the greatest years
lived with disability (YLDs), with recent estimates indicating
that human hookworm disease is associated with 4.1 million
disability-adjusted life years.3 This large contribution of
hookworm infections to the YLDs among those with nema-
tode infections is due to the link between hookworm disease
and anemia in children.4–6 Beyond its health impact, the
anemia it induces is linked to a moderate economic burden
ranging up to $139 billion annually.3
Necator americanus is the major hookworm species in the
Americas. Transmission requires fecal contamination of soil
and dermal penetration of human hosts. Conditions for larval
survival, include moist and temperate environments. These
soil-transmitted helminths are mainly found in areas where
sanitation and hygiene are poor,7 most commonly in resource-
limited countries. However, in the early 1930s, the southern
United States had a high prevalence of hookworm infections
caused by N. americanus. The initial surveys found 53.6% of
the population to be infected with hookworm; in some areas,
the prevalence rose as high as 76%.8 To control the disease,
thousands of individuals were treated, decreasing prevalence
to 39%.9 After these interventions, there were increases in
school enrolment, attendance, and literacy, and those within
the treated cohort had substantial gains in long-term in-
comes.10 However, because of posttreatment reinfection and
widespread transmission, hookworm infection and disease
continued to persist in the southern United States, especially
in areas of extreme poverty.11 According to a study in the
1950s, rural Alabama still suffered from a high prevalence of
hookworm infection in schoolchildren, with some counties
having 60% infection.12 With improved sanitation and waste
disposal infrastructure, in association with aggressive eco-
nomic development in the southern United States, the prev-
alence of hookworm infection decreased. In the 1990s,
surveillance studies for enteropathogens in southern Alabama
show a 30% prevalence for all soil-transmitted helminths
combined, including Ascaris lumbricoides, N. americanus,
and Enterobius vermicularis.13 This part of the United States
was identified as one at high risk for intestinal helminth in-
fections.14 A more recent systematic review, however, found
that few surveys for intestinal helminth infections have been
conducted in recent decades, with limited information about
these diseases,15 especially in poor rural and southern United
States.
According to the Alabama Center for Rural Enterprise
(ACRE), an organization that addresses poverty and economic
development in one of the poorest areas of the nation,16 there
continue to be residences without adequate sanitation sys-
tems, increasing exposure to open sewage near dwellings.
The “Black-Belt” soil native to this area is composed of a firm
sedimentary limestone bed overlain with a layer of dark, rich
soils,17 which requires expensive septic systems for proper
waste disposal. In Lowndes County, Alabama, where the per
capita income is $18,046, and 31.4% of the population lives
below the poverty line,18 sanitation systems are unaffordable.
For rural, impoverished individuals, the main form of waste
removal involves use of “straight piping,” a method involving a
series of ditches or crudely constructed piping systems to
* Address correspondence to Rojelio Mejia, Laboratory of Clinical
Parasitology and Diagnostics, National School of Tropical Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Baylor College of Medicine 113, Houston, TX 77030.
E-mail: rojelio.mejia@bcm.edu
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
1623
 guide human waste away from the residence. Most pipes
never reach more than 10 meters in length, and during rain-
storms or flooding, the residents report visible stool entering
their homes (reported by ACRE, unpublished data).
While the prevalence of intestinal parasites has decreased
in the past 85 years, conditions amenable to the parasite life-
cycle and transmission persist. Because of these conditions, a
more current investigation using modern molecular diagnos-
tics is warranted to determine the burden of intestinal parasitic
infection. The goal of this study seeks to address the current
prevalence of helminthic and protozoan infections and de-
termines correlation with sewage exposure in an economically
challenged region of the southern United States. Given con-
tinued poverty in these areas such as Lowndes County, lack of
access to contained septic systems, and potential exposure
to raw sewage, intestinal helminth infection likely persists
despite previous interventions. The results of this study will
provide insight into disease burden within this community and
a basis for further study on possible risk factors, intervention,
and effects on the community.
METHODS
Sample population. The study was performed in Lowndes
County, an area in Alabama known to have low per capita
income. According to the 2010 US Census, Lowndes County,
has 5,270 houses with a 11,299 total population.18 ACRE re-
ports approximately 50% of households have a failing or no
sewage system (ACRE, unpublished data). Dwellings and in-
dividuals were preselected by ACRE organizers from areas
with poor sanitation and used open sewage systems as a
means of waste management. Enrolment goals of 100 sub-
jects were planned, all subjects enrolled were African Ameri-
can. A total of 66 subjects were enrolled in the study from a
total of 24 homes. There were single individuals from seven
homes, four homes with two subjects, seven homes with three
subjects, three homes with four subjects, one home each with
five, six, and eight subjects, respectively. The research team
and those assisting from ACRE visited the selected dwellings,
interviewed residents using a questionnaire to obtain data
regarding their dwelling and health, and collected soil from the
surrounding areas and stool samples from participants. The
questionnaire included information regarding sex, age, pre-
vious travel outside the United States, prior history of parasitic
infections, exposure to sewage within the home, asthma, and
diarrheal symptoms. Before participating in the study, each
participant or guardian signed a written consent form. Par-
ticipants were excluded if they have ever traveled outside the
United States or were under 2 years of age, pregnant, HIV-
positive, or immunocompromised. This study was approved
by the Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Review Board
and the Alabama Department of Public Health.
Sample collection. Stool samples were self-collected by
the individual participants after instructions were provided
verbally and in writing, and soil samples were obtained near
areas of sewage collections or run-off by research team
members. Participants were instructed to fill stool containers
with approximately 5 grams of stool and store in provided
opaque double-sealed biohazard bags in the refrigerator
overnight, or if possible, the same day as the scheduled in-
terview and collection. All samples were stored in dry ice
coolers after collection and transported to the Laboratory of
Clinical Parasitology and Diagnostics, Baylor College of
Medicine within 5 days of collection, and stored in −20�C
freezers.
Molecular methods. DNA was extracted from the frozen
stool samples the following week after collection using MP
FastPrep® spin kits for soil (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA)
after a modified method was developed by the primary in-
vestigator, as previously described, for Trichuris trichiura
DNA.19 Parasite DNA was detected using a multiparallel quan-
titative real-time PCR (qPCR) protocol.19 Species-specific pri-
mers and 6-carboxyfluorescein-labeled Minor groove binder
probes (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) were selected for
each of the eight parasites tested, including helminths (Ascaris
lumbricoides, Trichuris trichiura, Strongyloides stercoralis,
Ancylostoma duodenale, and N.americanus), and protozoa
(Giardia lamblia, Cryptosporidium species, and Entamoeba
histolytica)19 (Supplemental Table 1). Samples were analyzed
on an ABI ViiA 7 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems)
using default parameters for fast chemistry and 40 cycles.19
DNA concentrations were calculated using parasite plasmid
standard curves.19 All controls (positive, negative, and a pBR322
plasmid internal control) were performed in triplicate with sub-
ject samples in duplicate. Samples were repeated for discor-
dant results. The threshold for positivity was set at 38 cycle
thresholds (Ct), which was the limit of detection for our dynamic
range of positive standard curves.19 Fifty grams of top soil was
collected at sites close to the opening of “straight pipes,” and the
same protocol used for stool was implemented for extracting
DNA from soil samples.
Additional analysis. A subsequent serological evaluation
using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) pro-
tocol for the detection of Toxocara species was performed on
11 patients who were found to be positive for N. americanus
and had serum available for study. Because of logistical re-
straints, blood from only those positive for any parasite was
requested, and only 11 subjects consented. A commercially
available Toxocara ELISA was used per manufacturer protocol
(Abnova,Taiwan) withpositive absorbance readings accepted
as greater than or equal to 0.3 optical density units. For the
detection of Strongyloides stercoralis, a previously described
NIE-ELISA protocol20 was implemented using serum from the
same 11 participants who were tested for Toxocara species.
Unfortunately, subject’s stool positive for Strongyloides by
qPCR declined further serum work up. Any positive laboratory
result (qPCR, microscopy, ELISA) was communicated to the
subject and their primary care provider, who decided what
clinical course to take.
Gel electrophoresis with 4% agarose gel was also used in
this study as a confirmatory tool for positive results. Sample
standards were used, as well as positive and negative con-
trols. Bands were visualized by ultraviolet fluorescent de-
tection. Those testing positive for N. americanus infection had
their stool sent to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) for
ova and parasites, and concentration microscopic evaluation.
Data analysis. All statistical analyses were performed using
Prism software version 5.0d (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA). The
level of significance was set at P < 0.05 for all analyses, and all
statistical tests were two-sided. Descriptive statistics were
computed to describe data for sample characteristics. Fre-
quency distribution and measures of central tendency and
dispersion were expressed by geometric means, medians,
standard deviations, and proportions. Fisher’s exact test was
1624
MCKENNA, MCATEE, AND OTHERS
 used to compare categorical variables and proportions. All
qPCR positive samples were reported as parasite DNA con-
centrations measured in femtograms per microliter (fg/μL).
Data were generated by detecting which parasites were pre-
sent in each person. Linear regression was used to calculate
fg/μL to hookworm eggs per gram (epg) of stool by micros-
copy in a previous study, which provides a good representa-
tion of parasitic infections within a population.21
RESULTS
The questionnaires were collected for 67 individuals, but
given exclusion criteria, only 66 were included in this study.
Not all questions were answered, therefore, the questionnaire
results were evaluated separately in a subgroup analysis
(Figure 1). Age ranged from 2 to 85 years, with a mean of
34.2 years of age. The participants included 36 females and
25 males. No one reported a previous diagnosis of a parasitic
infection. Only six individuals reported having diarrhea in the
past 7 days, and eight reported having asthma in the past
30 days. Twenty-eight individuals reported having exposure
to raw sewage inside their domicile (42.4% of those answering
the questionnaire within this study population).
Stool samples were collected for 55 individuals. Of these, 19
(34.5%) were positive for N. americanus, four (7.3%) for Strong-
yloides stercoralis, and one (1.8%) for Entamoeba histolytica
(Figure 2). Polyparasitism was identified in two stool samples,
both of which were positive for N. americanus and Strongyloides
stercoralis. All 55 samples were negative for Giardia lamblia,
Cryptosporidium species, Ascaris lumbricoides, and Trichirus
trichiura. Stool samples positive for N. americanus contained low
levels of parasite DNA (range of 0.013–0.059 fg/μL), and the es-
timated epg, based on calculations from a previous study,21
rangedfrom0.474to2.14epgofstool.Microscopyperformedon
qPCR positive stool samples were negative for ova or parasites.
The 19 N. americanus positive samples detected by qPCR
were run on 4% agarose gel electrophoresis with sample
standards, and all 19 samples had bands corresponding to the
appropriate size using a DNA ladder (New England Biolabs,
Ipswich, MA) (Supplemental Figure 1). None of the hookworm
samples were positive for Ancylostoma duodenale.
Eleven of the 23 participants with stool samples positive for
any parasite consented to further serology assays. Of these 11
participants, one (5.2%) tested positive for Toxocara species.
None tested positive for Strongyloides stercoralis IgG anti-
bodies based on ELISA. Of the 34 soil samples collected,
one (2.9%) tested positive for the protozoa, Cryptosporidium
species.
Further subanalysis was performed on 26 individuals with
fully completed questionnaires and qPCR stool testing. Those
meeting these criteria included 10 males and 16 females. Stool
samples tested negative for 15 patients, N. americanus posi-
tive for 11 patients, and N. americanus and Strongyloides
stercoralis coinfection positive for two patients. Females
comprised 61.5% of this subgroup analysis. There was no
statistically significant difference between males and females
with or without N. americanus infection (P = 0.68) (Table 1).
Raw sewage was reported inside the home for 73.1% of in-
dividuals included within this subanalysis, but there was no
statistically significant difference between those testing pos-
itive and negative for Necator americanus (P = 0.61). Three
individuals reported a diagnosis of asthma, and one reported
an episode of diarrhea within the past 7 days, but were not
statistically different between the uninfected and those in-
fected with N. americanus (P ³ 0.99) (Table 1).
DISCUSSION
Using field-tested molecular assays, 34.5% of individuals
living in a high-risk environment within a region of the southern
United States were found to have stool samples testing pos-
itive for N. americanus (hookworm). Even though the parasite
burden was low, with up to 0.059 fg/μL of parasite DNA and an
estimated egg burden up to 2.1 epg of stool, there is evidence
of endemic and autochthonous infection within this pop-
ulation. In addition, 73% of Lowndes County residents who
were tested and completed the questionnaire reported ex-
posure to raw sewage inside their home, and even though
not statistically significant (likely due to small sample size),
72.7% with this exposure tested positive for parasitic in-
fection. By using qPCR, gastrointestinal parasites known to
be endemic to developing countries have now been identified
FIGURE 1.
Flow diagram of questionnaires collected, questions answered, and results of the data available.
INTESTINAL PARASITES AND POOR SANITATION IN ALABAMA
1625
 in a resource-limited county in Alabama, among people who
havenevertraveledabroad,likelyfromautochthonousinfection.
Despite decreased hookworm prevalence reported by
previous soil helminth eradication programs, infection is still
present within this population. During the last century, repeat
surveys were performed to track the improvement of helminth
infections among local populations, but these studies used
microscopy as the diagnostic modality, which is limited by time
requirements, manpower, and need for skilled microscopists.
Even among those with ample training and experience within
the field of microscopy, sensitivity for ova and parasite
detection is 50–85%.22 In addition, detection of ova and
parasites is severely limited by the burden of disease—those
with less parasite burden are less likely to test positive via
microscopy. Given these limitations, this study was unable to
provide a correlation between the detection of parasite DNA
and the microscopy analysis of qPCR positive stool samples.
This was most likely due to the low N. americanus egg burden
(calculated 1–2 epg of stool), which is below the microscopy
limits of detection (12 epg).21,23,24 These limitations further
justify the utility of qPCR as a method for detection of intestinal
parasiteinfections withintheseresource-limitedcommunities,
where the burden of disease might be too low to accurately
detect via microscopy. A new method for parasite detection
could provide a more sensitive diagnostic approach for those
within these communities with a continued risk of low hook-
worm burden and other parasitic infections. These constraints
explain why qPCR is a desirable method to use with the po-
tential of multiplexing samples for varied infections.23 More-
over, qPCR requires less skilled operators, and has a
significantly higher sensitivity for detection of parasite DNA,
especially those with a low burden of disease, detecting levels
as low as 100 attograms [1 × 10−18] of DNA.19,21 The limit of
detection for qPCR and its specificity effectively rule out
A. duodenale hookworm DNA in the samples, together with a
historical record showing an absence of A. duodenale infec-
tions in the southern United States. Together with the positive
gel bands (Supplemental Figure 1), strengthens the likelihood
that the positive DNA signals for N. americanus hookworm in
this study do not reflect false positives and that transmission
continues in the modern era.
As shown in the 1950s Alabama study, hookworm infection
rates were as high as 60% in some of the more poverty-
stricken communities. In association with overall economic
development in the years during and after Franklin Delano
Roosevelt’s New Deal legislation, together with improvements
in sanitation, urbanization, and industrialization, these pock-
ets of infection were thought to have resolved.9 However,
given continued poor sanitation and advancement of de-
tection methods (improved sensitivity with PCR compared
with microscopy), low burdens of infection have now been
discovered in the United States among populations with au-
tochthonous transmission. Further testing is necessary as
hookworm continues to be a problem in areas with poor
sanitation, allowing recurrent infections due to repeat expo-
sure. Other areas in the United States have also been found to
harbor significant pockets of parasitic infections thought only
endemic to developing countries. Strongyloides stercoralis
has also been found in some Appalachian mountain com-
munities,25 as well as in Kentucky26 and rural Tennessee.27
Interestingly, we detected a 5.2% Toxocara IgG serological
prevalence,whichcoincideswithpredicted national prevalence
for this parasite among African Americans.28 While the soil
sampling did not reveal the presence of helminths, this was
likely because of the limitations of random sampling; how-
ever a single Cryptsporidium species sample was detected and
reinforces the perception that human or animal fecal contami-
nation occurs near these houses. Another limitation of soil was
that no concentration steps were performed, only 50 mg of soil
per 50 gm soil sample was processed for DNA extraction. This
smallamountofsoilandlowsamplenumbers likely contributed
to low-parasite positive samples. The discovery of these par-
asitic diseases within the United States begins to shift the idea
behind global health. One concept is blue marble health,29
which reveals that many of the world’s neglected tropical dis-
eases are paradoxically found in some of the wealthiest
countries, especiallyin these regions of extreme poverty. With
the introduction of more advanced diagnostic techniques,
emergence of rare, endemic infections may eventually be-
come less defined by geographic location, but more by
economic status.
Unfortunately, because of the mistrust stemming from
the illegalities of the self-constructed “straight pipe” waste
TABLE 1
Questionnaire subanalysis for patients with fully completed questionnaires and qPCR stool testing
Characteristic
Parasite infection
P value†
Uninfected [N = 15 (%)*]
Necator only infection [N = 9 (%)*]
Any infection [N = 11 (%)*]
Sex (N = 26)
Male 10 (38.5%)
5 (33.3%)
4 (44.4%)
5 (45.5%)
0.679
Female 16 (61.5%)
10 (66.7%)
5 (55.6%)
6 (54.5%)
–
Raw sewage in home
11 (73.3%)
8 (88.9%)
8 (72.7%)
0.615
Asthma or other lung disease
3 (20.0%)
2 (22.2%)
2 (18.2%)
> 0.999
Diarrhea in past week
1 (6.7%)
1 (11.1%)
1 (9.1%)
> 0.999
* Percentage of individuals within each infection group.
† P values derived from Fisher’s exact test for association between uninfected and Necator infection. All P values were above 0.05 comparing uninfected to any infection groups.
FIGURE 2.
Parasite DNA fg/mL in positive stool samples from rural
Alabama.
1626
MCKENNA, MCATEE, AND OTHERS
 disposal systems, as well as toward the medical community,
the number of individuals included in this study was much
smaller than expected. By working with the ACRE organiza-
tion, which has fostered trust and worked with several mem-
bers within the community, the research team was able to
include more participants, but some of the data obtained from
the questionnaires were incomplete because of different in-
dividuals performing the interviews. This should be consid-
ered when interpreting the results of this study. Performing
subgroup analyses with the information provided some
baseline data that could be assessed and compared among
those being tested for infection. These incomplete forms were
still included in data analyses given the difficulty of obtaining
this information by other means and to provide further insight
into the local population.
This preliminary study demonstrates that gastrointestinal
parasites are present in > 30% of this at-risk population in
Lowndes County, Alabama. Further testing in this community
is vital to better comprehend the parasitic burden in this
population, and additional studies should be initiated to fur-
ther understand the implications and effects on health and the
community. Parasitic testing needs to be expanded to include
more households to determine the prevalence and quantita-
tive parasitic burden. Hemoglobin monitoring should be per-
formed among those testing positive for infection, against a
negative control group, to determine if there is an impact on
health with low parasitic burdens or a correlation between
parasitic
burden
and
hemoglobin
levels.
Hookworm
(N. americanus) has also been shown to impair immune re-
covery (CD4+ cells) in HIV-infected individuals by, an aver-
age of, 102 cells/μL fewer CD4+ cells in those infected with
Necator.30 Interestingly, the participants of that study also had
low Necator burden of infection (0.025 fg/μL, 0.72 epg) and
similar to the Alabama findings.30 According to 2014 data, the
rates of HIV infection in Lowndes county is 758 per 100,000
African Americans and is an area with some of the highest
rates of HIV infections in the United States.31 The combination
of HIV and subclinical hookworm infections in Alabama could
have an impact on immune recovery. Also, previous studies
found a correlation between treatment and substantial gains in
long-term income, as well as improvement of school enrol-
ment, attendance, and literacy after hookworm eradication
programs.10 By monitoring for changes in median income,
standard of living, and economic status within this population
after treatment, correlations of these socioeconomic end-
points to infection, even among those with a low burden of
disease, could be determined. Further understanding of the
disease process and parasitic burden is vital for future public
health initiatives, decreasing hookworm infection, treatment,
and improvement of health outcomes, with the overall goal
of eradicating this neglected tropical disease in the United
States and worldwide.
Received May 19, 2017. Accepted for publication July 4, 2017.
Published online September 5, 2017.
Note: Supplemental figure and table appear at www.ajtmh.org.
Financial support: Funding provided by the Texas Children’s Hospital
Center for Vaccine Development, and the National School of Tropical
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine. Disclosure: R. M. has received
travel support from Romark Pharmaceuticals, the makers of nitazox-
anide. This study was completed before the association and was not
influenced by this relationship. P. J. H. and M. E. B. are principal
investigators and patent-holders on vaccines for hookworm and
schistosomiasis, currently in clinical trials, as well as several other
neglected tropical medicine disease vaccines currently in develop-
ment. Other authors report no conflicts of interests, have participated
in the study, and concur with the submission.
Authors’ addresses: Megan L. McKenna, ShannonMcAtee, Patricia E.
Bryan, Rebecca Jeun, Tabitha Ward, Jacob Kraus, Maria E. Bottazzi,
Peter J. Hotez, and Rojelio Mejia, National School of Tropical Medi-
cine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, E-mails: mmckenna@
bcm.edu, shannon.mcatee@gmail.com, patricia.e.bryan@uth.tmc.
edu, rjeun1@jhmi.edu, tabitha.ward@bcm.edu, jcbkraus@gmail.com,
bottazzi@bcm.edu, hotez@bcm.edu, and rojelio.mejia@bcm.edu.
Catherine C. Flowers, Alabama Center for Rural Enterprise, Montgomery,
AL, E-mail: catherineflowers@aol.com.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
REFERENCES
1. Checkley W, Buckley G, Gilman RH, Assis AM, Guerrant RL,
Morris SS, MelbakK, Valentiner-Branth P, Lanata CF, Black RE,
2008. Multi-country analysis of the effects of diarrhoea on
childhood stunting. Int J Epidemiol 37: 816–830.
2. GBD 2015 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collab-
orators, 2016. Global, regional, and national incidence, preva-
lence, and years lived with disability for 310 diseases and
injuries, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Bur-
den of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 388: 1545–1602.
3. Bartsch SM, Hotez PJ, Asti L, Zapf KM, Bottazzi ME, Diemert DJ,
Lee BY, 2016. The global economic and health burden of hu-
man hookworm infection. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 10: e0004922.
4. Brooker S, Hotez PJ, Bundy DAP, 2008. Hookworm-related
anaemia among pregnant women: a systematic review. PLoS
Negl Trop Dis 2: e291.
5. Smith JL, Brooker S, 2010. Impact of hookworm infection and
deworming on anaemia in non-pregnant populations: a sys-
tematic review. Trop Med Int Health 15: 776–795.
6. Hotez PJ, Brooker S, Bethony JM, Bottazzi ME, Loukas A, Xiao S,
2004. Hookworm infection. N Engl J Med 351: 799.
7. CDC, Global Health - Division of Parasitic Diseases, 2013. Para-
sites. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sth/. Accessed
December 15, 2016.
8. Smith WHY, McAlpine JG, Gill DG, 1937. Intestinal parasitesurvey
in Alabama. A comparative study of two hookworm anthel-
mintics. Am J Public Health 27: 471–475.
9. Humphreys M, 2009. How four once common diseases were
eliminated from the American south. Health Aff 28: 1734–1744.
10. Bleakley H, 2007. Disease and development: evidence from hook-
worm eradication in the American south. Q J Econ 122: 73–117.
11. Hotez P, 2007. Hookworm and poverty. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1136:
38–44.
12. Hosty TS, Wells DM, Freear MA, Whitfield NK, 1954. Hookworm in
Alabama. J Med Assoc State Ala 23: 179–182.
13. Badham AL, 1993. Wilcox County Alabama: Needs Assessment,
Doctoral Dissertation. Birmingham, AL: University of Alabama
at Birmingham. Available at: https://assets.documentcloud.
org/documents/2091580/pdf1-hookworm1993.pdf. Accessed
December 15, 2016.
14. Hotez PJ, 2008. Neglected infections of poverty in the United
States of America. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2: e256.
15. Starr MC, Montgomery SP, 2011. Soil-transmitted helminthiasis
in the United States: a systematic review-1940–2010. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 85: 680–684.
16. ACRE, Alabama Center for Rural Enterprise CDC Inc., 2017.
ACRE CDC, Inc. Overview. Available at: http://acrecdc.com/.
Accessed May 15, 2017.
17. Winemiller TL, 2009. Black Belt Region in Alabama. Encyclopedia
of Alabama. Auburn University at Montgomery. Available at:
http://www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/article/h-2458. Accessed
December 15, 2016.
INTESTINAL PARASITES AND POOR SANITATION IN ALABAMA
1627
 18. United States Census Bureau, 2010–2014. Lowndes County
Alabama: Income and Poverty. Available at: http://www.
census.gov/quickfacts/table/INC110214/01085. Accessed De-
cember 15, 2016.
19. Mejia R, Vicuña Y, Broncano N, Sandoval C, Vaca M, Chico M,
Cooper PJ, Nutman TB, 2013. A novel, multi-parallel, real-time
polymerase chain reaction approach for eight gastrointes-
tinal parasites provides improved diagnostic capabilities to
resource-limited at-risk populations. Am J Trop Med Hyg 88:
1041–1047.
20. Nabha L, Krishnan S, Ramanathan R, Mejia R, Roby G, Sheikh V,
McAuliffe I, Nutman T, Sereti I, 2012. Prevalence of Strong-
yloides stercoralis in an urban USAIDS cohort. Pathog Glob
Health 106: 238–244.
21. Cimino RO, Jeun R, Juarez M, Cajal PS, Vargas P, Echaz ´
u A,
Bryan PE, Nasser J, Krolewiecki A, Mejia R, 2015. Identification
of human intestinal parasites affecting an asymptomatic peri-
urban Argentinian population using multi-parallel quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Parasit Vectors 8: 380.
22. Mosli M, Gregor J, Chande N, Lannigan R, 2012. Nonutility of
routine testing of stool for ova and parasites in a tertiary care
Canadian centre. Can J Microbiol 58: 653–659.
23. Basuni M, Mohamed Z, Ahmad M, Zakaria NZ, Noordin R, 2012.
Detection of selected intestinal helminths and protozoa at
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia using multiplex real-time
PCR. Trop Biomed 29: 434–442.
24. Verweij JJ, Brienen EA, Ziem J, Yelifari L, Polderman AM, Van
Lieshout L, 2007. Simultaneous detection and quantification
of Ancylostoma duodenale, Necator americanus, and Oesopha-
gostomum bifurcum in fecal samples using multiplex real-time
PCR. Am J Trop Med Hyg 77: 685–690.
25. Segarra-Newnham M, 2007. Manifestations, diagnosis, and
treatment of Strongyloides stercoralis infection. Ann Phar-
macother 41: 1992–2001.
26. Fulmer HS, Huempfner HR, 1965. Intestinal helminths in eastern
Kentucky: a survey in three rural counties. Am J Trop Med Hyg
14: 269–275.
27. Berk SL, Verghese A, Alvarez S, Hall K, Smith B, 1987. Clinical and
epidemiologic features of strongyloidiasis. A prospective study
in rural Tennessee. Arch Intern Med 147: 1257–1261.
28. Congdon P, Lloyd P, 2011. Toxocara infection in the United
States: the relevance of poverty, geography and demography
as risk factors, and implications for estimating county preva-
lence. Inter J Pubc Health 56: 15–24.
29. Hotez PJ, 2013. NTDs V.2.0: “Blue Marble Health”-neglected
tropical disease control and elimination in a shifting health
policy landscape. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 7: e2570.
30. Morawski BM, Yunus M, Kerukadho E, Turyasingura G, Barbra L,
Ojok AM, DiNardo AR, Sowinski S, Boulware DR, Mejia R, 2017.
Hookworm infection is associated with decreased CD4+ T cell
counts in HIV-infected adult Ugandans. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 11:
e0005634.
31. Sullivan P, 2017. AIDSVu Interactive Online HIV Prevalence Map
Based on U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s
National HIV Surveillance Database. Available at: https://
aidsvu.org. Accessed June 30, 2017.
1628
MCKENNA, MCATEE, AND OTHERS
