 JPPT
104 
J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2016 Vol. 21 No. 2 • www.jppt.org
INTRODUCTION
“Vaccine hesitancy” is a relatively new term 
used in research over the past few years to de-
scribe anyone who is doubtful about vaccinations 
or who chooses to delay or refuse immunizations 
even when they are readily available.1,2 Vaccines 
play a vital role in preventing diseases in chil-
dren, so it is crucial that pharmacists and other 
healthcare professionals understand the reasons 
that parents are hesitant or refuse to vaccinate 
their children. Although there are no federal laws 
regarding vaccine administration, each state has 
laws in place dictating which vaccinations are 
required for children prior to entering schools.3 
All 50 states allow medical exemptions for cer-
tain patients, such as those who are immune 
compromised or allergic to various vaccine 
components. Additionally, there are 30 states that 
allow exemptions for children whose parents cite 
religious reasons and 18 states that make special 
accommodations for those expressing philo-
sophical reasons.3 States that have more lenient 
laws on vaccination requirements also have an 
increased rate of exemptions granted; this can 
Brief Review Article
Exploring the Reasons Behind Parental Refusal of Vaccines
Chephra McKee, PharmD1 and Kristin Bohannon, BS2
1Department of Pharmacy Practice, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center School of Pharmacy, Abilene, Texas; 
2Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center School of Pharmacy, Abilene, Texas
Parental refusal of vaccines is a growing a concern for the increased occurrence of vaccine preventable dis-
eases in children. A number of studies have looked into the reasons that parents refuse, delay, or are hesitant 
to vaccinate their child(ren). These reasons vary widely between parents, but they can be encompassed in 
4 overarching categories. The 4 categories are religious reasons, personal beliefs or philosophical reasons, 
safety concerns, and a desire for more information from healthcare providers. Parental concerns about 
vaccines in each category lead to a wide spectrum of decisions varying from parents completely refusing 
all vaccinations to only delaying vaccinations so that they are more spread out. A large subset of parents 
admits to having concerns and questions about childhood vaccinations. For this reason, it can be helpful for 
pharmacists and other healthcare providers to understand the cited reasons for hesitancy so they are better 
prepared to educate their patients’ families. Education is a key player in equipping parents with the necessary 
information so that they can make responsible immunization decisions for their children.
INDEX TERMS: parental refusal, personal beliefs, religious, safety concerns, vaccine hesitancy
J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2016;21(2):104–109
lead to greater vulnerability in the population in 
terms of contracting preventable diseases.4
There have been a number of studies examin-
ing the reasons why parents refuse, delay, or are 
hesitant to vaccinate their children (Table). In 
one such study,5 77% of parents polled reported 
having concerns about one or more childhood 
vaccinations. Reasons expressed by parents vary 
widely but can be classified into 4 overarching 
categories. These categories are religious reasons, 
personal beliefs or philosophical reasons, safety 
concerns, and a desire for more information from 
healthcare providers. The purpose of this article 
is to equip pharmacists and other healthcare 
providers with an understanding of the most 
heavily cited reasons that influence parents not 
to vaccinate their children. This will better enable 
healthcare personnel to provide the education 
and awareness that patients’ families need to 
make responsible immunization choices.
REASONS FOR VACCINE HESITANCY
Within each of the categories described above 
parents present a spectrum of compliance with 
 JPPT
105
J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2016 Vol. 21 No. 2 • www.jppt.org
Table. Review of Selected Literature
Reference
Population
Methods
Primary Findings
Dubé et al2 
Immunization manag-
ers (IMs) from 13 differ-
ent countries
Telephone-based interviews
13 IMs identified religion, cultural, 
sex, and socioeconomic reasons for 
vaccine hesitancy; 7 IMs identified 
parenteral concerns for vaccine 
safety, lack of belief in vaccine ben-
efit, and lack of understanding the 
problem of vaccine-preventable 
diseases as reason for hesitancy; 3 
IMs identified the risk of adverse ef-
fects as reason for hesitancy
Kennedy et al5
367 respondents report-
ed having kids ≤6 yr old 
Used results from the 2010 
HealthStyles survey, which 
looked into parents’ attitudes 
about vaccines and their con-
cerns
38% reported thinking that kids get 
too many shots during one doctor’s 
office visit; 32% reported concerns 
about fevers; 30% reported concerns 
about vaccines causing learning dis-
abilities; 11% reported they did not 
think their children would get the 
vaccine-preventable disease; 23% 
reported no concerns about vaccines
Imdad et al6 
Public schools in New 
York State
Used results from school-
based immunization surveys 
from the New York State De-
partment of Health (NYSDOH); 
calculated exemption rates 
were separated into counties, 
and changes in exemption 
rates were calculated from the 
difference in 2011 compared to 
2000; Pertussis cases for chil-
dren <19 yr old were obtained, 
and the incidence of pertussis 
was evaluated in each county
The prevalence of religious exemp-
tion increased from an average of 
0.23% in 2000 to 0.45% in 2011; 
counties with ≥1% exemption rate 
had higher incidence of pertussis 
(33.1 per 100,000) than counties 
with a lower exemption rate (20.1 per 
100,000); county incidence of per-
tussis was higher in the exempted 
children (6 to 1000 per 100,000) than 
in vaccinated children (5 to 98 per 
100,000). The average incidence of 
pertussis in exempted children was 
14 times higher than the incidence in 
vaccinated children (302 per 100,000 
and 22 per 100,000, respectively)
Wombwell et al7 
Not applicable
A comprehensive literature 
search for studies specifically 
looking at religious objections 
to the measles, mumps, rubella 
(MMR) vaccine 
The most common reason cited for 
religious objections with the MMR 
vaccine is the use of aborted fetus 
tissue and animal-derived gelatins 
used in the production of vaccines
Frederickson et al8 Family physicians, pe-
diatricians, nurses, and 
parents from 6 different 
cities 
32 focus groups (5-10 people 
each) comprising healthcare 
providers or parents were 
used to determine parenteral 
concerns about vaccinations
Found parents were usually open to 
discussions with a provider about 
vaccines if they were unsure about 
vaccinating and eventually were 
agreeable to vaccinations. Found 
the varicella vaccine to be the most 
commonly refused immunization. 
The most common reason for refusal 
of vaccines was fear of side effects 
heard about from word of mouth 
or media 
Parental Refusal of Vaccines
 JPPT
106 
J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2016 Vol. 21 No. 2 • www.jppt.org
vaccination, including delaying vaccinations, 
only refusing certain ones, or refusing immu-
nizations completely. Religious reasons tend to 
account for the majority of total vaccine refusal, 
while parents with personal beliefs against im-
munization tend to be more willing to compro-
mise and at least partially vaccinate their chil-
dren. Parents are concerned with doing the best 
for their children, and hearing reports of potential 
safety issues or that childhood diseases are not 
a large threat can hinder them from vaccinating 
their children.
Religious Reasons
One of the most common reasons parents offer 
for choosing not to vaccinate their children stems 
from their religious beliefs. With only 4 states not 
offering exemptions to families for this reason, it 
poses a major obstacle to those seeking to increase 
childhood vaccination rates.3 Religious reasons 
are distinct from other cited reasons in that they 
are generally linked to the core beliefs of the 
parents, and it is very difficult to dissuade these 
individuals from views against immunization. 
These choices are not the by-product of ignorance 
but rather the intentional and calculated deci-
sion related to a staunch conviction. In addition, 
in contrast to other cited reasons for hesitancy, 
those driven by religious assertions most often 
are linked to a complete refusal of all vaccines.2 
Imdad et al6 conducted a study in New York 
State and found that the rate of school vaccina-
tion exemptions due to religious reasons between 
2000 and 2011 increased sharply. In response to 
Table. Review of Selected Literature (cont.)
Reference
Population
Methods
Primary Findings
Saada et al9
Parents of 12- to 36-mo-
olds who were members 
of Kaiser Permanente in 
Northern California
Semistructured individual tele-
phone interviews with par-
ents asking about vaccination 
experiences, schedules, and 
preferences
Identified 5 alternative vaccination 
approaches and found parents ex-
pressed a desire for greater control of 
vaccine ingredient exposure. Parents 
also expressed concerns about vac-
cine safety, immune system burden, 
and perceived disease risk 
Harmsen et al10
Parents of children aged 
0-4 yr (partially vacci-
nated children and not 
vaccinated children) in 
The Netherlands
Online focus group discussions 
regarding decisions on vacci-
nation status and perceptions 
on new vaccines 
Most of the parents cited not enough 
information about immunizations as 
the reason for which they refused 
vaccines
Kennedy et al12
475 respondents to the 
2009 HealthStyles sur-
vey with at least 1 child 
<6 yr were included in 
the analysis
HealthStyles consumer mail 
panel survey asking questions 
regarding vaccine-related at-
titudes, concerns, and informa-
tion sources
Found that 93.4% reported their 
youngest child received or would 
receive vaccines. Also found that the 
majority of parents believed vaccines 
were important to health and were 
confident in their safety
Gust et al14
Parents with at least 
one child <6 yr old who 
responded to the 2003 
HealthStyles survey
HealthStyles consumer mail 
panel survey asking more in-
depth questions about specific 
health issues
Most parents agreed to having ac-
cess to vaccine information, yet one-
third did not. Those who felt they 
lacked information had negative 
attitudes about immunizations and 
toward healthcare providers 
Williams et al15
132 families scoring >25 
on the Parent Attitudes 
about Childhood Vac-
cines (PACV) survey at 2 
primary care sites
Provided families who scored 
>25 on the PACV survey with 
usual care or video and in-
formation about vaccines to 
parents hesitant about immu-
nizations. PACV scores were 
compared for enrollment and 
2 mo 
Those in the intervention group 
demonstrated a significant de-
crease in PACV score at 2 mo when 
compared to the control group. No 
difference between rates of on-time 
immunizations was found between 
the 2 groups at 12 wk
C McKee, et al
 JPPT
107
J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2016 Vol. 21 No. 2 • www.jppt.org
this reality, lawmakers put in place guidelines 
that introduced requirements that mandated that 
in order for schools to grant religious exemptions, 
the parents had to demonstrate their “genuine 
and sincere religious belief” that contradicted the 
use of vaccinations.6 These burdens of proof are 
likely to become more popular as an increasing 
number of parents attempt to use the nebulous 
loophole of religious freedom to bypass the soci-
etal necessity of combating preventable diseases 
through immunizations. The authors6 further dis-
covered that the counties that had higher exemp-
tion rates, ≥ 1%, also had an increase in reported 
pertussis cases, 33 per 100,000 compared to 20 per 
100,000 in counties with lower exemption rates. 
Wombwell et al7 evaluated different religions 
and the reasons that vaccines may violate their 
religious tenets. The explanation most commonly 
offered for why specific vaccinations oppose 
religious tenets involves components of the 
vaccines.7 The animal-derived gelatin used in 
producing some vaccines as well as the human 
fetus tissue used in the rubella component pose 
the largest concerns.7 By understanding the objec-
tions that large portions of the population hold, 
monies may be strategically targeted for research 
that can address these concerns and render vac-
cinations more acceptable for these groups.
Personal Beliefs or Philosophical Reasons
Another common reason that parents give for 
refusing or delaying vaccinating their children 
is personal or philosophical reasons. Although 
only a handful of states allow exemptions for this 
cause, it must be carefully studied, as it may pres-
ent opportunities for practitioners to enlighten 
parents regarding the urgency of protecting the 
children through preventive measures. Though 
it seems contrary to human intuition, there is a 
group of people who see some benefit in hav-
ing their children contract certain preventable 
diseases.8 Some parents believe that natural 
immunity is better for their children than is im-
munity acquired through vaccinations.8 Others 
express the belief that if their child contracts a 
preventable disease, it will be beneficial for the 
child in the long term, as it will help make the 
child’s immune system stronger as he grows 
into adulthood.8-10 Some parents believe that the 
diseases for which we vaccinate are not very 
prevalent so their children are at minimal risk of 
contracting these diseases. For this reason, they 
also believe that the possible negative side effects 
of vaccine administration outweigh the benefits 
of the vaccines.9 Many parents do not see the 
preventable diseases as serious or life-threatening 
and would prefer to not put extra chemicals into 
their children’s bodies.8,9 Other parents think if 
their children have healthy diets and lifestyles 
they are at a decreased risk of contracting pre-
ventable childhood diseases. They also are under 
the assumption that if they were to contract one 
of the diseases that it would be easily treatable.10
Safety Concerns
A third, and potentially the greatest, reason 
parents express for refusing vaccinations for 
their children are concerns about the safety of 
vaccines. Most of these concerns are based on 
information these parents have discovered in the 
media or received from acquaintances. Regard-
less of whether the stories stem from television, 
the Internet, radio, or from family and friends, 
parents are constantly bombarded with other 
peoples’ opinions about vaccinations.2,8,10 All of 
this information can be overwhelming for some 
parents to sift through, making it difficult for 
them to make their own well-informed deci-
sion.8,10 Many of the reports and opinions that 
bombard parents and cause uncertainty are tar-
geted at the safety of vaccines. They raise doubts 
about both short-term adverse reactions and the 
possibility of long-lasting negative effects.2,5,9,10 
It is these concerns about safety that can cause 
parents to completely refuse vaccines.
Fredrickson et al8 found that the most com-
monly reported reason parents had for refusing 
one or more vaccines was other people or media 
reports. Stories in the popular media, such as 
social media and large-scale news outlets, are 
often sensationalized to elicit higher ratings and 
oftentimes spotlight a rare incident in which a 
child suffers as a result of an unforeseen side ef-
fect of a vaccine. Media that cite problems with 
components of vaccines (such as thimerosal) 
and report that vaccines can cause autism, brain 
damage, or behavioral problems cause parents 
to be more cautious and have more concerns 
regarding the safety of vaccines.2,5,8–10 Thimerosal, 
however, has been removed from those vaccines 
intended for children under 6 years of age for 
over a decade now.11 Accounts noting these rare 
occurrences breed fear in the hearts and minds of 
parents, who overestimate the dangers associated 
Parental Refusal of Vaccines
 JPPT
108 
J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2016 Vol. 21 No. 2 • www.jppt.org
with vaccinations. Some fearful parents balk at 
the timing of immunizations. Fear can influence 
some parents to choose to delay vaccines so their 
child does not receive more than one vaccine at a 
time.9 They fear that simultaneously administer-
ing multiple vaccines may overload their child’s 
immune system, and they think that allowing 
all of the vaccinations to occur according to the 
recommended schedule will make the safety risk 
greater. As a result of this logic, many choose to 
delay vaccines in order to better protect their 
children.9,10,12,13 While some may view this as a 
missed opportunity, others believe that a delayed 
vaccination schedule is superior to not receiving 
vaccinations at all. Many parents believe the side 
effects of vaccines are more extensive than what 
they are told by their physicians and that the 
risks outweigh the benefits of vaccinating their 
children.9,10 Healthy relationships between a 
practitioner and parent can go a long way toward 
helping patients in terms of this concern. Trust is 
paramount and will help put parents at ease and 
help them overcome unmerited fears.
Desire for Additional Education
The fourth common thread is that parents 
want more information regarding vaccinations. 
They want to be able to make informed decisions 
about their child’s healthcare by knowing both 
the benefits and risks associated with each vac-
cine.9,10,14 In a study conducted by Gust et al,14 
approximately one-third of parents indicated 
that they did not have enough access to sufficient 
information, and the majority of those parents 
did not think their child’s provider was easy to 
talk to. Many parents desire to have more de-
tailed information regarding the side effects and 
benefits associated with vaccines expressed in a 
factual way that does not appear to be trying to 
sway them one way or the other regarding vac-
cinating their child.8,10 
A vital role pharmacists and other healthcare 
providers can play would involve the provi-
sion of unbiased, factual information relating 
to vaccines as well as the discussion of these 
materials with the parents.1 There are a number 
of resources online, including the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention and American 
Academy of Pediatrics Web sites, as well as print 
resources that can be provided to parents. Par-
ents want to be able to have open conversations 
with their child’s healthcare provider in which 
they do not feel judged or attacked.2,8,9 Parents 
would like to have the freedom to be able to ask 
questions without judgment. Physicians are one 
of the most important sources of information for 
parents who are making decisions about their 
children’s healthcare.2,8,10 In a study conducted 
by Kennedy et al12 noted that 81.7% of parents 
said their child’s healthcare provider was one 
of the most important sources of information. 
When parents do not get the information they 
want from their providers they seek information 
from other sources that can potentially mislead 
and misinform them, causing them to make poor 
choices for their children.8,10
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
If pharmacists and other healthcare providers 
are able to understand the main concerns parents 
have about vaccinating their children, they can 
be better prepared to have informative conversa-
tions about immunizations. They will also be able 
to provide the information parents need to make 
the best-informed decisions for their children. 
Parents who are hesitant to vaccinate or who re-
fuse vaccines care about their children and want 
to do what they can to protect them, just like any 
other parent. It is important for practitioners to 
have open and frank conversations with their 
patients and their families so that the families will 
understand the benefits of vaccination without 
feeling attacked or judged for having questions 
about their child’s healthcare.5,8,9 
Education and taking time with patients have 
been shown to result in modest improvement in 
terms of affecting parents’ attitudes about im-
munization, but the exact messages or tools for 
healthcare providers should use have not been 
fully discovered.15 Understanding the source of 
parents’ questions can equip pharmacists, phy-
sicians, nurses, and other healthcare providers 
to speak with patients on a more relatable level 
and to speak to the areas parents value the most. 
All healthcare workers should make an effort to 
stay up to date on the recommended vaccines 
and to understand why those immunizations 
are recommended. This information will allow 
patients to have face-to-face access to reliable 
information that can help them to make the best 
decisions for their families. Additional research 
aimed at evaluating how practitioners can bet-
ter provide information to parents to help them 
C McKee, et al
 JPPT
109
J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2016 Vol. 21 No. 2 • www.jppt.org
see the importance and benefits of vaccinations 
needs to be conducted.
Disclosures The authors declare no conflicts or finan-
cial interest in any product or service mentioned in the 
manuscript, including grants, equipment, medications, 
employment, gifts, and honoraria.
Acknowledgments At the time of publication, Kristin 
Bohannon was a Doctor of Pharmacy candidate at Texas 
Tech University Health Sciences Center School of Phar-
macy, Abilene, Texas.
Correspondence Chephra McKee, PharmD, Department 
of Pharmacy Practice, Texas Tech University Health Scienc-
es Center School of Pharmacy, 1718 Pine Street, Abilene, 
TX 79601; email: chephra.mckee@ttuhsc.edu
REFERENCES
1.  
The SAGE Vaccine Hesitancy Working 
Group. Strategies for addressing vaccine 
hesitancy—a systematic review. http://
www.who.int/immunization/sage/meet-
ings/2014/october/3_SAGE_WG_Strate-
gies_addressing_vaccine_hesitancy_2014. 
Accessed January 15, 2016.
2.  
Dubé E, Gagnon D, Nickels E, et al. Map-
ping vaccine hesitancy—country-specific 
characteristics of a global phenomenon. 
Vaccine. 2014;32(49):6649-6654.
3.  
State Vaccination Requirements. Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention Web 
Site. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/imz-
managers/laws/state-reqs.html. Accessed 
January 15, 2016.
4.  
Seither R, Masalovich S, Knighton CL, et 
al. Vaccination Coverage Among Children 
in Kindergarten—United States, 2013–14 
School Year. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention Web Site. http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6341a1.htm. Accessed January 15, 2016.
5.  
Kennedy A, Lavail K, Nowak G, et al. Con-
fidence about vaccines in the United States: 
understanding parents’ perceptions. Health 
Aff (Millwood). 2011;30(6):1151-1159.
6.  
Imdad A, Tserenpuntsag B, Blog DS, et al. 
Religious exemptions for immunization 
and risk of pertussis in New York State, 
2000-2011. Pediatrics. 2013;132(1):37-43.
7.  
Wombwell E, Fangman MT, Yoder AK, Spe-
ro DL. Religious barriers to measles vacci-
nation. J Community Health. 2015;40(3):597-
604.
8.  
Fredrickson DD, Davis TC, Arnould CL, 
et al. Childhood immunization refusal: 
provider and parent perceptions. Fam Med. 
2004;36(6):431-439.
9.  
Saada A, Lieu TA, Morain SR, et al. Parents’ 
choices and rationales for alternative vac-
cination schedules: a qualitative study. Clin 
Pediatr (Phila). 2015;54(3):236-243.
10.  Harmsen IA, Mollema L, Ruiter RA, et al. 
Why parents refuse childhood vaccina-
tion: a qualitative study using online focus 
groups. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:1183.
11.  Thimerosal in vaccines. Food and Drug 
Administration Web Site. http://www.fda.
gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/SafetyAvail-
ability/VaccineSafety/UCM096228#bib. 
Accessed January 15, 2016.
12.  Kennedy A, Basket M, Sheedy K. Vaccine at-
titudes, concerns, and information sources 
reported by parents of young children: 
results from the 2009 HealthStyles survey. 
Pediatrics. 2011;127(suppl 1):S92-S99.
13.  Siddiqui M, Salmon DA, Omer SB. Epi-
demiology of vaccine hesitancy in the 
United States. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 
2013;9(12):2643-2648.
14.  Gust DA, Kennedy A, Shui I, et al. Par-
ent attitudes toward immunizations and 
healthcare providers the role of informa-
tion. Am J Prev Med. 2005;29(2):105-112.
15.  Williams SE, Rothman RL, Offit PA, et al. 
A randomized trial to increase acceptance 
of childhood vaccines by vaccine-hesi-
tant parents: a pilot study. Acad Pediatr. 
2013;13(5):475-480.
Parental Refusal of Vaccines
