 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 13
VIROLOGY
Rift Valley fever virus induces fetal demise in  
Sprague-Dawley rats through direct placental infection
Cynthia M. McMillen1,2, Nitin Arora3, Devin A. Boyles1,2, Joseph R. Albe1,2, Michael R. Kujawa1,2, 
Jeffrey F. Bonadio4, Carolyn B. Coyne5,6, Amy L. Hartman1,2*
Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) infections in pregnant livestock cause high rates of fetal demise; miscarriage in preg-
nant women has also been associated with RVFV infection. To address how RVFV infection during pregnancy 
causes detrimental effects on the fetus, we developed a pregnant rodent model of RVFV infection. We found that 
pregnant rats were more susceptible to RVFV-induced death than their nonpregnant counterparts and that RVFV 
infection resulted in intrauterine fetal death and severe congenital abnormalities, even in pups from infected asymp-
tomatic pregnant rats. Virus distribution in infected dams was widespread, with a previously unrecognized pref-
erence for infection, replication, and tissue damage in the placenta. In human mid-gestation placental tissue, 
RVFV directly infected placental chorionic villi, with replication detected in the outermost syncytial layer. Our work 
identifies direct placental infection by RVFV as a mechanism for vertical transmission. This is the first study to 
show vertical transmission of RVFV with a lethal outcome in a species other than livestock. This study highlights 
the potential impact of a future epidemic of this emerging mosquito-borne virus.
INTRODUCTION
Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a disease of domesticated livestock that is 
frequently transmitted to humans. RVF virus (RVFV; of the Phenuiviridae 
family, formerly Bunyaviridae) is currently endemic in many regions 
of Africa and is transmitted by a range of mosquito species (1). 
Prominent instances of emergence of RVFV in new areas (such as 
Egypt in 1977–1978 and Saudi Arabia in 2000–2001) have caused con-
cern for further spread given that mosquito species found in Europe 
and the Americas could potentially harbor and transmit RVFV (2, 3). 
The World Health Organization warns of a pending public health 
emergency caused by RVFV, which would be exacerbated by the 
lack of U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved human vac-
cines and therapeutics and insufficient agricultural vaccines (4).
Epizootic outbreaks of RVF predominantly affect young ruminants 
such as sheep, goats, cattle, and camels. Within a given outbreak, 
infected animals succumb to disease characterized by fulminant he-
patic necrosis (5). The most notable and economically devastating 
outcome of RVF is the “abortion storm” that sweeps through herds 
of pregnant livestock, with abortogenic rates reaching as high as 90 
to 100% in pregnant ewes (6, 7). Even live-attenuated veterinary vac-
cines induce abortions in pregnant animals and cause physical ab-
normalities in fetuses (8–10).
In humans, RVF disease is primarily an acute febrile illness ac-
companied by body aches, joint pain, dizziness, and headaches with 
occasional progression to hemorrhagic fever with major hepatic in-
volvement, ocular damage, and/or encephalitis. Data from human 
outbreaks, while limited, suggest that vertical transmission of RVFV 
to the developing human fetus can occur with detrimental outcomes. 
Two published cases of vertical transmission resulted in infection and 
pathological outcomes in the fetuses. In one instance, a pregnant 
woman became infected with RVFV, resulting in delivery of an infant 
with rash, enlarged liver and spleen, and jaundice (11). In another 
family where nine members recently contracted RVF (one of whom 
died), a pregnant woman showed clinical signs of RVF a few days 
before labor and delivered an infant who subsequently died of RVF 
within a week (12). In a recent study in Sudan, pregnant women with 
confirmed RVF illness during pregnancy had higher rates of second- 
and third-trimester miscarriages or stillbirths (odds ratio of 7.4) (13).
Given the high incidence of fetal abortions in livestock and the 
increased risk for miscarriage in RVFV-infected pregnant women, 
this study addressed vertical transmission of RVFV in non-livestock 
species and the susceptibility of human placental tissue to RVFV in-
fection. Using immunocompetent Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats infected 
with a wild-type pathogenic strain of RVFV, we demonstrate direct 
vertical transmission and intrauterine fetal death similar to that ob-
served in livestock. Vertical transmission occurred in dams that suc-
cumbed to disease; notably, vertical transmission also occurred in 
pregnant dams with no clinical signs of disease, even after infection 
during late gestation when the placenta is fully formed. Antenatal 
infection resulted in delivery of stillborn pups with stunted develop-
ment and gross anatomical changes. It was remarkable that the pla-
centa had a higher viral burden than the liver and other maternal 
organs, given that the liver typically has the highest titer of RVFV 
compared to other organs. Ex vivo inoculation of second-trimester 
human fetal tissue explants with RVFV resulted in active replication 
in the syncytiotrophoblast layer of the placenta, a structure typically 
resistant to viral infections (14, 15). This study recapitulates the tera-
togenic effects of RVFV infection in livestock and is the first rodent 
model of congenital RVFV to result in fetal demise. In addition, this 
is the first time RVFV has been shown to directly infect human pla-
cental tissue. This study also highlights the previously unrecognized 
and potentially severe effects of RVFV infection in pregnant women.
METHODS
Biosafety information
All work with live RVFV was conducted at biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) in the 
University of Pittsburgh Regional Biocontainment Laboratory (RBL). 
1Center for Vaccine Research, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 2De-
partment of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. 4Department of Pathology, Magee Women’s 
Hospital of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 5De-
partment of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA. 6Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh of the 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: hartman2@pitt.edu
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 13
For respiratory protection, personnel wore powered air- 
purifying 
respirators (Versaflo TR-300, 3M) and used a class III biological safety 
cabinet. All animals were housed in individually ventilated micro- 
isolator caging (Allentown Inc.). Vesphene IIse (1:128 dilution; Steris 
Corporation) was used to disinfect all liquid wastes and surfaces at 
risk of contact with the infectious agent. The RBL is a shower-out 
facility that requires a full clothing change into scrubs before entry 
and a personal shower and new scrubs upon exit. All solid wastes, 
used caging, and animal wastes were steam sterilized. Animal car-
casses were incinerated or digested via alkaline hydrolysis (Peerless 
Waste Solutions). All tissues or samples destined for removal from 
BSL-3 were inactivated using methods described below; all inactivation 
methods have been verified and approved by a University of Pittsburgh 
biosafety oversight committee. The University of Pittsburgh RBL is 
a registered entity with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
and the U.S. Department of Agriculture for work with RVFV.
Virus and cell culture
Virulent RVFV strain ZH501, generated from reverse genetics plasmids 
(16), was provided by B. Miller (CDC, Ft. Collins, CO) and S. Nichol 
(CDC, Atlanta). Virus was propagated on Vero E6 (CRL-1586, American 
Type Culture Collection) cells using standard methods. Viral titer 
was determined by standard viral plaque assay (VPA). Briefly, 200 l 
of tissue homogenates or supernatant serially diluted in D2 medium 
[Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), 2% fetal bovine 
serum (FBS), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin] was plated on six-well 
plates (Corning) containing Vero E6 cells at 90 to 95% confluency. 
Plates were incubated (37°C, 5% CO2) for 1 hour for viral adsorp-
tion and rocked every 15 min. Following incubation, the virus inocu-
lum was removed and replaced with 3 ml of agarose overlay [minimum 
essential medium, 2% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1.5% (1 M) 
Hepes buffer, and 0.8% SeaKem agarose]. Plates were incubated for 
3 days at 37°C, 5% CO2 to allow plaque formation. Plates were treated 
with 2 ml of 10% formaldehyde for 4 hours for cell fixation and virus 
inactivation. Plaques were visualized after crystal violet (CV) staining 
(0.1% CV solution in 20% EtOH) and quantitated using the follow-
ing equation: Average no. of plaques × 5 (dilution factor) × dilution = 
plaque forming unit (PFU)/ml.
Animals
Age-matched nonpregnant and time-mated SD rats (6 to 8 weeks) were 
obtained from Envigo Laboratories. A positive copulation plug veri-
fied pregnancy for early-gestation [embryonic day 5 (E5)] and late- 
gestation (E14) females. All pregnant rats were delivered to individual 
cages, and nonpregnant rats were housed three to a cage in temperature- 
controlled rooms with a 12-hour day/12-hour night light schedule. 
Food (IsoPro Rodent 3000) and water were provided ad libitum. Rats 
were implanted with programmable temperature transponders (IPTT-
300, Bio Medic Data Systems) subcutaneously between the shoulder 
blades. For infection, all rats were anesthetized by inhalation of isoflu-
rane vapors (IsoThesia, Henry Schein) and inoculated subcutaneously 
in the hind flank with 500 l of RVFV diluted in D2 medium. Weight and 
body temperature were recorded daily starting the day of infection. In 
addition, each animal was closely monitored twice daily for the develop-
ment of clinical signs. Endpoint criteria, which prompt immediate 
euthanasia, were defined on the basis of weight, temperature, appear-
ance, and behavioral scoring parameters. Once euthanasia criteria were 
met, rats were anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane vapors, followed 
by an immediate blood draw and euthanasia by cardiac puncture.
Rats were inoculated on E14 with the following doses of RVFV 
strain ZH501: 7.5 × 101 PFU (n = 5), 1.8 × 102 PFU (n = 6), 1.5 × 103 
PFU (n = 11), and 2.6 × 104 PFU (n = 6). Unless dams met euthanasia 
criteria, they progressed to full-term and delivered pups on E22 
[8 days postinfection (dpi)]. After delivery, dams and pups were not 
disturbed until 5 days postdelivery (13 dpi) to reduce stress. Added 
stress on the dams can lead to consumption of newborn pups by dam 
(17). Weight monitoring of pups began on neonatal day 5 (13 dpi) 
until 18 dpi when both dam and pups were euthanized at the prede-
termined end of the study (Fig. 1A).
One rat at E5 was infected with 1.5 × 105 PFU of RVFV. A non-
infected dam at E5 gestation was observed in parallel. Dams were 
euthanized at a predetermined date of 7 dpi, corresponding to E13.
Age-matched nonpregnant rats were inoculated with the follow-
ing doses of RVFV strain ZH501: 3.1 × 103 PFU (n = 11), 3.5 × 104 
PFU (n = 5), and 1.3 × 105 PFU (n = 6). Unless the nonpregnant rats 
met euthanasia criteria and were euthanized, the rats were euthanized 
at a predetermined end date of the study at 16 dpi.
Upon necropsy, tissues were harvested and suspended in 2× 
weight/volume D2 media and homogenized using an Omni tissue 
homogenizer (Omni International). Tissue homogenates were used 
to quantitate infectious virus by VPA inside the BSL-3 facility. For 
quantitation of RVFV-specific viral RNA (vRNA) by quantitative 
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analy-
sis, 100 l of each tissue homogenate was inactivated in 900 l of 
Tri-Reagent (Invitrogen) for 10 min before removal from the BSL-3 
facility. Subsequent storage at −80°C or RNA isolation and qRT-PCR 
analyses occurred in a BSL-2 setting.
RNA isolation and qRT-PCR
RNA isolation was performed using a modified Invitrogen PureLink 
Viral RNA/DNA kit protocol. Briefly, 200 l of chloroform was added 
to the tissue homogenate/Tri-Reagent, mixed, and then centrifuged 
at 4°C at 12,000g for 15 min to separate the organic phase from the 
aqueous phase (contains RNA). The aqueous phase of the cell ly-
sates was collected and then mixed with an equal volume of 70% etha-
nol, and then the sample was applied to the PureLink spin column. The 
PureLink Viral RNA/DNA kit protocol, including deoxyribonuclease 
treatment, was followed for the remainder of RNA isolation procedure. 
qRT-PCR was performed using the SuperScript III Platinum One-Step 
qRT-PCR Kit (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s guidelines. 
Primers targeting the RVFV L segment include 5′-TGAAAATTCCT-
GAGACACATGG-3′ (RVFV-2912Fwd) and 5′-ACTTCCTTGCAT-
CATCTGATG-3′ (RVFV-2912Rev). Taqman probe (RVFV-2950 Probe 
5′-CAATGTAA GGGGCCTGTGTGGACTTGTG-3′) was labeled at 
the 5′ end with the reporter molecule 6-carboxyfluorescein (6-FAM) 
and quenched internally at a modified “T” residue with BHQ1 (Black 
Hole Quencher), with a modified 3′ end to prevent probe extension by 
Taq polymerase. Thermocycling parameters include the following: 
reverse transcription, 50°C for 30 min; Taq polymerase inhibitor acti-
vation, 95°C for 2 min; PCR amplification, 95°C for 15 s; and 55°C 
for 30 s (40 cycles). Semiquantitation of virus was determined by 
comparing cycle threshold (CT) values from unknown samples to CT 
values from the in-house developed ZH501 RVFV RNA standards 
based on PFU equivalents “PFU/ml eq”.
In situ infection of human tissue
Human placental tissue isolated within the second trimester (14 to 23 
weeks) from elective terminations of normal (nongenetically abnormal) 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 13
Fig. 1. Pregnant rats are more susceptible to death after RVFV infection, with virus homing to the liver and placenta. (A) Experimental design for E14 SD rats in-
fected with RVFV. After delivery at E22, dams and pups were not disturbed until 5 days postdelivery (13 dpi). Euthanasia of surviving dams and pups occurred 18 dpi 
(10 days postdelivery). (B) Survival of RVFV-infected pregnant dams and nonpregnant SD rats (n = 3 to 6 per dose). The shaded area represents the 2- to 6-day clinical window 
when lethally infected pregnant rats were euthanized owing to severe disease. (C) vRNA (qRT-PCR; left) and infectious virus (VPA; right) in tissues from pregnant rats that 
succumbed (red squares; n = 17) between 2 and 6 dpi. (D) vRNA in tissue samples from pregnant rats that survived infection (blue circles; n = 11) and were eutha 
nized 18 dpi. 
Placenta samples (open blue circles) were obtained at day of delivery (8 dpi). (E) Infectious virus measured by VPA in placental samples obtained from lethally infected (red squares) 
and surviving (blue circles) rats at the indicated dpi. CLN, cervical lymph node. Dotted horizontal lines represent the limits of detection (LOD) of the qRT-PCR (0.1 PFU/ml eq) 
and VPA (50 PFU). ND, not detected (below the LOD); PFU, plaque-forming unit; PFU/ml eq, PFU per milliliter equivalents; VPA, viral plaque assay; vRNA, viral RNA.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 13
pregnancies was obtained from the University of Pittsburgh Health 
Sciences Tissue Bank through an honest broker system after ap-
proval from the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board 
and in accordance with the University of Pittsburgh anatomical tis-
sue procurement guidelines.
Amnion (fetal membrane), decidua (maternal tissue), and chori-
onic villi were separated from whole placental tissue and cut to 1 cm 
by 1 cm sections. Each tissue section was placed in a well of a 
24-well plate (Corning) and inoculated with the following doses of 
RVFV strain ZH501, in duplicate: 1.6 × 107 PFU (n = 2 per donor), 
3.0 × 10 6 PFU, 3.0 × 10 5 PFU, 3.0 × 10 4 PFU, or 3.0 × 10 3 PFU (n = 4 
per donor unless otherwise stated). Five hundred microliters of 
virus diluted in D2 media was added to each tissue and incubated in 
a 37°C incubator for 1 hour for viral adsorption. The inoculum was 
removed, washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and 
then replaced with 1 ml of complete growth medium (DMEM/F12, 
10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and amphotericin B). To gen-
erate a viral growth curve, 50 l was collected from each tissue every 
12 hours for 48 hours and analyzed by qRT-PCR. Forty-eight hours 
after infection, all supernatant was collected, and tissues were washed 
two times with PBS and then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) 
for 24 hours for fluorescent microscopy imaging. Tissues or super-
natant was analyzed in quadruplicate; two of these tissues were pro-
cessed for fluorescent microscopy.
Fluorescent microscopy
Human tissue was fixed in 4% PFA for 24 hours at 4°C, washed in 
1× PBS, and then permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100 in 1× PBS 
for 30 min at room temperature with gentle agitation. Tissue was 
washed and then incubated with antibodies to double-stranded RNA 
[dsRNA; recombinant J2, as described previously (14)] and rabbit 
anti–cytokeratin-19 (Abcam) and counterstained with actin (using 
Alexa Fluor–conjugated phalloidin) for 1 hour at room temperature. 
Following washing with 1× PBS, tissue was incubated with Alexa 
Fluor–conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen), washed, and 
then mounted with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories) containing 
4′,6- 
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images were captured using 
a Zeiss LSM 710 inverted laser scanning confocal microscope and 
contrast adjusted in Photoshop. Quantification of the extent of RVFV 
infection was performed using Fiji (National Institutes of Health). 
Regions of interest of the syncytium from four different donors were 
defined using Fiji, and the extent of RVFV infection (as assessed by 
the relative fluorescent units) was quantified. In total, 11 villi were 
quantified from uninfected controls and 16 villi were quantified from 
RVFV infected tissue.
Histology
For fixation of tissues and inactivation of virus, tissues were sub-
merged for 24 hours in 4% PFA at 4°C. Before removal from the 
BSL-3 laboratory, 4% PFA was replaced with fresh 4% PFA. In the 
BSL-2 laboratory, 4% PFA was removed and washed from tissue 
with 1× PBS, submerged in PBS, and stored at 4°C until processed 
further. Tissues were paraffin embedded, and sections were cut onto 
slides following standard histological processes by the University of 
Pittsburgh McGowan Institute Histology Core.
Whole pups were submerged in 4% PFA for 24 hours. To ensure 
complete inactivation, pups were cut in half laterally and then ex-
posed to 4% PFA for another 24 hours before removal from the 
BSL-3 laboratory. Half pups were further cut into whole head and 
abdomen sections in the BSL-2 laboratory before embedding in 
paraffin and cut onto slides.
Slides were deparaffinized using an alcohol rehydration series 
and then stained following standard hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
staining procedures. For immunohistochemistry, fixed slides were 
deparaffinized using an alcohol rehydration series and boiled in 
10 mM citric acid buffer (pH 6.0) to unmask antigen-binding epitopes. 
Primary antibody was IBT Bioservices Rift Valley fever MP12 anti-
body (catalog no. 04-001); secondary antibody was Vector Labora-
tories biotinylated horse anti-rabbit (H+L) (catalog no. BA-1000). 
Chromogen staining for visualization was carried out using a Vector 
Laboratories Vector Blue Alkaline Phosphatase Substrate kit accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s instructions. Slides were imaged using the 
Nikon 90i Eclipse epifluorescent microscope provided by the Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh Center for Biologic Imaging.
Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad Prism 7.0. Sur-
vival of pup and dams was compared using Mann-Whitney U test. 
Growth curve of pups 7 and 8 from dam 4 was calculated using 
linear regression modeling. Intensity of RVFV immunostaining in 
uninfected and infected human placental tissue was compared using 
a t test.
RESULTS
Susceptibility of late-gestation pregnant SD rats to RVFV 
disease and death
Rats develop severe disease after RVFV infection, similar to the se-
vere liver pathology often observed in domesticated livestock and 
occasionally in humans (18, 19). We have previously used rats to 
study different disease outcomes resulting from RVFV infection 
(18, 20). Although there are notable morphologic differences be-
tween the placentas of humans and rodents, rats are often used to 
study placental development, embryogenesis, embryotoxicity, and 
vaccine teratogenicity during pregnancy (21–23). The fully intact 
placenta forms a physical barrier between the mother and fetus, fa-
cilitates nutrient exchange, and protects the developing fetus from 
microbial invasion. The gestational period for rats is 22 days, and by 
E14, the placenta is fully formed with deep trophoblast invasion 
within the uterine wall (21).
For these studies, time-mated SD rats at E14 were infected with 
the pathogenic ZH501 strain of RVFV by subcutaneous injection in 
the hind flank (Fig. 1A). As controls, age-matched, nonpregnant 
rats were similarly infected. Some rats developed severe disease as a 
result of infection, and in these cases, euthanasia endpoint criteria 
were met within 2 to 6 dpi in both pregnant and nonpregnant groups 
(Fig. 1B). Rats that survived infection had few signs of disease and 
delivered pups on E22. Surviving pups were not handled until 5 days 
postdelivery, after which they were weighed daily. Surviving dams 
and pups were euthanized at the end of the study (neonatal age of 
10 days; 18 dpi) (Fig. 1A).
The pregnant rats were more susceptible to death after infection 
than their nonpregnant counterparts (Fig. 1B). Nonpregnant rats 
survived infection despite exposure to high doses of RVFV (only 2 
of 22 died; 9%), whereas 57% of pregnant rats died (16 of 28) when 
exposed to even low doses of RVFV (P = 0.0008). Within the preg-
nant rat cohort, there was no association between death after infec-
tion and the administered dose (P = 0.321).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 13
Reproductive tissues are targets of RVFV infection in 
pregnant and nonpregnant rats
The distribution of virus throughout the tissues was measured by 
qRT-PCR and/or VPA in pregnant rats that succumbed to lethal 
disease (2 to 6 dpi; Fig. 1C), pregnant rats that survived (18 dpi; 
Fig. 1D), and their nonpregnant counterparts (16 dpi for survivors; 
fig. S1, A and B). Infectious virus was widely distributed throughout 
the animals that succumbed, regardless of pregnancy status. In sur-
viving animals at 18 dpi, infectious viral burden was not detected in 
both pregnant and nonpregnant rats. vRNA, however, remained wide-
ly distributed in the survivors at the end of the study, 18 dpi (Fig. 1D). 
As expected, because RVFV is a hepatotropic virus, the liver con-
tained large amounts of infectious virus in lethally infected rats (preg-
nant and nonpregnant; Fig. 1C and fig. S1B), and large amounts of 
vRNA remained in the liver of survivors at 18 and 16 dpi, respectively 
(Fig. 1D and fig. S1A).
Placental samples were available from the pregnant rats that suc-
cumbed to disease and a few that survived (most surviving rats con-
sumed the placenta at the time of delivery and were not available for 
analysis; Fig. 1E). The placenta contained high levels of infectious 
virus measured by plaque assay regardless of the time after infec-
tion. Even the placentas obtained from the surviving rats on the day 
of delivery contained extraordinary amounts of infectious virus, 
with one animal having over 109 PFU/ml.
In addition to the placenta, the uterus, ovary, and amniotic sac 
contained infectious virus in the lethally infected rats (Fig. 1C), and 
vRNA persisted in these tissues in survivors (Fig. 1D). Virus was 
also found in the mammary glands (four of five rats had detectable 
vRNA and one had infectious virus), indicating that vertical trans-
mission of RVFV from dam to pup could possibly occur through 
lactation. There is a concern that consumption of raw milk from 
goats and cattle may be a risk for human infection with RVFV (24).
Compared to controls, histology sections of livers from lethally 
infected pregnant (Fig. 2) and nonpregnant (fig. S1C) rats displayed 
a reproducible pattern of tissue injury that included widespread sinus-
oidal congestion, multifocal recent hemorrhage, massive hepato-
cyte necrosis, and acute inflammation. These are classic histological 
findings in animals infected with RVFV (25). In addition, the livers 
of infected rats had high levels of RVFV antigen (fig. S1, D and E). 
Together, our data suggest that both pregnant and nonpregnant rats 
succumb to infection following massive liver necrosis, although preg-
nant rats are more susceptible to developing disease after exposure 
to low levels of virus compared to nonpregnant rats (Fig. 1B).
The placentas from lethally and sublethally infected dams dis-
played a reproducible pattern of tissue injury that included multifocal 
necrosis and recent hemorrhage in the decidua and trophospongiosum, 
vascular congestion and massive necrosis of parenchymal cells within 
the labyrinth, and an acute intravascular and perivascular inflam-
matory infiltrate associated with intraplacental arteries (Fig. 2, A 
and B). A discernible increase in circulating nucleated red blood cells 
was also seen.
Within lethally infected dams, necrotic lesions were found within 
the uterus (Fig. 2A). Several pregnant dams that survived infec-
tion had subserosal nodules within the myometrium of the uterus 
that showed evidence of liquefactive necrosis, acute inflammation, 
and calcification. Despite the presence of vRNA and infectious 
RVFV within the ovaries of both nonpregnant (fig. S1, A and B) and 
pregnant (Fig. 1, C and D) RVFV-infected rats, reproducible histo-
pathological changes were not observed.
RVFV vRNA was also found in the testes of infected male Lewis 
rats (fig. S2). The levels of RVFV vRNA and infectious particles 
found here in the uterus, ovary, placenta, amniotic sac, mammary 
glands, and testes, as well as the histological damage in certain tis-
sues, demonstrate that RVFV has a previously unappreciated pref-
erence for targeting the reproductive tissues.
Direct vertical transmission of RVFV to pups during late 
gestation results in pup deformity and demise
Within the pregnant dams that succumbed to RVFV infection at 
2 to 6 dpi, virus was widespread throughout various tissues, corrobo-
rating the pantropic nature of RVFV (Fig. 1C). Within the correspond-
ing pups from these dams that died, qRT-PCR of the peritoneal 
cavity or brains also detected high levels of vRNA (Fig. 3A). Vertical 
transmission occurred while the pups were in utero, as the dams 
were euthanized before delivery.
Because most humans develop nonlethal febrile illness when in-
fected with RVFV, we were interested in the outcome of the pups 
from dams that survived infection with few to no clinical signs. 
Many of the pups born from these surviving, clinically normal dams 
were dead at delivery or shortly thereafter (Fig. 3B). Of 10 pregnant 
dams that survived infection and reached full-term (E22), all gave 
birth to at least one pup that died either due to infection or con-
sumption on the days following delivery. An additional dam sur-
vived to full-term; however, all pups were consumed by this dam 
and were unable to be recorded for analysis.
The 11 infected dams gave birth to a total of 111 pups, 39 of 
which survived (35.1%). In comparison, of the eight uninfected 
control dams, 66 of 88 (75.0%) pups survived to the end of the study 
(P < 0.0001). Dams are known to eat their young owing to stress 
(such as the laboratorian disturbing the pups to weigh them after 
delivery) or if they notice abnormalities (17). Some of the uninfected 
dams consumed their pups during this study; thus, the survival rate 
of the pups from uninfected dams can be considered the baseline 
for these experimental conditions. The average survival rate of pups 
per litter delivered by infected dams was 27.2%, whereas uninfected 
rats were 2.45 times more likely to survive (66.8%, P = 0.02). Out-
comes from four specific dam cases are presented and discussed in 
the following section.
Overall, we detected very high levels of vRNA (106 to 107 PFU/ml eq) 
in the peritoneal cavity of stillborn pups birthed by dams that had 
no apparent clinical disease (Fig. 3B). It is quite notable that the 
virus was vertically transmitted and replicated to high levels in the 
pups while causing no clinical disease in the dam herself. vRNA was 
also detected in the brains of pups from both surviving and lethally 
infected dams (Fig. 3, A and B). Fetal resorption is characteristic of 
vertical transmission in animals infected with viruses such as Zika 
virus (26) and vesicular stomatitis virus (27). Evidence of fetal 
resorption occurred in three lethally infected dams exposed to RVFV 
during late-stage gestation (Fig. 3C and fig. S3).
H&E sections of whole pups from lethally infected dams showed 
significant liver damage (massive parenchymal necrosis, vascular 
congestion, and areas of recent hemorrhage; Fig. 3D). Pups also 
displayed altered intestinal structure compared to pups from un-
infected dams.
During the late stages of pregnancy, RVFV is directly transmit-
ted to the developing pups, resulting in increased rates of death 
and tissue damage. This is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon 
within individual litters, as we found that physical changes and 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 13
survival varied within the same litter. To illustrate this, four selected 
cases are described below.
Description of individual dam cases
Dam 1 reached full-term gestation with no apparent clinical signs or 
significant liver damage, yet she still died giving birth (8 dpi). Dam 1 
delivered 11 pups that were all dead upon delivery, with 2 pups remain-
ing within the uterus at the time of her demise (Fig. 4A). Like other 
RVFV-infected dams, vRNA was widespread throughout the dam’s tis-
sues (Fig. 4B). Because this dam died during delivery, the placenta was 
available to directly compare the virus burden of the placenta to other 
maternal tissues harvested at the same time. In the other cases dis-
cussed below, the dams ate placentas after birth, so they were un-
available to sample. Notably, at the time of death, dam 1 had 107 PFU/ml 
of virus in the placenta, which is 4 logs more vRNA than the liver and 
Fig. 2. RVFV causes pathology within the liver, uterus, and placenta of pregnant dams. H&E staining within the indicated tissues. (A) Images (20×) of liver, uterus, 
and placenta. (B) Images (60×) of placenta. Blue, white, yellow, orange, and green arrowheads highlight evidence of hemorrhaging, necrosis, vascular/perivascular con-
gestion, calcification, and nucleated red blood cells, respectively.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 13
spleen, the primary targets of the virus (Fig. 4B). In addition, the uterus 
and ovary had about 1 log more vRNA than the liver and spleen, demon-
strating a preference for RVFV to replicate within reproductive tissues.
The stillborn pups from dam 1 had apparent gross abnormalities 
(small, rounded head and gray discoloration) and variable size (1.5 to 
3 cm) compared to uninfected pups (5 cm; Fig. 4A). Nine of the 
Fig. 3. Infection of pregnant dams results in direct transmission of RVFV to the peritoneum and brain of pups. Pups delivered from (A) lethally infected and 
(B) surviving pregnant rats were tested for vRNA within the peritoneal cavity (left) and brain (right). In (A), the x axis represents the day the dams were euthanized owing to 
severe disease. In (B), the x axis represents the day after delivery, with day 10 representing surviving pups euthanized at the end of the study. For both graphs, red square 
data points indicate pup demise and blue circle data points indicate pup survival. Open data points are pup brain tissues; all closed data points are pup peritoneal cavity. 
(C) Photographic evidence of fetal resorption within the uterus of one of three dams that succumbed to RVFV infection. (D) Images (10×) of whole pups were examined 
for histological changes. H&E staining of a whole pup from a dam that succumbed to infection (right) or a corresponding uninfected control rat (left) euthanized at the 
same day of gestation. Blue, white, and black arrowheads highlight evidence of hemorrhaging, necrosis, and altered intestinal structure, respectively.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 13
11 pups (82%) had abnormally shaped heads compared to unin-
fected pups. Pups 6 and 7 likely died earlier in utero, as indicated by 
their small size and apparent decomposition; both of their heads 
were disproportionately large owing to early gestational demise. 
While the other pups were larger than pups 6 and 7, none of them 
were normal in size, and they were all born deceased. The pups 
had very high levels of vRNA (106 to 107 PFU/ml eq, irrespective 
of pup size; Fig. 4C). Less infectious virus was recovered from 
the pups compared to vRNA (Fig. 4, C and D), likely due to the 
inability to preserve tissue immediately after death because pups 
succumb to infection in utero or shortly after delivery. This trend 
is observed for all representative dams (Figs. 4 and 5); otherwise, 
RVFV infectivity correlates very closely with qRT-PCR results as 
seen in Fig. 1.
Fig. 4. Vertical transmission of RVFV in two dams resulted in stillborn pups with physical abnormalities and high viral titers. (A to D) Dam 1 was inoculated with 
175 PFU and died giving birth at 8 dpi. Dam 1 delivered 13 stillborn pups, with 2 remaining in the uterus. (A) Pictures of individual pups are shown as numbered. Uterus 
with pups 13 and 14 within birth canal after demise. (B) vRNA within maternal tissue. (C) vRNA and (D) infectious virus within peritoneal cavity of indicated pups. The three 
pups not included in the graphs were used for other analyses. (E to H) Dam 2 was inoculated with 175 PFU and survived with no clinical signs of disease. Dam 2 delivered 
seven pups to full-term; five were dead and two were alive but subsequently consumed by the dam (data not available). (E) Pictures of individual pups as labeled. A nor-
mal pup from an uninfected dam is shown for comparison. (F) vRNA within maternal tissue. (G) vRNA and (H) infectious virus within peritoneal cavity of indicated pups. 
For all graphs, red square data points indicate either dam or pup demise. Blue circle data points indicate dam or pup survival.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 13
Fig. 5. Evidence of variable survival and developmental outcome of pups resulting from vertical transmission. (A to E) Dam 3 was inoculated with 175 PFU and 
survived with no clinical signs of disease. Dam 3 delivered 10 pups to full-term; 6 were dead and 4 were alive. Two living pups were consumed by the dam within 2 days 
of birth (data not available). Two remaining pups survived to the end of the study (pups 7 and 8). (B) vRNA within maternal tissue. (C) vRNA and (D) infectious virus within 
peritoneal cavity of indicated pups. (E) Weight of surviving pups from dam 3 from days 5 to 10 neonate. The black line and the gray line represent growth curve calculated 
by linear regression modeling of pups 7 and 8, respectively. (F to J) Dam 4 was inoculated with 1300 PFU and survived with no clinical signs of disease. Dam 4 delivered 
nine stillborn pups. (F) Pictures of individual pups as labeled. (G) vRNA within maternal tissue. (H) vRNA and (I) infectious virus within peritoneal cavity of indicated pups. 
(J) Cage of dam 4 as it was found on day of pup delivery (E22; 8 dpi).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 13
Dam 2 survived infection with no apparent clinical signs. vRNA 
was still detected throughout the dam at 18 dpi, with the highest 
burden in reproductive tissues and the brain (Fig. 4F). At E22, she 
delivered seven pups; five were born dead and two were alive. Both 
living pups were consumed by the dam within a day of birth. Dams 
periodically eat their young because of stress or if they notice abnor-
malities in their pups (17). The pups shown in Fig. 4E are around 5 cm 
in length, which is normal for full-gestation pups. Several have dark- 
colored bodies, likely signifying decomposing tissue and/or blood 
congealment. Smaller, rounded heads without a pointed snout were 
observed in three of the seven pups (pups 2, 3, and 5). Despite pup 
1 having physical features and length similar to those of a normal pup 
delivered from an uninfected mother (Fig. 4E), vRNA and infec-
tious virus were highest in this pup compared to its littermates that 
had more severe gross anatomical abnormalities (Fig. 4, G and H). 
This may be due to more advanced decomposition setting in pups 
2, 3, and 5 that affected virus infectivity.
In another case, dam 3 also survived infection with no clinical signs 
of disease and had widespread vRNA in tissues at 18 dpi (Fig. 5B). She 
delivered 10 pups at full-term (E22); 6 pups were born deceased and 
4 were alive. Two of the living pups survived until the scheduled eutha-
nasia date (18 dpi; 10 days neonate), whereas the other two were con-
sumed by the dam within 2 days postdelivery. Pups 1 and 2 from dam 
3 were relatively normal in appearance; however, they were born de-
ceased and displayed the highest vRNA (Fig. 5C) and infectious virus 
(Fig. 5D) burden compared to littermates with physical abnormali-
ties; this could be due to the more recent demise of pups 1 and 2, which 
preserved infectious virus until tissue was collected. The pups that die 
earlier in utero likely have less infectious virus due to decomposition, 
which affects virus viability. Despite pups 7 and 8 surviving until 
planned euthanasia at neonatal age of 10 days with no signs of dis-
ease or gross abnormalities, vRNA was still detected in the peritone-
al cavity of these pups, although infectious virus was not found 
(Fig. 5, C and D). Pup 7 weighed significantly less than its littermate, 
and both had similar growth rates (slope = 1.88 for pup 7 and slope = 
2.26 for pup 8; P = 0.14) after birth (Fig. 5E). It is unclear whether this 
is natural variation in pup size or an effect of viral infection in utero.
Last, dam 4 had no signs of clinical disease and delivered a total 
of nine deceased pups at full-term (Fig. 5F). Multiple pups were found 
encapsulated in an amniotic sac and/or still connected to a placenta 
(Fig. 5J). Placenta collected the day of delivery had high levels of 
vRNA (105 PFU/ml eq); the vRNA levels in the placenta were simi-
lar to that found in the pups, regardless of pup size (Fig. 4, H and I). 
Seven of nine pups (78%) had abnormally shaped heads compared 
to uninfected pups. The pups had gross abnormalities and varied in 
color from pink to gray to black. Infectious virus was detected in 
five of nine pups (Fig. 4I). The smallest pup (pup 11) measured at 
about 2.2 cm, while the largest pup from the litter was about 4.1 cm 
in length; all pups from this litter were still smaller than pups deliv-
ered from uninfected dams (typically 5 cm).
The four dams highlighted above, despite being asymptomatic, 
had liquefactive myonecrosis within the uterus (Fig. 2). The placenta 
also had notable abnormalities, including inflammation, cell necrosis, 
and hemorrhage in the decidua and villous structures (Fig. 2, A and B).
Vertical transmission of RVFV in an early-gestation  
pregnant rat
To examine the potential for vertical transmission of RVFV before 
the development of a fully formed placenta, an early-gestation (E5) 
SD dam was infected with 1.5 × 105 PFU of RVFV. An uninfected, 
age-matched, pregnant dam served as a control. At 7 dpi, correspond-
ing to E13, neither dam had clinical signs of disease, and both dams 
underwent planned euthanasia (fig. S4A). The observed virus distri-
bution in the early-gestation pregnant rat resembled that of the late- 
gestation pregnant rats (fig. S4B and Fig. 1). Infectious virus was 
detected in the cervical lymph node, spleen, liver, and placenta, with 
the placenta containing 3 logs more infectious virus than the spleen 
(106 PFU/ml versus 103 PFU/ml, respectively; fig. S4B). Because of 
the small size of each embryo at this gestational age, embryonic tis-
sue from the entire litter was pooled and analyzed for the presence 
of vRNA and infectious particles (fig. S4C). Pooled embryos had 
2 logs more vRNA and infectious virus than the spleen of the dam 
(106.5 PFU/ml versus 103 PFU/ml, respectively).
At the time of euthanasia, the uninfected dam had a healthy 
uterus containing 14 embryos, all with similar sizes, shapes, and a 
translucent pale yellow coloring. Of the 16 embryos of the infected 
dam, 4 (25%) were red in color (fig. S4D) instead of the pale yellow 
coloring observed in the remaining 12 embryos and embryos of the 
uninfected control (fig. S4D, left). Three embryos were smaller than 
the embryos from the rest of the litter. They lacked amniotic fluid 
and were palpably dense and hard in appearance (fig. S4D, embryos 
4 to 6); embryos 4 and 5 were two of the four red in color. The red 
coloring and rigid appearance and structure of embryos from in-
fected dams suggest early hemorrhaging and/or resorption of the 
embryos. These results show that RVFV is vertically transmitted to 
embryos of dams infected during early gestation, with a preferential 
niche within the placental tissue.
Replication of RVFV in human placental tissue
Although two isolated cases of vertical transmission have been re-
ported in humans from Africa and the Middle East (11, 12) and a 
single study highlighted the potential of RVFV-infected women to 
be four times more likely to have a late miscarriage or stillbirth (13), 
the effect of RVFV infection on the developing human fetus is not 
known. To evaluate whether human fetal tissue is permissive to 
RVFV infection and replication, placental chorionic villi were ob-
tained from healthy human donors undergoing elective termina-
tion at 16 to 23 weeks of gestation (second trimester). Tissues were 
inoculated in vitro with RVFV, and explant supernatant was col-
lected every 12 hours for measurement of viral replication. Similar 
viral growth kinetics was seen in chorionic villi from two different 
donors (Fig. 6A); 2 to 3 log increase in virus production was detected 
between 12 and 36 hours after infection.
To identify the cell type(s) targeted by RVFV in placental villi, we 
performed immunostaining for dsRNA as previously described (14). 
Viral replication, as assessed by the production dsRNA, was evident 
in the villi, with replication observed in both the syncytial layer and the 
subsyncytial layers within mononuclear cytotrophoblasts (Fig. 6B). 
Significantly higher levels of dsRNA signal were detected in infected 
villi from four different donors compared to uninfected villi from the 
same donors (Fig. 6C). These data suggest that RVFV exhibits tropism 
for human placental tissue and can replicate to some degree in syncy-
tiotrophoblasts, which are known to resist many viruses (28).
DISCUSSION
Viral infections in pregnant women can have adverse effects on both 
the mother and the developing fetus. Pregnant women are likely to 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 13
have more severe pathology, more serious complications, and an 
increased risk of death compared to nonpregnant women (29). For 
both seasonal and pandemic influenza, pregnant women are more 
susceptible to developing severe complications requiring hospital-
ization (30, 31). Other emerging viruses, such as Ebola and Lassa, 
are also more severe or deadly in pregnant women (32, 33). Here, 
we found pregnant rats to be more susceptible to severe disease and 
death after RVFV infection than their nonpregnant counterparts. 
Necrosis of the liver was characteristic of disease in both pregnant 
and nonpregnant rats, indicating that pregnancy did not alter the 
disease presentation but rather made the pregnant animals more sus-
ceptible to severe disease overall.
A 1987 study of pregnant women in Mozambique showed that 
women with miscarriage or stillbirth had the same prevalence of 
RVFV- 
specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies as women with 
normal deliveries (34). However, detection of IgG antibodies is in-
dicative of past exposure to RVFV and not necessarily acute infec-
tion during pregnancy. In a more recent cross-sectional study in 
Sudan, there was a significant association between RVFV infection 
during pregnancy and miscarriage (13). Of the women with con-
firmed RVFV infections and disease during pregnancy, 54% had 
miscarriage compared to 12% in uninfected women. RVFV infection 
was an independent predictor of miscarriage (odds ratio of 7.4); 
all of these miscarriages occurred in the second and third trimes-
ters (13). While this is only one study, it strongly implicates RVFV 
infection as a causative agent of miscarriage in late gestation. Mis-
carriage earlier in pregnancy due to RVF may also occur but remain 
underreported.
Two cases of vertical transmission of RVFV were documented in 
Saudi Arabia (2000) and Sudan (2007) (11, 12). In both cases, onset 
of RVF-like illness in the mothers occurred around 37 to 38 weeks of 
gestation. In the 2 weeks before illness in the Saudi woman, six fam-
ily members developed RVF-like illness and one died of confirmed 
RVF. The woman developed RVF-like symptoms 4 days before de-
livery of a full-term infant at home. On the second day of life, the 
infant was hospitalized with respiratory distress, jaundice, and leth-
argy. He died 6 days after admission with hemorrhagic signs and an 
enlarged liver. In the Sudanese patient, labor commenced within 
10 days of illness onset, and an infant was born with skin rash, palpable 
liver and spleen, and an Apgar score of 5. Samples from the mother 
and cord blood tested positive for RVFV IgM. The outcome of this 
infant is not known. Together, these data suggest that RVFV infec-
tion is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes during the sec-
ond and third trimesters. Vertical transmission and miscarriage due 
Fig. 6. RVFV replicates in human placental tissue, even the highly resistant syncytiotrophoblasts within placenta villi. Human chorionic villous tissue explants 
from donors 1 and 2 (A) were infected in vitro with RVFV at the indicated doses and then the supernatant was harvested at 0, 12, 24, 36, and 48 hours after infection for 
measurement of vRNA by qRT-PCR. (B) Immunofluorescent microscopy images of villi infected with 3 × 106 PFU RVFV for 48 hours. Uninfected control is shown on the left. 
DAPI (blue) stains DNA, J2 antibody (green) stains dsRNA of RVFV, cytokeratin 19 (red) stains epithelial cells, and actin (purple) stains all cells. (C) Fluorescent dsRNA signal 
was quantified from four human donors. Data from uninfected (n = 11) and infected (n = 16) villi are shown with symbols stratified by donor (closed circles, donor 1; open 
circles, donor 2; closed squares, donor 3; open squares, donor 4). **P < 0.01.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
12 of 13
to RVFV infection early in pregnancy may be easily overlooked; 
therefore, vertical transmission during the first trimester should not 
be disregarded.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to discover the degree to 
which RVFV targets reproductive tissues and causes catastrophic 
pathology. The ovaries, uterus, and placenta are previously unrec-
ognized sites of virus replication in both pregnant and nonpregnant 
animals. A previous study in mice found virus-infected macro-
phages within the stroma of ovaries from immunodeficient animals 
infected with an attenuated strain of RVFV (35). Here, we found 
high levels of infectious virus and vRNA in the reproductive tissues, 
and the placenta and uterus displayed histological changes associat-
ed with viral infection. Liquefactive necrosis within the uterus of the 
four dams profiled was notable. Uterine cell death may be a contrib-
uting factor to premature placental detachment and intrauterine 
fetal death within RVFV-infected dams. In addition, the tissues 
with the highest viral burden were the liver and placenta of both 
lethally and sublethally infected pregnant dams. Further studies 
should be performed to understand the onset and progression to 
fetal demise and elucidate commonalities between the liver and pla-
cental structure that accommodates comparable pathology after 
RVFV infection.
The most alarming and arresting finding from our study was the 
delivery of dead pups from dams that survived RVFV infection, 
appeared otherwise clinically normal, and gave birth at normal gesta-
tion length. The pups displayed physical abnormalities that resem-
bled hydrops fetalis, which is an abnormal accumulation of fluid in 
the fetus. Hydrops fetalis is seen in RVFV-infected livestock (36) 
and has been noted as a prominent occurrence in pregnant women 
infected with parvovirus and Zika (37, 38). Most humans infected 
with RVFV develop mild febrile disease, and our study suggests that 
mild infection of pregnant women may still have devastating im-
pacts on the developing fetus.
A previous study in mice inoculated pregnant dams 3 to 4 days 
before term with a mouse-passaged strain similar to the Smithburn 
live vaccine strain (39). Variable levels of virus were detected in em-
bryos taken from sick dams, and the authors state that no abortions 
were observed. It is not clear whether all of the dams died as a result 
of infection and whether any delivered live pups.
In contrast, we observed heterogeneous survival and developmental 
outcomes of pups delivered by RVFV-infected dams. Some dams 
gave birth to both live and dead pups, and within the dams that 
delivered only dead pups, there was variation with the size and gross 
abnormalities seen within pups from the same litter, indicating that 
infection, growth restriction, developmental abnormalities, and/or 
death did not occur simultaneously or with the same outcome. Fur-
ther studies will determine the specific developmental effects that 
RVFV infection in utero has on the developing fetus.
Our work demonstrates the lethal effects of RVFV in pregnant 
rats. However, given that the human and rodent placenta differ at 
both the morphologic and cellular levels, which may influence ver-
tical transmission, we also performed studies in human tissue iso-
lated from mid-gestation. This gestational age represents a stage in 
which RVF-induced fetal death has been observed in humans (13). 
Our studies revealed that RVFV can replicate to a high degree in 
human chorionic villi, which resist infection by other viruses, in-
cluding Zika virus (14, 15). Immunofluorescence analysis showed 
that viral replication occurred in both the outermost syncytial layer 
and subsyncytial layers such as cytotrophoblasts. Of note, we have 
shown previously that human placental syncytiotrophoblasts are 
highly resistant to viral infections through their constitutive release 
of antiviral molecules including type III interferons (IFNs) (15). 
We have also shown that the syncytium expresses high levels of 
IFN- 
stimulated genes (ISGs) under basal states, suggesting that 
these IFNs protect the syncytium from viral infections in an auto-
crine manner. Our data thus suggest that RVFV may be insensitive 
to placenta- 
derived type III IFNs, perhaps through mechanisms 
that suppress the activity of ISGs or the response of the syncytium 
to type III IFNs.
Ruminants have multicotyledonary, epitheliochorial placentas, 
while both humans and rodents have discoid hemochorial placentas 
(21, 40). Despite some similarities, the placental structure differs 
between rats and humans in many ways. Humans have a placental- 
fetal interface consisting of villous trophoblasts with extravillous 
trophoblastic cells, while rats have a labyrinth zone with invasive 
trophoblasts (21). Although livestock have placental structures dif-
ferent from those of rodents and humans, our data suggest that the 
mechanism by which RVFV is vertically transmitted can be shared 
among eutherian mammals, with specific tropism for fetal-derived 
placental cells. Our study thus provides a framework for under-
standing vertical transmission of RVFV that is applicable to both 
veterinary and human context. Comparison of these models could 
also explain the potentially disparate rate of miscarriages between 
livestock and humans.
While the abortogenic effect of RVFV in pregnant livestock is 
historically well known, the mechanisms underlying these observa-
tions are not. The teratogenic potential of live-attenuated vaccine 
candidates is assessed in pregnant sheep, despite the lack of data on 
the basic mechanism of vertical transmission of wild-type virus (8–10). 
Our findings here are noteworthy because this is the first time direct 
vertical transmission through the placenta resulting in fetal death 
has been demonstrated in a species other than livestock. Because 
the ability to test vaccines in livestock is expensive and limited to 
only a few facilities able to perform these types of experiments, evalua-
tion of vertical transmission in rats would be very useful. Vaccine 
candidates could be screened for adverse effects in pregnant rats be-
fore evaluation in pregnant ewes.
This study provides insights into the vertical transmission po-
tential of RVF in humans and highlights the need for more epide-
miological data from human outbreaks to understand the effect of 
RVFV infection in pregnant women. The existing data, combined 
with what is known to occur in livestock and our work presented 
here, point to the high likelihood that RVFV can have damaging 
effects on fetuses in humans. Emergence of RVFV beyond its cur-
rent locations due to changing climate, altered mosquito habitats, 
and/or accidental introduction would present a significant risk to 
pregnant women. Future work aimed at defining teratogenic poten-
tial of RVF in humans is critical to design strategies to reduce the 
potential for fetal disease in pregnant women, who may themselves 
display few clinical symptoms.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/12/eaau9812/DC1
Fig. S1. RVFV is present in the ovary and uterus of nonpregnant female rats.
Fig. S2. Detection of RVFV in the testes of male rats.
Fig. S3. RVFV infection leads to fetal resorption.
Fig. S4. Evidence of vertical transmission of RVFV in an RVFV-infected early-gestation (E5) 
pregnant dam, with high viral titers in the placenta.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 McMillen et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaau9812     5 December 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
13 of 13
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. K. J. Linthicum, S. C. Britch, A. Anyamba, Rift valley fever: An emerging mosquito-borne 
disease. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 61, 395–415 (2016).
 2. M. J. Turell, S. C. Britch, R. L. Aldridge, D. L. Kline, C. Boohene, K. J. Linthicum, Potential for 
mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) from Florida to transmit Rift valley fever virus.  
J. Med. Entomol. 50, 1111–1117 (2013).
 3. M. Brustolin, S. Talavera, A. Nuñez, C. Santamaría, R. Rivas, N. Pujol, M. Valle, M. Verdún, 
A. Brun, N. Pagès, N. Busquets, Rift Valley fever virus and European mosquitoes: Vector 
competence of Culex pipiens and Stegomyia albopicta (= Aedes albopictus).  
Med. Vet. Entomol. 31, 365–372 (2017).
 4. World Health Organization, “Annual review of diseases prioritized under the Research 
and Development Blueprint,” Workshop on Prioritization of Pathogens (2017).
 5. B. C. Easterday, Rift Valley Fever. Adv. Vet. Sci. 10, 65–127 (1965).
 6. I. H. Abd el-Rahim, U. Abd el-Hakim, M. Hussein, An epizootic of Rift Valley fever in Egypt 
in 1997. Rev. Sci. Tech. 18, 741–748 (1999).
 7. F. G. Davies, V. Martin, Recognizing Rift Valley Fever, in FAO Animal Health Manual  
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2003).
 8. B. Makoschey, E. van Kilsdonk, W. R. Hubers, M. P. Vrijenhoek, M. Smit, 
P. J. Wichgers Schreur, J. Kortekaas, V. Moulin, Rift Valley fever vaccine virus clone 13 is 
able to cross the ovine placental barrier associated with foetal infections, malformations, 
and stillbirths. PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10, e0004550 (2016).
 9. P. Hunter, B. J. Erasmus, J. H. Vorster, Teratogenicity of a mutagenised Rift Valley fever 
virus (MVP 12) in sheep. Onderstepoort J. Vet. Res. 69, 95–98 (2002).
 10. B. Botros, A. Omar, K. Elian, G. Mohamed, A. Soliman, A. Salib, D. Salman, M. Saad, 
K. Earhart, Adverse response of non-indigenous cattle of European breeds to live 
attenuated Smithburn Rift Valley fever vaccine. J. Med. Virol. 78, 787–791 (2006).
 11. I. Adam, M. S. Karsany, Case report: Rift valley fever with vertical transmission in a 
pregnant Sudanese woman. J. Med. Virol. 80, 929 (2008).
 12. H. M. Arishi, A. Y. Aqeel, M. M. Al Hazmi, Vertical transmission of fatal Rift Valley fever in a 
newborn. Ann. Trop. Paediatr. 26, 251–253 (2006).
 13. M. Baudin, A. M. Jumaa, H. J. E. Jomma, M. S. Karsany, G. Bucht, J. Näslund, C. Ahlm, 
M. Evander, N. Mohamed, Association of Rift Valley fever virus infection with miscarriage 
in Sudanese women: A cross-sectional study. Lancet Glob. Health 4, e864–e871 (2016).
 14. D. J. Platt, A. M. Smith, N. Arora, M. S. Diamond, C. B. Coyne, J. J. Miner, Zika virus-related 
neurotropic flaviviruses infect human placental explants and cause fetal demise in mice. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao7090 (2018).
 15. A. Bayer, N. J. Lennemann, Y. Ouyang, J. C. Bramley, S. Morosky, 
E. T. De Azeved Marques Jr., S. Cherry, Y. Sadovsky, C. B. Coyne, Type III interferons 
produced by human placental trophoblasts confer protection against Zika virus 
infection. Cell Host Microbe 19, 705–712 (2016).
 16. B. H. Bird, C. G. Albarino, S. T. Nichol, Rift Valley fever virus lacking NSm proteins retains 
high virulence in vivo and may provide a model of human delayed onset neurologic 
disease. Virology 362, 10–15 (2007).
 17. R. D. Reynolds, Preventing maternal cannibalism in rats. Science 213, 1146 (1981).
 18. J. M. Bales, D. S. Powell, L. M. Bethel, D. S. Reed, A. L. Hartman, Choice of inbred rat strain 
impacts lethality and disease course after respiratory infection with Rift Valley Fever 
Virus. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2, 105 (2012).
 19. C. J. Peters, T. W. Slone, Inbred rat strains mimic the disparate human response to Rift 
Valley fever virus infection. J. Med. Virol. 10, 45–54 (1982).
 20. A. L. Caroline, M. R. Kujawa, T. D. Oury, D. S. Reed, A. L. Hartman, Inflammatory biomarkers 
associated with lethal rift valley fever encephalitis in the lewis rat model. Front. Microbiol. 
6, 1509 (2016).
 21. M. J. Soares, D. Chakraborty, M. A. Karim Rumi, T. Konno, S. J. Renaud, Rat placentation: 
An experimental model for investigating the hemochorial maternal-fetal interface. 
Placenta 33, 233–243 (2012).
 22. L. Segal, O. K. Wilby, C. R. Willoughby, S. Veenstra, M. Deschamps, Evaluation of the 
intramuscular administration of Cervarix™ vaccine on fertility, pre- and post-natal 
development in rats. Reprod. Toxicol. 31, 111–120 (2011).
 23. T. Ohkawara, T. Katsuyama, M. Ida-Eto, N. Narita, M. Narita, Maternal viral infection during 
pregnancy impairs development of fetal serotonergic neurons. Brain Dev. 37, 88–93 
(2015).
 24. World Health Organization, in WHO Fact Sheet (WHO, 2017).
 25. J. A. Coetzer, The pathology of Rift Valley fever. II. Lesions occurring in field cases in adult 
cattle, calves and aborted foetuses. Onderstepoort J. Vet. Res. 49, 11–17 (1982).
 26. F. M. Szaba, M. Tighe, L. W. Kummer, K. G. Lanzer, J. M. Ward, P. Lanthier, I. J. Kim, A. Kuki, 
M. A. Blackman, S. J. Thomas, J. S. Lin, Zika virus infection in immunocompetent pregnant 
mice causes fetal damage and placental pathology in the absence of fetal infection.  
PLOS Pathog. 14, e1006994 (2018).
 27. S. C. Suffin, K. B. Muck, D. D. Porter, Vesicular stomatitis virus causes abortion and 
neonatal death in ferrets. J. Clin. Microbiol. 6, 437–438 (1977).
 28. N. Arora, Y. Sadovsky, T. S. Dermody, C. B. Coyne, Microbial vertical transmission during 
human pregnancy. Cell Host Microbe 21, 561–567 (2017).
 29. M. Silasi, I. Cardenas, K. Racicot, J.-Y. Kwon, P. Aldo, G. Mor, Viral infections during 
pregnancy. Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 73, 199–213 (2015).
 30. L. G. Mosby, S. A. Rasmussen, D. J. Jamieson, 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) in 
pregnancy: A systematic review of the literature. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 205,  
10–18 (2011).
 31. K. M. Neuzil, G. W. Reed, E. F. Mitchel, L. Simonsen, M. R. Griffin, Impact of influenza on 
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant women. Am. J. Epidemiol. 148, 
1094–1102 (1998).
 32. M. E. Price, S. P. Fisher-Hoch, R. B. Craven, J. B. McCormick, A prospective study of 
maternal and fetal outcome in acute Lassa fever infection during pregnancy. BMJ 297, 
584–587 (1988).
 33. K. Mupapa, W. Mukundu, M. A. Bwaka, M. Kipasa, A. De Roo, K. Kuvula, K. Kibadi, 
M. Massamba, D. Ndaberey, R. Colebunders, J. J. Muyembe-Tamfum, Ebola hemorrhagic 
fever and pregnancy. J. Infect. Dis. 179 (suppl. 1), S11–S12 (1999).
 34. B. Niklasson, J. Liljestrand, S. Bergstrom, C. J. Peters, Rift Valley fever:  
A sero-epidemiological survey among pregnant women in Mozambique.  
Epidemiol. Infect. 99, 517–522 (1987).
 35. C. Gommet, A. Billecocq, G. Jouvion, M. Hasan, T. Zaverucha do Valle, L. Guillemot, 
C. Blanchet, N. van Rooijen, X. Montagutelli, M. Bouloy, J.-J. Panthier, Tissue tropism  
and target cells of NSs-deleted rift valley fever virus in live immunodeficient mice.  
PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 5, e1421 (2011).
 36. J. A. Coetzer, B. J. Barnard, Hydrops amnii in sheep associated with hydranencephaly and 
arthrogryposis with wesselsbron disease and rift valley fever viruses as aetiological 
agents. Onderstepoort J. Vet. Res. 44, 119–126 (1977).
 37. Y.-L. Gao, Z. Gao, M. He, P. Liao, Infection status of human parvovirus B19, 
cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus-1/2 in women with first-trimester 
spontaneous abortions in Chongqing, China. Virol. J. 15, 74 (2018).
 38. M. Sarno, G. A. Sacramento, R. Khouri, M. S. do Rosário, F. Costa, G. Archanjo, L. A. Santos, 
N. Nery Jr., N. Vasilakis, A. I. Ko, A. R. P. de Almeida, Zika virus infection and stillbirths:  
A case of hydrops fetalis, hydranencephaly and fetal demise. PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10, 
e0004517 (2016).
 39. C. A. Mims, Rift valley fever virus in mice. I. General features of the infection.  
Br. J. Exp. Pathol. 37, 99–109 (1956).
 40. P. L. Grigsby, Animal models to study placental development and function throughout 
normal and dysfunctional human pregnancy. Semin. Reprod. Med. 34, 11–16 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We express our gratitude for the technical assistance provided by 
A. Walters, advice on experimental design from J. Lundy and R. Walker, rat art provided by 
H. Ma, and study coordination by S. Barrick. We also thank the Center for Biologic Imaging and 
the McGowan Center for Regenerative Medicine for histology support. Funding: This work 
was partially supported by the University of Pittsburgh Center for Vaccine Research (to A.L.H.), 
NIH R01-NS101100-01A1 (to A.L.H.), R21-NS088326 (to A.L.H.), NIH R01-AI081759 (to C.B.C.), 
R01-HD075665 (to C.B.C.), a Burroughs Wellcome Investigators in the Pathogenesis of 
Infectious Disease Award (C.B.C.), and the Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh of the UPMC Health 
System (to C.B.C.). We also acknowledge the Tissue and Research Pathology Services/Health 
Sciences Tissue Bank, which receives funding from P30CA047904. Ethics statement: All 
animal work described here was carried out in strict accordance with the Guide for the Care 
and Use of Laboratory Animals of the NIH and the Animal Welfare Act. The protocol was 
approved and overseen by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee. The Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care  
has fully accredited the University of Pittsburgh. Author contributions: C.M.M., C.B.C., and 
A.L.H. conceived the study and designed the experiments; C.M.M., N.A., D.A.B., J.R.A., and 
M.R.K. performed experimental work; J.F.B. contributed pathology expertise and 
interpretation; C.M.M., C.B.C., and A.L.H. analyzed and interpreted the data; C.M.M. and A.L.H. 
wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the 
conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. 
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 2 August 2018
Accepted 6 November 2018
Published 5 December 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aau9812
Citation: C. M. McMillen, N. Arora, D. A. Boyles, J. R. Albe, M. R. Kujawa, J. F. Bonadio, C. B. Coyne, 
A. L. Hartman, Rift Valley fever virus induces fetal demise in Sprague-Dawley rats through direct 
placental infection. Sci. Adv. 4, eaau9812 (2018).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 infection
Rift Valley fever virus induces fetal demise in Sprague-Dawley rats through direct placental
and Amy L. Hartman
Cynthia M. McMillen, Nitin Arora, Devin A. Boyles, Joseph R. Albe, Michael R. Kujawa, Jeffrey F. Bonadio, Carolyn B. Coyne
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aau9812
 (12), eaau9812.
4
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/12/eaau9812
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/12/03/4.12.eaau9812.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/12/eaau9812#BIBL
This article cites 37 articles, 4 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
