 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
734 
MMWR / July 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 27
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
High Risk for Invasive Meningococcal Disease Among Patients Receiving 
Eculizumab (Soliris) Despite Receipt of Meningococcal Vaccine
Lucy A. McNamara, PhD1; Nadav Topaz, MSc1; Xin Wang, PhD1; Susan Hariri, PhD1; LeAnne Fox, MD1; Jessica R. MacNeil, MPH1
On July 7, 2017, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
Use of eculizumab (Soliris, Alexion Pharmaceuticals), a ter-
minal complement inhibitor, is associated with a 1,000-fold to 
2,000-fold increased incidence of meningococcal disease (1). 
Administration of meningococcal vaccines is recommended 
for patients receiving eculizumab before beginning treatment 
(2,3). Sixteen cases of meningococcal disease were identified in 
eculizumab recipients in the United States during 2008–2016; 
among these, 11 were caused by nongroupable Neisseria menin-
gitidis. Fourteen patients had documentation of receipt of at least 
1 dose of meningococcal vaccine before disease onset. Because 
eculizumab recipients remain at risk for meningococcal disease 
even after receipt of meningococcal vaccines, some health care 
providers in the United States as well as public health agencies 
in other countries recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis for the 
duration of eculizumab treatment; a lifelong course of treatment 
is expected for many patients. Heightened awareness, early care 
seeking, and rapid treatment of any symptoms consistent with 
meningococcal disease are essential for all patients receiving 
eculizumab treatment, regardless of meningococcal vaccination 
or antimicrobial prophylaxis status.
Eculizumab is licensed in the United States for treatment of 
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and atypical hemolytic 
uremic syndrome (2); both are rare, life-threatening illnesses. 
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved prescrib-
ing information includes a boxed warning regarding increased 
risk for meningococcal disease in eculizumab recipients (2). 
To mitigate the occurrence of and morbidity associated with 
meningococcal infections, FDA requires a Risk Evaluation and 
Mitigation Strategy (REMS) (http://www.solirisrems.com/) to 
educate health care providers and patients about the risk for and 
early signs of possible meningococcal infection and the need for 
immediate medical evaluation of signs and symptoms consistent 
with possible meningococcal infection. A key element of the 
Soliris REMS is ensuring that patients receive meningococcal 
vaccines.* The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
recommends that eculizumab recipients receive both quadriva-
lent meningococcal conjugate (MenACWY) and serogroup B 
(MenB) meningococcal vaccines (3).
In February 2017, CDC requested that health departments 
review existing meningococcal disease case investigation records 
since 2007 to identify cases in eculizumab recipients; isolates 
or clinical specimens for identified cases were also requested for 
additional characterization. The requests were made through 
Epi-X (https://www.cdc.gov/epix/), CDC’s secure communica-
tions network for public health officials, and follow-up with 
each health department occurred through individual e-mail 
correspondence. Forty-seven state health departments and 
the health departments of New York City and the District of 
Columbia responded to CDC’s request for information. A 
search of the FDA Adverse Events Reporting System identified 
additional information on meningococcal vaccines received by 
patients identified through the Epi-X request.
CDC’s Bacterial Meningitis Laboratory performed slide 
agglutination,† polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing, and 
whole genome sequencing (WGS) on isolates to determine the 
serogroup (4); the serogroup for one clinical specimen with no 
isolate was determined by PCR. The serogroup results from 
slide agglutination (nongroupable) and WGS (serogroup C) 
differed for one isolate. For that isolate, the slide agglutina-
tion result (nongroupable) was used in analysis, because slide 
agglutination detects expression of the polysaccharide capsule, 
which is necessary for protection by MenACWY vaccines. 
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing also was performed.
In response to the Epi-X request, 16 meningococcal disease 
cases in eculizumab recipients were identified for the period 
2008–2016 from 10 jurisdictions. The median patient age 
was 30 years (range = 16–83 years). All patients had menin-
gococcemia; six also had evidence of meningitis. Patients were 
hospitalized for an average of 6.6 days (range = 1–14 days); one 
patient died (case-fatality ratio = 6%). Ten of the 16 patients 
were receiving eculizumab for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglo-
binuria, five for atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome, and one 
for another condition, through a clinical trial.
Isolates from 14 patients were available for further charac-
terization; a clinical specimen, but no isolate, was available for 
one patient; and for one patient no clinical specimen or isolate 
was available. Four cases were determined to be caused by 
* FDA background package for meeting of drug safety and risk 
management advisory Committee. https://www.fda.gov/downloads/
AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/
DrugSafetyandRiskManagementAdvisoryCommittee/UCM423030.pdf.
† Laboratory methods for the diagnosis of meningitis caused by Neisseria 
meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenzae. https://
www.cdc.gov/meningitis/lab-manual/full-manual.pdf.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 27 
735
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
serogroup Y and 11 by nongroupable N. meningitidis (Table 1). 
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed on the 
14 isolates (Table 2). One patient infected with a penicillin 
intermediate-susceptible strain had been prescribed penicillin 
prophylaxis, although the patient reported poor compliance. 
Further characterization of these isolates is ongoing.
Fourteen patients had documentation of receipt of 
MenACWY before disease onset (Table 1). Three of four 
meningococcal disease cases diagnosed after publication of the 
ACIP recommendations for use of MenB vaccine in persons 
at increased risk occurred in patients with documentation of 
receipt of 1 or more doses of MenB vaccine before disease 
onset. Three of four patients with serogroup Y disease had 
documentation of previous MenACWY receipt.
Discussion
Meningococcal disease following MenACWY vaccination 
in eculizumab recipients has been reported previously (1,5), 
and in vitro data have shown that eculizumab impairs menin-
gococcal killing in whole blood even in subjects vaccinated 
against the relevant meningococcal serogroup (6). In addi-
tion, although nongroupable N. meningitidis is often carried 
asymptomatically in the nasopharynx, it rarely causes disease 
in healthy persons (7).
MenACWY vaccines target the serogroup-specific polysac-
charide capsule and provide no protection against nongroup-
able N. meningitidis. MenB vaccines are licensed specifically 
for protection against serogroup B meningococcal disease. 
The extent of any potential cross-protection has not been 
assessed. The evidence of meningococcal disease in eculizumab 
recipients vaccinated against the infecting serogroup, together 
with the susceptibility of these persons to nongroupable 
meningococcal strains, is consistent with the in vitro data and 
suggests that eculizumab therapy interferes with the ability of 
antimeningococcal antibodies to provide protection against 
invasive disease.
Many clinicians and public health agencies, particularly in 
the United Kingdom and France, recommend antimicrobial 
prophylaxis with penicillin for the duration of eculizumab 
treatment; macrolides are typically recommended for peni-
cillin-allergic patients (8).§ Long-term penicillin prophylaxis 
is generally considered to be safe,¶ although the effectiveness 
of this strategy for meningococcal disease prevention has not 
been established. Ten of the 14 isolates characterized in this 
analysis were fully susceptible to penicillin, three demonstrated 
§ PNH 
National 
Service 
Leeds. 
2017. 
Meningococcal 
infection 
and 
eculizumab. 
http://
www.pnhleeds.co.uk/professionals/meningococcal-infection-and-eculizumab/.
¶ Safety of long term therapy with penicillin and penicillin derivatives. https://
www.fda.gov/drugs/emergencypreparedness/bioterrorismanddrugpreparedness/
ucm072755.htm.
TABLE 1. Meningococcal vaccination status and disease-causing serogroup 
in eculizumab recipients with meningococcal disease (N = 16) — 10 U.S. 
jurisdictions, 2008–2016
Characteristic
No. (%)
MenACWY vaccination*
Yes
14 (88)
No/unknown
2 (12)
MenB vaccination (patients with diagnosis after June 12, 2015)†
Yes§
3 (75)
No/unknown
1 (25)
Disease-causing serogroup
B
0 (—)
C
0 (—)
Y
4 (25)
Nongroupable¶
11 (69)
Not determined
1 (6)
* MenACWY vaccination includes MenACWY conjugate vaccine, meningococcal 
polysaccharide vaccine, and meningococcal vaccine of unknown type. Only 
vaccines received before disease onset are included.
† MenB vaccines were licensed for use in the United States in 2014 and 2015. 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommendations for use of 
MenB vaccine in persons at increased risk for serogroup B meningococcal 
disease were published on June 12, 2015. No patients had received MenB-FHbp 
(Trumenba, Pfizer Vaccines); three patients had received MenB-4C (Bexsero, 
GlaxoSmithKline). Only vaccines received before disease onset are included.
§ Includes 1 or 2 doses of MenB vaccine.
¶ Includes one patient for whom no isolate was available but classified as 
nongroupable based on polymerase chain reaction testing on a clinical specimen.
intermediate penicillin susceptibility, and one was resistant 
to penicillin. This finding is consistent with recent stud-
ies of invasive meningococcal isolates in the United States, 
which have shown that most isolates are fully susceptible to 
penicillin and that penicillin resistance is very rare (9). The 
clinical implications of intermediate penicillin susceptibility 
are unclear. Meningococcal disease caused by both penicillin-
resistant N. meningitidis and N. meningitidis with intermedi-
ate penicillin susceptibility have been reported in eculizumab 
recipients taking penicillin or amoxicillin prophylaxis (7,10), 
but patient compliance was not reported.
Although neither meningococcal vaccination nor antimicro-
bial prophylaxis can be expected to prevent all cases of menin-
gococcal disease in eculizumab recipients, providers should 
continue to follow ACIP recommendations for eculizumab 
recipients to receive both MenACWY and MenB vaccines. 
Providers could also consider antimicrobial prophylaxis for 
the duration of eculizumab treatment to potentially reduce 
the risk for meningococcal disease. Data will continue to be 
evaluated and additional guidance will be developed as evidence 
becomes available. Heightened awareness and vigilance for 
symptoms consistent with meningococcal disease are essential 
for all patients receiving eculizumab treatment and their health 
care providers, regardless of meningococcal vaccination or 
antimicrobial prophylaxis status.
Of note, 10 cases in this report had meningococcemia 
without meningitis. Although a petechial or purpuric rash is 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
736 
MMWR / July 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 27
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing on isolates from 
eculizumab recipients (N = 14) with meningococcal disease — 10 U.S. 
jurisdictions, 2008–2016
Antibiotic
Susceptibility (No.)
Susceptible Intermediate Resistant Nonsusceptible*
Ampicillin
11
3
0
N/A
Ceftriaxone
14
0
0
N/A
Ciprofloxacin
13
0
1
N/A
Penicillin
10
3
1
N/A
Rifampin
14
0
0
N/A
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
2
1
11
N/A
Azithromycin
14
N/A
N/A
0
Abbreviation: N/A = not applicable.
* Breakpoints for intermediate susceptibility versus resistance not established.
a hallmark of meningococcemia, this rash might not appear 
until later stages of illness. Initial symptoms of meningococ-
cemia are often relatively mild and nonspecific, and might 
include fever, chills, fatigue, vomiting, diarrhea, and aches or 
pains in the muscles, joints, chest, or abdomen; however, these 
symptoms can progress to severe illness and death within hours. 
Health care providers should have a high index of suspicion 
for meningococcal disease in patients taking eculizumab who 
develop any symptoms consistent with either meningitis or 
meningococcemia, even if the patient’s symptoms initially 
appear mild, and even if the patient has been fully vaccinated 
or is receiving antimicrobial prophylaxis.
State health departments are asked to complete a supplemen-
tal case report form (available at https://www.cdc.gov/menin-
gococcal/surveillance/index.html) for all meningococcal disease 
cases occurring among eculizumab recipients; forms should be 
submitted to CDC via secure e-mail (meningnet@cdc.gov) or 
secure fax (404-471-8372), along with any available isolates 
for whole genome sequencing.
Acknowledgments
Vaccine-preventable disease surveillance staff members of the 
following state and large local health departments: Alabama, Alaska, 
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, 
District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, 
Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, 
Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nevada, 
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, New York 
City, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, 
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, 
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, 
and Wyoming; staff members in the Food and Drug Administration’s 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and Center for Biologics 
Evaluation and Research; Amy Blain, Melissa Whaley, How-Yi 
Chang, David Lonsway, Karen Anderson, CDC.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Eculizumab (Soliris, Alexion Pharmaceuticals), a terminal 
complement inhibitor, is associated with a 1,000-fold to 2,000-
fold increased incidence of meningococcal disease among 
persons receiving the drug. The Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)–approved prescribing information includes a boxed 
warning regarding increased risk for meningococcal disease in 
eculizumab recipients. The Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices recommends both MenACWY and MenB vaccination for 
patients taking eculizumab.
What is added by this report?
Following review of existing meningococcal disease case 
investigation records, 16 cases of meningococcal disease were 
identified in eculizumab recipients in the United States for the 
period 2008–2016. The majority of cases were caused by 
nongroupable Neisseria meningitidis and occurred in patients 
who had documentation of receipt of at least 1 dose of 
meningococcal vaccine before disease onset.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Health care providers should continue to follow recommenda-
tions from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
for eculizumab recipients to receive both MenACWY and MenB 
vaccines and could consider antimicrobial prophylaxis for the 
duration of eculizumab treatment to potentially reduce the risk 
for meningococcal disease. However, neither vaccination nor 
antimicrobial prophylaxis can be expected to prevent all cases 
of meningococcal disease in eculizumab recipients. Heightened 
awareness, early care seeking, and rapid treatment of any 
symptoms consistent with meningococcal disease are essential 
in all patients receiving eculizumab treatment, regardless of 
meningococcal vaccination or antimicrobial prophylaxis status.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
1Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and 
Respiratory Diseases, CDC.
Corresponding author: Lucy A. McNamara, LMcNamara@cdc.gov, 
404-639-8743.
References
1. Food and Drug Administration. Alexion briefing information for the November 
18, 2014, meeting of the Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committee. 
https://www.fda.gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/
Drugs/DrugSafetyandRiskManagementAdvisoryCommittee/ucm423029.htm
2. Food and Drug Administration. Soliris product insert. Silver Spring, MD: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug
Administration; 2017. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/
label/2017/125166s417lbl.pdf
3. CDC. Meningococcal ACIP recommendations. Atlanta, GA: US
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/mening.html
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 27 
737
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 4. Kretz CB, Retchless AC, Sidikou F, et al.; Niger Response Team. Whole-
genome characterization of epidemic Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C 
and resurgence of serogroup W, Niger, 2015. Emerg Infect Dis 
2016;22:1762–8. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2210.160468
 5. Cullinan N, Gorman KM, Riordan M, Waldron M, Goodship THJ, 
Awan A. Case report: Benefits and challenges of long-term eculizumab 
in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Pediatrics 2015;135:e1506–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2014-3503
 6. Konar M, Granoff DM. Eculizumab blocks vaccine-induced 
opsonophagocytic killing of meningococci by whole blood from 
immunized adults. Blood 2017; Epub ahead of print. https://doi.
org/10.1182/blood-2017-05-781450
 7. Caugant DA, Tzanakaki G, Kriz P
. Lessons from meningococcal 
carriage studies. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2007;31:52–63. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2006.00052.x
 8. Haut Conseil de la santé publique. Avis: actualisation de l’avis relatif à 
l’antibioprophylaxie et la vaccination méningococcique des personnes 
traitées par eculizumab (Soliris 300 mg solution à diluer pour perfusion) 
[French]. Paris, France: Haut Conseil de la santé publique; 2017. http://
www.hcsp.fr/Explore.cgi/avisrapportsdomaine?clefr=447
 9. Harcourt BH, Anderson RD, Wu HM, et al. Population-based 
surveillance of Neisseria meningitidis antimicrobial resistance in the 
United States. Open Forum Infect Dis 2015;2:ofv117 10.1093/ofid/
ofv117. https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofv117
 
10. Parikh SR, Lucidarme J, Bingham C, et al. First report of meningococcal B 
vaccine failure in a young adult on long-term eculizumab. In: 20th 
International Pathogenic Neisseria Conference, 2016; Manchester, 
United Kingdom. http://www.ipnc2016.org
