 Manipulating DNA damage-response signaling for the
treatment of immune-mediated diseases
Jonathan P. McNallya,1, Scott H. Millena,1, Vandana Chaturvedia, Nora Lakesa, Catherine E. Terrella, Eileen E. Elfersa,
Kaitlin R. Carrolla, Simon P. Hoganb, Paul R. Andreassenc, Julie Kanterd, Carl E. Allene, Michael M. Henryf,
Jay N. Greenbergg, Stephan Ladischg, Michelle L. Hermistonh, Michael Joycei, David A. Hildemana, Jonathan D. Katza,j,2,
and Michael B. Jordana,k,2
aDivision of Immunobiology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH
45229; bDivision of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229; cDivision of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center
and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229; dDepartment of Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC 29425; eSection of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030; fDepartment of
Hematology and Oncology, Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ 85016; gDepartment of Hematology, Children’s National Medical Center, Washington,
DC 20010; hDepartment of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA 94143; iDepartment of Hematology and
Oncology, Nemours Children’s Specialty Care, Jacksonville, FL 32258; jDivision of Endocrinology, Diabetes Research Center, Department of Pediatrics,
Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229; and kDivision of Bone Marrow Transplantation
and Immune Deficiency, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati,
OH 45229
Edited by Christopher C. Goodnow, The Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia, and approved April 27, 2017 (received for review
March 13, 2017)
Antigen-activated lymphocytes undergo extraordinarily rapid cell
division in the course of immune responses. We hypothesized that
this unique aspect of lymphocyte biology leads to unusual genomic
stress in recently antigen-activated lymphocytes and that targeted
manipulation of DNA damage-response (DDR) signaling pathways
would allow for selective therapeutic targeting of pathological
T cells in disease contexts. Consistent with these hypotheses, we
found that activated mouse and human T cells display a pronounced
DDR in vitro and in vivo. Upon screening a variety of small-molecule
compounds, we found that potentiation of p53 (via inhibition of
MDM2) or impairment of cell cycle checkpoints (via inhibition of
CHK1/2 or WEE1) led to the selective elimination of activated,
pathological T cells in vivo. The combination of these strategies
[which we termed “p53 potentiation with checkpoint abrogation”
(PPCA)] displayed therapeutic benefits in preclinical disease models
of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and multiple sclerosis,
which are driven by foreign antigens or self-antigens, respectively.
PPCA therapy targeted pathological T cells but did not compromise
naive, regulatory, or quiescent memory T-cell pools, and had a mod-
est nonimmune toxicity profile. Thus, PPCA is a therapeutic modality
for selective, antigen-specific immune modulation with significant
translational potential for diverse immune-mediated diseases.
autoimmunity | immune regulation | DNA damage response | therapeutics
T
he immune system has evolved under intense pressure from
pathogens that proliferate very rapidly (1). In responding to
infections, the adaptive immune system needs to mobilize rare
pathogen-specific lymphocytes quickly. This mobilization is
achieved by rapid, exponential expansion of responding lympho-
cyte clones. Indeed, antigen-activated T and B cells appear to have
some of the most rapid division rates among all mammalian cell
types (2). We hypothesized that this unique aspect of lymphocyte
biology would cause significant genomic stress in responding
lymphocytes and that novel forms of therapeutic immune sup-
pression could be developed by exploiting this weakness. Such
strategies would allow for “developmental” or “kinetic” targeting
of pathological immune responses at the time of disease activity or
organ rejection and could complement or replace chronic sup-
pression of immune signaling or cytokine pathways. The recent
preclinical and clinical development of a wide array of rationally
designed small-molecule inhibitors of various signaling and ef-
fector molecules within DNA damage-response (DDR) cascades
has provided an opportunity to test this hypothesis (3, 4).
We first looked for evidence of a DDR occurring in activated
T cells in physiological contexts and found a broad DDR in
murine and human T cells. Next, upon screening an array of
DNA-damaging agents and DDR-altering small molecules for
their ability to kill activated, but not resting, T cells, we identified
two promising strategies. We found that inhibition of MDM2 (an
endogenous inhibitor of p53) and inhibitors of cell cycle check-
point kinases such as CHK1 or WEE1 (5, 6) displayed significant
potency and selectivity in vitro and in vivo. Both strategies dis-
played synergy with a DNA-damaging drug or with each other.
Furthermore, this combination of DDR-active drugs, which we
term “p53 potentiation with checkpoint abrogation” (PPCA),
proved to be highly efficacious in two diverse mouse models
of human diseases, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Significance
Therapeutic immune suppression is essential for treating a
variety of immune conditions, including autoimmune diseases,
immunoregulatory disorders, and in transplantation. Reliance
on broadly acting drugs carries substantial risks, and even
pathway-specific agents are problematic, because most im-
mune pathways have essential functions. The ideal form of
immune suppression would be antigen-specific, suppressing an
undesired immune response but sparing all others. We describe
a unique strategy for therapeutic immune suppression, relying
on targeted manipulation of DNA damage-response signaling,
that exploits unique aspects of lymphocyte biology. This ap-
proach allows for highly selective suppression of recently ac-
tivated T cells, displays clear therapeutic benefits, and has less
off-target toxicity than conventional DNA-damaging drugs.
Author contributions: J.P.M., S.H.M., V.C., N.L., C.E.T., K.R.C., S.P.H., P.R.A., D.A.H., J.D.K.,
and M.B.J. designed research; J.P.M., S.H.M., V.C., N.L., C.E.T., E.E.E., K.R.C., and M.B.J.
performed research; J.K., C.E.A., M.M.H., J.N.G., S.L., M.L.H., M.J., and M.B.J. contributed
new reagents/analytic tools; J.P.M., S.H.M., V.C., N.L., C.E.T., E.E.E., K.R.C., S.P.H., D.A.H.,
J.D.K., and M.B.J. analyzed data; and J.P.M., S.H.M., V.C., K.R.C., D.A.H., J.D.K., and M.B.J.
wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: M.B.J. is an inventor on a patent filing related to this work.
The authors have no other conflicts to disclose.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1J.P.M. and S.H.M. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: michael.jordan@cchmc.org or
jonathan.katz@cchmc.org.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1703683114/-/DCSupplemental.
E4782–E4791
|
PNAS
|
Published online May 22, 2017
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1703683114
 and multiple sclerosis (MS), with minimal effects on non-
activated T cells or nonimmune toxicity. Thus, targeted manip-
ulation of the DDR during a pathological immune response may
provide a highly effective, nontoxic, and antigen-selective means
of clinical immune modulation.
Results
Activated Mouse T Cells Display a DDR in Physiological Contexts.
Activated lymphocytes are among the most sensitive cells to ir-
radiation or DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics (7), suggesting
that they exist precariously at the edge of genotoxic death. This
exquisite sensitivity of activated lymphocytes to DNA-damaging
drugs has been exploited for years for therapeutic immune
suppression with little mechanistic insight. However, we recently
reported the efficacy of etoposide, a genotoxic topoisomerase
inhibitor (8), for the selective elimination of pathogenic, acti-
vated T cells in both mouse HLH and experimental autoimmune
encephalitis (EAE) (9, 10). While investigating the mechanism
of T-cell killing by genotoxic agents, we found that in vitro
antigen-activated T cells differed from resting T cells in that they
displayed significant amounts of DNA breakage (Fig. 1A). Al-
though T cells activated in vitro with lectins or phorbol esters
have been shown to display evidence of a DDR (11), a similar
phenomenon in primary T cells activated with antigen has not
previously been reported. Using physiologically activated, puri-
fied T cells that were viable and nonapoptotic, as assessed by
permeability and phosphatidylserine exposure, we found that
activated (but not resting) T cells had nuclear foci of phospho-
ser139 H2AX (γH2AX), a classic indicator of a DDR (12, 13)
(Fig. 1B). Next, we assessed DDR signaling in vivo by assessing
adoptively transferred T-cell receptor (TCR) transgenic T cells
specific for lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) in infected
hosts. Comparing these antigen-activated transgenic T cells with
nonactivated naive T cells (CD44lo) from the same animals, we
found that the activated cells had clearly elevated γH2AX, p-p53,
p-ATM, and p-CHK2 (Fig. 1C). Thus, T cells responding to a viral
infection manifested a profound DDR in vivo. Notably, this
damage response was occurring without exposure to exogenous
genotoxins and indicated that this DDR is a normal part of T-cell
responses. Furthermore, it shows that targeted manipulation of
this endogenous DDR could be sufficient to cause selective apo-
ptosis of recently activated lymphocytes.
MDM2 Inhibition Synergizes with Etoposide for the Selective Killing
of Activated T Cells. A large number of small-molecule agents
targeting various aspects of the DDR and cell cycle regulation
are currently in clinical and preclinical development for the
treatment of cancer. We screened a panel of these agents for
their ability to kill activated T cells in vitro, alone or in combi-
nation with etoposide. Although compounds inhibiting various
proteins important for the DDR or cell cycle regulation [in-
cluding ATM, DNA-PK, poly-ADP ribose polymerase, p53,
polo-like kinase, aurora kinase, and various cyclin-dependent
kinases] did not have significant activity in our assay, two strat-
egies appeared promising: MDM2 inhibition and cell cycle
checkpoint kinase inhibition (CHK1/2 or WEE1; see Fig. 3).
MDM2 is an E3 ligase for p53 and drives its ubiquitin-mediated
degradation (14). Thus, inhibition of MDM2 leads to increase of
p53 levels and potentiation of its function in some contexts. It is
known that p53 is a key regulator of cell fate decisions after
DNA damage (15). Its initial activation leads to cell cycle arrest
and attempts to repair the cellular damage that prompted its
activation (16). However, if p53 signaling continues or there is an
overwhelming amount of DNA damage, p53 drives apoptosis. A
recent report describes MDM2 up-regulation and p53 down-
regulation after T-cell activation, suggesting to us that this ac-
tivity is an essential response to DNA damage associated with
activation (17). Thus, we postulated that enhancement of p53
signaling would drive apoptosis of activated (but not resting)
T cells. To test this hypothesis, we used the MDM2 inhibitor
(MDM2i) nutlin-3 (18). Although we did not observe significant
effects of the MDM2i alone on survival of activated T cells, we
found that MDM2 inhibition shifted the dose–response curve for
etoposide-induced death of activated T cells in vitro (Fig. 2A).
Mechanistically, we found that although MDM2 inhibition was
not sufficient to induce phospho-p53 (Ser15) in activated T cells,
it enhanced accumulation of phospho-p53 in etoposide-exposed
cells (Fig. 2B). Furthermore, MDM2 inhibition did not increase
γH2AX levels, a more proximal indicator of DNA damage (19),
suggesting that it was amplifying the toxic effects of DNA
breakage in these cells (Fig. 2C). As expected, MDM2i enhanced
killing of activated T cells in a strictly p53-dependent manner
(Fig. S1). Next, we assessed whether MDM2 inhibition could
amplify the effects of etoposide on T cells in vivo. When we
treated LCMV-infected mice with a subtherapeutic dose (five-
fold less than a standard therapeutic dose) of etoposide, we
found notable synergy with MDM2i (Fig. 2D). Although treat-
ment with this low dose of etoposide had only a very modest
effect on LCMV-activated cells (Db-GP33 tetramer+), the ad-
dition of MDM2i led to near-complete ablation of tetramer+
(below the limit of detection) cells in these animals, in contrast
to treatment with MDM2i alone. This effect was relatively se-
lective, with a modest, albeit significant, effect of this combina-
tion on naive T cells (Fig. 2E). Thus, an MDM2i can synergize
with DNA-damaging drugs for the selective elimination of re-
cently activated T cells in vivo.
Fig. 1.
Activated mouse T cells display a spontaneous DDR in physiological
contexts. (A) Detection of DNA breaks in activated T cells via Comet Assay.
Transgenic (P14) CD8+ T cells were assayed either directly ex vivo [non-
activated (Non-Acti)] or after 5 d of in vitro activation and expansion with
cognate peptide and IL-2. As a positive control, cells were cultured with
etoposide (Etop., 1 μM) for 4 h. ****P < 0.001, determined by one-way
ANOVA with a Bonferroni post hoc test. (B) Representative micrographs of
nonactivated and activated T cells stained for γH2AX, a marker of the DDR.
(Magnification, 40×.) (C) P14 T cells were transferred into recipient mice that
were infected with LCMV on the following day. Six days after infection,
splenic T cells were analyzed for the indicated intracellular phosphoproteins.
Naive (CD8+, CD44lo) cells are compared with activated cells (transgenic;
CD8+, CD45.1+) in the same animals. The percentages of cells in the upper
right quadrant are shown. Results are representative of three independent
experiments (n = 8 in C). Act., activated.
McNally et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 22, 2017
|
E4783
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 Inhibition of Cell Cycle Checkpoint Kinases Selectively Kills Activated
T Cells and Synergizes with Etoposide. When a cell senses DNA
damage, progression through the cell cycle is halted to repair the
DNA and allow for the survival of the cell. Cell cycle checkpoints
may prevent either initiation of DNA replication (G1/S) or pro-
gression at later phases of the cell cycle (mid-S or G2/M). Al-
though multiple mechanisms may enforce cell cycle checkpoints,
p53 plays a dominant role in enforcing the G1/S checkpoint via
induction of p21cip (20). For this reason, it has been speculated
that p53-deficient malignant cells are highly dependent on the S
and G2/M checkpoints for maintaining their genomic integrity.
Accordingly, a variety of kinase inhibitors have been developed as
cancer therapeutics that inhibit CHK1, CHK2, or WEE1, the
known enforcers of these later checkpoints (21, 22). We specu-
lated that even though normal T cells have intact p53, their ex-
traordinarily rapid rate of division would also make them
exquisitely dependent on the S and G2/M checkpoints for survival.
Additionally, a recent report that T cells down-regulate p53 upon
TCR stimulation also suggested to us that T cells may rely strongly
on the S and G2/M checkpoints (17). To test this hypothesis we
used two different inhibitors of S and G2/M cell cycle checkpoint
proteins: the WEE1 inhibitor (WEE1i) AZD1775 (23) and the
CHK1/2 inhibitor (CHKi) AZD7762 (24). Although the two
compounds have distinct targets, they ultimately function by pro-
moting premature S or G2/M progression and initiation of mitosis.
When T cells were cultured with either compound, we observed
a strong, dose-dependent proapoptotic effect, with substantial
selectivity for activated over nonactivated T cells (Fig. 3A). Similar
to the effects of MDM2i, cotreatment with either CHKi or WEE1i
shifted the etoposide dose–response curve for the killing of acti-
vated T cells (Fig. 3B). This enhanced killing appeared to be se-
lective for activated T cells cycling at faster rates because these
cells were more sensitive to treatment with CHKi or WEE1i (Fig.
3C). Furthermore, inhibition of cell cycle progression, via coinhi-
bition of CDK2 (thus preventing entry from G1 into S phase),
provided substantial protection from CHKi or WEE1i exposure
(Fig. 3D). Of note, CHKi treatment was equally effective in p53−/−
and WT T cells, but MDM2 inhibition heightened this response
only in WT T cells (Fig. S1). Careful cell cycle analysis of treated
T cells using 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine incorporation and phos-
pho-H3 staining (a marker of mitotic signaling) indicated that
both CHKi and WEE1i led to an increase in the proportion of cells
in G2 and/or an increase in the proportion of cells that had initi-
ated mitotic signaling (Fig. S2). Finally, when we assessed T cells
after exposure to CHKi or WEE1i, we found that cells in late S or
G2/M displayed a substantial increase in γH2AX levels and that
those cells displaying premature mitotic signaling (those cells still
in S-phase, but phospho-H3+) had the highest levels (Fig. 3E).
These results indicated that disturbing the mid-S and G2/M
checkpoints in activated T cells led to premature cell cycle pro-
gression, DNA damage, and death of these cells. They also sug-
gested to us that CHKi or WEE1i would have substantial
specificity in vivo for recently activated lymphocytes, which are
transiting extremely rapidly through the cell cycle.
Next, we assessed the effects CHKi or WEE1i on activated
T cells in vivo using an acute infection with LCMV. CHKi or
WEE1i led to a significant loss of recently activated LCMV-
specific (Db-GP33 tetramer+) T cells (Fig. 3F). This effect was
relatively modest unless combined with a subtherapeutic dose of
etoposide. However, when used in combination, there was a po-
tent depletion of recently activated cells, with only a mild or
moderate decrease of naive T cells (Fig. 3 F and G). Thus, CHKi
and WEE1i display selective, potent, and antigen-specific immu-
nosuppressive effects in combination with etoposide. Further-
more, we hypothesized that because MDM2i and CHKi/WEE1i
act on distinct nodes within the DDR, they may display synergistic
effects when used in combination, and may allow for antigen-
selective therapeutic immune suppression without the use of
nonspecifically DNA-damaging drugs.
Combination Therapy with Inhibitors of MDM2 and Cell Cycle
Checkpoint Kinases Selectively Eliminates Pathogenic CD8+ T Cells,
Suppresses Hypercytokinemia, and Treats Mouse HLH. HLH is a fa-
tal immunoregulatory disorder affecting infants and children born
with defects of perforin-dependent cytotoxic function (25). Be-
cause perforin-dependent cytotoxicity acts as a brake on T-cell
activation, individuals with HLH display abnormally persistent and
severe T-cell activation in response to infections or other stimuli.
Conventional treatment of patients with HLH relies on etoposide,
administered episodically (25). A well-established animal model
involving LCMV infection of perforin-deficient (Prf−/−) mice
recreates this disorder and the therapeutic benefits of etoposide
(10). However, because etoposide use is associated with significant
adverse effects in clinical contexts, including marrow suppression
and induction of secondary leukemia (26, 27), we tested an
etoposide-free regimen in this model, relying solely on targeted
manipulation of the DDR. We combined our previously identified
strategies of MDM2 inhibition and CHK1/2 or WEE1 inhibition
as a combination PPCA therapy. Administration of PPCA to
LCMV-infected Prf−/− mice gave a synergistic effect, essentially
Fig. 2.
MDM2 inhibition synergizes with etoposide for the selective killing of activated T cells. (A) Nonactivated or in vitro-activated CD8+ T cells (P14,
stimulated with peptide and then with IL-2 for 5 d) were cocultured with increasing concentrations of etoposide ± MDM2i and nutlin-3 (2.5 μM) for 18 h and
assessed for apoptosis. (B) Phospho-p53 (Ser15) staining of activated T cells exposed to etoposide (1 μM) and/or MDM2i for 4 h. (C) γH2AX and DNA content
(7-AAD) staining of activated T cells exposed to etoposide (1 μM) and/or MDM2i for 4 h. (D and E) WT mice were infected with LCMV and treated as indicated
5 d after infection. Etoposide was given at a subtherapeutic dose (10 mg/kg). Absolute numbers (Abs.) of splenic LCMV-specific (Db-GP33 tetramer+/CD44hi)
and naive (CD44lo) CD8+ T cells were enumerated 8 d after infection. Dotted lines represent the limit of tetramer detection. Data are mean (A) or individual
animals (C and D) ± SE. Significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni post hoc test. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001. Results
represent three independent experiments (n = 6–10).
E4784
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1703683114
McNally et al.
 ablating the pathogenic anti-LCMV responses but largely sparing
naive T cells, in contrast to the moderate loss of naive T cells seen
when the inhibitors were used in combination with etoposide (Fig.
4 A and B). Next, we assessed systemic IFN-γ levels, a major
mediator of HLH pathology (28, 29). PPCA gave efficient sup-
pression of IFN-γ levels (Fig. 4C). Finally, we treated LCMV-
infected Prf−/− mice with PPCA, incorporating either a CHKi or
WEE1i, and found that whereas all mice treated with carrier died
by about 3 wk after infection, most animals treated with PPCA
survived long term (Fig. 4D). The efficacy of PPCA suggested that
it may have significant potential for the clinical treatment of pa-
tients with HLH.
Combination PPCA Therapy Selectively Eliminates Pathogenic CD4+ T
Cells, Preserves Regulatory T Cells, and Treats EAE. To assess the
wider applicability of PPCA to autoimmunity, we also tested it in
the well-described model of MS, EAE, which is dependent on self-
reactive CD4+ T cells. EAE was induced in C57BL/6J mice with
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-derived peptide
vaccination. Animals were treated with the combination of WEE1i
and MDM2i (PPCA) on days 5 and 9 postimmunization. Splenic
MOG-reactive CD4+ T cells were analyzed on day 15 using either
a tetrameric MHC peptide reagent (I-Ab-MOG35–55 tetramer) or
intracellular staining for IL-17A after MOG peptide stimulation.
Both methodologies revealed a significant and similar decrease in
MOG-reactive T cells after PPCA (Fig. 5 A and B), whereas naive
CD4+ T cells and regulatory T cells (Tregs) were spared (Fig. S3).
Although PPCA significantly decreased pathogenic CD4+
T cells in vivo, we next needed to determine whether it would
impact disease symptoms. PPCA therapy provided significant
protection from the development of paralysis when given 5 and 9 d
after initial vaccination (Fig. 5C), whereas treatment with MDM2i
or WEE1i alone failed to provide disease protection (Fig. S3). The
most stringent and clinically relevant test of therapy for EAE
entails treatment after disease onset (30). In this context, we
treated animals with clinically apparent disease on days 12 and 16,
and observed significant protection from worsening paralysis, with
a mean peak disease score of 1.9 vs. 2.6 (Fig. 5D). Thus, combi-
nation PPCA therapy selectively purges encephalitogenic CD4+
T cells in EAE, sparing both naive CD4+ T cells and Tregs, and
displays therapeutic benefits in both preemptive and postparalysis
therapeutic contexts.
Activated T Cells Are Uniquely Susceptible to DNA Damage Induction
by Conventional Chemotherapeutics or PPCA Therapy, Although PPCA
Spares Other Tissues. The therapeutic activity and immune selec-
tivity we observed with PPCA suggested to us that activated ef-
fector T cells may be uniquely susceptible to DNA damage
induction in vivo after exposure to DNA-modifying agents or tar-
geted manipulation of the DDR, such as with PPCA. To in-
vestigate this idea, we examined DNA damage in various cell types
directly ex vivo, using γH2AX staining. We compared activated
CD8+ T cells (as in Fig. 1), nonactivated CD8+ T cells (CD44lo),
double-negative thymocytes, and lineage (Lin)−/C-kit+ (LK) mar-
row cells. At baseline, activated T cells had the highest γH2AX
levels, followed by LK cells (Fig. 6A). Next, we compared γH2AX
levels 2 h after animals were treated with etoposide, cyclophos-
phamide, or PPCA (MDM2i with either CHKi or WEE1i). Each of
these approaches gave somewhat different γH2AX staining pat-
terns, as illustrated by representative flow cytometric plots of
Fig. 3.
Inhibition of cell cycle checkpoint kinases selectively kills activated
T cells and synergizes with etoposide. (A) Nonactivated or in vitro-activated
CD8+ T cells (P14) were cocultured with increasing concentrations of either a
CHKi (AZD7762) or WEE1i (AZD1775) overnight and assessed for apoptosis.
(B) Activated CD8+ T cells (P14) were cocultured with increasing concentra-
tions of etoposide ± a fixed concentration of either CHKi or WEE1i for 18 h
and assessed for apoptosis. (C) Activated CD8+ T cells with a range of cell
division rates (Materials and Methods) were cultured overnight with CHKi, or
WEE1i (1 or 10 μM) and assessed for apoptosis, which is plotted by division
rates. (D) Activated CD8+ T cells were cultured ± a selective CDK2 inhibitor
(SU-9516, 5 μM), along with either CHKi (1 μM) or WEE1i (10 μM), overnight
and assessed for apoptosis. Nonactivated T cells exposed to these drugs are
shown for comparison. (E) Representative flow plots of activated CD8+
T cells cultured with either CHKi (1μM) or WEE1i (10 μM) for 4 h, showing
γH2AX expression, DNA content (7-AAD), and phospho-H3 (a marker of
mitotic signaling). (F and G) WT mice were infected with LCMV and treated
as indicated 5 d after infection. Etoposide was given at a subtherapeutic
dose (10 mg/kg). Splenic LCMV-specific (Db-GP33 tetramer+/CD44hi) and na-
ive (CD44lo) CD8+ T cells were enumerated on day 8 postinfection. Data are
mean (A–D) or individual animals (F and G) ± SE. Significance was de-
termined by one-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni post hoc test. **P < 0.01,
***P < 0.001. NS, not significant. Results represent three independent ex-
periments (n = 6–12).
McNally et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 22, 2017
|
E4785
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 activated CD8+ T cells in Fig. 6B. Etoposide gave the most pro-
found increases, whereas cyclophosphamide and PPCA gave
somewhat lower increases. Of note, γH2AX staining substantially
underestimates the extent of DNA damage and the DDR in re-
sponse to cyclophosphamide. This conventional chemotherapeutic
acts by attaching alkyl groups to DNA and primarily causing
intrastrand and interstrand cross-links. These cross-links are rapidly
converted to DNA breaks in cells during S phase, but alkylation
occurs at all phases of the cell cycle (and in nearly all cells). If not
repaired, these lesions will lead to breakage at a later time points,
during DNA replication or RNA transcription. Repair mechanisms
for these lesions include base excision repair and other pathways
that are not readily detectable by γH2AX staining.
When we compared the change in γH2AX staining 2 h after
these treatments [normalized to the γH2AX mean fluorescent in-
tensity (MFI) of the same cell type from carrier-treated animals],
we observed that activated T cells experienced the most profound
increases of all tissues assessed (Fig. 6C). Thus, activated effector
T cells have the highest baseline DDR and are uniquely susceptible
to further DNA damage induction by either DNA-damaging agents
or targeted manipulation of DDR signaling pathways. This in-
creased susceptibility, perhaps related to cell cycle speed (as in Fig.
3C), may be a primary mechanism underlying the efficacy of
PPCA. Additionally, we noted that PPCA caused the smallest in-
crease in γH2AX signal in all other cell types compared with
etoposide or cyclophosphamide (Fig. 6C and Fig. S4). This ob-
servation demonstrates that PPCA has fewer off-target effects, and
suggests that it may have substantially less toxicity, than conven-
tional DNA-damaging drugs.
Combination Inhibitor Therapy Causes Minimal Off-Target Tissue Damage.
Conventional chemotherapeutic agents damage DNA via a variety
of biochemical mechanisms, including direct DNA binding/
intercalation (alkylators, anthracyclines, and platinum derivatives),
binding DNA-damaging intermediates (etoposide and camptothe-
cins), or direct interference with DNA synthesis (e.g., methotrexate,
cytarabine), and they usually do so in a tissue/cell-type nonspecific
fashion. As such, the use of these agents for immune suppression is
substantially limited by adverse effects, typically involving the gut
and bone marrow. Because PPCA therapy relies instead on ma-
nipulating cell signaling downstream of endogenous DNA damage
present in activated lymphocytes, we hypothesized that PPCA is less
toxic than conventional chemotherapeutics.
We assessed potential gut, marrow, and immune toxicities of
PPCA in experimental animals. As a functional assessment of gut
toxicity, we measured small-molecule permeability (which rises
with increasing gut damage) and transepithelial resistance
(which falls with gut damage) of isolated terminal ileum from
animals treated with PPCA or conventional chemotherapy (Fig.
7 A and B). Although the conventional DNA-damaging agents
had a substantial impact on these measures of gut integrity,
PPCA had a more modest or no impact.
Next, we examined the effects of combination PPCA therapy on
hematopoietic progenitor cells. C-kit+ progenitors [those pro-
genitors positive for C-kit and negative for an array of Lin markers
(LK cells)] are constantly dividing and are known to be some of
the most sensitive cells to DNA-damaging agents. We compared
the effects of conventional chemotherapy with the effects of PPCA
and found that PPCA had a more limited effect on their numbers
(Fig. 7C). Additionally, we examined the effects of these drugs on
rapidly dividing double-negative thymocytes and found that PPCA
caused less depletion than conventional agents (Fig. 7D). Thus,
although PPCA therapy appears to rely (at least in part) on the
uniquely rapid proliferative nature of activated lymphocytes, other
proliferating cells types are spared by PPCA compared with con-
ventional DNA-damaging agents. Importantly, this finding is
consistent with published reports showing that MDM2i, CHK1/2i,
Fig. 4.
PPCA selectively eliminates pathogenic CD8+ T cells, suppresses hyper-
cytokinemia, and treats mouse HLH. Prf−/− mice were infected with LCMV and
treated as indicated on days 5 and 6 postinfection. (A and B) Splenic LCMV-
specific (Db-GP33 tetramer+/CD44hi) and naive (CD44lo) CD8+ T cells were enu-
merated on day 8 postinfection. (C) Serum IFN-γ levels from 8 d postinfection.
(D) Survival of Prf−/− mice treated with drug carrier or indicated agents. Signifi-
cance was determined by one-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni post hoc test.
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Results represent more than three independent ex-
periments (n = 8–15 per group in A–C, n = 12–15 per group in D).
Fig. 5.
PPCA selectively eliminates pathogenic CD4+ T cells, preserves Tregs, and treats mouse EAE. C57BL/6 mice were vaccinated with MOG peptide to
induce EAE and treated on days 5 and 9 after vaccination with drug carrier or PPCA. Splenocytes were harvested on day 30 and stained for MOG35-specific
CD4+ T cells (CD4+, CD44hi, I-Ab MOG35 tetramer+) (A) and CD4+ T cells producing IL-17 after ex vivo MOG35–55 peptide stimulation (B). (C) MOG-vaccinated
animals were treated on days 5 and 9 with combination inhibitor therapy and assessed for progressive paralysis using standard clinical scoring. (D) After the
onset of paralysis, animals were treated as indicated (on days 12 and 16) and followed for clinical score. Data are mean ± SE. **P < 0.001, ***P < 0.001,
****P < 0.0005. Results represent three independent experiments (n = 8–12).
E4786
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1703683114
McNally et al.
 and WEE1i have demonstrated relatively mild toxicities in clinical
trials (5, 31, 32).
Although PPCA therapy appears to spare nonactivated, bystander
T cells, we wanted to look more closely at Tregs because they have
been reported to be a chronically dividing T-cell population in vivo
(33). Additionally, DNA-damaging agents, including cyclophospha-
mide, are reported to kill these cells (34, 35). To test the acute ef-
fects of combination PPCA therapy on Tregs, mice were treated
twice with PPCA, cyclophosphamide, or etoposide, and total splenic
Treg numbers were enumerated 1 d after the second treatment (Fig.
7E). Although cyclophosphamide treatment led to a substantial
decrease in total Treg numbers, PPCA did not affect them.
Next, we tested whether quiescent memory T cells would be
affected by exposure to PPCA. To generate a quiescent memory
T-cell response under physiological conditions, we infected mice
with LCMV (Armstrong) and waited 2 mo to establish a stable
memory pool that slowly proliferates. Then, EAE was induced in
the mice and in groups of mice that were treated with either PPCA
or carrier. Twenty-one days after EAE induction, mice were
rechallenged with LCMV clone 13 to assess the in vivo function
of LCMV-specific memory T cells. As expected, rechallenge with
LCMV caused a rapid increase in LCMV-specific CD8+ T cells
Fig. 6.
Activated T cells are uniquely susceptible to DNA damage induction
by conventional chemotherapeutics or PPCA, although PPCA spares other
tissues. (A) γH2AX staining was assessed in various cell types directly ex vivo,
including activated T cells (transferred CD45.1+ P14 T cells, 6 d after LCMV
infection), nonactivated CD8+ T cells (CD44lo), double-negative thymocytes,
and LK marrow cells. (B) Representative flow cytometric plots, gating on
LCMV-specific (CD8+/CD45.1+) splenic T cells, obtained 2 h after animals were
treated with the indicated agents. Cyclos, cyclophosphamide. (C) Fold in-
crease of γH2AX MFI (normalized to the same cell types from carrier-treated
animals) of cells obtained 2 h after animals received the indicated treat-
ments. Each symbol reflects data from individual mice, cumulative from two
to three independent experiments. Mean ± SEM is shown. Differences be-
tween indicated groups were calculated using an unpaired Student’s t test.
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. ns, not significant.
Fig. 7.
PPCA causes minimal off-target tissue damage. For assessment of gut
toxicity, WT mice were treated twice, as indicated, 24 h apart and tissues were
harvested 24 h following the second treatment. FITC-dextran migration (A) and
transepithelial resistance (B) were measured through isolated ileum using a
Ussing chamber. Total cell counts from the bone marrow (one femur) (C) and
thymus (D) of WT mice 3 d after treatment with indicated drugs are shown.
(E) Total cell count per spleen of Tregs (CD4+/CD25+/FoxP3+) 1 d after the in-
dicated treatment. (F) WT mice were infected with LCMV (Armstrong), and EAE
was induced and treated 60 d later, as per Fig. 5E. On day 81, mice were rechal-
lenged with LCMV-CL13, and splenocytes were analyzed 5 d later for the total
number of LCMV-specific Db-GP33+ memory CD8+ T cells or IAb-GP61+ memory
CD4+ T cells by tetramer staining. “No rechallenge” indicates initial LCMV chal-
lenge but no further treatment or CL13 rechallenge. (G) WT mice were infected
with LCMV and treated with the indicated agents, as per Fig. 4D. Seventy days
later, spleens were assessed by quantitative PCR for persistence of virus. (H) WT
BALB/c mice were infected with MCMV (Smith strain, 104 pfu), treated with the
indicated drugs 3 d postinfection, and monitored for survival. Data are repre-
sentative of two individual experiments with eight mice per group. Where indi-
cated, data are mean ± SE. Significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with
a Bonferroni post hoc test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.001, ***P < 0.001. Results represent
two to four independent experiments (n = 6–12). NS, not significant.
McNally et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 22, 2017
|
E4787
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 (Db-GP33 tetramer+), and the increases in these populations
were unaffected by combination PPCA therapy given during
EAE (Fig. 7F).
Finally, we asked whether PPCA would affect concurrent viral
infections. We treated WT animals with PPCA on days 5 and 6 of
LCMV infection (the same treatment and timing as for Prf−/−
mice in Fig. 4). Seventy days later, mice were killed and spleens
were assessed by quantitative PCR for the presence of LCMV.
Despite treatment with PPCA or cyclophosphamide, all animals
cleared the LCMV infection (Fig. 7G). Because even persistent
LCMV may be nonpathogenic in WT animals (36), we sought to
assess the effects of PPCA using a highly pathogenic virus, mouse
cytomegalovirus (MCMV). Selgrade et al. (37) reported that when
given early after MCMV infection, cyclophosphamide led to
substantial mortality. We infected WT mice with MCMV, treated
them with either PPCA or cyclophosphamide 3 d later, and ob-
served that most cyclophosphamide mice died within 10 d, al-
though no mice treated with PPCA or drug carrier died (Fig. 7H).
Thus, taken together, PPCA potently suppresses recently activated
T-cell responses, yet it has minimal or decreased off-target ef-
fects on the gut and marrow; it has limited off-target effects on
bystander thymocytes, Tregs, and quiescent memory T cells; and it
does not affect clearance or survival of concurrent viral infections,
as demonstrated by two distinct viral infection models. These
qualities indicate that PPCA has a superior toxicity profile com-
pared with conventional DNA-damaging drugs currently used for
immune modulation.
Activated T Cells from Healthy Human Donors and Peripheral Blood T
Cells from Patients with Active HLH Display a Spontaneous DDR. The
data above demonstrate that mouse T cells display a strong DDR
when activated by antigen under physiological conditions. To
understand the translational potential of this strategy better, we
examined activated human T cells from healthy donors. T cells
were activated and expanded in vitro with the lectin Con A, fol-
lowed by IL-2, and examined via phosphospecific flow cytometry
for various markers of the DDR. Similar to mouse T cells, we
found that activated human T cells had elevated levels of γH2AX,
phospho-p53, phospho-ATM, and phospho-CHK1/2 (Fig. 8A). To
define the kinetics of this DDR, we stimulated normal donor
lymphocytes with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 for 4 d, followed by
culture in IL-2 for 3 d, where we assessed γH2AX staining at the
start of culture and regularly thereafter. We observed that both
activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells displayed an increase in γH2AX
staining within 1 d of initial stimulation (Fig. 8B). The γH2AX
levels increased further over the next few days as cells began to
proliferate rapidly. Thus, initial activation and subsequent pro-
liferation both contribute to the DDR in activated human T cells.
Because HLH is a disease of excessive T-cell activation, we
postulated that we would be able to observe evidence of a DDR in
T cells from patients with active disease, directly ex vivo and
without stimulation. When we examined peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with untreated HLH, we
observed a significant increase in γH2AX in CD8+ T cells com-
pared with T cells from healthy donors (Fig. 8C). Thus, we found
that human T cells, either activated in vitro or activated in vivo in
the disease context of HLH, display clear evidence of a DDR.
Human T Cells Are Sensitive to MDM2, CHK1/2, and WEE1 Inhibition
After Activation with Lectins or Specific Antigen. When we cultured
T cells from healthy donors with titrations of etoposide, CHKi, or
WEE1i, we found that Con A-activated, but not resting, T cells
were very sensitive to each of these agents (Fig. 9 A–C). Fur-
thermore, the addition of MDM2i to each of these agents en-
hanced killing of activated T cells. Of note, although the
magnitude of killing was similar between activated human and
mouse T cells, the selectivity of these agents for activated vs.
nonactivated T cells was greater with human versus mouse cells.
To assess the effect of PPCA on antigen-driven responses in hu-
mans, fluorescently labeled PBMCs were stimulated with a pool of
human CMV peptides in culture and then treated with PPCA.
Specific T-cell death was determined for activated (dye-diluted),
resting memory (CD45RA−), and naive (CD45RA+) T-cell sub-
sets (gating in Fig. S5) by comparing PPCA-treated with control
cultures. PPCA induced high levels of cell death in antigen-
activated T cells, although sparing both resting memory and na-
ive human T cells (Fig. 9 D–F). Thus, human T cells display a
similar or stronger pattern of DDR signaling with activation,
sensitivity to DDR manipulation, and selectivity of these agents
for activated T cells, as we observed with mouse T cells. These
results suggest that the in vivo therapeutic activity we have ob-
served in mice has significant translational potential for the
treatment of human diseases.
Discussion
In the current study, we demonstrate that activated mouse and
human T cells display a strong DDR with activation in physio-
logical conditions and in the human disease context of HLH;
they have a marked sensitivity to inhibition of MDM2, CHK1/2,
Fig. 8.
Activated T cells from healthy human donors and peripheral blood
T cells from patients with active HLH display a spontaneous DDR. (A) T cells
from normal donors were activated in vitro (Con A, followed by IL-2) and
assessed by flow cytometry for the indicated phosphoprotein markers, in
comparison to nonactivated T cells. (B) Kinetics of γH2AX (MFI) expression in
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from human PBMCs after stimulation with anti-
CD3 and anti-CD28 for 4 d and expansion in IL-2 for 3 d. Data are repre-
sentative of three experiments with similar results. (C) PBMCs from healthy
pediatric donors and patients with untreated, active HLH were assessed for
the percentage of γH2AX+ cells among CD3+/CD8+ cells by flow cytometry. #,
data point off scale at 32.1%. Data are mean ± SE. **P < 0.01. Ctrl, control.
Results represent three independent experiments (n = 12–27).
E4788
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1703683114
McNally et al.
 or WEE1; and small-molecule agents targeting these proteins
display significant potential for selective therapeutic immune
suppression. The strategy of p53 potentiation (via MDM2i)
combined with inhibition of cell cycle checkpoint proteins
(CHK1/2 or WEE1), termed PPCA therapy, allows for selective
ablation of recently activated T cells, although sparing the naive,
regulatory, and quiescent memory pools and evidencing minimal
nonimmune toxicity. Moreover, PPCA appears to be broadly
applicable, displaying clear benefits in models of a CD8+ T-cell–
driven immune regulatory disorder (HLH) and a CD4+ T-cell–
driven autoimmune disorder (EAE). Thus, this strategy repre-
sents a promising approach for the treatment of potentially many
immune-mediated diseases.
Our findings represent a clear demonstration of DNA damage
signaling in T cells responding to antigen in vivo or in vitro. We
find that DNA damage is detectable once T cells are activated
(at 24 h, before significant division; Fig. 8B), that T cells sustain
greater damage than other cell types in response to PPCA or
DNA-damaging agents (Fig. 6C), and that T cells dividing at
faster rates are more sensitive to inhibition of CHK or WEE1
(Fig. 3C). Together, these observations suggest that extremely
rapid cell division stresses cell cycle checkpoints to the limit of
survivability and contributes to [but is likely not the only cause of
(38)] DNA damage, which primes activated T cells for apoptosis.
Thus, activated T cells, living near their DDR limits, are readily
killed by additional DNA damage or by targeted inhibition of
pathways critical for tolerance of their unusual biology. Further
studies are needed to define more completely the critical path-
ways allowing lymphocytes to sustain their unique bursts of
proliferation after activation.
The role of DDR signaling in the survival and function of
mature T cells remains poorly defined. Multiple defects of the
DDR, including mutations in ATM, ATR, DNA-PK, and other
genes, are associated with immune deficiency (39). However, these
mutations all cause severe abnormalities of lymphocyte develop-
ment, and it is not clear to what extent peripheral T-cell function is
altered. Indeed, the immune phenotypes of these disorders are
similar to disorders of V(D)J recombination (e.g., RAG mutants),
which is only active during the development of T cells. Of note,
human diseases affecting multiple DNA repair pathways, including
abnormalities of homologous and nonhomologous breakage repair,
base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, and repair of in-
terstrand cross-links, are not associated with abnormal immune
phenotypes (40). Furthermore, p53-deficient mice do not have an
abnormal T-cell phenotype (41). Although multiple factors may
limit peripheral T-cell expansion and survival (as in p53−/− mice),
our findings suggest that proper function of specific DDR pathways
is also critical for the survival of activated T cells.
Dozens of small-molecule inhibitors targeting DDR pathways
have been developed, largely for the treatment of cancer (42).
Multiple compounds have entered clinical trials, typically in com-
bination with conventional chemotherapeutics as a way to enhance
efficacy of DNA-damaging chemotherapy without promoting tox-
icity (43). Although clinical data are limited, initial experience
suggests that these small-molecule drugs are well tolerated (44, 45).
Although immune effects (or toxicities) of drugs that modulate
DDR signaling have not been previously reported, our findings
suggest that such effects should be examined in future clinical tests
of DDR altering small molecules.
PPCA therapy is a novel combination. MDM2 was one of the
first molecules targeted to manipulate DDR signaling (18). The
normal function of MDM2 is to promote p53 degradation and limit
its transcriptional activities and other functions (14). The normal
function of CHK1 includes phosphorylation of CDC25, which in-
duces S/G2 arrest (24). Similarly, WEE1 functions to restrict mi-
totic entry by phosphorylating CDK1 and preventing its interaction
with cyclin-B (46). Inhibition of these cell cycle checkpoint proteins
leads to premature mitotic progression and is associated with
heightened DDR signaling (Fig. 3). Because p53 activation po-
tently enforces the G1/S checkpoint, it has been theorized that p53-
null tumors are especially dependent on the S and G2/M check-
points to maintain genomic integrity. Therefore, inhibitors of cell
cycle checkpoint proteins have largely been developed for the
treatment of p53-deficient malignancies (5, 21, 24, 47, 48).
Meanwhile, MDM2is have been developed for use in p53-sufficient
malignancies because they have little or no impact in the absence
of p53. In theory, targeting of MDM2 may antagonize targeting of
CHK1 or WEE1, because it may cause G1 arrest. Indeed, Li et al.
(49) report that MDM2i may protect p53 WT cells from WEE1
inhibition. However, we have not observed antagonism in vivo
when assessing activated T cells, suggesting that the S and G2/M
checkpoints may be uniquely important for the survival of these
cells. Thus, PPCA is unique not only because it is an unexpected
and novel combination, but because it appears to exploit unique
aspects of T-cell biology.
PPCA demonstrates reduced nonimmune toxicities compared
with conventional DNA-damaging agents. Although DNA-
damaging chemotherapeutics, such as etoposide and cyclophos-
phamide, may be highly effective immune suppressants, their
clinical use is severely limited by adverse effects such as myelo-
suppression, gut toxicity, and induction of secondary malignancies
(27, 50). In contrast, PPCA potentiates and amplifies endogenous
genotoxic stresses in activated lymphocytes, although it causes
minimal damage in other cell types (Fig. 6 and Fig. S4). Further-
more, because DDR-based therapy does not directly damage DNA
and is not likely to affect cells that are not in cycle, it is relatively
nongenotoxic to the recipient. In contrast to agents such as eto-
poside or cyclophosphamide, which damage DNA in essentially all
cells (albeit more strongly in dividing ones) and throughout the cell
cycle, PPCA relies on the unusual levels of DNA damage sustained
by activated lymphocytes. Within the immune system, PPCA
Fig. 9.
Human T cells are sensitive to MDM2i, CHKi, and WEE1i after acti-
vation with lectins or specific antigen. Con A-activated and nonactivated
T cells from healthy donors were cocultured with increasing concentrations
of etoposide (A), CHKi (B), or WEE1i (C) ± MDM2i for 18 h and assessed for
apoptosis. Separately, T cells were activated from healthy donor PBMCs with
a CMV peptide pool followed by IL-2. Antigen-specific cells (D), resting
memory cells (E), and naive T cells (F) were cultured with the indicated
treatments (5 μM MDMD2i, 3 μM etoposide, 1 μM CHKi, and 1 μM WEE1i),
and apoptosis was assessed after 18 h. ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001. Results
represent five independent experiments.
McNally et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 22, 2017
|
E4789
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 spares Tregs and nonactivated naive or memory T cells, likely
because they are either not dividing or divide much more slowly
(2, 51). Thus, the high degree of susceptibility that activated
lymphocytes display to PPCA, relative to other cell types, creates
a favorable “therapeutic index,” the ratio of potential thera-
peutic benefit to potential toxicity.
The efficiency of PPCA as a form of antigen-specific T-cell
immune suppression raises questions regarding inadvertent sup-
pression of immunity to incidental (or latent) viral infections in
patients receiving PPCA therapy. Because our current report
represents a proof of principle with favorable toxicity data, this
issue will likely have to be resolved in empirical clinical studies.
However, this risk appears quite low for several reasons. First, our
studies (Fig. 7) demonstrate that PPCA does not impair functional
bystander T-cell memory, prevent clearance of LCMV, or pro-
mote mortality after MCMV infection. Indeed, antiviral immunity
in mice and humans appears to overshoot what is needed (52), so
there is an ample margin of safety in most contexts. Second, PPCA
is likely to be used transiently and episodically, given at times for
maximal disease impact. Because PPCA would not be applied
continuously (in contrast to strategies like cytokine blockade), it is
far less likely to cause complications like latent tuberculosis
reactivation, as seen with TNF blockade. Third, although treat-
ment of immune disorders with conventional DNA-damaging
chemotherapeutics is associated with increased risk of infection,
this risk is mostly related to nonimmune effects on the marrow or
gut, which PPCA minimizes. The experience of patients with HLH
treated in international trials with etoposide demonstrates that
most treatment-emergent infections are due to bacterial, not viral,
infections largely secondary to myelosuppression (53). Finally, in
contrast to the selective effects of PPCA, alternatives such as
broad and nonspecific T-cell–depleting antibodies (e.g., antithy-
mocyte globulin or alemtuzumab) are clearly associated with viral
reactivation and disseminated viral and fungal infections (54).
Thus, targeted manipulation of the DDR is likely to be superior to
current therapeutic strategies in terms of infection risk.
As immune-based therapies become increasingly important
for the future of anticancer therapies, it is equally fitting and
intellectually satisfying to note that DDR-based strategies,
rooted in cancer biology and developed for the treatment of
malignancies, may find an important role in the treatment of
immune-mediated disorders.
Materials and Methods
Mice. C57BL/6J, BALB/cJ, C57BL/6-Prf1tm1Sdz/J (Prf−/−), and B6.129S2-
Trp53tm1Tyj/J (p53−/−) mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory and
bred in-house. TCR-transgenic postnatal day (P) 14 mice [B6.Cg-Tcratm1Mom
Tg(TcrLCMV)327Sdz] were a gift from P. Marrack (University of Colorado/
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Denver, CO). All mice were housed under
specific pathogen-free conditions in an Association for Assessment and Ac-
creditation of Laboratory Animal Care-approved barrier facility under the
monitoring and care of the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center
(CCHMC) veterinary staff. Experiments were performed with CCHMC In-
stitutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approval.
Viral Infections and Drug Treatments. LCMV viral stocks were grown in BHK-21
cells, and the number of plaque-forming units (pfu) was assayed on Vero cells
as previously described (55). LCMV-WE was used in all studies (200 pfu ad-
ministered i.p.), except the studies shown in Fig. 7 F and G, in which LCMV
Armstrong (2 × 105 pfu administered i.p.) was used for initial challenge and
mice were rechallenged with LCMV clone 13 (2 × 106 pfu administered i.v.).
MCMV stocks were generated from salivary glands of Smith strain-infected
animals and titered using standard plaque assays. BALB/c mice were infected
i.p. with 1 × 104 pfu per animal. All chemotherapeutics were obtained from
the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center clinical pharmacy or the
indicated supplier, administered i.p., and dosed as follows: etoposide (10 or
50 mg/kg), cyclophosphamide (200 mg/kg), nutlin-3 (50 mg/kg; Cayman
Chemicals), AZD1775 (60 mg/kg; Chemietek), and AZD6672 (25 mg/kg;
Selleck Chemical).
HLH Induction. HLH was induced in Prf−/− mice by LCMV-WE infection as
described elsewhere (29). Mice were examined longitudinally, typically three
times per week, for development of HLH-like disease symptoms.
EAE Induction and Treatment. Female C57BL/6 mice were immunized s.c. with
100 μg of MOG35–55 emulsified in 5 mg/mL complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA)
(Hooke Laboratories). On days 0 and 2, animals received i.p. injections of
250 ng of pertussis toxin (Hooke Laboratories). Disease severity was assessed
every day thereafter and assigned a value using the following scale: 1, tail
flaccidity; 2, hind-limb weakness; 3, hind-limb paralysis; 4, hind-limb and
forelimb paralysis; 5, moribund.
Immunization and pertussis toxin injections were formulated to maximize
the disease severity to be ≤3 per the manufacturer’s specifications (Hooke
Laboratories) and recommendations of our IACUC.
MHC Tetramer Staining and Flow Cytometry. Spleens from individual mice
were harvested and crushed through a 70-μm cell strainer (BD Biosciences) to
generate a single-cell suspension. A total of 2 × 106 cells were stained with
different combinations of cell surface antibodies to CD4, CD8, CD44, CD62L,
CD16/32, CD25, F4/80, and Foxp3 (purchased from Biolegend, eBiosciences,
Miltenyi Biotec, or Rockland Immunochemicals). The MOG35–55 I-Ab, LCMV
GP61–80 I-Ab, and LCMV GP33–41 Db tetramers were provided by the NIH
Tetramer Core. Phosphoprotein staining for γH2Ax, phos-p53, phos-ATM,
and phos-CHK1 or phos-CHK2 was performed after fixation and per-
meabilization with either methanol or Foxp3 permeabilization buffer
(Biolegend) using antibodies from Cell Signaling Technology. For all staining
of human cells or staining of murine cells after in vitro culture or drug
treatment, dead cells were excluded by fixable viability dye staining. For ex
vivo assessment of γH2AX and other DDR phosphoproteins, spleens were
disaggregated in 0.3% paraformaldehyde directly to prevent apoptotic loss
of activated cells due to tissue disruption.
Ex Vivo Cytokine Production. T cells were assessed by restimulation with 5 μg
of peptide, MOG35–55, GP33–41, or GP61–80 (Synthetic Biomolecules) in the
presence of Golgi Plug (BD Biosciences). Cells were permeabilized using a
Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit (BD Biosciences) and stained with anti–IFN-γ or anti–IL-
17a (Biolegend). Where noted, CD4+ T cells were isolated from spleen and
inguinal lymph nodes and purified by negative selection using a CD4+ T Cell
Isolation Kit II (Miltenyi Biotec) before staining. Flow cytometry data were
acquired on a FACSCaliber or LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences) and were ana-
lyzed using FlowJo software version 7.6.5 (TreeStar, Inc.).
In Vitro Cell Death Assay. Splenocytes were harvested from P14 TCR transgenic
mice, activated in vitro with the cognate peptide (LCMV GP33–41, 1 μg/mL),
and cultured in complete DMEM media for 2 d. Human T cells were enriched
from PBMCs of normal healthy donors and stimulated with Con A (5 μg/mL),
or whole PBMCs were stimulated with Pepmix CMV IE1 peptide pool (JTP).
Activated human or mouse cells were then expanded in vitro with IL-2 (100
U/mL; PeproTech) for 3–5 d, except where noted otherwise. Nonactivated
T cells were obtained by purifying CD8+ cells from C57BL/6J spleens. For all
assays, viable cells were purified by Ficoll (GE Life Sciences) gradient centri-
fugation before culturing with the indicated drug. Cells were cultured for
18 h with the indicated treatments, and apoptosis was evaluated by mea-
suring phosphatidylserine exposure using A647-labeled MFG-E8 binding (56)
and permeability using 7-AAD (Biolegend) or the viability dye eFluor 506
(eBiosciences). For all dose–response curves depicting cell killing by drugs,
the death shown is the death measured above baseline (untreated cells),
which was typically 10–15%.
Comet Assay. Naive and in vitro-activated P14 CD8+ T cells were assessed for
DNA damage per the manufacturer’s recommendations for a neutral Comet
Assay (Trevigen). In short, 1 × 105 T cells were mixed with 37 °C agarose
plated on slides. Cells were lysed overnight and rinsed before electropho-
resis. Slides were dried at 37 °C, stained with SYBR Gold, and viewed on a
Leica ST-2 fluorescent microscope.
Tissue Processing for Toxicity Assessment. C57BL/6J cells were treated as
described 24 h apart, and tissues were harvested 24 h later. Terminal
ileum was harvested and assessed using a Ussing chamber as previously
described (57).
Study Design. Human blood samples were obtained from healthy donors and
patients with HLH under CCHMC Institutional Review Board-approved Pro-
tocols 2009-2797 and 2008-0483. Written informed consent was received
E4790
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1703683114
McNally et al.
 from participants before inclusion in the study. Animal experiments were
performed with IACUC approval.
Statistics. Where appropriate, results are given as the mean ± SEM, with
statistical significance determined by a two-tailed t test using either paired
or unpaired (assuming equal variance) or one-way ANOVA with a Dunnett
post hoc test, according to the data characteristics. Survival curves were
assessed by the Wilcoxon–Gehan test for differences among groups. Sig-
nificance was defined as P < 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed using
GraphPad Prism 5.04 software (GraphPad Software, Inc.).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank the Cincinnati Rheumatic Diseases Center
Animal Models of Inflammatory Disease Core (NIH Grant P30 AR047363) at
the CCHMC for help in setting up our EAE model. Additionally, we thank
Simon Hogan and David Wu for assisting in the assessment of gastrointes-
tinal permeability. We thank Rhonda Cardin for assistance with MCMV
studies. We thank Harinder Singh for invaluable feedback on this manu-
script. We also thank the NIH Tetramer Core for the MOG35–55 I-Ab, LCMV
GP61–80 I-Ab, and LCMV GP33–41 Db tetramers. This work was supported by
NIH Grants RO1DK081175 (to J.D.K. and D.A.H.), RO1AI109810 (to M.B.J. and
D.A.H.), and RO1AI057753 (to D.A.H.), as well by as a Research Innovation
grant provided by the CCHMC (to M.B.J. and D.A.H.).
1. Pancer Z, Cooper MD (2006) The evolution of adaptive immunity. Annu Rev Immunol
24:497–518.
2. Yoon H, Kim TS, Braciale TJ (2010) The cell cycle time of CD8+ T cells responding in
vivo is controlled by the type of antigenic stimulus. PLoS One 5:e15423.
3. Essmann F, Schulze-Osthoff K (2012) Translational approaches targeting the
p53 pathway for anti-cancer therapy. Br J Pharmacol 165:328–344.
4. Kelley MR, Logsdon D, Fishel ML (2014) Targeting DNA repair pathways for cancer
treatment: What’s new? Future Oncol 10:1215–1237.
5. Seto T, et al. (2013) Phase I, dose-escalation study of AZD7762 alone and in combi-
nation with gemcitabine in Japanese patients with advanced solid tumours. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 72:619–627.
6. Kreahling JM, et al. (2012) MK1775, a selective Wee1 inhibitor, shows single-agent
antitumor activity against sarcoma cells. Mol Cancer Ther 11:174–182.
7. Heylmann D, Rödel F, Kindler T, Kaina B (2014) Radiation sensitivity of human and
murine peripheral blood lymphocytes, stem and progenitor cells. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1846:121–129.
8. Bromberg KD, Burgin AB, Osheroff N (2003) A two-drug model for etoposide action
against human topoisomerase IIalpha. J Biol Chem 278:7406–7412.
9. McNally JP, et al. (2014) Eliminating encephalitogenic T cells without undermining
protective immunity. J Immunol 192:73–83.
10. Johnson TS, et al. (2014) Etoposide selectively ablates activated T cells to control the
immunoregulatory disorder hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. J Immunol 192:
84–91.
11. Tanaka T, Kajstura M, Halicka HD, Traganos F, Darzynkiewicz Z (2007) Constitutive
histone H2AX phosphorylation and ATM activation are strongly amplified during
mitogenic stimulation of lymphocytes. Cell Prolif 40:1–13.
12. Banáth JP, Olive PL (2003) Expression of phosphorylated histone H2AX as a surrogate
of cell killing by drugs that create DNA double-strand breaks. Cancer Res 63:
4347–4350.
13. Rogakou EP, Pilch DR, Orr AH, Ivanova VS, Bonner WM (1998) DNA double-stranded
breaks induce histone H2AX phosphorylation on serine 139. J Biol Chem 273:
5858–5868.
14. Kruse J-P, Gu W (2009) Modes of p53 regulation. Cell 137:609–622.
15. Kracikova M, Akiri G, George A, Sachidanandam R, Aaronson SA (2013) A threshold
mechanism mediates p53 cell fate decision between growth arrest and apoptosis. Cell
Death Differ 20:576–588.
16. Topham CH, Taylor SS (2013) Mitosis and apoptosis: How is the balance set? Curr Opin
Cell Biol 25:780–785.
17. Watanabe M, Moon KD, Vacchio MS, Hathcock KS, Hodes RJ (2014) Downmodulation
of tumor suppressor p53 by T cell receptor signaling is critical for antigen-specific
CD4(+) T cell responses. Immunity 40:681–691.
18. Vassilev LT, et al. (2004) In vivo activation of the p53 pathway by small-molecule
antagonists of MDM2. Science 303:844–848.
19. Siliciano JD, et al. (1997) DNA damage induces phosphorylation of the amino ter-
minus of p53. Genes Dev 11:3471–3481.
20. Szak ST, Mays D, Pietenpol JA (2001) Kinetics of p53 binding to promoter sites in vivo.
Mol Cell Biol 21:3375–3386.
21. Landau HJ, et al. (2012) The checkpoint kinase inhibitor AZD7762 potentiates
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis of p53-mutated multiple myeloma cells. Mol Cancer
Ther 11:1781–1788.
22. Guertin AD, et al. (2013) Preclinical evaluation of the WEE1 inhibitor MK-1775 as
single-agent anticancer therapy. Mol Cancer Ther 12:1442–1452.
23. Hirai H, et al. (2010) MK-1775, a small molecule Wee1 inhibitor, enhances anti-tumor
efficacy of various DNA-damaging agents, including 5-fluorouracil. Cancer Biol Ther
9:514–522.
24. Zabludoff SD, et al. (2008) AZD7762, a novel checkpoint kinase inhibitor, drives
checkpoint abrogation and potentiates DNA-targeted therapies. Mol Cancer Ther 7:
2955–2966.
25. Jordan MB, Allen CE, Weitzman S, Filipovich AH, McClain KL (2011) How I treat he-
mophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Blood 118:4041–4052.
26. My LT, et al. (2010) Comprehensive analyses and characterization of haemophago-
cytic lymphohistiocytosis in Vietnamese children. Br J Haematol 148:301–310.
27. Imashuku S (2007) Etoposide-related secondary acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) in
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Pediatr Blood Cancer 48:121–123.
28. Zoller EE, et al. (2011) Hemophagocytosis causes a consumptive anemia of in-
flammation. J Exp Med 208:1203–1214.
29. Jordan MB, Hildeman D, Kappler J, Marrack P (2004) An animal model of hemo-
phagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH): CD8+ T cells and interferon gamma are es-
sential for the disorder. Blood 104:735–743.
30. Constantinescu CS, Farooqi N, O’Brien K, Gran B (2011) Experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE) as a model for multiple sclerosis (MS). Br J Pharmacol 164:
1079–1106.
31. Do K, et al. (2015) Phase I study of single-agent AZD1775 (MK-1775), a Wee1 kinase
inhibitor, in patients with refractory solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 33:3409–3415.
32. Patnaik A, et al. (2015) Clinical pharmacology characterization of RG7112, an
MDM2 antagonist, in patients with advanced solid tumors. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 76:587–595.
33. Suffner J, et al. (2010) Dendritic cells support homeostatic expansion of Foxp3+
regulatory T cells in Foxp3.LuciDTR mice. J Immunol 184:1810–1820.
34. Brode S, Raine T, Zaccone P, Cooke A (2006) Cyclophosphamide-induced type-1 di-
abetes in the NOD mouse is associated with a reduction of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ reg-
ulatory T cells. J Immunol 177:6603–6612.
35. Lutsiak MEC, et al. (2005) Inhibition of CD4(+)25+ T regulatory cell function impli-
cated in enhanced immune response by low-dose cyclophosphamide. Blood 105:
2862–2868.
36. Oldstone MB (2013) Lessons learned and concepts formed from study of the patho-
genesis of the two negative-strand viruses lymphocytic choriomeningitis and in-
fluenza. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:4180–4183.
37. Selgrade MK, Daniels MJ, Hu PC, Miller FJ, Graham JA (1982) Effects of immuno-
suppression with cyclophosphamide on acute murine cytomegalovirus infection and
virus-augmented natural killer cell activity. Infect Immun 38:1046–1055.
38. Huang X, Tanaka T, Kurose A, Traganos F, Darzynkiewicz Z (2006) Constitutive his-
tone H2AX phosphorylation on Ser-139 in cells untreated by genotoxic agents is cell-
cycle phase specific and attenuated by scavenging reactive oxygen species. Int J Oncol
29:495–501.
39. Slatter MA, Gennery AR (2010) Primary immunodeficiencies associated with DNA-
repair disorders. Expert Rev Mol Med 12:e9.
40. O’Driscoll M (2012) Diseases associated with defective responses to DNA damage.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 4:12.
41. Grayson JM, Lanier JG, Altman JD, Ahmed R (2001) The role of p53 in regulating
antiviral T cell responses. J Immunol 167:1333–1337.
42. Hosoya N, Miyagawa K (2014) Targeting DNA damage response in cancer therapy.
Cancer Sci 105:370–388.
43. Jackson SP, Helleday T (2016) DNA repair. Drugging DNA repair. Science 352:
1178–1179.
44. Bai L, Wang S (2014) Targeting apoptosis pathways for new cancer therapeutics.
Annu Rev Med 65:139–155.
45. Wahl DR, Lawrence TS (2017) Integrating chemoradiation and molecularly targeted
therapy. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 109:74–83.
46. Do K, Doroshow JH, Kummar S (2013) Wee1 kinase as a target for cancer therapy. Cell
Cycle 12:3159–3164.
47. Hirai H, et al. (2009) Small-molecule inhibition of Wee1 kinase by MK-1775 selectively
sensitizes p53-deficient tumor cells to DNA-damaging agents. Mol Cancer Ther 8:
2992–3000.
48. Ma Z, et al. (2012) The Chk1 inhibitor AZD7762 sensitises p53 mutant breast cancer
cells to radiation in vitro and in vivo. Mol Med Rep 6:897–903.
49. Li Y, Saini P, Sriraman A, Dobbelstein M (2015) Mdm2 inhibition confers protection of
p53-proficient cells from the cytotoxic effects of Wee1 inhibitors. Oncotarget 6:
32339–32352.
50. Bosca I, Pascual AM, Casanova B, Coret F, Sanz MA (2008) Four new cases of therapy-
related acute promyelocytic leukemia after mitoxantrone. Neurology 71:457–458.
51. Walker LSK, Chodos A, Eggena M, Dooms H, Abbas AK (2003) Antigen-dependent
proliferation of CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cells in vivo. J Exp Med 198:249–258.
52. Wojciechowski S, et al. (2006) Bim mediates apoptosis of CD127(lo) effector T cells
and limits T cell memory. Eur J Immunol 36:1694–1706.
53. Trottestam H, et al.; Histiocyte Society (2011) Chemoimmunotherapy for hemopha-
gocytic lymphohistiocytosis: Long-term results of the HLH-94 treatment protocol.
Blood 118:4577–4584.
54. Mahlaoui N, et al. (2007) Immunotherapy of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistio-
cytosis with antithymocyte globulins: A single-center retrospective report of 38 pa-
tients. Pediatrics 120:e622–e628.
55. Hildeman D, Yañez D, Pederson K, Havighurst T, Muller D (1997) Vaccination against
persistent viral infection exacerbates CD4+ T-cell-mediated immunopathological
disease. J Virol 71:9672–9678.
56. Bu HF, et al. (2007) Milk fat globule-EGF factor 8/lactadherin plays a crucial role in
maintenance and repair of murine intestinal epithelium. J Clin Invest 117:3673–3683.
57. Wu D, et al. (2011) Interleukin-13 (IL-13)/IL-13 receptor alpha1 (IL-13Ralpha1) sig-
naling regulates intestinal epithelial cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance reg-
ulator channel-dependent Cl- secretion. J Biol Chem 286:13357–13369.
McNally et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 22, 2017
|
E4791
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
