 T R A U M A T I C B R A I N I N J U R Y
Repetitive blast exposure in mice and combat veterans
causes persistent cerebellar dysfunction
James S. Meabon,1,2 Bertrand R. Huber,3 Donna J. Cross,4 Todd L. Richards,4 Satoshi Minoshima,5
Kathleen F. Pagulayan,1,2 Ge Li,1,2,6 Kole D. Meeker,6 Brian C. Kraemer,6,7 Eric C. Petrie,1,2
Murray A. Raskind,1,2 Elaine R. Peskind,1,2 David G. Cook6,7,8*
Blast exposure can cause mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) in mice and other mammals. However, there are important
gaps in our understanding of the neuropathology underlying repetitive blast exposure in animal models compared to
the neuroimaging abnormalities observed in blast-exposed veterans. Moreover, how an increase in the number of blast
exposures affects neuroimaging endpoints in blast-exposed humans is not well understood. We asked whether there is a
dose-response relationship between the number of blast-related mild TBIs and uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG),
a commonly used indicator of neuronal activity, in the brains of blast-exposed veterans with mild TBI. We found that the
number of blast exposures correlated with FDG uptake in the cerebellum of veterans. In mice, blast exposure produced
microlesions in the blood-brain barrier (BBB) predominantly in the ventral cerebellum. Purkinje cells associated with
these BBB microlesions displayed plasma membrane disruptions and aberrant expression of phosphorylated tau protein.
Purkinje cell loss was most pronounced in the ventral cerebellar lobules, suggesting that early-stage breakdown of BBB
integrity may be an important factor driving long-term brain changes. Blast exposure caused reactive gliosis in mouse
cerebellum, particularly in the deep cerebellar nuclei. Diffusion tensor imaging tractography of the cerebellum of blast-
exposed veterans revealed that mean diffusivity correlated negatively with the number of blast-related mild TBIs.
Together, these results argue that the cerebellum is vulnerable to repetitive mild TBI in both mice and humans.
INTRODUCTION
There is mounting concern that blast exposure may initiate latent patho-
logical processes leading to chronic traumatic encephalopathy or other re-
lated neurodegenerative disorders (1–6). Detonation of high explosives can
inflict brain injury in at least three ways: primary blast effects due to blast
overpressure, secondary blast effects caused by fragmented objects or shrap-
nel inflicting trauma when hitting the head, and tertiary effects caused
by the head striking other objects (7). Even without direct blunt impacts
or significant head acceleration/deceleration from secondary and tertiary
impacts (8), blast overpressure is capable of injuring the brain (7, 9–15).
The prevalence of repetitive blast-related mild traumatic brain injuries
(TBIs) among Iraq and Afghanistan veterans (16, 17) has spurred intensive
efforts to understand its cognitive and pathological consequences in both
humans and animal models. Studies in mice, rats, swine, and other mam-
mals have demonstrated that the intense energy imparted by blast
overpressure is sufficient to induce an array of neuropathological and be-
havioral disturbances (7, 9–14, 18–21).
Neuroimaging studies of military service members and veterans have
documented chronic abnormalities on 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, which assesses glucose
metabolic activity in the brain (4, 22, 23). Abnormalities of brain white mat-
ter tract structural integrity and myelin density in these veteran populations
have also been characterized using magnetic resonance diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) and macromolecular proton fraction mapping (5, 24–26).
Multiple research groups, including ours, have shown that blast exposure
in mice permits study of well-characterized mild to moderate effects of blast
overpressure with attenuated secondary and tertiary injury components,
thereby affording new opportunities for mechanistic pathological and ge-
netic investigations that are difficult to achieve in any other species (7, 9–15).
Nonetheless, it remains challenging to assess potential correlations between
this animal model and neuroimaging findings in patients with blast-related
mild TBIs and blast-induced neuropathology in specific anatomical
brain regions. This is due in part to interspecies differences in cerebral
cortical gray matter and subcortical white matter anatomy between
humans (a gyrencephalic species) and rodents (a lissencephalic species).
The cerebellum, however, is gyrencephalic in both humans and rodents
and has broadly similar structural organization in both species. Findings
from previous neuropathological studies in rodents (7, 9–15, 27) and
neuroimaging studies in human subjects (3–5, 26, 28–31) suggest that
the cerebellum is susceptible to blast injury. A growing body of data sug-
gest that the cerebellum, in addition to controlling motor-related func-
tions, subserves important cognitive and affective functions that may
be specifically related to cognitive and behavioral symptoms in blast-
exposed individuals (32–35). Therefore, we investigated the consequences
of repetitive blast exposure in the cerebellum of mice and humans.
RESULTS
An increase in the number of blast exposures is associated
with lower cerebellar glucose metabolism in veterans with
blast-related mild TBI
Several FDG-PET studies have demonstrated lower metabolic activity
in a number of brain regions including the cerebellum in veterans with
1Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care
System (VA Puget Sound), Seattle, WA 98108, USA. 2Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 3VA Jamaica Plain,
Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Jamaica Plain, MA
02130, USA. 4Department of Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
5Department of Radiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. 6Geriatric
Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA
98108, USA. 7Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
8Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: dgcook@u.washington.edu
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
1
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 blast-related mild TBI compared to veterans without blast exposure (5, 22)
or nonmilitary controls (4, 36). Nonetheless, the significance of graded
increases in the number of blast exposures on subsequent chronic brain
glucose hypometabolism has not been addressed directly. Among our
study cohort of blast-exposed veterans with mild TBI (Table 1), the
number of blasts experienced by each individual varied considerably,
ranging from 1 to >100 reported blast events that caused acute symptoms
consistent with mild TBI. This wide range in the number of blast-related
mild TBIs in a well-characterized cohort (5) presented an opportunity to
test the hypothesis that an increasing number of blast events would be
associated with a greater degree of chronic brain glucose hypometabolism
and would allow us to address the possibility that the cerebellum may be
vulnerable to injury from repetitive blast exposure.
Here, blast-exposed veterans reported experiencing an average of
21 (median, 11; range, 1 to 102) blast-related mild TBIs during the en-
tire period of their military service (Table 1). Among this group, 21, 52,
and 27% reported 1 to 5, 6 to 20, and 21 to 102 blast-related mild TBIs,
respectively. The number of mild TBIs associated with loss of con-
sciousness from any cause was relatively low (average of 2.3 lifetime mild
TBIs; Table 1). The average time from the last blast-related mild TBI
to imaging with FDG-PET was 3.6 years.
Figure 1A shows a statistical parametric map of the mean voxel-
wise correlations between brain metabolic activity (normalized to global
activity) and log10-transformed number of blast exposures among the
33 blast-exposed veterans. The brightest colors (yellow, z score range
from −4 to −5) denote brain regions with the strongest negative corre-
lations between blast number and glucose metabolism. Statistical sig-
nificance following correction for multiple comparisons was achieved
in three brain areas, all of which were localized within the right in-
ferior semilunar lobule of the cerebellum (z scores, 4.02, 4.09, and
4.37, respectively; P ≤ 0.05; see Supplementary Methods).
Using an alternative, independent analytical approach, we also cor-
related blast number (log10) versus mean metabolic activity in regions
of interest circumscribing the entire left and right cerebellar hemi-
spheres. Figure 1B shows that this method also revealed a statistically
significant negative correlation between the number of blast-related
mild TBIs and cerebellar metabolism [Spearman r = −0.433 (P ≤
0.012) and −0.406 (P ≤ 0.019) for left and right cerebellar hemispheres,
respectively].
Because posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and al-
cohol use are common in this cohort of blast-exposed veterans (4, 37)
and may contribute to hypometabolism in the central nervous system
(CNS), we performed multivariate regression analysis to control for po-
tential confounding effects. We modeled FDG uptake in the left and
right cerebellar hemispheres as a function of blast number (log10)
and controlled for PTSD with the Clinician-Administered PTSD (CAPS)
total score, Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), and alcohol
use with the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test—Consumption
(AUDIT-C). The associations between blast number and decreased
FDG uptake in both left and right hemispheres of the cerebellum re-
mained statistically significant (log10 blast exposure, P ≤ 0.01, and
log10 blast exposure, P < 0.02, left and right cerebellar hemispheres, re-
spectively). Also, none of these factors was significantly correlated with
metabolic activity in either cerebellar hemisphere (P > 0.05). Thus, the
associations between the number of blast-related mild TBIs and re-
duced normalized FDG uptake in the cerebellum of veterans exposed
to mild TBIs were not likely to be due to comorbid PTSD, depression, or
alcohol use.
Repetitive blast exposure causes chronic neuronal loss and
persistent synaptic disturbances in murine cerebellum
Our FDG-PET findings (Fig. 1) suggested the possibility that the cer-
ebellum may be especially vulnerable to the cumulative effects of repetitive
blast exposure. In addition, the correlation of the number of blast exposures
and glucose hypometabolism in the cerebellum (Fig. 1A) raised the pos-
sibility of subregional vulnerability within the cerebellum to blast exposure.
To address these issues in more detail, we used a mouse model of
blast-induced TBI that mimics battlefield-relevant blast overpressure in
keeping with well-established approaches. We used blast overpressure param-
eters consistent with mild to moderate blast exposure (9, 38, 39). Brief-
ly, 3-month-old male C57BL/6 mice were exposed to blasts using a shock
tube and exposure parameters described in detail elsewhere (9). Here,
mice were exposed either to one (1×) or three (3×) blast overpressure
events (24-hour interblast intervals), which were highly reproducible,
with a mean peak intensity of 19.2 psi ± 0.21, initial peak wave dura-
tion of 5.8 ± 0.028 ms, and a calculated impulse of 30.7 pressure per
square inch per millisecond (Fig. 2A). Under these experimental
conditions, the overall survival rate was 99%, with blast-exposed mice ap-
pearing comparable to sham-exposed animals by inspection 2 hours after
blast exposure. Sham-exposed control mice were treated identically to
animals exposed to blast overpressure events: animals were anesthetized for
3 to 5 min with isoflurane and mounted in the same shock tube restraint
harness for the same amount of time. Each sham-exposed control animal
was yoked to a blast-exposed animal, thereby receiving either one or three
sham treatments.
First, we examined mice exposed to one blast that were administered
Texas Red–conjugated 10-kD dextran immediately before treatment. A
sagittal section of the brain following clearance of peripheral circulating
dextran revealed domains of breakdown in the blood-brain barrier
(BBB) as shown by regions of parenchymal dextran accumulation
(Fig. 2B). At lower magnification, dextran accumulation was most
Table 1. FDG-PET (n = 33). PSQI, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index; NSI,
Neurobehavioral Symptom Inventory.
Demographics
Mean (SD), range
Age (years)
31.5 (9.4), 23–60
Education (years)
13.7 (1.5), 11–16
Race, nonwhite, n (%)
8 (24.2%)
APOE-&4–positive (%)
8 (25.8%)
Blast exposures
Number of blast-related mild TBIs
during military service (lifetime)
21.2 (26.7), 1–102
Median = 11
Number of lifetime mild TBIs with
loss of consciousness
2.3 (2.5), 0–11
Median = 2
Time since last blast-related mild
TBI (years)
3.6 (1.5), 1–7
Median = 4
Behavioral and neurological measures
CAPS score (3 missing)
55.6 (30.5), 4–106
PHQ-9 score
9.6 (7.4), 0–25
PSQI score (4 missing)
9.3 (5.1), 1–19
AUDIT-C score
4.8 (2.4), 0–10
NSItotal score
29.4 (17.8), 2–77
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
2
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 obvious in the cerebellum, particularly in the more ventral regions
(Fig. 2B). Figure 2C shows cerebellar lobule 9 of a blast-exposed mouse
displaying distinct regions of BBB breakdown.
Four-channel confocal microscopy (Fig. 2D) carried out in these
domains of BBB breakdown revealed that within 1 to 4 hours after
a single blast, individual cerebellar Purkinje cells took up dextran
(red staining) that had crossed the BBB. It has been reported previ-
ously that neuronal uptake of dextran exogenously applied directly
onto the brain following TBI is associated with disturbances of the
neuronal plasma membrane (40). Consistent with this, in our study,
dextran uptake by Purkinje cells was evident in blast-exposed but not
sham-treated animals (Fig. 2D). In addition, within the same domain
in which dextran had crossed the BBB, other Purkinje cells immediately
adjacent to the dextran-positive neuron were also exposed to parenchy-
mal dextran but did not accumulate it. Although the dextran-positive
Purkinje cell in Fig. 2D appeared morphologically normal following
blast exposure, accumulation of extracellular parenchymal dextran indi-
cated early-stage neuronal dysfunction. To obtain initial insight into the
loss of BBB integrity in different cerebellar lobules, Fig. 2E shows the
results of an analysis where a line of interest (see Supplementary
Methods) was traced along the cerebellar molecular layer of sagittal
brain sections from dextran-treated blast-exposed and sham-treated
animals. Figure 2E shows that lobule by
lobule, relative to sham-treated mice, the
amount of Texas Red–conjugated 10-kD
dextran that crossed the BBB into the
brain parenchyma was greater in blast-
exposed animals, with lobule 9 showing
the greatest effect (t12 = 2.15, P ≤ 0.05,
n = 7, blast-exposed and sham-exposed,
respectively). Figure 2F shows represent-
ative confocal images from a sham-exposed
and a blast-exposed animal, where Texas
Red–conjugated dextran crossed the BBB
into the cerebellar parenchyma with subse-
quent Purkinje cell dextran uptake 1 hour
after a single blast exposure. This was ac-
companied by aberrant expression of phos-
phorylated tau in brain parenchyma.
Aberrant expression of phosphorylated
tau was further confirmed using a differ-
ent rabbit anti-tau antibody in the same
mice (Fig. 2G). In addition, Western blot
analysis confirmed that a single blast in-
duced increased expression of multiple
phosphorylated tau species in the cere-
bellum within 1 hour (Fig. 2H). Three
days after a single blast exposure, 1,4,5-
trisphosphate receptor type 1 (IP3R1) im-
munostaining (a morphological marker
of Purkinje cells) in lobule 9 (Fig. 2I) re-
vealed dystrophic Purkinje cells (black
arrowheads). Together, these data sug-
gest that blast exposure disturbs cerebel-
lar BBB integrity, which is associated
with early accumulation of aberrant
phosphorylated tau and neuronal plasma
membrane dysfunction.
The FDG-PET findings in the blast-exposed veterans argue that
the chronic consequences of repetitive blast exposure are demonstrable
in the cerebellum (Fig. 1). The findings in blast-exposed mice indicate
that even a single blast is sufficient to evoke aberrant phosphorylated
tau accumulation and uptake of microvessel-derived dextran indicative
of neuronal injury (Fig. 2). To address directly whether repetitive blast
exposure causes permanent and specific subregional cerebellar Purkinje
cell loss, we quantified “empty baskets” (a term referring to the dense
axonal terminals from basket cells enveloping Purkinje cell bodies that
persist long after Purkinje cells have been lost) in mice 30 days after
they were exposed to either one or three blasts.
Fixed cerebellar sections (50 mm) were serially imaged by confocal
microscopy (22 scans at 2.27-mm intervals in the z plane). Figure 3A
shows a merged maximum field projection with orthogonal views of
lobule 9 in the x-y plane with basket cell processes (immunostained
green with anti-neurofilament heavy chain antibodies) enveloping
the soma of Purkinje cells (immunostained red with anti-IP3R1 anti-
bodies). The corresponding serially reconstructed z-plane image stacks
along the indicated image planes (white lines) are depicted above and
to the right of merged x-y images. We observed distributed, patchy
microdomains of empty baskets in mice exposed to three blasts com-
pared to sham-exposed animals 30 days after exposure.
Fig. 1. Number of blast exposures is associated with decreased FDG uptake in the cerebellum of
veterans with mild TBI. (A) Distribution and relative magnitude of negative correlations between log10
number of blast exposures and FDG uptake by the human brain (normalized to global activity) overlaid on
magnetic resonance template images for anatomical orientation. Shown are right lateral (RT LAT), left
lateral (LT LAT), right medial (RT MED), left medial (LT MED), and inferior (INF) aspects of the human brain.
Scale bar indicates z scores. A greater number of log10 blast exposures were associated with decreased
metabolic activity in three adjacent loci within the right inferior semilunar lobule by whole-brain voxel-
wise analyses. (B) Scatter plots of the mean activity in predefined cerebellar hemisphere volumes of interest
(VOIs; left and right cerebellum) versus log10 number of blast exposures during military service. There was a
statistically significant negative correlation between the number of blast exposures (log10) and FDG uptake
in each cerebellar hemisphere VOI (Spearman r correlations, n = 33).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
3
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Thirty days after treatment, empty baskets were quantified in each
of the eight major cerebellar lobules (Fig. 3B) in 1× blast– and 3× blast–
exposed mice. Quantification of empty baskets in sham-exposed mice
revealed no statistically significant differences between 1× and 3×
animals in any cerebellar lobule. Therefore, these groups were combined
as a single composite sham group for each lobule. Results among the 1×
blast– and 3× blast–exposed mice are presented as a ratio of empty baskets
in blast-exposed versus sham-exposed mice (Fig. 3, C and D). Analysis of
the results shown in Fig. 3C revealed a statistically significant effect of re-
petitive blast exposure in both the ventral cerebellar lobules (7 to 10) and
the dorsal cerebellar lobules (1 to 6) (F2,26 = 14.997, P ≤ 0.0001, and
F2,26 = 6.356, P ≤ 0.01, respectively). This confirmed that repetitive
blast exposure produced chronic cerebellar Purkinje cell loss. Further
inspection also revealed that although 3× blast exposure caused Pur-
kinje cell loss throughout the cerebellum, the ventral lobules appeared
to be more vulnerable to Purkinje cell loss after a single blast exposure.
This was confirmed by a planned Helmert comparison test of blast (1×
and 3×) versus sham, which showed statistically significant differences in
Purkinje cell loss in the ventral (P < 0.01) but not the dorsal cerebellum.
ANOVA tests of empty baskets in cerebellar lobules of sham-, 1×
blast–, and 3× blast–exposed mice (Fig. 3D) further confirmed that
repetitive blast exposure caused Purkinje cell loss throughout the cer-
ebellum. However, the more ventral subregions of the cerebellum were
more vulnerable to Purkinje cell loss: lobules 1/2, F2,22 = 2.678, n.s.;
Fig. 2. A single blast causes inferior cerebellar BBB dysfunction and
Purkinje cell injury in a mouse model of mild TBI. (A) Shock tube–generated
highly reproducible battlefield-relevant blast overpressure. The red trace
shows the time (ms) versus pressure (psi) measured 5 cm above the animal
averaged among n = 32 blast overpressure waveforms that were collected
over a randomly selected 2-day period (black bars indicate ±SEM). Super-
imposed blue Friedlander waveform illustrates the close correspondence
of the shock tube–generated blast overpressure to the waveform expected
from an open-field detonation of about 22.4 kg of trinitrotoluene (TNT) at a
distance of 6.1m. (B) Blast-exposed mice were retro-orbitally loaded with
10-kD dextran labeled with Texas Red; they were allowed to recover for 1 or
4 hours after a single blast exposure, and brain slices were observed using
confocal microscopy. Blast-specific dextran (red) labeling was most fre-
quently observed in the cerebellum (white arrowheads). Shown is an ex-
ample of a mouse brain slice (50 mm thickness) 1 hour after treatment. (C) Texas
Red–labeled dextran in the blood that crossed the BBB into the cerebellar
parenchyma was observed at both 1 and 4 hours after blast exposure (red
highlights). Extravasated dextran was most noticeable in the cerebellar
molecular layer. DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. (D) Blast-exposed
Purkinje cells that internalized dextran that had crossed the BBB were asso-
ciated with morphologically distinct microglia (green) that appeared to be
activated. (n = 20 blast-treated animals, 19 of 73 brain slices had dextran-
labeled Purkinje cells with only one cell (a granule cell) labeled in the
upper half of the cerebellum; n = 20 sham-treated animals, with 0 of 75 slices
showing dextran-positive Purkinje cells. GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic
protein. (E) To assess regional BBB breakdown, the linear pixel-by-pixel
mean dextran fluorescence intensity within the molecular layer of the cer-
ebellum was measured across each lobe and plotted. Results show the
mean normalized with respect to values for seven sham-treated and sev-
en blast-treated animals. Only lobule 9 showed evidence of increased
dextran fluorescence (P ≤ 0.05, two-tailed t test; mean = 1.65 and 1.0
for blast- and sham-treated animals, respectively). (F) Confocal microsco-
py revealed elevated aberrant tau phosphorylated at Ser396 (detected
with mouse monoclonal anti-tau396 antibody) in blast-treated versus
sham-treated cerebellum. (G) Confocal microscopy revealed elevated ab-
errant tau phosphorylated at Ser396 (detected with rabbit anti-tau396 an-
tibody) in blast-treated versus sham-treated cerebellum. (H) In mouse
cerebellum, multiple pathological forms of phosphorylated tau were ob-
served 1 to 4 hours after blast exposure. Representative Western blots illus-
trate blast-induced elevation of phosphorylated tau in mouse cerebellum.
Each lane corresponds to one sham-treated or blast-exposed animal (1 hour:
n = 4, 4 hours: n = 4; n = 3 sham-treated and n = 4 blast-exposed). Pyruvate
kinase (PK) was the gel protein loading control. (I) Three days after experi-
mental treatment, Purkinje cell injury (black arrowheads) was observed in
the form of swollen cell bodies, cell membrane breakdown, and aberrant
IP3R1 staining in two of three blast-exposed animals. Similar Purkinje cell dys-
morphology was not observed in sham-treated animals (n = 0/3). Images are representative examples from lobule 9, taken at 20×. Slides were prepared using
antibodies against IP3R1 and standard immunohistochemistry. Scale bars, 500 mm (B), 250 mm (C), and 50 mm (D, F, and G). (F) and (G) represent data from five
sham-treated and five blast-exposed animals. Error bars represent SEM. *P ≤ 0.05, two-tailed t test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
4
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 lobule 3, F2,25 = 3.617, P ≤ 0.042; lobules 4/5, F2,23 = 2.372, n.s.; lobule
6, F2,26 = 1.857, n.s.; lobule 7, F2,23 = 3.562, P ≤ 0.045; lobule 8, F2,26 =
4.369, P ≤ 0.023; lobule 9, F2,22 = 6.738, P ≤ 0.005; lobule 10, F2,24 =
7.298, P ≤ 0.003.
In keeping with the Purkinje cell loss findings, Fig. 4 shows that 30 days
after blast exposure, the mice showed impaired rotarod performance
in the 3× but not the 1× blast group (F1,37 = 0.423, n.s., 1× blast; F1,6 =
7.477, P ≤ 0.034, 3× blast). In addition, a two-way mixed between/
within-subjects ANOVA comparing 1×, 3×, and sham controls (1× sham–
and 3× sham–treated mice were not significantly different and thus were
pooled) further confirmed that repetitive blast exposure decreased
motor performance on the rotarod test (F2,44 = 5.603, P ≤ 0.007).
To address the consequences of blast exposure on synaptic proteins,
we examined the expression of the glutamatergic synaptic scaffold-
ing protein PSD-95 (postsynaptic density-95) (41) and of GABAB-R1
(g-aminobutyric acid B receptor 1) by Western blotting (Fig. 5, A and
B). One month after a single blast exposure, PSD-95 protein expression,
but not GABAB-R1 expression, was significantly reduced compared to
sham-treated animals (t8 = −5.988, P ≤ 0.0003; t8 = −0.003, n.s., respec-
tively). Additional experiments in Fig. 5C showed that blast-induced
loss of PSD-95 expression in the cerebellum developed slowly. There
were no significant differences between sham-treated and 1× blast–
exposed animals at 1 day after exposure (F1,7 = 0.262, n.s.). However,
at the 30-day time point, PSD-95 expression was significantly reduced in
1× blast– and 3× blast–exposed animals compared to sham-treated
controls (F2,26 = 6.392, P ≤ 0.006). Confocal microscopy carried out
120 days after 3× blast exposure also indicated that PSD-95 expression
within the cerebellar molecular layer was reduced compared to 3× sham
controls (Fig. 5, D and E).
Repetitive blast exposure causes persistent cerebellar white
matter and glial neuropathology
To investigate the consequences of repetitive blast exposure on cere-
bellar white matter tracts in mice, we first performed Bielschowsky
Fig. 3. Purkinje cell loss increases with the number of blast exposures
in mice. (A) Representative confocal images of cerebellar lobule 9 in sham-
and 3× blast–treated mice 30 days after treatment. Images show a merged
maximum projection of 22 scans acquired at 2.27-mm intervals in the z plane
immunostained for neurofilament heavy chain (NF-HC)–positive basket cells
(green) and IP3R1-positive Purkinje cells (red). Blast-exposed cerebellum
displayed prominent microdomains of Purkinje cell loss (empty baskets) that
were also apparent when viewed along the z plane for highlighted regions
(white boxes) projected above and to the right of the merged x-y images. (B)
For illustrative purposes, this sagittal section denotes cerebellar lobule anat-
omy(lobules1/2to10).(C)Histogramshowsemptybasketfrequenciesin1×blast–
and 3× blast–exposed mice normalized with respect to the number of empty
baskets observed in sham-treated mice (n = 10, 7, and 12 for sham-treated, 1×
blast–exposed, and 3× blast–exposed mice, respectively). In both dorsal/superior
(lobules 1 to 6) and ventral/inferior (lobules 7 to 10) regions of the cerebellum,
blast exposure caused an overall increase in empty baskets [P < 0.01 and P <
0.0001, analyses of variance (ANOVAs), respectively]. 3× blast exposure caused
marked Purkinje cell loss throughout the cerebellum. However, the ventral/
inferior lobules appeared more vulnerableto Purkinje cell loss after a single blast
exposure. **P < 0.01, Helmert test. (D) Histogram shows normalized empty
baskets for each lobule in the same sham-treated, 1× blast–exposed, and 3×
blast–exposedmice.*P<0.05,**P<0.01,ANOVA.n.s.,nonsignificant. Scale bars,
50 mm (A) and 500 mm (B). Data represent mean normalized to values for
sham-treated mice, with error bars indicating ±SEM.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
5
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 silver staining, which revealed aberrant axonal varicosities and thick-
ened neuronal processes within the granule layer adjoining the deep
white matter tracts and the Purkinje cell layer 24 hours after a single
blast exposure (Fig. 6, A and B). To further investigate the effects of
repetitive blast exposure in cerebellar white matter, we also measured
amyloid precursor protein (APP) expression, which was easier to
quantify than Bielschowsky staining (42, 43). At both 24 hours and
7 days after a single blast exposure, APP expression was increased
compared to sham-exposed animals but then returned to sham levels
by 30 days after exposure (Fig. 6, C and D). However, 30 days after a
3× blast exposure, APP expression in the cerebellum remained
elevated. A two-factor ANOVA comparing treatment groups (sham-
treated, 1× blast, and 3× blast) with respect to time after exposure (1, 7,
and 30 days) confirmed that blast exposure significantly increased
APP expression in the cerebellum (treatment group factor: F2,31 =
9.923, P ≤ 0.0005; time post-exposure factor: F2,31 = 1.310, n.s.). In
addition, a one-factor ANOVA comparing the overall effects of the
number of blast exposures (sham, 1× blast, and 3× blast) was also
statistically significant (F2,35 = 8.048, P ≤ 0.001).
To investigate prolonged consequences of blast exposure, we next
examined GFAP immunoreactivity in the mouse cerebellum by con-
focal microscopy 30 days after one or three blast exposures. Persistently
elevated GFAP, an indication of inflammatory reactive astrocytes, was
apparent throughout the cerebellar white matter tracts (Fig. 7A). Quan-
tification of relative GFAP immunoreactivity (Fig. 7B) circumscribing
both the lobular and peri-deep cerebellar nuclei white matter tracts con-
firmed that GFAP expression was significantly increased 30 days after
blast exposure (F2,18 = 21.055, P < 0.001). In addition, at higher mag-
nification (Fig. 7C), GFAP expression was found in white matter re-
gions adjacent to deep cerebellar nuclei with statistically significant
increases in blast-exposed mice compared to sham-exposed animals
(F2,18 = 25.990, P < 0.001) (Fig. 7D).
To further investigate blast-induced neuroinflammation-related re-
sponses, we also carried out Iba-1 immunostaining of the mouse cer-
ebellum. Figure 7E shows that 3× blast exposure evoked distinct
patches of microglia/macrophages with a morphology indicative of ac-
tivation. Figure 7F shows the cumulative anatomical distribution of
these microglial patches in 1× blast, 3× blast, and sham controls at
14 and 30 days after treatment. Blast-induced microglial responses
were particularly prominent in regions near the cerebellar peduncles
of mice exposed to 3× blast at 14 days after exposure.
To address this in more detail, a neuropathologist blind to treat-
ment condition evaluated 13 pairs of Iba-1–immunostained confocal
images from the white matter superior to the deep cerebellar nuclei
(1× blast, 3× blast, and corresponding shams, n = 5, n = 8, and n =
13, respectively). Blinded pairwise (sham versus blast) comparisons
were judged on the basis of an expected overall appearance of reduced
microglial process length/arborization and increased soma size in
blast-exposed mice. The rater correctly assigned condition (blast ver-
sus sham) in 84.6% of comparisons (11 of 13 correct group assign-
ments; c2 = 4.9231, df = 1, P ≤ 0.027; with 4 of 5 and 7 of 8 correct
responses for the 1× and 3× blast/sham groups, respectively). As a
further confirmation, overall size of microglial processes was also
examined by convex hull volume analysis that calculated the volume
created by forming a convex envelope containing all of the cellular
filaments associated with a given Iba-1–immunostained microglial
cell. Figure 7G (right panel) shows convex hull volumes calculated
using Imaris software from the representative Iba-1–immunostained
confocal images in the left panel from white matter tracts superior to the
deep cerebellar nuclei 2 weeks after sham, 1× blast, or 3× blast expo-
sure. The summary histogram (Fig. 7H) indicates that convex hull vol-
ume was statistically significantly reduced in Iba-1–immunostained
cells in blast-exposed animals (1× and 3×) compared to sham controls
[F1,24 = 4.718, P ≤ 0.040; average number of cells examined per ani-
mal = 23 (range, 15 to 34); n = 8, n = 6, n = 12; 1× blast, 3× blast, and
sham controls, respectively; with sham controls from 1× and 3× groups
pooled together because they were not statistically different].
Together, these dataargue that blast exposure provokes a more con-
tracted morphology of microglia, suggesting that the microglia were
activated. Consistent with this, we also observed a significant increase
in CD68 expression, an indication of microglia/macrophage activation,
on Western blots of cerebellum protein lysates obtained 2 weeks after
blast exposure (Fig. 7I) (F2,16 = 6.359, P ≤ 0.01). Double-labeled fluores-
cent immunostaining also showed that Iba-1–immunopositive microglia/
macrophages coexpressed CD68, further suggesting that blast exposure
provoked microglial activation (Fig. 7J).
Number of blast-related mild TBIs correlates with mean
diffusivity in deep cerebellar tracts of combat veterans
The findings in mice indicate that blast exposure can give rise to
persistent neuropathology in cerebellar deep peri-peduncular/deep
cerebellar nuclei regions. The results in Fig. 7 suggest that this area,
which is the major route of fiber passage in and out of the cerebellum,
is susceptible to injury caused by blast exposure. This prompted us to
hypothesize that an increase in the number of blast exposures in com-
bat veterans might correlate with structural neuroimaging measures
that are sensitive to disturbances in the deep white matter tracts
traversing the cerebellum.
To test this hypothesis, DTI tractography was carried out to define
fiber tracts derived from a seed region located in areas surrounding
the bilateral dentate nuclei. Out of the total cohort of blast-exposed
veterans in this study, 19 participants had magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) scans that were suitable for tractography analysis (Table 2).
Mean diffusivity, fractional anisotropy radial diffusivity, and axial dif-
fusivity were calculated for three spherical 1-cm3 volumes of interest
(VOIs) within fiber tracts arising from the seed point near the dentate
Fig. 4. Repetitive blast exposure impairs motor performance in mice.
(A) Single blast exposure (1×) did not alter rotarod performance in mice at
30 days after treatment (n = 20 sham-treated, n = 19 blast-exposed mice).
(B) In contrast, mice exposed to 3× blast exposure showed significant im-
pairment in rotarod performance compared to sham-treated mice (n = 4
sham-treated, n = 5 blast-exposed; P ≤ 0.034, ANOVA). Data represent
mean, with error bars indicating ±SEM.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
6
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 nucleus (see Materials and Methods). In keeping with the findings in
blast-exposed mice, VOI1 and VOI2 were located in the white matter
tracts near the left and right dentate nuclei, and VOI3 was located in
the middle cerebellar peduncle, a region that contains white matter
tracts contiguous with those crossing through VOI1 and VOI2 (Fig. 8A)
(44). The three VOIs were averaged together for each subject. Figure 8B
shows that there was a statistically significant negative correlation between
average mean diffusivity–VOI(1–3) and log10 number of blast exposures
(rank-order Spearman r = −0.487, P ≤ 0.034). Fractional anisotropy, radial
diffusivity, and axial diffusivity, as well as average track density were not
significantly correlated with the number of blast exposures (Spearman r =
−0.201, −0.340, −0.278, and −0.106, respectively; all n.s. P > 0.05).
Whereas increased mean diffusivity is most often associated with de-
myelination and neuronal loss, recent reports suggest that presympto-
matic inflammation-related processes, including gliosis occurring in
advance of overt neurodegeneration, can restrict water diffusivity, thus
resulting in reduced mean diffusivity (45) (see Discussion). Figure. 8 (B
and C) shows representative DTI tractography images from two blast-
exposed individuals, one with5 and the other with >100 blast exposures.
Tract colors correspond to mean diffusivity values, with green indicat-
ing a lower mean diffusivity. In this example, the white matter tracts de-
picted in the subject exposed to more blasts appear to be more green in
the highlighted region (arrow), indicative of lower mean diffusivity. As
noted above, overall average track density for VOI(1–3) was not signifi-
cantly correlated with the number of blast exposures. This suggests that
apparent tract density differences in these two examples in this angle of
view may not be representative of tract density in the group as a whole.
An axial presentation of mean diffusivity with the tractography removed
in the same two subjects (Fig. 8D) further corroborates that the tracto-
graphy mean diffusivity observations (Fig. 8C) in the subject with >100
blast exposures were lower compared to those in the subject reporting
only 5 blast exposures. The number of blast exposures (log10) did not
correlate significantly with scores measuring PTSD (CAPS), depression
(PHQ-9), and alcohol use (AUDIT-C) (Spearman correlation coeffi-
cients = −0.012, −0.027, and −0.199, respectively; all P > 0.05; Sup-
plementary Materials). Multivariate regression analysis modeling of
the average mean diffusivity–VOI(1–3) as a function of the number of blast
exposures (log10) accounting for PTSD symptoms and PTSD-related
factors (CAPS, PHQ-9, AUDIT-C) still resulted in a statistically sig-
nificant correlation between log10 number of blast exposures and mean
diffusivity (P ≤ 0.012), thus further strengthening the conclusion that
increasing numbers of blast exposures may be associated with reduced
mean diffusivity in white matter tracts of the inferior cerebellum.
Number of blast-related mild TBIs correlates with symptoms
of impaired sensorimotor integration in combat veterans
Sensorimotor integration is a critical function of the cerebellum. To ad-
dress whether symptoms related to impaired sensorimotor integration
Fig. 5. Blast exposure reduces PSD-95 expression in mouse cerebellum.
(A) Western blots for PSD-95 and GABAB-R1 performed at 30 days after
treatment showed reduced PSD-95, but not GABAB-R1, in 1× blast-exposed
mice compared to sham-treated animals. Each lane shows Triton X-100–soluble
cerebellar protein lysates (20 mg), with one animal per lane using PK as a gel
protein loading control. (B) Histograms show densitometric quantification of
Western blots in (A) normalized to sham-treated mice, which are considered
to be 1.0 (that is, 100%). Expression of PSD-95, but not GABAB-R1, was reduced
by blast exposure (P ≤ 0.0003, t test; n = 5 sham-treated and n = 5 blast-
exposed mice). (C) Histogram shows normalized PSD-95 expression from
Western blot experiments. One day after 1× blast exposure, PSD-95 expres-
sion was not different from sham controls (ANOVA, n.s.; n = 5 sham-treated
and n = 4 blast-exposed mice). However, 30 days after blast exposure, PSD-
95 expression was significantly reduced in blast-exposed animals com-
pared to sham controls [P ≤ 0.006, ANOVA; n = 14, 11, and 4, sham-treated,
1× blast–exposed, and 3× blast–exposed mice, respectively; includes data
pooled from (B) and (C)]. (D) Confocal microscopy confirmed decreased
PSD-95 immunostaining in cerebellum of 3× blast–exposed mice 4 months
after treatment. (E) At higher magnification, different sections from (D)
showed reduced PSD-95 immunopositive puncta in the cerebellar molec-
ular layer (white arrows) of 3× blast–exposed mice 4 months after treat-
ment compared to sham-treated mice. Results are representative of n = 5
blast-exposed and n = 5 sham-treated mice. Scale bars, 500 mm (D) and
50 mm (E).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
7
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 correlate with an increase in the number of blast exposures, we corre-
lated symptoms of dizziness, loss of balance, and poor coordination
(items of the NSI) in 41 blast-exposed veterans, with the number of
blast-related mild TBIs (ranging from 1 to >100). Symptoms were rated
by participants as none to severe (0 to 4). Table 3 shows that the number
of blast exposures significantly correlated with sensorimotor symptoms
of dizziness, loss of balance, and poor coordination (Spearman corre-
lation: P ≤ 0.016, P ≤ 0.005, and P ≤ 0.019, respectively), as well as total
symptoms (Spearman correlation: P ≤ 0.004). In addition, the associa-
tion between total symptoms and the number of blast exposures re-
mained statistically significant after adjusting for PTSD symptoms,
depression, and alcohol use by multivariate regression analysis (P ≤
0.02), thus arguing that these impairments are not likely to be the
result of comorbid PTSD, depression, or alcohol use.
DISCUSSION
Numerous reports indicate that blast-exposed individuals exhibit ab-
normalities in the brain after imaging with FDG-PET, DTI, DTI tracto-
graphy, or macromolecular proton fraction mapping (3–5, 26, 31, 46, 47).
This raises concerns that repetitive blast exposure may set in motion
latent pathological processes that place these individuals at risk for de-
veloping neurodegenerative disorders in mid-to-late life, as has been
argued for repetitive impact-related mild TBIs (48–53).
A number of obstacles currently limit our understanding of the
significance of aberrant neuroimaging findings in veterans with blast-
related mild TBIs. First, with one exception (28), most of the subjects
studied experienced multiple mild TBIs. Second, it can be challenging
to assess the relative contributions of primary blast overpressure and
secondary/tertiary (impact) injury to overall TBI symptoms and
persisting neuroimaging abnormalities. Third, little is known regard-
ing early-stage pathology among individuals who currently have only
subtle cognitive symptoms yet nonetheless have abnormal neuroima-
ging findings (5).
To begin closing these important knowledge gaps, we studied the
effects of increasing numbers of blast exposures on neuronal activity
Fig. 6. Blast exposure induces persistent axonal injury in mice. (A)
Bielschowsky silver staining of cerebellar slices from single blast-exposed
mice at 24 hours shows thickened axonal varicosities evident in axons
emanating from the Purkinje cell layer (n = 5/6 blast-exposed and n =
1/5 sham-treated mice). (B) Enlarged insets from (A) numbered 1 to 4 (ar-
rowheads denote axonal varicosities). (C) Representative Western blot
analyses from individual blast-treated and sham-exposed mice showed
that blast exposure increased APP expression in cerebellum. Each lane re-
presents Triton X-100–soluble protein lysates (20 mg total protein per lane)
for a single animal using PK or SYPRO-Ruby (SR) as a total protein loading
control. (D) Histogram indicates APP normalized to values for sham-treated
mice, which are considered to be 100%. A two-factor ANOVA comparing all
groups (sham-treated, 1× blast–exposed, and 3× blast–exposed mice) with
respect to posttreatment delay (1, 7, and 30 days) confirmed that blast
exposure increased APP in the cerebellum (ANOVA: treatment group,
P ≤ 0.0005). Each group n = 5, except 1× blast–exposed and 1× sham–
treated, which were n = 4. Error bars indicate ±SEM. Scale bars, 50 mm
(A) and 10 mm (B).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
8
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 7. Blast exposure induces
persistent reactive gliosis in
mouse cerebellum. (A) Represent-
ative confocal images (20 merged
scans at 2.5 mm along the z axis)
show persistently elevated GFAP ex-
pression (red) in cerebellar white
matter 30 days after 1× and 3×
blast–exposure. White lines indicate
areas of interest (AOI) delineated by
the interior border of the cerebellar
granule cell layer. (B) GFAP immuno-
reactivity (normalized with respect
to sham-treated mice) in cerebellar
AOIs circumscribing overall cerebellar
white matter was increased in the
blast-exposed animals (P ≤ 0.001,
ANOVA; n = 8, 10, and 3 sham-
treated, 1× blast–exposed and 3×
blast–exposed mice, respectively).
(C) In these slices, GFAP immuno-
staining in white matter surround-
ing deep cerebellar nuclei/dentate
nuclei (DCN/DN) was increased (see
insets). (D) GFAP immunoreactivity
(normalized with respect to sham-
treated) in cerebellum surrounding
the deep cerebellar nuclei/dentate
nuclei was increased in the blast-
exposed animals (P ≤ 0.001, ANOVA;
n = 8, 10, and 3 sham-treated, 1×
blast–exposed,and 3×blast–exposed
mice, respectively). (E) Fourteen
days after treatment, Iba-1 staining
(green) in the brains of 3× blast–
exposed mice shows clusters of Iba-
1–positive cells (green). Highlighted
regions (white boxes) are shown
at higher magnification (far right
panels). Iba-1 immunoreactivity
does not colocalize with GFAP-
positive astrogliosis (red). (F) The
cumulative distribution of microglial/
macrophage clusters was observed
in the brains of individual animals
(with sample size noted in panels)
at 14 and 30 days after exposure.
At 14 days, microglial clusters
were observed with a predomi-
nant distribution in the cerebellar
nuclei and white matter, with oc-
currences increasing near the pe-
duncle. The number of clusters
increased with the number of blast
exposures and diminished 30 days
after exposure. (G) The overall volume of microglial processes was quantified
by calculating the convex hull volume (right panels) of the Iba-1 immuno-
positive cells in 285-mm2 (x, y plane) × 50-mm (z plane) images from deep
cerebellar white matter from sham-treated, 1× blast–exposed, and 3× blast–
exposed animals 14 days after treatment (left panel shows representative
maximum field projections). (H) Histogram shows that microglial convex hull
volume was reduced in blast-exposed animals compared to sham-treated
mice (P ≤ 0.04; n = 8, 6, and 12, 1× blast, 3× blast, and sham-treated mice,
respectively). (I) Histogram of Western blot densitometry of CD68 expression
(an indication of microglial/macrophage activation) in cerebellar protein ly-
sates in blast-exposed mice (ANOVA: P ≤ 0.01; n = 9, 5, and 5, sham-treated,
1× blast–exposed, and 3× blast–exposed mice, respectively) 14 days after
exposure. Total protein was normalized with respect to reprobing of PK im-
munoreactivity. (J) Double-label confocal microscopy shows Iba-1–positive
microglial cells (green) coexpressing CD68 (red). Data represent mean (nor-
malized to sham values), with error bars indicating ± SEM. Scale bars, 250 mm
(A and C), 100 mm (E, left panels, and G), 50 mm (E, right panels), and 25 mm (J).
WM, white matter; ML, molecular layer; GCL, granule cell layer.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
9
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 measured by FDG-PET. We also carried out DTI tractography to assess
the structural integrity of tracts in the inferior cerebellum. We focused
on the impact of repetitive blast in the cerebellum to facilitate potential
translational correspondence between the neuropathological findings in
blast-exposed mice and findings in blast-exposed veterans.
That unbiased whole-brain voxel-wise analyses demonstrated a
marked dose-response relationship between increasing numbers of
blast-related mild TBIs and decreased metabolic activity specifically
in the cerebellum argues that the cerebellum may be particularly vulner-
able to graded increases in the number of blast exposures. Our findings
in the repetitive blast-exposed mice support this notion. We found that
an increase in the number of blasts produced graded increases in Purkinje
cell loss (Fig. 3). Although Purkinje cell loss was statistically significant,
any specific injured neuron was surrounded by neighboring Purkinje
cells that appeared, at least initially, to be intact. More extensive subclus-
ters of empty baskets became apparent 30 days after mice received three
blast exposures. Although the absolute number of lost Purkinje cells was
small compared to the number of remaining morphologically intact
cells, the extensive synaptic arbors supported by each Purkinje cell
might be expected to amplify the functional consequences of individual
Purkinje cell loss. In keeping with this, we observed slowly developing
blast-induced reductions in the synaptic scaffolding protein, PSD-95, at
least 4 months after blast exposure, further supporting that synapses in
the cerebellum are lost or become chronically structurally abnormal.
We found that the ventral lobules (7 to 10) of the murine cerebel-
lum are more vulnerable to blast-related injury compared to other re-
gions of the cerebellum. This highly specific pattern of neuron loss
corresponded with the overall pattern of BBB dysfunction and altered
Purkinje cell plasma membrane integrity occurring within 1 to 4 hours
of blast exposure. This suggested that early-occurring BBB distur-
bances may play a key role in subsequent chronic CNS injury. This
emphasizes the importance of developing early treatment strategies to
limit the pathophysiological consequences of even limited BBB inju-
ry to prevent long-term neuron loss.
The negative dose-response relationship between mild TBIs from
blast exposure and metabolic activity assessed by FDG-PET was
most pronounced in the inferior aspect of the cerebellum in blast-
exposed veterans. Nonetheless, these correlations may also include
contributions from more superior cerebellar domains, which may
not be distinguishable due to the inherently lower spatial resolution
and lack of neuroanatomical discrimination of FDG-PET imaging in
human brains, particularly in inferior brain regions where slight co-
registration mismatches may reduce localization specificity.
In landmark neuropathological studies, Corsellis and colleagues
mapped Purkinje cell loss (54) in former boxers and found an ana-
tomical pattern of loss that was strikingly similar to our findings in
blast-exposed mice. Specifically, they found the most prominent Pur-
kinje cell loss in the inferior/ventral aspects and, to a lesser extent,
limited losses in more superior domains of the cerebellum (54). Pur-
kinje cell damage was one of the most prominent neuropathological
findings in nonhuman primates after exposure to explosive blasts that
caused behavioral changes similar to humans with mild TBIs (55).
The neuroanatomical correspondence between blast-exposed
mice and veterans with repetitive blast-related mild TBIs or former
boxers with impact-related mild TBIs raises interesting questions
about the mechanisms by which blast injures the cerebellum. It
has been argued that the anatomical structure of the cerebellum
may render it vulnerable to injury from shear stress or rapid accel-
eration/deceleration impacts (26, 56–59), particularly impacts of the
inferior cerebellar lobules against the posterior fossa and/or herniation
of the cerebellar tonsils through the magnum foramen itself (54, 60).
In the mouse model of blast-induced mild TBI used in this study, head
movements were attenuated (9), consistent with previous studies using
comparably restrained movement models of blast that produce neu-
ropathology and behavioral deficits (7, 11–13, 19, 39, 61–67). The blast
parameters we used were comparable to those estimated to be sufficient
to produce brain injury in humans without substantial acceleration/de-
celeration (8). Nonetheless, it is not possible to rule out acceleration/de-
celeration as a contributing injury mechanism.
Factors other than biomechanical insults may also contribute to
blast-related cerebellar injury. The high basal metabolic activity of
Purkinje cells may influence their susceptibility to injury (68). This
may partially explain their vulnerability to injury by ischemia and hy-
poxia (69). The microvasculature of the Purkinje cell layer renders it
vulnerable to the development of ischemia during episodes of hypoper-
fusion (70), and vasospasm is uniquely associated with blast-related versus
impact-related TBI (71). Thus, these factors also may contribute to cere-
bellar vulnerability to blast-related mild TBIs. In addition, unrelated to
displacement or shear stress, the cerebellum is predisposed to CNS in-
sults that involve susceptibility to BBB breakdown in the experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis mouse model (72). Also, a large number
of human genetic diseases target the cerebellum (73). Thus, it would be
premature to conclude that any one factor governs susceptibility of the
cerebellum to blast-related mild TBI. It is more likely that complex inter-
actions among multiple factors underlie the correspondence we have
found between blast-exposed mice and veterans with blast-related mild
TBI, and that have previously been found in former boxers (54).
In addition to Purkinje cell and synaptic disturbances, we also ob-
served increased cerebellar expression of APP, axonal varicosities in
cerebellar white matter tracts, and persistent reactive gliosis in white
Table 2. DTI tractography (n = 19).
Demographics
Mean (SD), range
Age (years)
33.2 (7.7), 22–52
Education (years)
14.6 (1.6), 12–18
Race, nonwhite, n (%)
5 (26.3%)
APOE-&4 positive (%)
6 (33.3%)
Blast exposures
Number of blast-related mild TBIs
during military service (lifetime)
27.1 (28.3), 3–102 Median = 15
Number of lifetime mild TBIs with
loss of consciousness
2.6 (2.7), 0–11 Median = 2
Time since last blast-related mild
TBI (years)
5.7 (2.2), 1–8 Median = 6
Behavioral and neurological measures
CAPS score
64.1 (28.7), 13–111
PHQ-9 score
10.6 (7.9), 0–25
PSQI score
10.5 (4.3), 3–17
AUDIT-C score
3.4 (2.3), 0–9
NSItotal score
29.5 (13.4), 4–57
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
10
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 matter tracts in proximity to the deep cerebellar nuclei. In keeping
with previous findings in both humans and blast-exposed animals
(26, 39, 55, 66, 74), these data suggest that deep cerebellar white matter tracts
in blast-exposed veterans may also exhibit graded vulnerability to
increasing numbers of blast-related mild TBIs. The DTI tractography
results (Fig. 8) were consistent with this notion, as we observed a sta-
tistically significant negative correlation between blast number and mean
diffusivity in these tracts.
In this regard, it is often reported that white matter damage, typ-
ically exemplified by distinct myelin disruption and axonal loss, is as-
sociated with increased, rather than decreased, mean diffusivity,
because the loss of overall white matter integrity allows for more freely
moving water molecules in all directions (75–77). However, a growing
body of data support that different types of white matter tract pathol-
ogy can result in complex and sometimes opposing changes in mean
diffusivity. For example, inflammatory processes such as reactive gli-
osis and microgliomatosis accompanied by increased cellularity can
restrict water diffusivity (78). In some instances, a CNS insult results
in an initial decrease in mean diffusivity or the apparent diffusion co-
efficient of water (ADCw), followed by increased diffusivity (79). Simi-
lar observations have recently been reported among individuals with
presenilin-1 (PS1) mutations (45). Compared to normal controls,
mean diffusivity was reduced in PS1 mutation carriers before onset
of symptoms. However, mean diffusivity was increased in symptomatic
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients with PS1 mutations compared to
controls, thereby raising the possibility that the initial mean diffusivity
decrease may reflect early-occurring glial activation or cellular swelling
preceding overt AD-related pathology (45). Additional support for the idea
that reactive gliosis attending neurodegenerative disease processes could be
associated with decreased mean diffusivity comes from recent findings in
patients with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in whom DTI analy-
ses revealed widespread decreased mean diffusivity in white matter tracts
(80, 81). In addition, among a limited number of CJD cases in which it
was possible to relate the mean diffusivity findings to histopathological ex-
aminations, reactive astrocytic gliosis and microglial activation appeared to
be roughly associated with the degree of reduction in mean diffusivity (80).
These reports raise the possibility that our finding of lower mean
diffusivity in deep cerebellar white matter in veterans with the largest
Table 3. Correlation between number (log10) blast exposures and
symptoms related to sensorimotor integration (n = 41). D, dizziness;
LB, loss of balance; PC, poor coordination.
Symptom
Spearman r
P
Dizziness
0.374
0.016
Loss of balance
0.431
0.005
Poor coordination
0.365
0.019
Total (D + LB + PC)
0.438
0.004
Fig. 8. Decreased mean diffusivity in human cerebellum correlates with
an increase in the number of blast-related TBIs. (A) Approximate spatial
locations of three VOIs (1 to 3) used for quantification of DTI parameters are
shown on a reference T1-weighted MRI scan (Montreal Neurological Insti-
tute −32 mm in z axis). (B) Scatter plot reveals a statistically significant neg-
ative correlation between log10 number of blast-related mild TBIs and
mean diffusivity calculated as the average of VOI 1 to 3 (Spearman r, P ≤
0.034, n = 19). (C) Examples of DTI fiber tracts arising from the seed point
defined near the dentate nucleus for one VOI in a subject with 5 reported
blast exposures (upper panel) and a subject with >100 reported blast ex-
posures (lower panel). Color scale represents the maximum eigenvalue of
the tensor that is related to mean diffusivity (MD). Compared to the subject
with five blasts, the greater amount of green color in the highlighted re-
gions (white arrows) in the >100 blast-exposed subject indicates a lower
mean diffusivity. (D) Mean diffusivity axial images from the same two
subjects shown in (C) depicted as a mean diffusivity map. The ovals highlight
the same regions shown in (C), demonstrating lower mean diffusivity
(more green) in the subject with >100 blast-related mild TBIs compared
to the subject with 5 blast exposures. Color bars represent mean diffusivity
values (mm2/s).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
11
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 number of blast exposures may indicate chronic subacute reactive gli-
osis and microgliomatosis. Nonetheless, in the absence of more direct
neuropathological evidence and with the lack of correlated changes in
fractional anisotropy, this possibility remains to be confirmed. Alter-
natively, the relationship between mean diffusivity and the number of
blast exposures could be due to other factors that include impaired
axonal transport, cellular swelling, or changes in crossing fiber anatomy
(78, 80). It also remains unclear whether or not such underlying white
matter DTI abnormalities in these blast-related mild TBI subjects are an
early indication of latent disease processes that may later give rise to
neurological symptoms.
Our study has limitations with respect to estimates of the number
of blast exposures, which relied on retrospective recollection facilitated
by a semistructured interview. However, unbiased whole-brain voxel-wise
analysis yielded a correlation between the number of recalled blast ex-
posures and glucose hypometabolism in the cerebellum. The number
of blast exposures also correlated with self-reported sensorimotor symp-
toms. Another important limitation is that the possible link between de-
creased mean diffusivity on diffusion tensor images in the blast-exposed
veterans and mild, chronic white matter neuroinflammation-related pro-
cesses is only suggestive. Nonetheless, this possibility is supported by re-
cent PET translocator protein imaging data in former National Football
League players, suggesting that neuroinflammation is associated with
repetitive impact mild TBI (82). Despite the cell loss seen in the cerebel-
lum of blast-exposed mice, which is indicative of lasting CNS injury
(Fig. 3), the microglial and astrocytic pathology we observed 30 days after
repetitive blast exposure in the mice requires further study.
The deep cerebellar white matter tracts imaged here subserve func-
tional networks connecting the cerebellum with brain regions that are
critical to both cognitive and emotional function, including the prefrontal
cortex and limbic regions (33, 83, 84). Thus, it is possible that the cere-
bellar white matter and Purkinje cell abnormalities observed in our study
could disrupt cerebellar-cortical connections and thereby contribute to
the chronic behavioral and postconcussive symptoms that are frequent-
ly observed in this population, as well as impaired sensorimotor integra-
tion. Continued longitudinal investigation of the veterans in this study is
currently under way in an effort to address this important question.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The overall aim of this study was to investigate the neurological
consequences of repetitive mild TBI in the cerebellum and to test
the correlation between cerebellar injury in a mouse model of repeti-
tive blast-induced mild TBI and neuroimaging findings in veterans
with multiple blast-related mild TBI. A total of 41 veterans reporting
from 1 to greater than 100 blast-related mild TBI events were studied.
All participants were male. Females were eligible for study inclusion,
but no females with blast-related mild TBI were enrolled. Inclusion
criteria for all veteran participants included documented hazardous
duty in Iraq and/or Afghanistan with the U.S. Armed Forces during
Operation Iraqi Freedom and/or Operation Enduring Freedom. Ve-
terans with mild TBI must have had exposure to at least one blast with
acute symptoms that meet VA/Department of Defense/American
Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine criteria for mild TBI. Exclusion
criteria for all participants included moderate-severe TBI, seizure dis-
order, insulin-dependent diabetes, current DSM-IV (Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition) diagnosis of alco-
hol abuse or other substance abuse, schizophrenia or other psychotic
disorders, bipolar disorder, or dementia, and taking medications likely
to affect cognitive performance such as opiates, benzodiazepines, and
sedating antihistamines. Veterans with retained shrapnel or metal
fragments or foreign objects in the eyes, skin, or body that would con-
traindicate a brain MRI scan were excluded from MRI. All partici-
pants who had undergone FDG-PET scanning were included in the
reported FDG-PET analysis. A subset of these underwent MRI scan-
ning; all of those with MRI scans of sufficient quality for DTI tractogra-
phy were included in this study. Sensorimotor-related NSI symptoms for
all participants in this report are included.
A total of 175 male wild-type C57BL/6 mice ranging in age from 3
to 4 months were studied. Animals were randomly assigned to ex-
perimental (blast) and control (sham) groups. Experimental group
sample sizes were based on previous pathological findings (9). For
Western blots, entire flash-frozen cerebellum samples were analyzed
and reported. Fixed floating tissue sections from each brain were col-
lected into buffer holding tubes for each animal. For each experiment,
fixed sections from each brain were randomly pulled from the holding
tubes; subjected to immunostaining, mounting, and confocal micros-
copy; and analyzed under identical conditions for both blast-exposed
versus sham control samples with subsequent data reported, including
sections with missing lobules. Except where indicated, analyses were
performed nonblinded using identical experimental procedures for
data/image collection and with image adjustments limited only to linear
contrast and brightness adjustments applied identically to data from
blast- and sham-treated animals in each experiment.
Human subjects
These studies were approved by the VA Puget Sound Health Care
System Human Subjects Committee. Participants provided written
informed consent before study. The study conformed to institutional
regulatory guidelines and principles of human subject protection in
the Declaration of Helsinki. Veterans with mild TBI were character-
ized by physical and neurological examination. Behavioral assessments
were made for PTSD using CAPS (85), for depression using PHQ-9
(86), for alcohol consumption using AUDIT-C (87), and for potential
postconcussive symptoms using NSI. A lifetime history of both blast-
related and impact-related mild TBI was obtained using a semi-
structured interview by two expert clinicians [described in detail
elsewhere (5)]. FDG-PET and DTI were performed within 3 months
of clinical evaluation. Participants with retained shrapnel did not
undergo DTI.
Animal subjects
This study used wild-type C57BL/6 male, 3- to 4-month-old mice
(The Jackson Laboratory) that were group-housed with access to food
and water ad libitum. All animal experiments were conducted in ac-
cordance with Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Lab-
oratory Animal Care guidelines and were approved by the VA Puget
Sound Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Statistical analyses
Standard ANOVAs or t tests were used (two-tailed). Where noted,
following a statistically significant overall ANOVA, Helmert tests were
used to carry out a priori, planned comparisons (88, 89). Rank-order
Spearman correlations (two-tailed P values) were performed using
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 log10-transformed number of blast exposures to linearize blast num-
ber. Subsequent multivariate linear regression analyses reported corre-
lations (two-tailed) adjusted for CAPS, PHQ-9, and AUDIT-C scores.
Using established methods (90), NEUROSTAT performed an r-to-z
transform, with statistical significance of resultant z-score values eval-
uated using random Gaussian fields and a Euler characteristic algorithm
(91) to control for multiple comparisons and maintain a type I error
rate of P < 0.05 (corresponding to z > 4.0). All reported P values de-
note two-tailed critical values defined as P ≤ 0.05. Statistical likelihood
of correctly identifying the conditions for treatment pairs (sham ver-
sus blast) was performed using a test for one proportion. Statistical
analyses were done using SPSS software (IBM) and R version 3.2.2
(R Core Team).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/321/321ra6/DC1
Methods
Tabulated data for Figs. 1B, 2E, 3 (C and D), 4 (A and B), 5 (B and C), 6D, 7 (B, D, H, and I), and 8.
References (92–101)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. I. Cernak, Blast-induced neurotrauma models and their requirements. Front. Neurol. 5,
128 (2014).
2. J. E. Karr, C. N. Areshenkoff, E. C. Duggan, M. A. Garcia-Barrera, Blast-related mild traumatic
brain injury: A Bayesian random-effects meta-analysis on the cognitive outcomes of concus-
sion among military personnel. Neuropsychol. Rev. 24, 428–444 (2014).
3. C. L. Mac Donald, A. M. Johnson, D. Cooper, E. C. Nelson, N. J. Werner, J. S. Shimony,
A. Z. Snyder, M. E. Raichle, J. R. Witherow, R. Fang, S. F. Flaherty, D. L. Brody, Detection of
blast-related traumatic brain injury in U.S. military personnel. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 2091–2100
(2011).
4. E. R. Peskind, E. C. Petrie, D. J. Cross, K. Pagulayan, K. McCraw, D. Hoff, K. Hart, C.-E. Yu,
M. A. Raskind, D. G. Cook, S. Minoshima, Cerebrocerebellar hypometabolism associated
with repetitive blast exposure mild traumatic brain injury in 12 Iraq war Veterans with
persistent post-concussive symptoms. Neuroimage 54 (Suppl. 1), S76–S82 (2011).
5. E. C. Petrie, D. J. Cross, V. L. Yarnykh, T. Richards, N. M. Martin, K. Pagulayan, D. Hoff,
K. Hart, C. Mayer, M. Tarabochia, M. A. Raskind, S. Minoshima, E. R. Peskind, Neuroima-
ging, behavioral, and psychological sequelae of repetitive combined blast/impact mild
traumatic brain injury in Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans. J. Neurotrauma 31, 425–436
(2014).
6. A. C. McKee, M. E. Robinson, Military-related traumatic brain injury and neurodegenera-
tion. Alzheimers Dement. 10, S242–S253 (2014).
7. M. A. Mayorga, The pathology of primary blast overpressure injury. Toxicology 121, 17–28
(1997).
8. W. C. Moss, M. J. King, E. G. Blackman, Skull flexure from blast waves: A mechanism for
brain injury with implications for helmet design. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 108702 (2009).
9. B. R. Huber, J. S. Meabon, T. J. Martin, P. D. Mourad, R. Bennett, B. C. Kraemer, I. Cernak,
E. C. Petrie, M. J. Emery, E. R. Swenson, C. Mayer, E. Mehic, E. R. Peskind, D. G. Cook, Blast
exposure causes early and persistent aberrant phospho- and cleaved-tau expression in
a murine model of mild blast-induced traumatic brain injury. J. Alzheimers Dis. 37, 309–323
(2013).
10. I. Cernak, Blast injuries of the lung: Development, prognosis and possible therapy.
Vojnosanit. Pregl. 54, 91–102 (1997).
11. I. Cernak, J. Savic, Z. Malicevic, G. Zunic, P. Radosevic, I. Ivanovic, L. Davidovic, Involvement of
the central nervous system in the general response to pulmonary blast injury. J. Trauma 40
(Suppl. 3), S100–S104 (1996).
12. I. Cernak, Z. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Bian, J. Savic, Ultrastructural and functional characteristics
of blast injury-induced neurotrauma. J. Trauma 50, 695–706 (2001).
13. I. Cernak, Z. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Bian, J. Savic, Cognitive deficits following blast injury-induced
neurotrauma: Possible involvement of nitric oxide. Brain Inj. 15, 593–612 (2001).
14. J. M. K. Murthy, J. S. Chopra, D. R. Gulati, Subdural hematoma in an adult following a blast
injury. Case report. J. Neurosurg. 50, 260–261 (1979).
15. I. Cernak, L. J. Noble-Haeusslein, Traumatic brain injury: An overview of pathobiology with
emphasis on military populations. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 255–266 (2010).
16. R. S. Bell, A. H. Vo, C. J. Neal, J. Tigno, R. Roberts, C. Mossop, J. R. Dunne, R. A. Armonda,
Military traumatic brain and spinal column injury: A 5-year study of the impact blast and
other military grade weaponry on the central nervous system. J. Trauma 66 (Suppl. 4),
S104–S111 (2009).
17. B. D. Owens, J. F. Kragh Jr., J. C. Wenke, J. Macaitis, C. E. Wade, J. B. Holcomb, Combat
wounds in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom. J. Trauma 64,
295–299 (2008).
18. F. Ahmed, A. Gyorgy, A. Kamnaksh, G. Ling, L. Tong, S. Parks, D. Agoston, Time-dependent
changes of protein biomarker levels in the cerebrospinal fluid after blast traumatic brain
injury. Electrophoresis 33, 3705–3711 (2012).
19. R. A. Bauman, G. Ling, L. Tong, A. Januszkiewicz, D. Agoston, N. Delanerolle, Y. Kim, D. Ritzel,
R. Bell, J. Ecklund, R. Armonda, F. Bandak, S. Parks, An introductory characterization of a
combat-casualty-care relevant swine model of closed head injury resulting from exposure
to explosive blast. J. Neurotrauma 26, 841–860 (2009).
20. L. E. Goldstein, A. M. Fisher, C. A. Tagge, X. L. Zhang, L. Velisek, J. A. Sullivan, C. Upreti,
J. M. Kracht, M. Ericsson, M. W. Wojnarowicz, C. J. Goletiani, G. M. Maglakelidze, N. Casey,
J. A. Moncaster, O. Minaeva, R. D. Moir, C. J. Nowinski, R. A. Stern, R. C. Cantu, J. Geiling,
J. K. Blusztajn, B. L. Wolozin, T. Ikezu, T. D. Stein, A. E. Budson, N. W. Kowall, D. Chargin,
A. Sharon, S. Saman, G. F. Hall, W. C. Moss, R. O. Cleveland, R. E. Tanzi, P. K. Stanton,
A. C. McKee, Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in blast-exposed military veterans
and a blast neurotrauma mouse model. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 134ra60 (2012).
21. R. De Gasperi, M. A. Gama Sosa, S. H. Kim, J. W. Steele, M. C. Shaughness, E. Maudlin-Jeronimo,
A. A. Hall, S. T. Dekosky, R. M. McCarron, M. P. Nambiar, S. Gandy, S. T. Ahlers, G. A. Elder,
Acute blast injury reduces brain ab in two rodent species. Front. Neurol. 3, 177 (2012).
22. R. P. J. Stocker, M. A. Cieply, B. Paul, H. Khan, L. Henry, A. P. Kontos, A. Germain, Combat-
related blast exposure and traumatic brain injury influence brain glucose metabolism
during REM sleep in military veterans. Neuroimage 99, 207–214 (2014).
23. M. F. Mendez, E. M. Owens, G. Reza Berenji, D. C. Peppers, L.-J. Liang, E. A. Licht, Mild
traumatic brain injury from primary blast vs. blunt forces: Post-concussion consequences
and functional neuroimaging. NeuroRehabilitation 32, 397–407 (2013).
24. J. J. Bazarian, K. Donnelly, D. R. Peterson, G. C. Warner, T. Zhu, J. Zhong, The relation
between posttraumatic stress disorder and mild traumatic brain injury acquired during
Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom. J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 28, 1–12
(2013).
25. R. E. Jorge, L. Acion, T. White, D. Tordesillas-Gutierrez, R. Pierson, B. Crespo-Facorro,
V. A. Magnotta, White matter abnormalities in veterans with mild traumatic brain
injury. Am. J. Psychiatry 169, 1284–1291 (2012).
26. C. Mac Donald, A. Johnson, D. Cooper, T. Malone, J. Sorrell, J. Shimony, M. Parsons, A. Snyder,
M. Raichle, R. Fang, S. Flaherty, M. Russell, D. L. Brody, Cerebellar white matter abnormalities
following primary blast injury in US military personnel. PLOS One 8, e55823 (2013).
27. A. Kamnaksh, M. D. Budde, E. Kovesdi, J. B. Long, J. A. Frank, D. V. Agoston, Diffusion
tensor imaging reveals acute subcortical changes after mild blast-induced traumatic
brain injury. Sci. Rep. 4, 4809 (2014).
28. D. L. Warden, L. M. French, L. Shupenko, J. Fargus, G. Riedy, M. E. Erickson, M. S. Jaffee,
D. F. Moore, Case report of a soldier with primary blast brain injury. Neuroimage 47
(Suppl. 2), T152–T153 (2009).
29. W. Liu, B. Wang, R. Wolfowitz, P.-H. Yeh, D. E. Nathan, J. Graner, H. Tang, H. Pan, J. Harper,
D. Pham, T. R. Oakes, L. M. French, G. Riedy, Perfusion deficits in patients with mild trau-
matic brain injury characterized by dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI. NMR Biomed. 26,
651–663 (2013).
30. B. L. Fischer, M. Parsons, S. Durgerian, C. Reece, L. Mourany, M. J. Lowe, E. B. Beall, K. A. Koenig,
S. E. Jones, M. R. Newsome, R. S. Scheibel, E. A. Wilde, M. Troyanskaya, T. L. Merkley, M. Walker,
H. S. Levin, S. M. Rao, Neural activation during response inhibition differentiates blast from
mechanical causes of mild to moderate traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 31, 169–179
(2014).
31. P.-H. Yeh, B. Wang, T. R. Oakes, L. M. French, H. Pan, J. Graner, W. Liu, G. Riedy, Postcon-
cussional disorder and PTSD symptoms of military-related traumatic brain injury asso-
ciated with compromised neurocircuitry. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 2652–2673 (2014).
32. F. Van Overwalle, K. Baetens, P. Marien, M. Vandekerckhove, Social cognition and the
cerebellum: A meta-analysis of over 350 fMRI studies. Neuroimage 86, 554–572 (2014).
33. R. L. Buckner, The cerebellum and cognitive function: 25 years of insight from anatomy
and neuroimaging. Neuron 80, 807–815 (2013).
34. C. J. Stoodley, The cerebellum and cognition: Evidence from functional imaging studies.
Cerebellum 11, 352–365 (2012).
35. C. J. Stoodley, E. M. Valera, J. D. Schmahmann, Functional topography of the cerebellum
for motor and cognitive tasks: An fMRI study. Neuroimage 59, 1560–1570 (2012).
36. M. F. Mendez, E. M. Owens, E. E. Jimenez, D. Peppers, E. A. Licht, Changes in personality
after mild traumatic brain injury from primary blast vs. blunt forces. Brain Inj. 27, 10–18
(2013).
37. E. C. Petrie, D. J. Cross, V. L. Yarnykh, T. Richards, N. M. Martin, K. Pagulayan, D. Hoff, K. Hart,
C. Mayer, M. Tarabochia, M. Raskind, S. Minoshima, E. Peskind, Neuroimaging, behavioral,
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and psychological sequelae of repetitive combined blast/impact mild traumatic brain injury in
Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans. J. Neurotrauma 31, 425–436 (2014).
38. I. Cernak, A. C. Merkle, V. E. Koliatsos, J. M. Bilik, Q. T. Luong, T. M. Mahota, L. Xu, N. Slack,
D. Windle, F. A. Ahmed, The pathobiology of blast injuries and blast-induced neurotrau-
ma as identified using a new experimental model of injury in mice. Neurobiol. Dis. 41,
538–551 (2011).
39. V. E. Koliatsos, I. Cernak, L. Xu, Y. Song, A. Savonenko, B. J. Crain, C. G. Eberhart, C. E. Frangakis,
T. Melnikova, H. Kim, D. Lee, A mouse model of blast injury to brain: Initial pathological,
neuropathological, and behavioral characterization. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 70,
399–416 (2011).
40. O. Farkas, J. Lifshitz, J. T. Povlishock, Mechanoporation induced by diffuse traumatic
brain injury: An irreversible or reversible response to injury? J. Neurosci. 26, 3130–3140
(2006).
41. E. Kim, M. Sheng, PDZ domain proteins of synapses. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 771–781
(2004).
42. K. J. McKenzie, D. R. McLellan, S. M. Gentleman, W. L. Maxwell, T. A. Gennarelli, D. I. Graham, Is
b-APP a marker of axonal damage in short-surviving head injury? Acta Neuropathol. 92,
608–613 (1996).
43. S. H. Friess, R. N. Ichord, J. Ralston, K. Ryall, M. A. Helfaer, C. Smith, S. S. Margulies, Repeated
traumatic brain injury affects composite cognitive function in piglets. J. Neurotrauma 26,
1111–1121 (2009).
44. K. Oishi, A. Faria, P. C. M. van Zijl, S. Mori, MRI Atlas of Human White Matter (Academic
Press, Amsterdam, 2nd ed., 2011).
45. N. S. Ryan, S. Keihaninejad, T. J. Shakespeare, M. Lehmann, S. J. Crutch, I. B. Malone,
J. S. Thornton, L. Mancini, H. Hyare, T. Yousry, G. R. Ridgway, H. Zhang, M. Modat, D. C. Alexander,
M. N. Rossor, S. Ourselin, N. C. Fox, Magnetic resonance imaging evidence for presympto-
matic change in thalamus and caudate in familial Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 136, 1399–1414
(2013).
46. R. A. Morey, C. C. Haswell, E. S. Selgrade, D. Massoglia, C. Liu, J. Weiner, C. E. Marx; MIRECC
Work Group, I. Cernak, G. McCarthy, Effects of chronic mild traumatic brain injury on
white matter integrity in Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans. Hum. Brain Mapp. 34,
2986–2999 (2013).
47. K. H. Taber, R. A. Hurley, C. C. Haswell, J. A. Rowland, S. D. Hurt, C. D. Lamar, R. A. Morey,
White matter compromise in veterans exposed to primary blast forces. J. Head Trauma
Rehabil. 30, E15–E25 (2015).
48. D. M. Erlanger, K. C. Kutner, J. T. Barth, R. Barnes, Neuropsychology of sports-related head
injury: Dementia pugilistica to post concussion syndrome. Clin. Neuropsychol. 13, 193–209
(1999).
49. A. C. McKee, R. C. Cantu, C. J. Nowinski, E. T. Hedley-Whyte, B. E. Gavett, A. E. Budson,
V. E. Santini, H.-S. Lee, C. A. Kubilus, R. A. Stern, Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in
athletes: Progressive tauopathy after repetitive head injury. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 68,
709–735 (2009).
50. B. I. Omalu, S. T. DeKosky, R. L. Minster, M. I. Kamboh, R. L. Hamilton, C. H. Wecht, Chronic
traumatic encephalopathy in a National Football League player. Neurosurgery 57, 128–134;
discussion 128-34 (2005).
51. A. C. McKee, T. D. Stein, C. J. Nowinski, R. A. Stern, D. H. Daneshvar, V. E. Alvarez, H.-S. Lee,
G. Hall, S. M. Wojtowicz, C. M. Baugh, D. O. Riley, C. A. Kubilus, K. A. Cormier, M. A. Jacobs,
B. R. Martin, C. R. Abraham, T. Ikezu, R. R. Reichard, B. L. Wolozin, A. E. Budson, L. E. Goldstein,
N. W. Kowall, R. C. Cantu, The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Brain
136, 43–64 (2013).
52. Z. Yang, F. Lin, C. S. Robertson, K. K. W. Wang, Dual vulnerability of TDP-43 to calpain and
caspase-3 proteolysis after neurotoxic conditions and traumatic brain injury. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 34, 1444–1452 (2014).
53. C. M. Baugh, C. A. Robbins, R. A. Stern, A. C. McKee, Current understanding of chronic
traumatic encephalopathy. Curr. Treat. Options. Neurol. 16, 306 (2014).
54. J. A. N. Corsellis, C. J. Bruton, D. Freeman-Browne, The aftermath of boxing. Psychol. Med.
3, 270–303 (1973).
55. J. Lu, K. C. Ng, G. Ling, J. Wu, D. J. F. Poon, E. M. Kan, M. H. Tan, Y. J. Wu, P. Li, S. Moochhala,
E. Yap, L. K. H. Lee, M. Teo, I. B. Yeh, D. M. B. Sergio, F. Chua, S. D. Kumar, E.-A. Ling, Effect
of blast exposure on the brain structure and cognition in Macaca fascicularis. J. Neuro-
trauma 29, 1434–1454 (2012).
56. P. A. Taylor, C. C. Ford, Simulation of blast-induced early-time intracranial wave physics
leading to traumatic brain injury. J. Biomech. Eng. 131, 061007 (2009).
57. U. Krave, M. Al-Olama, H.-A. Hansson, Rotational acceleration closed head flexion trauma
generates more extensive diffuse brain injury than extension trauma. J. Neurotrauma 28,
57–70 (2011).
58. L. E. Goldstein, A. M. Fisher, C. A. Tagge, X. L. Zhang, L. Velisek, J. A. Sullivan, C. Upreti,
J. M. Kracht, M. Ericsson, M. W. Wojnarowicz, C. J. Goletiani, G. M. Maglakelidze, N. Casey,
J. A. Moncaster, O. Minaeva, R. D. Moir, C. J. Nowinski, R. A. Stern, R. C. Cantu, J. Geiling,
J. K. Blusztajn, B. L. Wolozin, T. Ikezu, T. D. Stein, A. E. Budson, N. W. Kowall, D. Chargin,
A. Sharon, S. Saman, G. F. Hall, W. C. Moss, R. O. Cleveland, R. E. Tanzi, P. K. Stanton,
A. C. McKee, Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in blast-exposed military veterans
and a blast neurotrauma mouse model. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 134ra160 (2012).
59. D. C. Viano, I. R. Casson, E. J. Pellman, L. Zhang, A. I. King, K. H. Yang, Concussion in
professional football: Brain responses by finite element analysis: Part 9. Neurosurgery
57, 891–916 (2005).
60. P. W. Lampert, J. M. Hardman, Morphological changes in brains of boxers. JAMA 251,
2676–2679 (1984).
61. A. Säljö, F. Bao, K. G. Haglid, H.-A. Hansson, Blast exposure causes redistribution of phos-
phorylated neurofilament subunits in neurons of the adult rat brain. J. Neurotrauma 17,
719–726 (2000).
62. I. Cernak, V. Savic, J. Kotur, V. Prokic, B. Kuljic, D. Grbovic, M. Veljovic, Alterations in mag-
nesium and oxidative status during chronic emotional stress. Magnes. Res. 13, 29–36
(2000).
63. J. B. Long, T. L. Bentley, K. A. Wessner, C. Cerone, S. Sweeney, R. A. Bauman, Blast
overpressure in rats: Recreating a battlefield injury in the laboratory. J. Neurotrauma
26, 827–840 (2009).
64. H. Bayir, V. E. Kagan, R. S. B Clark, K. Janesko-Feldman, R. Rafikov, Z. Huang, X. Zhang, V. Vagni,
T. R. Billiar, P. M. Kochanek, Neuronal NOS-mediated nitration and inactivation of manganese
superoxide dismutase in brain after experimental and human brain injury. J. Neurochem. 101,
168–181 (2007).
65. S. T. Ahlers, E. Vasserman-Stokes, M. C. Shaughness, A. A. Hall, D. A. Shear, M. Chavko,
R. M. McCarron, J. R. Stone, Assessment of the effects of acute and repeated exposure
to blast overpressure in rodents: Toward a greater understanding of blast and the potential
ramifications for injury in humans exposed to blast. Front. Neurol. 3, 32 (2012).
66. Y. Wang, Y. Wei, S. Oguntayo, W. Wilkins, P. Arun, M. Valiyaveettil, J. Song, J. B. Long,
M. P. Nambiar, Tightly coupled repetitive blast-induced traumatic brain injury: Development
and characterization in mice. J. Neurotrauma 28, 2171–2183 (2011).
67. E. Rostami, J. Davidsson, K. C. Ng, J. Lu, A. Gyorgy, J. Walker, D. Wingo, S. Plantman,
B.-M. Bellander, D. V. Agoston, M. Risling, A model for mild traumatic brain injury that induces
limited transient memory impairment and increased levels of axon related serum bio-
markers. Front. Neurol. 3, 115 (2012).
68. W. T. Thach, Cerebellar output: Properties, synthesis and uses. Brain Res. 40, 89–102
(1972).
69. J. R. Sarna, R. Hawkes, Patterned Purkinje cell death in the cerebellum. Prog. Neurobiol.
70, 473–507 (2003).
70. H. Nonaka, M. Akima, T. Hatori, T. Nagayama, Z. Zhang, F. Ihara, The microvasculature of
the human cerebellar meninges. Acta Neuropathol. 104, 608–614 (2002).
71. R. A. Armonda, R. S. Bell, A. H. Vo, G. Ling, T. J. DeGraba, B. Crandall, J. Ecklund, W. W. Campbell,
Wartime traumatic cerebral vasospasm: Recent review of combat casualties. Neurosurgery 59,
1215–1225; discussion 1225 (2006).
72. J. R. Tonra, Cerebellar susceptibility to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in
SJL/J mice: Potential interaction of immunology with vascular anatomy. Cerebellum 1, 57–68
(2002).
73. S. Jayadev, T. D. Bird, Hereditary ataxias: Overview. Genet. Med. 15, 673–683 (2013).
74. R. H. Garman, L. W. Jenkins, R. C. Switzer III, R. A. Bauman, L. C. Tong, P. V. Swauger, S. A. Parks,
D. V. Ritzel, C. E. Dixon, R. S. B. Clark, H. Bayir, V. Kagan, E. K. Jackson, P. M. Kochanek, Blast
exposure in rats with body shielding is characterized primarily by diffuse axonal injury.
J. Neurotrauma 28, 947–959 (2011).
75. C. Pierpaoli, A. Barnett, S. Pajevic, R. Chen, L. R. Penix, A. Virta, P. Basser, Water diffusion
changes in Wallerian degeneration and their dependence on white matter architecture.
Neuroimage 13, 1174–1185 (2001).
76. F. Agosta, E. Pagani, M. Petrolini, D. Caputo, M. Perini, A. Prelle, F. Salvi, M. Filippi, Assess-
ment of white matter tract damage in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A dif-
fusion tensor MR imaging tractography study. AJNR Am. J. Neuroradiol. 31, 1457–1461
(2010).
77. S.-K. Song, S.-W. Sun, M. J. Ramsbottom, C. Chang, J. Russell, A. H. Cross, Dysmyelination
revealed through MRI as increased radial (but unchanged axial) diffusion of water. Neuroimage
17, 1429–1436 (2002).
78. Y. Wang, Q. Wang, J. P. Haldar, F.-C. Yeh, M. Xie, P. Sun, T.-W. Tu, K. Trinkaus, R. S. Klein,
A. H. Cross, S.-K. Song, Quantification of increased cellularity during inflammatory
demyelination. Brain 134, 3590–3601 (2011).
79. M. Anderova, I. Vorisek, H. Pivonkova, J. Benesova, L. Vargova, M. Cicanic, A. Chvatal,
E. Sykova, Cell death/proliferation and alterations in glial morphology contribute to changes
in diffusivity in the rat hippocampus after hypoxia–ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31,
894–907 (2011).
80. E. Caverzasi, M. L. Mandelli, S. J. DeArmond, C. P. Hess, P. Vitali, N. Papinutto, A. Oehler,
B. L. Miller, I. V. Lobach, S. Bastianello, M. D. Geschwind, R. G. Henry, White matter involve-
ment in sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Brain 137, 3339–3354 (2014).
81. E. Caverzasi, R. G. Henry, P. Vitali, I. V. Lobach, J. Kornak, S. Bastianello, S. J. DeArmond,
B. L. Miller, H. J. Rosen, M. L. Mandelli, M. D. Geschwind, Application of quantitative
DTI metrics in sporadic CJD. Neuroimage Clin. 4, 426–435 (2014).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
14
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 82. J. M. Coughlin, Y. Wang, C. A. Munro, S. Ma, C. Yue, S. Chen, R. Airan, P. K. Kim, A. V. Adams,
C. Garcia, C. Higgs, H. I. Sair, A. Sawa, G. Smith, C. G. Lyketsos, B. Caffo, M. Kassiou,
T. R. Guilarte, M. G. Pomper, Neuroinflammation and brain atrophy in former NFL players:
An in vivo multimodal imaging pilot study. Neurobiol. Dis. 74, 58–65 (2015).
83. C. J. Stoodley, J. D. Schmahmann, Evidence for topographic organization in the cerebel-
lum of motor control versus cognitive and affective processing. Cortex 46, 831–844
(2010).
84. J. A. Bernard, S. J. Peltier, B. L. Benson, J. L. Wiggins, S. M. Jaeggi, M. Buschkuehl, J. Jonides,
C. S. Monk, R. D. Seidler, Dissociable functional networks of the human dentate nucleus.
Cereb. Cortex 24, 2151–2159 (2014).
85. D. D. Blake, F. W. Weathers, L. M. Nagy, D. G. Kaloupek, F. D. Gusman, D. S. Charney,
T. M. Keane, The development of a Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale. J. Trauma. Stress 8,
75–90 (1995).
86. K. Kroenke, R. L. Spitzer, J. B. Williams, The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity
measure. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 16, 606–613 (2001).
87. K. Bush, D. R. Kivlahan, M. B. McDonell, S. D. Fihn, K. A. Bradley, The AUDIT alcohol con-
sumption questions (AUDIT-C): An effective brief screening test for problem drinking.
Ambulatory Care Quality Improvement Project (ACQUIP). Alcohol Use Disorders Identifi-
cation Test. Arch. Intern. Med. 158, 1789–1795 (1998).
88. B. J. Winer, D. R. Brown, K. M. Michels, Statistical Principles in Experimental Design
(McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, ed. 3, 1991), p. 1057.
89. A. Field, Discovering Statistics Using SPSS (Sage Publications, London, ed. 2, 2005), p. 777.
90. E. C. Petrie, D. J. Cross, D. Galasko, G. D. Schellenberg, M. A. Raskind, E. R. Peskind,
S. Minoshima, Preclinical evidence of Alzheimer changes: Convergent cerebrospinal fluid bio-
marker and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography findings. Arch. Neurol. 66,
632–637 (2009).
91. K. J. Worsley, A. C. Evans, S. Marrett, P. Neelin, A three-dimensional statistical analysis
for CBF activation studies in human brain. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 12, 900–918
(1992).
92. J. Talairach, P. Tournoux, Co-Planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain. 3-Dimensional Pro-
portional System: An Approach to Cerebral Imaging (Thieme Medical Publishers, New York,
1988).
93. S. Minoshima, R. A. Koeppe, K. A. Frey, M. Ishihara, D. E. Kuhl, Stereotactic PET atlas of the
human brain: Aid for visual interpretation of functional brain images. J. Nucl. Med. 35,
949–954 (1994).
94. S. Minoshima, R. A. Koeppe, K. A. Frey, D. E. Kuhl, Anatomic standardization: Linear scaling
and nonlinear warping of functional brain images. J. Nucl. Med. 35, 1528–1537 (1994).
95. S. Minoshima, K. A. Frey, R. A. Koeppe, N. L. Foster, D. E. Kuhl, A diagnostic approach in
Alzheimer’s disease using three-dimensional stereotactic surface projections of fluorine-
18-FDG PET. J. Nucl. Med. 36, 1238–1248 (1995).
96. S. Minoshima, K. A. Frey, N. L. Foster, D. E. Kuhl, Preserved pontine glucose metabolism in
Alzheimer disease: A reference region for functional brain image (PET) analysis. J. Comput.
Assist. Tomogr. 19, 541–547 (1995).
97. I. Oguz, M. Farzinfar, J. Matsui, F. Budin, Z. Liu, G. Gerig, H. J. Johnson, M. Styner, DTIPrep:
Quality control of diffusion-weighted images. Front. Neuroinform. 8, 4 (2014).
98. I. Cernak, J. Savic, D. Ignjatovic, M. Jevtic, Blast injury from explosive munitions. J. Trauma
47, 96–103; discussion 103–104 (1999).
99. J. S. Meabon, A. Lee, K. D. Meeker, L. M. Bekris, R. K. Fujimura, C.-E. Yu, G. S. Watson, D. V. Pow,
I. R. Sweet, D. G. Cook, Differential expression of the glutamate transporter GLT-1 in pancreas.
J. Histochem. Cytochem. 60, 139–151 (2012).
100. N. W. Dunham, T. S. Miya, A note on a simple apparatus for detecting neurological deficit
in rats and mice. J. Am. Pharm. Assoc. Am. Pharm. Assoc. 46, 208–209 (1957).
101. B. J. Jones, D. J. Roberts, The quantitative measurement of motor inco-ordination in naive
mice using an accelerating rotarod. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 20, 302–304 (1968).
Funding: This work was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Research
and Development Medical Research Service (D.G.C. and B.C.K.); VA Rehabilitation Research &
Development Service (E.R.P.); University of Washington Friends of Alzheimer’s Research (D.G.C.
and E.R.P.); University of Washington Royalty Research Fund (D.G.C.); Northwest Network Mental
Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center (J.S.M., B.R.H., K.F.P., E.C.P., M.A.R., and E.R.P.);
Office of Academic Affiliations Advanced Fellowship Program Mental Illness Research and
Treatment, Department of Veterans Affairs (B.R.H.); NIH T32 AG000258 (J.S.M.); and VA Clinical
Science R&D Career Development Award Program #CX00516 (K.F.P.). Author contributions: J.S.M.
and B.R.H. conducted blast procedures, biochemistry experiments, and microscopy. K.D.M.
conducted biochemistry experiments. J.S.M., B.R.H., D.J.C., T.L.R., S.M., G.L., E.C.P., M.A.R., E.R.P.,
and D.G.C. contributed to study design. J.S.M., D.J.C., E.R.P., G.L., E.R.P., M.A.R., and D.G.C. performed
data analysis and data interpretation. J.S.M., D.J.C., T.L.R., K.F.P., G.L., B.C.K., E.C.P., M.A.R., E.R.P.,
and D.G.C. drafted the manuscript and/or edited it critically for important intellectual content.
Competing interests: J.S.M. is chief operations officer of Neurogenix Pharmaceuticals. The
other authors declare no competing interests.
Submitted 2 March 2015
Accepted 17 December 2015
Published 13 January 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa9585
Citation: J. S. Meabon, B. R. Huber, D. J. Cross, T. L. Richards, S. Minoshima, K. F. Pagulayan,
G. Li, K. D. Meeker, B. C. Kraemer, E. C. Petrie, M. A. Raskind, E. R. Peskind, D. G. Cook, Repetitive
blast exposure in mice and combat veterans causes persistent cerebellar dysfunction. Sci.
Transl. Med. 8, 321ra6 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
13 January 2016
Vol 8 Issue 321 321ra6
15
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 dysfunction
Repetitive blast exposure in mice and combat veterans causes persistent cerebellar
Ge Li, Kole D. Meeker, Brian C. Kraemer, Eric C. Petrie, Murray A. Raskind, Elaine R. Peskind and David G. Cook
James S. Meabon, Bertrand R. Huber, Donna J. Cross, Todd L. Richards, Satoshi Minoshima, Kathleen F. Pagulayan,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa9585
, 321ra6321ra6.
8
Sci Transl Med 
veterans.
correspond to abnormal brain imaging findings obtained in similar cerebellar regions in blast-exposed combat
integrating sensory information and movement, is injured by blast exposure in mice in specific areas that 
 report that the cerebellum, a brain structure important for
et al.
correspond to humans with mild TBI. Meabon 
causes persistent brain injuries. There is also limited insight into how blast-induced brain injuries in animal models
Afghanistan. Most of these TBIs are blast-related. Currently, there is limited understanding of how mild blast 
Mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) is often referred to as the ''signature injury'' of the wars in Iraq and
The cerebellum is vulnerable to blast injury in mice and combat veterans
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/321/321ra6
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/01/11/8.321.321ra6.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/352/6288/881.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/321/321ra6#BIBL
This article cites 97 articles, 6 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
