 R E V I E W A R T I C L E
Pathogenesis and management of tendinopathies in sports
medicine
M. P. Mead1 | J. P. Gumucio1,2 | T. M. Awan1 | C. L. Mendias1,2
| K. B. Sugg1,2,3
1Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Section of Plastic & Reconstructive
Surgery, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
2Departments of Molecular & Integrative
Physiology, Section of Plastic &
Reconstructive Surgery, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA
3Departments of Surgery, Section of
Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery,
University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Correspondence
Kristoffer B. Sugg, Department of
Surgery, Section of Plastic &
Reconstructive Surgery, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA.
Email: krisugg@med.umich.edu
Funding information
National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Grant/
Award Number: F31-AR065931, F32-
AR067086, R01-AR063649
Tendinopathy is a major clinical problem in sports medicine and is often diffi-
cult to treat. Traditional therapeutic approaches have focused on reducing
inflammation, yet research suggests that little to no inflammation is present in
the tendons that fail to heal. The purpose of this review was to evaluate the
effectiveness of the available treatment options for tendinopathy and to inform
best clinical practices. A comprehensive search of electronic databases (PubMed,
Google Scholar, and Web of Science) was conducted to identify relevant studies
through June 2016. Studies were deemed relevant if they were published in
English and contained original research on the management of tendinopathy in
humans. Studies varied in methodological quality and were often limited by
small sample size and lack of sufficient control groups. Critical evaluation of
the literature suggests that physical therapy with or without eccentric exercise
should be considered a first-line treatment. Corticosteroids and non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs provide short-term symptomatic relief, but long-term
efficacy has not been demonstrated. Inconsistent results do not support the rou-
tine use of prolotherapy, platelet-rich plasma injections, and topical nitric oxide
patches. Operative intervention should be reserved until conservative measures
fail or an obvious operative lesion is present. While numerous therapeutic
modalities exist for tendinopathy in the athlete, the ideal treatment protocol has
not been clearly defined. The development of new targeted therapies for
tendinopathy is likely to follow a greater understanding of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms that underlie its pathogenesis.
K E Y W O R D S
tendinitis, tendinopathy, tendinosis, tendon injury, wound healing
1
|
INTRODUCTION
Tendinopathy is a frequent and difficult-to-treat clinical
problem in athletes and invariably leads to a negative
impact on sport performance. It is often considered a fail-
ure of damaged matrix proteins within the tendon to prop-
erly heal, but the exact etiology remains largely unknown.
Hallmark findings of this disorder include localized pain,
swelling, and reduced strength and performance of the
affected tendon. While frequently thought to be associated
with increasing age and participation in sports, tendinopa-
thy is routinely diagnosed in patients of all ages and levels
of physical activity.1 Management of this painful condition
can be particularly challenging, and recovery is usually
slow.2 This is especially true for athletes where higher
levels of physical activity and minimal rest times make it
difficult to return to sports and can lead to re-injury.
Numerous treatment options exist for tendinopathy, but
overall, there is a lack of consensus in the literature regard-
ing their efficacy. Indeed, some tendinopathies respond to
Accepted: 11 December 2017
DOI: 10.1002/tsm2.6
Transl Sports Med. 2018;1:5–13.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/tsm2
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd |
5
 simple interventions, while others are refractory to nearly
all forms of treatment. A greater understanding of the cellu-
lar and molecular mechanisms that underlie the pathogene-
sis of tendinopathy will likely facilitate the discovery of
new targeted therapies to enhance tendon healing and
repair.
The objective of this review was to first explore the
normal structure and function of tendon followed by an
overview of tendinopathy, including its classification, epi-
demiology, and the risk factors associated with its develop-
ment. The remainder of this review will then provide a
cogent and practical approach to the management of
tendinopathy with a focus on both non-operative and oper-
ative therapeutic interventions.
2
|
TENDON STRUCTURE AND
CELL BIOLOGY
2.1 | Macroscopic overview of tendon
Tendons connect skeletal muscle to bone and transmit
force generated by muscular contraction to permit move-
ment. They are considered an extension of the skeletal
muscle extracellular matrix (ECM) and terminate on bone
at the enthesis.3 Tendons vary in size and shape with short,
thick tendons originating from the powerful muscle groups
of the proximal limb, while long, thin tendons execute fine
movements of the digits.4 Smooth and efficient motion
requires tendon gliding that is not restricted by adjacent
tissue. For that reason, synovial sheaths form a closed sys-
tem around many tendons to provide lubrication and to
cushion the tendon as it stretches and relaxes.3 Tendons
that lack true synovial sheaths are instead surrounded by a
loose, fatty, and vascularized peritendinous tissue, which
allows for free excursion of the tendon within its fascial
compartment.4
The mechanical properties of tendon are determined by
the macromolecular structural organization and biochemical
composition of the ECM.5 When a tendon is loaded, the
extent of tissue deformation is dependent on the rate at
which the load is applied.6 At low strain rates, tendons
deform more and absorb more energy, while at high strain
rates, tendons deform less, become stiffer, and are more
effective at carrying mechanical load.7 During physical
activity, tendons store elastic energy as they are stretched
and release that energy as they shorten. As tendons are
stretched, the non-covalent bonds between amino acid resi-
dues are broken which gives off energy in the form of
heat.6 In situations of high-frequency cyclical stretching,
certain regions within tendon may not be able to efficiently
dissipate this heat.6 This potentially causes an irreversible
denaturing of matrix proteins and can lead to tendinopathy
or acute tendon rupture.8 In addition to the rate at which
tendons are stretched, the degree to which tendons are
stretched can also contribute to injury. Strains <4% gener-
ally allow the tendon to return to its original length once
the load is removed, but above 4% strain the collagen
fibers can begin to fail, and beyond 8% strain the tendon is
susceptible to rupture.2,4 Lastly, 2 additional features that
highlight the viscoelastic properties of tendon are creep and
stress relaxation. Creep refers to time-dependent elongation
of the tendon while under constant load, whereas stress
relaxation is a time-dependent decline in the load required
to maintain constant elongation of the tendon.9
2.2 | Microscopic overview of tendon
Tendon is a hypocellular tissue composed of elongated
fibroblasts interspersed between a complex network of
matrix proteins. The organizational pattern of tendon clo-
sely resembles that of skeletal muscle with distinct connec-
tive tissue layers running parallel to its longitudinal axis.4
The smallest functional unit of tendon is the collagen fibril.
Collagen fibrils combine to form larger collagen fibers, and
then, groups of these fibers coalesce into tendon fascicles.
Tendon fascicles are enveloped by the endotenon, which is
a delicate reticular network of connective tissue supporting
a rich supply of vascular, lymphatic, and neural channels.4
The tendon proper is the final structure formed by numer-
ous tendon fascicles held together by a loose epithelial-like
tissue layer called the epitenon.10 The epitenon contains
larger blood vessels and nerves and is a potential source of
new tendon fibroblasts during periods of tendon growth
and repair.11
During the course of embryonic development, tendons
arise from a separate pool of progenitor cells than other
limb tissues, including skeletal muscle, cartilage, and
bone.12 Tendon fibroblasts are rod- or spindle-shaped cells
with long cytoplasmic extensions known as fibripositors,
whose primary function is to synthesize and secrete colla-
gen fibrils in parallel with the direction of load across the
long axis of the tendon.13 Ippolito and colleagues originally
described 2 different populations of tendon fibroblasts,
namely immature proliferating tenoblasts and terminally
differentiated tenocytes.14 As individuals approach adult-
hood, the amount of tenoblasts decrease while terminally
differentiated tenocytes become the most abundant cell
population in tendon.15 The origin and identity of the stem
cell population within tendon that gives rise to tenocytes is
not fully understood. However, pericytes, which are a pop-
ulation of stem cells that exist in close proximity to the
vasculature,
appear
to
be
attractive
candidates.16
The
remaining cells within tendon mostly consist of endothelial
and smooth muscle cells of the tendon vasculature, syn-
ovial cells within the tendon sheath, and chondrocytes at
the enthesis.2
6 |
MEAD ET AL.
 The main structural protein of tendon is type I collagen,
which accounts for 65%-80% of the tendon dry weight.5
Type I collagen is first synthesized as a procollagen mole-
cule within the tendon fibroblast and typically consists of 2
a1 and 1 a2 subunits. Procollagen is then secreted from
the cell into the tendon ECM where its amino- and car-
boxy-terminal ends are cleaved to produce tropocollagen.
As the final step in the collagen synthesis pathway, multi-
ple tropocollagen molecules are cross-linked resulting in
the formation of the mature collagen fibril. Type I and III
collagens are part of the fibrillar collagen family and play
an important role in the longitudinal transmission of force
during locomotion.3 Compared to type I collagen, type III
collagen tends to be smaller in diameter, less organized,
and has decreased tensile strength.17 Type III collagen is
often found at increased levels in aged tendon or at the
rupture sites of highly stressed tendons.18 Type V collagen
is also a fibrillar collagen, but is present in lesser quantities
and regulates the initiation of collagen fibril assembly.19 In
addition to the fibrillar collagens, many other types of col-
lagen can be found in tendon. These collagens, such as the
network type IV and VI collagens, help to transmit forces
laterally between cells and provide structural support for
vascular and lymphatic tissue in the endotenon and epite-
non.3 Mice deficient in type VI collagen display mechani-
cally weak tendons with an increase in the number of
small and aberrant collagen fibrils, indicating that type VI
collagen also facilitates collagen fibril organization.20 Aside
from collagen, a small but significant portion of the tendon
structure in humans is formed by elastin.4 While little is
known about its exact function, elastin tends to be local-
ized to the interfascicular matrix and likely contributes to
sliding between adjacent tendon fascicles and recoil after
mechanical loading.21 Finally, intermixed with the collagen
and non-collagen proteins of the tendon ECM is the gelati-
nous ground substance composed of proteoglycans (PGs)
and glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). PGs and GAGs have a
fixed net negative charge that allows them to retain water,
which in turn helps the tendon to dissipate heat into the
surrounding tissues as well as resist high compressive and
tensile forces during exercise.22
In humans, the core of the Achilles tendon will grow
until the age of 17, after which protein synthesis and
matrix turnover begin to decline.23 This is supported by
animal studies in rodents that demonstrate tendon growth
mostly occurs in an outward direction from the epite-
non.15,16 However, the lack of a discernible endotenon in
rodents makes it difficult to rule out the possibility of
intrafascicular growth between tendon fascicles. Together,
these findings suggest that the lack of tissue renewal in the
core of adult tendon tissue may contribute to the protracted
course that is characteristic of many tendinopathies, and
perhaps
cell-based
therapies
that
selectively
utilize
a
fraction of cells from those connective tissue layers known
to be enriched in tendon stem cells may enhance the regen-
eration of injured tendon tissue.
3
|
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND
PATHOGENESIS OF TENDINOPATHY
Tendon injuries account for 30%-50% of all injuries in
sports, and the risk of these injuries is increasing as a lar-
ger proportion of younger and older age groups participate
in recreational activities.1 Greater demands have been
placed on athletic performance, requiring that athletes train
longer, harder, and more often. This type of chronic over-
use is associated with an increased risk of developing
tendinopathy.
For
example,
Olympic
runners
had
an
increased
incidence of Achilles
tendinopathy
with
an
adjusted odds ratio of 31.2 compared with age-matched
controls.24 In addition to the frequency of overuse, activi-
ties that prolong the loading of tendons without adequate
rest in between sessions also contribute to the risk of devel-
oping tendinopathy.25 It has been demonstrated that total
hours spent practicing sports is a known risk factor for
developing patellar tendinopathy in elite soccer players.26
Understanding the pathogenesis of tendinopathy has
been hindered by a lack of consistent terminology. Tradi-
tionally, the term tendinitis referred to symptomatic tendons
associated with chronic pain and implied an element of
inflammation in its basic etiology, especially in the initial
phases of the disease process.27 Repetitive microtrauma
from overload or overuse can lead to collagen fibril rupture
and activation of the innate immune system.27 However,
continued research has demonstrated little to no biochemi-
cal or histological evidence of inflammation in biopsies
from patients with chronic tendinopathy.28 Given the uncer-
tainty surrounding the role of inflammation in the develop-
ment of tendon disorders, we prefer to use the term
tendinopathy to describe an ongoing process of degenera-
tion and failed regeneration of the tendon ECM in response
to injury or disease. In clinical practice, tendinopathy refers
to a spectrum of pathologies from intratendinous degenera-
tive lesions that are a source of chronic pain, to sponta-
neous tendon rupture as a result of mechanical attrition.
Several features are characteristic of tendinopathy at the
cellular level (Figure 1). Compared to healthy tendons,
tendinopathic tendons have marked disorganization and
separation of collagen fibrils with a concomitant increase
in mucoid ground substance.29 Collagen fibril diameter is
more variable, and an increased content of type III collagen
contributes to mechanical weakness of the diseased ten-
don.18 Tendon fibroblasts adopt a rounded rather than flat-
tened appearance and tend to be unevenly distributed
throughout
the
tissue.
Another
hallmark
feature
of
MEAD ET AL.
|
7
 tendinopathy is neovascularization with budding capillaries
invading the tendon from the paratenon.29 These capillaries
are usually accompanied by the ingrowth of sensory nerve
fibers that release nociceptive substances and trigger pain.30
Finally, there is absence of an inflammatory cell infiltrate
in
the
tendon
proper,
although
inflammation
can
be
observed within the peritendinous tissue.29
4
|
NON-OPERATIVE
MANAGEMENT OF TENDINOPATHY
The management of tendinopathy can vary based on the
history and extent of the condition, the severity of symp-
toms, and the physical demands and activity level of an
athlete. Conservative measures remain the mainstay of
treatment for most tendinopathies, but operative interven-
tion is available for recalcitrant cases, or for athletes with
obvious operative lesions (Table 1).
4.1 | Eccentric exercises
Eccentric exercises, defined as exercises in which the mus-
cle and tendon lengthen while under tension, have been
well studied and long utilized as a form of treatment in the
management
of
tendinopathies.31
Several
studies
have
demonstrated that eccentric exercises can improve patient-
reported outcomes with favorable changes in strength, clin-
ical imaging, and biochemical and histological markers of
ECM remodeling.32,33 While the mechanisms are not com-
pletely understood at the molecular level, eccentric exer-
cises result in the production of new type I collagen and
increase the density of collagen fibrils.34 Furthermore,
mechanical loading induces the expression of genes such
as scleraxis and tenomodulin that are associated with the
accumulation of new tenocytes and the production of
healthy ECM.15,16 A particular form of eccentric exercise,
termed “heavy slow resistance” training, uses heavy weight
with slow repetition and has been notably effective for the
treatment of patellar tendinopathy.33 The combined effi-
cacy of eccentric training from clinical research studies,
the low cost of therapy, and the compelling evidence of
improved ECM quality at the cellular and molecular levels
have resulted in eccentric exercises being frequently con-
sidered as a first-line therapy in the management of
tendinopathy.
4.2 | Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which function to
block the production of prostaglandins from the cyclooxy-
genase enzymes, remain a popular choice for the manage-
ment of tendinopathies. Prostaglandins are physiologically
active lipid molecules derived from arachidonic acid that
play an important role in the development of acute inflam-
mation. Accordingly, both the oral and topical delivery of
NSAIDs are generally effective as short-term analgesics for
these painful conditions.35,36 While useful for reducing pain
and inflammation, NSAIDs do not appear to alter the
course of the disease process, which is consistent with the
lack of an inflammatory phenotype in tendinopathic ten-
dons.29,37 Furthermore, the drugs likely do not accumulate
in sufficient quantities within the tendon tissue to change
gene transcription.38 There is also some evidence to sug-
gest that NSAIDs may negatively impact tendon healing by
impairing the proliferation and differentiation of tenocytes,
as well as promoting the formation of adipocytes from
mesenchymal stem cells.39,40 In summary, NSAIDs may
have utility in the alleviation of acute pain, but emerging
evidence indicates no effect, or potential deleterious effects
of NSAIDs, in the management of tendinopathy.
FIGURE 1
Graphical representation of
the morphological features in healthy
tendon and tendinopathy. Modified from
Scott et al64
8 |
MEAD ET AL.
 4.3 | Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids are synthetic analogues of a particular class of
steroid hormones produced by the adrenal cortex. These
potent anti-inflammatory molecules have been evaluated
extensively in many clinical trials of patients with tendinopa-
thies.41,42 Even though the inflammatory process appears to
play little to no role in the pathogenesis of tendinopathy, sev-
eral studies have demonstrated that corticosteroid therapy
often significantly improves patient outcomes in the short
term by providing pain relief and enhancing function.43 The
positive effect of corticosteroids on pain and function is
thought to occur due to a reduction in inflammation within the
peritendinous tissue.33 However, there exists the potential risk
of iatrogenic tendon rupture and atrophy of the surrounding
soft tissues with repeated corticosteroid use.44 A 2015
Cochrane Review investigating the efficacy of injection thera-
pies including corticosteroids for the treatment of painful
Achilles tendons also found that there is insufficient evidence
to support the routine use of injection therapies in patients
with Achilles tendinopathy.45 While corticosteroids have been
shown to reduce pain in many tendon disorders, clinicians
should be careful against the widespread use of corticosteroids
in the management of tendinopathy, due to the lack of long-
term benefits and the potential risk of adverse effects.
4.4 | Nitric oxide
Nitric oxide therapies have gained popularity within recent
years for the management of tendinopathies.46 The most
common approach involves the transdermal delivery of nitro-
glycerin to the involved area where it is converted into bioac-
tive nitric oxide by endogenous nitric oxide synthase.46 At
the cellular and molecular levels, nitric oxide increases teno-
cyte proliferation and collagen synthesis, while the inhibition
of nitric oxide synthase decreases the cross-sectional area of
healing tendons and reduces the amount of mechanical load
required for tendon failure.47 There have been several ran-
domized controlled trials to evaluate the effectiveness of
topical nitroglycerin in patients with tendinopathy, but have
yielded conflicting results.48,49 Two meta-analyses have con-
cluded that while additional studies need to be performed,
there is evidence to support the use of low-dose nitroglycerin
patches for the short-term relief of pain associated with
tendinopathy.50,51 Studies of the long-term efficacy of nitro-
glycerin patches, however, have generally shown marginal to
no improvement in pain and function.52 Side effects of nitro-
glycerin patches have also been reported, including head-
ache, rash, facial flushing, and sweating.49 These potential
side effects along with the contradictory short-term results
and the lack of long-term efficacy have limited the
TABLE 1
Summary of non-operative and operative therapeutic interventions for the management of tendinopathy
Treatment
Proposed mechanism
Outcome
Non-operative
Eccentric exercises
Promotion of tissue reorganization with
improved changes in tendon structure and
mechanical properties31,34
Positive outcomes including reduced pain,
improved strength, and decreased time to return to sport32,33
NSAIDs
Reduced pain and inflammation
during tendon healing37
Positive short-term outcomes for analgesia35,36; no
significant long-term benefits29,37; some evidence to
support that NSAIDs have potential to inhibit normal
tendon healing39,40
Corticosteroids
Reduced pain and inflammation
within the peritendinous tissue33
Positive short-term outcomes for analgesia and
functional improvement33,41–43; limited or no long-term
benefits45; potential risk of complications44
Nitric oxide
Increased tenocyte proliferation
and collagen synthesis47
Unclear short-term outcomes50,51; no significant long-term
benefits52
Prolotherapy
Cellular and tissue irritation to
promote inflammation53
Insufficient studies to demonstrate short- or
long-term benefits54,55
PRP
Increased growth factors and cytokines
at the side of tendon healing56
Insufficient studies to demonstrate short- or
long-term benefits57,58
Operative
Percutaneous
longitudinal tenotomy
Promotion of tissue regeneration
and angiogenesis60
Positive long-term outcomes with minimal complications60
Percutaneous
ultrasonic
microtenotomy
Removal of pathological tissue and
sensory nerve fiber destruction62
Reduced pain symptoms at 3 y63
NSAIDs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PRP, platelet-rich plasma.
MEAD ET AL.
|
9
 enthusiasm for the use of nitroglycerin patches as a first-line
therapy in the management of tendinopathy.
4.5 | Prolotherapy
Prolotherapy refers to the injection of an irritant solution
within or around a tendinopathic tendon.53 The irritant effect
is thought to promote inflammation and trigger a regenerative
response in order to heal the chronically degraded ECM that
is characteristic of patients with tendinopathy. There is con-
siderable variability in the type and concentration of irritant
solution that can be injected, although most solutions contain
either hyperosmolar dextrose, phenol-glycerin-glucose, or
sodium morrhuate. While the mechanism of action is not
completely understood, hyperosmolar dextrose is thought to
dehydrate cells until they rupture by creating a large osmotic
gradient, phenol-glycerin-glucose causes localized cellular
and tissue irritation, and sodium morrhuate functions as a
chemoattractant for inflammatory cells and other media-
tors.53 These irritant solutions can also sclerose small blood
vessels and nociceptive neurons that are enriched in tendino-
pathic tendons. A small number of clinical studies have eval-
uated the effectiveness of prolotherapy in patients with
tendinopathy, but most of these studies are limited by either
small sample size or lack of appropriate controls.54,55 There-
fore, while prolotherapy is a relatively safe and low-cost
treatment option, there is a need for larger randomized con-
trolled trials to more rigorously assess the use of prolotherapy
as a first-line therapy in the management of tendinopathy.
4.6 | Platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
Platelet-rich plasma is an autologous blood product consist-
ing of plasma enriched with a concentration of platelets that
is greater than that of whole blood, typically at least 4 times
the baseline value.56 PRP has grown in popularity within
recent years as a way to accelerate healing in a variety of
musculo-skeletal conditions, and numerous potential appli-
cations have been explored, including the use of PRP as a
treatment option for tendinopathy. Platelets are thought to
be particularly important for injured tissues to properly heal,
as they are enriched with multiple growth factors and
cytokines, including transforming growth factor beta (TGF-
b), interleukins (ILs), fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), pla-
telet-derived growth factors (PDGFs), vascular endothelial
growth factors (VEGFs), connective tissue growth factor
(CTGF), and others.56 These proteins are thought to
enhance tissue healing when delivered locally.2 However,
recent work using wide-scale genome profiling and bioin-
formatics has reported PRP to work through inducing local
inflammation in tissue.56
There have been several clinical studies to explore the
effectiveness of PRP in treating patients with tendinopathy,
but have produced mixed results.57,58 Some of the most
encouraging results have come in the treatment of lateral
epicondylitis, with PRP demonstrating a near twofold
improvement in outcomes compared to corticosteroids.57 A
recent meta-analysis concluded that PRP injections did not
provide significantly greater relief compared to placebo or
dry needling for the treatment of tendinopathy at 6 months
of follow-up, although there was marginal improvement in
patients suffering from rotator cuff tendinopathy.59 Larger
clinical studies, conducted on multiple different anatomical
locations, are necessary to better inform the evidence-based
use of PRP in the management of tendinopathy.
5
|
OPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF
TENDINOPATHY
Nearly a third of all patients with tendinopathy fail non-
operative management.1 For these patients, they either alter
or reduce their activity level and sport participation, or seek
operative treatments. The goal of operative management for
patients with tendinopathy is to either remove the patholog-
ical areas of tendon or to induce low-grade trauma to the
degenerated tendon in an effort to restart the healing
response, similar to prolotherapy or PRP. Several tech-
niques are outlined below.
5.1 | Percutaneous longitudinal tenotomy
Percutaneous longitudinal tenotomy is a procedure in which
the surgeon introduces 1 or multiple stab incisions parallel
to the longitudinal axis of the tendon. This has been shown
to promote tissue regeneration, increase blood flow, and
create a local environment more suitable for healing.60 This
is a relatively simple procedure, which can be performed on
an outpatient basis with the use of local anesthesia.61 Ultra-
sound is used to identify the pathogenic area and helps with
placement of the stab incisions. Complications from percu-
taneous longitudinal tenotomies are reported to be minimal
and do not lead to long-term morbidity.61
5.2 | Percutaneous ultrasonic microtenotomy
Percutaneous
ultrasonic
microtenotomy
has
recently
become available as a method to treat tendinopathy. Using
ultrasonic energy, this minimally invasive procedure is able
to debride pathologic tissue through a needlelike device
placed within the tendon. In a case series of 20 patients
with recalcitrant lateral epicondylitis, percutaneous ultra-
sonic microtenotomy demonstrated improvement in pain
and function in 95% of patients treated at 1 year.62 A fol-
low-up on the same patient population demonstrated sus-
tained
clinical
efficacy
at
3 years,
with
all
patients
10 |
MEAD ET AL.
 demonstrating a reduction in tendon thickness and 95%
exhibiting a resolution of tendon hypervascularity.63 While
studies evaluating the effectiveness of percutaneous ultra-
sonic microtenotomy have largely been limited to lateral
epicondylitis, this treatment has the potential to be used for
other refractory cases of tendinopathy.
6
|
CONCLUSIONS
Despite their prevalence, tendon disorders remain difficult
to treat. While numerous therapeutic modalities exist for
tendinopathy in the athlete, the ideal treatment protocol has
not been clearly defined. New insights into the pathophysi-
ology of these diseases are constantly evolving, and more
sophisticated treatment strategies continue to emerge. The
development of new targeted therapies for tendinopathy is
likely to follow a greater understanding of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms that underlie its pathogenesis. At
the moment, non-operative management is the cornerstone
of therapy. Minimally invasive procedures have shown
early promising results, especially in patients with recalci-
trant tendinopathy, but high-quality randomized controlled
trials are needed before these procedures can be recom-
mended for routine use.
7
|
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS
• Rehabilitation, with a focus on eccentric training, should
be a first-line therapy in the treatment of painful tendon
disorders.
• NSAIDs can be used for short-term symptomatic relief.
However, prolonged use should be avoided due to the risk
of complications and the lack of proven long-term benefit.
• Second-line therapies include prolotherapy, PRP injec-
tions, and topical nitric oxide patches. As a group, the
data for these are inconclusive, but their risks are low
and therefore can be recommended for athletes that fail
first-line treatment.
• Corticosteroids should be used with caution in the treat-
ment of painful tendon disorders, as the underlying
cause likely does not involve inflammatory changes and
their use may increase the risk of spontaneous tendon
rupture.
• Surgery should only be pursued when conservative mea-
sures have failed or an obvious pathologic lesion is pre-
sent within the tendon.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors have no financial interest to declare in relation
to the content of this article. This work was supported by
NIH Grants R01-AR063649, F31-AR065931, and F32-
AR067086.
ORCID
C. L. Mendias
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2384-0171
K. B. Sugg
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0301-4083
REFERENCES
1. Ackermann PW, Renstrom P. Tendinopathy in sport. Sports
Health. 2012;4:193-201.
2. Sharma P, Maffulli N. Tendon injury and tendinopathy: healing
and repair. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005;87:187-202.
3. Davis ME, Gumucio JP, Sugg KB, et al. MMP inhibition as a
potential method to augment the healing of skeletal muscle and
tendon extracellular matrix. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013;115:884-
891.
4. Kannus P. Structure of the tendon connective tissue. Scand J
Med Sci Sports. 2000;10:312-320.
5. Kjaer M. Role of extracellular matrix in adaptation of tendon and
skeletal muscle to mechanical loading. Physiol Rev. 2004;84:649-
698.
6. Paxton JZ, Baar K. Tendon mechanics: the argument heats up.
J Appl Physiol (1985). 2007;103:423-424.
7. Wang JHC. Mechanobiology of tendon. J Biomech. 2006;39:
1563-1582.
8. Patterson-Kane JC, Becker DL, Rich T. The pathogenesis of ten-
don microdamage in athletes: the horse as a natural model for
basic cellular research. J Comp Pathol. 2012;147:227-247.
9. Magnusson SP, Hansen P, Kjaer M. Tendon properties in relation
to muscular activity and physical training. Scand J Med Sci
Sports. 2003;13:211-223.
10. Taylor SH, Al-Youha S, Van Agtmael T, et al. Tendon is cov-
ered by a basement membrane epithelium that is required for cell
retention and the prevention of adhesion formation. PLoS One.
2011;6:e16337.
11. Sugg KB, Lubardic J, Gumucio JP, et al. Changes in macrophage
phenotype and induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
genes following acute Achilles tenotomy and repair. J Orthop
Res. 2014;32:944-951.
12. Schweitzer R, Zelzer E, Volk T. Connecting muscles to tendons:
tendons and musculoskeletal development in flies and vertebrates.
Development. 2010;137:2807-2817.
13. Canty EG, Lu Y, Meadows RS, et al. Coalignment of plasma
membrane channels and protrusions (fibripositors) specifies the
parallelism of tendon. J Cell Biol. 2004;165:553-563.
14. Ippolito E, Natali PG, Postacchini F, et al. Morphological,
immunochemical, and biochemical study of rabbit achilles tendon
at various ages. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1980;62:583-598.
15. Gumucio JP, Phan AC, Ruehlmann DG, et al. Synergist ablation
induces rapid tendon growth through the synthesis of a neotendon
matrix. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014;117:1287-1291.
16. Schwartz AJ, Sarver DC, Sugg KB, et al. p38 MAPK signaling
in postnatal tendon growth and remodeling. PLoS One. 2015;10:
e0120044.
17. Birk DE, Mayne R. Localization of collagen types I, III and V
during tendon development. Changes in collagen types I and III
MEAD ET AL.
|
11
 are correlated with changes in fibril diameter. Eur J Cell Biol.
1997;72:352-361.
18. Eriksen HA, Pajala A, Leppilahti J, et al. Increased content of
type III collagen at the rupture site of human Achilles tendon.
J Orthop Res. 2002;20:1352-1357.
19. Wenstrup RJ, Florer JB, Brunskill EW, et al. Type V collagen
controls the initiation of collagen fibril assembly. J Biol Chem.
2004;279:53331-53337.
20. Izu Y, Ansorge HL, Zhang G, et al. Dysfunctional tendon colla-
gen fibrillogenesis
in collagen VI null mice. Matrix Biol.
2011;30:53-61.
21. Screen HR, Berk DE, Kadler KE, et al. Tendon functional extra-
cellular matrix. J Orthop Res. 2015;33:793-799.
22. Yoon JH, Halper J. Tendon proteoglycans: biochemistry and
function. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2005;5:22-34.
23. Heinemeier KM, Schjerling P, Heinemeier J, et al. Lack of tissue
renewal in human adult Achilles tendon is revealed by nuclear
bomb (14)C. FASEB J. 2013;27:2074-2079.
24. Kujala UM, Sarna S, Kaprio J. Cumulative incidence of achilles
tendon rupture and tendinopathy in male former elite athletes.
Clin J Sport Med. 2005;15:133-135.
25. Cook JL, Purdam CR. Is tendon pathology a continuum? A
pathology model to explain the clinical presentation of load-
induced tendinopathy. Br J Sports Med. 2009;43:409-416.
26. H€
agglund M, Zwerver J, Ekstrand J. Epidemiology of patellar
tendinopathy in elite male soccer players. Am J Sports Med.
2011;39:1906-1911.
27. Millar NL, Hueber AJ, Reilly JH, et al. Inflammation is present
in early human tendinopathy. Am J Sports Med. 2010;38:2085-
2091.
28. Alfredson H, Forsgren S, Thorsen K, et al. In vivo microdialysis
and immunohistochemical analyses of tendon tissue demonstrated
high amounts of free glutamate and glutamate NMDAR1 recep-
tors, but no signs of inflammation, in Jumper’s knee. J Orthop
Res. 2001;19:881-886.
29. Khan KM. Histopathology of common tendinopathies. Update and
implications for clinical management. Sports Med. 1999;27:393-
408.
30. Schubert T, Weidler C, Lerch K, et al. Achilles tendinosis is
associated with sprouting of substance P positive nerve fibres.
Ann Rheum Dis. 2005;64:1083-1086.
31. Lorenz D, Reiman M. The role and implementation of eccentric
training in athletic rehabilitation: tendinopathy, hamstring strains,
and acl reconstruction. Int J Sports Phys Ther. 2011;6:27-44.
32. Gardin A, Movin T, Svensson L, et al. The long-term clinical
and MRI results following eccentric calf muscle training in
chronic Achilles tendinosis. Skeletal Radiol. 2010;39:435-442.
33. Kongsgaard M, Kovanen V, Aagaard P, et al. Corticosteroid
injections, eccentric decline squat training and heavy slow resis-
tance training in patellar tendinopathy. Scand J Med Sci Sports.
2009;19:790-802.
34. Langberg H, Ellingsgaard H, Madsen T, et al. Eccentric rehabili-
tation exercise increases peritendinous type I collagen synthesis
in humans with Achilles tendinosis. Scand J Med Sci Sports.
2007;17:61-66.
35. Mazieres B, Rouanet S, Guillon Y, et al. Topical ketoprofen
patch in the treatment of tendinitis: a randomized, double blind,
placebo controlled study. J Rheumatol. 2005;32:1563-1570.
36. Petri M, Hufman SL, Waser G, et al. Celecoxib effectively treats
patients with acute shoulder tendinitis/bursitis. J Rheumatol.
2004;31:1614-1620.
37. Magra M, Maffulli N. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs in
tendinopathy: friend or foe. Clin J Sport Med. 2006;16:1-3.
38. Heinemeier KM, Øhlenschlæger TF, Mikkelsen UR, et al. Effects
of anti-inflammatory (NSAID) treatment on human tendinopathic
tissue. J Appl Physiol. 2017;123:1397-1405.
39. Fredriksson M, Li Y, Stalman A, et al. Diclofenac and triamci-
nolone acetonide impair tenocytic differentiation and promote
adipocytic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. J Orthop
Surg Res. 2013;8:30.
40. Zhang Y, Wang X, Qiu Y, et al. Effect of indomethacin and
lactoferrin on human tenocyte proliferation and collagen forma-
tion in vitro. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014;454:301-307.
41. Smidt N, van der Windt DA, Assendelft WJ, et al. Corticosteroid
injections, physiotherapy, or a wait-and-see policy for lateral epi-
condylitis: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;359:657-
662.
42. Tonks JH, Pai SK, Murali SR. Steroid injection therapy is the
best conservative treatment for lateral epicondylitis: a prospective
randomised controlled trial. Int J Clin Pract. 2007;61:240-246.
43. Smidt N, Assendelft WJ, van der Windt DA, et al. Corticosteroid
injections for lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review. Pain.
2002;96:23-40.
44. Drug-Induced
KK,
Disorders
T.
Adv
Exp
Med
Biol.
2016;920:229-238.
45. Kearney RS, Parsons N, Metcalfe D, et al. Injection therapies for
Achilles tendinopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;(5):
CD010960.
46. Andres B, Murrell GC. Treatment of tendinopathy: what works,
what does not, and what is on the horizon. Clin Orthop Relat
Res. 2008;466:1539-1554.
47. Murrell GA, Szabo C, Hannafin JA, et al. Modulation of tendon
healing by nitric oxide. Inflamm Res. 1997;46:19-27.
48. Berrazueta JR, Losada A, Poveda J, et al. Successful treatment of
shoulder pain syndrome due to supraspinatus tendinitis with trans-
dermal nitroglycerin. A double blind study. Pain. 1996;66:63-67.
49. Paoloni JA, Murrell GA, Burch RM, et al. Randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of a new topical glyceryl
trinitrate patch for chronic lateral epicondylosis. Br J Sports Med.
2009;43:299-302.
50. Gambito ED, Gonzalez-Suarez CB, Oquinena TI, et al. Evidence
on the effectiveness of topical nitroglycerin in the treatment of
tendinopathies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil. 2010;91:1291-1305.
51. Garrick JG. Topical nitroglycerin decreases pain intensity in daily
activities: a review. Clin J Sport Med. 2011;21:539-540.
52. Paoloni JA, Murrell GA. Three-year followup study of topical
glyceryl trinitrate treatment of chronic noninsertional Achilles
tendinopathy. Foot Ankle Int. 2007;28:1064-1068.
53. Distel LM, Best TM. Prolotherapy: a clinical review of its role in
treating chronic musculoskeletal pain. PM R. 2011;3(6 Suppl 1):
S78-S81.
54. Ryan M, Wong A, Taunton J. Favorable outcomes after sono-
graphically guided intratendinous injection of hyperosmolar dex-
trose for chronic insertional and midportion achilles tendinosis.
Am J Roentgenol. 2010;194:1047-1053.
12 |
MEAD ET AL.
 55. Scarpone M, Rabago DP, Zgierska A, et al. The efficacy of pro-
lotherapy for lateral epicondylosis: a pilot study. Clin J Sport
Med. 2008;18:248-254.
56. Hudgens JL, Sugg KB, Grekin JA, et al. Platelet-rich plasma acti-
vates proinflammatory signaling pathways and induces oxidative
stress in tendon fibroblasts. Am J Sports Med. 2016;44:1931-
1940.
57. Peerbooms JC, Sluimer J, Bruijn DJ, et al. Positive effect of an
autologous platelet concentrate in lateral epicondylitis in a dou-
ble-blind randomized controlled trial: platelet-rich plasma versus
corticosteroid injection with a 1-year follow-up. Am J Sports
Med. 2010;38:255-262.
58. Thanasas C, Papadimitriou G, Charalambidis C, et al. Platelet-
rich plasma versus autologous whole blood for the treatment of
chronic lateral elbow epicondylitis: a randomized controlled clini-
cal trial. Am J Sports Med. 2011;39:2130-2134.
59. Tsikopoulos K, Tsikopoulos I, Simeonidis E, et al. The clinical
impact of platelet-rich plasma on tendinopathy compared to pla-
cebo or dry needling injections: a meta-analysis. Phys Ther Sport.
2016;17:87-94.
60. Maffulli N, Testa V, Capasso G, et al. Results of percutaneous
longitudinal tenotomy for Achilles tendinopathy in middle- and
long-distance runners. Am J Sports Med. 1997;25:835-840.
61. Maffulli N, Longo UG, Denaro V. Novel approaches for the
management of tendinopathy. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2010;92:
2604-2613.
62. Koh JS, Mohan PC, Howe TS, et al. Fasciotomy and surgical
tenotomy for recalcitrant lateral elbow tendinopathy: early clinical
experience with a novel device for minimally invasive percuta-
neous microresection. Am J Sports Med. 2013;41:636-644.
63. Seng C, Mohan PC, Koh SB, et al. Ultrasonic percutaneous teno-
tomy for recalcitrant lateral elbow tendinopathy: sustainability
and sonographic progression at 3 years. Am J Sports Med.
2016;44:504-510.
64. Scott A, Huisman E, Khan K. Conservative treatment of chronic
Achilles tendinopathy. CMAJ. 2011;183:1159-1165.
How to cite this article: Mead MP, Gumucio JP,
Awan TM, Mendias CL, Sugg KB. Pathogenesis and
management of tendinopathies in sports medicine.
Transl Sports Med. 2018;1:5-13. https://doi.org/
10.1002/tsm2.6
MEAD ET AL.
|
13
