 372   ENDOCRINE PRACTICE Vol 23 No. 3 March 2017 
  
Copyright © 2017 AACE
 
 AACE/ACE Position Statement
ADIPOSITY-BASED CHRONIC DISEASE AS A NEW DIAGNOSTIC TERM: 
THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS AND 
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ENDOCRINOLOGY POSITION STATEMENT
Jeffrey I. Mechanick, MD, FACP, FACE, FACN, ECNU1; 
Daniel L. Hurley, MD, FACE2; W. Timothy Garvey, MD, FACE3
Submitted for publication November 27, 2016
Accepted for publication December 4, 2016
From the 1Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Bone Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; 2Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 3Department of Nutrition Sciences, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
Address correspondence to Dr. Jeffrey I. Mechanick; 1192 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10128.
E-mail: jeffreymechanick@gmail.com 
Published as a Rapid Electronic Article in Press at http://www.endocrinepractice.org on December 14, 2016. DOI:10.4158/EP161688.PS
To purchase reprints of this article, please visit: www.aace.com/reprints.
Copyright © 2017 AACE.
*A complete list of the Reviewers of the AACE/ACE Obesity Committee Reviewers can be found in the Acknowledgment.
This document represents the official position of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American 
College of Endocrinology. Where there were no randomized controlled trials or specific U.S. FDA labeling for issues 
in clinical practice, the participating clinical experts utilized their judgment and experience. Every effort was made to 
achieve consensus among the committee members. Position statements are meant to provide guidance, but they are not to be 
considered prescriptive for any individual patient and cannot replace the judgment of a clinician.
 ABCDs of Obesity, Endocr Pract. 2017;23(No. 3)  373 
Copyright © 2017 AACE
ABSTRACT
 
The 
American 
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 
(AACE) and American College of Endocrinology (ACE) 
have created a chronic care model, advanced diagnos-
tic framework, clinical practice guidelines, and clinical 
practice algorithm for the comprehensive management 
of obesity. This coordinated effort is not solely based on 
body mass index as in previous models, but emphasizes a 
complications-centric approach that primarily determines 
therapeutic decisions and desired outcomes. Adiposity-
Based Chronic Disease (ABCD) is a new diagnostic term 
for obesity that explicitly identifies a chronic disease, 
alludes to a precise pathophysiologic basis, and avoids the 
stigmata and confusion related to the differential use and 
multiple meanings of the term “obesity.” Key elements 
to further the care of patients using this new ABCD term 
are: (1) positioning lifestyle medicine in the promotion of 
overall health, not only as the first algorithmic step, but 
as the central, pervasive action; (2) standardizing proto-
cols that comprehensively and durably address weight 
loss and management of adiposity-based complications; 
(3) approaching patient care through contextualization 
(e.g., primordial prevention to decrease obesogenic envi-
ronmental risk factors and transculturalization to adapt 
evidence-based recommendations for different ethnicities, 
cultures, and socio-economics); and lastly, (4) develop-
ing evidence-based strategies for successful implemen-
tation, monitoring, and optimization of patient care over 
time. This AACE/ACE blueprint extends current work and 
aspires to meaningfully improve both individual and popu-
lation health by presenting a new ABCD term for medi-
cal diagnostic purposes, use in a complications-centric 
management and staging strategy, and precise reference to 
the obesity chronic disease state, divested from counter-
productive stigmata and ambiguities found in the general 
public sphere. (Endocr Pract. 2017;23:372-378)
Abbreviations:
AACE 
= 
American 
Association 
of 
Clinical 
Endocrinologists; ABCD = Adiposity-Based Chronic 
Disease; ACE = American College of Endocrinology; 
BMI = body mass index; CPG = clinical practice guide-
lines; HCP = health care professionals
THE OBESITY PROBLEM
 
The United States is in the midst of an obesity 
epidemic. This problem is complicated, prevalent, and 
not adequately addressed by current interventions (1-3). 
Pragmatically, the management of obesity, both for indi-
viduals and the population at large, can be approached by 
addressing 3 principal characteristics of obesity interven-
tion:
1. 
Impact on Health: due to clinically relevant and 
progressive adiposity-based complications in 
many but not all patients;
2. 
Sustainability: related to costly, disease-oriented, 
fragmented, and varying health care infrastruc-
tures and the high prevalence of obesity; and
3. 
Therapeutic Nihilism: on the part of both health 
care professionals (HCP) and the general public, 
based on beliefs that patients with obesity will 
have poor responses to current efforts because 
obesity is solely a lifestyle choice rather than a 
chronic disease with important behavioral compo-
nents.
In this position paper, the American Association of 
Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE) and American College 
of Endocrinology (ACE) further evolve their blueprint to 
improve obesity care by presenting a new diagnostic term 
and conceptual framework.
A. Obesity as an Adiposity-Based 
Chronic Disease (ABCD)
 
“Obesity” is currently applied by most HCP, regula-
tors, and third-party payers to any person with a body mass 
index (BMI) of 30 kg/m2 or greater. For the most part, the 
general public, and indeed most HCP, are confused about 
this definition and the related health implications of obesity 
since the diagnosis is based solely on an anthropometric 
measurement. In fact, in the 2014 AACE/ACE Consensus 
Conference on Obesity, participants representing 4 stake-
holder pillars (biomedical; government/regulatory; health 
industry and economics; and professional organizations, 
education, and research) were unable to embrace “obesity” 
as an actionable term because the relationship of the term to 
the health of individuals was obscure (4). Furthermore, the 
term obesity carries with it a great deal of stigmatization in 
the public domain that has negative implications pertain-
ing to the personal character of patients with the disease, 
even after obesity was recognized as a disease state in 2012 
(5). Patients with excess adiposity often harbor guilt from 
being overweight or obese (6). Indeed, the predominant 
sentiment associated with the term obesity in social media 
is derogatory and often cloaked in disparaging humor, 
invariably pointing to weight bias (7). Although the diag-
nosis of obesity is typically interpreted as being “bad” for 
one’s health, few recognize the far-reaching integrative 
physiology centering on body fat and affecting quality 
of life and longevity. The word “obesity” itself conveys 
little about the conditions associated with excess adiposity. 
Scientifically, BMI can be used as an office screening tool 
to estimate adiposity, but it is an anthropometric measure 
that clearly underperforms as a predictor of health and sole 
guide for clinical decision-making (8-10). Objections to 
the exclusive use of BMI as a screening tool or diagnos-
tic term include, but are not limited to, varying cut-offs 
with different ethnicities, effect of increased or decreased 
 374  ABCDs of Obesity, Endocr Pract. 2017;23(No. 3)
Copyright © 2017 AACE
muscle mass, and independent cardiometabolic risks asso-
ciated with waist circumference (WC). AACE/ACE has 
promoted a “complications-centric” approach to the diag-
nosis and management of patients with obesity (3,8,11). 
However, a new nomenclature is warranted that concep-
tualizes obesity as a chronic disease state leading to char-
acteristic adiposity-based complications, and encompasses 
a specific medical diagnostic term reflecting the adiposity-
based pathophysiologic process.
 
The term “adiposity” directly refers to adipocytes and 
adipose tissue, which in the context of ABCD, incorporates 
an impact on health that can relate to quantity, distribution, 
and/or function of adipose tissue. The quantity of body fat 
mass can correlate with certain adverse clinical endpoints or 
adiposity-based complications but is inadequately reflected 
by BMI (8-10). Advanced body imaging promises a better 
means to assess adiposity, and investigational studies are 
underway (10,12). The distribution of body fat also corre-
lates with relevant pathophysiology such as insulin resis-
tance and inflammation. For example, the relative accumu-
lation of fat in the intra-abdominal depot, and accumulation 
of lipid within hepatocytes (i.e., nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease) and muscle cells, is linked to insulin resistance, 
development of type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. 
On the other hand, gluteo-femoral fat accumulation is inde-
pendently associated with a protective effect on glucose- 
and lipid-related cardiometabolic risk (13-15). The func-
tional attributes of fat are governed by the adipocyte secre-
tome, as well as involving other cytokine, hormonal, and 
humoral factors, and will be delineated by emerging tech-
nologies in genetic/genomic analyses (16). Dysregulated 
secretion of these factors can affect multiple organ systems 
that correlate with adiposity-based complications. In short, 
adiposity is an encompassing term that offers advantages in 
health messaging and scientific research.
 
A disease state results when the severity of abnormal 
adiposity translates into a physiologic process and symp-
tom burden through definable mechanisms. Chronic disease 
occurs when a disease state persists for more than 3 months 
(defined by the National Center for Health Statistics [17]), 
and is characterized by adaptive and maladaptive processes, 
interacting and evolving toward a steady state, which may 
not be reached and which can obfuscate the primary etiology 
(18). For example, subtle changes in adiposity distribution 
can drive events that lead to metabolic syndrome, increased 
body weight, vascular inflammation, heart disease, and 
cognitive changes, eventually creating a complex medical 
state that conceals the initial problems with fat deposition. 
Hence, what has been generally termed obesity can now be 
reconsidered as an ABCD based upon a preponderance of 
evidence (Fig. 1) (3,4,8). This new terminology of obesi-
ty offers distinct opportunities to demystify the imprecise 
term “obesity” with a diagnostic term that describes the 
disease state. The clinical use of ABCD has the potential to 
Fig. 1. Translating adiposity and context into chronic disease burdena
a Adiposity is described by total body fat (body mass index, plethysmography, and imaging), 
distribution of fat (waist circumference, imaging), and secretory function (biochemical, molecular 
analyses). This phenotype, resulting from abnormalities in adipose mass, distribution, and function 
is contextualized by the physical (“built” or human-made) and nonphysical (e.g., culture, beliefs, 
customs, and socio-political-economic) environment. The result is an “adiposity-based chronic 
disease” (ABCD) with clinically relevant and actionable adiposity-based complications. These 
adiposity-based complications are reviewed in references 3 and 6, determine disease stages, and 
are managed with structured lifestyle interventions, pharmacotherapy, and/or bariatric procedures 
(surgical and nonsurgical) based on severity.
 ABCDs of Obesity, Endocr Pract. 2017;23(No. 3)  375 
Copyright © 2017 AACE
promote improvements in patient care, appropriate screen-
ing for associated health comorbidities, and structured treat-
ment protocols. We propose that the term ABCD be used 
for medical diagnostic purposes and precise reference to the 
chronic disease state, with related disease stages, divested 
from the stigmata and ambiguity associated with the word 
obesity in the general public sphere.
B. The Central Role for Lifestyle Medicine
 
By its very nature, chronic disease is complex and 
can be configured as a biological network of interac-
tions and relationships (18). Obesity interventions target-
ing single pathways or mechanisms may be able to cause 
some scientifically predictable changes (19), but durable 
benefits are frequently elusive. The current treatment para-
digm for obesity is to focus on weight loss (reducing BMI 
and/or WC) and identify and specifically treat adiposity-
based complications. This is executed with often meager 
attempts at achieving long-term healthy eating patterns 
and increased physical activity, as well as inconsistent use 
of pharmacotherapy and poorly defined clinician/patient 
thresholds for bariatric procedures.
 
Lifestyle medicine is the nonpharmacologic, nonsur-
gical/procedural management of chronic disease (Table 
1) (18). With reference to the ABCD term in a complica-
tions-centric framework of care, lifestyle medicine offers 
the advantage of exerting a broad set of network-based 
interventions. However, the optimal application of lifestyle 
medicine in clinical practice requires scientific study and 
validation, much more effort in HCP education and train-
ing for standardized evidence-based protocols, and clini-
cal implementation and monitoring with fair reimburse-
ment strategies. Lifestyle medicine will need to address the 
classic prevention stages of chronic disease management: 
primordial (decreasing disease risk on a population level), 
primary (decreasing disease in at-risk patients), secondary 
(decreasing complications in patients with early disease), 
and tertiary (decreasing morbidity and mortality in patients 
with complications and/or late disease) (3). Furthermore, 
the conversational message of lifestyle medicine is framed 
positively as promoting “health”; can be applied to all 
patients with any disease type or stage; includes human 
behavior, social reform, and environmental change; and 
should be adopted by an entire HCP team (20,21).
C. Standardization of ABCD 
Complications-Centric Protocols
 
The AACE/ACE obesity chronic care model consists 
of 4 main parts: contextualization (healthy environment 
and reformed health care system), a prepared obesity prac-
tice, a motivated or “activated” patient, and assessment of 
outcomes (individual- and population-based with subse-
quent innovations) (3). Pragmatically, there are several key 
actions for comprehensive patient care using the ABCD 
term. First, the patient must be “activated” for change by 
implementing proven behavioral medicine skills. Patient 
activation is the linchpin for managing ABCD as a complex 
clinical problem, and this aspect of behavioral medicine 
needs to be a focus of medical education. Next, the relevant 
drivers and associated abnormalities in adipose tissue need 
to be identified pertaining to mass, distribution, and func-
tion (e.g., increased fat mass [history and physical exami-
nation], insulin resistance and ectopic lipid [using avail-
able biochemical testing and imaging], and adipose tissue 
inflammation and abnormal secretory function affecting 
cardiovascular and metabolic disease risk [may require 
laboratory testing not widely available]). In addition, an 
evaluation of the risk, presence, and severity of adiposity-
based complications within the AACE/ACE framework 
[8]) should be performed (i.e., stage 0 ABCD has no iden-
tifiable adiposity-based complications, stage 1 has mild to 
moderate adiposity-based complications, and stage 2 has 
severe adiposity-based complications). Lastly, an individ-
ualized care plan needs be designed that always includes 
structured lifestyle change and can include pharmacother-
apy, endoscopic procedures, or bariatric surgery based on 
the presence and severity of adiposity-based complications, 
as well as the degree of weight loss needed to ameliorate 
adiposity-based complications (ranging from at least 3% 
to over 15% depending on the specific adiposity-based 
complications [3]). Unfortunately, evidence-based proto-
cols to specifically address ectopic lipid and an abnormal 
adipocyte secretome are currently lacking (the AACE/ACE 
has published management recommendations for lipodys-
trophy, which is related to ABCD based on the hypothesis 
that dysfunctional fat deposition with decreased or absent 
areas of adipose tissue increases the risk for ectopic lipid 
deposition, insulin resistance, and metabolic syndrome 
[22]). Subtle, evidence-based decision-making for specific 
adiposity-based complications in various real-life settings 
is provided in the AACE/ACE obesity clinical practice 
guidelines (CPG) (3); however, portfolios of more specific 
ABCD protocols will need to be standardized so that they 
can have the desired broad and significant impact on both 
individual- and population-based health promotion. 
 
The translation of specific abnormalities of adipose 
tissue into the clinical presentation and care plan requires 
intermediation or contextualization (Fig. 1) taking into 
account both the physical (“built” or human-made) and 
nonphysical (e.g., culture, beliefs, customs, and socio-
political-economic) environment (Table 2). Realistically, 
in order for standardized, evidence-based protocols to be 
implemented successfully, they must be adapted for the 
patient within their unique context. In fact, the transcul-
turalization process, which adapts evidence-based recom-
mendations from one culture and/or ethnicity to another, 
and recently implemented by the AACE/ACE in Latin 
America (23), is inherently part of personalized/precision 
medicine and will be included in care strategies using the 
ABCD term. 
 376  ABCDs of Obesity, Endocr Pract. 2017;23(No. 3)
Copyright © 2017 AACE
Table 1
Components of Lifestyle Medicine
Component
Description
Healthy eating patterns
Aggregation of foods consumed over a specified time and associated with clinical benefit; addresses disor-
dered eating with counseling, group therapy, CBT, and stimulus management
Physical activity
Body movements (e.g., aerobic, strength training, sports, exercise, walking); can be employment-related 
and associated with reduced sedentary activity
Body composition
Target %fat mass and fat distribution; implicates muscle mass and intracellular lipid storage
Sleep hygiene
Amount and quality of sleep
Stress reduction
Relaxation, yoga, meditation, counseling, and CBT
Tobacco cessation
Counseling and CBT
Alcohol moderation
Spectrum of alcohol use disorder; counseling, and CBT
Substance abuse
Counseling and CBT
Mood
Counseling, psychotherapy, medical therapy, and physical activity
Behavior
Focus on healthy/unhealthy behaviors; CBT
Community engagement
Provide local resources (e.g., houses of worship, schools, neighborhood centers)
Transculturalization
Adapt recommendations for different ethnicities/cultures
Abbreviation: CBT = cognitive-behavioral therapy
Table 2
ABCD Contextualization Factorsa
Category
Features
Physical
“Built” or human-made environment
Healthy/unhealthy food availability in restaurants, schools, workplace, and stores
Food and water supply, food sourcing, food “deserts,” pesticides, and endocrine disruptors
Walking paths, public/private gyms, school fitness programs, green spaces, and parks
Building design (elevators versus stairs), distances to walk, and handicapped access
Security personnel, safe routes to schools, safe venues for exercise, city planning, community 
design, and energy supply
Nonphysical
Culture, ethnicity, belief systems, and socio-political-economic factors
Attitudes and customs toward food and eating, food policy and politics, and religious dictates
Affordability of healthy foods (e.g., fresh fruits, fresh vegetables, and whole grains)
Use of unhealthy, processed, and fast foods due to economics, availability, and affordability
Attitudes and customs toward physical activity and exercise (e.g., not sweating in public)
Screen time (e.g., television, games, computer)
Home and workplace stress including personal safety and crime (e.g., decreased sleep and 
increased use of comfort foods)
Disparities in health care access (gender and socio-economic class)
Discrimination and stigmatization with obesity
Confusion and ambiguity centered on the term “obesity”
a See reference 23.
D. Strategies and Tactics for 
Successful ABCD Implementation
 
The approach to care of patients with obesity has 
made enormous strides forward in recent years, but current 
management is still suboptimal, perhaps due to poor coor-
dination of medical care with the legislative-regulatory 
environment, as well as problems with public education, 
health care access, and stigmatization (24).
 
The AACE/ACE is dedicated to advancing preventive 
and therapeutic practices for obesity that improve health 
for all people and believe that the adoption of ABCD as 
a precise pathophysiologic term referring to the medical 
diagnosis of obesity and importance of addressing body 
fat and related adiposity-based complications will advance 
this goal. Strategically, this ABCD conceptual approach is 
not a rebranding of obesity per se, but a novel approach 
that incorporates better health messaging for HCP and 
patients. This approach spans primordial/primary preven-
tion to decrease the risks and adverse effects of abnormal 
adiposity mass, distribution, and/or function, to second-
ary/tertiary prevention to decrease the risks and adverse 
effects of adiposity-based complications. For instance, 
 ABCDs of Obesity, Endocr Pract. 2017;23(No. 3)  377 
Copyright © 2017 AACE
special populations such as children, adolescents, and 
young adults who are metabolically healthy will need to be 
screened for adiposity derangements so appropriate proto-
cols can be initialized to prevent adiposity-based compli-
cations. The ABCD approach includes formal behavioral 
science and is in adherence with the AACE/ACE obesity 
chronic care model and CPG, which prioritize patient 
activation for change, practice preparedness, protocol 
formulation with standardization, and relevant contextual 
adaptions. The AACE/ACE also endorses a continued, 
concerted, and vigorous effort regarding health policy and 
the legislative agenda pertaining to reimbursement for 
structured lifestyle medicine and indeed all evidence-based 
therapeutic modalities for patients with ABCD. Tactically, 
to continue to address the obesity epidemic beyond CPG, 
the AACE/ACE is developing varied and enduring educa-
tional materials (e.g., web-based, printed, and face-to-face) 
and conferences, and with its partner professional organi-
zations, continues to press on with legislative and regula-
tory initiatives at the local, state, and federal levels (see 
www.aace.com). More specifically, the AACE/ACE will 
spearhead clear definition and positioning of ABCD in the 
human disease ontology database (25) and then creation 
of relevant complication-based International Classification 
of Diseases, 10 revision coding to facilitate HCP reim-
bursements, routine implementation, and realizable quality 
metrics. However, a major challenge to using the ABCD 
term is identification of appropriate, available, and afford-
able markers/metrics reflecting the impact of adiposity on 
health. To be clear, the ABCD approach does not elimi-
nate BMI as this computation still confers value for many 
patients with excess adiposity. However, further research 
is needed that can now focus on specific tools to quantitate 
derangements in adiposity mass, distribution, and func-
tion. Overall, to combat this prevalent, chronic, and inju-
rious disease, HCP will need to incorporate a conceptual 
approach to management that goes beyond a singular focus 
on BMI. The adoption of the new ABCD diagnostic term is 
a clear step forward.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 
AACE/ACE Obesity Committee Reviewers: W. 
Timothy Garvey, MD, FACE (Chair); Jeffrey I. Mechanick, 
MD, FACP, FACE, FACN, ECNU (Vice-Chair); Fida 
Bacha, MD; Nancy J.V. Bohannon, MD, FACP, FACE; 
George A. Bray, MD, MACP, MACE; Michael A. Bush, 
MD; Felice A. Caldarella, MD, FACP, CDE, FACE; Rhoda 
H. Cobin, MD, MACE, ECNU; Daniel Einhorn, MD, FACP, 
FACE; Ken Fujioka, MD; Alan J. Garber, MD, PhD, FACE; 
J. Michael Gonzalez–Campoy, MD, PhD, FACE; George 
Grunberger, MD, FACP, FACE; Yehuda Handelsman, MD, 
FACP, FNLA, FACE; Daniel L. Hurley, MD, FACE; Scott 
D. Isaacs, MD, FACP, FACE; Janet B. McGill, MD, FACE; 
Travis J. McKenzie, MD; Etie S. Moghissi, MD, FACP, 
FACE; Leigh Perrault, MD; Domenica M. Rubino, MD; 
Sunil J. Wimalawansa, MD, PhD, MBA, FCCP, FACP, 
FRCP, DSc, FACE; Yi-Hoa Yu, MD, PhD, FACE; Farhad 
Zangeneh, MD, FACP, FACE.
 
This work was supported by a grant from the National 
Institutes of Health establishing the UAB Diabetes 
Research Center (P30 DK-079626).
DISCLOSURES
 
Dr. Mechanick has received honoraria for program 
development by Abbott Nutrition International, and hono-
raria for lectures from the NCD Pre-Disease Forum. 
 
Dr. Garvey has served on scientific advisory boards 
for Novo Nordisk, Alexion, Janssen, Vivus, Eisai, Takeda, 
Astra Zeneca, and Merck, and research sponsored by 
Merck, Astra Zeneca, Weight Watchers, Elcelyx, Lexicon, 
Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, and Sanofi. He is also a stockholder 
of Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Eli Lilly, Isis, Merck, Novartis 
and Pfizer.
 
Dr. Hurley has no multiplicity of interest to disclose.
REFERENCES
 1. 
Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence 
of childhood and adult obesity in the United States, 2011-
2012. JAMA. 2014;311:806-814.
 2. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Adult obesity 
facts. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.
html. Accessed September 25, 2016. 
 3. 
Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, et al. American 
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American 
College of Endocrinology comprehensive clinical practice 
guidelines for medical care of patients with obesity. Endocr 
Pract. 2016;2 Suppl 3:1-205.
 4. 
Garvey WT, Garber AJ, Mechanick JI, et al. American 
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American 
College of Endocrinology Consensus Conference on 
Obesity: building an evidence base for comprehensive 
action. Endocr Pract. 2014;20:956-976.
 5. 
Mechanick JI, Garber AJ, Handelsman Y, Garvey WT. 
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists’ posi-
tion statement on obesity and obesity medicine. Endocr 
Pract. 2012;18:642-648.
 6. 
Previte J, Gurrieri L. Who is the biggest loser? Fat news 
coverage is a barrier to healthy lifestyle promotion. Health 
Mark Q. 2015;32:330-349.
 7. 
Chou WS, Prestin A, Kunath S. Obesity in social media: 
a mixed methods analysis. Transl Behav Med. 2014;4:314-
323.
 8. 
Garvey WT, Garber AJ, Mechanick JI, et al. American 
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American 
College of Endocrinology position statement on the 2014 
advanced framework for a new diagnosis of obesity as a 
chronic disease. Endocr Pract. 2014;20:977-989.
 9. 
Mechanick JI. “What if” being overweight was good for 
you? Endocr Pract. 2013;19:166-168.
 10. 
Neeland IJ, de Lemos JA. Time to retire the BMI? J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1522-1524.
 11. 
Garvey WT. New tools for weight loss therapy enable a 
more robust medical model for obesity treatment: ratio-
 378  ABCDs of Obesity, Endocr Pract. 2017;23(No. 3)
Copyright © 2017 AACE
nale for a complications-centric approach. Endocr Pract. 
2013;19:864-874.
 12. 
Lee JJ, Pedley A, Hoffmann U, Massaro JM, Fox CS. 
Associations of changes in abdominal fat quantity and 
quality with incident cardiovascular disease risk factors. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1509-1521.
 13. 
Sánchez-López M, Ortega FB, Moya-Martínez P, et al. 
Leg fat might be more protective than arm fat in relation to 
lipid profile. Eur J Nutr. 2013;52:489-495.
 14. 
Manolopoulos KN, Karpe F, Frayn KN. Gluteofemoral 
body fat as a determinant of metabolic health. Int J Obes 
(Lond). 2010;34:949-959.
 15. 
Snijder MB, Visser M, Dekker JM, et al. Low subcu-
taneous thigh fat is a risk factor for unfavourable glucose 
and lipid levels, independently of high abdominal fat. The 
Health ABC Study. Diabetologia. 2005;48:301-308.
 16. 
Mechanick JI, Zhao S, Garvey WT. The adipokine-
cardiovascular-lifestyle network. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2016;68:1785-1803.
 17. 
National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Summary Health Statistics for the 
U.S. Population: National Health Interview Survey, 2012. 
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/
sr10_259.pdf. Accessed October 22, 2016.
 18. 
Mechanick JI, Kushner RF. Why lifestyle medicine? In: 
Mechanick JI, Kushner RF, eds. Lifestyle Medicine. New 
York, NY: Spring; 2016: 1-8.
 19. 
Bray GA, Frühbeck G, Ryan D, Wilding JP. Management 
of obesity. Lancet. 2016;387:1947-1956.
 20. 
World Health Organization. Health promotion. Available at: 
http://www.who.int/topics/health_promotion/en/. Accessed 
October 1, 2016.
 21. 
Rural Health Information Hub. Defining health promo-
tion and disease prevention. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.
org/community-health/health-promotion/1/definition. 
Accessed October 1, 2016.
 22. 
Handelsman Y, Bloomgarden ZT, Brown RJ, et al. 
The clinical to the detection of lipodystrophy - an AACE 
consensus statement. Endocr Pract. 2013;19:107-116.
 23. 
Mechanick JI, Harrell RM, Allende-Vigo MZ, et al. 
Transculturalization recommendations for developing 
Latin American clinical practice algorithms in endocri-
nology--proceedings of the 2015 Pan-American workshop 
by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 
and American College of Endocrinology. Endocr Pract. 
2016;22:476-501.
 24. 
Trivedi NJ, Fields J, Mechanick CH, Klein M, 
Mechanick JI. Lack of correlation between antiobe-
sity policy and obesity growth rates: review and analysis. 
Endocr Pract. 2012;18:737-744.
 25. 
Kibbe WA, Arze C, Felix V, et al. Disease ontology 
2015 update: an expanded and updated database of human 
diseases for linking biomedical knowledge through disease 
data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43:D1071-D1078.
