 CASE REPORT
ANTHROPOLOGY
Lauren A. Meckel,1 M.A.; Chloe P. McDaneld,1 M.A.; and Daniel J. Wescott,1 Ph.D.
White-tailed Deer as a Taphonomic Agent:
Photographic Evidence of White-tailed Deer
Gnawing on Human Bone
ABSTRACT: Ungulate gnawing on bone has been reported in the taphonomic and zooarchaeological literature, but there are no known
reports of ungulates altering human remains. Herein, we report on the first known photographic evidence of deer gnawing human remains. As
described in nonhuman scavenging literature, forking of the bone characterizes the taphonomic effect of deer gnawing in this case, which is dis-
tinct from the effect caused by other scavengers. This type of osteophagia during the winter season is consistent with previously documented
behavior of deer gnawing on nonhuman bone, possibly to obtain minerals absent in their diet. In this study, we briefly discuss the distinguish-
ing features of ungulate gnawing, the reasons for this behavior, and possible confusion with other common types of scavenging and modifica-
tion. This report contributes to taphonomic literature covering the range of animal interactions with human skeletal remains.
KEYWORDS: forensic science, forensic anthropology, taphonomy, animal scavenging, osteophagia, ungulates
The taphonomic modification of nonhuman animal bone by
ungulates has been extensively documented in the taphonomic
and zooarchaeological literature (1–11). While most forensic
anthropologist and taphonomists are aware that carnivorous non-
human animals chew on and consume human bones, the fact that
ungulate species also gnaw on human bone is not as widely rec-
ognized. Through the use of a motion-sensitive camera, research-
ers at the Forensic Anthropology Research Facility in San
Marcos, Texas, discovered the first known evidence of a white-
tailed deer scavenging human bones. This article describes the
taphonomic alteration of human ribs by a deer to provide infor-
mation regarding the effect of ungulate scavenging on human
bone and to inform the forensic community of scavenging by
this particular herbivore. Although ungulates do not greatly con-
tribute to the scavenging guild, they should not be overlooked as
a possible taphonomic agent in the modification of human
remains in medicolegal death investigations.
Case Report
The Forensic Anthropology Center at Texas State (FACTS)
University accepts whole-body human donations for taphonomic
research. This research is conducted at the outdoor Forensic
Anthropology Research Facility (FARF) located at the Freeman
Center in the Texas Hill Country. The 26 acres allotted to
FACTS is a humid subtropical environment that occasionally
experiences drought (12). Generally, donated bodies are placed
in a supine or prone position with a cage placed over the body
to limit scavenging activity. However, at times scavenging stud-
ies are conducted and the individual is placed without a cage.
Many wild animals known to scavenge human remains inhabit
this area including foxes, raccoons, opossums, coyotes, rodents,
caracara, and black and turkey vultures. Evidence of scavenging
by these animals is documented in the forensic literature (13)
and has been observed at FARF personally by researchers and in
photographs taken by motion-sensitive cameras. The Texas Hill
Country is also host to one of the largest populations of white-
tailed deer in the country. In 1998, this region alone contained
up to 40% of the white-tailed deer population in Texas (14).
On 7 July 2014, as part of the ongoing research project to
document scavenging activities on naturally decomposing human
remains, an uncaged human body was placed in a wooded
region at FARF and a motion-sensitive camera was strapped to
an oak tree approximately six and a half feet from the placement
location. The body was initially scavenged by vultures that
removed much of the soft tissue, leaving a mostly articulated
skeleton and large pieces of desiccated tissue at the articular
surfaces of the vertebrae and limb bone joints. In January (5
January 2015), at approximately 182 days postmortem, the
motion-sensitive camera captured multiple images of a young
deer standing next to the skeleton with a human rib bone in its
mouth (Fig. 1). A deer was also captured on camera near the
body a few days earlier (16 December 2014), but was not in
contact with the remains. Eight days later (13 January 2015), the
camera captured additional images of a deer gnawing another rib
(Fig. 2). In both cases, the deer was holding the sternal end of
the rib in its mouth. The position of the rib mimics observations
by Hutson et al. (1) and Sutcliffe (2) on the orientation of a
bone in the mouth of an ungulate scavenger, described, amus-
ingly, as extending from the side of the mouth like a cigar.
1Forensic Anthropology Center at Texas State, Department of Anthropology,
Texas State University, San Marcos, TX 78666.
Received 6 Jan. 2017; and in revised form 7 Mar. 2017; accepted 9 Mar.
2017.
1
© 2017 American Academy of Forensic Sciences
J Forensic Sci, 2017
doi: 10.1111/1556-4029.13514
Available online at: onlinelibrary.wiley.com
 Upon discovery of the photographs, the authors set out to con-
duct an investigation of the skeletal remains at FARF. At the
scavenging site, two ribs disarticulated from the vertebrae and
moved less than 1 m from the articulated trunk and were quickly
identified as the affected elements. The sternal third of the rib
shafts exhibited shallow grooves perpendicular to the long axis,
while the sternal end displayed a forking pattern consistent with
previous descriptions of ungulate scavenging (1,3) (Fig. 3).
Discussion
Although the taphonomic literature provides numerous exam-
ples of ungulates, including deer, gnawing on bone (1–7,15),
most documented evidence of bone modification in a natural
environment has focused on interpretations of scavenging in
modern and archaeological nonhuman animal bone. This obser-
vation of an ungulate scavenging the osseous material of a
human is the first of its kind. The general consensus in archaeo-
logical science is that osteophagia, the desire to consume bone,
is practiced by ungulates primarily to obtain phosphorus in addi-
tion to supplementing calcium, sodium, and other minerals that
are absent from their vegetarian diet during periods of nutritional
stress, particularly in the winter months (8,9,16–18) or without
seasonal preference (19). When this scavenging is caught on
camera or through personal observation, researchers describe the
ungulate as situating the bone in the mouth both parallel and
perpendicular to the tooth rows (1,2,7). First, the bone is
retrieved with the long axis of the bone parallel to the tooth row
causing a “forking” of the gnawed element. Subsequently, the
deer may manipulate the bone, situating it sideways in the jaw,
perpendicular to the teeth like a cigar.
The markings on the ribs recovered at FARF display similari-
ties to those described in the literature. The rib exhibited a mini-
mum of three superficial striations, or grooves, at the distal third
of the bone, perpendicular to the shaft, and adjacent to the
forked sternal end. Forking has previously been recorded as
occurring only in advanced stages of osteophagia where the deer
has scavenged the bone on multiple occasions (10). However,
the forking still occurred despite being the product of primary
osteophagia.
In early stages of scavenging, it is possible that taphonomic
effects of ungulate gnawing may be mistaken for modifications
by carnivores, rodents, or, in archaeological material, early
humans (2–4,6,7,11,20,21). Generally, ungulates such as deer
FIG. 1––White-tailed deer holding a human rib in its mouth on 5 January
2015 at the Forensic Anthropology Research Facility at Texas State
University.
FIG. 2––Second observed event of a white-tailed deer scavenging on human bones (13 January 2015).
FIG. 3––Photograph of sternal end of a human rib showing forking
resulting from a white-tailed deer gnawing on the bone.
2
JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES
 are known only to scavenge dry bones that are easy to manipu-
late, such as a rib, or bones that are rectangular in cross section
like the tibiae and metapodials. The characteristic features of
ungulate scavenging appear superficially in the weathered corti-
cal bone of the shaft and only disrupt the morphology of the epi-
physis due to the zigzag motion of the jaw, creating a stripped,
forked pattern in the bone. On the contrary, carnivores tend to
scavenge fresher, less desiccated, remains, leaving punctures and
pits that perforate deep into the fresh spongy trabecular tissue in
the epiphysis of long bones (10). While rodents are also partial
to dry bone, striations created by the central incisors typically
appear in a serial pattern with deeper cortical impact perpendicu-
lar to the long axis of the shaft (22).
Conclusion
In January of 2015, one or more white-tailed deer was
observed scavenging human ribs on two separate occasions at
the outdoor Forensic Anthropology Research Facility in San
Marcos, Texas. Recovery of the ribs revealed modifications con-
sistent with previous reports of ungulate scavenging on nonhu-
man animal bone during the winter season. Upon analysis, one
rib exhibited characteristic superficial grooves in the cortical
bone perpendicular to the long axis of the shaft, as well as
marked “forking” at the sternal end of the bone. This feature has
been described by researchers as an artifact caused by the deer
and other ungulates holding the bone in its mouth like a cigar.
This is the first reported incident in the forensic literature of a
deer scavenging human remains indicating that it is important to
consider deer scavenging when analyzing taphonomic modifica-
tions to weathered bones in medicolegal death investigations.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sophia Mavroudas and Dr. Kate Spradley for assis-
tance in accessing photographs.
References
1. Hutson JM, Burke CC, Haynes G. Osteophagia and bone modifications
by giraffe and other large ungulates. J Archaeol Sci 2013;40:4139–49.
2. Sutcliffe AJ. Further notes on bones and antlers chewed by dear and
other ungulates. Deer 1977;4:73–82.
3. Browthwell D. Further evidence of bone chewing by ungulates: the
sheep of North Ronaldsay, Orkney. J Archaeol Sci 1976;3:179–82.
4. Sutcliffe AJ. Similarity of bones and antlers gnawed by deer to human
artefacts. Nature 1973;246:428–30.
5. Keating KA. Bone chewing by Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep. Great
Basin Naturalist 1990;50(1):89.
6. Kierdorf U. Fork formation and other signs of osteophagia on a long
bone swallowed by a red deer stag. Int J Osteoarchaeol 1993;3:37–40.
7. Kierdorf U. A further example of long-bone damage due to chewing by
deer. Int J Osteoarchaeol 1994;4:209–13.
8. Caceres I, Esteban-Nadal M, Bennasar M, Marin Monfort MD, Pesquero
MD, Fernandez-Jalvo Y. Osteophagia and dental wear in herbivores:
actualistic
data
and
archaeological
evidence.
J
Archaeol
Sci
2013;40:3105–16.
9. Barrette C. Antler eating and antler growth in wild Axis deer. Mammalia
1985;49:491–9.
10. Caceres I, Esteban-Nadal M, Bennasar M, Fernandez-Jalvo Y. Was it the
deer or the fox? J Archaeol Sci 2011;38(10):2767–74.
11. Johnson DL, Haynes CV. Camels as taphonomic agents. Quatern Res
1985;24:365–6.
12. Dixon R. Climatology of the Freeman Ranch, Hays County, Texas. Free-
man Ranch Pub Series 2000;3:1–9.
13. Spradley MK, Hamilton MD, Giordano A. Spatial patterning of vulture
scavenged human remains. Forensic Sci Int 2012;219:59–62.
14. Young EL, Traweek MS. White-tailed deer population trends. Federal
Aid in Wildlife Restoration, W-127-R-7, Project No. 1. Austin, TX:
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, 1999.
15. Ramis D, Bover P. A review of evidence for domestication of Myotragus
balearicus Bate 1909 (Artiodactyla, Caprinae) in the Balearic Islands.
J Archaeol Sci 2001;28:265–82.
16. Denton DA, Blair-West JR, McKinley MJ, Nelson JF. Problems and
paradigms: physiological analysis of bone appetite (osteophagia). BioEs-
says 1986;4:40–2.
17. Gordon JG. Food selection by ruminants. Proc Nutr Soc 1970;29:325–30.
18. Grasman BT, Hellgren EC. Phosphorus nutrition in white-tailed deer:
nutrient balance, physiological responses, and antler growth. Ecology
1993;74(8):2279–96.
19. Barnes TG, Verner LW, Blankenship LI, Heineman SC. Macro and trace
mineral content of selected South Texas deer foragers. J Range Manag
1990;43(3):220–3.
20. Tokugana S. Fossil land mammals form the Riukiu Islands. Proc Impe-
rial Acad (Tokyo) 1936;12:225–57.
21. Tokugana S. Bone artifacts used by ancient man in the Riukiu Islands.
Proc Imperial Acad (Tokyo) 1936;12:352–7.
22. Haglund HG. Contribution of rodents to postmortem artifacts of bone
and soft tissue. J Forensic Sci 1992;37:1459–65.
Additional information and reprint requests:
Lauren A. Meckel, M.A.
Department of Anthropology
Texas State University
601 University Drive
San Marcos
TX 78666
E-mail: lm1424@txstate.edu
MECKEL ET AL. . EVIDENCE OF DEER GNAWING ON HUMAN REMAINS
3
