 By Neil Mehta and Mikko Myrskylä
The Population Health Benefits Of
A Healthy Lifestyle: Life
Expectancy Increased And Onset
Of Disability Delayed
ABSTRACT A key determinant of population health is the behavioral
profile of a population. Nearly 80 percent of Americans reach their fifties
having smoked cigarettes, been obese, or both. It is unknown to what
extent risky behaviors (for example, smoking, having a poor diet, being
physically inactive, and consuming an excessive amount of alcohol)
collectively are reducing the health and life expectancy of the US
population, or what improvements might be achievable in their absence.
Using data from the Health and Retirement Study, we studied people ages
fifty and older who had never smoked, who were not obese, and who
consumed alcohol moderately. Compared to the whole US population,
those with such a favorable behavioral profile had a life expectancy at age
fifty that was seven years longer, and they experienced a delay in the
onset of disability of up to six years. These results provide a benchmark
for evaluating the massively damaging effects that behavioral risks have
on health at older ages and the importance of prioritizing policies to
implement behavioral-based interventions.
O
lder Americans are living longer
and are generally healthier than
their predecessors.1,2 The health
and functional ability of the elder-
ly are key policy concerns because
they are critically important in determining the
potential productivity and health care costs of
aging populations. Nearly all high-income coun-
tries subsidize medical and hospice care for the
elderly, and a healthier older population may
reduce public health care expenditures. More-
over, compared to an unhealthier older popula-
tion, ahealthier onewillhave greaterpotentialto
participate in the labor market and perform
social roles such as caring for grandchildren.
In the United States, actuarial calculations of
Social Security’s future solvency rely heavily on
the predicted life expectancy of people who will
enter old age in the coming decades.3
Research has shown strong heterogeneity in
healthy aging across individuals—that is, indi-
viduals appear to “age” at different rates.4
Among the key determinants of this variation
are health-related behaviors (for example, ciga-
rette smoking, diet, and level of physical activity)
whose effects often are realized over the long
term and at older ages. By ages 50–59, nearly
80 percentof USadults haveeithersmoked, been
obese, or both—a level that has remained re-
markably stable since the 1970s (Exhibit 1).
While the percentage of Americans who have
ever smoked has been declining over time, the
prevalence of obesity has increased markedly,
potentially offsetting health gains achieved from
reductions in smoking.5,6
The combined prevalence of smoking and obe-
sity (an indicator for dietary and physical activity
behaviors) suggests that these two behavioral
factors are key determinants of healthy aging
among older Americans. An additional behavior-
al factor is excessive consumption of alcohol.
Recent estimates indicate that one in ten deaths
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1569
HEALTH AFFAIRS 36,
NO. 8 (2017): 1495–1502
©2017 Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
Neil Mehta (nkmehta@
umich.edu) is an assistant
professor in the Department
of Health Management and
Policy, School of Public
Health, at the University of
Michigan, in Ann Arbor.
Mikko Myrskylä is director of
the Max Planck Institute for
Demographic Research, in
Rostock, Germany; a research
professor at the London
School of Economics and
Political Science, in the United
Kingdom; and professor of
social statistics at the
University of Helsinki, in
Finland.
August 2017
36:8
Health Affairs
1495
Web First
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 among Americans ages 20–64 in the period
2006–10 were attributable to excessive alcohol
consumption.7 Because behavioral factors can be
targeted by a wide range of policies, measuring
their cumulative impact aids in the prioritization
of such policies.
The massively damaging effects that risky be-
haviors have on population health are increas-
ingly recognized by international bodies outside
of the traditional health sector. In 2011, for ex-
ample, the United Nations General Assembly
held a high-level meeting on noncommunicable
disease, with behavioral interventions as a pri-
mary focus. This meeting was the first high-level
meeting convened about a health issue since
AIDS.
Among scientists, there is also long-standing
interest in identifying maximum achievable
levels of human health and longevity.8–10 One
approach has been the study of “vanguard”
populations—groups that exhibit exceptionally
favorable health—such as certain religious mi-
nority groups (for example, Seventh Day Adven-
tists and Mormons) and scientific elites.11,12 A key
vanguard population that to our knowledge has
not been analyzed in this context is people with a
favorable profile across multiple behaviors, such
as people who have never smoked, who are not
obese, and who drink alcohol moderately. A van-
guard population defined by a favorable behav-
ioral profile would be drawn broadly from di-
verse socioeconomic and racial/ethnic groups.
Thus, the study of their health would be highly
informative about maximum achievable levels of
health and longevity in large populations.
Against this backdrop, we evaluated the extent
to which three major behavioral factors (ciga-
rette smoking, obesity, and unhealthy consump-
tion of alcohol) influence the overall and disabil-
ity-free life expectancy (that is, how long a
person is expected to live without a disability)
of Americans ages fifty and older. Our contribu-
tion is twofold.
First, the focus on life expectancies provides
straightforward policy-relevant metrics that can
be used to assess the population-level effects of
behavioral factors. Disability-free life expectancy
is particularly relevant because it conveys infor-
mation about the functional capacity of older
people.
Second, we analyzed subgroups by behavioral
profiles, in addition to addressing each risk
factor separately. This approach allowed us to
assess the total effect of the three risk factors.
We focused in particular on people with a low-
risk profile (that is, people who have never
smoked or been obese and who drink alcohol
at healthy levels), as the study of this population
provides insights into how much the three risk
factors combined are restricting overall and dis-
ability-free life expectancies.
Study Data And Methods
Data Our data were from the Health and Retire-
ment Study, a high-quality ongoing longitudinal
survey on health among Americans ages fifty and
older and their spouses that began in 1992. The
study is supported by the National Institute on
Aging and the Social Security Administration
and is conducted by the University of Michigan.13
Respondents are surveyed biannually, with fol-
low-up response levels consistently above 85 per-
cent.14 Since 1998 the study has been nationally
representative of noninstitutionalized Ameri-
cans ages fifty and older. After participants en-
roll in the study, they are followed even if they
become institutionalized. Study data are linked
to the National Death Index.We used study data
from the RAND Center for the Study of Aging.15
Our analytical sample consisted of 14,804
respondents ages 50–74 in 1998. Deaths and
transitions across disability states were modeled
during the period 2000–12. There were 4,305
deaths and 6,795 disability transitions over
153,991 person-years of follow-up (online Ap-
pendix 1 provides descriptive information about
deaths and disability transitions).16
Measures Disability was defined by a respon-
Exhibit 1
Percentages of adults ages 50–59 who ever smoked, were ever obese, or ever had either
risk factor, selected years
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey II
(1976–80), III (1988–94), and continuous waves (1999–2010). NOTES Survey respondents who
reported having smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their lifetime were categorized as “ever smoked.”
Respondents who reported a maximum lifetime body weight (excluding pregnancy) that resulted in a
body mass index of at least 30 kg/m2 were categorized as “ever obese.” Authors used measured
height at time of survey along with reported maximum body weight to calculate body mass index.
Respondents in either or both of the other two categories were also categorized as having “either risk
factor.”
Web First
1496
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 dent’s report of having a limitation in at least one
of five activities of daily living: walking,dressing,
bathing, getting in or out of bed, and eating.
Respondents not reporting any limitations were
considered to be free of disability.
Smoking categories were current, former, or
never smoker, with never smoker as the low-risk
category.Weight status categories, based on def-
initions for adults from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, were obese (body mass
index [BMI] at least 30.0 kg/m2) and nonobese
(BMI less than 30.0), with nonobese as the
low-risk category. Because preliminary models
indicated nonsignificant differences in risk
between normal weight (BMI of 18.5–24.9)
and overweight (BMI of 25.0–29.9), respon-
dents in these two groups were combined into
the nonobese category. Underweight respon-
dents (BMI less than 18.5) were excluded from
the low-risk nonobese group.
Alcohol consumption categories were non- or
irregular drinker, moderate drinker, and heavy
drinker, with moderate drinker as the low-risk
category.17,18 Moderate and heavy drinkers were
defined as people who drink alcohol at least one
day per week and who meet a threshold for week-
ly number of drinks: Moderate is having fewer
than fourteen drinks per week for men and fewer
than seven drinks per week for women; heavy is
having fourteen or more drinks per week for men
and seven or more drinks per week for women.19
People who reported drinking alcohol less often
than one day per week (irregular drinkers), who
represented about one-fifth of all drinkers, were
classified with nondrinkers because preliminary
analyses revealed higher mortality and disability
risks in irregular drinkers compared to the low-
risk moderate drinkers.
Behavior Profiles We examined two low-risk
behavior (LRB) profiles: LRB1 referred to all peo-
ple who had never smoked and were not obese;
LRB2 (a subset of LRB1) referred to people
who had never smoked, who were not obese,
and who were moderate drinkers.We also exam-
ined two high-risk behavior (HRB) profiles:
HRB1 referred to obese people who had ever
smoked, and HRB2 (a subset of HRB1) referred
to obese people who had ever smoked and who
were not moderate drinkers.
Control variables were educational attainment
(did not complete high school; had a high school
diploma, GED, or some college; or had graduat-
ed
from
college)
and
race/ethnicity
(non-
Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic,
or non-Hispanic other race).
Statistical Analysis We produced two sets
of metrics. The first was the mean age at the first
incident of disability, conditional on not being
disabled at age fifty. The second was life expec-
tancy in disabled and nondisabled states. We
measured overall, disabled, and disability-free
life expectancy, all from age fifty.
We used multinomial logistic regression mod-
els to estimate age- and sex-specific transition
probabilities across the states of nondisabled,
disabled, and dead. We used the estimated tran-
sition probabilities in structured matrix popula-
tion models to estimate overall, disabled, and
disability-free life expectancies at age fifty and
meanageat the firstincidentof disability.Matrix
population models are extensions of multistate
life table techniques.20
Appendix 2 describes the regression and ma-
trix population models, and Appendix 3 provides
coefficients from the regression models.16
Standard errors were estimated using boot-
strap procedures. All analyses were conducted
using Stata, version 14. Statistical code is avail-
able on request.
Limitations Our study had several limita-
tions. First, we were unable to account for all
of the behavioral factors that affect health.
We relied on three behavioral factors (obesity,
smoking, and drinking) that have been shown
to have the largest impact on life expectancy in
high-income countries. Obesity is used as an
imperfect marker of lifelong dietary practices
and levels of physical activity. Sufficiently de-
tailed dietary history is rarely available in health
surveys and was not available in our data.While
the Health and Retirement Study does contain
information on physical activity, we excluded it
because physical activity is simultaneously a
cause and a consequence of health, which makes
it difficult to infer reliable estimates of the effect
of physical activity on life expectancy. We also
lacked information on obesity earlier in life—
which, if accounted for, could have resulted
in a larger negative effect of obesity on life
expectancy.
The findings indicate
the magnitude of
health gains that
could be achieved if
more Americans
adopted low-risk
behaviors.
August 2017
36:8
Health Affairs
1497
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 Second, we were unable to observe disability
incidence for people before age fifty. Because the
estimated mean age at first onset of disability
does not account for disability incidence before
a respondent entered the study, the actual mean
age of disability incidence will be lower than that
shown in our results.
Finally, while our study provides novel in-
sights into the potential health gains of adopting
low-risk behaviors, our study did not address the
role of genetic factors, which may simultaneous-
ly influence both the presence of a risk factor and
its damaging effects.21 For example, a similar set
of genes may increase both the risk of becoming
obese, given a certain diet, and the negative met-
abolic consequences of obesity.22 In addition,
people who refrain from risky behavior may
be likely to have other health-promoting traits
(for example, an optimistic outlook), and our
study did not account for such traits.
Study Results
Descriptive Characteristics Of The Sample
At the beginning of the study period, 13 percent
of women and 10 percent of men were disabled
(Appendix4 includes a tableof samplecharacter-
istics at baseline, in 1998).16 Approximately
26 percent of the sample were obese, 62 percent
had ever smoked, and 73 percent were non-,
irregular, or heavy drinkers. Twenty-seven per-
cent of the sample were in the low-risk category
LRB1 (all nonobese people who had never
smoked), and women (33 percent) were more
likely than men (20 percent) to be in this cate-
gory. Seven percent of the sample were in the
low-risk category LRB2 (nonobese people who
had never smoked and who were moderate
drinkers), which had equal percentages of
men and women.While people at all educational
levels were represented among the low-risk cat-
egories, people with high levels of education
were more likely than others to be in these cate-
gories (Appendix 5 shows the percentages of
people in each low-risk category by educational
attainment).16
Disability Onset As expected, each behavior-
al risk factor was independently associated with
early disability onset, with obesity the most con-
sequential (Exhibit 2). On average, obese men
became disabled at age 64.9 years, and obese
women at age 63.0 years—a penalty of 3 years
for men and 6 years for women, compared to
their nonobese counterparts.
Appendix 6 shows mean age at the first inci-
dent of disability at age 50 or later, by behavioral
profile.16 Nonobese men and women who had
never smoked had a mean age at the first incident
of disability of 71.0 years—3.5 years later than
in the whole population. Nonobese men and
women who never smoked and were moderate
drinkers displayed the longest postponement of
disability, with a mean age at the first disability
incident of 72.1 for men and 75.2 for women.
Life Expectancies Remaining life expectancy
at age 50 was 27.7 years for all men and 31.4 years
for all women—or a life expectancy of 77.7 years
for men and 81.4 years for women (Exhibit 3).
Our life expectancy estimates were similar to US
life expectancy from 2005 National Vital Statis-
tics data.23 (Note that the measure of years lived
before disability onset is not the same as the
measure of disability-free life expectancy. People
can recover from disability, and the latter mea-
sure, but not the former one, includes disability-
free years after an episode of disability onset and
recovery.)
As shown in Exhibit 3, women spent 5.8 years
of life disabled, compared to 4.0 years for men.
For both men and women, obesity had a small
effect on overall life expectancy and a more sub-
stantial effect on disability-free life expectancy:
Being obese shortened disability-free life expec-
tancy by 2.3 years for men and 4.8 years for
women. Nonobese people also spent less time
disabled compared to obese people.
Both men and women who had never smoked
Exhibit 2
Mean age of first incident of disability at age 50 or later, by
behavioral risk factor
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 1998–2012 from the Health
and Retirement Survey. NOTES Obesity is defined as a body mass
index of at least 30.0 kg/m2. “Ever smoked” includes former and
current smokers. “Moderate drinkers” are defined as men who
consume fewer than fourteen drinks per week and women who
consume fewer than seven drinks per week. “Heavy drinkers”
are defined as men who consume at least fourteen drinks per
week and women who consume at least seven drinks per week.
Web First
1498
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 had a substantially longer overall and disability-
free life expectancy and lived longer with a dis-
ability, compared to people who had smoked.
Compared to heavy drinkers and non- or irregu-
lar drinkers, moderate drinkers had longer over-
all and disability-free life expectancies.
The life expectancy advantages of the popula-
tions with low-risk behavior profiles are shown
in Exhibit 4. Compared to all men and women,
respectively, nonobese men and women who
never smoked (LRB1) live on average about four
years longer, and nonobese men and women
who never smoked and who were moderate
drinkers (LRB2) live on average about seven
years longer. Importantly, nearly all of this ad-
vantage was due to longer disability-free life ex-
pectancy. Thus, the two low-risk behavior pop-
ulations not only live longer, but they also do so
free of disability.
In contrast, obese men and women who had
ever smoked and were not moderate drinkers
had significantly shorter life expectancies—both
overall and disability-free—compared to all men
and women. The differences are even greater
between the populations with the best and the
worst profiles. Forexample,a fifty-year-oldwom-
an who has never smoked, is not obese, and
drinks moderately will live until she’s almost
eighty-nine, roughly twelve years longer than a
fifty-year-old obese woman who ever smoked
and does not drink moderately. For men, the
difference in life expectancy between these two
categories is slightly more than eleven years.
The exceptional advantages of the two low-risk
behavior populations are further illustrated
through a comparison with life expectancy in
2005 in Japan, a nation known for its citizens’
longevity (Exhibit 4). Life expectancy at age fifty
for all US men was three years less than for Japa-
nese men, and the difference was five years for
women. However, with the exception of LRB1
women, the other three low-risk behavior groups
had a longer total life expectancy compared to
the Japanese.
Additional
Findings In our sample, the
dominant smoking group was former smokers
(41 percent of the total sample), and it is relevant
to ask whether smokers who quit early in life can
still experience a long and disability-free life.
In separate analyses (data not shown), we found
that nonobese people who had quit smoking ten
or more years before entering the survey and
who were moderate drinkers had overall and
disability-free life expectancies that were only
one year shorter than nonobese people who
had never smoked and were moderate drinkers.
We also explored whether the life expectancies
at age fifty changed over the study period.
We divided the period in two—1998–2004 and
2005–2012—and compared life expectancy at
age fifty between the two periods. For the total
sample, life expectancy at age fifty increased by
about 0.6 year from the earlier to the later peri-
od, and about one-third of the increase was dis-
ability-free. The results were similar for the two
low-risk behavior groups. However, our analysis
was likely underpowered to distinguish differ-
ences in trends across these subgroups.
Discussion
Sizable segments of the US population have
advantageous behavioral profiles, but little is
known about how long people in those groups
live because previous research has been limited
to studying the effect of single health behaviors
on life expectancy. Studying the effect of multi-
ple health behaviors exercised simultaneously
provides new insights into levels of health that
are achievable
without novel
life-extending
medical technologies.
We analyzed nondisabled and disabled life
expectancy for low-risk behavioral groups, one
Exhibit 3
Overall, disability-free, and disabled life expectancy at age 50, by behavioral risk factor
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 1988–2012 from the Health and Retirement Study. NOTES Obe-
sity, “ever smoked,” “moderate drinkers,” and “heavy drinkers” are defined in the Notes to Exhibit 2.
Appendix 7 shows 95% confidence intervals; see Note 16 in text.
August 2017
36:8
Health Affairs
1499
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 consisting of respondents who were not obese
and hadneversmoked and a similargroupwhose
members also drank alcohol moderately. Com-
pared to the average American, these two low-
risk groups had life expectancy at age fifty that
was four to seven years longer and a substantial
postponement of the onset of disability. Strik-
ingly, these low-risk populations also experi-
enced a disability-free life expectancy similar
to or longer than the overall life expectancy of
the average American. A methodological advan-
tage of our study was that we used longitudinal
data to estimate transition probabilities, avoid-
ing the biases arising from cross-sectional ap-
proaches.24
Risk-Factor Prevention Our findings are
best interpreted in the context of population-
level prevention of unhealthy and risky behav-
iors. The findings indicate the magnitude of
health gains that could be achievedif moreAmer-
icans adopted low-risk behaviors. They demon-
strate what is being achieved by a sizable seg-
ment of Americans and is potentially achievable
by many others.
The low-risk behavior groups have a life expec-
tancy comparable to other exceptionally long-
lived populations. Jennifer Montez and Mark
Hayward examined populations defined by a
combination of race, childhood health, socioeco-
nomic adversities, and educational attainment
and found that the most advantaged groups—
those
with
favorable
childhood
health,
no
socioeconomic adversity, and high educational
achievement—had life expectancies of 82 years
for men and 86 years for women,25 similar to our
estimates for the LRB1 groups of 82 years for
men and 85 years for women. Immigrant popu-
lations also exhibit exceptionally high longevity,
which has been attributed in part to positive
health selection (sometimes referred to as the
“healthy migrant effect”), and some immigrant
populations have cultural expectations that may
discourage risky behaviors. Neil Mehta and
coauthors showed that in the period 2000–10,
US immigrants who survived to age 65 had a life
expectancy of 84 years for men and 87 years
for women.26 However, neither study accounted
explicitly for behavioral factors.
Role Of Behavioral Change Our approach
did not lend itself to estimating the benefits of
behavioral change among people who already
had a risk factor. However, our study provides
some indications of the sizable benefits achiev-
able through behavioral change. We found that
people who quit smoking at least ten years before
entering the study experienced an exceptionally
long disability-free life if they were also at low
risk in terms of other behavioral factors. This
result is consistent with previous findings that
quitting smoking and making other favorable
behavioral changes, even late in life, increases
longevity.27 Similarly, an emerging body of evi-
dence suggests that obesity exhibits “duration”
effects, in that reducing the length of time a
person is obese may be associated with improved
health.28
Disability Postponement Our study of the
low-risk behavior groups suggest that these ex-
ceptional groups experience substantial disabil-
ity postponement, compared to other groups.
The benefits to society are that postponement
will defer disability-associated health care costs
until older ages and provide opportunities for
people to work longer. Nonetheless, our find-
ings also indicate that low-risk groups live a sim-
ilar number of disabled years, compared to the
total population. In other words, we did not find
evidence of a “compression” of disability among
the low-risk groups.
In contrast, people with multiple behavioral
risk factors not only live shorter lives than those
without these factors but also experience an ex-
tended time disabled, which underscores the
large negative effects of risky health behaviors.
Of note, we found obesity to be strongly associ-
Exhibit 4
Overall, disability-free, and disabled life expectancy at age 50, by behavioral profile
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 1988–2012 from the Health and Retirement Study and for
2005 for Japan from The Human Mortality Database [home page on the Internet]. Berkeley (CA):
The Database; [cited 2017 May 11]. Available from: http://www.mortality.org. NOTES “High-risk
behavioral profile (HRB) 1” refers to obese people who have ever smoked. “HRB2” refers to obese
people who have ever smoked and were nonmoderate drinkers. “Low-risk behavioral profile (LRB) 1”
refers to all nonobese people who never smoked. “LRB2” refers to nonobese people who never
smoked and were moderate drinkers. “Japan” refers to all Japanese. Appendix 7 shows 95% confi-
dence intervals; see Note 16 in text.
Web First
1500
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 ated with years lived with a disability, a finding
that has been reported in at least one previous
study and is especially concerning given the fact
that the prevalence of obesity has been rising
since at least the early 1980s.29 As shown in
Exhibit 1 and some previous analyses of data
from the National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Survey (NHANES),30 the increasing prev-
alence of obesity may have leveled off during the
early and mid-2000s. However, we believe that it
is premature to infer that the long-term rise in
obesity has ended. For example, between 2005–
06 and 2013–14 the prevalence of obesity among
adult American women increased significantly,
according to analyses of NHANES data.31
Policy Considerations
As aging nations grapple with the social and
economic consequences of a growing elderly
population, a key variable is the future health
status of the older population.32 Our findings
indicate that the high prevalence of risky behav-
iors poses a formidable challenge to achieving
improvements in population health. Evidence
shows that population-level behavior profiles
can be responsive to large-scale and high-level
policy efforts, with some of the most convincing
evidence
coming
from
antismoking
cam-
paigns.33 The Affordable Care Act made a major
step forward in federal support for prevention
through its establishment of the Prevention and
Public Health Fund, which focuses on improve-
ment in health behaviors, among other topics.
There is also solid evidence of the effectiveness
of financial “sticks” such as taxes on cigarettes,
alcohol, and potentially beverages and foods as-
sociated with obesity.34 The success of these and
other policies in helping people maintain a
healthy body weight and refrain from smoking
and immoderate alcohol consumption will large-
ly determine the future health and disability
status of the aging US population. ▪
Both authors contributed equally to this
work and are listed in alphabetical order
by last name. This research was
supported by the National Institute on
Aging (NIA) (Grant No. R01AG040212;
principal investigator: Samuel Preston),
and pilot funding from the NIA
supported the Network on Life Course
Health Dynamics and Disparities in 21st
Century America (Grant No. NIA
R24AG045061; http://isr.umich.edu/
nlchdd/). Mikko Myrskylä was supported
by the European Research Council
(Grant No. 336475). The authors thank
Daniel Schneider for his excellent
statistical support. The viewpoints
expressed reflect those of the authors
and not necessarily those of any funding
body or affiliated institution. [Published
online July 19, 2017.]
NOTES
1 Cutler DM, Landrum MB. Dimen-
sions of health in the elderly popu-
lation [Internet]. Cambridge (MA):
National Bureau of Economic Re-
search; 2011 Jun [cited 2017 May 11].
(NBER Working Paper No. 17148).
Available from: http://www.nber
.org/papers/w17148.pdf
2 Kramarow E, Lubitz J, Lentzner H,
Gorina Y. Trends in the health of
older Americans, 1970–2005. Health
Aff (Millwood). 2007;26(5):
1417–25.
3 Board of Trustees. The 2015 annual
report of the Board of Trustees of the
Federal Old-Age and Survivors In-
surance and Federal Disability In-
surance Trust Funds [Internet].
Washington (DC): Government
Publishing Office; 2015 [cited 2017
May 11]. Available from: https://
www.ssa.gov/oact/tr/2015/tr2015
.pdf
4 Lowsky DJ, Olshansky SJ,
Bhattacharya J, Goldman DP.
Heterogeneity in healthy aging.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
2014;69(6):640–9.
5 Preston SH, Stokes A, Mehta NK,
Cao B. Projecting the effect of
changes in smoking and obesity on
future life expectancy in the United
States. Demography. 2014;51(1):
27–49.
6 Stewart ST, Cutler DM, Rosen AB.
Forecasting the effects of obesity and
smoking on U.S. life expectancy. N
Engl J Med. 2009;361(23):2252–60.
7 Stahre M, Roeber J, Kanny D, Brewer
RD, Zhang X. Contribution of ex-
cessive alcohol consumption to
deaths and years of potential life lost
in the United States. Prev Chronic
Dis. 2014;11:E109.
8 Manton KG, Stallard E, Tolley HD.
Limits to human life expectancy:
evidence, prospects, and implica-
tions. Popul Dev Rev. 1991;17(4):
603–37.
9 Oeppen J, Vaupel JW. Demography.
Broken limits to life expectancy.
Science. 2002;296(5570):1029–31.
10 Olshansky SJ, Carnes BA, Cassel C.
In search of Methuselah: estimating
the upper limits to human longevity.
Science. 1990;250(4981):634–40.
11 Andreev EM, Jdanov D, Shkolnikov
VM, Leon DA. Long-term trends in
the longevity of scientific elites: evi-
dence from the British and the
Russian academies of science. Popul
Stud (Camb). 2011;65(3):319–34.
12 Enstrom JE, Breslow L. Lifestyle and
reduced mortality among active
California Mormons, 1980–2004.
Prev Med. 2008;46(2):133–6.
13 Health and Retirement Study [home
page on the Internet]. Ann Arbor
(MI): University of Michigan Insti-
tute for Social Research; c 2016
[cited 2017 May 11]. Available from:
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/
14 Health and Retirement Study. Sam-
ple sizes and response rates [Inter-
net]. Ann Arbor (MI): University of
Michigan Institute for Social Re-
search; 2011 [cited 2017 May 11].
Available from: http://hrsonline
.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/sample
response.pdf
15 RAND Center for the Study of Aging.
RAND HRS data, version N. Santa
Monica (CA): RAND; 2016 Mar 1.
16 To access the Appendix, click on the
Appendix link in the box to the right
of the article online.
17 Thun MJ, Peto R, Lopez AD, Monaco
JH, Henley SJ, Heath CWJ Jr, et al.
Alcohol consumption and mortality
among middle-aged and elderly U.S.
adults. N Engl J Med. 1997;337(24):
1705–14.
18 Gaziano JM, Gaziano TA, Glynn RJ,
Sesso HD, Ajani UA, Stampfer MJ,
et al. Light-to-moderate alcohol
consumption and mortality in the
Physicians’ Health Study enrollment
cohort. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;
35(1):96–105.
19 Department of Health and Human
Services, Department of Agriculture.
Dietary guidelines for Americans,
August 2017
36:8
Health Affairs
1501
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 2015–2020: eighth edition [Inter-
net]. Washington (DC): The Depart-
ments; 2015 Dec [cited 2017 May 11].
Available from: https://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/2015/resources/
2015-2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf
20 Caswell H. Applications of Markov
chains in demography. In: Langville
AN, Stewart WJ, editors. MAM2006:
Markov Anniversary Meeting.
Raleigh (NC): Boson Books; 2006.
p. 319–34.
21 Thorgeirsson TE, Geller F, Sulem P,
Rafnar T, Wiste A, Magnusson KP,
et al. A variant associated with nic-
otine dependence, lung cancer and
peripheral arterial disease. Nature.
2008;452(7187):638–42.
22 Walley AJ, Blakemore AIF, Froguel P.
Genetics of obesity and the predic-
tion of risk for health. Hum Mol
Genet. 2006;15(Spec No 2):
R124–30.
23 Arias E, Rostron BL, Tejada-Vera B.
United States life tables, 2005. Natl
Vital Stat Rep. 2010;58(10):1–132.
24 Guillot M, Yu Y. Estimating health
expectancies from two cross-sec-
tional surveys: the intercensal
method. Demogr Res. 2009;21:
503–34.
25 Montez JK, Hayward MD. Cumula-
tive childhood adversity, educational
attainment, and active life expec-
tancy among U.S. adults. Demogra-
phy. 2014;51(2):413–35.
26 Mehta NK, Elo IT, Engelman M,
Lauderdale DS, Kestenbaum BM.
Life expectancy among U.S.-born
and foreign-born older adults in the
United States: estimates from linked
Social Security and Medicare data.
Demography. 2016;53(4):1109–34.
27 Rizzuto D, Orsini N, Qiu C, Wang
HX, Fratiglioni L. Lifestyle, social
factors, and survival after age 75:
population based study. BMJ. 2012;
345:e5568.
28 Mehta NK. Obesity and mortality. In:
Wright JD, editor. International en-
cyclopedia of the social and behav-
ioral sciences. 2nd ed. Amsterdam:
Elsevier; 2015. p. 75–81.
29 Reuser M, Bonneux LG, Willekens
FJ. Smoking kills, obesity disables: a
multistate approach of the US Health
and Retirement Survey. Obesity
(Silver Spring). 2009;17(4):783–9.
30 Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Ogden CL,
Curtin LR. Prevalence and trends in
obesity among US adults, 1999–
2008. JAMA. 2010;303(3):235–41.
31 Flegal KM, Kruszon-Moran D,
Carroll MD, Fryar CD, Ogden CL.
Trends in obesity among adults in
the United States, 2005 to 2014.
JAMA. 2016;315(21):2284–91.
32 Harper S. Economic and social im-
plications of aging societies. Science.
2014;346(6209):587–91.
33 Cutler DM. Behavioral health inter-
ventions: what works and why? In:
Anderson NB, Bulatao RA, Cohen B,
editors. Critical perspectives on ra-
cial and ethnic differences in health
in late life. Washington (DC):
National Academies Press; 2004.
p. 644–74.
34 Preston SH. Commentary: when
people behave badly. Epidemiology.
2014;25(2):191–3.
Web First
1502
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
