 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 28 July 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01112
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
Edited by:
Angelo Compare,
University of Bergamo, Italy
Reviewed by:
Silvia Serino,
Istituto Auxologico Italiano (IRCCS),
Italy
Inês Mendes,
University of Minho, Portugal
*Correspondence:
Marion Tegethoff
marion.tegethoff@unibas.ch
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychology for Clinical Settings,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 02 May 2016
Accepted: 11 July 2016
Published: 28 July 2016
Citation:
Meinlschmidt G, Lee J-H, Stalujanis E,
Belardi A, Oh M, Jung EK, Kim H-C,
Alfano J, Yoo S-S and Tegethoff M
(2016) Smartphone-Based
Psychotherapeutic
Micro-Interventions to Improve Mood
in a Real-World Setting.
Front. Psychol. 7:1112.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01112
Smartphone-Based
Psychotherapeutic
Micro-Interventions to Improve Mood
in a Real-World Setting
Gunther Meinlschmidt 1, 2, Jong-Hwan Lee 3, Esther Stalujanis 4, Angelo Belardi 4,
Minkyung Oh 3, Eun Kyung Jung 3, Hyun-Chul Kim 3, Janine Alfano 1, Seung-Schik Yoo 5, 6
and Marion Tegethoff 4*
1 Division of Clinical Psychology and Epidemiology, Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland,
2 Faculty of Medicine, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 3 Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea
University, Seoul, South Korea, 4 Division of Clinical Psychology and Psychiatry, Department of Psychology, University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5 Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA, 6 Incheon St. Mary’s Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Incheon, South Korea
Background: Using mobile communication technology as new personalized approach
to treat mental disorders or to more generally improve quality of life is highly promising.
Knowledge
about
intervention
components
that
target
key
psychopathological
processes in terms of transdiagnostic psychotherapy approaches is urgently needed. We
explored the use of smartphone-based micro-interventions based on psychotherapeutic
techniques, guided by short video-clips, to elicit mood changes.
Method: As part of a larger neurofeedback study, all subjects—after being randomly
assigned to an experimental or control neurofeedback condition—underwent daily
smartphone-based micro-interventions for 13 consecutive days. They were free to
choose out of provided techniques, including viscerosensory attention, emotional
imagery, facial expression, and contemplative repetition. Changes in mood were
assessed in real world using the Multidimensional Mood State Questionnaire (scales:
good–bad, GB; awake–tired, AT; and calm–nervous, CN).
Results: Twenty-seven men participated on at least 11 days and were thus included in
the analyses. Altogether, they underwent 335, generally well-tolerated, micro-intervention
sessions, with viscerosensory attention (178 sessions, 53.13%) and contemplative
repetition (68 sessions, 20.30%) being the most frequently applied techniques. Mixed
models indicated that subjects showed better mood [GB: b = 0.464, 95%confidence
interval (CI) [0.068, 0.860], t(613.3) = 2.298, p = 0.022] and became more awake [AT: b =
0.514, 95%CI [0.103, 0.925], t(612.4) = 2.456, p = 0.014] and calmer [CN: b = 0.685,
95%CI [0.360, 1.010], t(612.3) = 4.137, p < 0.001] from pre- to post-micro-intervention.
These mood improvements from pre- to post-micro-intervention were associated with
changes in mood from the 1st day until the last day with regard to GB mood (r = 0.614,
95%CI [0.297, 0.809], p < 0.001), but not AT mood (r = 0.279, 95%CI [−0.122,
0.602], p = 0.167) and CN mood (r = 0.277, 95%CI [0.124, 0.601], p = 0.170).
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
Discussion: Our findings provide evidence for the applicability of smartphone-based
micro-interventions eliciting short-term mood changes, based on techniques used
in
psychotherapeutic
approaches,
such
as
mindfulness-based
psychotherapy,
transcendental meditation, and other contemplative therapies. The results encourage
exploring these techniques’ capability to improve mood in randomized controlled studies
and patients. Smartphone-based micro-interventions are promising to modify mood
in real-world settings, complementing other psychotherapeutic interventions, in line
with the precision medicine approach. The here presented data were collected within
a randomized trial, registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (Identifier: NCT01921088) https://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01921088.
Keywords:
behavioral
intervention
technology,
ehealth,
health
information
technology,
information
and
communication technology, Internet- and mobile-based intervention, mental disorder, mhealth, wireless health
INTRODUCTION
Mental disorders are one of the leading global causes of disability
(Murray et al., 2012). Besides the personal suffering, their
direct and indirect economic costs are tremendous (Wittchen
et al., 2011; Olesen et al., 2012). A prominent consortium
of researchers, advocates, and clinicians identified key “grand
challenges in global mental health” in terms of major research
priorities for improving the lives of people with mental illnesses
around the world (Collins et al., 2011). Notably, one of the
prioritized goals is to improve treatments and expand access
to mental health care, with the development of mobile and
Internet technologies to increase access to evidence-based care
being among the top challenges (Collins et al., 2011). This
need is underscored by the fact that in countries, regardless of
their economic status, the demand for individual face-to-face
psychotherapy is already exceeding or will exceed mental health
service supply in the future (Kazdin and Blase, 2011). Therefore,
new forms of treatment are required that can complement or
expand our current approaches in treating people who suffer
from mental disorders (Kazdin and Blase, 2011; Kostkova, 2015).
To this end, Internet-based psychotherapies have received
considerable attention during the past decade, lowering the
barrier to access mental health service. Most studies indicated
that
Internet-delivered
interventions
were
efficacious
in
achieving positive behavioral change or symptom reduction,
with no clear evidence of superiority or inferiority as compared
to face-to-face interventions (Cuijpers et al., 2010; Griffiths et al.,
2010; Richards and Richardson, 2012; Andersson et al., 2014;
Riper et al., 2014; Ebert et al., 2015; Richards et al., 2015; Kuester
et al., 2016; Melioli et al., 2016; Olthuis et al., 2016; Zachariae
et al., 2016).
The advent of mobile information technologies has taken
this low-barrier approach to the next level. In the year 2020,
70% of the world’s population will use a smartphone (Ericsson,
2015). The core features of smartphones and other mobile
devices are that they are running most of the time, are used
in a variety of situations during daily life, and ensure a
broad reachability of their users beyond calls, e-mails, short
messaging, or instant messaging. Unlike the dissemination of
many other technologies, the rapid uptake of mobile phones
has not been restricted to developed countries (Kay et al.,
2011). Furthermore, mobile phones are the preferred means
of communication among young people, the age group most
unlikely to seek treatment (Oliver et al., 2005). However, some
target populations, such as veterans, that experience mental
health service gaps may also be more difficult to reach via
smartphone-based interventions, as compared to the general
population (Klee et al., 2016). Smartphones are increasingly
complex, computationally powerful, sensory-rich, and integrated
with social networking (Morris and Aguilera, 2012). These
factors make them ideal for the delivery of mental health
information, digital psychotherapeutic techniques and support
anywhere, in real-time and when needed, the latter identified
amongst others using sensors integrated in the smartphone
(McClernon and Roy Choudhury, 2013). This is in line with
the “precision medicine approach,” aiming to provide the right
treatment, at the right time, and for the right person (Insel,
2014; Collins and Varmus, 2015). Integrating smartphones in
mental healthcare provides a wealth of opportunities, including
to overcome the innovation gap by allowing for “disruptive
innovation” (Bower and Christensen, 1995), and to provide the
basis for new, personalized forms of treatment (Ehrenreich et al.,
2011; Zeevi et al., 2015).
Modifying mood or inducing certain mood states in the
laboratory, using different approaches in non-clinical samples,
has a long-standing history in psychological research (Velten,
1968; Martin, 1990; Schaefer et al., 2010). However, there are only
few studies that examined the use of exclusively smartphone-
based interventions to modify mood or affective states in healthy
populations (e.g., Cipresso et al., 2012); which is in contrast to the
large number of studies using smartphones for mood assessment
(e.g., Asselbergs et al., 2016). However, a better understanding
on how smartphones may be used to modify mood in healthy
subjects may provide an important basis for its future application
in clinical samples.
Notably, even though an increasing number of mobile
applications (apps) that claim to target mental health are available
in software repositories (Mani et al., 2015; Nicholas et al.,
2015; Shen et al., 2015), as yet, studies that evaluate the effects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
of applying smartphones as a means of behavior modification
are relatively scarce (Donker et al., 2013; Mohr et al., 2013a;
Harrison and Goozee, 2014; Mani et al., 2015; Olff, 2015;
Torous and Powell, 2015; Bakker et al., 2016). Initial studies
provide evidence that smartphone-based interventions have the
potential to reduce symptoms of mental disorders, such as
anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, and substance use disorders
(Watts et al., 2013; Ben-Zeev et al., 2014; Gustafson et al.,
2014; Ly et al., 2014; Ahmedani et al., 2015). Further, there is
first evidence that mobile technology, including smartphone-
based applications, can boost the efficacy of psychotherapy
and behavioral interventions (Lindhiem et al., 2015). In sum,
further research on smartphone-based interventions in non-
clinical samples is highly warranted, and may provide an
important basis for future studies and applications, aiming
at improving and facilitating prevention and treatment of
mental disorders, which has the potential to complement
established treatment approaches, serving great clinical and
societal relevance.
One particular challenge in the field of mobile mental
health research is the mismatch of the paces of research and
technology development, with rather long timeframes of classical
randomized controlled trials (RCTs), the gold standard of
research designs to determine the efficacy of an intervention,
with a median duration of more than 5 years from initial
enrollment to publication and much longer timeframes until
implementation into routine care (Ioannidis, 1998; Riley et al.,
2013; Clough and Casey, 2015). This has led to the call
for new frameworks and refinement of mobile mental health
research (Kumar et al., 2013; Riley et al., 2013; Mohr et al.,
2013a,b; Ben-Zeev et al., 2015; Clough and Casey, 2015; Nicholas
et al., 2015; Bakker et al., 2016). Classical RCTs evaluate a
well-circumscribed intervention; hence modifications of the
intervention require conducting a new RCT. One solution to
this problem, we believe, is to evaluate core psychotherapeutic
components and key features of interventions, which can then
guide the assembly of the intervention as a whole, if desired
still followed by an RCT. To this end, studies that focus on the
evaluation of important elements, characteristics, and principles
of smartphone-based interventions, starting with non-clinical
samples and later being applied to patients, may be of great
importance (Mohr et al., 2014; Alkhaldi et al., 2016; Bakker et al.,
2016).
The idea to focus on core intervention components is in line
with transdiagnostic treatment approaches, which center on core
disease mechanisms to improve the understanding and treatment
of mental disorders (Wilamowska et al., 2010; Thompson-
Hollands et al., 2014; Newby et al., 2015, 2016). One central
target of psychotherapeutic interventions is the improvement
of mood, with mood disturbances being the key symptom of a
variety of mental disorders (American Psychiatric Association,
2013). Furthermore, mood plays a key role in the quality of daily
life, and influences personal and social adjustment and physical
health, social interactions, and problem solving (Fredrickson,
2004; Shallcross et al., 2010). Hence, the advancement of easily
applicable interventions to improve mood is of paramount
importance.
Our goal was to explore in a real-world setting, in a
non-clinical sample, the use of smartphone-based micro-
interventions and related changes in mood. We thereby applied
micro-interventions in form of psychotherapeutic techniques
that have already been used as components of face-to-face
psychotherapy (see Paredes et al., 2014), guided by short
video-clips of <5 min duration. More specifically, we aimed at
estimating changes in mood and hypothesized that mood would
improve from pre- to post-micro-intervention. Furthermore, we
evaluated whether these changes were related to changes in mood
from the first to the last micro-intervention day, and finally,
whether they varied over time and between techniques. The
analyzed data were collected from 13 daily micro-intervention
sessions, as part of a larger neurofeedback study, in which two
real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging neurofeedback
(RT-fMRI NF) sessions were conducted, one before all daily
micro-intervention sessions and one after, separated by 14 days.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Outline of the Study Procedure
Overall Study Procedure
The data presented here were collected within a randomized
trial, registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (Identifier: NCT01921088)
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01921088. The aim of
this larger study was to assess the application of real-time
functional magnetic resonance imaging neurofeedback (RT-fMRI
NF) to modulate the response to an acute stressor in form
of the Stroop color word interference task. RT-fMRI NF is a
type of self-regulation technique that provides an individual
with feedback about specific brain activity using functional
magnetic resonance imaging in connection with a related
behavior; The underlying assumption at the core of this practice
is that through RT-fMRI NF a subject can learn to regulate
neural activity and related mental functions (see Thibault et al.,
2016).
The institutional review board of Korea University approved
the study protocol. All subjects gave written informed consent
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The study was
conducted between August and October 2013 at the facilities of
Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea [Resource Identifier
(RRID): SCR_004095].
The whole study consisted of three laboratory visits and 13
days of ambulatory smartphone-based micro-interventions using
psychotherapeutic strategies, the latter following the second
laboratory visit on which the RT-fMRI NF procedure was
applied for the first time (see Figure 1; for a brief overview
of the whole study, please refer to Supplementary Material
Data Sheet 1). The data presented here were collected during
the preliminary testing day and the smartphone-based micro-
interventions, with the exception of the feedback on the
micro-interventions that was collected before the RT-fMRI NF
procedure on experiment day 2. First, we screened subjects
interested in study participation during a telephone interview
for any history of neurological or mental disorders and invited
those eligible to a laboratory visit, the preliminary testing
day, on which we verified whether subjects met all eligibility
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
FIGURE 1 | Outline of the larger study. The data presented here were
collected during the preliminary testing day and the smartphone-based
micro-interventions, with the exception of the feedback on the
micro-interventions that was collected before the RT-fMRI NF procedure on
experiment day 2. *We instructed participants in four psychotherapeutic
techniques, first at the preliminary testing day, then at the beginning of the
session at experiment day 1, and briefly reiterated these instructions at the end
of this session; RT-fMRI NF, real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging
neurofeedback.
criteria (see below). Subjects fulfilling eligibility criteria and
interested in study participation were asked to provide additional
data via questionnaires, were instructed in psychotherapeutic
techniques (see section below) to be practiced in different phases
of the study, and invited to two further laboratory visits (14
days apart from each other) for a RT-fMRI NF experiment.
Between these two experiment days, subjects participated
in smartphone-based micro-interventions, during which they
practiced the psychotherapeutic techniques they had previously
learned on the preliminary testing day and experiment day 1,
respectively.
Preliminary Testing Day
At the preliminary testing day, we first outlined the whole study
procedure to the subjects and collected their written informed
consent. Then, we had them practice four psychotherapeutic
techniques (for details, see below), which they later applied
during the RT-fMRI NF experiment and the micro-interventions.
In this first introduction to the techniques, we used detailed
instructions and handed out copies with the written instructions
to the participants, so that they could follow the text while
we explained the techniques. Next, we explained them all
other tasks relevant for the RT-fMRI NF experiment procedure
(details available from the authors on request). We then
asked the participants to fill in a set of questionnaires and
checklists to verify their eligibility to the experiment and gather
additional information (e.g., sociodemographic data). A detailed
description of those questionnaires relevant for this publication
is given below. The experimenter then looked through the results
and decided upon inclusion of participants. In case of inclusion,
the experimenter and subject made an appointment for the next
visit at the laboratory for experiment day 1 (6 weeks later at
maximum).
Psychotherapeutic Techniques
We instructed the participants in four psychotherapeutic
techniques, first at the preliminary testing day, then at the
beginning of the session at experiment day 1, and briefly
reiterated these instructions at the end of this session. We
told the participants that they might find these techniques
useful to accomplish the upcoming tasks during the RT-fMRI
NF experiment in terms of modulating their brain activity
as well as their stress level. The following four techniques
were instructed: (i) viscerosensory attention, (ii) emotional
imagery, (iii) facial expression, and (iv) contemplative repetition.
Additionally, participants were allowed to use (v) any other
individual technique that they felt would be helpful. A brief
outline of the techniques, as provided at the end of experiment
day 1, is depicted in Table 1. In brief, (i) viscerosensory attention
consisted of shifting attention toward vs. away from bodily
sensations, for example heartbeat or breathing; (ii) emotional
imagery consisted of imagining emotionally positive (e.g., great
holidays, a beloved person), negative (e.g., a stressful exam, a
conflict) or neutral (e.g., a bus ride, reading the newspaper)
situations; (iii) facial expression consisted of making different
emotional facial expressions, e.g., a happy, angry, or neutral face;
and (iv) contemplative repetition consisted of repeating a short
simple sentence or word over and over again, or slowly and
repeatedly counting from 1 to 10. The shifting between different
extremities, as instructed for viscerosensory attention, emotional
imagery, and facial expression, was to exploit a preferably large
scope of modifiability. To ensure that subjects well remembered
the techniques for application during the smartphone-based
micro-interventions, at the end of experiment day 1, we asked
subjects (i) to take some time to vividly remember the technique
that they had just applied in the scanner and that worked best
for them, and to briefly describe this technique in written form;
(ii) to think of and write down a keyword that might help them
to call up this technique once they would apply it during the
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
TABLE 1 | Description of techniques applied during the micro-interventions.
Technique
Instruction
Viscerosensory attention
“Shift your attention toward vs. away from bodily sensations, for example your heartbeat, breathing, or feelings in stomach. Keep your
attention focused on each sensation for a while.”
Emotional imagery
“Imagine emotionally positive, negative, or neutral situations, and shift your attention between them. For example think of a beloved
person, a stressful exam or a conflict, or a bus ride. Keep your attention focused on each situation for a while.”
Facial expression
“Make different emotional expressions with your face and keep each for a while (e.g., happy face, angry face, neutral face).”
Contemplative repetition
“Repeat a short, very easy sentence, or slowly count from 1 to 10 (repeat this over and over again).”
Other technique
“Remember the strategy that you have successfully practiced in the scanner. Please concentrate and practice this strategy during the next
minutes.”
subsequent micro-intervention sessions; and (iii) to think of a
picture that might help them to recall this technique during the
micro-intervention sessions, and to describe it in words or draft
it. All four psychotherapeutic techniques have been shown to be
related to changes in mood (Kleinke et al., 1998; Holmes et al.,
2006; Lane et al., 2007; Pollatos et al., 2015), with potential for
the treatment of mental disorders (Ito et al., 2001; Holmes et al.,
2007; Orme-Johnson and Barnes, 2014; Lin et al., 2015).
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
To familiarize the participants with the smartphone-based
micro-intervention, we asked all subjects to undergo one micro-
intervention session for training purposes, while still in the
laboratory at the end of experiment day 1. Data collected during
this training session were not included in our analyses.
On the 13 days between experiment day 1 and 2, each
participant
underwent
one
session
of
smartphone-based
micro-intervention per day during their daily life, in which
he applied one of the psychotherapeutic techniques outlined
above. We instructed subjects to use their own smartphones
for
participating
in
the
micro-intervention
sessions
(see
Supplementary Material Table 1 for additional information on
smartphone types, operating systems, and Internet browsers
used). Subjects were free to choose the time of day at which
they underwent the micro-intervention session. The time
window during which the subjects had to undergo the daily
micro-intervention session started each day at 0800 h when
they received the invitation-e-mail including the personalized
and day-specific hyperlink for access to the micro-intervention
session. This hyperlink expired at 0300 h on the following day. In
addition to the daily invitation-e-mail at 0800 h, subjects received
a reminder-e-mail at 2000 h if they had not yet participated since
the last invitation.
We used EFS Survey 10.0 (Questback GmbH, Berlin,
Germany)
to
conduct
the
smartphone-based
micro-
interventions,
including
instructions,
presentation
of
a
video-clip, and collection of questionnaire data, as well as
for automatically sending the invitation- and reminder-e-mails.
The detailed procedure of each session was as follows: (1)
Subjects used their smartphones to connect via internet browser,
using a personalized hyperlink provided in the daily invitation
or reminder e-mails, to the server hosted by Questback. (2)
We instructed the subjects by text display to seek a quiet place
allowing them to concentrate on the micro-intervention, and
to ensure having a stable Internet connection. Furthermore, we
instructed them that the end of the micro-intervention would
be signalized by a sound, and that they should therefore ensure
to plug in their headphones or set the loudspeakers of their
smartphone on high volume, if possible, and that alternatively,
the end of the micro-intervention would also be recognizable by
visual cues. (3) We asked the subjects to enter their individual
subject ID that we had previously provided, as well as a self-
generated personal code that they had already generated during
the preliminary testing day. This code allowed verifying subject
identity. (4) Subjects responded to the Multidimensional Mood
State Questionnaire (MDMQ), described in more detail below,
and the self-assessment manikin (SAM) scales (Bradley and
Lang, 1994). (5) We instructed the subjects to prepare for the
micro-intervention, including (i) asking them to remember the
technique that they successfully applied during experiment day
1 and telling them that they should use this technique on each
of the daily micro-intervention sessions, (ii) instructing them
that a micro-intervention session would consist of two rounds
lasting 2 min each, interrupted by a pause of 30 s and that in
order to start with the session, they should click on the “play”-
button of the video player; (iii) asking them—if their Internet
connection was weak—to click on the “stop”-button to wait until
the player had completely loaded the video, then to reset the
video, and to the start the video by clicking on “play” again;
and (iv) informing them that the end of the micro-intervention
session was signalized by a sound and visually announced in
the video, and instructing them not to click on “Continue”
before they heard the sound or before the end of the video was
reached, as this is important to ensure a standardized duration
of the session for each participant and on each day; (v) After
this, we asked subjects to select the psychotherapeutic technique
they wanted to use during this session (for details, see previous
sections). (6) Then, subjects underwent the micro-intervention
by following the instructions provided within a short video-
clip (duration each: ∼4 min 40 s), presented according to the
technique that they wanted to apply (the video-clips are provided
as Supplementary Material Video 1–5; details of the structure
and content of the video-clips are as Supplementary Material
Data Sheet 2; additional information regarding the video files
as Supplementary Material Data Sheet 3). (7) Subjects again
responded to the MDMQ and the SAM scales. (8) Then, subjects
replied to two questions related to the micro-intervention
session: first, they were asked how successful their session was
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
today, with possible replies on a 5-level scale ranging from −2
(much less than expected/very bad) to +2 (much more than
expected/very good). Second, they were asked how they could
optimize their micro-intervention (e.g., conditions, motivation,
timing, etc.), with an open answer format. The aim of this second
question was to guide subjects toward individual optimization
of their personal micro-intervention. (9) The session finished
by thanking them for their participation in today’s session and
reminding them of the next micro-intervention session on the
subsequent day (or of experiment day 2 on the last day of
micro-intervention sessions).
For each page that EFS provided, it recorded a time-stamp,
from which we were able to derive date and time of each micro-
intervention session.
Assessment Instruments
Assessment of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
We applied a set of well-established questionnaires (presented
as paper-pencil questionnaires or electronically) to gather
information from the participants along the study. Further, we
used a set of short checklists to collect additional information,
such as data regarding eligibility criteria and feedback regarding
the smartphone-based micro-interventions.
To verify the eligibility criterion “right handedness” and
the exclusion criterion “color-blindness,” we asked the study
participants to fill in the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (EHI;
Oldfield, 1971) and the Ishihara test for color-blindness (Ishihara
and Force, 1943), respectively, on the preliminary testing day.
Assessment of Mood and Feedback on
Micro-Intervention Sessions
We applied the 12-item MDMQ to assess current mood on three
dimensions ranging from good to bad (GB), awake to tired (AT),
and calm to nervous (CN). The MDMQ is the English version of
the German Mehrdimensionale Befindlichkeitsfragebogen (MDBF;
Steyer et al., 1997; Steyer, 2014), which is a well-established tool
for the assessment of current mood, with very good psychometric
properties, especially suited for repeated measures within short
intervals. For each dimension, a score is calculated, ranging
from 4 to 24. Depending on the dimension, high scores suggest
positive affectivity, wakefulness, and calmness, respectively. We
applied the MDMQ twice during each smartphone-based micro-
intervention session, both before and after subjects practiced the
psychotherapeutic technique.
We obtained feedback regarding the smartphone-based
micro-intervention sessions at the beginning of experiment day
2, asking the subjects if they agreed with the four statements
displayed in Supplementary Material Table 2. Additionally,
participants were encouraged to provide further comments
regarding the micro-intervention sessions.
Two researchers (AB and JA) independently entered all data
from paper-pencil questionnaires into electronic spreadsheets,
and a third researcher (ES) crosschecked their entries.
Participants
We recruited participants from the student body of the Korea
University. Advertisements for the study were posted on the
university website and a local bulletin board. Participants had
to fulfill the following eligibility criteria, which were based
on the requirements of the larger RT-fMRI NF study: male,
age 18–65 years, right-handed, no color-blindness, no history
of cardiovascular or neurological diseases or mental disorders,
sufficient English language skills to follow the experimental
instructions, and self-reported at least minimal familiarity with
smartphone-use to carry out the micro-interventions. The
sample size was determined a priori, based on the requirements
of the randomized trial assessing RT-fMRI NF effects, to provide
sufficient statistical power to test the main hypotheses of the
trial. Samples size estimates were based on previous studies,
demonstrating large effect sizes within RT-fMRI NF paradigms
(deCharms et al., 2005; Yoo et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2015). We
estimated, by calculating a priori power analysis (using G∗ Power
3, Faul et al., 2007, RRID: SCR_013726) that with n = 14
subjects in each condition, effects of d = 1.0 can be detected with
sufficient power (1–ß > 0.80; given α = 0.05, one-sided test).
After completion of the study, each subject received 60,000
KRW (≈57 USD) in compensation for his participation. The
compensation was split in three parts, for the participation at
experiment day 1, smartphone-based micro-interventions, and
experiment day 2, and paid out in part if the subject did not take
part in the complete study.
Statistical Analyses
We checked the data for distribution properties and verified
normality by inspecting histograms and qq-plots. For descriptive
analyses, we calculated means and standard deviations for
continuous normally distributed variables and absolute and
relative frequencies for categorical variables with categories
outlined in Table 2.
As the values of the scales of the MDMQ were approximately
normally distributed, transformation was not required. Twenty-
six of the 27 participants applied the same psychotherapeutic
technique across micro-intervention days, but one subject
extensively varied the psychotherapeutic technique across days.
Therefore, we did not enter psychotherapeutic technique as
factor at the level of the micro-intervention day, but entered
it at the participant level. To this end, we assigned each of
the above-mentioned 26 participants to the psychotherapeutic
technique category that they used, and created an additional
category “mixed techniques” for the subject that extensively
varied the psychotherapeutic techniques. As in four of the
resulting six categories there were only few subjects (“emotional
imagery”, n
=
3; “facial expression”, n
=
2; “other
technique”, n
=
2; and “mixed techniques”, n
=
1), we
collapsed these four categories, leading to the trichotomous
variable “psychotherapeutic technique” with the three levels
“viscerosensory attention” (n = 14), “contemplative repetition”
(n = 5), and “other” (n = 8).
Each scale of the MDMQ was entered as outcome variable in
separate linear mixed-effects models (Singer and Willett, 2003),
to estimate mood changes from pre- to post-micro-intervention
and across micro-intervention days, as well as differences in
mood changes from pre- to post-micro-intervention across
micro-intervention
days
and
between
psychotherapeutic
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
TABLE 2 | Characteristics of the study sample (N = 27).
Variable
Category
n
(%)*
CATEGORICAL VARIABLES
Marital status
Single
20
(74.07%)
In a relationship
7
(25.93%)
Highest degree
High school or equivalent
24
(88.89%)
Bachelor’s degree
3
(11.11%)
Size of household
(including participant)**
1
1
(3.85%)
2
0
(0%)
3
1
(3.85%)
4
22
(84.62%)
5
2
(7.69%)
“I am very experienced in
using smartphones”
Strongly agree
7
(25.93%)
Agree
14
(51.85%)
Neutral
4
(14.81%)
Disagree
1
(3.70%)
Strongly disagree
1
(3.70%)
Variable (unit)
Mean
(SD) Range [min, max]
CONTINUOUS VARIABLES
Age (years)
24.32
(2.27)
[19.75, 28.70]
Full time education (years)
15.15
(1.38)
[12, 18]
*Percentages may not total 100 due to rounding; **Information from one subject missing;
max, maximum; min, minimum; SD, standard deviation.
techniques. Furthermore, we adjusted analyses for the condition
(experimental or sham/control condition) to which subjects
had been assigned within the larger randomized controlled
trial from which the data was derived. Hence, we entered the
following predictors into the model: (i) “pre- vs. post-micro-
intervention”, (ii) “micro-intervention day” (dimensional, day
1–13), iii) “psychotherapeutic technique” (trichotomous, see
above), and iv) “condition” (experimental vs. sham/control), as
well as the interactions of “pre- vs. post micro-intervention” with
“micro-intervention day”, “psychotherapeutic technique”, and
“condition”. We entered random intercept and random slope
parameters when this improved model fit, with the latter being
assessed based on Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC; Singer
and Willett, 2003). Furthermore, we tested whether entering
a higher order polynomial of the variable “micro-intervention
day” would improve model fit. We first fitted models including
main and interaction effects, as outlined above. In case of
the interaction effects being statistically not significant, we
repeated analyses with main effects only, leading to the main
results reported. We calculated 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
using the Wald method. For the main mixed model analyses,
we included all subjects that took part in at least 3 micro-
intervention sessions. Mixed models accommodated further
missing data.
To test whether average mood improvements from pre- to
post-micro-interventions were associated with overall baseline
mood improvements over all intervention days, we calculated
Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients between the
mean
of
the
non-missing
mood
changes
from
pre-
to
post-micro-interventions averaged across days 2–12 and change
in mood from pre-micro-intervention day 1 to pre-micro-
intervention day 13, separately for GB, AT, and CN mood.
All tests were two-tailed and we set the significance level at
0.05. We used the statistical software package R (version 3.2.3 and
above; R Project for Statistical Computing, RRID: SCR_001905;
R Core Team, 2015) for all data analyses and statistical testing,
including the packages to conduct the mixed models, “lme4”
(Bates et al., 2014) and “optimx” (Nash and Varadhan, 2011),
as well as further packages, required for data preparation
and descriptive statistics “car” (Fox and Weisberg, 2011),
“dplyr” (Wickham and Francois, 2015), “haven” (Wickham and
Miller, 2015), “Hmisc” (Frank and Dupont, 2015), “lmerTest”
(Kuznetsova et al., 2015), “lsmeans” (Lenth, 2016), “pastecs”
(Grosjean and Ibanez, 2014), and “tidyr” (Wickham, 2015).
RESULTS
Flow and Descriptive Information on Study
Participants
The flowchart of participants is provided in Figure 2. From
the 31 subjects included in the study, one participant did not
show up on experiment day 1 and hence neither received
instructions for nor participated in any smartphone-based micro-
intervention. Three other subjects did participate in <3 micro-
intervention sessions (one subject participated in 1 session
and two subjects participated in 2 sessions) and were hence
excluded from further analyses. All subjects were males of
Korean nationality. Characteristics of the study sample on
which the analyses are based (N = 27) are provided in
Table 2. (For the sake of transparency, characteristics of the full
study sample (N = 30) is provided in Supplementary Material
Table 3).
Descriptive Information on
Smartphone-Based Micro-Intervention
Sessions
The 27 subjects participated in 336 out of 351 possible
smartphone-based micro-intervention sessions in total (95.73%).
The mean number of micro-intervention sessions per subject
was 12.44 (standard deviation, SD = 0.80, Range: 11–13)
[respective information regarding the sample of N = 30
participants, who in total participated in 342 out of 390
possible micro-intervention sessions (87.69%) is provided in
Supplementary Material Table 3]. 26 sessions (7.74%) were
conducted at 0800 h or later but before 0900 h, 63 sessions
(18.75%) were conducted at 0900 h or later but before 1200 h,
54 sessions (16.07%) were conducted at 1200 h or later but
before 1500 h, 44 sessions (13.10%) were conducted at 1500 h
or later but before 1800 h, 69 sessions (20.54%) were conducted
at 1800 h or later but before 2100 h, 69 sessions (20.54%)
were conducted at 2100 h or later but before 0000 h, and 11
sessions (3.27%) were conducted at 0000 h or later but before
0300 h. The relative frequency of psychotherapeutic techniques
applied during the micro-intervention sessions is depicted in
Figure 3.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
FIGURE 2 | Participant flow through study.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
FIGURE 3 | Relative frequency of psychotherapeutic techniques
applied during the smartphone-based micro-intervention sessions.
Information on selected technique missing for one session; s, number of
sessions.
Main Results from the Mixed Model
Analyses
Changes in mood from pre- to post-micro-intervention and
across micro-intervention days are depicted in Figure 4 (MDMQ
good-bad mood; Figures 4B,A, respectively), Figure 5 (MDMQ
awake-tired mood; Figures 5B,A, respectively), and Figure 6
(MDMQ
calm-nervous
mood;
Figures 6B,A,
respectively).
Mood
changes
stratified
according
to
psychotherapeutic
technique are depicted in Figure 7. All mixed models included
a random intercept and slope of day varying among subjects.
Entering “micro-intervention day” as higher order than linear
polynomial did not improve model fit. In all three mixed models
(with GB, AT, and CN as outcome) none of the interaction terms
were statistically significant (see Supplementary Material Table 4
for related statistical parameters) and they were hence removed
from the models. This means that there was no indication that
changes in mood from pre- to post-micro-intervention differed
across micro-intervention days, between psychotherapeutic
techniques, and between conditions.
With regard to good or bad mood as outcome, mood
improved from pre- to post-micro-intervention [b = 0.464,
95%CI [0.068, 0.860], t(613.3) = 2.298, p = 0.022]. Increases in
mood across days were statistically non-significant [b = 0.051,
95%CI [–0.039, 0.140], t(26.8) = 1.112, p = 0.276]. With regard
to awake–tired (AT) mood as outcome, subjects became more
awake from pre- to post-micro-intervention [b = 0.514, 95%CI
[0.103, 0.925], t(612.4) = 2.456, p = 0.014], but not across days
[b = 0.002, 95%CI [−0.073, 0.077], t(25.5) = 0.048, p = 0.962].
With regard to calm–nervous (CN) mood as outcome, subjects
became calmer from pre- to post-micro-intervention [b = 0.685,
95%CI [0.360, 1.010], t(612.3) = 4.137, p < 0.001], but not
across days [b = −0.018, 95%CI [−0.088, 0.052], t(26.3) = 0.502,
p = 0.620].
Additional Results Regarding Mood
Changes, and Participants’ Feedback
Average
mood
improvements
from
pre-
to
post-micro-
interventions across day 2 to day 12 were significantly associated
with an increase in mood pre-micro-interventions from day 1 to
day 13 with regard to GB mood (r = 0.614, 95%CI [0.297, 0.809],
p < 0.001), but not AT mood (r = 0.279, 95%CI [−0.122, 0.602],
p = 0.167) and CN mood (r = 0.277, 95%CI [−0.124, 0.601],
p = 0.170) (calculations based on n = 26, due to missing data).
The feedback of the participants (N = 27) regarding the
number of days of the smartphone-based micro-intervention
revealed that 5 subjects (18.52%) agreed that 2 weeks were too
short to be successful, while 10 subjects (37.04%) disagreed (the
other 12 subjects were neutral); 13 subjects (48.15%) agreed that
2 weeks were well tolerable, while 3 subjects (11.11%) disagreed
(the other 11 subjects were neutral). Regarding the duration of
the sessions, 8 subjects (29.63%) agreed that the duration was
too short to be successful, while 13 subjects (48.10%) disagreed
(among which one subject even “strongly disagreed”; the other
6 subjects were neutral); 18 subjects (66.66%) agreed (among
which one subject even “strongly agreed”) that the duration was
well tolerable, while 2 subjects (7.40%) disagreed (among which
one subject even “strongly disagreed”) (the other seven subjects
were neutral). More detailed information on the feedback, as well
as respective information based on the sample of participants
who at least received the micro-intervention instructions (N =
30) with relative frequency of responses virtually identical to
those reported here, are provided in Supplementary Material
Table 2.
DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to scrutinize in a real-world
setting the use of smartphone-based micro-interventions in
form of psychotherapeutic techniques and related changes in
mood in a non-clinical sample. We hypothesized that mood
improved from pre- to post micro-intervention sessions. Our
hypothesis was confirmed. Subjects reported better mood and
being calmer and more awake at post- as compared to pre-micro-
intervention. However, there was no indication of increases in
mood across days. Notably, greater mood improvements (GB
mood) from pre- to post-micro-intervention were associated
with overall changes in mood from the 1st day until the last day,
which would be in line with micro-interventions incrementally
improving mood across days if successful on individual days,
even though our study design does not allow inferring causality
or making assumptions about the long-term stability of the
effects. There was no indication that mood improvements from
pre- to post-micro-intervention differed between techniques
or across the 13 micro-intervention days; hence there was
no evidence for habituation of potential micro-intervention
effects.
Participants conducted the vast majority of the requested
micro-interventions sessions, and only a minority of subjects
provided negative feedback regarding the number of micro-
intervention days or the duration of the sessions. This
indicates that a repeated application of smartphone-based micro-
intervention sessions is generally well tolerated. Still, some
individuals reported that they would have preferred a higher or
lower number of sessions or a longer or shorter training duration,
which indicates that personalization also of these parameters
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
FIGURE 4 | Good–bad mood (predicted marginal means, 95%CIs) pre- and post-micro-intervention, by the micro-intervention day (A) and across all
micro-intervention days (B). *b = 0.464, 95%CI: 0.068–0.860, t(613.3) = 2.298, p = 0.022; Higher values indicate better mood; In (A), for the
pre-micro-intervention values, the lower boundaries of the 95%CIs are depicted, for the post-micro-intervention values, the upper boundaries of the 95%CIs are
depicted; CI, confidence interval; MDMQ, Multidimensional Mood State Questionnaire; PMM, predicted marginal means.
FIGURE 5 | Awake–tired mood (predicted marginal means, 95%CIs) pre- and post-micro-intervention, by the micro-intervention day (A) and across all
micro-intervention days (B). *b = 0.514, 95%CI: 0.103–0.924, t(612.4) = 2.456, p = 0.014; Higher values indicate being more awake; In (A), for the
pre-micro-intervention values, the lower boundaries of the 95%CIs are depicted, for the post-micro-intervention values, the upper boundaries of the 95%CIs are
depicted; CI, confidence interval; MDMQ, Multidimensional Mood State Questionnaire; PMM, predicted marginal means.
may have the potential to further improve the acceptance of
smartphone-based micro-interventions.
Our findings extend previous evidence that short-term
interventions, using different strategies, can modify mood
in non-clinical samples in well-controlled laboratory settings
(Velten, 1968; Martin, 1990; Schaefer et al., 2010), by indicating
that this holds true when interventions are applied via
smartphone in a real-world setting. They are in line with
preliminary laboratory-based evidence that smartphone-based
interventions can elicit positive mood states (e.g., Cipresso et al.,
2012).
With regard to studies with clinical samples assessing
psychotherapeutic face-to-face settings, our findings are in
line
with
evidence
that
mindfulness-based
strategies
can
improve mood and distress (e.g., Brake et al., 2016), even
though the current study was only performed on a non-
clinical sample of participants. A recent meta-analysis reported
that online mindfulness-based intervention programs of 2–12
weeks duration were effective to reduce symptoms of mental
disorders, notably with larger effect sizes for interventions of
longer duration (Spijkerman et al., 2016). Furthermore, there
is preliminary evidence that smartphone-based mindfulness
intervention programs, lasting one to several weeks, may improve
mood and reduce stress or symptoms of mental disorders (e.g.,
Brake et al., 2016). Our findings—notably based on a non-
clinical sample of participants—are in line with this observation,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
FIGURE 6 | Calm–nervous mood (predicted marginal means, 95%CIs) pre- and post-micro-intervention, by the micro-intervention day (A) and across
all micro-intervention days (B). *b = 0.685, 95%CI: 0.360–1.010, t(612.3) = 4.137, p < 0.001; Higher values indicate being calmer; In (A), for the
pre-micro-intervention values, the lower boundaries of the 95%CIs are depicted, for the post-micro-intervention values, the upper boundaries of the 95%CIs are
depicted; CI, confidence interval; MDMQ, Multidimensional Mood State Questionnaire; PMM, predicted marginal means.
indicating that (i) mindfulness-based micro-interventions of only
several minutes duration, applied via smartphone, go along with
rapid mood improvements, and (ii) if these interventions are
successful during daily individual sessions, they are potentially
leading to mood improvements across 2 weeks, even though
we cannot make any assumptions about potential longer-term
effects. Furthermore, our findings are in line with evidence from
the field of smoking cessation, indicating that mobile phones
(however, primarily via text messaging), have been successfully
used to trigger behavior change (Whittaker et al., 2016). Notably,
studies on smartphone-based interventions that target mental
health related behavior do not always provide evidence that
the interventions have the intended effects; in contrast, some
interventions may even lead to opposite effects, at least in
subgroups (Gajecki et al., 2014).
Our study design does not allow to disentangle potential
processes underlying the mood changes observed in our study,
and to identify to which extent different features of the
intervention may have contributed to the observed mood
changes and the overall good engagement of study participants
with the digital intervention. One may speculate that the
use of prompts and reminders in our study has improved
digital engagement, in line with what has been previously
shown (Alkhaldi et al., 2016). Further, consistent with previous
evidence, the personal encounter between study personnel and
the participants preceding the real-world micro-interventions
may have enhanced intervention effects and digital engagement
(Palmqvist et al., 2007; Spek et al., 2007; Andersson and Cuijpers,
2009; Richards and Richardson, 2012; Baumeister et al., 2014).
Important strengths of this study include, first, the use
of psychotherapeutic techniques for which previous evidence
indicated potential to improve stress-related processes; second,
the participants’ individual selection of their preferred techniques
and, third, individual selection of training times; fourth, the
use of video-clip supported procedures, ensuring a standardized
application of the micro-intervention; and fifth, the use of mixed
model analyses, taking into account, amongst others, individual
mood variations across days.
There are also limitations. First, we did not include a
randomized control condition. Therefore, we cannot determine
which factors led to the mood related changes, and we cannot
exclude changes in mood driven by digital placebo effects
(Torous and Firth, 2016), which, however, is an issue not only
in our study but in numerous other studies on the effects
of psychotherapeutic interventions (Ioannidis, 2016). Future
studies should estimate the effects of micro-interventions on
mood within larger randomized controlled trials. Second, the
data presented here were collected within a larger study. We
cannot finally exclude that our findings were influenced by
procedures during the preceding study days. However, there was
no statistically significant association between the experimental
condition participants were assigned to on experiment day 1 and
smartphone-based micro-intervention-related mood changes
during the 13 real-world sessions, making it rather unlikely
that the randomization within the framework of the larger
study was of substantial relevance. Third, the study sample was
rather homogenous, with all participants being male and the
majority being rather experienced using smartphones. Notably,
given that males seek less traditional face-to-face treatment
for mental health issues than females (Rhodes et al., 2002),
males may be of special interest as target group for alternative
interventive approaches. Our findings should be generalized with
caution, and future studies are needed that target populations
of different cultural backgrounds and more heterogeneous
with regard to sex, age, educational background, and digital
literacy. Fourth, even though participants were of Korean
nationality, having Korean as a first language, written study
material was provided in English, which was not adapted or
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
FIGURE 7 | Mood changes (means, 95%CIs) from pre- to post-micro-intervention, stratified according to psychotherapeutic technique. Depending on
the scale, higher values indicate better mood, being more awake, and calmer, respectively; CI, confidence interval; s, number of sessions.
normed to the local population. However, all participants had
excellent knowledge of written English, and using the English
versions of assessment instruments ensured that well-validated
versions were applied. Fifth, without follow-up assessment, we
cannot draw any conclusion regarding the long-term stability
of the mood changes. Finally, we did not randomize the
order in which the different techniques were introduced to
the participants. Hence, we cannot exclude that order of
introduction may have influenced the individual choice of
techniques. However, identifying differences in mood changes
across psychotherapeutic techniques was not the main goal of
our study, and we would have needed a larger sample size and
randomized assignment to techniques to further scrutinize this
question. Notably, allowing participants to select the technique
of their choice increased external validity of our study design, as
smartphone-users usually substantially participate in the choice
of apps that they apply, and the individual selection may also have
improved engagement (Schueller, 2010).
Our findings may have different implications. They suggest
the applicability of smartphone-based micro-interventions based
on techniques that have been previously applied across
a range of therapeutic approaches, including mindfulness-
based psychotherapy. If our findings are corroborated in
randomized controlled settings and different patient groups,
targeted smartphone-based micro-interventions may represent a
promising tool to modify mood in real-world settings, as part
of more complex behavioral intervention technologies (BITs;
Mohr et al., 2014), and complementing other psychotherapeutic
interventions within blended treatments (Ly et al., 2015), and
in line with the precision medicine approach (Insel, 2014;
Collins and Varmus, 2015). Furthermore, they may be used
to provide in-the-moment support for non-clinical populations
to improve their mood, and allow delivering state-of-the-art
psychotherapeutic techniques in a non-stigmatizing fashion to
individuals who otherwise would not have access to therapy
(Morris et al., 2010).
As mentioned above, future randomized controlled trials are
needed to further scrutinize the effects of smartphone-based
micro-interventions on mood, including studies addressing
in detail the underlying mechanisms. Notably, alternative
methodological frameworks, such as the “Continuous Evaluation
of Evolving Behavioral Intervention Technologies (CEEBIT)”
approach (Mohr et al., 2013b) or the “Person-Based Approach
to Intervention Development” (Yardley et al., 2015), may
allow evaluating the micro-interventions in different application
contexts and help to further tailor applications based on
the micro-interventions toward the target user population.
In this context, we acknowledge that techniques used in the
present study (i.e., the micro-interventions based on video-
clips accessed via smartphones) may be considered rather
“conventional,” in light of the rapid technological advancements
made in smartphone technology. More recently, more advanced
techniques, such as game-like applications, have been used for
delivering smartphone-based psychotherapeutic interventions
(e.g., Franklin et al., 2016). However, we also note that the
advantage of our approach is that the video-clips can be easily
integrated into more complex interventive “apps” (mobile phone
applications) or within the contexts of communication routes,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
for example social media or messenger services (Dinakar et al.,
2015). These approaches, with proper steps taken to safeguard
information privacy, may confer low-barrier psychosocial
interventions. With regard to technological advances, one may
also consider combining the approach with the collection
of information based on ambulatory biomarkers (Ben Khelil
et al., 2011; Tegethoff et al., 2011; Choi et al., 2014), which
may allow the application of micro-interventions based on
multi-source information. Besides this, future studies should
elucidate emerging questions, such as (i) to which extend the
mood changes related to the micro-interventions depend on
preceding personal contact with the subjects undergoing the
micro-intervention, (ii) to which extend mood changes depend
on whether subjects self-selected the type of technique applied,
and (iii) whether individual mood changes triggered by a micro-
intervention session can be predicted by contextual or time
factors (Paredes et al., 2014), which will provide a basis for the
further personalization of interventions.
Taken together, we provided evidence that smartphone-
based micro-interventions are well-tolerated and go along with
improvements in mood. In line with the precision medicine
approach, smartphone-based micro-interventions may represent
a promising tool to modify mood in real-world settings.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GM, JL, SY, and MT designed the study; GM, JL, ES, and MT
prepared the study material and data acquisition; JL, ES, MO, EJ,
and HK recruited participants and acquired the data; ES, AB, and
JA entered the data and prepared it for statistical analyses; GM,
ES, and AB analyzed the data; GM, JL, and MT interpreted the
data; GM wrote the first draft of the manuscript; GM, JL, ES, AB,
MO, EJ, HK, JA, SY, and MT critically revised the manuscript
for important intellectual content; MT obtained funding; All
authors gave final approval of the manuscript version to be
published and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work
in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity
of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and
resolved.
FUNDING
GM, JL, and MT receive funding from the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) within the Global Research
Network Program (under project no. 2013S1A2A2035364). MT
receives funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation,
SNSF (project no. PZ00P1_137023). JL receives funding from
the NRF, Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future Planning,
Korea
(2015R1A2A2A03004462)
and
the
Korean
Health
Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Korea
(HI12C1847); GM receives funding from the SNSF (project no.
100014_135328).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.
2016.01112
REFERENCES
Ahmedani, B. K., Crotty, N., Abdulhak, M. M., and Ondersma, S. J. (2015).
Pilot feasibility study of a brief, tailored mobile health intervention for
depression among patients with chronic pain. Behav. Med. 41, 25–32. doi:
10.1080/08964289.2013.867827
Alkhaldi, G., Hamilton, F. L., Lau, R., Webster, R., Michie, S., and Murray,
E. (2016). The effectiveness of prompts to promote engagement with
digital interventions: a systematic review. J. Med. Internet Res. 18, e6. doi:
10.2196/jmir.4790
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (dsm-5). Arlington, TX: American Psychiatric Association.
Andersson, G., and Cuijpers, P. (2009). Internet-based and other computerized
psychological treatments for adult depression: a meta-analysis. Cogn. Behav.
Ther. 38, 196–205. doi: 10.1080/16506070903318960
Andersson, G., Cuijpers, P., Carlbring, P., Riper, H., and Hedman, E. (2014).
Guided internet-based vs. Face-to-face cognitive behavior therapy for
psychiatric and somatic disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
World Psychiatry 13, 288–295. doi: 10.1002/wps.20151
Asselbergs, J., Ruwaard, J., Ejdys, M., Schrader, N., Sijbrandij, M., and Riper, H.
(2016). Mobile phone-based unobtrusive ecological momentary assessment
of day-to-day mood: an explorative study. J. Med. Internet Res. 18, e72. doi:
10.2196/jmir.5505
Bakker, D., Kazantzis, N., Rickwood, D., and Rickard, N. (2016). Mental
health smartphone apps: review and evidence-based recommendations
for
future
developments.
JMIR
Ment.
Health
3,
e7.
doi:
10.2196/
mental.4984
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S. (2014). Fitting linear mixed-
effects models using lme4. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5823. Available online at:
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/lme4/
Baumeister, H., Reichler, L., Munzinger, M., and Lin, J. (2014). The impact of
guidance on internet-based mental health interventions—a systematic review.
Internet Interv. 1, 205–215. doi: 10.1016/j.invent.2014.08.003
Ben Khelil, M., Tegethoff, M., Meinlschmidt, G., Jamey, C., Ludes, B., and Raul,
J. S. (2011). Simultaneous measurement of endogenous cortisol, cortisone,
dehydroepiandrosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate in nails by use
of uplc-ms-ms. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 401, 1153–1162. doi: 10.1007/s00216-011-
5172-3
Ben-Zeev, D., Brenner, C. J., Begale, M., Duffecy, J., Mohr, D. C., and
Mueser, K. T. (2014). Feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary efficacy of a
smartphone intervention for schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 40, 1244–1253.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbu033
Ben-Zeev, D., Schueller, S. M., Begale, M., Duffecy, J., Kane, J. M., and Mohr, D.
C. (2015). Strategies for mhealth research: lessons from 3 mobile intervention
studies. Adm. Policy Ment. Health 42, 157–167. doi: 10.1007/s10488-014-0556-2
Bower, J. L., and Christensen, C. M. (1995). Disruptive technologies: catching the
wave. Harv. Bus. Rev. 73, 43–53.
Bradley, M. M., and Lang, P. J. (1994). Measuring emotion: the self-assessment
manikin and the semantic differential. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 25, 49–59.
doi: 10.1016/0005-7916(94)90063-9
Brake, C. A., Sauer-Zavala, S., Boswell, J. F., Gallagher, M. W., Farchione, T.
J., and Barlow, D. H. (2016). Mindfulness-based exposure strategies as a
transdiagnostic mechanism of change: an exploratory alternating treatment
design. Behav. Ther. 47, 225–238. doi: 10.1016/j.beth.2015.10.008
Choi, S., Kim, S., Yang, J.-S., Lee, J.-H., Joo, C., and Jung, H.-I. (2014).
Real-time measurement of human salivary cortisol for the assessment of
psychological stress using a smartphone. Sens. Bio-Sens. Res. 2, 8–11. doi:
10.1016/j.sbsr.2014.08.001
Cipresso, P., Serino, S., Villani, D., Repetto, C., Sellitti, L., Albani, G., et al.
(2012). Is your phone so smart to affect your state? An exploratory study
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
based on psychophysiological measures. Neurocomputing 84, 23–30. doi:
10.1016/j.neucom.2011.12.027
Clough, B. A., and Casey, L. M. (2015). The smart therapist: a look to the future
of smartphones and mhealth technologies in psychotherapy. Prof. Psychol. Res.
Pr. 46, 147. doi: 10.1037/pro0000011
Collins, F. S., and Varmus, H. (2015). A new initiative on precision medicine. N.
Engl. J. Med. 372, 793–795. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1500523
Collins, P. Y., Patel, V., Joestl, S. S., March, D., Insel, T. R., Daar, A. S., et al.
(2011). Grand challenges in global mental health. Nature 475, 27–30. doi:
10.1038/475027a
Cuijpers, P., Donker, T., van Straten, A., Li, J., and Andersson, G. (2010). Is guided
self-help as effective as face-to-face psychotherapy for depression and anxiety
disorders? A systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative outcome
studies. Psychol. Med. 40, 1943–1957. doi: 10.1017/S0033291710000772
deCharms, R. C., Maeda, F., Glover, G. H., Ludlow, D., Pauly, J. M., Soneji,
D., et al. (2005). Control over brain activation and pain learned by using
real-time functional mri. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 18626–18631. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0505210102
Dinakar, K., Chen, J., Lieberman, H., Picard, R., and Filbin, R. (2015). “Mixed-
initiative real-time topic modeling & visualization for crisis counseling,” in
IUI’15 Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces (New York, NY: ACM), 417–426. Available online at: http://dl.acm.
org/citation.cfm?id=2701395
Donker, T., Petrie, K., Proudfoot, J., Clarke, J., Birch, M. R., and Christensen,
H. (2013). Smartphones for smarter delivery of mental health programs: a
systematic review. J. Med. Internet Res. 15, e247. doi: 10.2196/jmir.2791
Ebert, D. D., Zarski, A. C., Christensen, H., Stikkelbroek, Y., Cuijpers, P., Berking,
M., et al. (2015). Internet and computer-based cognitive behavioral therapy
for anxiety and depression in youth: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
outcome trials. PLoS ONE 10:e0119895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119895
Ehrenreich, B., Righter, B., Rocke, D. A., Dixon, L., and Himelhoch, S. (2011).
Are mobile phones and handheld computers being used to enhance delivery
of psychiatric treatment? A systematic review. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 199, 886–891.
doi: 10.1097/NMD.0b013e3182349e90
Ericsson (2015). Ericsson Mobility Report [Online]. Available online at: http://
www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2015/ericsson-mobility-report-june-2015.pdf
(Accessed February 14, 2016).
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., and Buchner, A. (2007). G∗ power 3: a flexible
statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical
sciences. Behav. Res. Methods 39, 175–191. doi: 10.3758/BF03193146
Fox, J., and Weisberg, S. (2011). An {r} Companion to Applied Regression.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Available online at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/car/
Frank, E. H. Jr., and Dupont, C. (2015). Hmisc: Harrell Miscellaneous. Available
online at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Hmisc/
Franklin, J. C., Fox, K. R., Franklin, C. R., Kleiman, E. M., Ribeiro, J. D.,
Jaroszewski, A. C., et al. (2016). A brief mobile app reduces nonsuicidal
and suicidal self-injury: evidence from three randomized controlled trials.
J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 84, 544–557. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000093
Fredrickson,
B.
L.
(2004).
The
broaden-and-build
theory
of
positive
emotions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 359, 1367–1377. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2004.1512
Gajecki, M., Berman, A. H., Sinadinovic, K., Rosendahl, I., and Andersson, C.
(2014). Mobile phone brief intervention applications for risky alcohol use
among university students: a randomized controlled study. Addict. Sci. Clin.
Pract. 9:11. doi: 10.1186/1940-0640-9-11
Griffiths, K. M., Farrer, L., and Christensen, H. (2010). The efficacy of internet
interventions for depression and anxiety disorders: A review of randomised
controlled trials. Med. J. Aust. 192, S4–S11.
Grosjean, P., and Ibanez, F. (2014). Pastecs: Package for Analysis of Space-Time
Ecological Series. Available online at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
pastecs/
Gustafson, D. H., McTavish, F. M., Chih, M. Y., Atwood, A. K., Johnson, R. A.,
Boyle, M. G., et al. (2014). A smartphone application to support recovery
from alcoholism: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 71, 566–572. doi:
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.4642
Harrison, A. M., and Goozee, R. (2014). Psych-related iphone apps. J. Ment. Health
23, 48–50. doi: 10.3109/09638237.2013.869575
Holmes, E. A., Arntz, A., and Smucker, M. R. (2007). Imagery rescripting in
cognitive behaviour therapy: images, treatment techniques and outcomes.
J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 38, 297–305. doi: 10.1016/j.jbtep.2007.10.007
Holmes, E. A., Mathews, A., Dalgleish, T., and Mackintosh, B. (2006). Positive
interpretation training: effects of mental imagery versus verbal training on
positive mood. Behav. Ther. 37, 237–247. doi: 10.1016/j.beth.2006.02.002
Insel, T. R. (2014). The nimh research domain criteria (rdoc) project:
precision medicine for psychiatry. Am. J. Psychiatry 171, 395–397. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.14020138
Ioannidis, J. P. (1998). Effect of the statistical significance of results on the time
to completion and publication of randomized efficacy trials. J. Am. Med. Assoc.
279, 281–286. doi: 10.1001/jama.279.4.281
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2016). Most psychotherapies do not really work, but those that
might work should be assessed in biased studies. Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci. doi:
10.1017/S2045796015000888 . [Epub ahead of print].
Ishihara, S., and Force, R. A. A. (1943). Ishihara Tests for Colour Blindness. Sydney,
NSW: Shephard & Newman.
Ito, L. M., de Araujo, L. A., Tess, V. L., de Barros-Neto, T. P., Asbahr, F. R., and
Marks, I. (2001). Self-exposure therapy for panic disorder with agoraphobia:
randomised controlled study of external v. Interoceptive self-exposure. Br. J.
Psychiatry 178, 331–336. doi: 10.1192/bjp.178.4.331
Kay, M., Santos, J., and Takane, M. (2011). Mhealth: New horizons for Health
through Mobile Technologies: Based on the Findings of the Second Global Survey
on ehealth (Global Observatory for ehealth Series, Volume 3). Geneva: World
Health Organization.
Kazdin, A. E., and Blase, S. L. (2011). Rebooting psychotherapy research and
practice to reduce the burden of mental illness. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6, 21–37.
doi: 10.1177/1745691610393527
Kim, D. Y., Yoo, S. S., Tegethoff, M., Meinlschmidt, G., and Lee, J. H.
(2015). The inclusion of functional connectivity information into fmri-based
neurofeedback improves its efficacy in the reduction of cigarette cravings.
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 1552–1572. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00802
Klee, A., Stacy, M., Rosenheck, R., Harkness, L., and Tsai, J. (2016). Interest
in technology-based therapies hampered by access: a survey of veterans
with serious mental illnesses. Psychiatr. Rehabil. J. 39, 173–179. doi:
10.1037/prj0000180
Kleinke, C. L., Peterson, T. R., and Rutledge, T. R. (1998). Effects of self-generated
facial expressions on mood. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 74:272. doi: 10.1037/0022-
3514.74.1.272
Kostkova, P. (2015). Grand challenges in digital health. Front. Public Health 3:134.
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2015.00134
Kuester,
A.,
Niemeyer,
H.,
and
Knaevelsrud,
C.
(2016).
Internet-based
interventions for posttraumatic stress: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 43, 1–16. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.11.004
Kumar, S., Nilsen, W. J., Abernethy, A., Atienza, A., Patrick, K., Pavel, M., et al.
(2013). Mobile health technology evaluation: the mhealth evidence workshop.
Am. J. Prev. Med. 45, 228–236. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2013.03.017
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., and Christensen, R. H. B. (2015). Lmertest: Tests
in Linear Mixed Effects Models. Available online at: https://cran.r-project.org/
web/packages/lmerTest/
Lane, J. D., Seskevich, J. E., and Pieper, C. F. (2007). Brief meditation training
can improve perceived stress and negative mood. Altern. Ther. Health Med. 13,
38–44.
Lenth, R. V. (2016). Least-squares means: the {r} package {lsmeans}. J. Stat. Softw.
69, 1–33. doi: 10.18637/jss.v069.i01. Available online at: https://cran.r-project.
org/web/packages/lsmeans/
Lin, W., Hu, J., and Gong, Y. (2015). Is it helpful for individuals with minor
depression to keep smiling? An event-related potentials analysis. Soc. Behav.
Pers. 43, 383–396. doi: 10.2224/sbp.2015.43.3.383
Lindhiem, O., Bennett, C. B., Rosen, D., and Silk, J. (2015). Mobile technology
boosts the effectiveness of psychotherapy and behavioral interventions: a meta-
analysis. Behav. Modif. 39, 785–804. doi: 10.1177/0145445515595198
Ly, K. H., Topooco, N., Cederlund, H., Wallin, A., Bergström, J., Molander,
O., et al. (2015). Smartphone-supported versus full behavioural activation
for depression: a randomised controlled trial. PLoS ONE 10:e0126559. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0126559
Ly, K. H., Trüschel, A., Jarl, L., Magnusson, S., Windahl, T., Johansson, R.,
et al. (2014). Behavioural activation versus mindfulness-based guided self-help
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
14
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
treatment administered through a smartphone application: a randomised
controlled trial. BMJ Open 4:e003440. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003440
Mani, M., Kavanagh, D. J., Hides, L., and Stoyanov, S. R. (2015). Review and
evaluation of mindfulness-based iphone apps. JMIR mHealth and uHealth
3:e82. doi: 10.2196/mhealth.4328
Martin, M. (1990). On the induction of mood. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 10, 669–697. doi:
10.1016/0272-7358(90)90075-L
McClernon, F. J., and Roy Choudhury, R. (2013). I am your smartphone, and
i know you are about to smoke: the application of mobile sensing and
computing approaches to smoking research and treatment. Nicotine Tob. Res.
15, 1651–1654. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntt054
Melioli, T., Bauer, S., Franko, D. L., Moessner, M., Ozer, F., Chabrol, H., et al.
(2016). Reducing eating disorder symptoms and risk factors using the internet:
a meta-analytic review. Int. J. Eat. Disord. 49, 19–31. doi: 10.1002/eat.22477
Mohr, D. C., Burns, M. N., Schueller, S. M., Clarke, G., and Klinkman, M. (2013a).
Behavioral intervention technologies: evidence review and recommendations
for future research in mental health. Gen. Hosp. Psychiatry 35, 332–338. doi:
10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2013.03.008
Mohr, D. C., Cheung, K., Schueller, S. M., Hendricks Brown, C., and Duan,
N. (2013b). Continuous evaluation of evolving behavioral intervention
technologies. Am. J. Prev. Med. 45, 517–523. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2013.06.006
Mohr, D. C., Schueller, S. M., Montague, E., Burns, M. N., and Rashidi, P. (2014).
The behavioral intervention technology model: an integrated conceptual and
technological framework for ehealth and mhealth interventions. J. Med.
Internet Res. 16:e146. doi: 10.2196/jmir.3077
Morris, M. E., and Aguilera, A. (2012). Mobile, social, and wearable computing
and the evolution of psychological practice. Prof. Psychol. Res. Pr. 43, 622. doi:
10.1037/a0029041
Morris, M. E., Kathawala, Q., Leen, T. K., Gorenstein, E. E., Guilak, F., DeLeeuw,
W., et al. (2010). Mobile therapy: case study evaluations of a cell phone
application for emotional self-awareness. J. Med. Internet Res. 12, e10. doi:
10.2196/jmir.1371
Murray, C. J., Vos, T., Lozano, R., Naghavi, M., Flaxman, A. D., Michaud,
C., et al. (2012). Disability-adjusted life years (dalys) for 291 diseases and
injuries in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the global burden
of disease study 2010. Lancet 380, 2197–2223. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)
61689-4
Nash, J. C., and Varadhan, R. (2011). Unifying optimization algorithms
to aid software system users: optimx for r. J. Stat. Softw. 43, 1–14.
doi: 10.18637/jss.v043.i09. Available online at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/optimx/
Newby, J. M., McKinnon, A., Kuyken, W., Gilbody, S., and Dalgleish, T.
(2015). Systematic review and meta-analysis of transdiagnostic psychological
treatments for anxiety and depressive disorders in adulthood. Clin. Psychol. Rev.
40, 91–110. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.06.002
Newby, J. M., Twomey, C., Yuan Li, S. S., and Andrews, G. (2016). Transdiagnostic
computerised cognitive behavioural therapy for depression and anxiety: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Affect. Disord. 199, 30–41. doi:
10.1016/j.jad.2016.03.018
Nicholas, J., Larsen, M. E., Proudfoot, J., and Christensen, H. (2015). Mobile apps
for bipolar disorder: a systematic review of features and content quality. J. Med.
Internet Res. 17, e198. doi: 10.2196/jmir.4581
Oldfield, R. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness. Neuropsychologia
9, 97–113. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(71)90067-4
Olesen, J., Gustavsson, A., Svensson, M., Wittchen, H. U., and Jonsson, B. (2012).
The economic cost of brain disorders in europe. Eur. J. Neurol. 19, 155–162.
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2011.03590.x
Olff, M. (2015). Mobile mental health: a challenging research agenda. Eur. J.
Psychotraumatol. 6:27882. doi: 10.3402/ejpt.v6.27882
Oliver, M. I., Pearson, N., Coe, N., and Gunnell, D. (2005). Help-seeking behaviour
in men and women with common mental health problems: cross-sectional
study. Br. J. Psychiatry 186, 297–301. doi: 10.1192/bjp.186.4.297
Olthuis, J. V., Watt, M. C., Bailey, K., Hayden, J. A., and Stewart, S.
H. (2016). Therapist-supported internet cognitive behavioural therapy for
anxiety disorders in adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 3:CD011565. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD011565.pub2
Orme-Johnson, D. W., and Barnes, V. A. (2014). Effects of the transcendental
meditation technique on trait anxiety: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled
trials.
J.
Altern.
Complement.
Med.
20,
330–341.
doi:
10.1089/acm.2013.0204
Palmqvist, B., Carlbring, P., and Andersson, G. (2007). Internet-delivered
treatments with or without therapist input: does the therapist factor have
implications for efficacy and cost? Expert Rev. Pharmacoecon. Outcomes Res.
7, 291–297. doi: 10.1586/14737167.7.3.291
Paredes, P., Gilad-Bachrach, R., Czerwinski, M., Roseway, A., Rowan, K., and
Hernandez, J. (2014). “Poptherapy: coping with stress through pop-culture,”
in PervasiveHealth 2014, (Gent: Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-
Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering (ICST)), 109–117. Available
online at: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2686909
Pollatos, O., Matthias, E., and Keller, J. (2015). When interoception helps to
overcome negative feelings caused by social exclusion. Front. Psychol. 6:786.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg,.2015.00786
R Core Team (2015). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna.
Rhodes, A. E., Goering, P. N., To, T., and Williams, J. I. (2002). Gender
and outpatient mental health service use. Soc. Sci. Med. 54, 1–10. doi:
10.1016/S0277-9536(01)00002-8
Richards,
D.,
and
Richardson,
T.
(2012).
Computer-based
psychological
treatments for depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin. Psychol.
Rev. 32, 329–342. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2012.02.004
Richards, D., Richardson, T., Timulak, L., and McElvaney, J. (2015). The
efficacy of internet-delivered treatment for generalized anxiety disorder:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Internet Interv. 2, 272–282. doi:
10.1016/j.invent.2015.07.003
Riley, W. T., Glasgow, R. E., Etheredge, L., and Abernethy, A. P. (2013). Rapid,
responsive, relevant (r3) research: a call for a rapid learning health research
enterprise. Clin. Transl. Med. 2:10. doi: 10.1186/2001-1326-2-10
Riper, H., Blankers, M., Hadiwijaya, H., Cunningham, J., Clarke, S., Wiers, R.,
et al. (2014). Effectiveness of guided and unguided low-intensity internet
interventions for adult alcohol misuse: a meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 9:e99912.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099912
Schaefer, A., Nils, F., Sanchez, X., and Philippot, P. (2010). Assessing the
effectiveness of a large database of emotion-eliciting films: a new tool
for emotion researchers. Cogn. Emotion 24, 1153–1172. doi: 10.1080/
02699930903274322
Schueller, S. M. (2010). Preferences for positive psychology exercises. J. Posit.
Psychol. 5, 192–203. doi: 10.1080/17439761003790948
Shallcross, A. J., Troy, A. S., Boland, M., and Mauss, I. B. (2010). Let it
be: accepting negative emotional experiences predicts decreased negative
affect and depressive symptoms. Behav. Res. Ther. 48, 921–929. doi:
10.1016/j.brat.2010.05.025
Shen, N., Levitan, M. J., Johnson, A., Bender, J. L., Hamilton-Page, M., Jadad,
A. A., et al. (2015). Finding a depression app: a review and content analysis
of the depression app marketplace. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 3, e16. doi:
10.2196/mhealth.3713
Singer, J. D., and Willett, J. B. (2003). Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Spek, V., Cuijpers, P., Nyklícek, I., Riper, H., Keyzer, J., and Pop, V.
(2007).
Internet-based
cognitive
behaviour
therapy
for
symptoms
of
depression and anxiety: a meta-analysis. Psychol. Med. 37, 319–328. doi:
10.1017/S0033291706008944
Spijkerman, M., Pots, W., and Bohlmeijer, E. (2016). Effectiveness of online
mindfulness-based interventions in improving mental health: a review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 45, 102–114.
doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2016.03.009
Steyer, R. (2014). Mdmq Questionnaire (English Version of Mdbf) [Online].
Jena: Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Institut für Psychologie, Lehrstuhl für
Methodenlehre und Evaluationsforschung. Available online at: https://www.
metheval.uni-jena.de/mdbf.php (Accessed April 4, 2016).
Steyer, R., Schwenkmezger, P., Notz, P., and Eid, M. (1997). Der Mehrdimensionale
Befindlichkeitsfragebogen (mdbf): Handanweisung [The Multidimensional Mood
State Questionnaire (mdmq): Manual]. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Tegethoff, M., Raul, J. S., Jamey, C., Khelil, M. B., Ludes, B., and Meinlschmidt,
G. (2011). Dehydroepiandrosterone in nails of infants: a potential biomarker
of intrauterine responses to maternal stress. Biol. Psychol. 87, 414–420. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2011.05.007
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
15
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
 Meinlschmidt et al.
Smartphone-Based Micro-Interventions
Thibault, R. T., Lifshitz, M., and Raz, A. (2016). The self-regulating brain and
neurofeedback: experimental science and clinical promise. Cortex 74, 247–261.
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.10.024
Thompson-Hollands, J., Sauer-Zavala, S., and Barlow, D. H. (2014). Cbt and the
future of personalized treatment: a proposal. Depress. Anxiety 31, 909–911. doi:
10.1002/da.22301
Torous, J., and Firth, J. (2016). The digital placebo effect: mobile mental health
meets clinical psychiatry. Lancet Psychiatry 3, 100–102. doi: 10.1016/S2215-
0366(15)00565-9
Torous, J., and Powell, A. C. (2015). Current research and trends in the use of
smartphone applications for mood disorders. Internet Interv. 2, 169–173. doi:
10.1016/j.invent.2015.03.002
Velten, E. (1968). A laboratory task for induction of mood states. Behav. Res. Ther.
6, 473–482. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(68)90028-4
Watts, S., Mackenzie, A., Thomas, C., Griskaitis, A., Mewton, L., Williams, A., et al.
(2013). Cbt for depression: a pilot rct comparing mobile phone vs. Computer.
BMC Psychiatry 13:49. doi: 10.1186/1471-244x-13-49
Whittaker, R., McRobbie, H., Bullen, C., Rodgers, A., and Gu, Y. (2016). Mobile
phone-based interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
4:CD006611. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006611.pub4
Wickham, H. (2015). Tidyr: Easily Tidy Data with “Spread()” and “Gather()”
Functions. Available online at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tidyr/
Wickham, H., and Francois, R. (2015). Dplyr: A Grammar of Data Manipulation.
Available online at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/dplyr/
Wickham, H., and Miller, E. (2015). Haven: Import Spss, Stata and Sas Files.
Available online at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/haven/
Wilamowska, Z. A., Thompson-Hollands, J., Fairholme, C. P., Ellard, K.
K., Farchione, T. J., and Barlow, D. H. (2010). Conceptual background,
development,
and
preliminary
data
from
the
unified
protocol
for
transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders. Depress. Anxiety 27,
882–890. doi: 10.1002/da.20735
Wittchen, H.-U., Jacobi, F., Rehm, J., Gustavsson, A., Svensson, M., Jönsson, B.,
et al. (2011). The size and burden of mental disorders and other disorders
of the brain in europe 2010. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 21, 655–679. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2011.07.018
Yardley, L., Morrison, L., Bradbury, K., and Muller, I. (2015). The person-
based
approach
to
intervention
development:
application
to
digital
health-related behavior change interventions. J. Med. Internet Res. 17,
e30. doi: 10.2196/jmir.4055
Yoo, S. S., Lee, J. H., O’Leary, H., Panych, L. P., and Jolesz, F. A. (2008).
Neurofeedback fmri-mediated learning and consolidation of regional brain
activation during motor imagery. Int. J. Imaging Syst. Technol. 18, 69–78. doi:
10.1002/ima.20139
Zachariae, R., Lyby, M. S., Ritterband, L. M., and O’Toole, M. S. (2016). Efficacy
of internet-delivered cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia–a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Sleep Med. Rev. 30,
1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2015.10.004
Zeevi, D., Korem, T., Zmora, N., Israeli, D., Rothschild, D., Weinberger, A., et al.
(2015). Personalized nutrition by prediction of glycemic responses. Cell 163,
1079–1094. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.001
Conflict of Interest Statement: GM acts as consultant for Janssen Research &
Development, LLC.
The other authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Meinlschmidt, Lee, Stalujanis, Belardi, Oh, Jung, Kim,
Alfano, Yoo and Tegethoff. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
16
July 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1112
