 Loss of DJ-1 impairs antioxidant response by altered glutamine and
serine metabolism
J. Meiser a, S. Delcambre a, A. Wegner a, C. Jäger a, J. Ghelfi a, A. Fouquier d'Herouel a, X. Dong a, D. Weindl a,
C. Stautner c, Y. Nonnenmacher a, A. Michelucci a,k, O. Popp j, F. Giesert c, S. Schildknecht b, L. Krämer a,
J.G. Schneider a,i, D. Woitalla g, W. Wurst c,d,e,f, A. Skupin a,h, D.M. Vogt Weisenhorn c, R. Krüger a,
M. Leist b, K. Hiller a,⁎
a Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, L-4367 Belvaux, Luxembourg
b Doerenkamp-Zbinden Chair for In Vitro Toxicology and Biomedicine, University of Konstanz, Konstanz D-78457, Germany
c Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Developmental Genetics, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
d Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen e. V. (DZNE) Standort München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 17, 81377 München, Germany
e Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Adolf-Butenandt-Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Schillerstrasse 44, 80336 München, Germany
f Technische Universität München-Weihenstephan, Lehrstuhl für Entwicklungsgenetik, c/o Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
g Neurology, St. Josef Hospital, Ruhr-University, Gudrunstr. 56, 44780 Bochum, Germany
h National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States
i Saarland University Medical Center, Department of Internal Medicine II, Homburg/Saar, Germany
j Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Max-Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Roessle Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany
k NorLux Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 84, Val Fleuri, L-1526, Luxembourg
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 17 July 2015
Revised 16 January 2016
Accepted 20 January 2016
Available online 1 February 2016
The oncogene DJ-1 has been originally identified as a suppressor of PTEN. Further on, loss-of-function mutations
have been described as a causative factor in Parkinson's disease (PD). DJ-1 has an important function in cellular
antioxidant responses, but its role in central metabolism of neurons is still elusive. We applied stable isotope
assisted metabolic profiling to investigate the effect of a functional loss of DJ-1 and show that DJ-1 deficient neu-
ronal cells exhibit decreased glutamine influx and reduced serine biosynthesis. By providing precursors for GSH
synthesis, these two metabolic pathways are important contributors to cellular antioxidant response. Down-
regulation of these pathways, as a result of loss of DJ-1 leads to an impaired antioxidant response. Furthermore,
DJ-1 deficient mouse microglia showed a weak but constitutive pro-inflammatory activation. The combined ef-
fects of altered central metabolism and constitutive activation of glia cells raise the susceptibility of dopaminergic
neurons towards degeneration in patients harboring mutated DJ-1. Our work reveals metabolic alterations lead-
ing to increased cellular instability and identifies potential new intervention points that can further be studied in
the light of novel translational medicine approaches.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Parkinson's disease
Mitochondrial metabolism
Glutamine
Serine
Folate mediated one-carbon metabolism
Oxidative stress
ROS
Glutathione
Stable isotope-assisted metabolomics
GC/MS
1. Introduction
DJ-1 (PARK 7) is expressed in different organs throughout the body
and has first been identified as an oncogene together with activated
Ras (Nagakubo et al., 1997). High levels of DJ-1 have been associated
with malignancy of tumor development (Nagakubo et al., 1997;
Davidson et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2005; Yuen et al., 2008). Mechanistical-
ly, DJ-1 has been identified as a repressor of the phosphatase PTEN,
which itself is a repressor of PKB/AKT (Stambolic et al., 1998; Sun
et
al.,
1999).
In
case
of
DJ-1
overexpression,
PKB/AKT
is
hyperphosphorylated, promoting cell survival and anaplerotic metabo-
lism needed for proliferation (Kim et al., 2005). In cancer cells, DJ-1 has
been identified as a positive regulator of NRF2 (Clements et al., 2006), a
master regulator in the antioxidant response. NRF2 has also been shown
to influence central metabolism (Hayes and Dinkova-Kostova, 2014).
However, its role in neuronal metabolism remains to be elucidated.
While DJ-1 overexpression provokes oncogenesis, loss of function muta-
tions in DJ-1 have been associated with a familial autosomal recessive
form of Parkinson's disease (PD) with an early onset of disease progres-
sion (Bonifati, 2003; Bonifati et al., 2003; Van Duijn et al., 2001). PD
leads to motor and non-motor symptoms with hallmarks such as
Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
⁎ Corresponding author at: University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg Centre for Systems
Biomedicine, 6, avenue du Swing, L-4367 Belvaux, Luxembourg.
E-mail address: karsten.hiller@uni.lu (K. Hiller).
Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2016.01.019
0969-9961/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Neurobiology of Disease
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynbdi
 elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and specifically, a decay
of dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons of the substantia nigra pars
compacta (Antony et al., 2013).
Lack of DJ-1 hampers quenching of cellular ROS, affecting mitochon-
drial and cellular integrity (Clements et al., 2006; Ariga et al., 2013;
Irrcher et al., 2010; Kahle et al., 2009; Krebiehl et al., 2010). Within
the brain, DJ-1 is expressed in neuronal as well as non-neuronal cells
(Bader et al., 2005) and is up-regulated with increasing oxidative stress
(Baulac et al., 2009). Oxidation of cysteine residues in DJ-1 leads to a
shift of the isoelectric point (pI) and subsequent relocation of the pro-
tein to the nucleus, as well as the mitochondrial membrane (Canet-
Avilés et al., 2004). ROS production and a concomitant shift of the pI
have also been shown in cells exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), an
inducer of inflammatory responses (Mitsumoto and Nakagawa, 2001)
indicating further implications in the context of neuroinflammation
and mitochondrial metabolism (Kim et al., 2013; Trudler et al., 2014;
Waak et al., 2009). Activation of microglia has been found to correlate
with the occurrence of neurodegenerative diseases (Brown and Neher,
2010; Meiser et al., 2013).
Although there is evidence that DJ-1 regulates metabolism directly
(Lee et al., 2012) and indirectly (Clements et al., 2006; Aleyasin et al.,
2010; van der Brug et al., 2008), a detailed understanding of its role in
central metabolism, especially in the context of PD, is still missing.
Here, we investigated the impact of a functional loss of DJ-1 on cel-
lular metabolism. Our study demonstrates that loss of DJ-1 affects
central metabolism by decreasing glutamine influx and serine biosyn-
thesis. These two metabolic pathways provide the precursors gluta-
mate, serine and glycine for de novo synthesis of glutathione. In line
with these metabolic flux changes, we observed decreased glutathione
levels in DJ-1 deficient cells.
Additionally, DJ-1 deficient mouse microglia showed a weak but
constitutive pro-inflammatory phenotype. We reason that the combi-
nation of weak pro-inflammatory activation with metabolic dysfunction
renders DAergic neurons more susceptible for early cell death.
2. Results
2.1. Loss of DJ-1 increases susceptibility to oxidative stress
To investigate the effect of loss of DJ-1 on central metabolism, we
targeted DJ-1 by RNAi in the human tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive
neuronal cell model LUHMES (Scholz et al., 2011) (Fig. 1a and b; S1). As
a control we used non-specific shRNA and generated shCtrl LUHMES
cells in parallel to the shDJ-1 cells. LUHMES cells are conditionally im-
mortalized and are postmitotic after differentiation (Scholz et al., 2011).
To confirm our working hypothesis that DJ-1 deficient cells are more
susceptible to oxidative stress (Zhou and Freed, 2005), we first per-
formed a viability assay after treating the cells with different concentra-
tions of the ROS-inducing compound 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)
(Fig. 1c). 6-OHDA treated LUHMES cells lacking DJ-1 showed 30–40%
Fig. 1. Loss of DJ-1 increases sensitivity to oxidative stress and affects glutathione homeostasis. (a–b) Western blot and qPCR analysis demonstrating DJ-1 knockdown. (c) Viability assay of
LUHMES cells in response to oxidative stress. Cells were treated for six hours with different concentrations of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA). (d–e) Relative quantification of (d) GSH and
(e) GSSG, 20 min after treatment with H2O2. (f) Ratio GSSG/GSH. (g) Gene expression of GR. Error bars represent SEM. Asterisks indicate a significant difference to the respective shCtrl
(Welch's t-test, p b 0.05; number of biological replicates: n ≥ 3). See also Supplementary Fig. S1.
113
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 decreased viability (within the range of 10–50 μM 6-OHDA) compared
to shCtrl, confirming that loss of DJ-1 increases sensitivity to oxidative
stress.
To further analyze the cellular response to ROS, we measured the
level of reduced (GSH) and oxidized (GSSG) glutathione after H2O2
treatment by UHPLC–MS (Fig. 1d–f). Already without any additional
perturbation, GSH levels in shDJ-1 cells were lower than in the re-
spective shCtrl cells. With increasing concentrations of H2O2, we de-
tected decreasing GSH levels and a concomitant increase of GSSG and
thus an increase in the GSSG/GSH ratio. The GSSG/GSH ratios were
more increased in shDJ-1 cells, pointing to insufficient GSH regener-
ation from GSSG or a lack of alternative detoxification mechanisms.
In line with these observations, we also found decreased gene
expression levels of glutathione reductase (GR) in DJ-1 deficient
cells (Fig. 1g).
Insufficient ROS detoxification is likely to affect mitochondrial integ-
rity (Irrcher et al., 2010; Kahle et al., 2009). In neurons, mitochondria
are actively transported through the projections of neuronal cells to di-
rectly satisfy axonal and synaptic energy demands (Saxton and
Hollenbeck, 2012). Therefore, we investigated whether shDJ-1 cells ex-
hibit systematically different mitochondrial motion patterns than shCtrl
cells and whether loss of the gene function would elicit different re-
sponses upon 6-OHDA treatment. To that end, we monitored the global
motion of fluorescence-stained mitochondria in differentiated LUHMES
cells by time-lapse microscopy (Fig. 2, Supplementary Movies and
Fig. S2). Without perturbation, there was no significant difference in mi-
tochondrial movement between the two cell types (Fig. 2C).
Consistent with the literature (Chen et al., 2008) we observed a gen-
eral deceleration of mitochondrial motion in both cell types, following
6-OHDA treatment (Fig. 2b). Surprisingly, deceleration showed a trend
to be less in shDJ-1 cells compared to shCtrl cells (Fig. 2c and Supple-
mentary movies and Fig. S2), suggesting that the regulation of mito-
chondrial transport in response to 6-OHDA-mediated oxidative stress
might be affected by loss of DJ-1.
Fig. 2. Loss of DJ-1 affects mitochondrial motility in neurons (a) Fluorescence microscopy image of differentiated LUHMES cells stained with TMRM (scale bar = 100 μM) and a 10×
magnification of a selected area (red square). Stain shows the location of mitochondria in soma and neurites. (b) Representative time-course of global mitochondrial motion analysis
(in this case shDJ-1). Before and after (300 s; grey bar) addition of 200 μM 6-OHDA. Mito motility was reduced due to addition of 6-OHDA (red) compared to control (blue).
(c) Parallel measurement of global mitochondrial motion. Shown values were normalized to the mean velocity measured before treatment with 6-OHDA. Error bars in (c) represent
SD. Asterisks indicate a significant difference to the respective shCtrl cells (Student's t-test, p b 0.05 number of biological replicates n = 3). See also Supplementary movies and Fig. S2.
114
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 Together with the observation that the treatment did not lead to a
significant drop of the mitochondrial membrane potential in the two
cell types (Supplementary Movies) this may indicate additional effects
of the induced oxidative stress. A direct target would be Ca2+ homeo-
stasis (Guzman et al., 2010) that in turn can influence mitochondrial
trafficking by Miro1 (Stephen et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2014) and
TCA cycle activity by polarization (Krols et al., 2016). Furthermore, DJ-
1 deficiency is associated with an impaired microtubule dynamics
(Sheng et al., 2013) leading to modified cytoskeleton structures that
can affect mitochondrial transport.
2.2. Loss of DJ-1 affects central metabolism
To investigate if the observed moderate changes in mitochondrial
motility may have an impact on the cellular energy pool, we profiled
cellular metabolism by determining uptake and release rates and by an-
alyzing intracellular fluxes using stable isotope labeled tracers. We de-
tected a decrease in alanine release in shDJ-1 cells (Fig. 3a), whereas
differences in glucose, pyruvate and serine consumption and lactate re-
lease were not statistically different (Fig. 3b, c, d, e). This reduction in al-
anine release of shDJ-1 cells, suggests a lower requirement for nitrogen
excretion in these cells.
Since shDJ-1 cells are more sensitive to oxidative stress, we investi-
gated if the canonical NADPH producing pathways, the pentose phos-
phate pathway and the folate mediated one-carbon metabolism are
affected. To this end, we analyzed gene expression of glycine
dehydrogenase (GLDC), the rate-limiting enzyme of the glycine cleavage
system, of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH), the rate-
limiting enzyme of the PPP and of 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate
(THF) dehydrogenase (MTHFD), a key enzyme in folate metabolism.
We did not observe significant changes in the expression of GLDC, but
decreased expression of G6PDH, MTHFD1 and MTHFD2 (Fig. 3f–h, S3),
pointing to decreased carbon flux into these pathways and decreased
cellular potential to generate NADPH, needed for antioxidative
activities.
To monitor metabolic fluxes through glycolysis, the serine biosyn-
thesis pathway, glycine cleavage and through PDH, we used uniformly
labeled 13C glucose as a tracer. We found that relative glucose contribu-
tion to serine biosynthesis was decreased in shDJ-1 cells (Fig. 3j), which
is in line with the observed decreased expression of MTHFD1/2. The
trend of increased serine uptake (p-value = 0.084) might be a conse-
quence of the decreased biosynthetic flux from glucose. Furthermore,
based on M2 citrate isotopologues we did not observe any difference
in relative glucose oxidation through PDH (Fig. 3k; 3I for atom transi-
tions), suggesting that not glucose oxidation, but serine and folate me-
tabolism are dependent on DJ-1.
DJ-1 has been shown to stabilize NRF2 in cancer cells (Clements
et al., 2006). NRF2 is a key transcription factor that regulates cellular an-
tioxidant responses also by activating serine flux and folate-mediated
one-carbon metabolism (Mitsuishi et al., 2012). However, by Western
Blotting we were unable to detect NRF2 in LUHMES cells (Fig. S3f). Con-
cluding from non-detectable NRF2 levels in LUHMES cells, it is possible
Fig. 3. Metabolic profiling of DJ-1 silenced LUHMES cells reveals decreased serine biosynthesis flux. (a) Medium consumption and release rates of (a) alanine (release) (b) glucose and
lactate. (c) Ratio lactate release/glucose consumption. (d–e) Consumption rates of (d) pyruvate and (e) serine. (f–h) Gene expression (qPCR) of (f) G6PDH (g) MTHFD1 and
(h) MTHFD2. (i) Schematic of atom transitions in central metabolism using [U-13C]glucose as a tracer. 13C carbons are in green, 12C in black. (j–k) Application of [U-13C]glucose as a
tracer in LUHMES cells for determination of MIDs to infer relative intracellular fluxes. (j) M3 serine isotopologue indicating relative serine biosynthesis flux. (k) M2 citrate
isotopologue indicating relative PDH flux. Error bars represent SEM. Asterisks indicate a significant difference to the respective shCtrl (Welch's t-test, p b 0.05; number of biological rep-
licates: n ≥ 3). See also Supplementary Fig. S3.
115
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 that the role of DJ-1 in regulating neuronal metabolism in the context of
cellular antioxidant responses is even more pronounced, compared to
other cell types.
Next, we analyzed TCA cycle fluxes in more detail and we applied
uniformly labeled glutamine as a tracer (Fig. 4a for atom transitions).
Stable isotope labeling revealed decreased glutamine contribution to
the intracellular glutamate pool and to the TCA cycle intermediates
alpha-ketoglutarate (aKG), succinate, fumarate, malate, aspartate (as a
proxy of oxaloacetate) and citrate (Fig. 4b and c). Analysis of glutamine
consumption indicated decreased uptake in shDJ-1 cells (p-value =
0.057) (Fig. 4d). Moreover, we observed decreased gene expression of
glutaminase 2 (GLS2) (Fig. 4e), suggesting decreased glutamine-based
anaplerosis. To evaluate the importance of glutamine as a carbon source,
we calculated its relative carbon contribution to aKG and citrate
(Fig. 4f). Providing 45% of carbon to aKG in shCtrl, glutamine represents
the major precursor of aKG, highlighting the importance of this amino
acid to central metabolism. In shDJ-1, glutamine carbon contribution
to aKG and citrate was significantly lower than in shCtrl, which is in
line with our finding of decreased glutamine uptake in shDJ-1. Interest-
ingly, we found, that not the contribution of glucose, but that of other
carbon sources increased to compensate for the lack of glutamine.
Therefore, we quantified the consumption of branched chain amino
acids (BCAAs), because their catabolism produces anaplerotic acetyl-
coA and succinyl-coA. We observed that the uptake of these three
amino acids was indeed elevated in shDJ-1 cells compared to shCtrl
(Fig. 4g).
In conclusion, an increased uptake of BCAAs may compensate for the
decreased glutamine carbon contribution, but does not prevent increased
sensitivity to oxidative stress, which therefore, seems to depend more
specifically on serine metabolism and the supply of cysteine via the
transsulfuration pathway to generate GSH. Moreover, since glutamine
has additional roles in metabolism such as to provide nitrogen for the syn-
thesis of nucleotides it is possible that lack of glutamine represents an ad-
ditional perturbation to the cell, which makes it more prone to collapse.
Fig. 4. Metabolic profiling of DJ-1 silenced LUHMES cells reveals decreased glutamine influx. (a) Schematic of atom transitions in central metabolism using [U-13C]glutamine as a tracer. 13C
carbons are in green, 12C in black. ACO: aconitase; AT: aminotransferase; CS: citrate synthase; GDH: glutamate dehydrogenase; GLS: glutaminase; GS: glutamine synthetase; IDH: isocitrate
dehydrogenase. The dotted line indicates beginning and end of one cycle. (b–c) Application of [U-13C]glutamine as a tracer in LUHMES cells for determination of MIDs to infer relative
intracellular fluxes. (b) MID of glutamate. (c) Relative abundance of M5 aKG, M4 succinate, M4 fumarate, M4 malate, M4 aspartate and M4 citrate. (d) Glutamine consumption from the
medium. (e) Gene expression of GLS2. (f) Carbon contribution of glucose, glutamine and other carbon sources (%) to aKG and citrate. (g) Branched chain amino acid consumption. Error
bars represent SEM. Asterisks indicate a significant difference to the respective shCtrl. (Welch's t-test, p b 0.05; number of biological replicates: n ≥ 3). See also Supplementary Fig. S4.
116
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 2.3. Loss of DJ-1 affects mitochondrial metabolism but does not impair TCA
cycle activity
Loss of DJ-1 is often discussed in the context of mitochondrial dys-
function (Clements et al., 2006; Ariga et al., 2013; Irrcher et al., 2010;
Kahle et al., 2009; Krebiehl et al., 2010), but how, and more importantly,
to what extent this dysfunction manifests on a pathophysiological level
remains to be further specified. A strong inhibition of oxidative phos-
phorylation (OxPhos) caused by ROS would be detrimental for persons
carrying a loss of function mutation in DJ-1. To analyze this hypothesis
in more detail, we inspected TCA cycle activity. In case of OxPhos inhibi-
tion, NADH can no longer be oxidized by complex I of the respiration
chain, which results in an increased NADH/NAD+ ratio. This altered
ratio leads to a thermodynamic shift of IDH activity, resulting in in-
creased reductive carboxylation of aKG (Fendt et al., 2013; Mullen
et al., 2014; Wegner et al., 2015). When using [U-13C5]glutamine as a
tracer, this inhibition manifests in increased relative abundance of M5
citrate isotopologues, while the relative abundance of M4 citrate
isotopologues, decreases (Fig. 5A). To test the effect of OxPhos inhibition
and to compare this effect with the metabolic phenotype of shDJ-1 cells,
we treated the cells with MPP+, an inhibitor of complex I of the electron
transport chain, specifically taken up by DAergic neurons through the
DA transporter (Javitch et al., 1985; Schildknecht et al., 2015).
Upon MPP+ treatment, we observed a significant increase in fully la-
beled glutamate and M5 citrate in both cell lines (Fig. 5b, c). As expect-
ed, the oxidative route of the TCA cycle was inhibited upon MPP+
treatment, and therefore, relative abundance of M4 citrate was strongly
reduced. Although reductive IDH flux was induced in MPP+-treated
shDJ-1 cells, M5 labeling of citrate and glutamate was lower in shDJ-1,
originating from decreased relative glutamine influx into the TCA
cycle. This decrease was also reflected in higher abundances of unla-
beled citrate and glutamate as well as in lower M3 glutamate (Fig. 5b,
c). Interestingly, compared to shDJ-1, we did not observe a decrease in
M0 citrate upon MPP+ treatment in shCtrl cells (Fig. 5c). To normalize
for the decreased glutamine influx we analyzed the ratio of M5 cit-
rate/M5 glutamate, indicating reductive carboxylation of aKG, M4 cit-
rate/M5 glutamate, indicating glutamine oxidation and M5 citrate/M4
citrate, indicating the ratio of reductively to oxidatively derived citrate
from fully labeled glutamine (Fig. 5d–f). These ratios confirmed a strong
induction of reductive IDH flux upon MPP+-treatment in both cell lines.
However, there was no significant difference between the two cell
types.
Fig. 5. DJ-1 silenced LUHMES cells show an active TCA cycle but suffer from decreased glutamine contribution. (a) Schematic of atom transitions in central carbon metabolism using
[U-13C]glutamine as a tracer. Shown is reductive carboxylation of M5 aKG to M5 citrate via IDH and ACO. The specific isoenzyme depends on the compartment and is not further
considered. For abbreviations see Fig. 4. The dotted line indicates end of one route. In case of complex I inhibition at the electron transport chain (ETC), NADH can no longer be
oxidized which leads to a thermodynamic shift in the IDH reaction. (b–c) Application of [U-13C]glutamine as a tracer in LUHMES cells for determination of MIDs to infer relative
intracellular fluxes. (b) MID of glutamate. (c) MID of citrate. (d–f) Ratios of (d) M5 citrate/M5 glutamate, indicating reductive carboxylation of aKG (e), M4 citrate/M5 glutamate,
indicating oxidation of aKG (f), M5 citrate/M4 citrate, indicating the ratio of reductive to oxidative route. LUHMES shDJ-1 and shCtrl cells were treated with 10 μM MPP+ for 6 h. Error
bars represent SEM. Asterisks indicate a significant difference to the respective shCtrl (two-way ANOVA, p b 0.05; number of biological replicates: n = 3).
117
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 Analysis of MPP+ treated LUHMES cells leads to the following three
conclusions: (1) Lack of DJ-1 does not result in inhibition of OxPhos.
Therefore, the general potential to produce ATP via NADH oxidation is
still present in DJ-1 deficient cells. (2) The metabolic fate of glutamine
between the oxidative and the reductive route is not different between
the two cell types upon MPP+ treatment. (3) As a consequence of loss of
DJ-1, glutamine influx into the TCA cycle is decreased. Whether or not
this is solely a result of elevated ROS levels in DJ-1 deficient cells, or if
this is rather a mechanistic consequence, needs to be studied further.
2.4. Loss of Dj-1 affects central metabolism in mouse microglia and is suffi-
cient to trigger pro-inflammatory activation
Since neuronal integrity in the central nervous system (CNS) also re-
lies on surrounding glia cells, we investigated the effect of Dj-1 silencing
in the mouse microglia cell line BV-2 (Fig. S5) (Blasi et al., 1990; Henn
et al., 2009).
First, we were interested if the observed metabolic alteration in neu-
ronal cells also occurs in microglia. We did not observe significantly in-
creased glucose consumption but a 20% increase in lactate release
(Fig. 6a–b). Although glutamine uptake seemed to be decreased in DJ-
1 deficient cells, this difference was not significant (Fig. 6c). Stable iso-
tope labeling of glutamine revealed decreased glutamate labeling in
shDJ-1 BV-2 cells (Fig. 6d). However, the difference in isotopic enrich-
ment was not as pronounced as in LUHMES cells and was only signifi-
cantly different in the case of malate, aspartate and glutamate
(Fig. 6e). Overall, proliferating BV-2 cells showed similar alterations
than observed in LUHMES cells but less pronounced.
Recently, it has been reported that loss of Dj-1 leads to increased
pro-inflammatory (M1) activation of microglia and astrocytes after per-
turbation with activating compounds such as the toll like receptor
Fig. 6. Dj-1 silencing affects glutamine metabolism in the mouse microglia cell model BV-2 and causes pro-inflammatory activation. (a–c) Medium consumption and release rates of
(a) glucose, (b) lactate and (c) glutamine. (d–e) Application of [U-13C]glutamine as a tracer in BV-2 cells for determination of MIDs to infer relative intracellular fluxes. (d) MID of
glutamate. (e) Relative abundance of M4 fumarate, M4 malate, M4 aspartate and M4 citrate. (f–h) Intracellular metabolite levels of itaconate (f), succinate (g) and lactate (h) in BV-2
shDJ-1 cells compared to shCtrl. (i) Gene expression analysis of the inflammatory marker genes TNFα, Irg1 and iNOS. (j) Intracellular itaconate levels in shDJ-1 and shCtrl cells. shCtrl
cells were treated for 6 h with LPS. Error bars represent SEM. Asterisks indicate a significant difference to the respective shCtrl (Welch's t-test, p b 0.05; number of biological replicates:
n = 3). See also Supplementary Fig. S5.
118
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 agonist LPS or the cytokine IFNγ (Kim et al., 2013; Trudler et al., 2014;
Waak et al., 2009). In this study we wanted to investigate if solely the
lack of Dj-1 is already sufficient to trigger M1 polarization, and thus,
could be relevant in the context of neuroinflammation. We analyzed
levels
of
the metabolic M1 markers succinate
and itaconate
(Michelucci et al., 2013; Strelko et al., 2011; Tannahill et al., 2013) as
well as expression of TNFα and iNOS. We observed that a lack of Dj-1
function increased itaconate and succinate levels without an additional
perturbation (Fig. 6f, g, S5). Furthermore, we observed increased intra-
cellular lactate levels, most probably a combined result of both, lack of
Dj-1 and M1 polarization (Fig. 6h).
To validate the activation, we analyzed gene expression levels of the
pro-inflammatory marker genes Irg1, iNOS and TNFα. Irg1 codes for the
enzyme (Cad) that catalyzes the synthesis of itaconate from cis-
aconitate (Michelucci et al., 2013; Degrandi, 2009; Hall et al., 2013).
The increased level of itaconate correlates with a more than twofold in-
creased Irg1 gene expression in shDJ-1 compared to shCtrl. Moreover,
we observed that TNFα gene expression was increased twofold and
that iNOS was more than three times higher expressed than in shCtrl
(Fig. 6i). To evaluate, how the detected itaconate level in shDJ-1 cells
correlates with different levels of LPS stimulation, we activated the
shCtrl cells with 0.2 ng, 1 ng and 10 ng of LPS (Fig. 6j). We observed
that shDJ-1 BV-2 microglia constitutively synthesize itaconate amounts
corresponding to an activation of shCtrl cells with approximately 1 ng of
LPS. Since we use 10 ng of LPS to mimic a full activation in vitro, we con-
clude that shDJ-1 cells show a moderate but constitutive activation.
2.5. Loss of DJ-1 leads to a metabolic shift in primary human and murine
immune cells
To validate the observed metabolic alterations in primary cells, we
isolated bone marrow-derived cells of Dj-1 knock-out (KO) mice and
differentiated them into macrophages (BMDMs). Since DJ-1 is ubiqui-
tously expressed (Nagakubo et al., 1997), we expected to find the ob-
served metabolic changes also in non-CNS cell types. In line with our
previous results in BV-2 cells, BMDMs of Dj-1 KO mice produced more
lactate (Fig. 7a). Moreover, BMDMs of Dj-1 KO mice consumed signifi-
cantly less glutamine compared to wild type (WT) BMDMs (Fig. 7B).
Additionally, we applied [U-13C]glutamine as a tracer and observed
decreased M5 glutamate fractions in Dj-1 KO cells (Fig. 7c). However,
isotopic enrichment in other TCA cycle related metabolites (Fig. 7d)
was not significantly different. Compared to LUHMES cells, these differ-
ences in isotopic enrichment might be caused by fundamental differ-
ences in carbon utilization between the two cell types and/or in a
species-specific manner. Although each cell type shows also specific dif-
ferences, overall, the uptake and release rates of glutamine and lactate
point in the same direction when comparing LUHMES, BV-2 and
BMDM cells. It is not surprising that cell type specific differences lead
to different metabolic phenotypes. However, it is appealing that loss of
DJ-1 shows a similar picture in these various cell types.
To further validate our findings, we were interested in analyzing
human samples directly originating from patients carrying a DJ-1 muta-
tion. We analyzed cellular metabolism of peripheral blood derived
mononuclear cells (PBMCs)-derived CD14+ macrophages from four pa-
tients carrying homozygous and heterozygous loss of function muta-
tions (c.192G N C) in the DJ-1 gene (Hering et al., 2004). PBMCs are
relatively easy to access and could therefore be used as a model in sub-
sequent clinical trials. As controls, we analyzed three independent
healthy controls. We applied [U-13C]glucose to provide flux information
for both, glycolysis and TCA cycle. Analysis of isotopic enrichment re-
vealed that serine biosynthesis in CD14+ macrophages was close to
zero (Fig. S6a). However, the labeling pattern of glutamate showed in-
creased relative abundance of M2 isotopologues in patient-derived
macrophages carrying a DJ-1 mutation (Fig. 7e, f, S6b), indicating in-
creased relative glucose carbon contribution to the TCA cycle and to glu-
tamate. This increase can be a consequence of lower glutamine influx,
resulting in higher relative 13C labeling from glucose. We also observed
a relative increase of M2 glutamate in LUHMES shDJ-1 cells compared to
shCtrl (Fig. S6c).
In summary, the analysis of human PBMCs indicated that metabolic
changes initially observed in a cellular model of the CNS might be diag-
nosed from patient-derived primary blood cells. Further analyses will
clarify if the observed flux changes are common for this mutation and
if heterozygous patients show gene-dose dependent effects.
3. Discussion
In this study, we analyzed the metabolic impact of loss of DJ-1. We
demonstrated that loss of DJ-1 affects central metabolism, specifically
leading to (1) decreased glutamine uptake and decreased glutamine
contribution to the TCA cycle, (2) decreased serine biosynthesis, (3) in-
creased sensitivity to ROS and (4) weakly, but constitutively activated
microglia. These metabolic alterations coincide with decreased cell sur-
vival upon oxidative stress, which may promote early onset of PD. We
speculate that these changes are caused by increased sensitivity to
ROS as a direct result of loss of DJ-1. Unlike cancer cells, we did not de-
tect NRF2 protein in LUHMES wild type cells which leads us to the as-
sumption that DJ-1 has a more fundamental role in neurons,
compared to cancer cells, where NRF2 as a regulator of antioxidant re-
sponses is highly abundant (Clements et al., 2006). We conclude that in-
sufficient ROS quenching in DJ-1 deficient neurons is due to decreased
GSH levels as well as decreased activity of NADP-reducing enzymes
within central metabolism. In line, we observed decreased expression
of G6PDH, the rate-limiting enzyme of the PPP and decreased expression
of MTHFD1 and 2, enzymes of the folate cycle and an alternative route
for the generation of NADPH. Moreover, we measured decreased GR ex-
pression, which is in line with the lower GSH levels and an increased
GSSG/GSH ratio upon hydrogen peroxide stress. In conclusion, loss of
DJ-1 affects all pathways needed for GSH homeostasis.
DJ-1 has been shown to activate the expression of glutamate cyste-
ine ligase, a key enzyme of GSH synthesis (Zhou and Freed, 2005). How-
ever, based on our gene expression analysis, GCLC and GCLM expression
was not altered, at least not in LUHMES cells (Fig. S3g, h). We suggest
that decreased levels of the rate limiting amino acid cysteine provoke
the drop in GSH abundance by altering the net flux towards GSH
(Richman and Meister, 1975; Lu, 2013).
Serine can act as a precursor for cysteine and glycine and serves at
the same time as a carbon donor for folate-mediated one-carbon metab-
olism, which has recently been appreciated for its importance in main-
taining the cellular NADPH pool (Fan et al., 2014). 5,10-methylene-THF
can be oxidized by the NADP-dependent enzyme MTHFD. We observed
a moderate, but significantly decreased expression of cytosolic MTHFD1
and a more strongly decreased expression of mitochondrial MTHFD2.
Together with glutamate, cysteine and glycine are the building blocks
for de novo glutathione synthesis. We have demonstrated before that
enzymes of serine and folate metabolism as well as the transsulfuration
pathway are induced in human neurons upon oxidative stress (Krug
et al., 2014). Intriguingly, in the DJ-1 knock-out model, that shows ele-
vated levels of oxidative stress, we observed that serine biosynthesis is
decreased and expression of both MTHFD1 and 2 are reduced. Therefore,
DJ-1 is likely to have an important regulatory function in serine and fo-
late metabolism by supporting NADPH and GSH homeostasis. This is es-
pecially pronounced due to our observation of no detectable protein
levels of NRF2 in post-mitotic neuronal cells. However, we do not ex-
clude the possibility that in vivo, neurons are supported by NRF2 medi-
ated protective mechanisms that are derived from surrounding glia cells
(Kraft et al., 2004).
The third building block of GSH is glutamate, directly derived from
glutamine via glutaminase. We showed that shDJ-1 cells exhibit de-
creased GLS2 expression and lower glutamine influx. The decreased glu-
tamine influx is furthermore reflected in decreased alanine release,
suggesting lower glutamine derived anaplerotic reactions. When less
119
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 glutamate enters the TCA cycle, less nitrogen has to be disposed from
the cell. Previous work in cancer cell models demonstrated that a
knock-down of GLS2 results in decreased GSH levels and increased oxi-
dative stress (Suzuki et al., 2010; Hu et al., 2010). However, Richman
and Meister showed that not glutamate but cysteine is rate limiting to
GSH synthesis (Richman and Meister, 1975). Therefore, we believe
that serine and the adjacent transsulfuration pathway play an important
role for the generation of GSH. On top of serine metabolism, decreased
Fig. 7. Stable isotope labeling of BMDMs of Dj-1 KO mice and PBMCs-derived CD14+ macrophages of DJ-1 patients indicate decreased glutamine contribution to the TCA cycle. (a) Relative
lactate release of BMDMs. (b) Relative glutamine consumption of BMDMs. (c) MID of glutamate in BMDMs after application of [U-13C]glutamine. (d) Relative abundance of M4 succinate,
M4 fumarate, M4 malate, M4 aspartate and M4 citrate in BMDMs. Error bars represent SEM. Asterisks indicate a significant difference to the respective shCtrl (Welch's t-test, p b 0.05;
number of biological replicates: n = 5). (e) Schematic of atom transitions in central carbon metabolism using [U-13C]glucose. Illustrated is how M2 glutamate is generated from
[U-13C]glucose. The dotted line indicates end of one route. (f) Glutamate M2 isotopologue abundance of DJ-1 subjects and non-familial healthy controls (Ctrl). Error bars represent
SEM. The asterisk indicates a significant difference to the control (Welch's t-test, p b 0.05; number of individuals: n ≥ 3). (g) Model highlighting the functional role of DJ-1 and summarizing
the affected metabolic pathways as a result of DJ-1 deficiency. Affected metabolites, enzymes or pathways are highlighted with a red star. Loss of DJ-1 leads to decreased glutamine influx,
decreased serine biosynthesis and decreased MTHFD expression, needed for glutathione (GSH) homeostasis and antioxidant response. Due to lower GSH levels, DJ-1 deficient cells show
increased sensitivity to ROS. Additionally, lower expression of MTHFD and G6PDH suggests decreased potential to generate NADPH, needed for the reduction of GSSG. In cancer cells, DJ-1
acts as a repressor of PTEN, a negative regulator of AKT. Activated AKT can activate mTORC1. Both AKT and mTOR are important to drive metabolic processes needed for cell survival and
proliferation, among others, glutaminolysis (for further explanation see discussion). Additionally, the transcription factor p53 can act as an activator on PTEN, thereby antagonizing DJ-1
function. Moreover, p53 can repress mTOR and introduces apoptosis. However, the relevance of these potential nodes of the metabolic network has to be further validated in neuronal cells.
See also Supplementary Fig. S6.
120
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 expression of GLS2 and lower glutamine influx adds an additional per-
turbation to the cell system, which ultimately triggers the observed
physiological effects (Fig. 7g). The defect present in shDJ-1 cells might
not only be the result of elevated oxidative stress levels, but DJ-1
might play a role in additional processes. A possible role could be related
to the described inhibitory function on PTEN (Kim et al., 2005). When
DJ-1 is absent, AKT becomes hypophosphorylated (Aleyasin et al.,
2010; Yang et al., 2005) and mTOR, a master regulator of anaplerosis,
proliferation and cell survival, becomes less active, which could also
favor the activity of p53. The transcription factor p53 is activated upon
oxidative stress and can induce apoptosis (Vousden and Ryan, 2009).
The role of these fundamental metabolic mechanisms is also relevant
during neurogenesis (Rafalski and Brunet, 2011; Vasseur et al., 2009).
However, the mechanistic link between DJ-1 and PTEN in regulating
the AKT pathway is derived from cancer cells (Kim et al., 2005) and
needs additional validation in post-mitotic neurons. Also the interplay
between p53 and DJ-1 as well as the role of p53 in activating PTEN in
neuronal non-proliferating cells needs additional research to gain a
deeper understanding of the metabolic processes that are in place. An-
other potential link to the mTOR pathway is based on the work by
Durán and colleagues (2012) who demonstrated that Rag-mTORC1 sig-
naling is directly regulated by glutaminolysis and that a lack of gluta-
mine results in less mTORC1 phosphorylation and less downstream
activation without affecting ATP production (Durán et al., 2012). No dif-
ference in ATP production is also in line with our own results indicating
functional OxPhos, a major pathway for ATP production, especially in
neuronal cells. However, given the example of NRF2 abundance in
LUHMES versus A549 lung cancer cells (Fig. S3f), comparisons with pro-
liferating cancer cells should be interpreted carefully, since post-mitotic
cells have very different metabolic requirements.
An apparent difference was also reflected by the lactate release in
LUHMES cells and proliferating, immortalized BV-2 cells. In proliferating
cells, increased ROS levels, as present in shDJ-1 cells, can regulate PKM2
and enhance the Warburg effect. In its metabolically active form PKM2
acts as a tetramer. However, at increased ROS levels, PKM2 is post-
translationally modified, stabilizing its dimeric or monomeric form
(Anastasiou et al., 2011; Gupta and Bamezai, 2010; Lyssiotis et al.,
2012). In this form, PKM2 translocates to the nucleus and influences
transcriptional regulation to increase lactate release. In contrast to pro-
liferating cells, post-mitotic neurons express the M1 isoform of pyruvate
kinase (Tolle et al., 1976), which is less regulated (Anastasiou et al.,
2012; Chaneton et al., 2012). This explains why we did not observe an
increase in lactate fermentation in LUHMES cells, but increased lactate
release in the proliferating (PKM2 expressing) BV-2 cells.
The reduction of glutamine influx after loss of DJ-1 was weaker in
BV-2 cells than in post-mitotic LUHMES cells because BV-2 cells are im-
mortalized with v-myc/ras (Blasi et al., 1990), which reprograms cellu-
lar metabolism to drive proliferation. A dependency of cancerous and
proliferating cells on glutamine is well known (Wise and Thompson,
2010). Moreover, DJ-1 has been shown to activate ERK signaling, pro-
moting cellular protection against oxidative stress (Gu et al., 2009).
For that reason, immortalization with v-myc, an upstream regulator of
ERK1/2 and AKT, might mask underlying metabolic defects by artificial-
ly activating the ERK pathway in DJ-1 deficient cells. Thus, the observed
decreased glutamine influx and the known increased activation of PTEN
due to lack of DJ-1 is at least partially overwritten in immortalized BV-2
cells, leading to re-elevated glutamine uptake. In differentiated LUHMES
cells, v-myc expression is absent and is therefore not masking decreased
glutamine influx (Scholz et al., 2011). Therefore, the metabolic dysfunc-
tion in differentiated, post-mitotic neurons is more pronounced and
represents a clearer phenotype compared to BV-2 cells.
Besides the described effects in neurons, DJ-1 has been shown to
play a role in inflammation by regulating cytokine expression and by
interacting with STAT1 signaling (Kim et al., 2013; Trudler et al., 2014;
Waak et al., 2009). Here, we demonstrated that solely the loss of DJ-1 re-
sults in weakly activated microglia. A constitutive, strong activation
would cause immediate detrimental effects in a multicellular environ-
ment. However, a weak activation could be tolerated over a longer peri-
od of time (e.g. several years or decades) but would represent an
additional trigger for PD, increasing the sensitivity of DAergic neurons
over the course of life.
A metabolic reprogramming of immune cells upon M1 polarization
has recently been described (Tannahill et al., 2013; Palsson-McDermott
et al., 2015). M1 polarization in immune cells has been shown to induce
a Warburg-like metabolic phenotype. A PKM2-mediated regulation in
macrophages is possible (Palsson-McDermott et al., 2015). M1 polarized
macrophages increase their rate of glycolysis and increase lactate release.
In the case of loss of DJ-1, this is an additive effect and explains why the
increase in lactate release is more pronounced in BV-2 cells compared
to neurons. The metabolic adaptation to inflammation also includes in-
creased glutamine oxidation in the TCA cycle (Tannahill et al., 2013).
Therefore, decreased GLS2 activity in immune cells as a result of DJ-1 de-
ficiency can at least be partially overwritten by inflammatory activation
and immortalization.
Although TH+-neurons do not proliferate, cellular survival and anti-
oxidant response is even more important since these cells are mostly
matured during embryogenesis and need to be functional over the
whole life span to supply sufficient dopamine to the striatum. Increased
oxidative stress during development can result in a lower absolute
number of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain (Pham et al., 2010).
In conclusion, it becomes evident that as opposed to cancer therapy,
where SHMT2 amplification drives oncogenesis (Kim et al., 2015; Lee
et al., 2014) and where a decrease of glutamine uptake is a strategy to
stop cell proliferation, a lack of glutamine influx and decreased serine
biosynthesis flux seem to be part of the underlying metabolic problem
in PD patients carrying a loss of function mutation in DJ-1.
4. Methods
4.1. Cell culture
Cells were standardwise tested for mycoplasma contamination in a
rhythm of four to eight weeks.
4.2. LUHMES
Cells were kindly provided by the lab of Marcel Leist. Cells were
grown in proliferation medium (Advanced DMEM/F12 + 1xN2 supple-
ment (Invitrogen), 40 ng/ml FGF-2 and 2 mM glutamine) at 37 °C and
5% CO2. Further cultivation and differentiation was performed as de-
scribed in (Krug et al., 2014). For isotopic labeling, medium was re-
placed by differentiation medium containing 2 mM [U-13C5]glutamine
or 17.5 mM [U-13C6]glucose. Cells were extracted at metabolic and iso-
topic steady state (42 h after labeling start). All experiments were per-
formed with differentiated post-mitotic cells.
4.3. BV-2
Cells were kindly provided by the lab of Wolfgang Wurst. Cells were
grown in DMEM (D5796) (Invitrogen) containing 5 mM glutamine,
25 mM glucose, 10% FBS and 1% P/S at 37 °C and 5% CO2. For isotopic la-
beling medium was replaced by the same medium containing 5 mM
[U-13C]glutamine or 25 mM [U-13C]glucose and dialysed FBS. Cells
were extracted at metabolic and isotopic steady state (24 h after label-
ing start).
4.4. Extraction of intracellular metabolites
Cells were cultivated in 12-well plates and washed with 1 ml of 0.9%
NaCl and quenched with 0.2 ml −20 °C methanol. After adding an equal
volume of 4 °C cold water, cells were collected with a cell scraper and
transferred to tubes containing 0.2 ml −20 °C chloroform. The extracts
121
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 were shaken at 1400 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C (Thermomixer Eppendorf)
and centrifuged at 16,000 ×g for 5 min at 4 °C. 0.2 ml of the upper aque-
ous phase was collected in specific glass vials with micro inserts and
evaporated under vacuum at −4 °C using a refrigerated CentriVap Con-
centrator (Labconco).
4.5. Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry to measure GSH
and GSSG
Cells were cultured in 12-well plates (500,000 cells per well) and
washed once with 1× PBS before adding 40 μl of 5% TCA, followed by
an equal volume of cold H2O. 2 wells were pooled for one sample to in-
crease abundance of GSSG in the sample. Cells were scraped, transferred
into 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000 ×g at
4 °C. Supernatant was transferred into LC–MS glass vials with insert
and stored at −80 °C until measurement. Measurement was performed
using an Agilent 1290 Series LC coupled to an Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-
TOF MS system equipped with a Dual Agilent Jet Stream ESI source.
The columns used in this study were a Waters ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3
1.8 μm (length, I.D., particle size: 100 mm × 2.1 mm × 1.8 μm) and a
Phenomenex Kinetex 2.6 μm C18 100 A (length, I.D., particle size:
150 mm × 2.1 mm × 2.6 μm). The autosampler was kept at 4 °C and
the column compartment at constant temperature of 45 °C. The LC con-
ditions were optimized to achieve the best chromatographic parame-
ters for both analytes. The flow rate was set to 0.3 ml/min and the
mobile phases consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (eluent A) and
0.1% formic acid in 60% methanol (eluent B). The run consisted of a
isocratic delivery of 1% eluent B over 10 min, followed by a linear gradi-
ent to 99% eluent B over 2 min, isocratic delivery of 99% eluent B for
7 min, and a re-equilibration phase on starting conditions with 1% elu-
ent B for 5 min. The eluent from the column was only introduced into
the mass spectrometer within the first 10 min. The injection volume
was 20 μl.
All the MS experiments were performed using electrospray ioniza-
tion in positive mode (+ESI).
The identity of both GSH and GSSH were confirmed by MS/MS and
standard addition experiments. Full scan spectra were acquired from
m/z 150…1000 (1 spectra/s).
The protonated molecules of both GSH and GSSG were monitored in
high resolution mode with following Q-TOF MS conditions: drying gas
temperature: 225 °C, drying gas flow: 14 l/min (nitrogen), nebulizer:
35 psig, sheath gas temperature: 350 °C, sheath gas flow: 11 l/min,
fragmentor: 400 V, skimmer: 65 V, Oct. RF Vpp: 750 V.
All data were acquired with Agilent MassHunter Workstation Soft-
ware, version B.05.01 and analyzed with Agilent Qualitative Analysis,
version B.06.00. Signal intensities were normalized to cell number.
4.6. Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry
Metabolite derivatization was performed using a Gerstel MPS. Dried
polar metabolites were dissolved in 15 μl of 2% methoxyamine hydro-
chloride in pyridine at 40 °C under shaking. After 60 min an equal vol-
ume of MTBSTFA was added and held for 60 min at 40 °C. 1 μl sample
was injected into an SSL injector at 270 °C in splitless mode. GC/MS anal-
ysis was performed using an Agilent 7890A GC equipped with a 30 m
DB-35MS + 5 m Duraguard capillary column. Helium was used as car-
rier gas at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. The GC oven temperature was
held at 100 °C for 2 min and increased to 300 °C at 10 °C/min. After
3 min, the temperature was increased to 325 °C. The GC was connected
to an Agilent 5975C inert XL MSD, operating under electron ionization at
70 eV. The MS source was held at 230 °C and the quadrupole at 150 °C.
The MS was operated in selected ion monitoring (SIM) (Table S1). The
total run time of one sample was 25.00 min. All GC/MS chromatograms
were processed by using MetaboliteDetector. MIDs were determined
and corrected for natural isotope abundance using MetaboliteDetector
(Hiller et al., 2009).
In case of absolute quantification of metabolites, a dilution series of a
standard mix containing all relevant metabolites was included in the se-
quence and measured in duplicates.
Measurement of glucose and pyruvate intensities was performed by
derivatization with an equal volume of MSTFA (instead of MTBSTFA)
and held for 30 min at 40 °C under continuous shaking. 1 μl sample
was injected into an SSL injector at 270 °C in split 10 mode. GC oven
temperature was held at 90 °C for 1 min and increased to 300 °C at
15 °C/min for 8 min to 320 °C. The total run time of one sample was
24.3 min.
4.7. Quantification of amino acids
Quantification of amino acids was performed on an Agilent 1100
HPLC System equipped with a Diode Array Detector. Separation was
carried out on a ZORBAX Amino Acid Analysis Column (150 × 4.6 mm,
5 μm) with a preceding ZORBAX Amino Acid Analysis Guard Cartridge
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) at 40 °C in gradient mode.
The eluents used were 40 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 7.8, eluent A) and a mix-
ture of Acetonitrile, Methanol and Water (45:45:10, eluent B). 0.02% so-
dium azide was added to eluent A to prevent microbial growth. Primary
amines were automatically derivatized with ortho-phthalaldehyde
(OPA) in borate buffer (0.4 N in water, pH 10.2) and diluted in eluent
A prior to injection. The resulting OPA-derivatives were subsequently
detected at 338 nm (10 nm bandwidth — reference wavelength:
390 nm, 20 nm bandwidth). All medium samples were diluted 1:1
with the internal standard L-2-aminobutyric acid (final concentration:
300 μM) to correct for deviations resulting from the derivatization-
process. External calibration standards as well as reference media with
known concentrations were measured with every run to determine
sample concentrations and ensure stability of the analysis. Gradient
profile: 1.9 min: 0% eluent B; 18.1 min: 57% eluent B; 18.6 min: 100% el-
uent B; 22.3 min: 100% eluent B; 23.2 min: 0% eluent B; 26 min: 0% elu-
ent B.
4.8. cDNA synthesis and gene expression analysis
cDNA synthesis and qPCR was performed as previously described
(Michelucci et al., 2013). Briefly, RNA was isolated from the interphase
after extraction of metabolites, using the Quiagen RNAeasy Mini Kit.
0.5–1 μg RNA was used for cDNA synthesis using SuperScript III
(Invitrogen), following the manufacturer's instructions. qPCR was per-
formed using iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) as manufacturer's in-
structions. PCR was carried out on a Light Cycler 480 (Roche). Data
analysis was performed using the Roche analysis software. Gene expres-
sion was normalized to the housekeeping gene L27. Primer sequences
are summarized in Table S2.
4.9. Lentivirus mediated shRNA gene silencing
For gene silencing of LUHMES cells, the destination vectors contain-
ing shRNA were ordered from Thermo Scientific (http://www.
thermoscientificbio.com). Plasmids were amplified and purified by
maxiprep in Escherichia coli and subsequently used for virus production
in HEK298FT cells according to the manufacturer's protocol. Harvested
virus was filtered using a 45 μM filter and precipitated with 1/5 volume
of sterile PEG10000 over night at 4 °C. Concentrated virus was aliquoted
in 10 μl and stored at −80 °C. For virus transduction 10 μl virus was
added to 50,000 cells on day 1 and day 2. After medium change on
day 3 cells were selected using 200 ng/ml puromycin. Correct concen-
tration of puromycin was evaluated by a kill curve.
4.10. Western blot
For preparation of whole cell extract, 1 × 106 cells were harvested,
washed with ice cold 1× PBS (Invitrogen/Life Technologies Europe BV
122
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 Belgium), lyzed in 1× M-PER®, Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent
(Thermo Scientific, Belgium) completed with 1× protease inhibitor
cocktail (Complete®, Roche, Luxembourg) and further processed ac-
cording to manufactures instructons. Bradford assay was used to mea-
sure the protein concentration (Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye Reagent,
Bio-Rad, Belgium). Proteins were separated by size using sodium dode-
cyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel elegrophoresis (SDS-PAGE, 15%) and
transferred to an Immobilon-FL PVDF membrane (Merck Millipore)
using the Mini-PROTEAN Tetra Cell and PowerPac Basic Power Supply
(Bio-Rad, Belgium). The membrane was blocked in 5% non-fat milk in
phosphate buffered saline (PBS)-Tween for 1 h at room temperature.
Blots were incubated with primary antibodies: anti DJ-1 XP® Rabbit
mAb (D29E5) (CellSignaling, Bioke, Netherlands) in 5% BSA in PBS-T
(1:1000) for 1 h at room temperature. After incubation with primary
antibody, membrane was washed with PBS-T and incubated for 1 h
at room temperature with anti rabbit-HRP secondary antibody
(1:10,000). For equal loading control of samples monoclonal anti-
GAPDH-HRP (mouse) antibody (G9295, Sigma, Belgium), was probed
in 5% non-fat milk in PBS-T for 1 h at room temperature. Visualization
was done using the ECL Plus Western Blotting Detection System Kit
(GE Healthcare, Netherlands).
4.11. Cell viability assay
Cell viability was assayed using Resazurin (Sigma Aldrich, R7017)
(O'Brien et al., 2000). Briefly, resazurin, blue and non-fluorescent, is re-
duced to resorufin, pink and fluorescent, proportionally to the number
of living cells. After 1 h incubation with 5 μg/ml resazurin (spiked in me-
dium), fluorescence was measured with a Biotek Synergy Mx micro-
plate reader coupled to the Gen5 software at the excitation
wavelength of 570 nm and emission at 590 nm.
4.12. Cell imaging
Predifferentiated LUHMES cells were seeded at a density of 60 k cells/
well in 96-well plates. After 96 h the cells were post-mitotic and had
formed strongly connected networks. One hour prior to imaging experi-
ments, the wells were carefully washed and filled with 100 μl fresh differ-
entiation medium supplemented with 25 nM tetramethylrhodamine
(TMRM) to fluorescently stain mitochondria. Plates were then incubated
for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2, whereafter the medium was replaced by
TMRM-free solution. Plates were kept for further 30 min at 37 °C, 5%
CO2. Time-lapse images were acquired on a Nikon Ti Eclipse inverted mi-
croscope with motorized stage (Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) and
high intensity mercury short arc lamp with monochromator (Cairn Re-
search, Kent, UK) enclosed in a bench top incubator. Fluorescence excita-
tion filter was 540/15 and emission filter 620/60. Automatic microscope
control, stage programming and acquisition were done using OptoMorph
(Cairn Research, Kent, UK).
Two types of experiments were performed: i) longitudinal acquisi-
tion of a single well with one image taken every 2 s for 20 min, and ii)
comparative parallel acquisition by switching between two neighboring
wells using the motorized stage and taking images every 5 s for 30 min.
Imaged wells were supplemented with 200 μM 6-OHDA or pure water
for control after 5 min. Images were taken using a 20× air objective
and an EXi Blue camera (Qimaging, Surrey, BC) with an exposure time
of 350 ms and saved as 16-bit grayscale TIFFs in 1392 × 1040 px.
4.13. Global motion analysis
Global motion by particle image velocimetry (PIV) was analyzed,
which quantifies correlations between pairs of time-lapse images and
infers velocities of the image elements that give rise to differences. Mi-
croscopy images were contrast-normalized and converted to 8-bit gray-
scale using ImageMagick. Particle image velocimetry was performed
using the OpenPIV toolbox (Taylor et al., 2010) in sliding windows of
16 × 16 px with 8 px overlap in both vertical and horizontal direction.
Statistical analysis of resulting velocity fields and visualization of results
was done in GNU R. Global motion was quantified by calculating median
velocities over sliding windows spanning six acquisition frames to re-
duce impulse noise corruption from imaging artifacts. Average motion
was assessed in acquisition windows 1 to 100 (pre-treatment) and
401 to 500 (post-treatment) for longitudinal measurements as well as
1 to 40 (pre-treatment) and 301 to 340 (post treatment) for parallel
measurements. Significance of difference in motility reduction was
assessed by pooling average velocities before and after treatment from
all time-lapse experiments (n = 3) and performing Student's t-test on
relative velocities, i.e., normalized to untreated control. Propagation of
uncertainty when normalizing velocities was taken into account.
4.14. BMDM isolation, cultivation and differentiation
4.14.1. Animals
For bone marrow-derived macrophages cultures, C57BL/6 DJ-1 KO
and age-matched C57BL/6 WT mice were obtained from the Helmholtz
Zentrum München (Germany) from Dr. Daniela Vogt-Weisenhorn and
Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Wurst. Per group, 5 mice were analyzed and from
each mouse three independent samples were obtained. All animal
work in Munich was carried out in accordance with the European Com-
munities' Council Directive 2010/63/EU. All efforts were made to mini-
mize animal suffering during the work. All protocols involving animal
handling were approved by the committee for the Care and Use of Lab-
oratory animals of the Government of Upper Bavaria, Germany. C57BL/6
mice (obtained from Charles River Germany) were group housed in in-
dividually ventilated type IIL cages (four mice per cage) and maintained
on a 12 h/12 h light/dark cycle with food and water available ad libitum.
All animal procedures in Luxembourg, such as handling and euthanasia,
have been performed according to the Federation of European Laborato-
ry Animal Science Associations (FELASA) guidelines for the use of
animals in research, and were institutionally approved by the
Luxembourg Centre for System Biomedicine animal user committee
and authorized by the local governmental agencies (Ministry of Health,
Ministry of Agriculture, chief veterinarian of the Luxembourg
government).
4.14.2. Bone marrow-derived macrophages
Mice were deeply anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of
50 mg/kg of ketamine hydrochloride and 5 mg/kg xylazine hydrochlo-
ride and bone marrows were isolated and cultured as previously de-
scribed by Zhang and colleagues (Zhang et al., 2008). Briefly, bone
marrow was flushed from femurs and tibias of five C57BL/6 DJ-1 KO
and five age-matched C57BL/6 WT mice and the resultant cell suspen-
sion was passed through a 70 μm filter (Greiner Bio-One). After a
10 min centrifugation step at 250 ×g, supernatant was discarded and
pellet re-suspended in 2 ml hypotonic solution (170 mM NH4Cl) for
5 min to allow lysis of any remaining extracellular red blood cells.
Bone marrow-derived cells were finally plated in 12-well plates
(Greiner Bio-One) at 5 × 105 cells per well. Cells were cultured for
6 days in complete macrophage medium (Dulbecco modified Eagle's
minimal essential medium DMEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen), 20% conditioned medium
from macrophage-colony stimulating factor-secreting L929 fibroblasts
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen) at 37 °C. After 6 days in cul-
ture, adherent cells were approximately 95% pure macrophages and
cells were used for experiments. Stable isotope tracers were added for
24 h prior extraction of intracellular metabolites.
Per genotype 5 individual mice were sacrificed and from each mouse
three replicates of BMDMs were used for the analysis.
4.14.3. PBMC derived CD14+ macrophages
The four DJ-1 patients were brothers of one family (one homozygous
and three heterozygous). The samples were analyzed in a blinded
123
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 study; patient samples were given numbers and were identified after
the results were completely analyzed. The controls were non-family
members with different genetic background (two male, one genotype
unknown (blood donation from the red cross)). The CD14+ cells were
isolated by a positive selection method using the magnetic activated
cell sorting (MACS) method: Blood samples of the patients were sepa-
rated in 50 ml Leucosept tubes (Greiner) through Ficoll-Paque Premium
(GE Healthcare) density gradient centrifugation (1000 ×g) for 10 min at
room temperature, using no break. After 30 min incubation at 4 °C with
2 μl of CD14+ beads (Miltenyi biotech) per 107 PBMCs, the CD14+ cells
got purified using a positive LS column (Miltenyi Biotech). The purified
CD14+ cells were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in DMEM
D5030 medium (Sigma) containing 11 mM [U-13C6]glucose and 5 mM
glutamine for metabolite extraction. Cells were extracted at metabolic
and isotopic steady state (24 h after labeling start, (tested before with
other blood donations)). Heterozygous and homozygous patients
were male, two healthy controls were male, the status of the third
healthy control is unknown (blood donation of the red cross).
4.14.4. Statistical analyses
To analyze a significant difference between two groups, the Welch's
t-test or two-way ANOVA was applied. The level of p b 0.05 was consid-
ered as significant different. Significance of difference in motility reduc-
tion was assessed by pooling average velocities before and after
treatment from all time-lapse experiments (n = 3) and performing
Student's t-test on relative velocities, i.e., normalized to untreated con-
trol. Propagation of uncertainty when normalizing velocities was
taken into account.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2016.01.019.
Author contributions
JM planned and performed experiments, analyzed data and wrote
the manuscript; SD performed experiments, analyzed data and provid-
ed parts of Fig. S3. AW and DW analyzed data and revised the manu-
script; JG, XD, and LK performed experiments; SS performed and
discussed experiments; AM isolated BMDMs; YN set up the HPLC meth-
od and measured medium samples; AF and AS performed microscopy
and motility analysis; CJ developed LC–MS methods, measured and an-
alyzed the GSH experiments; CS generated and validated BV-2 shDJ-1
and BV-2 shCtrl cells; FG supervised virus production for BV-2 cells;
OP tried to detect NRF2 protein via mass-spectrometry; JS helped to es-
tablish the method for the PBMCs experiments; RK helped with PBMCs
experiment and revised the manuscript; DWo. takes care for DJ-1 pa-
tients and isolated blood of DJ-1 patients; DV-W and WW provided
Dj-1 KO mice and revised the manuscript; ML revised the manuscript
and discussed experiments; KH planned and discussed experiments
and revised the manuscript.
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgments
Related research of the authors was supported by the Fonds National
de la Recherche (FNR) Luxembourg (ATTRACT A10/03 and AFR-
Postdoc-3973022). We thank the laboratory of Prof. Paul Heuschling
for mouse hosting and Dr. Eric Koncina and Dr. Manuel Buttini for ex-
pert help with bone marrow isolation. We thank Dr. Aidos Baumuratov
from the LCSB Imaging Facility for assistance and technical support with
the microscopes. This work was funded (in part) by the Helmholtz Alli-
ance ICEMED — Imaging and Curing Environmental Metabolic Diseases,
through the Initiative and Network Fund of the Helmholtz Association
(WW), and the Helmholtz Portfolio Themes ‘Metabolic Dysfunction
and Common Disease’ (CS, DMVW) and ‘Supercomputing and Model-
ling for the Human Brain’ (SMHB) (FG). We also thank Dr. Dietrich
Trümbach and Artem Romanov for critical input.
References
Aleyasin, H., et al., 2010. DJ-1 protects the nigrostriatal axis from the neurotoxin MPTP by
modulation of the AKT pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107, 3186–3191.
Anastasiou, D., et al., 2011. Inhibition of pyruvate kinase M2 by reactive oxygen species
contributes to cellular antioxidant responses. Science 334, 1278–1283.
Anastasiou, D., et al., 2012. Pyruvate kinase M2 activators promote tetramer formation
and suppress tumorigenesis. Nat. Chem. Biol. 8, 839–847.
Antony, P.M.A., Diederich, N.J., Krüger, R., Balling, R., 2013. The hallmarks of Parkinson's
disease. FEBS J. 280, 5981–5993.
Ariga, H., et al., 2013. Neuroprotective function of DJ-1 in Parkinson's disease. Oxidative
Med. Cell. Longev. 2013, 1–9.
Bader, V., Ran Zhu, X., Lübbert, H., Stichel, C.C., 2005. Expression of DJ-1 in the adult
mouse CNS. Brain Res. 1041, 102–111.
Baulac, S., et al., 2009. Increased DJ-1 expression under oxidative stress and in Alzheimer's
disease brains. Mol. Neurodegener. 4, 12.
Blasi, E., Barluzzi, R., Bocchini, V., Mazzolla, R., Bistoni, F., 1990. Immortalization of murine
microglial cells by a v-raf/v-myc carrying retrovirus. J. Neuroimmunol. 27, 229–237.
Bonifati, V., 2003. Mutations in the DJ-1 gene associated with autosomal recessive early-
onset parkinsonism. Science 299, 256–259.
Bonifati, V., et al., 2003. DJ-1 (PARK7), a novel gene for autosomal recessive, early onset
parkinsonism. Neurol. Sci. 24, 159–160.
Brown, G.C., Neher, J.J., 2010. Inflammatory neurodegeneration and mechanisms of
microglial killing of neurons. Mol. Neurobiol. 41, 242–247.
Canet-Avilés, R.M., et al., 2004. The Parkinson's disease protein DJ-1 is neuroprotective
due to cysteine-sulfinic acid-driven mitochondrial localization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 101, 9103–9108.
Chaneton, B., et al., 2012. Serine is a natural ligand and allosteric activator of pyruvate ki-
nase M2. Nature 491, 458–462.
Chen, S., Owens, G.C., Edelman, D.B., 2008. Dopamine inhibits mitochondrial motility in
hippocampal neurons. PLoS One 3, e2804.
Clements, C.M., McNally, R.S., Conti, B.J., Mak, T.W., Ting, J.P.-Y., 2006. DJ-1, a cancer- and
Parkinson's disease-associated protein, stabilizes the antioxidant transcriptional mas-
ter regulator Nrf2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103, 15091–15096.
Davidson, B., et al., 2008. Expression and clinical role of DJ-1, a negative regulator of PTEN,
in ovarian carcinoma. Hum. Pathol. 39, 87–95.
Degrandi, 2009. The proinflammatory cytokine-induced IRG1 protein associates with mi-
tochondria. 29, 55–68.
Durán, R.V., et al., 2012. Glutaminolysis activates Rag-mTORC1 signaling. Mol. Cell 47,
349–358.
Fan, J., et al., 2014. Quantitative flux analysis reveals folate-dependent NADPH production.
Nature 510, 298–302.
Fendt, S.-M., et al., 2013. Reductive glutamine metabolism is a function of the α-
ketoglutarate to citrate ratio in cells. Nat. Commun. 4.
Gu, L., et al., 2009. Involvement of ERK1/2 signaling pathway in DJ-1-induced neuropro-
tection against oxidative stress. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 383, 469–474.
Gupta, V., Bamezai, R.N.K., 2010. Human pyruvate kinase M2: A multifunctional protein.
Protein Sci. 19, 2031–2044.
Guzman, J.N., et al., 2010. Oxidant stress evoked by pacemaking in dopaminergic neurons
is attenuated by DJ-1. Nature 468, 696–700.
Hall, C.J., et al., 2013. Immunoresponsive gene 1 augments bactericidal activity of macro-
phage-lineage cells by regulating β-oxidation-dependent mitochondrial ROS produc-
tion. Cell Metab. 18, 265–278.
Hayes, J.D., Dinkova-Kostova, A.T., 2014. The Nrf2 regulatory network provides an inter-
face between redox and intermediary metabolism. Trends Biochem. Sci. 39, 199–218.
Henn, A., et al., 2009. The suitability of BV2 cells as alternative model system for primary
microglia cultures or for animal experiments examining brain inflammation. ALTEX
26, 83–94.
Hering, R., et al., 2004. Novel homozygous p. E64D mutation in DJ1 in early onset
Parkinson disease (PARK7). Hum. Mutat. 24, 321–329.
Hiller, K., et al., 2009. MetaboliteDetector: comprehensive analysis tool for targeted and
nontargeted GC/MS based metabolome analysis. Anal. Chem. 81, 3429–3439.
Hu, W., et al., 2010. Glutaminase 2, a novel p53 target gene regulating energy metabolism
and antioxidant function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107, 7455–7460.
Irrcher, I., et al., 2010. Loss of the Parkinson's disease-linked gene DJ-1 perturbs mitochon-
drial dynamics. Hum. Mol. Genet. 19, 3734–3746.
Javitch, J.A., D'Amato, R.J., Strittmatter, S.M., Snyder, S.H., 1985. Parkinsonism-inducing
neurotoxin, N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine: uptake of the metabolite
N-methyl-4-phenylpyridine by dopamine neurons explains selective toxicity. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 82, 2173–2177.
Kahle, P.J., Waak, J., Gasser, T., 2009. DJ-1 and prevention of oxidative stress in Parkinson's
disease and other age-related disorders. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 47, 1354–1361.
Kim, R.H., et al., 2005. DJ-1, a novel regulator of the tumor suppressor PTEN. Cancer Cell 7,
263–273.
Kim, J., et al., 2013. DJ-1 facilitates the interaction between STAT1 and its phosphatase,
SHP-1, in brain microglia and astrocytes: A novel anti-inflammatory function of DJ-
1. Neurobiol. Dis. 60, 1–10.
Kim, D., et al., 2015. SHMT2 drives glioma cell survival in ischaemia but imposes a depen-
dence on glycine clearance. Nature 520, 363–367.
Kraft, A.D., Johnson, D.A., Johnson, J.A., 2004. Nuclear factor E2-related factor 2-dependent
antioxidant
response
element
activation
by
tert-butylhydroquinone
and
124
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
 sulforaphane occurring preferentially in astrocytes conditions neurons against oxida-
tive insult. J. Neurosci. 24, 1101–1112.
Krebiehl, G., et al., 2010. Reduced basal autophagy and impaired mitochondrial dynamics
due to loss of Parkinson's disease-associated protein DJ-1. PLoS One 5, e9367.
Krols, M., et al., 2016. Mitochondria-associated membranes as hubs for neurodegenera-
tion. Acta Neuropathol. (Berl.) http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00401-015-1528-7.
Krug, A.K., et al., 2014. Transcriptional and metabolic adaptation of human neurons to the
mitochondrial toxicant MPP+. Cell Death Dis. 5, e1222.
Lee, J.-Yy., et al., 2012. Human DJ-1 and its homologs are novel glyoxalases. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 21, 3215–3225.
Lee, G.Y., et al., 2014. Comparative oncogenomics identifies PSMB4 and SHMT2 as poten-
tial cancer driver genes. Cancer Res. 74, 3114–3126.
Lu, S.C., 2013. Glutathione synthesis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 1830, 3143–3153.
Lyssiotis, C.A., et al., 2012. Cellular control mechanisms that regulate pyruvate kinase M2
activity and promote cancer growth. Biomed. Res. 23, 213–217.
Meiser, J., Weindl, D., Hiller, K., 2013. Complexity of dopamine metabolism. Cell Commun.
Signal. 11.
Michelucci, A., et al., 2013. Immune-responsive gene 1 protein links metabolism to immu-
nity by catalyzing itaconic acid production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 7820–7825.
Mitsuishi, Y., et al., 2012. Nrf2 redirects glucose and glutamine into anabolic pathways in
metabolic reprogramming. Cancer Cell 22, 66–79.
Mitsumoto, A., Nakagawa, Y., 2001. DJ-1 is an indicator for endogenous reactive oxygen
species elicited by endotoxin. Free Radic. Res. 35, 885–893.
Mullen, A.R., et al., 2014. Oxidation of alpha-ketoglutarate Is required for reductive car-
boxylation in cancer cells with mitochondrial defects. Cell Rep. 7, 1679–1690.
Nagakubo, D., et al., 1997. DJ-1, a novel oncogene which transforms mouse NIH3T3 cells
in cooperation with ras. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 231, 509–513.
Nguyen, T.T., et al., 2014. Loss of Miro1-directed mitochondrial movement results in a
novel murine model for neuron disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111,
E3631–E3640.
O'Brien, J., Wilson, I., Orton, T., Pognan, F., 2000. Investigation of the Alamar Blue
(resazurin) fluorescent dye for the assessment of mammalian cell cytotoxicity. Eur.
J. Biochem. 267, 5421–5426.
Palsson-McDermott, E.M., et al., 2015. Pyruvate kinase M2 regulates hif-1α activity and
IL-1β induction and is a critical determinant of the Warburg effect in LPS-activated
macrophages. Cell Metab. 21, 65–80.
Pham, T.T., et al., 2010. DJ-1-deficient mice show less TH-positive neurons in the ventral
tegmental area and exhibit non-motoric behavioural impairments. Genes Brain
Behav. 9, 305–317.
Rafalski, V.A., Brunet, A., 2011. Energy metabolism in adult neural stem cell fate. Prog.
Neurobiol. 93, 182–203.
Richman, P.G., Meister, A., 1975. Regulation of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine synthetase by
nonallosteric feedback inhibition by glutathione. J. Biol. Chem. 250, 1422–1426.
Saxton, W.M., Hollenbeck, P.J., 2012. The axonal transport of mitochondria. J. Cell Sci. 125,
2095–2104.
Schildknecht, S., et al., 2015. Preferential extracellular generation of the active parkinso-
nian toxin MPP(+) by transporter-independent export of the intermediate
MPDP(.). Antioxid. Redox Signal. 23, 1001–1016.
Scholz, D., et al., 2011. Rapid, complete and large-scale generation of post-mitotic neurons
from the human LUHMES cell line. J. Neurochem. 119, 957–971.
Sheng, C., et al., 2013. DJ-1 deficiency perturbs microtubule dynamics and impairs striatal
neurite outgrowth. Neurobiol. Aging 34, 489–498.
Stambolic, V., et al., 1998. Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell survival by the
tumor suppressor PTEN. Cell 95, 29–39.
Stephen, T.-L., et al., 2015. Miro1 regulates activity-driven positioning of mitochondria
within astrocytic processes Apposed to synapses to regulate intracellular calcium sig-
naling. J. Neurosci. 35, 15996–16011.
Strelko, C.L., et al., 2011. Itaconic acid is a mammalian metabolite induced during macro-
phage activation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 16386–16389.
Sun, H., et al., 1999. PTEN modulates cell cycle progression and cell survival by regulating
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5,-trisphosphate and Akt/protein kinase B signaling path-
way. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96, 6199–6204.
Suzuki, S., et al., 2010. Phosphate-activated glutaminase (GLS2), a p53-inducible regulator
of glutamine metabolism and reactive oxygen species. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107,
7461–7466.
Tannahill, G.M., et al., 2013. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1β
through HIF-1α. Nature 496, 238–242.
Taylor, Z.J., Gurka, R., Kopp, G.A., Liberzon, A., 2010. Long-duration time-resolved PIV to
study unsteady aerodynamics. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 59, 3262–3269.
Tolle, S.W., Dyson, R., Newburgh, R., Cardenas, J.M., 1976. Pyruvate kinase isozymes in
neurons, glia, neuroblastoma, and glioblastoma. J. Neurochem. 27, 1355–1360.
Trudler, D., Weinreb, O., Mandel, S.A., Youdim, M.B.H., Frenkel, D., 2014. DJ-1 deficiency
triggers microglia sensitivity to dopamine toward a pro-inflammatory phenotype
that is attenuated by rasagiline. J. Neurochem. 129, 434–447.
van der Brug, M.P., et al., 2008. RNA binding activity of the recessive parkinsonism protein
DJ-1 supports involvement in multiple cellular pathways. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105,
10244–10249.
Van Duijn, C.M., et al., 2001. PARK7, a novel locus for autosomal recessive early-onset par-
kinsonism, on chromosome 1p36. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69, 629–634.
Vasseur, S., et al., 2009. DJ-1/PARK7 is an important mediator of hypoxia-induced cellular
responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 1111–1116.
Vousden, K.H., Ryan, K.M., 2009. p53 and metabolism. Nat. Rev. Cancer 9, 691–700.
Waak, J., et al., 2009. Regulation of astrocyte inflammatory responses by the Parkinson's
disease-associated gene DJ-1. FASEB J. 23, 2478–2489.
Wegner, A., Meiser, J., Weindl, D., Hiller, K., 2015. How metabolites modulate metabolic
flux. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 34, 16–22.
Wise, D.R., Thompson, C.B., 2010. Glutamine addiction: a new therapeutic target in can-
cer. Trends Biochem. Sci. 35, 427–433.
Yang, Y., et al., 2005. Inactivation of Drosophila DJ-1 leads to impairments of oxidative
stress response and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 102, 13670–13675.
Yuen, H.-F., et al., 2008. DJ-1 could predict worse prognosis in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 17, 3593–3602.
Zhang, X., Goncalves, R., Mosser, D.M., 2008. The isolation and characterization of murine
macrophages. Curr. Protoc. Immunol. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/0471142735.
im1401s83 (Chapter 14:Unit 14.1).
Zhou, W., Freed, C.R., 2005. DJ-1 up-regulates glutathione synthesis during oxidative
stress and inhibits A53T α-synuclein toxicity. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 43150–43158.
125
J. Meiser et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 89 (2016) 112–125
