 C. elegans Neurons Jettison Protein Aggregates and 
Mitochondria Under Neurotoxic Stress
Ilija Melentijevic1, Marton L. Toth1,*, Meghan L. Arnold1,*, Ryan J. Guasp1, Girish Harinath1, 
Ken C. Nguyen2, Daniel Taub3,4, J. Alex Parker5, Christian Neri6, Christopher Gabel3,4, 
David H. Hall2, and Monica Driscoll1
1Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Nelson Biological Laboratories, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854
2Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Rose F
. Kennedy Center, Bronx, New York 10461
3Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02118, USA
4Boston University Photonics Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA
5Département de Neurosciences, Université de Montréal CRCHUM, Montréal, Canada H2X 0A9
6INSERM, Unit 894, Laboratory of Neuronal Cell Biology and Pathology, 75014 Paris, France
Introduction
The toxicity of misfolded proteins and mitochondrial dysfunction are pivotal factors that 
promote age-associated functional neuronal decline and neurodegenerative disease1,2. 
Accordingly, neurons invest considerable cellular resources in chaperones, protein 
degradation, autophagy, and mitophagy to maintain proteostasis and mitochondrial 
quality3,4. Complicating the challenges of neuroprotection, misfolded human disease 
proteins and mitochondria can move into neighboring cells via unclear mechanisms, which 
may promote pathology spread5,6. Here we document a previously unrecognized capacity of 
Caenorhabditis elegans adult neurons to extrude large (~4 μm) membrane-surrounded 
vesicles called “exophers” that can harbor protein aggregates and organelles. Inhibiting 
chaperone expression, autophagy, or the proteasome, as well as compromising mitochondrial 
quality, enhances exopher production. Proteotoxically-stressed neurons that extrude 
exophers subsequently function better than those that do not. The extruded exopher transits 
through a surrounding tissue where some contents appear degraded, but some non-
degradable materials can be subsequently found in remote cells. Our observations suggest 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.D. driscoll@dls.rutgers.edu.
*equal contributions
Author Contributions I.M., M.L.T., M.L.A., R.J.G. and G.H. conducted and designed experiments along with M.D. I.M. and M.D. 
wrote the manuscript with input from R.J.G., M.L.A. and M.L.T. C.V.G. and D.T. carried out calcium connection experiments. K.C.N. 
and D.H.H. carried out electron microscopy. J.A.P. and C.N. supplied the Q128 reagent and manuscript critiques.
Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 February 16; 542(7641): 367–371. doi:10.1038/nature21362.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that exopher-genesis is a potential “garbage-removal” response to challenged proteostasis 
and organelle function. We propose that exophers are components of a conserved 
mechanism that constitutes a fundamental, but formerly unrecognized, branch of neuronal 
proteostasis and mitochondrial quality control, which, when dysfunctional or diminished 
with age, might actively contribute to pathogenesis in human neurodegenerative disease and 
brain aging.
Results
While studying age-associated dendritic restructuring in C. elegans neurons7, we noticed 
that fluorescent signals originating from neurons sometimes appeared situated outside of the 
cell in defined vesicle-like structures that we call exophers (Fig. 1a–c, Extended Data Fig. 
1a–c, 2g). We first characterized exophers associated with the six gentle touch receptor 
neurons, for which cell bodies and dendrites are easily visualized. We found that exophers 
were comparable in size (average 3.8 μM) to neuronal somas (Extended Data Fig. 1d). The 
size of the vesicles, the morphological stages in their biogenesis (Fig. 1a–c), and the genetic 
requirements for their production (Extended Data Table 1a), distinguish them from much 
smaller exosomes (~30–100nm; Extended Data Table 2 compares exophers to characterized 
extracellular vesicles). Neuronal exophers do not appear to result from classical cell 
division: a) exophers did not stain with nuclear DNA indicator DAPI (Fig. 1b); b) cell 
division-inhibiting hydroxyurea8 did not change exopher levels (n > 30 per trial, three trials); 
and c) RNAi-mediated disruption of cell cycle genes did not change exopher detection 
(Extended Data Table 1b).
We found that exopher production is not restricted to a specific transgene reporter or line 
(examples in Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 1). Amphid neurons that are dye-filled due to 
openings to the outside environment9 (Extended Data Fig. 1e, f) can produce exophers, 
establishing that exophers can form under native/physiological cellular conditions. Exopher 
production differs dramatically among the six touch receptor neurons, with ALMR 
producing exophers most frequently (Fig. 1d). Multiple neuronal types can produce 
exophers, including dopaminergic PDE and CEP neurons (Extended Data Fig. 1g, h), FLP 
neurons (not shown), sensory ASER neurons (Extended Data Fig. 1i).
Time-lapse analyses (Supplemental Videos 1–2) revealed that exophers typically arise from 
the soma by asymmetrically amassing labeled protein to create a balloon-like extrusion via a 
pinching off event; the exopher compartment then moves outward from the neuronal cell 
body (extrusion ~15–100 minutes; Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 1a). Plasma membrane 
reporter Pmec-4PH(plcDelta)::GFP (Extended Data Fig. 2a) and electron microscopy data 
(Extended Data Fig. 2) confirm that exophers are membrane-bound. Exophers can initially 
remain connected to the soma by a thin thread-like tube (Fig. 1c) that can allow transfer of 
tagged proteins and calcium into the attached exopher compartment (Extended Data Fig. 1a, 
3, Supplemental Video 2). Exophers ultimately disconnect from the originating neuronal 
soma (Extended Data Fig. 3).
Why might neurons produce exophers? Time-lapse studies indicated that aggregating 
mCherry often appeared preferentially concentrated into exophers, and we found that 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurons expressing neurotoxic polyglutamine expansion protein huntingtinQ128CFP could 
also concentrate and extrude this aggregating protein in exophers (Fig. 2a, b). We therefore 
further queried the relationship of aggregating or toxic protein expression to exopher 
production. Strains expressing Q128 (toxic with high levels of apparent aggregation10,11) 
produced significantly more exophers compared to strains that did not express polyQ or 
expressed huntingtinQ19CFP (non-toxic and low aggregation) (Fig. 2c). Likewise, 
aggregating mCherry lines exhibited higher average exopher numbers over adult life as 
compared to lines expressing soluble GFP (example in Fig. 2d). High aggregate load in 
individual neurons was predictive of increased exopher production on the following day 
(Fig. 2e). Conversely, mCherry(RNAi) reduced exopher number by ~half in a line producing 
aggregating mCherry (Fig. 2f). Although our studies cannot determine the relative 
contribution of aggregate load from protein expression levels, they suggest that proteostatic 
challenges increase exopher production. Consistent with a potential role for exophers in 
elimination of potentially harmful neuronal contents, expression of amyloid-forming human 
Alzheimer’s disease fragment Aβ1–42 in ASER neurons increases exopher numbers (Fig. 
2g). Our combined observations on exopher formation, contents, and frequency of detection 
suggest that exophers preferentially include aggregated, excess, or otherwise neurotoxic 
proteins for removal.
To address the hypothesis that aggregation-prone proteins might be selectively extruded in 
exophers, we constructed a line that expressed both an aggregation-prone mCherry 
(Is[Pmec4mCh1]) and a non-aggregating GFP (Is[pmec-4GFP]) and compared the red and 
green fluorescence distribution between exophers and somas (example in Fig. 2h, data in 
Fig. 2i). In 22/23 exophers, we found higher relative levels of mCherry in the exopher, and 
higher relative levels of GFP in the soma. That neurons appear to preferentially extrude 
aggregation-prone mCherry over soluble GFP suggests deleterious materials are identified 
and sorted for export during exopher-genesis.
To address the hypothesis that proteostatic challenges enhance the exopher production 
response, we manipulated the in vivo protein-folding milieu. We examined exopher 
production in an hsf-1(sy441) mutant deficient in core proteostasis transcription factor 
HSF-1 (and therefore chaperone expression) to record ~6-fold increase in exophers (Fig. 3a). 
We impaired autophagy by treating animals with a pharmacological inhibitor, Spautin-1 and 
by RNAi knockdown (lgg-1, atg-7, bec-1, lgg-1/2) in a strain expressing aggregation-prone 
mCherry and measured a significant increase in exopher incidence (Fig. 3b,c). Impairment 
of proteasome activity with inhibitor MG132 in strain Is[pmec-4mCh1] also increased 
exopher production (Fig. 3d). Given that inhibiting multiple facets of proteostasis increases 
exopher extrusion, we suggest that exophers may constitute a previously undescribed 
component of the proteostasis network, which may function as a backup or alternative 
response to rid cells of neurotoxic aggregates/proteins when proteostasis becomes 
overwhelmed by mounting intracellular proteotoxicity.
Exopher production occurs with a striking bimodal distribution over adult life: exophers are 
most commonly observed on adult days A2-A3, diminish in abundance A4-A8, and then 
reappear again later in life ~A10-A11 (Fig. 2d; similar young adult pattern with dye-filled 
amphid neurons, Extended Data Fig. 1f; and with a 1 day earlier onset in an hsf-1 mutant, 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 1j). The distinctive temporal production profile suggests that conditions 
permissive for exopher production exist in young adulthood but can then be limited or 
remain below a threshold until late adulthood. The coincidence of the early peak with a 
transition in C. elegans young adult proteostasis management12–14 suggests the first wave of 
exopher-genesis may serve as a normal component of an orchestrated proteostasis reset in 
young adulthood that involves jettisoning neuronal garbage generated during development; 
the later adult increase in exopher production may be the consequence of age-associated 
decline in proteostatic robustness.
Rather than inducing neuronal death or dysfunction, exopher-genesis appears beneficial. 
First, in hundreds of longitudinal observations, we did not observe neuronal loss after 
exopher production: exophers are distinct from apoptotic bodies in their biogenesis (Fig. 1a, 
Extended Data Fig. 1a), and the soma of an exopher-producing neuron retains normal 
ultrastructural features (Extended Data Fig. 2e). Second, the relative functionality of 
proteotoxically-stressed neurons that have generated exophers is increased over neurons that 
did not extrude exophers. In blinded studies in a line expressing Q128CFP, which 
progressively impairs touch sensation10, we found that midlife touch sensitivity is greater 
when ALMR had definitely produced an exopher at A2, as compared to age-matched 
siblings in which ALMR had not produced an exopher (Fig. 3e). Third, we identified pod-1 
and emb-8 as polarity genes required in adults for exopher-genesis (Fig. 3f), and found that 
adult RNAi knockdown impaired midlife touch sensitivity (Fig. 3g). Although we cannot 
rule out that pod-1 and emb-8 RNAi interventions might generally disrupt adult neuronal 
function, taken together our data are consistent with a model in which adult neurons that do 
not make exophers become functionally compromised compared to those neurons that 
extruded offending contents. Overall, despite a striking expulsion of cellular contents, adult 
neurons appear to be healthier after throwing out their trash.
Considering the large volume of exophers, we hypothesized they might include organelles. 
Indeed, both lysosomes (Extended Data Fig. 4) and mitochondria (Fig. 4a, b; Extended Data 
Fig. 5) can be extruded in exophers. Mitochondrially-localized GFP reporters revealed 
mitochondrial inclusion in budding and dissociated exophers, with punctate or filamentous 
morphology typical of adult mitochondrial networks (Fig. 4a, Extended Data Fig. 5a–c). To 
address whether impairing mitochondrial quality enhances the production of exophers, we 
genetically manipulated dct-1/BNIP3 (mitophagy), pink-1/PINK15 and pdr-1/Parkin16 
(human Parkinson’s disease homologs implicated in mitochondrial maintenance), and 
ubl-517(mitochondrial unfolded protein response), (Fig. 4c, d). We conclude that multiple 
approaches toward genetic impairment of mitochondria can increase exopher-genesis.
To address the hypothesis that stressed or damaged mitochondria might be preferentially 
segregated to exophers, we utilized mitoROGFP, a mitochondrially localized reporter that 
changes its peak excitation wavelength from ~405 nm (oxidized) to 476 nm (reduced) 
according to the local oxidative environment18,19. We find a significant increase in the 405 
nm (oxidized) / 476 nm (reduced) excitation ratio of mitochondria in exophers as compared 
to those in somas (Fig. 4e), roughly equivalent to the redox excitation ratio observed in C. 
elegans neurons subjected to H2O2-induced oxidative stress19. We confirmed higher 
oxidation scores using MitoTimer, an alternative reporter of mitochondrial matrix 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 oxidation20 (Extended Data Fig. 5d). In addition, touch neurons of juglone-treated21 
bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry]; zhsEx17[Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP] animals had significantly higher 
numbers of mitochondria-including exophers than matched controls (Supplemental Data 
Fig. 5e). Although compromised mitochondrial health may impair neuronal proteostasis, 
thus increasing exopher production, our data establish that touch neurons can eject 
mitochondria via exophers, which raises the intriguing possibility that exopher-genesis may 
constitute a previously unappreciated removal-based mechanism of mitochondrial 
homeostasis.
What is the fate of the extruded exopher and its contents? With time, exopher fluorescence 
intensity diminishes or disappears (persistence times ~1–12 hours), possibly as exopher 
contents are degraded internally or digested by the neighboring hypodermis that fully 
surrounds the touch neuron and has degradative capabilities. Consequent to disruption of the 
C. elegans apoptotic engulfment genes ced-1 (homologue of mammalian CD91, LRP1 and 
MEGF10, and fly Draper), ced-6 (GULP) and ced-7 (ABC), ALMR neurons are associated 
with multiple exophers (Fig. 5a; Extended Data Fig. 6a). However, genetic manipulation of a 
parallel engulfment pathway comprising ced-2, ced-5, ced-10, ced-12, and psr-1, changed 
neither the frequency of exopher generation nor the detection of multiple exophers. 
Moreover, we did not detect the apoptotic “eat-me” signal phosphatidylserine (PS) on the 
exopher surface using a widely expressed PS-binding annexinV::GFP (0/43 exophers; 
Extended Data Fig. 6b). Our data suggest that hypodermal recognition/degradation of 
exophers and their contents occurs by mechanisms that are at least in part distinct from 
classical removal of apoptotic corpses, but involve the CED-1, CED-6, CED-7 proteins. 
Electron microscopy studies support that the hypodermis may mediate degradation of at 
least some of exopher contents (Extended Data Fig. 2d–f, h).
The lack of detectable PS “eat me” signal on exophers raised the question as to whether at 
least some exopher contents might be destined to elude hypodermal degradation. Indeed, 
fluorescent mCherry protein that was originally expressed specifically in touch neurons, or 
fluorescent DiI loaded into dye-filling neurons, appeared later in distant scavenger 
coelomocytes (Fig. 5b–d; Extended Data Fig. 6c). Blocking coelomocyte uptake capacity by 
cup-4 mutation22 caused fluorescent particles to accumulate outside neurons, possibly 
within the pseudocoelomic fluid (body cavity; Extended Data Fig. 6d, e). We conclude that 
some exopher contents transit the hypodermal tissue to be released into the pseudocoelom, 
from which materials can later be taken up by distant coelomocytes. Exophers can therefore 
mediate transfer of neuronal materials to remote cells.
Considerable excitement in the neurodegenerative disease field has been generated by the 
findings that mammalian neurons can extrude conformational disease proteins, including in 
Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and prion disease23. C. elegans exopher production constitutes a 
newly identified mechanism by which neurons can transfer cellular material (preferentially 
neurotoxic species) to other cells. Interestingly, in a C. elegans muscle model of prion 
toxicity, offending prion proteins were transferred among muscle cells and ultimately 
localized to coelomocytes24. We speculate that the basic mechanism we document here may 
correspond to a conserved pathway for the transfer of toxic contents out of multiple cell 
types. In this regard, it may be noteworthy that mammalian aggregated poly-Q expanded 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 huntingtin can transfer between neurons via tunneling nanotubes25–27 that resemble thin 
connections between C. elegans somas and exophers, and that neuronal polyQ in Drosophila 
is transferred to glia via a process that requires the CED-1 homolog, DRAPER28.
Recent reports show mitochondria can transfer out of specific cells to contribute positive 
roles (mesenchymal stem cells via tunneling nanotubes29; astrocytes to neurons in a stroke 
model30), but our study underscores a generally underappreciated option for mitochondrial 
quality control: mitochondrial expulsion. The mito-expulsion we report in C. elegans touch 
neurons has a striking mammalian counterpart: mouse mitochondria originating in retinal 
ganglion cells can be extruded into neighboring astrocytes for degradation6 (with some 
intriguingly similar morphology to C. elegans exophers; see Fig. 1e of ref. 6). Although 
further study will be required to definitively establish the health status and fates of 
transferred mitochondria in the C. elegans model, it is tempting to speculate that 
transcellular degradation of mitochondria may be a more broadly utilized mechanism of 
mitochondrial quality control than currently appreciated, with associated potential 
importance in neuronal health.
Overall, although further experiments are needed to elucidate the detailed mechanisms at 
play, and validate the proposed functions of exophers in proteostasis and the removal of 
damaged organelles, we suggest that exopher production is a previously unrecognized 
mechanism for clearing out accumulating protein aggregates and dysfunctional organelles 
that threaten neuronal homeostasis (Extended Data Fig. 7). The analogous process in 
mammals could promote transfer of misfolded protein and/or dysfunctional mitochondria to 
neighboring cells, promoting human pathology in neurodegenerative disease if 
compromised. Mechanistic dissection of this novel facet of proteostasis and mitochondrial 
homeostasis should thus inform on fundamental mechanisms of neuronal maintenance and 
suggest novel targets for intervention in neurodegenerative disease.
Methods
Strains and Media
C. elegans strains were cultured at 20 °C with standard methods31. Strains used were 
SK4005 zdIs5[Pmec-4GFP] (abbreviated in the text as Is[Pmec-4GFP]), ZB4065 
bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry1](abbreviated in the text as Is[Pmec-4mCh1]), ZB4066 
bzIs167[Pmec-4mitogfp Pmec-4mCherry2] (abbreviated in the text as Is[Pmec-4mCh2]), 
ZB4067 bzIs167[Pmec-4mitogfp Pmec-4mCherry4]; igIs1[Pmec-7YFP Pmec-3htt57Q128::cfp 
lin-15+]10 (abbreviated in the text as Is[mCh2 ; Q128CFP]), sesIs2512[Pgcy-5GFP], 
sesIs25[Pflp-6 Aβ; Pgcy-5GFP]32, KWN176 rnyIs014[Pmec-4mCherry unc-119(+)], ZB4071 
bzIs169[Pmec-18sid-1Psng-1YFP]; bzIs101[Pmec-4mCherry; Punc-119+], ZB4087 
bzIs169[Pmec-18sid-1Psng-1YFP]; bzIs101[Pmec-4mCherry; Punc-119+]; hsf-1(sy441), BZ555 
egIs1[Pdat-1GFP], ZB4070 bzIs168 [Pmec-7LMP-1::GFP], ZB4509 bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry]; 
bzIs168[Pmec-7LMP-1::GFP], ZB4082 cup-4(ok837); bzIs166[pmec-4mCherry], ZB4083 
smIS76 [Phsp-16ANV::GFP]33; bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry], ZB4084 hsf-1(sy441); 
zdIs5[Pmec-4GFP], ZB4085 hsf-1(sy441); bzIs166 [Pmec-4mCherry], ZB4086 
zdIs5[Pmec-4GFP]; bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry], PTN73 pha-1(e2123); him-5(e1490); 
zhsEx17[Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP], RBW2834 rbw2834Si[Pmec-3::mitotimer::T54, CB-
Melentijevic et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 unc-119 + II ttTi5605] in unc-119 (ed3)20, QH3738 ced-1(e1735); zdIs5, 
QH3737ced-6(n1813); zdIs5, QH4623 ced-5(n1812); zdIs5, QH3768 ced-7(n2690); zdIs5, 
QH3130 ced-10(n3246); zdIs5, QH3533 psr-1(ok714); zdIs534, ZB4526 
bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry]; pdr-1(gk448), ZB4525 bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry]; (pwIs979 
[Pcup-4GFP::vps-29]cB-unc119), ZB4528 bzIs166[Pmec-4mCherry]; zhsEx17 
[Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP], ZB4059 bzIs163 [Pmec-4::GCaMP3.0::SL2::mCherry], ZB4524 
bzEx242 [Pmec-4::PH(plcDelta)::GFP]35, and wild type N2.
RNAi was administered through feeding animals with RNAi-expressing bacteria with 
standard methods36 with touch neurons RNAi-enhanced via SID-1 expression37. Exophers 
are readily visible at 400X total magnification, with high power dissecting microscopes. In 
general, exophers have the following features: a ~4 μm membrane-bound vesicle extruded 
from a neuron via a mechanism that temporarily includes a thin filamentous connection to 
the originating soma, but eventually breaks off. Contents of exophers can include neurotoxic 
proteins, mitochondria, and lysosomes; exophers are produced by native amphid neurons 
after dye-filling.
Age synchronization and RNAi screening
To synchronize animals, L4 stage hermaphrodites were selected and moved to test plates. 
The day after moving was considered adult day 1, and animals were scored on adult day 2 
for the occurrence of exophers. For scoring of exophers, animals were immobilized by 
adding 100 μL of 10 mM tetramisole to the surface of the plate. Animals were measured on 
the plate with a Kramer dissecting scope with a 20x objective. The ALMR neuron was 
scored for the presence of an exopher, which was counted if greater than ¼ the size of the 
soma, as a threshold against inclusion of smaller species of extracellular vesicles. Exophers 
were also visible in live animals without anesthetic. RNAi experiments had a negative empty 
vector control. An mCherry knockdown was used to confirm RNAi had an effect in the 
neurons of interest. RNAi screens were performed with the strain bzIs169[Pmec-18sid-1 
Psng-1YFP]; bzIs101[Pmec-4mCherry; unc-119+]. All genes were independently screened a 
minimum of three times.
Microscopy Techniques
For imaging, animals were mounted by placing them in a drop of cold, liquid 36% Pluronic 
F-127 with 1 mM tetramisole solution and pressed between two coverslips. The slides were 
brought to room temperature, solidifying the Pluronic F-127 gel and immobilizing the 
animals. Co-localization images were made using iVision software. Images were taken using 
a Zeiss Imager D1m upright compound microscope with a 40x dry objective. For confocal 
imaging, animals were immobilized by using 7.5% M9 agarose pads with 2.5 μl 
PolySciences 0.05 μm polystyrene microspheres. A Zeiss spinning disk confocal upright 
microscope with 100x oil immersion objective was used for select images to show additional 
details, including lysosomal imaging and connection imaging.
MitoROGFP Imaging and Quantification
Adult day 2 PTN73 pha-1(e2123); him-5(e1490); zhsEx17[Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP] animals 
were mounted as above on a Leica SP5 II confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems, Exton, 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PA) with a 63x oil immersion lens. Samples were alternately excited with a 30% power 405 
nm UV laser and a 30% power 476 nm visible laser with a sequential line scanning method. 
Emission was detected by HYD1 photon counting at 508–513 nm. Images were quantified 
using ImageJ. Images were thresholded to remove background. The 405 nm channel was 
divided by the 476 nm channel, and ROI measurement was used to quantify mean 
intensities.
MitoTimer Imaging and Quantification
MitoTimer encodes a dsRed derivative that fluoresces green when reduced (first 
synthesized), but irreversibly shifts tored fluorescence as it oxidizes 20. Adult day 2 
rbw2834Si[Pmec-3::mitotimer::T54, CB-unc-119 + II ttTi5605] in unc-119 (ed3)20 animals 
were mounted as above on a Zeiss Imager D1m upright compound microscope with a 63x 
oil immersion lens. Samples were alternately measured under GFP and dsRed channels, 
keeping light intensity and exposure times constant between images. Images were quantified 
using ImageJ by selecting the ROI, subtracting the background, measuring red and green 
intensities, and calculating the red/green ratio.
Fluorescence Quantification
Fluorescence quantification was performed in ImageJ by selecting the ROI, measuring the 
mean intensity, and subtracting background intensity.
Time-lapse Imaging
Time-lapse imaging was performed with a 100x oil immersion objective with a motorized 
stage. 15 animals were mounted to a slide using a 7.5% M9 agarose pads with 2.5 μl 
PolySciences 0.05 μm polystyrene microspheres; coverslip was sealed with a 60:40 mix of 
Vaseline and paraffin wax. An iVision script was used to image selected locations every 8–
15 minutes for 12 hours. Image analysis and video compilation were done manually.
Dye-filling
Animals were washed off a plate into a 1.5 mL centrifuge tube with 1 mL M9 and 10 μL of 
1 mM DiI. Animals were allowed to soak at room temperature for 3 hours. Animals were 
washed with M9 twice before mounting onto slides for imaging.
Longitudinal measurements
50 animals were synchronized at the L4 stage and 25 animals were measured on subsequent 
adult days, directly from the plate without anesthetics using a Kramer microscope. The 
animals were transferred to fresh plates every 2 days until adult day 8 to prevent crowding 
and starvation.
DAPI Staining
DAPI staining was performed after wash-harvesting with PBS and permeabilizing the 
membrane at −80 °C freezer for 10 minutes. After thawing, the supernatant was removed 
and animals were re-suspended in 1 mL cold methanol and incubated 5 minutes for fixation. 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Animals were washed with PBS twice and then stained in a 1 mL DAPI solution (200 ng/mL 
in PBS) for 30 minutes before mounting for microscopy.
Size Measurement
Exopher and cell size was performed by measuring pixel length with Photoshop and 
comparing to a calibration scale for each objective used. Width was measured at the widest 
point.
Drug Assays
MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich C2211) and Spautin-138 (Sigma-Aldrich SML0440) were dissolved 
in DMSO at 10 mM and 1 mM, respectively, and administered by placing 30 μL of the 
solution over the bacterial food lawn.
Juglone21 (Sigma-Aldrich 59990) was dissolved to a final concentration of 230 μM in a 
solution of 0.23% v/v ethanol in M9. Adult day 1 worms were transferred into either a 1 mL 
tube of the juglone solution or a 1 mL control tube of 0.23% v/v ethanol in M9 for 90 
minutes. Animals were washed with M9 buffer, centrifuged, and recovered onto a 
microscope slide for imaging.
Hydroxyurea (Sigma-Aldrich H8627) was dissolved in distilled water to make a 1 M 
solution, of which 250 mL was added to a standard seeded NGM plate to reach a working 
concentration of 25 mM8. Plate was left at room temperature for 6 hours to allow for 
complete diffusion before transferring adult day 1 animals for measurement 24 hours later 
on adult day 2.
Touch Sensitivity Assay
To assay for touch sensitivity, animals were stroked with a calibrated force probe on the 
anterior and posterior halves of the body. Reversal was an indication of a positive response. 
Animals responding to at least 3 out of 5 touches were considered sensitive. Animals 
responding to 2 or fewer touches were considered not sensitive.
Aggregate measurements
Q128 aggregates can be visually distinguished in touch neuron somas with a 20x 
objective11,39. The aggregate exopher prediction experiment was done by separating day 1 
adult animals into two populations, those that had one visible aggregate in the ALMR 
neuron and those that had two or more. The two populations were scored on the next day for 
exophers extruded from the ALMR neuron.
Electron microscopy
Young adults were screened by light microscopy to identify samples in which the ALM 
neurons had recently expelled an exopher. These animals were prepared for TEM analysis 
approximately 3 hours after initial selection by high pressure freezing and freeze substitution 
(HPF/FS) following a standard protocol for preservation of ultrastructure40. Briefly, after 
HPF, animals were exposed to 1% osmium tetroxide in acetone with 2% water added, kept at 
−90 °C for 5–6 days before slowly warming back to room temperature. Samples were rinsed 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in cold acetone and embedded in plastic resin before curing at high temperature for 1–2 
days. Serial thin sections were collected on plastic-coated slot grids, post-stained with uranyl 
acetate, and examined with a Philips CM10 electron microscope. By looking in transverse 
sections for landmarks such as the 2nd bulb of the pharynx, it was possible to reach the 
vicinity of the ALM soma before collecting about 1,500 serial thin transverse sections. 
Having found the soma, one could then explore the region 30–50 μm posterior to the ALMR 
for evidence of the exopher.
FRAP Analysis
Synchronized Is[Pmec-4mCh1] adult day 2 animals were immobilized on 7.5% M9 agarose 
pads with 2.5 μL PolySciences 0.05 μm polystyrene microspheres. Exopher centers were 
photo-bleached with 7 pulses of the MicroPoint pulsed nitrogen pumped dye laser (neutral 
density filter at position 9, Lumencor solid state light source) attached to a Zeiss Inverted 
Axio Observer microscope (100x 1.4 N.A. objective) on an anti-vibration table. 1 frame was 
recorded every 5 seconds using constant excitation intensity and exposure time with a 
Qimaging EXi Blue camera. Images were analyzed with ImageJ. Exopher fluorescence 
intensity was normalized to the intensity of the first data point in each series.
GCaMP studies on axotomized neurons with connected exophers
Adult day 4 bzIs163 [Pmec-4::GCaMP3.0::SL2::mCherry] worms expressing the genetically 
encoded calcium indicator GCaMP3.0 in the mechanosensory neurons were immobilized 
with 0.1% tetramisole on 3% agar pads. As described in Gabel et al.41, a Ti:Sapphire laser 
system was used to perform axotomy (10 KHz pulse rate, 15 nJ/pulse). Axons were cut 20 
μm from the soma with five rapid exposures (0.25 seconds) to the laser beam, resulting in 
vaporization of the axon at the target point. Time-lapse images were taken 20 seconds before 
cutting and up to a minute following the cut, 1 frame/second. Two individuals with exophers 
connected to the soma and three individuals with exophers not connected to the soma were 
analyzed, with only the connected exophers showing any calcium response to axotomy.
Blinding
Blinding was performed by lab members uninvolved in the relevant experiment. Strain and 
treatment information were recorded in a secret key and replaced with a symbol on the 
measurement plates. The data were unblinded following completion of the experiment. 
Animals were allocated to measurement plates randomly.
Statistical Analysis
Sample size was established using G-power software to be able to detect moderate effects 
with 80% power at P = 0.05 after a replicate for routine measurements. For higher 
throughput, larger screens were designed to have an 80% power to meet the re-screening 
cutoff of P = 0.25. Data were considered normal by the Shapiro-Wilk normality test.
Because of variable RNAi outcomes in different trials, exopher numbers were always 
compared to the empty vector control for that particular experiment. Statistics were 
performed using a two tailed unpaired t-test between the trial means, considering neurons 
with an exopher as 1 and neurons without an exopher as 0. One-way ANOVA was performed 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with Dunnett’s test when multiple samples were compared to a single control, and with 
Tukey’s test when multiple samples were compared to each other. Details of statistics are 
described in figure legends.
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.
Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Morphological features of exophers derived from touch neurons
a. An exopher is generated with evident filling and growth. S indicates the soma of an ALM 
neuron on adult day 2 with mCherry visualized; E indicates the significant extrusion of a 
balloon-like exopher, which grows with time. We noted that the size of this exopher 
increased for more than an hour, with fluorescence intensity increasing specifically in the 
exopher compartment, possibly via continual delivery of materials to the exopher after the 
initial formation (see Supplemental Video 2 for striking time-lapse movie corresponding to 
this image). Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh1].
b. An ALMR soma with multiple exophers. S, soma; E, exopher; strain is Is[pmec-4mCh2], 
adult day 2; scale bar, 2 μm.
c. A rare instance of an ALM neuron with exophers that appear extruded from the dendrite 
(arrows). Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh1], adult day 2. Scale bar, 2 μm.
d. Size measurements for somas (squares) and exophers (circles). Data are combined for 
exophers scored in different backgrounds, n = 35. Values are the basis of the measurements 
in Extended Data Table 2.
e. Example of a dye-filled exopher derived from an amphid neuron. We dye-filled the 
amphid neurons, which are open to the environment, in N2 animals and identified exophers 
in the amphid region, some of which appeared attached. Neuronal exophers are thus not 
induced solely in response to expression of foreign proteins, but rather can be produced from 
neurons that express only native proteins. Scale bar, 2 μm. Note that a second example of an 
exopher labeled by dye-filling is included in Extended Data Fig. 6c.
f. Early adult longitudinal time-course on DiI-soaked wild type N2. Dye-filled 
chemosensory amphid neurons also produce exophers with a peak early in life in wild type 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 animals. The production of exophers in this study reflects the extrusion of native neuronal 
contents, as no fluorescent transgene is introduced. Total n > 150, 3 trials; trial means ± 
s.e.m.; day of adult life indicated on x-axis.
g, h. Dopaminergic PDE and CEP neurons can produce exophers. g. GFP-expressing PDE 
neuron with two anterior exophers indicated (8/450 had exophers, typical of the low rate 
observed with GFP reporters in touch neurons); h. CEP neuron with an associated exopher. 
Transgene is dopaminergic neuron-specific reporter egIs1[pdat-1GFP]; adult day 2; scale bar, 
2 μm.
i. ASER neurons can form exophers. Strain is sesIs25 [Pflp-6Aβ; Pgcy-5GFP]32; adult day 2; 
scale bar, 2 μm.
j. The onset of touch neuron exophers in an hsf-1 mutant background occurs one day earlier 
than wild type touch neurons, beginning on adult day 1, but follows the general trend of high 
incidence early in adult life. Longitudinal study with Is[pmec-4GFP]; hsf-1(sy441) (2 green 
trials, starting n = 25), and Is[pmec-4mCh1]; hsf-1(sy441) (red, starting n = 25), day of adult 
life indicated on x-axis. We observed a similar temporal pattern for distinct transgenic line 
Is[pmec-4mCh2]; [pmec-3Q128CFP] (data not shown). A late onset peak might not be 
apparent due to sickness of hsf-1 mutants later in life. Data are from single longitudinal 
trials and thus error bars are not included.
Extended Data Figure 2. Electron microscopy images of an extruded exopher
a. A membrane GFP reporter reveals that exophers contain membrane. Strain is ZB4524 
bzEx242 [Pmec-4PH(plcDelta)::GFP]35. PVM neuron. S, soma; E, exopher. Scale bar, 2 μm.
b. General relationship of exopher to ALMR soma. Schematic view from a lateral aspect 
(anterior to the left). The ALMR soma remains connected to its primary dendrite as 
represented here, projecting leftward. Several smaller membrane-bound tubes extend away 
from the soma, containing small items expelled from the ALMR soma, such as the large 
vesicle shown along the path between the soma and the exopher. The ALMR nucleus (N) 
remains intact, but pushed to an eccentric position by other cytoplasmic inclusions. The 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 soma contains intact rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER), mitochondria (M), small vesicles 
(not shown), and larger protein aggregates (A).
The exopher comprises heterogeneous contents. The exterior of the exopher is completely 
bounded by the hypodermal plasma membrane, so that none of the exopher contents are 
immediately in contact with the hypodermal cytoplasm. Often, a double membrane is 
observed in which the exopher is likely to supply the inner bilayer, and the hypodermis is 
likely to contribute the outer bilayer. Additional, separate membrane-bound items lie 
peripherally (not shown; but see panel h), whose provenance is uncertain, but may represent 
breakdown products from an earlier, larger stage of the exopher. Most internal contents of 
the exopher also have their own membrane boundaries, but some diffuse material (not 
shown; but see panels c, e) fills the spaces around those membrane-bound objects. 
Membrane-bound contents include portions of the neuronal cytoplasm holding intact RER, 
large protein aggregates (A), and complex whorls of membrane (W) that generally seem to 
enclose empty space. Two lysosomes (L) are shown here, one lying separately, nearby the 
exopher, and a second one in the process of fusing into the exopher’s outer membrane. Other 
small lysosomes are seen within the exopher (not shown). A tube is shown extending away 
(far right) towards the pseudocoelom, which might offer one potential route for elimination 
of contents that cannot be degraded during hypodermal transit. Cartoon designed by and 
published with permission of C. Crocker.
Panelsc,d,f,h are TEM views of a single exopher, emitted from the cell body in panel e.
c. The exopher is fully embedded within the hypodermis. Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh1]; 
Is[pmec-4GFP]. TEM of thin transverse section, seen from anterior aspect (thus left/right are 
reversed). Shown is an exopher (E) fully embedded within the hypodermis (H). Animal 
cuticle shown on the left (C). The exopher is ~1.5 μm across, similar in size to the excretory 
canal (EC). The exopher lies closer to the pseudocoelom (P), while the ALMR neuron soma 
lies closer to the cuticle (see panel e). Jagged white spaces running vertically through the 
hypodermis are an artifact where the tissue cracked during processing. Scale bar, 2 μm.
d. Exophers are complex and heterogeneous structures with multiple membranes. The 
exopher is characterized by many small round protrusions and involutions. The main 
exopher complex has a complete plasma membrane surrounding it, isolating its contents 
from the hypodermal cytoplasm. Involuted portions of the exopher can have multiple 
membrane layers. In this thin section, the exopher displays structures such as protein 
aggregates (A), rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER), and a possible small lysosome, in 
addition to loose material floating inside the exopher membrane within a less electron dense 
fluid matrix. Scale bar, 1 μm.
e. The originating touch neuron soma remains intact. The ALMR neuron still has intact cell 
and nuclear membranes. Small mitochondria (M) are visible inside the soma, as are protein 
aggregates (A). Note that the aggregate within the soma is not membrane bound, resembling 
a mammalian aggresome42. The electron density of the neuronal cytoplasm is darker than 
that of the surrounding hypodermis, and the mitochondria of the hypodermis are far larger 
than those of the neuron. Scale bar, 2 μm.
f. The exopher is surrounded by a continuous membrane and contains electron-lucent 
materials and electron dense membrane whorls (W). The exterior of the exopher is 
completely bounded by the hypodermal plasma membrane, so that none of the exopher 
contents are immediately in contact with the hypodermal cytoplasm. The exopher contains 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 complex whorls of membrane (W) that enclose an electron-lucent lumen. Within the exopher 
membrane, the exopher lumen also is electron-lucent, with some diffuse free-floating 
material. Scale bar is 1μm.
g. Fluorescent images demonstrate exopher features similar to the TEM ultrastructure. 
Fluorescent microscopy of exophers have irregular shapes and round protrusions, and an 
irregular distribution of distinct fluorescent signals that resemble the heterogeneous domains 
we see by TEM. Shown is an exopher in a day 2 animal expressing a soluble YFP, a CFP 
PolyQ128 fusion, and an aggregation prone mCherry. The mCherry has a bright spot that 
excludes the other two signals (arrow). The Q128 CFP is localized in the middle portion of 
the exopher, and the YFP is most strongly localized to the bottom portion of the exopher. 
The YFP signal also forms a dim ring around the mCherry spot. View is from a lateral 
aspect, as in panel a. Scale bar, 2 μm.
h. Serial sections of the exopher reveal a complex and heterogeneous structure. Seven views 
(numbered 1–7) are shown from 50 serial thin sections that traverse the main region of the 
exopher. As one approaches the edge of the exopher, additional membrane-bound objects 
can be seen at the fringe of the main body (see panels 6, 7), which likely represent portions 
that have decayed from the original larger object, and are perhaps more easily phagocytosed 
by the hypodermis, or shuttled along a tube for release into the pseudocoelom. A small 
electron dense lysosome (L) lies beside the exopher in panel 5. Scale bar, 1 μm.
Extended Data Figure 3. FRAP and post-axotomy calcium imaging support that exophers that 
appear connected to the soma can fill with cytoplasmic materials
Melentijevic et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a. Both connected and unconnected exophers can be identified at high frequency in the same 
strain with a 40x objective. Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh1], adult day 2; n = 77 total, 3 trials; trial 
means ± s.e.m.
b. Example of a connected ALMR exopher recovering after laser-bleaching. Strain is 
Is[pmec-4mCh1]; Is[pmec-4GFP], adult day 2. 0 seconds is prior to laser treatment, other 
times are post-treatment.
c. Example of a detached ALMR exopher photo-bleaching and failing to refill. Strain is 
Is[pmec-4mCh1]; Is[pmec-4GFP], adult day 2.
d. Fluorescence recovery measurements reveal that some connected exophers are able to 
transport fluorescent material from the cytoplasm to the exopher, while disconnected 
exophers do not appear to transport fluorescent material. Shown are data for examples in b 
(red, connected) and c (blue, unconnected) above.
e. Time-lapse measurements of fluorescence intensity of the soma (blue trace) and the 
exopher (red trace) during the laser axotomy experiment in f show that the injury-induced 
calcium wave in the soma is followed by a pulse of calcium elevation in the exopher (yellow 
arrow, laser axotomy at t = 0 seconds). We analyzed two individual neurons with exophers 
connected to the soma and three individual neurons with what appeared to be non-connected 
exophers. Only the clearly connected exophers gave a calcium response comparable (~100% 
signal) to that measured at the cell soma as in this panel. Strain is ZB4059 bzIs163 
[Pmec-4GCaMP3.0::SL2::mCherry].
f. The soma calcium wave induced by laser axotomy is followed by a calcium wave to 
connected exophers. We laser-cut an ALMR neuron that had a connected exopher in a day 2 
adult that expressed both mCherry and the calcium sensitive fluorophore, GCaMP3. We 
made the laser cut 20 μm along the axon (yellow arrow) at time t = 0 while taking 
simultaneous time-lapse images (1 frame/5 seconds). Selected frames are shown at t = −20 
seconds (before laser axotomy), right after laser axotomy at t = 5 seconds (note increased 
fluorescence in the soma; white arrow), and at t = 15 seconds and 25 seconds post-axotomy 
(note the later exopher increase in fluorescence; white arrowheads). Signal quantitation is in 
e above. Supplemental Video 3 shows the calcium wave that travels from soma to exopher.
Melentijevic et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Lysosomes can be found in exophers
We also analyzed GFP-tagged lysosomes in touch neurons (bzIs168 [Pmec-7LMP-1::GFP]) 
to establish that lysosomes can be extruded in exophers. We observe two types of lysosomal 
arrangements in exophers: (1) those that have small lysosome-like concentrated 
fluorescence, with mCherry dispersed (d), and (2) those that are nearly fully loaded with 
lysosome-like staining in which mCherry is also present throughout (Extended Data Fig. 
6c). The inclusion of lysosomes in exophers suggests that some elimination of expelled 
material might be accomplished via internal degradation. Alternatively, dysfunctional 
lysosomes might be expelled via exophers. Future studies will be needed to define the role 
of the lysosome in exophers.
a. Neuron soma featuring typical two large LMP-1::GFP-tagged pericentric lysosome 
domains, with no smaller ones evident. Strain is ZB4509 Is[pmec-4mCh1]; bzIs168 
[Pmec-7LMP-1::GFP], green channel shown. As has previously been observed43, 
LMP-1::GFP signal clearly marks the plasma membrane (M), but less intensely than the 
lysosomes (L). Scale bar, 2 μm.
b. LMP-1::GFP reveals lysosome inclusions are frequent and sometimes prominent in 
exophers. Strain is ZB4070 bzIs168 [Pmec-7LMP-1::GFP]; S, soma; E, exopher. We found 
that 18/25 (~70%) of exophers scored contained lysosomes in day 2 adults. Note that 
LMP-1::GFP faintly labels membrane43 and rings the exopher in panels b-d, supporting that 
the exopher is membrane-bound. Scale bar, 2 μm.
c, d. Co-labeling of aggregating mCherry and lysosome compartments suggests two types of 
lysosomal organization in exophers. Strain is ZB4509 Is[pmec-4mCh1]; bzIs168 
[Pmec-7LMP-1::GFP]. c. Some exophers appear to be filled with LMP-1::GFP and 
coincident mCherry. d. LMP-1::GFP-tagged lysosomes included in exophers can be small 
and differentially localized from mCherry. In the absence of stress, neurons typically feature 
two large intensely-fluorescent pericentric lysosome domains with LMP-1::GFP, with few 
smaller ones evident (see panel a). Neurons that had an exopher tended to also have 
additional small mobile lysosomes that we did not observe in cells without an exopher(see 
panel b, c, d). Additionally, neurons that featured “large lysosome” exophers generally 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 appeared to have fewer of the large perinuclear lysosomes in the soma (example in d). Scale 
bar, 2 μm.
Extended Data Figure 5. Mitochondria GFP markers exhibit a normal mitochondrial 
appearance in exophers
a. Mitochondria in exophers can form a network. Strain Is[Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP]; 
Is[Pmec-4mCh1]). Shown is an exopher (E) budding off from the ALMR soma (S). The 
exopher contains a disproportionate number of punctate mCherry aggregates; the exopher 
also includes a GFP signal typical in size for neuronal mitochondria. It is noteworthy that the 
mitochondria in the exopher exhibit a filamentous structure similar to those in the soma, and 
the signal does not co-localize with the mCherry signal, but rather may remain within a 
distinct sub-cellular domain. These two observations are consistent with the mito-GFP label 
localized to actual mitochondria as opposed to representing mislocalized GFP-labeled 
protein. Scale bar, 2 μm.
b. Exophers can contain punctate mitochondria, networked mitochondria, or no 
mitochondria. Strain Is[Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP]; Is[Pmec-4mCh1]). Here we show three 
exophers. In the left exopher, the mitoROGFP signal is localized to two puncta. The middle 
exopher contains networked mitochondria. The right exopher contains no visible 
mitoROGFP signal. Scale bar, 2 μm.
c. Zoom out of panel b, to show location of exophers(E) relative to the touch neuron soma 
(S). Scale bar, 2 μm.
Melentijevic et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 d. MitoTimer reporter reveals a difference in mitochondrial-matrix oxidation environment in 
exophers vs. somas. MitoTimer encodes a dsRed derivative that fluoresces green when 
reduced (first synthesized), but irreversibly shifts to red fluorescence as it oxidizes20. We 
used a single copy pmec-4MitoTimer reporter to measure the relative red/green signal in 
exopher-soma pairs. Exophers have proportionately more oxidized signal, suggesting 
“older” mitochondria (with more oxidation of the matrix-localized reporter) are 
preferentially expelled. n = 7 exophers, scale bar, 2 μm; single exopher means ± s.e.m.; *P < 
0.05, paired t-test.
e. Pharmacological disruption of mitochondria leads to higher rates of mitochondrial 
inclusion in exophers. Juglone exposure leads to an increase in intracellular reactive oxygen 
species production, most notably superoxide radicals, and can cause mitochondrial 
membrane depolarization and opening of permeability transition pores, allowing pro-
apoptotic Cytochrome C to escape from the mitochondria21. We treated strain 
Is[Pmec-4mCh1]; zhsEx17 [Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP] with 230 μM juglone which increases 
ROS production.. Exophers from ALMR neurons from animals exposed to juglone (blue, n 
= 30 total exophers) were significantly more likely to include at least one mitochondrion 
than exophers from animals in the control (white, n = 22 total exophers). Mitochondrial 
extrusion increases under conditions of juglone-induced oxidative stress. 3 trials, trial means 
± s.e.m.; **P < 0.01, unpaired t-test.
Extended Data Figure 6. RNAi knockdown of ced-1 and ced-6, but not other engulfment 
machinery, increases occurrence of multiple exophers detected
a. RNAi knockdown of ced-1 and ced-6 engulfment genes increases the number of ALMR 
neurons with 2 or more exophers near the touch neurons, supporting conclusions from 
mutants. RNAi against C. elegans transmembrane receptor ced-1/CD91, ced-6/GULP, 
GTPase ced-10/RAC1, phosphatidylserine receptor psr-1, and pgrn-1/progranulin-1(RNAi 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 increases apoptotic corpse clearance44). Control is empty vector, strain is ZB4071 bzIs169 
[Pmec-18sid-1Psng-1YFP]; bzIs101 [Pmec-4mCherry], at least 3 trials each, n > 30 ALMRs 
measured per trial; n > 15 cells with exopher per condition graphed; means ± s.e.m., one-
way ANOVA with Dunnett’s test, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01. Note that ced-1 and ced-6 
RNAi do not increase the percentage of ALMRs producing exophers (data not shown), but 
rather increases the number of animals with multiple exophers detectable at adult day 2. 
Thus, ced-1 and ced-6 knockdown might affect persistence of expelled materials introduced 
into the hypodermal compartment.
b. Phosphatidylserine (PS) indicator annexin V::GFP ref. 44 labels apoptotic corpses, but 
does not label exophers in ZB4083 smIS76 [phsp-16ANV::GFP]; Is[pmec-4mCh1]. Broadly 
expressed annexinV::GFP binds to PS on developmental apoptotic corpses in embryos (I), 
but does not bind to exophers (right example compares mCherry-labeled exopher (II) to 
annexinV::GFP channel for the same image (III), which should visualize bound 
annexinV::GFP (as occurs for apoptotic corpses in embryos of the same strain (I) if PS is on 
the exopher surface). Note that in published studies, PS can be recognized on corpses of 
necrotic touch neurons, showing that touch neurons can produce surface PS, and can be 
recognized by annexinV-tagging, when inappropriately induced to die33,45. 0/18 fluorescent 
mCherry-labeled exophers were co-labeled with annexinV::GFP. Knocking down ced-1 by 
RNAi in the annexinV::GFP line did not enable us to better detect PS on exophers (n = 0/25 
additional observations).
c. DiI introduced via amphid neurons can be detected in anterior coelomocytes. In a DiI-
soaked N2 animal, an amphid exopher (E) originating from the ASIR soma (S) can be seen 
proximal to the terminal bulb of the pharynx (P). The anterior coelomocytes ccAR and ccPR 
(C) also contain DiI. Coelomocytes have no connection to the external environment, 
suggesting that the DiI must have been uptaken and jettisoned by the chemosensory amphid 
neurons and subsequently engulfed, analogously to the mCherry detected in Is[pmec-4 mCh1] 
coelomocytes. This wild type context suggests coelomocytes can scavenge the contents of 
exophers that are generated under normal physiological conditions, without the added stress 
of a potentially aggregating product of a transgene. Scale bar 5 μm.
d. In ZB4082 cup-4(ok837); Is[pmec-4mCh1] mutants in which coelomocyte uptake is 
disrupted, we observe increased incidence of dispersed fluorescence, similar to that shown 
here (S, ALMR soma; D bracket, “starry night phenotype,” present in 29/200 animals, adult 
day 4). Similar dispersions are rare in cup-4(+) lines. Scale bar, 2 μm. AVM soma is also 
visible.
e. Young adult animals that produced an exopher often later exhibit the starry night 
phenotype, suggesting mCherry material can move through the body. Is[pmec-4mCh1] 
animals were separated into populations that had an ALMR exopher on either adult day 2 or 
day 3 (blue arrows), and a population that had no ALMR exopher on either day 2 or 3 (white 
arrows). Animals were scored again on day 5 for presence of the starry night phenotype. In 
the exopher-producing group, 42% of animals exhibited a starry night phenotype, while in 
the non-exopher producing group only 6% of the animals exhibited the starry night 
phenotype. 3 trials, n = 60 total per group, means ± s.e.m.; *P < 0.05, unpaired t-test. Arrow 
thickness is weighted according to relative incidence. Note that the “no exopher” category 
should include animals that have actually produced exophers, but were not present at the 
time of sampling, thus differences are likely to be under-estimated in this panel.
Melentijevic et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Working model for a proposed exopher role in proteostasis
As neurotoxic events such as protein aggregation or mitochondrial dysfunction occur in the 
cell, multiple homeostatic mechanisms clear them (left panel). At the young adult transition 
point to adult proteostasis (heat shock response down, UPR down, proteasome activity 
up12–14) or when basal levels of damage reach a threshold and overwhelm neuronal 
proteostasis, aggregates and organelles such as mitochondria and lysosomes are sequestered 
into a compartment that can be jettisoned from the cell. One possibility is that this 
compartment might correspond to the aggresome described in mammalian cells42. For touch 
neurons, extruded exopher contents may be degraded by accompanying lysosomes, digested 
by the surrounding hypodermis, or may reach the pseudocoelom and be taken up by 
coelomocytes. The process of exopher-genesis appears to be neuroprotective in young 
adults, but when dysregulated, might induce toxicity in neighboring tissues. We speculate 
that exopher contents that cannot be degraded or passed on could remain in the neighboring 
cell, where they could contribute to dysfunction. Possibly, exopher-genesis may be akin to 
the process by which protein aggregates and mitochondria become localized to neighboring 
neurons in humans, promoting disease spread.
Melentijevic et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Table 1
Impact of RNAi knockdown of genes functioning in 
exosome biogenesis and cell cycle progression on 
exopher detection
a, b. Neither ESCRT proteins required for exosome biogenesis, nor cell cycle-related 
homologs exert major influences on exopher-genesis.
a. RNAi knockdown against ESCRT genes did not significantly affect exopher occurrence. 
Strain is bzIs169 [Pmec-18sid-1 Psng-1YFP]; bzIs101 [Pmec-4mCherry; unc-119+]; 
hsf-1(sy441). For each listed gene, P-value is from at least 3 trials, n > 100 total per 
condition, unpaired t-test. Note that negative results for RNAi screens are not definitive. The 
data support that the biogenesis of the exopher is distinct from the biogenesis of exosomes 
(Extended Data Table 2).
b. RNAi knockdown against homologs of cell cycle-related genes did not significantly 
influence exopher production, with the exception of cki-1. Reducing cki-1 activity by RNAi 
causes extra larval cell divisions46, so its inhibition of exopher-genesis, although interesting, 
is not consistent with new cell division underlying exopher production. Note that cdk-4 and 
cyd-1 are required for cell cycle progression in postembryonic cells. Strain is bzIs169 
[Pmec-18sid-1 Psng-1YFP]; bzIs101 [Pmec-4mCherry; unc-119+]. For each listed gene, P-value 
is from at least 3 trials, n > 100 total per condition, unpaired t-test. FDR statistic for 
cki-1(RNAi) is q = 0.04, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR calculator.
a. Exosome Biogenesis
Process Targeted
Gene Name
P-value
ESCRT-0
hgrs-1
0.48
stam-1
0.21
ESCRT-1
tsg-101
0.55
vps-28
0.67
vps-37
0.22
ESCRT-2
vps-22
0.50
vps-25
0.96
vps-36
0.54
ESCRT-3
vps-20
0.49
vps-24
0.89
b. Cell Cycle-related
Gene Name
P-value
Gene Name
P-value
cki-1
0.03*
cit-1.2
0.75
ccnk-1
0.46
cki-2
0.83
cdk-4
0.84
cya-1
0.52
cdk-9
0.68
cya-2
0.45
cdk-1
0.40
cyb-2.1
0.52
cdk-12
0.23
cyd-1
0.95
Melentijevic et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 b. Cell Cycle-related
Gene Name
P-value
Gene Name
P-value
cdk-5
0.72
cye-1
0.95
cdk-8
0.79
cyl-1
0.32
cic-1
0.95
dpl-1
0.94
Extended Data Table 2
Comparison of features of exophers to other 
characterized extracellular vesicles
Exosomes
Microvesicles
Migrasomes
Exophers
Diameter
30 nm–100 nm46
100 nm–1,000 nm46
500 nm–3,000 nm49
1,000 nm–7,800 nm
Timing of release
Tens of minutes47
Seconds47
40–200 minutes49
15–60 minutes
Mechanism of Release
Multi-vesicular bodies 
fuse to the cell 
membrane46
Outward budding and 
scission46
Expands at tip of 
retraction fibers49
Jettisoned from cell 
body
ESCRT Machinery involved
Yes47
ESCRT3; tsg-10147
Unknown
No
Attachment to releasing cell
No
No
Yes (via retraction 
fibers)49
Sometimes (via thin 
fiber)
Actin required
No
No
Yes49
Yes
Vesicular Contents
DNA, RNA, Proteins, 
Lipids46
DNA, RNA, Proteins, 
Lipids46
Cytosol, Proteins49
Mitochondria, 
Lysosomes, Protein 
Aggregates
Phosphatidylserine Distribution
Membrane outer leaflet46
Membrane outer leaflet48
Unknown
Not displayed on 
membrane outer 
leaflet
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank B. Grant for expert advice, C. Reina for time-lapse microscopy help; N. Kane and J. Kramer for confocal 
microscopy assistance; and H. Ushakov for construction of some genetic lines. We thank Geoff Perumal and Frank 
Macaluso for help with HPF fixations, and Chris Crocker for the cartoon in Extended Data Fig. 2b. Federico Sesti 
and Massimo Hilliard generously supplied C. elegans strains; Alex Mendenhall, Bryan Sands, Roger Brent 
constructed the MOSCI mitoTimer strain. Research was supported by the National Institutes of Health under award 
numbers 1R01NS086064 and 1R01AG046358. IM and RG were supported by the National Institute of General 
Medical Sciences under award number T32 GM008339. KN and DH were supported by NIH OD10943 (to DHH); 
Core EM facilities (Hall) NICHD P30 HD71593 for the RFK-IDDRC at Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Some 
strains were provided by the CGC, which is funded by NIH Office of Research Infrastructure Programs (P40 
OD010440) The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official 
views of the National Institutes of Health.
References
1. Yankner BA, Lu T, Loerch P. The aging brain. Annu Rev Pathol. 2008; 3:41–66. DOI: 10.1146/
annurev.pathmechdis.2.010506.092044 [PubMed: 18039130] 
2. Federico A, et al. Mitochondria, oxidative stress and neurodegeneration. J Neurol Sci. 2012; 
322:254–262. DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.05.030 [PubMed: 22669122] 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. Morimoto RI. Proteotoxic stress and inducible chaperone networks in neurodegenerative disease and 
aging. Genes Dev. 2008; 22:1427–1438. DOI: 10.1101/gad.1657108 [PubMed: 18519635] 
4. Ben-Gedalya T, Cohen E. Quality control compartments coming of age. Traffic. 2012; 13:635–642. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01330.x [PubMed: 22280095] 
5. Lee SJ, Desplats P, Sigurdson C, Tsigelny I, Masliah E. Cell-to-cell transmission of non-prion 
protein aggregates. Nat Rev Neurol. 2010; 6:702–706. DOI: 10.1038/nrneurol.2010.145 [PubMed: 
21045796] 
6. Davis CH, et al. Transcellular degradation of axonal mitochondria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 
111:9633–9638. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1404651111 [PubMed: 24979790] 
7. Toth ML, et al. Neurite sprouting and synapse deterioration in the aging Caenorhabditis elegans 
nervous system. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:8778–8790. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1494-11.2012 
[PubMed: 22745480] 
8. Craig AL, Moser SC, Bailly AP, Gartner A. Methods for studying the DNA damage response in the 
Caenorhabdatis elegans germ line. Methods in cell biology. 2012; 107:321–352. DOI: 10.1016/
b978-0-12-394620-1.00011-4 [PubMed: 22226529] 
9. Perkins LA, Hedgecock EM, Thomson JN, Culotti JG. Mutant sensory cilia in the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev Biol. 1986; 117:456–487. [PubMed: 2428682] 
10. Parker JA, et al. Expanded polyglutamines in Caenorhabditis elegans cause axonal abnormalities 
and severe dysfunction of PLM mechanosensory neurons without cell death. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2001; 98:13318–13323. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.231476398 [PubMed: 11687635] 
11. Vayndorf EM, et al. Morphological remodeling of C. elegans neurons during aging is modified by 
compromised protein homeostasis. NPJ Aging Mech Dis. 2016; 2
12. Labbadia J, Morimoto RI. Proteostasis and longevity: when does aging really begin? F1000Prime 
Rep. 2014; 6:7. [PubMed: 24592319] 
13. Labbadia J, Morimoto RI. Repression of the Heat Shock Response Is a Programmed Event at the 
Onset of Reproduction. Mol Cell. 2015; 59:639–650. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.06.027 
[PubMed: 26212459] 
14. Liu G, Rogers J, Murphy CT, Rongo C. EGF signalling activates the ubiquitin proteasome system 
to modulate C. elegans lifespan. EMBO J. 2011; 30:2990–3003. DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.195 
[PubMed: 21673654] 
15. Samann J, et al. Caenorhabditits elegans LRK-1 and PINK-1 act antagonistically in stress response 
and neurite outgrowth. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2009; 284:16482–16491. DOI: 
10.1074/jbc.M808255200 [PubMed: 19251702] 
16. Springer W, Hoppe T, Schmidt E, Baumeister R. A Caenorhabditis elegans Parkin mutant with 
altered solubility couples alpha-synuclein aggregation to proteotoxic stress. Hum Mol Genet. 
2005; 14:3407–3423. DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi371 [PubMed: 16204351] 
17. Benedetti C, Haynes CM, Yang Y, Harding HP, Ron D. Ubiquitin-like protein 5 positively regulates 
chaperone gene expression in the mitochondrial unfolded protein response. Genetics. 2006; 
174:229–239. DOI: 10.1534/genetics.106.061580 [PubMed: 16816413] 
18. Cannon MB, Remington SJ. Redox-sensitive green fluorescent protein: probes for dynamic 
intracellular redox responses. A review. Methods Mol Biol. 2008; 476:51–65. [PubMed: 
19157008] 
19. Ghose P, Park EC, Tabakin A, Salazar-Vasquez N, Rongo C. Anoxia-reoxygenation regulates 
mitochondrial dynamics through the hypoxia response pathway, SKN-1/Nrf, and stomatin-like 
protein STL-1/SLP-2. PLoS Genet. 2013; 9:e1004063. [PubMed: 24385935] 
20. Laker RC, et al. A novel MitoTimer reporter gene for mitochondrial content, structure, stress, and 
damage in vivo. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2014; 289:12005–12015. DOI: 10.1074/
jbc.M113.530527 [PubMed: 24644293] 
21. Ji YB, Qu ZY, Zou X. Juglone-induced apoptosis in human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells via the 
mitochondrial pathway. Experimental and toxicologic pathology : official journal of the 
Gesellschaft fur Toxikologische Pathologie. 2011; 63:69–78. DOI: 10.1016/j.etp.2009.09.010 
[PubMed: 19815401] 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Patton A, et al. Endocytosis function of a ligand-gated ion channel homolog in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Current biology : CB. 2005; 15:1045–1050. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.04.057 [PubMed: 
15936276] 
23. Nath S, et al. Spreading of neurodegenerative pathology via neuron-to-neuron transmission of beta-
amyloid. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:8767–8777. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0615-12.2012 [PubMed: 
22745479] 
24. Nussbaum-Krammer CI, Park KW, Li L, Melki R, Morimoto RI. Spreading of a prion domain from 
cell-to-cell by vesicular transport in Caenorhabditis elegans. PLoS Genet. 2013; 9:e1003351. 
[PubMed: 23555277] 
25. Costanzo M, et al. Transfer of polyglutamine aggregates in neuronal cells occurs in tunneling 
nanotubes. J Cell Sci. 2013; 126:3678–3685. DOI: 10.1242/jcs.126086 [PubMed: 23781027] 
26. Abounit S, Zurzolo C. Wiring through tunneling nanotubes--from electrical signals to organelle 
transfer. J Cell Sci. 2012; 125:1089–1098. DOI: 10.1242/jcs.083279 [PubMed: 22399801] 
27. Gousset K, et al. Prions hijack tunnelling nanotubes for intercellular spread. Nat Cell Biol. 2009; 
11:328–336. DOI: 10.1038/ncb1841 [PubMed: 19198598] 
28. Pearce MM, Spartz EJ, Hong W, Luo L, Kopito RR. Prion-like transmission of neuronal huntingtin 
aggregates to phagocytic glia in the Drosophila brain. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6768. [PubMed: 
25866135] 
29. Pasquier J, et al. Preferential transfer of mitochondria from endothelial to cancer cells through 
tunneling nanotubes modulates chemoresistance. J Transl Med. 2013; 11:94. [PubMed: 23574623] 
30. Hayakawa K, et al. Transfer of mitochondria from astrocytes to neurons after stroke. Nature. 2016; 
535:551–555. DOI: 10.1038/nature18928 [PubMed: 27466127] 
31. Brenner S. The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics. 1974; 77:71–94. [PubMed: 4366476] 
32. Duan Z, Sesti F. A Caenorhabditis elegans model system for amylopathy study. Journal of 
visualized experiments : JoVE. 2013:e50435. [PubMed: 23711592] 
33. Mapes J, et al. CED-1, CED-7, and TTR-52 regulate surface phosphatidylserine expression on 
apoptotic and phagocytic cells. Curr Biol. 2012; 22:1267–1275. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.05.052 
[PubMed: 22727702] 
34. Neumann B, et al. EFF-1-mediated regenerative axonal fusion requires components of the 
apoptotic pathway. Nature. 2015; 517:219–222. DOI: 10.1038/nature14102 [PubMed: 25567286] 
35. Kachur TM, Audhya A, Pilgrim DB. UNC-45 is required for NMY-2 contractile function in early 
embryonic polarity establishment and germline cellularization in C. elegans. Developmental 
biology. 2008; 314:287–299. DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.11.028 [PubMed: 18190904] 
36. Kamath RS, Ahringer J. Genome-wide RNAi screening in Caenorhabditis elegans. Methods. 2003; 
30:313–321. [PubMed: 12828945] 
37. Calixto A, Chelur D, Topalidou I, Chen X, Chalfie M. Enhanced neuronal RNAi in C. elegans 
using SID-1. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:554–559. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1463 [PubMed: 20512143] 
38. Liu J, et al. Beclin1 controls the levels of p53 by regulating the deubiquitination activity of USP10 
and USP13. Cell. 2011; 147:223–234. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.08.037 [PubMed: 21962518] 
39. Scerbak C, et al. Insulin signaling in the aging of healthy and proteotoxically stressed 
mechanosensory neurons. Front Genet. 2014; 5:212. [PubMed: 25101108] 
40. Topalidou I, et al. Genetically separable functions of the MEC-17 tubulin acetyltransferase affect 
microtubule organization. Curr Biol. 2012; 22:1057–1065. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.03.066 
[PubMed: 22658602] 
41. Gabel CV, Antoine F, Chuang CF, Samuel AD, Chang C. Distinct cellular and molecular 
mechanisms mediate initial axon development and adult-stage axon regeneration in C. elegans. 
Development. 2008; 135:1129–1136. DOI: 10.1242/dev.013995 [PubMed: 18296652] 
42. Kopito RR. Aggresomes, inclusion bodies and protein aggregation. Trends in cell biology. 2000; 
10:524–530. [PubMed: 11121744] 
43. Hermann GJ, et al. Genetic analysis of lysosomal trafficking in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol Biol 
Cell. 2005; 16:3273–3288. [PubMed: 15843430] 
44. Zhou Z, Hartwieg E, Horvitz HR. CED-1 is a transmembrane receptor that mediates cell corpse 
engulfment in C. elegans. Cell. 2001; 104:43–56. [PubMed: 11163239] 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Hong Y, Roy R, Ambros V. Developmental regulation of a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
controls postembryonic cell cycle progression in Caenorhabditis elegans. Development. 1998; 
125:3585–3597. [PubMed: 9716524] 
46. Kastelowitz N, Yin H. Exosomes and microvesicles: identification and targeting by particle size 
and lipid chemical probes. Chem Bio Chem. 2014; 15:923–928.
47. Cocucci E, Meldolesi J. Ectosomes and exosomes: shedding the confusion between extracellular 
vesicles. Trends Cell Biol. 2015; 25:364–372. [PubMed: 25683921] 
48. Thery C, Zitvogel L, Amigorena S. Exosomes: composition, biogenesis and function. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2002; 2:569–579. [PubMed: 12154376] 
49. Ma L, et al. Discovery of the migrasome, an organelle mediating release of cytoplasmic contents 
during cell migration. Cell Res. 2015; 25:24–38. [PubMed: 25342562] 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. C. elegans touch neurons can extrude cytoplasmic contents
a. An exopher is generated with a striking concentration of fluorescence segregated to the 
extrusion. Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh2]. ALM neuron with mCherry-visualized cytoplasm and 
aggregates. See supplementary Video 1 for corresponding movie: https://youtu.be/HR-
G9UphZeA.
b. Exophers do not include nuclear-like levels of DNA. Blue, DAPI; red, cytoplasm. 0/25 
exophers but 25/25 soma were DAPI positive. Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh2].
c. An ALMR soma with one attached exopher (right) and one unattached (left). Strain is 
Is[pmec-4mCh1]; Is[pmec-4GFP].
d. Individual touch neurons differ in their production of detectable exophers. ALMR 
neurons produce most (~23%) for Is[pmec-18sid-1]; Is[pmec-4mCh3], and PLM neurons fail 
to generate detectable extrusions (0/>500). 12 trials of RNAi empty vector controls with n > 
500 total for each neuron. All animals, adult day 2; E, exophers; S, soma; arrowhead, 
neuronal process; scale bars, 2 μm; trial means ± s.d. Data in d are mean ± s.d.
Melentijevic et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Touch neurons under proteotoxic stress jettison aggregation-prone proteins into 
exophers
a. CFP-tagged Q128 concentrated into a budding domain. Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh2; 
pmec-3Q128CFP]. Blue, Q128CFP; green, mitochondria GFP signal.
b. Mature exopher containing Q128CFP aggregates. Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh2; 
pmec-3Q128CFP]. 5/10 ALM exophers were Q128CFP positive. These five had no detectable 
Q128CFP in their somas.
c. Neurons expressing Q128CFP produce more exophers than neurons expressing Q19CFP. 
Is[pmec-4GFP] (Q0), Is[pmec-7YFP; pmec-3Q19CFP] (Q19) and Is[pmec-7YFP; 
pmec-3Q128CFP] (Q128). 3 trials, n > 100 total for each strain, one-way ANOVA with 
Tukey’s test, *P < 0.05. PolyQ-expressing strains have similar expression levels10.
d. Touch neuron exophers are detectable in young adults, diminish in abundance in midlife, 
and increase again in older animals. Longitudinal study of Is[pmec-4GFP] and 
Is[pmec-4mCh1] (starting n = 75 total per strain), 3 trials, adult days 1–12. Variation between 
days and between strains was significant (***P < 0.001). A similar early adulthood peak 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 occurs in dye-filled amphid neurons (Extended Data Fig. 1f) and in the hsf-1 mutant 
(Extended Data Fig. 1j).
e. Multiple early visible aggregates predict later exopher formation. On adult day 1, we 
segregated animals by number of mCherry aggregates (1 Ag vs ≥ 2 Ag) in the ALMR soma 
and scored for exophers on adult day 2. 5 trials, n > 130 total per condition, ***P < 0.001. 
Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh1].
f. Reducing mCherry expression levels using an anti-mCherry RNAi reduces exopher levels. 
Strain is Is[pmec-18sid-1 pmec-4mCh3]. 3 trials, n > 35 per trial, *P < 0.05.
g. ASER neurons expressing human toxic AD protein fragment exhibit elevated exopher 
production. Adult day 2 exopher production for 7 trials, n > 800 total for each strain, 
sesIs2512 [Pgcy-5GFP], and sesIs25 [Pflp-6Aβ1–42; Pgcy-5GFP]. *P < 0.05.
h, i. Aggregation-prone mCherry is preferentially segregated into the exopher compared to 
non-aggregating GFP, which is relatively more concentrated in the soma. h. mCherry (top) 
and GFP (bottom) channels from an ALMR exopher and soma pair in a strain co-expressing 
Is[pmec-4mCh1] and Is[pmec-GFP]. i. Quantification of mCherry and GFP fluorescence ratios 
for exopher and soma pairs. Each point represents an exopher-to-soma fluorescence ratio for 
either GFP or mCherry. Each cell has a paired GFP and mCherry ratio, aligned vertically, n 
= 23 pairs. Mean E/S ratio of mCherry was 2.2, mean E/S ratio of GFP was 0.75, **P < 
0.01. All animals, adult day 2; E, exophers; S, soma; scale bars, 2 μm; trial means ± s.e.m.; 
unpaired t-test (e, f, g), one-way ANOVA (d) and one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test (c).
Melentijevic et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Disruption of multiple branches of proteostasis increases exopher formation
a. Disrupting proteostasis by hsf-1 impairment increases exopher formation. Strains were 
Is[pmec-4GFP] and Is[pmec-4GFP]; hsf-1(sy441), ***P < 0.001, n > 280 total per strain.
b. Pharmacological inhibition of autophagy by Spautin-1 increases the occurrence of 
exophers. Strain is Is[pmec-4GFP], n > 80 total per condition, *P< 0.05.
c. RNAi knockdown of autophagy genes lgg-1, atg-7, and bec-1 increases the occurrence of 
exophers. Strain is Is[pmec-18sid-1 pmec-4mCh3]. White, empty vector control RNAi; blue, 
RNAi against gene indicated, lgg-1 (5 trials), atg-7 (5 trials), bec-1 (4 trials), lgg-1/2 (5 
trials), n > 100 total per condition, *P< 0.05.
d. Pharmacological inhibition of the proteasome by MG132 treatment increases the 
occurrence of exophers. Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh1], 3 trials, n > 33 per trial, *P < 0.05.
e. Q128-expressing animals with an ALMR exopher on day 2 have better anterior touch 
sensitivity on adult day 4 compared to animals with no apparent early exopher. We tested 
sensitized strain Is[pmec-4mCh2; pmec-3Q128CFP], which exhibits accelerated functional 
decline of touch neurons. 3 trials, n > 100 animals total, ***P < 0.001. Note that the “no 
exopher” category should include animals that have actually produced exophers, but were 
not present at the time of sampling, thus differences are likely to be under-estimated in this 
panel.
f. Knocking down pod-1 or emb-8 by RNAi significantly decreases exopher detection, 
defining a genetic approach to limiting exopher-genesis. Strain was Is[pmec-18sid-1 
pmec-4mCh3]. 4 trials, n > 100 total per condition, ***P< 0.001.
Melentijevic et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 g. Knocking down pod-1 and emb-8 by RNAi is associated with a decrease of anterior touch 
sensitivity in day 4 adults. Strain was Is[pmec-18sid-1 pmec-4mCh3], an aggregation-prone 
mCherry line which, like wild type, maintains strong touch sensitivity in young adult life. 
pod-1 and emb-8 RNAi knockdown had no effect on young animal touch sensitivity from 
egg-lay RNAi knockdown, but L4 pod-1 and emb-8 knockdown reduced exopher production 
and decreased touch sensitivity in day 4 adults. 3 trials, n > 130 total per condition, *P < 
0.05.
All animals, adult day 2; E, exophers; S, soma; scale bars, 2 μm; trial means ± s.e.m. (a, b, 
c,), ± s.d. (d, e, f,); unpaired t-test (a, b, c, d, e), one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s test (f, g).
Melentijevic et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Mitochondria can be extruded in exophers, and mitochondria with higher 
mitochondrial matrix oxidation might be preferentially extruded
a. Mitochondria in a budding exopher. Mitochondria form a ring around the somatic 
periphery, typical of young adulthood, with some mitochondria segregated into a putative 
exopher. Strain is bzIs167[pmec-4mitoGFP].
b. Mitochondrially localized mitoGFP (strain bzIs167[Pmec-4mitoGFP]) can be extruded in 
exophers; left exopher shown does not include substantial mitochondrial content, but right 
exopher does. 10/20 exophers scored with this reporter contained mitochondria.
c. RNAi knockdown of mitochondrial health and function genes ubl-5, pink-1, and dct-1 
increases the occurrence of exophers. White, empty vector control; blue, RNAi against genes 
indicated. ubl-5 (3 trials), pink-1(4 trials,) dct-1 (3 trials). n > 80 total per condition, *P < 
0.05.
d. Genetic disruption of mitochondrial health and function increases the occurrence of 
exophers. We compared exopher levels in Is[pmec-4mCh1]; pdr-1(gk448) mutant, a Parkin 
homolog16 *P < 0.05, n = 30 per trial, 6 trials.
e. Mitochondria segregated into exophers have higher relative oxidation levels than somatic 
mitochondria, as reported by mitoROGFP. Left, a pseudo-colored image indicating relative 
emission levels at excitation wavelengths of 405 nm/476 nm (blue, oxidized; green, 
reduced). Right, redox excitation ratio in exophers vs. soma. n =10 pairs of exophers with 
mitochondria and originating soma, *P < 0.05, strain is zhsEx17 [Pmec-4mitoLS::ROGFP]. 
Of note, the soma shown exhibits locally concentrated oxidized mitochondria, indicating 
that oxidizing conditions are not restricted to exopher. Wild type, unstressed somas have a 
typical 405 nm/476 nm ratio of 119; cells that form an exopher may experience somewhat 
Melentijevic et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 elevated levels of oxidation in the soma, overall. All animals, adult day 2; E, exophers; S, 
soma; scale bars, 2 μm; trial means ± s.e.m. (c, d, e,), unpaired t-test (c, d), one-way 
ANOVA with Tukey’s test (e).
Melentijevic et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Fluorescent mCherry escapes touch neurons and surrounding hypodermis to later 
concentrate in distant coelomocytes
a. ced-1, ced-6, and ced-7 mutations increase the number of ALMR neurons with two or 
more exophers, and ced-5, ced-10, and psr-1 mutations, acting in a parallel phagocytosis 
pathway, do not. Strain zdIs5[Pmec-4GFP]), adult day 2, 3 trials, n > 90 total per strain; 
unpaired t-test, *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001 (replicating RNAi data in Extended Data Fig. 6a). 
ced-1, ced-6, and ced-7 mutations do not increase the percentage of ALMRs producing 
exophers (data not shown), but rather increase multiple exopher detection, suggesting a 
deficit in persistence rather than generation.
b. In older animals, coelomocytes (green) can concentrate fluorescent proteins that were 
originally expressed in touch neurons (red). Strain Is[pmec-4mCh1]; 
pwIs979[Pcup-4GFP::vps-29], adult day 6.
c. mCherry localization in coelomocytes (arrows) can also be visualized with DIC underlay. 
Strain is Is[pmec-4mCh1], adult day 6.
d. The number of coelomocytes containing mCherry released from touch neurons increases 
with time. Is[pmec-4mCh1] animals with an exopher on adult day 2 were segregated and 
scored for red fluorescence in coelomocytes on A2, A3 and A5; n=20 per trial, 3 trials, **P< 
0.01, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test. Scale bars, 2μm. Data are mean±s.e.m.
Melentijevic et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
