 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
Beyond Neonatal Microcephaly
Adriana Suely de Oliveira Melo, MD, PhD; Renato Santana Aguiar, PhD; Melania Maria Ramos Amorim, MD, PhD;
Monica B. Arruda, PhD; Fabiana de Oliveira Melo, MD; Suelem Taís Clementino Ribeiro, MD;
Alba Gean Medeiros Batista, MD; Thales Ferreira, MD; Mayra Pereira dos Santos, MD; Virgínia Vilar Sampaio, MD;
Sarah Rogéria Martins Moura, MD; Luciana Portela Rabello, MD; Clarissa Emanuelle Gonzaga, MD;
Gustavo Malinger, MD; Renato Ximenes, MD; Patricia Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld, MD;
Fernanda Tovar-Moll, MD, PhD; Leila Chimelli, MD, PhD; Paola Paz Silveira, MSc; Rodrigo Delvechio, MSc;
Luiza Higa, PhD; Loraine Campanati, PhD; Rita M. R. Nogueira, PhD; Ana Maria Bispo Filippis, PhD;
Jacob Szejnfeld, MD, PhD; Carolina Moreira Voloch, PhD; Orlando C. Ferreira Jr, MD, PhD;
Rodrigo M. Brindeiro, PhD; Amilcar Tanuri, MD, PhD
IMPORTANCE Recent studies have reported an increase in the number of fetuses and
neonates with microcephaly whose mothers were infected with the Zika virus (ZIKV) during
pregnancy. To our knowledge, most reports to date have focused on select aspects of the
maternal or fetal infection and fetal effects.
OBJECTIVE To describe the prenatal evolution and perinatal outcomes of 11 neonates who
had developmental abnormalities and neurological damage associated with ZIKV infection
in Brazil.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS We observed 11 infants with congenital ZIKV infection
from gestation to 6 months in the state of Paraíba, Brazil. Ten of 11 women included in this
study presented with symptoms of ZIKV infection during the first half of pregnancy, and all
11 had laboratory evidence of the infection in several tissues by serology or polymerase chain
reaction. Brain damage was confirmed through intrauterine ultrasonography and was
complemented by magnetic resonance imaging. Histopathological analysis was performed on
the placenta and brain tissue from infants who died. The ZIKV genome was investigated in
several tissues and sequenced for further phylogenetic analysis.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Description of the major lesions caused by ZIKV congenital
infection.
RESULTS Of the 11 infants, 7 (63.6%) were female, and the median (SD) maternal age at
delivery was 25 (6) years. Three of 11 neonates died, giving a perinatal mortality rate of 27.3%.
The median (SD) cephalic perimeter at birth was 31 (3) cm, a value lower than the limit to
consider a microcephaly case. In all patients, neurological impairments were identified,
including microcephaly, a reduction in cerebral volume, ventriculomegaly, cerebellar
hypoplasia, lissencephaly with hydrocephalus, and fetal akinesia deformation sequence
(ie, arthrogryposis). Results of limited testing for other causes of microcephaly, such as
genetic disorders and viral and bacterial infections, were negative, and the ZIKV genome was
found in both maternal and neonatal tissues (eg, amniotic fluid, cord blood, placenta, and
brain). Phylogenetic analyses showed an intrahost virus variation with some polymorphisms
in envelope genes associated with different tissues.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Combined findings from clinical, laboratory, imaging, and
pathological examinations provided a more complete picture of the severe damage and
developmental abnormalities caused by ZIKV infection than has been previously reported.
The term congenital Zika syndrome is preferable to refer to these cases, as microcephaly is
just one of the clinical signs of this congenital malformation disorder.
JAMA Neurol. 2016;73(12):1407-1416. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.3720
Published online October 3, 2016. Corrected on October 24, 2016.
Editorial page 1395
Supplemental content
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions 1508
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Amilcar
Tanuri, MD, PhD, Laboratório de
Virologia Molecular, Departamento
de Genética, Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, CCS Bloco A Sala 121,
Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil
(atanuri1@gmail.com).
Research
JAMA Neurology | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
1407
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
T
he birth prevalence of neonatal microcephaly and other
central nervous system malformations greatly in-
creased between 2015 and mid-2016 in Brazil.1-3 Sev-
eral reports1,2,4-6 suggested an association between these find-
ings and Zika virus (ZIKV) infection during outbreaks in Brazil
and French Polynesia. Zika virus arrived in Brazil through the
northeastern region and spread primarily to the states of Ba-
hia, Pernambuco, and Paraíba.7,8 It is a flavivirus transmitted
by Aedes mosquitoes, and the infection in humans usually pre-
sents with 1 or more of the following symptoms: low-grade fe-
ver,arthralgia,rash,headache,andmyalgia.9,10However,most
infections are asymptomatic.2 Neurological disorders associ-
ated with ZIKV infection include congenital microcephaly and
adult manifestations such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, acute
myelitis, and meningoencephalitis.1,11-13
To our knowledge, most of the previously reported neo-
natal microcephaly cases (eg, birth head circumference less
than the third percentile for sex and gestational age14) were as-
sociated with the manifestation of ZIKV infection symptoms
in the first trimester of pregnancy.1,2,5 Microcephaly was not
the only fetal abnormality observed, and other findings were
documented later. Fetal neurosonography and magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) have also showed diffuse calcification in
the subcortical parenchyma and thalamic areas, ventriculo-
megaly, lissencephaly, and pachygyria (ie, smooth brains with
reduced gyral ridges).6 Nevertheless, to our knowledge, a sys-
tematic follow-up of clinical and morphological features of
these cases along with anatomic and pathological descrip-
tions associated with congenital ZIKV infection has not been
reported. In addition, the mechanism by which the ZIKV in-
fection can cause fetal brain damage is not known, and some
reports suggest that the virus is able to evade the normal im-
munoprotective responses of the placenta.15 Zika virus is not
theonlypathogenassociatedwithneonatemicrocephaly.Other
viruses, such as cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus types
1 and 2, varicella-zoster virus, human immunodeficiency vi-
rus, and chikungunya virus, have also been described to cause
congenital malformations.16,17
We report the follow-up of 11 infants with congenital ZIKV
infections in Brazil. Zika virus was identified in the amniotic
fluid (AF), placenta, cord blood, and neonatal tissues col-
lected postmortem for all patients. We combined informa-
tion from clinical evaluations and diagnostic laboratory and
imaging findings with postmortem anatomical and pathologi-
caldatatomorecompletelydescribethelesionscausedbyZIKV
congenital infection and document its effect in different tar-
get tissues and organs during intrauterine development.
Methods
Case Selection
Between October 2015 and February 2016, several cases of
suspected fetal microcephaly associated with maternal ZIKV
infection in the first half of pregnancy were referred to the
fetal medicine service of the Instituto Paraibano de Pesquisa
Professor Joaquim Amorim Neto (IPESQ) in Campina Grande,
Paraíba, Brazil. This prospective study was conducted in
Campina Grande, the second largest city in the state of
Paraíba, which has reported the second highest prevalence of
microcephaly at birth in Brazil. More than 150 pregnant
women with symptoms of ZIKV infection were observed.
Eleven of these women were selected to study because of
findings of brain lesions during fetal ultrasound imaging
(USG). Amniocentesis was performed in all women for labo-
ratory confirmation of ZIKV infection by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). These women were observed until they gave
birth, and additional imaging and other samples after birth
(eg, AF, cord blood, and placenta samples) were collected to
confirm the presence of the virus in the newborns. Three of
11 babies died after birth, and the remaining neonates are still
alive. Two mothers gave consent for autopsies, and several
tissues were collected for PCR testing as well histopathology
studies (Table). This study was approved by Hospital Pedro I
Institutional Review Board. Written informed consent was
obtained from all mothers.
Imaging
After initial evaluation, 3 fetal medicine specialists contin-
ued to monitor fetal anatomy, biometrical indices, AF levels,
placental health, and umbilical and middle cerebral artery
blood flow. Abdominal and transvaginal ultrasonographic ex-
amination was performed for all women per Brazilian public
health recommendations, and amniocentesis was performed
in all mothers to investigate the cause of neurological dam-
age. Ultrasonography-guided transabdominal amniocentesis
was performed, and about 5 mL of AF was aspirated and stored
at −80°C. Doppler studies were conducted to investigate um-
bilical artery and/or middle cerebral artery abnormalities for
all women. Examinations were performed on Accuvix XG and
WS80 (Samsung) with 2- to 9-mHz probes. Three-dimen-
sional construction was also available in some cases.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the fetus was performed
on a MAGNETOM Skyra 3-T scanner (Siemens Healthcare) or
on a MAGNETOM Espree 1.5-T scanner (Siemens Healthcare)
with an 8-channel body coil and standard acquisition proto-
cols. Brain 16-channel multislice computed tomography scan-
ning(SiemensHealthcare)and/orbrainMRI(Espree1.5T)were
performed on neonates. A postmortem brain computed to-
mography scan and MRI were conducted using a 64-channel
Key Points
Question Which kind of abnormalities are present in babies from
pregnant women exposed to the Zika virus?
Findings In this follow-up of 11 infants with congenital Zika virus
infection, we identified neurological impairments, including
microcephaly, a reduction in cerebral volume, ventriculomegaly,
cerebellar hypoplasia, lissencephaly with hydrocephalus, and fetal
akinesia deformation sequence (ie, arthrogryposis).
Meaning These data reinforce that microcephaly is one of several
neurological impairments observed in infants exposed to the Zika
virus, and complementary examinations, such as ultrasonography
and magnetic resonance imaging, should be performed to better
characterize the clinical manifestations of Zika virus infection.
Research Original Investigation
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
1408
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
multislice computed tomography scanner (General Electrics)
and an Achieva 3-T TX scanner (Philips), respectively.
Autopsy and Sample Collection
Amniotic fluid was collected in 8 of 11 neonates by amniocen-
tesis. Placenta, AF, and cord blood samples were collected at
delivery. Postmortem tissues from the brain, cerebellum, cord
blood, spinal cord, and lung were also collected from de-
ceased babies. Full autopsies were performed less than 8 hours
after death. Samples were either fixed in 10% buffered forma-
lin and embedded in paraffin for histopathology analysis or
stored in RNAlater (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for further in-
vestigations of pathogens. Representative areas of formalin
fixed tissues were processed for paraffin embedding. Histo-
logical sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin. From
selected areas, immunohistochemical reactions were per-
formed using the following antibodies and dilutions: anti–
glial fibrillary acidic protein (1:500), anti-neurofilament (1:
2000), anti-CD3 (1:1000), anti-CD20 (1:1000), and anti-CD68
(1:1000).
ZIKV Infection Diagnosis
Viral RNA was extracted from AF and blood using the QIAamp
viral RNA mini kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’
s
recommendations. Fifty milligrams of organ tissues, such as
brain, lung, and placenta, were disrupted using TissueRuptor
(Qiagen) using 325 μL of RTL buffer from the RNEasy plus mini
kit(Qiagen),accordingtothemanufacturer’
sprotocol.RNAwas
extracted from 10 mg of tissue from the placenta, lungs, heart,
skin, spleen, thymus, liver, kidneys, and cerebral cortex with
the use of a TRIzol Plus RNA purification kit (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Real-time reverse-transcription PCRs (RT-PCRs)
were performed for the detection of ZIKV RNA (NS5 gene) and
1-step RT-PCR for the detection of the envelope-protein cod-
ing region (350 base pairs) as described previously.18 The
envelope gene of positive samples for ZIKV RT-PCR was se-
quenced for further phylogenetic analysis. Viral complemen-
tary DNA was amplified using the SuperScript III One-Step RT-
PCR system with platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Thermo
FisherScientific)followingthemanufacturer’
sprotocol.Afrag-
ment of 350 base pairs containing the env gene was amplified
using primers 5′-TTGGTCATGATACTGCTGATTGC–3′ (for-
ward)and5′-CCACTAACGTTCTTTTGCAGACAT-3′(reverse)and
subjectedtonucleicacidsequenceanalysiswiththesameprim-
ers by using the ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosys-
tems). Raw sequence data were aligned and edited by the Se-
qMan module of LaserGene (DNASTAR). Amino acid sequence
alignment was performed using the Clustal W package. Sero-
logical tests against ZIKV were performed using the rapid-
test dual path platform Zika IgM/IgG from Chembio (Med-
ford). We previously validated this rapid test with sera from
ZIKV-positive babies (patients 1 and 2 in the Table) and a sero-
Table. Characteristics of Mothers and Fetuses or Neonates With Microcephaly
Patient
No., Sex
Maternal
Age, y
Acute ZIKV
Symptoms
(GT of First
Appearance, wk)
GT of First
Image
With
Lesion, wk
PCR Diagnosis
of Amniocentesis
(GT, wk)
GT Delivery,
wk (CP, cm)
Newborn
Outcome
PCR
Diagnosis at
Birth (AF, CB,
and PL)
Postmortem
Tissue PCR
(PL, BR, CB,
SC, and LG)
ZIKV Rapid Test
Result for CB
IgG
IgM
1, M
23
Rash, itching,
and arthralgia
(18)
20
Pos (20)
41
(36.5)
Deceased
Neg
Pos (BR)
Pos
Neg
2, F
34
Rash, arthralgia,
and
conjunctivitis
(8)
20
Pos (20)
41
(30.5)
Alive
Neg
NA
Pos
Neg
3, M
29
Rash, arthralgia,
and itching (12)
24
Pos (24)
41
(31.5)
Alive
Pos (AF)
NA
NA
NA
4, F
25
NA
23
Pos (23)
39
(35.5)
Alive
NA
Pos (AF)
NA
NA
5, F
18
Rash (10)
37
Pos (37)
40
(29)
Alive
Neg
NA
NA
NA
6, F
19
Rash, headache,
and asthenia (6)
20
Pos (20)
39
(33.0)
Alive
NA
Pos (AF)
NA
NA
7, F
31
Rash, itching,
and feet edema
(7)
17
Neg (17)
36
(35.0)
Deceased
Pos (AF)
Pos (BR, CR,
SC, LG)
NA
NA
8, M
19
Rash, asthenia,
and itch (10)
35
Neg (35)
41
(32.5)
Alive
Pos (PL)
Neg
NA
NA
9, M
15
Rash, itch, and
arthralgia (8)
25
Neg (25)
34
(27.0)
Deceased
Pos (PL, CB)
Neg (BR,CR)
NA
NA
10, F
29
Rash and itching
(11)
20
Neg (20)
40
(29.0)
Alive
Neg
NA
Pos
Neg
11, F
26
Rash and
headache (9)
22
Neg (22)
38
(29.0)
Alive
Neg
NA
Pos
Neg
Female,
7 of
11 (63.6%)
Median (SD)
age, 25 (6) y
Median (SD) GT,
9.5 (3.4) wk
Median
(SD) GT,
22 (6.4)
wk
Pos on AF PCR,
6 of 11 (54.5%);
median (SD) GT,
22 (6.4) wk
Median (SD)
GT, 39
(2.3) wk;
median (SD)
CP, 31
(3) cm
Mortality,
3 of
11 (27.3%)
NA
NA
NA
NA
Abbreviations: AF, amniotic fluid; BR, brain; CB, cord blood; CP, cephalic perimeter; GT, gestational time; LG, lung; NA, not applicable; Neg, negative;
PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PL, placenta; Pos, positive; SC, spinal cord; ZIKV, Zika virus.
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jamaneurology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
1409
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
conversionserapanelfromadultsinfectedwithZIKVinthestate
of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (eFigure 1 in the Supplement). More-
over, this rapid test has been previously validated with a bona
fide ZIKV seroconversion panel from adults infected with ZIKV
inthestateofRiodeJaneiro.Findingsfrompatients1and2also
validated the use of cord blood as a diagnostic matrix for the
Chembio dual path platform. Furthermore, the manufacturer
reports the specificity for DENV, YFV, and WNV proteases were
all greater than 90%. Phylogenetic analysis methods are de-
scribed in eAppendix 1 in the Supplement.
Results
Cases Series Characteristics
ElevenpregnantwomenwithconfirmedZIKVdiagnosesshow-
ing some fetal abnormality in brain development by abdomi-
nal ultrasonographic examination were enrolled in this study
after providing informed consent (Table). Then, during the in-
trauterine period, RT-PCR of the AF confirmed the ZIKV diag-
nosis in 6 of 11 women (patients 1-6 in Table). The remaining in-
fants were diagnosed after birth through RT-PCR using AF,
placentatissues,orcordbloodcollectedafterdelivery,withthe
exception of patients 10 and 11, from whom only a small vol-
ume of cord blood was available. However, both patients were
included in the study on the basis of a strong IgG anti-ZIKV re-
sponse obtained by the Chembio dual path platform ZIKV IgG/
IgM rapid test. Patients 10 and 11 are considered suspect cases
because of suggestive imaging findings, a maternal history of
ZIKVinfectionsymptomsduringpregnancy,andstrongIgGanti-
ZIKV immune titles (eFigure 1 in the Supplement).
The ZIKV genome was identified in postmortem tissues in
patient 1 (brain) and patient 7 (brain, cerebellum, spinal cord,
and lung). Of note, patient 1 had more severe brain damage and
a higher viral load in brain tissues compared with patient 7. Ad-
ditional laboratory tests conducted in their mothers ex-
cludeddiabetesandotherchronicdiseases,suchasbloodpres-
sure–related disorders. Other causes of microcephaly, such as
drug use, alcohol consumption, smoking, or medication, were
also excluded. Test results for other arboviruses, such as den-
gue virus and chikungunya, were found to be negative by en-
zyme-linked immunosorbent assay and PCR examination in
blood and AF. Tests for syphilis, toxoplasmosis, human im-
munodeficiency virus, measles, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and
herpessimplexpanelswerealsonegativeforallinfants,aswere
specific human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, cytomega-
lovirus, and parvovirus B19 screens.
Fetal USG was performed 3 to 6 times on each pregnant
woman, depending on the severity of findings. Magnetic reso-
nance imaging was also performed if fetal cerebral malforma-
tions were detected. At the time of this submission, all 11 pa-
tients were delivered. Three infants died after delivery (within
48 hours of life), and 2 mothers allowed full autopsy. The sum-
mary of demographic information and clinical and labora-
tory findings are presented in the Table. The median (SD) ma-
ternal age was 25 (6) years. Five of 11 mothers (45.5%) were
primigravidas, while the median number of births for the re-
mainingmotherswas2.Allpregnantwomenexceptthemother
of patient 1 had a history of skin rash at the beginning of preg-
nancy, appearing at a median (SD) gestational time of 9.5 (3.4)
weeks, suggesting an early ZIKV infection. The median (SD)
gestational age at delivery was 39 (2.6) weeks, and labor was
induced for most women. All infants were aged 2 to 6 months
at the time of submission. Three of 11 neonates died, giving a
perinatal mortality rate of 27.3%. The median (SD) cephalic pe-
rimeter at birth was 31 (3) cm, a value lower than the limit to
consider a microcephaly case. However, we found newborns
with severe brain lesions with normal cephalic perimeter.
Imaging Findings
ThemostcommonfindingonabdominalandtransvaginalUSG
was severe cerebral atrophy associated with fetal micro-
cephaly, which was found in 9 patients. Ventriculomegaly was
another frequent finding, appearing in 10 patients, and was
mild, moderate, or severe and usually asymmetric. The head
circumference was less than 2 SDs for gestational age in most
infants; however, normal or enlarged head circumference with
severe ventriculomegaly was found in 2 patients (median [SD;
range] of 31 [3; 27-36.5] cm). Hypoplasia of the cerebellar ver-
mis and cerebellum occurred in 9 patients. We found unilat-
eral microphthalmia and bilateral cataracts in patient 1 but
could not visualize the corpus callosum and the thalami. Fe-
talakinesiadeformationsequence(FADS)orarthrogryposiswas
found in 3 infants, and all 3 died after delivery (patients 1, 7,
and 9). Polyhydramnios was found in patient 7, who also de-
veloped severe maternal respiratory distress necessitating
therapeutic interruption of pregnancy at 36 weeks. Oligohy-
dramnios was observed in patient 2. Doppler flow velocim-
etry indices (umbilical and middle cerebral artery) were nor-
mal in all patients. Other USG findings included calcifications
in several regions in the brain, cerebellum, and brainstem in
addition to fetal restriction growth. We also identified frontal
bone plane, hypertelorism, and enlargement of the posterior
fossa, interhemispheric space, and subarachnoid space. The
earliest sonographic findings were FADS for patient 7 and head
circumferences less than the third percentile for patients 2 and
7 at 17 weeks.
Complementing the USG findings, fetal and/or postnatal
MRI and CT findings showed additional abnormalities, includ-
ingcallosalhypoplasia,reducedcerebralvolume,abnormalcor-
tical development, and subcortical calcifications, which were
found in all patients. Although abnormal cortical develop-
ment could be identified in every patient, changes included
less severe gyral disorganization (patients 3 and 6-8), pachy-
gyria (patients 2, 5, and 9-11), and lissencephaly (patients 1 and
4). Morphological abnormalities of basal ganglia and thala-
mus and hypodevelopment of the brainstem and cerebellum
were observed in most patients. Figure 1 summarizes the typi-
cal developmental abnormalities identified in different pa-
tients. Imaging findings in each patient are summarized in
eTables 1 and 2 in the Supplement. Figure 2 shows fetal and
postmortem imaging findings of patients 1 and 7.
Pathology Findings
Tissues collected post mortem (patients 1 and 7) were pro-
cessed for further histopathological investigations. On mac-
Research Original Investigation
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
1410
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
roscopic inspection, brain tissue available from patient 1 was
a segment of cerebral hemisphere, weighing 38.5 g, includ-
ing a small segment of the brainstem. It was partly agyric,
with congested leptomeninges and occasional shallow sulci
(Figure 3A). The lateral ventricles were enlarged, with very
thin cortex and white matter (eFigure 3 in the Supplement).
Neither the basal ganglia nor thalami were identified. Histo-
pathological analyses showed cortical polymicrogyria, small
clusters of calcification closer to the ventricular surface
(Figure 3B), absence of ependymal lining, and multiple small
foci of calcification and degenerate nerve cells in the brain-
stem (Figure 3C; eFigure 4 in the Supplement). There were
occasional meningeal and perivascular lymphocytes in the
brainstem. Leptomeningeal glioneuronal heterotopia was
observed in the surface of the hemispheres and the brain-
stem (eFigure 5 in the Supplement).
For patient 7, available brain tissue consisted of 1 cere-
bral hemisphere weighing 109 g, 1 cerebellar hemisphere
Figure 1. Typical Imaging Findings
Patient 2 USG
A
Patient 2 MRI
B
Patient 2 MRI
C
Patient 2 CT
D
Patient 2 3-D reconstruction
E
Patient 3 MRI
F
Patient 4 USG
G
Patient 4 MRI
H
Patient 5 USG
I
Patient 5 MRI
J
Patient 10 CT
K
Patient 11 CT
L
Patients 2 (A-E), 3 (F), 4 (G, H), 5 (I, J), 10 (K), and 11 (L) underwent fetal
ultrasound imaging (USG), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and computed
tomography (CT). A, Multiple and aligned subcortical calcifications
(arrowheads) at 29 weeks’gestation. B, Reduced cerebral volume, callosal
hypoplasia, vermian hypoplasia (arrowhead), and enlarged cisterna magna.
C, Abnormal cortical development (pachygyria). D, Basal ganglia and subcortical
calcifications (arrowheads) on postnatal imaging. E, Microcephaly on postnatal
3-dimensional (3-D) reconstruction. F, Abnormal cortical development,
ex-vacuo ventriculomegaly, and ventricular septa between the atrium and
occipital horn (arrowhead) with hyposignal spots suggestive of calcification in
thalamus at 29 weeks’gestation. G, Subcortical calcifications (arrowheads) at
24 weeks’gestation. H, Severe reduction of cerebral parenchyma volume
associated with lissencephaly (blue arrowhead) and accentuated
hypodevelopment of diencephalon, brainstem, and cerebellum (yellow
arrowheads) at 36 weeks’gestation. I, Remarkable hypodevelopment of the
cerebral parenchyma and aligned subcortical calcifications (arrowheads) at 37
weeks’gestation. J, Ventriculomegaly and abnormal cortical development with
polymicrogyria (arrowheads) on postnatal imaging. K, Subcortical calcifications
(white arrowheads) and skull deformity (red arrowheads) on postnatal imaging.
L, Reduced cerebral volume, ventriculomegaly, and aligned subcortical
calcifications (arrowheads) on postnatal imaging.
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jamaneurology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
1411
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
weighing 7 g, the brainstem, and a short segment of the spi-
nal cord. The leptomeninges were thickened and congested
with chronic lymphocytic meningitis (Figure 3D). There
were shallow sulci, grayish translucent white matter, and
enlarged lateral ventricle (Figure 3E; eFigure 2 in the Supple-
ment), showing erosion of the ependyma. The corpus callo-
sum was thin. There were scattered perivascular lympho-
cytes, histiocytes, gliosis, and a cluster of calcification in the
thalamus (Figure 3F). Nerve cell degeneration, coarse and
filamentous calcification possibly representing axons, and
dendrites were seen in the brainstem (Figure 3G). The cer-
ebellum was hypoplastic (Figure 3H) and had focal cortical
dysplasia. Although the sections of the spinal cord could not
be well oriented to obtain transverse histological sections,
the impression was that there were fewer motor nerve cells
than expected. Samples from the paravertebral skeletal
muscle showed neurogenic atrophy (data not shown).
The histopathological investigations in both patients 1
and 7 showed predominantly CD3+ lymphocytes (eFigure 6
in the Supplement). Indeed, histiocyte and microglial prolif-
eration, gliosis, and neuronal and axonal degeneration were
confirmed with immunohistochemical markers (anti-CD68,
Figure 2. Imaging Findings for Patients 1 and 7
Patient 1 USG
A
Patient 1 USG
B
Patient 1 MRI
C
Patient 1 MRI
D
Patient 1 MRI
E
Patient 7 MRI
F
Patient 7 MRI
G
Patient 7 MRI
H
Patient 7 MRI
I
Patient 7 MRI
J
Patients 1 (A-E) and 7 (F-J) underwent fetal ultrasound imaging (USG) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). A, Microphthalmia at 29 weeks’gestation.
B, Reduced cerebral volume and subcortical calcifications (arrowheads).
C, Vetroculomegalia and abnormal cortical development (ie, lissencephaly;
arrowhead). D, Brainstem hypoplasia (arrowhead). E, Cerebellum hypoplasia
(arrowhead). F, Reduced cerebral volume, vetroculomegalia, callosal hypoplasia
(white arrowhead), and brainstem hypoplasia (yellow arrowhead) at 36 weeks’
gestation. G, Abnormal cortical development with hyposignal spots suggestive
of calcification (arrowheads). H, Cerebellum hypoplasia (arrowhead).
I, Abnormal cortical development and brainstem (arrowhead) post mortem.
J, Subcortical calcifications (arrowhead) post mortem.
Research Original Investigation
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
1412
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
anti–glial fibrillary acidic protein antibodies, and anti-
neurofilament antibodies, respectively). Two small frag-
ments of the placenta (2.5 × 2.0 cm) from each patient were
also examined histologically. Vessel walls in some villi and
villous axis were thickened with consequent reduction of
their lumens (eAppendix 2 in the Supplement).
Clinical Features
Unilateral ocular abnormalities were observed in patient 10,
who presented with a macular chorioretinal scar and perile-
sional pigmentary mottling. Regarding the neurological
development of newborns, our main ocular findings to
date have been paresis of the oculomotor and abduces
muscles with convergent strabismus and loss of photomotor
and consensual reflexes. Others findings included myo-
clonic seizures, hyporeflexia, cervical hypotonia, paralysis
of the diaphragm, and premature closure of the anterior
fontanelle.
Phylogenetic Analyses and Intrahost Variation
To evaluate the phylogenetic associations of ZIKV sequences
found in these patients and the intrahost variation, we
sequenced 350 nucleotide sequences of the envelope gene
domain I from patients 1 and 3 to 8 and compared them with
other available ZIKV and Spondweni virus sequences from
Asia, the Pacific Islands, Africa, and the Americas (eFigure 7
in the Supplement). All African sequences were clustered in
4 monophyletic groups that were separate from the
American-Asian-Pacific lineage, supporting the previous
findings that Brazilian ZIKV lineages are probably more
closely related to Asian-Pacific than to African strains. Our
results also support the finding that the American-Asian-
Pacific and African lineages could have been isolated for a
long time, as the 1966 Malaysian sequence (HQ234449) is
the first Asian sequence that derives in the American-Asian-
Pacific clade. Several nodes of the tree had low support val-
ues, and consequently, the phylogenetic relation of the
Figure 3. Macroscopic and Histopathologic Findings of Postmortem Brain Tissues of Patients 1 and 7
Patient 1 hemisphere
A
Patient 1 ventricular surface
B
Patient 1 brainstem
C
Patient 7 leptomeninges
D
Patient 7 coronal section
E
Patient 7 thalamus
F
Patient 7 brainstem
H
Patient 7 cerebellum
G
A, Segment of a partly agyric hemisphere, with congested leptomeninges and
occasional shallow sulci. B, Small clusters of calcification closer to the
ventricular surface (arrowhead) (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification
×100). C, Multiple small foci of calcification in the brainstem (white arrowheads)
and degenerate nerve cells (yellow arrowheads) (hematoxylin-eosin, original
magnification ×400). D, Chronic lymphocytic meningitis (hematoxylin-eosin,
original magnification ×100). E, Coronal section of the upper part of one
hemisphere showing shallow sulci, grayish translucent white matter, and
enlarged lateral ventricle (eFigure 2 in the Supplement). F, Thalamus showing
scattered perivascular lymphocytes, histiocytes, gliosis, and a cluster of
calcification (arrowhead) (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification ×400).
G, Hypoplastic cerebellum and brainstem. H, Coarse calcification in the
brainstem (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification ×400).
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jamaneurology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
1413
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
clades could not be clearly inferred. The phylogenetic analy-
ses also showed an intrahost variation between ZIKV
sequences of different postmortem tissues from patients 1
and 7 that did not group in the same branch (eFigure 7A in
the Supplement). Some Brazilian sequences presented a
V23I polymorphism at amino acid position 23 of the ZIKV
envelope protein (eFigure 7B in the Supplement). Whether
this polymorphism results in a different behavior of virus
tropism or other virological effects should be investigated
further.
Discussion
Our study reports the evaluation of 11 infants exposed to ZIKV
infection intrautero and describes their prenatal and postna-
tal brain lesions and other developmental abnormalities. Pa-
tients 1 through 9 had evidence of a positive RT-PCR for ZIKV
during gestation and/or after birth. Patients 10 and 11 only had
serological evidence of infection, with a suggestion that in-
fection occurred at the time of their gestation. The report dem-
onstrates phenotypic variability in regard to the presence of
observed microcephaly as well as the degree of brain damage
and affected brain structures with congenital ZIKV infection.
Although most infants had microcephaly by head circumfer-
encemeasure,somepatientshadameasurementthatwascon-
sistent with their gestational age, as brain atrophy was com-
pensated by an enlargement in ventricular size.19
Although there was variable damage resulting from brain
lesions associated with ZIKV congenital infection, a common
pattern of brain atrophy and changes associated with distur-
bances in neuronal migration were observed. Some patients
presented with mild brain atrophy and calcifications, and oth-
ers presented with more severe malformations, such as the ab-
sence of the thalamus and lissencephaly. Infection caused by
ZIKV during pregnancy caused brain damage, mainly charac-
terized by decreased cortical development and atrophy.6 This
cerebral atrophy may be attributable to interference in the
formation and neuronal migration during the cerebral em-
bryogenesis that has been described for other congenital in-
fections also associated with malformations of cortical devel-
opment(particularlytoxoplasmosis,rubella,cytomegalovirus,
herpes simplex virus complex).20-22 This is the common path-
way that may explain other brain findings and fetal compli-
cations caused by ZIKV infection.23
Other frequent findings were hypoplasia of the cerebel-
lum and cerebellar vermis, with consequent enlargement of
the posterior fossa, calcifications in various brain regions, and
hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. The corpus callosum
changes may be associated with a decreased number of neu-
ronal cells and/or the interference of the virus in the neuronal
migration process, similar to what has been described for hu-
man immunodeficiency virus and herpes virus.24-26 In more
severely affected infants, we observed a slender brainstem on
fetal MRI, making it impossible for the fetus to breathe nor-
mally at birth, with death occurring within hours. Therefore,
evaluation of brainstem appearance on fetal MRI may inform
the likelihood of survival of the newborn.
In addition to changes in the central nervous system, we
also observed FADS, also known as arthrogryposis.27 In par-
ticular, patient 7 presented signs of FADS after 17 weeks of ges-
tation, very early in the fetal development. One hypothesis to
explain the early development of FADS could be the interfer-
ence of ZIKV in the motor neurons migration process, evi-
denced by histopathological study of patients 1 and 7. An-
otherintrauterineabnormalityobservedinseveralpatientswas
polyhydramnios, probably associated with swallowing im-
pairment due to brain injury.28
In our study, most of the women demonstrated symp-
toms of ZIKV infection in the first trimester, which could be
associated with the disturbance in neuronal migration pro-
cesses and the formation of the neural tube. However, in pa-
tient 1, one of the most severely affected infants, important
brain structures such as the thalamus could not be identified,
andthemotherreportedsymptomsofZIKVinfectionlaterthan
others at 18 weeks of gestation. In fact, this was the only in-
stance in our study in which the mother showed ZIKV symp-
toms after the first trimester of gestation. Other factors asso-
ciated with immunity and maternal nutrition could also
interfere with ZIKV vertical transmission, as could individual
factors that interfere with placental development, and should
be further investigated.15
Of note, all ZIKV genomes sequenced from fetuses in early
pregnancy and newborns belonged to the ZIKV Asian lin-
eage, and they were all related to the viruses identified in the
French Polynesian outbreak.29-31 It was interesting to note that
the viral sequences amplified from patients 1 and 7 after birth
gained a new substitution, V23I, which is located in the enve-
lope domain I and may be implicated in viral tropism to dif-
ferent tissues. We need to further investigate if this specific
variation is associated with neuropathogenesis.
Our study had limitations. One limitation was that most
of the imaging was performed during gestation, and further
MRI examinations should be performed after delivery to in-
vestigate brain damage associated with the neuron-motor de-
velopment of the child. Another limitation was that most of
the ZIKV diagnoses were performed after clinical symptoms
during the pregnancy.
Conclusions
The presence of ZIKV in AF during gestation indicates that AF
is a valuable fluid for prenatal diagnoses. The finding of ZIKV
sequences in placenta and cord blood in some of our new-
borns provides additional evidence of the vertical transmis-
sion of the virus during pregnancy. Unlike the findings re-
ported by others, we did not observe changes in umbilical and
cerebral blood flow, even in the most serious cases.2 How-
ever, other questions concerning virus pathogenesis and con-
sequences to fetal development remain unanswered. What
seems to be universal is that microcephaly is not the sole find-
ing but is a consequence of several brain injuries. Growth re-
striction and other damages, such as ophthalmologic altera-
tions, were observed in neonates.32,33 Indeed, we observed a
pronounced ventriculomegaly in most patients that could in-
Research Original Investigation
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
1414
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
fluence the observed microcephaly. Perhaps some infants do
have damages that impair cerebrospinal fluid flow and then
have the obstructive type of ventricular enlargement. Based
on that, we recommend using the term congenital Zika syn-
drome instead of microcephaly associated with Zika virus in-
fection, which involves a spectrum of changes, including other
neurological and fetal development manifestations.
Our observations add ZIKV to a list of other pathogens as-
sociated with congenital syndromes during pregnancy. How-
ever, based on confirmed ZIKV-associated cases of micro-
cephaly reported by the Brazilian Ministry of Health, the
northeastern region of Brazil has a 10 times larger incidence
of confirmed cases compared with the rest of Brazil as well
otherLatinAmericancountrieswhereZIKVcirculates.Thisfact
suggests that there must be some additional unknown factor
to enhance ZIKV fetal infection in this region. Coinfections as
well as environmental factors should be explored to clear this
unexpected finding.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: July 19, 2016.
Correction:ThisarticlewascorrectedonOctober24,
2016,tofixthecorrespondingauthor’
semailaddress.
Published Online: October 3, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.3720
Author Affiliations: Instituto de Pesquisa Professor
Amorim Neto (IPESQ), Campina Grande, Paraíba,
Brazil (A. S. Melo, Amorim, F. d. Melo); Instituto de
Saúde Elpidio de Almeida, Campina Grande,
Paraíba, Brazil (A. S. Melo, Amorim, F. d. Melo,
Ribeiro, dos Santos); Faculdade de Ciências Médicas
de Campina Grande, Campina Grande, Paraíba,
Brazil (A. S. Melo, Amorim, Ribeiro, Sampaio,
Moura, Rabello); Hospital Municipal Pedro I,
Campina Grande, Paraíba, Brazil (A. S. Melo, Batista,
Sampaio, Moura, Rabello, Gonzaga); Departamento
de Genética, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil (Aguiar, Arruda, Silveira, Delvechio,
Higa, Voloch, O. C. Ferreira, Brindeiro, Tanuri);
Universidade Federal de Campina Grande, Paraíba,
Brazil (Amorim, T. Ferreira); Division of Ultrasound
in Obstetrics and Gynecology, Lis Maternity
Hospital, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel (Malinger); Fundação de Medicina Fetal
Latino Americana, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(Ximenes); Fundação Instituto de Pesquisa e Ensino
de Diagnostico por Imagem, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
(de Oliveira-Szejnfeld); Instituto de Ciências
Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (Tovar-Moll,
Campanati); Instituto D’
Or de Pesquisa e Ensino,
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (Tovar-Moll);
Laboratório de Neuropatologia do Instituto
Estadual do Cérebro Paulo Niemeyer, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil (Chimelli); Laboratório de Flavivírus,
Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz,
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (Nogueira,
Filippis); Departamento de Diagnóstico por
Imagem, Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil (Szejnfeld).
Author Contributions: Drs Tanuri and Melo had full
access to all the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. Drs A. S. Melo and
Aguiar contributed equally.
Concept and design: Tanuri, Melo, Aguiar.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
A. S. Melo, Aguiar, Amorim, Arruda, F. d. Melo,
Ribeiro, Batista, Ferreira, dos Santos, Sampaio,
Moura, Rabello, Gonzaga, Malinger, Ximenes,
de Oliveira-Szejnfeld, Tovar-Moll, Chimelli, Silveira,
Delvechio, Higa, Campanati, Nogueira, Filippis,
Szejnfeld, Voloch, Ferreira, Brindeiro.
Drafting of the manuscript: Tanuri, Melo, Aguiar,
Amorim, de Oliveira-Szejnfeld, Tovar-Moll,
Chimelli, Campanati, Voloch, Brindeiro.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: A. S. Melo, Aguiar, Amorim,
Arruda, F. d. Melo, Ribeiro, Batista, Ferreira,
dos Santos, Sampaio, Moura, Rabello, Gonzaga,
Malinger, Ximenes, de Oliveira-Szejnfeld,
Tovar-Moll, Silveira, Delvechio, Higa, Campanati,
Nogueira, Filippis, Szejnfeld, Ferreira.
Statistical analysis: Tovar-Moll, Voloch.
Obtaining funding: Tanuri, Melo, Aguiar, Campanati.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
A. S. Melo, Aguiar, Amorim, Arruda, F. d. Melo,
Ribeiro, Ferreira, Sampaio, Moura, Rabello,
Malinger, Ximenes, de Oliveira-Szejnfeld,
Tovar-Moll, Silveira, Higa, Campanati, Nogueira,
Filippis, Szejnfeld, Voloch, Ferreira, Brindeiro.
Study supervision: Tanuri, A. S. Melo.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: This study was supported by
Consellho Nacional de Desenvolvimento e
Pesquisa, Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do
Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Coordenação de
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior,
and Prefeitura Municipal de Campina Grande.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funders had no
role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
REFERENCES
1. Calvet G, Aguiar RS, Melo AS, et al. Detection and
sequencing of Zika virus from amniotic fluid of
fetuses with microcephaly in Brazil: a case study.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2016;16(6):653-660.
2. Brasil P, Pereira JP Jr, Raja Gabaglia C, et al. Zika
virus infection in pregnant women in Rio de
Janeiro: preliminary report [published online March
4, 2016]. N Engl J Med.
3. Malone RW, Homan J, Callahan MV, et al; Zika
Response Working Group. Zika virus: medical
countermeasure development challenges. PLoS
Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10(3):e0004530.
4. Cauchemez S, Besnard M, Bompard P, et al.
Association between Zika virus and microcephaly
in French Polynesia, 2013-15: a retrospective study.
Lancet. 2016;387(10033):2125-2132.
5. Faria NR, Azevedo RdoS, Kraemer MUG, et al.
Zika virus in the Americas: early epidemiological
and genetic findings. Science. 2016;352(6283):
345-349.
6. Mlakar J, Korva M, Tul N, et al. Zika virus
associated with microcephaly. N Engl J Med. 2016;
374(10):951-958.
7. Faye O, Freire CCM, Iamarino A, et al. Molecular
evolution of Zika virus during its emergence in the
20th century. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014;8(1):e2636.
8. Campos GS, Bandeira AC, Sardi SI. Zika virus
outbreak, Bahia, Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015;21
(10):1885-1886.
9. Lindenbach BD, Rice CM. Molecular biology of
flaviviruses. Adv Virus Res. 2003;59:23-61.
10. Zanluca C, Melo VC, Mosimann ALP, Santos GI,
Santos CN, Luz K. First report of autochthonous
transmission of Zika virus in Brazil. Mem Inst
Oswaldo Cruz. 2015;110(4):569-572.
11. Mécharles S, Herrmann C, Poullain P, et al. Acute
myelitis due to Zika virus infection. Lancet. 2016;
387(10026):1481.
12. Carteaux G, Maquart M, Bedet A, et al. Zika
virus associated with meningoencephalitis. N Engl J
Med. 2016;374(16):1595-1596.
13. Cao-Lormeau V, Blake A, Mons S, et al.
Guillain-Barré syndrome outbreak caused by Zika
virus infection in French Polynesia [published
online February 29, 2016]. Lancet. doi:10.1016
/S0140-6736(16)00562-6.
14. Woods CG, Parker A. Investigating
microcephaly. Arch Dis Child. 2013;98(9):707-713.
15. Adibi JJ, Marques ET Jr, Cartus A, Beigi RH.
Teratogenic effects of the Zika virus and the role of
the placenta. Lancet. 2016;387(10027):1587-1590.
16. von der Hagen M, Pivarcsi M, Liebe J, et al.
Diagnostic approach to microcephaly in childhood:
a two-center study and review of the literature. Dev
Med Child Neurol. 2014;56(8):732-741.
17. Gérardin P, Sampériz S, Ramful D, et al.
Neurocognitive outcome of children exposed to
perinatal mother-to-child Chikungunya virus
infection: the CHIMERE cohort study on Reunion
Island. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014;8(7):e2996.
18. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Genetic
and serologic properties of Zika virus associated
with an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 2007.
Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14(8):1232-1239.
19. Stadlbauer A, Salomonowitz E, Brenneis C,
et al. Magnetic resonance velocity mapping of 3D
cerebrospinal fluid flow dynamics in
hydrocephalus: preliminary results. Eur Radiol.
2012;22(1):232-242.
20. Zucca C, Binda S, Borgatti R, et al.
Retrospective diagnosis of congenital
cytomegalovirus infection and cortical
maldevelopment. Neurology. 2003;61(5):710-712.
21. Jaglin XH, Chelly J. Tubulin-related cortical
dysgeneses: microtubule dysfunction underlying
neuronal migration defects. Trends Genet. 2009;25
(12):555-566.
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jamaneurology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
1415
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
22. Romaniello R, Arrigoni F, Bassi MT, Borgatti R.
Mutations in α- and β-tubulin encoding genes:
implications in brain malformations. Brain Dev.
2015;37(3):273-280.
23. Tang H, Hammack C, Ogden SC, et al. Zika virus
infects human cortical neural progenitors and
attenuates their growth. Cell Stem Cell. 2016;18(5):
587-590.
24. Corey L, Wald A. Maternal and neonatal herpes
simplex virus infections. N Engl J Med. 2009;361
(14):1376-1385.
25. Müller-Oehring EM, Schulte T, Rosenbloom MJ,
Pfefferbaum A, Sullivan EV. Callosal degradation in
HIV-1 infection predicts hierarchical perception:
a DTI study. Neuropsychologia. 2010;48(4):1133-1143.
26. Bosnjak VM, Daković I, Duranović V, Lujić L,
Krakar G, Marn B. Malformations of cortical
development in children with congenital
cytomegalovirus infection: a study of nine children
with proven congenital cytomegalovirus infection.
Coll Antropol. 2011;35(suppl 1):229-234.
27. Hall JG. Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita:
etiology, genetics, classification, diagnostic
approach, and general aspects. J Pediatr Orthop B.
1997;6(3):159-166.
28. Kouamé N, N’
goan-Domoua AM, Nikiéma Z,
et al. Polyhydramnios: a warning sign in the
prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of foetal
malformation? Diagn Interv Imaging. 2013;94(4):
433-437.
29. Baronti C, Piorkowski G, Charrel RN, Boubis L,
Leparc-Goffart I, de Lamballerie X. Complete coding
sequence of Zika virus from a French polynesia
outbreak in 2013. Genome Announc. 2014;2(3):
e00500-e00514.
30. Besnard M, Lastère S, Teissier A, Cao-Lormeau
V, Musso D. Evidence of perinatal transmission of
Zika virus, French Polynesia, December 2013 and
February 2014. Euro Surveill. 2014;19(13).
31. Musso D. Zika virus transmission from French
Polynesia to Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015;21(10):
1887-1889.
32. McCarthy M. Severe eye damage in infants with
microcephaly is presumed to be due to Zika virus.
BMJ. 2016;352:i855.
33. Ventura CV, Maia M, Bravo-Filho V, Góis AL,
Belfort R Jr. Zika virus in Brazil and macular atrophy
in a child with microcephaly. Lancet. 2016;387
(10015):228.
Research Original Investigation
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
1416
JAMA Neurology
December 2016
Volume 73, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
