 Developmental Science. 2018;21:e12651. 
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/desc 
  |  1 of 13
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12651
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
 
Received: 1 August 2017 | Accepted: 22 November 2017
DOI: 10.1111/desc.12651
PA P E R
Infant brain responses to felt and observed touch of hands and 
feet: an MEG study
Andrew N. Meltzoff1
 | Rey R. Ramírez1 | Joni N. Saby1 | Eric Larson1 |  
Samu Taulu1,2 | Peter J. Marshall3
1Institute for Learning & Brain 
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA
2Department of Physics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
3Department of Psychology, Temple 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Correspondence
Andrew N. Meltzoff, Institute for Learning & 
Brain Sciences, University of Washington (Box 
357988), Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
Email: Meltzoff@uw.edu
Funding information 
NSF grants SMA-1540619 and BCS-1460889
Abstract
There is growing interest concerning the ways in which the human body, both one’s 
own and that of others, is represented in the developing human brain. In two experi-
ments with 7- 
month- 
old infants, we employed advances in infant magnetoencepha-
lography (MEG) brain imaging to address novel questions concerning body 
representations in early development. Experiment 1 evaluated the spatiotemporal or-
ganization of infants’ brain responses to being touched. A punctate touch to infants’ 
hands and feet produced significant activation in the hand and foot areas of contralat-
eral primary somatosensory cortex as well as in other parietal and frontal areas. 
Experiment 2 explored infant brain responses to visually perceiving another person’s 
hand or foot being touched. Results showed significant activation in early visual re-
gions and also in regions thought to be involved in multisensory body and self–other 
processing. Furthermore, observed touch of the hand and foot activated the infant’s 
own primary somatosensory cortex, although less consistently than felt touch. These 
findings shed light on aspects of early social cognition, including action imitation, 
which may build, at least in part, on infant neural representations that map equiva-
lences between the bodies of self and other.
RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS
• We investigated the neural representation of the body in human 
infants using magnetoencephalography (MEG) brain imaging with 
awake participants.
• Seven-month-old infants had their own hand or foot touched or 
observed someone else’s hand or foot being touched.
• Infants’ hand and foot regions were activated when their own body 
was touched, and also when infants visually perceived touch to 
someone else’s body.
• Cortical representations of body parts may underlie connections be-
tween self and other, supporting infant social learning and imitation.
1 | INTRODUCTION
Increasing attention is being given to the ways in which the body 
is represented in the human brain, both in terms of the perception 
of one’s own body and the perception of the bodies of others. One 
important source of information about neural representations of the 
body derives from studies examining brain responses to touch. This 
work has highlighted the presence of somatotopically organized rep-
resentations of the body in primary somatosensory cortex (S1) (e.g., 
Kaas, 1997; Kaas, Jain, & Qi, 2002). A large literature with adult human 
and nonhuman primates has documented the properties of these 
“neural body maps” in S1, including demonstrations of experience- 
dependent plasticity (e.g., Buonomano & Merzenich, 1998; Elbert, 
Pantev, Wienbruch, Rockstroh, & Taub, 1995; Kaas, 1991).
Although a great deal is understood about neural body maps in 
adults, relatively little is known about their development in human 
infancy. Filling in this gap is important for two reasons. First, novel 
research on neural body maps in human infants has the potential 
to inform key questions about the functional specification and 
plasticity of cortical regions in relation to behavioral development 
(Gondo et al., 2001; Hahamy et al., 2017). Second, research on body 
maps in the somatosensory cortex of human infants can shed light 
 2 of 13  |    
MELTZOFF ET aL.
on their role in facilitating connections between self and other in the 
first months of life, with potential implications for studying social- 
cognitive development and developmental disorders (Marshall & 
Meltzoff, 2015). A burgeoning literature with adults has examined 
the involvement of the somatosensory cortex in social perception 
(e.g., Gillmeister, Bowling, Rigato, & Banissy, 2017; Keysers, Kaas, 
& Gazzola, 2010; Lankinen et al., 2016), but far less work has been 
done with infants.
Research employing infant electroencephalography (EEG) and 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) has begun to shed light on how 
the developing human brain responds to touch (for reviews see, 
Nevalainen, Lauronen, & Pihko, 2014; Saby, Meltzoff, & Marshall, 
2016). To date, most studies in this area have focused on tactile stim-
ulation of the hand. In accord with brain studies of adults, a touch to 
the infant’s hand elicits responses that are strongest at sensors located 
over the lateral central region in the hemisphere contralateral to the 
stimulation (Pihko et al., 2004; Pihko, Nevalainen, Stephen, Okada, 
& Lauronen, 2009; Rigato, Begum Ali, van Velzen, & Bremner, 2014; 
Saby, Meltzoff, & Marshall, 2015).
Compared with studies involving only stimulation of hand, very 
few studies have examined infant brain responses to tactile stimula-
tion of other body parts, which is essential for building a more com-
plete picture of neural body maps in the developing brain. In one 
such study, Saby et al. (2015) examined EEG responses to a tactile 
stimulus delivered to four body parts (left and right hands and feet) 
in 7- 
month- 
old infants. A computer- 
controlled tap on the infant’s 
left or right hand elicited a larger response at the lateral electrode 
in the central region of the contralateral hemisphere (electrodes 
C4 and C3, respectively) than at the midline central electrode (Cz); 
and a tap to the left and right foot elicited a larger response at the 
midline central electrode than at the lateral central sites. A broadly 
similar topographic pattern was reported by Milh et al. (2007) in an 
EEG study of preterm newborns in which “gentle caressing” of in-
fants’ hands and feet evoked delta- 
brush activity (a characteristic of 
preterm EEG that disappears around term age). However, inferences 
from this study are limited because it involved passive movement of 
the infant’s limbs, a small sample size, and visual inspection of the 
raw EEG signal rather than the quantitative analysis of somatosen-
sory evoked responses.
The pattern of EEG responses obtained to stimulation of infants’ 
hands and feet is roughly consistent with what one would expect if 
there were a somatotopic organization in the infant somatosensory 
cortex. However, measurements derived from EEG scalp electrodes 
are based on a mixture of signals arising from the whole brain, and 
therefore provide only a rough indication of source locations. In the 
first of two experiments (Experiment 1) we capitalized on advances 
in infant MEG brain imaging to more closely examine, at the source 
level, both the spatial and temporal aspects of infant brain responses 
to felt touch. In the second experiment (Experiment 2), we applied 
these same advances to examine infant brain responses to observed 
touch, with the aim of shedding light on possible connections between 
infants’ representation of their own bodies and the perception of the 
bodies of others.
1.1 | Registering self–other bodily correspondences
A major area of interest in developmental science concerns the de-
velopment of linkages between one’s own body and the bodies of 
others. Although these linkages play a role across the lifespan, they 
have particular significance in the first months and years of life. The 
ability to register correspondences between self and other is an im-
portant part of the capacity for interpersonal engagement in human 
infancy (Rochat, 2009). This capacity includes the imitation of others’ 
behaviors, skills, and mannerisms, which provides a mechanism for 
social learning and plays a role in the development of social cogni-
tion prior to spoken language (Meltzoff, 2013; Tomasello, 1999). It has 
been suggested that an initial step in infant imitation is establishing a 
“match” between the specific effector used by another person and the 
corresponding effector on one’s own body (Meltzoff & Moore, 1997). 
The current study is partly aimed at elucidating whether data from 
infant brain imaging can further illuminate this theoretical proposal.
Prior experimental work with infants has begun to explore neuro-
science correlates of this matching process by investigating the mod-
ulation of the sensorimotor mu rhythm in the infant EEG during the 
observation of an adult achieving a goal by using her hand or her foot 
(Saby, Meltzoff, & Marshall, 2013). The infant mu rhythm exhibited a 
degree of somatotopy, such that observation of hand actions was as-
sociated with greater mu desynchronization at lateral central electrode 
sites, and observation of foot actions was associated with greater de-
synchronization at the midline central electrode. A similar somatotopic 
pattern of mu rhythm desynchronization has been documented during 
infants’ own production of hand and foot actions (de Klerk, Johnson, 
& Southgate, 2015; Marshall, Saby, & Meltzoff, 2013). These findings 
are consistent with a much larger infant EEG literature suggesting an 
involvement of the sensorimotor system in action perception (for re-
views, see Cuevas, Cannon, Yoo, & Fox, 2014; Marshall & Meltzoff, 
2014). However, the focus of this prior literature has been on infant 
goal- 
directed acts rather than specifically on neural responses to 
touch and somatosensory aspects of self–other connections, which 
are the focus of the current studies.
1.2 | Current experiments
Prior studies of infant responses to touch have not involved source 
localization of neural responses to multiple effectors (e.g., hands and 
feet) and have not tested responses to both felt touch and seeing 
others being touched in the absence of being touched oneself. To fill 
this gap, we designed two infant MEG experiments involving awake 
7- 
month- 
old infants. Experiment 1 involved delivering precisely con-
trolled tactile taps to infants’ hands and feet. The results of this study 
were expected to provide a much finer level of spatial and temporal 
detail on brain responses to tactile stimulation than has been possible 
in prior infant studies. In Experiment 2, the infants’ own bodies were 
not touched. Instead, infants visually observed an adult hand or foot 
being touched. Some EEG work with infants has begun to examine 
brain responses to somatosensory stimulation during the observation 
of touch to others (Rigato et al., 2017). In our second experiment we 
     |  3 of 13
MELTZOFF ET aL.
employed advanced source localization methods to examine infant 
cortical responses to the viewing of tactile stimulation of others, in 
the absence of touch to the infant’s body. The rationale for the second 
experiment is based on findings that when older children and adults 
see another person’s body being touched, there is activation of the 
observer’s own somatosensory cortex (e.g., Gillmeister et al., 2017; 
Keysers et al., 2010; Pihko, Nangini, Jousmäki, & Hari, 2010; Remijn 
et al., 2014). If traces of such activation could be detected in the infant 
brain, it would inform the theoretical proposition that infants can reg-
ister correspondences between their own and other people’s bodies, 
with implications for the development of interpersonal connectedness 
and early social cognition.
The data were acquired with a whole- 
head MEG sensor array using 
advanced signal processing approaches including infant head move-
ment tracking and compensation. Studying infants between 6 and 12 
months of age allows sustained MEG data collection in awake infants, 
as demonstrated by studies of speech processing in the infant brain 
(Ferjan Ramírez, Ramírez, Clarke, Taulu, & Kuhl, 2017; Kuhl, Ramírez, 
Bosseler, Lin, & Imada, 2014; Zhao & Kuhl, 2016). In the current paper 
we conducted source localization using both single dipole fits and a 
distributed linear method that allowed us to identify a network of 
infant brain activity to felt and observed touch. We further applied 
state- 
of- 
the- 
art statistical methods including conjunction analyses 
(Benjamini & Heller, 2008) that are especially well suited to infants 
and other populations expected to have marked inter- 
subject variation 
in neural responses.
2 | EXPERIMENT 1: INFANT BRAIN 
RESPONSES TO FELT TOUCH
2.1 | Methods
2.1.1 | Participants
The participants were awake and alert 7- 
month- 
old infants tested in 
a narrow age window (32 weeks ± 14 days old). To further minimize 
inter- 
subject differences, three predetermined criteria were used 
for recruiting infants: (a) > 37 weeks gestational age, (b) typical birth 
weight (2.5–4.5 kg), and (c) no significant health or developmental 
problems. The infants were recruited through a central subject pool 
maintained at the University of Washington. Soon after birth, par-
ents received a postcard asking about participation in infant research. 
Parents who returned the card indicating interest were entered into 
the computerized pool, and were subsequently contacted by indi-
vidual laboratories to solicit participation. Families received a nominal 
gift for participating. Recruitment and experimental procedures were 
approved by the university Institutional Review Board (IRB), and pa-
rental informed consent was obtained.
A total of 30 infants began MEG testing. Of these, two were ex-
cluded due to technical issues and 7 were excluded for having fewer 
than 200 accepted trials. This left 21 infants who contributed ana-
lyzable data (Mage = 32.8 weeks, SD = 0.7, 16 males). For these 21 
participants, 14 infants had a sufficient number of accepted trials 
(≥ 200) for only one effector (hand or foot), and seven other infants 
had a sufficient number of accepted trials for both effectors (hand 
and foot) (see Stimuli). Therefore, analyses are based on data from 14 
 
infants in the hand condition and 14 infants in the foot condition.
2.1.2 | Stimuli
Tactile stimulation was applied to the dorsal surface of the infant’s 
right hand or right foot using an inflatable diaphragm (Figure 1A; MEG 
International Services, Coquitlam, BC, Canada), similar to one used 
in other MEG and EEG studies involving somatosensory stimulation 
(e.g., Pihko et al., 2009; Riquelme & Montoya, 2010; Saby et al., 2015). 
When the diaphragm was expanded, it resulted in a punctate “tap” 
on the hand or foot. Although the palm of the hand would (presum-
ably) have greater sensitivity than the dorsal surface, the latter was 
used because pilot testing showed that the diaphragm could not be 
securely affixed to the palm—infants tended to open and close their 
hands around the diaphragm, loosening contact with the skin.
The inflatable diaphragm was mounted in a plastic casing (10 mm 
diameter) and was attached to the midpoint of the dorsal surface of 
the hand and foot using an adhesive electrode collar reinforced with 
medical tape and covered with a tubular bandage. The diaphragm 
was inflated by a short burst of pressurized air delivered via poly-
urethane tubing (5 m length). Air delivery was controlled by E- 
Prime 
stimulus presentation software in combination with a pneumatic stim-
ulator unit (James Long Company, Caroga Lake, NY) and a regulator 
that restricted airflow to 100 psi. For each tactile stimulus, a trigger 
FIGURE 1 Experiment 1 examined infants’ response to felt touch. (a) Example photograph of tactile stimulator used in Experiment 1. Infants 
were stimulated on the right hand (or foot) by an inflatable diaphragm. Experiment 2 examined infants’ responses to observed touch. (b) Single 
video frame extracted from the visual stimulus shown to infants in Experiment 2 at the point when the rod contacted the hand. Infants watched 
a hand (or foot) being touched
(a)
(b)
 4 of 13  |    
MELTZOFF ET aL.
generated by the E- 
Prime software caused a solenoid in the pneumatic 
stimulator to open for 10 ms. The airflow that produced an expansion 
of the diaphragm (attached to the infant’s hand or foot) began 20 ms 
following the trigger. The force delivered peaked at about 40 ms fol-
lowing the first diaphragm movement. The delay between the trigger 
and membrane expansion is accounted for in the analyses such that 
time zero corresponds to the onset of diaphragm movement at the 
skin surface. The pneumatic stimulator and regulator were housed in 
a soundproofed box located in a separate room, not in the magneti-
cally shielded room (MSR), to ensure that any sounds produced by the 
stimulator were not audible to the infant. The burst of air originating in 
the separate room traveled through closed tubing that was capped on 
the infants’ end by the diaphragm that expanded a few mm to produce 
the “tap” on the skin. In pilot work we found that adults sitting in the 
seat and receiving taps did not report hearing noise associated with 
the apparatus.
Tactile stimulation was presented to the hand or foot with a 
stimulus- 
onset asynchrony (SOA) of 2000–2500 ms in a block of 480 
trials (n = 7) or with an SOA of 1000–1500 ms in a block of 400 trials (n 
= 14). If the infant remained calm at the end of the first block, a second 
block with the other effector was immediately presented. Whether the 
hand or foot was presented first was counterbalanced across partic-
ipants. During the MEG recording, infants watched an experimenter 
(who was inside the MSR) playing with toys. The infant’s parent was 
inside the MSR, seated behind the MEG out of the infant’s view.
2.1.3 | Experimental procedure
Prior to beginning the MEG scan, infants were seated in a custom-
ized high chair outside of the MSR, and a research assistant dis-
tracted the infant while the technician fitted a lightweight nylon 
cap containing five head position indicator (HPI) coils on the infant’s 
head. A three- 
dimensional Polhemus Fastrak digitizer (Colchester, 
VT, USA) was used to mark the locations of the five HPI coils rela-
tive to anatomical landmarks on each infant’s head (nasion and left 
and right pre- 
auricular points). Approximately one hundred addi-
tional points around the head were also digitized to determine each 
infant’s individual head shape to increase the accuracy of later data 
analysis. During recordings, the HPI coils were activated to gener-
ate signals that could be used to localize the position of the coils 
within the MEG helmet (dewar). This enabled us to continuously 
estimate the position and orientation of each infant’s head with 
respect to the MEG sensor array, which made it possible to recon-
struct the magnetic fields offline as though they originated from 
a stationary head position. There was a variable amount of head 
movement made by different infants during the recording sessions. 
The head position- 
tracking procedure allowed for head movement 
compensation and rejection of epochs with excessive movement 
(see Epoch rejection and averaging, below).
Following digitization, infants were brought into the MSR and 
seated upright in an adjustable, padded infant seat under the MEG 
sensor array. The tactile stimulators were attached, and the adjustable 
seat was raised so that each individual infant’s head was at an optimal 
position in the MEG dewar. The MEG session lasted approximately 15 
min, depending on how many trials were completed.
2.1.4 | MEG measurement
MEG data were collected using a whole- 
head MEG system (Elekta 
Oy, Helsinki, Finland) with 306 sensors (204 planar gradiometers and 
102 magnetometers) located inside an MSR (IMEDCO, Noblesville, 
IN) at the University of Washington’s Institute for Learning & Brain 
Sciences. Signals were collected with a sampling rate of 1 kHz and 
bandpass filter settings of 0.03–330 Hz. The position of the infant’s 
head relative to the MEG sensor array was tracked continuously 
throughout the recording by extracting the signals emitted by five 
HPI coils fastened to the infant cap, which was taped to the head to 
avoid slippage during testing.
2.1.5 | MEG preprocessing
Acquisition of MEG data from awake infants poses challenges in 
terms of signal- 
to- 
noise ratio and movement- 
induced signal distor-
tions. To address this, the raw MEG recordings underwent a series 
of standardized preprocessing steps to suppress noise from outside 
the MEG dewar and to compensate for the effects related to in-
fants’ head movements during the recording. Similar procedures 
have been used in infant MEG studies of speech perception (Ferjan 
Ramírez et al., 2017; Kuhl et al., 2014). More specifically, the MEG 
data were preprocessed with temporal signal space separation 
(tSSS) (Taulu & Hari, 2009; Taulu & Simola, 2006) and head move-
ment compensation (Taulu, Simola, & Kajola, 2005) transformed to 
the mean of each individual’s head position to minimize reconstruc-
tion noise. This head movement compensation method has been 
cross- 
validated in both adult and child studies (Medvedovsky, Taulu, 
Bikmullina, & Paetau, 2007; Wehner, Hämäläinen, Mody, & Ahlfors, 
2008). For the exact low- 
resolution electromagnetic tomography 
(eLORETA) analyses, the data were then subjected to automatic 
cardiac artifact suppression with signal space projection (SSP) 
(Uusitalo & Ilmoniemi, 1997) and digital band- 
pass filtering (1–40 
Hz). For sensor- 
level and equivalent current dipole (ECD) modeling, 
the data of all infants were transformed to the same head position 
(the mean of all infants) using a regularized version of movement 
compensation.
2.1.6 | Epoch rejection and averaging
The pre- 
processed data were epoched (−250 to 750 ms) relative to 
touch onset, and accepted epochs were averaged to obtain the event- 
related field (ERF) time series for each condition and participant. Epochs 
were rejected if they contained infant limb movement (see Behavioral 
annotation), if infant head position/orientation was unsatisfactory with 
respect to the MEG probe, or if the peak- 
to- 
peak amplitude was over 
3 pT/cm (gradiometers) or 4 pT (magnetometers). The mean number of 
epochs retained after rejection for the hand and foot touch conditions 
were 331.5 (SD = 66.9) and 340.7 (SD = 82.2), respectively.
     |  5 of 13
MELTZOFF ET aL.
Behavioral annotation
Because limb movement is known to affect somatosensory evoked 
responses (Rushton, Rothwell, & Craggs, 1981), MEG sessions were 
video- 
recorded for the purposes of coding infant movement. During 
recording, an electronic trigger corresponding to stimulus onset was 
placed simultaneously on the video and the MEG records, allowing the 
two to be aligned offline. Videos were examined trial- 
by- 
trial using 
ELAN annotation software (Wittenberg, Krugman, Russel, Klassmann, 
& Sloetjes, 2006), and trials containing clearly discernable movements 
were marked and removed prior to analysis.
2.1.7 | Analyses
Source localization
Two inverse methods were used to estimate the sources of the meas-
ured magnetic fields: (a) equivalent current dipole (ECD) modeling (SI 
Methods, Section 1) and (b) exact low- 
resolution electromagnetic to-
mography (eLORETA), a distributed linear inverse method (Pascual- 
Marqui, 2007). SI Methods, Sections 2.1–2.3 contain details about 
the eLORETA source imaging and single- 
subject statistics. The results 
from eLORETA were expected to be compatible with and to extend 
the results of the ECD analyses.
Group analyses of eLORETA source estimates
The eLORETA time series consists of three waveforms per voxel cor-
responding to the amplitudes of the three dipole components in the x, y, 
and z directions as a function of time. Statistical mapping using Hotelling’s 
T2 tests of these waveforms provided p- 
maps for each individual sub-
ject (SI Methods, Section 2.3). Two types of group level analyses were 
applied to the p- 
maps: (a) subject consistency maps, which determine 
the number of subjects that surpassed a particular p- 
value threshold 
(SI Methods, Section 2.4), and (b) spatiotemporal subject partial con-
junction (st- 
sPC) group analysis, an advanced and robust alternative to 
mixed/random effect analysis that determines the minimum number 
of subjects with significant activation under FDR control (Benjamini & 
Heller, 2008; Heller, Golland, Malach, & Benjamini, 2007), for details and 
motivation see S1 Methods, Section 2.5.
Software
Analyses were performed using in- 
house MATLAB software, except 
for: (a) tSSS and head movement compensation, which were carried 
out with MaxFilter (Elekta Oy, Helsinki, Finland), (b) ECD analyses, 
which was carried out with MNE (Gramfort et al., 2014), and (c) MRI 
cortical and subcortical segmentation, which was done with Freesurfer 
(Destrieux, Fischl, Dale, & Halgren, 2010).
2.2 | Results and discussion
Figure 2 shows the sensor- 
level grand average somatosensory evoked 
fields following hand and foot tactile stimulation. As predicted, the 
responses to hand tactile stimulation were apparent in more lateral 
sensors compared to those for foot tactile stimulation, which were 
concentrated around the midline. For both conditions, the grand av-
erage waveforms exhibited two large deflections within 400 ms of 
touch onset: An earlier peak around 100 ms followed by a later peak 
around 250 ms. Dipolar field patterns were observed during these 
early and late responses for both hand and foot tactile stimulation 
(see Figure S1).
The results of the ECD analyses are summarized in Table 1, 
which shows the localization results in the head coordinate system. 
Consistent with the prediction of a neural somatotopic organiza-
tion, the source of the early hand response was more lateral (to 
FIGURE 2 Whole- 
head view of 
gradiometers showing grand average 
waveforms for hand (red) and foot (black) 
tactile stimulus conditions in Experiment 
1. An expanded view shows individual 
sensors proximal to the hand (top) and 
foot (bottom) areas of the contralateral 
somatosensory cortex. Waveforms are 
shown from −100 to 400 ms relative to 
touch onset. In presenting grand averages 
for visual inspection, it should be noted 
that there was variation in latencies across 
infants
 6 of 13  |    
MELTZOFF ET aL.
the left) than the source of the early foot response (difference = 
19 mm); for the late responses, the source of the hand response 
was also more lateral (difference = 20 mm). We tested the differ-
ence between the means for the hand and the foot conditions using 
a permutation test approach, which is increasingly being used in 
neuroscience (Ernst, 2004; Maris, 2012); it has minimal statistical 
assumptions and is appropriate for the type of data obtained in this 
experiment. We ran 10,000 random permutations of the observed 
data in a Monte Carlo simulation. The results showed a significant 
difference for both the early measurement, p = .024, and the late 
measurement, p = .0018.
The eLORETA analyses yielded results compatible with those 
found with the ECD modeling. Current density estimates showed 
 
neural activity in hand and foot regions within contralateral S1 (BA3, 
1, 2), and also in parietal (BA5, 7) and frontal (BA4, 6) areas. Statistical 
mapping of these current density estimates, using Hotelling’s T2 tests, 
provided single- 
subject p- 
maps. The maps revealed both inter- 
subject 
similarities and differences in their precise spatial distribution and la-
tency. Two types of group- 
level analyses were applied to the p- 
maps.
First, we counted, at each voxel, the number of infants meeting 
a p < 10−6 threshold at any time point within the 0–400 ms window 
from touch onset. These subject consistency maps showed that 14/14 
infants in the hand condition had activation of the contralateral S1 
hand region in response to hand touch, and 13/14 infants in the foot 
condition had activation of the foot region in response to foot touch 
(Figure 3). Note that our approach does not restrict the analysis to pre-
determined regions of interest (ROIs). Rather the neural regions that 
were activated by touch of hand and foot automatically emerged from 
the spatial intersection where many subjects showed activity that 
passed the 10−6 threshold at the same voxel. Thus, these empirically 
determined regions or “hot spots” (Figure 3) naturally define the focus 
of activation in response to hand and foot touch without employing 
predetermined ROIs. The obtained spatial pattern of activated voxels 
accords with the hand and foot regions previously reported in MRI/
fMRI studies (Arichi et al., 2010; Keysers et al., 2010; Ulmer, 2013; 
Williams et al., 2015), hence from this point on we employ the short-
hand nomenclature of infant “hand and foot regions”.
The consistency maps provide informative and intuitive summaries 
of the single- 
subject statistics across a temporal window. Although the 
analyses used a conservative 10−6 threshold, they were not formally 
corrected for multiple hypotheses. Therefore, additional group analy-
ses using spatiotemporal subject partial conjunction (st- 
sPC) mapping 
were undertaken to determine the minimum number of subjects with 
significant activation at each voxel and time point (millisecond) under 
false discovery rate (FDR) control (SI Methods, Section 2.5). Figure 4 
shows the resulting st- 
sPC maps at four latencies.
TABLE 1 Latency, coordinates, and goodness- 
of- 
fit (GOF) values 
of the dipoles for the early and late hand and foot responses
Hand
Foot
M 
SD
M 
SD
Early
Latency (ms)
93
(14)
102
(17)
x (mm)
−31.4
(16.1)
−12.8
(21.6)
y (mm)
9.9
(32.1)
12.9
(19.3)
z (mm)
60.2
(17.2)
68.8
(19.9)
GOF (%)
82.7
(11.9)
89.6
(7.4)
Late
Latency (ms)
259
(50)
236
(52)
x (mm)
−30.7
(17.3)
−10.5
(18.5)
y (mm)
15.6
(20.5)
17.0
(11.7)
z (mm)
63.6
(16.3)
77.7
(13.0)
GOF (%)
92.7
(3.6)
89.8
(5.5)
Note. All results shown as mean (SD). The x- 
axis runs from left to right 
(negative towards left), the y- 
axis from posterior to anterior, and the z- 
axis 
from inferior to superior. The origin was approximately at the middle point 
between two ears. Corresponding magnetic field patterns for the four la-
tencies shown are provided in Supporting Information, Figure S1.
FIGURE 3 Experiment 1: (a) hand and (b) foot touch subject consistency maps showing, at each voxel, the number of infants (out of 14) 
meeting the p < 10−6 threshold at any time point within the 400 ms window following tactile stimulus onset. The maps are visualized with a 
lower bound of 11 subjects
     |  7 of 13
MELTZOFF ET aL.
As shown, 11/14 infants in the hand condition had significant ac-
tivation in the expected contralateral S1 (BA3, 1, 2) hand region in 
response to hand touch; and similarly, infants in the foot condition 
had significant activation in the contralateral foot region in response 
to foot touch. We also found significant activation in contralateral 
BA5, 7, intraparietal sulcus (IPS), inferior parietal lobule (IPL), supple-
mentary motor area (SMA) and inferior frontal sulcus (IFS). Earlier S1 
activity, prior to 90 ms, was also significant, but for a smaller subset of 
infants (SI, Figure S2). Note that the partial conjunction analyses, per-
formed at every millisecond post- 
stimulus, were robustly corrected for 
multiple hypotheses across time and space. Using this approach, even 
a partial conjunction value of one means that at least one subject had a 
significant effect not attributable to chance, which allows the rejection 
of the “global null hypothesis” that no subject had a significant effect 
(Friston, Penny, & Glaser, 2005; Nichols, Brett, Andersson, Wager, & 
Poline, 2005). This conjunction approach is very useful in neuroscience 
studies using participants who are expected to have large inter- 
subject 
variation, such as infants. Using the partial conjunction approach, we 
can validly infer that at least 11 individual cases showed significant 
activity in the hand region at a given time point (voxel and ms accu-
racy) when the hand was touched (and similarly for foot).
3 | EXPERIMENT 2: INFANT BRAIN 
RESPONSES TO OBSERVED TOUCH
In Experiment 2 we used MEG to explore infant cortical regions ac-
tivated by visual perception of someone else’s body being touched. 
Seven- 
month- 
old infants saw videos of an adult’s right hand or foot 
being touched by a wooden rod (Figure 1B). None of the infants had 
participated in Experiment 1.
The first experiment helped motivate Experiment 2 in three respects. 
First, it showed that our MEG methods could be used to examine cortical 
responses to somatosensory stimulation in awake infants. Previous in-
fant MEG studies involving touch were limited to sleeping infants, which 
has the advantage of decreased movement. However, sleeping infants 
are not suitable for testing how the brain processes observed touch, be-
cause infants need to be awake to see the tactile event. Second, the first 
experiment served to localize brain areas within primary somatosensory 
cortex that activate in response to touch. The results documented re-
gions within S1 that can plausibly be labeled as hand and foot regions in 
7- 
month- 
old infants. Prior EEG studies were suggestive but insufficient 
to localize the source of responses to touch in the infant brain. Third, the 
statistical approaches used in Experiment 1 (consistency maps and partial 
conjunction maps) revealed both individual variation and also measurable 
overlap and consistency across infants. We could therefore apply these 
statistical approaches, which are designed to be sensitive to inter- 
subject 
variation, to the case of observed touch.
3.1 | Methods
3.1.1 | Participants
The participants were awake and alert 7- 
month- 
old infants tested in a 
narrow age window (32 weeks ± 14 days old). Infants were recruited 
in the same way as in Experiment 1 and met the same predetermined 
criteria about normal birth weight, gestational age, and healthy devel-
opment. A total of 41 infants began MEG testing. Of these, two were 
excluded for technical issues and 17 were excluded for an insufficient 
number of trials (< 20) in which the infant was still and attentive to the 
movies (see Rejection and averaging, below). This left 22 infants who 
contributed analyzable data (Mage = 32.3 weeks, SD = 0.7, 16 males). 
For these 22 participants, 16 infants had a sufficient number of ac-
cepted trials (≥ 20) for only one of the effectors (hand or foot), and six 
other infants had a sufficient number of accepted trials for both ef-
fectors (hand and foot). Therefore, the analysis is based on data from 
14 infants in the hand condition and 14 infants in the foot condition.
3.1.2 | Stimuli
The visual stimuli were digital video recordings of an adult’s right 
hand or right foot being contacted by a wooden rod (10 mm diameter; 
FIGURE 4 Experiment 1: Spatiotemporal subject partial 
conjunction (st- 
sPC) maps showing infant responses to tactile 
stimulation of hand (column a) and foot (column b). Maps are 
visualized on inflated cortical surfaces, displaying significant results 
for the two strongest hypotheses, H0
10/14 and H0
11/14 (i.e., at least 
10 or 11 of the 14 subjects had a real effect, with FDR < 0.05), at 
example latencies after touch onset. Recurrent patterns of activation 
were observed in the contralateral S1 (BA3, 1, 2) hand and foot 
regions in response to hand and foot touch, respectively, and also 
in parietal (BA5, 7, IPS, IPL) and frontal (BA4, 6, SMA, IFS) areas. SI 
Movies 1 and 2 provide dynamic visualizations of these st- 
sPC maps
 8 of 13  |    
MELTZOFF ET aL.
Figure 1B). The videos began with a static hand or foot. A rod entered 
from the right or left side of the frame, made contact with the dorsal 
surface of the hand or foot, and was withdrawn to exit the frame. In 
an effort to keep infants engaged, seven different video clips were 
created for each condition (hand stimuli and foot stimuli). These video 
clips varied in whether the hand or foot was female or male, whether 
it was presented in a first- 
 or third- 
person perspective, and the color 
of the rod (red, blue, yellow, white or black) that appeared from the 
right or left side of the frame. All videos were 2000 ms in duration 
with the rod contacting the hand or foot at 1100 ms.
3.1.3 | Experimental procedure
All infants were fitted with the nylon cap with embedded HPI coils 
following the procedures described in Experiment 1. Infants were then 
taken into the MSR, and appropriately situated under the MEG sensor 
array in the adjustable, padded infant seat. The visual stimuli were pre-
sented with a Digital Light Processor projector (model PT- 
DW7000U) 
onto a back- 
projection screen placed 85 cm in front of the infant. The 
size of the stimulus frame on the screen was 36 × 64 cm. Each infant 
was first shown videos of either hand or foot stimulation, and if they 
remained still and attentive to the videos after approximately 60 tri-
als of one condition (hand or foot), the videos were switched to the 
other condition. The videos were presented in blocks of three trials. 
In a single block, one of the seven different hand (or foot) videos was 
presented three times in succession. Each block was preceded by an 
animation of colored patterns with accompanying sound effects to re-
tain or attract the infant’s visual attention. The offset of this attention 
grabber was controlled by an experimenter who was inside the MSR 
and observing the infants on a monitor, which was out of sight of the 
child. When the infant was attending to the stimulus screen, the ex-
perimenter advanced the visual presentation to the next block of three 
video trials. The MEG sessions lasted approximately 10 min, depend-
ing on the number of trials completed.
3.1.4 | MEG measurements, preprocessing, 
rejection, and averaging
These methods were the same as Experiment 1, save for two modifi-
cations due to the use of visual stimuli. The preprocessed data were 
epoched (−250 to 1750 ms) relative to the onset of the video. An ad-
ditional epoch rejection criterion was added. In addition to excluding 
trials containing infant movement, the video recordings of the infants 
were examined offline for infant attention to the visual stimulus; and 
trials were rejected if the infant looked away from the screen during 
the duration of the 2000 ms video. The mean number of epochs re-
tained after rejection for the observed hand and foot touch conditions 
were 50.6 (SD = 21.3) and 44.6 (SD = 15.4), respectively.
3.2 | Results
Observed touch of the hand and foot resulted in ERFs that were less 
clearly dipolar than the fields obtained in Experiment 1, and thus we 
were not able to reliably fit the data using ECD modeling (see also 
Pihko et al., 2010, for a similar report using adult MEG participants). 
This is possibly due to the more spatially distributed activation pat-
terns evoked by the visual stimulus, which included both visual and 
somatosensory areas. Nevertheless, with eLORETA source estimation 
we were able to localize the ERFs to areas thought to be involved in 
body perception. Statistical mapping of these source estimates, using 
Hotelling’s T2 tests, provided single- 
subject p- 
maps. Following the ap-
proach in Experiment 1, two types of group- 
level analyses were ap-
plied to the p- 
maps.
First, we constructed consistency maps by counting the number 
of infants at each voxel that exceeded a statistical threshold of p < 
.001 at any time point within the 400 ms time window following the 
contact of the rod with the hand or foot (i.e. 1100–1500 ms). As ex-
pected, the consistency maps (Figure 5) showed bilateral activation of 
the occipital lobe. Furthermore, they showed consistent activation in 
the somatosensory cortices and some degree of somatotopy: 11/14 
infants in the hand touch condition and 8/14 infants in the foot touch 
condition surpassed threshold in hand and foot somatosensory re-
gions, respectively.
Next, we performed spatiotemporal subject partial conjunction (st- 
sPC) mapping under FDR control to assess responses at each voxel and 
ms (SI, Figure S3). The pattern of activation was compatible with that 
shown in Figure 5; however, as expected, this analysis showed fewer 
infants with significant activation in somatosensory areas in response 
to observed touch than in response to felt touch in Experiment 1. 
Nonetheless, the results of the st- 
sPC mapping showed significant acti-
vation in bilateral somatosensory regions in S1 (BA3, 1, 2) and other pa-
rietal areas (S2, BA5 and 7) which overlap with similar regions activated 
in Experiment 1. These analyses also revealed activation in: (a) early 
visual areas (e.g., V1, V2, V3a); (b) areas that may correspond to the 
adult extrastriate body area (EBA) and fusiform body area (FBA), which 
are thought to be multimodal areas involved in visual body processing 
and haptic perception; (c) the superior temporal sulcus (STS), an area 
involved in action perception including its social dimensions; (d) the 
temporoparietal junction (TPJ), an area involved in self–other distinc-
tion; and (e) the lateral occipital complex (LOC), involved in visual object 
recognition, and the human middle temporal region (hMT+) involved in 
motion processing, probably due to the moving rod (Figure S4).
Lastly, we also examined infant brain oscillations during observed 
touch. We focused on the infant beta band because previous adult 
studies have implicated beta band oscillations in cognitive processes 
related to touch (Engel & Fries, 2010; van Ede, Jensen, & Maris, 2010). 
The source event- 
related spectral perturbation (ERSP) of the infant beta 
band (12–18 Hz) was estimated (Makeig, 1993; Pfurtscheller & Lopes 
da Silva, 1999). Statistical analyses of the ERSP were performed using 
spatiotemporal threshold- 
free cluster enhancement (TFCE) with family- 
wise error rate (FWER) correction, p < .05 (see SI Methods, Section 2.6). 
As shown in Figure 6, observed hand touch significantly increased beta 
band power relative to the pre- 
stimulus baseline in the hand region of 
S1 (BA3, 1, 2), and in S2, EBA, FBA, and other visual and parietal cortical 
areas. Observed foot touch significantly increased beta band power in 
the foot region of S1 (BA3, 1, 2) and also in the cingulate cortex.
     |  9 of 13
MELTZOFF ET aL.
4 | GENERAL DISCUSSION
The current experiments used MEG to investigate cortical responses 
to felt and observed touch in 7- 
month- 
old human infants. This in-
fant work addressed two novel questions. First, what is the specific 
pattern of brain activation when awake infants are touched on their 
hands and feet? Current knowledge of infant brain responses to tac-
tile stimulation of multiple body parts is based primarily on sensor- 
level EEG studies, which do not provide information about the 
sources of activity in the infant brain. Second, what spatiotemporal 
 
pattern of activation is present in the infant brain during the ob-
servation of another person’s body being touched, in the absence 
of tactile stimulation to the self? This has previously been studied 
in adults and older children but not in infants. Taken together, the 
results of the two experiments inform theorizing on the develop-
ment of body representations, including the connections between 
the body of self and the bodies of others.
Experiment 1 showed that punctate touch to the hand and foot 
activates infant somatosensory cortex in a somatotopic manner. 
The ECD analyses localized activity approximately 19 mm more lat-
eral in response to the touch of the infant’s hand compared to the 
infant’s foot; and conjunction analyses of the eLORETA source esti-
mates mapped activity to the contralateral S1 (BA3, 1, 2) hand and 
foot regions, respectively. A significant contralateral S1 response was 
apparent in 11 of 14 infants by 90 ms (hand) and 103 ms (foot), with 
some infants showing responses at earlier latencies. We also observed 
that the spatiotemporal source patterns in somatosensory cortex ex-
hibited waves of activity that started focally in the S1 hand or foot 
area, and then spread to neighboring regions, often returning to where 
they originated and then reactivating recurrently, with waves generally 
spreading further at later latencies (Figure 3). Related patterns have 
also been reported in animal studies utilizing voltage- 
sensitive dye im-
aging (Wester & Contreras, 2012; Wu, Huang, & Zhang, 2008).
The results of Experiment 1 serve to inform the interpretation 
of the results from Experiment 2, in which infants visually perceived 
the touch to others’ hands and feet. Consistent with the results of 
Experiment 1, significant activation occurred in the infant’s own 
somatosensory cortex in response to seeing a hand or foot being 
touched. The results also showed that observing hand and foot touch 
resulted in significant increases of beta- 
band power in S1 hand and 
foot regions, respectively (Figure 6). Previous studies with adults 
showed that modulation of beta- 
band oscillations is implicated in the 
processing of tactile stimuli (Engel & Fries, 2010; Gardner & Martin, 
2000; Linkenkaer- 
Hansen, Nikulin, Palva, Ilmoniemi, & Palva, 2004; 
van Ede et al., 2010).1
Taken together, the results of Experiment 2 provide evidence for 
activation of somatosensory cortex during infants’ viewing of touch 
FIGURE 6 Experiment 2: Spatiotemporal threshold- 
free cluster 
enhancement (TFCE) statistical maps showing increases in infant beta 
band (12–18 Hz) power relative to the pre- 
stimulus baseline, that is, 
the event- 
related spectral perturbation (ERSP) for (a) observed hand 
touch and (b) observed foot touch. Maps are thresholded at the TFCE 
value corresponding to p < .05, after family- 
wise error rate (FWER) 
correction for multiple hypotheses. SI Movies 5 and 6 provide 
dynamic visualizations of these TFCE maps
FIGURE 5 Experiment 2: (a) Observed hand touch and (b) observed foot touch subject consistency maps showing, at each voxel, the number 
of infants (out of 14) meeting the p < .001 threshold at any time point within the 400 ms time window following the rod touching the hand (or 
foot) in the video stimulus. The maps are visualized with a lower bound of eight subjects
 10 of 13  |    
MELTZOFF ET aL.
to another person’s body. Three statistical approaches support this 
conclusion (consistency maps, partial conjunction, and threshold- 
free 
cluster enhancement). It is noteworthy that the spatial distribution of 
the results obtained in response to felt touch (Figure 4) and observed 
touch (Figure 6) show a great deal of overlap. This suggests that some 
shared anatomical regions in human infants are activated whether 
touch of the body is tactilely or visually perceived, which is compat-
ible with cognitive neuroscience work done with human adults (e.g., 
Keysers et al., 2010; Pihko et al., 2010).
It is notable that activation of somatosensory cortex for observed 
touch (Experiment 2) occurred in fewer infants than for felt touch 
(Experiment 1). A weaker somatosensory response to observed 
touch has also been reported in adult subjects (Pihko et al., 2010), 
for whom the source strength for observing someone else being 
touched was ten times weaker than that to felt touch. Reflecting 
further on the difference between felt and observed touch, there is a 
“labeled line” (direct pathway) (Gardner & Martin, 2000) connecting 
tactile stimulation of patches of skin to the thalamus and S1. Thus, 
felt touch is registered at a basic level, whereas observed touch is 
indirect and requires the infant to make perceptual- 
cognitive in-
ferences related to body- 
part identification. In the visual modality, 
infants might, at least on first encounter with the movie, register a 
“limb- 
like” body part being touched rather than a clearly identified 
hand versus foot. The visual stimuli were two- 
dimensional displays 
of stationary body parts being touched. It would be interesting to 
examine whether infant responses to observed touch are enhanced 
and more clearly differentiated if infants: (a) are shown a live three- 
dimensional body being touched or (b) are shown canonical actions 
of the body part (e.g., a grasping act of the hand) prior to seeing it 
touched, as a way of assisting infants in visual identification of the 
specific body part.
In Experiment 2, viewing a video of another person’s body being 
touched resulted in activation in early visual regions, with further ac-
tivity in areas thought to be involved in multisensory body and self–
other processing. Specifically, observation of touch was associated 
with activation in areas corresponding to the EBA, FBA, STS, and TPJ. 
Previous infant work has used near- 
infrared spectroscopy to broadly 
examine temporal cortex responses to the biological motion of differ-
ent body parts (Lloyd- 
Fox, Blasi, Everdell, Elwell, & Johnson, 2011), 
but to our knowledge, our results are the first to suggest EBA and 
FBA responses to seen body parts in infants. The functional proper-
ties of these regions have been studied with fMRI in older children 
(Peelen, Glaser, Vuilleumier, & Eliez, 2009; Ross, de Gelder, Crabbe, 
& Grosbras, 2014) and adults (Lingnau & Downing, 2015; Peelen & 
Downing, 2007; Taylor & Downing, 2011). Remaining to be tested 
is the degree to which these areas in the infant brain respond selec-
tively to body parts versus similar objects, as assessed in adult subjects 
(Peelen & Downing, 2007).2
Behavioral studies have documented that human infants can vi-
sually identify body parts (Bhatt, Hock, White, Jubran, & Galati, 2016; 
Meltzoff, 1988; Meltzoff & Moore, 1997). Notably, human infants 
can imitate specific bodily acts they see others perform, including 
hand gestures (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977; Nagy, Pal, & Orvos, 2014; 
Piaget, 1962). In order to imitate with fidelity, infants must map the 
effector they see the adult use to the corresponding effector on their 
own body and then perform the same movement with that effector. 
Theoretical models of infant imitation hypothesize that “organ identi-
fication” (Meltzoff & Moore, 1997) is an early step in achieving imita-
tion. Work with 14- 
month- 
old infants provided initial insights into the 
neural correlates of this process of organ identification by showing a 
coarse somatotopic pattern of infant EEG responses during the ob-
servation of hand and foot actions (Marshall et al., 2013; Saby et al., 
2013). By using MEG to conduct fine- 
grained analyses of both the 
spatial and temporal dynamics of infant brain responses to felt and 
observed touch, the current work with younger infants provides new 
insights into the mechanisms involved in organ identification.3
The current work raises fundamental questions concerning the 
connections between the bodies of self and other. One possibility 
is that infants first learn an exclusively visual category for hands. A 
different possibility is that this “hand category” is multimodally spec-
ified, such that the hands of self and other share a common repre-
sentation supporting the identification of “hand” across variations in 
size, visual perspective, texture, and even modality of input. Infants 
in the first half- 
year of life engage in intense visual examination of 
their own hands, termed “hand regard”. It is unknown whether this 
kind of visual input is necessary for the ontogenesis of selectivity in 
neural regions that respond to seen hands, or whether such neural 
selectivity predates this visual experience. Pre- 
existing neural selec-
tivity could trigger infant hand regard—attracting infants’ attention to 
hands, which would in turn provide visual input and engender more 
fine- 
tuned selectivity.
Future work could address these developmental questions by: (a) 
testing younger infants in tactile and visual conditions similar to those 
used here, (b) exploring how neural body maps change with age and 
experience (e.g., before/after the onset of infant visual hand regard), 
and (c) examining neural representations of body parts beyond the 
hands and feet—especially those, such as one’s own lips, that can be 
seen on other people but are invisible on one’s own body.
From the viewpoint of developmental cognitive neuroscience, fu-
ture work could: (a) attempt to further differentiate which particular 
subareas within primary somatosensory cortex (BA3, 1, and 2) are 
most involved in infant responses to felt and observed touch, (b) im-
prove infant data acquisition and analysis approaches to further cope 
with the large inter- 
individual variations in infant brain responses, and 
(c) explore the temporal sequence and causal relations among brain 
regions activated when visually perceiving someone else’s body being 
touched (e.g., neural circuits linking early visual areas to brain regions 
involved in body- 
part recognition, self–other correspondences, and 
vicarious touch).
The current work also opens the possibility of testing infants longi-
tudinally while combining infant MEG and behavioral tests. Such work 
might shed light on how human infants so rapidly and effortlessly de-
velop interpersonal skills such as high- 
fidelity bodily imitation and the 
attribution of action goals and intentions to others. These capacities 
may build, at least in part, on infant neural representations that map 
equivalences between the bodies of self and other.
     |  11 of 13
MELTZOFF ET aL.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Supported by NSF grants SMA- 
1540619 (ANM) and BCS- 
1460889 
(PJM). We thank P. Kuhl and T. Imada for helpful comments and M. 
Clarke, M. Reilly, and R. Brooks for assistance.
ENDNOTES
1 Increases in beta- 
band power have been reported in other studies in 
which participants can predict regular outcomes of events (e.g., Engel 
& Fries, 2010; Kilavik, Zaepffel, Brovelli, MacKay, & Riehle, 2013). One 
speculative possibility is that the beta increase we observed may be 
attributable to infants’ predictions about the visual events. Because the 
rod’s touch on the hand (or foot) can be predicted at the endpoint of 
the seen trajectory of movement, there is an expected hand (or foot) 
event. A different possibility is that observed touch induces movements 
in the infant’s corresponding limb, which is reflected in changes in beta. 
Weighing against the latter view is that epochs with clearly discernible 
movements were rejected; however, video review and epoch rejection 
would not be able to completely rule out very subtle movements (or 
invisible motor intentions).
2 A comprehensive exploration would involve the presentation of static body 
parts, moving body parts, similarly shaped objects, and the presence/ab-
sence of the moving rod touching these entities.
3 Organ identification has been investigated in behavioral studies of in-
fant imitation. For example, when an infant sees an adult touching a 
box with his head, infants imitate by using their own heads and not 
their hands (Király, Csibra, & Gergely, 2013; Meltzoff, 1988). Such 
body- 
part identification allows infants to imitate specific bodily acts 
with high fidelity, and not simply to emulate more general aspects of 
what they see others do. Imitating with the corresponding body part is 
relevant for learning culturally specific customs, rituals, and manner-
isms—for which it is often important to imitate in the exact right way 
(e.g., Legare, Wen, Herrmann, & Whitehouse, 2015).
ORCID
Andrew N. Meltzoff 
 http:/
/orcid.org/0000-0001-8683-0547 
REFERENCES
Arichi, T., Moraux, A., Melendez, A., Doria, V., Groppo, M., & Merchant, N., 
… Edwards, A.D. (2010). Somatosensory cortical activation identified by 
functional MRI in preterm and term infants. NeuroImage, 49, 2063–2071.
Benjamini, Y., & Heller, R. (2008). Screening for partial conjunction hypoth-
eses. Biometrics, 64, 1215–1222.
Bhatt, R.S., Hock, A., White, H., Jubran, R., & Galati, A. (2016). The devel-
opment of body structure knowledge in infancy. Child Development 
Perspectives, 10, 45–52.
Buonomano, D.V., & Merzenich, M.M. (1998). Cortical plasticity: From syn-
apses to maps. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 21, 149–186.
Cuevas, K., Cannon, E.N., Yoo, K., & Fox, N.A. (2014). The infant EEG 
mu rhythm: Methodological considerations and best practices. 
Developmental Review, 34, 26–43.
de Klerk, C.C.J.M., Johnson, M.H., & Southgate, V. (2015). An EEG study on 
the somatotopic organisation of sensorimotor cortex activation during 
action execution and observation in infancy. Developmental Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 15, 1–10.
Destrieux, C., Fischl, B., Dale, A., & Halgren, E. (2010). Automatic parcella-
tion of human cortical gyri and sulci using standard anatomical nomen-
clature. NeuroImage, 53, 1–15.
Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., & Taub, E. (1995). 
Increased cortical representation of the fingers of the left hand in string 
players. Science, 270, 305–307.
Engel, A.K., & Fries, P. (2010). Beta- 
band oscillations—Signalling the status 
quo? Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 20, 156–165.
Ernst, M.D. (2004). Permutation methods: A basis for exact inference. 
Statistical Science, 19, 676–685.
Ferjan Ramírez, N., Ramírez, R.R., Clarke, M., Taulu, S., & Kuhl, P.K. (2017). 
Speech discrimination in 11- 
month- 
old bilingual and monolingual in-
fants: A magnetoencephalography study. Developmental Science, 20, 
e12427.
Friston, K.J., Penny, W.D., & Glaser, D.E. (2005). Conjunction revisited. 
NeuroImage, 25, 661–667.
Gardner, E.P., & Martin, J.H. (2000). Coding of sensory information. In E.R. 
Kandel, J.H. Schwartz, & T.M. Jessell (Eds.), Principles of neural science 
(4th edn., pp. 411–429). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gillmeister, H., Bowling, N., Rigato, S., & Banissy, M.J. (2017). Inter- 
individual differences in vicarious tactile perception: A view across the 
lifespan in typical and atypical populations. Multisensory Research, 30, 
485–508.
Gondo, K., Tobimatsu, S., Kira, R., Tokunaga, Y., Yamamoto, T., & Hara, T. 
(2001). A magnetoencephalographic study on development of the so-
matosensory cortex in infants. NeuroReport, 12, 3227–3231.
Gramfort, A., Luessi, M., Larson, E., Engemann, D.A., Strohmeier, D., & 
Brodbeck, C., … Hämäläinen, M.S. (2014). MNE software for processing 
MEG and EEG data. NeuroImage, 86, 446–460.
Hahamy, A., Macdonald, S.N., van den Heiligenberg, F., Kieliba, P., Emir, U., 
& Malach, R., … Makin, T.R. (2017). Representation of multiple body 
parts in the missing- 
hand territory of congenital one- 
handers. Current 
Biology, 27, 1350–1355.
Heller, R., Golland, Y., Malach, R., & Benjamini, Y. (2007). Conjunction group 
analysis: An alternative to mixed/random effect analysis. NeuroImage, 
37, 1178–1185.
Kaas, J.H. (1991). Plasticity of sensory and motor maps in adult mammals. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 14, 137–167.
Kaas, J.H. (1997). Topographic maps are fundamental to sensory process-
ing. Brain Research Bulletin, 44, 107–112.
Kaas, J.H., Jain, N., & Qi, H.-X. (2002). The organization of the somatosen-
sory system in primates. In R.J. Nelson (Ed.), The somatosensory system: 
Deciphering the brain’s own body image (pp. 1–25). New York: CRC.
Keysers, C., Kaas, J.H., & Gazzola, V. (2010). Somatosensation in social per-
ception. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 417–428.
Kilavik, B.E., Zaepffel, M., Brovelli, A., Mackay, W.A., & Riehle, A. (2013). The 
ups and downs of beta oscillations in sensorimotor cortex. Experimental 
Neurology, 245, 15–26.
Király, I., Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2013). Beyond rational imitation: 
Learning arbitrary means actions from communicative demonstrations. 
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 116, 471–486.
Kuhl, P.K., Ramírez, R.R., Bosseler, A., Lin, J.-F.L., & Imada, T. (2014). Infants’ 
brain responses to speech suggest analysis by synthesis. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 111, 11238–11245.
Lankinen, K., Smeds, E., Tikka, P., Pihko, E., Hari, R., & Koskinen, M. (2016). 
Haptic contents of a movie dynamically engage the spectator’s senso-
rimotor cortex. Human Brain Mapping, 37, 4061–4068.
Legare, C.H., Wen, N.J., Herrmann, P.A., & Whitehouse, H. (2015). Imitative 
flexibility and the development of cultural learning. Cognition, 142, 
351–361.
Lingnau, A., & Downing, P.E. (2015). The lateral occipitotemporal cortex in 
action. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19, 268–277.
Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikulin, V.V., Palva, S., Ilmoniemi, R.J., & Palva, J.M. 
(2004). Prestimulus oscillations enhance psychophysical performance 
in humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 10186–10190.
Lloyd-Fox, S., Blasi, A., Everdell, N., Elwell, C.E., & Johnson, M.H. (2011). 
Selective cortical mapping of biological motion processing in young in-
fants. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 2521–2532.
 12 of 13  |    
MELTZOFF ET aL.
Makeig, S. (1993). Auditory event- 
related dynamics of the EEG spectrum 
and effects of exposure to tones. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 86, 283–293.
Maris, E. (2012). Statistical testing in electrophysiological studies. 
Psychophysiology, 49, 549–565.
Marshall, P.J., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2014). Neural mirroring mechanisms and 
imitation in human infants. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 369, 20130620.
Marshall, P.J., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2015). Body maps in the infant brain. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 19, 499–505.
Marshall, P.J., Saby, J.N., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2013). Imitation and the devel-
oping social brain: Infants’ somatotopic EEG patterns for acts of self 
and other. International Journal of Psychological Research, 6, 22–29.
Medvedovsky, M., Taulu, S., Bikmullina, R., & Paetau, R. (2007). Artifact and 
head movement compensation in MEG. Neurology, Neurophysiology and 
Neuroscience, 4.
Meltzoff, A.N. (1988). Infant imitation after a 1- 
week delay: Long- 
term 
memory for novel acts and multiple stimuli. Developmental Psychology, 
24, 470–476.
Meltzoff, A.N. (2013). Origins of social cognition: Bidirectional self-other 
mapping and the “Like-Me” hypothesis. In M.R. Banaji & S.A. Gelman 
(Eds.), Navigating the social world: What infants, children, and other spe-
cies can teach us (pp. 139–144). New York: Oxford University Press.
Meltzoff, A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1977). Imitation of facial and manual ges-
tures by human neonates. Science, 198, 75–78.
Meltzoff, A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1997). Explaining facial imitation: A theoret-
ical model. Early Development and Parenting, 6, 179–192.
Milh, M., Kaminska, A., Huon, C., Lapillonne, A., Ben-Ari, Y., & Khazipov, R. 
(2007). Rapid cortical oscillations and early motor activity in premature 
human neonate. Cerebral Cortex, 17, 1582–1594.
Nagy, E., Pal, A., & Orvos, H. (2014). Learning to imitate individual finger 
movements by the human neonate. Developmental Science, 17, 841–857.
Nevalainen, P., Lauronen, L., & Pihko, E. (2014). Development of human 
somatosensory cortical functions—what have we learned from magne-
toencephalography: A review. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 158.
Nichols, T., Brett, M., Andersson, J., Wager, T., & Poline, J.-B. (2005). Valid con-
junction inference with the minimum statistic. NeuroImage, 25, 653–660.
Pascual-Marqui, R.D. (2007). Discrete, 3D distributed, linear imaging meth-
ods of electric neuronal activity. Part 1: Exact, zero error localization. 
arXiv:0710.3341.
Peelen, M.V., & Downing, P.E. (2007). The neural basis of visual body per-
ception. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 636–648.
Peelen, M.V., Glaser, B., Vuilleumier, P., & Eliez, S. (2009). Differential de-
velopment of selectivity for faces and bodies in the fusiform gyrus. 
Developmental Science, 12, F16–F25.
Pfurtscheller, G., & Lopes da Silva, F.H. (1999). Event- 
related EEG/MEG 
synchronization and desynchronization: Basic principles. Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 110, 1842–1857.
Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood (C. Gattegno & F.M. 
Hodgson, Trans.). New York: Norton.
Pihko, E., Lauronen, L., Wikström, H., Taulu, S., Nurminen, J., Kivitie-Kallio, 
S., & Okada, Y. (2004). Somatosensory evoked potentials and mag-
netic fields elicited by tactile stimulation of the hand during active 
and quiet sleep in newborns. Clinical Neurophysiology, 115, 448–455.
Pihko, E., Nangini, C., Jousmäki, V., & Hari, R. (2010). Observing touch 
activates human primary somatosensory cortex. European Journal of 
Neuroscience, 31, 1836–1843.
Pihko, E., Nevalainen, P., Stephen, J., Okada, Y., & Lauronen, L. (2009). 
Maturation of somatosensory cortical processing from birth to adult-
hood revealed by magnetoencephalography. Clinical Neurophysiology, 
120, 1552–1561.
Remijn, G.B., Kikuchi, M., Shitamichi, K., Ueno, S., Yoshimura, Y., & Nagao, 
K., … Minabe, Y. (2014). Somatosensory evoked field in response to 
visuotactile stimulation in 3- 
 to 4- 
year- 
old children. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 8, 170.
Rigato, S., Banissy, M.J., Romanska, A., Thomas, R., van Velzen, J., & 
Bremner, A.J. (2017). Cortical signatures of vicarious tactile experi-
ence in four- 
month- 
old infants. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 
https:/
/doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2017.09.003
Rigato, S., Begum Ali, J., van Velzen, J., & Bremner, A.J. (2014). The neural 
basis of somatosensory remapping develops in human infancy. Current 
Biology, 24, 1222–1226.
Riquelme, I., & Montoya, P. (2010). Developmental changes in somato-
sensory processing in cerebral palsy and healthy individuals. Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 121, 1314–1320.
Rochat, P. (2009). Others in mind: Social origins of self-consciousness. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Ross, P.D., de Gelder, B., Crabbe, F., & Grosbras, M.-H. (2014). Body- 
selective areas in the visual cortex are less active in children than in 
adults. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 941.
Rushton, D.N., Rothwell, J.C., & Craggs, M.D. (1981). Gating of somato-
sensory evoked potentials during different kinds of movement in man. 
Brain, 104, 465–491.
Saby, J.N., Meltzoff, A.N., & Marshall, P.J. (2013). Infants’ somatotopic neu-
ral responses to seeing human actions: I’ve got you under my skin. PLoS 
ONE, 8, e77905.
Saby, J.N., Meltzoff, A.N., & Marshall, P.J. (2015). Neural body maps 
in human infants: Somatotopic responses to tactile stimulation in 
7- 
month- 
olds. NeuroImage, 118, 74–78.
Saby, J.N., Meltzoff, A.N., & Marshall, P.J. (2016). Beyond the N1: A review 
of late somatosensory evoked responses in human infants. International 
Journal of Psychophysiology, 110, 146–152.
Taulu, S., & Hari, R. (2009). Removal of magnetoencephalographic ar-
tifacts with temporal signal- 
space separation: Demonstration with 
single- 
trial auditory- 
evoked responses. Human Brain Mapping, 30, 
1524–1534.
Taulu, S., & Simola, J. (2006). Spatiotemporal signal space separation 
method for rejecting nearby interference in MEG measurements. 
Physics in Medicine and Biology, 51, 1759–1768.
Taulu, S., Simola, J., & Kajola, M. (2005). Applications of the signal 
space separation method. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 53, 
3359–3372.
Taylor, J.C., & Downing, P.E. (2011). Division of labor between lateral and 
ventral extrastriate representations of faces, bodies, and objects. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 4122–4137.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ulmer, S. (2013). Neuroanatomy and cortical landmarks. In S. Ulmer & O. 
Jansen (Eds.), fMRI: Basics and clinical applications (pp. 7–16). Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag.
Uusitalo, M.A., & Ilmoniemi, R.J. (1997). Signal- 
space projection method 
for separating MEG or EEG into components. Medical & Biological 
Engineering & Computing, 35, 135–140.
van Ede, F., Jensen, O., & Maris, E. (2010). Tactile expectation modu-
lates pre- 
stimulus β- 
band oscillations in human sensorimotor cortex. 
NeuroImage, 51, 867–876.
Wehner, D.T., Hämäläinen, M.S., Mody, M., & Ahlfors, S.P. (2008). Head 
movements of children in MEG: Quantification, effects on source esti-
mation, and compensation. NeuroImage, 40, 541–550.
Wester, J.C., & Contreras, D. (2012). Columnar interactions determine hor-
izontal propagation of recurrent network activity in neocortex. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 32, 5454–5471.
Williams, G., Fabrizi, L., Meek, J., Jackson, D., Tracey, I., & Robertson, N., … 
Fitzgerald, M. (2015). Functional magnetic resonance imaging can be 
used to explore tactile and nociceptive processing in the infant brain. 
Acta Paediatrica, 104, 158–166.
Wittenberg, P., Krugman, H., Russel, A., Klassmann, A., & Sloetjes, H. 
(2006). ELAN: A professional framework for multimodality research. 
Proceedings of the 5th international conference on language resources and 
evaluation (LREC 2006) (pp. 1556–1559). Genoa.
     |  13 of 13
MELTZOFF ET aL.
Wu, J.-Y., Huang, X., & Zhang, C. (2008). Propagating waves of activity in the 
neocortex: What they are, what they do. Neuroscientist, 14, 487–502.
Zhao, T.C., & Kuhl, P.K. (2016). Musical intervention enhances infants’ neu-
ral processing of temporal structure in music and speech. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 113, 5212–5217.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional Supporting Information may be found online in the sup-
porting information tab for this article.
How to cite this article: Meltzoff AN, Ramírez RR, Saby JN, 
Larson E, Taulu S, Marshall PJ. Infant brain responses to felt 
and observed touch of hands and feet: an MEG study. Dev Sci. 
2018;21:e12651. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12651
