 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
85
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
During CDC’s response to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus 
disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, U.S. and international 
public health decision-makers and stakeholders needed 
information early in the epidemic. This information included 
the number of Ebola cases that could be expected over time; 
the resources and personnel needed to respond adequately; 
and the impact of interventions, such as Ebola treatment units 
Modeling in Real Time During the Ebola Response
Martin I. Meltzer, PhD1
Scott Santibanez, MD1
Leah S. Fischer, PhD1
Toby L. Merlin, MD1
Bishwa B. Adhikari, PhD1
Charisma Y. Atkins, MPH1
Caresse Campbell, PhD2
Isaac Chun-Hai Fung, PhD1
Manoj Gambhir, PhD1
Thomas Gift, PhD3
Bradford Greening, PhD1
Weidong Gu, MD, PhD4
Evin U. Jacobson, PhD5
Emily B. Kahn, PhD1
Cristina Carias, PhD1
Lina Nerlander, MD5
Gabriel Rainisch, MPH1
Manjunath Shankar, MD, PhD1
Karen Wong, MD4
Michael L. Washington, PhD1
1Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
2Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
3Division of Sexually Transmitted Disease Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC
4Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
5Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention-Surveillance and Epidemiology, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC
Corresponding author: Martin I. Meltzer, Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
CDC. Telephone: 404-639-7778; E-mail: MMeltzer@cdc.gov.
Summary
To aid decision-making during CDC’s response to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC activated 
a Modeling Task Force to generate estimates on various topics related to the response in West Africa and the risk for importation of cases 
into the United States. Analysis of eight Ebola response modeling projects conducted during August 2014–July 2015 provided insight into 
the types of questions addressed by modeling, the impact of the estimates generated, and the difficulties encountered during the modeling. 
This time frame was selected to cover the three phases of the West African epidemic curve. Questions posed to the Modeling Task Force 
changed as the epidemic progressed. Initially, the task force was asked to estimate the number of cases that might occur if no interventions 
were implemented compared with cases that might occur if interventions were implemented; however, at the peak of the epidemic, the 
focus shifted to estimating resource needs for Ebola treatment units. Then, as the epidemic decelerated, requests for modeling changed to 
generating estimates of the potential number of sexually transmitted Ebola cases. Modeling to provide information for decision-making 
during the CDC Ebola response involved limited data, a short turnaround time, and difficulty communicating the modeling process, 
including assumptions and interpretation of results. Despite these challenges, modeling yielded estimates and projections that public health 
officials used to make key decisions regarding response strategy and resources required. The impact of modeling during the Ebola response 
demonstrates the usefulness of modeling in future responses, particularly in the early stages and when data are scarce. Future modeling 
can be enhanced by planning ahead for data needs and data sharing, and by open communication among modelers, scientists, and others 
to ensure that modeling and its limitations are more clearly understood. 
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
86 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(ETUs), community care centers (CCCs), and safe burials. On 
August 4, 2014, CDC activated a Modeling* Task Force (CDC 
Modeling) and incorporated the task force into its incident 
management structure.
Models were used at the outset of the Ebola response in 
early September 2014 to estimate the impact of the epidemic 
with and without intervention. These models indicated not 
only that public health agencies had the means to stop the 
epidemic by using existing tools and strategies but also that the 
international community needed to act quickly with sufficient 
resources to stop the spread of the epidemic. The simple 
models (1–3) used by CDC Modeling enabled decisions to 
be made quickly during the response. This report summarizes 
1) CDC Modeling’s role, accomplishments, and impact; 2) key 
issues, challenges, and lessons learned; and 3) suggestions for 
modeling in future responses.
Personnel conducting this assessment comprised both CDC 
Modeling staff and other CDC staff. All documents produced 
by CDC Modeling during August 4, 2014–July 13, 2015, 
were assessed: five publications, approximately 40 internal 
memoranda that included multiple versions documenting 
the modeling process, 1,000 technical consulting e-mails, 
and 30 presentations, as well as numerous meeting notes. 
In-depth after-action discussions with CDC Modeling staff 
aided understanding of how models were developed and used 
in the response, the difficulties encountered, and the impact of 
the models on decision making. Other assessments were the 
amount and type of data used (data requirements), how readily 
data were available, and the time available before response 
leadership needed preliminary results (turnaround time). Within 
the context of CDC’s Ebola response, “impact” referred to the 
use of models to provide information for the response and make 
decisions. Models associated with major projects that resulted 
in a publication, written report, or internal memorandum were 
categorized into 1 of 3 phases of the West African epidemic 
curve: 1) start and incidence acceleration, 2) peak and incidence 
deceleration, and 3) final phase and extinguishing (Figure). Eight 
reviewed projects resulted in either a publication or an internal, 
predecisional memorandum.
CDC Role, Accomplishments, 
and Impact
Start and Acceleration
Initial modeling questions concerned resource needs and thus 
predicted the number of Ebola cases that could be expected over 
time with and without isolation, treatment, and safe burials. 
These estimates enabled CDC Modeling to evaluate the impact 
that interventions, such as ETUs, CCCs, and safe burials, could 
have on the epidemic. On the basis of these questions and the 
knowledge available at the time about virus characteristics and 
transmission, CDC Modeling developed a simple Microsoft Excel 
spreadsheet–based model called EbolaResponse (4). This model 
included input values that could be easily changed (e.g., the number 
of Ebola patients placed in ETUs) and thus, could estimate potential 
outcomes if the disease remained unchecked and assess the relative 
impact of interventions. Because data from the field were limited, 
CDC Modeling calculated a correction factor for underreporting 
(4). In late August 2014, the correction for underreporting was 
estimated to be approximately 2.5; in other words, the true case 
count was 2.5 times greater than the reported case count.
By using data available through late August 2014, CDC 
Modeling estimated that 550,000 total reported Ebola cases could 
occur in Liberia and Sierra Leone (1.4 million when corrected for 
underreporting) by January 20, 2015, if no additional interventions 
or behavior changes occurred and if current parameters continued 
without change (4). Conversely, CDC Modeling predicted that 
transmission would decline substantially by mid-January 2015 if 
approximately 70% of Ebola patients were placed into ETUs or 
CCCs (or an equivalent) and if safe burials were conducted when 
needed. If this 70% goal could be reached, it would “bend the 
curve,” causing transmission to drop off substantially. If a large-
scale response was delayed, the projected number of cases at the 
epidemic’s peak most likely would more than double and thus 
require more resources to control (4).
Initial estimates from EbolaResponse were published in 
September 2014 (4), with scenarios predicting that each month 
of delayed response would cause approximately 3.1 times more 
cases. Perhaps the most important message contained in the report 
was that public health agencies and the international community 
needed to act quickly with sufficient resources to stop the epidemic. 
On the basis of this information and other factors, including the 
United Nations Ebola virus disease outbreak overview of needs 
and requirements document (5), CDC leadership and U.S. 
government officials recommended a rapid increase in aid for the 
Ebola response. International donors provided approximately U.S. 
$154.6 million to support Ebola response activities in West Africa, 
including approximately $71 million from the United States (5). 
By March 2015, 10 countries had supplied approximately U.S. 
* For practical purposes, modeling is divided into two broad categories: statistical 
modeling and mathematical modeling. Statistical modeling is used when analysts 
have all, or almost all, the data from a given population, in an identified time 
step and locale, needed to analyze potential differences over time, between 
subgroups, or both. For this modeling, analysts use accepted means of statistically 
testing hypotheses, such as the t test or regression statistical models. Usual results 
include causality between variables. Mathematical modeling is used when not all 
the data are available to answer a given question. Analysts then either use data 
collected from different populations, often at different points in time and locales, 
or make assumptions based on expert opinion. Using these “islands of data,” 
analysts then construct a series of equations or simulations that describes the 
situation (e.g., disease transmission, logistics, or interventions). Usual results 
include possible decisions that could mitigate or improve a situation.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
87
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
$2.2 billion in aid, with the United States providing approximately 
$1.05 billion of that amount (6). Later analyses demonstrated how 
the increase in resources helped to ensure that the actual number 
of cases was far less than if prompt action had not been taken (7).
In another modeling project, CDC Modeling analyzed the regional 
spread of Ebola in West Africa. CDC Modeling used geographic 
information system software and various regression models to identify 
factors that could be used to calculate the probability of individual 
areas becoming affected next (8) and helped to provide data to 
decision-makers about allocating resources for surveillance, especially 
in the countries surrounding Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
CDC also needed data on the staff, equipment, and materials 
required to operate a typical ETU. CDC Modeling helped conduct 
a cost analysis to determine the budget needed to start up and run 
up to 1,000 ETU beds for 6 months, using the cost per bed from 
an interagency partner and publicly available data. CDC used this 
information internally to help guide resource allocation decisions.
Another study estimated the impact of ETUs and CCCs 
on Ebola transmission (7). Results suggested that during 
September 23–October 31, 2014, hospitalizing approximately 
20% of all Ebola patients in ETUs prevented an estimated 
2,244 cases. In addition, placing 35% of patients in CCCs 
or equivalent community settings that prevent transmission 
through reduced contact with patients, coupled with the use 
of safe burials, prevented an estimated 4,487 cases. Together, 
these interventions prevented an estimated 9,097 cases (7). The 
findings of this analysis provided evidence that interventions 
were working.
In September 2014, CDC Modeling began producing weekly 
predecisional memoranda for internal CDC use only, which 
provided estimates of the number of active cases (e.g., persons 
with Ebola and in need of a bed, either in an ETU or CCC) 
based on updated case counts from the field. These weekly 
updates provided senior leadership with situational awareness 
about the epidemic as it evolved. As data and case reporting 
improved through November 2014–March 2015, the need 
for projections to support decision making declined. However, 
projections indicated that the situation could change quickly and 
bolstered the need for public health agencies to avoid becoming 
complacent (4) (CDC, unpublished data, 2014).
Peak and Deceleration
As the epidemic progressed, public health officials developed 
plans to increase ETU capacities and developed methods to 
isolate patients in non-ETU settings to disrupt Ebola transmission 
(5,6). Senior U.S. leadership authorized personnel, funds, and 
supplies to help control the Ebola epidemic (5,6). Various 
philanthropic organizations and the U.S. Public Health Service 
agreed to operate ETUs and CCCs built by the U.S. military and 
others, and funded by the U.S. government. The governments 
of the United Kingdom, France, China, and other countries also 
helped to build and support treatment units that were run by 
FIGURE. Timeline* of CDC Modeling Task Force projects for decision making in response to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa — August 2014–
July 2015
Peak and deceleration
Final phase and extinguishing
Estimate future number of Ebola cases in West Africa, with updates approximately every 2–4 
weeks.
Estimate efectiveness of interventions targeted toward Ebola 
outbreak in West Africa. 
Estimate probability of Ebola 
spread to districts with no Ebola 
cases and to cross international 
boundaries to previously 
unafected countries in Africa. 
Calculate personnel, equipment, 
and material needed to staf and 
operate ETUs. 
Estimate number of Ebola 
cases 
that might occur in United 
States. 
Estimate impact of presumptive malaria treatment during 
contact tracing; reduce number of persons seeking 
treatment at ETUs for non–Ebola-related fever. 
Estimate potential impact of using 
rapid Ebola diagnostic tests. 
Estimate potential number of 
Ebola cases from sexual 
transmission. 
Phase of West African Ebola epidemic curve
Start and acceleration
June   
May
April   
March
February
January
December 
November   
October  
September
July
August
2014
2015
2014
2015
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; ETUs = Ebola treatment units. 
* Arrows indicate approximate start and completion dates of projects.
 Supplement
88 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
international nongovernmental organizations and agencies (9). 
Once increased resources were allocated, questions arose about 
stocking and staffing the ETUs and preventing Ebola’s spread 
to patients within ETUs whose illnesses had been misclassified 
as Ebola. In one analysis, modelers considered ways to prevent 
Ebola’s spread to febrile persons with malaria whose illness had 
been misclassified as Ebola. Modelers analyzed the feasibility of 
treating all contacts of Ebola patients for malaria to prevent the 
onset of febrile malaria and subsequent admission to ETUs. If 
implemented, the intervention could avert admissions even for low 
levels of treatment compliance (10). Only a few clinics used this 
strategy. Although these strategies were implemented on a small 
scale, they might be useful on a wider scale for future responses.
CDC Modeling also contributed to the domestic U.S. 
response when the first imported case of Ebola prompted CDC 
and health departments to collaborate to improve hospital 
preparedness. State and local public health planners needed 
to know where in the United States travelers from West Africa 
were most likely to arrive, where they might seek treatment, and 
whether the United States had enough facilities designated to 
treat patients with Ebola. In a research letter, CDC Modeling 
and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ 
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority 
estimated the rate of new Ebola cases expected in the United 
States based on three categories of persons arriving from Liberia, 
Sierra Leone, and Guinea: 1) travelers who were not health care 
workers, 2) health care workers, and 3) medical evacuees (11). 
The rate of new infections in the United States was multiplied 
by treatment length to determine the number of Ebola patients 
expected to need treatment at any given time while the epidemic 
in West Africa continued. According to this analysis, the capacity 
of Ebola treatment centers in the United States (49 hospitals 
with 71 total beds) was sufficient to care for the model’s highest 
estimated number of patients with Ebola, with a large reserve 
capacity if epidemic conditions worsened (11).
Final Phase and Extinguishing
By May 2015, transmission of Ebola in West Africa had 
diminished substantially, and the response focused on 
eliminating transmission (12). Ebola virus was cultured from 
the semen of male Ebola survivors several months after clinical 
illness. Therefore, sex partners of these Ebola survivors could 
be infected but unaware of their infection while the illness is 
incubating. CDC Modeling was asked to project how often 
a person who acquired Ebola through sexual transmission 
and in whom the illness is incubating might arrive from West 
Africa into the United States (13). Using data from May and 
June 2015, modelers estimated that the projected frequency 
of a person traveling from West Africa who has acquired Ebola 
through sexual transmission and whose Ebola is incubating to 
be one traveler every 2.75 to 8.3 years (CDC, unpublished data, 
2015). These estimates were specific for May and June 2015. 
As long as a resurgence of Ebola does not occur, the risk of 
importation will decline over time as the number of survivors 
capable of transmitting Ebola declines.
CDC Modeling produced a predecisional memorandum for 
internal CDC use that provided estimates of the potential impact 
of rapid Ebola diagnostic tests, specifically, the ability to rapidly 
test a patient with fever or other symptoms possibly indicative of 
Ebola. Although nucleic acid tests are more accurate, they require 
well-established laboratories and fully trained personnel. Rapid 
diagnostic tests produce quick results, are simple to perform, and 
do not require electricity, which is an important consideration in 
remote areas. Decision-makers needed to know the best possible 
strategies for using rapid diagnostic tests and how decreasing or 
low prevalence of Ebola might affect potential strategies for using 
these tests. The model results suggested that using rapid tests 
during low-prevalence periods most likely would require a second 
sequential confirmatory test at the treatment center to decrease 
the false-positive test results (CDC, unpublished data, 2015). This 
modeling provided evidence to support the use of rapid Ebola tests 
in low-prevalence settings as an effective screening tool to rule 
out Ebola infection (<1% false negatives), enabling patients with 
Ebola-like symptoms, but with negative rapid test results, to be 
treated outside of Ebola isolation units. In addition, this modeling 
predicted the number of false-positive (and true negative) rapid 
test results that could be expected at various disease prevalence 
levels in the community (CDC, unpublished data, 2015).
Key Challenges and Lessons Learned
Throughout the response, relevant data were not always 
available, and available data frequently contained inconsistencies 
that took time and effort to resolve. In addition, reporting delays 
made the incidence of Ebola difficult to accurately calculate, 
a crucial input in the models produced by CDC Modeling. 
Expert opinion was needed when data were not available (e.g., 
when data from the field were limited and a correction factor 
was used to estimate the actual number of cases). Even when 
adequate data existed, because no data sharing agreements 
had been developed and executed, questions arose about who 
owned the data and who could use them for analysis. As a 
result, some modeling projects were delayed.
The urgency of the Ebola response required a short 
turnaround time for projects. CDC Modeling typically was 
given ≤1 week to answer questions. To reduce errors and 
ensure the reproducibility and accuracy of the estimates in 
this short time frame, the CDC Modeling had two teams that 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
89
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
cross-checked each other’s calculations, and other modelers at 
CDC reviewed the calculations during the clearance process. 
Each team had to clearly document its modeling methods so 
that other modelers could replicate the model. Therefore, for 
each model, CDC Modeling provided a technical appendix 
accessible to scientists within and outside of CDC.
Models and findings needed to be shared with the public, 
technical experts, responders, and other stakeholders. However, 
communicating about modeling is difficult when persons 
unfamiliar with modeling have difficulty interpreting what the 
estimates mean and understanding the nature of assumptions, 
uncertainty, and context. For example, if one assumption is 
disputed, nonmodelers might perceive this dispute as a reason 
to dismiss the entire model, rather than understand that 
defining assumptions and improving inputs is part of model 
development. Publishing manuscripts in scientific journals was, 
by itself, insufficient for communication. The immediate and 
primary purpose of the models was to provide information for 
decision-making, whereas publishing articles about the work 
provides information for future emergency responses.
Modeling in Future Responses
The benefits of incorporating modeling into major emergency 
responses were clear in the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic response 
(14). Models provided critical decision-making tools in real time 
and helped demonstrate to public health authorities that the 
epidemic could be stopped by using existing tools and strategies 
(4). Although initial model estimates of Ebola represented a 
worst-case scenario, the international community responded to 
ensure that these dire predictions would not be realized (14). 
The following comments were made regarding the accuracy of 
CDC models that forecasted the trajectory of the epidemic: 
“the model predicted that when the tipping point was reached, 
transmission would decline rapidly. This prediction was shown 
to be accurate in the following months in Liberia and Sierra 
Leone. . . . The predictions also closely matched the actual case 
trajectory after effective intervention” (14).
In future emergency responses, modeling can be improved in 
several ways. First, flexibility is needed to enable data collection 
to focus on data needs relative to the size of the epidemic 
and to collect the types of data modelers can use to produce 
improved, more accurate models (e.g., number of cases that 
can be expected over time based on available knowledge about 
pathogen characteristics and transmission, as well as the impact 
that interventions could have on the epidemic). For example, 
in a large-scale epidemic, data collection might focus on small 
amounts of very specific data from sentinel surveillance (1). 
Second, data-sharing agreements should be in place before an 
event. Finally, promoting ongoing dialogue will ensure that 
scientists and audiences understand data limitations and what 
can and cannot be reliably concluded from models.
Modeling is an important but underused public health tool. 
Prioritizing modeling in future responses will take hard work, 
commitment, education, and an openness in public health to 
new disciplines and approaches.
Acknowledgment
CDC Ebola response staff in Atlanta and in affected countries.
References
 1. Shrestha SS, Swerdlow DL, Borse RH, et al. Estimating the burden of 
2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) in the United States (April 2009–
April 2010). Clin Infect Dis 2011;52(Suppl 1):S75–82. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/ciq012
 2. Reed C, Angulo FJ, Swerdlow DL, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of 
pandemic (H1N1) 2009, United States, April–July 2009. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2009;15:2004–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1512.091413
 3. Meltzer MI, Cox NJ, Fukuda K. The economic impact of pandemic 
influenza in the United States: priorities for intervention. Emerg Infect 
Dis 1999;5:659–71.
 4. Meltzer MI, Atkins CY, Santibanez S, et al. Estimating the future number 
of cases in the Ebola epidemic—Liberia and Sierra Leone, 2014–2015. 
MMWR Suppl 2014;63.
 5. US Agency for International Development. West Africa—Ebola 
outbreak. Fact sheet #6. Washington, DC: US Agency for International 
Development; 2014. https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/1864/09.17.14%20-%20USG%20West%20Africa%20
Ebola%20Outbreak%20Fact%20Sheet%20%236.pdf
 6. US Agency for International Development. West Africa—Ebola 
outbreak. Fact sheet #23. Washington, DC: US Agency for International 
Development; 2015. https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/1864/03.04.15%20-%20USG%20West%20Africa%20
Ebola%20Outbreak%20Fact%20Sheet%20%2323.pdf
 7. Washington ML, Meltzer ML. Effectiveness of Ebola treatment units 
and community care centers—Liberia, September 23–October 31, 2014. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:67–9.
 8. Rainisch G, Shankar M, Wellman M, Merlin T, Meltzer MI. Regional 
spread of Ebola virus, West Africa, 2014. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:444–
7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2103.141845
 9. Fink S, Belluck P
. One year later, Ebola outbreak offers lessons for next 
epidemic. The New York Times, March 22, 2015. http://www.nytimes.
com/2015/03/23/world/one-year-later-ebola-outbreak-offers-lessons-
for-next-epidemic.html?_r=0
 
10. Carias C, Greening B Jr, Campbell CG, Meltzer MI, Hamel MJ. 
Preventive malaria treatment for contacts of patients with Ebola virus 
disease in the context of the West Africa 2014–15 Ebola virus disease 
response: an economic analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2016;16:449–58. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00465-X
 
11. Rainisch G, Asher J, George D, et al. Estimating Ebola treatment needs, 
United States. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1273–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid2107.150286
 
12. CDC. Ebola: getting to zero. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.cdc.gov/
features/ebola-zero
 
13. Christie A, Davies-Wayne GJ, Cordier-Lassalle T, et al. Possible sexual 
transmission of Ebola virus—Liberia, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2015;64:479–81. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:1180.
 
14. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949  
