 SARS-like WIV1-CoV poised for human emergence
Vineet D. Menacherya, Boyd L. Yount Jr.a, Amy C. Simsa, Kari Debbinka,b, Sudhakar S. Agnihothramc, Lisa E. Gralinskia,
Rachel L. Grahama, Trevor Scobeya, Jessica A. Plantea, Scott R. Royala, Jesica Swanstroma, Timothy P. Sheahana,
Raymond J. Picklesc,d, Davide Cortie,f,g, Scott H. Randelld, Antonio Lanzavecchiae,f, Wayne A. Marascoh,
and Ralph S. Barica,c,1
aDepartment of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; bDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; cDivision of Microbiology, National Center for Toxicological Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Jefferson, AR 72079; dDepartment of Cell Biology and Physiology and Marsico Lung Institute/Cystic Fibrosis Center, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; eInstitute for Research in Biomedicine, Bellinzona, Switzerland; fInstitute of Microbiology, Eidgenössische
Technische Hochschule Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; gHumabs BioMed SA, Bellinzona, Switzerland; and hDepartment of Cancer Immunology and AIDS,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute–Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02215
Edited by Peter Palese, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, and approved January 6, 2016 (received for review September 4, 2015)
Outbreaks from zoonotic sources represent a threat to both
human disease as well as the global economy. Despite a wealth of
metagenomics studies, methods to leverage these datasets to identify
future threats are underdeveloped. In this study, we describe an
approach that combines existing metagenomics data with reverse
genetics to engineer reagents to evaluate emergence and pathogenic
potential of circulating zoonotic viruses. Focusing on the severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS)-like viruses, the results indicate that the
WIV1-coronavirus (CoV) cluster has the ability to directly infect and
may undergo limited transmission in human populations. However,
in vivo attenuation suggests additional adaptation is required for
epidemic disease. Importantly, available SARS monoclonal antibodies
offered success in limiting viral infection absent from available
vaccine approaches. Together, the data highlight the utility of a
platform to identify and prioritize prepandemic strains harbored in
animal reservoirs and document the threat posed by WIV1-CoV for
emergence in human populations.
SARS | CoV | emergence | Spike | WIV1
A
lthough previously associated with upper respiratory infec-
tions, the emergence of severe acute respiratory coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) in 2002–2003, and more recently, Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS)-CoV underscores the threat of
cross-species transmission leading to virulent pandemic viral in-
fections (1, 2). Whereas prevailing research suggests that SARS-
CoV emerged from viruses in the Chinese horseshoe bat, identi-
fying a progenitor strain that used human angiotensin converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) had proven elusive (3, 4). However, recent
metagenomics studies isolated several SARS-like virus sequences
that share ≥90% genome-wide homology and represented the
closest sequences to the epidemic strains (5, 6). Importantly, re-
searchers also isolated replication competent virus; WIV1-CoV,
part of the Rs3306 cluster, could use ACE2 orthologs and medi-
ated low-level replication in human cells (5). Overall, the evidence
indicates that SARS-CoV likely emerged from Chinese horseshoe
bats and that similar viruses are still harbored in these populations.
The identification of WIV1-CoV and its capacity to use ACE2
orthologs offers a warning for possible reemergence and pro-
vides an opportunity to prepare for a future CoV outbreak. To
achieve this goal, a new platform is required to translate meta-
genomics findings; the approach must generate critical di-
agnostic reagents, define emergence potential of novel strains,
and determine efficacy of current therapeutics. Building on this
premise, we developed a framework to examine circulating CoVs
using reverse genetic systems to construct full-length and chi-
meric viruses. The results indicate that viruses using WIV1-CoV
spike are poised to emerge in human populations due to efficient
replication in primary human airway epithelial cell cultures.
However, additional adaptation, potentially independent of the
spike protein receptor-binding domain, is required for patho-
genesis and epidemic disease. Importantly, monoclonal antibody
strategies against SARS were effective against WIV1-CoV spike
unlike available vaccine approaches. Together, the results highlight
the utility of developing platforms to evaluate circulating zoonotic
viruses as threats for future emergence and epidemic potential.
Results
The discovery of SARS-like virus clusters that bridge the gap
between the epidemic strains and related precursor CoV strain
HKU3 virus provided the best evidence for emergence of SARS-
CoV from Chinese horseshoe bats (5). Comparing the receptor
binding domain (RBD), SARS-CoV Urbani and WIV1 share
homology at 11 of the 14 contact residues with human ACE2
(Fig. 1A); importantly, the three amino acid changes represent
relatively conservative substitution not predicted to ablate
binding (Fig. 1B). Therefore, exploring WIV1 strains allows ex-
amination of emergence, pathogenesis potential, and adap-
tation requirements. Using the SARS-CoV infectious clone as a
template (7), we designed and synthesized a full-length infectious
clone of WIV1-CoV consisting of six plasmids that could be
enzymatically cut, ligated together, and electroporated into cells
to rescue replication competent progeny virions (Fig. S1A). In
addition to the full-length clone, we also produced WIV1-CoV
Significance
The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)-CoV
highlights the continued risk of cross-species transmission leading
to epidemic disease. This manuscript describes efforts to extend
surveillance beyond sequence analysis, constructing chimeric and
full-length zoonotic coronaviruses to evaluate emergence poten-
tial. Focusing on SARS-like virus sequences isolated from Chinese
horseshoe bats, the results indicate a significant threat posed by
WIV1-CoV. Both full-length and chimeric WIV1-CoV readily repli-
cated efficiently in human airway cultures and in vivo, suggesting
capability of direct transmission to humans. In addition, while
monoclonal antibody treatments prove effective, the SARS-based
vaccine approach failed to confer protection. Together, the study
indicates an ongoing threat posed by WIV1-related viruses and
the need for continued study and surveillance.
Author contributions: V.D.M., B.L.Y., and R.S.B. designed research; V.D.M., B.L.Y., A.C.S.,
S.S.A., L.E.G., T.S., J.A.P., S.R.R., J.S., and T.P.S. performed research; V.D.M., B.L.Y., R.J.P.,
D.C., S.H.R., A.L., and W.A.M. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; V.D.M., A.C.S.,
K.D., R.L.G., and R.S.B. analyzed data; and V.D.M. and R.S.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
See Commentary on page 2812.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: rbaric@email.unc.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1517719113/-/DCSupplemental.
3048–3053
|
PNAS
|
March 15, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 11
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1517719113
 chimeric virus that replaced the SARS spike with the WIV1
spike within the mouse-adapted backbone (WIV1-MA15,
Fig. S1B). WIV1-MA15 incorporates the original binding and
entry capabilities of WIV1-CoV, but maintains the backbone
changes to mouse-adapted SARS-CoV. Importantly, WIV1-
MA15 does not incorporate the Y436H mutation in spike that is
required for SARS-MA15 pathogenesis (8). Following electro-
poration into Vero cells, robust stock titers were recovered from
both chimeric WIV1-MA15 and WIV1-CoV. To confirm growth
kinetics and replication, Vero cells were infected with SARS-
CoV Urbani, WIV1-MA15, and WIV1-CoV (Fig. 1C); the
results indicate similar replication kinetics and overall titers
between the CoVs. However, Western blot analysis suggests
potential differences in spike cleavage/processing of WIV1 and
SARS-CoV spike proteins (Fig. S1C); the ratio of full-length to
cleaved spike varied between SARS spikes (Urbani, 1.21; MA15,
1.44) and WIV1 (full length, 0.61; WIV1-MA15, 0.25) signaling
possible variation in host proteolytic processing (Fig. S1D).
Overall, the results indicate comparable viral replication, but
possible biochemical differences in processing.
Replication in Primary Human Epithelial Cells. Next, we wanted to
determine WIV-CoV replication potential in models of the hu-
man lung. Previous examination of WIV1-CoV recovered from
bat samples demonstrated poor replication in A549 cells (5);
however, replication of epidemic SARS-CoV is also poor in
this cell type, potentially due to ACE2 expression levels (9).
Therefore, well-differentiated primary human airway epithelial
cell (HAE) air–liquid interface cultures were infected with WIV1-
MA15, WIV1-CoV, SARS-CoV Urbani, or SARS-CoV MA15. At
24 and 48 h postinfection, both WIV1-MA15 and WIV1-CoV
produce robust infection in HAE cultures equivalent to the epi-
demic strain and mouse-adapted strains (Fig. 1D). Together, the
data demonstrate that the WIV1-CoV spike can mediate infection of
human airway cultures with no significant adaptation required.
WIV1 Spike in Vivo. To extend analysis to pathogenesis, we next
evaluated in vivo infection following WIV1-MA15 and WIV1-
CoV challenge. Initial studies compared WIV1-MA15 to mouse-
adapted SARS-CoV (MA15) to determine spike-dependent
pathogenesis. Ten-week-old BALB/c mice were infected with 104
plaque forming units (pfu) of WIV1-MA15 or SARS-CoV MA15
and followed over a 4-d time course. As expected, animals in-
fected with SARS-CoV MA15 experienced rapid weight loss and
lethality by day 4 postinfection (Fig. 2A and Fig. S2A) (10). In
contrast, WIV1-MA15 induced neither lethality nor notable
changes in body weight, indicating limited disease in vivo. Viral
titer in the lung also revealed reduced replication following
WIV1-MA15 challenge compared with control (Fig. 2B). Simi-
larly, lung antigen staining indicated distinct attenuation of the
WIV1-MA15, with most staining occurring in the airways and
absent from large regions of the lungs (Fig. S2 B–D). Together,
these data indicate that WIV1 spike substitution does not pro-
gram pathogenesis in the mouse-adapted SARS-CoV backbone.
Although chimeric studies suggest minimal pathogenesis po-
tential for WIV1 spike, SARS-CoV Urbani spike within the
mouse-adapted backbone yielded similar results (8). Therefore,
we examined the full-length WIV1-CoV versus the epidemic
SARS-CoV Urbani strain in vivo. Ten-week-old BALB/c mice
Fig. 1.
Full-length and chimeric WIV1 infectious clones produce viruses that
replicate in primary human airway epithelial cell cultures. (A) Spike amino
acid residues that interact directly with human ACE2 from SARS-CoV, SARS-
MA15, and WIV1-CoV spike proteins. Residue changes are highlighted by
color. (B) Interaction between S1 domain of SARS-Urbani spike (black) and
WIV1 spike (blue) with human ACE2 (gray). Contact residues highlighted
with consensus amino acids (red) and differences (circled) between SARS and
WIV1 spike proteins; human ACE2 contact residues are also highlighted
(orange). (C) Viral replication of WIV1-CoV (blue), WIV1-MA15 (blue
hatched), and SARS-CoV Urbani (black) following infection of Vero cells at a
multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01. (D) Well-differentiated air–liquid in-
terface primary human airway epithelial cell cultures were infected with
SARS-CoV Urbani (black), SARS-CoV MA15 (black hatched), WIV1-MA15
(blue-white hatched), and WIV-CoV (blue) at (E) MOI of 0.01 in cells from the
same donor at an MOI of 0.01. Samples were collected at individual time
points with biological replicates (n = 3) for all experiments for both C and D.
Fig. 2.
Viruses using WIV1 spike attenuated relative to SARS spike in vivo.
(A and B) Ten-week-old BALB/c mice were infected with 104 pfu of either
SARS-CoV MA15 (black) or WIV1-MA15 (blue hatched) via the i.n. route and
examined over a 7-d time course. (A) Weight loss (n = 17 for WIV1-MA15, n =
9 for SARS-CoV MA15) and (B) lung titer (n = 3 for MA15, n = 4 for WIV1-
MA15. (C and D) Ten-week-old BALB/c mice were infected with 1 × 105 pfu of
either SARS-CoV Urbani (black), WIV1-CoV (blue), or SARS-CoV MA15 (gray)
and examined over a 4-d time course. (C) Weight loss (n = 6 for WIV1-CoV,
n = 6 for SARS-CoV Urbani) and (D) lung titer (n = 3 for WIV1-CoV, n = 3 for
SARS-CoV Urbani) were examined. For each bar graph, center value is rep-
resentative of group mean and error bars are defined by SEM. P values based
on two-tailed Student’s t test of individual time points are marked as in-
dicated: ***P < 0.001.
Menachery et al.
PNAS
|
March 15, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 11
|
3049
MICROBIOLOGY
SEE COMMENTARY
 were infected with 105 pfu of WIV1-CoV or SARS-CoV Urbani
and followed over a 4-d time course. As expected, neither in-
fection condition resulted in significant weight loss compared
with MA15 (Fig. 2C). However, viral replication was significantly
attenuated for WIV1-CoV compared with SARS-CoV Urbani
(Fig. 2D); at both days 2 and 4 postinfection, WIV1-CoV titer was
reduced nearly 10,000- and 1,000-fold, respectively. Similarly, only
minor antigen staining was observed following WIV1-CoV in-
fection, contrasting antigen staining throughout the parenchyma
2-d post–SARS-CoV Urbani infection (Fig. S2 E and F). To-
gether, the data indicate significant attenuation of WIV1-CoV
relative to the epidemic SARS-CoV in wild-type mice.
WIV1-CoV in Human ACE2 Expressing Mice. Whereas studies in wild-
type mice provide insight into pathogenesis potential, the ab-
sence of clinical disease in the epidemic strains of SARS-CoV
suggests that the mouse model may not be adequate to access
human disease potential. To test a model more relevant to hu-
mans, we generated a mouse that expresses human ACE2 re-
ceptor under control of HFH4, a lung ciliated epithelial cell
promoter (11). However, whereas robust expression was ob-
served in the lung, other tissues including brain, liver, kidney,
and gastrointestinal tract had varying levels of human ACE2
expression, indicating greater tissue distribution of HFH4-
mediated expression than initially expected (Fig. S3A). In addi-
tion, examination of individual HFH4-ACE2–expressing progeny
revealed the occasional absence of the human ACE2 gene,
suggesting possible selection against human receptor (Fig. S3B).
Therefore, PCR-positive, 10- to 20-wk-old HFH4-ACE2–
expressing mice were infected with 105 pfu of WIV1-CoV or
SARS-CoV Urbani and then followed for a 7-d time course to
determine pathogenesis. The results indicated that WIV1-CoV
infection was augmented, but remained attenuated relative to
SARS-CoV Urbani in the presence of human ACE2. Following
SARS-CoV Urbani challenge, HFH4-hACE2–expressing mice
lost no weight, but then, experienced rapid weight loss and death
between days 4 and 5 (Fig. 3A and Fig. S3C). In contrast, WIV1-
CoV produce minimal changes in weight loss until late times
where animals fell into distinct categories either losing less than
or more than 10% of their body weight. Whereas day-2 lung ti-
ters were still attenuated relative to SARS-CoV Urbani, titers for
WIV1-CoV were 100-fold higher in the presence of human ACE2
compared with wild-type BALB/c, with no similar augmentation
observed with the epidemic SARS-CoV strain (Fig. 3B). Based on
pilot studies and previous studies with ACE2 transgenic animals
(12), mice experiencing rapid weight loss were predicted to have
lethal encephalitis and were humanely killed and harvested for
lung and brain titer if weight loss approached >20% of starting
body weight. All HFH4-ACE2 mice infected with SARS-CoV
Urbani lost >20% body weight and maintained robust replica-
tion in the lung and brain following infection (Fig. 3 C and D).
Similarly, mice with >10% weight loss following WIV1-CoV
infection produced robust viral replication in the brain, but sig-
nificantly lower titers in the lung. In contrast, mice that main-
tained minimal weight loss (<10%) following WIV1-CoV
infection after 7 d had minimal titers in both the lung and brain,
suggesting a sufficient adaptive immune response was generated
to clear virus and survive infection. Together, the data indicate
that WIV1-CoV maintains attenuation relative to SARS-CoV
Urbani despite the availability of human ACE2. In addition,
augmented replication suggests that WIV1-CoV may bind the
human ACE2 receptor more efficiently that the mouse ACE2,
indicating potential inadequacies in the current mouse models of
SARS pathogenesis.
Therapeutics Against WIV1 Emergence. Having established a po-
tential threat based on replication in primary human cells and
preference for the human ACE2 receptor in vivo, we next sought
to determine if monoclonal antibody therapies could be used to
lessen disease similar to ZMApp for Ebola (13). We first tested a
SARS-CoV monoclonal derived via phage display and antibody
escape (Fm6) (14) and found both wild-type SARS-CoV Urbani
and WIV1-MA15 were strongly neutralized at low antibody
concentrations (Fig. 4A). Similarly, a panel of monoclonal anti-
bodies derived from B cells from SARS-CoV–infected patients
also prevented virus infection via WIV1-CoV spike (15, 16).
Both antibodies 230.15 and 227.14 robustly inhibited WIV1-
MA15 replication with kinetics similar to or exceeding SARS-
CoV Urbani (Fig. 4 B and C). In contrast, antibody 109.8, which
maps outside the receptor binding domain, produced only mar-
ginal neutralization of WIV1-MA15 (Fig. 4D). Whereas the
residue associated with prior escape mutants was conserved
at position 332, the adjacent residue had a significant change
(K332T) in WIV1-CoV, possibly contributing to reduced efficacy
of this antibody.
To further extend these findings, in vivo studies with antibody
227.14 were initiated in HFH4-ACE2–expressing mice. One day
before infection, HFH4-ACE2–expressing mice were injected with
200 μg of antibody 227.14 or PBS control as previously described
(17); mice were subsequently challenged with either SARS-CoV
Urbani or WIV1-CoV and monitored for 7 d. The results indicate
that antibody 227.14 protected mice from both lethal SARS-CoV
Urbani and WIV-CoV challenge (Fig. 4E); in addition, lung titers
revealed no detectable virus in either SARS-CoV or WIV1-CoV–
infected HFH4-ACE2–expressing mouse lungs following antibody
treatment (Fig. 4F). Together, the in vitro and in vivo data in-
dicate that a mixture of broadly neutralizing antibodies against
SARS-CoV would likely provide significant protection if WIV1-
CoV–like viruses successfully transmitted to humans.
Vaccine Efficacy Limited Against WIV1 Spike. Previously, whole vi-
rion SARS-CoV inactivated by both formalin and UV irradiation
(double inactivated virus, DIV) was demonstrated as a po-
tential vaccination candidate based on robust neutralization
and protection following homologous SARS-CoV challenge in
young mice (18). However, both aged animal and heterologous
Fig. 3.
WIV1-Cov still attenuated despite human ACE2 expression in vivo.
(A) Ten- to twenty-week-old HFH4 ACE2-expressing mice were infected with
105 pfu of SARS-CoV Urbani (black) or WIV1-CoV (blue) and examined over a
7-d time course for (A) survival and (B) day-2 lung titer (n = 3 for WIV1-CoV,
n = 3 for SARS-CoV Urbani). (C and D) Upon reaching thresholds for humane
sacrifice (>20% weight loss) or 7 d postinfection (DPI), endpoint titers were
determined in the (C) lung and (D) brain following infection. P values based
on two-tailed Student’s t test of individual time points are marked as in-
dicated: *P < 0.05.
3050
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1517719113
Menachery et al.
 challenge studies revealed incomplete protection, increased im-
mune pathology, and eosinophilia, indicating the possibility of
adverse affects following DIV vaccination (19). To determine
if heterologous challenge with WIV1-CoV spike produced a
similar affect, 1-y-old BALB/c mice were vaccinated and boosted
with DIV or PBS mock control. Mice were then challenged 6 wk
postinitial vaccination with WIV1-MA15 and examined over a
4-d time course. Similar to previous experiments, mice infected
with WIV1-MA15 had only marginal weight loss and showed no
clinical signs of disease with either vaccination group (Fig. 5A).
However, viral replication at day 4 was not significantly reduced
in DIV-vaccinated groups compared with control (Fig. 5B). In
addition, plaque reduction neutralization titers from the serum
of aged DIV-vaccinated mice indicated no neutralization of WIV1-
MA15, suggesting inadequate protection (Fig. 5C). Importantly,
examination of histopathology revealed increased eosinophilia
in DIV-vaccinated mice compared with PBS controls, indicating
the potential for immune induced pathology due to vaccination.
Together, the data indicate that DIV vaccination would not pro-
vide significant protection and may cause adverse effects in the
context of WIV1-CoV spike-mediated outbreak.
Discussion
The recent outbreaks of Ebola, influenza, and MERS-CoV un-
derscore the threat posed by viruses emerging from zoonotic
sources. Coupled with air travel and uneven public health in-
frastructures, it is critical to develop approaches to mitigate these
and future outbreaks. In this paper, we outline a platform that
leverages metagenomics data, synthetic genome design, trans-
genic mouse models, and therapeutic human antibodies to
identify and treat potential prepandemic viruses. Focusing on
SARS-like CoVs, the approach indicates that viruses using the
WIV1-CoV spike protein are capable of infecting HAE cultures
directly without further spike adaptation. Whereas in vivo data
indicate attenuation relative to SARS-CoV, the augmented
replication in the presence of human ACE2 in vivo suggests that
the virus has significant pathogenic potential not captured by
current small animal models. Importantly, therapeutic treatment
with monoclonal antibodies suggests a Zmapp-based approach
would be effective against a WIV1-CoV spike-mediated out-
break. However, failure of SARS DIV vaccine to induce pro-
tection highlights the need for continued development of
additional therapeutics. Overall, the characterization of WIV1-
CoV and its pathogenic potential highlight the utility of this
platform in evaluating currently circulating zoonotic viruses.
Primary human airway epithelial cell cultures derived from
human donors and grown at an air–liquid interface represent the
Fig. 4.
SARS-CoV monoclonal antibodies have robust neutralization against
WIV1 spike-mediated infection. Neutralization efficacy was evaluated using
percent neutralization assays against SARS-CoV Urbani (black) or WIV1-MA15
(blue) with a panel of monoclonal antibodies: (A) fm6, (B) 230.15, (C) 227.15,
and (D) 109.8, all originally generated against epidemic SARS-CoV. Each data
point is representative of two or more independent neutralization wells. (E and
F) Twenty- to twenty-four-week-old HFH4 ACE2-expressing mice were injected
with 200 μg of anti-SARS human antibody 227.15 (hatched line) or mock (solid
line) 1 d before infection with 1 × 10^5 pfu of SARS-CoV Urbani (black) or WIV1-
CoV (blue) and examined over a 7-d time course for (E) survival (n = 3 for both
antibody-treated groups and mock PBS control WIV1-CoV, n = 2 for mock-
treated SARS-CoV Urbani), (F) day-2 lung titer (n = 3 for all groups). ND signifies
no titers detected. For each bar graph, center value is representative of group
mean and error bars are defined by SEM.
Fig. 5.
Double-inactivated whole SARS-CoV vaccine fails to protect aged
animals from chimeric WIV1-CoV infection. Twelve-month-old mice were
vaccinated and boosted with DIV (dotted line) or PBS (solid line) and infected
21 d postboost with 104 pfu of WIV1-MA15 via the i.n. route. (A) Weight loss
following WIV1-MA15 challenge and (B) viral replication in the lung 4 DPI.
(C) Neutralization of WIV1-MA15 (blue) with serum from aged, DIV-vacci-
nated mice. (D–H) Histopathology lung sections stained for H&E from DIV-
and mock-vaccinated mice. (D) Eosinophil score (scale 0–4) following DIV or
mock vaccination 4 DPI. (E and F) Representative H&E lung sections for
(E) mock- and (F) DIV-vaccinated mice infected with WIV-MA15. Red arrows
indicate individual eosinophil locations. P values based on two-tailed Stu-
dent’s t test of individual time points are marked as indicated: **P < 0.01.
Menachery et al.
PNAS
|
March 15, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 11
|
3051
MICROBIOLOGY
SEE COMMENTARY
 closest model to the human lung. Therefore, the ability of both
WIV1-CoV and WIV1-MA15 to grow equivalently to the epi-
demic SARS-CoV in these cultures is a major concern for
emergence. However, pathogenesis studies in mice suggest that
further adaptation may be required for epidemic disease. Com-
pared with SARS equivalents, both full-length and chimeric
WIV1 viruses had significant attenuation even with the presence
of human ACE2 in the mouse model. Together, the data suggest
that despite using ACE2 and robust replication in primary
human airway epithelial cultures, WIV1-CoV likely maintains
deficits that impact pathogenesis in mice; therefore, WIV1-
mediated infection may have diminished epidemic potential in
humans relative to SARS-CoV.
A number of factors may contribute to reduced mouse path-
ogenesis observed following WIV1-CoV spike-mediated in-
fection. In the context of both the SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV
outbreaks, focus had been primarily directed to spike binding
as the key component of emergence and pandemic potential.
Supported by adaption at Y436H in mouse-adapted SARS spike
(10), improved binding to host receptor cannot be discounted as
a crucial component in emergence. This fact is supported by
improved replication of WIV1-CoV in mice expressing human
ACE2 compared with control (Fig. 2D versus Fig. 3B). However,
in vivo attenuation of WIV1-CoV relative to SARS-CoV Urbani
despite efficient infection in primary human airway cultures
suggests that additional factors contribute to epidemic emer-
gence. One possibility is that adaptation outside of spike protein
may lead to emergence via altered host–virus interactions.
Whereas WIV1-MA15 was attenuated relative to SARS-MA15
in vivo, overall titers in the lung were similar to the epidemic
SARS-CoV Urbani in BALB/c mice (Figs. 3 and 4). These data
suggest that CoV backbone changes may account for or com-
pensate for deficits in WIV1-CoV replication compared with
SARS-CoV Urbani in vivo. Another possible factor accounting for
attenuation is changes to spike that are independent of receptor
binding. Whereas the receptor binding domain had garnered the
most interest, changes in the remaining portion of S1 as well as the
S2 portion of spike may also play a critical role in facilitating CoV
infection, transmission, and/or pathogenesis (20). Differences in
these regions of spike may yield increased protease targeting,
enhanced spike cleavage, and/or expanded tropism leading to
more robust infection for the epidemic SARS strains. Globally,
the in vivo results suggest that any of these areas may have con-
tributed to SARS-CoV emergence. However, even these inter-
pretations must be tempered due to the robust differences
between mouse and human models; further studies in nonhuman
primates are required to confirm these results and derive further
insight into CoV emergence from zoonotic sources.
Despite the differences in the backbone genome sequences,
therapeutics developed against SARS-CoV provide some mea-
sure of protection in the context of a future outbreak. Testing the
four most broadly neutralizing SARS-CoV antibodies revealed
effective control of WIV1-MA15 at relatively low concentrations
of antibody (14, 15, 21). For two of the four antibodies tested
(Fm6 and 230.15), WIV1-CoV spike-expressing virus was neu-
tralized equivalently or better than SARS-CoV Urbani. Simi-
larly, only minimal differences at the low end of the neutrali-
zation curve were noted for antibody 227.14. Whereas antibody
109.8 produced only marginal neutralization of WIV1-MA15,
the overall antibody neutralization data argue that multivalent
monoclonal antibody approaches could limit a WIV1-CoV
spike-mediated outbreak. As such, a “ZMapp”-based approach
could have great potential in stemming or preventing a future
SARS-CoV–like outbreak.
In contrast to the success of monoclonal antibodies, vaccine
failure indicated further development and refinement are nec-
essary. The development of a DIV SARS-CoV vaccine was
buoyed as a possible means to control SARS-CoV outbreaks
based on robust neutralization and protection in young mice
(18). However, studies with DIV in aged animals revealed in-
complete protection, significant immune pathology, and eo-
sinophilia (19). Despite these prior results, the efficacy of
monoclonal antibody treatments made further testing of DIV
seemingly worthwhile against WIV1-CoV spike-mediated in-
fection. However, the results remained the same, as vaccination
of aged mice resulted in no protection from WIV1-MA15
replication in vivo (Fig. 5). Importantly, increased immune
pathology and observed eosinophilia indicate that broad-based
vaccination efforts against SARS-CoV–like viruses must con-
sider heterologous viruses as well as failure due to senescence in
the aged host. A number of novel platforms including Venezuelan
Equine Encephalitis Virus Replicon Particle (VRP) and live-
attenuated vaccine approaches show great promise in these
areas, but require further testing and development before de-
ployment in an outbreak setting (22, 23).
Overall, the results from these studies highlight the utility of a
platform that leverages metagenomics findings and reverse
genetics to identify prepandemic threats. For SARS-like WIV1-
CoV, the data can inform surveillance programs, improve di-
agnostic reagents, and facilitate effective treatments to mitigate
future emergence events. However, building new and chimeric
reagents must be carefully weighed against potential gain-of-
function (GOF) concerns. Whereas not generally expected to
increase pathogenicity, studies that build reagents based on
viruses from animal sources cannot exclude the possibility of
increased virulence or altered immunogenicity that promote
escape from current countermeasures. As such, the potential of a
threat, real or perceived, may cause similar exploratory studies to
be limited out of an “abundance of caution.” Importantly, the
government pause on GOF studies may have already impacted
the scope and direction of these studies. Whereas previous
adaption of the epidemic SARS-CoV strain provided insights
into species-specific changes, bat-derived WIV1 adaptation
may identify elements critical for pathogenesis and transition
from reservoir to human host; targets include viral proteins that
interact with host machinery or host immunity like NSP1, en-
velope, or ORF6 (22, 24, 25). Similarly, WIV1-CoV could be
used to drive improved therapeutics, including escape mutants
for improved monoclonal antibodies or more broadly neutral-
izing vaccine approaches. However, it remains unclear from the
current policies and GOF environment if these types of studies
will be permissible. Although limits and standards for these
types of experiments must be established, erring on the side of
caution is not without its own risks and balancing the benefits
of these types of studies must also be weighed against the
potential hazards.
Using a novel platform to translate metagenomics findings, the
WIV1-CoV cluster has been identified as a threat for future
emergence in human populations due to robust replication in
primary human airway epithelial cell cultures. However, based
on in vivo mouse data, additional adaptations will likely be re-
quired to produce epidemic disease. Notably, whereas current
antibody-based therapies hold great promise in treating WIV1-
CoV spike-mediated infection, failure of SARS-CoV vaccination
approaches presents a major challenge for any efforts to protect
against future emergent viruses. Together, the data illustrate the
utility of the platform and highlight the need to build and
maintain preparations for future emergence events.
Materials and Methods
Viruses, Cells, and Infection. Wild-type and chimeric CoVs were cultured on
Vero E6 cells, grown in DMEM (Gibco) and 5% fetal clone serum (HyClone)
along with anti/anti (Gibco). Growth curves in Vero and primary human
airway epithelial cells were performed as previously described (26, 27). Hu-
man lungs were procured under University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
(UNC) Institutional Review Board-approved protocols.
3052
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1517719113
Menachery et al.
 Construction of Chimeric SARS-Like Viruses. Both wild-type and chimeric WIV-
CoV infectious clones were designed using published sequences and based
on the SARS-CoV infectious clone (10). Synthetic construction of chimeric
mutant and full-length WIV1-CoV were approved by the UNC Institutional
Biosafety Committee and the Dual Use Research of Concern Committee.
Ethics Statement. The study was carried out in accordance with the recom-
mendations for care and use of animals by the Office of Laboratory Animal
Welfare (OLAW), National Institutes of Health. The Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee (IACUC) of University of North Carolina (UNC permit no.
A-3410-01) approved the animal study protocol (IACUC no. 13–033).
Mice and in Vivo Infection. Female 10-wk- and 12-mo-old Balb/cAnNHsD
mice ordered from the Harlan Labs were infected as previously described
(23). For vaccination, young and aged mice were vaccinated and boosted
by footpad injection with a 20-μL volume of either 0.2 μg of double-
inactivated SARS-CoV vaccine (DIV) with alum or mock PBS as previously
described (19).
Generation and Infection of ACE2 Tissue-Specific Transgenic Mice. Transgenic
mice with airway-targeted overexpression of human ACE2 were generated
by microinjection of fertilized C3H × C57BL/6 (C3B6) F1 hybrid oocytes with
an expression cassette consisting of the HFH4/FOXJ1 lung ciliated epithelial
cell-specific promoter elements and the coding region of ACE2 cDNA in a
pTG1 vector (11) (UNC Animal Model Core). Founder mice were crossed to
C3B6, producing human ACE2-transgenic mice that were each previously
tested for transgene expression as described in SI Materials and Methods.
ACE2-transgenic mice given i.p. injection of 200 μg of human Ab S227.14 or
PBS control (0.20 mL total volume, five to six mice per group) 1 d before
infection as previously described (17).
Histological Analysis. Lung tissues for histological analysis were fixed in
buffered formalin phosphate 10% (4–5% wt/wt formaldehyde) (Fisher
#SF100-20) for at least 7 d, tissues were embedded in paraffin, and 5-μm
sections were prepared by the UNC histopathology core facility as previous
described (23). Images were captured using an Olympus BX41 microscope
with an Olympus DP71 camera.
Virus Neutralization Assays. Plaque reduction neutralization titer assays were
preformed with previously characterized antibodies against SARS-CoV as
previously described (14, 15, 21). Briefly, neutralizing antibodies or serum
were serially diluted twofold and incubated with 100 pfu of the different virus
strains for 1 h at 37 °C. The virus and antibodies were then added to a six-well
plate with 5 ×105 Vero E6 cells per well with n ≥ 2. After a 1-h incubation at
37 °C, cells were overlaid with 3 mL of 0.8% agarose in media. Plates were
incubated for 2 d at 37 °C and then stained with neutral red for 3 h, and
plaques were counted. The percentage of plaque reduction was calculated as
[1 − (no. of plaques with antibody/no. of plaques without antibody)] × 100.
Statistical Analysis. All experiments were conducted contrasting two experi-
mental groups (either two viruses or vaccinated and unvaccinated cohorts).
Therefore, significant differences in viral titer and histology scoring were de-
termined by a two-tailed Student’s t test at individual time points. Data were
normally distributed in each group being compared and had similar variance.
Biosafety and Biosecurity. Reported studies were initiated after the University
of North Carolina Institutional Biosafety Committee approved the experi-
mental protocol: project title: Generating infectious clones of Bat SARS-like
CoVs; lab safety plan ID: 20145741; schedule G ID: 12279. These studies were
initiated before the US Government Deliberative Process Research Funding
Pause on Selected Gain of Function Research Involving Influenza, MERS, and
SARS Viruses (www.phe.gov/s3/dualuse/Documents/gain-of-function.pdf),
and the current paper has been reviewed by the funding agency, the Na-
tional Institutes of Health (NIH). Continuation of these studies has been
requested and approved by the NIH.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. Zhengli-Li Shi of the Wuhan Institute
of Virology for access to bat CoV sequences and plasmid of WIV1-CoV spike
protein. Research was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease and the National Institute of Aging of the NIH under
Awards U19AI109761 and U19AI107810 (to R.S.B.), AI1085524 (to W.A.M.),
and F32AI102561 and K99AG049092 (to V.D.M.). Human airway epithelial
cell cultures were supported by the National Institute of Diabetes and Di-
gestive and Kidney Disease under Award NIH DK065988 (to S.H.R.). Support
for the generation of the mice expressing human ACE2 was provided by NIH
Grants AI076159 and AI079521 (to A.C.S.).
1. Peiris JS, Guan Y, Yuen KY (2004) Severe acute respiratory syndrome. Nat Med
10(12, Suppl):S88–S97.
2. Al-Tawfiq JA, et al. (2014) Surveillance for emerging respiratory viruses. Lancet Infect
Dis 14(10):992–1000.
3. Graham RL, Baric RS (2010) Recombination, reservoirs, and the modular spike:
Mechanisms of coronavirus cross-species transmission. J Virol 84(7):3134–3146.
4. Graham RL, Donaldson EF, Baric RS (2013) A decade after SARS: Strategies for con-
trolling emerging coronaviruses. Nat Rev Microbiol 11(12):836–848.
5. Ge XY, et al. (2013) Isolation and characterization of a bat SARS-like coronavirus that
uses the ACE2 receptor. Nature 503(7477):535–538.
6. He B, et al. (2014) Identification of diverse alphacoronaviruses and genomic charac-
terization of a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome-like coronavirus from bats in
China. J Virol 88(12):7070–7082.
7. Yount B, et al. (2003) Reverse genetics with a full-length infectious cDNA of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100(22):12995–13000.
8. Frieman M, et al. (2012) Molecular determinants of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus pathogenesis and virulence in young and aged mouse models of human
disease. J Virol 86(2):884–897.
9. Gillim-Ross L, et al. (2004) Discovery of novel human and animal cells infected by the
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus by replication-specific multiplex re-
verse transcription-PCR. J Clin Microbiol 42(7):3196–3206.
10. Roberts A, et al. (2007) A mouse-adapted SARS-coronavirus causes disease and mor-
tality in BALB/c mice. PLoS Pathog 3(1):e5.
11. Ostrowski LE, Hutchins JR, Zakel K, O’Neal WK (2003) Targeting expression of a
transgene to the airway surface epithelium using a ciliated cell-specific promoter. Mol
Ther 8(4):637–645.
12. Netland J, Meyerholz DK, Moore S, Cassell M, Perlman S (2008) Severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus infection causes neuronal death in the absence of encephalitis in
mice transgenic for human ACE2. J Virol 82(15):7264–7275.
13. Qiu X, et al. (2014) Reversion of advanced Ebola virus disease in nonhuman primates
with ZMapp. Nature 514(7520):47–53.
14. Sui J, et al. (2008) Broadening of neutralization activity to directly block a dominant
antibody-driven SARS-coronavirus evolution pathway. PLoS Pathog 4(11):e1000197.
15. Rockx B, et al. (2010) Escape from human monoclonal antibody neutralization affects
in vitro and in vivo fitness of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J Infect
Dis 201(6):946–955.
16. Traggiai E, et al. (2004) An efficient method to make human monoclonal antibodies from
memory B cells: Potent neutralization of SARS coronavirus. Nat Med 10(8):871–875.
17. Zhu Z, et al. (2007) Potent cross-reactive neutralization of SARS coronavirus isolates by
human monoclonal antibodies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(29):12123–12128.
18. Spruth M, et al. (2006) A double-inactivated whole virus candidate SARS coronavirus
vaccine stimulates neutralising and protective antibody responses. Vaccine 24(5):
652–661.
19. Bolles M, et al. (2011) A double-inactivated severe acute respiratory syndrome corona-
virus vaccine provides incomplete protection in mice and induces increased eosinophilic
proinflammatory pulmonary response upon challenge. J Virol 85(23):12201–12215.
20. McRoy WC, Baric RS (2008) Amino acid substitutions in the S2 subunit of mouse
hepatitis virus variant V51 encode determinants of host range expansion. J Virol
82(3):1414–1424.
21. Sui J, et al. (2014) Effects of human anti-spike protein receptor binding domain an-
tibodies on severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus neutralization escape and
fitness. J Virol 88(23):13769–13780.
22. DeDiego ML, et al. (2014) Coronavirus virulence genes with main focus on SARS-CoV
envelope gene. Virus Res 194:124–137.
23. Agnihothram S, et al. (2014) A mouse model for Betacoronavirus subgroup 2c using a
bat coronavirus strain HKU5 variant. MBio 5(2):e00047–e14.
24. Narayanan K, Ramirez SI, Lokugamage KG, Makino S (2015) Coronavirus non-
structural protein 1: Common and distinct functions in the regulation of host and viral
gene expression. Virus Res 202:89–100.
25. Bolles M, Donaldson E, Baric R (2011) SARS-CoV and emergent coronaviruses: Viral
determinants of interspecies transmission. Curr Opin Virol 1(6):624–634.
26. Sheahan T, Rockx B, Donaldson E, Corti D, Baric R (2008) Pathways of cross-species
transmission of synthetically reconstructed zoonotic severe acute respiratory syn-
drome coronavirus. J Virol 82(17):8721–8732.
27. Sims AC, et al. (2013) Release of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nu-
clear import block enhances host transcription in human lung cells. J Virol 87(7):
3885–3902.
Menachery et al.
PNAS
|
March 15, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 11
|
3053
MICROBIOLOGY
SEE COMMENTARY
