 366
T
he first 60 years of the 20th century saw a remarkable trans-
formation in health and longevity in the United States and 
other industrialized countries. In 1900, life expectancy in the 
United States was only 47.3 years (46.3 for men and 48.3 for 
women and only 33 for blacks).1,2 Infectious diseases such as 
pneumonia, influenza, tuberculosis, and gastroenteritis were the 
leading causes of death and collectively accounted for more than 
twice as many deaths as heart disease and stroke, the next 2 lead-
ing causes of death. By 1960, improvements in sanitation and 
the development of vaccines and antibiotics had brought about 
dramatic declines in infectious disease mortality and concomitant 
increases in life expectancy to 69.7 years (ranging from 61 for 
black men to 74 for black women).1,2 Heart disease, cancer, and 
stroke replaced infectious diseases as the leading causes of death.
The increasing preeminence of heart disease among causes 
of death in the first half of the 20th century in part reflects the 
decline of infectious diseases and the resulting increase in life ex-
pectancy, with many more Americans living to an age when they 
are likely to have the sequelae of chronic atherosclerosis. Indeed, 
many physicians of that era viewed atherosclerosis as a natural 
and somewhat inevitable feature of aging and regarded only pre-
mature cardiovascular disease (CVD; before the age of 60 years) 
as a legitimate target for preventive medicine.3 However, even in 
the 1960s, it was evident from time trends in age-adjusted heart 
disease rates since 1940 that heart attack rates were on the rise and 
were not merely a spurious manifestation of an aging population.4
Then, in the early 1970s, epidemiologists in the United 
States and Australia published an unexpected observation that 
coronary heart disease (CHD) mortality rates, after peaking 
in 1968, had apparently begun to decline.5–7 This observa-
tion was met with skepticism in many quarters. For example, 
a 1975 editorial in the British Medical Journal questioned 
Review
© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation Research is available at http://circres.ahajournals.org 
DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.309115
Abstract: If the control of infectious diseases was the public health success story of the first half of the 20th century, 
then the decline in mortality from coronary heart disease and stroke has been the success story of the century’s past 4 
decades. The early phase of this decline in coronary heart disease  and stroke was unexpected and controversial when 
first reported in the mid-1970s, having followed 60 years of gradual increase as the US population aged. However, 
in 1978, the participants in a conference convened by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute concluded 
that a significant recent downtick in coronary heart disease  and stroke mortality rates had definitely occurred, at 
least in the US Since 1978, a sharp decline in mortality rates from coronary heart disease  and stroke has become 
unmistakable throughout the industrialized world, with age-adjusted mortality rates having declined to about one 
third of their 1960s baseline by 2000. Models have shown that this remarkable decline has been fueled by rapid 
progress in both prevention and treatment, including precipitous declines in cigarette smoking, improvements 
in hypertension treatment and control, widespread use of statins to lower circulating cholesterol levels, and the 
development and timely use of thrombolysis and stents in acute coronary syndrome to limit or prevent infarction. 
However, despite the huge growth in knowledge and advances in prevention and treatment, there remain many 
questions about this decline. In fact, there is evidence that the rate of decline may have abated and may even be 
showing early signs of reversal in some population groups. The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, through a 
request for information, is soliciting input that could inform a follow-up conference on or near the 40th anniversary 
of the original landmark conference to further explore these trends in cardiovascular mortality in the context of what 
has come before and what may lie ahead.  
 
(Circ Res. 2017;120:366-380. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.309115.)
Key Words: cardiovascular diseases ■ coronary disease ■ hypertension ■ mortality ■ risk factors
Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality 
Possible Causes and Implications
George A. Mensah, Gina S. Wei, Paul D. Sorlie, Lawrence J. Fine, Yves Rosenberg,  
Peter G. Kaufmann, Michael E. Mussolino, Lucy L. Hsu, Ebyan Addou, Michael M. Engelgau,  
David Gordon
Original received December 1, 2016; revision received December 23, 2016; accepted December 23, 2016.
From the Center for Translation Research and Implementation Science (CTRIS) (G.A.M., M.M.E.) and Division of Cardiovascular Sciences (G.S.W., P.D.S., 
L.J.F., Y.R., P.G.K., M.E.M., L.L.H., E.A., D.G.), National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD.
Current address for P.G.K.: University of Colorado Denver.
The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 
National Institutes of Health; or the United States Department of Health and Human Services.
Correspondence to George A. Mensah, MD, Center for Translation Research and Implementation Science, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, One Rockledge Center, 6705 Rockledge Dr, Suite 6070, Bethesda, MD 20892. E-mail George.Mensah@nih.gov
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Mensah et al  Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality Rate  367
“whether the decline, which is far from dramatic, may be con-
sidered real” and concluded that, at that time, “the prospects 
of an appreciable improvement in coronary mortality rates do 
not seem bright.”8
To look further into whether the observed decline in 
CHD mortality and factors that might explain it, the National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) convened the 
1978 Bethesda Conference on the Decline in Coronary Heart 
Disease Mortality.9 The conference participants included a 
panel of international experts from the fields of CVD epide-
miology, clinical cardiology, biostatistics, and public health 
practice and research. Among the data examined and dis-
cussed at the conference were figures and tables on cause-of-
death statistics and their comparability, as well as technical 
aspects of trends in mortality decline.9,10 The conferees con-
cluded that the evidence supported a previously unappreciated 
and unexplained decline of the heart disease epidemic and that 
a range of factors acting together, from changes in risk factor 
profiles to improved clinical management, were all likely to 
have contributed to this new trend. The conference also con-
firmed that the declining CHD mortality rates seemed to be 
confined to the United States and that the evidence that similar 
trends were occurring elsewhere was equivocal.9
Now, ≈40 years after the original conference on the de-
cline in CHD mortality rates, it has become clear that CHD 
mortality rates have continued to decline in the United States 
(Figure 1) in both men and women (Figure 2) and throughout 
the industrialized world.11–14 Using the 1940 US population 
as reference, the age-adjusted annual heart disease mortality 
per 100 000 fell by 56% from 307.4 in 1950 to 134.6 in 1996, 
whereas age-adjusted annual stroke rates per 100 000 fell by 
70% during this same period from 88.8 to 26.5.4 Annual age-
adjusted cardiovascular mortality rates have continued to de-
cline thereafter, falling by 22% from 376 to 274 per 100 000 
from 1990 to 2013. Similar declines have been observed in 
nearly all regions of the world, especially in high-income 
North America, Western Europe, Japan, Australia, and New 
Zealand.12,13,15 In most of these countries, the declines in CVD 
mortality rates have been phenomenal—>70% decline in men 
and women in the Netherlands;16 and more than 60% decline 
in the United Kingdom and Ireland—from 1980 to 2009.16
However, despite the huge growth in knowledge and ad-
vances in treatment (Table), there remain some remarkable 
and unresolved issues about this decline. The NHLBI, through 
a request for information,17 is soliciting input that could in-
form a follow-up conference on or near the 40th anniversary 
of the original landmark conference,9 which took place in 
Bethesda, MD, on October 24 to 25, 1978. Such a follow-
up conference could convene the expertise needed to further 
explore recent trends in the CHD and total CVD mortality 
decline in the United States and abroad and anticipate their 
future trajectories worldwide.17
Contributions to the Declining CVD Mortality 
Rate: Relative Roles of Primordial, Primary, 
and Secondary Prevention
An important first step in exploring future trajectories of CVD 
mortality trends is the examination of contributors to the de-
cline in CHD mortality. Ford et al18 used a previously validated 
statistical model (IMPACT Coronary Heart Disease Model) to 
examine contributions to the decline in age-adjusted mortal-
ity rate for CHD in the United States from 1980 to 2000. The 
IMPACT model incorporates major CHD risk factors such as 
cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, elevated total choles-
terol, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and physical inactivity and 
all established medical and surgical interventions for CHD. 
The model has been used to examine the relative contribu-
tions of medical and surgical interventions for CHD versus 
preventive strategies that target the reduction of major CHD 
risk factors. The model has been validated and replicated and 
has been used specifically in efforts to explain CHD mortality 
trends in >15 countries worldwide19–43 Using this model, Ford 
et al18 estimated that ≈47% of the decline in CHD mortality 
rate from that period was attributable to evidence-based medi-
cal and surgical treatments, whereas reductions in major risk 
factors contributed ≈44%. As reported by Ford et al,18 the per-
centage contributions included secondary preventive therapies 
after myocardial infarction (MI) or revascularization (11%), 
initial treatments for acute MI or unstable angina (10%), treat-
ments for heart failure (9%), revascularization for chronic an-
gina (5%), and other therapies (12%) and ≈44% was attributed 
to changes in risk factors, including reductions in total choles-
terol (24%), systolic blood pressure (20%), smoking preva-
lence (12%), and physical inactivity (5%).18 About 9% of the 
decline remained unexplained.18 Importantly, increases in the 
body mass index (BMI) and the prevalence of diabetes mel-
litus accounted overall for an additional 59 500 deaths from 
CHD in 2000, suggesting that a greater decline in CHD mor-
tality would have been seen had the rise in BMI and diabetes 
mellitus prevalence been controlled.18
Although most of the countries where the IMPACT model 
has been used are in high-income North America and Western 
Europe, it has been used recently to explain CHD mortality 
trends in developing countries.39 In addition, the model has 
been used to make future projections or predictions of ex-
pected deaths prevented or postponed as part of the European 
Heart Health Strategy II Project on CHD mortality projections 
to 2020 comparing different policy scenarios.44 In these as-
sessments, the agreement between future CHD mortality and 
explicitly observed mortality in 4 countries was high and var-
ied between 80% and 106%.44
Gouda et al45 have recently demonstrated that in trying 
to explain the contributions to the decline in CHD mortality 
rates, the choice of the metric for comparisons matters. For 
Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
AHA 
American Heart Association
BMI 
body mass index
CHD 
coronary heart disease
CVD 
cardiovascular disease
EAPC 
estimated annual percentage change
IMPACT 
IMPACT Coronary Heart Disease Model
MI 
myocardial infarction
NHLBI 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 368  Circulation Research  January 20, 2017
example, analyses that use the metric of number of deaths 
prevented typically attribute about half the decline to disease 
treatments and half to preventive strategies that reduce risk 
factor levels.45 However, when a time-based metric such as 
life-years gained is used, the contribution from changes in 
risk factors typically increases significantly to >60%.45 They 
demonstrated that deaths averted before the age of 65 years 
through reductions in risk factors contribute only 15.9% of the 
total deaths prevented or postponed but 36.2% of total life-
years gained.45 For the CHD mortality decline in the United 
States between 1980 and 2000, reductions in major risk fac-
tors contributed 42% when deaths prevented or postponed is 
used as the metric, whereas a contribution of 79% is noted 
when life-years gained is the metric chosen.45
The importance of major risk factors in the prevention, 
pathogenesis, and clinical outcomes of CHD is well estab-
lised46,47; thus, it is not surprising that changes in risk factor levels 
are important contributors to the CHD mortality decline in the 
United States.48,49 However, the relative contribution of the role 
of primordial, primary, and secondary prevention in that decline 
has been difficult to establish because of the lack of reliable data 
on time trends and the incidence of cardiovascular events likely 
to be affected by those changes50 and because they are likely 
to vary from country to country.51,52 Ideally, prevention studies 
need to account for the role and incidence of out-of-hospital sud-
den cardiac death that is known to be the most common fatal 
cardiovascular event in most patients with CHD. Thus, there is 
a need for reliable, large population surveillance data including 
administrative data, data on incidence of CHD risk factors and 
their treatment, and death certificate data with cause of death 
certification. Most primordial/primary prevention studies to date 
have used retrospective data analysis and modeling.
Mannsverk et al.53 reported data from a 15-year prospec-
tive study in the Norwegian town of TromsØ that consisted 
of 3 population surveys conducted between 1994 and 2008 
that included 29 582 participants free of MI at inclusion. Main 
results showed that age- and sex-standardized CHD mortality 
fell by 7.3% annually and CHD incidence fell by 3%. Thus, 
Figure 2. Age-adjusted cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) mortality rates by sex, 
1950 to 2014. *The comparability ratio 
1.0502 was applied to the death rates 
reported in vital statistics for 1979 to 
1998. Source: CDC/NCHS, National Vital 
Statistics System, Mortality Multiple-
Cause-of-Death. These data represent 
underlying cause of death only. CHD 
indicates coronary heart disease; F: 
female; ICD, International Classification of 
Diseases; and M, male.
Figure 1. Age-adjusted cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) mortality rates, 1950 to 
2014. *The comparability ratio 1.0502 was 
applied to the death rates reported in vital 
statistics for 1979 to 1998. Source: CDC/
NCHS, National Vital Statistics System, 
Mortality Multiple-Cause-of-Death. These 
data represent the underlying cause 
of death only. CHD indicates coronary 
heart disease; and ICD, International 
Classification of Diseases.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Mensah et al  Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality Rate  369
Table. Examples of Major Advances in the Prevention and Treatment of Coronary Heart Disease
Advance
Year or Period
Impact on the Prevention and Treatment of Coronary Heart Disease and Risk Factors
Framingham Heart Study identified smoking, high BP and 
high blood cholesterol as major cardiovascular risk factors
1960s
New targets for atherosclerotic coronary heart disease prevention and treatment
First coronary artery bypass surgery
1960
Surgical procedure to bypass clogged arteries
Surgeon General’s Report on Smoking and Health
1964
Publicized dangers of cigarette smoking
Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program
Early 1970s
Demonstrated benefit of treating even moderate hypertension
First percutaneous transvascular coronary angioplasty
1977
Successful restoration of perfusion in occluded coronary arteries via percutaneous 
catheter
Discovery of the low-density lipoprotein  receptor
1970s
Michael Brown and Joseph Goldstein laid the groundwork for statins
LRC-CPPT trial (Lipid Research Clinics Coronary Primary 
Prevention)
1984
Established benefit of cholesterol lowering
National clinical practice guidelines for high BP and high 
blood cholesterol
1987
Established standards and targets for BP and cholesterol
Development of statins, angiotensin-converting enzyme-
inhibitors and calcium channel blockers
1987–8
New powerful drugs for managing cholesterol and blood pressure
TIMI trial (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction)
1987
Thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction
First coronary stent
1988
Made angioplasty more durable
Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S)
1994
First statin end point trial showed reduction in mortality. Many other statin trials 
followed
SHEP (Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly)
1996
Established the benefit of treating isolated systolic hypertension in elderly. Many 
other BP trials followed
SPRINT trial (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention)
2015
Established the benefit of intensive BP control (to target systolic BP <120 mm Hg) in 
high-risk patients without diabetes
BP indicates blood pressure.
the authors could demonstrate the changes in incidence and 
case-fatality contributed 43% and 57%, respectively, to the de-
cline in CHD mortality.53 Most importantly, the study showed 
that changes in risk factors contributed almost two thirds of 
the change in CHD events, 64% in women and 61% in men. 
The prevalence of most risk factors decreased during that pe-
riod, except for increases in BMI and diabetes mellitus. The 
major cause of the observed decline in CHD mortality was a 
cholesterol decrease of about one third, thus accounting for 
about half of the observed CHD mortality decline. Changes in 
systolic blood pressure, smoking, resting heart rate, and physi-
cal activity each accounted for 9% to 14% of the decrease in 
risk of CHD, whereas increases in BMI and diabetes mellitus 
prevalence accounted for a 7% and 2% increase, respectively.
Björck et al37 also tried to quantify the relative contribution 
of the primary and secondary preventions on cardiovascular 
mortality, as well as the part medical treatment played in the 
known reduction of CHD mortality rate observed in Sweden 
between 1986 and 2002. Using the IMPACT model, they re-
ported that 75% of the mortality reduction was accounted for 
by reduction of the major risk factors (cholesterol, blood pres-
sure, and smoking) in the asymptomatic population, leading 
to their conclusion that the “largest effects on mortality came 
from primary prevention.”37 This study also made the observa-
tion that the major contributors to the mortality reduction were 
dietary changes during that period in Sweden (because the use 
of statins at that time was low in asymptomatic individuals), 
whereas the large decrease in cholesterol in the CHD popula-
tion was because of both diet and use of statins.37
Other studies have tried to model the role of primordial 
prevention. For example, O’Flaherty, calculated that a more 
aggressive policy producing substantial dietary improve-
ments such as the one already achieved in other countries, 
would result in an estimated 30 000 fewer cardiovascular 
deaths in the United Kingdom between 2006 and 2015 com-
pared with 12 500 less cardiovascular deaths if the current 
trend continued.54 Other recent studies analyzing European55 
or American56 data are consistent with these numbers. These 
studies strongly suggest that primordial and primary pre-
vention account for a large part of the observed reduction 
in the incidence and rate of cardiovascular events observed 
in the last 20 to 30 years. Data from the prospective WHO 
Multinational monitoring of trends and determinants in car-
diovascular disease  Project confirmed the importance of the 
main cardiovascular risk factors by showing at least a partial 
correlation between changes in those risk factors and changes 
in CHD event rates.57 The proportion of the decline explained 
by the change in risk factors may be lower in countries where 
there is no provision for universal healthcare and where na-
tional health policies for primordial and primary prevention 
of CHD are not in place. Conversely, the increase in CHD 
mortality observed in countries such as China seems to be 
related to an increase in smoking rates and higher choles-
terol levels further emphasizing the importance of risk fac-
tor reduction overall and primordial or primary prevention in 
particular.21
The role of other potentially modifiable risk factors in 
primordial and primary prevention, such as environmental 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 370  Circulation Research  January 20, 2017
stressors, remains to be determined but is assumed to play an 
important role.58 In 2010, an American Heart Association sci-
entific statement indicated that “the overall evidence is consis-
tent with a causal relationship between PM2.5 exposure and 
CVD morbidity and mortality.”59 There is also evidence that 
ambient noise and air pollution have a combined effect on the 
increased incidence of CVD.60,61 However, there are no direct 
data showing that the decreases in these environmental stress-
ors lead to a decline in the incidence of CVD events. These 
studies suggest an independent improvement in life expec-
tancy and a reduction in cardiovascular events after reduction 
of the exposure.60,61
Recent trends in the increased prevalence of obesity both 
in adults62 and in children63 not only in the United States and 
other developed countries but also in developing countries52 
are associated with corresponding trends in diabetes mellitus, 
again highlighting the need for primordial and primary pre-
vention with emphasis on policy and environmental changes 
that support and facilitate healthy lifestyle and behavioral 
choices.
In addition to primordial and primary prevention strate-
gies, improvement in the delivery of evidence-based therapies 
in patients with established CHD contribute significantly to 
the decline in CHD mortality. A historical study conducted 
on patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graft surgery 
between 1970 and 1984 estimated that the surgical contri-
bution to the annual decrease in CHD mortality increased 
from 0.2% to 6.6% during that period.64 Wijeysundera et al65 
showed that a 20% reduction in mortality could be achieved 
by meeting quality indicators of use, with the greatest benefit 
obtained by use of angiotensin-converting enzyme-inhibitors 
in patients with stable CAD and β-blocker use in heart failure. 
In the WHO Multinational monitoring of trends and determi-
nants in cardiovascular disease Project, Tunstall-Pedoe et al66 
were able to show that the use of evidence-based therapies 
before and during acute MI was strongly correlated with a de-
crease in coronary event rates, including CHD mortality.66,67 
Other data from the Multinational monitoring of trends and 
determinants in cardiovascular disease-Australia cohort also 
showed that 28-day survivors of acute MI had a 28% lower 
relative risk reduction for the risk of death >12 years after the 
incident admission, but the benefit completely disappeared 
when the analysis was further adjusted for medical treatment 
(thrombolysis, antiplatelet, β blocker, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor, and lipid-lowering drugs) received after 
admission.68
Some recent studies conducted after 2000 may indicate the 
results obtained by the reduction of cardiovascular risk factors 
may not be sustained, especially in the United States. For ex-
ample, Pilkerton et al69 analyzed the results of the Behavioral 
Risk Factor Surveillance System using a global Cardiovascular 
Health Index developed by the American Heart Association , 
combining the major 7 cardiovascular risk factors. There was 
a small decrease in the mean Cardiovascular Health Index, 
with an increase in the prevalence of nonsmokers and favor-
able diet status, but a decrease in the prevalence of ideal blood 
pressure, cholesterol, and a higher reported prevalence of 
lack of physical activity, as well an increase in BMI and high 
blood glucose. There were significant disparities by state and 
demographic groups. Despite the design limitations, this study 
suggests that there may be a population-wide decrease in pri-
mordial prevention.69 Again, as demonstrated in other stud-
ies,53,70–72 there were negative trends recorded in BMI and high 
blood glucose, whose long-term consequences on the overall 
CV prevalence and mortality remain to be determined.
Adverse Impact of Obesity and  
Diabetes Mellitus
The continuing global epidemic of obesity remains one of 
the greatest public health challenges of the present century.73 
It has been estimated that if current trends continue through 
2025, the global obesity prevalence (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) will 
reach 18% in men and exceed 21% in women.73 The profile 
in the United States has paralleled the global pattern with a 
recent study finding 35% of men and 36% of women obese.74 
These trends have not been limited to adults—among children 
in the United States, during the past 4 decades, alarming in-
creases in overweight and obesity have also been found. In 
fact, it is estimated that nearly one third of children in the 
United States are overweight or obese.75
These rising trends in the prevalence of obesity and diabe-
tes mellitus have significant implications for CHD mortality 
rates because of the recognition that diabetes mellitus is a cor-
onary risk equivalent76 and obesity is a major CVD risk fac-
tor. In spite of this recognition, it remains challenging to fully 
appreciate the impact of diabetes mellitus and obesity on the 
CHD mortality decline, especially across the entire lifespan, 
and in particular, in reference to their role in the perceived 
deceleration of the CHD mortality rate declines. Three impor-
tant studies have examined this issue in the United States. In 
the first study, Ford et al31 demonstrated that although nearly 
half of the decline in CHD mortality over the period of 1980 
to 2000 was attributed to reductions in risk factors, increas-
es in the body- BMI and the prevalence of diabetes mellitus 
accounted for an increased number of deaths (8% and 10%, 
respectively).31
A second study examined CVD mortality rates between 
1979 and 2011 and the variation across age and sex groups. 
In this study, adults aged ≥65 years showed consistent CHD 
mortality declines, whereas younger men and women (<55 
years of age) initially had declines in CHD mortality be-
tween 1979 until 1989, followed by 2 decades of stagnation 
with minimal improvement.77 The reasons for this stagna-
tion among younger persons are not clearly understood. The 
authors speculated that many factors, including the ongoing 
obesity epidemic, may have contributed to the findings. One 
third and more recent study, that used US national epidemi-
ology data, found declines in CHD mortality from 2000 to 
2014.78 However, a deceleration in the CVD mortality rate 
decline was noted after 2011. Importantly, this decelera-
tion occurred in men, women, and all race/ethnicity groups. 
The authors expressed concern about the adverse impact of 
obesity and diabetes mellitus on the mortality rate declines, 
especially considering the national epidemiological data 
showing that the prevalence of adult obesity increased from 
22.9% in 1988 to 1994 to 34.9% in 2011 to 2012, whereas 
diabetes mellitus prevalence nearly tripled, between 1990 
and 2013.78 As shown in Figure 3, it has been estimated that 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Mensah et al  Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality Rate  371
if current trends continue unabated, there will be ≈7.3 mil-
lion incident cases of coronary artery disease and stroke in 
the United States and United Kingdom by 2030.79,80 There 
will also be an estimated 65 million more obese adults in the 
United States and 11 million more in the United Kingdom by 
2030 resulting in.79,80
The challenge of attributing causality in the relationship 
between rising prevalence of obesity and deceleration in the 
CHD mortality decline is made even more complex by the 
lack of adequate understanding of the combined impact of 
fatness and fitness and the related confounding influence of 
exercise capacity on CVD mortality trends in diverse popu-
lations. For example, in study of >29 000 ethnically diverse 
participants, McAuley et al81 identified reduced exercise ca-
pacity as a powerful predictor of total mortality independent 
of the impact of BMI or obesity. Although the end point in 
this was not CHD or CVD mortality, this finding is infor-
mative and consistent with previous data, showing that fit-
ness may reduce the all-cause and cardiovascular hazards of 
obesity82 and that low cardiorespiratory fitness and physical 
inactivity imposes an adverse impact independent of the 
impact of obesity.83,84 Continued rigorous research on the 
impact of obesity and diabetes on CHD mortality trends is 
needed.
Dynamics of the Decline in CHD  
Mortality Rates
Trends in CHD mortality rate are dynamic and reflect chang-
ing contributions from the prevention and control of major 
CHD risk factors, effective treatment of established CHD, 
and possibly the role of other factors yet to be identified. In 
addition, because the magnitude of contributions from these 
factors and their degree of success in preventing CHD deaths 
vary among different populations and subgroups, important 
differences in CHD trends may be noted by age, sex, race, 
ethnicity, geographic location, and other sociodemographic 
categories. As a result, CHD mortality rates may be continu-
ing to decline in some groups at the initial dramatic rates ob-
served in the United States in the early 1970s,31 whereas rates 
of decline may be decelerating, stagnating, or even reversing 
elsewhere. This has been demonstrated using the IMPACT 
CHD model.19,23,38,39,42,78,85–88
Ezzati et al52 have provided a comprehensive assessment 
of the contributions of risk factors and medical care to CVD 
mortality trends in many countries with a special focus on the 
established risk factors such as smoking; blood glucose and 
diabetes mellitus; raised blood pressure; and serum choles-
terol for which reasonably robust data on trends exist in many 
countries. They also address the contributions of adiposity, 
Figure 3. Variations in the number of 
projected incident cases of obesity-
related complications between 2010 
and 2030, according to 3 hypothetical 
scenarios of population-wide body 
mass index (BMI) change. The first 
column assumes that past trends 
continue unabated; the middle column 
assumes an immediate population-
wide 1% BMI reduction; and the third 
column assumes that population BMIs 
had remained at 1990 levels. CAD 
indicates coronary artery disease; CVD, 
cerebrovascular disease; and DM, 
diabetes mellitus. Reproduced from 
Padwal80 based on data presented by 
Wang et al79 with permission of the 
publisher. Copyright ©2014, Canadian 
Cardiovascular Society. Published by 
Elsevier, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 372  Circulation Research  January 20, 2017
certain aspects of diet, and alcohol intake. In the present ar-
ticle, we explore current understanding of these contributions 
and their relationships to known CHD mortality trends that 
have slowed, stagnated, or reversed in different countries to 
examine recent trends in the United States.
Where Have Trends Decelerated?
In 2007, Ford and Capewell89 provided the first evidence sug-
gesting that CHD mortality rates for young adults <55 years 
old in the United States might be leveling off or even showing 
early nonsignificant signs of a rise. Using mortality data from 
1980 to 2002 to calculate age-specific mortality rates from 
CHD for United States adults aged ≥35 years and a validated 
Joinpoint analysis software, they examined changes in the an-
nual percentage change in mortality rates from CHD. The key 
parameter determined in this exercise was the estimated an-
nual percentage change (EAPC). Overall, they observed that 
age-adjusted CHD mortality rate had declined from 1980 to 
2002 by 52% in men and 49% in women. The decline in the 
overall EAPC for the entire American adult population was 
fairly constant over the 20-year period from 1980 to 2000, and 
foreshadowing the decade of 2001 and 2010, the EAPC accel-
erated in the 2000 to 2002. This study suggested that although 
the overall EAPC had declined at a fairly steady rate, the trend 
for younger compared with older adults differed during the 
1980 to 2002 period. For example, among women aged 35 to 
54 years, the EAPC for CHD mortality decreased significantly 
from −5.4% in 1980 to 1989 to EAPC of −1.2% in the 1990s, 
and similarly among men aged 34 to 54 years, the EAPC also 
decreased significantly from −6.2% in the 1980s to −2.3% in 
the 1990s. In contrast to the younger adults, US adults aged 
>55 years had the opposite pattern with greater mortality rate 
declines in the 1990s than in the 1980s.89
Since the Ford and Capewell publication in 2007, more 
evidence on the trend in younger adults has emerged. One 
analysis in Australia found that for both men and women be-
tween ages 25 and 54 years, the decline in CHD mortality 
slowed starting in the early 1990s in comparison to the previ-
ous 2 decades.19 The authors concluded that the most likely 
explanations for the reduction of the CHD mortality decline 
were attenuations of the earlier declines in major traditional 
risk factors and diabetes mellitus.19 In another study, Wilmot 
et al,77 also using Joinpoint analysis, found that from 1989 to 
2004, the EAPC for CHD mortality in women aged <55 years 
was 0.2 (95% confidence interval, −0.1 to 0.4), whereas men 
in the same age group during a nearly identical period of 1989 
to 2005 showed a modest decline of −0.9 (95% confidence 
interval, −1.1 to −0.8). But in the latter part of the decade, the 
CHD mortality rates in this age group improved slightly to 
−2.9 (2005–2011; 95% confidence interval −3.5 to −2.3) in 
men and to −2.0 (2004–2011; 95% confidence interval, −2.7 
to −1.3) in women. In contrast, during the period of 2002 to 
2011, CHD EAPC mortality rates for both men and women 
aged >65 years continued to decline at ≥5%.
The most recent study of trends in CVD mortality in the 
United States concluded that the rate of decline in heart dis-
ease mortality that includes CHD mortality has substantially 
slowed for the 2011 to 2014 period for both sexes and for all 
race/ethnic groups.78,85 Because this period only contains 4 
years, the pattern of the decline by age group is not yet clear 
and it is probably too early to determine whether the pattern 
since 1990 in which the older adults had more rapid declines 
in CHD mortality than the younger adults will persist. The 
modest upturn in the magnitude of decline among the younger 
adults in the last part of the past decade suggests a need for 
caution in predicting the trend of CHD mortality rates by age 
group for the rest of this decade although careful monitoring 
and further study are definitely warranted.
Where Are Trends Likely to Reverse or Are 
Already Rising?
Comparison of trends in CHD mortality decline at the inter-
national level is complex because of challenges in definitions 
of metrics used, differences in data quality and methods of 
acquisition, and consistency in cause of death recording and 
certification. In addition, information from countries undergo-
ing social and political changes can show results because of 
process rather than cause of death. Nevertheless, data from 
countries that exhibit unusual changes can be informative in 
understanding the dynamics of mortality changes.
In an analysis of trends in CVD mortality from 1980 to 
2009 in Europe, Hartley et al16 found substantial variation in 
the declines by country. Declines in ischemic heart disease 
were >60% over this time period for Western Europe, where-
as Eastern European states had much less decline.16 There 
were periods in the decade of the 1990s where countries like 
Croatia, Latvia, and Slovenia showed substantial increases 
in ischemic heart disease  mortality. The authors suggested 
that these increases were influenced by the social and politi-
cal changes after the fall of Communism.16 Social constructs 
also play a role in trends in mortality in England.90 Using data 
from 1982 and 2006 and prediction model to 2030, Allen et 
al90 noted that all economic groups demonstrated declining 
ischemic heart disease  mortality rates, but those in the lowest 
economic groups were projected to decline the least. Thus, 
although absolute inequalities were decreasing, relative in-
equalities were projected to widen further, reflecting slower 
mortality declines in the most deprived groups.90 Differences 
by sex are also important and concerning. In their assessment 
of possible plateaus in the CHD mortality decline over the 
20th century in England and Wales, Allender et al23 noted that 
the rate of improvement in CHD mortality seems to be begin-
ning to decline and may even be reversing among younger 
women. These may not always be entirely explained by differ-
ences in risk factor burdens.
Using data from vital statistics and from risk factor survey 
data, Critchley et al39 described trends in CVD mortality for 
Syria, Tunisia, occupied Palestinian territories, and Turkey. In 
the periods from the late 1990s to the late 2000s, age-stan-
dardized rates of CHD rose by 20% in Tunisia and 62% in 
Syria, but declined by 17% in occupied Palestinian territories 
and 29% in Turkey. BMI and diabetes mellitus increased in all 
of these areas over this time period, although cholesterol and 
blood pressure increased only in Tunisia and Syria, the coun-
tries where the CHD mortality rates increased.39 Cigarette 
smoking declined substantially in Turkey and occupied 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Mensah et al  Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality Rate  373
Palestinian territories, the countries where the CHD mortal-
ity rates decreased. Thus, these findings are suggestive but 
somewhat inconsistent about the risk factor explanations for 
the CHD mortality rate changes.
Continuing to complicate the picture of identifying clearly 
the causes of CHD declines is a study of trends in Japan.91 The 
age-adjusted trend in CHD mortality was described for Japan 
and 7 other countries. Although there were large differences 
in the CHD mortality rates by country, all showed declines 
from 1980 to 1983 to 2004 to 2007. Japan showed the small-
est percent decline, but even by the last period, their mortal-
ity rates were one third of the United States for men and one 
fourth for women.91 The key issue in this study, however, is 
that despite the CHD mortality declines, the cholesterol levels 
in Japan are rising, whereas in every other country, they are 
declining. Although cigarette smoking is very high in Japan 
(35% in 2012), it has shown a substantial decrease from the 
high of 61% in 2008.91
Trends from CHD in England were analyzed among those 
with or without diabetes mellitus.92 In those without diabetes 
mellitus mentioned on the death certificate, the deaths from 
CHD dropped consistently from 1995 to 2010 with an average 
annual percent change of 4.5%. However, CHD mortality rates 
either remained constant over time or increased slightly for 
those with a mention of diabetes mellitus on the death certifi-
cate.92 This result could have several meanings, one of which 
could be that diabetes mellitus is being added more frequently 
on the death certificate without any real change in the disease 
impact. However, the other suggestion is that mortality from 
the combination of diabetes mellitus and CHD remains stub-
bornly unchanged, and substantial improvements are needed 
in prevention and treatment of diabetes mellitus.
The foregoing examples illustrate the difficulty of con-
cretely attributing causes to changes in CHD mortality rates, 
but they do not negate the likely role of traditional risk factors. 
However, it is also important to consider other changes such 
as increases in economic disparity or social change that dis-
rupts secure well-being. From all of the data from the United 
States presented earlier in this article, there is likely a decel-
eration of the CHD mortality decline in some age groups, but 
it will be unclear whether it is a major change or one of the 
short-term level periods seen when reviewing the long trend 
line from 1965.
Disparities in the Declining CVD  
Mortality Trends
The decline in CVD mortality rate in recent years has been 
uniform neither for all population subgroups nor for all causes 
of CVD death.49,93–95 In addition, despite the decades of the 
decline, substantial disparities in mortality rates continue by 
race, ethnicity, and sex (Figures 4A and 4B). Unequal access 
to preventive interventions is one of the contributing factors. 
The Medical Expenditures Panel Survey of more than 157 000 
adults showed that, although statin use among US adults 
increased by ≈80% between 2002 and 2013, statin use was 
significantly lower in women, racial/ethnic minorities, and 
the uninsured.96 Differences in CVD mortality also exist by 
geographic location and socioeconomic status and are often 
attributed to related differences in risk factor status; social and 
environmental differences; and inequities in access to care and 
the quality of care received. Because of their close association 
with CVD events and mortality, it is of interest to examine 
their influence on the decline of CVD mortality in the United 
States and internationally.
A comprehensive assessment of cardiovascular health 
disparities using national surveys of adults aged ≥18 years 
demonstrated that disparities by race/ethnicity, sex, education 
level, socioeconomic status, and geographic location were 
pervasive in the United States.97 In fact, disparities were com-
mon in all risk factors examined. Hypertension prevalence was 
high among blacks (39.8%) regardless of sex or educational 
status, and hypercholesterolemia was high among whites and 
Mexican American men and white women in both groups of 
educational status. CVD mortality at all ages tended to be 
highest in blacks. The highest prevalence of obesity in men 
(29.2%) was found in Mexican Americans who had completed 
a high-school education. In women, the highest prevalence of 
obesity (47.3%) was noted in black women with or without a 
high-school education.97
In spite of the steady decline in smoking since the publi-
cation of the first Surgeon General’s Report on Smoking and 
Health in 1964,98 smoking still continues to influence CVD 
risk. Although the prevalence of smoking was significantly 
lower in 2010 to 2013 than in 2002 to 2005 in many subgroups 
in the United States, differences between various population 
subgroups span more than an order of magnitude.99 For ex-
ample, only 2.5% of Chinese women smoke, compared with 
32.5% pf Puerto Rican Men and 25% of Puerto Rican women. 
Even among different Hispanic subgroups, there is a 3-fold 
difference in smoking rates.99 Moreover, for the overall US 
adult population, the rate of decline has slowed and seems 
to have reached an asymptote at just above 18%.100 Thus, al-
though there is significant variation in smoking rates among 
different subgroups of the US population, the overall trend has 
been stable for the past decade. To the extent that the decline 
in prevalence of smoking, long considered one of the most 
toxic CVD risk factors has stalled, it should not be surprising 
that the rate of decline in CVD deaths has also slowed.
Considerable geographic, racial, ethnic, and socioeco-
nomic variation exists in the prevalence of 7 common indi-
ces of cardiovascular health, defined by the American Heart 
Association as including smoking, physical inactivity, obesity, 
poor diet, hypertension, high cholesterol, and diabetes mel-
litus.101 Although no study has evaluated trends in their col-
lective prevalence, 5 of the American Heart Association  7 
indices of cardiovascular health (serum cholesterol, blood 
pressure, BMI, diabetes mellitus, and smoking) were in-
cluded in the definition of low risk for CVD in the Hispanic 
Community Health Study.102 A striking variation was found 
in the prevalence of low-risk status by Hispanic/Latino back-
ground (Cuban, Dominican, Mexican, Puerto Rican, Central 
American, and South American), as well as among the 5 
individual components that constitute the risk metric in the 
Hispanic Community Health Study. Additional variation in 
risk was also observed by age, sex, acculturation, and age 
at immigration. For example, Puerto Rican women had the 
highest percentage with a high-risk profile, whereas South 
American women had the lowest (43.9 versus 18.1%). Cuban 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 374  Circulation Research  January 20, 2017
women had the highest proportion with a low-risk profile, with 
Mexican men having the lowest proportion in the low-risk cat-
egory (15.0 versus 4.6%).102 Thus, the limited classifications 
of racial and ethnic groups usually seen in the literature do not 
portray the nuances of Hispanic/Latino subgroup health status 
adequately, obscuring an understanding of their underlying 
causes. Finally, an insufficient granularity in defining impor-
tant subgroups impedes a sufficiently refined understanding of 
the preventive interventions needed to optimize improvement 
in risk factors in underserved subgroups of the population.
Considerable disparities also exist by geography and State 
within the United States.103,104 One such study is an exami-
nation of trends in heart disease mortality in Mississippi, the 
state with the highest cardiovascular mortality rates in the 
United States.105 In the most recent years described in the anal-
yses (late 1990s to 2013), mortality in all race and sex group 
declined by an average of 3% to 4% annually. This is impor-
tant because their heart disease death rate in 2014 is twice that 
of the state with the lowest mortality106 and improvement is 
certainly needed. Comparing age-adjusted heart disease death 
rates for the 50 states in 2010 and 2014 showed declines in 
all states with a few exceptions.107,108 The top 10 states with 
the highest heart disease mortality all showed declines, but 5 
states throughout the range showed no decline over this time 
period. This may be because of variation in mortality rates 
and possibly regression to the mean, but attention needs to 
be given to assure the improvements in heart disease are met 
throughout the United States. Gillum et al104 also showed in 
an earlier analysis that between 1999 and 2007, the level and 
rates of decline in CHD mortality were greater in the Ohio and 
Mississippi River region than in other geographic regions of 
the United States.
An often overlooked CVD risk factor is infection by the 
influenza virus, a risk that has been shown in randomized trials 
to be ameliorated by vaccination, reducing CVD mortality by 
55% in secondary prevention trials.109 Vaccination rates were 
highest among non-Hispanic whites, followed by Hispanics 
and non-Hispanic blacks (66% versus 54% versus 48%). 
Figure 4. Coronary heart disease 
mortality by race-ethnicity, and sex, 
ages between 25 and 34 y (A) and 
between 45 and 54 y (B), US, 1999 
to 2014. Data for Hispanic females are 
unreliable and not shown. Source: CDC/
NCHS, National Vital Statistics System, 
Mortality Multiple-Cause-of-Death. These 
data represent the underlying cause of 
death only. BM indicates black male; NH, 
non-Hispanic; and WM, white male.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Mensah et al  Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality Rate  375
Rates increased in all subgroups of the population between 
1989 and 1999, but declined slightly for non-Hispanic whites 
until 2003.110 In 2011, vaccinations among those over the age 
of 65 years reached 72.1% among non-Hispanic whites, ver-
sus 57.2% among Hispanics and 53.3% among non-Hispanic 
blacks.111 Given the significant impact of influenza vaccina-
tion on the secondary prevention of CVD death, the 18% vac-
cination differential between major population subgroups 
contributes significantly to disparities in CVD mortality.
Successful preventive intervention on CVD risk factors, 
including novel ones such as influenza infection, is key for 
accelerating a decline in CVD mortality. Strategies must take 
into account a more nuanced understanding of subgroups 
of the population, including differences among urban, inner 
city, and rural populations, as well as a more granular clas-
sification of ethnic and at-risk population subgroups. Greater 
detail is needed in surveillance programs to optimize predic-
tion and the optimal application of resources. Modeling future 
CVD mortality is more successful when trends in changing 
demographics are included.112 It can be even more successful 
if detailed data become available on trends in prevalence of 
specific risk factors among subgroups of the population.
International data also suggest that differences in CVD 
risk factors may be the major contributor to disparities in mor-
tality. In Scotland, decline in mortality rates flattened between 
1986 and 2006, with the decline confined to younger men 
and women in the 2 most deprived fifths in socioeconomic 
status.113 These are also the groups with the highest preva-
lence of CVD risk factors, especially smoking. When 30-year 
CVD mortality trends are compared among countries in the 
European Union, it is evident that there is a considerable East–
West disparity for ischemic heart disease  and CVD,16 attrib-
uted to a differential prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors. 
In Lithuania, for example, smoking prevalence increased 1985 
to 2013 in both sexes, as well as hypertension and obesity, 
which contributed to a slowing decline in CVD mortality.114
Implications for Clinical and Public Health 
Research and Practice
The data on CVD mortality trends in the United States pre-
sented throughout this review have been derived from a 
variety of sources, including national surveys, regional sur-
veillance efforts, and cohort studies. Most of these data 
sources act independently of one another. A coordinated sur-
veillance system can serve many functions such as providing 
benchmark data for local, regional, state, and national policies 
and programs, thereby helping to direct the allocation of lim-
ited resources.115,116 A system that includes the capability for 
methodically and accurately capturing key factors underlying 
health disparities by race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and 
geographic region would further enable more effective goal 
setting for programs and policies aimed at eliminating health 
disparities.
In the absence of ideal data, the results of modeling stud-
ies can be invaluable but they must be interpreted cautiously 
given that both the heterogeneity of the data sources, as well 
as of the models used lead to great imprecision, a limitation 
that has been well recognized by most investigators. For ex-
ample, in the analysis by Ford et al,31 the best estimate of the 
reduction in CHD deaths because of therapies was 47%, but 
could have been as low as 19% or as high as 94%. However, 
other recent studies using the same model seem to confirm 
that about half of the reduction in CHD deaths may indeed 
be because of medical or surgical treatments.117 These data 
again highlight the benefit of collecting prevalence data on a 
large scale, coupled with longitudinal surveys to better under-
stand trends in cardiovascular risk factors and provide data on 
cardiovascular events. The National Institutes of Health All 
of Us Research Program118 (formerly the Precision Medicine 
Initiative) Cohort Program that intends to build a national re-
search cohort of 1 million or more US participants may be 1 
way to achieve this goal.119
Expanding the Research Evidence to More 
Precisely Prevent and Treat CVD
Despite all the accomplishments in cardiovascular research 
to date, only a small proportion of clinical CVD guidelines 
are based on high-quality evidence.120 There is a critical need 
to support the continued generation of research findings to 
guide evidence-based decision making, in both CVD preven-
tion and treatment. Whenever feasible to conduct random-
ized clinical trials to generate the gold standard evidence on 
new interventions, such efforts should be pursued. In other 
incidences, such as when evaluating impacts of harmful be-
haviors or environmental exposures, population-based cohort 
studies are invaluable.121 Observational studies from clinical 
settings, including those based on platforms provided by dis-
ease registries or electronic health records, represent another 
rich source of research evidence. Yet another often underap-
preciated but valuable method is research that generates prac-
tice-based evidence (as opposed to the well-known concept 
of evidence-based practice). Instead of shying away from 
analyzing complicated factors that often occur in real-life set-
tings, practice-based research embraces these variables in the 
analyses to generate evidence that better reflects the complex 
reality rather than cover it.122 Recently, in light of advancing 
technologies in genomics, high-throughput molecular assays, 
wearable and mobile devices, electronic health records, and 
data sciences, precision medicine has appeared on the fore-
front of many areas of research. Precision medicine is defined 
by the National Institutes of Health as an emerging approach 
for disease treatment and prevention that takes into account 
individual variability in genes, environment, and lifestyle for 
each person.123 In his January 20, 2015, State of the Union 
address, President Obama announced his plan to launch the 
Precision Medicine Initiative, including National Institutes 
of Health funding starting from fiscal year 2016 to build a 
national cohort study of ≥1 million US volunteers.119,124 The 
Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort Program will be inclu-
sive of participants from diverse racial/ethnic, social, and 
geographic backgrounds and health statuses. The large sam-
ple size and the multiple types of data to be collected are 
intended to have the statistical power to detect associations 
between genetic, behavioral, environmental exposures, and 
other individual variability to a variety of health outcomes.125 
Given the high prevalence and incidence of CVD, a substan-
tial portion of the cohort is expected to have risk factors or 
existing CVD at the outset or to develop CVD during the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 376  Circulation Research  January 20, 2017
course of follow-up. One can readily envision the potential of 
leveraging the Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort Program 
to enable deeper observational investigations or targeted tri-
als to enable more precise prevention and treatments of CVD. 
Examples of scientific opportunities might include, but not 
limited to (1) advancing the field of pharmacogenetics in 
managing CVD, (2) improving risk stratification of a variety 
of CVD and conditions, (3) developing new disease classifi-
cations for CVD, especially heterogeneous conditions such 
as heart failure, and (4) tailoring behavioral interventions 
based on one’s genomic and molecular profile, as well as en-
vironmental exposures.
Toward Effective Implementation in Clinical 
Care and Public Health
Critics have raised concerns that ongoing attention to preci-
sion medicine detracts from public health efforts.126–129 One 
criticism is that a heightened focus on improving clinical 
care will not address the fundamental social and economic 
problems that play huge roles in driving health disparities.126 
Others, however, view precision medicine and public health 
as complementary rather than opposing efforts. One such area 
of complement is that advances in precision medicine could 
improve population health by refining the risk stratification of 
populations for multiple chronic diseases including CVD to 
enable more efficient prevention strategies and potentially re-
duce the cost of care.130,131 Nevertheless, it is well established 
that generating the evidence and developing strategies for 
prevention and treatment does not necessarily lead to changes 
in clinical practice. The learning healthcare system has been 
identified as one key approach envisioned in real-world clini-
cal settings to foster the integration of genomics and other pre-
cision medicine interventions with implementation science.130 
Indeed, it should be recognized that implementation science 
is a crucial element and a potential catalyst in the translation 
of research findings into routine clinical and public health 
practice.132,133
In brief, this section has laid out several ways in which 
population science might be advanced to further understand 
and promote the continued decline in CVD mortality rates in 
the United States. The approaches include developing a co-
ordinated national surveillance system to obtain CVD inci-
dence and mortality data at local, state, and national levels, 
and expanding the current research evidence base through a 
wide-spectrum of clinical research methods, ranging from tra-
ditional clinical studies to novel approaches such as precision 
medicine. Moreover, to continue to bend the CVD mortality 
curve, multidimensional efforts are required that go beyond 
solely focusing on generating research evidence to also ap-
plying implementation science for successful adoption, 
scale-up, and spread of effective clinical and public health 
interventions.132–134
Summary and Conclusions
Viewed from the perspective of the early 21st century, the 
20th century dramatically reshaped the public health profile 
of the United States and the rest of the world. The first half 
of the century saw a remarkable 25-year increase in longev-
ity in the United States, fueled mainly by control of commu-
nicable diseases through improvements in sanitation and the 
development of vaccines and antibiotics. However, this im-
provement was mitigated somewhat by a concurrent rise in 
mortality from CVD and other noncommunicable diseases. 
This rise partly reflected population growth and aging, as well 
as real increases in age-specific CVD mortality rates driven 
most likely by the increasing prevalence of tobacco use and 
socioeconomic changes permitting a more atherogenic diet 
and more sedentary lifestyle. The second half of the 20th cen-
tury brought about an at-first unexpected sharp decline in car-
diovascular mortality in the United States, attributed almost 
equally to risk factor control and major pharmacological and 
technological advances in both the acute and long-term treat-
ment CHD and stroke. This decline has given Americans an 
additional decade of longevity, pushing life expectancy into 
Figure 5. Age-adjusted death rates for heart failure (multiple cause), 1999 to 2015. Source: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention/NCHS 1999 to 2015 Multiple Cause-of-Death, United States, International Classification of Diseases-Tenth Revision (ICD-10) 
Code I50. CHD indicates coronary heart disease; and CVD, cardiovascular disease.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Mensah et al  Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality Rate  377
the late 1970s and early 1980s. Although less apparent at first, 
it has become clear that similar changes have occurred else-
where. Indeed, many other high-income countries throughout 
the world have surpassed the United States and report even 
lower CVD mortality rates and greater life expectancy.
But the picture is not altogether rosy. Prevalence of obesity, 
metabolic syndrome, and type 2 diabetes mellitus have increased 
during the past 20 years, and the decline in CHD mortality rates 
seem to have decelerated. Advances in the prevention and treat-
ment of CVD have become more incremental during this period. 
Although patients who have heart attack often survive their ini-
tial events and may live into their 1980s, many go on to develop 
and die of chronic heart failure, and we have had very little suc-
cess in preventing or treating this end-stage outcome. In fact, as 
shown in Figure 5, the age-adjusted mortality rate for heart fail-
ure during the period of 2012 to 2015 seems to be on the rise af-
ter more than a decade and a half of gradual declines since 1999. 
Finally, many segments of the US population have been unable 
to access the remarkable advances made in CVD prevention and 
treatment and marked inequities in cardiovascular health and 
healthcare remain pervasive.97 Although these disparities may 
not be as stark as they were in 1900, much work remains to be 
done toward the elimination of health inequities.
Through a published request for information, the NHLBI 
is soliciting information that could inform a follow-up confer-
ence on or near the 40th anniversary of the landmark 1978 
conference where the decline in CHD mortality in the United 
States was first recognized. Areas of major emphasis for such 
a conference could include worldwide trends in CHD mor-
tality and morbidity since 1978; major contributors to ac-
celeration or deceleration of the CHD mortality rate decline, 
especially in young adults; national, regional, and global pat-
terns in the geographic, socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic dis-
parities in the trends in CHD mortality declines at the national 
and international levels; impact of the continuing epidemic on 
obesity, metabolic syndrome, and type 2 diabetes mellitus on 
CHD mortality trends; potential strategic targets for research 
likely to lead to transformative advances in prevention, early 
detection, treatment, and control of CHD. Consistent with the 
NHLBI Strategic Vision,135,136 the conference could also ex-
plore additional unanswered questions or poorly understood 
areas of CHD research and related critical challenges that re-
quire NHLBI facilitation to ensure scientific progress.
Disclosures
All authors are Federal Government employees at National Institutes 
of Health.
References
 1. National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 2010: with 
special feature on death and dying. CDC 2011. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
data/hus/hus10.pdf. Accessed November 30, 2016.
 2. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. Measuring the global burden of disease. N Engl J 
Med. 2013;369:448–457. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1201534.
 3. Gotto AM Jr. Evolving concepts of dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis, and 
cardiovascular disease: the Louis F. Bishop Lecture. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2005;46:1219–1224. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.06.059.
 4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Achievements in Public 
Health, 1900–1999: Decline in Deaths from Heart Disease and 
Stroke – United States, 1900–1999. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
1999;48(30):649–56.
 5. Recent trends in mortality from heart disease. Stat Bull Metropol Life 
Insur Co 1975;56:2–6.
 6. Rogers DE, Blendon RJ. The changing American health scene. Sometimes 
things get better. JAMA. 1977;237:1710–1714.
 7. Reader R. Incidence and prevalence of ischaemic heart disease in 
Australia. Med J Aust. 1972;2:Suppl:3–Suppl:6.
 8. Editorial: A decline in coronary mortality. Br Med J 1976 January 
10;1(6001):58.
 9. Proceedings of the Conference on the Decline in Coronary Heart Disease 
Mortality: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institute of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, October 24–25, 1978. NIH publication; no. 
79–1610. Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH; 
1979.
 
10. National Center for Health Statistics. Chartbook for the Conference on the 
Decline in Coronary Heart Disease Mortality. Hyattsville, MD: NCHS; 
1978.
 
11. GBD 2015 Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators. Global, 
regional, and national life expectancy, all-cause mortality, and 
cause-specific mortality for 249 causes of death, 1980–2015: a sys-
tematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 
2016;388(10053):1459–544.
 
12. GBD 2013 Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators. Global, region-
al, and national age-sex specific all-cause and cause-specific mortality 
for 240 causes of death, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet 2015;385(9963):117–171.
 
13. Moran AE, Forouzanfar MH, Roth GA, Mensah GA, Ezzati M, 
Murray CJ, Naghavi M. Temporal trends in ischemic heart disease 
mortality in 21 world regions, 1980 to 2010: the Global Burden of 
Disease 2010 study. Circulation. 2014;129:1483–1492. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.113.004042.
 
14. Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, et al. Global and regional mortality 
from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a sys-
tematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 
2012;380:2095–2128. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61728-0.
 
15. Roth GA, Huffman MD, Moran AE, Feigin V, Mensah GA, Naghavi 
M, Murray CJ. Global and regional patterns in cardiovascular mortal-
ity from 1990 to 2013. Circulation. 2015;132:1667–1678. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.114.008720.
 
16. Hartley A, Marshall DC, Salciccioli JD, Sikkel MB, Maruthappu M, 
Shalhoub J. Trends in mortality from ischemic heart disease and cerebro-
vascular disease in Europe: 1980 to 2009. Circulation. 2016;133:1916–
1926. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.018931.
 
17. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Request for Information 
(RFI) for Bethesda+40: Forty Years after the Bethesda Conference on 
Declining Mortality from Coronary Heart Disease (Notice Number: NOT-
HL-16–440). NIH 2016.
 
18. Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, Critchley JA, Labarthe DR, Kottke TE, Giles 
WH, Capewell S. Explaining the decrease in U.S. deaths from coronary 
disease, 1980-2000. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2388–2398. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMsa053935.
 
19. O’Flaherty M, Allender S, Taylor R, Stevenson C, Peeters A, Capewell S. 
The decline in coronary heart disease mortality is slowing in young adults 
(Australia 1976-2006): a time trend analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2012;158:193–
198. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.01.016.
 
20. Wijeysundera HC, Machado M, Farahati F, Wang X, Witteman W, van 
der Velde G, Tu JV, Lee DS, Goodman SG, Petrella R, O’Flaherty M, 
Krahn M, Capewell S. Association of temporal trends in risk factors and 
treatment uptake with coronary heart disease mortality, 1994-2005. JAMA. 
2010;303:1841–1847. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.580.
 
21. Critchley J, Liu J, Zhao D, Wei W, Capewell S. Explaining the in-
crease in coronary heart disease mortality in Beijing between 1984 
and 
1999. 
Circulation. 
2004;110:1236–1244. 
doi: 
10.1161/01.
CIR.0000140668.91896.AE.
 
22. Bruthans J, Cífková R, Lánská V, O’Flaherty M, Critchley JA, Holub J, 
Janský P, Zvárová J, Capewell S. Explaining the decline in coronary heart 
disease mortality in the Czech Republic between 1985 and 2007. Eur J 
Prev Cardiol. 2014;21:829–839. doi: 10.1177/2047487312469476.
 
23. Allender S, Scarborough P, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S. Patterns of coro-
nary heart disease mortality over the 20th century in England and Wales: 
Possible plateaus in the rate of decline. BMC Public Health. 2008;8:148. 
doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-8-148.
 
24. Unal B, Critchley JA, Capewell S. Modelling the decline in coronary heart 
disease deaths in England and Wales, 1981-2000: comparing contributions 
from primary prevention and secondary prevention. BMJ. 2005;331:614. 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.38561.633345.8F.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 378  Circulation Research  January 20, 2017
 
25. Guzman-Castillo M, Ahmed R, Hawkins N, Scholes S, Wilkinson E, Lucy 
J, Capewell S, O’Flaherty M. The contribution of primary prevention 
medication and dietary change in coronary mortality reduction in England 
between 2000 and 2007: a modelling study. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e006070. 
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-006070.
 
26. Laatikainen T, Critchley J, Vartiainen E, Salomaa V, Ketonen M, Capewell 
S. Explaining the decline in coronary heart disease mortality in Finland be-
tween 1982 and 1997. Am J Epidemiol. 2005;162:764–773. doi: 10.1093/
aje/kwi274.
 
27. Aspelund T, Gudnason V, Magnusdottir BT, Andersen K, Sigurdsson G, 
Thorsson B, Steingrimsdottir L, Critchley J, Bennett K, O’Flaherty M, 
Capewell S. Analysing the large decline in coronary heart disease mortal-
ity in the Icelandic population aged 25-74 between the years 1981 and 
2006. PLoS One. 2010;5:e13957. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013957.
 
28. Hughes J, Kee F, O’Flaherty M, Critchley J, Cupples M, Capewell S, 
Bennett K. Modelling coronary heart disease mortality in Northern 
Ireland between 1987 and 2007: broader lessons for prevention. Eur J Prev 
Cardiol. 2013;20:310–321. doi: 10.1177/2047487312441725.
 
29. Kabir Z, Perry IJ, Critchley J, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S, Bennett K. 
Modelling Coronary Heart Disease Mortality declines in the Republic of 
Ireland, 1985-2006. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:2462–2467. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2013.03.007.
 
30. Kabir Z, Bennett K, Shelley E, Unal B, Critchley J, Feely J, Capewell S. 
Life-years-gained from population risk factor changes and modern cardi-
ology treatments in Ireland. Eur J Public Health. 2007;17:193–198. doi: 
10.1093/eurpub/ckl090.
 
31. Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, Critchley JA, Labarthe DR, Kottke TE, Giles 
WH, Capewell S. Explaining the decrease in U.S. deaths from coronary 
disease, 1980-2000. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2388–2398. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMsa053935.
 
32. Kabir Z, Bennett K, Shelley E, Unal B, Critchley JA, Capewell S. 
Comparing primary prevention with secondary prevention to explain de-
creasing coronary heart disease death rates in Ireland, 1985-2000. BMC 
Public Health. 2007;7:117. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-7-117.
 
33. Bennett K, Kabir Z, Unal B, Shelley E, Critchley J, Perry I, Feely J, 
Capewell S. Explaining the recent decrease in coronary heart disease 
mortality rates in Ireland, 1985-2000. J Epidemiol Community Health. 
2006;60:322–327. doi: 10.1136/jech.2005.038638.
 
34. Palmieri L, Bennett K, Giampaoli S, Capewell S. Explaining the decrease 
in coronary heart disease mortality in Italy between 1980 and 2000. Am J 
Public Health. 2010;100:684–692. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2008.147173.
 
35. Bandosz P, O’Flaherty M, Drygas W, Rutkowski M, Koziarek J, 
Wyrzykowski B, Bennett K, Zdrojewski T, Capewell S. Decline in mortal-
ity from coronary heart disease in Poland after socioeconomic transforma-
tion: modelling study. BMJ. 2012;344:d8136.
 
36. Pereira M, Azevedo A, Lunet N, Carreira H, O’Flaherty M, Capewell 
S, Bennett K. Explaining the decline in coronary heart disease mortal-
ity in Portugal between 1995 and 2008. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2013;6:634–642. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.113.000264.
 
37. Björck L, Rosengren A, Bennett K, Lappas G, Capewell S. Modelling 
the decreasing coronary heart disease mortality in Sweden between 1986 
and 2002. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:1046–1056. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehn554.
 
38. Rastam S, Al Ali R, Maziak W, Mzayek F, Fouad FM, O’Flaherty M, 
Capewell S. Explaining the increase in coronary heart disease mortality 
in Syria between 1996 and 2006. BMC Public Health. 2012;12:754. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-12-754.
 
39. Critchley J, Capewell S, O’Flaherty M, et al.; MedCHAMPS; This publi-
cation was prepared with support from and on behalf of the MedCHAMPS 
consortium members. Contrasting cardiovascular mortality trends in 
Eastern Mediterranean populations: Contributions from risk factor 
changes and treatments. Int J Cardiol. 2016;208:150–161. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2016.01.031.
 
40. Abu-Rmeileh NM, Shoaibi A, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S, Husseini A. 
Analysing falls in coronary heart disease mortality in the West Bank be-
tween 1998 and 2009. BMJ Open 2012 August 24;2(4):e001061.
 
41. Saidi O, Ben Mansour N, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S, Critchley JA, Ben 
Romdhane H. Analyzing recent coronary heart disease mortality trends in 
Tunisia between 1997 and 2009. PLoS One. 2013;8:e63202. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0063202.
 
42. Unal B, Sözmen K, Arık H, Gerçeklioğlu G, Altun DU, Şimşek H, 
Doganay S, Demiral Y, Aslan Ö, Bennett K, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S, 
Critchley J. Explaining the decline in coronary heart disease mortality in 
Turkey between 1995 and 2008. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:1135. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-13-1135.
 
43. Capewell S, Hayes DK, Ford ES, Critchley JA, Croft JB, Greenlund KJ, 
Labarthe DR. Life-years gained among US adults from modern treatments 
and changes in the prevalence of 6 coronary heart disease risk factors be-
tween 1980 and 2000. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;170:229–236. doi: 10.1093/
aje/kwp150.
 
44. European Heart Health Strategy II (Euroheart II) Project. CHD mortal-
ity projections to 2020, comparing different policy scenarios, Euroheart 
IIWork Package 6, 2014. European Society of Cardiology 2014. https://
www.escardio.org/static_file/Escardio/EU-Affairs/chd-mortality.pdf. 
Accessed November 30, 2016.
 
45. Gouda HN, Critchley J, Powles J, Capewell S. Why choice of met-
ric matters in public health analyses: a case study of the attribu-
tion of credit for the decline in coronary heart disease mortality in 
the US and other populations. BMC Public Health. 2012;12:88. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-12-88.
 
46. Kannel WB, Dawber TR, Kagan A, Revotskie N, Stokes J 3rd. Factors 
of risk in the development of coronary heart disease–six year follow-up 
experience. The Framingham Study. Ann Intern Med. 1961;55:33–50.
 
47. Kannel WB. Hypertension, blood lipids, and cigarette smoking as co-risk 
factors for coronary heart disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1978;304:128–139.
 
48. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. heart disease and stroke 
statistics-2016 update: a report from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation 2016;133(4):e38–e360.
 
49. Ma J, Ward EM, Siegel RL, Jemal A. Temporal trends in mortality in the 
United States, 1969-2013. JAMA. 2015;314:1731–1739. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2015.12319.
 
50. Jones DS, Greene JA. The contributions of prevention and treatment 
to the decline in cardiovascular mortality: lessons from a forty-year 
debate. Health Aff (Millwood). 2012;31:2250–2258. doi: 10.1377/
hlthaff.2011.0639.
 
51. Björck L, Capewell S, O’Flaherty M, Lappas G, Bennett K, Rosengren 
A. Decline in Coronary Mortality in Sweden between 1986 and 2002: 
Comparing Contributions from Primary and Secondary Prevention. PLoS 
One. 2015;10:e0124769. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124769.
 
52. Ezzati M, Obermeyer Z, Tzoulaki I, Mayosi BM, Elliott P, Leon DA. 
Contributions of risk factors and medical care to cardiovascular mortality 
trends. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:508–530. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2015.82.
 
53. Mannsverk J, Wilsgaard T, Mathiesen EB, Løchen ML, Rasmussen K, 
Thelle DS, Njølstad I, Hopstock LA, Bønaa KH. Trends in modifiable 
risk factors are associated with declining incidence of hospitalized and 
nonhospitalized acute coronary heart disease in a population. Circulation. 
2016;133:74–81. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016960.
 
54. O Flaherty M, Flores-Mateo G, Nnoaham K, Lloyd-Williams F, Capewell 
S. Potential cardiovascular mortality reductions with stricter food policies 
in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Bull World 
Health Organ. 2012;90:522–531. doi: 10.2471/BLT.11.092643.
 
55. Dégano IR, Salomaa V, Veronesi G, Ferriéres J, Kirchberger I, Laks 
T, Havulinna AS, Ruidavets JB, Ferrario MM, Meisinger C, Elosua R, 
Marrugat J; Acute Myocardial Infarction Trends in Europe (AMITIE) 
Study Investigators. Twenty-five-year trends in myocardial infarction at-
tack and mortality rates, and case-fatality, in six European populations. 
Heart. 2015;101:1413–1421. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-307310.
 
56. Gerber Y, Weston SA, Jiang R, Roger VL. The changing epidemiology of 
myocardial infarction in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1995-2012. Am J 
Med. 2015;128:144–151. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2014.09.012.
 
57. Kuulasmaa K, Tunstall-Pedoe H, Dobson A, Fortmann S, Sans S, Tolonen 
H, Evans A, Ferrario M, Tuomilehto J. Estimation of contribution of 
changes in classic risk factors to trends in coronary-event rates across the 
WHO MONICA Project populations. Lancet. 2000;355:675–687.
 
58. Unal B, Critchley JA, Capewell S. Explaining the decline in coronary heart 
disease mortality in England and 
Wales between 1981 and 2000. Circulation. 
2004;109:1101–1107. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000118498.35499.B2.
 
59. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA 3rd, Brook JR, Bhatnagar A, Diez-
Roux AV, Holguin F, Hong Y, Luepker RV, Mittleman MA, Peters A, 
Siscovick D, Smith SC Jr, Whitsel L, Kaufman JD; American Heart 
Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on the 
Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease, and Council on Nutrition, Physical 
Activity and Metabolism. Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovas-
cular disease: An update to the scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;121:2331–2378. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e3181dbece1.
 
60. Munzel T, Sorensen M, Gori T, et al. Environmental stressors and cardio-
metabolic disease: part I-epidemiologic evidence supporting a role for 
noise and air pollution and effects of mitigation strategies. Eur Heart J 
2016; 26:ehw269.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Mensah et al  Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality Rate  379
 
61. Munzel T, Sorensen M, Gori T, et al. Environmental stressors and 
cardio-metabolic disease: part II-mechanistic insights. Eur Heart J 
2016;26:ehw294.
 
62. Flegal KM, Kruszon-Moran D, Carroll MD, Fryar CD, Ogden CL. 
Trends in obesity among adults in the United States, 2005 to 2014. JAMA. 
2016;315:2284–2291. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.6458.
 
63. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Lawman HG, Fryar CD, Kruszon-Moran D, 
Kit BK, Flegal KM. Trends in obesity prevalence among children and 
adolescents in the United States, 1988-1994 Through 2013-2014. JAMA. 
2016;315:2292–2299. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.6361.
 
64. Doliszny KM, Luepker RV, Burke GL, Pryor DB, Blackburn H. Estimated 
contribution of coronary artery bypass graft surgery to the decline in 
coronary heart disease mortality: the Minnesota Heart Survey. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1994;24:95–103.
 
65. Wijeysundera HC, Mitsakakis N, Witteman W, Paulden M, van der Velde 
G, Tu JV, Lee DS, Goodman SG, Petrella R, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S, 
Krahn M. Achieving quality indicator benchmarks and potential impact on 
coronary heart disease mortality. Can J Cardiol. 2011;27:756–762. doi: 
10.1016/j.cjca.2011.06.005.
 
66. Tunstall-Pedoe H, Vanuzzo D, Hobbs M, Mähönen M, Cepaitis Z, 
Kuulasmaa K, Keil U. Estimation of contribution of changes in coro-
nary care to improving survival, event rates, and coronary heart dis-
ease mortality across the WHO MONICA Project populations. Lancet. 
2000;355:688–700.
 
67. Tunstall-Pedoe H, Kuulasmaa K, Mähönen M, Tolonen H, Ruokokoski 
E, Amouyel P. Contribution of trends in survival and coronary-event rates 
to changes in coronary heart disease mortality: 10-year results from 37 
WHO MONICA project populations. Monitoring trends and determinants 
in cardiovascular disease. Lancet. 1999;353:1547–1557.
 
68. Briffa T, Hickling S, Knuiman M, Hobbs M, Hung J, Sanfilippo FM, 
Jamrozik K, Thompson PL. Long term survival after evidence based 
treatment of acute myocardial infarction and revascularisation: fol-
low-up of population based Perth MONICA cohort, 1984-2005. BMJ. 
2009;338:b36.
 
69. Pilkerton CS, Singh SS, Bias TK, Frisbee SJ. Changes in Cardiovascular 
Health in the United States, 2003-2011. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e001650. 
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001650.
 
70. Yatsuya H, Li Y, Hilawe EH, Ota A, Wang C, Chiang C, Zhang Y, Uemura 
M, Osako A, Ozaki Y, Aoyama A. Global trend in overweight and obe-
sity and its association with cardiovascular disease incidence. Circ J. 
2014;78:2807–2818.
 
71. Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity and 
trends in the distribution of body mass index among US adults, 1999-
2010. JAMA. 2012;307:491–497. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.39.
 
72. McEwen LN, Karter AJ, Curb JD, Marrero DG, Crosson JC, Herman WH. 
Temporal trends in recording of diabetes on death certificates: results from 
Translating Research Into Action for Diabetes (TRIAD). Diabetes Care. 
2011;34:1529–1533. doi: 10.2337/dc10-2312.
 
73. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Trends in adult body-mass 
index in 200 countries from 1975 to 2014: a pooled analysis of 1698 pop-
ulation-based measurement studies with 19.2 million participants. Lancet 
2016;387(10026):1377–1396.
 
74. Yang L, Colditz GA. Prevalence of overweight and obesity in the United 
States, 2007-2012. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:1412–1413. doi: 10.1001/
jamainternmed.2015.2405.
 
75. Lobstein T, Jackson-Leach R, Moodie ML, Hall KD, Gortmaker SL, 
Swinburn BA, James WP, Wang Y, McPherson K. Child and adolescent 
obesity: part of a bigger picture. Lancet. 2015;385:2510–2520. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61746-3.
 
76. Haffner SM, Lehto S, Rönnemaa T, Pyörälä K, Laakso M. Mortality from 
coronary heart disease in subjects with type 2 diabetes and in nondiabetic 
subjects with and without prior myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
1998;339:229–234. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199807233390404.
 
77. Wilmot KA, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S, Ford ES, Vaccarino V. 
Coronary Heart Disease mortality declines in the United States from 
1979 through 2011: evidence for stagnation in young adults, es-
pecially women. Circulation. 2015;132:997–1002. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.115.015293.
 
78. Sidney S, Quesenberry CP Jr, Jaffe MG, Sorel M, Nguyen-Huynh MN, 
Kushi LH, Go AS, Rana JS. Recent trends in cardiovascular mortality in 
the United States and public health goals. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:594–
599. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1326.
 
79. Wang YC, McPherson K, Marsh T, Gortmaker SL, Brown M. Health and 
economic burden of the projected obesity trends in the USA and the UK. 
Lancet. 2011;378:815–825. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60814-3.
 
80. Padwal RS. Obesity, diabetes, and the metabolic syndrome: the 
global scourge. Can J Cardiol. 2014;30:467–472. doi: 10.1016/j.
cjca.2013.11.004.
 
81. McAuley PA, Blaha MJ, Keteyian SJ, Brawner CA, Al Rifai M, Dardari 
ZA, Ehrman JK, Al-Mallah MH. Fitness, fatness, and mortality: The FIT 
(Henry Ford Exercise Testing) Project. Am J Med. 2016;129:960–965.e1. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2016.04.007.
 
82. Lee CD, Blair SN, Jackson AS. Cardiorespiratory fitness, body composi-
tion, and all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality in men. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 1999;69:373–380.
 
83. Florez H, Castillo-Florez S. Beyond the obesity paradox in diabetes: fit-
ness, fatness, and mortality. JAMA. 2012;308:619–620. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2012.9776.
 
84. Carnethon MR, De Chavez PJ, Biggs ML, Lewis CE, Pankow JS, Bertoni 
AG, Golden SH, Liu K, Mukamal KJ, Campbell-Jenkins B, Dyer AR. 
Association of weight status with mortality in adults with incident diabe-
tes. JAMA. 2012;308:581–590. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.9282.
 
85. Lloyd-Jones DM. Slowing progress in cardiovascular mortality rates: 
you reap what you sow. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:599–600. doi: 10.1001/
jamacardio.2016.1348.
 
86. Vaartjes I, O’Flaherty M, Grobbee DE, Bots ML, Capewell S. Coronary 
heart disease mortality trends in the Netherlands 1972-2007. Heart. 
2011;97:569–573. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2010.206565.
 
87. O’Flaherty M, Ford E, Allender S, Scarborough P, Capewell S. Coronary 
heart disease trends in England and Wales from 1984 to 2004: concealed 
levelling of mortality rates among young adults. Heart. 2008;94:178–181. 
doi: 10.1136/hrt.2007.118323.
 
88. Islek D, Sozmen K, Unal B, Guzman-Castillo M, Vaartjes I, Critchley J, 
Capewell S, O’Flaherty M. Estimating the potential contribution of stroke 
treatments and preventative policies to reduce the stroke and ischemic 
heart disease mortality in Turkey up to 2032: a modelling study. BMC 
Public Health. 2016;16:46. doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-2655-8.
 
89. Ford ES, Capewell S. Coronary heart disease mortality among young 
adults in the U.S. from 1980 through 2002: concealed leveling of mor-
tality rates. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:2128–2132. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2007.05.056.
 
90. Allen K, Gillespie DO, Guzman-Castillo M, Diggle PJ, Capewell S, 
O’Flaherty M. Future trends and inequalities in premature coronary 
deaths in England: Modelling study. Int J Cardiol. 2016;203:290–297. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.10.077.
 
91. Sekikawa A, Miyamoto Y, Miura K, Nishimura K, Willcox BJ, Masaki 
KH, Rodriguez B, Tracy RP, Okamura T, Kuller LH. Continuous decline 
in mortality from coronary heart disease in Japan despite a continuous 
and marked rise in total cholesterol: Japanese experience after the Seven 
Countries Study. Int J Epidemiol. 2015;44:1614–1624. doi: 10.1093/ije/
dyv143.
 
92. Ecclestone TC, Yeates DG, Goldacre MJ. Fall in population-based mor-
tality from coronary heart disease negated in people with diabetes mel-
litus: data from England. Diabet Med. 2015;32:1329–1334. doi: 10.1111/
dme.12770.
 
93. Smilowitz NR, Maduro GA Jr, Lobach IV, Chen Y, Reynolds HR. Adverse 
trends in ischemic heart disease mortality among young New Yorkers, 
particularly young black women. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0149015. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0149015.
 
94. Cooper R, Cutler J, Desvigne-Nickens P et al. Trends and disparities in 
coronary heart disease, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases in the 
United States: findings of the national conference on cardiovascular dis-
ease prevention. Circulation 2000;102(25):3137–3147.
 
95. Murray CJ, Kulkarni SC, Michaud C, Tomijima N, Bulzacchelli MT, 
Iandiorio TJ, Ezzati M. Eight Americas: investigating mortality disparities 
across races, counties, and race-counties in the United States. PLoS Med. 
2006;3:e260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030260.
 
96. Salami JA, Warraich H, Valero-Elizondo J, et al. National trends in statin 
use and expenditures in the US adult population from 2002 to 2013: 
insights from the medical expenditure panel survey. JAMA Cardiol 
2016;10:E1–E10. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2016.4700.
 
97. Mensah GA, Mokdad AH, Ford ES, Greenlund KJ, Croft JB. State of 
disparities in cardiovascular health in the United States. Circulation. 
2005;111:1233–1241. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000158136.76824.04.
 
98. United States Office of the Surgeon General. Smoking and Health: Report 
of the Advisory Committee of the Surgeon General of the Public Health 
Service. Public Health Service Publication No. 1103. Washington, DC; 1964.
 
99. Martell BN, Garrett BE, Caraballo RS. Disparities in Adult Cigarette 
Smoking - United States, 2002-2005 and 2010-2013. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:753–758. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6530a1.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 380  Circulation Research  January 20, 2017
 
100. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Trends in Current Cigarette 
Smoking Among High School Students and Adults, United States, 1965–
2014. CDC 2016 March 30. http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/
tables/trends/cig_smoking/index.htm. Accessed November 30, 2016.
 
101. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong 
Y, Labarthe D, et al.; American Heart Association 
Strategic Planning Task Force and Statistics Committee. Defining and 
setting national goals for cardiovascular health promotion and disease 
reduction: the American Heart Association’s strategic Impact Goal 
through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. 2010;121:586–613. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192703.
 
102. Daviglus ML, Pirzada A, Durazo-Arvizu R, et al. Prevalence of low 
cardiovascular risk profile among diverse Hispanic/Latino adults in 
the United States by age, sex, and level of acculturation: The Hispanic 
Community Health Study/Study of Latinos. J Am Heart Assoc 
2016;5(8):e003929. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.116.003929.
 
103. Gebreab SY, Davis SK, Symanzik J, Mensah GA, Gibbons GH, Diez-
Roux AV. Geographic variations in cardiovascular health in the United 
States: contributions of state- and individual-level factors. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2015;4:e001673. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001673.
 
104. Gillum RF, Mehari A, Curry B, Obisesan TO. Racial and geographic 
variation in coronary heart disease mortality trends. BMC Public Health. 
2012;12:410. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-410.
 
105. Mendy VL, Vargas R, El-Sadek L. Trends in heart disease mortality 
among Mississippi adults over three decades, 1980-2013. PLoS One. 
2016;11:e0161194. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161194.
 
106. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Heart disease mortality by 
state: 2014. CDC 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/sosmap/
heart_disease.htm. Accessed November 30, 2016.
 
107. Kochanek KD, Murphy SL, Xu J, Tejada-Vera B. Table 19: Number 
of deaths, death rates, and age-adjusted death rates for major causes 
of death: United States, each state, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Guam, 
American Samoa, and Northern Marianas, 2014. Deaths: Final Data for 
2014. Natl Vital Stat Rep 2016;65(4):89–94.
 
108. Murphy SL, Xu J, Kochanek KD. Table 19: Number of deaths, death 
rates, and age-adjusted death rates for major causes of death: United 
States, each state, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
and Northern Marianas, 2010. Deaths: Final Data for 2010. Natl Vital 
Stat Rep 2013;61(4):85–90.
 
109. Clar C, Oseni Z, Flowers N, Keshtkar-Jahromi M, Rees K. Influenza vac-
cines for preventing cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2015;(5):CD005050.
 
110. Stein CR, Wortley PM, Singleton JA. Racial/ethnic disparities in influen-
za and pneumococcal vaccination levels among persons aged >65 years 
— United States, 1989–2001. MMWR 2003;52(40):958–962.
 
111. Lu PJ, Santibanez TA, Williams WW, et al.; Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC). Surveillance of influenza vaccination coverage–
United States, 2007-08 through 2011-12 influenza seasons. MMWR 
Surveill Summ. 2013;62:1–28.
 
112. Pearson-Stuttard J, Guzman-Castillo M, Penalvo JL, Rehm CD, 
Afshin A, Danaei G, Kypridemos C, Gaziano T, Mozaffarian D, 
Capewell S, O’Flaherty M. Modeling Future Cardiovascular Disease 
Mortality in the United States: National Trends and Racial and 
Ethnic Disparities. Circulation. 2016;133:967–978. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.115.019904.
 
113. O’Flaherty M, Bishop J, Redpath A, McLaughlin T, Murphy D, Chalmers 
J, Capewell S. Coronary heart disease mortality among young adults 
in Scotland in relation to social inequalities: time trend study. BMJ. 
2009;339:b2613.
 
114. Tamosiunas A, Klumbiene J, Petkeviciene J, Radisauskas R, Vikhireva 
O, Luksiene D, Virviciute D. Trends in major risk factors and mortality 
from main non-communicable diseases in Lithuania, 1985-2013. BMC 
Public Health. 2016;16:717. doi: 10.1186/s12889-016-3387-0.
 
115. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on a National Surveillance 
System for Cardiovascular and Select Chronic Diseases. A Nationwide 
Framework for Surveillance of Cardiovascular and Chronic Lung 
Diseases. IOM; 2011.
 
116. Goff DC Jr, Brass L, Braun LT, et al; American Heart Association Council 
on Epidemiology and Prevention; American Heart Association Council on 
Stroke; American Heart Association Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; 
American Heart Association Working Group on Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research; American Heart Association Working Group on 
Atherosclerotic Peripheral Vascular Disease. Essential features of a surveil-
lance system to support the prevention and management of heart disease and 
stroke: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Councils 
on Epidemiology and Prevention, Stroke, and Cardiovascular Nursing and 
the Interdisciplinary Working Groups on Quality of Care and Outcomes 
Research and Atherosclerotic Peripheral Vascular Disease. Circulation. 
2007;115:127–155. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.179904.
 
117. Bajekal M, Scholes S, Love H, Hawkins N, O’Flaherty M, Raine R, 
Capewell S. Analysing recent socioeconomic trends in coronary heart 
disease mortality in England, 2000-2007: a population modelling study. 
PLoS Med. 2012;9:e1001237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001237.
 
118. National Institutes of Health. All of Us Research Program. NIH 2016. 
https://www.nih.gov/research-training/allofus-research-program. 
Accessed November 30, 2016.
 
119. Collins FS, Varmus H. A new initiative on precision medicine. N Engl J 
Med. 2015;372:793–795. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1500523.
 
120. Tricoci P, Allen JM, Kramer JM, Califf RM, Smith SC Jr. Scientific 
evidence underlying the ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines. JAMA. 
2009;301:831–841. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.205.
 
121. Sorlie P, Wei GS. Population-based cohort studies: still relevant? J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:2010–2013. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.08.020.
 
122. Green LW. Public health asks of systems science: to advance our evi-
dence-based practice, can you help us get more practice-based evidence? 
Am J Public Health. 2006;96:406–409. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2005.066035.
 
123. Genetics Home Reference - Your Guide to Understanding Genetic 
Conditions. What is Precision Medicine? NIH 2016. https://ghr.nlm.nih.
gov/primer/precisionmedicine/definition. Accessed November 30, 2016.
 
124. Fact Sheet: President Obama’s Precision Medicine Initiative. The White 
House 2015. https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/30/
fact-sheet-president-obama-s-precision-medicine-initiative. 
Accessed 
November 30, 2016.
 
125. Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Working Group Report to the 
Advisory Committee to the Director N. The Precision Medicine Initiative 
Cohort Program - Building a Research Foundation for 21st Century 
Medicine. NIH 2015. http://acd.od.nih.gov/reports/DRAFT-PMI-WG-
Report-9-11-2015-508.pdf. Accessed November 30, 2016.
 
126. Bayer R, Galea S. Public health in the precision-medicine era. N Engl J 
Med. 2015;373:499–501. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1506241.
 
127. Oh SS, White MJ, Gignoux CR, Burchard EG. Making precision medi-
cine socially precise. take a deep breath. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2016;193:348–350. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201510-2045ED.
 
128. Carlsten C, Brauer M, Brinkman F, Brook J, Daley D, McNagny K, Pui 
M, Royce D, Takaro T, Denburg J. Genes, the environment and personal-
ized medicine: We need to harness both environmental and genetic data 
to maximize personal and population health. EMBO Rep. 2014;15:736–
739. doi: 10.15252/embr.201438480.
 
129. Burke W, Burton H, Hall 
AE, Karmali M, Khoury MJ, Knoppers B, Meslin 
EM, Stanley F, Wright CF, Zimmern RL; Ickworth Group. Extending the 
reach of public health genomics: what should be the agenda for public 
health in an era of genome-based and “personalized” medicine? Genet 
Med. 2010;12:785–791. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182011222.
 
130. Chambers DA, Feero WG, Khoury MJ. Convergence of Implementation 
Science, Precision Medicine, and the Learning Health Care System: A 
New Model for Biomedical Research. JAMA. 2016;315:1941–1942. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2016.3867.
 
131. Khoury MJ, Galea S. Will precision medicine improve population 
health? JAMA. 2016;316:1357–1358. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.12260.
 
132. Fisher ES, Shortell SM, Savitz LA. Implementation science: a poten-
tial catalyst for delivery system reform. JAMA. 2016;315:339–340. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2015.17949.
 
133. Glasgow RE, Rabin BA. Implementation science and comparative effec-
tiveness research: a partnership capable of improving population health. 
J Comp Eff Res. 2014;3:237–240. doi: 10.2217/cer.14.9.
 
134. Mensah GA. Embracing dissemination and implementation research 
in cardiac critical care. Glob Heart. 2014;9:363–366. doi: 10.1016/j.
gheart.2014.10.002.
 
135. Mensah GA, Kiley J, Mockrin SC et al. National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute Strategic Visioning: Setting an Agenda Together for the NHLBI 
of 2025. Am J Public Health 2015;e1–e4.
 
136. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Charting the Future Together: 
The NHLBI Strategic Vision. Bethesda, MD: NHLBI; 2016.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
