  2015
Global
tuberculosis
report
 ii  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Global tuberculosis report 2015.
1.Tuberculosis – epidemiology. 2.Tuberculosis, Pulmonary – prevention and control. 3.Tuberculosis – economics. 
4.Tuberculosis, Multidrug-Resistant. 5.Annual Reports. I.World Health Organization.
ISBN 978 92 4 156505 9 
 (NLM classification: WF 300)
© World Health Organization 2015
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO website (www.who.int) or can be purchased 
from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: 
bookorders@who.int).
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for non-commercial distribution – should be 
addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website (www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning 
the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may 
not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the 
World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of 
proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this publication. 
However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the 
interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising 
from its use. 
Designed by minimum graphics
Cover designed by Irwin Law
Printed in France 
WHO/HTM/TB/2015.22
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  iii
Contents
Abbreviations 
iv
Acknowledgements  
v
Preface 
 
ix
Executive summary 
1
Chapter 1. Introduction 
5
Chapter 2. Disease burden and 2015 targets assessment 
8
Chapter 3. TB case notifications and treatment outcomes 
36
Chapter 4. Drug-resistant TB 
54
Chapter 5. Diagnostics and laboratory strengthening 
69
Chapter 6. Addressing the co-epidemics of TB and HIV 
78
Chapter 7. Financing 
87
Chapter 8. Research and development 
105
Annexes 
1. Access to the WHO global TB database 
117
2. Country profiles for 22 high-burden countries 
123
3. Regional profiles for 6 WHO regions 
147
4. Key TB indicators for individual countries and territories, WHO regions  
 
and the world 
155
 iv  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Abbreviations
ART 
antiretroviral therapy 
ARV 
antiretroviral (drug) 
BCG 
Bacille-Calmette-Guérin
BRICS 
Brazil, Russian Federation, India, China, 
South Africa
CDR 
case detection ratio
CHMP 
Committee for Medicinal Products for 
Human Use
CI 
confidence interval
CPT 
co-trimoxazole preventive therapy
CTD 
Central TB Division (India)
CROI 
Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections
CRS 
creditor reporting system
DST 
drug susceptibility testing
EMA 
European Medicines Agency
EQA 
external quality assessment
FDA 
US Food and Drug Administration
FIND 
Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics 
GDP 
gross domestic product
GHE 
government health expenditures
HBC 
high-burden country
HIV 
human immune-deficiency virus
HVTN 
HIV Vaccine Trials Network
IDRI 
Infectious Disease Research Institute
IGRA 
interferon gamma release assays
IMPAACT 
International Maternal Pediatric Adolescent 
AIDS Clinical Trials Group
IPT 
isoniazid preventive therapy
LED 
light-emitting diode microscopy
LF-LAM 
urine lateral flow lipoarabinomannan
LPA 
line probe assay
LTBI 
latent TB infection
MDGs 
Millennium Development Goals
MDR-TB 
multidrug-resistant TB
NAAT  
nucleic acid amplification test
NHA 
National Health Account
NHI 
national health insurance
NIAID 
US National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases
NRL 
national reference laboratory
NTP 
national TB programme
OBR 
optimized background regimen
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development
OOP 
out-of-pocket
PK 
pharmacokinetic
PMDT 
programmatic management of drug-
resistant TB
PPM 
public-private mix
RNTCP 
Revised National Tuberculosis Control 
Programme (India)
RR-TB 
rifampicin-resistant TB
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals
SMS 
short messaging services
SRL 
Supranational Reference Laboratory
SRL-CE 
SRL National Centres of Excellence
TAG 
Treatment Action Group
TB 
tuberculosis
TBTC 
TB Trial Consortium
TBVI 
Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative
TPP 
target product profile
TST 
tuberculin skin test
UHC 
universal health coverage
UNAIDS 
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS
USAID 
US Agency for International Development
VR 
vital registration
WHA 
World Health Assembly
WHO 
World Health Organization
XDR-TB 
extensively drug-resistant TB
ZN 
Ziehl-Neelsen 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  v
Acknowledgements 
This global TB report was produced by a core team of 
19 people: Laura Anderson, Anna Dean, Dennis Falzon, 
 
Katherine Floyd, Inés Garcia Baena, Christopher Gilpin, 
Philippe Glaziou, Yohhei Hamada, Tom Hiatt, Avinash Kan-
char, Irwin Law, Christian Lienhardt, Linh Nguyen, Andrew 
Siroka, Charalambos Sismanidis, Lana Syed, Hazim Timimi, 
Wayne van Gemert and Matteo Zignol. The team was led 
by Katherine Floyd. Overall guidance was provided by the 
Director of the Global TB Programme, Mario Raviglione.
The data collection forms (long and short versions) were 
developed by Philippe Glaziou and Hazim Timimi, with input 
from staff throughout the WHO Global TB Programme. 
Hazim Timimi led and organized all aspects of data man-
agement. The review and follow-up of data was done by a 
team of reviewers that included Laura Anderson, Annemieke 
Brands, Andrea Braza, Dennis Falzon, Inés Garcia Baena, 
Giuliano Gargioni, Medea Gegia, Yohhei Hamada, Avinash 
Kanchar, Soleil Labelle, Irwin Law, Fuad Mirzayev, Linh 
Nguyen, Andrew Siroka, Lana Syed, Hazim Timimi, Mukund 
Uplekar, Wayne van Gemert and Matteo Zignol at WHO 
headquarters; Tom Hiatt from the Western Pacific Regional 
Office; Anna Scardigli, Yamil Silva Cabrera, Ezra Tessera, Eli-
ud Wandwalo and Mohammed Yassin from the Global Fund; 
and Andrea Pantoja (consultant). 
Data for the European Region were collected and vali-
dated jointly by the WHO Regional Office for Europe and the 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC); 
we thank in particular Encarna Gimenez, Vahur Hollo and 
Csaba Ködmön from ECDC for providing validated data files 
and Andrei Dadu from the WHO Regional Office for Europe 
for his substantial contribution to follow-up and validation of 
data for all European countries. UNAIDS managed the pro-
cess of data collection from national AIDS programmes and 
provided access to their TB/HIV dataset. Review and valida-
tion of TB/HIV data was undertaken in collaboration with 
Theresa Babovic and Michel Beusenberg from the WHO HIV 
department, along with UNAIDS headquarters, regional and 
country strategic information advisers.
Many people contributed to the analyses, preparation of 
figures and tables, and writing required for the main chapters 
of the report. Chapter 2 (TB disease burden and 2015 targets 
assessment) was prepared by Katherine Floyd, Philippe 
Glaziou and Charalambos Sismanidis, with contributions 
from Laura Anderson, Tom Hiatt, Irwin Law and Ikushi Ono-
zaki. Chapter 3, on TB notifications and treatment outcomes 
as well as the treatment of latent TB infection, was prepared 
by Katherine Floyd, Haileyesus Getahun, Yohhei Hamada, 
Tom Hiatt, Alberto Matteelli, Anissa Sidibe, Lana Syed and 
Mukund Uplekar, with contributions from Hannah Monica 
Dias, Dennis Falzon, Achutan Sreenivas and Hazim Timimi. 
Chapter 4, on drug-resistant TB, was prepared by Anna Dean, 
Dennis Falzon, Linh Nguyen and Matteo Zignol, with input 
from Katherine Floyd, Charalambos Sismanidis and Karin 
Weyer. Chapter 5, on TB diagnostics and laboratory strength-
ening, was prepared by Wayne van Gemert, with input from 
Christopher Gilpin, Fuad Mirzayev and Karin Weyer. Chap-
ter 6, on the co-epidemics of TB and HIV, was prepared by 
Katherine Floyd, Haileyesus Getahun, Yohhei Hamada, Tom 
Hiatt and Avinash Kanchar, who are also grateful to Bharat 
Rewari for his contribution to Box 6.1. Chapter 7, on TB financ-
ing, was prepared by Katherine Floyd, Inés Garcia Baena and 
Andrew Siroka. Chapter 8, on TB research and development, 
was prepared by Christian Lienhardt (new TB drugs and new 
TB vaccines) and Christopher Gilpin (new TB diagnostics), 
with input from Karin Weyer and Katherine Floyd. Tom Hiatt 
coordinated the finalization of figures and tables for all chap-
ters and was the focal point for communications with the 
graphic designer. Irwin Law designed the report cover and 
also coordinated the review and correction of proofs. 
The report team is grateful to various internal and exter-
nal reviewers for their useful comments and suggestions on 
advanced drafts of the main chapters of the report. Particu-
lar thanks are due to Michel Beusenberg, Theresa Babovic 
and Jesus Maria Garcia Calleja from the HIV department in 
WHO and colleagues from UNAIDS for their careful review of 
Chapter 6; and to Daniella Cirillo and Tom Shinnick (new TB 
diagnostics), Cherise Scott and Mel Spigelman (new TB drugs) 
and Jonathan Daniels, Jennifer Woolley and Tom Evans (new 
TB vaccines) for their reviews of and input to Chapter 8. 
Annex 1, which explains how to use the online global TB 
database, was written by Hazim Timimi. The country profiles 
that appear in Annex 2, the regional profiles that appear in 
Annex 3 and the detailed tables showing data for key indica-
tors for all countries in the latest year for which information is 
available (Annex 4) were also prepared by Hazim Timimi. The 
online technical appendix that explains the methods used 
to estimate the burden of disease caused by TB (incidence, 
prevalence, mortality) was prepared by Philippe Glaziou, 
with input from Anna Dean, Carel Pretorius, Charalambos 
Sismanidis and Matteo Zignol. We thank Colin Mathers of 
the WHO Mortality and Burden of Disease team for his care-
ful review.
We thank Pamela Baillie in the Global TB Programme’s 
monitoring and evaluation unit for impeccable administra-
 vi  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
tive support, Doris Ma Fat from the WHO Mortality and 
Burden of Disease team for providing TB mortality data 
extracted from the WHO Mortality Database, and UNAIDS 
for providing epidemiological data that were used to esti-
mate HIV-associated TB mortality. 
The entire report was edited by Sarah Galbraith-Emami, 
who we thank for her excellent work. We also thank, as usual, 
Sue Hobbs for her excellent work on the design and layout 
of this report. Her contribution, as always, was very highly 
appreciated. 
The principal source of financial support for WHO’s work 
on global TB monitoring and evaluation is the United States 
Agency for International Development (USAID), without 
which it would be impossible to produce the Global Tubercu-
losis Report. Production of the report was also supported by 
the governments of Japan and the Republic of Korea. We 
acknowledge with gratitude their support.
In addition to the core report team and those mentioned 
above, the report benefited from the input of many staff 
working in WHO regional and country offices and hun-
dreds of people working for national TB programmes or 
within national surveillance systems who contributed to the 
reporting of data and to the review of report material prior 
to publication. These people are listed below, organized by 
WHO region. We thank them all for their invaluable contri-
bution and collaboration, without which this report could 
not have been produced. 
Among the WHO staff not already mentioned above, we 
thank in particular Anna Volz, Mirtha Del Granado, Khurshid 
Alam Hyder, Rafael López Olarte, Nobu Nishikiori, André 
Ndongosieme, Kefas Samson, Karam Shah, and Henriette 
Wembanyama for their major contribution to facilitation of 
data collection, validation and review. 
WHO staff in regional and country offices
WHO African Region
Boubacar Abdel Aziz, Abdoulaye Mariama Baïssa, Esther Aceng-Dokotum, Harura Adamu, Inacio Alvarenga, Samuel Hermas 
Andrianarisoa, Javier Aramburu, Claudina Augusto da Cruz, Ayodele Awe, Nayé Bah, Marie Catherine Barouan, Babou Bazie, 
Siriman Camara, Malang Coly, Davi Kokou Mawule,  Eva De Carvalho, Noel Djemadji, Sithembile Dlamini-Nqeketo, Ismael 
Hassen Endris, Louisa Ganda, Boingotlo Gasennelwe, Carolina Cardoso da Silva Gomes, Patrick Hazangwe, Télesphore 
Houansou, Jeuronlon Moses Kerkula, Michael Jose, Joel Kangangi, Nzuzi  Katondi, Kassa Hailu Ketema, Khelifi Houria, Daniel 
Kibuga, Hillary Kipruto, Aristide Désiré Komangoya Nzonzo, Katherine Lao, Sharmila Lareef-Jah, Mwendaweli Maboshe, 
Leonard Mbemba, Mbumba Ngimbi Richard, Julie Mugabekazi, Christine Musanhu, Ahmada NassuriI, Andre Ndongosieme, 
Denise Nkezimana, Wilfred Nkhoma, Nicolas Nkiere, Abel Nkolo, Ghislaine Nkone Asseko, Ishmael Nyasulu, Laurence 
Nyiramasarabwe, Samuel Ogiri, Daniel Olusoti, Amos Omoniyi, Hermann Ongouo, Chijioke Osakwe, Felicia Owusu-Antwi, 
Philip Patrobas, Kalpesh Rahevar, Harilala Nirina Razakasoa, Richard Oleko Rehan, Kefas Samson, Babatunde Sanni, Neema 
Gideon Simkoko, Susan Zimba-Tembo, Traore Tieble, Desta Tiruneh, Hubert Wang, Henriette Wembanyama, Addisalem 
Yilma, Assefash Zehaie.
WHO Region of the Americas
Jean Seme Alexandre, Monica Alonso Gonzalez, Pedro Avedillo, Carlos Ayala, Jean Seme Fils Alexandre, Angel Manuel Alvarez, 
Miguel Angel Aragón, Denise Arakaki, Pedro Avedillo, Eldonna Boisson, Gustavo Bretas, Margarette Bury, David Chavarri, 
Beatriz Cohenca, Mirtha del Granado, Thais dos Santos, Marcos Espinal,  Ingrid García, Yitades Gebre, Massimo Ghidinelli, 
Guillermo Gonzalvez, Percy Halkyer, Kathryn Johnston, Sandra Jones, Francisco Leon Bravo, Rafael Lopez Olarte, Roberto 
Montoya, Romeo Montoya, Enrique Perez, Soledad Pérez, Giovanni Ravasi, Jean Marie Rwangabwoba, Hans Salas, Alfonso 
Tenorio, Jorge Victoria, Marcelo Vila, Anna Volz.
WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region
Mohamed Abdel Aziz, Rehab Abdelhai, Ali Akbar, Samiha Baghdadi, Mai Eltigany Mohammed, Kakar Qutubuddin, Ali Reza 
Aloudel, Sindani Ireneaus Sebit, Sayed Karam Shah, Bashir Suleiman, Rahim Taghizadeh.
WHO European Region
Andrei Dadu, Masoud Dara, Jamshid Gadoev, Dmitriy Pashkevich, Bogdana Shcherbak-Verlan, Szabolcs Szigeti, Gazmend 
Zhuri.
WHO South-East Asia Region
Mohammad Akhtar, Vikarunnesa Begum, Maria Regina Christian, Erwin Cooreman, Martina Dwihardiani, Md Khurshid Alam 
Hyder, Navaratnasingam Janakan, Kim Kwang Jin, Partha Pratim Mandal, Giampaolo Mezzabotta, O Hyang Song, Malik 
Parmar, Pokanevych Igor, Ranjani Ramachandran , Rim Kwang Il, Mukta Sharma, Achuthan Nair Sreenivas, Sabera Sultana, 
Namgay Tshering, Lungten Wangchuck.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  vii
WHO Western Pacific Region
Ahmadova Shalala, Laura Gillini, Lepaitai Hansell, Cornelia Hennig, Tom Hiatt, Tauhid Islam, Narantuya Jadambaa, Ridha 
Jebeniani, Woo-Jin Lew, Nobuyuki Nishikiori, Katsunori Osuga, Khanh Pham, Fabio Scano, Jacques Sebert, Mathida Thongseng, 
Yanni Sun, Rajendra-Prasad Yadav.
National respondents who contributed to reporting and verification of data 
WHO African Region
Mohamed Khairou Abdallahi Traoré, Oumar Abdelhadi, Abderramane Abdelrahim, Abena Foe Jean Louis, Kwami  Afutu, 
Gabriel Akang, Sofiane Alihalassa, Arlindo Tomás do  Amaral, Rosamunde Amutenya, Anagonou Séverin, Andrianasolo 
Lazasoa Radonirina, Assoumani Younoussa, Georges Bakaswa Ntambwe, Ballé Boubakar, Adama Marie Bangoura, Jorge 
Barreto, Wilfried Bekou, Serge Bisuta Fueza, Frank Adae Bonsu, Miguel Camará, Evangelista Chisakaitwa, Amadou Cissé, 
Abdoul Karim Coulibaly, António Ramos da Silva, Isaias Dambe, Diakite  Aïcha, Awa Helene Diop, Marie Sarr Diouf, Themba 
Dlamini, Sicelo Samuel Dlamini, Antoine Etoundi Evouna, Juan Eyene Acuresila, Lynda  Foray, Gilberto Frota, Gasana Evariste, 
Michel Gasana, Abu George, Belaineh Girma, Amanuel Hadegu Mebrahtu, Boukoulmé Hainga, Hainikoye Aoua Hima 
Oumarou, Adama  Jallow, Saffa Kamara, Madou Kane, Kanyerere Henry Shadreck, Nathan  Kapata, Kesselly Deddeh, Botshelo 
Tebogo Kgwaadira, Fannie Khumalo, Désiré Aristide Komangoya Nzonzo, Patrick  Konwloh, Kouakou Jacquemin, Andargachew 
 
Kumsa, Kuye Joseph Oluwatoyin, Joseph Lasu, Gertrude Lay Ofali, Thomas Douglas  Lere, Joseph Lou, Llang Maama-Maime, 
Jocelyn Mahoumbou, Lerole David Mametja, Ivan Manhiça, Tseliso Marata, Enos Masini, Farai Mavhunga, Agnès Mezene, 
Salem Mohameden, Louine Morel, Youwaoga Isidore Moyenga, Mpunga James Upile, Mary Mudiope, Frank Mugabe 
Rwabinumi, Clifford Munyandi, Beatrice Mutayoba, Lindiwe Mvusi, Aboubacar Mzembaba, Fulgence Ndayikengurukiye, 
Thaddée Ndikumana, Faith Ngari, Ngoulou Antoine, Lourenço Nhocuana, Emmanuel Nkiligi, Adolphe Nkou Bikoe, Nii Nortey, 
Gérard Ntahizaniye, Franck Hardain Okemba-Okombi, Emile Rakotondramanana, Martin Rakotonjanahary, Thato Raleting, 
Ranivomahefa Myrienne Bakoliarisoa Zanajohary, Mohammed Fezul Rujeedawa, Agbenyegan Samey, Charles Sandy, Kebba 
Sanneh, Tandaogo Saouadogo, Emilie Sarr Seck, Nicholas Siziba, Kate Schnippel, Celestino Francisco Teixeira, Gebreyesus 
Rahwa Tekle, Kassim Traore, Eucher Dieudonné Yazipo, Eric Ismaël Zoungrana.
WHO Region of the Americas
Rosmond  Adams, Sarita Aguirre García, Shalauddin Ahmed, Valentina Antonieta Alarcon Guizado, Xochil Alemán de Cruz, 
Kiran Kumar Alla, Mirian Alvarez, Aisha Andrewin, Alister Antoine, Chris Archibald, Carlos Ayala Luna, Wiedjaiprekash Balesar, 
Draurio Barreira, Patricia Bartholomay, Beltrame Soledad, Dorothea Bergen Weichselberger, María del Carmen Bermúdez 
Perez, Marta Isabel Calona de Abrego, Martín Castellanos Joya, Jorge Castillo Carbajal, Annabell Cedeño Ugalde, Karolyn 
Chong Castillo, Eric Commiesie, Carlos Cruz, Ofelia Cuevas, Cecilia de Arango, Nilda de Romero, Camille Deleveaux, Dy-Juan 
DeRoza, Khan Diana, Luz Marina Duque, Mercedes España Cedeño, Alisha Eugene, Santiago Fadul, Fernandez Hugo, Cecilia 
Figueroa Benites, Greta Franco, Victor Gallant, Julio Garay Ramos, Izzy Gerstenbluth, Norman Gil, Margarita Godoy, Roscio 
Gomez, Beatriz Gutierrez, Yaskara Halabi, Dorothea Hazel, Maria Henry, Tania Herrera, Carla Jeffries, Olga Joglar Jusino, Tracy-
Ann Kernanet-Huggins, Athelene Linton, Claudia Llerena, Eugène Maduro, Andrea Maldonado Saavedra, Marvin Manzanero, 
Belkys Marcelino, Marrero Figueroa Antonio, María de Lourdes Martínez, Zeidy Mata Azofeifa, Timothy McLaughlin-Munroe, 
Angelica Medina, Monica Meza, Roque Miramontes, Leilawati Mohammed, Jeetendra Mohanlall, Ernesto Moreno, Francis 
Morey, Willy Morose, Denis Danny Mosqueira Salas, Alice Neymour, Andres Oyola, Cheryl Peek-Ball, Tomasa Portillo, Irad 
Potter, Robert Pratt, Edwin Antonio Quiñonez Villatoro, Manohar Singh Rajamanickam, Dottin Ramoutar, Anna Esther Reyes 
Godoy, Paul Ricketts, Rincon Andres, Cielo Rios, David Rodriguez, Jorge Rodriguez De Marco, Marcela Rojas, Myrian Román, 
Monica Rondon, Arelisabel  Ruiz, Wilmer Salazar, Hilda María Salazar Bolaños, Maritza Samayoa Peláez, Joan Simon, Nicola 
Skyers, Natalia Sosa, Diana Sotto, Stijnberg Deborah, Jackurlyn  Sutton, Ariel Antonio Torres Rodríguez, Maribelle Tromp, 
William Turner, Melissa Valdez, Diana Vargas, Daniel Vázquez, Nestor Vera, Juan Jose Victoria, Ana María Vinueza, Michael 
Williams, Oritta Zachariah.
WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region
Najib Abdulaziz Abdullah, Mohammad Abouzeid, Khaled Abu Rumman, Abu Sabrah Nadia, Ahmadi Shahnaz, Abdul Latif  Al 
Khal, Mohammed Redha Al Lawati, Al Saidi Khlood, Rashid Alhaddary, Abdulbari Al-Hammadi, Reem Alsaifi, Kifah ALshaqel-
di, Wagdy Amin, Nagi Awad, Bahnasy Samir, Bennani Kenza, Molka Bouain, Sawsen Boussetta, Walid Daoud, Rachid Fourati, 
Mohamed Furjani, Amal Galal, Dhikrayet Gamara, Assia Haissama, Kalthoom Hassan, Abu Bakar Ahmad Hassan, Hawa Hass-
san Guessod, Salma Haudi, Basharat Khan, Sayed Daoud Mahmoodi, Salah Ben Mansour, Mulham Mustafa, Nasehi Mahshid, 
Ejaz Qadeer, Mohammad Khalid Seddiq, Sghiar Mohammed, Tamara Tayeb, Mohemmed Tbena, Yaacoub Hiam, Ammar Zidan.
 viii  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
WHO European Region
Tleukhan Abildaev, Ibrahim Abubakar, Alikhanova  Natavan, Ekkehardt Altpeter, Elena Andradas Aragonés, Delphine Antoine, 
Trude Margrete Arnesen, Andrei Astrovko, Zaza Avaliani, Avazbek Jalolov, Velimir Bereš, Yana Besstraschnova, Thorsteinn 
Blöndal, Oktam Bobokhojaev, Bojovic Olivera, Snježana Brckalo, Bonita Brodhun, Anna Caraglia, Aysoltan Charyeva, Daniel 
Chemtob, Domnica Ioana Chiotan, Ana Ciobanu, Nico Cioran, Thierry Comolet, Radmila Curcic, Edita Davidavicene, Hayk 
Davtyan, Gerard de Vries, Irène Demuth, Antonio Diniz, Raquel Duarte, Mladen Duronjic, Lanfranco Fattorini, Lyalya Gabbas-
ova, Gasimov   Viktor, Majlinda  Gjocaj, Larus Jon Gudmundsson, Gennady Gurevich, Walter Haas, Armen Hayrapetyan, Peter 
Helbling, Ilievska-Poposka Biljana, Sarah Jackson, Jakelj Andraz, Jonsson Jerker, Erhan Kabasakal, Abdullaat Kadyrov, Dmitriy 
Klimuk, Maria Korzeniewska-Kosela, Kosnik Mitja, Kovacs Gabor, Maeve Lalor, Yana Levin, Irina Lucenko, Ekaterina Maliukova, 
Donika Mema, Violeta Mihailovic-Vucinic, Usmon Mihmanov, Vladimir Milanov, Ucha Nanava, Anne Negre, Natalia Nizova, 
Zdenka Novakova, Joan O’Donnell, Analita Pace Asciak, Clara  Palma Jordana, Olga Pavlova, Sabine Pfeiffer, Maria Grazia Pom-
pa, Georgeta Gilda Popescu, Kate Pulmane, Bozidarka Rakocevic, Vija Riekstina, Jerome Robert, Elena Rodríguez-Valín, Karin 
Rønning, Kazimierz Roszkowski-Sliz, Gerard Scheiden, Firuze Sharipova, Aleksandar Simunovic, Cathrine Slorbak, Erika Slump, 
Hanna Soini, Ivan Solovic, Petra Svetina Sorli, Sergey Sterlikov, Jana Svecova, Tillyashaykhov Mirzagaleb, Shahnoza Usmonova, 
Tonka Varleva, Piret Viiklepp, Kate Vulane, Jiri Wallenfels, Wanlin Maryse, Pierre Weicherding, Aysegul Yildirim, Zakoska Maja, 
Zsarnoczay Istvan, Hasan Žutic.
WHO South-East Asia Region
Shina Ahmed, Aminath Aroosha, Si Thu Aung, Ratna Bhattarai, Choe Tong Chol, Laurindo da Silva, Triya Novita Dinihari, 
Sulistyo Epid, Emdadul Haque, Jittimanee Sirinapha, Niraj Kulshrestha, Myo Su Kyi, Bikash Lamichhane, Pramil Liyanage, 
Constatino Lopes, Md. Mojibur Rahman, Md. Mozzamel Haque, Namwat Chawetsan, Nirupa Pallewatta, Kirankumar Rade, 
Chewang  Rinzin, Sudath Samaraweera, Gamini Seneviratne, Janaka Thilakaratne, Christina Widaningrum, Bimal Yadav.
WHO Western Pacific Region
Mohd Rotpi Abdullah, Paul Aia, Cecilia Teresa Arciaga, Zirwatul Adilah Aziz, Mahfuzah Mohamad Azranyi, Puntsag Banzragch, 
Christina Bareja, Cheng Shiming, Phonenaly Chittamany, Chou Kuok Hei, Nese Ituaso Conway, Jane Dowabobo, Mayleen Ekiek, 
Fanai Saen, Florence Flament, Ludovic Floury, Jiloris Frederick Dony, Anna Marie Celina Garfin, Donna Mae Gaviola, Go Un-Yeo-
ng, Shakti Gounder, Neti Herman, Anie Haryani Hj Abdul Rahman, Daniel Houillon, Hajime Inoue, Noel Itogo, Tom  Jack, Kang 
Hae-Young, Seiya Kato, Khin Mar Kyi Win, Daniel Lamar, Leo Lim, Liza Lopez, Sakiusa Mainawalala, Henri-Pierre Mallet, Mao 
Tan Eang, Andrea  McNeill, Serafi Moa, Grizelda  Mokoia, Nguyen Viet Nhung, Nguyen Binh Hoa, Nou Chanly, Connie Olikong, 
Dorj Otgontsetseg, Sosaia Penitani, Nukutau Pokura, Marcelina Rabauliman, Asmah Razali, Bereka Reiher, Risa Bukbuk, Ber-
nard Rouchon, Temilo Seono, Hidekazu Shimada, Vita Skilling, Grant Storey, Phannasinh Sylavanh, Tagaro Markleen, Tam 
Cheuk Ming, Silivia Tavite, Kyaw Thu, Tieng Sivanna, Toms Cindy, Tong Ka Io, Alfred Tonganibeia, Kazuhiro Uchimura, Kazunori 
Umeki, Lixia  Wang, Yee Tang Wang, Du Xin.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  ix
Preface 
Dr Mario Raviglione
At a meeting of stakeholders and donors to the Global Tuberculosis Programme held in 
Oslo in September 1995, a key discussion point related to the need to monitor progress 
towards global targets set in 1991 by the World Health Assembly. The targets – the 
popular 70% case detection rate and 85% cure rate for new cases of smear-positive 
pulmonary TB – were to be reached by 2000.
At the time of the meeting, no standardized global monitoring system existed. While 
clear definitions of TB cases and treatment outcomes were key components of WHO’s 
then-new global TB strategy – DOTS – the only data available to assess trends in the 
disease came from the epidemiological bulletins of better-off countries and occasional 
ad-hoc reports from low-income countries following reviews and monitoring missions. 
Since TB is primarily a disease of poor countries, this was not good enough for the 
influential people meeting in Oslo. Their request came loud and clear: WHO should 
start immediately to develop a system that would request all Member States to report 
essential information on TB notifications and treatment outcomes, so that progress – or 
lack of progress – could be monitored and discussed at their next meeting.
Though global targets had been set in 1991, it nevertheless took four years before 
such a system was recognized as a necessity: this was not yet the era of precision, 
accountability, and evidence-based evaluation. Since only a couple of other 
programmes had developed such systems by then, the field of TB was among the 
pioneers in this endeavour.
As a result of the discussions in Oslo, Dr Arata Kochi, then the Director of the Global 
TB Programme, asked me to move quickly to create a global monitoring and evaluation 
system that would satisfy the request.
Exactly 20 years ago, in October 1995, I started setting up a team composed of a 
handful of people charged with globalizing the local recording and reporting system 
recommended within the DOTS strategy. That strategy was based on the model 
programmes that Dr Karel Styblo had developed in several countries where the KNCV 
Tuberculosis Foundation and the Union were implementing modern TB control efforts.
During several months of intensive work, we created a database and a standard data 
collection form (in paper and electronic formats) that was distributed to all Member 
States. By the summer of 1996, most countries had provided information to WHO 
Headquarters using standardized definitions so that data from one country could 
be compared easily with data from another. For the first time, we could assess global 
progress toward the 2000 targets. The results were presented at the September 1996 
meeting of donors and other stakeholders. They showed that fewer than 20% of all 
cases estimated worldwide were being detected and that the global cure rate was less 
than 80%.
In the following years, our global monitoring and evaluation system for TB evolved 
further, with the inclusion of additional information and more sophisticated analyses. 
For example, our team – led first by Dr Christopher Dye and later by Dr Katherine Floyd 
 x  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
– began to monitor the financing of TB control to assess whether Member States were 
investing as required. Later, we integrated data from the drug resistance surveillance 
system to enable us to assess comprehensively all the key indicators needed to monitor 
progress and to identify and correct problems. Our team, under the guidance of Dr 
Philippe Glaziou, developed more precise estimates of the burden of TB, improving 
the methodology to measure incidence, prevalence and mortality. In particular, since 
2006, concerted efforts have been guided by the WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact 
Measurement, resulting in substantially increased data from national TB prevalence 
surveys and much greater use of mortality data from vital registration systems.
As a result of these efforts, 20 years later, we are able to judge fairly precisely the 
status of the epidemic and the response of Member States. We can assess where people 
with TB are missing from notification systems; where cure rates remain low and failure 
rates are high; where multidrug- resistant TB is a serious issue; and where domestic 
funding must be complemented by international financing. None of this was possible in 
1995.
We are now entering the era of the Sustainable Development Goals, in which 
paradigm shifts are expected in all sectors, including health. TB is an infectious disease 
that, despite all progress, claims a number of deaths paralleled only by those from HIV/
AIDS. To end the epidemic (defined as an incidence of fewer than 100 cases per million 
people) by 2035 will require a rapid upgrade of care and managerial standards.
During the next 20 years, we will need to change our mentality and adopt all effective 
innovations, including those exploiting digital technology, especially in the realm of 
information management. Novel ways of diagnosing and reporting already exist and 
their adoption will help us evolve further towards interventions that are more user-
friendly, cheaper and more sustainable. If fully adopted, these technologies will not only 
transform the way we handle care and surveillance, but will increase the effectiveness of 
managerial and training efforts for the benefit of those who suffer from TB.
On the occasion of the publication of this 20th WHO global TB report, which 
coincides with the assessment of the 2015 global TB targets set as part of the Millennium 
Development Goals, I am humbled by the progress in terms of impact and operations 
that we have witnessed in many countries over two decades. The Global Report 
is a testimony to the tireless efforts of many people worldwide, from National TB 
Programme staff to community members, from clinicians and nurses to those working 
for non-governmental organizations who have devoted themselves to the noble fight 
against a classic example of a disease of poverty.
Mario Raviglione
Director of the Global TB Programme
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  1
Executive summary 
Background
The year 2015 is a watershed moment in the battle against 
tuberculosis (TB). It marks the deadline for global TB targets 
set in the context of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs), and is a year of transitions: from the MDGs to a new 
era of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and from the 
Stop TB Strategy to the End TB Strategy. It is also two dec-
ades since WHO established a global TB monitoring system; 
since that time, 20 annual rounds of data collection have 
been completed. 
Using data from 205 countries and territories, which 
account for more than 99% of the world’s population, this 
global TB report documents advances in prevention, diag-
nosis and treatment of the disease. It also identifies areas 
where efforts can be strengthened. 
Main findings and messages
The advances are major: TB mortality has fallen 47% since 
1990, with nearly all of that improvement taking place since 
2000, when the MDGs were set. 
In all, effective diagnosis and treatment of TB saved an 
estimated 43 million lives between 2000 and 2014.
The MDG target to halt and reverse TB incidence has 
been achieved on a worldwide basis, in each of the six WHO 
regions and in 16 of the 22 high-burden countries that collec-
tively account for 80% of TB cases. Globally, TB incidence has 
fallen by an average of 1.5% per year since 2000 and is now 
18% lower than the level of 2000.
This year’s report describes higher global totals for new 
TB cases than in previous years, but these reflect increased 
and improved national data rather than any increase in the 
spread of the disease. 
Despite these advances and despite the fact that nearly 
all cases can be cured, TB remains one of the world’s biggest 
threats. 
In 2014, TB killed 1.5 million people (1.1 million HIV-negative 
and 0.4 million HIV-positive). The toll comprised 890 000 
men, 480 000 women and 140 000 children. 
TB now ranks alongside HIV as a leading cause of death 
worldwide. HIV’s death toll in 2014 was estimated at 1.2 
million, which included the 0.4 million TB deaths among HIV-
positive people.1  
Worldwide, 9.6 million people are estimated to have fall-
en ill with TB in 2014: 5.4 million men, 3.2 million women and 
1.0 million children. Globally, 12% of the 9.6 million new TB 
cases in 2014 were HIV-positive.
To reduce this burden, detection and treatment gaps must 
be addressed, funding gaps closed and new tools developed. 
In 2014, 6 million new cases of TB were reported to WHO, 
fewer than two-thirds (63%) of the 9.6 million people esti-
mated to have fallen sick with the disease. This means that 
worldwide, 37% of new cases went undiagnosed or were not 
reported. The quality of care for people in the latter category 
is unknown.
Of the 480 000 cases of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) 
estimated to have occurred in 2014, only about a quarter of 
these – 123 000 – were detected and reported.
Although the number of HIV-positive TB patients on 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) improved in 2014 to 392 000 
people (equivalent to 77% of notified TB patients known to 
be co-infected with HIV), this number was only one third of 
the estimated 1.2 million people living with HIV who devel-
oped TB in 2014. All HIV-positive TB cases are eligible for ART. 
Funding gaps amounted to US$ 1.4 billion for implemen-
tation of existing interventions in 2015. The most recent 
estimate of the annual funding gap for research and devel-
opment is similar, at about US$ 1.3 billion.
From 2016, the goal is to end the global TB epidemic by 
implementing the End TB Strategy. Adopted by the World 
Health Assembly in May 2014 and with targets linked to 
the newly adopted SDGs, the strategy serves as a blueprint 
for countries to reduce the number of TB deaths by 90% by 
2030 (compared with 2015 levels), cut new cases by 80% and 
ensure that no family is burdened with catastrophic costs 
due to TB. 
1 The cause of TB deaths among HIV-positive people is classified as HIV in 
the International classification of diseases system. 
 2  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Additional highlights from the report
Disease burden and 2015 targets assessment
"
" The quantity and quality of data available to estimate TB 
disease burden continue to improve. These include direct 
measurements of mortality in 129 countries and final 
results from 18 national TB prevalence surveys completed 
since 2009, six of them in the past year (Ghana, Indonesia, 
Malawi, Sudan, Zambia and Zimbabwe). 
"
" Revised estimates for Indonesia (1 million new cases per 
year, double the previous estimate) explain the upward 
revision to WHO’s global estimates of incident cases com-
pared with those published in 2014. Importantly, however, 
revisions also affect estimates for previous years and the 
trend in TB incidence globally as well as in Indonesia is still 
downward since around 2000.
"
" Of the 9.6 million new TB cases in 2014, 58% were in the 
South-East Asia and Western Pacific regions. 
"
" The African Region had 28% of the world’s cases in 2014, 
but the most severe burden relative to population: 281 
cases for every 100 000 people, more than double the 
global average of 133. 
"
" India, Indonesia and China had the largest number of 
cases: 23%, 10% and 10% of the global total, respectively. 
"
" Globally, TB prevalence in 2015 was 42% lower than in 
1990. The target of halving the rate compared with 1990 
was achieved in three WHO regions – the Region of the 
Americas, the South-East Asia Region and the Western 
Pacific Region – and in nine high-burden countries (Brazil, 
Cambodia, China, Ethiopia, India, Myanmar, the Philip-
pines, Uganda and Viet Nam).
"
" The target of halving the TB mortality rate by 2015 com-
pared with 1990 was met in four WHO regions – the Region 
of the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean Region, the 
South-East Asia Region and the Western Pacific Region – 
and in 11 high-burden countries (Brazil, Cambodia, China, 
Ethiopia, India, Myanmar, Pakistan, the Philippines, Ugan-
da, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe).
"
" All three of the 2015 targets (for incidence, prevalence 
and mortality) were met in nine high-burden countries 
– Brazil, Cambodia, China, Ethiopia, India, Myanmar, the 
Philippines, Uganda and Viet Nam.
TB case notifications and treatment outcomes
"
" In the 20 years since WHO established a global report-
ing system in 1995, it has received reports of 78 million TB 
cases, 66 million of which were treated successfully. 
"
" In 2014, that system measured a marked increase in glob-
al TB notifications for the first time since 2007. The annual 
total of new TB cases, which had been about 5.7 million 
until 2013, rose to slightly more than 6 million in 2014 (an 
increase of 6%). This was mostly due to a 29% increase in 
notifications in India, which followed the introduction of a 
policy of mandatory notification in May 2012, creation of 
a national web-based reporting system in June 2012 and 
intensified efforts to engage the private health sector. 
India accounted for 27% of global TB notifications in 2014. 
"
" Globally, the treatment success rate for people newly 
diagnosed with TB was 86% in 2013, a level that has been 
sustained since 2005. Treatment success rates require 
improvement in the Region of the Americas and the Euro-
pean Region (75% in both regions in 2013).
Drug-resistant TB
"
" Globally, an estimated 3.3% of new TB cases and 20% of 
previously treated cases have MDR-TB, a level that has 
changed little in recent years.
"
" In 2014, an estimated 190 000 people died of MDR-TB. 
"
" More TB patients were tested for drug resistance in 2014 
than ever before. Worldwide, 58% of previously treated 
patients and 12% of new cases were tested, up from 17% 
and 8.5% respectively in 2013. This improvement is partly 
due to the adoption of rapid molecular tests.
"
" If all of the TB cases notified in 2014 had been tested for 
drug resistance, an estimated 300 000 would have been 
found to have MDR-TB, with more than half of them (54%) 
occurring in India, China and the Russian Federation. 
"
" The number of cases detected (123 000) worldwide repre-
sented just 41% of this global estimate, and only 26% of 
the 480 000 incident cases of MDR-TB estimated to have 
occurred in 2014. Detection gaps were worst in the West-
ern Pacific Region, where the number of cases detected 
was only 19% of the number of notified cases estimated to 
have MDR-TB (the figure for China was 11%).
"
" A total of 111 000 people started MDR-TB treatment in 
2014, an increase of 14% compared with 2013.
"
" The ratio of patients enrolled in treatment to patients 
newly notified as having MDR-TB or rifampicin-resistant 
TB was 90% globally. The ratio was above 90% in 15 of the 
27 high MDR-TB burden countries as well as in the Euro-
pean Region and the Region of the Americas.
"
" Globally, only 50% of MDR-TB patients were successfully 
treated. However, the 2015 treatment success target of 
≥75% for MDR-TB patients was reached by 43 of the 127 
countries and territories that reported outcomes for the 
2012 cohort, including three high MDR-TB burden coun-
tries (Estonia, Ethiopia and Myanmar). 
"
" Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB) had been report-
ed by 105 countries by 2015. An estimated 9.7% of people 
with MDR-TB have XDR-TB. 
Diagnostics and laboratory strengthening
"
" The use of the rapid test Xpert MTB/RIF® has expanded 
substantially since 2010, when WHO first recommended 
its use. In all, 4.8 million test cartridges were procured in 
2014 by 116 low- and middle-income countries at conces-
sional prices, up from 550 000 in 2011.
"
" By 2015, 69% of countries recommended using Xpert 
MTB/RIF as the initial diagnostic test for people at risk of 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  3
drug-resistant TB, and 60% recommended it as the initial 
diagnostic test for people living with HIV. 
Addressing the co-epidemics of TB and HIV 
"
" In 2014, an estimated 1.2 million (12%) of the 9.6 million 
people who developed TB worldwide were HIV-positive. 
The African Region accounted for 74% of these cases.  
"
" The number of people dying from HIV-associated TB 
peaked at 570 000 in 2004 and had fallen to 390 000 in 
2014 (a 32% decrease). 
"
" Globally, 51% of notified TB patients had a documented 
HIV test result in 2014, a small increase from 49% in 2013. 
The figure was highest in the African Region, at 79%.
"
" The number of people living with HIV who were treated 
with isoniazid preventive therapy reached 933 000 in 
2014, an increase of about 60% compared with 2013. A 
large proportion of these people (59%) were in South 
Africa.
Financing
"
" The funding required for a full response to the global TB 
epidemic in low- and middle-income countries is esti-
mated at US$ 8 billion per year in 2015, excluding research 
and development. Projections made in 2013 suggested 
that, by 2015, about US$ 6 billion could be mobilized from 
domestic sources, leaving a balance of US$ 2 billion need-
ed from international donors.
"
" Based on self-reporting by countries, funding for TB pre-
vention, diagnosis and treatment reached US$ 6.6 billion 
in 2015, up from US$ 6.2 billion in 2014 and more than dou-
ble the level of 2006 (US$ 3.2 billion).
"
" Overall, 87% (US$ 5.8 billion) of the US$ 6.6 billion avail-
able in 2015 is from domestic sources.
"
" International donor funding reported by countries to 
WHO has increased since 2006, reaching US$ 0.8 billion in 
2015. 
"
" The total amount of international donor funding record-
ed in the creditor reporting system of the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is high-
er: the latest data show total contributions of US$  1  billion 
in 2013. Of this amount, 77% was from the Global Fund. 
The largest country donor was the government of the 
United States of America, which contributed about one 
third of the TB funding channelled via the Global Fund as 
well as bilateral funds of US$ 362 million for TB and TB/
HIV in 2013.1 
"
" Domestic funding accounts for more than 90% of the 
total funding in 2015 in three country groups: Brazil, the 
Russian Federation, India, China and South Africa (BRICS); 
upper-middle-income countries; and regions outside 
Africa and Asia.
1 Not all of these bilateral funds are captured in the OECD database. For 
example, this does not record flows of funds between OECD countries, 
and funding for TB/HIV may be coded as funding for HIV.
"
" International donor funding dominates in the group of 
17 high-burden countries outside BRICS (72% of the total 
funding available in 2015) and in low-income countries 
(81% of the total funding available in 2015).
"
" The cost per patient treated for drug-susceptible TB in 
2014 ranged from US$ 100−500 in most countries with a 
high burden of TB. The cost per patient treated for MDR-
TB was typically US$ 5000−10 000.
Research and development
"
" In the diagnostics pipeline, tests based on molecular tech-
nologies are the most advanced.
"
" A diagnostic platform called the GeneXpert Omni® is 
in development. It is intended for point-of-care testing 
for TB and rifampicin-resistant TB using Xpert MTB/RIF 
cartridges. The device is expected to be smaller, lighter 
and less expensive than currently available platforms for 
point-of-care nucleic acid detection and will come with 
a built-in, 4-hour battery. WHO expects to evaluate the 
platform in 2016.  
"
" A next-generation cartridge called Xpert Ultra® is also in 
development. It is intended to replace the Xpert MTB/RIF 
cartridge and could potentially replace conventional cul-
ture as the primary diagnostic tool for TB. 
"
" Eight new or repurposed anti-TB drugs are in advanced 
phases of clinical development. For the first time in six 
years, an anti-TB drug candidate (TBA-354) is in Phase I 
testing. 
"
" Several new TB treatment regimens for drug-susceptible 
and/or drug-resistant TB are being tested in Phase II or 
Phase III trials; at least two more trials are scheduled to 
start towards the end of 2015 or in early 2016. 
"
" WHO has issued interim guidance on the use of bedaqui-
line (in 2013) and delamanid (in 2014).
"
" By the end of 2014, 43 countries reported having used 
bedaquiline to treat patients as part of efforts to expand 
access to treatment for MDR-TB.
"
" Recent observational studies of the effectiveness of short 
treatment regimens for MDR-TB in Niger and Cameroon 
found that a 12-month regimen was effective and well-tol-
erated in patients not previously exposed to second-line 
drugs. At least 16 countries in Africa and Asia have intro-
duced shorter regimens as part of trials or observational 
studies under operational research conditions, and WHO 
will reassess current guidance on their use in 2016. 
"
" Fifteen vaccine candidates are in clinical trials. Their 
emphasis has shifted from children to adolescents and 
adults.
"
" New diagnostics, drugs and vaccines will be needed to 
achieve the targets set in the End TB Strategy.
 4  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Box 1.1 Basic facts about TB
TB is an infectious disease caused by the bacillus Mycobacterium tuberculosis. It typically affects the lungs (pulmonary TB) but can affect 
other sites as well (extrapulmonary TB). The disease is spread in the air when people who are sick with pulmonary TB expel bacteria, for 
example by coughing. Overall, a relatively small proportion (5–15%) of the estimated 2–3 billion people infected with M. tuberculosis will 
develop TB disease during their lifetime. However, the probability of developing TB is much higher among people infected with HIV. 
The most common method for diagnosing TB worldwide remains sputum smear microscopy (developed more than 100 years ago), in which 
bacteria are observed in sputum samples examined under a microscope. However, developments in TB diagnostics in the last few years 
mean that the use of rapid molecular tests to diagnose TB and drug-resistant TB is increasing, and some countries are phasing out use of 
smear microscopy for diagnostic (as opposed to treatment monitoring) purposes. In countries with more developed laboratory capacity, 
cases of TB are also diagnosed via culture methods (the current reference standard). 
Without treatment, the death rate is high. Studies from the pre-chemotherapy era found that about 70% of people with sputum smear-
positive pulmonary TB died within 10 years, and that this figure was 20% among culture-positive (but smear-negative) cases of pulmonary 
TB.a 
Effective drug treatments were first developed in the 1940s. The most effective first-line anti-TB drug, rifampicin, became available in 
the 1960s. The currently recommended treatment for new cases of drug-susceptible TB is a six-month regimen of four first-line drugs: 
isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide. Treatment success rates of 85% or more for new cases are regularly reported to WHO 
by its Member States. Treatment for multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB), defined as resistance to isoniazid and rifampicin (the two most 
powerful anti-TB drugs) is longer, and requires more expensive and more toxic drugs. For most patients with MDR-TB, the current regimens 
recommended by WHO last 20 months, and treatment success rates are much lower. 
New TB drugs are now emerging from the pipeline, and combination regimens that include new compounds are being tested in clinical 
trials. There are several TB vaccines in Phase I or Phase II trials. For the time being, however, a vaccine that is effective in preventing TB in 
adults remains elusive.
a Tiemersma EW et al. Natural history of tuberculosis: duration and fatality of untreated pulmonary tuberculosis in HIV-negative patients:  
A systematic review. PLoS ONE, 2011, 6(4): e17601. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  5
Introduction 
CHAP TER
1
Tuberculosis (TB) is a major global health problem. It causes 
ill-health among millions of people each year and ranks 
alongside the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) as a 
leading cause of death worldwide.1 In 2014, there were an 
estimated 9.6 million new TB cases: 5.4 million among men, 
3.2 million among women and 1.0 million among children. 
There were also 1.5 million TB deaths (1.1 million among 
HIV-negative people and 0.4 million among HIV-positive 
people), of which approximately 890 000 were men, 480 000 
were women and 140 000 were children. The number of TB 
deaths is unacceptably high: with a timely diagnosis and cor-
rect treatment, almost all people with TB can be cured. Basic 
facts about TB are summarized in Box 1.1.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has published 
a global TB report every year since 1997. The main aim of 
these reports is to provide a comprehensive and up-to-date 
assessment of the TB epidemic and progress in prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment of the disease at global, regional 
and country levels, in the context of recommended global TB 
strategies and targets endorsed by WHO’s Member States. 
For the past decade, the focus has been on progress towards 
2015 global targets for reductions in TB disease burden 
set in the context of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). The targets are that TB incidence should be falling 
(MDG Target 6.c) and that TB prevalence and mortality rates 
should be halved compared with their 1990 levels. The Stop 
TB Strategy,2 developed for the period 2006–2015, has been 
WHO’s recommended approach to achieving these targets 
(Box 1.2). 
With 2015 marking the MDG and global TB target dead-
line, the special emphasis and most important topic of this 
2015 global TB report is an assessment of whether the 2015 
targets have been achieved. This assessment is made for the 
world, for the six WHO regions and for the 22 high-burden 
countries that collectively account for 80% of TB cases. The 
topics covered in the remaining six chapters of the report 
1 In 2014, there were an estimated 1.2 million deaths due to HIV; this 
includes 0.4 million deaths from TB among HIV-positive people. See 
unaids.org.
2 Raviglione M, Uplekar M. WHO’s new Stop TB strategy. The Lancet, 2006; 
367: 952–5.
are: TB case notifications and treatment outcomes; drug-
resistant TB; diagnostics and laboratory strengthening; 
addressing the co-epidemics of TB and HIV; financing; and 
research and development. Since the end of 2015 also marks 
the end of the MDG and Stop TB Strategy eras and the start of 
a post-2015 development framework (2016–2030) of Sustain-
able Development Goals (SDGs)3 and an associated post-2015 
global TB strategy,4 each chapter of the report features con-
tent related to the transition to the new End TB Strategy 
(Box 1.3).
As usual, the 2015 global TB report is based on data col-
lected in annual rounds of global TB data collection from 
countries and territories, including 194 Member States. This 
is done using a web-based system (https://extranet.who.int/
tme), which was opened for reporting in mid-March. In 2015, 
205 countries and territories that account for more than 99% 
of the world’s population and estimated TB cases reported 
data; this included 183 of WHO’s 194 Member States. Data 
about the provision of isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) 
to people living with HIV and antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
for HIV-positive TB patients, which were collected by the 
HIV department in WHO and the Joint United Nations Pro-
gramme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), were also used. Following 
review and follow-up with countries, the results presented in 
the main part of this report are based on data available on 6 
August 2015. 
The report has four annexes. Annex 1 describes the con-
tents of the global TB database, how data were collected and 
how to access the data. Annex 2 contains country profiles for 
the 22 high-burden countries (profiles for other countries 
are available online5) and Annex 3 contains regional profiles. 
Annex 4 provides detailed data tables for key indicators for 
the most recent year for which data or estimates are avail-
able, for all countries. 
As the 20th in the series, this 2015 global TB report marks 
an important landmark in global TB monitoring by WHO. 
3 http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/focussdgs.html
4 Uplekar M, Weil D, Lonnroth K, Jaramillo E, Lienhardt C, Dias HM, et al. 
WHO’s new End TB Strategy. The Lancet. 2015;385:1799–801.
5 www.who.int/tb/data.
 VISION
A TB-free world
GOAL
To dramatically reduce the global burden of TB by 2015 in line with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and 
the Stop TB Partnership targets
OBJECTIVES
n Achieve universal access to high-quality care for all people with TB 
n Reduce the human suffering and socioeconomic burden associated with TB
n Protect vulnerable populations from TB, TB/HIV and drug-resistant TB
n Support development of new tools and enable their timely and effective use
n Protect and promote human rights in TB prevention, care and control
TARGETS 
n MDG 6, Target 6.c: Halt and begin to reverse the incidence of TB by 2015
n Targets linked to the MDGs and endorsed by the Stop TB Partnership:
 — 2015: reduce prevalence of and deaths due to TB by 50% compared with a baseline of 1990
 — 2050: eliminate TB as a public health problem (defined as <1 case per 1 million population per year)
COMPONENTS
1.  Pursue high-quality DOTS expansion and enhancement
a. Secure political commitment, with adequate and sustained financing 
b. Ensure early case detection, and diagnosis through quality-assured bacteriology
c. Provide standardized treatment with supervision, and patient support
d. Ensure effective drug supply and management 
e. Monitor and evaluate performance and impact
2.  Address TB/HIV, MDR-TB, and the needs of poor and vulnerable populations
a. Scale up collaborative TB/HIV activities
b. Scale up prevention and management of MDR-TB
c. Address the needs of TB contacts, and of poor and vulnerable populations
3.  Contribute to health system strengthening based on primary health care
a. Help improve health policies, human resource development, financing, supplies, service delivery and information 
b. Strengthen infection control in health services, other congregate settings and households 
c. Upgrade laboratory networks, and implement the Practical Approach to Lung Health 
d. Adapt successful approaches from other fields and sectors, and foster action on the social determinants of health 
4.  Engage all care providers 
a. Involve all public, voluntary, corporate and private providers through public–private mix approaches
b. Promote use of the International Standards for Tuberculosis Care 
5.  Empower people with TB, and communities through partnership
a. Pursue advocacy, communication and social mobilization
b. Foster community participation in TB care, prevention and health promotion 
c. Promote use of the Patients’ Charter for Tuberculosis Care
6.  Enable and promote research 
a. Conduct programme-based operational research 
b. Advocate for and participate in research to develop new diagnostics, drugs and vaccines.
Box 1.2 The Stop TB Strategy at a glance (2006–2015)
6  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
 VISION
A WORLD FREE OF TB
 
—  zero deaths, disease and suffering due to TB
GOAL
END THE GLOBAL TB EPIDEMIC
INDICATORS
MILESTONES
TARGETS
2020
2025
SDG 2030a
End TB 2035
Reduction in number of TB deaths 
compared with 2015 (%)
35%
75%
90%
95%
Reduction in TB incidence rate 
compared with 2015 (%) 
20% 
(<85/100 000)
50% 
(<55/100 000)
80% 
(<20/100 000)
90% 
(<10/100 000)
TB-affected families facing catastrophic 
costs due to TB (%)
0
0
0
0
PRINCIPLES
1. Government stewardship and accountability, with monitoring and evaluation
2. Strong coalition with civil society organizations and communities
3. Protection and promotion of human rights, ethics and equity
4. Adaptation of the strategy and targets at country level, with global collaboration
PILLARS AND COMPONENTS
1.  INTEGRATED, PATIENT-CENTRED CARE AND PREVENTION
A. Early diagnosis of TB including universal drug-susceptibility testing, and systematic screening of contacts and high-risk groups 
B. Treatment of all people with TB including drug-resistant TB, and patient support 
C. Collaborative TB/HIV activities, and management of co-morbidities
D. Preventive treatment of persons at high risk, and vaccination against TB
2.  BOLD POLICIES AND SUPPORTIVE SYSTEMS
A. Political commitment with adequate resources for TB care and prevention
B. Engagement of communities, civil society organizations, and public and private care providers
C. Universal health coverage policy, and regulatory frameworks for case notification, vital registration, quality and rational use of 
medicines, and infection control
D. Social protection, poverty alleviation and actions on other determinants of TB
3.  INTENSIFIED RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
A. Discovery, development and rapid uptake of new tools, interventions and strategies
B. Research to optimize implementation and impact, and promote innovations
a Targets linked to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Box 1.3 The End TB Strategy at a glance (2016–2035)
GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  7
 8  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Disease burden and  
2015 targets assessment 
CHAP TER
2
The burden of TB disease can be measured in terms of inci-
dence (defined as the number of new and relapse cases of TB 
arising in a given time period, usually one year), prevalence 
(defined as the number of cases of TB at a given point in time) 
and mortality (defined as the number of deaths caused by TB 
in a given time period, usually one year). 
This chapter presents the latest WHO estimates of TB 
incidence, prevalence and mortality between 1990 and 2015. 
Special emphasis is given to assessment of whether 2015 tar-
Key facts and messages
The data available to estimate TB disease burden (incidence, 
prevalence, mortality) continue to improve. In 2014, data from 
vital registration (VR) systems and/or mortality surveys were 
used to estimate TB mortality in 129 countries (up from three 
countries in 2008). There has been substantial progress in the 
implementation of national population-based surveys of the 
prevalence of TB disease since 2008, with 18 surveys (of which 12 
were first-ever national surveys) completed between 2009 and 
August 2015. Of these, results from six surveys were finalized 
in the past year (Ghana, Indonesia, Malawi, Sudan, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe), and additional survey results became available 
for the United Republic of Tanzania. Three additional surveys 
were begun in late 2014 or 2015. Notification data for 2014 were 
reported by 205 countries and territories.
This chapter presents the latest WHO estimates of TB disease 
burden between 1990 and 2015. Special emphasis is given to 
assessment of whether 2015 targets set in the context of the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were achieved. The 
targets were that incidence should be falling by 2015 (MDG 
target 6c) and that prevalence and mortality rates should be 
halved compared with 1990 levels.
Globally in 2014, there were an estimated 9.6 million incident 
cases of TB: 5.4 million among men, 3.2 million among 
women and 1.0 million among children. The global total is 
a considerable upward revision compared with estimates 
published in 2014, following results from the national 
prevalence survey in Indonesia. It is now estimated that there 
are about 1 million new TB cases per year in Indonesia, twice the 
previously estimated level. 
Globally in 2014, there were an estimated 1.2 million new HIV-
positive TB cases (12% of all TB cases). Almost three-quarters of 
these cases were in the African Region.
Globally in 2014, there were an estimated 1.5 million deaths 
from TB: 1.1 million deaths among people who were HIV-
negative and 390 000 deaths among people who were HIV-
positive.* TB ranks alongside HIV (1.2 million deaths in 2014, 
including the 390 000 TB deaths among HIV-positive people) as 
a leading cause of death worldwide. 
The South-East Asia and Western Pacific Regions collectively 
accounted for 58% of the world’s TB cases in 2014. The African 
Region had 28% of the world’s cases, but the most severe 
burden relative to population (281 incident cases per 100 000 
population on average, more than double the global average 
of 133). India, Indonesia and China had the largest numbers of 
cases (23%, 10% and 10% of the global total, respectively). 
The MDG target of halting and reversing TB incidence by 2015 
was achieved globally, in all six WHO regions and in 16 of the 
22 high TB burden countries (HBCs). The TB incidence rate has 
fallen at an average rate of 1.5% per year since 2000. 
Globally, the TB mortality rate in 2015 was 47% lower than in 
1990: the target of a 50% reduction was almost met. The target 
was achieved in four WHO Regions (the exceptions were the 
African and European regions), and in 11 HBCs. 
Globally, the TB prevalence rate in 2015 was 42% lower than 
in 1990. The target of a 50% reduction was met in three WHO 
regions and in nine HBCs. 
All three 2015 targets were met in the Region of the Americas, 
the South-East Asia Region and the Western Pacific Region, 
and in nine HBCs: Brazil, Cambodia, China, Ethiopia, India, 
Myanmar, the Philippines, Uganda and Viet Nam.
Between 2000 and 2014, TB treatment alone saved 35 million 
lives among HIV-negative people; TB treatment and anti-
retroviral therapy saved an additional 8 million lives among 
HIV-positive people. 
* The underlying cause of TB deaths among HIV-positive people is classified as HIV in the international classification of diseases system.
gets set in the context of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) were achieved at global level, in the six WHO regions 
and in the 22 high TB burden countries (HBCs) that collective-
ly account for about 80% of the world’s TB cases. The targets 
were that incidence should be falling by 2015 (MDG target 6c) 
and that prevalence and mortality rates should be halved 
compared with their levels in 1990 (Box 2.1).
WHO updates estimates of the burden of disease caused 
by TB annually, using the latest available data and analytical 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  9
methods.1,2 Since 2006, concerted efforts have been made 
to improve the available data and methods used, under 
the umbrella of the WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact 
Measurement (Box 2.1). Notification data are consistently 
reported by about 200 countries and territories each year 
(205 in 2014). For this report, direct measurements of TB 
mortality from national or sample vital registration (VR) 
systems were available for 127 countries (up from three 
countries in 2008) and data from mortality surveys were 
available for two countries. Between 2009 and August 2015, 
18 population-based surveys of the prevalence of TB disease 
(of which 12 were first-ever national surveys) were complet-
ed. Of these, results from six surveys were finalized in the 
past year (Ghana, Indonesia, Malawi, Sudan, Zambia, Zim-
babwe), and additional survey results became available for 
the United Republic of Tanzania. These results are reflected 
in prevalence estimates published in this report, and have 
also allowed improvements to estimates of TB incidence and 
mortality. Those for Indonesia in particular have had a major 
impact on global estimates of TB incidence and prevalence. A 
summary of the main updates to available data and methods 
is provided in Box 2.2.
The chapter has five major sections. The first three cover 
estimates of TB incidence, prevalence and mortality in turn, 
including assessment of whether the 2015 target was met. 
The section on TB mortality includes estimates of the lives 
saved through TB treatment (including the additional ben-
efit from antiretroviral therapy for HIV-positive TB patients) 
between 2000 and 2014. The fourth section presents esti-
mates disaggregated by age and sex. The fifth and final 
section explains how WHO will update the current lists of 
HBCs for the post-2015 era. 
2.1  
TB incidence 
TB incidence has never been measured at national level 
because this would require long-term studies among large 
cohorts of people (hundreds of thousands), involving high 
costs and challenging logistics. Notifications of TB cases pro-
vide a good proxy indication of TB incidence in countries that 
have both high-performance surveillance systems (for exam-
ple, there is little under-reporting of diagnosed cases) and 
where the quality of and access to health care means that 
few cases are not diagnosed. In the large number of coun-
tries where these criteria are not yet met, better estimates 
of TB incidence can be obtained from an inventory study (an 
inventory study is a survey to quantify the level of under-
reporting of detected TB cases; if certain conditions are met, 
capture-recapture methods can also be used to estimate TB 
1 The online technical appendix is available at www.who.int/tb/data. 
2 It should be highlighted that these updates affect the entire time-series 
back to 1990. For this reason, estimates presented in this chapter for 
1990−2013 supersede those of previous reports and direct comparisons 
(for example, 2013 estimates in this report and 2013 estimates in the last 
report) are not appropriate. 
incidence).3 To date, such studies have been undertaken in 
only a few countries: examples include Egypt, Iraq, Pakistan 
and Yemen. A recent example, from the Republic of Korea, is 
profiled in Box 2.3.
The ultimate goal is to directly measure TB incidence from 
TB notifications in all countries. This requires a combina-
tion of strengthened surveillance, better quantification of 
under-reporting (i.e. the number of cases that are missed by 
surveillance systems) and universal access to health care. A 
TB surveillance checklist developed by the WHO Global Task 
Force on TB Impact Measurement defines the standards 
that need to be met for notification data to provide a direct 
measure of TB incidence (Box 2.1). By August 2015, a total of 
38 countries including 16 HBCs had completed the checklist 
(Figure 2.1).
Methods currently used by WHO to estimate TB incidence 
can be grouped into four major categories (Figure 2.2). These 
are: 
1. Case notification data combined with expert opinion 
about case detection gaps. Expert opinion, elicited in 
regional workshops or country missions, is used to esti-
mate levels of under-reporting and under-diagnosis. 
Trends are estimated using either mortality data, surveys 
of the annual risk of infection or exponential interpolation 
using estimates of case detection gaps for three years. 
In this report, this method is used for 120 countries that 
accounted for 51% of the estimated global number of inci-
dent cases in 2014. 
2. Results from national TB prevalence surveys. Incidence 
is estimated using prevalence survey results combined 
with either a dynamic model or estimates of the dura-
tion of disease. This method is used for 19 countries that 
accounted for 46% of the estimated global number of 
incident cases in 2014.
3. Notifications in high-income countries adjusted by a 
standard factor to account for under-reporting and 
under-diagnosis. This method is used for 73 countries 
(all high-income countries except the Netherlands and 
the United Kingdom), which accounted for 3% of the esti-
mated global number of incident cases in 2014.
4. Results from inventory/capture-recapture studies. This 
method is used for 5 countries: Egypt, Iraq, the Nether-
lands, the United Kingdom and Yemen. They accounted 
for 0.5% of the estimated global number of incident cases 
in 2014. 
Further details about these methods are provided in the online 
technical appendix1 and in background documents prepared 
for the global review of methods used to produce TB burden 
3 Inventory studies can be used to measure the number of cases that are 
diagnosed but not reported. A guide on inventory studies is available 
at: www.who.int/tb/publications/inventory_studies. 
 10  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Box 2.1 2015 global TB targets assessment 
Background
Global targets for reductions in TB disease burden by 2015 
were set within the context of the United Nations’ Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). The targets were that TB incidence 
should be falling, and that TB mortality and prevalence rates 
should be halved by 2015 compared with their level in 1990. The 
targets were adopted at regional and country levels. The Stop TB 
Strategy (2006–2015) developed by WHO had the overall goal of 
achieving these targets (Chapter 1). 
Since 2005, WHO has published estimates of TB incidence, 
prevalence and mortality and an assessment of progress towards 
2015 targets in its annual global TB report. With 2015 marking the 
MDG and global TB target deadline, the special emphasis and most 
important topic of this 2015 global TB report is an assessment of 
whether the 2015 targets were achieved. This assessment is made 
for the world, for the six WHO regions and for the 22 high-burden 
countries (HBCs) that collectively account for 80% of TB cases. It 
is built on the work of the WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact 
Measurement. 
The WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact 
Measurement
The WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact Measurement was 
established in 2006, with the aim of ensuring that assessment of 
whether 2015 targets were met should be as rigorous, robust and 
consensus-based as possible. 
To fulfil this mandate, the Task Force agreed upon three strategic 
areas of work: 
1. Strengthened surveillance in all countries, towards the 
ultimate goal of direct measurement of TB incidence and 
TB mortality using notification and vital registration data, 
respectively;
2. National TB prevalence surveys in 22 global focus countries;
3. Periodic review and updating of methods used to translate 
surveillance and survey data into TB disease burden estimates. 
A wide range of technical, financial and development agencies, 
countries and individual experts have been engaged in the work 
of the Task Force, and full details can be found on the Task Force 
website.a 
The Task Force’s work on strengthened surveillance has covered 
four main topics. These are:
"
 Development of a TB surveillance checklist of standards 
and benchmarks (with ten core and three supplementary 
standards).b This can be used to systematically assess the 
extent to which a surveillance system meets the standards 
required for notification and vital registration data to 
provide a direct measurement of TB incidence and mortality, 
respectively. By August 2015, 38 countries including 16 HBCs 
had used the checklist (Figure 2.1). 
"
 Electronic recording and reporting. Case-based electronic 
databases are the reference standard for recording and 
reporting TB surveillance data. A guide was produced in 2011,c 
and efforts to introduce such systems have been supported. 
"
 Development of a guide on inventory studies to measure under-
reporting of detected TB cases,d and support to such studies in 
priority countries. One of the main reasons for uncertainty in 
estimates of TB incidence is that in many countries, especially 
those with a large private sector, cases may be detected but 
not reported. An inventory study can be used to quantify the 
number of cases that are detected but not reported to national 
surveillance systems, and serve as a basis for addressing gaps in 
reporting. 
"
 Expanded use of data from vital registration (VR) systems 
and mortality surveys to produce estimates of the number of 
TB deaths, and contributions to wider efforts to promote VR 
systems. In this report, estimates of TB mortality are based on 
such data sources for 129 countries (Figure 2.15). 
There has been substantial success in the implementation of 
national TB prevalence surveys. Between 2009 and 2015, 18 
countries including 15/22 global focus countries completed a 
survey and more are scheduled to do so by 2016 (Figure 2.11, 
Figure 2.12). Results from these surveys have provided a large body 
of new evidence about the burden of TB disease (Box 2.2) and also 
have important policy, programmatic and funding implications 
(Box 2.4).
A Task Force subgroup undertook a major review and 
update of methods between June 2008 and October 2009. 
Recommendations were endorsed at a full meeting of the Task 
Force in March 2010. A second thorough and comprehensive 
review of these methods as well as possible alternatives was 
undertaken in 2015, with the purpose of reaching consensus on 
methods to be used for reporting in the 2015 global TB report on 
whether 2015 targets were met. The key recommendation from the 
group of experts was that existing methods should be used – the 
consensus was to “finish the cycle with established methods”.e
Looking forward: TB burden estimates post-2015
The End TB Strategy includes ambitious targets for reductions 
in TB incidence and TB mortality (Chapter 1). During the expert 
review of current methods used to estimate these indicators, 
there was strong agreement that the main goal is to strengthen 
TB surveillance so that TB cases and TB deaths can be directly 
measured using notification and vital registration systems.e 
Therefore, the Task Force strategic area of work related to 
strengthened surveillance needs to be continued. In the interim, 
for countries without high-performance surveillance systems, 
options for improving current methods that were identified 
included the use of new statistical models, use of dynamic models 
(especially for estimation of TB incidence in countries with recent 
prevalence survey data), and implementation of more inventory 
studies to measure under-reporting. It was also agreed that a 
strategic selection of priority countries in which repeat prevalence 
surveys should be done to measure trends is important. 
a www.who.int/tb/advisory_bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce
b www.who.int/tb/publications/standardsandbenchmarks/en/
c Electronic recording and reporting for TB care and control. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2011 (WHO/HTM/TB/2011.22). Available at 
www.who.int/tb/publications/electronic_recording_reporting
d Assessing tuberculosis underreporting through inventory studies. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2013 (WHO/HTM/TB/2012.12). Available 
at: www.who.int/tb/publications/inventory_studies
e www.who.int/tb/advisory_bodies/impact_measurement_
taskforce/meetings/global_consultation_meeting_report.pdf
vvv
 Box 2.2 Updates to estimates of TB disease burden in this report and updates that 
 
are anticipated in the near future 
UPDATES IN THIS REPORT
1. New data from national TB prevalence surveys
Between October 2014 and August 2015, final results from 
surveys in Ghana, Indonesia, Malawi, Sudan, the United Republic 
of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe became available. The size 
of Indonesia’s population and TB burden means that upward 
revisions to estimates based on the prevalence survey affect global 
estimates of the absolute number of incident cases (although 
importantly, global trends in TB incidence are not affected and the 
impact on estimates of global TB deaths is small given a relatively 
low case fatality ratio in Indonesia). In the other countries, updated 
estimates are either higher (Ghana, Malawi, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Zambia) or lower (Sudan, Zimbabwe) than previous 
estimates. Post-survey estimates are almost always more precise 
than earlier estimates that were indirectly derived from incidence 
(Figure B2.2.1). 
2.  Newly reported data and updated estimates 
 
from other agencies
New VR data were reported to WHO between mid-2014 and 
mid-2015 and some countries made corrections to historical data. 
UNAIDS published updated HIV estimates in August 2014. The 
United Nations Population Division published new estimates in 
July 2015. In most instances, any resulting changes to TB burden 
estimates are well within the uncertainty intervals of previously 
published estimates, and trends are generally consistent. 
For the first time, estimates of TB mortality (HIV-negative) in 
Indonesia could be produced using data from a sample vital 
registration system, after adjustment for incomplete coverage 
and ill-defined causes of death. For South Africa, estimates of 
TB mortality (HIV-negative) were obtained from the Institute of 
Health Metrics and Evaluation; these estimates use data from 
the national vital registration system, adjusted for widespread 
miscoding of deaths caused by HIV and TB,a,b and replace previous 
indirect estimates derived from TB incidence and the case fatality 
ratio. 
3. Updated methods for estimating TB burden
In March 2015, the WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact 
Measurement convened an expert group to review methods 
for estimating TB disease burden (see Box 2.1). In general, the 
meeting recommended that current methods should be retained, 
especially for the purposes of reporting on whether 2015 targets 
were met. An exception was methods used to estimate the burden 
of TB disease among children, which have been published by 
WHO since 2013 and which are not relevant to reporting on 2015 
targets. It was recommended that WHO should update methods 
used to estimate TB incidence among children by implementing 
an “ensemble” approach in which estimates derived from case 
notifications adjusted for under-detection and under-reportingc 
are combined with estimates derived from dynamic modelling.d 
An additional recommendation was that HIV-positive TB mortality 
in children should be estimated using a similar approach to that 
used for disaggregating TB/HIV mortality by sex. Estimates of 
childhood TB incidence and mortality presented in this report are 
based on these recommendations.
4. In-depth epidemiological reviews at country level
Estimates for Angola were revised based on discussions with 
experts from the NTP and partners. They should however be 
considered preliminary, pending the findings of an ongoing 
epidemiological review. Estimates for Kazakhstan were updated 
in February 2015 following an in-depth review conducted by WHO 
staff (headquarters and the Regional Office for Europe) in close 
collaboration with the Ministry of Health.
UPDATES ANTICIPATED IN THE NEAR FUTURE
Updates to estimates of disease burden are expected within the 
next year for three countries in which a national TB prevalence 
survey has been recently completed (Uganda, July 2015) or is 
scheduled for completion around the end of 2015 (Bangladesh, 
Mongolia). Estimates of TB incidence may be updated following 
the implementation of inventory studies to measure under-
reporting of detected TB in China, Indonesia, the Philippines, 
Thailand and Viet Nam. An expert review of methods used to 
estimate the burden of MDR-TB is scheduled for 2016.
GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  11
FIGURE B2.2.1
Estimates of TB prevalence (all ages, all forms of TB) for 17 countries, before (in 
blue) and after (in red) results from national prevalence surveys became available. 
Panels are ordered according to the before-after difference.a
Myanmar
Pakistan
China
Thailand
Cambodia
Indonesia
Lao PDR
Gambia
Zimbabwe
Ethiopia
Sudan
Rwanda
Zambia
Nigeria
Ghana
Malawi
UR Tanzaniaa
Prevalence per 1000 population (log scale)
Asia
Africa
0.25
0.50
1.00
2.00
5.00
10.00
0.25
0.50
1.00
2.00
5.00
10.00
Prevalence per 1000 population (log scale)
a The wide uncertainty interval of the post-survey estimate for the United Republic of Tanzania is 
because laboratory challenges meant that it was only possible to directly estimate the prevalence of 
smear-positive (as opposed to bacteriologically confirmed) TB. 
a Murray C, Ortblad K, Guinovart C 
et al. Global, regional, and national 
incidence and mortality for HIV, 
tuberculosis, and malaria during 
1990–2013: a systematic analysis for 
the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2013. Lancet 2014; 384: 1005–70. 
25059949.
b Groenewald P, Nannan N, Bourne D et al. 
Identifying deaths from AIDS in South 
Africa. AIDS 2005; 19: 193–201. 15668545.
c Jenkins H, Tolman A, Yuen C et al. 
Incidence of multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis disease in children: 
systematic review and global estimates. 
Lancet 2014; 383: 1572–9. 24671080.
d Dodd P, Gardiner E, Coghlan R et al. 
Burden of childhood tuberculosis in 22 
high-burden countries: a mathematical 
modelling study. Lancet Glob Health 2014; 
2: e453–9. 25103518
 12  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 2.1 
Countries that had completed a systematic assessment of TB surveillance using the WHO TB surveillance checklist of 
standards and benchmarks by August 2015
High-burden countries (16)
Other countries (22)
n FIGURE 2.2 
Main method used to estimate TB incidencea
a In the first method, case notification data are combined with expert opinion about  case detection gaps (under-reporting and under-diagnosis), and 
trends are estimated  using either mortality data, repeat surveys of the annual risk of infection or exponential interpolation using estimates of case 
detection gaps for three years. For all high-income countries except the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, notifications are adjusted by a standard 
amount or measure of under-reporting from inventory studies, to account for case detection gaps. For further details about all four methods, see text.
Main method
Case notifications, 
expert opinion
Prevalence survey
Case notifications, 
standard adjustment
Capture–recapture
No data
Not applicable
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  13
estimates that was held 31 March–2 April 2015 (Box 2.1).1,2 
In 2014, there were an estimated 9.6 million incident cases 
of TB (range, 9.1 million–10.0 million)3 globally, equivalent 
to 133 cases per 100 000 population (Table 2.1, Table 2.2). 
The absolute number of incident cases is falling slowly (Fig-
ure 2.3), at an average rate of 1.5% per year 2000−2014 and 
2.1% between 2013 and 2014. The cumulative reduction in the 
TB incidence rate 2000–2014 was 18%. 
Most of the estimated number of cases in 2014 occurred 
in Asia (58%) and the African Region (28%);4 smaller pro-
portions of cases occurred in the Eastern Mediterranean 
Region (8%), the European Region (3%) and the Region of 
the Americas (3%). The 22 HBCs that have been given high-
est priority at the global level since 2000 (listed in Table 2.1 
and Table 2.2) accounted for 83% of all estimated incident 
cases worldwide. The six countries that stand out as having 
the largest number of incident cases in 2014 were India, Indo-
nesia, China, Nigeria, Pakistan and South Africa; these and 
the other five countries that make up the top ten in terms of 
numbers of cases are highlighted in Figure 2.4. India, Indo-
nesia and China alone accounted for a combined total of 43% 
of global cases in 2014. 
The 9.6 million incident TB cases in 2014 included 1.1 mil-
lion–1.3 million (11–13%) among people living with HIV, with 
a best estimate of 1.2 million (12%) (Table 2.1, Table 2.2). The 
proportion of TB cases co-infected with HIV was highest in 
countries in the African Region (Figure 2.5). Overall, 32% of 
TB cases were estimated to be co-infected with HIV in this 
region, which accounted for 74% of TB cases among people 
living with HIV worldwide. In parts of southern Africa, more 
than 50% of TB cases were co-infected with HIV (Figure 2.5).
Following a systematic review of evidence about mortal-
ity caused by MDR-TB undertaken in 2013 and consensus 
about what indicators to use for reporting on the burden of 
MDR-TB,5 this report includes updated global estimates of 
MDR-TB incidence and mortality. The best estimate is that 
there were 480 000 (range, 360 000–600 000) new cases 
of MDR-TB worldwide in 2014 (see also Chapter 4). This total 
includes cases of primary and acquired MDR-TB. 
The number of incident TB cases relative to population 
size (the incidence rate) varies widely among countries 
(Figure 2.6, Figure 2.7). The lowest rates are found predomi-
nantly in high-income countries including most countries in 
western Europe, Canada, the United States of America, Aus-
tralia and New Zealand. In these countries, the incidence rate 
is less than 10 cases per 100 000 population per year. Most 
countries in the Region of the Americas have rates below 50 
per 100 000 population per year and this is the region with 
1 The online technical appendix is available at www.who.int/tb/data. 
2 All background documents are available at www.who.int/tb/
advisory_bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce/meetings/
consultation_april_2015_tb_estimates_subgroup/en/
3 “Range” refers here and elsewhere to the 95% uncertainty interval.
4 Asia refers to the WHO Regions of South-East Asia and the Western 
Pacific.
5 See Box 5.3, Chapter 5 in the 2014 global TB report. 
Box 2.3 Low level of under-reporting of  
 
detected TB cases in the Republic  
 
of Korea
A national case-based and internet-based TB notification 
system is a key element of the NTP in the Republic of Korea, 
linked to the initiation of response measures including 
outbreak investigations, evaluation of contacts and TB case 
management. The online TB reporting system was established 
in 2000.a 
All TB patients who are treated in public health centres are 
notified to the Korea National TB Surveillance System (KNTSS). 
In 2006, a national survey found that only 67.6% of patients 
diagnosed and treated in the private sector were notified, 
despite a legal framework making notification of TB cases 
mandatory. Since 2008, the coverage of routine TB surveillance 
has been systematically assessed using record-linkage of 
medical records from the National Health Insurance (NHI) 
system and records from the KNTSS database.b National 
identification numbers are used for record-linkage.
Data on levels of under-reporting of TB case notifications in 
2012 and 2013 are presented in Table B2.3.1. Under-reporting 
was defined as failing to report a detected case within 
6 months.
TABLE B2.3.1
Under-reporting of detected TB cases in the  
Republic of Korea
2012
2013
National health insurance system
36 735
33 800
National TB surveillance system
32 515
31 534
Under-reporting
11.5%
6.7%
Under-reporting to the national TB surveillance system was 
found to be lower when cases were diagnosed in general 
hospitals (8%, 2012–2013) compared with private clinics (24%). 
A regulation is being put in place that makes reimbursement 
from the national health insurance system conditional upon 
notification of cases by prescribing physicians, as part of a 
5-year plan for TB elimination (2013–2017). In 2011, the national 
health insurance system covered 90% of medical expenses 
related to TB, and reimbursement coverage is planned to reach 
100% for TB patients in 2016. The new regulation regarding 
conditional reimbursement and the planned increase in 
coverage of health insurance to 100% for TB patients should 
ensure a close to zero level of under-reporting of detected cases 
in the near future.
a WJ Lew, EG Lee, JY Bai et al. An Internet-based surveillance system 
for tuberculosis in Korea. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis, 2006; 10:1241–7.
b YS Park, SJ Hong, YK Boo et al. The national status of tuberculosis 
using nationwide medical records survey of patients with 
tuberculosis in Korea. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul), 2012; 73:48–55.
 14  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n TABLE 2.1 
Estimated epidemiological burden of TB, 2014. Best estimates are followed by the lower and upper bounds of the 95% 
uncertainty interval. Numbers in thousands.a 
POPULATION
MORTALITYb
HIV-POSITIVE TB 
MORTALITY
PREVALENCE
INCIDENCE
HIV-POSITIVE INCIDENT 
TB CASES
Afghanistan
31 628
14
10–18
<0.1
0–0.1
110
56–180
60
53–67
0.3
0.2–0.4
Bangladeshc
159 078
81
59–110
0.2
0.1–0.2
640
340–1 000
360
320–410
0.6
0.4–0.7
Brazil
206 078
5.3
4.9–5.7
2.4
1.8–3.2
110
51–180
90
86–95
16
14–17
Cambodia
15 328
8.9
6.3–12
0.8
0.6–1.0
100
87–120
60
54–66
1.8
1.6–2.0
China
1 369 436
38
37–40
0.7
0.5–0.9
1 200
1 100–1 400
930
860–1 000
13
11–16
DR Congo
74 877
52
38–68
6.3
5.0–7.7
400
210–640
240
220–270
34
27–42
Ethiopia
96 959
32
22–43
5.5
4.4–6.8
190
160–240
200
160–240
19
15–23
India
1 295 292
220
150–350
31
25–38
2 500
1 700–3 500
2 200
2 000–2 300
110
96–120
Indonesia
254 455
100
66–150
22
13–32
1 600
1 300–2 000
1 000
700–1 400
63
41–90
Kenya
44 864
9.4
6.7–12
8.1
6.4–10
120
64–190
110
110–110
40
38–42
Mozambique
27 216
18
12–26
37
29–45
150
80–240
150
120–180
85
65–110
Myanmar
53 437
28
20–37
4.1
3.3–5.1
240
190–310
200
180–220
19
15–24
Nigeria
177 476
170
91–280
78
53–110
590
450–740
570
340–870
100
59–160
Pakistan
185 044
48
11–110
1.3
0.8–1.9
630
530–740
500
370–650
6.4
4.4–8.7
Philippines
99 139
10
9.0–11
<0.1
0–0.1
410
360–470
290
250–320
2.5
2.0–3.2
Russian Federation
143 429
16
15–16
1.1
0.8–1.3
160
70–270
120
110–130
5.5
4.5–6.6
South Africa
53 969
24
22–26
72
58–89
380
210–590
450
400–510
270
240–310
Thailand
67 726
7.4
3.9–12
4.5
2.3–7.4
160
110–220
120
61–190
15
7.8–24
Uganda
37 783
4.5
3.2–6.1
6.4
5.0–8.1
60
33–95
61
53–69
28
24–32
UR Tanzania
51 823
30
13–54
28
15–43
270
110–510
170
80–290
62
29–110
Viet Nam
92 423
17
11–23
1.9
1.3–2.5
180
76–330
130
110–150
7
5.7–8.5
Zimbabwe
15 246
2.3
1.4–3.4
5.2
3.2–7.8
44
24–71
42
29–58
25
17–35
High-burden 
countries
4 552 704
940
790–1 100
320
280–360
10 000
9 200–12 000
8 000
7 500–8 500
930
850–1 000
AFR
963 361
450
350–560
310
270–350
3 200
2 800–3 600
2 700
2 400–3 000
870
790–950
AMR
981 613
17
16–18
6
5.2–6.8
350
270–440
280
270–290
36
34–38
EMR
635 745
88
43–150
3.2
2.6–4.0
1 000
880–1 200
740
610–890
12
10–15
EUR
907 279
33
33–34
3.2
2.7–3.7
440
330–560
340
320–350
20
18–21
SEAR
1 906 087
460
350–570
62
51–74
5 400
4 400–6 500
4 000
3 700–4 400
210
180–240
WPR
1 845 184
88
81–95
4.9
4.2–5.7
2 100
1 900–2 400
1 600
1 500–1 600
31
28–35
Global
7 239 269
1 100
970–1 300
390
350–430
13 000
11 000–14 000
9 600
9 100–10 000
1 200
1 100–1 300
a Numbers for mortality, prevalence and incidence shown to two significant figures. Totals (HBCs, regional and global) are computed prior to rounding.
b Mortality excludes deaths among HIV-positive TB cases. Deaths among HIV-positive TB cases are classified as HIV deaths according to ICD-10 and are 
shown separately in this table. 
c For Bangladesh, a joint reassessment of estimates of TB disease burden will be undertaken following completion of the national TB prevalence survey.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  15
n TABLE 2.2 
Estimated epidemiological burden of TB, 2014. Best estimates are followed by the lower and upper bounds of the 95% 
uncertainty interval. Rates per 100 000 population except where indicated.
POPULATION
(THOUSANDS)
MORTALITYa
HIV-POSITIVE
TB MORTALITY
PREVALENCE
INCIDENCE
HIV PREVALENCE IN
INCIDENT TB CASES (%)
Afghanistan
31 628
44
32–57
0.3
0.2–0.3
340
178–555
189
167–212
0.5
0.4–0.7
Bangladeshb
159 078
51
37–68
0.1
0–0.1
404
211–659
227
200–256
0.2
0.1–0.2
Brazil
206 078
2.6
2.4–2.7
1.2
0.9–1.6
52
25–89
44
42–46
17
16–19
Cambodia
15 328
58
41–78
5.3
4.1–6.7
668
565–780
390
353–428
3.0
2.8–3.2
China
1 369 436
2.8
2.7–2.9
<0.1
0–0.1
89
78–102
68
63–73
1.4
1.2–1.7
DR Congo
74 877
69
50–90
8.4
6.7–10
532
282–859
325
295–356
14
11–17
Ethiopia
96 959
33
23–44
5.7
4.6–7.0
200
161–243
207
168–250
9.3
8.2–10
India
1 295 292
17
12–27
2.4
2.0–2.9
195
131–271
167
156–179
5.0
4.5–5.4
Indonesia
254 455
41
26–59
8.5
5.2–13
647
513–797
399
274–546
6.2
5.1–7.5
Kenya
44 864
21
15–28
18
14–22
266
142–427
246
240–252
36
34–38
Mozambique
27 216
67
44–96
134
106–165
554
295–893
551
435–680
57
50–63
Myanmar
53 437
53
38–70
7.7
6.1–9.5
457
352–575
369
334–406
9.7
7.9–12
Nigeria
177 476
97
51–156
44
30–61
330
253–417
322
189–488
18
15–22
Pakistan
185 044
26
6.0–61
0.7
0.4–1.0
341
285–402
270
201–350
1.3
1–1.5
Philippines
99 139
10
9.1–11
<0.1
0–0.1
417
367–471
288
254–324
0.9
0.7–1.1
Russian Federation
143 429
11
11–11
0.7
0.6–0.9
109
49–192
84
76–93
4.6
3.8–5.3
South Africa
53 969
44
41–48
134
107–164
696
390–1 090
834
737–936
61
56–66
Thailand
67 726
11
5.7–18
6.6
3.4–11
236
161–326
171
90–276
13
12–14
Uganda
37 783
12
8.4–16
17
13–21
159
87–253
161
141–183
45
42–48
UR Tanzania
51 823
58
26–104
53
30–84
528
215–979
327
155–561
37
32–42
Viet Nam
92 423
18
12–25
2
1.4–2.7
198
83–362
140
116–167
5.4
5–5.9
Zimbabwe
15 246
15
9.5–22
34
21–51
292
158–465
278
193–379
60
55–65
High-burden 
countries
4 552 704
21
17–24
6.9
6.1–7.8
227
203–253
176
165–188
12
10–13
AFR
963 361
46
36–58
32
28–36
330
288–375
281
250–313
32
28–37
AMR
981 613
1.7
1.6–1.8
0.6
0.5–0.7
36
28–45
28
27–29
13
12–14
EMR
635 745
14
6.8–23
0.5
0.4–0.6
160
139–183
117
96–140
1.7
1.3–2.2
EUR
907 279
3.7
3.6–3.8
0.3
0.3–0.4
48
36–61
37
35–39
5.9
5.4–6.5
SEAR
1 906 087
24
19–30
3.3
2.7–3.9
286
233–343
211
192–232
5.2
4.3–6.1
WPR
1 845 184
4.8
4.4–5.1
0.3
0.2–0.3
116
104–128
85
80–89
2.0
1.8–2.3
Global
7 239 269
16
13–18
5.3
4.8–5.9
174
158–190
133
126–141
12
11–13
a  Mortality excludes deaths among HIV-positive TB cases. Deaths among HIV-positive TB cases are classified as HIV deaths according to ICD-10 and are 
shown separately in this table.
b  For Bangladesh, a joint reassessment of estimates of TB disease burden will be undertaken following completion of the national TB prevalence survey.
 16  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 2.4 
Estimated TB incidence: top-ten countries, 2014. The range shows the lower and upper bounds of the 95% uncertainty 
interval. The bullet marks the best estimate.
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
Papua New Guinea
DPR Korea
Gabon
Timor−Leste
Mozambique
Namibia
Djibouti
Swaziland
South Africa
Lesotho
Ethiopia
DR Congo
Philippines
Bangladesh
South Africa
Pakistan
Nigeria
China
Indonesia
India
0
300
600
900
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Millions
Incidence: rates
Incidence: absolute numbers
n FIGURE 2.3 
Estimated absolute numbers of TB cases and deaths (in millions per year), 1990–2014
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Millions
Millions
TB incidence
TB deaths
All TB cases
HIV-positive TB cases
TB deaths among 
HIV-negative people
TB deaths among 
HIV-positive peoplea
a HIV-associated deaths are classified as HIV deaths according to ICD-10.
the lowest burden of TB on average. Most of the HBCs have 
rates of around 150–300 cases per 100 000 population per 
year (Table 2.2, Figure 2.7); HBCs with markedly lower rates 
in 2014 were Brazil, China and the Russian Federation, while 
rates were above 500 per 100 000 population in Mozambique 
and South Africa. Other countries in the top ten worldwide in 
terms of incidence rates in 2014 are shown in Figure 2.4. 
Globally, the incidence rate was relatively stable from 1990 
up until around 2000, and then started to fall (Figure 2.8), 
achieving the MDG target far ahead of the 2015 deadline. The 
MDG target has also been met in all six WHO regions and in 
16 of the 22 HBCs (Figure 2.9, Figure 2.10, Table 2.3). 
2.2  
TB prevalence 
In countries with a relatively high burden of TB (around 100 
cases per 100 000 population or more), the prevalence of 
bacteriologically-confirmed pulmonary TB can be directly 
measured in nationwide population-based surveys using 
sample sizes of around 50 000 people. Survey results can be 
used to produce a national estimate of TB prevalence that 
includes all forms of TB. The cost of a survey usually ranges 
from US$ 1 to 4 million, and comprehensive theoretical 
and practical guidance on survey design, implementation, 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  17
n TABLE 2.3
2015 targets assessment: global, WHO regions and 22 high-burden countries 
INDICATORS AND 2015 TARGETSa
INDICATOR
TB INCIDENCE RATE
TB PREVALENCE RATE
TB MORTALITY RATE
TARGET
INCIDENCE RATE FALLING
50% REDUCTION IN PREVALENCE 
RATE BY 2015 COMPARED WITH 1990
50% REDUCTION IN MORTALITY RATE 
BY 2015 COMPARED WITH 1990
GLOBAL
Global
Met
Almost met
Almost met
WHO REGION
African (AFR)
Met
Not met
Not met 
Americas (AMR)
Met
Met
Met
Eastern Mediterranean (EMR)
Met
Not met
Met
European (EUR)
Met
Not met
Not met 
South-East Asia (SEAR)
Met
Met
Met
Western Pacific (WPR)
Met
Met
Met
22 HIGH-BURDEN COUNTRIES
AFR
DR Congo
Not met
Not met
Not met 
Ethiopia
Met
Met
Met 
Kenya
Met
Not met
Not met 
Mozambique
Not met
Not met 
Almost met
Nigeria
Not met
Not met 
Not met
South Africa
Met
Not met
Not met 
Uganda
Met
Met
Met
UR Tanzania 
Met
Not met
Not met 
Zimbabwe
Met
Not met
Met
AMR
Brazil
Met
Met
Met
EMR
Afghanistan
Not met
Not met 
Not met
Pakistan
Not met
Not met 
Met
EUR
Russian Federation
Met
Not met
Not met 
SEAR
Bangladeshb
Not met
Not met
Not met 
India
Met
Met
Met
Indonesia
Met
Not met
Not met 
Myanmar
Met
Met
Met
Thailand
Met
Not met
Almost met
WPR
Cambodia
Met
Met
Met
China 
Met
Met
Met
Philippines
Met
Met
Met 
Viet Nam
Met
Met
Met
a Met (green) means that the target was achieved before or by the end of 2015. Not met (orange) means that the target will not be achieved by the end 
of 2015. Almost met (light green) means that the reduction was in the range 40–49%, according to the best estimate. Values for 2015 were based on an 
algorithm that selects the best performing among a family of exponential smoothing via state-space models of the 2005–2014 time-series.
b For Bangladesh, a joint reassessment of estimates of TB disease burden will be undertaken following completion of the national TB prevalence survey.
 18  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 2.5 
Estimated HIV prevalence in new and relapse TB cases, 2014
n FIGURE 2.6 
Estimated TB incidence rates, 2014
HIV prevalence in
new TB cases,
all ages (%)
0–4
5–19
20–49
≥50
No data
Not applicable
Estimated new TB 
cases (all forms) per
100 000 population
per year
0–9.9
10–19
20–49
50–124
125–299
300–499
≥500
No data
Not applicable
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  19
n FIGURE 2.7 
Global distribution of estimated TB incidence by rate and absolute number, 2014. The size of each bubble is proportional to 
the size of the country’s population. High-burden countries are shown in red.
Uganda
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Brazil
China
DR Congo
Ethiopia
Indonesia
India
Kenya
Cambodia
Myanmar
Mozambique
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Democratic 
People's 
Republic 
of Korea
Russian
Federation
Thailand
UR Tanzania
Viet
Nam
South Africa
Zimbabwe
Djibouti
Lesotho
Namibia
Swaziland
Timor-Leste
Kiribati
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
AFR
AMR
EMR
EUR
SEAR
WPR
G
G
G
G
G
G
0
100
200
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
WHO region
Cases per year (thousands)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Cases per year (thousands)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Rate per 100 000 population per year
analysis and reporting of results is available.1 Repeat surveys 
conducted about every ten years allow trends in disease bur-
den to be assessed. HBCs that have completed repeat surveys 
in the last ten years include Cambodia, China, the Philippines 
and Thailand. Repeat surveys are planned in Myanmar and 
Viet Nam around 2016–2017; a fourth survey is also planned 
in the Philippines in 2016. Countries in which surveys have 
been implemented or are planned in the near future are 
shown in Figure 2.11 and Figure 2.12. In the 1990s and early 
2000s, there was typically no or one survey per year, and all 
the surveys that were done were in Asia. Between 2009 and 
2016, an unprecedented number of national TB prevalence 
surveys have been or will be conducted, in both Africa and 
Asia (Figure 2.12, Box 2.1, Box 2.2). The results and lessons 
learned from one of the most recent surveys, in Indonesia, 
are highlighted in Box 2.4.
1 TB prevalence surveys: a handbook. Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2011 (WHO/HTM/TB/2010.17). Available at www.who.int/tb/advisory_
bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce/resources_documents/
thelimebook/
In low- and medium-burden countries, sample sizes and 
costs for surveys become prohibitively large. If survey data 
are not available, prevalence can be indirectly estimated as 
the product of incidence and the average duration of disease, 
but with considerable uncertainty. 
Details about the methods used to produce estimates of 
TB prevalence are provided in the online technical appen-
dix and in background documents prepared for the global 
review of methods used to produce TB burden estimates that 
was held 31 March–2 April 2015 (Box 2.1).2,3 
There were an estimated 13 million prevalent cases (range, 
11 million–14 million) of TB in 2014 (Table 2.1), equivalent to 
174 cases per 100 000 population (Table 2.2). By the end of 
2015, it is estimated that the prevalence rate will have fallen 
42% globally since 1990, missing the target (Figure 2.8, 
Table  2.3). However, two regions met the target before 2015 
(the Region of the Americas and the Western Pacific Region) 
and the South-East Asia Region reached the target (accord-
2 The online technical appendix is available at www.who.int/tb/data. 
3 All background documents are available at www.who.int/tb/
advisory_bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce/meetings/
consultation_april_2015_tb_estimates_subgroup/en/
 20  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Box 2.4 The 2013/2014 national TB prevalence survey in Indonesia: main results,  
 
and policy, programmatic and funding implications
A national survey of the prevalence of TB disease in Indonesia was 
successfully implemented in 2013/2014 under the leadership of 
the National TB Programme and the National Institute of Health 
Research and Development. The main objective of the survey was 
to estimate the prevalence of pulmonary TB (bacteriologically-
confirmed) among the general population aged ≥15 years old.
Methods and main results 
Survey methods from design through implementation, 
analysis and reporting of results followed the international 
recommendations of the WHO Global Task Force on TB Impact 
Measurement.a 
All survey participants were screened for symptoms by interview 
and chest X-ray examination. Participants with any current 
symptom suggestive of TB or radiological lesion(s) in the lung 
were requested to submit two sputum specimens (one spot and 
one early-morning) that were examined by microscopy (AFB) and 
culture (LJ solid media).
A total of 112 350 people of all ages were enumerated, from 156 
clusters around the country. Of these, there were 76 576 eligible 
individuals aged ≥15 years old. All eligible individuals were invited 
to participate in the survey, of whom 67 994 (89%) did so. Of those 
who participated, 15 446 (23%) screened positive and were eligible 
for sputum examination. A total of 426 TB cases were identified by 
the survey (Figure B2.4.1). The excellent participation rate as well 
as other survey indicators (for example, very low levels of missing 
data) show that the survey was implemented to a high standard. 
The TB prevalence rate per 100 000 population aged ≥15 years old 
was estimated to be 257 (95% CI: 210–303) for smear-positive TB, 
and 759 (95% CI: 590−961) for bacteriologically-confirmed TB. Clear 
and consistent age and sex differentials were observed for both 
smear-positive and bacteriologically-confirmed TB, with higher 
rates among men and older age groups (Figure B2.4.2). 
The final survey results were used in combination with other 
sources of information (such as notification data, mortality data 
from a sample vital registration system and previous national 
TB prevalence surveys) to update estimates of the burden of TB 
disease in Indonesia (Figure B2.4.3). Both survey results and these 
updated estimates were discussed and agreed upon in national 
consensus meetings involving all key stakeholders that were held 
in September and October 2014. 
Lessons learned 
The key lessons learned from the survey were: 
1. The burden of TB disease in Indonesia is much higher 
than previously thought.b Revised figures for 2013 are an 
estimated TB incidence rate of 403 (range, 278–550) per 
100 000 population and an estimated prevalence (all forms 
of TB, and including children as well as adults) of 660 (range, 
523–813) per 100 000 population. The 2013/2014 survey has 
provided a more accurate measurement of TB disease burden 
compared with earlier surveys, since unlike previous surveys it 
included systematic chest X-ray screening of the entire survey 
population and bacteriological testing for all those with signs or 
symptoms suggestive of TB. 
2. When analysed alongside results from previous surveys, TB 
incidence is falling, in line with the MDG target for TB. TB 
prevalence and mortality are also falling. In addition, the case 
fatality ratio (the proportion of incident cases that die from TB) 
is estimated at 11%, considerably better than the global average 
of 16%.
3. Overall, only about one third of the estimated 1 million incident 
cases that occur each year are being detected and reported to 
national authorities.
4. The number of TB patients receiving treatment in public 
and private hospitals, without linkage or reporting to the 
national TB programme, was much larger than expected. A 
high proportion of detected cases (about 50%) had not been 
reported. 
5. A high proportion of people with TB had not been detected at 
the time of the survey, showing serious delays in TB diagnosis 
and treatment.
Policy, programmatic and funding implications
The major implications of survey results, some of which require 
high-level policy action, include:
1. TB warrants being one of the top health priorities in Indonesia. 
2. Funding needs for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment 
are considerably larger than previously thought. Additional 
resources will need to be mobilized at national, provincial and 
district levels.
3. Expansion of health insurance coverage is crucial to support 
high quality TB diagnosis and treatment in public and private 
hospitals (and in the private sector in general), to ensure that 
TB disease does not impose a financial burden on patients and 
their households, and to ensure appropriate cost-recovery for 
care providers.
4. The current policy of mandatory case notification needs to be 
strongly enforced to reduce under-reporting of detected cases. 
This could be facilitated by systems that make it easier for care 
providers to notify cases, such as a user-friendly electronic 
surveillance system, and by incentives for reporting (or 
penalties for not reporting). 
5. Screening and diagnostic tools that have a higher sensitivity 
than current symptom screening and smear microscopy need 
to be introduced or expanded to help reduce the number of 
undetected cases in the community, as well as to reduce the 
possibility of over-diagnosis. Examples include much wider use 
of chest X-ray screening and rapid molecular diagnostics. 
6. Referral mechanisms between health centres and hospitals in 
both the public and private sectors need to be strengthened 
and awareness of TB increased throughout the population and 
among health care workers. These measures will also help to 
reduce the number of undetected cases in the community. 
Conclusions and next steps
The 2013/2014 national survey of the prevalence of TB disease in 
Indonesia is one of the highest quality national TB prevalence 
surveys conducted to date, and the importance of the evidence it 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  21
FIGURE B2.4.1
Consort diagram of the 2013–2014 national TB prevalence survey in Indonesia
Enumerated population: 112 350
Not eligible to participate: 35 774 (31.8%)
33 206 were less than 15 years old
2 568 were resident for less than 1 month
Did not participate: 8 632 (11.3%)
Negatively screened: 52 498 (77.3%)
Eligible to participate: 76,576 (68.2%)
Positively screened, eligible for sputum examination: 15 446 (22.7%)
Symptom and chest X-ray positive:  
4 459 (28.9%)
Symptom positive only:  
3 844 (24.9%)
Chest X-ray positive only:  
6 743 (43.7%)
Other:   
400 (2.6%)
Participated: 67 944 (88.7%)
Did not submit sputum: 305 (2.0%):
174 refused, 131 could not produce sputum
Submitted at least one sputum specimen: 15 141 (98.0%)
Submitted two sputum specimens: 14 568
Submitted only one specimen: 573 
of which 557 were spot specimens and 16 were morning specimens
No laboratory result: 14 (0.1%)
Laboratory results were available: 15 127 (99.9%)
All laboratory results 
were normal: 13 836
At least one smear was positive
Culture results:
MTB: 141
NTM: 14
Negative: 129
Contamination: 6
NA: 1
Both smears were negative
Culture results:
MTB: 259
NTM: 386
Contamination: 333
NA: 22
Panel review
TB cases: 426
Definite case: 419
Probable case: 7
Not TB cases
14 700
FIGURE B2.4.2 
Overall, and age and sex-specific TB 
prevalence rates as measured in the 
2013–2014 national TB prevalence 
survey in Indonesia, with 95% 
confidence intervals
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
All
15−24
25−34
35−44
45−54
55−64
≥65
Male
Female
Smear−positive TB
Bacteriologically confirmed TB
250
500
750
1000
1500
2000
Rate per 100 000 population
All
15−24
25−34
35−44
45−54
55−64
≥65
Male
Female
 22  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
FIGURE B2.4.3 
Trends in estimated rates of incidence, prevalence and mortality in Indonesia, 1990–2015. Left panel: the incidence rate 
(green) is shown alongside notifications of TB cases (black). Centre and right panels: The horizontal dashed lines represent 
the Stop TB Partnership targets of a 50% reduction in prevalence and mortality rates by 2015 compared with 1990. Shaded 
areas represent uncertainty bands.
Prevalence
Mortality (HIV-negative)
Incidence
Rate per 100 000 population per year
Rate per 100 000 population
0
200
400
600
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0
500
1000
0
25
50
75
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
has produced is clear. Following wide dissemination of findings, 
results have been used to help develop the national strategic plan 
2015–2020 and the preparation of a Concept Note required for 
financing from the Global Fund. A survey report has been finalized 
and results will be summarized in a paper for a peer-reviewed 
journal. 
a Tuberculosis prevalence surveys: a handbook. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2010 (WHO/HTM/TB/2010.17). Available at: http://
www.who.int/tb/advisory_bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce/
resources_documents/thelimebook/en/ 
b Other examples of countries where a survey has shown that the burden 
of TB was higher than previously include Laos PDR (2011), Nigeria (2012), 
Ghana (2013), Malawi (2013) and Zambia (2014).
ing to the best estimate) in 2015 (Figure 2.13).1 TB prevalence 
is falling in all of the other three regions. Among the 22 HBCs, 
nine are assessed to have met the target of a 50% reduction 
from 1990 levels (Figure 2.14, Table 2.3). 
2.3  
TB mortality
TB mortality among HIV-negative people can be directly 
measured using data from national VR systems, provided 
that these systems have high coverage and causes of death 
are accurately coded according to the latest revision of the 
International classification of diseases (ICD-10). Sample VR sys-
tems covering representative areas of the country (e.g. as 
in China) provide an interim solution. Mortality surveys can 
also be used to estimate deaths caused by TB. In 2014, most 
countries with a high burden of TB lacked national or sample 
VR systems and few had conducted mortality surveys. In the 
absence of VR systems or mortality surveys, TB mortality 
can be estimated as the product of TB incidence and the case 
fatality rate, or from ecological modelling based on mortali-
ty data from countries with VR systems. TB mortality among 
1 Values for 2015 were estimated using an algorithm that selects the best 
performing among a family of exponential smoothing via state-space 
models of the 2005–2014 time-series.
HIV-positive people is hard to measure even when VR sys-
tems are in place because deaths among HIV-positive people 
are coded as HIV deaths and contributory causes (such as TB) 
are often not reliably recorded. For this 2015 report, country-
specific estimates of TB deaths among HIV-positive people 
were produced using the Spectrum software that has been 
used for HIV burden estimates for over a decade. 
Until 2008, WHO estimates of TB mortality used VR data 
for only three countries. This was substantially improved to 
89 countries in 2009; however, most of the data were from 
countries in the European Region and the Region of the 
Americas, which accounted for less than 10% of the world’s 
TB cases. In 2011, the first use of sample VR data from China 
and survey data from India enabled a further major improve-
ment to estimates of TB mortality. For the current report, VR 
data of sufficient coverage and quality were available for 127 
countries (Figure 2.15) including Indonesia and South Africa 
for the first time (Box 2.2), and survey data were available 
for two countries (India and Viet Nam). The combined total 
of 129 countries accounted for 43% of the estimated number 
of TB deaths globally in 2014. The African Region is the part 
of the world in which there is the greatest need to introduce 
or strengthen a vital registration system in which causes of 
death are classified according to the ICD system. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  23
n FIGURE 2.8 
Global trends in estimated rates of TB incidence (1990-2014), and prevalence and mortality rates (1990–2015).  
Left: Estimated incidence rate including HIV-positive TB (green) and estimated incidence rate of HIV-positive TB (red).  
Centre and right: The horizontal dashed lines represent the Stop TB Partnership targets of a 50% reduction in prevalence  
and mortality rates by 2015 compared with 1990. Shaded areas represent uncertainty bands. Mortality excludes  
TB deaths among HIV-positive people.
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Prevalence
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Mortality
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
0
50
100
150
Incidence
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Rate per 100 000 population per year
Rate per 100 000 population
n FIGURE 2.9 
Estimated TB incidence rates by WHO region, 1990−2014. Estimated TB incidence rates (green) and estimated incidence 
rates of HIV-positive TB (red). Shaded areas represent uncertainty bands.
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0
100
200
300
400
0
20
40
60
0
20
40
60
0
100
200
0
50
100
150
0
50
100
150
Africa
Europe
The Americas
South−East Asia
Eastern Mediterranean
Western Pacific
 24  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Details about the methods used to produce estimates 
of TB mortality are provided in the online technical appen-
dix and in background documents prepared for the global 
review of methods used to produce TB burden estimates that 
was held 31 March–2 April 2015 (Box 2.1).1,2 
There were an estimated 1.5 million TB deaths in 2014 
(Table 2.1, Figure 2.2): 1.1 million among HIV-negative people 
and 390 000 among HIV-positive people (TB deaths among 
HIV-positive people are classified as HIV deaths in ICD-10).3 
TB ranks alongside HIV as a leading cause of death from an 
infectious disease (Figure 2.16a, Figure 2.16b).4 
1 The online technical appendix is available at www.who.int/tb/data. 
2 All background documents are available at www.who.int/tb/
advisory_bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce/meetings/
consultation_april_2015_tb_estimates_subgroup/en/
3 International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, 
10th revision (ICD-10), 2nd ed. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2007.
4 WHO Global Health Observatory data repository, available at http://
apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.GHECOD?lang=en (accessed 27 
August 2015).
Approximately 90% of total TB deaths (among HIV-neg-
ative and HIV-positive people) and 80% of TB deaths among 
HIV-negative people occurred in the African and South-East 
Asia Regions in 2014. India and Nigeria accounted for about 
one third of global TB deaths (both including and excluding 
those among HIV-positive people). 
The number of TB deaths (among HIV-negative people) 
per 100 000 population averaged 16 globally in 2014 (Table 
2.2) and 21 when TB deaths among HIV-positive people are 
included. There is considerable variation among countries 
(Figure 2.17), ranging from <1 TB death per 100 000 popula-
tion (examples include most countries in western Europe, 
Canada, the United States of America, Australia and New 
Zealand) to more than 40 deaths per 100 000 population in 
much of the African Region as well as five HBCs (Afghani-
stan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Indonesia and Myanmar). 
Globally, the mortality rate (excluding deaths among HIV-
n FIGURE 2.10 
Estimated TB incidence rates, 22 high−burden countries, 1990−2014. Estimated TB incidence rates (green) and estimated 
incidence rates of HIV−positive TB (red). Shaded areas represent uncertainty bands.
Afghanistan
Bangladesha
Brazil
Cambodia
China
DR Congo
Ethiopia
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Russian Federation
South Africa
Thailand
Uganda
UR Tanzania
Viet Nam
Zimbabwe
0
50
100
150
200
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
0
50
100
150
0
100
200
300
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0
100
200
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
0
300
600
900
0
200
400
600
800
0
25
50
75
100
0
50
100
150
200
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
0
200
400
600
0
200
400
600
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
800
0
50
100
150
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
0
200
400
600
800
1990 1995
2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995
2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995
2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995
2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995
2000 2005 2010 2015
a For Bangladesh, a joint reassessment of estimates of TB disease burden will be 
undertaken following completion of the national TB prevalence survey.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  25
n FIGURE 2.11
Countries in which national population-based surveys of the prevalence of TB disease have been implemented  
using currently recommended screening and diagnostic methodsa since 1990 or are planned in the near future:  
status in August 2015
a Screening methods include field chest X-ray; culture is used to confirm diagnosis. 
b A country has submitted at least a draft survey protocol and a budget plan to the WHO Global Task Force for TB Impact Measurement. 
c Countries were implementing field operations in August 2015 or were undertaking data cleaning and analysis. 
d A survey was conducted in accordance with WHO recommendations as outlined in “Tuberculosis prevalence surveys: a handbook (2011)” and at least a 
preliminary report has been published. 
e A repeat national survey is one in which participants were screened with chest X-ray, and culture examination was used to diagnose TB cases. In the 
Philippines, a repeat survey is planned in 2016.
n FIGURE 2.12
Global progress in implementing national surveys of the prevalence of TB disease, actual (2002–2015) and expected 
(2016–2017)
Number of surveys
7
6
DPR Korea
5
Gambia
Nepal
4
Lao PDR
Nigeria
Mongolia
Mozambique
3
Ethiopia
Rwanda
Sudan
Zimbabwe
Kenya
South Africa
2
Philippines
Cambodia
UR Tanzania
Ghana
Zambia
Uganda
Philippines
1
Cambodia
Malaysia
Indonesia
Eritrea
Thailand
Viet Nam
Bangladesh
Myanmar
China
Pakistan
Thailand
Malawi
Indonesia
Bangladesh
Viet Nam
Myanmar
0
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Global focus countries (GFC)  
selected by WHO Global Task Force 
on TB Impact Measurement
Asia – GFC 
 
 
Africa – GFC 
 
 
Non – GFC
No national 
survey planned
National survey 
plannedb
National survey 
ongoingc
One national 
survey completedd
Repeat national survey 
planned
≥1 repeat national survey 
completede
Not applicable
 26  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 2.13 
Estimated TB prevalence rates 1990−2015, by WHO region. Shaded areas represent uncertainty bands. The horizontal 
dashed lines represent the Stop TB Partnership target of a 50% reduction in the prevalence rate by 2015 compared with 1990. 
n FIGURE 2.14 
Estimated TB prevalence rates 1990−2015, 22 high−burden countries. Shaded areas represent uncertainty bands. The 
horizontal dashed lines represent the Stop TB Partnership target of a 50% reduction in the prevalence rate by 2015 compared 
with 1990.
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
0
200
400
600
800
0
250
500
750
1000
0
500
1000
0
100
200
300
0
250
500
750
1000
Rate per 100 000 population
0
250
500
750
0
200
400
600
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
0
200
400
600
800
0
50
100
150
200
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
500
1000
0
200
400
600
0
200
400
600
800
Afghanistan
Bangladesha
Brazil
Cambodia
China
DR Congo
Ethiopia
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Russian Federation
South Africa
Thailand
Uganda
UR Tanzania
Viet Nam
Zimbabwe
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
0
50
100
150
200
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
500
1000
0
500
1000
1500
a For Bangladesh, a joint reassessment of estimates of TB disease burden will be 
undertaken following completion of the national TB prevalence survey.
0
100
200
300
400
0
25
50
75
100
0
100
200
0
50
100
0
200
400
600
0
100
200
300
Rate per 100 000 population
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Africa
The Americas
Eastern Mediterranean
Europe
South−East Asia
Western Pacific
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  27
positive people)1 fell 47% between 1990 and 2015, narrowly 
missing the target of a 50% reduction (Figure 2.8, Table 2.3). 
However, two WHO regions met the target about ten years in 
advance of the deadline (the Region of the Americas and the 
Western Pacific Region), and the Eastern Mediterranean and 
South-East Asia Regions reached the target (according to the 
best estimate) by 2015 (Figure 2.18).2 TB mortality has been 
falling rapidly in the European Region since around 2005, 
but not fast enough to reach the target given the increase in 
mortality levels that occurred during the 1990s. In the African 
Region, mortality is falling but only slowly. Among the 22 
HBCs, 11 are assessed to have met the 50% reduction target 
(Figure 2.19, Table 2.3). 
1 Trends in TB mortality rates are restricted to TB deaths among 
HIV-negative people, given that TB deaths among HIV-positive people 
are classified as HIV deaths in ICD-10. 
2 Values for 2015 were estimated using an algorithm that selects the best 
performing among a family of exponential smoothing via state-space 
models of the 2005–2014 time-series.
n TABLE 2.4
Estimated case fatality ratios (CFRs) in the absence of 
treatment 
CATEGORY OF TB CASE 
CFR 
(95% UNCERTAINTY INTERVAL)
HIV-negative, not on TB treatment
0.43 (0.28–0.53)
HIV-positive, not on TB treatment or ART
0.78 (0.65–0.94)
n FIGURE 2.15 
Countries (in red) for which TB mortality is estimated using measurements from vital registration systems (n=127)  
and/or mortality surveys (n=2)
2.3.1 Estimated number of lives saved by TB 
treatment, 2000–2014
The actual numbers of TB deaths (presented above) can be 
compared with the number of TB deaths that would have 
occurred in the absence of TB treatment, to give an esti-
mate of the lives saved by TB interventions. The number of 
deaths that would have occurred each year in the absence 
of TB treatment (and without ART provided alongside TB 
treatment for HIV-positive cases) can be conservatively esti-
mated as the number of estimated incident cases (section 
2.1) multiplied by the relevant case fatality ratio (Table 2.4).3 
Estimates are conservative because they do not account for 
the impact of TB control or ART on the level of TB incidence, 
or the indirect, downstream impact of these interventions on 
future levels of infections, cases and deaths. 
Between 2000 and 2014, TB treatment alone saved an 
estimated 35 million lives among HIV-negative people (Table 
2.5). Among HIV-positive people, TB treatment supported by 
ART saved an additional 8.4 million lives. 
2.4  
Estimates disaggregated by age and sex
This section presents estimates of TB incidence and TB mor-
tality disaggregated by age and sex. Specifically, estimates 
are shown for men (defined as males aged ≥15 years), women 
3 Further details about methods used to estimate lives saved, including 
CFRs for different categories of TB case, are provided in the online 
technical appendix, available at www.who.int/tb/data. 
 28  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 2.16a 
Top causes of death worldwide in 2012.a,b Deaths from TB 
among HIV-positive people are shown in grey.c
Road injury
HIV/AIDS
Diabetes mellitus
Diarrheal diseases
Tracheal, bronchus,
 lung cancers
TB
Chronic obstructive
 pulmonary disease
Lower respiratory
 infections
Stroke
Ischaemic heart
 disease
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Millions
n FIGURE 2.16b 
Estimated number of deaths from HIV/AIDS and TB in 
2014. Deaths from TB among HIV-positive people are shown 
in grey.a,b
a This is the latest year for which estimates for all causes are currently 
available. See WHO Global Health Observatory data repository, 
available at http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.GHECOD 
(accessed 27 August 2015).
b For HIV/AIDS, the latest estimates of the number of deaths in 2012 
that have been published by UNAIDS are available at www.unaids.
org/en/resources/documents/2015/HIV_estimates_with_uncertainty_
bounds_1990-2014. For TB, the estimates for 2012 are those published in 
this report.
c Deaths from TB among HIV-positive people are officially classified as 
deaths caused by HIV/AIDS in the International classification of diseases.
a For HIV/AIDS, the latest estimates of the number of deaths in 2014 
that have been published by UNAIDS are available at www.unaids.
org/en/resources/documents/2015/HIV_estimates_with_uncertainty_
bounds_1990-2014. For TB, the estimates for 2014 are those published 
in this report.
b Deaths from TB among HIV-positive people are officially classified as 
deaths caused by HIV/AIDS in the International classification of diseases.
HIV/AIDS
TB
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Millions
n TABLE 2.5
Cumulative number of lives saved by TB and TB/HIV interventions 2000–2014 (in millions), globally and by WHO region. 
Best estimates are followed by 95% uncertainty intervals.
WHO REGION
HIV-NEGATIVE PEOPLE
HIV-POSITIVE PEOPLE
TOTAL
BEST ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY INTERVAL
BEST ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY INTERVAL
BEST ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY INTERVAL
AFR
4.2
3.4–5.1
5.9
5.3–6.5
10.1
9.0–11.2
AMR 
1.4
1.2–1.5
0.31
0.28–0.33
1.7
1.6–1.8
EMR 
2.6
2.1–3.0
0.06
0.056–0.075
2.6
2.2–3.0
EUR
2.1
1.9–2.4
0.13
0.12–0.14
2.3
2.0–2.5
SEA
15.7
13.7–17.7
1.6
1.4–1.8
17.3
15.3–19.3
WPR
9.2
8.3–10.0
0.29
0.27–0.32
9.5
8.6–10.3
Global
35.2
30.9–39.4
8.4
7.6–9.2
43.5
39.2–47.8
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  29
n FIGURE 2.17 
Estimated TB mortality rates excluding TB deaths among HIV−positive people, 2014
n FIGURE 2.18 
Estimated TB mortality rates 1990−2015, by WHO region. Estimated TB mortality excludes TB deaths among HIV-positive 
people. Shaded areas represent uncertainty bands.a The horizontal dashed lines represent the Stop TB Partnership target of a 
50% reduction in the mortality rate by 2015 compared with 1990.
0
20
40
60
80
0
2
4
6
8
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0
10
20
30
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
2
4
6
0
20
40
60
Africa
Europe
The Americas
South−East Asia
Eastern Mediterranean
Western Pacific
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
a The width of an uncertainty band narrows as the proportion of regional mortality estimated using vital registration data increases or the quality and 
completeness of the vital registration data improves.
Estimated TB deaths
per 100 000 population
0–0.9
1–3.9
4–9.9
10–19
20–39
≥40
Not applicable
 30  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 2.19 
Estimated TB mortality rates 1990−2015, 22 high−burden countries. Estimated TB mortality excludes TB deaths among  
HIV-positive people. The horizontal dashed lines represent the Stop TB Partnership target of a 50% reduction in the mortality 
rate by 2015 compared with 1990. Uncertainty is due to adjustments made to the mortality data from vital registration 
systems that were reported by countriesa (mortality data from vital registration systems are represented by the ‘x’ symbol).
0
25
50
75
100
0
25
50
75
100
125
0
50
100
150
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
20
40
60
80
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0
2
4
6
0
20
40
0
50
100
150
0
10
20
30
40
0
30
60
90
0
50
100
150
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
0
20
40
60
0
100
200
0
25
50
75
0
30
60
90
120
0
25
50
75
100
0
5
10
15
20
0
10
20
30
0
20
40
60
0
50
100
150
Afghanistan
Bangladeshb
Brazil
Cambodia
China
DR Congo
Ethiopia
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Russian Federation
South Africa
Thailand
Uganda
UR Tanzania
Viet Nam
Zimbabwe
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
a The width of an uncertainty band narrows as the proportion of regional mortality 
estimated using vital registration data increases or the quality and completeness 
of the vital registration data improves. 
b For Bangladesh, a joint reassessment of estimates of TB disease burden will be 
undertaken following completion of the national TB prevalence survey.
(defined as females aged ≥15 years) and children (defined as 
people aged <15 years). The cut-off of 15 years is used because 
it is consistent with the age categories for which notifica-
tion data are reported and with the cut-off used in current 
guidelines to define people eligible to participate in a TB 
prevalence survey.1 Details of the methods used to produce 
disaggregated estimates are provided in the online techni-
cal appendix.2 
1 TB prevalence surveys: a handbook. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2011 (WHO/HTM/TB/2010.17). Available at www.who.int/tb/advisory_
bodies/impact_measurement_taskforce/resources_documents/
thelimebook
2 The online technical appendix is available at www.who.int/tb/data. 
2.4.1  TB incidence
Estimates of TB incidence among men and women were 
produced by using notification data combined with the 
assumption that the men:women ratio of notified cases 
(1.7 globally)3 was the same as the ratio for incident cases.4 
In 2014, there were an estimated 5.4 million (range, 5.1–5.8 
million) incident cases among men and 3.2 million (range, 
3.0–3.4 million) among women. 
3 See also Table 3.2 in Chapter 3. 
4 Evidence from national prevalence surveys of bacteriologically-positive 
TB consistently show bigger ratios of prevalence to notifications in men 
than women. This means that the implicit assumption made here, that 
there is no sex differential in the detection of incident cases, may not be 
correct. With currently available data, it is not possible to estimate 
male and female case detection ratios for all countries, but if anything 
the estimates presented in this chapter are underestimating the share 
of total TB incidence that is accounted for by men. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  31
n FIGURE 2.20 
Global progress in reporting of TB cases among children, 1995–2014.a Left panel: Number of notifications of cases among 
children reported to WHO. Right panel: Percentage of case notifications reported to WHO that are age-disaggregated.
n FIGURE 2.21 
Reporting of new and relapse TB case notifications disaggregated by age, 2014
new smear-positive
new smear-negative and 
smear not done
new extrapulmonary
new and relapse, all forms
0–14 age group
0–4 age group
5–14 age group
0
100
200
300
400
0
20
40
60
80
100
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Case notifications
Completeness of reporting
Number (thousands)
Percentage
a Before 2013 childhood case notifications included smear-positive, smear-negative, smear not done and extrapulmonary TB for all new patients. After 
2013 (shown as a gap in the graph) childhood case notification include all new and relapse cases irrespective of case type.
Age disaggregation (new)
Age disaggregation (new and relapse)
No age disaggregation
No data reported
Not applicable
 32  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Box 2.5 Estimating TB incidence among children: challenges, progress  
 
to date and next steps
It is well recognized that estimating the incidence of TB in children 
is difficult and that published estimates vary.a,b There are at least 
four major reasons for this:
1. TB in children is rarely bacteriologically confirmed. Direct 
examination of sputum smears and tuberculin skin testing both 
suffer from very poor diagnostic performance. TB in children is 
thus a condition that is usually clinically diagnosed based on a 
combination of signs and symptoms that are not specific to TB. 
Case definitions are inconsistent among countries and within 
countries over time (as a result of changes in medical practice). 
2. Paediatricians who diagnose TB do not always report cases to 
public health authorities. Childhood TB is not usually a public 
health priority and effective linkages between NTPs and the 
hospitals and clinics where children are usually diagnosed are 
lacking. Reporting of cases is therefore often incomplete and 
not supported by a legal framework.
3. TB cases among children are less likely to be diagnosed in 
countries with a high burden of TB compared with adults. Sick 
children may be evaluated in facilities with little to no capacity 
to diagnose childhood TB, and diagnostic challenges (the low 
specificity of clinical signs and symptoms) translate into low 
access to quality diagnosis and care services. 
4. Different methods have been used to produce estimates. 
These include a dynamic model and statistical approaches. 
The estimates included in this report are based on combining 
results from a dynamic model,c a statistical approach based 
on a recent study,d and methods previously used by WHOb in a 
statistical ensemble model.e Estimates from the dynamic model 
and statistical approaches using the most updated data for 2014 
were found to be similar. This has contributed to a more robust 
combined estimate compared with those produced using the 
dynamic model or statistical approaches on their own. In turn, this 
means that the uncertainty interval from the ensemble approach 
is narrower than those of estimates produced from each approach 
used on its own. Nonetheless, the uncertainty interval relative to 
the best estimate is about twice as large as the relative uncertainty 
of the overall TB incidence estimate for all ages. 
The lack of overlap between the estimate of childhood TB 
incidence in this report and the one published in the 2014 editionb 
illustrates the difficulties in producing such estimates (explained 
above) and limitations in the documentation of uncertainty. 
The estimates in this report use an updated methodological 
approach recommended by the WHO Global Task Force on TB 
Impact Measurement (Box 2.1, Box 2.2). However, even using 
this approach does not allow all sources of uncertainty, such as 
uncertainty due to model specification, to be fully quantified in 
practice.
The variability and lack of stability in recently published estimates 
of TB incidence among children is concerning. Addressing this 
challenge requires much greater commitment from national public 
health authorities to the definition and application of consistent 
case definitions, to ensuring reporting of cases based on a legal 
framework and ensuring that children who are close contacts 
of people with TB are thoroughly investigated using up-to-date 
national recommendations. 
a JA Seddon and D Shingadia. Epidemiology and disease burden of 
tuberculosis in children: a global perspective. Infect Drug Resist, 
7:153–65, null 2014.
b World Health Organization. Global tuberuclosis report 2014. World Health 
Organization, Geneva; 2014. (WHO/HTM/TB/2014.08). See particularly 
Box 2.5 in Chapter 2. 
c PJ Dodd, E Gardiner, R Coghlan, and JA Seddon. Burden of childhood 
tuberculosis in 22 high-burden countries: a mathematical modelling 
study. Lancet Glob Health 2014; 2:e453–9.
d HE Jenkins, AW Tolman, CM Yuen et al. Incidence of multidrug-
resistant tuberculosis disease in children: systematic review and global 
estimates. Lancet, 2014; 383:1572–9.
e For details, see the online technical appendix to this report at www.
who.int/tb/data.
Global progress in reporting of cases among children 
since 1995 (the first year in which such data were requested 
for the 0–14 age group) and since 2005 (when further dis-
aggregation for those aged 0–4 and 5–14 was requested) is 
shown in Figure 2.20. By 2014, reporting of age-disaggre-
gated notification data was almost universal (Figure 2.21). 
In 2014, 359 000 new and relapse cases among children were 
reported, an increase of about 30% compared with 2013. The 
largest increases were in India (about 30 000) and the Phil-
ippines (about 10 000). Cambodia and Myanmar reported 
age-disaggregated data for the first time.
Producing estimates of TB incidence among children is 
challenging (Box 2.5). However, progress is being made, 
based on collaborations established in 2013 between WHO 
and academic groups working on the estimation of TB dis-
ease burden among children, as well as recommendations 
from a global consultation held earlier in 2015 (Box 2.1, Box 
2.2). Methods to estimate TB incidence in children were 
updated for this report compared with those used to pro-
duce estimates published in 2013 and 2014. The updated 
methods involve use of an ensemble approach in which 
results from two independent methods are combined. The 
first method is based on the WHO approach used since 2012, 
with the modification that child-specific case detection 
ratios (as opposed to one ratio for all ages) are used accord-
ing to previously published methods1 that were updated to 
use more recent notification data.2 The second method is a 
1 HE Jenkins, AW Tolman, CM Yuen et al. Incidence of multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis disease in children: systematic review and global 
estimates. Lancet, 2014; 383:1572–9.
2 This is in line with WHO suggestions documented in 2014. See 
Sismanidis C, Law I, Glaziou P,et al. The burden of tuberculosis disease 
in children. Lancet. 2014; 384(9951):1343. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(14)61810-9.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  33
n FIGURE 2.22 
The male:female ratios of TB deaths among adults (aged ≥15 years), globally and by WHO region
0
1
2
3
4
5
Global
WPR
SEAR
EUR
EMR
AMR
AFR
Sex Ratio (M:F)
Sex Ratio (M:F)
0
1
2
3
4
5
HIV-negative
HIV-positive
n TABLE 2.6
Estimated number of incident cases of TB among children 
in 2014, globally and by WHO region
WHO 
REGION
NUMBER 
OF TB CASE 
NOTIFICATIONS
ESTIMATED TB INCIDENCE
BEST ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY INTERVAL
AFR
90 523
330 000
290 000–370 000
AMR
10 489
27 000
25 000–29 000
EMR
42 028
80 000
64 000–97 000
EUR
9 898
31 000
28 000–34 000
SEAR
168 310
340 000
310 000–370 000
WPR
37 273
150 000
130 000–170 000
Global
358 521
1 000 000
900 000–1 100 000
dynamic model that uses adult TB prevalence estimates and 
parameters related to the natural history of TB in children. 
Global and regional estimates of TB incidence among chil-
dren using this ensemble approach are shown in Table 2.6. 
The total estimated number of incident cases in 2014 was 
1 million, with a CDR of 36%. The African and South-East Asia 
Regions account for about one third of global cases each. 
2.4.2 TB mortality
To produce estimates of TB deaths among HIV-negative 
adults, mortality data from VR systems disaggregated by 
age and sex were used. Data were available for 113 countries 
(all middle or high-income countries). For countries with-
out VR data, estimates were produced using an imputation 
model that included risk factors known to be associated with 
TB mortality. This model was used to estimate the ratios of 
the male to female and child to adult number of TB deaths. 
TB deaths among HIV-positive people were disaggregated 
by sex and age using the assumption that the male to female 
and children to adult ratios are similar to the corresponding 
ratios of AIDS deaths estimated by UNAIDS.
TB deaths among HIV-negative people 
There were an estimated 700 000 TB deaths among HIV-
negative men and 340 000 among HIV-negative women in 
2014 (Table 2.7). The male: female ratio was also above two in 
all six WHO regions (left panel of Figure 2.22). There were an 
additional 81 000 (range, 69 000–93 000) TB deaths among 
HIV-negative children, equivalent to 7% of the total number 
of HIV-negative TB deaths.
TB deaths among HIV-positive people 
There were an estimated 190 000 TB deaths among HIV-pos-
itive men and 140 000 among HIV-positive women in 2014 
n TABLE 2.7
Estimated number of TB deaths among HIV-negative 
adults disaggregated by sex, globally and by WHO region
WHO 
REGION
WOMEN
MEN
BEST 
ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY 
INTERVAL
BEST 
ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY 
INTERVAL
AFR
130 000
81 000–170 000
280 000
170 000–400 000
AMR
5 000
4 200–5 800
11 000
9 700–12 000
EMR
26 000
8 600–43 000
55 000
760–110 000
EUR
9 500
7 800–11 000
24 000
22 000–26 000
SEAR
150 000
90 000–210 000
280 000
160 000–400 000
WPR
29 000
21 000–37 000
53 000
43 000–64 000
Global
340 000
270 000–420 000
700 000
530 000–880 000
 34  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
(Table 2.8). Most of these deaths were in the African Region, 
where the male:female ratio was close to one (right panel 
of Figure 2.22). The male:female ratio in other regions var-
ied from around 2–4, with best estimates of 2.4–3.5. There 
were an additional 55 000 (range, 50 000–60 000) TB deaths 
among HIV-positive children, equivalent to 14% of the total 
number of HIV-positive TB deaths.
The total number of TB deaths among children (136 000, 
range 115 000–157 000) corresponds to a CFR of 13.6% (com-
pared with 15.5% in adults). 
2.5 
HBC lists to be used by WHO in the  
post-2015 era
2.5.1 Background and brief history
The concept of a “high burden country” has become very 
familiar and widely used in the context of TB. The initial 
definition of HBCs in 1998 was based on the burden of TB 
in absolute terms. Its purpose was to allow focused inter-
ventions in the countries responsible for 80% of the global 
burden (measured in terms of the estimated number of inci-
dent cases), since progress in these countries would translate 
into global impact. The concept was subsequently applied to 
TB/HIV (in 2005) and MDR-TB (in 2008). 
The current list of 22 HBCs (featured throughout this 
chapter) has not changed since 2002, and the HBC lists for 
TB/HIV and MDR-TB have not been updated since 2009 and 
2008, respectively.1 With the end of the MDGs and Stop TB 
Strategy in 2015 and the transition to a new era of Sustain-
able Development Goals (SDGs) and the End TB Strategy 
(Chapter 1), 2015 was the ideal year in which to revisit all three 
HBC lists and consider their future. 
1 For the TB/HIV list, see Table 6.1 in Chapter 6. For the MDR-TB list, see 
Table 4.1 in Chapter 4. 
2.5.2 Process used to revisit HBC lists and their use 
post-2015
The process of revisiting HBC lists started with the develop-
ment of a discussion paper by the Global TB Programme in 
WHO. This provided a brief history of the current HBC lists, 
and identified their potential advantages and disadvan-
tages, drawing on input provided from across the WHO TB 
network, by major global technical and financial agencies, 
and by individuals who played a leading role in the original 
establishment and definition of each list. An online survey 
was then conducted in May 2015, focused on elicitation of 
feedback about the advantages and disadvantages of the 
lists, principles and design characteristics related to their use 
post-2015, and which of four “high-level” options for the use 
of lists after 2015 was preferred.2 
Based on feedback received on the discussion paper and 
the results of the online survey, a proposal was then pre-
sented for consideration by WHO’s Strategic and Technical 
Advisory Group for TB (STAG-TB) in June 2015. Full details are 
available in the discussion paper prepared for the STAG-TB 
meeting.3 
2.5.3 Proposal presented to STAG-TB, June 2015
The proposal presented at the June 2015 meeting of STAG-TB 
can be summarized as follows: 
"
" Three updated lists, for each of TB, MDR-TB and TB/HIV.
"
" Each list includes 30 countries, defined as the top 20 in 
terms of absolute numbers of cases, plus the 10 countries 
with the most severe burden in relative terms that do not 
already appear in the top 20 (“20+10”). 
"
" Two options for defining the “additional top ten” that have 
a severe burden in relative terms were presented for con-
sideration. The first was to use rates per capita for the TB 
list, and the proportion of TB cases with MDR-TB and TB/
HIV for the other two lists. The second was to use rates 
per capita for all three lists. It was also recognized that for 
the additional top ten, a threshold in terms of a minimum 
number of cases was relevant. The TB list with and with-
out a threshold of 10 000 cases was presented. 
"
" A lifetime of five years for all three lists, 2016–2020. 
The STAG-TB recognized the value of HBC lists and endorsed 
the proposal for three “20+10” lists that would have a lifetime 
of five years. It was recommended to use rates per capita 
to define the additional top-ten countries, and to also use a 
2 These were: 1) Discontinue the use of HBC lists; 2) Continue to use three 
HBC lists (TB, MDR-TB, TB/HIV) but update them using the original 
criteria; 3) Continue to use three HBC lists (TB, MDR-TB, TB/HIV) but 
define them using new criteria; 4) Define one HBC list only.
3 World Health Organization. Use of high TB burden country lists in the 
post-2015 era. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. (Discussion 
paper). Available at: www.who.int/tb/data. This document was updated 
in August 2015 to reflect the recommendations provided during the 
STAG-TB meeting and to use the latest estimates of disease burden 
prepared for this report.
n TABLE 2.8
Estimated number of TB deaths among HIV-positive adults 
disaggregated by sex, globally and by WHO region
WHO 
REGION
WOMEN
MEN
BEST 
ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY 
INTERVAL
BEST 
ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY 
INTERVAL
AFR
120 000
110 000–140 000
130 000
94 000–170 000
AMR
1 700
1 500–1 900
3 900
3 200–4 700
EMR
730
550–920
2 000
1 300–2 700
EUR
850
710–980
2 300
1 800–2 800
SEA
13 000
10 000–15 000
45 000
34 000–57 000
WPR
1 300
1 100–1 600
3 300
2 500–4 000
World
140 000
120 000–160 000
190 000
150 000–230 000
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  35
threshold for a minimum number of cases. It was noted that 
countries with high rates but small numbers of cases are best 
included as part of regional HBC lists (if such lists are consid-
ered useful at that level). 
2.5.4 Definition of HBC lists to be used by WHO  
post-2015, and associated next steps
Following the STAG-TB meeting, the Global TB Programme 
finalized the definition of the HBC lists to be used by WHO 
post-2015, as follows: 
"
" Three HBC lists, one for each of TB, MDR-TB and TB/HIV.
"
" Each list includes 30 countries, defined as the top 20 in 
terms of absolute numbers and an additional ten that 
have the highest rates per capita and that are not already 
part of the top 20.1 For inclusion in the lists on the basis of 
rates, countries must also have a minimum of 10 000 inci-
dent cases per year (for the TB list) or 1000 cases per year 
(for the TB/HIV and MDR-TB lists). 
1 Some countries with the highest numbers in absolute terms also rank in 
the top ten in terms of rates.
"
" The estimates of TB disease burden used to define the 
lists are the most up-to-date estimates available in 2015 
i.e. those published in this 2015 global TB report.
"
" The lists will have a lifetime of five years, 2016–2020. 
In each list, the resulting list accounts for 86–90% of the 
global number of cases. 
There are two major next steps in 2015. The first is further 
communication by the Global TB Programme to WHO Mem-
ber States, technical partners and funding agencies about the 
final definition of the lists. The second is a meeting to be held 
on 30 November in association with the international confer-
ence on TB and lung diseases (organized by the Union in Cape 
Town, South Africa). This will focus on implementation of the 
End TB Strategy (Chapter 1) with particular attention to the 
30 countries in the new HBC list for TB. Starting in 2016, the 
new lists of 30 HBCs for TB, TB/HIV and MDR-TB will be used 
by WHO, including in the next edition of the global TB report. 
 36  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
TB case notifications and 
treatment outcomes 
CHAP TER
3
Key facts and messages
2015 is a landmark year in global monitoring of TB case 
notifications and treatment outcomes by WHO: it is twenty 
years since a system for annual collection of these data from 
all countries was established in 1995. Between 1995 and 2014, 
data compiled via this system show that a cumulative total of 
78 million cases of TB were notified to WHO and 66 million TB 
patients were successfully treated.
In 2014, 6.3 million cases of TB were notified by national 
tuberculosis programmes (NTPs) and reported to WHO: 
just over 6 million individuals were newly diagnosed in 2014 
and 261 000 were previously diagnosed TB patients whose 
treatment regimen was changed. 
In 2014, most notified TB cases were adults. Children (aged 
<15 years) accounted for 6.5% of notified cases, ranging from 
3.4% in the Western Pacific Region to 9.5% in the Eastern 
Mediterranean Region. The male:female ratio of notified cases 
across all age groups was 1.7 globally, ranging from 1.0 in the 
Eastern Mediterranean Region to 2.1 in the Western Pacific 
Region. 
Among pulmonary TB cases, 58% were bacteriologically 
confirmed (as opposed to clinically diagnosed) in 2014; this was 
unchanged from 2013. 
For the first time since 2007, there was a noticeable increase in 
global TB notifications in 2014 (these had stabilized at around 
5.7–5.8 million new and relapse cases for 2007–2013). The 
increase is explained by a 29% increase in notifications in India, 
linked to the introduction of a policy of mandatory notification, 
a new web-based and case-based reporting system that has 
been rolled out nationwide and greater engagement of the 
country’s large private health sector. India accounted for 27% of 
global TB notifications in 2014, followed by China (14%). 
The private health sector, providers of health services in 
the public sector that are not directly linked to NTPs and 
community workers or volunteers can make important 
contributions to the notification and treatment of TB cases. For 
example, 12% of notifications in India were from the private 
sector in 2014, and 55% of notifications in China were from 
public hospitals outside the NTP network. In six of 41 countries 
that reported data, more than 50% of notifications were from 
community referrals in areas where community engagement 
activities were in place.
Globally, notifications of newly diagnosed TB cases in 2014 
represented 63% (95% uncertainty interval, 60–66%) of 
estimated incident cases. The best estimate of the gap between 
notifications of new episodes of TB (new and relapse cases) and 
incident cases was 3.6 million cases. 
Two factors explain gaps between notifications and estimated 
incidence. The first is under-reporting of diagnosed TB cases: 
for example, of cases detected and treated in the private sector. 
The second is under-diagnosis. Reasons for under-diagnosis 
include poor access to health care and failure to detect cases 
when people with TB visit health care facilities. Intensified 
efforts, such as those already being made in India, are needed 
to ensure that all cases are detected, notified to national 
surveillance systems, and treated according to international 
standards. 
Globally in 2013, the treatment success rate for new cases of TB 
was 86%. Improvement in treatment outcomes is needed in 
the Region of the Americas and the European Region, where 
treatment success rates in 2013 were 75% and 76%, respectively.
The management of latent TB infection (LTBI) is a critical 
component of the new post-2015 End TB Strategy, and WHO 
issued guidance for upper-middle and high-income countries 
with an incidence rate of less than 100 per 100 000 population 
in 2015. In many of these countries, LTBI policies are in place 
and detection and treatment is being provided. However, there 
are also policy-practice gaps that need to be addressed and 
systems for routine recording and reporting of data need to be 
improved.
Routine recording and reporting of the numbers of TB cases 
diagnosed and treated by national TB programmes (NTPs) 
and monitoring of treatment outcomes was one of the five 
components of the global TB strategy (DOTS) launched by 
WHO in the mid-1990s; this remained a core element of its 
successor, the Stop TB Strategy (2006–2015), and is part of 
the new End TB Strategy (Chapter 1). With the standard defi-
nitions of cases and treatment outcomes recommended by 
WHO and associated recording and reporting framework as 
a foundation, the number of people diagnosed and treated 
for TB and associated treatment outcomes is routinely moni-
tored by NTPs in almost all countries, which in turn report 
these data to WHO in annual rounds of global TB data collec-
tion (Chapter 1). 2015 is a landmark year in global monitoring 
of TB case notifications and treatment outcomes by WHO: it 
is twenty years since a system for annual collection of these 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  37
data from all countries was established in 1995. Between 1995 
and 2014, data compiled via this system show that a cumula-
tive total of 78 million cases of TB were notified to WHO and 
66 million TB patients were successfully treated.1
This chapter has six parts. Section 3.1 summarizes the 
total number of people diagnosed with TB and notified by 
NTPs in 2014; these numbers are also disaggregated by case 
type, age and sex. Section 3.2 presents and discusses the spe-
cific contribution to total case notifications of public–public 
and public–private mix (PPM) initiatives. Section 3.3 high-
lights the role of community engagement in TB detection 
and treatment. Section 3.4 presents trends in notifications 
between 1990 and 2014 and compares these with trends in 
estimated TB incidence. The ratios of notified to estimated 
incident cases (an indicator known as the case detection rate 
or CDR) are provided for selected years. Section 3.5 describes 
the latest data on treatment outcomes (for cases regis-
tered for treatment in 2013) as well as treatment outcomes 
achieved in selected years since 1995. Section 3.6, the final 
part of the chapter, introduces a new topic to the global TB 
report: policy and practices related to treatment of latent TB 
infection (LTBI). This is a core component of the End TB Strat-
egy, which covers the period 2016–2035 (Chapter 1).
3.1  
Case notifications in 2014 by type of 
disease, age and sex
Box 3.1 lists the definitions of TB cases recommended by 
WHO as part of an updated recording and reporting frame-
work issued in March 2013,2 and that were used in the 2014 
and 2015 rounds of global TB data collection. These updated 
definitions were necessary to accommodate diagnosis using 
Xpert MTB/RIF and other WHO-endorsed molecular tests 
(Chapter 5), as well as offering an opportunity to improve 
aspects of the previous (2006) framework, such as inclusion of 
more comprehensive reporting of TB cases among children. 
Notifications of TB cases in 2014 are summarized glob-
ally, for the six WHO regions and for the 22 high TB-burden 
countries (HBCs) in Table 3.1. In 2014, 6.3 million people with 
TB were notified to NTPs and reported to WHO. Of these, 
just over 6 million had a new episode of TB (shown as the 
total of new and relapse cases) and 261 000 had already been 
diagnosed with TB but their treatment was changed to a 
retreatment regimen. 
For the first time since 2007, there was a noticeable 
increase in global TB notifications in 2014, which had previ-
ously stabilized at 5.7–5.8 million new and relapse cases for 
the seven years from 2007–2013 (Figure 3.1). The increase is 
mostly explained by a 29% increase in notifications in India, 
linked to the introduction of a policy of mandatory notifica-
tion, a new web-based and case-based reporting system that 
1 These figures are for new and relapse cases. See Box 3.1 for case 
definitions.
2 Definitions and reporting framework for tuberculosis – 2013 revision. Geneva, 
World Health Organization; 2013 (WHO/HTM/TB/2013.2). Available at: 
www.who.int/tb/publications/definitions.
has been rolled out nationwide, and greater engagement of 
the country’s large private health sector. India accounted for 
27% of global TB notifications in 2014 (Box 3.2, Figure 3.3), up 
from 22% in 2013. The South-East Asia and Western Pacific 
Regions (which include India and China, respectively) togeth-
er accounted for 63% of notifications of new and relapse 
cases globally, and the African Region for 21%. The other 
three regions accounted for relatively small proportions of 
cases. Among pulmonary TB cases, 58% were bacteriologi-
cally confirmed (as opposed to clinically diagnosed) in 2014; 
this was unchanged from 2013. 
In both the Eastern Mediterranean and Western Pacific 
regions, the TB epidemic is a markedly ageing one, with a 
progressive increase in the notification rate with age and a 
peak among those aged ≥65 years old (Figure 3.4). A similar 
pattern is evident in the South-East Asia Region. Elsewhere, 
and most noticeably in the African Region, notification rates 
in 2014 peaked in younger adults. 
Most countries are now able to report notifications dis-
aggregated by both age and sex (Table 3.2). In 2014, adults 
accounted for most of the notified cases. Children (aged <15 
years) accounted for only 6.5% of notifications, although this 
ranged from 3.4% in the Western Pacific Region to 9.5% in 
the Eastern Mediterranean Region. The global male:female 
sex ratio was 1.7, but among HBCs this ratio varied from 0.7 
in Afghanistan to 3.0 in Viet Nam. Variation among coun-
tries in the child:adult and male:female ratios of cases may 
reflect real differences in epidemiology, differential access 
to or use of health care services linked to the NTP, and/or dif-
ferential reporting practices. Evidence from recent national 
TB prevalence surveys shows that the male:female ratio for 
bacteriologically-confirmed TB among adults is typically 
around 2–3 in Asian countries and 1–2 in Africa, and that the 
ratio of prevalent to notified cases is systematically higher 
among men than women (suggesting that women with TB 
have a higher chance of being notified).3,4
3.2  
Contribution of public–public and 
public–private mix initiatives to TB case 
notifications and treatment support in 2014
Ensuring proper diagnosis, standardized treatment and 
prompt notification of all TB cases to NTPs requires collabo-
ration with the full range of health care providers. Engaging 
all care providers in TB care and control is component four of 
the Stop TB Strategy and part of pillar two (of three) of the 
post-2015 End TB Strategy (Chapter 1). 
In recent years, many countries have made con 
siderable 
progress in scaling up PPM initiatives. However, demon-
3 Onozaki I, Law I, Sismanidis C et al. National tuberculosis prevalence 
surveys in Asia 1990–2012: an overview of results and lessons 
learned. Trop Med Int Health 2015; 20(9):1128–1145. doi: 10.1111/tmi.12534. 
Epub 2015 Jun 7.
4 WHO and partners are preparing a paper summarizing results from 
recent prevalence surveys in Africa. It is anticipated that this will be 
published in 2016.
 38  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Box 3.1 WHO definitions of TB cases recommended for use since March 2013 and  
 
that were used in the 2014 and 2015 rounds of global TB data collectiona
Bacteriologically confirmed case of TB A patient from whom 
a biological specimen is positive by smear microscopy, culture or 
WHO-approved rapid diagnostic test (such as Xpert MTB/RIF). All 
such cases should be notified, regardless of whether TB treatment 
is started. 
Clinically diagnosed case of TB A patient who does not fulfil the 
criteria for bacteriologically confirmed TB but has been diagnosed 
with active TB by a clinician or other medical practitioner who 
has decided to give the patient a full course of TB treatment. 
This definition includes cases diagnosed on the basis of X-ray 
abnormalities or suggestive histology and extrapulmonary cases 
without laboratory confirmation. Clinically diagnosed cases 
subsequently found to be bacteriologically positive (before or 
after starting treatment) should be reclassified as bacteriologically 
confirmed.
Case of pulmonary TB Any bacteriologically confirmed or 
clinically diagnosed case of TB involving the lung parenchyma or 
the tracheobronchial tree. Miliary TB is classified as pulmonary TB 
because there are lesions in the lungs. Tuberculous intra-thoracic 
lymphadenopathy (mediastinal and/or hilar) or tuberculous 
pleural effusion, without radiographic abnormalities in the lungs, 
constitute a case of extrapulmonary TB. A patient with both 
pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB should be classified as a case of 
pulmonary TB.
Case of extrapulmonary TB Any bacteriologically confirmed or 
clinically diagnosed case of TB involving organs other than the 
lungs, e.g. abdomen, genitourinary tract, joints and bones, lymph 
nodes, meninges, pleura, skin.
New case of TB A patient who has never been treated for TB or 
has taken anti-TB drugs for less than one month.
Retreatment case of TB A patient who has been treated for one 
month or more with anti-TB drugs in the past. Retreatment cases 
are further classified by the outcome of their most recent course of 
treatment into four categories. 
1. Relapse patients have previously been treated for TB, were 
declared cured or treatment completed at the end of their 
most recent course of treatment, and are now diagnosed with 
a recurrent episode of TB (either a true relapse or a new episode 
of TB caused by reinfection).
2. Treatment after failure patients have previously been treated for 
TB and their most recent course of treatment failed i.e. they had 
a positive sputum smear or culture result at month 5 or later 
during treatment. 
3. Treatment after loss to follow-up patients have previously been 
treated for TB and were declared ‘lost to follow-up’ at the end of 
their most recent course of treatment. 
4. Other previously treated patients are those who have previously 
been treated for TB but whose outcome after their most recent 
course of treatment is unknown or undocumented. 
Case of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) TB that is resistant to 
two first-line drugs: isoniazid and rifampicin. For most patients 
diagnosed with MDR-TB, WHO recommends treatment for 20 
months with a regimen that includes second-line anti-TB drugs.
Case of rifampicin-resistant TB (RR-TB) A patient with TB that 
is resistant to rifampicin detected using phenotypic or genotypic 
methods, with or without resistance to other anti-TB drugs. It 
includes any resistance to rifampicin, whether mono-resistance, 
multidrug resistance, polydrug resistance or extensive drug 
resistance.
a Definitions and reporting framework for tuberculosis – 2013 revision. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2013 (WHO/HTM/TB/2013.2). Available at 
www.who.int/tb/publications/definitions.
n FIGURE 3.1 
Global trends in absolute number of notified TB cases (black) and estimated TB incidence (green), 1990−2014.  
Case notifications include new and relapse cases (all forms).
0
3
6
9
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Cases per year (millions)
0
50
100
150
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Rate per 100 000 population per year
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  39
n TABLE 3.1 
Case notifications, 2014
TOTAL 
NOTIFIED
NEW AND 
RELAPSEa
RETREAT-
MENT 
EXCLUDING 
RELAPSE
NEW OR PREVIOUS TREATMENT  
HISTORY UNKNOWN
RELAPSE
PERCENTAGE 
OF PULMO-
NARY CASES 
BACTERIO-
LOGICALLY 
CONFIRMED
PULMONARY 
BACTERI 
O-
LOGICALLY 
CONFIRMED
PULMONARY 
CLINICALLY 
DIAGNOSED
EXTRA-
PULMONARY
PULMONARY 
BACTERIO-
LOGICALLY 
CONFIRMED
PULMONARY 
CLINICALLY 
DIAGNOSED
EXTRA-
PULMONARY
Afghanistan
32 712
31 746
966
14 737
8 573
7 227
1 209
65
Bangladesh
196 797
191 166
5 631
106 767
42 832
37 406
2 989
863
309
72
Brazil
81 512
73 970
7 542
41 120
17 801
9 479
3 602
1 488
480
70
Cambodia
43 738
43 059
679
12 168
11 286
18 310
445
709
141
51
China
826 155
819 283
6 872
235 704
526 106
32 348
25 125
33
DR Congo
116 894
115 795
1 099
75 631
13 494
19 566
4 298
1 892
914
84
Ethiopia
119 592
119 592
40 087
41 575
37 930
49
India
1 683 915
1 609 547
74 368
754 268
343 032
275 502
124 679
112 066
66
Indonesia
324 539
322 806
1 733
193 321
101 991
19 653
6 449
1 391
1
66
Kenya
89 294
88 025
1 269
34 997
30 872
14 640
3 569
2 947
1 000
53
Mozambique
58 270
57 773
497
24 430
23 455
6 276
1 542
2 070
50
Myanmar
141 957
138 352
3 605
42 608
70 305
16 108
5 276
3 650
405
39
Nigeria
91 354
86 464
4 890
49 825
29 460
4 764
2 415
0
64
Pakistan
316 577
308 417
8 160
122 537
120 350
57 463
7 420
426
221
52
Philippines
267 436
243 379
24 057
92 991
139 950
4 161
6 277
41
Russian Federation
136 168
102 340
33 828
37 296
40 894
8 763
7 982
6 753
652
49
South Africa
318 193
306 166
12 027
155 473
106 482
33 522
7 430
2 693
566
60
Thailand
71 618
67 722
3 896
34 394
21 115
10 244
1 969
0
0
63
Uganda
46 171
44 187
1 984
26 079
11 854
4 180
1 499
468
107
69
UR Tanzania
63 151
61 571
1 580
23 583
23 380
13 600
1 008
51
Viet Nam
102 087
100 349
1 738
49 938
25 179
18 118
7 114
69
Zimbabwe
32 016
29 653
2 363
11 224
13 151
3 909
1 369
49
High-burden 
countries
5 160 146
4 961 362
198 784
2 179 178
1 763 137
653 169
223 666
137 416
4 796
56
AFR
1 342 400
1 300 852
41 548
635 560
399 155
212 057
39 782
11 217
3 081
62
AMR
228 476
215 243
13 233
127 864
40 746
32 501
10 193
2 918
1 021
76
EMR
465 677
453 393
12 284
183 630
151 696
103 959
12 368
866
874
56
EUR
321 421
266 058
55 363
112 416
76 759
39 175
23 935
11 483
2 290
61
SEAR
2 580 605
2 482 074
98 531
1 188 654
632 418
389 819
152 498
117 970
715
64
WPR
1 375 572
1 335 816
39 756
449 845
734 179
103 085
44 354
3 037
1 316
40
Global
6 314 151
6 053 436
260 715
2 697 969
2 034 953
880 596
283 130
147 491
9 297
58
Blank cells indicate data not reported.
a New and relapse includes cases for which the treatment history is unknown.
strating progress in terms of the contribution of non-NTP 
public and private sector providers to total case notifications 
requires systematic recording of the source of referral and 
place of TB treatment locally, and reporting and analysis of 
aggregated data nationally. In many countries, data related 
to the contribution of private sector providers are still not 
collected or reported through routine monitoring systems, 
although there are excellent examples of how this can be 
done (Box 3.2). 
The available data show that the approach to and contri-
bution of PPM varies across countries, and is related to the 
number and type of health care providers. Table 3.3a shows 
ten prominent examples of countries (including HBCs) where 
public-public mix interventions contributed between 11% 
and 55% of total notifications in 2014. Table 3.3b presents 
ten prominent examples of countries (including HBCs) where 
public-private mix interventions contributed between 12% 
and 46% of total case notifications. 
 Box 3.2 Substantial increases in TB notifications in India 2013–2014 – the role of  
 
mandatory notification and e-health interventions
The number of new and relapse TB cases notified in India reached 
1.61 million in 2014, a 29% increase compared with 1.24 million 
in 2013 (Figure B3.2). This substantial increase is due to better 
reporting of detected cases to national authorities (as opposed to 
an increase in the underlying TB incidence), which can be explained 
by three major factors:
"
 The introduction of a policy of mandatory notification of TB 
cases in May 2012;a 
"
 The launch of a new web-based system (Nikshay) for case-
based notification by the Central TB Division (CTD) and the 
National Informatics Centre in June 2012;b 
"
 Increased and intensified efforts to engage with the 
private sector by the Revised National Tuberculosis Control 
Programme (RNTCP), which have been facilitated by Nikshay. 
(DOT), patient transfers, and contact tracing, as well as 
demographic and clinical details of the individual TB patient such 
as age, sex, HIV status, bacteriology and drug-susceptibility test 
results, and treatment outcomes. This has allowed the RNTCP 
to generate reports consistent with updated definitions of case 
definitions and treatment outcomes recommended by WHO since 
2013 (Box 3.1). This includes age and sex-disaggregated data for 
all new and relapse cases, which could not be produced using the 
old reporting system. The CTD uses five variables to avoid entry 
of duplicate records in Nikshay. The greater granularity of the 
data being recorded in Nikshay is also allowing better forecasting 
of TB drug requirements for children and adults, and provides 
information on the nutritional status of patients. 
To support the introduction and implementation of Nikshay, 
online videos in English and Hindi were used to train frontline 
workers, and mobile-phone short messaging services (SMS) were 
used to ensure regular contact of users with programme managers 
at all levels. Managers can now receive reports on case-finding, 
sputum conversion and treatment outcome via SMS. Patients – 
half of whom have a mobile number entered in the system – also 
benefit from SMS reminders for visits related to follow-up of 
treatment. Traditional paper-based and aggregated quarterly 
reporting will be phased out in 2016, and reporting will be entirely 
through Nikshay.
In the next phase of Nikshay’s development, the aim is to capture 
geospatial data to enable spatial surveillance, and to use and 
record bar-codes on medication boxes for drug supply chain and 
inventory management. Linking up with other electronic services 
may also allow electronic payments to patients and providers, and 
access to the national unique identification number (Aadhaar)d 
and related social support schemes for TB patients. 
The cities of Mumbai, Patna and Mehsana already provide good 
examples of how digital technologies are helping the RNTCP to 
reach out to providers who are involved in TB care but who have 
previously been outside the reach of national surveillance. In these 
settings, private providers can phone call centres free of charge to 
ensure free anti-TB medications for their patients. Patients receive 
“e-vouchers” for standardized medications, which they can redeem 
at no charge at private chemists. Call centres also issue reminders 
to patients for follow-up visits via telephone calls and SMS. This 
digital system is linked with the RNTCP, so that programme staff 
receive alerts and can take actions as necessary. Incentives for 
notification are paid to providers electronically, as are payments 
for laboratory tests. e-Learning tools have also been introduced to 
facilitate the dissemination of the ‘Standards for TB Care in India’, 
and e-Learning techniques have also been useful for rapid, large-
scale training of staff on the use of the call centres.
a http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=83486
b http://nikshay.gov.in/AboutNikshay.htm
c Satyanarayana S, Nair SA, Chadha SS, et al. From where are tuberculosis 
patients accessing treatment in India? Results from a cross-sectional 
community based survey of 30 districts. PLoS One 2011; 6: e24160
d https://resident.uidai.net.in/
40  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
FIGURE B3.2 
Case notifications in India, 2000–2014
2000
2005
2010
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2014
Cases per year (millions)
Mandatory notification was introduced in recognition of the fact 
that while the private sector provides treatment for approximately 
50% of TB patients,c most of these cases were not being reported 
to the RNTCP. 
Nikshay was introduced as part of efforts to facilitate reporting of 
TB cases, including those treated in the private sector. The system 
is available for reporting of cases by both public and private health 
care facilities. It is accessible via android-based smartphones and a 
web-portal, both of which facilitate the process of notifying cases. 
Since its rollout nationwide by the end of 2012, reporting from 
the private sector has grown and data quality has improved. By 
June 2015, more than 4.6 million TB patients had been reported by 
over 40 000 public and over 90 000 private health care facilities, 
with about 5 000 TB cases being added to the system each day. 
Nikshay has also eliminated the time previously taken to transmit 
laboratory results to treatment sites and peripheral units. 
Nikshay captures data that are important for both programme 
management and clinical care. These include details of who 
notified a TB case, who provides direct observation of treatment 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  41
n FIGURE 3.2 
Case notification and estimated TB incidence rates by WHO region, 1990−2014. Regional trends in case notification  
rates (new and relapse cases, all forms) (black) and estimated TB incidence rates (green). Shaded areas represent  
uncertainty bands.
The Americas
Eastern Mediterranean
South−East Asia
Western Pacific
0
100
200
300
400
0
20
40
60
0
50
100
150
0
20
40
60
0
100
200
0
50
100
150
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Rate per 100 000 population per year
Africa
Europe
In China, a large proportion of people with TB seek 
care from public hospitals, and various models of hospital 
engage 
ment exist. In 2014, public hospitals contributed 55% 
of all notified TB cases. A web-based system for reporting 
of communicable diseases has played a key role in ensuring 
that TB cases detected in public hospitals outside the NTP 
network are notified. Medical college hospitals in India, 
speciality lung hospitals and general hospitals in Indonesia, 
hospitals owned by social security organizations in Peru 
and other Latin American countries, and the hospitals of 
health insurance organizations in Egypt are other examples 
of public health care providers that are making important 
contributions to TB case notifications. In 2014, public sector 
medical college hospitals in India alone reported 176 000 
TB cases. Given that health centres and hospitals are often 
managed by different departments within ministries of 
health and that ministries such as those for education, social 
welfare, defence or justice can also be involved in providing 
health services, implementing public-public mix approaches 
is essential in many parts of the world.
Public-private mix approaches are necessary in coun-
tries with a large private sector, including most HBCs in the 
South-East Asia and Western Pacific regions and an increas-
ing number of countries in the African Region, where the 
private medical sector is growing rapidly. The steep rise in 
TB case notifications from private sector care providers in 
India between 2013 and 2014 (from 85 000 to 195 000 in 2014) 
is particularly impressive. Further details are provided in 
Box 3.2. A large increase of more than 30% in notifications 
from the private sector in Pakistan between 2013 and 2014 is 
also a notable achievement. Both countries have made con-
certed efforts to increase notifications of detected cases by 
the private sector, and these are now paying off. 
The private health sector in Africa is often considered 
insignificant in terms of its contribution to provision of TB 
care. Data from Kenya, Malawi and Nigeria show that this 
is not always the case. In 2014 as in 2013, almost one in five 
cases notified in Malawi was reported by a private care 
provider, even though TB drugs are generally not available 
in private pharmacies (unlike in Kenya and Nigeria). Most 
of the contributions to TB case notifications in Malawi are 
referrals of people with TB signs and symptoms to the pub-
lic sector by the front-line, community-based private health 
care providers. These often include clinical officers, nurses 
and traditional healers. Engaging such front-line care pro-
viders, including drug shops and pharmacies, facilitates 
early case detection. The Malawi example should prompt 
other countries that have not previously considered PPM to 
be of importance to revisit their strategies. In all settings, 
PPM interventions should also be designed to help not only 
detection of TB cases, but also early detection by providers 
where care is often sought first. 
 42  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 3.3 
Case notification and estimated TB incidence rates, 22 high-burden countries, 1990−2014. Trends in case notification  
rates (new and relapse cases, all forms) (black) and estimated TB incidence rates (green). Shaded areas represent  
uncertainty bands.
Rates per 100 000 population per year
0
50
100
150
200
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
0
50
100
150
0
100
200
300
0
100
200
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
0
300
600
900
0
200
400
600
800
0
25
50
75
100
0
50
100
150
200
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
0
200
400
600
0
200
400
600
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
800
0
50
100
150
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
0
200
400
600
800
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
Afghanistan
Bangladesha
Brazil
Cambodia
China
DR Congo
Ethiopia
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Russian Federation
South Africa
Thailand
Uganda
UR Tanzania
Viet Nam
Zimbabwe
a For Bangladesh, a joint reassessment of estimates of TB disease burden will be 
undertaken following completion of the national TB prevalence survey.
n FIGURE 3.4
Regional TB notification rates by age, 2014a
a Countries not reporting cases in these categories are excluded.  
Cases included make up 87% of reported cases and exclude the 
following high−burden countries: Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Mozambique 
and Thailand.
AFR
SEAR
EMR
WPR
EUR
AMR
Rate per 100 000 population per year
0–14
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65
0
100
200
300
Age group (years)
3.3 
Community contributions to TB 
notifications and treatment support
Despite the best efforts of health systems, about one third of 
people who develop TB globally are still either not diagnosed, 
or their cases are not reported (see section 3.5). Difficulty in 
accessing health facilities is one of the reasons why people 
with TB may not be diagnosed, and can also have a negative 
impact on treatment adherence. Access to health care can 
be affected by social and political factors (such as stigma 
and discrimination, and the availability of cross-border ser-
vices for migrants), and economic barriers (for example, 
the cost of transport). The role of community engagement 
in contributing to TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment, 
especially where people with TB have poor access to formal 
health services, is therefore well-recognized. Fostering such 
community participation has been an explicit component of 
the Stop TB Strategy and a “strong coalition with civil society 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  43
n TABLE 3.2 
Notifications of new and relapse TB cases by age and sex, 
2014
0–14 
YEARS
≥15 YEARS
AGE 
UNKNOWN
% AGED  
< 15 YEARS
MALE/
FEMALE 
RATIO
Afghanistan*
4 454
18 856
7 227
19
0.7
Bangladesh*
6 262
180 743
0
3.3
1.5
Brazil
2 368
71 602
0
3.2
2.1
Cambodia
12 050
31 009
28
1.2
China
4 164
815 119
0
0.5
2.3
DR Congo*
3 438
71 901
292
4.6
1.3
Ethiopia*
15 917
103 675
0
13
1.2
India
95 709
1 513 838
5.9
1.9
Indonesia
23 170
299 636
0
7.2
1.4
Kenya
8 448
80 846
0
9.5
1.5
Mozambique
–
–
Myanmar
36 301
101 987
64
26
1.6
Nigeria
5 463
85 891
0
6.0
1.5
Pakistan
27 245
281 172
0
8.8
1.0
Philippines
12 191
46 965
38 422
21
1.8
Russian 
Federation
3 195
98 433
712
3.1
2.3
South Africa
31 977
274 189
0
10
1.3
Thailand*
119
34 275
0
0.3
2.5
Uganda
3 316
40 871
7.5
1.8
UR Tanzania
6 463
55 108
0
10
1.5
Viet Nam*
144
49 785
0.3
3.0
Zimbabwe
2 290
27 363
7.7
1.3
High-burden 
countries
304 684
4 283 264
46 717
6.6
1.7
AFR
90 523
963 808
2 298
8.6
1.4
AMR
10 489
198 350
1 935
5.0
1.7
EMR
42 028
399 043
7 945
9.5
1.0
EUR
9 898
250 946
719
3.8
2.0
SEAR
168 310
2 248 065
19 394
7.0
1.8
WPR
37 273
1 063 252
38 422
3.4
2.1
Global
358 521
5 123 464
70 713
6.5
1.7
Blank cells indicate data that could not be reported for the age categories 
shown.
–  indicates values that cannot be calculated.
* New cases only.
TABLE 3.3a
Contribution of public-public mixa to notifications of  
TB cases in selected countries, 2014
COUNTRY
NUMBER OF  
TB CASES NOTIFIED 
BY NON-NTP PUBLIC 
SECTOR CARE 
PROVIDERS 
TOTAL NUMBER  
OF TB CASES 
NOTIFIED
CONTRIBUTION 
OF NON-NTP 
PUBLIC SECTOR 
CARE PROVIDERS 
TO TOTAL CASE 
NOTIFICATIONS (%) 
China
458 356
826 155
55
Côte d’Ivoire
2 279
23 750
9.5
Egypt
1 375
7 467
18
El Salvador
1 016
2 220
46
India
189 857
1 683 915
11
Indonesia
57 586
324 539
18
Iraq
2 748
8 341
33
Peru
8 164
31 461
26
Sri Lanka
4 457
9 473
47
Yemen
3 390
9 693
35
a Includes all contributions from non-NTP providers of care in the public 
sector, including public hospitals, public medical colleges, prisons/
detention centres, military facilities, railways and public health 
insurance organizations.
TABLE 3.3b
Contribution of public-private mixa to notifications of  
TB cases in selected countries, 2014
COUNTRY
NUMBER OF  
TB CASES NOTIFIED 
BY PRIVATE SECTOR 
CARE PROVIDERS
TOTAL NUMBER  
OF TB CASES 
NOTIFIED 
CONTRIBUTION OF 
PRIVATE SECTOR 
CARE PROVIDERS 
TO TOTAL 
NOTIFICATIONS (%) 
Bangladesh
22 960
196 797
12
Ethiopia
16 876
119 592
14
India
194 992
1 683 915
12
Iran
3 093
10 395
30
Iraq
3 803
8 341
46
Kenya
18 200
89 294
20
Malawi
3 500
17 723
20
Myanmar
25 978
141 957
18
Nigeria
13 031
91 354
14
Pakistan
55 254
316 577
17
a Private sector providers include private individual and institutional 
providers, corporate/business sector providers, mission hospitals, 
nongovernmental organizations and faith-based organizations.
 44  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
organizations and communities” is one of the four principles 
underpinning the End TB Strategy (Chapter 1). Establishing 
and strengthening collaboration with nongovernmental 
and other civil society organizations to scale up community-
based TB activities, and enhancing their role in the design 
and implementation of national TB strategic plans, are 
important. 
Accurate monitoring of the contributions of communities 
to TB notifications and treatment support requires standard 
definitions of key concepts and indicators, and standard-
ized systems for recording and reporting of data. These were 
developed in 2013 and are shown in Box 3.3. Data for the 
three core indicators were collected for the first time in 2013, 
with a focus on 13 countries in the African and South-East 
Asia regions that were known to be recording and report-
ing such information. In 2014, data collection was expanded 
and 22 countries from the same two regions reported data. 
Based on these two years of experience, data collection was 
expanded in the 2015 round of global TB data collection to 
cover the European, Eastern Mediterranean and Western 
Pacific regions. Following consultations with WHO staff in 
Regional and Country Offices, a total of 69 countries were 
targeted for reporting of data. Of these, 41 reported data for 
at least one of the three core indicators; 34 (83%) reported 
data on the percentage of TB patients who received treat-
ment support in the community, and 30 (73%) reported data 
on the percentage of TB notifications that originated from 
community referrals. 
A summary of the contribution of communities to TB 
notifications and treatment support is provided in Table 
Box 3.3 Definitions of key terms and indicators used to monitor  
 
community engagement
Community-based TB activities. These cover a wide range 
of activities that contribute to the detection, referral and 
treatment of people with drug-susceptible, drug-resistant and 
HIV-associated TB. They are conducted outside the premises of 
formal health facilities (e.g. hospitals, health centres and clinics) 
in community-based structures (e.g. schools, places of worship, 
congregate settings, markets) and homesteads. Community 
health workers and community volunteers carry out community-
based TB activities, depending on the national and local context. 
Community health workers. These are people with some 
formal education who have been given training to contribute to 
community-based health services, including TB prevention and 
patient care and support. Their profile, roles and responsibilities 
vary greatly among countries, and their time is often compensated 
by incentives in kind or in cash.
Community volunteers. These are people who have been 
systematically sensitized about TB prevention and care, either 
through a short, specific training scheme or through repeated, 
regular contact sessions with professional health workers.
Core indicators for routine monitoring of community-based TB 
activities
In 2013, three core indicators were defined and agreed by WHO 
and partners. These are:
1. Percentage of TB notifications from community referrals. This 
indicator measures the proportion of notified TB patients (all 
forms of TB) who were referred by a community health worker 
or community volunteer.
2. Percentage of registered TB patients who received treatment support 
in the community. This indicator measures the proportion 
of TB patients who were supported during treatment by a 
community health worker or community volunteer.
3. Percentage of registered TB patients who received treatment 
support in the community who were successfully treated. This 
indicator measures the proportion of TB patients who received 
treatment support from a community health worker or 
community volunteer during their TB treatment and who were 
successfully treated. 
3.4. About one third (14/41) of countries reported nationwide 
coverage of community engagement in case notification, 
and 41% (17/41) reported nationwide coverage of community-
based treatment support. In areas where community-based 
referral activities were in place, the percentage of notified 
TB patients accounted for by community referrals ranged 
from 2% in Myanmar and Sri Lanka to 73% in Cambodia. The 
proportion of TB patients receiving community-based treat-
ment support ranged from 2% in Malaysia, Romania and 
Sierra Leone to 100% in Kenya, Pakistan and Tajikistan. 
Reporting of the treatment success rate among TB 
patients who received treatment support in the commu-
nity has continued to be a challenge. Among the 41 countries 
that reported data related to community engagement, only 
26 (41%) reported information for this indicator. Even in 
these countries, there are concerns with the accuracy of the 
reported data. For example, while the general tendency was 
for treatment outcomes to improve between 2013 and 2014 
among patients receiving treatment support from a com-
munity volunteer or community health worker, there were 
large year-to-year changes in some countries that appeared 
implausible. Intensified efforts are needed to improve the 
accuracy of data for this indicator, and/or to revisit its status 
as a core indicator. For example, it may be more appropriate 
to assess this indicator as part of a periodic evaluation, rather 
than through routine reporting. This is being considered by 
WHO as part of wider efforts to develop expanded guidance 
on community engagement. 
It is also important to note that there are countries in 
which community-based TB activities are a routine com-
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  45
Box 3.4 The ENGAGE-TB approach: progress and highlights to date
The ENGAGE-TB approach aims to integrate community-based TB activities into the work of nongovernmental organizations and other 
civil society organizations that were previously not engaged in TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment. Pilot projects were started in 
2012 with funding from the Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation Secure the Future in five countries: the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa and the United Republic of Tanzania. In Ethiopia, TB activities were integrated into maternal and child health 
activities and cervical cancer screening. In Kenya, they were integrated into maternal and child health activities and livelihood initiatives. In 
the other three countries, they were integrated into HIV programmes. 
By the end of 2014, the total population covered by the pilot projects had reached 8 million and 24 previously unengaged nongovernmental 
organizations had started to implement community-based TB activities. In pilot areas, community referrals of people with signs and 
symptoms suggestive of TB contributed 5–68% of notified TB patients in 2013 and 2014, and 20–89% of all TB patients had benefited from 
community-based treatment support during the same period. 
ponent of TB services, but where it is not yet possible to 
quantify this contribution. For example, Zimbabwe has 
recently finalized revisions to its national monitoring and 
evaluation system and will be able to report data on commu-
nity contributions starting in 2016. In the near future, it is also 
anticipated that Malawi will incorporate routine reporting of 
community contributions within the existing monitoring and 
evaluation system. 
In addition to improving the documentation and report-
ing of community-based TB activities, efforts to engage 
nongovernmental organizations that have previously not 
been involved in TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment 
have continued using the ENGAGE-TB approach.1 In addition 
to five focus countries (the Democratic Republic of the Con-
go, Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa and the United Republic 
of Tanzania), five additional countries have now integrated 
the ENGAGE-TB approach into their national strategies and 
mobilized funding for its implementation. These are Burkina 
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Malawi, Namibia and Zimbabwe. Pro-
gress made to date in the original five countries is described 
in Box 3.4. 
3.4  
Trends in case notifications 1990–2014 and 
estimates of the case detection rate
Globally, the number of TB cases newly diagnosed and noti-
fied per 100 000 population remained relatively stable 
between 1990 and 2000, rose sharply between 2000 and 
2008, and then fell slowly from 2009 to 2013 (Figure 3.1). In 
terms of absolute numbers, there was an increase from 1995 
to 2000, a more pronounced increase from 2000 to 2008 
and then very little change from 2008 to 2013 (Figure 3.1). 
Between 2013 and 2014, these patterns changed, with a clear 
upward increase in terms of rates and absolute numbers. 
This change is driven by an increase in the South-East Asia 
Region (Figure 3.2), which itself reflects the large increase 
in notifications (of 366 000 cases) in India between 2013 and 
2014 (Figure 3.3, Box 3.2). 
1 http://www.who.int/tb/people_and_communities/en/
Globally and in all WHO regions, a clear gap exists 
between the numbers of notified cases and the estimated 
numbers of incident cases. However, this gap has narrowed 
in the last 15 years, especially in the Eastern Mediterranean 
and Western Pacific regions and to a lesser extent in the 
South-East Asia Region (Figure 3.2). Trends in the 22 HBCs 
are shown in Figure 3.3; for other countries these trends are 
illustrated in country profiles that are available online.2
The case detection rate (CDR)3 for TB is an indicator that 
is included within the Millennium Development Goals (MDG)
framework. For a given country and year, the CDR is calculat-
ed as the number of new and relapse TB cases (see Box 3.1 for 
definitions) that were notified by NTPs (Table 3.1), divided by 
the estimated number of incident cases of TB that year. The 
CDR is expressed as a percentage; it gives an approximate4 
indication of the proportion of all incident TB cases that are 
actually diagnosed and reported to NTPs or national surveil-
lance systems. 
The best estimate of the CDR for all forms of TB globally 
in 2014 was 63% (range, 60–66%), up from 48–52% in 2005 
and 36–40% in 1995 – the year in which the DOTS strategy 
began to be introduced and expanded (Table 3.5).5 The best 
estimate of the global gap between notifications (of new epi-
sodes of TB i.e. new and relapse cases) and incident cases in 
2014 was 3.6 million cases. 
At regional level, the highest CDRs in 2014 were estimat-
ed to be in the Region of the Americas (best estimate 77%; 
range, 75–81%), the Western Pacific Region (best estimate 
85%; range, 81–90%) and the European Region (best esti-
mate 79%; range, 75–83%). The other regions had estimated 
CDRs of 43–75%, with best estimates in the range 48−62%. 
2 www.who.int/tb/data
3 The CDR is actually a ratio rather than a rate, but the term ‘rate’ has 
become standard terminology in the context of this indicator.
4 It is approximate because of uncertainty in the underlying incidence of 
TB and because notified cases are not necessarily a subset of incident 
cases that occurred in the same year; see Chapter 2 for further 
discussion.
5 The ranges represent 95% uncertainty intervals. There is uncertainty in 
estimates of the CDR because of uncertainty in estimates of TB 
incidence (the denominator).
 46  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
TABLE 3.4
Community contributions to TB case notifications and treatment support for TB patients (all forms) in 41 countries,a 
2013–2014. Data are for the basic management units (BMUs) that reported data.
COUNTRIES
CONTRIBUTION TO TB NOTIFICATIONS, 2014
CONTRIBUTION TO TREATMENT ADHERENCE SUPPORT, 2013
TOTAL TB NOTIFICATIONS (ALL FORMS) FROM 
COMMUNITY REFERRALS IN 2014
GEOGRAPHIC 
COVERAGE OF DATA 
REPORTING BY BMUs
TB PATIENTS (ALL FORMS) WHO RECEIVED 
TREATMENT ADHERENCE SUPPORT IN THE 
COMMUNITY IN 2013
GEOGRAPHIC 
COVERAGE OF DATA 
REPORTING BY BMUs
NUMBER
% OF BMU 
NOTIFICATIONS
NUMBER
% OF ALL TB PATIENTS
Afghanistan
1 088
7
661/722
1 089
13
336/722
Bangladesh
79 477
61
478/880
Not available
Botswana
Not available
5 316
63
27/27
Bulgaria
229
15
22/22
Not available
Burkina Faso
299
5
86/86
1 569
39
30/86
Burundi
796
11
17/17
1 335
18
17/17
Cambodia
14 115
73
43/93
Not available
Côte d’Ivoire
8 165
36
151/184
7 785
29
134/184
DR Congo
12 649
57
95/516
7 202
49
95/516
Eritrea
102
4
69/69
Not available
Ethiopia
14 399
38
364/957
11 314
22
760/957
Georgia
28
82
3/77 
Not available
Ghana
326
16
49/216
11 392
73
216/216
Guineab
1 307
11
55/465
1 307
12
55/465
India
19 713
3
1 200/3 394
726 069
52
3 394/3 394
Indonesia
8 707
11
47/511
4 218
14
27/511
Kenya
3 535
9
798/3 320
78 813
100
3 046/3 320
Lesotho
Not available
9 649
90
17/34
Madagascar
5 914
52
72/215
382
5
72/215
Malaysia
Not available
84
2
15/146
Mongolia
351
8
32/32
731
16
32/32
Mozambiqueb
2 868
5
323/323
5 656
11
251/323
Myanmar
1 304
2
171/354
1 605
5
165/354
Namibia
Not available
6 463
63
31/34
Nepal
457
3
75/75
363
19
5/75
Nigeria
Not available
55 995
56
774/774
Pakistan
Not available
231 557
100
1 137/1 306
Republic of Moldova
Not available
3 308
78
57/57
Romania
Not available
320
2
177/177
Rwanda
1 188
20
515/515
2 889
48
515/515
Sao Tome and Principe
109
69
1/1
Not available
Senegal
1 011
10
76/76
891
7
76/76
Sierra Leone
3 065
40
170/170
187
2
170/170
South Africac
928
0.3
Not available
Not available
Sri Lanka
85
2
26/26
1 637
18
26/26
Tajikistan
883
14
109/109
6 495
100
109/109
Timor-Leste
Not available
244
7
18/18
Uganda
Not available
26 044
55
117/117
UR Tanzania
10 416
18
168/168
49 412
75
168/168
Uzbekistanb
7 191
64
4 278/4 516
20 812
96
4 433/4 516
Viet Nam
Not available
100 721
99
815/815
a Twenty-eight countries did not submit data for either indicator: Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central 
African Republic, Chad, Congo, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Kiribati, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Philippines, Sudan, Swaziland, 
Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Zambia and Zimbabwe. 
 
 
 
 
 
b The proportion of patients receiving treatment support in the community was calculated using the total cohort (all BMUs) of TB patients starting 
treatment in 2013 as the denominator. Data disaggregated by BMU were not reported. 
 
 
 
 
 
c The proportion of notifications that came from community referrals was calculated using the total cohort (all BMUs) of TB patients notified in 2014 as 
the denominator. Data disaggregated by BMU were not reported.  
 
 
 
 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  47
n TABLE 3.5 
Estimates of the case detection rate for new and relapse cases %, 1995–2014.a Best estimates are followed by the lower and 
upper bounds of the 95% uncertainty interval
1995
2000
2005
2010
2014
Afghanistan
–
–
19
18–21
47
44–51
53
48–59
53
47–60
Bangladesh
21
20–23
26
24–28
38
36–41
45
41–50
53
47–60
Brazil
79
73–85
73
67–80
84
79–90
82
78–86
82
78–86
Cambodia
24
22–26
27
25–30
52
49–56
65
59–70
72
66–80
China
33
31–35
33
31–35
75
71–79
87
81–94
88
82–95
DR Congo
31
29–33
39
36–42
53
50–56
53
49–57
48
43–52
Ethiopia
11
9.3–13
33
27–40
48
41–57
66
55–80
60
49–73
India
59
56–61
49
47–51
48
47–50
59
55–62
74
70–80
Indonesia
4
2.9–5.8
8.9
6.5–13
26
19–37
30
22–44
32
23–46
Kenya
62
60–64
72
70–74
81
79–82
82
80–84
80
78–82
Mozambique
23
18–32
23
17–31
30
25–36
33
27–40
39
31–49
Myanmar
10
9.3–11
16
14–17
53
50–56
66
61–72
70
64–78
Nigeria
4.3
3.4–5.7
6.5
4.9–9.1
13
11–18
16
11–24
15
10–26
Pakistan
3.9
3.3–4.6
2.9
2.4–3.6
34
29–40
56
45–73
62
48–83
Philippines
42
39–46
42
38–46
47
44–51
58
52–65
85
76–97
Russian Federation
60
56–64
75
70–80
65
62–69
84
77–92
85
77–94
South Africa
59
53–67
58
51–65
60
53–68
73
65–82
68
61–77
Thailand
41
26–78
23
14–43
39
24–74
56
34–100
59
36–110
Uganda
23
19–27
30
25–37
48
43–55
62
55–70
72
64–83
UR Tanzania
28
16–62
32
20–61
31
20–54
31
20–58
36
21–77
Viet Nam
34
30–38
57
50–65
64
58–71
71
61–84
77
65–94
Zimbabwe
61
44–92
67
54–86
66
54–83
76
59–100
70
51–100
High-burden countries
34
33–36
35
33–36
48
46–50
57
54–60
62
58–66
AFR
28
26–30
34
32–37
44
41–47
50
46–55
48
43–54
AMR
69
66–72
71
68–74
76
74–79
76
73–79
77
75–81
EMR
22
19–24
23
20–27
44
39–50
58
50–69
61
51–75
EUR
58
57–60
65
63–67
69
67–72
80
76–84
79
75–83
SEAR
38
35–42
35
32–39
43
39–46
52
47–57
62
56–68
WPR
36
35–38
38
36–40
69
66–71
79
75–83
85
81–90
Global
37
36–39
38
36–40
50
48–52
58
55–61
63
60–66
–  indicates values that cannot be calculated.
a  Estimates for all years are recalculated as new information becomes available and techniques are refined, so they may differ from those published 
previously. The lower and upper bounds are defined as the 2.5th and 97.5th centiles of outcome distributions produced in simulations.
All regions have improved their estimated CDRs since the 
mid-1990s, with improvements particularly evident since 
2000. Among the 22 HBCs, the highest rates of case detec-
tion in 2014 (>80%) were estimated to be in Brazil, China, the 
Philippines and the Russian Federation. The lowest rates, 
with best estimates of 50% or less, were in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Indonesia, Mozambique, Nigeria and 
the United Republic of Tanzania. 
There are two major reasons for a gap between notifica-
tions and estimated incidence. The first is underreporting 
of diagnosed TB cases, for example because private sector 
providers fail to notify cases. This is one of the reasons for a 
relatively low CDR in Indonesia (see also Box 2.4, Chapter 2). 
The second is under-diagnosis of people with TB for reasons 
such as poor access to health care and failure to recognize TB 
signs and symptoms and test for TB when people do present 
to health care facilities. A good example is Nigeria, where 
the 2012 national TB prevalence survey suggested that this is 
a major reason for the low CDR.1 It should also be acknowl-
edged that the estimates of TB incidence are uncertain, and 
the gap between the estimated number of incident cases and 
1 World Health Organization. Global tuberculosis report 2014. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2014 (WHO/HTM/TB/2014.08). See 
pp10–11.
 48  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
the number of notifications could be under- or over-stated. 
Intensified efforts are needed to ensure that all cases 
are detected, notified to national surveillance systems, 
and treated according to international standards. Progress 
towards the goal of universal health coverage, implementa-
tion of PPM initiatives such as those described in section 3.2, 
and ensuring that there is an effective regulatory framework 
that includes mandatory notification of cases are all essential 
to reduce underreporting and under-diagnosis, and con-
stitute part of the End TB Strategy (Chapter 1). The current 
status of progress towards universal health coverage from a 
financing perspective is discussed further in Chapter 7.
3.5  
Treatment outcomes
The definitions of TB treatment outcomes for new and 
relapse cases of TB that are recommended by WHO as part 
of an updated recording and reporting framework issued 
in March 2013, and used in the 2015 round of global TB data 
collection, are shown in Box 3.5.1 Most of these cases (97% 
globally) have drug-susceptible TB, but in some parts of the 
world, especially countries of the former Soviet Union, more 
than 20% of new and relapse cases have MDR-TB (Chapter 4). 
Universal access to drug susceptibility testing, as called for in 
the End TB Strategy (Chapter 1), is required to ensure that all 
people with TB receive appropriate treatment. 
Data on treatment outcomes for new and relapse cases of 
1 Treatment outcomes for people diagnosed with rifampicin-resistant 
and MDR-TB are presented in Chapter 4. 
TB are shown for the world, the six WHO regions and the 22 
HBCs in Table 3.6 and Figure 3.5. Globally, the treatment suc-
cess rate for the 5.4 million new and relapse cases that were 
treated in the 2013 cohort was 86%. It is impressive that as 
the size of the global treatment cohort grew from 1.0 million 
in 1995 to 4.2 million in 2005 and 5.4 million in 2013, the treat-
ment success rate first improved and has subsequently been 
sustained at a high level. 
Among the six WHO regions, the highest treatment 
success rates were in the Western Pacific Region, the South-
East Asia Region and the Eastern Mediterranean Region. 
The treatment success rate was 79% in the African Region. 
The lowest treatment success rates were in the Region of 
the Americas and the European Region (both 75%). In the 
Region of the Americas, treatment outcomes would prob-
ably be considerably improved if the number of patients in 
the “not evaluated” category could be reduced. In the Euro-
pean Region, rates of treatment failure, death and loss to 
follow-up, as well as the proportion of patients without a 
documented treatment outcome, all need to be reduced. 
One explanation for the poor outcomes in this region may be 
that the proportion of new and relapse cases that have drug-
resistant TB is high (Chapter 4). All cases need to be tested 
for susceptibility to first-line drugs, and those with rifampic-
in-resistant and MDR-TB enrolled on second-line rather than 
first-line regimens. 
Most of the 22 HBCs have reached or exceeded a treat-
ment success rate of 85%. Improvements are still needed in 
Box 3.5 Definitions of treatment outcomes for new and relapse cases recommended  
 
for use since March 2013 and that were used in the 2014 and 2015 rounds of  
 
global TB data collectiona
Cured A pulmonary TB patient with bacteriologically-confirmed 
TB at the beginning of treatment who was smear- or culture-
negative in the last month of treatment and on at least one 
previous occasion. 
Completed treatment A TB patient who completed treatment 
without evidence of failure but with no record to show that sputum 
smear or culture results in the last month of treatment and on at 
least one previous occasion were negative, either because tests 
were not done or because results are unavailable. 
Died A TB patient who died from any cause during treatment.
Failed A TB patient whose sputum smear or culture is positive at 
month five or later during treatment.
Lost to follow-up A TB patient who did not start treatment or 
whose treatment was interrupted for two consecutive months or 
more.
Not evaluated A TB patient for whom no treatment outcome 
is assigned. This includes cases ‘transferred out’ to another 
treatment unit as well as cases for whom the treatment outcome is 
unknown to the reporting unit.
Successfully treated A patient who was cured or who completed 
treatment.
Cohort A group of patients in whom TB has been diagnosed, and 
who were registered for treatment during a specified time period 
(e.g. the cohort of new cases registered in the calendar year 2012). 
This group forms the denominator for calculating treatment 
outcomes. The sum of the patients included in the above treatment 
outcome categories should equal the number of cases registered. 
It should be highlighted that in the new definitions recommended 
since March 2013 any patient found to have drug-resistant 
TB and placed on second-line treatment should be removed 
from the drug-susceptible TB outcome cohort. This means that 
management of the standard TB register and of the second-line 
TB treatment register needs to be coordinated to ensure proper 
accounting of the outcomes of treatment (see also Chapter 4).
a Definitions and reporting framework for tuberculosis – 2013 revision. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2013 (WHO/HTM/TB/2013.2). Available at 
www.who.int/tb/publications/definitions.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  49
a. Treatment success (%)
1995
2000
2005
2010
2011
2012
2013
Afghanistan
–
85
90
86
88
88
88
Bangladesh
71
81
90
91
91
92
93
Brazil
17
71
72
72
73
72
72
Cambodia
91
91
91
89
94
94
93
China
93
93
92
95
95
95
95
DR Congo
74
78
85
89
87
88
87
Ethiopia
61
80
78
77
89
91
89
India
25
34
87
89
89
88
88
Indonesia
91
87
89
89
88
86
88
Kenya
75
80
81
86
87
86
86
Mozambiqueb
39
75
79
85
–
87
88
Myanmar
67
82
83
88
88
89
87
Nigeria
49
79
75
81
85
86
86
Pakistan
70
74
82
90
92
91
93
Philippines
60
88
89
90
87
88
90
Russian 
Federation
65
68
67
66
65
69
68
South Africa
58
63
69
53
77
77
78
Thailand
64
69
71
83
82
81
81
Uganda
44
63
73
68
73
77
75
UR Tanzania
73
78
83
89
88
90
91
Viet Nam
89
92
92
92
93
91
89
Zimbabwe
53
69
66
76
80
81
80
High-burden 
countries
53
67
85
86
88
88
88
AFR
60
71
74
73
79
81
79
AMR
50
76
75
73
75
75
75
EMR
79
81
82
88
89
87
91
EUR
67
75
77
74
73
76
75
SEAR
33
50
87
89
89
88
88
WPR
80
90
90
92
93
92
92
Global
57
69
84
84
87
86
86
n TABLE 3.6 
Treatment success for all new and relapsea cases (%) and cohort size (thousands), 1995–2013
Blank cells indicate data not reported.
– indicates values that cannot be calculated.
a  Cohorts before 2012 include new cases only. For the 2012 and 2013 cohorts, 14 and 16 high-burden countries respectively included both new and relapse 
cases, as recommended in the revised recording and reporting framework issued by WHO in 2013 (see Definitions and reporting framework for 
tuberculosis 2013 revision. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2013 (WHO/HTM/TB/2013.2). Available at www.who.int/tb/publications/definitions.
b  Treatment outcomes in Mozambique are for new pulmonary bacteriologically-confirmed cases only. Introduction of monitoring of outcomes for other 
cases was started in 2015.
b. Cohort size (thousands)
1995
2000
2005
2010
2011
2012
2013
Afghanistan
3.1
10
26
26
29
31
Bangladesh
11
38
119
150
148
165
184
Brazil
46
34
78
78
71
75
77
Cambodia
4.4
15
34
40
37
38
36
China
131
214
788
877
856
885
842
DR Congo
16
36
65
109
92
105
112
Ethiopia
5.1
30
39
152
91
45
44
India
265
349
1 071
1 229
1 209
1 288
1 244
Indonesia
3
52
244
296
314
329
326
Kenya
6.5
28
98
90
82
98
81
Mozambique
11
13
18
20
21
23
Myanmar
7.9
17
73
127
135
137
136
Nigeria
9.5
16
35
78
84
90
92
Pakistan
0.8
4.1
117
256
255
111
289
Philippines
90
50
81
162
190
214
216
Russian 
Federation
0.05
3.6
74
94
89
90
83
South Africa
28
86
259
338
292
328
321
Thailand
20
23
49
48
49
58
66
Uganda
15
14
21
40
43
26
45
UR Tanzania
20
24
59
59
59
62
64
Viet Nam
38
53
55
88
89
104
102
Zimbabwe
9.7
14
43
46
40
38
35
High-burden 
countries
739
1 119
3 430
4 403
4 252
4 337
4 475
AFR
178
365
886
1 220
1 103
1 142
1 165
AMR
129
111
187
200
191
202
201
EMR
46
64
226
386
391
242
432
EUR
34
42
221
255
244
251
241
SEAR
318
512
1 639
1 980
1 986
2 114
2 101
WPR
296
360
1 030
1 240
1 233
1 344
1 298
Global
1 001
1 453
4 188
5 280
5 146
5 295
5 437
 50  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Box 3.6 Outcomes of TB treatment by HIV statusa
Brazil, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Thailand, Ugan-
da and Zimbabwe. 
Treatment outcomes in 2013 were worse among HIV-
positive TB patients compared with HIV-negative TB patients 
(Box 3.6). Further efforts are needed to narrow this gap. 
3.6  
Detection and treatment of latent TB 
infection
Latent TB infection (LTBI) is defined as the presence of 
immune responses to Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens 
without clinical evidence of active TB. Most people with 
LTBI have no signs or symptoms of TB disease and are not 
infectious. However, they are at risk of developing active 
TB disease and becoming infectious. The lifetime risk of TB 
disease for a person with documented LTBI is estimated at 
5–15%, with the majority of cases occurring within the first 
five years after initial infection.1 
The risk of LTBI reactivation can be reduced by preven-
tive treatment. WHO has issued global recommendations 
on the treatment of LTBI for people living with HIV and for 
1 Getahun H, Matteelli A, Chaisson RE, Raviglione M. Latent Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis infection. New Engl J Med. 2015;372(22):2127–35.
In the 2015 round of global TB data collection, 140 countries 
reported treatment outcomes for the 2013 patient cohort that 
were disaggregated by HIV status. This was an increase from 133 
countries that reported such data for 2012. These 140 countries 
included 22 of the 41 high TB/HIV burden countries (listed in 
Table 6.1 of Chapter 6) and collectively accounted for 71% (n= 
397 000) of the HIV-positive TB patients reported by NTPs in 2013, 
similar to the level of 2012 (70%). 
Overall, the treatment success rate in 2013 was worse for HIV-
positive TB patients (73%) compared with HIV-negative TB patients 
(88%), similar to levels in 2012 (Figure B3.6). The difference was 
smaller in the African region (75% and 84%, respectively). There 
were large differences in the European and Eastern Mediterranean 
Regions, where the treatment success rates among HIV-positive TB 
patients were only 47% and 60% respectively, compared with 80% 
and 91% among HIV-negative patients. The treatment success rate 
in the European Region were much worse than in 2012 (47% versus 
57%), mainly reflecting data for Ukraine. This country accounted 
for 80% of the HIV-positive TB patients for whom treatment 
outcomes in 2013 were reported, but did not report data in 2012. 
More encouragingly, the treatment success rate for HIV-positive TB 
patients in the Western Pacific Region was substantially better in 
2013 compared with 2012 (73% vs 57%).
Globally, the proportion of TB patients who died during treatment 
remained more than three times higher among HIV-positive TB 
patients (11% versus 3.5%). In the African Region, HIV-positive 
TB patients were almost twice as likely to die compared with 
HIV-negative TB patients (9.8% versus 5.1%). Differentials were 
larger in the European Region (21% versus 6.6%) and the Eastern 
children aged less than 5 years old who are close contacts 
of a TB case.2,3 Most recently, WHO has issued guidelines on 
the management of LTBI that are targeted at upper-middle 
and high-income countries with an estimated incidence rate 
of less than 100 per 100 000 population.4 In these countries, 
systematic testing and treatment of LTBI is recommended 
for a wider range of risk groups: people living with HIV, adult 
as well as child contacts of pulmonary TB cases, patients with 
silicosis, patients initiating anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) 
treatment, patients on dialysis, and transplant patients 
(Table 3.7). 
The management of LTBI is a critical component of the 
new post-2015 End TB Strategy (Chapter 1), and is one of the 
interventions that can help countries to achieve the ambi-
2 World Health Organization. Guidelines for intensified tuberculosis 
case-finding and isoniazid preventive therapy for people living with HIV in 
resource-constrained settings. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011.
3 World Health Organization. Recommendations for investigating contacts of 
persons with infectious tuberculosis in low- and middle income countries. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
4 World Health Organization. Guidelines on the management of latent 
tuberculosis infection. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/tb/publications/ltbi_document_page/
en/
Mediterranean Region (17% versus 1.8%). The proportion of 
patients categorized as lost to follow-up, who may also have died 
of TB, was also higher for those who were HIV-positive (6.5% versus 
4.6%), similar to levels in 2012. The proportion of HIV-positive TB 
patients for whom the treatment outcome was not evaluated 
was relatively similar globally (8.1% compared with 7.6% of HIV-
negative TB patients), although there was a noticeable drop in the 
Western Pacific Region (from 30% of patients in 2012 to 12% in 
2013). This is the main explanation for the large improvement in the 
treatment success rate for HIV-positive TB patients in this region.
a Countries with no treatment outcome data for HIV-positive TB patients 
were excluded from the analysis.
FIGURE B3.6 
Outcomes of TB treatment by HIV status, 2013
HIV+                   HIV–
Percentage of cohort
Treatment
success
Failed
Died
0
20
40
60
80
100
Lost to
follow-up
Not
evaluated
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  51
n FIGURE 3.5
Treatment outcomes for new and relapse cases, 2013, 
globally, for the six WHO regions and 22 high-burden 
countries
Treatment success                Failure                Died
Lost to follow-up                Not evaluated
Global
WPR
SEAR
EUR
EMR
AMR
AFR
High-burden countries
Zimbabwea
Viet Nam
UR Tanzania
Uganda
Thailand
South Africa
Russian Federation
Philippines
Pakistan
Nigeriaa
Myanmara
Mozambiqueb
Kenyaa
Indonesia
India
Ethiopiaa
DR Congoa
China
Cambodia
Brazil
Bangladesh
Afghanistan
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of cohort (%)
a Treatment outcomes are for new cases only.
b Treatment outcomes in Mozambique are for new pulmonary 
bacteriologically-confirmed cases only. Introduction of monitoring of 
outcomes for other cases was started in 2015.
tious targets of a 90% reduction in the TB incidence rate and 
a 95% reduction in TB deaths by 2035, compared with 2015 
levels. LTBI management can also contribute to TB elimina-
tion, especially in low TB incidence settings. In this context, 
country preparedness for the programmatic implementation 
of LTBI management (including addressing well-recognized 
challenges such as treatment adherence) is of growing pri-
ority and importance. A two-pronged approach is required, 
in which: (1) treatment for LTBI is provided in all countries to 
people living with HIV and children aged less than 5 years 
old who are household or close contacts of a TB case; and 
(2) treatment for LTBI is provided to additional risk groups in 
upper-middle and high-income countries with an incidence 
rate of less than 100 per 100 000 population. 
Data on the treatment of LTBI among people living with 
HIV are already collected routinely, with data presented in 
this report (Chapter 6). In 2014 and 2015, WHO expanded 
data collection related to LTBI through discussions during 
regional meetings of NTP managers (or their equivalent) 
and other national stakeholders in four WHO regions, and 
by conducting a special survey of existing policy and prac-
tices in upper-middle income and high-income countries 
with an incidence rate of less than 100 per 100 000 popula-
tion (shown in Figure 3.6). The main results are summarized 
below. 
n TABLE 3.7
WHO recommendations for the management of latent TB infection, by country group 
COUNTRY GROUP
AT RISK POPULATIONS
TESTING ALGORITHM
TREATMENT OPTIONS
High-income and upper middle-
income countries with an estimated 
TB incidence rate of less than 100 
per 100 000 population
Strongly recommended for the 
following risk groups:
1) People living with HIV; 
2) Adults and children who are 
household or close contacts of 
pulmonary TB cases;
3) Clinical indications – patients 
with silicosis; patients initiating 
anti-TNF treatment; patients on 
dialysis; transplant patients. 
Exclude active TB using TB 
investigations.
A positive IGRA or TST test result is 
required to diagnose LTBI.
6 months daily isoniazid 
9 months daily isoniazid
3 months weekly rifapentine plus 
isoniazid
3 to 4 months daily isoniazid plus 
rifampicin
3 to 4 months  daily rifampicin
Resource-limited and other middle-
income countries with an estimated 
TB incidence rate of more than 100 
per 100 000 population
1) People living with HIV;
2) Children under 5 years of age 
who are household contacts of 
a TB case.
Exclude active TB using TB 
investigations. An LTBI test is not 
required prior to LTBI treatment, 
but is encouraged for people living 
with HIV.
IGRA should not replace TST.
6 months daily isoniazid
 52  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 3.6
The 113 upper-middle-income and high-income countries with an estimated incidence rate of less than 100 per 100 000 
population that are the primary audience for 2015 WHO guidelines on the management of latent TB infection
n FIGURE 3.7
Reported policies and practices for latent TB infection 
(LTBI) in upper-middle-income and high-income countries 
with an estimated incidence rate of less than 100 per 
100 000 population, four WHO regionsa
a Two countries in the African Region (Algeria and Seychelles) were 
included in the survey, both of which reported that they had national 
policies on LTBI and were providing LTBI testing and treatment for 
people living with HIV and/or children who are close contacts of TB 
cases. One country in the South-East Asia Region (Maldives) was invited 
to participate in the survey but no response was received.
National policy on LTBI exists
Testing and treatment for LTBI being provided for people living 
with HIV, and/or children who are close contacts of TB cases.
WHO region
AMR
EMR
EUR
WPR
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Number of countries
3.6.1  Results from a survey of LTBI policy and practice 
in upper-middle and high-income countries 
with an incidence rate of less than 100 per 
100 000 population
Data were reported by 74 (69%) of the 108 countries invited 
to participate in the survey.1 Among these countries, 76% 
(56/74) had a national policy on LTBI but a higher number 
(68/74, 92%) were providing testing for LTBI and preventive 
treatment for people living with HIV and/or children who 
were contacts of TB cases. This demonstrates a gap between 
policy and practice, which existed in three of four WHO 
regions (Figure 3.7). Systematic testing and treatment for 
LTBI in other risk groups for whom it is recommended was 
reported by only a few countries. 
Testing for LTBI and exclusion of active TB
Of the 68 countries implementing systematic testing and 
treatment of LTBI in at least one at-risk population, 30 (44%) 
relied only on the tuberculin skin test (TST); the other 38 
countries used both TST and interferon-gamma release 
assays (IGRAs) to test for LTBI.2 TST was the only test used in 
most countries in the Eastern Mediterranean Region (70%, 
7/10) and the Americas (73%, 11/15). Both tests were common-
1 Five countries or territories with very small populations and numbers of 
TB cases were not included in the survey: Bermuda, Monaco, San 
Marino, Turks and Caicos Islands, US Virgin Islands.
2 In the remaining six countries, specific at-risk populations were not 
identified. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  53
ly used in the European Region (81%, 25/31). Shortages of TST 
were reported by 34 countries. 
To exclude active TB prior to starting treatment for LTBI, 
most countries (62%, 42/68) used a combination of clinical 
screening for TB symptoms and a chest X-ray; this is consist-
ent with WHO recommendations. A further 24 countries 
used these methods but supplemented them with addition-
al diagnostic tests including smear microscopy, culture, and 
molecular testing. The remaining country used only clinical 
symptoms to exclude active TB. 
Treatment regimens
In just over half of the 68 countries (35/68, 51%), the only 
option for LTBI treatment was a daily regimen of isoniazid 
for six or nine months. Rifamycin-containing regimens were 
used in other countries, but to date the shortest and simplest 
regimen (a weekly dose of rifapentine plus isoniazid for 12 
weeks) had been adopted by only five of these countries.
Recording and reporting 
Recording and reporting gaps were evident in many coun-
tries. Of the 40 countries providing testing and treatment 
for LTBI for people living with HIV, only 21 had a system for 
recording and reporting data. Of the 53 countries providing 
LTBI to children aged less than five who were household or 
close contacts of TB cases, 33 had a system for recording or 
reporting data. A monitoring and evaluation framework for 
LTBI is being developed by WHO and is expected to be avail-
able in 2016.
Key messages and conclusions 
Overall, the survey shows that intensified efforts are need-
ed to ensure that national LTBI policies are in place, as a 
foundation for programmatic management of LTBI using 
standardised approaches. Such policies should prioritize and 
target population groups with the highest risk of progres-
sion to active disease in whom the benefits of preventive 
treatment outweigh the potential risks. Efforts are needed 
to promote the use of short treatment regimens, such as 
weekly rifapentine plus isoniazid for 12 weeks, which would 
have potential benefits in terms of acceptability, adherence, 
and tolerability compared to the standard isoniazid regi-
men. Systems for routine collection and analysis of data are 
required in all countries and shortages in the supply of TST 
must be addressed. 
 54  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Drug-resistant TB 
CHAP TER
4
Key facts and messages 
Drug-resistant TB poses a major threat to control of TB 
worldwide. By the end of 2014, data on anti-TB drug resistance 
were available for 153 countries, accounting for more than 95% 
of the world’s population and estimated TB cases. Eighty of 
these countries have continuous surveillance systems, while 
the others rely on epidemiological surveys. 
In 2014, the first-ever drug resistance surveys were completed 
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North 
Hwanghae Province), Iraq, Papua New Guinea (four provinces), 
Turkmenistan and Ukraine; repeat surveys were completed 
in Iran, Lesotho, Morocco and Senegal. In mid-2015, drug 
resistance surveys were ongoing in 13 countries. These included 
the first nationwide surveys in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, India and Sudan.
Globally, an estimated 3.3% (95% CI: 2.2–4.4%) of new cases 
and 20% (95%CI: 14–27%) of previously treated cases have 
MDR-TB; these levels have remained virtually unchanged in 
recent years. In 2014, there were an estimated 480 000 (range: 
360 000–600 000) new cases of MDR-TB worldwide, and 
approximately 190 000 (range: 120 000–260 000) deaths from 
MDR-TB. Among patients with pulmonary TB who were notified 
in 2014, an estimated 300 000 (range: 220 000–370 000) had 
MDR-TB. More than half of these patients were in India, China 
and the Russian Federation. 
Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB) has been reported by 
105 countries. On average, an estimated 9.7% (95% CI: 7.4–12%) 
of people with MDR-TB have XDR-TB.
There was major progress in coverage of drug susceptibility 
testing (DST) between 2013 and 2014. Worldwide, 12% of new 
bacteriologically-confirmed TB cases and 58% of previously 
treated TB patients were tested for drug resistance in 2014, 
up from 8.5% and 17% respectively in 2013 (representing 
proportional increases of 43% and 223%, respectively). 
Coverage was highest in the European Region (97% of new cases). 
In the South-East Asia and Western Pacific regions combined, 
two-thirds of previously treated cases underwent testing. 
Globally in 2014, 123 000 patients with MDR -TB or rifampicin-
resistant tuberculosis (RR-TB) were notified, of whom about 75% 
lived in the European Region, India, South Africa or China. This 
was equivalent to 41% of the 300 000 notified TB patients who 
were estimated to have MDR-TB in 2014. The number of notified 
MDR/RR-TB cases in 2014 was almost the same as in 2013. A 
major diagnostic gap has therefore persisted, and was worst in 
the Western Pacific Region where detected cases represented 
19% of estimated cases. The figure for China was 11%. 
People with MDR-TB or RR-TB are eligible for second-line 
treatment with MDR-TB regimens. A total of 111 000 people 
were started on MDR-TB treatment in 2014, an increase of 14% 
compared with 2013. The ratio of enrolled to notified MDR/
RR-TB cases was 90% globally, and >90% in 15 high MDR-TB 
burden countries as well as the European Region and the 
Region of Americas. The ratio was <60% in 3 high MDR-TB 
burden countries: China (49%), Myanmar (44%) and Nigeria 
(53%). 
The 2015 treatment success target of ≥75% for MDR-TB patients 
was reached by 43 of the 127 countries and territories that 
reported outcomes for the 2012 cohort. Only three high MDR-TB 
burden countries (Estonia, Ethiopia, and Myanmar) achieved a 
treatment success rate of ≥75%. Globally, only 50% of patients 
on MDR-TB treatment were successfully treated, largely due to 
high rates of mortality and loss to follow-up. 
Despite progress in responding to the challenge of drug-
resistant TB, serious detection and treatment gaps remain. 
Intensified efforts to close these gaps are urgently required.
Drug-resistant TB continues to threaten global TB control 
and remains a major public health concern in many coun-
tries. The first part of this chapter (section 4.1) summarizes 
the progress made in the global coverage of surveillance of 
anti-TB drug resistance, using the most recent data gathered 
from epidemiological surveys and continuous surveillance 
systems, with a focus on multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB)1 
and extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB).2 The second part 
1 Defined as resistance to at least rifampicin and isoniazid, the two most 
powerful first-line anti-TB drugs.
2 XDR-TB is defined as MDR-TB plus resistance to at least one 
fluoroquinolone and a second-line injectable.
of this chapter presents an assessment of global and national 
progress in diagnosing and treating rifampicin-resistant (RR-
TB) and MDR-TB (section 4.2). 
4.1  
Surveillance of drug-resistant TB
4.1.1  Progress in the coverage of drug resistance 
surveillance
Since the launch of the Global Project on Anti-tuberculosis 
Drug Resistance Surveillance in 1994, data on drug resist-
ance have been systematically collected and analysed from 
153 countries worldwide (79% of 194 WHO Member States). 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  55
This number includes 80 countries that have continuous 
surveillance systems based on routine diagnostic drug sus-
ceptibility testing (DST) of all TB patients, and 73 countries 
that rely on epidemiological surveys of representative sam-
ples of patients. Over the past two decades, all 22 high TB 
and/or 27 high MDR-TB burden countries (for a total of 36 
countries) have either established a continuous surveillance 
system or conducted at least one survey to monitor drug 
resistance. Progress towards achieving global coverage of 
drug resistance surveillance data is shown in Figure 4.1.
Continuous surveillance for MDR-TB, based on routine 
DST of TB patients and systematic collection and analysis 
of data, is the most effective approach to monitor trends 
in drug resistance. The number of countries that can rely 
on data generated by continuous surveillance systems is 
increasing, following major efforts to scale up the avail-
ability of culture and DST services. In the past two years, an 
additional 10 countries established high quality continuous 
surveillance systems to monitor drug resistance in new and 
previously treated TB cases. Several countries of the eastern 
European and central Asian regions, where proportions of 
MDR-TB among TB cases are the highest, have established 
high quality surveillance systems to monitor drug resistance. 
These are Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, 
Lithuania, the Russian Federation (at subnational level) and 
Tajikistan. 
Surveys conducted every five years represent the most 
common approach to investigating the burden of drug 
resistance in resource-limited settings where routine DST 
is not accessible to all TB patients, due to lack of laboratory 
capacity or resources. In 2014, the first-ever drug resistance 
surveys were completed in the Democratic People’s Repub-
lic of Korea (North Hwanghae Province), Iraq, Papua New 
Guinea (four provinces), Turkmenistan and Ukraine; repeat 
surveys were completed in Iran, Lesotho, Morocco and Sen-
egal.
Of the 36 high TB and/or MDR-TB burden countries, 
26 have generated drug resistance data through epide-
miological surveys. Nearly half of these (14 countries) have 
conducted surveys recently, between 2010 and 2014. These 
are Afghanistan (Central region), Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, 
Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, 
Tajikistan, Thailand, Uganda, Ukraine, Uzbekistan and 
Viet Nam. Three countries have not completed a survey since 
the mid-1990s: the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya 
and Zimbabwe. However, a national survey is currently being 
implemented in all three of these countries.
Six high TB and/or MDR-TB burden countries (Afghani-
stan, Brazil, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, India, 
Indonesia and the Russian Federation) still rely on drug 
resistance surveillance data gathered from sub-national are-
as only. This situation will improve in the near future. In 2014, 
Brazil launched a large nationwide sentinel system to moni-
tor drug resistance. The Democratic Republic of the Congo 
and India are currently conducting national surveys, and in 
Indonesia the first-ever nationwide drug resistance survey is 
n FIGURE 4.1
Global coverage of surveillance data on drug resistance, 1994–2015
Year of most
recent data
1995–1999
2000–2004
2005–2009
2010–2014
Ongoing survey in 2015
No data
Subnational data only
Not applicable
 56  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
scheduled for implementation in 2016. The remaining coun-
tries should consider conducting nationwide drug resistance 
surveys in the short term to better understand the burden of 
MDR-TB and to guide the planning of diagnostic, treatment 
and care services.
In mid-2015, drug resistance surveys were ongoing in 13 
countries. These included the first-ever nationwide surveys 
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, India and Sudan; 
and repeat surveys in Bolivia, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Kenya, 
Namibia, Romania, Rwanda, Venezuela, South Africa and 
Zimbabwe.
Central and Francophone Africa remain the parts of the 
world where drug resistance surveillance data are most 
lacking, largely as a result of weak laboratory infrastructure. 
These countries should consider conducting drug resistance 
surveys using Xpert MTB/RIF to at least obtain a nationally 
representative estimate of the proportion of TB patients with 
rifampicin resistance.
4.1.2  Percentage of new and previously treated TB 
cases that have MDR-TB
Globally in 2014, there were an estimated 3.3% (95% CI: 2.2–
4.4%) of new cases and 20% (95%CI: 14–27%) of previously 
treated cases with MDR-TB (Table 4.1). These estimates are 
essentially unchanged from those published in recent global 
TB reports.
The proportions of new and previously treated TB cases 
with MDR-TB at the country level are shown in Figure 4.2 and 
Figure 4.3, and for the 27 high MDR-TB burden countries also 
in Table 4.1. Eastern European and central Asian countries 
continue to have the highest levels of MDR-TB. Among new 
cases, the proportions with MDR-TB were highest in Belarus, 
Estonia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, 
the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. Among 
previously treated TB cases, the proportions with MDR-TB 
were highest in Belarus, Estonia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
the Republic of Moldova, Tajikistan, Ukraine and Uzbeki-
stan. In the Russian Federation, even though the average 
proportion of previously treated cases with MDR-TB does not 
exceed 50%, the proportion is well above 50% in several Fed-
eral Subjects.
Levels of drug resistance among new cases remain low 
(<3%) in many parts of the world, including in almost all 
countries in the Region of the Americas; most African coun-
tries where drug resistance surveys have been conducted; 
most of the South-East Asia Region; most of western Europe; 
and several countries in the Western Pacific Region.
4.1.3  Estimated global incidence of MDR-TB and 
estimated number of MDR-TB cases among 
notified TB patients in 2014
Data compiled from surveys and continuous surveillance of 
drug resistance among TB patients can be used to estimate 
the total number of incident cases of MDR-TB worldwide and 
the total number of deaths from MDR-TB in 2014. Methods 
n TABLE 4.1
Estimated proportion of TB cases that have MDR-TB, 
globally and for 27 high MDR-TB burden countries and 
WHO regions
ESTIMATED 
% OF NEW 
TB CASES 
WITH  
MDR-TBa
95% 
CONFIDENCE 
INTERVAL
ESTIMATED 
% OF RE-
TREATMENT 
TB CASES 
WITH  
MDR-TBa
95% 
CONFIDENCE 
INTERVAL
Armenia
9.4
7.0–12
43
38–49
Azerbaijan
13
10–16
28
22–37
Bangladesh
1.4
0.7–2.5
29
24–34
Belarus
34
32–36
69
66–72
Bulgaria
2.3
1.3–3.8
23
17–31
China
5.7
4.5–7.0
26
22–30
DR Congob
2.2
0.3–4.1
11
6.2–16
Estonia
19
14–27
62
42–79
Ethiopia
1.6
0.9–2.8
12
5.6–21
Georgia
12
10–13
39
35-44
India
2.2
1.9–2.6
15
11–19
Indonesia
1.9
1.4–2.5
12
8.1–17
Kazakhstan
26
25–27
58
57–59
Kyrgyzstan
26
23–31
55
52–58
Latvia
8.2
5.8–11
30
21–40
Lithuania
14
12–16
49
43–55
Myanmar
5.0
3.1–6.8
27
15–39
Nigeria
2.9
2.1–4.0
14
10–19
Pakistan
3.7
2.5–5.0
18
13–23
Philippines
2.0
1.4–2.7
21
16–29
Republic of Moldova
24
21–26
62
59–65
Russian Federation
19
14–25
49
40–59
South Africa
1.8
1.4–2.3
6.7
5.4–8.2
Tajikistan
8.1
6.9–9.4
52
47–57
Ukraine
22
20–24
56
50–61
Uzbekistan
23
18–30
62
53–71
Viet Nam
4.0
2.5–5.4
23
17–30
High MDR-TB 
burden countries
3.8
2.2–5.4
22
13–31
AFR
2.1
0.5–3.7
11
6.7–16
AMR
2.4
1.3–3.5
11
6.5–16
EMR
3.2
2.3–4.1
18
12–25
EUR
15
10–20
48
43–53
SEAR
2.2
1.9–2.6
16
14–18
WPR
4.4
2.5–6.3
22
18–25
Global
3.3
2.2–4.4
20
14–27
a Best estimates are for the latest available year. 
b The estimates for DR Congo are indirect estimates based on data from 
countries in the same epidemiological region.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  57
n FIGURE 4.2
Percentage of new TB cases with MDR-TBa
Percentage
of cases
0–2.9
3–5.9
6–11.9
12–17.9
≥18
No data
Subnational data only
Not applicable
a Figures are based on the most recent year for which data have been reported, which varies among countries. Data reported before the year 2000 are 
not shown.
n FIGURE 4.3
Percentage of previously treated TB cases with MDR-TBa
Percentage
of cases
0–5.9
6–11.9
12–29.9
30–49.9
≥50
No data
Subnational data only
Not applicable
a  Figures are based on the most recent year for which data have been reported, which varies among countries. Data reported before the year 2000 are 
not shown. In six countries or territories, the high percentages of previously treated cases with MDR-TB refer to only a small number (1–8) of notified TB 
cases. These are: Bahrain; Belize; Bonaire, Saint Eustatius and Saba; Cyprus; Israel; and Sao Tomé and Principe.
 58  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
used to produce these estimates are described in detail in 
an online technical appendix (available at www.who.int/tb/
data).
The number of incident cases includes cases among noti-
fied TB patients, cases among people diagnosed with TB 
that were not notified to national TB programmes (NTPs) in 
whom a diagnosis of MDR-TB was missed, and cases among 
people not diagnosed with TB at all. Globally in 2014, there 
were an estimated 480 000 (range: 360 000–600 000) inci-
dent cases of MDR-TB. This number is essentially unchanged 
from those published in recent global TB reports, despite 
an upward revision to global estimates of the burden of TB 
following results from the 2013/2014 national TB prevalence 
survey in Indonesia (which indicated that there are about 
1 million rather than 0.5 million incident TB cases per year 
in this country; see Chapter 2). The explanation is that the 
upward revision to the estimated number of incident cases 
of MDR-TB in Indonesia (equivalent to approximately 12 000 
extra cases) has been compensated for by reductions in the 
reported numbers of previously treated cases in several high 
MDR-TB burden countries (for example, India); this category 
of case (especially those not defined as relapse cases) has an 
important influence on estimates of the total number of inci-
dent cases of MDR-TB.1 There were approximately 190 000 
(range: 120 000–260 000) deaths from MDR-TB in 2014, com-
parable to estimates published in recent global TB reports. 
Data compiled from surveys and continuous surveil-
lance of drug resistance among TB patients also allow the 
production of global as well as country-specific estimates 
of the number of MDR-TB cases among notified TB patients 
with pulmonary TB. These are the MDR-TB cases that could be 
detected if all notified patients were tested for drug resistance 
to rifampicin and isoniazid using WHO-recommended diagnos-
tic tests. Globally, in 2014 there were an estimated 300 000 
(range: 220 000–370 000) MDR-TB cases among notified 
TB patients; this is unchanged from the estimate for 2013.2 
Of the 300 000 cases, 53% were among new cases and 47% 
were among previously treated cases. Of note, the increased 
number of TB cases notified in India between 2013 and 2014 
(Chapter 3) and the higher proportions of MDR-TB detect-
ed in Ukraine in the latest survey of drug resistance were 
counter-balanced by lower numbers of new TB cases noti-
fied in China, the Russian Federation and Ukraine and lower 
numbers of previously treated TB cases notified in India and 
1 The number of incident cases of MDR-TB is estimated as the sum of the 
number of cases in three distinct groups. These are (i) new cases of TB; 
(ii) relapse cases and (iii) all previously treated cases of TB, excluding 
those in the relapse category. A review of methods used by WHO to 
estimate MDR-TB incidence and mortality is scheduled for 2016. In line 
with retaining current methods for the 2015 targets assessment, 
methods to estimate the burden of MDR-TB have not been changed this 
year (see also Chapter 2, particularly Box 2.1 and Box 2.2). Further 
details about the methods used to estimate the burden of MDR-TB are 
provided in the online technical appendix, available at www.who.int/
tb/data
2 WHO. Global tuberculosis report 2014. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014 (WHO/HTM/TB/2014.08).
several Eastern European countries. Country-specific esti-
mates are discussed in section 4.2.
Given the increasing use of molecular diagnostics that 
detect RR-TB (Chapter 5), their growing importance in detec-
tion of TB patients with RR-TB (section 4.2) and the fact that 
the recommended treatment for people with RR-TB is the 
same as for those with MDR-TB, monitoring and evaluation 
of the response to drug-resistant TB requires more atten-
tion to and emphasis on the underlying burden of RR-TB. The 
burden of rifampicin resistance is presented in Box 4.1 and 
compared with that of MDR-TB.
4.1.4  Resistance to second-line drugs
XDR-TB, defined as MDR-TB plus resistance to at least one 
fluoroquinolone and a second-line injectable, had been 
reported by 105 countries globally by the end of 2014. A total 
of 83 countries and five territories reported representative 
data from continuous surveillance or surveys regarding the 
proportion of MDR-TB cases that had XDR-TB. Combining 
their data, the average proportion of MDR-TB cases with 
XDR-TB was 9.7% (95% CI: 7.4–12%), similar to estimates for 
previous years (9.0% in 2013 and 9.6% in 2012). Fourteen of 
these countries reported ≥10 XDR-TB cases in the most recent 
year for which data were available. Among those countries, 
the proportion of MDR-TB cases with XDR-TB was highest in 
Belarus (29% in 2014), Georgia (15% in 2014), Latvia (19% in 
2014) and Lithuania (25% in 2013). Among the 36 high TB and/
or MDR-TB burden countries, 23 have surveillance data on 
second-line drug resistance but only eight have established a 
national continuous surveillance system for second-line drug 
resistance among patients with MDR-TB. Increased efforts 
should be made to ensure that all patients diagnosed with 
MDR-TB undergo testing for susceptibility to fluoroquinolo-
nes and injectable agents, and that results are recorded and 
reported. 
The proportion of MDR-TB cases with resistance to any 
fluoroquinolone for which testing was done, including 
ofloxacin, levofloxacin and moxifloxacin, was 21% (95% CI: 
8.3–34%). 
4.2  
Management of drug-resistant TB 
4.2.1  Coverage of drug susceptibility testing (DST)
Targets included in the Global Plan to Stop TB 2011–2015 call 
for 20% of all new bacteriologically-confirmed TB cases (i.e. 
those considered to be at high risk for MDR-TB) as well as 
all previously treated cases to undergo DST to first-line TB 
drugs.3 According to WHO recommendations, all patients 
with MDR-TB should undergo testing for susceptibility to 
fluoroquinolones and second-line injectable agents, to 
determine if they have XDR-TB.
There was major progress in DST coverage between 2013 
3 The Global Plan to Stop TB 2011–2015: transforming the fight towards 
elimination of tuberculosis. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010 
(WHO/HTM/STB/2010.2).
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  59
and 2014 (Figure 4.4a, Figure 4.5). Globally in 2014, 12% of 
the 2.7 million new bacteriologically-confirmed TB cases and 
58% of the 0.7 million previously treated TB patients were 
tested for drug resistance in 2014, up from 8.9% and 17% 
respectively in 2013. This represents proportional increases 
in DST coverage of 43% and 223% among new and previously 
treated cases, respectively.1 
Coverage was highest in the European Region, where 97% 
of new cases were tested in 2014 (Table 4.2). In the South-
East Asia and Western Pacific regions combined, two-thirds 
of previously treated cases underwent testing, reflecting 
relatively better access to DST in these regions. Levels of test-
ing remained below 5% among new cases in the South-East 
Asia and Eastern Mediterranean regions, while there was a 
substantial increase in testing coverage among new bacte-
riologically confirmed cases in the African Region (from 0.9% 
in 2013 to 6.4% in 2014). Testing coverage among previously 
treated cases also improved considerably in most regions, 
notably from 5.8% to 67% in the South-East Asia Region 
(driven largely by improved reporting from India) and from 
9.6% to 33% in the African Region. 
Among the 27 high MDR-TB burden countries – which 
account for >85% of estimated MDR-TB cases in the world 
– the proportion of TB patients who were tested for drug sus-
ceptibility in 2014 varied markedly (Table 4.2). In nine of the 
12 European countries that reported data, testing was done 
for ≥95% of new cases; three of these countries reported 
universal coverage among previously treated cases. Among 
1 These figures are based on data reported by 160 (73%) countries and 
territories for new TB cases and by 157 (72%) countries and territories 
for previously treated cases.
Box 4.1 Monitoring and evaluation of progress in the response to drug-resistant TB:  
 
the increasing importance of rifampicin-resistant TB (RR-TB)
Following the rollout of molecular tests for the detection of M. 
tuberculosis and rifampicin resistance (line probe assays and 
Xpert MTB/RIF) (Chapter 5), the Global TB Programme in WHO 
has collected and reported notifications of drug-resistant TB 
that combine rifampicin-resistant TB (RR-TB) and MDR-TB since 
2013. All RR-TB and/or MDR-TB cases detected by either rapid 
molecular diagnostics or conventional DST are reported as cases 
of drug-resistant TB. Furthermore, in accordance with WHO 
recommendations to enrol all patients diagnosed with RR-TB on 
an MDR-TB drug regimen,a treatment enrolment and treatment 
outcomes of patients receiving MDR-TB treatment have been 
reported for all patients diagnosed with RR-TB, including those 
that did not have MDR-TB. 
To date, estimates of the burden of drug-resistant TB at global, 
regional and country levels have focused on MDR-TB. The number 
of cases with MDR-TB will be slightly lower than the combined 
number of cases with MDR-TB or RR-TB (that is not MDR-TB). 
This means that when the burden of MDR-TB is used as the 
denominator for estimating detection and treatment coverage, 
the values for both indicators will be slightly overstated.
For these reasons, it is becoming increasingly important to 
estimate the combined burden of MDR-TB and RR-TB. In 2014, 
the global proportion of TB cases with MDR-TB, irrespective of 
treatment history, was 7.7% (95%CI: 4.6–10.8%), with an estimated 
number of MDR-TB cases among notified pulmonary TB patients 
of 300 000. In the same year, the global proportion of TB cases 
with RR-TB was 8.8% (95%CI: 6.2–11.3%), meaning that there were 
approximately 40 000 additional cases of RR-TB that were not 
MDR-TB. In future global TB reports, greater emphasis will be given 
to estimates of the combined burden of MDR-TB and RR-TB when 
assessing global, regional and national progress in the detection 
and treatment of drug-resistant TB.
a Companion Handbook to the WHO Guidelines for the Programmatic 
Management of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014 (WHO/HTM/TB/2014.11). http://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/10665/130918/1/9789241548809_eng.pdf.
n FIGURE 4.4
DST coverage among new cases and enrolment on MDR-TB 
treatment, compared with the targets in the Global Plan to 
Stop TB, 2011–2015. Lines indicate the planned targets, blue 
circles show the actual situation in 2009–2014.
Number of patients
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
Percentage of cases (%)
a. DST coverage among new bacteriologically-
confirmed cases
b. Enrolment on MDR-TB treatment
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 60  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
the high MDR-TB burden countries outside Europe, testing 
among new cases was highest in Myanmar (24%) and China 
(19%). Among previously treated cases, testing coverage was 
higher overall, and reached 96% in Viet Nam, 88% in Indo-
nesia and 75% in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 
South Africa, the equivalent of 69% of all notified TB cases 
were tested, although DST data were not available separate-
ly for new and previously treated cases.
Among MDR-TB patients notified in 2014, only 24% had 
DST performed for both fluoroquinolones and second-line 
injectable drugs. Coverage was lowest in the European 
Region, likely as a result of incomplete reporting of DST 
results from laboratories.
Evidence of progress in DST coverage notwithstanding, 
diagnostic DST must be further expanded, especially given 
the call for universal DST in the post-2015 End TB Strategy 
(Chapter 1). This requires continued strengthening of labo-
ratory capacity and wider uptake of new rapid diagnostics 
(see Chapter 5), as well as increased deployment of informa-
tion and communication technologies (ICT) to improve the 
completeness of reporting from laboratory and treatment 
centres. 
4.2.2  Notification of RR-TB and MDR-TB cases 
Globally, 123 000 cases of MDR-TB or RR-TB, who are eligi-
ble for treatment with MDR-TB regimens, were notified to 
WHO in 2014. India, the Russian Federation and South Africa 
accounted for almost half of the total (Table 4.3). These 123 
000 cases represented 41% of the estimated 300 000 (range, 
220 000–370 000) MDR-TB cases among pulmonary TB 
patients that were notified in 2014 (Figure 4.6),1 and 26% of 
the estimated 480 000 (range: 360 000−600 000) incident 
MDR-TB cases in the world in 2014. 
The number of MDR/RR-TB cases reported for 2014 was 
nearly identical to the latest figure for 2013. In this context, 
it should be highlighted that the data available at the time of 
preparation of this report show that the number of MDR/RR-
TB cases detected globally in 2013 was lower than previously 
published,2 following a downward correction to numbers 
originally reported for India. Increases in the number of 
detected cases did however occur between 2013 and 2014 in 
India (23 162 to 25 748), China (4 183 to 5 807), the Russian Fed-
eration (13 521 to 15 585), and Myanmar (1 984 to 3 495). There 
were reductions between 2013 and 2014 in the Philippines, 
South Africa, Ukraine, Uzbekistan and several other coun-
tries (Figure 4.7). The reasons for the apparent stagnation in 
detection, given increasing DST coverage, are not clear and 
should be investigated as a matter of priority. A comparison 
of the number of Xpert MTB/RIF cartridges procured and the 
number of MDR/RR-TB cases detected in eight countries is 
provided in Box 4.2.
The number of notified MDR/RR-TB cases as a proportion 
of the estimated number of MDR-TB cases among pulmo-
nary TB patients ranged from 19% in the Western Pacific 
Region to 80% in the African Region. In Kazakhstan, South 
1 When compared with the estimate of all MDR/RR-TB cases (not just the 
MDR-TB cases), this value would decrease to 36% (see also Box 4.1). 
2 The number published in the 2014 global TB report was 136 000 in 2013.
n FIGURE 4.5 
DST coverage in previously treated TB cases, globally and for WHO regions, 2009–2014.a Numbers of cases tested are 
shown for each bar.
a DST is for rifampicin only or for both rifampicin and isoniazid.
43 980 48 022 49 582 66 568
125 042
404 509
4340
4294
3716
5299
11 015
31 952
3139
4234
5239
5590
7143
8724
1274
1257
1458
2273
5454
13 703
29 221 34 919
32 097
40 615 43 828
48 234
5069
1264
1935
3663
19 018
247 336
937
2054
5137
9128
38 584
54 560
Percentage of retreatment cases (%)
Africa
The Americas
Eastern Mediterranean
Europe
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
South-East Asia
Western Pacific
Global
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  61
n TABLE 4.2 
DST coverage among TB and MDR-TB cases, globally and for 27 high MDR-TB burden countries and WHO regions, 2014
NEW BACTERIOLOGICALLY CONFIRMED 
CASES 
RETREATMENT CASES
CONFIRMED MDR–TB CASES
NUMBER WITH DSTa 
RESULTS
% OF CASES WITH 
DST RESULT
NUMBER WITH DSTa 
RESULTS
% OF CASES WITH 
DST RESULT
NUMBER WITH DSTb 
RESULTS
% OF CASES WITH 
DST RESULT
Armenia
343
96
50
17
100
100
Azerbaijan
2 059
>100
3 901
>100
840
100
Bangladesh
12 573
12
4 959
51
182
19
Belarus
1 990
97
877
84
1 251
100
Bulgaria
639
80
101
45
36
97
China
45 664
19
17 210
54
–
DR Congo
545
0.7
6 135
75
41
19
Estonia
175
>100
29
71
47
96
Ethiopia
2 405
6
7 682
–
25
15
Georgia
1 700
95
634
61
357
93
India
12 795
1.7
214 209
69
3 572
25
Indonesia
1 058
0.5
8 445
88
229
35
Kazakhstan
9 597
>100
6 377
>100
–
Kyrgyzstan
–
–
–
Latvia
483
99
107
86
70
100
Lithuania
968
>100
294
100
232
86
Myanmar
10 295
24
15 166
>100
–
Nigeria
–
–
–
Pakistan
361
0
11 685
72
2 380
98
Philippines
4 415
4.7
20 196
67
868
80
Republic of Moldova
1 764
99
831
61
277
31
Russian Federation
31 250
84
13 925
28
–
South Africa
–
–
3 416
42
Tajikistan
2 432
100
800
64
371
100
Ukraine
13 833
97
9 707
69
–
Uzbekistan
11 956
>100
5 888
77
927
29
Viet Nam
2 756
5.5
8 511
96
246
78
High MDR–TB burden countries
172 056
8.6
357 719
64
15 467
22
AFR
40 940
6.4
31 952
33
3 898
35
AMR
30 531
24
8 724
32
606
20
EMR
8 404
4.6
13 703
52
2 465
78
EUR
108 569
97
48 234
52
5 294
14
SEAR
45 056
3.8
247 336
67
4 610
27
WPR
92 801
21
54 560
62
2 251
30
Global
326 301
12
404 509
58
19 124
24
Blank cells indicate data not reported. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– indicates values that cannot be calculated.  
 
 
 
 
 
The percentages may exceed 100% as a result of the inclusion of extrapulmonary patients among cases tested or inadequate linkages between laboratory 
and clinical registers.  
 
 
 
 
 
a DST is for rifampicin only or for both rifampicin and isoniazid. 
 
 
 
 
 
b DST for a fluoroquinolone and a second-line injectable drug. 
 
 
 
 
 
 62  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
TABLE 4.3
Estimated MDR-TB cases in 2014, notified cases of rifampicin-resistant TB and MDR-TB and enrolments on MDR-TB 
treatment in 2014, and treatment outcome reporting for 2012 cohort, globally and for 27 high MDR-TB burden countries 
and WHO regions
ESTIMATED MDR-TB AMONG NOTIFIED 
PULMONARY TB CASES, 2014
NOTIFIED MDR/RR-TB CASES, 
2014
CASES ENROLLED ON MDR-
TB TREATMENT, 2014
MDR-TB CASES REPORTED 
WITH TREATMENT OUTCOME 
DATA, 2012 COHORT
BEST 
ESTIMATE
UNCERTAINTY INTERVAL
NUMBER
NOTIFIED/ 
ESTIMATED 
MDR-TB 
(%)a
NUMBER
ENROLLED/
NOTIFIED 
MDR/RR–TB 
(%)
NUMBER
%b
Armenia
160
140–190
111
69
120
>100
115
>100
Azerbaijan
1 300
1 100–1 500
1 007
77
814
81
373
63
Bangladesh
4 800
3 400–6 200
994
21
945
95
505
98
Belarus
1 700
1 600–1 800
1 282
75
1 903
>100
2 502
>100
Bulgaria
72
53–91
44
61
29
66
44
90
China
52 000
42 000–61 000
5 807
11
2 846
49
1 906
63
DR Congo
2 800
980–4 500
442
16
436
99
134
>100
Estonia
62
48–75
50
81
48
96
50
81
Ethiopia
1 300
700–2 300
503
39
557
>100
271
95
Georgia
640
590–700
441
69
501
>100
623
>100
India
71 000
57 000–85 000
25 748
36
24 073
93
9 874
80
Indonesia
6 800
5 200–8 400
1 812
27
1 284
71
432
>100
Kazakhstan
4 900
4 800–5 000
5 877
>100
7 315
>100
7 213
95
Kyrgyzstan
2 000
1 800–2 100
1 267
63
1 157
91
775
81
Latvia
84
66–100
71
85
70
99
90
82
Lithuania
300
270–340
279
93
271
97
219
81
Myanmar
9 000
6 500–12 000
3 495
39
1 537
44
443
57
Nigeria
3 300
2 500–4 200
798
24
423
53
154
>100
Pakistan
12 000
8 800–15 000
3 243
27
2 662
82
858
54
Philippines
11 000
8 600–13 000
3 000
27
2 680
89
1 798
>100
Republic of Moldova
1 500
1 400–1 600
925
62
930
>100
856
96
Russian Federation
39 000
33 000–45 000
15 585
40
21 904
>100
16 021
>100
South Africa
6 200
5 100–7 300
18 734
>100
11 538
62
8 084
52
Tajikistan
880
810–950
902
>100
804
89
535
77
Ukraine
13 000
12 000–14 000
7 735
60
8 201
>100
5 556
80
Uzbekistan
7 000
6 100–7 900
4 955
71
3 665
74
1 491
86
Viet Nam
5 100
3 900–6 300
2 198
43
1 532
70
713
>100
High MDR-TB burden countries
260 000
180 000–330 000
107 305
41
98 245
92
61 635
87
AFR
32 000
15 000–49 000
25 531
80
17 352
68
10 246
56
AMR
7 000
4 700–9 300
3 745
54
3 568
95
2 866
97
EMR
15 000
12 000–19 000
4 348
29
3 423
79
1 271
57
EUR
72 000
62 000–81 000
42 293
59
49 074
>100
37 638
>100
SEAR
99 000
90 000–110 000
33 264
34
28 536
86
11 566
77
WPR
71 000
47 000–94 000
13 437
19
8 850
66
6 176
>100
Global
300 000
220 000–370 000
122 618
41
110 803
90
69 763
86
a Notified cases of MDR/RR-TB in 2014 as a percentage of the best estimate of MDR-TB cases among all cases of pulmonary TB in the same year. The 
percentage may exceed 100% if estimates of the number of MDR-TB are too conservative and if linkage between the clinical and laboratory registers is 
inadequate. Percentages shown are slightly higher than what would be expected if an estimate for all RR-TB cases (rather than MDR-TB) was used as a 
denominator (see also Box 4.1).
b The percentage of MDR-TB cases originally notified in 2012 with outcomes reported. The percentage may exceed 100% as a result of updated 
information about MDR-TB cases in 2012, inadequate linkages between notification systems for TB and MDR-TB, the inclusion of RR-TB cases in the 
numerator who were not confirmed MDR-TB, and the inclusion in the treatment cohort of cases of MDR-TB from a year prior to 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  63
Africa, and Tajikistan the figure was above 100% (Table 4.3), 
indicating either repeated reporting of cases when informa-
tion systems are based on laboratory results without linkage 
to patient registers, and/or that estimates of MDR-TB are too 
conservative (for example, because drug resistance surveil-
lance data have become outdated).
Box 4.2 The roll-out of rapid TB diagnostics compared with changes in the  
 
number of cases of MDR/RR-TB notified by national TB programmes
Global progress in the detection of drug-resistant TB should be 
related to the roll-out of molecular diagnostics such as Xpert 
MTB/RIF and line probe assays (LPAs).a However, as use of these 
technologies expands, the number of tests required to detect 
one case may increase. This is because initial use of the test 
is likely to focus on groups with a higher risk of having MDR/
RR-TB (such as previously treated TB patients), in line with policy 
recommendations,b and then broaden to cover people at lower 
risk for drug-resistance (such as patients being evaluated for TB). 
Variation among countries is also expected given differences in the 
prevalence of MDR/RR-TB (for example, the prevalence of MDR-TB 
is much higher in Ukraine compared with Bangladesh).
The relationship between annual procurements of Xpert MTB/RIF 
cartridges and notifications of MDR/RR-TB cases for 8 high MDR-TB 
burden countries is shown in Figure B4.2.1. These countries are 
among the major users of Xpert globally (each having procured 
42 000–82 000 cartridges in 2014) and Xpert is often the leading 
FIGURE B4.2.1 
The number of MDR/RR-TB cases reported for every 100 Xpert cartridges procured in selected high MDR-TB burden 
countries, 2011−2014
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
Number (log scale)
2011
2012
2013
2014
2011
2012
2013
2014
2011
2012
2013
2014
2011
2012
2013
2014
Bangladesh
Ethiopia
Indonesia
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Ukraine
Viet Nam
diagnostic test for drug resistance that is in use. Although there 
was substantial variation in the number of MDR/RR-TB cases 
reported for every 100 Xpert cartridges procured, the ratio tended 
to decrease over time in all countries. 
It was striking that sharp falls in the number of MDR/RR-TB cases 
detected for every 100 Xpert cartridges procured in Ethiopia and 
the Philippines between 2013 and 2014 occurred alongside an 
absolute reduction in the total number of reported MDR/RR-TB 
cases. The reasons for this are not well understood. Possible 
explanations include issues with reporting of cases, as opposed to 
actual levels of testing or laboratory results, and lag times between 
orders and actual use of tests. 
a For further details about these technologies, see Chapter 5.
b Xpert MTB/RIF implementation manual: technical and operational 
“how-to”; practical considerations. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014 (WHO/HTM/TB/2014.1). http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/112469/1/9789241506700_eng.pdf.
4.2.3  Enrolment of notified RR-TB and MDR-TB cases 
on treatment
The number of patients enrolled globally on MDR-TB treat-
ment was 111 000 in 2014, up from 97 000 in 2013. There was a 
13% increase in enrolments between 2013 and 2014 in the 27 
high MDR-TB burden countries, with increments exceeding 
1000 patients in India, Pakistan, the Russian Federation and 
Uzbekistan. 
Globally, the number of patients starting second-line 
 64  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 4.6
Number of MDR−TB cases estimated to occur among notified pulmonary TB cases, 2014
Estimated MDR-TB cases
0–199
200–1999
2000–19 999
20 000–49 999
≥50 000
No data
Not applicable
MDR-TB treatment was 90% of those notified with MDR/
RR-TB in 2014 (Table 4.3). The ratio was over 90% in 15 high 
MDR-TB burden countries, the European Region and the 
Region of Americas. The ratio was lowest in the Western 
Pacific (66%) and African (68%) regions.
In eight high MDR-TB burden countries, enrolments out-
stripped notifications of MDR/RR-TB (Figure 4.7). This may be 
caused by empirical treatment of TB patients considered at 
risk of having MDR-TB but for whom a laboratory-confirmed 
diagnosis was missing, incomplete reporting of laboratory 
data, or enrolment of “waiting lists” of people with MDR-
TB who were detected before 2014. In contrast, the ratio 
of enrolled to diagnosed cases was under 60% in 3 high 
 
MDR-TB burden countries in 2014, and below 50% in China 
(49%) and Myanmar (44%). These low ratios show that pro-
gress in detection is far outstripping capacity to provide 
treatment but may also reflect weaknesses in data collection 
systems. 
Overall, while the number of patients being enrolled on 
treatment for MDR-TB continues to increase, progress falls 
far short of Global Plan targets (Figure 4.4b, Table 4.3). Get-
ting closer to the Global Plan targets requires intensification 
of efforts in many countries, but particularly China and the 
Russian Federation. These two countries rank second and 
third globally in terms of estimated numbers of cases, while 
levels of detection and treatment coverage remain relatively 
low. Continued support to NTPs through updated guidance, 
as well as direct technical assistance provided through the 
mechanisms of the Regional Green Light Committees and 
the Global Drug-resistant TB Initiative (www.stoptb.org/wg/
mdrtb/), is expected to improve global detection and treat-
ment of drug-resistant TB.
In 2014, 49 countries and territories reported treating peo-
ple with XDR−TB (Figure 4.8). Globally, 4 044 patients with 
XDR-TB were enrolled on treatment (higher than the level of 
3 284 in 2013). Most of the cases in 2014 were notified from 
India (1 262, up from 392 in 2013), Ukraine (657), South Africa 
(562), Belarus (431), and Kazakhstan (318).
4.2.4   Accelerating the scale-up of detection and 
enrolment on treatment for people with  
drug-resistant TB: the role of models of care 
and non-NTP providers
In many countries, one of the reasons for inadequate access 
to diagnosis and treatment of drug-resistant TB is that 
the network for the programmatic management of drug-
resistant TB (PMDT) is too centralized. Hospital-based 
models of care, which are still dominant in many countries, 
are a barrier to the expansion of PMDT because they depend 
on hospitals or referral centres. Greater use of ambulatory 
care as part of decentralized PMDT services is necessary to 
expand access. However, national policies and practices vary 
and hospitalization is still the predominant model of care in 
many countries. 
Among the 27 high MDR-TB burden countries, the Demo-
cratic Republic of the Congo reported the lowest level of 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  65
n FIGURE 4.7 
MDR−TB cases and additional rifampicin−resistant TB cases detected (red) compared with TB cases enrolled on MDR−TB 
treatment (blue), global trend and trend in 27 high MDR−TB burden countries, 2009–2014
Number of cases
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
400
700
1000
1300
1600
60
80
100
120
140
200
300
400
500
600
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
200
400
600
800
0
1000
2000
3000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0
10000
20000
30000
0
250
500
750
1000
3000
5000
7000
9000
11000
0
2000
4000
6000
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
0
200
400
600
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
10000
20000
30000
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
100
600
1100
1600
2100
2600
20
40
60
80
0
2000
4000
6000
100
200
300
400
40
50
60
70
80
90
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Bulgaria
China
DR Congo
Estonia
Ethiopia
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Myanmar
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Republic of Moldova
Russian Federation
South Africa
Tajikistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
Globala
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
a The global total of MDR/RR-TB cases detected in 2013 (123 001) is lower than previously published in the 2014 Global TB Report (136 412) following revisions 
to data reported by India.
 66  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
hospitalization (5% of MDR-TB patients), followed by Myan-
mar (10%). In contrast, hospitalization for 100% of MDR-TB 
patients in 2014 (at least for part of their treatment) was 
reported by 10 high MDR-TB countries, including two of the 
top three MDR-TB burden countries: China and the Russian 
Federation. In a further six high MDR-TB burden countries, 
at least 90% of MDR-TB patients were hospitalized. When 
MDR-TB patients are hospitalized the duration of stay was 
relatively short in Indonesia, at five days, and ranged from 
30–60 days in five other countries (Bangladesh, China, 
Estonia, Ethiopia, Myanmar). In the other 15 countries that 
reported data, the average length of stay was 160 days.
The number of visits to a health facility after diagnosis of 
MDR-TB also varied markedly, from less than 30 (Bangladesh, 
Estonia, Myanmar, and South Africa) to over 700 (Armenia, 
Georgia, Indonesia, Russian Federation and Ukraine). The 
involvement of all relevant non-NTP health care providers is 
important to scale up PMDT and improve access to services. 
Unfortunately, reliable data on these activities are often not 
collected by NTPs. In 2014, only nine high MDR-TB burden 
countries provided information on the numbers of patients 
started on MDR-TB treatment by non-NTP health care pro-
viders. The Philippines, Latvia and Kyrgyzstan reported that 
22%, 14% and 11% respectively of MDR-TB cases were treated 
by non-NTP providers, while figures of 1−5% were reported 
to be treated in the private sector in Myanmar, Viet Nam and 
four Eastern European countries: Armenia, Republic of Mol-
dova, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.
n FIGURE 4.8 
Number of patients with laboratory−confirmed XDR−TB started on treatment in 2014
Number of patients
0
1–9
10–99
100–499
≥500
No data
Not applicable
In 2014, only 39 countries (including 13 of the 27 high 
 
MDR-TB burden countries) reported that palliative and end-
of-life care were provided within the scope of their NTPs. This 
finding attests to the huge unmet need for such services, 
which should be delivered alongside proper infection control 
measures (since most of these patients remain a source of 
infection).
4.2.5  Treatment outcomes for patients with 
MDR-TB and XDR-TB
The Global Plan included a target that all countries should 
report outcomes for all notified MDR-TB cases by 2015. A total 
of 127 countries and territories reported treatment outcomes 
for cases started on MDR-TB treatment in 2012. The country 
cohort size ranged from 1 to 16 000 cases. The number of 
cases reported in annual cohorts has steadily increased in 
all six WHO regions over time (with the exception of a small 
decrease in the Region of the Americas between the 2011 and 
the 2012 cohorts). The total reached 70 000 cases globally in 
2012, 33% more than in 2011 (Table 4.3 and Figure 4.9). 
The use of electronic systems to manage MDR-TB patient 
data could help to improve the completeness of reporting on 
treatment outcomes. One of the Global Plan targets is for all 
27 high MDR-TB countries to manage their data on treatment 
of MDR-TB patients electronically by 2015. By 2014, 15 of these 
countries reported that national electronic databases were 
in place for TB patients and another six had systems for MDR-
TB patients only. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  67
n FIGURE 4.9 
Treatment outcomes for patients diagnosed with MDR−TB by WHO Region, 2007–2012 cohorts. The total number of cases 
with outcome data is shown beside each bar
Treatment success
Failure
Died
Lost to follow-up
Not evaluated
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
0
20
40
60
80
100
10 246
8 260
6 176
6 143
5 496
4 570
1 271
874
676
511
262
128
11 566
4 305
3 113
1 597
483
315
2 866
2 916
2 413
2 298
1 732
1 464
37 638
31 889
20 598
12 133
7 181
4 214
6 176
4 238
2 455
1 027
758
453
Percentage of cohort 
Africa
The Americas
Eastern Mediterranean
Europe
South-East Asia
Western Pacific
Global
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of cohort 
69 763
52 482
35 431
23 709
15 912
11 144
Overall, the proportion of MDR-TB patients in the 2012 
cohort who successfully completed treatment (i.e. cured or 
treatment completed) was 50%; 16% died, 16% were lost to 
follow-up, treatment failed for 10% and 8% had no outcome 
information (Figure 4.9). The treatment success rate was 
highest in the Eastern Mediterranean Region (65%), and low-
est in the European and South-East Asia regions (49%). In the 
2012 cohort, treatment failure was highest in the European 
Region (13%), and the death rate was highest in the South-
East Asia Region (21%). 
The Global Plan target of achieving a treatment suc-
cess rate of ≥75% by 2015 had already been reached in 40 of 
the 122 countries that reported outcome data for the 2012 
cohort, including three of the 27 high MDR-TB burden coun-
tries (Estonia, Ethiopia, and Myanmar). Between 2007 and 
2012, more than 100 000 people who started MDR-TB treat-
 68  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
ment were reported to have had a successful outcome and 
numbers have increased over time (data not shown).
Among 2 685 XDR-TB patients in the 2012 cohorts of 41 
countries for whom outcomes were reported, 682 (26%) com-
pleted treatment successfully; 809 (30%) died; treatment 
failed for 510 (19%); and 684 (25%) were lost to follow-up or 
their treatment outcome was not evaluated. The Russian 
Federation accounted for 51% of the XDR-TB patients for 
whom outcomes were reported in 2012. The high mortality 
of XDR-TB patients in South Africa (47%) is likely to be associ-
ated with a high level of HIV co-infection in TB patients (see 
Chapter 6). 
The introduction of new drugs and novel regimens could 
potentially improve the treatment outcomes of patients with 
MDR- and XDR-TB. By the end of 2014, at least 43 countries 
reported having used bedaquiline to treat patients as part 
of efforts to expand access to treatment for MDR-TB, either 
for compassionate use or under normal programmatic con-
n FIGURE 4.10 
Countries that had used bedaquiline for the treatment of M/XDR-TB as part of expanded access, compassionate use or 
under normal programmatic conditions by the end of 2014
Yes
No
No data
Not applicable
ditions in the public or private sectors (Figure 4.10). Most 
(75%) of these patients were from two countries: the Russian 
Federation and South Africa. In addition, at least 16 countries 
in Africa and Asia have introduced shorter regimens as part 
of trials or observational studies under operational research 
conditions, and several have started to include repurposed 
drugs in treatment regimens, to try to improve the treatment 
outcomes of MDR-TB and XDR-TB patients.
Since the start of global monitoring, treatment suc-
cess rates among patients with MDR-TB and XDR-TB have 
remained consistently and unacceptably low. Major efforts 
are required to address this situation, using measures that 
are part of the End TB Strategy. These include adequate 
resources for detection and treatment and building capac-
ity among health care workers to provide high quality care. 
Research and development is also crucial. Without new TB 
drugs and regimens, it will be very difficult to improve treat-
ment outcomes in the near future. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  69
Key facts and messages
December 2010. By the end of 2014, 69% of countries reported 
that national policy by the end of 2014 indicated the use of 
Xpert MTB/RIF as the initial diagnostic test for people at risk 
of drug-resistant TB, and 60% reported that national policy 
indicated its use as the initial diagnostic test for people living 
with HIV. In 116 of the 145 countries eligible for concessional 
pricing that have purchased the technology, a total of 3 763 
GeneXpert machines had been procured for use in the public 
sector by the end of 2014. In 2014 alone, 4.8 million Xpert MTB/
RIF test cartridges were procured, up from 550 000 in 2011. 
Ensuring the quality of microscopy networks is critical, given 
that smear microscopy remains the most widely used tool for 
TB diagnosis in low- and middle-income countries. Among the 
22 HBCs, only four reported an external quality assessment 
scheme that encompassed all microscopy centres in 2014, and 
five more reported a programme that included at least 90% of 
centres.
Several sources of guidance and training platforms have been 
developed to assist TB reference laboratories to implement 
a quality management system that meets international 
accreditation standards. In 2014, 123 of 173 responding 
countries and territories (71%) indicated that a formal 
quality management system towards achieving laboratory 
accreditation had at least been started at the national reference 
laboratory (NRL).
In 2015, the WHO TB Supranational Reference Laboratory 
Network expanded to include three newly designated 
National Centres of Excellence in the Russian Federation. 
The three laboratories are of particular value for establishing 
and maintaining high-quality laboratory services within the 
country for the programmatic management of drug-resistant 
TB, including through the coordination of technical assistance, 
provision of monitoring and supervision, and organization of 
training for laboratory staff involved in diagnostic testing for 
drug resistance and monitoring of treatment for patients with 
drug-resistant TB.
Diagnostics and laboratory 
strengthening 
CHAP TER
5
The End TB Strategy calls for the early diagnosis of TB and 
universal drug susceptibility testing (DST), highlighting the 
critical role of laboratories in the post-2015 era for rapidly and 
accurately detecting TB and drug resistance.
Laboratory confirmation of TB and drug resistance is essential 
to ensure that individuals with TB are correctly diagnosed and 
have access to the appropriate treat 
ment as soon as possible. 
Of the 5.2 million incident (new and relapse) pulmonary TB 
patients notified globally in 2014, 3.0 million (58%) were 
bacteriologically confirmed, i.e., were smear- or culture-
positive or positive according to a WHO-recommended rapid 
diagnostic such as Xpert® MTB/RIF. Among new (previously 
untreated) cases of bacteriologically confirmed TB, 12% had 
access to DST; among previously treated cases, 58% had access 
to DST.
A new WHO Policy framework for implementing tuberculosis 
diagnostics was published in April 2015. This provides an 
overview of all current WHO policy recommendations on TB 
diagnostics and the role of each test within effective diagnostic 
algorithms across a laboratory network. The document also 
describes the managerial, technical and operational processes 
required for developing and implementing a comprehensive 
national strategy for TB laboratories.
WHO has recently issued policy recommendations on the use of 
the urine lateral flow lipoarabinomannan (LF-LAM) assay (Alere 
DetermineTM TB LAM Ag test). The test is not recommended 
for TB screening or diagnosis of TB in most population groups. 
However, it is recommended to help with the diagnosis of TB in 
two population groups: HIV-positive people who are inpatients 
with signs or symptoms of TB and who have a CD4 cell count 
less than or equal to 100 cells/µL, and HIV-positive people who 
are “seriously ill” (both inpatients and outpatients) with danger 
signs, regardless of CD4 count or if the CD4 count is unknown. 
The use of the rapid molecular test Xpert MTB/RIF continues 
to expand in line with WHO recommendations for its use since 
The microbiological detection of TB and drug susceptibility 
using rapid WHO-recommended diagnostics, together with 
an efficient system for transfer of specimens and results, 
allows patients to be correctly diagnosed and started on the 
most effective treatment regimen as early as possible. One 
of the core components of the first pillar of the post-2015 End 
TB Strategy (Chapter 1) is the early diagnosis of TB, includ-
ing universal drug susceptibility testing (DST). Operational 
guidance on the implementation of the strategy calls for all 
patients to receive DST at least for rifampicin, with further 
tests for drug susceptibility to first and second-line drugs for 
any TB patients found to have rifampicin resistance. A well-
equipped and staffed, quality-assured laboratory network 
with an efficient referral system is therefore an essential 
requirement for any national TB programme (NTP) in the 
post-2015 era.
For decades, resource-constrained countries have relied on 
sputum smear microscopy as the primary method for detect-
 70  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
ing TB. While inexpensive and requiring minimal biosafety 
standards, microscopy is not a sensitive test (particularly for 
people living with HIV and children) and it provides no infor-
mation on the resistance profile of the bacilli. Furthermore, 
microscopy is not able to distinguish between Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis complex and non-tuberculosis mycobacteria. 
Bacteriological culture is considered the reference stand-
ard for detecting TB, but suffers from the disadvantages 
that results take weeks to obtain and that testing requires a 
well-equipped laboratory, highly trained staff, and an effi-
cient transport system to ensure the viability of specimens. 
Phenotypic DST on cultured specimens is the conventional 
method used to detect resistance to first- and second-line TB 
drugs, and faster commercial liquid culture systems are now 
available. Building adequate culture capacity in many coun-
tries with a high burden of TB has been slow, given the cost 
and infrastructure requirements. 
In recent years, a limited but growing number of rapid 
and more sensitive tests for TB and drug-resistant TB based 
on molecular methods, including Xpert® MTB/RIF (Cepheid, 
USA) and line probe assays (LPAs), have become available to 
replace or complement existing conventional tests. Despite 
the advantages of molecular tests, conventional micros-
copy and culture remain necessary for monitoring patients’ 
response to treatment. Furthermore culture-based DST 
methods are currently the only methods available for accu-
rate testing of susceptibility to second-line drugs.
Of the 5.2 million incident pulmonary TB patients notified 
globally in 2014, only 3.0 million (58%) were bacteriologically 
confirmed, i.e., were smear- or culture-positive or positive 
according to a WHO-recommended rapid diagnostic such 
as Xpert MTB/RIF (Chapter 3). The remaining 42% of patients 
who were not bacteriologically confirmed were diagnosed 
clinically, i.e. based on symptoms, chest X-ray abnormalities 
or suggestive histology. The common symptoms of TB com-
bined with the poor specificity of X-ray screening may result 
in false diagnoses and people without TB being enrolled on 
TB treatment when it is not needed. Furthermore, a low rate 
of laboratory confirmation reflects under-diagnosis of true 
TB cases and contributes in part to the continuing global gap 
between notified and estimated incident TB cases: 6 million 
and 9.6 million in 2014, respectively (Chapter 3). The propor-
tion of new and previously treated cases receiving DST has 
steadily increased but much remains to be done. Globally, 
12% of new bacteriologically-confirmed TB cases and 58% of 
those previously treated for TB were tested for drug resist-
ance in 2014 (Chapter 4).
Laboratory strengthening and new diagnostics are crucial 
to improve the proportion of notified TB cases with a defini-
tive (bacteriologically confirmed) diagnosis of TB, and to 
close detection and treatment gaps for TB and drug-resistant 
TB. This chapter summarizes the status of progress in 2014. 
Section 5.1 highlights key developments in WHO guidance 
on TB diagnostics and laboratory strengthening during 
2014–2015. Section 5.2 presents the status of laboratory 
capacity globally, regionally and nationally in 2014, based on 
data reported to WHO by countries in 2015. Here, the focus 
is on the 36 countries in the combined list of 22 high burden 
countries (HBCs) and 27 high MDR-TB burden countries. 
Section 5.3 describes recent activities to strengthen TB labo-
ratories, including quality management systems, external 
quality assessment and the WHO TB Supranational Refer-
ence Laboratory (SRL) Network.
5.1  
Developments in WHO policy guidance 
on TB diagnostics and laboratory 
strengthening, 2014–2015
The WHO Global TB Programme follows a systematic pro-
cess for development of policy recommendations on TB 
diagnostics, involving synthesis of the available evidence 
on performance and cost effectiveness through systematic 
reviews, meta-analyses and modelling as appropriate, assess-
ment of the evidence by an external Guideline Development 
Group using the GRADE approach,1 and development of 
policy guidance2 for dissemination to Member States and 
other stakeholders. Policy documents are reviewed periodi-
cally, and revised as necessary when new evidence becomes 
available. 
In June 2015, WHO convened a Guideline Development 
Group to review the evidence on the use of the urine lateral 
flow lipoarabinomannan (LF-LAM) assay (Alere DetermineTM 
TB LAM Ag test, Alere Inc, USA) for detection of TB in people 
living with HIV. A lipoarabinomannan (LAM) antigen is a 
lipopolysaccharide present in mycobacterial cell walls, which 
is released from metabolically active or degenerating bacte-
rial cells and appears to be present only in people with active 
TB disease. Tests based on the detection of LAM in urine have 
the potential to be point-of-care tests for TB. Further advan-
tages over sputum-based testing are that urine is easy to 
collect and store, and lacks the infection control risks associ-
ated with sputum collection.
The urinary LAM assays currently available are unsuit-
able as general diagnostic or screening tests for TB, due to 
suboptimal sensitivity. However, unlike traditional diagnos-
tic methods for TB, they demonstrate improved sensitivity 
among people living with HIV, which further increases as CD4 
counts fall. Following the Guideline Development Group’s 
evaluation of the LF-LAM assay, the resulting 2015 WHO pol-
icy recommendations on its use are summarized in Box 5.1.
In the coming year, evaluations and updated reviews are 
planned for several other technologies. These include LPAs 
for detection of resistance to first- and second-line drugs 
(Hain LifeScience, Germany; and Nipro Corp., Japan); the use 
of sequencing for detection of resistance-conferring muta-
tions; and the Xpert® Ultra assay and GeneXpert® Omni 
(Cepheid, USA). Further potential technologies on the evalu-
1 www.gradeworkinggroup.org
2 WHO handbook for guideline development, 2nd ed. Geneva, World Health 
Organization; 2014. Available at: http://www.who.int/kms/
handbook_2nd_ed.pdf.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  71
ation horizon include several rapid and sensitive diagnostic 
tests that are expected to be available for use at reference 
laboratory level as well as closer to – or at – the point of 
patient care (Chapter 8).
In April 2015, a new WHO Policy framework for implement-
ing tuberculosis diagnostics was published.1 This document 
provides comprehensive guidance on the managerial, tech-
nical and operational processes required for developing 
and implementing a comprehensive national strategy for 
TB laboratories, which encompass early diagnosis of TB and 
universal access to DST as well as systematic screening of con-
tacts of people with TB and high-risk groups. The positioning 
of WHO-recommended diagnostics at different levels of a 
laboratory network is described, and templates of diagnos-
tic algorithms are presented. This generic policy framework 
1 WHO Policy framework for implementing tuberculosis diagnostics. 
Geneva, World Health Organization; 2015. Available at: http://www.
who.int/tb/publications/implementing_TB_diagnostics/en/
can be adapted and customized at 
country level to account for the wide 
variation in country resources and 
needs, as well as differences in the 
epidemiology of TB, HIV-associated 
TB and drug-resistant TB.
A comprehensive list of existing 
WHO policy documents, including on 
the use of microscopy, culture, DST 
and non-commercial and molecular 
diagnostic methods, is available at: www.who.int/tb/labora-
tory/policy_statements.
5.2 
Status of laboratory capacity globally, 
regionally and nationally 
Smear microscopy continues to be the most widely used 
tool for TB diagnosis in low- and middle-income countries, 
despite its shortcomings. A microscopy network with ade-
quate population coverage and high quality performance 
(see Section 5.3) is therefore critical. The Global Plan to Stop 
TB 2011–2015 includes the target that countries maintain at 
least one smear microscopy centre per 100 000 population.2 
Globally, the target has been met (1.1 centres per 100 000 
population in 2014), but significant disparities remain at 
regional and country levels (Table 5.1). For example, the 
Western Pacific and Eastern Mediterranean regions had 
less than one centre per 100 000 population in 2014. The 
target now requires country-specific adaptation given the 
increased use of Xpert MTB/RIF as an initial diagnostic test, 
especially in settings with high burdens of HIV and MDR-TB. 
In addition, it is important to emphasize that geographic 
variations in the TB epidemic within a country as well as dif-
ferences in access between urban and rural settings require 
that the number and placement of microscopy centres are 
strategically considered within countries.
Fluorescent light-emitting diode (LED) microscopy is 
more sensitive than conventional Ziehl–Neelsen (ZN) light 
microscopy and has further qualitative, operational and 
cost advantages. In 2009, WHO recommended that LED 
microscopy be phased in as an alternative for ZN microscopy. 
Globally, the switch to LED microscopes has been gradual: 
the technology was reported to have been present in only 7% 
of microscopy centres in 2014, up from 2% in 2012. Nonethe-
less, major progress is evident in certain countries. Among 
HBCs, major adopters of LED microscopy include South 
Africa (100% of microscopy sites in 2014), China (38%), Myan-
mar (31%), Bangladesh (22%), Kenya (21%) and Mozambique 
(21%). Adoption of LED microscopy remains particularly low 
in Indonesia (0%), Afghanistan (<1%), Brazil (<1%), Philip-
pines (<1%), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1%), India 
(2%), and Viet Nam (2%). 
The current target in the Global Plan to Stop TB 2011–2015 
for both culture and DST (to at least rifampicin and isoniazid) 
2 The Global Plan to Stop TB, 2011–2015. Geneva, World Health 
Organization; 2010 (WHO/HTM/STB/2010.2). 
Box 5.1 WHO recommendations on urine  
 
lateral flow lipoarabinomannan  
 
(LF-LAM) assay (Alere DetermineTM  
 
TB LAM Ag test, Alere Inc, USA)
The 2015 WHO recommendations on LF-LAM assay are:
1. LF-LAM should not be used for the diagnosis of TB, except 
as specifically described below for persons with HIV with low CD4 
counts or who are seriously illa (strong recommendation; low 
quality of evidence).
2. LF-LAM may be used to assist in the diagnosis of TB in 
HIV-positive adult inpatients with signs or symptoms of 
TB (pulmonary and/or extrapulmonary) who have a CD4 
cell count less than or equal to 100 cells/µL, or HIV-positive 
patients who are seriously illa regardless of CD4 count or 
with unknown CD4 count (conditional recommendation; 
low quality of evidence).
Remarks
"
 This recommendation also applies to HIV-positive adult 
outpatients with signs and symptoms of TB (pulmonary 
and/or extrapulmonary) who have a CD4 cell count less 
than or equal to 100 cells/µL, or HIV-positive patients 
who are seriously illa regardless of CD4 count or with 
unknown CD4 count, based on the generalisation of data 
from inpatients.
"
 This recommendation also applies to children, based 
on the generalisation of data from adults while 
acknowledging very limited data and concern regarding 
the low specificity of the LF-LAM assay in children.
3. LF-LAM should not be used as a screening test for TB (strong 
recommendation; low quality of evidence).
a “seriously ill” is defined based on four danger signs: respiratory 
rate > 30/min, temperature >39 °C, heart rate >120/min and 
unable to walk unaided.
 72  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n TABLE 5.1 
Laboratory capacity, 2014a
HIGH TB 
BURDEN
HIGH 
MDR-TB 
BURDEN
SMEAR MICROSCOPY
CULTURE
DRUG SUSCEPTIBILITY 
TESTING
LINE PROBE ASSAY
XPERT 
MTB/RIF
NUMBER OF 
LABORATORIES
LABORATORIES 
PER 100 000 
POPULATION
PERCENTAGE OF 
LABORATORIES 
USING LED 
MICROSCOPES
NUMBER OF 
LABORATORIES
LABORATORIES 
PER 5 MILLION 
POPULATION
NUMBER OF 
LABORATORIES
LABORATORIES 
PER 5 MILLION 
POPULATION
NUMBER OF 
LABORATORIES
LABORATORIES 
PER 5 MILLION 
POPULATION
NUMBER OF 
SITES
Afghanistan


720
2.3
< 1
3
0.5
0
0
0
0
1
Armenia


26
0.9
4
1
1.7
1
1.7
1
1.7
2
Azerbaijan


72
0.7
4
7
3.6
3
1.6
2
1
7
Bangladesh


1 104
0.7
22
3
<0.1
3
<0.1
1
<0.1
38
Belarus


154
1.6
2
29
15
8
4.2
8
4.2
15
Brazil


3 382
1.6
< 1
324
7.9
26
0.6
1
<0.1
48
Bulgaria


34
0.5
38
30
21
9
6.2
4
2.8
0
Cambodia


215
1.4
13
4
1.3
3
1
0
0
17
China


2 952
0.2
38
1 825
6.7
399
1.5
157
0.6
654
DR Congo


1 604
2.1
1
4
0.3
3
0.2
1
<0.1
39
Estonia


6
0.5
33
2
7.6
2
7.6
2
7.6
4
Ethiopia


2 972
3.1
9
8
0.4
8
0.4
8
0.4
28
Georgia


11
0.3
9
2
2.5
1
1.2
2
2.5
11
India


13 583
1
2
67
0.3
62
0.2
50
0.2
121
Indonesia


5 689
2.2
0
20
0.4
15
0.3
2
<0.1
41
Kazakhstan


466
2.7
0
85
24
22
6.3
12
3.5
23
Kenya


1 920
4.3
21
3
0.3
3
0.3
5
0.6
70
Kyrgyzstan


131
2.2
8
7
6
2
1.7
2
1.7
8
Latvia


12
0.6
0
5
13
1
2.5
1
2.5
2
Lithuania


13
0.4
15
6
10
6
10
2
3.4
4
Mozambique


336
1.2
21
3
0.6
2
0.4
1
0.2
24
Myanmar


492
0.9
31
3
0.3
2
0.2
2
0.2
38
Nigeria


1 765
1
15
8
0.2
8
0.2
6
0.2
96
Pakistan


1 483
0.8
3
12
0.3
5
0.1
4
0.1
42
Philippines


2 561
2.6
< 1
22
1.1
4
0.2
1
<0.1
84
Republic of Moldova


59
1.4
0
4
4.9
4
4.9
4
4.9
28
Russian Federation


5 347
3.7
6
405
14
299
10
6
0.2
96
South Africa


207
0.4
100
12
1.1
12
1.1
12
1.1
207
Tajikistan


84
1
6
5
3
1
0.6
3
1.8
14
Thailand


908
1.3
3
53
3.9
20
1.5
12
0.9
14
Uganda


1 365
3.6
18
5
0.7
5
0.7
3
0.4
74
Ukraine


676
1.5
0
65
7.2
24
2.7
3
0.3
25
UR Tanzania


945
1.8
14
4
0.4
1
<0.1
3
0.3
59
Uzbekistan


325
1.1
< 1
7
1.2
2
0.3
3
0.5
24
Viet Nam


989
1.1
2
23
1.2
2
0.1
2
0.1
30
Zimbabwe


220
1.4
10
2
0.7
2
0.7
1
0.3
62
High-burden countries
–
1.1
8
–
3.1
–
1
–
0.3
–
High MDR-TB burden countries
–
1
7
–
3.2
–
1.1
–
0.4
–
AFR
–
1.6
14
–
1
–
1.2
–
0.3
–
AMR
–
2
2
–
15
–
0.7
–
0.3
–
EMR
–
0.7
5
–
2.2
–
0.3
–
0.2
–
EUR
–
1.2
5
–
11
–
5.5
–
1.6
–
SEAR
–
1.2
3
–
0.4
–
0.3
–
0.2
–
WPR
–
0.5
16
–
6
–
1.3
–
0.5
–
Global
–
1.1
7
–
4.7
–
1.3
–
0.5
–
–  indicates values that cannot be calculated.
a  The regional and global figures are aggregates of data reported by low- and middle-income countries and territories. Data for the variables shown in 
the table are not requested from high-income countries in the WHO data collection form.
YES     NO 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  73
n FIGURE 5.1
Global capacity for drug-susceptibility testing (DST), 2014a
1st- and 2nd-line DST
1st-line DST only
Xpert MTB/RIF only
No capacity
No data
Not applicable
a Data for 2013 were used if data for 2014 were not reported (n=6).
capacity is one laboratory per 5 million population. In 2014, 
12 of the 27 high MDR-TB burden countries did not reach 
the target (Table 5.1), and several countries with large TB 
caseloads continue to completely lack in-country capacity 
for phenotypic DST (Figure 5.1). In 2014, 12 countries reported 
more than 1000 notified TB cases but no capacity to perform 
phenotypic DST: Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, Chad, Congo, 
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, Papua New 
Guinea, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan and Timor Leste. 
Among these, Equatorial Guinea and Sierra Leone also report-
ed lacking any capacity for Xpert MTB/RIF testing, which 
would at least allow for detection of rifampicin resistance. 
Patients with MDR-TB require DST for second-line drugs 
to refine and optimize their treatment regimen. Some 
countries with small caseloads of MDR-TB patients have 
reasonably opted to rely on partner laboratories (includ-
ing WHO Supranational Reference Laboratories) for such 
testing, instead of building in-country capacity. However, 
28 countries with reported RR/MDR-TB cases indicated that 
they had neither in-country capacity nor a linkage with a 
partner laboratory for second-line DST: Albania, Cambodia, 
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, 
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jordan, Ken-
ya, Kuwait, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, 
Panama, Paraguay, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, 
Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Turkmenistan and Yemen. Coun-
tries with sizeable TB and MDR-TB caseloads should aim as 
a priority to build sustainable in-country capacity to under-
take DST to at least rifampicin, to allow the timely diagnosis 
of drug-resistant strains.
As a high-throughput molecular tool for use at central 
and regional levels, LPAs have been adopted by many coun-
tries for rapid first-line DST (to rifampicin and isoniazid) on 
smear-positive specimens or cultures. In 2014, 92 countries 
and territories reported at least one facility with capacity to 
perform LPA tests. Of the 27 high MDR-TB burden countries, 
13 reported LPA capacity in more than one laboratory per 
5  million population.
Following initial WHO recommendations issued in 
December 2010, Xpert MTB/RIF has been quickly adopted 
by countries as an effective tool for the rapid detection of 
TB and rifampicin resistance at lower levels of the health sys-
tem. By the end of December 2014, a total of 3 763 GeneXpert 
instruments comprising 17 883 modules had been procured 
in the public sector in 116 of the 145 countries eligible for con-
cessional pricing. In 2014, 4.8 million test cartridges were 
procured by eligible countries (Figure 5.2), up from 550 000 
in 2011. Of these, 51% (2.4 million) went to South Africa.
The original WHO policy guidance on Xpert MTB/RIF 
issued in 2010 recommends its use as the initial diagnostic 
test in individuals suspected of having MDR-TB or HIV-asso-
ciated TB (strong recommendations). A policy update in 2013 
expanded its recommended uses, including for the diagno-
sis of TB in children, on selected specimens for the diagnosis 
 74  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 5.2
Xpert MTB/RIF cartridge procurements in 2014 at concessional prices
Xpert MTB/RIF
cartridges procured
in 2014 (thousands)
0–4
5–49
50–99
100–299
≥300
Not eligible for preferential pricing
Not applicable
of extrapulmonary TB, and for all individuals suspected of 
having pulmonary TB (conditional recommendations). 
High-burden countries have largely adopted the strong rec-
ommendations on its use as the initial diagnostic test for 
individuals suspected of having MDR-TB or HIV-associated 
TB (Table 5.2). While 19 of the 22 high TB burden countries 
have indicated policies on the use of Xpert MTB/RIF for indi-
viduals suspected of having HIV-associated TB, not all of the 
41 TB/HIV priority countries reported having such a policy: by 
the end of 2014, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Cote 
d’Ivoire, Malawi, Myanmar, Namibia, Sierra Leone and Sudan 
indicated that Xpert MTB/RIF was not yet the initial diagnos-
tic test for people suspected of having HIV-associated TB (see 
also Box 6.2 in Chapter 6).
Increasingly, countries are also updating their policies to 
include the use of Xpert MTB/RIF for children and for detec-
tion of extrapulmonary TB (50% and 41% of all reporting 
countries, respectively). A small number of countries with 
sufficient resources, including South Africa, Swaziland 
and Moldova, are also placing Xpert MTB/RIF as the initial 
diagnostic test for all people suspected of having TB. Some 
countries that cannot afford the use of Xpert MTB/RIF as 
the initial diagnostic test for all people with suspected TB 
have introduced diagnostic algorithms in which chest X-ray 
is used as an initial screening tool, with those with X-ray 
abnormalities then eligible for testing using Xpert MTB/
RIF. As countries continue to scale-up coverage of Xpert 
MTB/RIF testing, algorithms should be widened to increase 
patient access to the test as a sensitive and rapid tool both for 
detection of rifampicin resistance and for TB case-finding.
The growing number of drug-resistant cases being 
detected by Xpert MTB/RIF and LPAs requires adjustment 
of country culture and phenotypic DST capacities. The intro-
duction of Xpert MTB/RIF and LPAs reduces the need for 
culture as the initial diagnostic test, but at the same time 
the growing detection of drug-resistant TB cases requires 
culture capacity for monitoring of treatment and DST of 
other anti-TB drugs to guide treatment adjustments. It is 
also imperative that the increasing capacity of countries to 
diagnose drug-resistant TB is matched by increased capacity 
to provide appropriate treatment to all diagnosed cases (see 
also Chapter 4).
One of the main reasons for low TB and drug-resistant TB 
case detection rates in many parts of the world (Chapter 3) is 
the existence of a significant private sector, in which care pro-
viders frequently diagnose people with TB and drug-resistant 
TB but fail to notify these to national authorities. The quality 
of diagnostic services in the private sector is highly variable 
or unknown. Furthermore, in some settings, laboratories in 
the public sector that are not under the auspices of the NTP 
also diagnose TB and drug-resistant TB without necessarily 
following recommended guidelines and quality assurance 
procedures. Collaboration between NTPs and all laborato-
ries offering TB and drug-resistant TB diagnosis is critical to 
ensure that national guidelines are followed, that appropri-
ate diagnostic tests are used, and that patients diagnosed 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  75
n TABLE 5.2 
Incorporation of WHO policy guidance on Xpert MTB/RIF, 2014a  
 
 
 
HIGH TB 
BURDEN
HIGH 
MDR-TB 
BURDEN
XPERT MTB/RIF AS THE INITIAL DIAGNOSTIC TEST
PEOPLE LIVING  
WITH HIV
PEOPLE AT RISK OF 
DRUG-RESISTANT TB
CHILDREN SUSPECTED 
OF HAVING TB
EXTRAPULMONARY TB USING 
SELECTED SPECIMENS
Afghanistan






Armenia






Azerbaijan






Bangladesh






Belarus






Brazil






Bulgaria






Cambodia






China






DR Congo






Estonia






Ethiopia






Georgia






India






Indonesia






Kazakhstan






Kenya






Kyrgyzstan






Latvia






Lithuania






Mozambique






Myanmar






Nigeria






Pakistan






Philippines






Republic of Moldova






Russian Federation






South Africa






Tajikistan






Thailand






Uganda






Ukraine






UR Tanzania






Uzbekistan






Viet Nam






Zimbabwe






High-burden countries
86%
100%
77%
64%
High MDR-TB burden countries
85%
93%
81%
70%
AFR
72%
84%
67%
40%
AMR
52%
48%
35%
30%
EMR
56%
62%
38%
44%
EUR
50%
57%
45%
44%
SEAR
55%
82%
36%
45%
WPR
72%
83%
56%
50%
Global
60%
69%
50%
41%
a  The regional and global figures are aggregates of data reported by low- and middle-income countries and territories. Data for the variables shown in 
the table are not requested from high-income countries in the WHO data collection form. 
YES     NO 
 76  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
with TB and drug-resistant TB are notified to the NTP and 
receive proper care. In 2014, 17 of 36 high TB and MDR-TB 
burden countries reported some level of collaboration with 
laboratories in the private sector, and 23 reported collabora-
tion with non-NTP laboratories in the public  sector.
5.3 
Strengthening TB laboratories globally, 
regionally and nationally
Strengthening TB laboratories involves not only equipping 
them with modern diagnostics suitable to the various levels 
of the network (Section 5.2), but also ensuring the quality of 
every step in the diagnostic process, from the collection and 
testing of samples, to the recording and reporting of results. 
Implementing a system of quality management should be a 
priority across all TB laboratories in a network. A comprehen-
sive quality management system allows for the necessary 
activities to be carried out at the right time and by the appro-
priately trained people, for the necessary equipment and 
consumables to be in stock, and for all manuals, guidelines, 
forms and standard operating procedures to be in place so 
that processes are carried out correctly. 
Several sources of guidance and training platforms have 
been developed to assist TB reference laboratories to imple-
ment a quality management system that meets international 
accreditation standards. The GLI stepwise process towards TB 
laboratory accreditation is an online interactive guide1 divided 
into four phases, developed by the Royal Tropical Institute 
(KIT), the Union, the United States Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, the United States Agency for Inter-
national Development (USAID) and WHO. The framework 
known as the WHO guide for the stepwise laboratory improve-
ment process toward accreditation in the African Region (SLIPTA) 
is based on 12 quality-system essentials, and it is applicable 
to all laboratory settings and disciplines. The United States 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has developed 
a task-based mentoring programme known as Strengthen-
ing laboratory management towards accreditation (SLMTA). 
The Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND) has 
modified both the SLMTA programme and the SLIPTA frame-
work to include TB-specific guidance, to form TB-SLMTA and 
TB-SLIPTA. In 2014, 123 of 173 responding countries and ter-
ritories (71%) indicated that a formal quality management 
system towards achieving laboratory accreditation had at 
least been started at the national reference laboratory (NRL).
Quality assurance of microscopy remains a critical 
activity of all laboratory networks, and a comprehensive 
external quality assessment (EQA) programme should be 
implemented that includes on-site evaluation, random 
blinded rechecking, and panel testing. Of the 140 countries 
and territories that reported data on the number of smear 
microscopy centres undergoing EQA in 2013, only 34% indi-
cated the existence of a scheme that covered all centres in 
the country, with a further 16% covering at least 90% of cen-
1 http://gliquality.org
tres. Among the 22 HBCs, only four reported a scheme that 
encompassed all centres in 2014 (Bangladesh, India, Uganda 
and Zimbabwe) and five more reported a programme that 
included at least 90% of centres (Cambodia, China, Pakistan, 
South Africa and Viet Nam).
Quality-assured DST is critical to ensure accurate detec-
tion of drug resistance to inform treatment decisions and to 
avoid false diagnoses. Of the high TB and MDR-TB burden 
countries that reported on EQA coverage of DST laboratories 
in 2014 (34 of 36), 24 (71%) reported having a scheme that 
encompassed all DST laboratories. Of the 116 reporting coun-
tries globally, 78 (67%) indicated a scheme that encompassed 
all laboratories. Ensuring quality needs to be a priority for all 
levels of a laboratory network.
As a key partner in strengthening the capacity and qual-
ity of TB laboratories globally, the WHO TB Supranational 
Reference Laboratory (SRL) Network comprises 36 laborato-
ries that provide long-term technical assistance to low- and 
middle-income countries under the framework of collabora-
tive agreements. The network was formed in 1994 to ensure 
the quality of drug resistance surveys, but today SRLs pro-
vide a wide range of technical assistance services, including 
training, on-site supervisory missions, guidance to the 
development of national laboratory strategic plans, and pro-
ficiency testing. 156 countries and territories reported having 
a formal link with a partner SRL in 2014.
The SRL Network also includes ‘National Centres of Excel-
lence’ (SRL-CEs), which are well-performing national and 
regional TB reference laboratories in large, middle-income 
countries. These SRL-CEs have similar terms of reference 
(and national status) to that of an SRL but with an in-country 
focus for its laboratory strengthening activities. To meet its 
objectives, a SRL-CE commits to provide minimum service 
requirements including establishing formal links with at 
least two intermediate level laboratories within the country 
and undertaking at least one annual technical assistance 
visit to each laboratory. A SRL-CE needs to be nominated by 
its NTP to the WHO country office, establish a collabora-
tive agreement with an existing SRL, undergo a laboratory 
assessment by WHO, and actively implement a quality man-
agement system towards accreditation.
In 2014, the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation 
nominated TB laboratories of three Federal Institutes to 
undergo evaluations to assess their suitability for designa-
tion as SRL-CEs: Central Tuberculosis Research Institute, 
Moscow; Novosibirsk Tuberculosis Research Institute, 
Novosibirsk; and Ural Research Institute for Phthisiopul-
monology, Yekaterinburg. Following assessment missions, 
all three of the laboratories were recognized as performing 
well, with high-quality infrastructure and a high calibre of 
suitably-qualified technical staff. They were all subsequently 
designated as SRL-CEs in April 2015. These laboratories 
have a particular value for establishing and maintaining 
high-quality laboratory services within the country for the 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  77
n FIGURE 5.3
The WHO TB Supranational Reference Laboratory Network
Mexico City, Mexico
Santiago, Chile
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Guadeloupe, France
Atlanta, USA
Boston, USA
Johannesburg, South Africa
Kampala, Uganda
Cotonou, Benin
Adelaide, Australia
Brisbane, Australia
Chennai, India
Bangkok, Thailand
Hong Kong, China SAR
Tokyo, Japan
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Karachi, Pakistan
Cairo, Egypt
Le Hamma, Algeria
Porto, Portugal
Barcelona, Spain
Rome, Italy
Milan, Italy
Zagreb, Croatia
Prague, Czech Republic
Gauting, Germany
Riga, Latvia
Stockholm, Sweden
Borstel, Germany
London, UK
Antwerp, Belgium
Copenhagen, Denmark
New Delhi, India
Moscow, Russia
Yekaterinburg, Russia
Novosibirsk, Russia
Supranational Reference Laboratory
Supranational Reference Laboratory – Coordinating Centre
Candidate Supranational Reference Laboratory
National Centre of Excellence
programmatic management of drug-resistant TB, including 
through the coordination of technical assistance, provision 
of monitoring and supervision, and organization of trainings 
to laboratory staff involved in diagnostic testing for drug 
resistance and monitoring of treatment for patients with 
drug-resistant TB. 
The SRL network as of July 2015 is shown in Figure 5.3.
 
 78  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Addressing the co-epidemics  
of TB and HIV 
CHAP TER
6
Key facts and messages
In 2014, coverage of antiretroviral therapy (ART) for notified TB 
patients who were known to be co-infected with HIV reached 
77% globally. Further efforts are needed to reach the target of 
100%. This is especially the case given that the number of HIV-
positive TB patients on ART in 2014 represented only 33% of the 
estimated number of people living with HIV who developed TB 
in 2014. 
Coverage of co-trimoxazole preventive therapy (CPT) among 
HIV-positive TB patients remains high, and increased slightly to 
87% globally and 89% in the African Region in 2014. 
The number of people living with HIV who were treated with 
isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) reached 933 000 in 2014, an 
increase of about 60% compared with 2013. However, provision 
of IPT was reported by just 23% of countries globally, including 
only 13 of the 41 high TB/HIV burden countries. As in previous 
years, a large proportion of the people living with HIV who were 
initiated on IPT were in South Africa (59%), although in most 
countries that reported data in 2013 and 2014, coverage levels 
grew. 
Preventing TB deaths among HIV-positive people requires 
intensified scale-up of TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment 
interventions, including earlier initiation of ART among people 
living with HIV and those with HIV-associated TB. Increased 
efforts in joint TB and HIV programming could facilitate further 
scale-up and consolidation of collaborative TB/HIV activities. 
In 2014, an estimated 1.2 million (12%) of the 9.6 million people 
who developed TB worldwide were HIV-positive. The African 
Region accounted for 74% of the estimated number of HIV-
positive incident TB cases. 
The number of people dying from HIV-associated TB peaked 
at 570 000 in 2004 and has since fallen to 390 000 in 2014 (a 
reduction of 32%). In 2014, HIV-associated TB deaths accounted 
for 25% of all TB deaths (among HIV-negative and HIV-positive 
people) and one third of the estimated 1.2 million deaths from 
HIV/AIDS. 
In 2004, WHO recommended the implementation of 12 
collaborative TB/HIV activities. Between 2005 and 2014, an 
estimated 5.8 million lives were saved by TB/HIV interventions.
Globally, 51% of notified TB patients had a documented HIV 
test result in 2014, a small increase from 49% in 2013. The figure 
was highest in the African Region, at 79%, and ≥90% in 18 of the 
41 high TB/HIV burden countries.
The prevalence of HIV co-infection among TB patients is 
highest in the African Region. Of the 1.1 million TB patients 
with known HIV status in 44 countries, 39% were HIV-positive 
in 2014, a slight decline compared with 41% in 2013. The 
proportion of TB patients who were known to be HIV-positive 
in the African Region ranged from 6% in Eritrea to 73% in 
Swaziland. 
Globally, people living with HIV are 26 times more likely to 
develop TB disease than those who are HIV-negative.1 Begin-
ning in the 1980s, the HIV epidemic led to a major upsurge 
in TB cases and TB mortality in many countries, especially in 
southern and eastern Africa (Chapter 2). 
In 2014, 1.2 million (12%) of the 9.6 million people who 
developed TB worldwide were HIV-positive (Chapter 2, Table 
2.1); 74% of these HIV-positive TB cases were in the African 
Region. The number of people dying from HIV-associated TB 
peaked at 570 000 in 2004 and has since fallen to 390 000 in 
1 The probability of developing TB among people living with HIV divided 
by the probability of developing TB among HIV-negative people is the 
incidence rate ratio (IRR). The mean estimated global IRR (all ages) in 
2014 was 26 (range 24–28). However, there is considerable variation 
among countries: in 2014, the median IRR was 23 (interquartile range 
14-36). Further details are provided in the online technical appendix.
2014 (a reduction of 32%).2 However, this still represents an 
enormous burden of preventable deaths and ill-health. In 
2014, TB deaths among HIV-positive people accounted for 
25% of all TB deaths (among HIV-negative and HIV-positive 
people) and one third of the estimated 1.2 million deaths 
from HIV/AIDS.3 Current trends indicate that the target set 
by WHO, UNAIDS and the Stop TB Partnership to halve the 
number of HIV-associated TB deaths by 2015 (compared with 
2004) will not be met globally (Chapter 2).4 
WHO recommendations on the interventions needed to
2 Estimates of the total burden of TB disease and of the number of TB 
cases and deaths among HIV-positive people are updated annually by 
WHO. For further details, see Chapter 2 and the online technical 
appendix (www.who.who.int/data).
3 http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/documents/2015/HIV_estimates_
with_uncertainty_bounds_1990-2014
4 Of the 41 countries with the highest burden of HIV associated TB, 17 are 
estimated to have met the target by the end of 2014.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  79
prevent TB in HIV-positive people and to reduce the impact 
of HIV among TB patients were first issued in 2004, and 
are collectively known as collaborative TB/HIV activities.1 
They include: establishing and strengthening coordination 
mechanisms for delivering integrated TB and HIV services; 
HIV testing for all TB patients as well as people with TB signs 
or symptoms; providing antiretroviral therapy (ART) and co-
trimoxazole preventive therapy (CPT) to all HIV-positive TB 
patients; providing HIV prevention services for TB patients; 
intensifying TB case-finding among people living with HIV; 
offering isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) to people liv-
ing with HIV who do not have active TB; and preventing the 
transmission of TB infection in health care and congregate 
settings. The latter three activities are referred to as the Three 
‘Is’ for HIV/TB and, together with earlier ART, are the principal 
interventions for preventing TB among people living with 
HIV. Between 2005 and 2014, TB/HIV interventions saved an 
estimated 5.8 million lives.2 
In addition, use of the rapid molecular test, Xpert MTB/RIF 
and early ART among HIV positive TB patients are increas-
ingly considered critical components of collaborative TB/
HIV activities. WHO recommends the use of Xpert MTB/RIF 
as the primary diagnostic test for TB among people living 
with HIV who have TB signs and symptoms, and ART for all 
HIV-positive TB patients within the first eight weeks of start-
ing TB treatment (irrespective of their CD4 cell count). Early 
initiation of ART (within two weeks of starting TB treatment) 
is also important, particularly for TB patients with profound 
immunosuppression (e.g. CD4 cell count less than 50) among 
whom it has been shown to significantly improve survival. 
WHO began monitoring the implementation of collabo-
rative TB/HIV activities in 2004. This chapter presents the 
latest status of progress, using data for each year from 2004 
through 2014. 
6.1 
HIV testing and documentation of HIV 
status among TB patients 
WHO recommends that routine HIV testing should be 
offered to all TB patients, to all those with TB signs and symp-
toms, and to partners of known HIV-positive TB patients.3 In 
the WHO online data collection system, data are reported 
for TB patients only. 
In 2014, 3.2 million notified TB patients had a documented 
HIV test result, equivalent to 51% of notified TB cases (Table 
6.1, Figure 6.1). This represented an increase from 3 million 
and 49% respectively in 2013, and more than 17 times the cov-
1 An update was issued in 2012. See WHO policy on collaborative TB/HIV 
activities: guidelines for national programmes and other stakeholders. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012 (WHO/ HTM/TB/2012.1). 
Available at http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2012/9789241503006_eng.pdf
2 Estimates of lives saved by TB and HIV interventions are covered in 
more detail in Chapter 2. 
3 WHO policy on collaborative TB/HIV activities: guidelines for national 
programmes and other stakeholders. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2012 (WHO/ HTM/TB/2012.1). Available at http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2012/9789241503006_eng.pdf
erage reported in 2004 (Figure 6.1). There were 89 countries 
in which ≥75% of TB patients had a documented HIV test 
result in 2014 (Figure 6.2); this was unchanged from 2013. 
Overall, among the 41 countries identified as priorities for 
the global TB/HIV response (listed in Table 6.1), 60% of noti-
fied TB patients had a documented HIV test result in 2014, up 
from 58% in 2013. There has been a steady increase in these 
41 countries since 2007. However, levels of coverage vary sig-
nificantly, ranging from 5% in Indonesia to 99% in Rwanda 
in 2014.4 Eighteen of the 41 countries reported that ≥90% 
of TB patients knew their HIV status in 2014, of which five 
(Botswana, Kenya, Mozambique, Rwanda and Swaziland) 
have managed to maintain this level since 2011. A further 14 
countries (Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, 
Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia, Nigeria, South Africa, Togo, Ugan-
da, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe) have reported that 
≥80% TB patients know their HIV status since 2011. In seven 
high TB/HIV burden countries, the percentage of TB patients 
who know their HIV status has remained persistently low, at 
under 50% since 2011: China, Congo, the Democratic Repub-
lic of the Congo, Indonesia, Mali, Myanmar and Sudan.5 
The percentage of TB patients with known HIV status 
remains highest in the African Region, where it continues 
to increase and reached 79% in 2014, up from 78% in 2013 
(Table 6.1, Figure 6.1). Of the 47 African countries, 30 countries 
reported ≥75% of TB patients had a documented HIV test 
result in 2014, and 23 achieved levels of ≥90% (Figure 6.2). 
4 In India, the national figure fell slightly between 2013 and 2014, from 
63% to 61%. This reflects a large increase in notifications (see Chapter 3, 
Box 3.2) from the private sector (included in the denominator), without 
a corresponding increase in reporting related to HIV testing. When 
analysis is restricted to units that reported data in both 2013 and 2014, 
the percentage of TB patients who knew their HIV status rose from 63% 
to 72%.
5 The reported figure is also relatively low for the Russian Federation. 
However, this is because the denominator available for calculations is 
the total number of new and relapse cases that were notified while the 
numerator available for calculations includes only new TB patients in 
the civilian sector. In practice, testing coverage is estimated to be close 
to 100% in the Russian Federation.
n FIGURE 6.1
Percentage of notified TB patients with known HIV status, 
2004–2014
African region
Regions outside Africa
Global
Percentage of notified TB patients
0
25
50
75
100
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
 80  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n TABLE 6.1 
HIV testing for TB patients, treatment for HIV-positive TB patients and prevention of TB among people living with HIV,  
41 high TB/HIV burden countries and WHO regions, 2014. Numbers in thousands except where indicated.
ESTIMATED  
HIV-POSTIVE INCIDENT  
TB CASESa
NUMBER OF 
NOTIFIED TB 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
KNOWN HIV 
STATUS
% OF 
NOTIFIED TB 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
KNOWN HIV 
STATUS
% OF TB 
PATIENTS 
WITH AN HIV 
TEST RESULT 
WHO WERE 
HIV-POSITIVE
% OF 
NOTIFIED 
HIV-POSITIVE 
TB PATIENTS 
STARTED ON 
ART
NUMBER OF 
HIV-POSTIVE 
TB PATIENTS 
ON ART 
AS % OF 
ESTIMATED 
HIV-POSITIVE 
INCIDENT TB 
CASESb
NUMBER OF 
HIV-POSITIVE 
PEOPLE 
PROVIDED 
WITH IPT
% OF PEOPLE 
NEWLY 
ENROLLED 
IN HIV CARE 
WHO WERE 
NOTIFIED AS 
A TB CASE 
THE SAME 
YEAR
Angola
23
14–34
28
50
10
–
–
–
Botswana
4.5
4.1–5.0
5.5
91
60
78
57
–
Brazil
16
14–17
57
70
17
–
–
–
Burkina Faso
1.2
1.0–1.3
5.6
96
12
86
47
9.8
Burundi
1.9
1.6–2.1
6.7
91
14
68
32
–
Cambodia
1.8
1.6–2.0
36
81
2.7
98
52
0.9
19
Cameroon
20
17–23
23
87
37
70
30
–
Central African Republic
7.6
5.9–9.4
5.2
51
34
–
–
–
Chad
6.0
4.7–7.4
6.6
54
19
56
12
–
China
13
11–16
344
42
1.5
69
28
2.9
Congo
5.5
4.3–6.9
1.3
13
29
24
1.7
–
Côte d’Ivoire
8.5
7.5–9.6
22
93
24
21
13
3.2
Djibouti
0.54
0.44–0.65
1.9
84
8.5
68
20
–
DR Congo
34
27–42
53
46
14
67
14
4.4
Ethiopiac
19
15–23
89
75
9.7
39
18
10
22
Ghana
11
5.2–19
12
77
24
39
10
–
Haiti
3.7
3.2–4.3
14
88
19
54
38
22
–
India
110
96–120
1 035
61
4.3
90
36
3.1
Indonesia
63
41–90
15
4.6
16
26
1.0
–
Kenya
40
38–42
84
95
36
87
65
–
Lesotho
12
8.5–16
9.1
93
72
74
41
–
Malawi
19
10–31
16
93
54
92
43
135
1.5
Mali
0.71
0.64–0.78
2.6
43
14
100
52
–
Mozambique
85
65–110
56
96
52
81
28
94
–
Myanmar
19
15–24
56
40
11
90
30
3.0
8.5
Namibia
5.6
4.8–6.5
9.1
92
44
84
60
–
Nigeria
100
59–160
84
92
19
75
12
26
–
Russian Federation
5.5
4.5–6.6
67d
–
–
–
–
38
Rwanda
1.8
1.5–2.1
5.9
99
25
87
72
–
Sierra Leone
2.3
1.7–3.0
11
87
12
68
39
1.3
8.8
South Africa
270
240–310
295
93
61
79
53
552
10
Sudan
1.2
0.65–2.0
5.5
27
6.0
45
12
18
Swaziland
5.9
4.2–7.9
5.4
97
73
79
53
1.2
–
Thailand
15
7.8–24
51
71
13
69
31
–
Togo
0.83
0.67–1.0
2.5
97
21
76
48
–
Uganda
28
24–32
44
95
45
81
57
–
Ukraine
8.1
7.0–9.3
39
97
20
56
53
16
–
UR Tanzania
62
29–110
58
91
35
83
27
23
12
Viet Nam
7.0
5.7–8.5
74
73
5.2
73
40
–
Zambia
38
25–52
40
93
61
73
46
–
Zimbabwe
25
17–35
29
89
68
86
66
30
15
High TB/HIV burden countries
1 100
1 000–1 200
2 804
60
18
78
34
916
9.0
AFR
870
790–950
1 064
79
39
77
37
876
9.1
AMR
36
34–38
169
74
13
63
20
29
8.4
EMR
12
10–15
68
15
2.4
63
7.9
0.5
20
EUR
20
18–21
200
62
8.2
58
31
21
32
SEAR
210
180–240
1 171
45
5.1
85
24
3.0
3.7
WPR
31
28–35
552
40
2.3
68
27
3.7
3.9
Global
1 200
1 100–1 300
3 224
51
16
77
33
933
8.9
Blank cells indicate data not reported.
–  indicates values that cannot be calculated.
a  Best estimates are followed by the lower and upper bounds of the 95% uncertainty interval.
b  The numerator (i.e. all notified HIV-positive TB cases on ART) includes all notified new, relapse and non-relapse retreatment cases. The denominator 
(i.e. estimated HIV-positive incident TB cases) includes new and relapse cases only.
c  In 2014, ART and IPT data were missing for 3 of Ethiopia’s 11 regions, which in previous years had accounted for about one third of the national totals. In 
the 8 regions that reported data, 65% of HIV-positive TB patients were on ART.
d  Data for the Russian Federation are for new TB patients in the civilian sector only.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  81
n FIGURE 6.2
Percentage of notified TB patients with known HIV status by country, 2014a
Percentage of 
notified TB patients
0–14
15–49
50–74
≥75
No data
Not applicable
a Data for the Russian Federation are for new TB patients in the civilian sector only.
In the Region of the Americas and the European Region, 
there were small improvements between 2013 and 2014: 
from 72% to 74% and from 59% to 62% respectively.1 Larger 
increases were evident in some countries in the Americas, 
notably Bolivia (70% to 77%), Chile (35% to 50%), Colombia 
(74% to 80%), Guatemala (80% to 86%), Mexico (77% to 
85%), Nicaragua (69% to 77%) and Peru (66% to 74%). 
In the other three WHO regions in which concentrated 
HIV epidemics are the norm, the percentage of TB patients 
with known HIV status has remained low (15%–45%). 
Impressive gains were made in three countries, however: 
Myanmar (from 12% to 40%), Sri Lanka (from 49% to 78%) 
and the Philippines (from 2% to 20%). In Cambodia, 81% of 
TB patients knew their HIV status in 2014, similar to the level 
achieved in 2013. It should also be noted that in China, 91% of 
TB patients knew their HIV status in the counties defined as 
having a high TB/HIV burden, much higher than the national 
average of 42%. 
In some countries with concentrated epidemics, the pro-
grammatic feasibility and value of testing all TB patients for 
HIV has been questioned, especially in settings where both 
access to HIV treatment and funding are limited. At the same 
time, HIV testing for TB patients is a basic standard of care 
and provides a pathway to HIV treatment and prevention 
1 Figures for the European Region are an underestimate, due to 
under-estimation of testing coverage for the Russian Federation. 
services. National programmes should aim to ensure that 
the benefits of HIV testing are available to TB patients, their 
partners, families and the community at large, in the context 
of their specific programmatic settings.2 
6.2 
Levels of HIV infection among TB patients 
with HIV test results 
Globally, 16% of TB patients with an HIV test result were HIV-
positive (Table 6.1). The figure was 18% among the 41 high TB/
HIV burden countries that accounted for more than 94% of 
estimated HIV-positive incident TB cases in 2014. Overall, the 
percentage of TB patients testing HIV-positive has been fall-
ing globally since 2008 (Figure 6.3). 
The highest rates of HIV co-infection were reported for 
TB patients in the African Region (Table 6.1), where 39% of 
those with an HIV test result were HIV-positive (compared 
with 41% in 2013). The percentage of TB patients found to be 
HIV-positive in the 28 African countries in the list of 41 high 
TB/HIV burden countries ranged from about 10% in Angola 
and Ethiopia to more than 70% in Lesotho and Swaziland. In 
all other regions, the percentage of TB patients with a docu-
mented HIV test result who were HIV-positive was much 
lower. 
2 WHO policy on collaborative TB/HIV activities: guidelines for national 
programmes and other stakeholders. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2012 (WHO/ HTM/TB/2012.1). Available at http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2012/9789241503006_eng.pdf
 82  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Globally, a total of 528 000 HIV-positive TB patients were 
reported by NTPs in 2014. This represented less than 50% 
of the 1.2 million HIV-positive people estimated to have 
developed TB in the same year (Figure 6.4), although there 
was considerable variation among regions. The propor-
tion was highest in the European Region (81%), followed by 
the Region of the Americas (60%) and the African Region 
(50%), and much lower in the Eastern Mediterranean, South-
East Asia and Western Pacific Regions (13%, 29% and 39%, 
respectively). 
6.3 
Antiretroviral therapy and co-trimoxazole 
preventive therapy for HIV-positive TB 
patients
6.3.1 Antiretroviral therapy
ART is an intervention that can have an important impact on 
TB morbidity and mortality among HIV-positive TB patients. 
The number of notified HIV-positive TB patients on ART has 
grown from a very low level in 2004 (Figure 6.4) to reach 
392 000 in 2014. Among HIV-positive TB patients notified by 
NTPs in 2014,1 77% were on ART globally (Table 6.1, Figure 
6.3), a further improvement compared with 73% in 2013. 
In the African Region in 2014, 77% of HIV-positive TB 
patients reported by NTPs were started on ART (up from 
72% in 2013). ART coverage increased in 28 of the 41 high 
TB/HIV burden countries between 2013 and 2014 (data not 
shown). Among the top-ten high TB/HIV burden countries, 
the biggest increases between 2013 and 2014 were in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo (48% to 67%), Mozam-
bique (72% to 81%), the United Republic of Tanzania (73% to 
83%), Nigeria (67% to 75%) and South Africa (72% to 79%). 
Five other countries reported increments of more than 10%: 
Cambodia, Djibouti, Mali, Myanmar and Viet Nam. Six of the 
41 high TB/HIV burden countries have not yet reached levels 
1 In the annual WHO TB data collection form, countries are asked to 
report the number of TB patients notified in the most recent calendar 
year who were living with HIV and who “started or continued on ART”.
of 50%: Sudan, Ethiopia, Ghana, Indonesia, Congo and Côte 
d’Ivoire. In these countries, concerted efforts are needed to 
improve coverage. 
Early initiation of ART is important to reduce mortality. 
WHO recommends that ART should be initiated as soon as 
possible after TB treatment is started, and within the first 
two to eight weeks of treatment. WHO also encourages pro-
grammes to establish mechanisms to monitor the timeliness 
of ART through national data collection systems, and has 
provided guidance about how to do this.2 A recent example 
from India is highlighted in Box 6.1. 
Despite overall progress in ART coverage, there is a sub-
2 World Health Organization. WHO guide to monitoring and evaluation of 
collaborative TB/HIV activities. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 
Available at http://www.who.int/tb/publications/monitoring-
evaluation-collaborative-tb-hiv/en/
n FIGURE 6.3
Percentage of notified TB patients with known HIV status who were HIV-positive, and percentage of notified HIV-positive 
TB patients enrolled on co-trimoxazole preventive therapy (CPT) and antiretroviral therapy (ART), 2007–2014
Percentage of notified 
TB patients
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Notified TB patients with known HIV 
status who were HIV-positive
Notified HIV-positive TB patients  
started on CPT
Notified HIV-positive TB patients 
started on ART
n FIGURE 6.4
ART enrolment among HIV-positive TB patients compared 
with the reported number of HIV-positive TB patients 
and the estimated number of HIV-positive people who 
developed TB,a 2004–2014
0
500
1000
1500
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Number of TB patients (thousands)
Estimated HIV−positive incident TB cases
Notified HIV−positive TB patients
HIV−positive 
TB patients on ART
a Notified HIV-positive TB patients on ART includes new and relapse TB 
cases plus prevalent TB cases re-registered for treatment change  
(e.g. after treatment failure). Estimated HIV-positive incident TB cases 
includes only new and relapse TB cases.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  83
stantial gap between the number of HIV-positive TB patients 
started on ART, and the estimated total number of HIV-pos-
itive people with TB who are in need of both TB treatment 
and ART. The global number of HIV-positive TB patients 
reported to be started on ART by NTPs in 2014 represented 
only 33% of the estimated 1.2 million HIV-positive people 
who developed TB in the same year (Table 6.1, Figure 6.4). 
The ratio of patients started on ART in 2014 to the estimated 
number of HIV-positive people who developed TB in 2014 
was above 50% in only 14 of the 41 high TB/HIV burden coun-
tries: Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Kenya, Malawi, 
Mali, Namibia, Rwanda, South Africa, Swaziland, Uganda, 
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia (Figure 
6.5). While this is an improvement from only eight countries 
in 2013, much remains to be done to improve the detection 
of TB among HIV-positive people, the coverage of HIV test-
ing among TB patients, and enrolment of HIV-positive TB 
patients on ART.
Box 6.1 Monitoring when ART is  
 
initiated for HIV-positive TB  
 
patients: an example from India
In October–November 2014, data from 70 facilities in India 
where ART is provided were extracted from a system designed 
to capture early warning indicators related to the development 
of drug resistance and the quality of care. This was done by 
the National AIDS Control Organization and WHO India. Of 
the 9468 people living with HIV who had been enrolled in HIV 
care, 1871 (19%) developed TB within two years (Table B6.1.1). 
Data on the timing of initiation on ART were analysed for these 
individuals.
TABLE B6.1.1
Initiation on ART for HIV-positive TB patients in  
62 facilities in India, October–November 2014
STUDY COHORT (ADULTS, N=9468)
NUMBER
Patients diagnosed with TB
1871
Patients already on ART at the 
time of TB diagnosis
362
Time between start of TB treatment and ART initiation, for the 
1429 HIV-positive TB patients who were not already on ART 
<2 weeks
200 (14%, 95% CI: 12–16%)
2–8 weeks
933 (65%, 95% CI: 63–68%)
>8 weeks
296 (21%, 95% CI: 19–23%)
Median
23 days
The median time between the start of TB treatment and ART 
was 23 days. About 80% of HIV-positive TB patients were 
started on ART within eight weeks of TB diagnosis, in line with 
WHO recommendations.
These statistics about ART coverage among all estimated 
HIV-positive TB cases can also be compared with the level of 
ART coverage among all people living with HIV. Globally, over 
15 million people were on ART as of 31 March 2015.1 By the end 
of 2014, 40% (uncertainty interval, 37%–45%) of the esti-
mated number of people living with HIV were receiving ART. 
This is more than the estimated level of 35% for HIV-positive 
people who have TB, but also far from universal coverage. 
Major efforts are urgently required to improve access and 
narrow these gaps. The UNAIDS 90-90-90 fast track treat-
ment targets (by 2020, 90% of people living with HIV know 
their status, 90% of those who know their status are on ART, 
and 90% of those on ART have a suppressed viral load) pro-
vide a platform for doing this.2
6.3.2 Co-trimoxazole preventive therapy
Globally, 427 000 HIV-positive TB patients were enrolled on 
CPT in 2014, representing 87% of all notified HIV-positive TB 
patients, similar to levels achieved in 2013 (Table 6.1, Figure 
6.3). The African and South-East Asia regions maintained 
their particularly high levels of enrolment on CPT from 2013, 
at 89% and 85% respectively (Table 6.1). Of the 34 high TB/
HIV burden countries (out of a total of 41) that reported data, 
only four reported that less than 50% of HIV-positive TB 
patients were enrolled on CPT in 2014: Côte d’Ivoire (24%), 
Congo (27%), Indonesia (41%) and Ukraine (44%). 
6.4 
Intensified TB case-finding and initiation  
of isoniazid preventive therapy among 
people living with HIV 
The high proportion of people with undiagnosed TB found 
in autopsy studies of HIV-positive people3,4,5 shows that 
substantial efforts are needed to ensure effective TB screen-
ing among people living with HIV, so that TB is promptly 
diagnosed and treated and so that those without active TB 
disease are provided with IPT as well as ART. ART reduces the 
individual risk of TB disease among people living with HIV 
by 65%,6 irrespective of CD4 cell count. Its impact is further 
enhanced when IPT is also provided. Recently, IPT for six 
1 How AIDS changed everything – MDG 6. 15 years, 15 lessons of hope from the 
AIDS response. Geneva: UNAIDS; 2015. Available at: http://www.unaids.
org/en/resources/documents/2015/MDG6_15years-
15lessonsfromtheAIDSresponse
2 Understanding Fast-Track. Geneva: UNAIDS; 2015. Available at http://
www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/201506_JC2743_
Understanding_FastTrack_en.pdf)
3 Cox JA et.al. An autopsy study describing causes of death and 
comparing clinico-pathological findings among hospitalized patients in 
Kampala, Uganda; Plos One, 2012;7(3):e33685. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0033685. Epub 2012 Mar 14.
4 Wong EB et.al. Causes of death on antiretroviral therapy: a post-
mortem study from South Africa; Plos One 2012;7(10):e47542. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0047542. Epub 2012 Oct 16.
5 Kilale AM et.al. High prevalence of tuberculosis diagnosed during 
autopsy examination at Muhimbili National Hospital in Dar es Salaam, 
Tanzania; Tanzania Journal of Health Research 2013; 15.
6 Suthar AB et al. Antiretroviral therapy for prevention of tuberculosis in 
adults with HIV: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 2012, 
9(7): e1001270. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001270).
 84  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 6.5
Number of HIV-positive TB patients on ART as a percentage of estimated HIV-positive incident TB cases, 2014a
Percentage
0–24
25–49
50–74
75–100
No data
Not applicable
a The numerator (i.e. all notified HIV-positive TB cases on ART) includes all notified new, relapse and non-relapse retreatment cases. The denominator  
(i.e. estimated HIV-positive incident TB cases) includes new and relapse cases only.
months combined with ART for people with CD4 counts of 
>500 cells/mm3 was found to reduce the risk of severe HIV-
related illness by 44% and the risk of death from any cause 
by 35%.1
6.4.1 Intensified case-finding
Systematic screening for TB among people living with HIV 
is recommended by WHO as an essential component of the 
HIV package of care, along with ART, IPT and infection con-
trol. It is the first essential step before both IPT initiation and 
TB diagnosis. In 2014, 78 countries reported about seven mil-
lion people enrolled in HIV care who were screened for TB, up 
from 5.5 million in 64 countries in 2013. 
Being screened for TB does not necessarily guarantee 
completion of the TB diagnostic pathway. As part of efforts 
to improve the utility of TB screening, WHO encourages 
monitoring of the full cascade of intensified TB case find-
ing, including: 1) identification of TB in those who screened 
positive for TB symptoms; and 2) documentation of what TB 
investigations were done to diagnose or rule out TB disease. 
In December 2010, the rapid molecular test Xpert MTB/RIF 
was endorsed by WHO with a strong recommendation for its 
use as the initial diagnostic test for TB in two groups: people 
1 The TEMPRANO ANRS 12136 Study Group; A Trial of Early Antiretrovirals 
and Isoniazid Preventive Therapy in Africa. The New England Journal of 
Medicine 2015; DOI:10. 1056/NEJMoa1507198.
living with HIV with TB signs and symptoms, and people at 
high risk of having MDR-TB (Chapter 5). This was reiterated in 
the 2013 update to WHO policy recommendations on the use 
of Xpert MTB/RIF,2 and in the 2014 Xpert MTB/RIF implemen-
tation manual in which it is recommended that people living 
with HIV should be prioritized for testing with Xpert MTB/RIF 
when resources are limited.3 
Discussions at a Global Forum of Xpert MTB/RIF imple-
menters held in 2014 indicated that a major motivation 
for the roll-out of Xpert MTB/RIF was often the national 
response to multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB),4 rather than 
diagnosis of TB among people living with HIV. To maximize 
the detection of TB cases among HIV-positive people, Xpert 
MTB/RIF needs to be widely implemented in settings where 
HIV care is provided, using all available funding sources. 
Early detection of TB in HIV care settings can in turn help to 
2 Policy update: Xpert MTB/RIF assay for the diagnosis of pulmonary and 
extrapulmonary TB in adults and children. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2013 (WHO/HTM/TB/2013.16). Available at: http://who.
int/tb/laboratory/xpert_policyupdate/en/ 
3 Xpert MTB/RIF implementation manual: technical and operational ‘how-to’; 
practical considerations. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 
(WHO/HTM/TB/2014.1). Available at: http://who.int/tb/publications/
xpert_implem_manual/en/ 
4 Meeting Report of the Xpert MTB/RIF Implementers Global Forum, 1–2 May 
2014. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. Available at: http://
www.stoptb.org/wg/gli/assets/documents/Xpert%20
Implementers%20Global%20Forum%20meeting%20report.pdf.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  85
ensure prompt initiation of ART. Recent analysis suggests 
that there has been progress in adopting the WHO recom-
mendation to use Xpert MTB/RIF as the initial diagnostic test 
for TB among people living with HIV, but that more remains 
to be done (Box 6.2). 
In 2014, 76 countries reported data about the number of 
notified TB cases among those newly enrolled in HIV care to 
UNAIDS (up from 59 countries in 2013). Unfortunately, there 
were data quality problems for eight of these countries. 
Among the remaining 68 countries, 9% (211 000/2 304 000) 
of those newly enrolled in HIV care in 2014 were also notified 
with TB in the same year. Among the 41 high TB/HIV burden 
countries, the proportion ranged from 2–3% in China, Côte 
d’Ivoire, India and Malawi to 38% in the Russian Federa-
tion (Table 6.1). Ensuring good quality data and monitoring 
trends in this indicator are important to track the impact of 
HIV care, especially ART, on the burden of TB in people living 
with HIV. 
6.4.2 Initiation on isoniazid preventive therapy
A total of 49 countries (representing more than 60% of the 
estimated global burden of HIV-associated TB) reported ini-
tiating people living with HIV on IPT. The total number was 
933 000 people in 2014, an increase from just over 600 000 
people in 2013 (Figure 6.6). Thirteen of the 41 high TB/HIV 
burden countries reported provision of IPT in 2014, and 
coverage among people living with HIV who were newly 
enrolled in care was 41%. Coverage ranged from 5% in Swazi-
land to 97% in Haiti. 
As in previous years, South Africa accounted for a high 
proportion (59%) of the global total in 2014: 552 000 HIV-
n FIGURE 6.6
Provision of isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) to people 
living with HIV, 2005–2014
Global
South Africa
Rest of Africa
Rest of world
Number of people living with HIV 
(thousands)
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Box 6.2 The use of Xpert MTB/RIF in diagnosis of TB among people living with HIV
Data on national policies for using Xpert MTB/RIF as the initial 
diagnostic test for TB among people living with HIV were collected 
as part of the 2015 round of global TB data collection. Additional 
data were requested from 15 countries with the highest TB/HIV 
burden, of which nine responded: Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, 
Lesotho, Myanmar, South Africa, Uganda, the United Republic of 
Tanzania and Zimbabwe. 
Of the 41 high TB/HIV burden countries, 33 (80%) had a national 
policy on the use of Xpert MTB/RIF by the end of 2014. The eight 
countries that did not report having such a policy in place were 
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Myanmar, 
Namibia, Sierra Leone and Sudan.
Of the nine countries that responded to the more detailed survey, 
all except Myanmar reported a policy that recommended Xpert 
MTB/RIF as the initial diagnostic test for TB among people living 
with HIV. A nationally standardized TB diagnostic algorithm 
for people living with HIV that included Xpert MTB/RIF was also 
reported in these eight countries. Typically, Xpert MTB/RIF testing 
was restricted to secondary and tertiary level health care facilities. 
Exceptions were Ethiopia and South Africa, which reported 
availability at all levels including at primary health care facilities. 
In general, routine documentation and reporting of Xpert MTB/RIF 
test results among people living with HIV was stated to be a major 
challenge, reflecting the fact that national registers and reporting 
systems do not capture such data. 
To improve testing for TB among people living with HIV and ensure 
that progress can be monitored, wider adoption of the WHO 
recommendation to use Xpert/MTB RIF as the initial diagnostic 
test and updating of national monitoring and evaluation systems 
that will allow systematic recording and reporting are required.a 
The use of Xpert MTB/RIF by HIV service providers, including in 
peripheral facilities, also needs to be promoted.
a A guide to monitoring and evaluation for collaborative TB/HIV 
activities. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2015.02). Available at: http://www.who.int/tb/publications/m_
and_e_document_page/en/
 86  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
positive people were started on IPT, out of 1 034 000 (53%) 
people living with HIV who were newly enrolled in care. 
There was evidence of IPT scale-up in the past four years 
in other countries in the African Region. Countries report-
ing higher numbers in 2014 compared with previous years 
included Malawi (135 000), Mozambique (94 000), Zimbabwe 
(30 000) Nigeria (26 000), the United Republic of Tanzania 
(23 000) and Haiti (22 000). Nonetheless, 77% of countries 
did not report provision of IPT as part of HIV care in 2014, 
including 68% (28/41) of the high TB/HIV burden countries. 
As with TB screening, it is clear that countries continue to find 
it challenging to provide IPT and to record and report data 
on its provision or treatment completion. A good example is 
Namibia, where reporting on provision of IPT was not feasi-
ble in 2014 following the withdrawal of donor funding that 
had previously supported the staff required to record and 
report data. In 2013, more than 15 000 people newly enrolled 
in HIV care were reported to have been provided with IPT in 
Namibia. Global coverage of IPT is thus understated. 
6.5 
Improving data quality
Each year, efforts are made to improve the quality of data 
related to collaborative TB/HIV activities that are reported 
as part of global monitoring efforts by WHO and UNAIDS. 
Two challenges in particular have been evident: discrepan-
cies between the number of HIV-positive TB patients on ART 
reported by TB and HIV programmes, and inconsistencies in 
the number of people reported to be newly enrolled in HIV 
care for the same country within the same data collection 
form (this number is requested twice in the WHO Universal 
Access Health Sector TB indicators reported through the 
UNAIDS global reporting system for HIV for two separate 
indicators: enrollment on IPT, and TB notifications among 
those newly enrolled in HIV care). Encouragingly, the number 
of countries reporting discrepant data fell in 2014 compared 
with 2013, and in almost all instances these discrepancies 
were resolved following communications with national TB 
and HIV programmes. There were two countries for which 
discrepant data on provision of ART reported by national HIV 
and TB programmes could not be reconciled (Botswana and 
Côte d’Ivoire) and four countries for which discrepancies in 
data about the number of people newly enrolled in HIV care 
could not be resolved (Guinea-Bissau, Mongolia, Saint Vin-
cent and the Grenadines and Uzbekistan). 
In 2015, WHO published A guide to monitoring and evaluation 
for collaborative TB/HIV activities1 and the Consolidated strategic 
information guide for the health sector.2 Both documents have 
harmonized TB/HIV indicators using the same indicator defi-
nitions, to help ensure reporting of the same data through 
global reporting systems for HIV and TB. These guidelines 
also provide a consolidated set of indicators for monitor-
ing progress in the implementation of collaborative TB/HIV 
activities. Countries are being encouraged to adopt, monitor 
and routinely report on these indicators. UNAIDS is currently 
undertaking a review of the Global AIDS Response Progress 
Reporting (GARPR) indicators, in the context of these two 
guidance documents.
1 World Health Organization. A guide to monitoring and evaluation of 
collaborative TB/HIV activities: 2015 revision. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015. Available at: http://www.who.int/tb/publications/
monitoring-evaluation-collaborative-tb-hiv/en/
2 World Health Organization. Consolidated strategic information guidelines 
for HIV in the health sector. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 
Available at: http://who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/strategic-information-
guidelines/en/
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  87
Financing 
CHAP TER
7
 Key facts and messages
The funding required for a full response to the global TB 
epidemic in low- and middle-income countries is estimated 
at about US$ 8 billion per year in 2015 (excluding research and 
development for new TB diagnostics, drugs and vaccines). 
Of the US$ 8 billion required in 2015, about two thirds 
(US$ 5.3 billion) is for the detection and treatment of drug-
susceptible TB; 20% (US$ 1.6 billion) for treatment of MDR-TB; 
8% (US$ 0.6 billion) for rapid diagnostic tests and associated 
laboratory strengthening, much of which is to improve 
detection of drug-resistant TB; and 6% (US$ 0.5 billion) for 
collaborative TB/HIV activities. Projections made in 2013 
suggested that in 2015, about US$ 6 billion could be mobilized 
from domestic sources and that US$ 2 billion would be needed 
from international donors.
The 123 countries that reported financial data to WHO in 
2015 account for 95% of reported TB cases globally. Based on 
this self-reporting by countries, funding for TB prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment reached US$ 6.6 billion in 2015, up 
from US$ 6.2 billion in 2014 and more than double the level of 
2006 (US$ 3.2 billion). Compared with the estimated global 
resource requirement of US$ 8 billion in 2015 for a full response 
to the TB epidemic in low and middle-income countries, this 
leaves a gap of around US$ 1.4 billion. Countries themselves 
reported smaller gaps, amounting to US$ 0.8 billion in 2015; 
this reflects the fact that national plans for scaling up TB 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment are less ambitious than 
the targets set in the Global Plan to Stop TB, 2011–2015 in many 
countries.
Overall, 87% (US$ 5.8 billion) of the US$ 6.6 billion available in 
2015 is from domestic sources. International donor funding 
has increased since 2006, reaching US$ 0.8 billion in 2015. 
However, the global average for the share of funding provided 
from domestic sources conceals enormous variation among 
individual countries as well as country groups. 
Domestic funding dominates (93–94% of the total funding 
available in 2015) in three (not mutually exclusive) groups: 
Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, China and South Africa 
(BRICS); upper middle-income countries; and regions outside 
Africa and Asia. In addition to BRICS, only one HBC (Thailand) 
has consistently reported levels of domestic funding that 
exceed contributions from international donor funding in 
recent years. 
International donor funding dominates in the group of 17 HBCs 
outside BRICS (72% of the total funding available in 2015) and 
in low-income countries (81% of the total funding available 
in 2015). At the individual country level, international donor 
funding remains absolutely critical in most of the 22 HBCs. In 
four HBCs (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo and Mozambique), ≥90% of available funding in 
2015 is from international donor sources.
The cost per patient treated for drug-susceptible TB in 2014 fell 
into the range of US$ 100−US$ 500 in most countries with a high 
burden of TB. The cost per patient treated for MDR-TB was most 
often in the range US$ 5000−10 000, but the average varied 
from US$ 6 826 in low-income countries to US$ 21 265 in upper 
middle-income countries.
Health financing data from national health accounts provide 
insights into the current status of progress towards universal 
health coverage (UHC). Two suggested benchmarks required 
to achieve UHC are that health spending reaches at least 
6% of gross domestic product (GDP) and that out-of-pocket 
expenditures account for less than 15% of total health 
spending. Most countries, including all of the 22 HBCs and all 
low-income countries, have not yet reached these benchmarks. 
Among HBCs, Brazil, Thailand and South Africa are closest to 
doing so.
Progress in TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment requires 
adequate funding sustained over many years. WHO began 
annual monitoring of funding for TB in 2002, with findings 
published in global TB reports and peer-reviewed publica-
tions.1 Particular attention has always been given to the 22 
high-burden countries (HBCs) that account for about 80% 
1 The most recent publication is: Floyd K, Fitzpatrick C, Pantoja A and 
Raviglione M. Domestic and donor financing for tuberculosis care and 
control in low-income and middle-income countries: an analysis of 
trends, 2002–11, and requirements to meet 2015 targets. The Lancet 
Global Health, 2013; 1: e105–15.
of estimated incident cases (Chapter 2) and about 80% of TB 
cases reported by national TB programmes (NTPs) to WHO 
(Chapter 3). 
This chapter covers five main topics. It starts with a sum-
mary of the most up-to-date estimates of financial resources 
required for a full response to the TB epidemic in 2015. This is 
followed by presentation and discussion of trends in funding 
for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment by category of 
expenditure and source of funding for the period 2006 (when 
the Stop TB Strategy and Global Plan to Stop TB 2006−2015 were 
 88  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
both launched)1,2 to 2015, for 123 countries (accounting for 
95% of reported TB cases in 2013) for which data were avail-
able. The third part of the chapter analyses funding gaps 
reported by NTPs to WHO, with breakdowns by category of 
expenditure and country group. The fourth part of the chap-
ter includes the latest estimates of the unit costs of treatment 
for drug-susceptible and multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB). 
The new End TB Strategy includes 2025 milestones for a 
75% reduction in TB deaths and a 50% reduction in the TB 
incidence rate, compared with a baseline of 2015 (Chapter  1). 
Achievement of these milestones requires that universal 
health coverage (UHC), defined as access for all to essential 
preventive and treatment health care interventions, with 
financial protection, is in place by 2025.3,4 In this context, the 
fifth and final part of the chapter introduces a new topic to 
the global TB report: an analysis of health financing data and 
what insights these can offer about the current status of pro-
gress towards UHC. 
Further country-specific data can be found in finance pro-
files that are available online.5 
7.1 
Estimates of funding required in 2015 for a 
full response to the global TB epidemic
An updated version of the Global Plan to Stop TB 2006–2015, 
covering the last five years of the plan, was issued in 2010.6 
This set out the actions and estimated funding requirements 
for a full response to the TB epidemic for the five-year period 
2011−2015 in low and middle-income countries, based on the 
Stop TB Strategy, with the overall goal of achieving the 2015 
global targets for reductions in cases of and deaths from TB 
i.e. that incidence should be falling and that prevalence and 
mortality rates should be halved compared with their levels 
in 1990 (Chapter 1, Chapter 2). Key components of the plan 
included increasing the number of patients detected and 
treated according to WHO’s recommended strategy from 5.8 
million in 2011 to 6.9 million by 2015 (equivalent to more than 
80% of the forecast number of incident cases in 2015 at the 
time the projections were done); ensuring testing for drug 
susceptibility for all previously treated patients and all new 
patients with known risk factors for MDR-TB by 2015; enrol-
ment of all reported TB patients with MDR-TB (projected at 
approximately 300 000) in 2015 on second-line treatment; 
HIV testing of all patients with TB; and prompt initiation of 
ART in all HIV-positive TB patients.
1 Raviglione M, Uplekar M. WHO’s new Stop TB strategy. Lancet 2006; 367: 
952–5.
2 The Global Plan to Stop TB, 2006–2015. Geneva, World Health 
Organization; 2006 (WHO/HTM/STB/2006.35).
3 World Health Organisation, World Bank Group. Monitoring progress 
towards universal health coverage at country and global levels. Framework, 
measures and targets. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (WHO/
HIS/HIA/14.1).
4 World Health Organisation. The World Health Report 2010: Health systems 
financing: the path to universal coverage. Geneva, World Health 
Organization; 2010.
5 www.who.int/tb/data
6 The Global Plan to Stop TB, 2011–2015. Geneva, World Health 
Organization; 2010 (WHO/HTM/STB/2010.2).
From January to March 2013, the Global Plan datasets 
were used in combination with new country-specific plan-
ning and budgeting work with nine high TB or high MDR-TB 
burden countries to produce updated estimates of funding 
needs for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment in low and 
middle-income countries.7 The nine countries were Ethio-
pia, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
South Africa and Ukraine. Analyses were conducted in the 
context of estimates of funding needs and funding gaps 
required for the Global Fund’s replenishment efforts in 2013.8 
WHO subsequently extended these analyses to cover all low- 
and middle-income countries, including those not eligible to 
apply to the fund.9 Notable countries (in terms of TB burden 
and funding requirements) that are not eligible to apply to 
the Global Fund include Brazil, China and the Russian Fed-
eration. 
During the course of the work done for the first pre-
replenishment meeting held in April 2013, it should be 
highlighted that the Global Fund, WHO, UNAIDS, and other 
partners agreed that funding needs for ART for HIV-positive 
TB patients should be included in estimates of HIV resource 
needs to avoid double counting. For this reason, the esti-
mates of resource requirements for TB/HIV interventions 
included in the updated estimates of resource needs for TB 
are lower than those shown in the Global Plan. 
The total funding required in all low and middle-income 
countries was estimated at about US$ 8 billion in 2015. Of this 
total, about two-thirds (US$ 5.3 billion) was for the detection 
and treatment of drug-susceptible TB; 20% (US$ 1.6 bil-
lion) for treatment of MDR-TB; 8% (US$ 0.6 billion) for rapid 
diagnostic tests and associated laboratory strengthening, 
especially for the detection of MDR-TB; and 6% (US$ 0.5 bil-
lion) for collaborative TB/HIV activities (excluding ART). It 
was also estimated that of the total required in 2015, about 
US$ 6 billion could be mobilized from domestic sources and 
around US$ 2 billion would be needed from international 
donor sources. The capacities of Brazil, the Russian Federa-
tion, India, China and South Africa (BRICS, which collectively 
account for almost 50% of reported TB cases worldwide) to 
mobilize most of their funding needs from domestic sources, 
in contrast with other country groups including the 17 other 
HBCs and low-income countries (mostly in Africa) where 
large amounts of international funding would be needed, 
were highlighted. 
7 Funding required for research and development for new TB diagnostics, 
drugs and vaccines was not considered. In the Global Plan, it is 
estimated that about US$ 2 billion per year is needed for research and 
development. In 2013, funding for research and development 
amounted to US$ 0.7 billion (see http://www.treatmentactiongroup.
org/tbrd2014).
8 The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria fourth replenishment 
(2014–2016): needs assessment. Geneva, Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria; 2013.
9 Floyd K, Fitzpatrick C, Pantoja A and Raviglione M. Domestic and donor 
financing for tuberculosis care and control in low-income and 
middle-income countries: an analysis of trends, 2002–11, and 
requirements to meet 2015 targets. The Lancet Global Health, 2013;  
1: e105–15. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  89
7.2  
TB funding, overall and by category  
of expenditure and source of funding, 
2006–2015
Data reported by NTPs to WHO since 2006 allowed analy-
sis of funding trends 2006–2015 in 123 countries (Table 7.1). 
These countries accounted for 95% of the global number of 
TB cases reported in 2014, and included 120 low and middle-
income countries plus three high TB and/or MDR-TB burden 
countries that have reached high-income status (Estonia, 
Latvia and the Russian Federation). The methods used to 
collect, review and analyse financial data are summarized in 
Box 7.1.
n FIGURE 7.1
Funding for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment by 
intervention area, 2006–2015 (constant 2015 US$ billions) 
Total
Drug-susceptible TB
MDR-TB
Other
TB/HIV
US$ billions
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012
2013 2014
2015
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
n FIGURE 7.2
Funding for drug-susceptible TB and MDR-TB, 2006–2015, by country group (constant 2015 US$ millions)
Drug-susceptible TB                                            MDR-TB
US$ millions
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
0
250
500
750
1000
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
0
500
1000
1500
2000
BRICS
17 other HBCs
Other low- and middle-income countries 
(n=97)
n FIGURE 7.3
Funding for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment by 
funding source, 2006–2015 (constant 2015 US$ billions)
US$ billions
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012
2013 2014
2015
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total
Domestic (NTP budget)
Inpatient and outpatient care (best estimate – likely >95% 
is domestic fundinga)
Global Fund (NTP budget)
Other international donors (NTP budget)
a 96% of funding for inpatient and outpatient care is accounted for by 
middle and high-income countries; such countries do not typically 
receive international donor funding for inpatient and outpatient care 
services. Data is an estimate based on country-reported utilization.
In these 123 countries, funding for TB prevention, diag-
nosis and treatment reached US$ 6.6 billion in 2015, up from 
US$ 6.2 billion in 2014 and more than double the US$ 3.2 
billion that was available in 2006 (Figure 7.1). Of the total of 
US$ 6.6 billion, most is for the diagnosis and treatment of 
drug-susceptible TB (US$ 3.9 billion). Funding for MDR-TB has 
grown, especially since 2009, reaching US$ 2.3 billion in 2015 
(Figure 7.1, Figure 7.2). However, it should be highlighted 
that more than half of this funding is accounted for by the 
Russian Federation (Table 7.2), reflecting extensive use of 
hospitalization for patients with MDR-TB. Given the still large 
detection gaps for MDR-TB as well as gaps between the num-
bers of cases detected and started on treatment (Chapter 4), 
much more funding is required for MDR-TB globally and in 
most of the high MDR-TB burden countries. 
A detailed breakdown of the funding estimated to be 
required for drug-susceptible TB, MDR-TB and collaborative 
TB/HIV activities in 2015, based on NTPs assessments of their 
needs, is shown for the 36 high TB and MDR-TB burden coun-
tries in Table 7.2. 
Domestic funding for the TB-specific budgets of NTPs 
accounts for the largest single share of funding, followed by 
funding for inpatient and outpatient care (Figure 7.3). Since 
 90  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n TABLE 7.1
123 low and middle-income countries included in analyses of TB financing, by income group and WHO region, 2015a
LOW-INCOME 
(13% OF NOTIFIED CASES 
GLOBALLY IN 2014)
LOWER-MIDDLE-INCOME 
(57% OF NOTIFIED CASES 
GLOBALLY IN 2014)
UPPER-MIDDLE-INCOME
(25% OF NOTIFIED CASES 
GLOBALLY IN 2014)
BRICS 
(48% OF 
NOTIFIED CASES 
GLOBALLY IN 
2014)
17 HIGH-BURDEN 
COUNTRIES EXCLUDING 
BRICS
(33% OF NOTIFIED 
CASES GLOBALLY IN 
2014)
14 HIGH MDR-TB BURDEN 
COUNTRIES (NOT IN THE 
LIST OF 22 HIGH-BURDEN 
COUNTRIES) 
(2% OF NOTIFIED CASES 
GLOBALLY IN 2014)
Africa
Benin, Burkina Faso, 
Burundi, Central 
African Republic, 
Chad, DR Congo, 
Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
Gambia, Guinea, 
Guinea-Bissau, 
Liberia, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Mali, 
Mozambique, Niger, 
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, 
South Sudan, Togo, 
Uganda, UR Tanzania, 
Zimbabwe
Cabo Verde, 
Cameroon, Congo, 
Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, 
Kenya, Lesotho, 
Mauritania, Nigeria, 
Sao Tomé and 
Principe, Senegal, 
Swaziland, Zambia
Angola, Botswana, 
Gabon, Namibia, 
South Africa
South Africa
DR Congo, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Mozambique, 
Nigeria, Uganda, 
UR Tanzania, 
Zimbabwe
Americas
Haiti
Bolivia, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, 
Guyana, Honduras, 
Nicaragua
Belize, Brazil, 
Colombia, 
Dominican Republic, 
Ecuador, Jamaica, 
Mexico, Panama, 
Paraguay, Peru, 
Suriname
Brazil
Eastern 
Mediterranean
Afghanistan, Somalia
Djibouti, Egypt, 
Morocco, Pakistan, 
Sudan, Syria, West 
Bank and Gaza Strip, 
Yemen
Iran (Islamic 
Republic of), Iraq, 
Jordan, Lebanon, 
Tunisia
Afghanistan, 
Pakistan
Europe
Armenia, Georgia, 
Kyrgyzstan, 
Republic of 
Moldova, Tajikistan, 
Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 
Bulgaria, 
Kazakhstan, 
Montenegro, 
Romania, Serbia, 
The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia, Turkey
Russian 
Federation
Armenia,Bulgaria, 
Estonia, Georgia, 
Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, 
Latvia, Republic of 
Moldova, Tajikistan, 
Ukraine, Uzbekistan
South-East 
Asia
Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea, 
Nepal
Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
India, Indonesia, 
Myanmar, Sri Lanka, 
Timor-Leste
Maldives, Thailand
India
Bangladesh, 
Indonesia, 
Myanmar, Thailand
Western Pacific
Cambodia
Kiribati, Lao 
People’s Democratic 
Republic, Micronesia 
(Federal States of), 
Papua New Guinea, 
Philippines, Samoa, 
Solomon Islands, 
Vanuatu, Viet Nam
American Samoa, 
China, Fiji, Malaysia, 
Marshall Islands, 
Mongolia, Palau, 
Tonga, Tuvalu
China
Cambodia, 
Philippines, 
Viet Nam
Not included
Comoros
Albania, Algeria, 
Azerbaijan, Belarus, 
Costa Rica, Cuba, 
Dominica, Grenada, 
Libya, Palau, Saint 
Lucia, Saint Vincent 
and the Grenadines, 
Turkmenistan
Azerbaijan, Belarus, 
Lithuania
a  Analyses focus primarily on low and middle-income countries. Three high-income countries (Estonia, Latvia and the Russian Federation) were included 
because they are in the list of 22 high-burden countries or the list of 27 high MDR-TB burden countries. Additional countries included in trend analyses 
of TB financing compared with those included in previous global reports are shown in bold.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  91
n TABLE 7.2 
TB budget reported by NTP by intervention area, and estimated cost of inpatient and outpatient care for drug-susceptible 
(DS-TB) and MDR-TB, 36 high TB or MDR-TB burden countries, 2015 (current US$ millions)
TB BUDGET REPORTED BY NTP
RESOURCES REQUIRED  
FOR INPATIENT AND  
OUTPATIENT CARE
RESOURCES 
REQUIRED  
FOR TB CARE
TOTAL
DS-TB
MDR-TB
TB/HIV
DS-TB 
MDR-TB 
22 HIGH-BURDEN COUNTRIES
Afghanistan
15
13
1.3
0.1
6.7
0.2
22
Bangladesh
48
42
5.6
0.1
1.0
0.1
49
Brazil
77
65
9.4
2.3
47
1.9
126
Cambodia
31
28
1.9
0.6
6.4
0
37
Chinaa
340
313
27
0
–
–
340
DR Congo
55
48
3.3
3.1
2.7
0
57
Ethiopia
82
57
19
5.6
8.0
0.3
91
India
261
179
78
4.0
456
70
788
Indonesia
133
119
11
2.7
27.6
5.1
165
Kenya
45
39
0.8
5.2
4.4
0.9
50
Mozambique
29
18
6.4
4.3
3.7
0.3
33
Myanmar
36
23
9.5
4.4
3.0
0.5
40
Nigeria
228
156
54
17
8.5
3.8
240
Pakistan
50
33
17
0
3.0
0.2
53
Philippines
106
84
21
0.9
185
5.9
298
Russian Federationa,b
1 894
637
1 211
47
–
–
1 894
South Africa
248
129
61
58
99
363
710
Thailand
32
27
5.2
0.1
7.0
0.1
39
Uganda
24
21
2.1
1.1
0.6
0
25
UR Tanzania
67
53
9.6
4.5
2.4
0.3
70
Viet Nam
66
60
5.9
0.8
33
2.7
102
Zimbabwe
28
22
2.2
3.5
0.5
0
29
22 high-burden countries
3 895
2 166
1 563
165
910
455
5 261
REMAINING HIGH MDR-TB BURDEN COUNTRIES
Armenia
4.2
4.2
0
0
3.7
2.1
10
Azerbaijan
6.3
2.5
3.7
0
19
7.9
33
Belarus
15
1.9
13
<0.1
22
29
66
Bulgaria
15
15
0.2
0
11
0.6
27
Estonia
0.6
0.3
0.3
0
1.3
1.1
3.1
Georgia
17
8.6
8.0
0
5.4
4.6
27
Kazakhstan
195
163
30
1.2
105
81
381
Kyrgyzstan
29
16
13
0
5.1
5.0
39
Latvia
1.6
0.2
1.4
0
11
2.6
15
Lithuania
7.4
11
18
Republic of Moldova
17
13
4.1
0.1
6.8
5.8
30
Tajikistan
25
16
7.7
0.7
5.0
1.9
32
Ukraine
123
59
62
2.2
32
27
182
Uzbekistan
101
88
12
<0.1
35
10
146
27 high MDR-TB burden countries
4 097
2 268
1 681
148
1 101
640
5 838
36 high-TB or high MDR-TB burden countries
4 445
2 555
1 720
170
1 180
644
6 268
Blank cells indicate data not reported.
– indicates values that cannot be calculated.
a  No amount is shown for China and the Russian Federation because the NTP budgets reported by those countries include all budgets for inpatient and 
outpatient care.
b  In the Russian Federation, the staff and infrastructure reported for TB care and control were allocated to DS-TB (23%) and MDR-TB (77%) by WHO based 
on the proportion of bed-days used by DS-TB and MDR-TB patients.
 Box 7.1 Methods used to compile, validate and analyze financial data reported to WHO 
WHO began monitoring government and international donor 
financing for TB in 2002. All data are stored in the WHO global TB 
database. The standard methods used to compile, review, validate 
and analyse these data have been described in detail elsewhere.a,b 
This box provides a summary. 
Each year, WHO requests all low and middle-income countries 
(and the Russian Federation, the only HBC that is a high-income 
country) to report the funding required for TB prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment in their current fiscal year, by category of 
expenditure and source of funding; and expenditures for the most 
recently completed fiscal year, also by category of expenditure and 
source of funding. In the 2015 round of global TB data collection, 
the fiscal years were 2015 and 2014, respectively. Categories of 
expenditure for diagnosis and treatment of drug-susceptible 
TB were synthesized compared to those used 2006–2014, 
to simplify reporting. Six categories were used: laboratory 
infrastructure, equipment and supplies; NTP staff (central unit 
staff and subnational TB staff); drugs to treat drug-susceptible 
TB; programme costs; patient support; and operational research 
including surveys. The main change was that several subcategories 
of programme costs were condensed into one category (this 
means that trends can still be assessed back to 2006). Categories 
of expenditure used for MDR-TB remained the same as those used 
since 2006: second-line drugs, and programmatic management 
of MDR-TB. Budgets and expenditures for collaborative TB/
HIV activities were requested as one consolidated category of 
expenditure, as in previous years. Funding available from four 
major sources was requested, also as in previous years: domestic 
funding excluding loans; external loans, also considered domestic 
funding; the Global Fund; and grant financing from sources other 
than the Global Fund. A simplification compared with previous 
years was that only an overall breakdown of total funding was 
requested, as opposed to a breakdown for each category of 
expenditure. Again, this does not affect ability to report trends in 
a format consistent with those published in past reports. For high-
income countries (except the Russian Federation which is an HBC), 
only totals for both funding requirements and expenditures were 
requested, without any breakdown by category of expenditure or 
source of funding, as in previous years. 
As usual in 2015, all countries were asked to report on the 
utilization of inpatient and outpatient care required for treatment 
of people with drug-susceptible and MDR-TB, on a per patient 
basis (i.e. the average number of days spent in hospital, and the 
average number of outpatient visits to a health facility). These 
data are used in combination with other information to estimate 
the financial resources used for TB prevention, diagnosis and 
treatment that are not reflected in TB-specific reports of funding 
requirements, available funding and expenditures (further details 
are provided below). 
Core methods used to review and validate data have remained 
consistent since 2002. They include: 
"
 Routine checks for plausibility and consistency, including 
validation checks that are built into the online reporting 
system. Examples of validation checks are checks for 
implausibly large year-to-year changes (for example in total 
reported funding by source and by category of expenditure), or 
implausibly high or low values of funding for drugs relative to 
the number of TB patients (that differ substantially from prices 
quoted by the Global TB Drug Facility). 
"
 Discussions with country respondents to resolve queries.
"
 Triangulation with other data sources. One example is the 
detailed budgets prepared by NTPs that are peer-reviewed 
by WHO as part of efforts to strengthen the budgeting of 
national strategic plans for TB care and control. Comprehensive 
and robust budgets for national strategic plans are now an 
essential requirement for funding applications to the Global 
Fund, as part of this agency’s new funding model introduced 
in 2013. Two tools promoted by WHO (the WHO TB planning 
and budgeting tool and the OneHealth tool)c,d for estimating 
funding requirements allow mapping of detailed budgets 
to the line items used in the WHO TB data collection form, 
and comparisons with data reported online. Triangulation is 
also undertaken with data available from the Global Fund,e 
USAID,f and the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development’s Creditor Reporting System. In 2015, for 
example, reported data were compared with data submitted 
to the Global Fund as part of the funding gap analyses required 
for funding proposals and follow-up and adjustments made as 
appropriate.
In 2014 and 2015, additional elements of review and validation 
included facilitation of communications between focal points 
for National Health Accounts and NTP managers, with the aim of 
using expenditure data generated from implementation of the 
System of Health Accounts 2011 (that allows expenditures to be 
reported by disease) for reporting of TB expenditures wherever 
available.
In reviewing and validating data, particular attention has always 
been given to the 22 HBCs. A summary of data validation methods 
used for HBCs is provided in Table B7.1.
TB funding reported by NTPs usually does not include the financial 
costs associated with the inpatient and outpatient care required 
during TB treatment (among HBCs, the notable exceptions are 
China and the Russian Federation, since treatment is provided 
in TB-specific clinics or hospitals for which earmarked budgets 
and funding exist). Since many detailed costing studies in a wide 
range of countries show that these costs account for a large share 
of the cost of treating someone with TB,g analyses of TB financing 
undertaken by WHO have always included estimates of the 
funding used for both inpatient and outpatient care. 
As in past reports, WHO estimates the funding used for inpatient 
and outpatient care of TB patients by multiplying the number of 
outpatient visits and days of inpatient care per patient (reported by 
NTPs each year) by the cost per bed-day and clinic visits available 
from the WHO-CHOICE databaseh and then by the reported 
number of TB patients notified or projected to be notified. This 
is done separately for drug-susceptible TB and MDR-TB. For a 
further three countries (Belarus, Burkina Faso and the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo), data from a recent National Health 
Account (NHA) were used.i It is hoped that in the near future, NHA 
data will be routinely available for many more countries, including 
a breakdown by source of funding (domestic vs international) that 
is currently not available for any country. 
a Floyd K, Pantoja A, Dye C. Financing tuberculosis monitoring system. 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization; 2007; 85:334–40.
b Floyd K, Fitzpatrick C., Pantoja A and Raviglione M. Domestic and donor 
funding for tuberculosis care and control in low-income and middle-
income countries: an analysis of trends 2002–11, and requirements to 
meet 2015 targets. The Lancet Global Health; 1: e105–15.
c Planning and budgeting for TB control activities. Geneva, World Health 
Organization; 2015. http://www.who.int/tb/dots/planning_budgeting_
tool/en/ 
92  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
 TABLE B7.1 
Methods used to review and validate financing data reported by NTPs, high TB and MDR-TB burden countries 
COUNTRY
ROUTINE REAL-TIME CHECKS FOR 
PLAUSIBILITY AND INTERNAL 
CONSISTENCY (TRENDS OVER TIME), 
REVIEW AND FOLLOW-UP CHECKS 
BY WHO FINANCE DATA REVIEWERS, 
UPDATES/ CORRECTIONS ENCOURAGED 
REVIEW BY  
IN-COUNTRY  
WHO TB MEDICAL 
OFFICER
NATIONAL TB STRATEGIC 
PLANNING AND BUDGETING 
AND ASSOCIATED ASSESSMENT 
OF SOURCES OF FUNDING USING 
WHO RECOMMENDED  
COSTING TOOLS b
UNIT COST DATA 
AVAILABLE  
FROM INDEPENDENT 
ECONOMIC  
EVALUATION 
22 HIGH TB BURDEN COUNTRIES
Afghanistan
yes
yes
yes (2013)
no
Bangladesh
yes
yes
yes (2014)
yes
Brazil
yes
yes
no
yes
Cambodia
yes
yes
yes (2009)
yes
China
yes
yes
no
yes
DR Congo
yes
yes
yes (2014)
no
Ethiopia
yes
sometimes
yes (2014)
yes
India
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
Indonesia
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
Kenya
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
Mozambique
yes
mostly
yes (2013)
no
Myanmar
yes
yes
yes (2011)
no
Nigeria
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
Pakistan
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
Philippines
yes
yes
yes (2011)
yes
Russian Federation
yes
yes
no
yes
South Africa
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
UR Tanzania
yes
yes
no
yes
Thailand
yes
yes
yes (2015)
yes
Uganda
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
Viet Nam
yes
yes
no
yes
Zimbabwe
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
REMAINING HIGH MDR-TB BURDEN COUNTRIES
Armenia
yes
Wolfheze working 
group on financing
yes (2010)
no
Azerbaijan
yes
no
no
no
Belarus
yes
Wolfheze working 
group on financing
no
no
Bulgaria
yes
no
no
no
Georgia
yes
no
no
no
Kazakhstan
yes
no
yes (2013)
no
Kyrgyzstan
yes
yes
yes (2013)
no
Latvia
yes
no
no
yes
Lithuaniaa
no
no
no
no
Republic of Moldova
yes
no
no
no
Tajikistan
yes
no
no
yes
Ukraine
yes
yes
yes (2013)
yes
Uzbekistan
yes
no
yes (2011)
no
Source: GTB compilation based on data review process and Lawrence Y. et al, 2015.
a Data for Lithuania has never been reported to WHO.
b The tools recommended by WHO are the OneHealth tool and the WHO TB Planning and Budgeting tool. 
 
 
d Planning and budgeting for TB control activities as part of sector wide national 
strategic health plans and policies. Geneva, Inter-Agency working group; 
2015. Available at: http://www.who.int/choice/onehealthtool/en/
e For example, data available at http://web-api.theglobalfund.org/odata/ 
were accessed in May 2015.
f FY 2013 Congressional Budget Justification for Foreign Operations. 
Released March and April 2012, USAID http://www.state.gov/f/releases/
iab/fy2013cbj/pdf/
g Laurence YV, Griffiths UK, Vassall A. Costs to Health Services and 
the Patient of Treating Tuberculosis: A Systematic Literature Review. 
PharmacoEconomics. 2015:1–17.
h Choosing interventions that are cost effective (WHO-CHOICE). Geneva, 
World Health Organization; 2008. Available at: http://www.who.int/
choice/cost-effectiveness/inputs/health_service/en/
i National Health Accounts http://www.who.int/health-accounts/en/
GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  93
 94  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
almost all (96%) of the funding estimated to be used for 
inpatient and outpatient care is accounted for by middle- or 
high-income countries, it can be assumed that virtually all of 
this funding is from domestic sources (international donor 
funding for inpatient and outpatient care is only likely to 
occur in low-income countries, via general budget support 
to the health sector). Overall, 87% of the estimated funding 
of US$ 6.6 billion in 2015 is from domestic sources. Interna-
tional donor funding for the TB-specific budgets of NTPs has 
increased since 2006, reaching US$ 0.8 billion in 2015. 
It is important to highlight that the funding reported by 
NTPs does not capture all international donor funding for 
TB; donor funding is also provided to entities other than 
NTPs, including international and national governmental 
and nongovernmental organizations. A more comprehen-
sive analysis of international donor funding, based on donor 
reports to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD), is provided in Box 7.2.1 
It is also important to emphasize that the global average 
for the share of funding provided from domestic sources con-
ceals enormous variation among individual countries, as well 
as country groups that can be defined based on TB burden, 
geography, political/economic profile and income level (Fig-
ure 7.4, Table 7.3). 
Domestic funding dominates (93–94% of the total fund-
ing available in 2015) in three (not mutually exclusive) groups: 
BRICS, upper middle-income countries and regions outside 
Africa and Asia. In addition to BRICS, only one HBC (Thai-
land) has consistently reported levels of domestic funding 
that exceed contributions from international donor funding 
in recent years. 
In lower middle-income countries, domestic fund-
ing has risen from US$ 0.2 billion in 2006 to over US$ 0.5 
billion in 2015, but international donor funding has also 
assumed greater and greater importance, reaching parity 
with domestic funding in 2015. Most of the increase in lower 
middle-income countries has been driven by grants from the 
Global Fund.
International donor funding dominates in the group of 
17 HBCs outside BRICS (73% of the total funding available in 
2015) and in low-income countries (80% of the total funding 
available in 2015). At the individual country level, it remains 
absolutely critical to funding for TB prevention, diagno-
sis and treatment in most of the 22 HBCs, and in four HBCs 
(Afghanistan, Bangladesh, the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo and Mozambique), ≥90% of available funding in 2015 
is from international donor sources. 
1 Out-of-pocket expenditures are also not included in NTP reports. These 
are analysed in more detail in section 7.5. 
7.3  
Funding gaps reported by national  
TB programmes, 2006–2015
Despite growth in funding from domestic and international 
donor sources, many NTPs continue to be unable to mobi-
lize all the funding required for full implementation of their 
national strategic plans (Figure 7.5). Funding gaps (i.e. the 
difference between assessments by NTPs of funding needs 
for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment and the actual 
amount of funds mobilized) have persisted and in 2015 
amounted to a total of US$ 0.8 billion. This is considerably 
less than the gap of US$ 1.4 billion that exists between the 
US$ 8 billion estimated to be needed for a full response to the 
TB epidemic in 2015 (section 7.1) and the US$ 6.6 billion avail-
able in 2015 (section 7.2). The difference can be explained 
by the fact that national strategic plans for TB remain less 
ambitious than the targets set in the Global Plan to Stop TB, 
2011–2015 (section 7.1) in many countries. 
Lower middle-income countries account for the larg-
est reported funding gaps (about US$ 0.5 billion in 2015), of 
which US$ 0.4 billion was in five countries (Nigeria, Indone-
sia, Ukraine, Viet Nam and the Philippines, in descending 
order). There may be additional capacity to mobilize more 
domestic funding in these countries. Funding gaps were rela-
tively small in upper middle-income countries in 2015 (Figure 
7.5), and have fallen in recent years – mostly explained by 
large reductions in the funding gaps reported by the Russian 
Federation and Kazakhstan. These two countries reported 
no funding gaps in 2014 or 2015. Funding gaps reported by 
low-income countries fell between 2014 and 2015, reflect-
ing a shift of some countries from the low to middle-income 
country group between 2014 and 2015. 
Geographically, the African Region has by far the largest 
funding gap: US$ 0.4 billion in 2015, equivalent to half of the 
global total. The largest gap was reported by Nigeria (US$ 154 
million, see Table 7.3). 
Of the US$ 0.8 billion funding gap reported by NTPs in 
2015, US$ 0.64 billion is for drug-susceptible TB and US$ 0.14 
billion is for MDR-TB. Relative to total funding needs, the 
funding gap is larger for drug-susceptible TB. Domestic fund-
ing accounts for a larger share of the funding for MDR-TB 
compared with drug-susceptible TB, which is not surprising 
given that most of the high MDR-TB burden countries are 
middle or high-income countries and 14 of 27 are in the Euro-
pean Region. 
7.4  
Unit costs of treatment for drug-
susceptible and MDR-TB, 2014
The cost per patient treated for drug-susceptible and MDR-
TB could be estimated for 117 countries and 90 countries, 
respectively. The analysis of the cost per TB patient with 
drug-susceptible TB was limited to countries that had noti-
fied at least 100 TB cases in 2014. Estimates of the unit cost of 
MDR-TB treatment were restricted to countries that report-
ed at least 10 patients on second-line treatment for MDR-TB. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  95
n TABLE 7.3
TB budget reported by NTP, available funding from domestic and international donor sources, funding gap and share of 
budget provided by domestic and international donor funding, 36 high TB or MDR-TB burden countries, 2015  
(current US$ millions)
TB BUDGET 
REPORTED  
BY NTP
DOMESTIC 
FUNDING (A)
INTERNATIONAL 
DONOR 
FUNDING (B)
SHARE OF AVAILABLE 
FUNDING (A+B) 
PROVIDED FROM 
DOMESTIC SOURCES 
(%)
SHARE OF AVAILABLE 
FUNDING (A+B) 
PROVIDED BY 
INTERNATIONAL 
DONORS (%)
FUNDING 
GAPa
22 HIGH-BURDEN COUNTRIES
Afghanistan
15
0.9
10
8.1%
92%
4.0
Bangladesh
48
0.1
33
0.4%
100%
14
Brazil
77
55
0.6
99%
1.1%
21
Cambodia
31
3.6
14
20%
80%
13
China
340
306
6
98%
2%
28
DR Congo
55
3.0
27
10%
90%
24
Ethiopia
82
9.1
35
21%
79%
38
India
261
121
140
46%
54%
0
Indonesia
133
18
27
39%
61%
88
Kenya
45
12
13
48%
52%
20
Mozambique
29
1.6
19
7.9%
92%
8.1
Myanmar
36
3.9
25
14%
86%
8
Nigeria
228
30
44
41%
59%
154
Pakistan
50
8.4
30
22%
78%
12
Philippines
106
25
42
37%
63%
40
Russian Federation
1 894
1 893
1.0
100%
0%
0
South Africa
248
208
19
91%
8.6%
21
Thailand
32
17
3.6
82%
18%
12
Uganda
24
2.4
17
12%
88%
5.2
UR Tanzania
67
8.5
12
41%
59%
47
Viet Nam
66
6.7
12
37%
63%
48
Zimbabwe
28
2.0
17
11%
89%
10
22 high-burden countries
3 895
2 735
546
83%
17%
614
REMAINING HIGH MDR-TB BURDEN COUNTRIES
Armenia
4.2
3.0
1.2
71%
29%
0
Azerbaijan
6.3
1.2
5.1
19%
81%
0
Belarus
15
7.1
3.6
66%
34%
4.7
Bulgaria
15
13
1.8
88%
12%
0
Estonia
0.6
0.6
0
100%
<1%
0
Georgia
17
5.5
7.9
41%
59%
3.2
Kazakhstan
195
195
0
100%
0%
0
Kyrgyzstan
29
11
18
37%
63%
0
Latvia
1.6
1.6
0
100%
0%
0
Lithuania
–
–
Republic of Moldova
17
10
7.1
59%
41%
0
Tajikistan
25
6.9
13
35%
65%
5.1
Ukraine
123
50
23
68%
32%
50
Uzbekistan
101
86
14
86%
14%
0
27 high MDR-TB burden countries
4 097
3 023
536
85%
15%
538
36 high-TB or high MDR-TB burden countries
4 445
3 126
641
83%
17%
678
Blank cells indicate data not reported.
– indicates values that cannot be calculated.
a The funding gap reflects the anticipated gap for the year at the time a country reported data in the 2015 round of global TB data collection.
 Box 7.2 International donor funding for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment,  
 
based on donor reports to the Organization for Economic Cooperation  
 
and Development
International donor funding provided for TB prevention, diagnosis 
and treatment is channelled to NTPs and other recipients. The 
financial data reported to WHO by NTPs therefore understates the 
total amount of international donor funding being provided each 
year. 
The creditor reporting system (CRS) of the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is the most 
comprehensive source of information about international donor 
funding. Reports are provided by 31 multilateral organizations, 
the 26 countries that are members of the OECD’s Development 
Assistance Committee and a further two non-committee members 
(Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates). The OECD compiles data 
on commitments and disbursements from both governments 
and multilateral organizations. Disbursement data include both 
direct transfers to countries as well as the provision of goods and 
services, such as in-kind transfers or technical assistance. 
Data on gross disbursements for TB (as opposed to commitments 
that may not always be translated into actual funding) were 
analysed for 2004−2013. All funding coded as for TB (code 12263: 
tuberculosis control) was included. It should be highlighted that 
funding for TB that flows between OECD countries is not recorded 
in the OECD database. It is also important to note that in the OECD 
database, government contributions to multilateral organizations 
are not attributed to the government of origin but only to the 
multilateral organization (for example, funding received by 
countries from Global Fund grants are attributed to the Global 
Fund, as opposed to the original donor to the Global Fund). 
Figure B7.2.1 shows that international donor funding for TB 
increased from US$ 148 million in 2004 to US$ 1022 million in 
2013. Most of the funding that was provided 2004−2013 came 
from the Global Fund (72%), followed by the government of the 
United States of America (14%). Remaining funding for TB came 
from other countries (8%) and other multilateral organizations 
(6%), among which the largest donors were the governments 
of Canada (4%) and the United Kingdom (3%). The Global Fund 
has consistently been the largest provider of international donor 
funding for TB, including US$ 788 million in 2013.a Funding 
increased steadily from 2004 to 2013 with the exception of a drop 
from 2010 to 2011. Disbursements from the government of the 
United States of America steadily increased from 2007 to 2011 
FIGURE B7.2.2 
International donor funding for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment by region, 2004–2013
0
100
200
300
0
10
20
30
40
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
10
20
30
40
50
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
US$ millions
US$ millions
US$ millions
US$ millions
Africa
America
Asia
Europe
Global Fund                             United States                             Other countries                             Other multilaterals
FIGURE B7.2.1 
International donor funding for TB prevention, diagnosis 
and treatment by source, 2004–2013
Global Funda
Other countries
Other multilaterals
United States
US$ millions
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012
2013
0
200
400
600
800
a The increase between 2012 and 2013 was mostly accounted for by India, 
which had a Global Fund disbursement of US$ 11 million in 2012 and  
US$ 165 million in 2013.
96  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
 FIGURE B7.2.3 
International donor funding for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment to non-OECD countries, 2011–2013  
(constant 2013 US$, million). Donors are listed on the left and recipients of donor funding are listed on the right. The Global 
Fund through which much donor funding is channelled, is shown in the middle.
USA: $1077
France, 
Germany and 
the United 
Kingdom: 
$ 538
Other countries: 
$ 657
Bill &
 Melinda Gates 
Foundation: 
$ 77
Other 
multilaterals: 
$ 91
Asia: $ 1300
Africa: $ 899
Americas: $ 104
Europe: $ 109
Oceania: $ 28
Global Fund: $ 1728
and have since levelled off. However, it should also be noted 
that contributions from the government of the United States of 
America captured in the OECD database are lower than official 
allocations. In 2013, the allocation for TB was US$ 232 million and 
in addition more than US$ 130 million was allocated for TB/HIV via 
the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR). 
The Global Fund disbursed TB funding (in at least one year 
between 2004 and 2013) in 105 of the 109 countries that received 
any TB donor assistance. The top recipients of funding, with total 
amounts of over US$ 100 million each during the years 2004−2013, 
were (in descending order of the total funding received): China, 
India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Bangladesh, Nigeria and 
Pakistan. Collectively, these countries accounted for over 58% of 
the TB cases notified in 2014. Figure B7.2.2 shows that Africa, Asia, 
and Europe all experienced major increases in disbursements 
between 2012 and 2013 while amounts disbursed to the Americas 
remained relatively flat. The main drivers of these changes 
between 2012 and 2013 were increased financing from the Global 
Fund for Zambia (US$ 86 million in 2013), India (US$ 165 million in 
2013), and Ukraine (US$ 17 million in 2013).
Figure B7.2.3 shows the flow of international donor funding 
for TB during the period 2011–2013. In this figure, amounts of 
funding flowing to the Global Fund from countries and other 
donors were estimated on the assumption that 18% of a donor’s 
total contribution to the Global Fund was for TB, in line with the 
overall share of Global Fund financing that is used for TB. The 
Global Fund publishes the amounts received from each donor on 
its website. The four largest country donors (the United States 
of America, France, Germany and the UK) are shown separately, 
as is the largest non-country donor (the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation). The importance of the United States of America in the 
global funding of TB is particularly evident in this presentation of 
data, since it accounted for about one third of contributions to the 
Global Fund in addition to funding provided via bilateral channels.
 
a For comparison, the total funding reported by countries to WHO 
amounted to 85% of this total, US$ 669 million. 
GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  97
 98  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 7.4
Funding for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment from domestic sources and international donors, 2006–2015,  
9 country groups  (constant 2015 US$ billions)
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
Domestic                                            International donorse                                            Global Fund only
US$ billions
0
1
2
3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
1
2
3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
1
2
3
US$ billions
US$ billions
a. BRICS
b. 17 HBCs excluding BRICS
c. Rest of worlda
d.  Low-income countries
e. Lower-middle-income countries
f. Upper-middle-income countriesb
g.  Africa
h. Asiac
i. Other regionsd
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
2006
2009
2012
2015
a  Rest of the world includes 101 countries that are not in the list of 22 high TB burden or 27 high MDR-TB burden countries.
b  The upper-middle-income category includes three high-income countries that are in the list of TB and/or high MDR-TB burden countries: Estonia, Latvia 
and the Russian Federation.
c  Asia includes the WHO regions of South-East Asia and the Western Pacific. 
d  “Other regions” consists of three WHO regions: the Eastern Mediterranean Region, the European Region, and the Region of the Americas.
e  This includes the Global Fund.
Of the 36 countries that are in the list of high TB burden or 
high MDR-TB countries, 35 could be included in the analysis 
(the exception was Lithuania). Analytical methods are sum-
marized in Box 7.3.
Unit cost estimates for 2014 are shown for drug-suscepti-
ble and MDR-TB in Figure 7.6 and Figure 7.7. 
7.4.1 Drug-susceptible TB
The cost per patient treated for drug-susceptible TB was 
generally in the range US$ 100−US$ 1 000. In general, approx-
imately 80% of this cost was accounted for by reported 
NTP expenditures, with the remainder being inpatient and 
outpatient care. The cost per patient treated was typically 
higher, but still quite varied, in countries of the former Soviet 
Union, ranging from US$ 1 123−US$ 18 836. In these countries, 
lengthy hospitalizations play a more significant role in the 
total cost of care, with admissions lasting up to an average 
of 75 days and accounting for approximately 40–60% of 
the total cost per patient. However, there are some strik-
ing examples of reductions in reliance on hospitalization. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  99
n FIGURE 7.5
Funding gaps for TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment reported by countries, by income group and WHO region, 
2006–2015 (constant 2015 US$ millions)a
a The upper-middle-income category includes three high-income countries that are in the list of TB and/or high MDR-TB burden countries: Estonia, Latvia 
and the Russian Federation.
Box 7.3 Methods used to estimate the cost per patient treated for drug-susceptible  
 
and MDR-TB
Two main data sources were used. The first was the validated 
expenditure data reported by NTPs that are stored in the WHO 
global TB database. The second was country-specific estimates 
of the unit costs of bed-days and outpatient visits available from 
WHO’s CHOosing Interventions that are Cost-Effective (WHO-
CHOICE) model and associated database (managed by the Health 
Governance and Financing department). In a few instances when 
no expenditure data could be reported, information about the 
total funding available was used as a proxy for expenditures. For 
a few countries, WHO-CHOICE estimates were replaced with 
estimates of unit costs obtained directly from recent studies or 
discussions with experts.
Costs were calculated separately for drug-susceptible and MDR-
TB. In each case, the numerator was the total estimated cost of 
treatment, which has two main parts: 1) the national expenditures 
reported by the NTP; and 2) the costs associated with the 
utilization of health services by patients with TB and MDR-TB. 
As explained in Box 7.1, national NTP expenditures are reported 
annually to WHO using the online WHO global TB data 
collection system, and then reviewed and validated. Categories 
of expenditure considered as costs for MDR-TB were second-
line drugs, and all other inputs/activities implemented for the 
programmatic management of MDR-TB. All other categories (with 
the exception of collaborative TB/HIV activities) were assumed to 
be for drug-susceptible TB. 
For almost all countries, the total costs associated with utilization 
of inpatient and outpatient care were calculated using information 
about the typical number of days of inpatient care and outpatient 
visits required on a per patient basis during treatment (reported 
separately for drug-susceptible and MDR-TB by NTPs) combined 
with WHO-CHOICE unit cost estimates, multiplied by the 
number of patients treated in a given year (based on notification 
data – see Chapter 3 for drug-susceptible TB and Chapter 4 for 
MDR-TB). Multiplying quantities of visits and bed-days by their 
price estimates yields the total estimated cost of inpatient and 
outpatient services. For three countries (Belarus, Burkina Faso 
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo), TB inpatient and 
outpatient expenditures available from National Health Accounts 
were used in lieu of the estimated cost from this ingredients-based 
approach.
Unit costs were then calculated as the sum of 2014 NTP 
expenditures and total costs for utilization of inpatient and 
outpatient care, divided by the reported number of patients 
treated. Again, this calculation was carried out separately for drug-
susceptible and MDR-TB.
Lower-middle-income countries
Low-income countries
Upper-middle-income countries
African region
Region of the Americas
Eastern Mediterranean region
European region
South-East Asia region
Western Pacific region
Total gap = US$ 0.8 billion
Total gap = US$ 0.8 billion
US$ millions
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012
2013 2014
2015
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012
2013 2014
2015
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
100
200
300
400
500
US$ millions
 100  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 7.6 
Estimated cost per patient treated for drug-susceptible TB in 117 countries, 2014a
n FIGURE 7.7 
Estimated cost per patient treated for MDR-TB in 90 countries, 2014a
a Limited to countries with at least 20 patients on second-line treatment in 2014.
a Limited to countries with at least 100 notified patients in 2014.
G
500
G
G
G
WHO region
African
American
Eastern
Mediterranean
European
South-East Asia
Western Pacific
100
7 500
MDR-TB caseload (notified cases)
20 000
500
1 000
5 000
10 000
20 000
50 000
Cost per patient treated (2015 US$, log scale)
1 000
2 000
5 000
10 000
15 000
GDP per capita (2015 US$, log scale)
Bangladesh
DR Congo
Ethiopia
Nigeria
Armenia
Latvia
Estonia
Russian
Federation
Kazakhstan
Bulgaria
South
Africa
Azerbaijan
China
Belarus
Philippines
Indonesia
Tajikistan
Kyrgyzstan
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
India
Pakistan
Georgia
Ukraine
Republic of
Moldova
Myanmar
Ethiopia
100
500
1 000
5 000
10 000
20 000
500
1 000
2 000
5 000
10 000
15 000
GDP per capita (2015 US$, log scale)
Cost per patient treated (2015 US$, log scale)
DR Congo
Pakistan
Bangladesh
Myanmar
India
Kenya
UR Tanzania
Uganda
Mozambique
Afghanistan
Indonesia
Thailand
China
South Africa
Brazil
Philippines
Nigeria
Russian 
Federation
Viet
Nam
Cambodia
Zimbabwe
WHO region
African
American
Eastern
Mediterranean
European
South-East Asia
Western Pacific
250 000
1 000 000
TB caseload (notified TB cases)
1 500 000
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  101
Although not yet be reflected in analyses for 2014, the Rus-
sian Federation reported hospitalization of about 65% of TB 
patients with drug-susceptible TB in 2015, compared with 
93% in 2014. 
Low-income countries spent on average US$ 516 per TB 
patient, while upper-middle-income or high-income coun-
tries invested an average of US$ 5 558. In the 22 HBCs, the 
estimated cost per patient treated for drug-susceptible TB 
in 2014 ranged from US$ 74 in Pakistan to US$12 988 in the 
Russian Federation. In all of the 22 HBCs, the cost per patient 
treated for drug-susceptible TB was less than gross domestic 
product (GDP) per capita. Six countries – China, India, South 
Africa, Indonesia, Bangladesh and Pakistan, which together 
account for 58% of the global TB burden – have costs per 
patient treated that are relatively low compared with their 
GDP per capita. While the level of GDP per capita clearly 
influences the cost of TB treatment, this shows that the size 
of the total patient caseload is also an important factor (for 
example, when numbers of patients treated are very large, 
economies of scale can be realised). 
7.4.2 MDR-TB
For MDR-TB, the cost per patient treated ranged from an 
average of US$ 6 826 in low-income countries to an average of 
US$ 21 265 in upper middle-income countries in 2014. As for 
drug-susceptible TB, the cost per patient treated for MDR-TB 
was typically higher in countries of the former Soviet Union, 
ranging from US$ 2 935 in Uzbekistan to US$ 64 250 in Lat-
via (where all patients with MDR-TB are hospitalized for an 
average of 120 days, at an estimated cost of US$ 262 per day). 
This mainly reflects greater reliance on inpatient care, with 
admissions lasting up to an average of 240 days per patient 
and accounting for about 60% of the total cost of treatment. 
7.5 
Progress towards UHC: insights from 
health financing data
UHC is defined as access for all to essential preventive and 
treatment health care interventions, with financial protec-
tion.1 In financing terms, the absolute level of funding for 
health care must be high enough to ensure that it is possible 
to provide essential health services to the whole population; 
additionally, the costs of using those services, once avail-
able, must not be prohibitive (using them should not result 
in financial hardship). Mandatory pre-payment financing 
mechanisms (such as taxation or social insurance schemes) 
need to form the core of domestic health financing.2
There are three health financing indicators for which 
benchmarks required to achieve UHC have been suggested 
and for which recent estimates are available for all countries 
1 World Health Organisation, World Bank Group. Monitoring progress 
towards universal health coverage at country and global levels. Framework, 
measures and targets. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (WHO/
HIS/HIA/14.1).
2 World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2010. Health systems 
financing: the path to universal coverage. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2010.
to which the indicator applies. Analysis of data (from the 
WHO Global Health Expenditure database) for these three 
indicators can therefore provide useful insights into a coun-
try’s progress towards, or achievement of, UHC. The three 
indicators are:
"
" Total government spending on health as a proportion of 
GDP: the suggested benchmark is 5–6%;3,4,5 
"
" Government and donor-funded health expenditure per 
capita in low-income countries: the suggested benchmark 
is US$ 86 (in 2012 prices);2
"
" The share of out-of-pocket expenditures (OOP) in total 
health expenditures: the suggested benchmark is less 
than 15%.1,6,7
OOP expenditures are defined as direct payments made to 
health care providers by individuals at the time of service 
use, excluding prepayment for health services (for example 
in the form of taxes or specific insurance premiums or con-
tributions) and, where possible, net of any reimbursements 
to the individual who made the payment.8 The level of OOP 
expenditures provides a proxy measure of the degree to 
which people lack financial protection.
7.5.1 
Government spending on health as a proportion 
of GDP
The latest data on government health expenditures (GHE) 
are for 2013.9 GHE was less than 6% of GDP in most countries 
in 2013 (149/190, 78%), including all of the 36 countries in the 
current lists of high TB burden and/or MDR-TB burden coun-
tries (Figure 7.8). Among HBCs, those at the lowest end of the 
range were Bangladesh, Indonesia, India, Nigeria, Myanmar, 
Pakistan and the Philippines (all <1.5%); those closest to the 
6% threshold were Brazil, South Africa and Thailand (all at 
around 4.5%). Among WHO regions, the South-East Asia 
Region had the lowest levels of health spending as a propor-
tion of GDP. 
There were 41 countries where government spending on 
health exceeded 6% of GDP. Of these, only six were low or 
lower-middle income countries: Rwanda, Swaziland, Leso-
tho, Samoa, Kiribati and Micronesia. 
3 World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2010. Health systems 
financing: the path to universal coverage. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2010.
4 McIntyre et al. Fiscal Space for Domestic Funding of Health and Other Social 
Services. London: Chatham House; 2014.
5 World Health Organization and Pan American Health Organization. 
Resolution CD53.R14 Strategy for universal access to health and universal 
health coverage. 53rd Directing Council, 66th Session of the Regional 
Committee of WHO for the Americas. Washington: World Health 
Organization and Pan American Health Organization, 2014.
6 Xu et al, Protecting Households from Catastrophic Health Spending, 
Health Affairs 2007; 26(4): 972–983.
7 Xu et al., Household Catastrophic Health Expenditure: A Multicountry 
Analysis, The Lancet 2003;362: 111–117.
8 World Health Organization and World Bank. First Global Monitoring 
Report on Tracking Universal Health Coverage, 2015. http://www.who.int/
healthinfo/universal_health_coverage/report/2015/en/.
9 WHO National Health Accounts database, accessed July 2015 via http://
apps.who.int/nha/database
cvv
 102  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
n FIGURE 7.8 
Government spending on health, as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), 2013a
n FIGURE 7.9 
Government spending on health per capita in low-income countries (shown in blue), 2013. Middle and high-income 
countries are shown in white.a
Percentage 
of GDP
<4%
4–5.9%
6–9.9%
≥10%
No data
Not applicable
a Data for Bahrain and Brazil are for 2012.
a Countries are classified as per the World Bank income categories for 2013. Available at: http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-and-lending-groups
<US$ 5
US$ 5–9.9
US$ 10–19.9
US$ 20–29.9
US$ 30–44.9
US$ 45–60
No data
Not applicable
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  103
n FIGURE 7.11
Total health expenditures by source of financing in 
selected high TB burden and high-income countries, 2013
Private expenditures, other
Non-profit institutions serving households (e.g. NGOs)
Out-of-pocket expenditures
Voluntary pre-payment
Mandatory pre-payment
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
South Africa
Brazil
China
Russian Federation
Indonesia
India
Nigeria
France
United Kingdom
Germany
Netherlands
Canada
US
Italy
Percentage
n FIGURE 7.10 
Out-of-pocket expenditures as a percentage of total health expenditures, 2013
Percentage
≤15%
16–29%
30–44%
≥45%
No data
Not applicable
7.5.2 Government spending on health per capita, 
low-income countries
In 2013, government spending on health per capita was far 
below the suggested benchmark of US$ 86 per capita in all 
low-income countries (Figure 7.9). Most countries spent less 
than US$ 20 per capita. The countries that were closest to the 
benchmark were Rwanda (US$ 41 per capita) and Kyrgyzstan 
(US$ 51 per capita). 
7.5.3 Share of out-of-pocket expenditures in total 
health expenditures
In 2013, OOP expenditures were less than 15% of total health 
spending in 43 of 190 countries for which data were avail-
able, including three HBCs: Mozambique, Thailand and 
South Africa (Figure 7.10). At the other end of the scale, there 
were 49 countries where OOP expenditures accounted for at 
least 45% of total health expenditures, including ten HBCs: 
Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Cambodia, Nigeria, Myanmar, 
Pakistan, Philippines, Viet Nam and the Russian Federa-
tion. The global average in 2013 was 32%, a small reduction 
compared with 36% in 2000.1 The breakdown of total health 
expenditures by source of funding, including OOP expendi-
tures, is shown for selected high TB burden and high-income 
countries in Figure 7.11.
1 World Health Organization and World Bank. First Global Monitoring 
Report on Tracking Universal Health Coverage, 2015. http://www.who.
int/healthinfo/universal_health_coverage/report/2015/en/.
 104  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
7.5.4 Beyond financial risk protection
One of the three main targets in the End TB Strategy (2016–
2035) is that no TB patients or their households should face 
catastrophic costs as a result of TB disease (Chapter 1). This 
target was specifically included because it is a key marker 
of financial risk protection and progress towards UHC and 
social protection for TB-affected households.1 Catastrophic 
cost is a broader concept than catastrophic health expendi-
ture, since it includes not only direct expenditures on health 
services but also (1) non-medical payments (such as trans-
portation or lodging charges) that are directly related to 
accessing TB diagnosis and treatment and (2) indirect costs 
such as income losses (for example, related to time lost from 
work or loss of employment). 
The proportion of patients and their households that 
experience catastrophic costs can be measured using peri-
odic surveys. To support such surveys, WHO established a 
Task Force in 2015. The main focus of the Task Force’s work in 
2015 has been to develop a generic protocol and accompany-
ing questionnaires,2 building on methods used in previous 
studies of patient costs. 
1 Uplekar M, Weil D, Lonnroth K, Jaramillo E, Lienhardt C, Dias HM, et al. 
WHO’s new End TB Strategy. The Lancet. 2015;385:1799-801. See in 
particular Panel 2 in the supplementary appendix. 
2 Protocol for survey to determine direct and indirect costs due to TB and to 
estimate proportion of TB-affected households experiencing catastrophic costs 
– Field testing version, 2015. Available from the Global TB Programme in 
WHO upon request.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  105
Research and development 
CHAP TER
8
 Key facts and messages
first, bedaquiline, was approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) in December 2012 and the second, 
delamanid, was approved by the European Medicines Agency 
in November 2013. WHO issued interim guidance on the use 
of these two drugs in the treatment of MDR-TB in June 2013 
and October 2014, respectively. Additionally, there are eight 
new or repurposed anti-TB drugs in advanced phases of clinical 
development. For the first time in six years, a new anti-TB 
drug candidate has entered a Phase I clinical trial: TBA-354, 
a nitroimidazole that is part of the same class of drugs as 
delamanid and pretomanid. 
Results from three Phase III trials investigating four-month 
regimens for the treatment of drug-susceptible TB that 
include fluoroquinolones were released in 2014. These shorter 
regimens failed to show non-inferiority to the six-month 
standard of care regimen currently recommended by WHO. 
Several new regimens, including new and/or re-purposed 
drugs, are now being tested in a series of Phase II/III trials for 
the treatment of drug-susceptible and/or drug-resistant TB.
Two recent observational studies of the effectiveness of shorter 
treatment regimens for patients with MDR-TB in Niger and 
Cameroon have shown that a 12-month treatment regimen was 
effective and well-tolerated in patients not previously exposed 
to second-line drugs. 
There are 15 vaccine candidates in clinical trials. Results of 
Phase II efficacy data to determine whether BCG and/or H4:IC31 
can prevent infection, and M72 can prevent disease, as well as 
phase III data of whether M.vaccae can prevent disease, will 
shortly be available. Major shifts in TB vaccine research and 
development include the introduction of more stringent gating 
criteria/mechanisms for candidate entry into and progress 
in clinical trials; vaccine discovery that explores induction 
of immunity beyond conventional T cells; and support of 
experimental medicine studies for knowledge generation and 
to better connect data from animal models and human studies.
Intensified research and development is one of the three 
pillars of the WHO post-2015 global TB strategy, and will play a 
crucial role in accelerating the reductions in TB incidence and 
mortality required to reach global TB targets by 2035. Efforts to 
develop new TB diagnostics, drugs, and vaccines intensified in 
the past decade, but considerable progress and investment is 
still needed. 
The diagnostic technology landscape continues to look 
promising although very few technologies are at adequately 
advanced stages for WHO evaluation. Technologies under 
development include rapid tests to detect TB, drug resistance, 
or TB and drug resistance combined. Those based on molecular 
technologies such as nucleic acid amplification tests are the 
most advanced. 
A new diagnostic platform called the GeneXpert Omni® is in 
development. This is intended for point-of-care testing for TB 
and rifampicin-resistant TB using existing Xpert MTB/RIF® 
cartridges. This new platform will be assessed by WHO for 
equivalence to the current GeneXpert platform in 2016. A next-
generation cartridge called Xpert Ultra® is also in development, 
and is expected to replace the Xpert MTB/RIF cartridge. The 
Xpert Ultra assay will be assessed in 2016 in two stages, first as 
a replacement for the current Xpert MTB/RIF assay and second 
as a replacement for conventional diagnostic culture. 
In 2015, three diagnostic tests were reviewed by WHO: 
Determine TB LAM (lipoarabinomannan), referred to as 
LF-LAM; and two new generic versions of line probe assays 
(LPAs) for first-line drugs. LF-LAM is not recommended for 
the diagnosis of TB (pulmonary and extrapulmonary), with 
the exception of people living with HIV who have low CD4 
counts or who are seriously ill. WHO will update current policy 
recommendations for the use of LPAs in early 2016. 
Two new drugs have recently been recommended for 
the treatment of MDR-TB under specific conditions. The 
The goal of the End TB strategy endorsed by the World 
Health Assembly (WHA) in May 2014 is to end the global TB 
epidemic (Chapter 1). Despite major progress in TB preven-
tion, diagnosis and treatment since the mid-1990s (Chapters 
2−7), reaching this goal will require major technological 
breakthroughs from the research and development pipeline 
by 2025; these would make possible a major acceleration in 
the rate at which TB incidence declines compared with his-
toric levels. Critical components include: the availability of 
affordable short, effective and well-tolerated treatments 
for all forms of TB (latent TB infection, drug-susceptible and 
drug-resistant TB disease); a point-of-care diagnostic test 
with capacity to identify resistance to the most important 
anti-TB drugs; and an effective post-exposure vaccine.
This is the fifth successive year in which a chapter on 
research and development is included in the Global tubercu-
 106  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
losis report. The status of progress in the development of new 
TB diagnostics, drugs and vaccines as of August 2015 is sum-
marized, based on recent publications and communications 
with and contributions from the secretariats of the relevant 
Working Groups of the Stop TB Partnership.
8.1 
New diagnostics for TB
The End TB strategy targets set for 2035 are to reduce the 
absolute number of TB deaths by 95% and to reduce the 
TB incidence rate by 90%, compared with a baseline of 
2015 (Chapter 1). To achieve these targets, national TB pro-
grammes (NTPs) first need to implement strategies that 
fully optimize the use of existing diagnostic technologies. 
Research and development is required so that new rapid 
tests that can be used at the point of care, and that accelerate 
access to testing for drug susceptibility for all bacteriologi-
cally-confirmed TB cases, become available. 
8.1.1 
An overview of the diagnostics pipeline
Although very few technologies are at an advanced stage of 
evaluation, the diagnostic technology landscape continues 
to look promising. An overview of the diagnostic pipeline 
for rapid molecular tests in August 2015 is shown in Fig-
ure 8.1. The list of technologies is not necessarily complete 
or exhaustive, but does reflect technologies that have been 
documented in recent reports published by UNITAID1 and 
1 UNITAID. 2014. Tuberculosis Diagnostic Technology and Market 
Landscape 3rd edition. Geneva: World Health Organization. Available 
at: http://www.unitaid.eu/images/marketdynamics/publications/
UNITAID_TB_Diagnostics_Landscape_3rd-edition.pdf 
Treatment Action Group (TAG).2 Tools using molecular tech-
nologies such as nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) 
are the most advanced. Technologies under development 
include tests to detect TB, drug resistance, or TB and drug 
resistance combined. These include microarray-based multi-
plexing diagnostic platforms for the simultaneous detection 
of a large number of resistance-conferring mutations. Unfor-
tunately, most tests under development are intended for use 
at the reference or intermediate laboratory level only, requir-
ing dedicated infrastructure and experienced staff. 
There are at least three technologies that are commer-
cially available (Epistem Genedrive, Epistem, UK; Molbio 
Truelab, Molbio, India and EASYNAT, Ustar, China) that are 
intended for use at the microscopy level. However, to date no 
multicentre evaluation and/or demonstration studies in dif-
ferent epidemiological setting have been conducted. These 
are necessary to generate the performance data required 
by WHO to assess and produce recommendations on these 
technologies (Figure 8.2). Evaluation studies are expensive, 
and therefore additional funding is urgently needed, both 
to expedite the progress of promising new technologies 
through the pipeline and to conduct the necessary evalua-
tion studies. Priority should be given to tests that are suitable 
for use at the lower levels of the health system. The Foun-
dation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND) remains the 
lead organization conducting field evaluations of different 
2 Harrington M. “The tuberculosis diagnostics pipeline” in 2015 Pipeline 
Report: HIV, Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) and Tuberculosis Drugs, Diagnostics, 
Vaccines, Preventive Technologies, Research Toward a Cure, and Immune-
Based and Gene Therapies in Development. New York, Treatment Action 
Group, 2015. Available at: http://www.pipelinereport.org/sites/g/files/
g575521/f/201507/2015%20Pipeline%20Report%20Full.pdf
n FIGURE 8.1
An overview of progress in the development of molecular TB diagnostics, August 2015a
FOR USE IN REFERENCE -LEVEL 
LABORATORIES
n m2000 RealTime MTB assay, Abbott, USA 
n TruArray MDR-TB, Akkoni, USA
n BioFilmChip MDR-TB, AutoGenomics, USA
n MTBC-OCTA, AutoGenomics, USA
n BD ProbeTec ET Direct TB assay, BD, USA
n TB drug resistance array, Capital Bio, 
China
n AMTD test, Hologic Genprobe, USA
n Cobas TaqMan MTB test, Roche, 
Switzerland
n Anyplex™, Seegene, Korea
n Magicplex™ MTB, Seegene, Korea
n TRC Rapid®M.TB, Tosoh Bioscience, Japan
n MeltPro®, Zeesan Biotech, China
FOR USE IN INTERMEDIATE-LEVEL 
LABORATORIES 
n FluoroType MTB / FluoroType MTB RNA, 
Hain Lifesciences, Germany
n iCubate System, iCubate, USA 
n AdvanSure, LG Life sciences, Republic of 
Korea
n LPA NTM/MTB DR, Nipro, Japan
n vereMTB, Veredus Laboratories, 
Singapore
n SPEED-OLIGO®, Vircell, Spain
n MolecuTech REBA, YD Diagnostics, Korea
n LATE-PCR, Brandeis University, USA
n GeneXpert XDR cartridge, Cepheid, USA
n Xpert Ultra, Cepheid, USA
n Enigma ML, Enigma Diagnostics, UK
FOR USE IN PERIPHERAL-LEVEL 
LABORATORIES 
n Alere Q, Alere, USA 
n TB-LAMP, Eiken, Japan
n B-SMART, LabCorp, USA
n Genedrive MTB/RIF ID, Epistem, UK
n HYDRA, Insilixa Inc, USA
n TBDx System, KGI, USA
n Truelab/Truenat MTB, Molbio/bigtec 
Diagnostics, India
n Savanna, NWGHF, USA
n EasyNAT TB Diagnostic kit, Ustar 
Biotechnologies, China
n EOSCAPE-TB, Wave 80 Biosciences, USA
n GenePOC test, GenePOC, Canada
n Xpert Omni, Cepheid, USA
a This is not an exhaustive list of technologies in development. Those listed are the ones documented in publications by UNITAID and TAG: 
 
UNITAID. 2014. Tuberculosis Diagnostic Technology and Market Landscape 3rd edition. Geneva: World Health Organization. Available at: http://www.
unitaid.eu/images/marketdynamics/publications/UNITAID_TB_Diagnostics_Landscape_3rd-edition.pdf 
 
Harrington M. “The tuberculosis diagnostics pipeline” in 2015 Pipeline Report: HIV, Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) and Tuberculosis Drugs, Diagnostics, Vaccines, 
Preventive Technologies, Research Toward a Cure, and Immune-Based and Gene Therapies in Development. New York, Treatment Action Group, 2015. Available at: 
http://www.pipelinereport.org/sites/g/files/g575521/f/201507/2015%20Pipeline%20Report%20Full.pdf
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  107
technologies, but the engagement of other stakeholders and 
adequate funding are urgently needed. 
A new diagnostic platform called the GeneXpert Omni® 
is in development. This is intended for point-of-care testing 
for TB and rifampicin-resistant TB using existing Xpert MTB/
RIF® cartridges. The device is expected to be smaller, lighter, 
and less expensive than other currently available platforms 
for point-of-care nucleic acid detection. The platform will 
come with a built-in four-hour battery; an auxiliary battery 
that provides an additional 12 hours of run time is also avail-
able. In 2016, this new platform will be assessed by WHO for 
non-inferiority to the current GeneXpert platform.
Major gaps still remain in the diagnostic pipeline, and 
slow progress in the evaluation of technologies in the late 
stages of development is the major barrier to these tools 
reaching the market. There are insufficient tests under 
development for the diagnosis of TB in children, assessment 
of susceptibility to drugs that may be part of new treatment 
regimens, prediction of progression from latent TB infection 
(LTBI) to active TB disease and alternatives to TB culture for 
treatment monitoring. The development and implementa-
tion of such tests as well as increasing access to technologies 
already endorsed by WHO will be essential to meet targets 
outlined in the End TB Strategy.
8.1.2 TB diagnostic tests reviewed by WHO in 2015
In 2015, three diagnostic tests were reviewed by WHO: 
Determine TB LAM (lipoarabinomannan), referred to as 
 
LF-LAM, developed by Alere, USA; and two new generic ver-
sions of line probe assays (LPAs), one developed by the Nipro 
Corporation, Japan and the other by Hain Lifesciences. 
LF-LAM (Alere, USA)
LF-LAM is a lateral flow test that has been evaluated in sev-
eral studies for the detection of active TB in people living 
with HIV who are severely immunocompromised. Evidence 
from a systematic review of the performance characteristics 
of the assay was considered by a Guideline Development 
Group convened by WHO in 2015. This group recommended 
that LF-LAM should not be used for the diagnosis of TB (pul-
monary and extrapulmonary), with the exception of people 
living with HIV who have low CD4 counts or who are seriously 
ill. More details on these recommendations are provided in 
Chapter 5.
New generic versions of LPAs (Nipro Corporation, MTBDRplus 
version 2)
For new versions of technologies that WHO has already rec-
ommended, WHO requires a head-to-head comparison with 
the existing technology. If non-inferiority (that is, their equiv-
alence) in performance can be demonstrated, then WHO will 
recommend the new version. 
In 2008, WHO endorsed the use of LPAs for the rapid 
detection of rifampicin resistance, beginning what might 
be considered to be the molecular revolution in detection of 
drug-resistant TB. The evidence and subsequent recommen-
dations for the utility of LPAs included an assessment of the 
performance of the GenoType® MTBDRplus assay, Hain Life-
science (Hain Version 1 assay). This assay incorporates rpoB 
probes for rifampicin resistance detection as well as katG 
probes and inhA probes for the determination of isoniazid 
resistance. Hain Lifesciences have subsequently developed 
an updated version of their MTBDRplus line probe assay 
(Hain Version 2 assay).
n FIGURE 8.2
The phases of TB diagnostics development and assessment for WHO recommendation using the GRADE (Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) process
PHASE 3
WHO assessment 
of the evidence 
using GRADE 
tables
PHASE 4
Phased uptake 
and collection of 
evidence for 
scale-up
PHASE 5
Scale-up and 
policy refinement
PHASE 2
Evaluation and 
demonstration
PHASE 1
Research and 
development
 108  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
Nipro Corporation, Japan has developed an LPA that is 
similar to that of Hain Lifesciences, which was registered in 
Japan in 2012 (Nipro assay). This assay allows for the detec-
tion of rifampicin and isoniazid conferring mutations, the 
identification of M. tuberculosis complex and the identifi-
cation of some common nontuberculous mycobacteria 
including M. avium, M. intracellulare and M. kansasii. 
In 2014 and 2015, FIND coordinated a multi-center, 
blinded cross-sectional study of the diagnostic accuracy of 
these two tests, to compare their performance against that 
of the Hain Version 1 assay. A composite reference standard 
including phenotypic drug susceptibility testing (DST) and 
DNA sequencing was used. The study was divided into two 
distinct phases. Phase 1 was designed to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the newer assays on a wide range of clinical isolates 
and Phase 2 to evaluate their performance on sputum speci-
mens from patients with pulmonary TB.
The study demonstrated non-inferiority of the newer 
LPA assay versions (Hain Version 2 and Nipro) in comparison 
with the Hain Version 1 assay; these assays showed compa-
rable performance for the detection of M. tuberculosis and 
rifampicin resistance conferring mutations in acid-fast bacilli 
smear-positive samples and isolates of M. tuberculosis. WHO 
will update current policy recommendations for the use of 
LPAs and review new evidence about the clinical utility of the 
Hain Lifescience GenoType MTBDRsl assay and will assess 
the role of sequencing in detecting resistance to second-line 
drugs in 2016. 
8.1.3 Technologies scheduled for field evaluation 
studies in 2016
There are two technologies scheduled for field evaluation in 
2016. 
Xpert Ultra, Cepheid
A new version of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay, called Xpert 
Ultra®, is in development. The aim is to improve the sensitiv-
ity and specificity of the current assay in detection of TB and 
rifampicin resistance, respectively. In 2016, FIND will initiate 
a two-step evaluation process. The first step is a rapid non-
inferiority study that will compare the new Xpert Ultra assay 
with the current Xpert MTB/RIF assay. If non-inferiority is 
demonstrated, the Xpert Ultra assay will be recommended 
as a replacement for the current Xpert MTB/RIF assay. The 
second step will be multi-country evaluation studies. It is 
anticipated that these studies will demonstrate that the 
Xpert Ultra assay has superior performance (for example, 
about 95% sensitivity in detecting smear-negative, culture-
positive TB from a single sputum specimen). The Xpert Ultra 
assay will be developed for use on the Omni platform 
(described above).
Alere Q, Alere
The Alere™ q TB diagnostic system is being developed with 
funding support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 
It is a rapid and sensitive test for detection of TB, followed by 
an immediate reflex test for a full analysis of drug resistance 
for people found to have TB. A sputum sample is collected in 
a cup that is then screwed onto the test cartridge, which con-
tains all reagents. The inoculated cartridge is subsequently 
placed into a battery-powered stand-alone device that 
allows for sample processing, DNA amplification, detection 
and result interpretation and reporting in approximately 20 
minutes. This technology is a major step towards achieving 
universal DST for all TB cases. Multi-centre evaluation stud-
ies are planned for 2016–2017.
8.1.4 Tests that predict progression from latent to 
active TB
Most people with LTBI have no signs and symptoms of TB dis-
ease. People with LTBI are not infectious, but they are at risk 
for developing active disease and becoming infectious. On 
average, 5–15% of those infected will develop active TB dur-
ing their lifetime, typically within the first 2–5 years after the 
initial infection. Current tests for LTBI (i.e. interferon gamma 
release assays, IGRAs; and the tuberculin skin test, TST) are 
immunity-based and have very limited ability to identify 
which individuals are likely to progress to active TB. They also 
have limited sensitivity in people with HIV infection, and 
are not able to differentiate between recent and remote 
infection or to distinguish if a person has been re-infected if 
re-exposed. 
In May 2015, WHO hosted a meeting on behalf of FIND 
and the New Diagnostics Working Group of the Stop TB Part-
nership to review a set of minimal and optimal performance 
characteristics and develop a target product profile (TPP) for 
a biomarker-based test to predict the risk of progression to 
active TB from LTBI and rule out active TB. The meeting was 
attended by representatives from the diagnostic develop-
ment industry, universities, clinicians and technical partners. 
Following the meeting, the process to define the TPP for 
a test for progression of LTBI has continued alongside the 
development of standardized study protocols that could be 
used to evaluate the performance of such tests.
8.2 
New drugs and drug regimens to treat TB
Much progress has been made during the last ten years 
in the treatment of TB. The body of knowledge about the 
use of various drugs in combination regimens, as well their 
potential interaction with ARVs and the optimum timing of 
ART in the treatment of HIV-positive TB patients, has grown 
substantially. However, TB treatment remains centred on the 
standard 6 month regimen of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazi-
namide and ethambutol. Ensuring adherence to treatment 
remains a challenge, and drug-resistant TB remains a major 
threat to global TB prevention, diagnosis and treatment 
(Chapter 4). This section provides an overview of the latest 
status of the development of new TB drugs and new TB treat-
ment regimens.
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  109
n FIGURE 8.3
The development pipeline for new TB drugs, August 2015a
Discovery
Preclinical development
Clinical development
Lead 
optimization
Preclinical  
development
Good 
Laboratory 
Practice 
toxicity
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
Cyclopeptides
Diarylquinolines 
DprE Inhibitors 
InhA Inhibitor, Indazoles 
LeuRS Inhibitors, Ureas  
Macrolides, Azaindoles 
Mycobacterial Gyrase          
Inhibitors 
Pyrazinamide Analogs 
Ruthenium(II) Complexes 
Spectinamides SPR-113 
Translocase-1 Inhibitors
TBI-166
CPZEN-45
SQ609
SQ641
DC-159a
Sutezolid (PNU-
100480)
SQ109
Rifapentine for DS-TB
AZD5847
Bedaquiline-
Pretomanid-
Pyrazinamide 
Regimen
Bedaquiline (TMC-
207) with OBRb for 
MDR-TB
Delamanid (OPC-
67683) with OBRb 
for MDR-TB
Rifapentine for LTBI
Pretomanid-
Moxifloxacin-
Pyrazinamide 
Regimen
Chemical classes:  fluoroquinolone, rifamycin, oxazolidinone, nitroimidazole, diarylquinoline, benzothiazinone
a Details for projects listed can be found at http://www.newtbdrugs.org/pipeline.php and ongoing projects without a lead compound series identified 
can be viewed at http://www.newtbdrugs.org/pipeline-discovery.php
b OBR = Optimized Background Regimen
Source: Working Group on New TB Drugs, 2015 – www.newtbdrugs.org
PBTZ169
Q203
TBA-354
8.2.1 The pipeline of new and re-purposed  
anti-TB drugs 
The status of the pipeline for new and repurposed anti-TB 
drugs in August 2015 is shown in Figure 8.3. There are eight 
drugs in Phase I, Phase II or Phase III trials for the treatment 
of drug-susceptible, multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) or 
LTBI. Two of these compounds (AZD5847 and Sutezolid) do 
not appear to have progressed in the last two years. Howev-
er, for the first time in six years, a new anti-TB drug candidate 
has entered a Phase I clinical trial: TBA-354, a nitroimidazole 
that is part of the same class of drugs as delamanid and 
pretomanid (formerly PA-824).1 In addition, more diversified 
fundamental research is being conducted to better under-
stand the diversity of the metabolic stages of M.  tuberculosis 
and associated host responses, and to identify novel targets 
against which therapeutic chemicals can be directed. This is 
important to ensure that drugs are effective throughout the 
various stages of TB – from acute disease through treatment 
of chronic bacterial carriage to cure.
Rifapentine for drug-susceptible TB
Investigation of the potential effectiveness of rifapen-
tine in the treatment of drug-susceptible TB, is continuing 
based on the results of the TB Trial Consortium (TBTC) Study 
29 that showed comparable efficacy of daily rifapentine 
 
1 ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of 
Medicine (U.S.). 2000. Identifier NCT02288481, A phase 1 study to 
evaluate the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of TBA-354 in 
healthy adult subjects; 2014 November 7. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT02288481 
(10 mg/kg) and rifampicin (10 mg/kg) when provided 
along 
side standard doses of isoniazid, ethambutol and 
pyrazinamide. The outcome of interest is culture conversion 
at two months in smear-positive pulmonary TB patients.2 A 
further study (Study 29X), aimed at investigating the effect of 
various dosages of rifapentine (10, 15 or 20 mg/kg, given seven 
days a week with food supplements), showed that the substi-
tution of high-dose daily rifapentine for rifampicin improved 
the antimicrobial activity of combination chemotherapy dur-
ing the intensive phase of treatment, and that this activity 
was driven by rifapentine exposure.3 The observed safety and 
tolerability combined with the high levels of antimicrobial 
activity observed in the groups that received higher doses of 
rifapentine provide support for the evaluation of high-dose 
daily rifapentine-containing regimens of less than six months 
duration in Phase III clinical trials. 
Rifampicin
Assessment of whether higher doses of rifampicin could 
reduce treatment duration for drug-susceptible TB has 
continued. Results from the PanACEA MAMS-TB-01 trial 
presented at the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportun-
istic Infections (CROI) in March 2015 showed that daily dosing 
with 35 mg/kg of rifampin (in addition to standard doses of 
isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide) reduced the time 
2 Dorman S et al. Substitution of Rifapentine for Rifampin During 
Intensive Phase Treatment of Pulmonary Tuberculosis: Study 29 of the 
Tuberculosis Trials Consortium. J Infect Dis. 2012, 206 (7): 1030–1040.
3 Dorman S et al. Daily Rifapentine for Treatment of Pulmonary 
Tuberculosis: A Randomized, Dose-Ranging Trial. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2015, 191; 333–343.
 110  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
to stable culture conversion when measured over 12 weeks 
on liquid media, but not on solid media, compared to the 
standard six month regimen.1 In the same trial, a second 
arm in which 20 mg/kg of rifampin + moxifloxacin was pro-
vided showed a non-significant improvement in the time 
to culture conversion on liquid media over 12 weeks, but no 
improvement when measured using solid media. Both arms 
appeared safe and well tolerated, but a slightly higher per-
centage of patients (14% versus 10%) experienced grade 3 
adverse events compared with the control arm. There were 
potentially higher rates of hepatic adverse events that result-
ed in a change of treatment in the 35 mg/kg rifampin arm. 
Final analysis of results is underway. Further research about 
the safety and efficacy of higher dosages of rifampicin, with 
or without moxifloxacin, and its capacity to shorten treat-
ment, is needed. 
Fluoroquinolones
The results from three Phase III trials of four-month combi-
nation regimens for the treatment of drug-susceptible TB, all 
of which included a fluoroquinolone, were published in late 
2014. These were: (i) the OFLOTUB trial, in which gatifloxa-
cin was substituted for ethambutol;2 (ii) the ReMOX trial, in 
which moxifloxacin was substituted for either ethambutol or 
isoniazid;3 and (iii) the Rifaquin trial, in which moxifloxacin 
was substituted for isoniazid in the intensive phase of treat-
ment and rifapentine was used in the continuation phase of 
treatment.4 
Disappointingly, all of these trials showed that the short-
ened regimen cannot be recommended for the treatment of 
uncomplicated smear-positive pulmonary TB. Moreover, the 
inclusion of a third-generation fluoroquinolone as a substi-
tute for either ethambutol or isoniazid was associated with 
a higher risk of relapse compared with the standard regimen 
of six months. 
Bedaquiline
In December 2012, bedaquiline was approved by the US Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of MDR-TB as 
part of combination therapy for adults with pulmonary TB 
when other alternatives are not available. The drug is being 
introduced in several countries for the treatment of severe 
forms of MDR-TB (Chapter 4), following interim guidance 
issued by WHO in 2013.5
1 Boeree M, Hoelscher M. High-dose rifampin, SQ109 and moxifloxacin 
for treating TB: the PanACEA MAMS-TB trial. Paper presented at: 22nd 
Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; 2015 
February 23–26; Seattle, WA.
2 Merle CS et al. A Four-Month Gatifloxacin-Containing Regimen for 
Treating Tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1588–98.
3 Gillespie SH et al. Four-Month Moxifloxacin-Based Regimens for 
Drug-Sensitive Tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1577–87.
4 Jindani A et al. High-Dose Rifapentine with Moxifloxacin for Pulmonary 
Tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1599–608.
5 The use of bedaquiline in the treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis: 
Interim policy guidance. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 (WHO/
HTM/TB/2013.6). Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/84879/1/9789241505482_eng.pdf
The safety and efficacy of bedaquiline in combination 
with short MDR-TB regimens of six and nine months dura-
tion is currently being investigated as part of the Phase III 
STREAM trial. These shorter regimens are being compared 
with the current standard of care for MDR-TB recommended 
by WHO. 
Delamanid
In November 2013, a conditional marketing authorization 
for delamanid was granted by the Committee for Medicinal 
Products for Human Use (CHMP) of the European Medicines 
Agency (EMA). Delamanid was authorized for use as part 
of a combination regimen for pulmonary MDR-TB in adult 
patients “when an effective treatment regimen cannot oth-
erwise be composed for reasons of resistance or tolerability”. 
Interim guidance on the use of delamanid was issued by 
WHO in October 2014.6
Delamanid is currently being tested in a Phase III clinical 
trial, as an addition to an optimized background regimen 
(OBR) for the treatment of MDR-TB. The trial is comparing 
six months of treatment with delamanid plus the OBR with a 
placebo plus OBR. It is anticipated that the trial will be com-
pleted in 2016. 
Two other trials are evaluating the use of delamanid in the 
treatment of children with MDR-TB. The first trial is a 10-day 
open label pharmacokinetic (PK) study of delamanid plus an 
OBR. Patients who successfully complete this trial may then 
be enrolled in a second, open-label study (Trial 242-12-233) to 
assess the safety, tolerability, PK, and efficacy of delamanid 
plus an OBR over a six-month treatment period. These trials 
are scheduled for completion in 2017. 
Pretomanid 
Pretomanid is a nitroimidazole developed by the Global Alli-
ance for TB drug development. It is being tested as part of 
three potential combination regimens for the treatment of 
both drug-susceptible and drug-resistant TB (further details 
are provided in section 8.2.2). 
SQ109
Preliminary results from the PanACEA MAMS-TB-01 trial 
presented at CROI in March 2015 showed that there was no 
benefit of including SQ109 instead of ethambutol in stand-
ard therapy for drug-susceptible TB, in terms of time to 
culture conversion measured over 12 weeks.1 
8.2.2 Trials of new regimens for the treatment of 
drug-susceptible and/or drug-resistant TB
Besides individual compounds, new combinations of drugs 
are being tested in several Phase II or Phase III trials. 
The NC-002 Phase IIb trial, conducted by the Global Alli-
6 The use of delamanid in the treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis: 
Interim policy guidance. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014(WHO/
HTM/TB/2014.23). Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/137334/1/WHO_HTM_TB_2014.23_eng.pdf
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  111
ance for TB Drug Development (referred to in this text as “TB 
Alliance”) in South Africa and the United Republic of Tanza-
nia, investigated the efficacy, safety and tolerability of the 
combination of moxifloxacin + pretomanid + pyrazinamide 
(MPaZ) after eight weeks of treatment in 207 adult patients 
with newly diagnosed drug-susceptible or smear-positive 
pulmonary MDR-TB.1 Two doses of pretomanid were tested 
(100 mg and 200 mg); the 26 MDR-TB patients received 
only the higher dose. The primary endpoint was the rate of 
change in colony forming units (CFUs) from sputum on solid 
culture over eight weeks. Results of this trial showed that the 
MPaZ regimen had active bactericidal activity against both 
drug-susceptible and MDR-TB over two months and that this 
bactericidal activity was significantly greater than that of 
isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol (HRZE) 
therapy in patients with drug-susceptible TB when the 
MPa(200mg)Z regimen was used. The frequency of adverse 
events was similar to standard treatment in all groups. The 
combination of moxifloxacin, pretomanid, and pyrazina-
mide thus appeared to be safe, well-tolerated, and showed 
superior bactericidal activity for treatment of drug-suscepti-
ble TB during the first eight weeks of treatment.
On the basis of the results from the Phase IIb trial, a Phase 
III trial was launched in February 2015. Known as the STAND 
trial, it will be implemented in 16 countries and is a partially 
randomized clinical trial. Treatments are assigned to five 
parallel groups: Pa(100mg)-M-Z for 4 months for 350 patients 
with drug-susceptible TB; Pa(200mg)-M-Z for four months 
for 350 patients with drug-susceptible TB; Pa(200mg)-M-Z 
for six months for 350 patients with drug-susceptible TB; 
HRZE for six months for 350 patients with drug-susceptible 
TB; and Pa(200mg)-M-Z for six months for 350 patients with 
drug-resistant TB. 
The NC-003 trial tested the 14 day early bactericidal 
activity (EBA) of various combinations of clofazimine, 
bedaquiline, pretomanid and pyrazinamide in patients with 
drug-susceptible TB.2 Following the results from this trial, 
a Phase IIb trial, NC-005, has been launched. This is testing 
all-oral combination regimens that include bedaquiline 
(two different doses), pretomanid, and pyrazinamide for 
patients with drug-susceptible TB, and these drugs in com-
bination with moxifloxacin for patients with MDR-TB. The 
trial is measuring the decline in CFUs over eight weeks, and 
the time to positivity based on results from pooled sputum 
sampling every 16 hours. This study started in October 2014, 
and results are expected in mid-2016.
The NiX-TB study, implemented by the TB Alliance in 
South Africa, started in April 2015. It is investigating the safe-
1 Dawson R et al. Efficiency and safety of the combination of 
moxifloxacin, pretomanid (PA-824), and pyrazinamide during the first 8 
weeks of antituberculosis treatment: a phase 2b, open-label, partly 
randomised trial in patients with drug-susceptible or drug-resistant 
pulmonary tuberculosis. Lancet 2015
2 Everitt D et al. 14 Day EBA study of clofazimine alone and in 
combination. 44th Union World Conference on Lung Health, 
Late-breaker session, Paris, 2013
ty and efficacy of a six month combination of bedaquiline, 
pretomanid and linezolid (all compounds that are new or 
to which there is little pre-existing resistance due to limited 
use) for TB patients with XDR-TB. The primary endpoint is the 
incidence of bacteriologic failure or relapse or clinical failure, 
with follow-up for 24 months after the end of treatment. 
Alongside the Nix-TB study, the TB Alliance is undertak-
ing a study of the response to different doses of linezolid in 
patients with drug-susceptible TB over two weeks. This study 
will inform dosing adjustments that may need to be made 
for linezolid in the NiX-TB trial or other regimens that include 
linezolid. 
There are two clinical trials scheduled to start around the 
end of 2015. The first is called the endTB trial. It is a Phase 
III trial funded by UNITAID and implemented by Partners 
in Health and Médecins Sans Frontières. It will evaluate 
five new all-oral short regimens for the treatment of MDR-
TB. These regimens contain one new anti-TB drug (either 
bedaquiline or delamanid), moxifloxacin or levofloxacin, 
and pyrazinamide plus linezolid or clofazimine or both, in 
various combinations. They will be compared with the cur-
rent WHO standard of care. Potential sites include Georgia, 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho and Peru. The second is the 
TB-PRACTECAL trial. This is a randomized, controlled, open-
label, Phase II/III adaptive trial that will evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of six-month regimens that contain bedaqui-
line, pretomanid and linezolid with or without moxifloxacin 
or clofazimine for the treatment of adults with MDR-TB or 
XDR-TB. The trial is funded by Médecins Sans Frontières and 
will be conducted in Uzbekistan and Swaziland.
In addition to trials, two recent observational studies 
 
investigating the effectiveness of shorter treatment regi-
mens for patients with MDR-TB in Niger3 and Cameroon4 
have shown that a 12-month treatment regimen was effec-
tive and well-tolerated in patients not previously exposed to 
second-line drugs. 
8.2.3 Treatment of latent TB infection (LTBI)
Since the publication of WHO guidelines on the treatment 
of LTBI in 2015,5 new evidence about the benefits of isonia-
zid preventive therapy (IPT) when provided in addition to 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) to HIV-positive people with very 
high CD4 counts has become available from the TEMPRANO 
ANRS 12136 trial.6 This trial included 2056 patients in Côte 
3 Piubello A, Harouna SH, Souleymane MB et al. High Cure Rate with 
Standardised Short-Course Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis 
Treatment in Niger: No Relapses. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2015;18:1188–94.
4 Kuaban C, Noeske J, Rieder HL et al. High Effectiveness of a 12-Month 
Regimen for MDR-TB Patients in Cameroon. The International Journal 
of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2015;19: 517–24.
5 World Health Organization. Guidelines on the management of latent 
tuberculosis infection. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/tb/publications/ltbi_document_page/
en/
6 The TEMPRANO ANRS 12136 Study Group. A Trial of Early Antiretrovirals 
and Isoniazid Preventive Therapy in Africa. N Engl J Med 2015; 
373:808–822.
 112  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
d’Ivoire and found that IPT and ART provided together had a 
higher efficacy in preventing TB disease than ART alone. The 
study also found lower rates of severe illness when ART was 
started immediately alongside 6 months of IPT, compared 
with deferred ART and no IPT. This was true overall and 
among patients with CD4 counts of ≥500 cells/mm3. Study 
authors also highlighted that isoniazid can be prescribed 
safely when given early in the course of HIV disease. 
8.3  
New vaccines to prevent TB
The slow decline in TB incidence globally (Chapter 2) and the 
persistent threat of MDR-TB both highlight the critical need 
for new effective TB vaccines. It is estimated that at least 
US$ 8 billion is required each year for TB diagnosis and treat-
ment using currently available interventions (Chapter 7). 
A recent modelling study showed that developing at least 
one new TB vaccine over the next 10–15 years would cost 
about US$ 0.8–1 billion, approximately 1% of diagnosis and 
treatment costs, and that an adolescent and adult vaccine 
with 60% efficacy delivered to 20% of the population-at-
risk could avert as many as 30–50 million new cases of TB by 
2050.1 Recent modelling also indicates that targeting ado-
lescents will prevent morbidity and mortality in infants and 
young children, and is a more effective strategy to protect 
1 Aeras, TB Vaccine Research and Development: A Business Case for Investment. 
Rockville: Aeras; 2014. Available at: http://bit.ly/1EodJBj
them from TB than direct vaccination of infants with a similar 
vaccine.2
The potential for an adult/adolescent vaccine to have a 
meaningful impact on the global TB epidemic, compared 
with the limited impact of an infant vaccine, has shifted the 
focus of TB vaccine development. The new paradigm empha-
sises the development of a diverse pipeline of new TB vaccine 
candidates that target the prevention of active TB in these 
older age groups. 
Scientific advances have also enabled the pursuit of more 
sophisticated approaches to vaccine design. The global 
pipeline of TB vaccine candidates in clinical trials is more 
robust than at any previous period in history, now includ-
ing recombinant BCGs, attenuated M. tuberculosis strains, 
recombinant viral-vectored platforms, protein/adjuvant 
combinations, and mycobacterial extracts.
The status of the pipeline for new vaccines in August 2015 
is shown in Figure 8.4. These vaccines aim either to prevent 
infection (pre-exposure) or to prevent primary progression 
to disease or reactivation of latent TB (post-exposure). Fur-
ther details are provided below.
2 White, R. Indirect effects in infants on the force of TB disease from vaccinating 
adolescents and adults. London: TB Modelling Group, TB Centre, Centre 
for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases; 2015.
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
Phase IIb
n FIGURE 8.4
The development pipeline for new TB vaccines, August 2015
Ad5 Ag85A  
McMaster, CanSino
VPM 1002 (rbcg)a  
Max Planck, VPM, TBVI, SII
M72 + AS01Eb  
GSK, Aeras
M. Vaccae™c  
Anhui Zhifei Longcom
ID93 + GLA-SE  
IDRI, Aeras
H1 + IC31  
SSI, TBVI, EDCTP
DAR-901  
Dartmouth, Aeras
RUTI  
Archivel Farma, S.L
TB / FLU-04L  
RIBSP
H4: IC31d  
SSI, Sanofi-Pasteur, Aeras
Crucell Ad35 / MVA85A* 
Crucell, Oxford, Aeras
H56: IC31  
SSI, Aeras
ChAdOx1.85A / MVA85A* 
Birmingham, Oxford
MTBVAC (Attenuated M.Tb) 
TBVI, Zaragoza, Biofabri
MVA85A / MVA85A (ID, 
Aerosol)*  
Oxford
n Viral Vector
n Protein / Adjuvant
n Mycobacterial – Whole Cell or Extract
* Experimental medicine tools / platforms
a Initial safety and efficacy to begin 2015
b Efficacy data likely available in 2018
c Endpoint data should be available in 2016
d Prevention of infection data likely available in 2017
Sources: Aeras, 2015 – www.aeras.org; Working Group on New TB 
Vaccines, 2015 – www.newtbvaccines.org
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  113
8.3.1 Phase II and Phase III clinical trials
There are currently eight vaccines in Phase II or Phase III tri-
als. 
M72/AS01E (made by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK)) is a recom-
binant fusion protein of the M. tuberculosis antigens 32A and 
39A with the AS01E adjuvant. A large randomized place-
bo-controlled Phase IIb trial (NCT01755598, conducted by 
GSK and Aeras) is enrolling pulmonary TB-negative, IGRA-
positive, HIV-negative adults in Kenya, South Africa and 
Zambia. The aim is to enroll 3506 adults; by July 2015, 2096 
participants had been enrolled. The primary endpoint will 
be the protective efficacy of two doses of M72/AS01E against 
pulmonary TB disease. Secondary endpoints include safety 
and immunogenicity. 
Three vaccines are protein subunits with adjuvants, initially 
developed by the Statens Serum Institute (SSI) in Copenha-
gen, Denmark. These are:
"
" H1:IC31® is an adjuvanted subunit vaccine combining the 
M. tuberculosis antigens Ag85B and ESAT-6 with Valneva’s 
IC31 adjuvant. The H1:IC31® vaccine was the first TB vaccine 
to commence clinical development by SSI, and Aeras sub-
sequently joined this effort. The H1:IC31® vaccine has been 
evaluated in three Phase I trials, which showed the vac-
cine to be safe and immunogenic in HIV-negative adults 
who were either M. tuberculosis naïve, BCG vaccinated or 
latently infected, in low- and high TB burden settings. A 
Phase II double-blind and placebo controlled trial in HIV-
positive individuals with or without LTBI confirmed that 
the vaccine was safe and immunogenic.1 Recently, a large 
Phase II trial investigating the influence of dose, sched-
ule and LTBI status on the immunogenicity of H1:IC31® in 
240 adolescents in South Africa was finalized; H1:IC31® 
was the first TB vaccine to be tested in a large trial in this 
important target population. A paper in which results will 
be published is in preparation. In parallel, the H1:IC31® 
subunit vaccine construct has been improved with the 
addition of a third antigen, Rv2660c, becoming H56:IC31®. 
Clinical data on H1:IC31® will support the further develop-
ment of H56:IC31®. No further clinical trials with H1:IC31® 
are planned.
"
" H4:IC31 is being developed as a booster vaccine to BCG 
with Sanofi Pasteur. The vaccine candidate contains a 
fusion protein of Ag85B and TB10.4 formulated with IC31 
adjuvant. H4:IC31 is currently being evaluated in Phase 
II studies in African infants with Sanofi and SSI (and also 
with the International Maternal Pediatric Adolescent AIDS 
Clinical Trials Group (IMPAACT) network and the HIV Vac-
cine Trials Network (HVTN) in conjunction with NIAID). 
In addition, the H4:IC31 candidate is being assessed in a 
1 Reither K, Katsoulis L, Beattie T et al. Safety and Immunogenicity of H1/
IC31®, an Adjuvanted TB Subunit Vaccine, in HIV-Infected Adults with 
CD4+ Lymphocyte Counts Greater than 350 cells/mm3: A Phase II, 
Multi-Centre, Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial. 
PLoS ONE. 2014;9(12):e114602.
Phase II proof-of-concept study for its ability to prevent de 
novo infection with M. tuberculosis among IGRA-negative, 
HIV-uninfected South African adolescents at high risk of 
acquiring M. tuberculosis infection. An intensive immuno-
genicity study of H4:IC31 in South African adolescents is 
underway. 
"
" H56:IC31. This is an adjuvanted subunit vaccine that 
combines three M. tuberculosis antigens (Ag85B, ESAT-6, 
and Rv2660c) with Valneva’s IC31 adjuvant. It is being 
developed by SSI and Aeras. A Phase I study to evaluate 
the safety and immunogenicity profile of H56:IC31 in HIV-
negative adults with and without LTBI and no history or 
evidence of TB disease has been completed. Two Phase I 
studies are currently ongoing to determine the safety and 
immunogenicity profile of H56:IC31 in HIV-negative, BCG-
vaccinated adults with and without LTBI and in patients 
who have recently been treated for pulmonary TB disease, 
respectively. A study to determine the efficacy of H56:IC31 
in preventing TB infection in LTBI negative adolescents is 
planned for 2016. 
VPM 1002, originally developed at the Max Planck Institute 
of Infection Biology with further development by Vakzine 
Projekt Management, the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative 
(TBVI), and Serum Institute of India, is a live recombinant 
vaccine. It has been derived from the Prague strain of BCG 
into which the listerolysin gene from Listeria monocytogenes 
has been cloned, and the urease gene deleted, to potentially 
improve immunogenicity. A Phase IIa trial of this vaccine 
has been completed in South Africa. The Phase II trial (in 
planning) will assess the safety and immunogenicity of the 
vaccine in HIV exposed and unexposed newborns. 
RUTI® is a non-live and polyantigenic vaccine based on 
fragmented and detoxified M. tuberculosis bacteria. The 
product is a liposome suspension of the Drug Substance with 
a charge excipient. RUTI® is being developed by Archivel 
Farma as an immunotherapeutic vaccine. A Phase II trial in 
South Africa was completed recently and other clinical trials 
are in the planning stages. 
MTBVAC is being developed by the University of Zaragosa, 
Institut Pasteur, BIOFABRI and TBVI. It is a live M. tuberculosis 
strain attenuated via deletions of the phoP and fadD26 genes. 
It is the first live attenuated M. tuberculosis vaccine to enter 
a Phase I trial, which was recently completed. The next trial 
will be a Phase I/II trial among adults in South Africa. The vac-
cine is being developed both as a BCG replacement vaccine 
and as a potential boost vaccine in adolescents and adults. 
M. Vaccae™ is a specified lysate developed by the pharma-
ceutical company Anhui Zhifei Longcom Biologic Pharmacy 
Co., Ltd. and licensed by the China Food and Drug Adminis-
tration as an immunotherapeutic agent to help shorten TB 
treatment for patients with drug-susceptible TB. It is in a 
Phase III trial to assess its efficacy and safety in preventing 
TB disease in people with LTBI. The trial is being conducted 
in collaboration with the Guangxi Center for Disease Con-
 114  n  GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015
trol and Prevention in China. It is the largest TB vaccine trial 
undertaken in the last decade, including 10 000 people aged 
15–65 with a PPD>15mm. The trial is scheduled to be com-
pleted by April 2016. 
Of note, MVA85A, the attenuated vaccinia virus-vec-
tored vaccine candidate expressing Ag85A of M. tuberculosis 
designed at Oxford University as a booster vaccine for BCG 
vaccinated infants, has now completed a Phase II safety and 
immunogenicity study.1 The study was conducted in 650 
BCG-vaccinated, HIV-positive participants in Senegal and 
South Africa. As in the infant study2, the vaccine was well 
tolerated and immunogenic, but no efficacy against M. tuber-
culosis infection or disease was demonstrated (although the 
study was not powered to detect an effect against disease). 
Current and future clinical approaches focus on evaluating 
MVA85A delivered by aerosol, alone or in a prime-boost com-
bination with a second virally vectored vaccine, ChAdOx1.85A 
(see below).
8.3.2 Phase I clinical trials
There are seven vaccines in Phase I clinical trials. 
ID93 + GLA-SE, developed by the Infectious Disease 
Research Institute (IDRI) in collaboration with Aeras, com-
prises three M. tuberculosis immunodominant antigens 
(Rv2608, Rv3619 and Rv3620), one M. tuberculosis latency-
associated antigen (Rv1813), and the adjuvant GLA-SE. A 
Phase I trial in 60 adults in the United States to assess safety 
and immunogenicity was recently completed. The vaccine 
was found to have an acceptable safety profile, and T cell 
responses were seen at all of the dose levels that were stud-
ied. A further Phase I trial in South Africa is being conducted 
to describe the safety and immunogenicity profile of ID93 + 
GLA-SE in BCG-vaccinated, QuantiFERON TB-Gold negative 
and positive healthy adults. A Phase IIa trial in South Africa, 
with the support of the Wellcome Trust, is evaluating safety 
and immunogenicity in patients that have recently complet-
ing treatment for pulmonary TB disease. A Phase IIb trial 
to assess whether the vaccine can prevent recurrence of TB 
disease in patients who have recently and successfully com-
pleted TB treatment is being planned by IDRI and South 
African collaborators in the same population.
Ad5 Ag85A is an adenovirus serotype 5 vector expressing 
Ag85A. It has been developed by McMaster University with 
support from CanSino, a Chinese biotechnology company. 
Ad5Ag85A was evaluated in 24 healthy human volunteers 
(both BCG-naïve and previously BCG-immunized) for safety 
and immunogenicity following a single intra-muscular 
injection in a Phase I clinical study completed at McMaster 
1 Ndiaye BP, Thienemann F, Ota M, et al. Safety, immunogenicity, and 
efficacy of the candidate tuberculosis vaccine MVA85A in healthy 
adults infected with HIV-1: a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 
trial. Lancet Respir Med 2015;3:190–200.
2 Tameris MD, Hatherill M, Landry BS, et al. Safety and efficacy of 
MVA85A, a new tuberculosis vaccine, in infants previously vaccinated 
with BCG: a randomised placebo-controlled phase 2b trial. Lancet 
2013;381:1021–28
University, Canada. Immunization of Ad5Ag85A was safe and 
well-tolerated in both trial volunteer groups, with only reac-
tions at the injection site. Pre-existing Ad5 antibodies did 
not appear to affect the immune response. Ad5Ag85A was 
immunogenic in both groups and stimulated polyfunctional 
T cell responses, but it more potently boosted both CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cell immunity in previously BCG-vaccinated volun-
teers compared with BCG-naïve individuals.
DAR 901 is a heat-inactivated M. obuense. It has been 
developed by investigators at Dartmouth University, USA, 
and manufactured by Aeras. Enrolment in a Phase I safety 
and immunogenicity study in 60 BCG-vaccinated, HIV-infect-
ed and -uninfected individuals was recently completed in the 
USA. The study remains blinded while subjects continue to 
be followed. No serious adverse events have been reported 
and plans are underway to complete in-depth immunologic 
evaluations by the end of 2015, using data for the first people 
enrolled in the trial. 
TB/FLU-04L is a recombinant influenza vectored vaccine 
candidate developed by the Research Institute for Biological 
Safety Problems and the Research Institute on Influenza in 
the Russian Federation, with support and assistance from 
international experts. The influenza virus strain A/Puerto 
Rico/8/34 (H1N1) was used as a parent strain for construc-
tion of an attenuated replication-deficient vector expressing 
M. tuberculosis antigens Ag85A and ESAT-6. It was designed 
as a mucosal “boost” vaccine for infants, adolescents and 
adults. A Phase I trial in BCG-vaccinated QuantiFERON TB-
Gold negative healthy adult volunteers using intranasal 
administration was recently completed, and a Phase IIa trial 
is planned.
ChAdOx1.85A is a simian adenovirus expressing anti-
gen 85A that was developed at the University of Oxford. 
ChAdOX1.85A is being evaluated in a Phase I trial in BCG-
vaccinated adults, both alone and as part of a prime-boost 
strategy with MVA85A. In this first-in-humans study, 
ChAdOx1.85A is being administered intramuscularly. Future 
plans include evaluation of the aerosol route of delivery of 
ChAdOx1.85A.
Crucell Ad35/AERAS-402 and MVA85A are now being 
tested in combination, to try and induce both CD4+ and CD8+ 
T cells. One or two doses of Crucell Ad35 followed by a dose 
of MVA85A is being compared with 3 doses of Crucell Ad35 in 
a Phase I/II trial in adults in the United Kingdom. The trial is 
being implemented by Oxford University, Aeras and Crucell.
MVA85A (Aerosol) is an aerosolized MVA85A candidate 
developed by Oxford that recently underwent a Phase I 
double-blind trial to compare the safety and immunogenic-
ity of aerosol-administered and intradermally administered 
MVA85A in 24 BCG-vaccinated adults in the United Kingdom. 
The study concluded that aerosol vaccination with MVA85A 
appeared to be a safe and feasible vaccination that produced 
stronger CD4+ T-cell response than intradermal MVA85A. 
Further studies assessing the aerosol route are necessary. 
 GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS REPORT 2015  n  115
8.3.3 Early stage, translational research
As documented above, there is a reasonably robust pipeline 
of vaccine candidates, including those based on whole cell 
approaches, antibody-inducing vaccines and nucleic acid-
based (DNA and RNA) vaccines. This may help to diversify 
the clinical portfolio and fill the scientific gaps that currently 
exist. 
To supplement existing efforts, there is also a re-pri-
oritized focus on early stage, translational research. This 
will test hypotheses about immunological mechanisms, 
delivery methods, and candidate biomarkers, and help to 
broaden preclinical scientific approaches, antigen selection 
strategies, and evaluation strategies, with the overall goal 
of ensuring that a more diverse pipeline of new TB vaccine 
candidates can move forward into clinical trials.1 Discussions 
about relevant clinical endpoints, beyond immunological 
measures that indicate prevention of disease or infection, 
and how these endpoints may be assessed through biomark-
ers early in clinical trials or pre-clinically to select the most 
promising candidate vaccines/adjuvants, are also underway.
8.4 
The End TB Strategy: the critical role of 
research and development 
The End TB Strategy includes “Intensified Research and Inno-
vation” as one of three fundamental pillars (Chapter 1). This 
has two essential and complementary components: 
(1) Discovery, development and rapid uptake of new tools, 
interventions and strategies; and 
(2) Research to optimize implementation and impact.
The overall aim of the pillar is that intensified research will 
result in revolutionary new technologies, strategies and 
models of service delivery that will transform the way in 
which TB is diagnosed, treated and prevented. As high
1 Brennan MJ and Thole J, Eds. Tuberculosis vaccines: A strategic 
blueprint for the next decade. Tuberculosis. 2012; 92: Supplement 1; 
S6–S13.
lighted at the beginning of this chapter, such changes are 
necessary by 2025, so that the rate at which TB incidence 
falls can be accelerated beyond the best-ever historic perfor-
mance and targets that correspond to ending the global TB 
epidemic by 2035 can be achieved.
A massive increase in funding for research is required. 
This includes funding to create or expand research-enabling 
environments for the next generation of scientists in low and 
middle-income countries with the largest burden of TB, so 
that they can play a lead role in research based on domes-
tic investments, alongside established global expertise. 
Increased domestic investments in research in countries 
with a high burden of TB will be facilitated by advocacy from 
key players including national public health authorities, 
researchers, care providers, and civil society. It is also impor-
tant that high-income countries and their institutions, 
international agencies and philanthropic organizations 
increase their investments in TB research and training, in 
close collaboration with high-burden countries.
Once new technologies and innovative approaches are 
developed, they need to be translated into policies and prac-
tices, and then adapted to particular country contexts as 
appropriate. This will require expanded efforts to dissemi-
nate research results, particularly to policy makers. 
To foster and intensify high-quality research at national 
and international levels, WHO has developed a Global Action 
Framework for Research towards TB Elimination that covers the 
period 2016–2025. This plan shows how to operationalize 
Pillar 3 of the End TB Strategy, including through the devel-
opment of country-specific TB research strategic plans, 
capacity strengthening, and development/reinforcement 
of networks at country level, and through regular meetings 
and the development of international networks for research, 
capacity building and advocacy at global and regional levels. 
