  
 
 
 
 
Subscribe to PCMR and stay up-to-date with the only journal committed to publishing  
basic research in melanoma and pigment cell biology
As a member of the IFPCS or the SMR you automatically get online access to PCMR. Sign up as  
a member today at www.ifpcs.org or at www.societymelanomaresarch.org
If you wish to order reprints of this article,  
please see the guidelines here
EMAIL ALERTS
Receive free email alerts and stay up-to-date on what is published  
in Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research – click here
The official journal of
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF PIGMENT CELL SOCIETIES · SOCIETY FOR MELANOMA RESEARCH
PIGMENT CELL & MELANOMA
Research
To take out a personal subscription, please click here
More information about Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research at www.pigment.org
The state of melanoma: challenges and opportunities
Glenn Merlino, Meenhard Herlyn, David E. Fisher, Boris C. Bastian, Keith T. Flaherty, 
Michael A. Davies, Jennifer A. Wargo, Clara Curiel-Lewandrowski, Michael J. Weber, 
Sancy A. Leachman, Maria S. Soengas, Martin McMahon, J. William Harbour, 
Susan M. Swetter, Andrew E. Aplin, Michael B. Atkins, Marcus W. Bosenberg, 
Reinhard Dummer, Jeffrey E. Gershenwald, Allan C. Halpern, Dorothee Herlyn, 
Giorgos C. Karakousis, John M. Kirkwood, Michael Krauthammer, Roger S. Lo, 
Georgina V. Long, Grant McArthur, Antoni Ribas, Lynn Schuchter, Jeffrey A. Sosman, 
Keiran S. Smalley, Patricia Steeg, Nancy E. Thomas, Hensin Tsao, Thomas Tueting, 
Ashani Weeraratna, George Xu, Randy Lomax, Alison Martin, Steve Silverstein, 
Tim Turnham and Ze’ev A. Ronai
Submit your next paper to PCMR online at http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/pcmr
DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.12475
Volume 29, Issue 4, Pages 404–416 
 The state of melanoma: challenges and opportunities
Glenn Merlino1,*, Meenhard Herlyn2,*, David E. Fisher3,*, Boris C. Bastian4,*, Keith T. Flaherty5,*,
Michael A. Davies6, Jennifer A. Wargo6, Clara Curiel-Lewandrowski7, Michael J. Weber8, Sancy A.
Leachman9, Maria S. Soengas10, Martin McMahon11, J. William Harbour12, Susan M. Swetter13,
Andrew E. Aplin14, Michael B. Atkins15, Marcus W. Bosenberg16, Reinhard Dummer17,
Jeffrey E. Gershenwald6, Allan C. Halpern18, Dorothee Herlyn2, Giorgos C. Karakousis19,
John M. Kirkwood20, Michael Krauthammer21, Roger S. Lo22, Georgina V. Long23, Grant McArthur24,
Antoni Ribas22, Lynn Schuchter19, Jeffrey A. Sosman25, Keiran S. Smalley26, Patricia Steeg27,
Nancy E. Thomas28, Hensin Tsao29, Thomas Tueting30, Ashani Weeraratna2, George Xu19,
Randy Lomax31, Alison Martin31, Steve Silverstein31, Tim Turnham31 and Ze’ev A. Ronai32
1 Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
MD, USA 2 Melanoma Research Center, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA 3 Department of
Dermatology, Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA
4 Departments of Dermatology and Pathology, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA 5 Developmental Therapeutics, Cancer Center, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA 6 Department of Genomic Medicine and Surgical Oncology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA 7 Departments of Medicine and
Dermatology, University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA 8 Department of Microbiology, Immunology
and Cancer Biology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA 9 Department of
Dermatology, Knight Cancer Institute Melanoma and Skin Cancer Program, Oregon Health Science University,
Portland, OR, USA 10 Molecular Oncology Program, Melanoma Laboratory, CNIO, Madrid, Spain 11 Department
of Dermatology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, USA 12 Bascom Palmer Eye Institute and
Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 13 Department of Dermatology,
Stanford University Medical Center and Cancer Institute/VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA
14 Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 15 Lombardi Compre-
hensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA 16 Department of Dermatology and
Dermatopathology, Cancer Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 17 Department of Dermatology,
University of Zurich, Z€
urich, Switzerland 18 Dermatology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA 19 Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 20 Melanoma and Skin
Cancer Program, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 21 Department of Pathology, Cancer Center, Yale
University, New Haven, CT, USA 22 Department of Medical Oncology and Dermatology, University of California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA 23 Melanoma Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
24 Department of Cancer Medicine, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Vic., Australia
25 Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville,
TN, USA 26 Department of Tumor Biology, The Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
27 Women Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA
28 Melanoma Program, Department of Dermatology, Lineberger Cancer Center, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA 29 Melanoma and Pigmented Lesion Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
MA, USA 30 Department of Dermatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany 31 Melanoma Research
Foundation, Washington, DC, USA 32 Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, Cancer Center, Sanford
Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA
CORRESPONDENCE Ze'ev A. Ronai, e-mail: ronai@SBPdiscovery.org
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
KEYWORDS melanoma/prevention/early diagnosis/
metastasis/dormancy/therapy
PUBLICATION
DATA Received
4
March
2016,
revised and accepted for publication 4 March
2016, published online 5 April 2016
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12475
Summary
The Melanoma Research Foundation (MRF) has charted a comprehensive assessment of the current state of
melanoma research and care. Intensive discussions among members of the MRF Scientific Advisory Council and
Breakthrough Consortium, a group that included clinicians and scientists, focused on four thematic areas –
diagnosis/early detection, prevention, tumor cell dormancy (including metastasis), and therapy (response and
resistance). These discussions extended over the course of 2015 and culminated at the Society of Melanoma
Research 2015 International Congress in November. Each of the four groups has outlined their thoughts as per the
current status, challenges, and opportunities in the four respective areas. The current state and immediate and long-
term needs of the melanoma field, from basic research to clinical management, are presented in the following report.
404
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 29; 404–416
PERSPECTIVE
 Prologue
The field of melanoma – both research and clinical
management – has exponentially expanded over the past
decade and has become a paradigm for understanding
cancer signaling, tumor immunology, and their clinical
application. Recognizing how rewired signaling underlies
melanoma progression has prompted development of
specific drugs (such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib) that
decrease tumor burden, although only for a limited time
period. Combination drug therapy has also emerged as a
way to provide a more sustainable response, raising critical
questions relevant to which combination(s) are most
effective. In addition, the discovery of processes underly-
ing melanomagenesis, and on mechanisms that underlie
the traditional immune suppressive features of advanced
melanomas, has led to radical progress in devising and
applying immune checkpoint therapies. Advances made
with melanoma are now being productively applied to other
forms of cancer. Yet, despite all of these advances,
fundamental questions pertaining to prevention, detection,
diagnosis, tumor progression (including dormancy and
metastasis), and response to therapy (including resistance)
remain: Can we develop better tools to detect melanoma
earlier? Will identification of melanoma subtypes dictate
therapy? What causes melanoma cells to remain dormant
for years and thenreawaken? Howdo resistance to therapy
and metastatic propensity arise so readily, and how does
tumor heterogeneity confound efforts to achieve durable
responses? Can better tools be developed to prevent and
detect metastasis? What should be the mode and
sequence of therapy administration when combinations
are used? How do we prioritize the development of
immunotherapy-based combinations? How do we select
patients for single-agent versus combination immunother-
apy?
What
are
the
mechanisms
of
resistance
to
immunotherapy? These questions are of concern to clin-
icians and basic researchers alike, and many are addressed
in the following report.
Prevention
Melanoma arises through progressive accumulation of
genetic and (epi)genetic alterations that disrupt homeo-
static pathways, resulting in uncontrolled tumor cell
proliferation
followed
by
invasion
and
lymphatic
or
hematogenous dissemination of the tumor cells to distant
sites. In cutaneous melanocytic neoplasms, UV radiation
is the primary cause of mutations on sun-exposed skin.
Therefore, an individual’s susceptibility to melanoma is
likely determined by genetic and epigenetic factors that
determine the rate at which mutations are generated and
fixed (e.g. the intrinsic ability of melanocytic cells to
mount shielding responses to UV radiation, by inducing
tanning). DNA repair capacity, as well as environmental
factors, mainly dose and timing of UV exposure during
early periods of life, also dictates risk factors for malig-
nant transformation.
The precise role of UV radiation in carcinogenesis still
requires greater understanding, such as the relative contri-
butions of UVA versus UVB wavelengths. This would be of
enormous importance, given the ongoing efforts to devise
broad-spectrum sunscreen agents approved by the FDA.
Thereis strong evidence for UV-independent mutagenesisin
melanoma, a possibility suggested by the occurrence of
melanomasatcutaneouslocationsthatarenotsun-exposed,
as well as in the eye and in mucous membranes. Analysis of
animal models also shows that melanin, in particular
pheomelanin, the predominant pigment present in red-
haired/light-skinned individuals, can harbor carcinogenic
activity. These observations suggest that the relative degree
and type of pigmentation is key in determining melanoma
susceptibility. Research of mechanisms that explain the
nature of these carcinogenic activities is important and could
reveal strategies to neutralize them in the presence or
absence of UV irradiation.
Previous studies established a positive correlation
between melanoma development and traits such as light
eye and hair color, freckling, and nevus density when
assessing overall melanoma risk, but did not consider risk
for specific melanoma subtypes. There is increasing
evidence that two major types of melanomas can be
distinguished on sun-exposed skin. One shows macro-
and microscopic signs of long-term UV exposure and is
specifically highlighted by the presence of solar elastosis,
a distinctive change in elastic fibers of the skin. These
melanomas with chronic sun-induced damage (CSD)
typically originate on the head, neck, and the dorsal
surfaces of the distal extremities of older individuals
(>55 yr of age). They also have a high mutation burden
and often harbor mutations in NF1, NRAS, BRAFnon-V600E,
or KIT. The other major type (termed ‘non-CSD melano-
mas’) typically affects intermittently sun-exposed areas
such as the trunk and proximal extremities of younger
individuals (<55 yr of age), and patients do not show
marked solar elastosis. In these cases, tumor cells exhibit
a moderate mutation burden and a predominance of
BRAFV600E mutations. Both types are associated with
distinct precursor lesions, ‘non-CSD’ with acquired nevi
that already exhibit BRAFV600E mutations and ‘CSD’ with
atypical melanocytic neoplasms and melanoma in situ.
Prevention strategies
The effectiveness of UV-absorbing sunscreens in mela-
noma prevention represents an area of active investiga-
tion and offers significant promise for large populations at
risk. Studies demonstrate the benefit of sunscreen in
melanoma prevention, with up to 50% reduction in
incidences. Determining whether additional UV protection
could result from improved sunscreens or their contents
(i.e. their ability to reduce the formation of reactive
oxygen species) is of importance.
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
405
The state of melanoma
 Prevention strategies should be implemented with the
consideration of personal behavior, which is affected by
our awareness, education, and interaction with the
environment (degree of exposure to sun or indoor
tanning).
Knowing why individuals engage in melanoma risk-
associated UV exposure behaviors is key to devising
methods to improve primary intervention. Work in this
area has found that tanning is motivated by psychological
factors and can be associated with addictive behavior. A
Comprehensive Indoor Tanning Expectations scale found
that two positive factors (mood enhancement and social
approval) and one negative factor (psychological/physical
discomfort) predicted future indoor tanning behavior
among young women in the southeastern United States.
Additional work is necessary to develop working models to
understand motivations for melanoma risk-related behav-
iors across populations. This work then needs to be
translated into messages and interventions that address
the motivators. It hardly needs to be stated, but banning the
use of tanning salons by minors is a straightforward cost-
effective mechanism for reducing exposure, and should be
a priority for every advocacy organization.
Biologic addiction in melanoma risk and prevention
Data from human epidemiologic studies demonstrated
the presence of true addictive behaviors following UV
irradiation. These studies suggest that frequent use of
tanning beds may be associated with ‘self-treatment’ of
depressive symptoms and also may satisfy psychiatric
DSM (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental
Disorders) criteria for addictive human behaviors. Animal
models have demonstrated induction of beta-endorphin
by sun exposure. Collectively, sun-seeking behaviors may
represent an evolutionarily selected, hardwired pathway;
if so, novel approaches are needed to overcome them.
Empowering behavioral change
Empowering behavioral change is essential to translate
prevention knowledge into meaningful action for popula-
tions at risk for melanoma. Compliance with melanoma
prevention recommendations improves when individuals
from hereditary melanoma families are provided with
personal genetic test results. Individuals with a personal
history of melanoma are most compliant with prevention
recommendations. In addition, informing individuals with-
out a personal history of disease that they are carriers of a
CDKN2A/p16 mutation leads to improvement of photopro-
tection, self-skin examination, and professional examina-
tion behaviors, in the absence of melanoma diagnosis.
Provision of negative genetic test results to non-carriers
also improved compliance with some but not all medical
recommendations.
Behavior/risk assessment recommendation
By understanding cognitive processes underlying sun
exposure behaviors, we may be able to improve commu-
nication of risk and empower individuals to comply with
prevention recommendations (Table 1).
Approaches for melanoma prevention
Increased understanding of pigment cell biology and
molecular mechanisms has enhanced the potential of
employing a preventive approach. This approach targets
individuals at risk of the disease and uses safe drugs or
natural products that may prevent or reverse melanoma
development. Specific features of melanoma biology,
pathogenesis, and epidemiology make it an ideal model
for chemoprevention approaches, including identification
of key targetable signaling pathways, the availability of
surrogate disease markers (e.g. dysplastic nevi), the
accessibility of skin to perform serial non- to minimally
invasive assessments, and identification of individuals at
risk of developing cutaneous melanoma. Challenges,
however, remain to be addressed, including (i) the need
to identify drugs with a well-characterized mechanism of
action to prevent melanoma, (ii) analyses of drugs already
evaluated in humans that rely on validated biomarkers of
response as part of future intervention studies, and (iii)
identification of targeted risk cohorts based on under-
standing of drug mechanism and calculating the risk/
benefit ratio of the intervention.
Oxidants/pro-oxidants, vitamin D, and eumelanin are
among examples of chemicals/natural products that have
been assessed for their possible effect on melanoma
prevention. Those include the following: (i) NSAIDs (non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs): Multiple epidemiolog-
ical studies have evaluated the role of NSAIDs in
melanoma prevention with controversial results. Further
studies are thus required to clarify short- and long-term
effect of NSAIDs and their metabolites on melanocytes
and melanoma development. (ii) Statins: Meta-analyses
and intervention clinical trials (using clinical and histolog-
ical endpoints in benign nevi) do not currently support the
use of lipid-lowering agents in melanoma chemopreven-
tion. (iii) Sulforaphane: Experimental studies indicate that
sulforaphane upregulates antioxidant genes and may
affect immune pathways. Further assessment of its
possible use is currently underway. (iv) Vitamin D: Several
studies point to a possible role of vitamin D supplemen-
tation as a preventative agent in vitamin D-deficient
patients. However, the complex relationship between
vitamin D and melanoma risk/outcome (higher UV expo-
sure results in higher serum vitamin D levels but also
higher risk of skin cancer) is recognized and need to be
considered in these evaluations. A 7-yr follow-up trial
evaluating the effects of calcium and vitamin D supple-
mentation did not reveal a difference in incidence of non-
melanoma skin cancer or melanoma rates (except in a
subcohort of patients with a history of non-melanoma
skin cancer). Further studies that take into consideration
sun exposure and standardization of molecular markers of
response are needed. (v) Antioxidants: The effect of
systemic antioxidants as melanoma chemoprevention
406
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Merlino et al.
 drugs remains controversial. A growing body of data
suggests that antioxidants, including selenium, may
promote rather than prevent cancer, an outcome sup-
ported by data from large, randomized controlled trials
testing selenium and vitamin E in non-melanoma cancers.
Interestingly, both mouse models of melanoma and
xenografts of human melanoma in mice show that relief
from oxidative stress by treatment with the antioxidant N-
acetyl cysteine leads to disease progression, suggesting
that these approaches be reassessed in carefully crafted
human- and animal-model-based studies.
Overall, the current chemoprevention data suggest that
(i) there is no clear evidence to support any particular
agent for widespread use in melanoma prevention solu-
tion; and (ii) in the case of antioxidants, recent evidence
suggests promotion, rather than prevention of melanoma
metastasis in certain experimental settings.
Emerging opportunities/considerations
Pigmentation modifiers
The use of small molecules to induce the synthesis of
eumelanin in skin as a means of protecting against skin
damage has been proposed and carried out via topical
administration of the drug forskolin to mice genetically
engineered to be red-haired and light-skinned. This
strategy seeks to mimic inherent protection against
cutaneous melanoma incidence seen in humans with
dark skin pigmentation. The approach was found to offer
mutant mice significant protection against UV-induced
mutagenesis and skin carcinogenesis, although it was
tested in a squamous cell carcinoma model. Human trials
have been performed using alpha-melanocyte-stimulating
hormone and active peptides derived from MSH that
similarly lead to darkening the skin. These agents may
have substantial off-target effects, including promotion of
growth of nevi, which will need to be considered in the
design of subsequent trials. Approaches to identify safe
agents capable of modulating eumelanin synthesis in
human skin could provide tools to prevent both mela-
noma and non-melanoma skin cancers and serve as a
more general cutaneous photoprotection method in
various contexts (Table 1).
Microbiome considerations
A patient’s microbiome may also play a key role in
melanoma development and response to therapy. Cur-
rently, researchers are asking whether a specific sub-
species of gut bacteria is associated with resistance to
melanoma development and whether the presence of
Table 1. The 2016 road map for melanoma: challenges and opportunities
Prevention
Define challenges and opportunities in context of environmental exposure and individual (epi)genetic makeup
Incorporate genetic, epigenetic, dietary, behavior, and sun exposure data in design of clinical evaluations
Define the impact of UV wavelengths/filters and their optimal uses (sunscreens)
Understand cognitive process underlying sun exposure behavior
Improve communication with and education of ‘at-risk’ individuals
Understand and develop means for possible control of melanins/pigmentation
Define the microbiome: possible impact on the immune system and melanoma development
Early Detection/Diagnosis
Develop better tools to identify melanoma earlier
Develop methods to identify precursor lesions at high risk for progression to melanoma
Develop melanoma subtype-specific early detection algorithms (�
a la ABCD) for patients and providers
Develop melanoma subtype-specific staging criteria for improved prognostication, and melanoma subtype-specific risk pheno- and genotypes
Establish more accurate cost-effective methods for diagnosis
Improve reporting and standardize use of imaging technologies
Promote media campaigns to educate the public for protection and screening
Dormancy/Metastasis
Develop better tools to detect and prevent metastasis
Determine what constitutes competency for a dormant state and what governs long-term survival of dormant cells at metastatic sites
Identify mechanisms that maintain dormant cell capacity for tumorigenesis
Establish genetic models of tumor dormancy to evaluate mechanisms underlying the establishment and reawakening of dormant cells
Determine whether dormant cells should be awakened or maintained dormant as part of defined therapy
Study dormancy in retrospective and prospective cohorts of patient specimens
Monitor dormancy in clinical trial setting, using markers and driver genes identified in experimental genetic models
Therapy/Resistance
Identify mechanisms of resistance and therapeutic modalities to overcome it
Define mechanisms underlying and strategies to overcome intratumoral heterogeneity
Develop experimental models to explore novel immunotherapy and signaling therapy approaches that take into account the genetic and biologic
signatures of the disease
Identify biomarkers for selection of second-line target therapies for treatment of resistant tumors
Improve efficacy, safety, and tolerability of checkpoint inhibitors and develop biomarkers for more precise selection of therapies
Define the mode and sequence of therapy administration when combinations are used
Identify new subgroups for targeted therapies
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
407
The state of melanoma
 select bacterial species correlates with improved thera-
peutic outcomes. Although these initial studies demon-
strating the impact of the microbiome on cancer therapy
(including melanoma) are encouraging, they need to be
validated and extended to higher resolution (e.g. under-
standing the mechanisms linking the gut microbiome
with
immune
responses).
Notably,
while
the
gap
between mouse and human microbiota is recognized,
substantial efforts are needed before one may project the
mouse-based studies to human settings. The complexity
lies not only in the number of bacterial strains, but,
equally important, in the relationship among them (one
bacterial community affecting another). Further studies
are required to map different bacterial communities in the
gut and assess their effect on the immune response and
the tumor microenvironment. Altering the bacterial land-
scape in a manner that would antagonize tumor develop-
ment or favor therapy, possibly via use of probiotics, is a
challenge that would deserves proper recognition and
attention by the scientific and medical communities at
large (Table 1).
Chemoprevention recommendations.
There is a clear
need to perform additional studies that incorporate
genetic and epigenetic data, dietary, behavior, and sun
exposure data collection in their design (Table 1). Ade-
quately
powered
prospective,
randomized
trials
are
required to assess the implication of regular use of such
chemicals. Prior to initiating clinical studies, it will be
critical to establish the effective dose and timing of the
drug, the optimal delivery method, which biomarkers are
best surrogates of efficacy, and which population of
patients should be included or excluded. Critical consid-
erations of these studies should be the impact of the
tested chemical on skin cancer (basal and squamous cell
carcinomas) versus melanoma, and potentially harmful
off-target effects. Such studies will require large, risk-
selected cohorts and proper stratification across the
various arms of prevention studies to determine efficacy.
It is expected that such an investment could reduce the
overall burden of the disease and minimize the number of
individuals in need of treatment.
Detection/early diagnosis
Melanoma consists of several disease subtypes that
differ in their epidemiology, clinical manifestation, patho-
genesis, and clinical course. On sun-exposed skin at least
two different pathways are distinguished, and other
subtypes with distinct features arise from the choroidal
tract of the eye and meningea, as well as from glabrous
(non-hair-bearing skin) and mucosa. Additional work is
required to precisely delineate these subtypes, define
their individual predisposition to environmental factors
(such as UV exposure), and their respective molecular
evolution from precursor lesions. A deeper understanding
of the different pathways for melanoma formation and
clearer definitions of melanoma subtypes could improve
risk prediction and prognostication.
As melanoma screening efforts continue to expand, it
is critical to improve diagnostic accuracy of both clinical
and histopathological criteria to minimize the risk of harm
related to screening methods. Histopathological diagnosis
remains the gold standard but has proven limitations,
highlighting the need for identification of additional
markers that can assist in diagnosis. Several studies
show sizeable disagreement among pathologists regard-
ing the diagnosis of melanoma and benign melanocytic
nevi, with one study reporting up to 15% discordance.
Thus, it is imperative to improve diagnostic accuracy to
decrease false positives that might result in unnecessary
surgery, adjuvant therapy, and psychological harm. It is
even more critical to reduce the proportion of false-
negative diagnoses that could increase morbidity and
overall survival. Current work that addresses discrimina-
tion of melanoma from benign or low-grade dysplastic
nevi is based on gene expression or DNA copy number
changes by comprehensive genomic hybridization (CGH)
or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), while gene
expression profiling (GEP)-based analyses are gaining
traction.
It is expected that established melanoma risk pheno-
types and genotypes will differ among melanoma sub-
types. For example, high mole density is positively
associated with non-CSD melanoma, whereas actinic
keratosis and solar lentigines are positively associated
with CSD melanoma. The same holds for genetic
variants, which are likely to reveal similar differences
between the subtypes. While the precise definitions of
these subtypes are still emerging, sufficient phenotype
and genotype stratification markers are now available to
allow studies to assess associated risk. Such studies
could help refine criteria to identify individuals at high risk
for either CSD or non-CSD subtypes and to improve
disease education for patients and healthcare providers.
A similar rationale applies to early recognition of tumors
or high-risk precursor lesions and staging criteria for
established melanomas. The current ABCDE (A, asym-
metry; B, border irregularity; C, color variation; D, diam-
eter > 6 mm; E, evolving lesions) diagnostic criteria could
be improved by tailoring them to different subtypes and
risk groups. Moreover, AJCC (American Joint Committee
on Cancer) staging criteria, which are also currently in
use, may provide improved prognostic information once
different criteria or cutoffs for different subtypes are
developed.
Diagnosis recommendation
(i) While some CGH/FISH/GEP are already in use clinically
or are being validated, further studies are necessary to
develop more accurate, cost-effective, and practical
methods to improve the accuracy of melanoma diagnosis.
(ii) Development of refined risk phenotypes could be
improved by increasing the sensitivity and specificity of
408
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Merlino et al.
 markers tailored to melanoma subtypes. (iii) Additional
standards useful to identify individuals with increased risk
could include clinical or molecular markers indicating
mutation load in skin as well as biomarkers for immune
competence and the state of the tumor stroma. (iv)
Improved understanding of how melanomas evolve from
precursor lesions will allow development of objective
criteria for diagnosis based on the number and type of
pathogenic mutations or perturbations in critical signaling
pathways. Developing these objective standards will
improve diagnosis of primary melanomas and enable
classification of intermediate lesions, which cannot yet be
accomplished using current methods (Table 1).
Melanoma screening efforts
The vast majority of primary melanomas emerge in skin
where they can be readily detected without specialized
instrumentation. Screening the general population for
skin cancer has been controversial, as it is not yet clear
whether this effort will lead to reduced deaths, particu-
larly given the low mortality associated with the most
common skin cancers (such as basal cell and squamous
cell carcinomas). Thus, programs and policies regarding
screening have focused on melanoma – the most deadly
form of skin cancer.
A variety of screening programs have been proposed
and carried out in the United States and abroad. Critical
for the success of these programs is the proper public
education and the ability of general practitioners to refer
patients directly to dermatologists for basic risk assess-
ment. Lack of common protocols hampers the ability to
compare screening efforts either between or within
countries.
In 2009, the third US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) evaluated worldwide evidence (through 2005)
relevant to skin cancer screening by primary care physi-
cians. They rated this screening as ‘Insufficient’ to assess
benefit or harm in early detection of melanoma and other
skin cancers in the adult general population. No formal
randomized and controlled melanoma screening trials
have been conducted worldwide (due to high cost and
lack of feasibility). The USPSTF recently conducted a
systematic review of worldwide evidence from January
1995 through June 2015, again assigning an ‘Insufficient’
grade to melanoma screening by primary care physicians
in the United States in the Draft Recommendation.
Nevertheless, the USPSTF continues to note the value
of screening individuals at highest risk of fatal melanoma
and recommends screening of these individuals, along
with counseling of parents with young children, as well as
young individuals aged 10–24 regarding sun protection
and effects of UV exposure on photoaging and skin
cancer.
Slip-Slop-Slap (Slip on a shirt; Slop on the 30+ sun-
screen; Slap on a hat) was an internationally recognized
sun protection campaign in the 1980 in Australia. Later,
this initiative was also noted in New Zealand, Canada, and
the UK. The education of the Australian population is a
paradigm that can be followed, given the recognition,
appreciation, and measures undertaken for sun protection
today. ‘Get Naked’ is an example of a campaign spear-
headed by the Melanoma Research Foundation over the
past couple of years, which was largely conducted
through social media or limited advertisements in public
places. The simple public health recommendation that
one should subject oneself to periodical self-examination
is expected to increase awareness and early detection of
moles or lesions that can be evaluated by professionals
soon after. The campaign has resulted in impressive
social media attention, although it is too early to assess
its impact and effectiveness. At present, there are several
ongoing efforts nationwide designed to collect data on
the impact of screening on melanoma detection, cost,
and survival.
Screening efforts recommendations
(i) Large-scale, stand-alone media campaigns to encour-
age high-risk groups to undergo screening and support of
state-based demonstration projects that combine media,
provider reimbursement, and public education. (ii) Pro-
grams should emphasize collaboration with primary care
clinicians to improve skin cancer triage and reduce
morbidity and cost for all types of skin cancer. (iii) Studies
to assess benefits of targeting those at highest risk of
fatal melanoma, such as white men >50 yr of age, should
be conducted (Table 1).
Underreporting
Studies conducted in 2008 and 2009 raised concerns
about melanoma underreporting, with rates estimated in
the range of 30–40%, while acknowledging that the
overall magnitude of the problem remains unknown. A
more recent study in the state of Arizona indicates that
underreporting rates might be as high as 70%. In the
United States, management of cancer data generally falls
under the responsibility of state cancer registries, agen-
cies that rely solely on providers submitting appropriate
forms to them. Cancer incidence rates are calculated
from data maintained by state cancer registries, and the
accuracy of this information is highly dependent on the
actual
reporting
of
cancer
cases
from
community
sources, including physicians. The potential for underre-
porting is especially high for melanoma, as it is frequently
diagnosed and treated in outpatient settings and pathol-
ogy may be read out of state.
Single lesion assessment
Most single lesion evaluation is carried out through
unaided skin examination and dermoscopic assessment.
New technologies relevant to non-invasive melanoma
diagnosis are emerging with the goal of increasing
sensitivity and specificity of current practices. Among
technologies that attempt to enhance and/or automate
current practices are in vivo confocal microscopy, multi-
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
409
The state of melanoma
 spectral imaging, and electrical impedance. Challenges
related to these approaches include the need for further
validation to ensure diagnostic accuracy of these modal-
ities, the demands of learning a new technology, variabil-
ity among readers, lack of comparative trials between
new technologies, and cost. In addition, dermatology
practices seek to increase the efficiency of patient flow,
and introduction of emerging technologies may slow this.
Thus for successful adoption of new technologies, it is
necessary to identify barriers in implementation and
implement systems that offer a clear advantage to
current diagnostic approaches. In addition, many of these
new technologies are unlikely to be widely available in the
primary care setting, suggesting that they may enhance
sensitivity and specificity of melanoma diagnosis on per-
need basis.
Regional and total body imaging
Considering
the
rapidly
emerging
improvement
and
accessibility to digital imaging technologies, there is a
need to effectively standardize the use of digital imaging
in dermatology and other specialties when capturing
regional and total body photographs. While several
medical specialties have specific DICOM (Digital Imaging
and Communication in Medicine) standards for digital
communication, this is not the case for dermatology. An
initiative established by the International Society for
Digital Imaging of the Skin seeks to standardize current
practices for image capture, terminology, storage, and
privacy issues surrounding digital imaging of patient skin
[‘International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC): Mela-
noma Project’]. The value of photographic digital imaging
has been more consistently evaluated in settings where
patients at high risk for melanoma have undergone
regional/total body imaging or when skin lesions have
been monitored short term. Developing standardized
parameters is critical as new systems capable of auto-
mated and semi-automated total body image capture are
emerging.
Consumer-based early detection through mobile
technologies
Mobile
phones
have
revolutionized
communication
around the world, not only through voice-based commu-
nication but also through the development of phone-
based social media (such as Twitter and Instagram) and
development of healthcare-related mobile applications
(apps). Phone-associated technologies, particularly the
camera and the global positioning systems, enhance
specific performance capabilities of apps. The app indus-
try is rapidly entering the healthcare space, and because
skin is so accessible, skin lesion photographs are com-
monly sent to physicians, who are being asked to
evaluate these photos clinically. At this time, little data
are available regarding the validity of such an approach.
There are now over 100 melanoma detection apps
available in app stores around the world, but none have
yet been shown to demonstrate the capacity to diagnose
melanoma.
Need for increased specificity and healthcare cost
implications
A critical consideration when assessing current mela-
noma screening practices relates to the number of
procedures performed to diagnose the 76 100 cases of
melanoma reported in the United States in 2015. Current
estimates indicate that approximately 25 biopsies are
performed for every diagnosis of melanoma rendered. By
extension, this implies an estimate of 2 283 000 biopsies
performed per year as part of current melanoma screen-
ing practices. However, underreporting of melanoma is
estimated to range from 40 to 70%. Assuming an
average of 55% underreporting rate across all states
and a sustained biopsy rate of 25 procedures for every
melanoma diagnosed, an estimated 4 073 333 biopsies
may be performed annually in the United States to
diagnose 169 111 melanomas.
An area of significant opportunity is detection of
‘amelanotic’
melanoma.
This
tumor
subclass
was
recently found associated with higher mortality than
darkly pigmented melanomas, probably due to diagnosis
at a later (thicker) stage. Recent animal-model-based
studies suggest that in some amelanotic melanomas,
dark pigment is replaced with pheomelanin. Imaging of
pheomelanin may allow one to identify these more
dangerous lesions.
Diagnosis technologies/reporting recommendations
(i) Modification of the reporting along with effective
education of physicians for the need to report melanoma
cases should increase the number of reported cases, (ii)
effectively standardize the use of digital imaging in
dermatology
and
other
specialties
when
capturing
regional and total body photographs, and (iii) increase
our ability to diagnose aggressive melanoma subtypes
and to minimize morbidity associated with the compar-
atively larger number of unnecessary skin biopsies
(Table 1).
Dormancy and early metastasis
It is well accepted that melanoma cells can be shed early
from a primary tumor and remain silent or ‘dormant’ as
micrometastatic foci for periods ranging from under a
year to decades. Clinically, dormancy describes the status
of microscopic metastases prior to progression to overt
cancer. Tumor dormancy is thought to depend on at least
three elements: (i) cellular dormancy, in which tumor cells
survive in a quiescent, slowly dividing state; (ii) angiogenic
dormancy, in which lack of vascularization holds growth
of micrometastases in check and promotes programmed
cell death, known as apoptosis; and/or (iii) immune-
mediated dormancy, where the immune system contin-
ues to limit the tumor population. Disruption of these
410
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Merlino et al.
 processes can awaken dormant micrometastases and
stimulate their expansion into overt metastases, leading
to patient morbidity and mortality.
Maintenance of a dormant state likely requires intrinsic
or ‘cell autonomous’ factors and extrinsic microenviron-
mental cues. The latter can be derived from the vascular
and lymphatic systems, the presence of inflammatory
cells, or the activity of stromal and support cells. Relevant
to the immune system, ‘immunoediting’ may occur, a
process in which most immunogenic tumor cells are
eliminated, leaving a poorly immunogenic, dormant pop-
ulation. In cancer types other than melanoma, chemother-
apies (a topic covered in another section of this report)
have been shown to modulate either induction or escape
from dormancy. The adaptive immune system may also
regulate tumor dormancy. Here, we view dormancy as an
organ-based process and will discuss issues related to
dormancy that must be considered when designing
interventions.
Factors regulating dormancy
It is likely that complex mechanisms of cross talk between
cancer cells and their microenvironment and vice versa
initiate and establish tumor cell dormancy. In turn, mech-
anisms promoting cell survival and evasion of the immune
system may be enhanced and potentially altered as a
response to therapeutic agents. As a framework for future
studies, the following stages of dormancy and mecha-
nisms underlying them have been proposed: (i) Establish-
ment of competency for a dormant state: Shed melanoma
cells may be able to home directly to favorable metastatic
sites, and many of those regions may favor tumor cell
survival by creation of a premetastatic niche. However, like
other tumor cells, melanoma cells may exploit reservoirs
such as bone marrow as an intermediate site on the journey
to a target organ. The possibility that dormancy can be also
induced following exposure to a particular therapy cannot
be excluded. (ii) Mechanisms governing long-term survival
of tumor cells at metastatic sites: Cell survival mechanisms
may be switched on either in solitary quiescent cells or in a
small number or colony of cells. Such mechanisms may
foster resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy. (iii) Self-
renewal mechanisms that maintain the capacity for tumori-
genesis: These activities might allow a balance between
cell proliferation and cell death. Both intrinsic and extrinsic
(from the stroma, the vasculature, and/or the immune
system) signals likely govern this balance. (iv) Activation/
suppression mechanisms that affect aggressive out-
growth: A combination of intrinsic and extrinsic factors,
including microenvironment, angiogenesis, and immune
surveillance, is expected to impact the nature of out-
growth.
Noteworthy issues relevant to melanoma dormancy
Our current understanding allows us to define similarities/
differences between dormancy in melanoma and other
tumor types. Growing evidence supports the influences
of melanoma cell plasticity and stem-like properties on
dormancy; yet, precise factors that underlie the switch to
dormant cells are not known. Likewise, the relationship
between melanoma dormancy and physiological stem
cell dormancy is an important aspect that requires further
study.
In recognizing the nature and significance of melanoma
dormancy, it is conceivable that ‘reawakening’ dormant
cells could make them susceptible to immunological and/
or targeted drug therapy. In this context, the role of the
premetastatic niche in establishing or awakening dor-
mancy is an important area to explore. Lastly, one cannot
ignore the importance of the bone marrow as a nurturing
environment for the dormant melanoma cells. At present,
the molecular analysis of melanoma dormancy lags
significantly behind that of breast and prostate cancers.
Research directed at filling this gap is required.
Clinical considerations in assessing melanoma
dormancy
With high cure rate in patients subjected to surgical
therapy, one may question the significance of dormancy
in such cases. Notably, we do not know whether patients
that were cured lacked dormant melanoma cells. Thus,
with our current understanding, it will be important to
assess dormancy during all three phases of clinical
investigation: (i) detection/diagnosis, (ii) prediction/prog-
nosis, and (iii) treatment. A better understanding of tumor
dormancy at these points in time would allow us to block
awakening mechanisms. It is anticipated that tumor
dormancy will be most efficiently targeted in patients
with earlier stage disease, provided that effective treat-
ment regimens are available. Thus, an analysis of whether
current regimens are effective against dormant tumor
cells is warranted. New approaches to adjuvant therapy,
either pre- or post-surgical removal of the primary tumor,
also need to be considered. Finally, there is a critical need
to identify blood-based biomarkers and novel imaging
strategies that may indicate the status of a patient’s
dormant tumor cells, as well as novel imaging strategies
to detect them.
Development and exploitation of models of
melanoma dormancy
It is evident that animal models can significantly comple-
ment analysis of clinical samples by providing a platform
to define basic mechanisms underpinning tumor initiation,
as well as to serve for pharmacological screens. How-
ever, effective models of tumor dormancy are rare and
must be established for physiologically relevant studies.
Based on the already well-appreciated heterogeneous
and plastic nature of melanoma, dormant cells in this
disease will likely have inherent properties that require
tailored genetic engineering.
The mouse is the most well-characterized system
available. Cell lines that exhibit dormant behavior when
engrafted into mice have been described, and one mouse
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
411
The state of melanoma
 melanoma dormancy model has been established in the
context of constitutive activation of the oncogene rear-
ranged during transfection (RET). However, zebrafish
models may offer a complementary alternative. In either
case, care must be applied to develop models most
representative of conditions underlying dormancy of
human tumor cells.
More challenging is the development of cellular models
(namely genetically matched cell lines with a distinct
potential for dormancy) that recapitulate at least some
aspects of the physiology of human melanoma. Such
systems, which have been described in breast cancer,
would represent a tremendous advantage in understand-
ing mechanisms associated with awakening of dormant
melanoma cells.
Characteristics and needs of tumor dormancy models
include the following: (i) tumor cell dissemination to
organs that are the most frequent targets of human
melanoma metastasis, and tumor–microenvironmental
interaction; (ii) methodology capable of identifying prolif-
erative versus silent cells or cell clusters in vivo; (iii)
immunocompetence to assess immune contributions
(e.g. inflammatory cells) and the possibility to evaluate
antigen-specific responses; (iv) capability to evaluate
genotype-specific effects on dormancy; (v) ability to
evaluate
the
microenvironment
of
micrometastases,
including extra cellular matrix, target organ cells, endothe-
lial cells, pericytes, inflammatory cells, and cancer-
associated fibroblasts; (vi) ability to study effects of aging
on dormancy; (vii) heterogeneity of micrometastases and
their primary melanoma of origin; (viii) ability to employ an
on/off switch from dormant micro- to macrometastases;
(ix) ability for live imaging by non-invasive methods or by
intravital microscopy; (x) capability to conduct whole-body
imaging of angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis (e.g. by
exploiting VEGFR3-driven luciferase knock-in models); (xi)
methodology to image metastatic and premetastatic
niches; (xii) ability to test how mutational burden affects
dormancy; and (xiii) ability to detect conversion from
dormant to growing cells in live animals.
Dormancy model tools and approaches currently avail-
able and adaptable include the following: (i) GEM models:
Use of these models could be coupled with surgical
removal of the primary melanoma. Incorporation of Cre-
based fluorescent reporters would add value to this
model. (ii) Grafted models: These include orthotopic
subcutaneous implants for cutaneous melanoma models,
with and without surgery. Other implantation strategies
can include left ventricle or tail vein injection. For uveal
melanoma, injections into the eye uveal tract are feasible
and may be pursued as an anatomically relevant setting.
Although, it would certainly be more advantageous to
employ an immunocompetent model system, human
melanoma cells and tissue can be grafted into immuno-
compromised host mice. Future availability of host mice
with humanized immune systems will greatly enhance
the value of this approach. Availability of appropriate
cellular models that mimic genetics of the human disease
would also add value to this general approach. (iii) Genetic
engineering: This will include CRISPR-based gene editing
as well as transposon-based mutagenesis. (iv) Multidi-
mensional ‘omics’ analyses: These technologies can be
focused on isolated single cells and include analysis of
RNA, DNA, epigenetic changes, and metabolism. (v)
Imaging modalities: Multiple modalities are currently
available, including bioluminescent imaging, fluorescent
stereomicroscopy,
2-photon
microscopy,
light
sheet
microscopy, micron-sized nanoparticle-based imaging,
and quantitative histological imaging. (vi) Reporter tools:
Numerous reporters are available that can distinguish
between the vasculature, macrophages, fibroblasts, lym-
phocytes, and other cells or tissues. Importantly, more
complex reporter systems are already available that can
separate
proliferating
from
quiescent/dormant
cells
in vivo. (vii) Monitoring: Development and incorporation
of better tools for assessing dormancy in clinical trial
design, such as measuring and profiling circulating tumor
cells, circulating tumor DNA and exosomes, assessing
bone marrow, for dormant cells are important. The ability
to simultaneously identify and isolate dormant and prolif-
erating populations from several metastatic sites is also
of relevance for both cutaneous and uveal melanoma, and
development of improved tools is a priority.
Targeting dormancy
Targeting dormant cells poses significant challenges, as
one needs to consider the partial elimination of some
while awakening others. Their select targeting is of equal
challenge given their distinct state of proliferation and
metabolism. Here, immunotherapy could be useful if
dormant
cells
express
antigens
recognized
by
the
immune system; however, a dedifferentiated state may
mask dormant cells. Dormant cells may upregulate
several cell survival pathways that can also oppose drug
response. Moreover, the wiring of pro-tumorigenic path-
ways may be distinct depending on the specific environ-
ment
(‘conditioning’)
of
the
premetastatic
niche.
Therefore, a better understanding is needed on how
available
chemo-
or
immunotherapies
impact
either
establishment
or
awakening
of
dormant
cells.
The
following are possible strategic approaches: (i) Preven-
tion: The goal of this approach is to keep cells in an
indefinite dormant (G0) state. In this context, it is of
relevance to note patient-related compliance issues,
which drops if treatments extend beyond 6 months.
Therapy would need to be safe and tolerated over years
of administration. Differentiation therapy may also be
considered in an effort to induce a permanent G0 state for
dormant cells. (ii) Awaken and target dormant cells: This
approach requires identifying pathways underlying awak-
ening to push quiescent cells out of dormancy. Those
cells would then be targeted and killed using conventional
antiproliferation therapy. This approach is risky as it could
result in generation of highly aggressive cells, hence
412
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Merlino et al.
 complicating clinical tests due to ethical considerations.
(iii) Eradicate all dormant cells: This approach would
require identification of single or combination-based
therapies
with
a
broad
spectrum
of
action.
Some
approaches to be considered include the following: (iv)
target survival pathways that sustain dormant cells; (v)
target embryonic pathways that maintain the dormant
state; (vii) target the ‘dormancy niche’ by altering cell
adhesion and/or cell-to-cell communication; (viii) trigger
immunogenic protein expression in dormant cells, possi-
bly by inducing presentation of differentiation antigens;
(ix) eradicate dormant cells using monoclonal antibodies
specific/selective for tumor antigens coupled to toxins, a-
particle emitters, or other toxic substances; (x) implement
adjuvant therapies to attack dormant cells early, perhaps
at primary tumor resection; and (xi) extend the length of
treatment, depending on drug toxicity, which may sustain
dormancy, quiescence and/or differentiation.
How to best apply translational research to assess
tumor dormancy in patients?
Tumor dormancy can be studied in retrospective and
prospective cohorts of patients. These can include patients
with thin melanomas and positive sentinel nodes and poor
clinical outcome versus those with similar histopatholog-
ical manifestations but a positive prognosis. Cohorts from
randomized clinical trials are of highest value. Such spec-
imens are already available although highly dedicated
clinical teams and are needed to identify and annotate
cohorts of interest. Importantly, this effort will require
sharing of samples/datasets (ideally through controlled
repositories) to foster collaboration among multiple inves-
tigators and sites to increase sample size and statistical
power. As tumor material may be limited, it will be
important to prioritize samples (primary lesions, metas-
tases, blood) and time-points to be analyzed. Similarly,
efforts should be dedicated to ‘downstream analyses’,
including molecular and immune studies of tumor and
blood samples. We also need to define additional potential
contributors (e.g. germ line signatures of susceptibility/
influence of the gut microbiome) to direct experimentation
and mathematical modeling. These questions should be
addressed by collaborative approaches and coordination
with multiple stakeholders, including policymakers and
funding agencies. Specific funding calls will be needed to
ensure productive and long-lasting interactions. As we
move forward, it will be important to perform these studies
via a ‘coclinical trials’ approach – with parallel studies in
man and mouse for trans-species cross-validation of
mechanisms and insights gained.
Dormancy recommendations
(i) Assess early metastasis and tumor dormancy in
cohorts of patients with melanoma to better understand
activities leading to disease progression. (ii) Develop
biologically relevant models of metastatic dormancy in
which to conduct mechanistic and functional analyses. (iii)
Integrate data from preclinical studies to inform clinical
approaches. (iv) Determine what constitutes competency
for a dormant state and what governs long-term survival
of dormant cells at metastatic sites. (v) Identify mecha-
nisms that maintain dormant cell capacity for tumorige-
nesis. (vi) Define activation/suppression mechanisms that
influence aggressive outgrowth of dormant cells. (vii)
Determine whether dormant cells should be awakened or
maintained dormant (Table 1).
Therapy: status, challenges, and
opportunities
Advances over the past decade have identified genetic
changes that allow stratification of melanomas into
distinct groups. Among those, tumors harboring BRAF
or NRAS mutations are most prevalent. Other groups
include melanomas with genetic changes in the NF1, KIT,
or RAC1 genes. The genomic landscape of melanoma is
also defined by epigenetic changes in complexes of
proteins that interact with DNA to regulate gene expres-
sion. Some of the latter parallel genetic alterations, while
others reflect a cellular response to environmental stimuli
that drive cells to adapt to harsh conditions (such as lack
of nutrients or chemotherapeutic drugs). While the
analysis of somatic mutations has generally focused on
their effects on protein functions, there is growing
interest in their potential immunological effects (e.g.
neoantigens are potent immunogens).
In parallel to an improved understanding of the genetic
basis of this disease, the treatment of patients with
metastatic melanoma has undergone a paradigm shift in
the last 5 yr. Prior to 2011, only two therapies [dacar-
bazine and high-dose bolus interleukin-2 (IL-2)] were
approved in the United States to treat these individuals.
Both achieved clinical responses in <15% of patients, but
neither demonstrated significant impact on patient sur-
vival in a randomized trial. Thus, until very recently, the
only real option for patients with metastatic melanoma
was to participate in a clinical trial of an experimental drug
or treatment. However, after a prolonged period of failed
trials, the US FDA granted regulatory approval to 10 new
therapeutic regimens for patients with metastatic mela-
noma between 2011 and 2015, events that were both
unprecedented and exciting. Melanoma patients and their
physicians now have a plethora of therapeutic options at
their disposal.
Despite major progress, the need for high-quality
clinical and translational research remains. Little is known
about how best to match patients to therapies with the
greatest probability of promoting long-term disease con-
trol, and overcoming resistance to existing therapies
remains a pressing need. Thus, there is now a critical
opportunity to build on the growing foundation of knowl-
edge to translate predictive biomarkers into diagnostic
tests, to develop tools to discern mechanisms of resis-
tance, and to rapidly develop next generation therapies.
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
413
The state of melanoma
 Targeted therapies
The development of approved targeted therapies has
been driven by significant advances in understanding the
diverse molecular mechanisms of melanomagenesis. In
particular,
availability
of
therapies
for
patients
with
BRAFV600 mutations, which occur in ~45% of non-acral
cutaneous melanomas, has been promising but also
identified key challenges that must be overcome to
maximize long-term clinical benefits of this strategy.
Combined treatment with BRAF and MEK inhibitors as a
therapeutic approach achieves RECIST (response evalu-
ation criteria in solid tumors) responses in ~70% of
patients with BRAFV600 mutations and disease control in
virtually all patients. However, most treated patients will
eventually exhibit disease progression due to a constel-
lation of resistance mechanisms emerging from tumor
heterogeneity within an individual patient. To date, no
targeted therapies have demonstrated significant clinical
efficacy in patients whose disease progresses following
BRAF/MEK inhibition, thus driving an active area of
research.
In addition to new mutations, epigenetic factors and
tumor interaction with the microenvironment likely play
roles in drug resistance, activities that present diagnostic
challenges but also new therapeutic avenues. Diagnosis
in particular is complicated by the heterogeneity of
resistance. Thus, while much can be learned from
biopsies, more global diagnostic tools (such as markers
detectable in blood or molecular imaging) are needed to
stratify ‘types’ of resistant patients in order to develop
rational, effective approaches. Patient outcomes may also
be improved by interrogation of targeted therapy dosing
strategies, including intermittent approaches, which delay
resistance, or by higher dosing in terms of combination
therapies. Higher dosing may be particularly relevant to
central nervous system (CNS) metastases, which remain
a significant therapeutic challenge. There is also an unmet
need to identify markers to identify patients who will
achieve a more durable benefit from BRAF and BRAF/
MEK inhibition, a phenomenon known to occur in 10–
20% of BRAFi-treated patients and up to 30% of BRAF/
MEK-inhibitor-treated patients.
Finally, it is also critical to identify effective strategies
to
treat
metastatic
melanoma
in
patients
lacking
BRAFV600
mutations.
In-depth
studies
of
cutaneous
melanomas have identified several additional potentially
targetable genes and pathways. The lessons learned
from
the
still-evolving
treatment
of
patients
with
BRAFV600 mutations should facilitate progress in devel-
oping therapies aimed at patients who lack them, most
of whose melanomas harbor activating NRAS or inacti-
vating NF1 mutations. Both alterations perturb RAS
signaling; thus, a key question, which is also relevant to
multiple other cancers, is whether to directly target RAS
or consider targeting of effectors of RAS signaling, such
as RAF protein kinases or phosphatidylinositide (PI)-30
kinases. Initial molecular profiling studies also show that
non-cutaneous melanoma subtypes have distinct bio-
logic
properties.
This
is
particularly
true
of
uveal
melanoma, which is characterized by one of the lowest
mutation rates of all solid tumors and by a distinct set of
somatic alterations. There are currently no effective
therapies available to treat this condition, presenting
both a need and an opportunity.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy posits that one does not need to treat
tumor cells but rather prime a patient’s immune system
to more efficiently attack the patient’s tumor. This
approach
has
revolutionized
melanoma
therapy
and
resulted in unprecedented rates of long-term disease
control and survival in patients with metastatic disease.
However, multiple challenges and opportunities remain to
optimize this therapeutic approach.
The clinical experience with high doses of the cytokine
IL 2 provided the proof-of-concept that immunotherapy
can result in long-term disease control and survival in
metastatic melanoma patients, albeit only in a very small
percentage of patients and with very high toxicity in all
treated patients. However, the clinical development of
immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy has made such
outcomes a reality for an increasing number of patients.
For example, long-term follow-up with ipilimumab (Ipi),
which targets CTLA4, indicates that ~20% of patients
survive at least 3 yr after initial treatment, with current
data suggesting that few patients relapse and die after
that benchmark. This benefit is balanced by the fact that
Ipi treatment has a low clinical response rate (~10%), a
slow onset of action, and a significant rate (up to 25%) of
autoimmune toxicity. The approved single-agent anti-PD1
antibodies nivolumab (Nivo) and pembrolizumab (Pembro)
achieve clinical responses in 30–45% of patients, includ-
ing individuals who have failed Ipi either due to disease
progression or drug toxicity. Nivo and Pembro are also
associated with much lower rates (<10%) of autoimmune
toxicity than Ipi. Long-term survival data are still pending
for these agents, but many clinical responses to PD1
antibodies appear to last for at least the duration of active
treatment thus far (2 yr). Randomized trials with Nivo and
Pembro
demonstrated
significant
improvements
in
safety, response rates, and in overall survival compared
to Ipi. It remains to be determined which patient
subpopulations will derive long-term benefit from each
therapy.
Questions remain about how to further improve the
efficacy of these agents. Current evaluation of combined
Ipi + Nivo treatment suggests significantly increased
response rates, with 50–60% of patients responding
positively. However, the regimen is also characterized by
a high rate of autoimmune toxicity. Clinical trials are
underway to test other combinatorial approaches, with
success defined not only as improved efficacy but safety
and tolerability. Complementary efforts are aimed at
understanding
resistance
to
immunotherapy.
Initial
414
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Merlino et al.
 findings suggest that PD1-resistant melanomas are char-
acterized by markedly lower T-cell infiltration and by lower
tumor inflammation, revealing a potential early pharma-
codynamic endpoint useful to assess in clinical trials with
new therapies and combinations. Molecular studies also
show that melanomas with a relatively low mutation
burden are less likely to respond to Ipi, although this
finding has not yet prevented clinicians from treating
patients with this therapy. Molecular analyses identified
other oncogenic and targetable pathways in tumor cells
that may promote resistance to immune recognition,
infiltration, and tumor killing, and trials combining MAPK
inhibitors with immunotherapies are underway. Finally,
there are many other key regulatory molecules that have
been identified on T cells. These molecules may have
roles not only as therapeutic agents, but could potentially
also be biomarkers of efficacy, resistance, and/or toxicity.
Opportunities
Clinical therapy for melanoma is ripe with challenges
that, if met, could further improve disease outcomes.
One low-hanging fruit is the need for clinical interrogation
of alternative dosing strategies for currently available
agents. For targeted therapies, preclinical studies sup-
port the idea that intermittent strategies may slow or
prevent drug resistance. For immune therapies, the
optimal frequency and duration of therapies is unclear.
Testing of alternative dosing strategies could have safety
benefits and, in fact, may be necessary if significantly
higher-order combination regimens are needed to max-
imize long-lasting disease remissions. Fiscal benefit
could also drive prioritization of treatment strategies in
an increasingly cost-confined healthcare system. Assess-
ment of dosing strategies would clearly benefit greatly
from new markers that accurately predict clinical benefit
early in treatment.
Dramatic progress seen in treating patients with distant
metastases suggests that patients with regional disease
or even high-risk localized melanoma could experience
similar
benefits.
In
particular,
the
development
of
reagents with high response and disease control rates
with minimal toxicity presents an opportunity to safely
explore neoadjuvant approaches for patients with surgi-
cally resectable disease. Neoadjuvant treatment may
provide significant clinical benefit not only by reducing
the morbidity and/or complexity of surgical procedures,
but also by providing information to guide whether a
therapy is beneficial and should be continued in the
adjuvant setting. A neoadjuvant approach also provides a
chance to acquire high-quality biospecimens to analyze
resistance mechanisms, which remains challenging in
stage IV patients. Neoadjuvant evaluation of early-stage
investigational agents could also rapidly evaluate whether
that reagent achieved significant target inhibition at
clinically tolerated doses. Finally, the demonstration of
long-term clinical benefit from short-term neoadjuvant
treatments may also establish a more efficient paradigm
to evaluate and potentially approve new therapies.
In
contrast
to
recent
therapeutic
advances,
the
development of molecular and/or immune diagnostics
to guide clinical care remains largely unrealized. While
many research efforts are underway to identify individ-
uals with stage IV disease who are most likely to benefit
– or not – from current systemic therapies, there is a
strong rationale to also identify patients at greatest risk
of side effects. Improved biomarkers will also be critical
for the rational use of systemic therapies in patients with
earlier stage disease, particularly given the high cost of
most new therapies. These studies should be comple-
mented by efforts to improve risk models for earlier
stages of disease and to guide appropriate selection of
patients in which the risks and costs of aggressive
treatment are justifiable.
Heterogeneity within and between tumors presents a
significant challenge for overcoming resistance to thera-
pies. While currently available collections of tumor biop-
sies remain essential to research, the development of
non-invasive biomarker strategies would be clinically
beneficial. For example, blood-based biomarkers could
be a powerful adjunct to current surveillance strategies
for patients with early-stage disease. For patients receiv-
ing systemic therapies, sensitive blood-based response
markers could rapidly and rationally guide treatment
decisions and expedite evaluation of new strategies. In
addition
to
blood-based
markers,
new
imaging
approaches capable of assessing key disease outcomes,
such as immune cell infiltration, could also have tremen-
dous clinical impact.
Progress seen in clinical trials and regulatory approvals
largely reflects the experience in non-acral cutaneous
melanoma patients without significant comorbidities.
There is a need for increased investigation relevant to
populations previously excluded or underrepresented in
landmark trials. For example, clinical trials in patients with
significant comorbidities, including autoimmune disease
and CNS involvement, will help guide treatment of real-
world patient populations. The distinct molecular biology
of non-cutaneous melanoma subtypes, including mucosal
and uveal melanoma, also provides a rationale for focused
investigations in these populations.
With the growing understanding of melanoma cell
biology, the tumor microenvironment, and the role/regu-
lation of the immune system in cancer control, a large
number of new and exciting drugs are now at various
stages of clinical development for this disease. Yet, with
several drugs that improve survival (but cure few) already
widely available in clinical practice, determining and
validating surrogate clinical endpoints for long-term effi-
cacy is an urgent need to optimize the design and
conduct of clinical trials. Such improvements will ensure
that drugs with significant efficacy will be available to
patients in a timely manner.
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
415
The state of melanoma
 Therapy recommendations
(i)
Develop
experimental
models
to
explore
novel
immunotherapy and signaling based therapy approaches
that take into account the genetic and biologic signatures
of the disease. (ii) Identify mechanistic basis of intratu-
moral heterogeneity and develop strategies to overcome
this clinical obstacle. (iii) Identify and validate biomarkers
to select patient subgroups for targeted therapies. (iv)
Identify biomarkers for selection of second-line target
therapies for treatment-resistant tumors. (v) Improve
efficacy, safety, and tolerability of the current generation
of checkpoint inhibitors and develop biomarkers for more
precise selection of therapies.
The path forward
There remains a critical need to encourage participation in
clinical trials in the melanoma patient community. Despite
many regulatory approvals over the last 5 yr, there remains
an unacceptably high rate of treatment failure and death
from this disease. Melanoma researchers must partner
with patient support and advocacy organizations to com-
municate this message, and find ways to optimize the ease
and safety of participation in clinical trials. This message
must also be communicated effectively to funding agen-
cies to ensure continued progress. Progress also critically
depends upon collaboration and cooperation with pharma-
ceutical companies, particularly in designing and support-
ing innovative trials that may provide new insights.
Ample evidence now supports the idea that there is
significant overlap between the regulation of oncogenic
signaling and the antitumor immune response and that
both determine the efficacy of (or promote resistance to)
targeted and immune therapies. In the future, preclinical
models must be developed that allow concurrent evalu-
ation of both molecular and immune factors and include
dedicated analysis of both in experimental designs.
Clinically, there is a need to systematically evaluate both
the optimal sequence of and proper combination of
targeted and immune therapies to identify safe and
effective strategies for patients. It is likely that subsets of
patients will benefit differentially from these approaches,
and thus there is a critical need for infrastructure to
collect and annotate high-quality biospecimens. Further-
more, such studies should incorporate analyses of both
tumor and host factors, such as germ line polymorphisms
and the patients’ microbiome.
In addition to our appreciation of drug combinations,
we are also in an era that requires multidisciplinary
clinical care and expertise. For example, new opportuni-
ties for neoadjuvant therapy will be most impactful if
there is close collaboration between medical oncologists,
surgical oncologists, and pathologists. There are likewise
opportunities for collaborative investigations that include
radiation therapy and other interventional modalities;
these are just beginning to be realized but will likely
expand significantly. Importantly, the growing list of
therapeutic options across the melanoma continuum
requires multidisciplinary input in patient care and in
design of clinical research. Similarly, close collaboration
and
communication
between
clinical
and
laboratory
investigators are essential to expedite progress in the
field and provide a strong rationale for new clinical
studies.
Relevant to development of future treatment strate-
gies, there is interest in cellular machines that normally
maintain cellular homeostasis but are subverted in tumor
cells to promote survival. Thus far, these approaches,
which are equally relevant to melanoma, focus on five
complex biochemical processes: (i) the initiation complex
for protein translation; (ii) the unfolded protein response,
including the cellular response to misfolded proteins (also
part of the ER stress response); (iii) the spliceosome,
which functions in mRNA splicing and hence gives rise to
novel proteins, some of which may underlie cancer; (iv)
the apoptotic machinery, which has already been shown
to regulate the responsiveness of melanomas to targeted
therapy; and (v) the machinery of autophagy, which may
regulate the response of melanoma cells to targeted
blockade of pro-tumorigenic signal transduction path-
ways. Ongoing studies should define activities of these
complexes in drug resistance or metastasis and begin to
identify reagents to target them.
416
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Merlino et al.
