   1
Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
Lupus community panel proposals for 
optimising clinical trials: 2018
Joan T Merrill,1 Susan Manzi,2 Cynthia Aranow,3 Anca Askenase,4 Ian Bruce,5 
Eliza Chakravarty,1 Ben Chong,6 Karen Costenbader,7 Maria Dall’Era,8 
Ellen Ginzler,9 Leslie Hanrahan,10 Ken Kalunian,11 Joseph Merola,7 
Sandra Raymond,12 Brad Rovin,13 Amit Saxena,14 Victoria P Werth15
To cite: Merrill JT, Manzi S, 
Aranow C, et al. Lupus 
community panel proposals for 
optimising clinical trials: 2018. 
Lupus Science & Medicine 
2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/
lupus-2018-000258
The authors thank the following 
Panel of Expert Reviewers 
for their helpful comments 
and suggestions: Gabor Illei, 
MD MedImmune Jeffrey N. 
Siegel, MD Genentech, Inc. 
William J. Eastman, MD 
GlaxoSmithKline Bonnie Pobiner, 
PhD GlaxoSmithKline David 
Martin, MD Pfizer Inc. James 
B. Chung, MD, PhD Amgen 
Inc. Dorothy (Dottie) McCabe, 
PhD, FCP Boehringer Ingelheim 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. John 
Throup, PhD Bristol-Myers 
Squibb Sabine Bongardt UCB 
BIOSCIENCES GmbH Amy H. 
Kao, MD, MPH, MS EMD Serono 
Research & Development 
Institute, Inc. (A business 
of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, 
Germany)
Received 5 January 2018
Revised 6 February 2018
Accepted 12 February 2018
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Joan T Merrill;  
Joan- 
Merrill@ 
omrf. 
org
Review
AbstrAct
Formidable impediments stand in the way of treatment 
development for lupus. These include the unwieldy size of 
current trials, international competition for scarce patients, 
complex outcome measures and a poor understanding of 
these outcomes in the world at large. The heterogeneity 
of the disease itself coupled to superimposition of 
variegated background polypharmacy has created enough 
immunological noise to virtually ensure the failure of lupus 
treatment trials, leaving an understandable suspicion 
that at least some of the results in testing failed drugs 
over the years may not have been negative, but merely 
uninterpretable. The authors have consulted with many 
clinical trial investigators, biopharmaceutical developers 
and stakeholders from government and voluntary sectors. 
This paper examines the available evidence that supports 
workable trial designs and proposes approaches to 
improve the odds of completing interpretable treatment 
development programs for lupus.
IntroduCtIon
During the past several decades, more than 
30 promising, strategically targeted biologics 
have entered early development for the 
treatment of lupus.1 So far, only belimumab 
has successfully completed a Phase III 
programme to obtain regulatory approvals 
worldwide. However, even this treatment 
faced significant challenges in executing 
pivotal Phase III trials, requiring major invest-
ment in international trial sites and involving 
more than 2400 patients.2–4 Since the first 
approval of belimumab in 2011, seven novel 
immune modulators have managed to move 
into Phase III development,5–12 most on the 
basis of marginal early phase efficacy.6–11 
Development of three of these treatments has 
already been stopped because of failure to 
meet pivotal endpoints.13–15 Due to the wide-
spread community belief, likely based on the 
pioneering belimumab experience, that late 
phase lupus programmes must be very large 
to succeed, these three recently cancelled 
programmes for lupus represent more than a 
billion dollar loss in research and development 
costs. Meanwhile, many other theoretically 
promising investigational treatments were 
put aside earlier in the process.16–23 Given the 
rarity with which Phase II or III lupus trials 
have met their primary endpoints, it could 
be assumed that most of the mechanistically 
promising treatments tested for lupus in the 
past 25 years are either ineffective or barely 
effective. Alternatively, it might be suspected 
that the testing process itself has flaws.  
The objective of this paper is to address the 
formidable impediments that stand in the way 
of treatment development for lupus. These 
include the unwieldy size of current template 
designs for Phase II and III trials coupled to 
worldwide competition for patients who meet 
the stringent entry criteria at limited numbers 
of adequately trained trial sites. It has also 
been difficult to arrive at reliable study 
endpoints given the complexity and user-un-
friendliness of accepted, but often misunder-
stood outcome measures. The heterogeneity 
of the disease itself and the superimposition 
of background polypharmacy to this immuno-
logical complexity has created enough noise 
to ensure the failure of lupus treatment trials, 
leaving an understandable suspicion that at 
least some of the results observed may not have 
been negative, but merely uninterpretable.
The authors have consulted with many 
clinical trial investigators, biopharmaceu-
tical developers and stakeholders from 
government 
and 
voluntary 
sectors. 
To 
pursue solutions, we have considered strat-
egies for increasing the numbers of patients 
with lupus who have access to and knowl-
edge about clinical trials. We review data to 
support approaches to simplifying polyphar-
macy, tailored for patients with or without 
organ-threatening disease. We have also eval-
uated the feasibility of designing trials with 
more discriminatory endpoints, including 
a focus on adaptive trials, strategic popula-
tions, organ-specific endpoints and outcomes 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
2
Lupus Science & Medicine
measuring sustainable low disease activity. Any of these 
innovations might support greater clinical discrimination 
with effective treatments. As will be discussed below, all 
of these approaches have been subjected to preliminary 
testing and seem to increase differences between effective 
treatments and placebo, paving the way so that smaller 
trials can succeed. Our recommendations result from a 
comprehensive analysis of what has and has not worked 
well in lupus trials over the past several decades, and it 
is hoped that this analysis will be useful for clinical scien-
tists, clinical trial designers and regulatory agencies.
State of the art Care for lupuS IS InSuffICIent, baSed 
on InSuffICIent evIdenCe
Lupus 
is 
a 
complex, 
multifaceted 
autoimmune 
disease24 25 characterised by unpredictable flares of mild, 
moderate or organ-threatening inflammation and inexo-
rable organ damage which progresses over many decades, 
resulting in a high rate of disability and early death.26–35 
Advances in treatment have been accomplished by the 
largely empiric use of a variety of immune suppres-
sants developed and optimised for completely different 
diseases.36 In addition to the toxicity associated with long-
term steroid use, there are adverse effects related to the 
poorly studied combinations of immune suppressant 
medications that patients with lupus also ubiquitously 
receive.
Since moderately ill patients with lupus who have 
chronic, smouldering disease activity over many years are 
known to develop progressive disability and have a high 
risk for premature atherosclerosis and early mortality,32 33 
long-term management with a safe, targeted biologics 
would be a defensible position to take if it could be demon-
strated that biological therapies are effective. Surveys of 
patients with lupus were conducted by the Lupus Founda-
tion of America (LFA) in collaboration with UCB in 2010 
and Eli Lilly in 2014.37 38 When 531 patients answered the 
question, ‘Are you satisfied with your current medica-
tions?’, only 44% replied that they were either satisfied or 
very satisfied, and 45% indicated that the effects of medi-
cation impair their daily activities and work.37 In the 2014 
survey of 827 patients,38 respondents reported taking an 
average of eight prescription medications. Despite this 
fact (or perhaps because of it), 87% said that the disease 
affects their work life, and 55% indicated that they can 
only work part-time or intermittently because of lupus. 
Seventy-six per cent reported that chronic fatigue limits 
their social activities. Therefore, if you ask patients with 
lupus, the current standard of care is unacceptable.
For more than 50 years, the only approved treatments 
for lupus in the USA were aspirin, corticosteroids or 
steroid-inducing agents and antimalarials, which were 
grandfathered in for approval during the mid-20th 
century with minimal scientific stringency.
In 2011, belimumab was added to that short list, having 
survived an arduous Phase III international develop-
ment programme.2 3 The disconnect, however, is that 
passing a demanding regulatory process does not ensure 
patient access. Belimumab is expensive, and this has led 
to some confusion along well-worn tracks of insurance 
approval policies. The medical world has come to accept 
the stipulation that new, expensive treatments should 
only be prescribed when cheaper standard alternatives, 
which have longer safety and efficacy track records, are 
ineffective. In the case of lupus, this makes it necessary 
for patients to fail unproven treatments that have many 
known toxicities before the only proven treatment, which 
has an excellent 10-year safety and tolerability profile, can 
be tried. In addition, even though belimumab is known to 
work for cutaneous lupus,39 it was only tested in patients 
who meet criteria for SLE. Therefore, it is not approved 
for patients with refractory cutaneous disease who don’t 
also meet classification criteria for SLE, despite the fact 
that the intrinsic pathology is the same.40
addreSSIng the Severe Shortage of patIentS for 
trIalS
A significant impediment to treatment development 
for lupus is the lack of qualified trial sites and qualified 
patients to participate in studies. To expand the popula-
tion of suitable patients with lupus, an important first step 
might be to reach a more rational consensus about how 
to define the disease. Lupus can have myriad manifesta-
tions, with unpredictable impacts on various organs of 
the body. Two different classification criteria are currently 
in wide use, promulgated by projects from the American 
College of Rheumatology41 and the Systemic Lupus Inter-
national Collaborating Clinics.42 These criteria overlap, 
but each includes certain subsets of patients that the other 
does not.43 Each includes some patients with very severe 
disease, and each includes some with minimal disease, 
the latter being questionable candidates for clinical trials. 
Both classification criteria exclude many patients with 
single organ lupus who may have moderate to severe 
manifestations. These patients might benefit from new 
treatments, but would be excluded from clinical trials and 
any subsequent treatment approvals.
Although the science of prognostic markers is not well 
advanced, there is evidence that certain autoantibodies or 
immunological pathways may be more relevant to some 
manifestations such as nephritis.44 Because of this, many 
consider lupus to be multiple different diseases, distin-
guished by the organs that become involved. Although 
an acknowledgement that ‘one immunologic interven-
tion does not fit all’ has merit in optimising advanced 
treatment development, attempts to distinguish patients 
and choose treatments based simply on which organs 
are involved have not been very useful. For example, 
different pathologically distinct rashes can occur in 
patients who have nephritis,41 and not all kidney disease 
is identical.45 46 Thus, it seems most likely that lupus is 
a complex spectrum disorder where clinical manifesta-
tions and pathology may vary along a three-dimensional 
continuum from patient to patient.47
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
3
Review
Why the organs and/or pathologies vary from patient 
to patient remains obscure, but once focus is drawn to 
specific immunological disorders, there is some predict-
ability across patients regardless of the organs involved. 
There is no evidence to suggest that discoid lesions in a 
patient who also has nephritis are at all different from a 
discoid rash in a person who only has cutaneous involve-
ment.48 The availability of patients for clinical trials would 
be significantly increased by including those with lupus 
spectrum manifestations who may not meet classification 
criteria for SLE. This is particularly true for patients with 
cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE), since, in the age 
of the ubiquitous punch biopsy, they represent a large 
population of patients with objectively confirmable lupus 
and  measurable clinical findings.
Another way to increase the availability of lupus patients 
for trials is to develop a better way of finding them. Funda-
mental to this process will be to develop a greater number 
of trained, geographically dispersed trial sites.49 Support 
for the recruitment, training and infrastructure of inter-
ested clinical sites would make a significant difference in 
reaching more patients with the feasibility of trial partic-
ipation. People of African, Hispanic, Native American or 
Asian origin have increased risk for lupus and potentially 
more severe manifestations,50–52 but people of minority 
descent, poor socioeconomic status and rural residence 
are generally known to have low representation in clinical 
trials.53 Insufficient clinical trial participation by minority 
patients with a serious chronic disease such as lupus may 
significantly increase already profound healthcare dispar-
ities by causing confusion about whether advanced treat-
ments are appropriate for them. Indeed, belimumab, the 
first biologic that was approved for SLE in 2011, was not 
initially recommended for patients of African descent 
because isolated data from Phase III trials suggested 
that the treatment might not work in that population.54 
Nevertheless, African Americans were very poorly repre-
sented in Phase III trials, and belimumab appeared to 
be very effective for an equally underpowered group of 
African American patients in Phase II.55 Furthermore, 
patients with SLE of African descent are known to be 
more likely than other racial groups to have the serolog-
ical markers that define patients most likely to respond to 
belimumab.56 Of course, racial groupings (especially the 
mixed races that characterise culturally Hispanic people) 
provide a weak substitute for the advanced pharmacoge-
netics that would be optimal for predicting response to 
treatments, but there is no current genetic guidance to 
rationalise treatment selection for lupus, underscoring 
the importance of ensuring that all lupus groups are 
adequately represented in clinical trials.
Unless poor and minority patients live in larger urban 
areas near a university, accessibility to clinical trial partic-
ipation may not even be feasible. Besides geographical 
location, barriers to recruitment of these populations for 
trials may be complex,57 58 but likely include weak relation-
ships between patients and providers, provider attitudes, 
methods of presenting information about clinical trials 
and mistrust of research by vulnerable populations.53
Primary care providers may provide an important key 
to solving issues in minority recruitment. Although less 
than 1% of the US population participates in clinical 
trials, a recent poll found that 72% believed that they 
would participate in a clinical trial if recommended by 
their own doctor.59 Some data suggests that a focus on 
local communities and minority-dominant medical insti-
tutions may improve clinical trial participation.60 Provi-
sion of adequate translation and culturally competent 
communication, including community and faith-based 
input into educational materials, and improved attitudes 
and/or listening skills on the part of trial recruiters have 
been proposed as meaningful solutions.60–67
In worldwide trials with strong representation by South 
American and Asian sites, participation by some Hispanic 
subgroups and Asians has been adequate, but patients 
of African descent and North American Indians remain 
poorly represented, even in the largest international 
trials2 3 9 10 14 (see table 1). Initial steps to address this 
problem have been undertaken by the LFA with a grant 
from Health and Human Services, Office of Minority 
Health. They have developed a project called Improving 
Minority Participation and Awareness of Clinical Trials 
for Lupus and have developed a website for education 
about clinical trials (http://www. 
lupusfoundation. 
org/ 
clinicaltrials/). A follow-up pilot project is being under-
taken at the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
which will capitalise on LFA insights to create a CME-cer-
tified programme for primary care providers to increase 
awareness of lupus research, to identify roadblocks to 
participation in minority populations and to encourage 
appropriate referrals to trial centres.
We recommend that the entire lupus clinical research 
community mobilise to develop a comprehensive 
approach to recruiting, training and supporting the 
Table 1 Enrolment of minority groups in Phase III trials of SLE2 3 9 10 14
Trial
n
Location of trial sites
% African
% AI/AN
% Hispanic
BLyS 72
819
North America, Europe
14
13
21
BLyS 56
865
Asia, South America
4
32
49
Tabalumab
2288
Worldwide
11
13
29
Embody
1584
Worldwide
12
Unknown
20
AI, American Indian; AN, Asian.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
4
Lupus Science & Medicine
infrastructure for new trial sites in wider geographical 
areas, coupled with a thoughtful patient outreach initia-
tive using culturally competent information. This may 
improve the access to clinical trials by a larger population, 
including underserved populations, and enable empow-
ered, educated decision making about participation.
addreSSIng the IneffICIent SIze of ClInICal trIalS for 
lupuS
the problem: disease complexity
Lupus is not only clinically and immunologically heter-
ogenous, the compound outcome measures devised to 
evaluate patients with disparate clinical manifestations 
are fraught with pitfalls.47 68–70 Global trials present more 
than an administrative nightmare—they have also been 
difficult to design to ensure interpretability of data. 
Because of the paucity of evidence-based treatments 
and globally accepted treatment pathways, physicians in 
practice are empirically prescribing drugs based on habit 
and clinical lore rather than well-defined, immunologi-
cally based phenotypes. International standards for treat-
ment of lupus are not universally applied, and availability 
of immunosuppressants varies around the world, which 
together have added fuel to the fire of designing trials to 
evaluate biological therapies as add-ons to varying back-
ground immune modulators.
This increasingly unstructured polypharmacy approach 
seems archaic in a world that is rapidly moving towards 
sophisticated and strategic approaches to precision medi-
cine. For example, it is possible that adherence to back-
ground therapy being prescribed before baseline may 
suddenly improve after patients enter a clinical trial, once 
patients receive increased attention from study coordina-
tors, who studiously record every change and missed dose 
the patient can report. Since non-adherence to medica-
tions is known to be high in SLE,71–73 some have advo-
cated measuring levels of immunosuppressive therapy at 
the time of screening to ensure that patients truly have 
active disease on ‘standard of care’ and not because of 
non-compliance.
These factors might well account for high placebo 
response rates in trials, once patients who have been 
non-adherent are suddenly being reminded to take their 
medications by dedicated trial coordinators. If efficacy 
rates could approach 80%–100%, a placebo response rate 
of 35%–40% would not pose an insurmountable problem. 
Unfortunately, in a heterogenous disease such as lupus, 
any finely targeted treatment is extremely unlikely to be 
effective in the majority of patients. If there is a ceiling, 
as seems likely, with an efficacy for most single biologics 
of 40%–60%, it is clear that trial conditions that support 
placebo group response rates of 35%–40% are untenable.
It may not yet be possible to fully unravel the tangled 
threads of confusing outcome measurements and an 
alphabet soup of background treatments in heteroge-
nous patients who may or may not have been adherent 
to medications prior to entering the trial. Nevertheless, 
some evidence from secondary and exploratory anal-
yses of past trials, now prospectively validated by some 
recent Phase II studies, suggests simple and effective trial 
design strategies which juxtapose the degree of illness of 
patients, the requirement of different patient subsets for 
background therapy, the permissiveness of medication 
adjustments during a trial and the stringency of outcome 
measures (tables 2–4). Adjusting each of these compo-
nents to adapt to the others will help to decrease data 
‘noise’ and make smaller trials more feasible.
evIdenCe that effeCtIve lupuS treatmentS Can be 
dIStInguIShed from plaCebo
trial design
Exploratory analysis of a number of disappointing 
trials and confirmation using results of prespecified 
endpoints from a few more recent trials have produced 
two consistent potential solutions to improve trial 
designs. Table 2 illustrates that there is now substantial 
evidence to support improved discrimination of treat-
ments from placebo or lower placebo group response 
rates in analyses restricted to more severe subsets of 
patients7–9 12 15 18 21 74–76 or patients receiving less back-
ground medications.6 11–13 15 18 21 22 75 77 The definition of 
‘less background medication’ has varied, including the 
exclusion of some or all steroids and immune suppres-
sants,18 22 77 restrictions on baseline rescue treatments11 75 
or the encouragement or requirement for steroid tapering 
during the trial.13 15 21 The recent anifrolumab Phase II 
trial met its primary endpoint and prospectively demon-
strated increased discrimination between treatment and 
placebo when a steroid-tapering milestone was met. This 
result was predominantly due to lower placebo response 
rates when steroid lowering was part of the endpoint as 
compared with when it was not.12
When the more severe populations have been analysed 
separately, data from a number of trials confirm that a 
polypharmacy trial might be more feasible in the sicker 
subsets of patients.7–9 12 21 75 This concept is best confirmed 
using data from a treatment that has been proven to be 
effective in the overall population. Examination of the 
more ill subset in the belimumab studies demonstrated 
markedly increased treatment effect compared with the 
overall population, primarily due to decreased placebo 
group response rates.76 By mixing the more severe 
patients in with moderately ill patients, belimumab 
produced a far more modest treatment effect in its pivotal 
trials.2 3 Disappointing primary endpoints, using trial 
designs combining patients of different degrees of illness 
and allowing background medications sufficient for the 
most ill among them, confirms the inherent challenge in 
a complex trial design that allows aggressive background 
immunosuppressants to be used.6 9 10 14 This may be espe-
cially true today, since in the decade since those first 
successful belimumab trials were designed, ‘standard of 
care’ has become, if anything, more aggressive.78 Adap-
tive trial designs might provide robust solutions to some 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
5
Review
of the complexity encountered in lupus populations.79 80 
We suggest that pilot studies using adaptive, serial exclu-
sions of patients based on earlier biomarker or clinical 
changes should be considered.
Improving pharmacodynamic understanding
The more ill patients may require background treat-
ment, and experience from clinical trials has shown that 
this works. However, it seems logical that, as the field 
progresses, we could be more strategic in limiting the 
choice of background treatments by specifically consid-
ering their potential to add to, synergise with, antagonise 
or simply duplicate the mechanism of action of the 
treatment under investigation. To date, most trials have 
been embarked on with little knowledge of how the 
background and rescue therapy positively or negatively 
impacts the efficacy of an investigational agent. Given the 
lack of standard practice in prescribing these agents17 
and the heterogeneity of the patients receiving them, the 
impact of one background therapy, even in the context 
of being added to only one finely targeted investigational 
agent, may not be the same in all patients, and some 
of the patients in trials are taking more than one back-
ground treatment. Has science advanced to the point that 
Table 2 Recommended lupus trial designs
Phase
Robustness
(discriminatory capacity)
Size
(patient no)
Description
Duration 
(months)
Ib/2a
Very high
60–100
Based on BOLD design.77
Withdraw or quickly taper all background medications in 
an active, mild–moderate population without risk for organ-
threatening disease
6–8
High
100–200
Based on Anifrolumab Ph 2 design.12 Require steroid taper 
as tolerated in patients with moderate to moderately severe 
disease.
6–12
Increases efficiency of any 
design
60–200
Adaptive Trial: Example of PERFECT design.80 Exploratory 
pharmacodynamics optimise dosing or determine 
continuation to efficacy endpoint
12
2b/3
High
150–300
Based on Anifrolumab Ph 2 design.12 Require steroid taper 
as tolerated in patients with moderate to moderately severe 
disease
6–12
High
150–300
Based on Classic Design but restricted to patients with 
more severe disease.76 No medication taper required. An 
optimal design would select background treatments based 
on rational pharmacodynamics.
6–12
Increases efficiency of any 
design
150–300
Adaptive Trial79: Here Pharmacodynamic exploration is 
not part of trial , but dosing adjustments and/or primary 
endpoint may be adjusted based on clinical or biomarker-
driven data (patients who fail screening can be retained for 
secondary endpoints or safety).
12
Table 3 Performance of outcome measures for lupus studies
Endpoint
Robustness
(discriminatory 
capacity)
Suitability for 
primary endpoint
Data management
challenges
Validation/
community 
acceptance
SRI or BICLA2–4 9–11 17–27 75 76 89
Moderate
Strong
High
High
Enhanced SRI/BICLA2 3 11
Strong
Strong
High
Medium
Four-point SLEDAI decrease2 3 9 10 12 Moderate
Strong
Low
Medium
Severe flare2 3
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Medium
Mild/moderate flare2 3
Modest
Weak
Moderate
Low
CLASI12 110–114
Strong
Strong
Moderate
High
Low disease activity12
Strong
Strong
Moderate
Early
Sustained improvement12
Strong
Strong
Moderate
Early
PROs116 117
Unknown
Unknown
Moderate
Increasing
BICLA, BILAG-based Combined Lupus Assessment; CLASI, Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index; PRO, 
patient-reported endpoint; SLEDAI, Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index; SRI, Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Responder 
Index.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
6
Lupus Science & Medicine
we can ever perfectly define and characterise patients and 
their treatments as they enter into lupus trials? Has our 
technology advanced to the point that it is possible to do 
better than we are doing now? Perhaps not, but prelimi-
nary data suggest that this may be a critical consideration 
in effective trial designs.12 16 21 77 81–84 Application of run-in 
periods and adaptive trial designs may help to advance 
the field in this direction.
endpoints
The most common multiorgan outcome measures in 
current usage include versions of the Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI)85 86 and 
the British Isles Lupus Assessment Group 2004 (BILAG 
2004)87 Index. These are validated, widely accepted 
instruments, which, although limited in a number of 
ways,68–70 88 are well understood and capable of gener-
ating interpretable data from standard industry trials 
when applied in a discerning trial design. Combinations 
of these instruments have been used to develop categor-
ical endpoints in recent years that attempt to particu-
late clinically meaningful change in a disease burdened 
by complexity. These telescoped response definitions 
are the SLEDAI-based Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 
Responder Index (SRI) and the BILAG-based Combined 
Lupus Assessment (BICLA).11 89
The SRI response definition compares disease activity 
at a specified time point to the baseline condition of the 
patient, requiring a ≥4-point reduction in the SLEDAI 
score, no development of a new BILAG A (severe), or 
more than one new BILAG B (moderate) organ score, 
and no deterioration from baseline in the physician’s 
global assessment by ≥0.3 points (or 10% of the scale).89 
The BICLA is similar in concept, but the lynchpin is 
improvement in baseline BILAG disease activity with no 
worsening in different BILAG organ domains, SLEDAI or 
PGA.11 Although the SRI and BICLA have both detected 
treatment effects in trials,51 54 they are not necessarily 
in agreement with each other when compared directly 
in studies.11 75 Work to evaluate these two composite 
endpoints in a clinical setting has illuminated their 
strengths and weaknesses.70 The BICLA can demonstrate 
response more reliably than the SRI when there is at least 
partial response in all organs active at baseline, and the 
SRI demonstrates response more reliably than the BICLA 
when there is an expectation of complete response in 
at least one organ, but not necessarily in every organ. 
In practice, both of these scenarios occur with some 
frequency in real-world practice.70
The advantage of using combined indices as opposed 
to either the SLEDAI or the BILAG alone may be largely 
in the face validity of tracking concomitant improvement 
and worsening in different organs. However, when either 
the SLEDAI or BILAG is used to reflect worsening, this 
has had minimal to no impact on the combined outcome 
in trials. It turns out that it is quite rare for patients who 
improve in one organ to worsen in another. Neverthe-
less, the SRI and BICLA have occasionally been shown 
to increase the stringency of the endpoints to a small 
Table 4 Recommendations for more efficient lupus trials
In order to achieve
Recommendations
Methods
Smaller and shorter trials
Decrease or control background medications
Pharmacodynamic-based selection of background 
medications
Focus on strategical populations based on disease 
severity or biomarkers
Use more discriminatory endpoints (especially as 
primary endpoints)
More stringent improvement
Low disease activity
Sustained improvement
Single organ assessments
Flexibility in development programmes
Adaptive trials
Phase II trials could provide pivotal proof of efficacy
Single organ endpoints should justify approval for all 
affected patients
(not just people with SLE)
Progress on unmet needs requiring 
community action
Identification and training of more trial sites
Outreach to more patients (especially minority 
patients)
More work on PROs to incorporate patient 
perspectives in endpoints
Advance precision medicine concepts for lupus 
PRO, patient-reported endpoint.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
7
Review
degree.2 3 9 10 In trials where the effect size is not marginal, 
these complex endpoints are probably not necessary, 
and either a four-point drop in SLEDAI or incremental 
decreases in BILAG severity scoring should suffice.
organ-specific endpoints
A major advantage of considering organ-specific trials 
is the availability of focused, objective and interpretable 
endpoints. Renal, musculoskeletal and cutaneous involve-
ment are common in lupus, making organ-specific trials 
most feasible for these manifestations. Haematological 
features could also be feasibly studied in a focused manner, 
although these might be more difficult to recruit. Renal 
disease represents a very large unmet need for treat-
ment development, but will only be covered briefly here, 
since data-driven recommendations are still evolving.90–93 
Combination endpoints in nephritis induction trials have 
usually included improvements in proteinuria, creatinine 
and haematuria. The optimisation of endpoints, from 
the point of view of clinical utility and discriminatory 
capacity, has been challenging.90 The Lupus Nephritis 
Trial Network L(NTN has published a preliminary look 
at patients who participated in the Euro-Lupus Nephritis 
trial evaluating low dose, bimonthly cyclophospha-
mide.91 Seventy-six patients were followed ≥7 years so 
that endpoints used in earlier stages of treatment could 
be evaluated for their impact on longer-term outcomes. 
Proteinuria <0.8 g/day was the single best short-term 
predictor of good outcome, adding creatinine in an 
endpoint did not improve the specificity or sensitivity and 
adding red cells in a composite endpoint decreased the 
sensitivity of the measurement.
Nephritis induction trials are, by necessity, studies 
of patients with immediate organ-threatening disease, 
requiring aggressive increase of background medica-
tion or a head to head comparison of active treatments. 
However, maintenance patients could be combined in 
trials with the patients with more severe non-nephritis, 
assuming that earlier study of interactions between the 
investigational agent and preferred background treat-
ments has been considered. Renal endpoints using 
composite disease activity indices such as SLEDAI or 
BILAG are not recommended.
Joint counts may fluctuate from day to day or even 
during the course of a day and are not perfectly consistent, 
given that there is a subjective component to the determi-
nation of tenderness (which may vary by the degree of 
compression) and swelling (depending on the observer). 
Nevertheless, they are a reliable outcome measure as used 
in trials of rheumatoid arthritis94 are widely accepted by 
the community95 and have also been successfully used in 
lupus studies.12 77 93 96 97 This is true even though arthritis 
manifestations are generally more subtle in lupus than in 
rheumatoid arthritis.98 One promising avenue could be 
the use of MRI or ultrasound in the evaluation of joint 
inflammation.99 100
CLE presents a particularly compelling therapeutic 
need for a single organ approach, since there may be as 
many patients with primary CLE (without other systemic 
lupus manifestations) as there are with SLE, and patients 
with CLE are usually excluded from SLE trials. It follows 
that they will be similarly disenfranchised from new treat-
ment approvals, as has already occurred with belimumab, 
which is known to be effective for cutaneous manifesta-
tions of lupus.39 93
The current standard of care for CLE is inadequate. 
Approximately 10% of patients with CLE are refractory to 
all therapies, and about 50% require escalation beyond 
topical and antimalarial therapy despite the fact that 
immunosuppressive or biological treatments have never 
been optimised for their condition.101–104 Thus, a regula-
tory pathway allowing the evaluation of therapies directed 
specifically at lupus skin manifestations is greatly needed. 
Since there is very little detail about skin involvement 
captured by either the BILAG or SLEDAI, and a review 
of the few papers available about measuring skin manifes-
tations in SLE suggests that much data about cutaneous 
lupus is lost when relying on these instruments,105–108 
the Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and 
Severity Index (CLASI) was developed.109
This instrument was developed with input from Amer-
ican and European dermatologists and patients and has 
been validated in studies with dermatologists, rheuma-
tologists and trainees, correlating with physician-assessed 
cutaneous activity and damage, physician’s global skin 
assessments and pain scores.86–91 109–114 A minimal clin-
ically significant improvement in the CLASI has been 
determined using several gold standards, and a four-
point decrease in CLASI activity correlates with highly 
improved quality of life (QoL) in patients.91 114 115 Clinical 
responsiveness has been demonstrated in interventional 
studies of hundreds of patients, including anifrolumab,12 
hydroxychloroquine,104 belimumab,116 thalidomide,117 
lenalidomide,118 apremilast,119 CC-220120 and IVIG.121 
Biomarker studies also demonstrate a correlation between 
CLASI and immunological manifestations of inflamma-
tion.122 123
One strength of the CLASI is that it combines signs that 
are important to patients, as independently validated by 
the correlation of QoL with CLASI activity score, a finding 
not seen with the CLASI damage score.124 125 Discussion 
with patients has determined that they are concerned with 
erythema and scale as an indication of disease activity, but 
have often come to terms with the scarring and dyspig-
mentation that do not signify ongoing clinical activity. 
The CLASI breaks down the element of activity, such as 
erythema and scale, by body surface area, so it is possible 
to determine the type of activity and areas improved 
in a trial, although studies have shown that the total 
activity score correlates with other measures of improve-
ment.87 88 91 While interpretation of erythema may vary 
according to skin colour and expertise, that would be the 
case for any assessment of skin activity. Studies in other 
skin diseases have found that skin type has not altered the 
perception of colour in trained raters.126 Severe erythema 
can rarely result in haemorrhagic crusting, and this is 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
8
Lupus Science & Medicine
captured as an indication of severe activity. Evanescent 
erythema is a problem with any type of skin assessment. 
Oral lesions can be hidden, so oral involvement is assessed 
only if the patient is aware, so as to minimise inter-rater 
reliability related to different extent of the exam and 
lighting used in oral exams.
We conclude that the CLASI is now well-validated and 
functioning robustly in clinical trials. This instrument 
will provide a consistent, interpretable and meaningful 
endpoint for organ-specific trials of cutaneous lupus, suit-
able for a primary or secondary endpoint in trials where 
patients with active skin lesions may have a diagnosis of 
CLE and/or SLE. Furthermore, it will be valuable in 
trials of general lupus manifestations where there are 
expected to be substantial numbers of patients with skin 
involvement. If CLASI improvement is strong enough 
when nested in a study of wider SLE manifestations, the 
treatment should be made available for patients with CLE 
whether or not they meet classification criteria for SLE. 
Patients with CLE have the same skin disease as patients 
with SLE and may have the same or more unmet needs 
for treatment as many patients with SLE.
In 2003, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
reacted to the dearth of new drugs licensed for SLE with a 
guidance document, suggesting that organ-specific thera-
pies may be submitted to the FDA for approval. We agree 
that this is an excellent idea, and it is not clear why this 
has not already happened. Not only could organ-specific 
outcomes be useful for the study of patients who have 
lupus who do not meet criteria for SLE, but they might also 
provide a less confusing approach to measuring the most 
common features seen in SLE, such as skin and joints, 
as compared with multiorgan, multifaceted outcome 
measures. Since it is difficult to assign CLE subtype early 
on in disease and because 20% of patients with CLE have 
more than one subtype of CLE, it is important to have 
studies that include the spectrum of CLE and not insist 
on designating one specific CLE subtype for studies. The 
CLASI is able to measure all subtypes, with the exception 
of the rare patient with lupus panniculitis .
Stringent endpoints
Whether applying compound, multiorgan or organ-spe-
cific endpoints or whether the population under study has 
greater illness requiring more background treatments or 
less illness allowing greater reduction in polypharmacy, 
more stringent endpoints may increase the differentia-
tion between effective treatments and placebo. Several 
recent approaches to measuring endpoints have demon-
strated a significant impact on increasing treatment effect 
size, including dichotomous endpoints requiring greater 
degrees of improvement,2 3 7 9 12 15 74 attainment of low 
disease activity12 and demonstration of sustained improve-
ment.12 These analyses share the downside of being more 
stringent and harder to achieve than classic outcome 
measures for lupus. Therefore, the rates of response in 
both active and placebo groups are lowered compared 
with results using the same treatment and less stringent 
endpoints.12 However, recent trials have confirmed that 
each of these approaches can support the discrimination 
of effective treatments in smaller trials.
Severe flares have also demonstrated discriminatory 
capacity as endpoints,2 3 despite ongoing issues with the 
way in which they have been defined in currently used 
indices.69 There are few enough severe flares in trials 
that this endpoint would only be useful in larger trials. 
However, the lack of clinical significance of many flares 
that meet endpoint definitions for mild–moderate flare 
has reduced the interpretability of mild–moderate flare 
data.18 23 Some of this issue has been addressed by a 
revised SELENA SLEDAI Flare Index.127 This instrument 
separates moderate flare from mild flare, providing a 
compromise that does not require restriction of analysis 
to only the less common severe flares, while optimising 
the probability that those flares counted are likely to be 
clinically significant. However, this instrument follows the 
understandable but problematic pattern of prior flare 
definitions by integrating a change of treatment into 
the flare definition. This means that if certain treatment 
changes are made, a flare is defined even if disease activity 
has not increased, and it is unfortunate that treatment 
changes are common in clinical practice in the absence 
of disease flare.69 Furthermore, many moderate and even 
some severe flares are not immediately treated for various 
reasons, including infection, patient resistance, drug 
toxicities and lack of access to care. Thus, although the 
concept of intention to treat helps to anchor the clinical 
significance of a flare, it is clear that too close of a linkage 
between treatment and a flare definition is impractical 
and can produce misleading data.
A Phase II trial of Abatacept published in 2010 did not 
meet any of its primary or secondary endpoints, but a 
real-world evaluation was collected from a simple assess-
ment at each visit, in which clinicians were asked, ‘Did 
this patient flare?’ By answering this question, more flares 
were detected in the placebo group than the treatment 
group.23 Moreover, there were flares captured more 
frequently in this analysis than those defined by index 
‘severe flares’ but less frequently than those meeting 
the index ‘mild–moderate’ flare definitions, suggesting 
the possibility that the clinicians were capturing clini-
cally significant flares in a more discriminatory manner 
than they did when using glossary-driven indices, without 
much guidance.
In 2011, the LFA published the results of an interna-
tional consensus group which had been convened with the 
goal of reaching a simple but precise, real-world, clinically 
meaningful definition of flare. After an extensive Delphi 
process and deconstruction of many group discussions, this 
definition now reads, “a flare is a measurable increase in 
disease activity in one or more organ systems involving new 
or worse clinical signs and symptoms and/or laboratory 
measurements. It must be considered clinically significant 
by the assessor and usually there would be at least consid-
eration of a change or an increase in treatment.”.128 This 
approach relies on and benefits from practical clinical 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
9
Review
judgement, is devoid of the pitfalls of complex algorithms 
for severity definitions and provides a suitable compromise 
between the two issues that have limited past flare analyses: 
the infrequency of severe flares and the need to exclude 
flares that are not clinically meaningful. Including a consid-
eration of treatment enhances the likely clinical signifi-
cance of defined flares without unnecessarily restricting 
flares to those that are treated or eliminating those that are 
not. We recommend this definition as a potential outcome 
measurement for clinical trials.
The choice of endpoints and other aspects of trial 
design might depend on the phase of treatment develop-
ment. For example, aggressive withdrawal of background 
medications may be more practical in early phase trials. 
Since this approach requires a population limited to 
those with significant, but non-organ threatening disease, 
smaller-sized trials are more feasible. The advantage of 
these trials is that pharmacodynamic impact of agents can 
be studied in the absence of confusing polypharmacy, and 
this can inform later phase trials to limit the confounding 
effects of combining synergistic or mutually antagonistic 
agents. Optimal trial designs and endpoints at different 
phases are described (table 4).
patient-reported endpoints
Patient-reported endpoints (PROs) have had some 
success in following disease activity in SLE,129–136 and 
the importance of including the patient’s perspective in 
outcome measures for trials is widely appreciated. The 
LupusQoL, LupusPRO, L-QoL and SLEQOL were devel-
oped specifically for SLE and involved patients with lupus 
in concept elicitation and development of items.129 The 
FACIT fatigue and HAQ have also been used in a number 
of lupus trials.2 3 12 18 21 23 75 Unfortunately, the track record 
of PROs in clinical studies and clinical trials has not always 
been interpretable, sometimes producing opposite results 
to those of the clinician-evaluated endpoints.12 23 Given 
the failure of many trials to meet their primary and/or 
secondary clinical endpoints, however, a fair comparison 
of PRO performance in discriminating treatment from 
placebo is simply not possible yet.
Two well-validated PROs that were developed specifi-
cally for SLE (Lupus PRO and LupusQol) are candidates 
for further use in trials, but neither has had widespread 
use in currently published trials. The LupusQol was used 
in a Phase II trial of rituximab18 and in a large, Phase III 
programme for epratuzumab.14 Improvements were seen 
comparable to SLEDAI and BILAG scores, but there was 
no treatment difference in any groups. The SF-36134 and 
FACIT fatigue scale4 136 were able to distinguish differ-
ences comparable to clinician-reported endpoints in 
Phase III belimumab trials. Skin-specific QoL measures 
such as the Skindex have correlated well with CLASI 
endpoints for those with CLE.115
Clinician endpoints are designed to evaluate current 
disease activity, and PROs, which are purposefully designed 
for the patient perspective, may not make a strong distinc-
tion between current, reversible disease and elements 
that are unrelated to the efficacy of immune-modulating 
interventions, such as treatment side effects, life circum-
stances and irreversible damage from chronic disease. 
Both the LupusQol and Lupus PRO include reminders 
to report features that are due to lupus, but there are no 
distinctions between active, reversible disease and indi-
rect or chronic consequences of illness. Nevertheless, 
some descriptors lend themselves to active disease anal-
ysis quite well, so further testing of these instruments in 
trials may help better than generic PROs to channel the 
attention of the patient towards reversible lupus disease.
Summary
In our opinion, progress in treatment development for 
lupus will require reliable, smaller and shorter trials. 
This can be achieved by one or more of the following 
approaches: elimination, simplification or tapering of 
background treatments. Use of more discriminatory 
endpoints based on more stringent definitions of improve-
ment, such as ilow disease activity, sustained improvement 
or single organ improvement. If single organ assessments 
provide definitive results, we propose that approval should 
be extended to all patients with lupus with that manifesta-
tion, not just patients who meet classification criteria for 
SLE. If Phase II trials demonstrate convincing, statistically 
significant results, these should suffice for pivotal demon-
strations of efficacy. Larger trials could then be conducted 
to amass sufficient safety data, where precise application 
of complex disease activity instruments at widespread 
international trial sites would be, although still desirable, 
less critical. Meanwhile, identification and training of 
new trial sites and the initiation of education and access 
to trials of patients around the world should be a priority. 
Further work is also needed on integration of patient 
perspectives into outcome measures and outreach to 
minority populations who are under-represented in lupus 
trials. Finally, further study should be given to a better 
practical understanding of the immunological impact of 
targeted immune modulators, not only in terms of their 
pharmacodynamic effects on distinct subsets of patients, 
but also their interactions with standard of care medica-
tions that might be required for use as background thera-
pies in trials of substantially ill patients.
author affiliations
1Arthritis & Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA
2Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
3Autoimmune and Musculoskeletal Disease, Feinstein Institute for Medical 
Research, Manhasset, New York, USA
4Columbia University Medical Center, New York City, New York, USA
5University of Manchester, Manchester, England, UK
6Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA
7Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA
8UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA
9Department of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, 
USA
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
10
Lupus Science & Medicine
10Research and Education, Lupus Foundation of America, Washington, District of 
Columbia, USA
11Rheumatology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, USA
12Lupus Foundation of America, Washington, District of Columbia, USA
13Internal Medicine/Nephrology, Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA
14Rheumatology, New York University, New York City, New York, USA
15Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA
Contributors All authors contributed to the discussions and data interpretation 
that were used to form the recommendations contained in this paper and provided 
input to the manuscript and approved its final version. All consultants listed from 
the biotechnology sector reviewed the paper and provided helpful comments.
funding JTM received grant/research support from Bristol-Myers Squibb 
Company, GSK group of companies, Xencor and Office of Minority Health. VPW 
received grant support from Celgene, Janssen, Biogen and Gilead. SM received 
grant support from BMS, AstraZeneca, HGS/GSK and Amgen. 
disclaimer The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and 
not necessarily those of the NHS, the National Institute for Health Research or the 
Department of Health.
Competing interests JTM, MD Consultant: Anthera, Amgen, Baxalta, Biogen, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Celgene Corporation, 
Eisai, EMD Serono; Exagen Diagnostics, Genentech, GSK, Gilead, ImmuPharma 
PLC, Horizon, Incyte, Janssen Pharmaceuticals; Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, 
MedImmune/AstraZeneca, Neovacs SA, Pfizer, ReAlta, RRD International, Sanofi, 
Takeda Pharmaceuticals USA; UCB. VPW, MD Consultant: Resolve, Eli Lilly, Biogen, 
Idera, Medimmune, Genentech, BMS, Amgen, Penn own the copywright for the 
CLASI. IB MD, FRCP Research Support: Roche, GSK and Genzyme, and Sanofi 
Consulting/Speaker: Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, GSK and UCB. IB is a National Institute 
for Health Research (NIHR) Senior Investigator and is funded by Arthritis Research 
UK, the Medical Research Council and the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research 
Centre. BR MD Consultant: Alexion, Aurinia, Biogen, Biomarin, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
EMB Serono, Fraizer, Genentech, Gilead, Eli Lilly, Lupus Foundation of America, 
Mallinckrodt, Pfizer, Pharmalink, Retrophin, Rigel, Trinity, Trinity Partners. JM MD, 
MMSc Consultant/Advisor: GSK and Biogen IDEC in Lupus indications. EG MD, MPH 
Consultant: Ablynx/PPDI Data Monitoring Board: Janssen Clinical Trial Investigator: 
Aurina, BMS, Genentech, GSK. CA MD Consultant: GSK Research Support: 
GlaxoSmithKline, EMD Serrono, Xencor, Takeda Pharmaceuticals and Janssen. 
BC MD Investigator: Daavin Corporation and Biogen. MD’E MD Consultant: Kezar 
Abbvie Independent Data Monitoring Committee: Janssen Genentech Biogen. KK 
MD Consultant: Amgen, Eli Lilly, Genentech, Roche, BMS, Medimmune, AstraZeneca, 
Janssen, Xencor, Anthera, Exagen, Baxalta, Biogen Idec, Sorrento Therapeutics 
Grants/Contracts: NIH, Lupus Research Alliance, Sanford Regenerative Medicine 
Consortium, Pfizer, Ablynx, Resolve, Celgene, Takeda, Questcor, Proximagen, UCB, 
Gilead, Ampel, Kirin. KC MD MPH Consultant: AstraZeneca GSK Merck Research 
Collaborations: AstraZeneca GSK Merck. Research Support: NIH. SM MD, MPH 
Consultant: Exagen Diagnotics, Inc; GSK, UCB Advisory Board, Lupus Foundation of 
America (Medical Director), AstraZeneca (Advisory Board). 
patient consent None declared.
provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
data sharing statement All data presented in this article are already published 
and are not in possession of the authors.
open access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 
1.  
ClinicalTrials. 
gov. 740 Studies found for: lupus. https://www. 
clinicaltrials. 
gov/ 
ct2/ 
results? 
term= 
lupus& 
pg=3
 
2. Navarra SV, Guzmán RM, Gallacher AE, et al. Efficacy and safety of 
belimumab in patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus: 
a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 
2011;377:721–31.
 
3. Furie R, Petri M, Zamani O, et al. A phase III, randomized, placebo-
controlled study of belimumab, a monoclonal antibody that 
inhibits B lymphocyte stimulator, in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 2011;63:3918–30.
 
4. Stohl W, Schwarting A, Okada M, et al. Efficacy and safety of 
subcutaneous belimumab in systemic lupus erythematosus: a 
fifty-two-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. 
Arthritis Rheumatol 2017;69:1016–27.
 
5.  
ClinicalTrials. 
gov. 102 Studies found for: Phase 3 | Lupus. https:// 
clinicaltrials. 
gov/ 
ct2/ 
results? 
term= 
Phase+ 
3& 
cond= 
Lupus& 
draw= 
9& 
pg=1
 
6. Isenberg D, Gordon C, Licu D, et al. Efficacy and safety of atacicept 
for prevention of flares in patients with moderate-to-severe 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE): 52-week data (APRIL-SLE 
randomised trial). Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:2006–15.
 
7. Furie RA, Leon G, Thomas M, et al. A phase 2, randomised, 
placebo-controlled clinical trial of blisibimod, an inhibitor of B cell 
activating factor, in patients with moderate-to-severe systemic 
lupus erythematosus, the PEARL-SC study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2015;74:1667–75.
 
8. Furie R, Nicholls K, Cheng TT, et al. Efficacy and safety of abatacept 
in lupus nephritis: a twelve-month, randomized, double-blind study. 
Arthritis Rheumatol 2014;66:379–89.
 
9. Merrill JT, van Vollenhoven RF
, Buyon JP
, et al. Efficacy and safety 
of subcutaneous tabalumab, a monoclonal antibody to B-cell 
activating factor, in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: 
results from ILLUMINATE-2, a 52-week, phase III, multicentre, 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2016;75:332–40.
 10. Isenberg DA, Petri M, Kalunian K, et al. Efficacy and safety 
of subcutaneous tabalumab in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus: results from ILLUMINATE-1, a 52-week, phase III, 
multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. 
Ann Rheum Dis 2016;75:323–31.
 11. Wallace DJ, Kalunian K, Petri MA, et al. Efficacy and safety of 
epratuzumab in patients with moderate/severe active systemic 
lupus erythematosus: results from EMBLEM, a phase IIb, 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre study. 
Ann Rheum Dis 2014;73:183–90.
 12. Furie R, Khamashta M, Merrill JT, et al. Anifrolumab, an anti-
interferon-α receptor monoclonal antibody, in moderate-to-severe 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheumatol 2017;69:376–86.
 13. Dooley MA, Pendergraft W, Ginzler EM, et al. 2016. Speed of 
remission with the use of voclosporin, mmf and low dose steroids: 
results of a global lupus nephritis study 2016. ACR/ARHP Annual 
Meeting. Abstract Number 5L.
 14. Clowse ME, Wallace DJ, Furie RA, et al. Efficacy and Safety 
of Epratuzumab in Moderately to Severely Active Systemic 
Lupus Erythematosus: Results From Two Phase III Randomized, 
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trials. Arthritis Rheumatol 
2017;69:362–75.
 15. Merrill JT, Martin RS, Shanahan WR, et al. Phase 3 trial results 
with Blisibimod, a selective inhibitor of B-cell Activating Factor in 
subjects with SLE. EULAR 2017. Abstract number SAT0240.
 16. Kalunian KC, Merrill JT, Maciuca R, et al. A Phase II study of the 
efficacy and safety of rontalizumab (rhuMAb interferon-α) in patients 
with systemic lupus erythematosus (ROSE). Ann Rheum Dis 
2016;75:196–202.
 17. Appel GB, Contreras G, Dooley MA, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil 
versus cyclophosphamide for induction treatment of lupus nephritis. 
J Am Soc Nephrol 2009;20:1103–12.
 18. Merrill JT, Neuwelt CM, Wallace DJ, et al. Efficacy and safety 
of rituximab in moderately-to-severely active systemic lupus 
erythematosus: the randomized, double-blind, phase II/III systemic 
lupus erythematosus evaluation of rituximab trial. Arthritis Rheum 
2010;62:222–33.
 19. Cardiel MH, Tumlin JA, Furie RA, et al. Abetimus sodium for renal 
flare in systemic lupus erythematosus: results of a randomized, 
controlled phase III trial. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:2470–80.
 20. Kalunian KC, Davis JC, Merrill JT, et al. Treatment of systemic lupus 
erythematosus by inhibition of T cell costimulation with anti-CD154: 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis 
Rheum 2002;46:3251–8.
 21. Khamashta M, Merrill JT, Werth VP
, et al. Sifalimumab, an anti-
interferon-α monoclonal antibody, in moderate to severe systemic 
lupus erythematosus: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Ann Rheum Dis 2016;75:1909–16.
 22. Mysler EF
, Spindler AJ, Guzman R, et al. Efficacy and safety of 
ocrelizumab in active proliferative lupus nephritis: results from 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
11
Review
a randomized, double-blind, phase III study. Arthritis Rheum 
2013;65:2368–79.
 23. Merrill JT, Burgos-Vargas R, Westhovens R, et al. The efficacy 
and safety of abatacept in patients with non-life-threatening 
manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus: results of a 
twelve-month, multicenter, exploratory, phase IIb, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum 
2010;62:3077–87.
 24. Dai C, Deng Y, Quinlan A, et al. Genetics of systemic lupus 
erythematosus: immune responses and end organ resistance to 
damage. Curr Opin Immunol 2014;31:87–96.
 25. Marion TN, Postlethwaite AE. Chance, genetics, and the 
heterogeneity of disease and pathogenesis in systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Semin Immunopathol 2014;36:495–517.
 26. Mirabelli G, Cannarile F
, Bruni C, et al. One year in review 
2015: systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin Exp Rheumatol 
2015;33:414–25.
 27. Yee CS, Su L, Toescu V, et al. Birmingham SLE cohort: outcomes of 
a large inception cohort followed for up to 21 years. Rheumatology 
2015;54:836–43.
 28. Björk M, Dahlström Ö, Wetterö J, et al. Quality of life and acquired 
organ damage are intimately related to activity limitations in patients 
with systemic lupus erythematosus. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 
2015;16:188.
 29. Hanly JG, Su L, Urowitz MB, et al. Mood disorders in systemic 
lupus erythematosus: results from an international inception cohort 
study. Arthritis Rheumatol 2015;67:1837–47.
 30. Bruce IN, O'Keeffe AG, Farewell V, et al. Factors associated with 
damage accrual in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: 
results from the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics 
(SLICC) Inception Cohort. Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:1706–13.
 31. Al Sawah S, Zhang X, Zhu B, et al. Effect of corticosteroid use by 
dose on the risk of developing organ damage over time in systemic 
lupus erythematosus-the Hopkins Lupus Cohort. Lupus Sci Med 
2015;2:e000066.
 32. Becker-Merok A, Nossent HC. Damage accumulation in systemic 
lupus erythematosus and its relation to disease activity and 
mortality. J Rheumatol 2006;33:1570–7.
 33. Baker K, Pope J, Fortin P
, et al. Work disability in systemic lupus 
erythematosus is prevalent and associated with socio-demographic 
and disease related factors. Lupus 2009;18:1281–8.
 34. Pego-Reigosa JM, Rúa-Figueroa Í, López-Longo FJ, et al. Analysis 
of disease activity and response to treatment in a large Spanish 
cohort of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus 
2015;24:720–9.
 35. Danoff-Burg S, Friedberg F
. Unmet needs of patients with systemic 
lupus erythematosus. Behav Med 2009;35:5–13.
 36. Croyle L, Morand EF
. Optimizing the use of existing therapies in 
lupus. Int J Rheum Dis 2015;18:129–37.
 37. http://www. 
lupus. 
org/ 
pages/ 
unveil/ 
survey
 38. Lerstrom K, Crimmings M, Govoni M, et al. Disease symptoms, 
treatment satisfaction, and coping strategies in patients with lupus. 
Poster session presented at: EULAR conference. London, UK;May 
25–28, 2011;
 39. Manzi S, Sánchez-Guerrero J, Merrill JT, et al. Effects of belimumab, 
a B lymphocyte stimulator-specific inhibitor, on disease activity 
across multiple organ domains in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus: combined results from two phase III trials. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2012;71:1833–8.
 40. Vera-Recabarren MA, García-Carrasco M, Ramos-Casals 
M, et al. Comparative analysis of subacute cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus and chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus: 
clinical and immunological study of 270 patients. Br J Dermatol 
2010;162:91–101.
 41. Hochberg MC. Updating the American college of rheumatology 
revised criteria for the classification of systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:1725.
 42. Petri M, Orbai AM, Alarcón GS, et al. Derivation and validation of 
the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics classification 
criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 
2012;64:2677–86.
 43. Aberle T, Bourn RL, Chen H, et al. Use of SLICC criteria in a large, 
diverse lupus registry enables SLE classification of a subset of 
ACR-designated subjects with incomplete lupus. Lupus Sci Med 
2017;4:e000176.
 44. Wu H, Zeng J, Yin J, et al. Organ-specific biomarkers in lupus. 
Autoimmun Rev 2017;16:391–7.
 45. Romick-Rosendale LE, Brunner HI, Bennett MR, et al. Identification 
of urinary metabolites that distinguish membranous lupus 
nephritis from proliferative lupus nephritis and focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis. Arthritis Res Ther 2011;13:R199.
 46. Der E, Ranabothu S, Suryawanshi H, et al. Single cell RNA 
sequencing to dissect the molecular heterogeneity in lupus 
nephritis. JCI Insight 2017;2:211.
 47. Merrill JT. Connective tissue diseases: Is SLE many single-organ 
diseases or an overlapping spectrum? Nat Rev Rheumatol 
2015;11:385–6.
 48. Skiljevic D, Bonaci-Nikolic B, Brasanac D, et al. Apoptosis 
of keratinocytes and serum DNase I activity in patients with 
cutaneous lupus erythematosus: relationship with clinical and 
immunoserological parameters. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 
2017;31:523–9.
 49. Goel N. Welcome to IQVIA. http://www. 
quintiles. 
com/ 
blog/ 
lupus- 
trials- 
are- 
on- 
the- 
rise
 50. Danchenko N, Satia JA, Anthony MS. Epidemiology of systemic 
lupus erythematosus: a comparison of worldwide disease burden. 
Lupus 2006;15:308–18.
 51. Pons-Estel GJ, Alarcón GS, Scofield L, et al. Understanding the 
epidemiology and progression of systemic lupus erythematosus. 
Semin Arthritis Rheum 2010;39:257–68.
 52. Ferucci ED, Johnston JM, Gaddy JR, et al. Prevalence and 
incidence of systemic lupus erythematosus in a population-based 
registry of American Indian and Alaska Native people, 2007-2009. 
Arthritis Rheumatol 2014;66:2494–502.
 53. Ford JG, Howerton MW, Lai GY, et al. Barriers to recruiting 
underrepresented populations to cancer clinical trials: a systematic 
review. Cancer 2008;112:228–42.
 54. U S Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry 
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus — Developing Medical Products 
for Treatment.  
http 
://w 
ww.f 
da.g 
ov/d 
ownl 
oads 
/Drugs/ 
Gu 
idan 
ceCo 
mplianceRe 
gulato 
ryInformation /Guidances / 
ucm072063. 
pdf
 55. Wallace DJ, Stohl W, Furie RA, et al. A phase II, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of belimumab 
in patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis 
Rheum 2009;61:1168–78.
 56. Ritterhouse LL, Crowe SR, Niewold TB, et al. B lymphocyte 
stimulator levels in systemic lupus erythematosus: higher circulating 
levels in African American patients and increased production after 
influenza vaccination in patients with low baseline levels. Arthritis 
Rheum 2011;63:3931–41.
 57. Symonds RP
, Lord K, Mitchell AJ, et al. Recruitment of ethnic 
minorities into cancer clinical trials: experience from the front lines. 
Br J Cancer 2012;107:1017–21.
 58. Roberson NL. Clinical trial participation. Viewpoints from racial/
ethnic groups. Cancer 1994;74:2687–91.
 59. Research!America. National Poll on Clinical Research conducted in 
partnership with Zogby Analytics, 2013.
 60. Joseph G, Dohan D. Recruiting minorities where they receive care: 
Institutional barriers to cancer clinical trials recruitment in a safety-
net hospital. Contemp Clin Trials 2009;30:552–9.
 61. McCaskill-Stevens W, Pinto H, Marcus AC, et al. Recruiting minority 
cancer patients into cancer clinical trials: a pilot project involving 
the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group and the National Medical 
Association. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1029–39.
 62. Freimuth VS, Quinn SC, Thomas SB, et al. African Americans' 
views on research and the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. Soc Sci Med 
2001;52:797–808.
 63. Siminoff LA, Zhang A, Colabianchi N, et al. Factors that predict 
the referral of breast cancer patients onto clinical trials by their 
surgeons and medical oncologists. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1203–11.
 64. Morgan SE, Occa A, Potter J, et al. "You Need to Be a Good 
Listener": Recruiters' Use of Relational Communication Behaviors 
to Enhance Clinical Trial and Research Study Accrual. J Health 
Commun 2017;22:95–101.
 65. Larkey LK, Staten LK, Ritenbaugh C, et al. Recruitment of Hispanic 
women to the Women's Health Initiative. the case of Embajadoras 
in Arizona. Control Clin Trials 2002;23:289–98.
 66. Howerton MW, Gibbons MC, Baffi CR, et al. Provider roles in the 
recruitment of underrepresented populations to cancer clinical 
trials. Cancer 2007;109:465–76.
 67. Hudson SV, Momperousse D, Leventhal H. Physician perspectives 
on cancer clinical trials and barriers to minority recruitment. Cancer 
Control 2005;12(Suppl 2):93–6.
 68. Thanou A, Merrill JT. Treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus: 
new therapeutic avenues and blind alleys. Nat Rev Rheumatol 
2014;10:23–34.
 69. Thanou A, Chakravarty E, James JA, et al. How should lupus 
flares be measured? Deconstruction of the safety of estrogen 
in lupus erythematosus national assessment-systemic lupus 
erythematosus disease activity index flare index. Rheumatology 
2014;53:2175–81.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
12
Lupus Science & Medicine
 70. Thanou A, Chakravarty E, James JA, et al. Which outcome 
measures in SLE clinical trials best reflect medical judgment? Lupus 
Sci Med 2014;1:e000005.
 71. Petri M, Perez-Gutthann S, Longenecker JC, et al. Morbidity of 
systemic lupus erythematosus: role of race and socioeconomic 
status. Am J Med 1991;91:345–53.
 72. Durcan L, Clarke WA, Magder LS, et al. Hydroxychloroquine 
blood levels in systemic lupus erythematosus: clarifying 
dosing controversies and improving adherence. J Rheumatol 
2015;42:2092–7.
 73. Mehat P
, Atiquzzaman M, Esdaile JM, et al. Medication 
nonadherence in systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic 
review. Arthritis Care Res 2017;69:1706–13.
 74. Merrill JT, Wallace DL, Wax S, et al, 2016. Efficacy and safety of 
atacicept in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: results of 
a 24-week randomized, placebo-controlled, phase iib study. ACR/
ARHP Annual Meeting. Abstract number 12L.
 75. Wallace DJ, Strand V, Merrill JT, et al. Efficacy and safety of an 
interleukin 6 monoclonal antibody for the treatment of systemic 
lupus erythematosus: a phase II dose-ranging randomised 
controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:534–42.
 76. van Vollenhoven RF
, Petri MA, Cervera R, et al. Belimumab in the 
treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus: high disease activity 
predictors of response. Ann Rheum Dis 2012;71:1343–9.
 77. Merrill JT, Immermann F
, Whitley M, et al. The Biomarkers of 
Lupus Disease Study: a bold approach may mitigate interference 
of background immunosuppressants in clinical trials. Arthritis 
Rheumatol 2017;69:1257–66.
 78. University of Maryland Medical Center. Systemic lupus 
erythematosus. http:// 
umm. 
edu/ 
health/ 
medical/ 
reports/ 
articles/ 
systemic- 
lupus- 
erythematosus
 79. Bhatt DL, Mehta C. Adaptive designs for clinical trials. N Engl J Med 
2016;375:65–74.
 80. Buyon JP
, Cohen P
, Merrill JT, et al. A highlight from the LUPUS 
2014 meeting: eight great ideas. Lupus Sci Med 2015;2:e000087.
 81. Hoffman RW, Merrill JT, Alarcón-Riquelme MM, et al. Gene 
Expression and Pharmacodynamic Changes in 1,760 Systemic 
Lupus Erythematosus Patients From Two Phase III Trials of BAFF 
Blockade With Tabalumab. Arthritis Rheumatol 2017;69:643–54.
 82. Bandyopadhyay S, Connolly SE, Jabado O, et al; De-Convolution 
of Whole Blood Transcriptomic Data from a Phase IIb, Randomized, 
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial of Abatacept in Systemic 
Lupus Erythematosus, 2015.ACR/ARHP Annual Meeting. Abstract 
number 2067.
 83. Lu P
, Fleischmann R, Curtis C, et al. Safety and pharmacodynamics 
of venetoclax (ABT-199) in a randomized single and multiple 
ascending dose study in women with systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Lupus 2018;27:290–302.
 84. Stohl W, Hiepe F
, Latinis KM, et al. Belimumab reduces 
autoantibodies, normalizes low complement levels, and reduces 
select B cell populations in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 2012;64:2328–37.
 85. Touma Z, Gladman DD, Ibañez D, et al. Development and initial 
validation of the systemic lupus erythematosus disease activity 
index 2000 responder index 50. J Rheumatol 2011;38:275–84.
 86. Petri M, Kim MY, Kalunian KC, et al. Combined oral contraceptives 
in women with systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 
Overseas Ed 2005;353:2550–8.
 87. Yee CS, Farewell V, Isenberg DA, et al. British Isles Lupus 
Assessment Group 2004 index is valid for assessment of disease 
activity in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 
2007;56:4113–9.
 88. Bruce IN, Gordon C, Merrill JT, et al. Clinical trials in lupus: what 
have we learned so far? Rheumatology 2010;49:1025–7.
 89. Furie RA, Petri MA, Wallace DJ, et al. Novel evidence-based 
systemic lupus erythematosus responder index. Arthritis Rheum 
2009;61:1143–51.
 90. Anders HJ, Jayne DR, Rovin BH. Hurdles to the introduction of new 
therapies for immune-mediated kidney diseases. Nat Rev Nephrol 
2016;12:205–16.
 91. Dall'Era M, Cisternas MG, Smilek DE, et al. Predictors of long-term 
renal outcome in lupus nephritis trials: lessons learned from the 
Euro-Lupus Nephritis cohort. Arthritis Rheumatol 2015;67:1305–13.
 92. Corapi KM, Dooley MA, Pendergraft WF
. Comparison and 
evaluation of lupus nephritis response criteria in lupus activity 
indices and clinical trials. Arthritis Res Ther 2015;17:110.
 93. Iaccarino L, Bettio S, Reggia R, et al. Effects of belimumab on 
flare rate and expected damage progression in patients with active 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Care Res 2017;69:115–23.
 94. Fleischmann R, Goldman JA, Leirisalo-Repo M, et al. Infliximab 
efficacy in rheumatoid arthritis after an inadequate response to 
etanercept or adalimumab: results of a target-driven active switch 
study. Curr Med Res Opin 2014;30:2139–49.
 95. Smolen JS, Breedveld FC, Burmester GR, et al. Treating rheumatoid 
arthritis to target: 2014 update of the recommendations of an 
international task force. Ann Rheum Dis 2016;75:3–15.
 96. Pincus T, Maclean R, Yazici Y, et al. Quantitative measurement of 
patient status in the regular care of patients with rheumatic diseases 
over 25 years as a continuous quality improvement activity, rather 
than traditional research. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2007;25(6 Suppl 
47):69–81.
 97. Witt M, Grunke M, Proft F
, et al. Clinical outcomes and safety of 
rituximab treatment for patients with systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) - results from a nationwide cohort in Germany (GRAID). Lupus 
2013;22:1142–9.
 98. Askanase A, Shum K, Mitnick H. Systemic lupus erythematosus: an 
overview. Soc Work Health Care 2012;51:576–86.
 99. Tani C, Chiara T, D'Aniello D. et al. MRI pattern of arthritis 
in systemic lupus erythematosus: a comparative study with 
rheumatoid arthritis and healthy subjects. Skeletal Radiol 
2015;44:267–6.
 
100. Lins CF
, Santiago MB. Ultrasound evaluation of joints in 
systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review. Eur Radiol 
2015;25:2688–92.
 
101. Moghadam-Kia S, Chilek K, Gaines E, et al. Cross-sectional 
analysis of a collaborative Web-based database for lupus 
erythematosus-associated skin lesions: prospective enrollment of 
114 patients. Arch Dermatol 2009;145:255–60.
 
102. Chang AY, Piette EW, Foering KP
, et al. Response to antimalarial 
agents in cutaneous lupus erythematosus: a prospective analysis. 
Arch Dermatol 2011;147:1261–7.
 
103. Ikeda T, Kanazawa N, Furukawa F
. Hydroxychloroquine 
administration for Japanese lupus erythematosus in Wakayama: a 
pilot study. J Dermatol 2012;39:531–5.
 
104. Yokogawa N, Tanikawa A, Amagai M, et al. Response to 
hydroxychloroquine in Japanese patients with lupus-related skin 
disease using the cutaneous lupus erythematosus disease area and 
severity index (CLASI). Mod Rheumatol 2013;23:249–55.
 
105. Liang MH, Socher SA, Larson MG, et al. Reliability and validity 
of six systems for the clinical assessment of disease activity in 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 1989;32:1107–18.
 
106. Parodi A, Massone C, Cacciapuoti M, et al. Measuring the activity 
of the disease in patients with cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Br J 
Dermatol 2000;142:457–60.
 
107. Faust HB, Gonin R, Chuang TY, et al. Reliability testing of the 
dermatology index of disease severity (DIDS). An index for staging 
the severity of cutaneous inflammatory disease. Arch Dermatol 
1997;133:1443–8.
 
108. Albrecht J, Werth VP
. Outcome measures in cutaneous autoimmune 
disease: dermatomyositis and lupus erythematosus In: The skin in 
systemic autoimmune disease: Elsevier, 2006.
 
109. Albrecht J, Werth VP
. Development of the CLASI as an outcome 
instrument for cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Dermatol Ther 
2007;20:93–101.
 
110. Albrecht J, Taylor L, Berlin JA, et al. The CLASI (Cutaneous Lupus 
Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index): an outcome 
instrument for cutaneous lupus erythematosus. J Invest Dermatol 
2005;125:889–94.
 
111. Bonilla-Martinez ZL, Albrecht J, Troxel AB, et al. The cutaneous 
lupus erythematosus disease area and severity index: a responsive 
instrument to measure activity and damage in patients with 
cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Arch Dermatol 2008;144:173–80.
 
112. Krathen MS, Dunham J, Gaines E, et al. The cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus disease activity and severity index: expansion for 
rheumatology and dermatology. Arthritis Rheum 2008;59:338–44.
 
113. Jolly M, Kazmi N, Mikolaitis RA, et al. Validation of the Cutaneous 
Lupus Disease Area and Severity Index (CLASI) using physician- 
and patient-assessed health outcome measures. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 2013;68:618–23.
 
114. Klein R, Moghadam-Kia S, LoMonico J, et al. Development of the 
CLASI as a tool to measure disease severity and responsiveness 
to therapy in cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Arch Dermatol 
2011;147:203–8.
 
115. Chang AY, Ghazi E, Okawa J, et al. Quality of life differences 
between responders and nonresponders in the treatment of 
cutaneous lupus erythematosus. JAMA Dermatol 2013;149:104–6.
 
116. Vashisht P
, Borghoff K, O'Dell JR, et al. Belimumab for the treatment 
of recalcitrant cutaneous lupus. Lupus 2017;26:857–64.
 
117. Cortés-Hernández J, Torres-Salido M, Castro-Marrero J, et 
al. Thalidomide in the treatment of refractory cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus: prognostic factors of clinical outcome. Br J 
Dermatol 2012;166:616–23.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Merrill JT, et al. Lupus Science & Medicine 2018;5:e000258. doi:10.1136/lupus-2018-000258
13
Review
 
118. Cortés-Hernández J, Ávila G, Vilardell-Tarrés M, et al. Efficacy 
and safety of lenalidomide for refractory cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus. Arthritis Res Ther 2012;14:R265.
 
119. De Souza A, Strober BE, Merola JF
, et al. Apremilast for discoid 
lupus erythematosus: results of a phase 2, open-label, single-arm, 
pilot study. J Drugs Dermatol 2012;11:1224–6.
 
120. Werth VP
, Hough DR, Korish S, et al. A phase 2, randomized, 
placebo –controlled, double-blind, ascending dose study to 
evaluate efficacy, safety, and tolerability of CC220 in subjects 
with systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus Sci Med 2016;3(Suppl 
1):A41.
 
121. Ky C, Swasdibutra B, Khademi S, et al. Efficacy of intravenous 
immunoglobulin monotherapy in patients with cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus: results of proof-of-concept Study. Dermatol 
Reports 2015;7:5804.
 
122. Braunstein I, Klein R, Okawa J, et al. The IFN-regulated gene 
signature is elevated in SCLE and DLE and correlates with CLASI 
score. Br J Dermatol 2012;166:971–5.
 
123. Oh SH, Roh HJ, Kwon JE, et al. Expression of interleukin-17 is 
correlated with interferon-α expression in cutaneous lesions of 
lupus erythematosus. Clin Exp Dermatol 2011;36:512–20.
 
124. Verma SM, Okawa J, Propert KJ, et al. The impact of skin 
damage due to cutaneous lupus on quality of life. Br J Dermatol 
2014;170:315–21.
 
125. Klein R, Moghadam-Kia S, Taylor L, et al. Quality of life 
in cutaneous lupus erythematosus. J Am Acad Dermatol 
2011;64:849–58.
 
126. Zhao CY, Hao EY, Oh DD, et al. A comparison study of clinician-
rated atopic dermatitis outcome measures for intermediate- to 
dark-skinned patients. Br J Dermatol 2017;176:985–92.
 
127. Petri M, Merrill JT, Davis JC, et al. Validation of the revised selena 
flare index in systemic Lupus Erythematosus. America College of 
Rheumatology Annual Meeting. 2012. abstract number 2542.
 
128. Ruperto N, Hanrahan LM, Alarcón GS, et al. International consensus 
for a definition of disease flare in lupus. Lupus 2011;20:453–62.
 
129. Holloway L, Humphrey L, Heron L, et al. Patient-reported outcome 
measures for systemic lupus erythematosus clinical trials: a review 
of content validity, face validity and psychometric performance. 
Health Qual Life Outcomes 2014;12:116.
 
130. Annapureddy N, Devilliers H, Jolly M. Patient-reported outcomes in 
lupus clinical trials with biologics. Lupus 2016;25:1111–21.
 
131. Leong KP
, Kong KO, Thong BY, et al. Development and preliminary 
validation of a systemic lupus erythematosus-specific quality-of-life 
instrument (SLEQOL). Rheumatology 2005;44:1267–76.
 
132. Jolly M, Pickard AS, Block JA, et al. Disease-specific patient 
reported outcome tools for systemic lupus erythematosus. Semin 
Arthritis Rheum 2012;42:56–65.
 
133. Meacock R, Harrison M, McElhone K, et al. Mapping the disease-
specific LupusQoL to the SF-6D. Qual Life Res 2015;24:1749–58.
 
134. Jolly M, Cornejo J, Mikolaitis RA, et al. LupusPRO and 
responsiveness the changes in health status and disease activity 
over time. Arthritis Rheum 2011;63:S898.
 
135. Giangreco D, Devilliers H, Annapureddy N, et al. LupusPRO is 
Responsive to Changes in Disease Activity Over Time. Paris: 
EULAR, 2014.
 
136. Strand V, Levy RA, Cervera R, et al. Improvements in health-related 
quality of life with belimumab, a B-lymphocyte stimulator-specific 
inhibitor, in patients with autoantibody-positive systemic lupus 
erythematosus from the randomised controlled BLISS trials. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2014;73:838–44.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://lupus.bmj.com/
Lupus Sci Med: first published as 10.1136/lupus-2018-000258 on 23 March 2018. Downloaded from 
