 REVIEW
published: 01 December 2017
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00987
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
Edited by:
Kimberly Huey,
Drake University, United States
Reviewed by:
Matthew M. Robinson,
Oregon State University, United States
Hans-Peter Wiesinger,
University of Salzburg, Austria
David Hawkins,
University of California, Davis,
United States
*Correspondence:
Adamantios Arampatzis
a.arampatzis@hu-berlin.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Exercise Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 16 August 2017
Accepted: 17 November 2017
Published: 01 December 2017
Citation:
Mersmann F, Bohm S and
Arampatzis A (2017) Imbalances in the
Development of Muscle and Tendon
as Risk Factor for Tendinopathies in
Youth Athletes: A Review of Current
Evidence and Concepts of Prevention.
Front. Physiol. 8:987.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00987
Imbalances in the Development of
Muscle and Tendon as Risk Factor
for Tendinopathies in Youth Athletes:
A Review of Current Evidence and
Concepts of Prevention
Falk Mersmann 1, 2, Sebastian Bohm 1, 2 and Adamantios Arampatzis 1, 2*
1 Department of Training and Movement Sciences, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2 Berlin School of
Movement Science, Berlin, Germany
Tendons feature the crucial role to transmit the forces exerted by the muscles to the
skeleton. Thus, an increase of the force generating capacity of a muscle needs to go in
line with a corresponding modulation of the mechanical properties of the associated
tendon to avoid potential harm to the integrity of the tendinous tissue. However, as
summarized in the present narrative review, muscle and tendon differ with regard to
both the time course of adaptation to mechanical loading as well as the responsiveness
to certain types of mechanical stimulation. Plyometric loading, for example, seems to
be a more potent stimulus for muscle compared to tendon adaptation. In growing
athletes, the increased levels of circulating sex hormones might additionally augment
an imbalanced development of muscle strength and tendon mechanical properties,
which could potentially relate to the increasing incidence of tendon overload injuries
that has been indicated for adolescence. In fact, increased tendon stress and strain
due to a non-uniform musculotendinous development has been observed recently in
adolescent volleyball athletes, a high-risk group for tendinopathy. These findings highlight
the importance to deepen the current understanding of the interaction of loading and
maturation and demonstrate the need for the development of preventive strategies.
Therefore, this review concludes with an evidence-based concept for a specific loading
program for increasing tendon stiffness, which could be implemented in the training
regimen of young athletes at risk for tendinopathy. This program incorporates five sets of
four contractions with an intensity of 85–90% of the isometric voluntary maximum and a
movement/contraction duration that provides 3 s of high magnitude tendon strain.
Keywords: muscle, tendon, adaptation, athletes, adolescence, tendinopathy, imbalance
INTRODUCTION
Tendinopathy is a clinical condition that is associated with pathological processes within the
tendon and pain (Fredberg and Stengaard-Pedersen, 2008). In specific sport disciplines (i.e., jump
disciplines) about every second athlete develops a tendinopathy during the athletic career and most
individuals suffer from chronic symptoms (Lian et al., 2005). Until recently, only few information
was available on the prevalence of tendinopathy in children and adolescents. However, the available
literature indicates that tendon overload injury is a common issue in youth sports and that the
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
prevalence increases during maturation (Simpson et al., 2016).
Some reports indicate that tendinopathy is the most frequent
overuse injury in adolescent athletes (Le Gall et al., 2006).
The present narrative review explores the hypothesis that an
imbalanced adaptation of muscle and tendon might contribute
to the etiology of tendinopathies in youth sports.
In the production of movement, muscles and tendons work
as a unit, in which the tendon transmits the forces generated
by the muscle to the skeleton (Józsa and Kannus, 1997; Nigg
and Herzog, 2007). The resultant stress that is applied to the
tendon (i.e., force normalized to tendon cross-sectional area)
is a measure of absolute load on the tissue irrespective of its
dimensions. Yet, ultimate stress (i.e., stress at tendon failure)
varies markedly across different tendons and species (LaCroix
et al., 2013). In contrast, the ultimate strain of tendons is
remarkably constant (Abrahams, 1967; Loitz et al., 1989; LaCroix
et al., 2013; Shepherd and Screen, 2013). This means that,
from a mechanobiological perspective, tendon strain is the most
adequate indicator of the mechanical demand for the tendon
as a result of loading. Though it has been argued that an
increase of stress might still contribute to either physiological
adaptation (Wiesinger et al., 2015) or pathological changes
(Couppé et al., 2013), experimental evidence clearly highlights
habitual tendon strain as the most crucial parameter for the
risk of injury (Wren et al., 2003; LaCroix et al., 2013; Veres
et al., 2013). Therefore, an increase of the strength-generating
capacity of a muscle needs to go in line with a corresponding
modulation of the mechanical properties of the respective
tendon. The increase of tendon stiffness (i.e., the slope of the
force-elongation relationship) serves as a protective mechanism
for integrity of the tendinous tissue and has been frequently
observed in humans to accompany strength gains due to both
mechanical loading (Kubo et al., 2001a; Arampatzis et al.,
2007; Kongsgaard et al., 2007) as well as maturation (Kubo
et al., 2001b, 2014; O’Brien et al., 2010b; Waugh et al., 2012;
Mersmann et al., 2016). Yet, there is now growing evidence
that the adaptation of muscle and tendon does not necessarily
proceed in a uniform manner during a training process.
In young athletes, maturation acts as an additional stimulus
on the development of the muscle-tendon unit, which could
potentially further challenge the uniformity of muscle strength
and tendon stiffness changes. In the following chapters, we
will summarize potentially influential factors for an imbalanced
musculotendinous development during training and maturation.
We discuss evidence of non-uniform muscle and tendon
adaptation in adults and adolescent athletes and the potential
implications. The review concludes with proposing a concept for
prevention, which targets the increase of tendon stiffness and is
based on recent advancements in our understanding of tendon
adaptation.
INFLUENTIAL FACTORS OF IMBALANCED
MUSCLE-TENDON ADAPTATION AND
DEVELOPMENT
The following sections will briefly review the basic mechanisms
of muscle and tendon adaptation and mechanotransduction. We
will emphasize differences in the temporal dynamics of adaptive
changes and the mechanical stimuli that effectively elicit changes
of the respective tissue properties, structure and morphology. For
a more comprehensive overview on muscle or tendon adaptation
the reader is referred, for instance, to the reviews by Toigo and
Boutellier (2006), Folland and Williams (2007), and Gonzalez
et al. (2016), or Wang (2006), Magnusson et al. (2007), and Bohm
et al. (2015), respectively.
Differences in the Temporal Dynamics of
Muscle and Tendon Adaptation
Muscle and tendon tissue both adapt to increased mechanical
loading from the subcellular to the macroscopic level. Here we
give a synopsis about the changes that can be observed in the
musculotendinous system that are most relevant for strength and
power production. With regard to the scope of this review, we
will specifically address the time course of these changes and the
features of muscles and tendons that might be responsible for
differences in the temporal dynamics of adaptation.
Basic Mechanisms of Muscle Adaptation
The adaptive changes that affect the strength generating capacity
of a muscle can be categorized into (a) radial adaptation, (b)
longitudinal adaptation and (c) adaptation of specific tension
(Goldspink, 1985; Bottinelli, 2001). Radial adaptation describes
the modulation of the number of sarcomeres in parallel and
is best reflected by changes of the physiological cross-sectional
area (PCSA) of a muscle (Haxton, 1944), which is the area
of the muscle cross-section perpendicular to the orientation of
the fibers. In humans, an increase in muscle PCSA following
strength training has been demonstrated for the elbow flexors
(Kawakami et al., 1995) and knee extensors (Kawakami et al.,
1995; Seynnes et al., 2009; Erskine et al., 2010). Moreover,
several authors reported an increase of pennation angle after
applying interventions that promote muscle strength (Aagaard
et al., 2001; Blazevich et al., 2007; Seynnes et al., 2007; Farup
et al., 2012). An increase of pennation angle is considered to
be a modulating factor of the PCSA (Alexander and Vernon,
1975) that enables fiber hypertrophy and hence radial muscle
growth to exceed the changes of the whole muscle anatomical
cross-sectional area (ACSA; Häkkinen et al., 1998; Aagaard et al.,
2001). The increase in single muscle fiber cross-sectional area that
governs the radial muscle adaptation is the main contributor to
the increasing force generating potential of the muscle (Johnson
and Klueber, 1991; Aagaard et al., 2001; Farup et al., 2012) and is
in turn attributed to increased myofibrillar growth (McDougall
et al., 1980) and proliferation (Goldspink, 1970). Longitudinal
muscle adaptation refers to the modulation of the number of
sarcomeres in series, which is positively associated with the
maximum shortening velocity and mechanical power of muscle
fibers (Goldspink, 1985). Animal models (Lynn and Morgan,
1994; Butterfield et al., 2005) and indirect evidence from human
in vivo studies (Blazevich et al., 2007; Duclay et al., 2009; Potier
et al., 2009; Reeves et al., 2009; Franchi et al., 2014; Sharifnezhad
et al., 2014) both support the notion that eccentric loading can
induce longitudinal muscle plasticity. Specific tension (or force)
refers to the intrinsic strength generating capacity of the muscle
tissue (i.e., active force normalized to PCSA upon maximum
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
activation). However, in light of the conflicting results on
loading-induced changes of single-fiber specific tension (Widrick
et al., 2002; D’Antona et al., 2006; Pansarasa et al., 2009) it is
still unclear if the modulation of specific tension is a relevant
contributor to strength gains in response to exercise (Folland and
Williams, 2007).
Basic Mechanisms of Tendon Adaptation
The early work of Ingelmark (1945, 1948) already suggested that
tendons adapt to their mechanical environment. When a muscle-
tendon unit is repeatedly exposed to increased mechanical
loading, for instance by means of resistance exercise, it is
commonly observed that the associated gains of muscle strength
are accompanied by an increase of tendon stiffness (Kubo
et al., 2001a; Arampatzis et al., 2007; Kongsgaard et al.,
2007). When a shortening of the tendon is ruled out as a
potential contributor, two candidate mechanisms can account
for exercise-induced increases of tendon stiffness: (a) changes
of the material properties (i.e., elastic modulus) and (b) radial
tendon hypertrophy. Exercise intervention studies on human
adults that reported an increase of tendon stiffness almost
exclusively (with the exception of Kongsgaard et al., 2007)
also found the tendon elastic modulus increasing by 17–77%
(Kubo et al., 2001a; Arampatzis et al., 2007, 2010; Seynnes
et al., 2009; Carroll et al., 2011; Malliaras et al., 2013b; Bohm
et al., 2014). In comparison, indications of tendon hypertrophy
were documented less consistently, with some evidence of
moderate increases of tendon cross-sectional area (CSA; 4–
10%) in response to increased mechanical loading (Arampatzis
et al., 2007; Kongsgaard et al., 2007; Seynnes et al., 2009;
Bohm et al., 2014), and several reports of increased tendon
stiffness without concomitant radial tendon growth (Kubo et al.,
2001a, 2002, 2007, 2010a; Arampatzis et al., 2010; Carroll
et al., 2011; Malliaras et al., 2013b). However, cross-sectional
comparisons between athletes and untrained adults suggest that
tendon hypertrophy of 20–35% is well possible (Rosager et al.,
2002; Magnusson and Kjaer, 2003; Kongsgaard et al., 2005;
Seynnes et al., 2013). Negating potential selection bias and
intersubject variations by comparing the dominant with the
nondominant leg of badminton players and fencers, Couppé
et al. (2008) found habitually increased loading to result in
an average increase of tendon CSA of about 20%. Therefore,
tendon hypertrophy is currently considered to contribute
to increased tendon stiffness following long-term mechanical
loading.
Temporal Dynamics of Adaptation
It is evident that both muscle and tendon are responsive to
mechanical loading. However, the metabolism of tendons is
designed to meet the functional demand of bearing loads over
long durations and, thus, tendon tissue needs to tolerate low
oxygen tension (Józsa and Kannus, 1997). Therefore, tendon
tissue is characterized by a lower cell to overall dry mass
ratio, vascularization, and metabolism compared to muscle
tissue (Peacock, 1959; Smith, 1965; Laitinen, 1967; Ippolito
et al., 1980). The half-life of tendon collagen is estimated to
be almost tenfold higher compared to the muscle proteins
actin and myosin (Lundholm et al., 1981; Thorpe et al., 2010).
A recent study that investigated tissue renewal by means of
comparing nuclear bomb 14C residues in forensic muscle and
tendon samples provided strong support for the hypothesis of a
lower rate of tissue remodeling in tendon, especially following
the formation of the tendon core tissue during adolescence
(Heinemeier et al., 2013). Though similar to muscle proteins,
collagen synthesis increases rapidly following exercise (Miller
et al., 2005), effective tissue turnover is markedly lower, leading
to the suggestion that a considerable amount of the synthesized
collagen molecules is not permanently incorporated in the tissue
structure but broken down relatively quickly (Heinemeier et al.,
2013). In accordance with this notion, it has been demonstrated
in adults that changes of muscle morphology and architecture
can occur as early as after 3 to 4 weeks in a heavy resistance
training intervention (Seynnes et al., 2007; DeFreitas et al.,
2011), while there are no reports of such rapid adaptations
of tendon morphological or mechanical properties. Moreover,
neuronal
adaptation enables muscle
strength
to increase
markedly even before major morphological changes occur
(Folland and Williams, 2007). An increase of tendon stiffness
on the other hand relies on a modulation of tissue metabolism
and subsequent adaptive changes of tissue structure and tendon
morphology.
Kubo and colleagues investigated the time course of muscle
and tendon adaptation in two separate 3-month exercise
intervention studies on the patellar (Kubo et al., 2010b) and the
Achilles tendon (Kubo et al., 2012), respectively. In both studies, a
marked increase of muscle strength preceded significant changes
of tendon stiffness by 1–2 month and morphological (CSA)
changes occurred at the muscle level only. In contrast, Urlando
and Hawkins (2007) reported no significant changes of Achilles
tendon strain during maximum voluntary contractions despite
an increase of tendon force determined at six time-points over
an 8-week strength training intervention. This finding indicates
a uniform adaptation of muscle strength and tendon stiffness.
However, it is interesting to note that the individual tendon
strain values showed great fluctuations between the measurement
sessions. The highest single values of tendon strain measured
in each session, for example, ranged from 8.6 to 13.5%. This
substantial variation indicates that the time course of muscle and
tendon adaptation might show an individual development and
that imbalances of muscle strength and tendon stiffness might
have remained undetected in the study by Urlando and Hawkins
(2007) due to the analysis of group mean values only.
In conclusion, both muscle and tendon are able to adapt to
a change of their mechanical environment. Though information
on the time course of muscle and tendon adaptation in vivo is
still rare, the metabolic features and adaptive mechanisms differ
between muscle and tendon. Muscle seems to be characterized
by a greater rate of effective tissue renewal compared to tendon,
and neural adaptation further increases the plasticity of the force
generating capacity of the neuromuscular system. Thus, it is
possible that imbalances of muscle strength and tendon stiffness
can develop during a training process.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Differences of Muscle and Tendon in the
Responsiveness to Certain Mechanical
Stimuli
Besides the potentially different time course of adaptive changes
reviewed above, substantial evidence suggest that muscle and
tendon feature significant differences regarding the mechanical
stimuli that effectively elicit adaptive changes. This section gives
a short overview about the processes of mechanotransduction
and the stimuli that seem to successfully activate the respective
signaling pathways for both muscle and tendon, and then closes
with a comparative discussion.
Mechanotransduction in Muscle
It is now well known that both mechanical and metabolic stress
are important, separate but interacting stimuli that trigger muscle
adaptation and growth (Goldberg et al., 1975; Vandenburgh and
Kaufman, 1979; Rooney et al., 1994; Schott et al., 1995; Smith
and Rutherford, 1995). Briefly, mechanical stress subjected to
muscle tissue leads to the activation of mechanosensitive calcium
channels (Kameyama and Etlinger, 1979), intracellular enzymes
and second messengers (Hornberger et al., 2006) and stimulates
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) release from the muscle cells
(Perrone et al., 1995). These events trigger a signaling cascade
via autocrine and direct intracellular pathways that results in an
increase of protein synthesis (Tidball, 2005; Toigo and Boutellier,
2006; Gonzalez et al., 2016). It has been demonstrated that
the increase of muscle protein synthesis following an acute
bout of resistance exercise exceeds the increase of protein
breakdown, given a sufficient amino acid availability provided by
appropriate feeding (Rennie et al., 1982; Biolo et al., 1995; Phillips
et al., 1997). The positive net muscle protein balance remains
elevated for several days and contributes to the remodeling of
the contractile machinery and, subsequently, to hypertrophy
(Kumar et al., 2009; McGlory et al., 2017 for reviews). The
increase of protein synthetic capability is mediated by an increase
of myonuclear number (Allen et al., 1999). Satellite cells are
activated by nitric oxide efflux of stressed myofibers (Anderson,
2000) and proliferate under the regulatory influence of IGF-I
(Barton-Davis et al., 1999). The proliferated satellite cells then
fuse with existing myofibers as new myonuclei (Allen et al.,
1999).
Metabolic stress refers to the exercise-related accumulation
of metabolites (specifically lactate and hydrogen ions). The
role of metabolic stress for muscle growth in response to
exercise has been attributed to the associated systemic growth-
related hormone and local myokine up-regulation and/or the
increased fiber recruitment with muscle fatigue (Schoenfeld,
2013; Ozaki et al., 2016). Muscle hypertrophy was consequently
suggested to be driven by the interaction of mechanical and
metabolic stress, and that the degree of contribution depends
on the exercise modality (i.e., greater mechanical stress at high
intensities and greater metabolic stress at moderate intensities;
Ozaki et al., 2016). It can be concluded from this assumption
that, given a sufficient overall training volume, a wide range of
exercise intensities effectively elicits muscle hypertrophy, which
is convincingly supported by experimental evidence (Campos
et al., 2002; Tanimoto and Ishii, 2006; Mitchell et al., 2012;
Schoenfeld et al., 2015, 2016).
Mechanotransduction in Tendon
In tendon tissue, the load-induced strain of the extracellular
matrix is transmitted to the cytoskeleton of the embedded
fibroblast via specific transmembrane proteins (Wang, 2006;
Heinemeier and Kjaer, 2011). The conformational changes of
these transmembrane proteins upon load application and the
activation of stretch-sensitive ion channels in the cell membrane
activate intracellular signaling cascades of gene and growth factor
expression for the up-regulation of collagen and matrix protein
synthesis (Sackin, 1995; Chiquet, 1999; Wang, 2006; Lavagnino
et al., 2015). Accordingly, studies demonstrate an increased
concentration of both interstitial growth factors and binding
proteins (Heinemeier et al., 2003; Olesen et al., 2006; Jones et al.,
2013) as well as elevated collagen synthesis (Langberg et al.,
1999, 2001; Miller et al., 2005) in mechanically loaded tendon
tissue. The load-induced proliferation and collagen synthesis of
tendon stem cells seems to contribute to this anabolic response
of tendons to mechanical loading as well (Bi et al., 2007; Zhang
et al., 2010). Further, it has been demonstrated in a rat model
that mechanical loading leads to an increased production of
enzymes that mediate collagen cross-linking (Heinemeier et al.,
2007a), which is thought to be involved in the modulation
of collagen cross-link profile in humans following resistance
exercise (Kongsgaard et al., 2009).
From a mechanobiological point of view, fibroblast cell
deformation and fluid flow-induced shear stress are important
determinants of mechanotransduction and, thus, the adaptive
response of tendons (Lavagnino et al., 2008). In vitro testing
on the effects of cyclic load-application demonstrated that high-
level magnitude strains are associated with greater tenocyte cell
deformation (Arnoczky et al., 2002), collagen fiber recruitment
(Kastelic et al., 1980; Hansen et al., 2002), and greater inhibition
of catabolic activity (Lavagnino et al., 2003; Arnoczky et al.,
2004) in comparison to lower levels of cyclic strain. These
results correspond well to observations from human in vivo
exercise intervention studies. Arampatzis et al. (2007, 2010)
compared the effects of two equivolume loading regimen and
found significant changes of tendon stiffness and elastic modulus
of the Achilles tendon only in response to the high-strain
protocols [i.e., 90% isometric maximum voluntary contraction
(iMVC), corresponding to 4.6% of tendon strain], while no
significant changes were induced by moderate-strain training
(i.e., 55% iMVC, 2.9% tendon strain). Similar results from
experimental studies on the patellar tendon (Kongsgaard et al.,
2007; Malliaras et al., 2013b) and two recent meta-analyses
(Bohm et al., 2015; Wiesinger et al., 2015) strengthened the
conclusion that high-intensity loading is a crucial stimulus for
in vivo tendon adaptation. The muscle contraction type (i.e.,
isometric, concentric, eccentric) for load application does on the
other hand not seem to be of particular relevance for the adaptive
response (Kjaer and Heinemeier, 2014; Bohm et al., 2015).
Interestingly, against the assumptions of finite-element
modeling (Lavagnino et al., 2008), the main body of experimental
in vivo evidence suggests that the induction of high strain
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
rates and associated increased fluid flow-related shear stress by
means of plyometric exercise fails to elicit significant adaptive
changes of human tendons (Kubo et al., 2007; Fouré et al.,
2009, 2010; Houghton et al., 2013), even at high-intensity
loading magnitudes (Bohm et al., 2014). Though it needs to
be acknowledged that there are also reports of an increase of
tendon stiffness in response to plyometric loading (Burgess et al.,
2007; Wu et al., 2010; Hirayama et al., 2017), some of these
findings might have been biased by the lack of consideration
of the contribution of antagonistic activity in the calculation
of tendon forces (Wu et al., 2010; Hirayama et al., 2017),
which leads to an overestimation of the increase of tendon
stiffness upon a training-induced reduction of antagonistic
coactivation. Yet, more importantly, the few existing studies
directly comparing the effects of plyometric training to low-
strain-rate loading regimen consistently show lower adaptive
responses in the plyometric training groups (Burgess et al.,
2007; Kubo et al., 2007; Bohm et al., 2014). It has been argued
that a short duration of strain-application (e.g., high-frequency
load-relaxation cycles or plyometric loading) might reduce
the effectiveness of mechanotransduction processes (Arampatzis
et al., 2010; Bohm et al., 2014). In a systematic experimental
modulation of strain duration at high strain magnitude in vivo,
an increase by up to 3 s facilitated tendon adaptation (Arampatzis
et al., 2010; Bohm et al., 2014). However, a further increase of
strain duration to 12 s per cycle did not further promote adaptive
effects. It seems possible that longer sustained tendon strains
become less effective if the strain duration is increased at the
expense of the number of loading cycles (Bohm et al., 2014).
Collectively, current in vivo evidence on human tendon
adaptation suggests that tendons can be most effectively
strengthened if loading regimen incorporate slow repetitive
high-magnitude tendon strain application. High strain rate and
frequency modes of loading as, for instance, plyometric exercise,
do not seem to consistently stimulate tendon adaptation.
Comparison of Muscle and Tendon Mechanical
Stimulation
Comparing the types of mechanical stimulation that effectively
elicit muscle compared to tendon adaptation, it seems that
fatiguing training with moderate loads can trigger increases of
muscle strength and size (Moss et al., 1997; Wernbom et al.,
2007; Mitchell et al., 2012; Schoenfeld et al., 2016), but do not
provide a sufficient stimulus for tendon adaptation (Arampatzis
et al., 2007, 2010; Kongsgaard et al., 2007). This way, an increase
of muscle strength without a concomitant modulation of tendon
stiffness following moderate intensity loading can result in higher
tendon strain during maximal voluntary contractions, which
implies an increase of the mechanical demand placed upon
the tendon by the working muscle (Arampatzis et al., 2007,
2010; Figure 1). Furthermore, numerous studies demonstrated
that plyometric loading effectively promotes muscle strength
development, also in trained athletes (Sáez-Sáez de Villarreal
et al., 2010 for review), while evidence suggests that plyometric
loading does not consistently increase tendon stiffness (Kubo
et al., 2007; Fouré et al., 2009, 2010; Houghton et al., 2013).
Accordingly, Kubo et al. (2007) reported increased tendon
elongation (and, thus, tendon strain, given that the rest length
did not change) during maximum muscle contractions following
their plyometric training intervention. Such differences in the
responsiveness of muscles and tendons to plyometric loading and
its mechanical implications could be of particular significance in
light of the high prevalence of tendon overuse injuries in sports
with a plyometric loading profile like volleyball, basketball or
athletic jump disciplines (Lian et al., 2005). Studies on growth
factor transcription following loading also support the idea of
differently graded responses of muscle and tendon to specific
types of loading. For example, Heinemeier et al. (2007a,b) found a
contraction type-specific expression of growth factors in muscle
but not tendon tissue using a rat model. More recently, it was
also demonstrated in humans that following a fatiguing one-leg
kicking exercise with moderate loads the expression of tissue-
specific growth factors increased only at the muscle but not
tendon level (Heinemeier et al., 2011). This observation led the
authors to conclude that an imbalanced adaptation of muscle
and tendon might develop under specific loading conditions
(Heinemeier et al., 2007a, 2011).
In summary, muscle responds well to a wide range of exercise
modalities with an increase of strength. Tendon tissue on the
other hand seems only to be responsive to high magnitude
loading and repetitive loading cycles featuring long tendon strain
durations show greater effects compared to modes of loading
where single-cycle strain duration is short. Those differences
in the responsiveness to certain stimuli might promote the
development of imbalances of muscle strength and tendon
stiffness in the training process in specific sport disciplines (e.g.,
jump disciplines).
The Effects of Maturation on Muscle and
Tendon Development and Plasticity
Aside from mechanical loading, maturation induces profound
changes of the skeletal, neuromuscular and tendinous system
in young athletes. The following section briefly reviews muscle
and tendon development from child to adulthood, then focuses
on somatic and hormonal changes that might challenge the
balance of the development of muscle and tendon properties. The
section closes with a synopsis of recent experimental evidence
of an imbalanced muscle and tendon development in adolescent
athletes.
Maturation and Muscle Development
Whole body muscle mass increases progressively from childhood
to adulthood, with a pronounced rise during adolescence,
especially in boys (Malina et al., 2004; McCarthy et al., 2014;
Kim et al., 2016). Even when normalized to body mass, these
changes are still marked in boys yet modest in girls (McCarthy
et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2016). Studies investigating single muscle
development consequently reported an increase in length, ACSA
and volume (Kanehisa et al., 1995a,b; Kubo et al., 2001b; Neu
et al., 2002; Tonson et al., 2008; O’Brien et al., 2010c). It
seems that the gain of muscle volume is governed by both an
increase in PCSA and fascicle length, yet the gains in PCSA
exceed those of fascicle length in pennate muscles, which is
an indication of a remodeling in favor of force production
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
FIGURE 1 | Achilles tendon-aponeurosis force-strain relationship before and after two isometric exercise protocols. The two legs of eleven adults were subjected to
either moderate [i.e., 55% maximum voluntary contraction (MVC); low strain] or high loading (90% MVC; high strain) for 14 weeks, respectively. Both protocols
induced an increase of tendon force. However, following moderate loading (i.e., low strain protocol) tendon stiffness did not change significantly and, thus, there was a
significant increase of tendon strain during maximum muscle contractions. This implies an increase of the mechanical demand placed upon the tendon. No change
was observed in a control group (data not shown). *Significant difference between pre- and post-exercise values (Arampatzis et al., 2007, adapted with permission
from The Company of Biologists Limited).
(Morse et al., 2008; O’Brien et al., 2010c; Bénard et al., 2011).
Together with an increase of moment arm lengths (O’Brien
et al., 2009; Waugh et al., 2012) and muscle activation (Dotan
et al., 2012), this leads to a disproportionate increase of muscle
strength (O’Brien et al., 2010a). The development of muscle
PCSA from childhood to adulthood is most likely based on
single fiber hypertrophy and not hyperplasia (Bowden and Goyer,
1960; Aherne et al., 1971; Oertel, 1988; Lexell et al., 1992).
The growth hormone-IGF-I axis, which is markedly activated
during adolescence for the regulation of overall body growth,
stimulates fiber hypertrophy and protein synthesis (Grohmann
et al., 2005). For example, myoblast proliferation and fusion
with myotubes—a prerequisite for radial and longitudinal fiber
growth—depends on growth hormone and IGF-I secretion
(Cheek et al., 1971; Allen et al., 1999; Grohmann et al., 2005).
Consequently, there is a close association between single fiber
CSA and body height (Aherne et al., 1971). The alteration
of the endocrine environment during adolescence, specifically
the increasing systemic levels of sex steroid hormones, further
initiate the development of the muscle functional, morphological
and structural differences between boys and girls (Oertel, 1988;
Round et al., 1999).
Maturation and Tendon Development
First information on the development of the mechanical
properties of human tendinous tissue in vivo was provided
by Kubo et al. (2001b). Their comparison of vastus lateralis
tendon-aponeurosis compliance between children, adolescents
and adults indicated a progressive increase of tendinous stiffness
(i.e., the inverse of compliance) from childhood to adulthood,
despite the longitudinal growth of the muscle-tendon unit.
Theoretically, an increase in length of the series elastic elements
would reduce their stiffness (given similar material properties
and CSA; Butler et al., 1978). However, O’Brien et al. (2010b)
found greater stiffness of the patellar tendon in adults compared
to pre-pubertal children as well, and Mersmann et al. (2016)
recently demonstrated an increase of patellar tendon stiffness
in a longitudinal study over 1 year throughout adolescence.
More detailed information on the time course of human tendon
development in vivo is strongly limited. Kubo et al. (2014)
compared the mechanical and morphological properties of the
patellar tendon of elementary and high school boys to adult
men. The results indicated that the major developmental increase
of tendon elastic modulus from childhood to adulthood occurs
until early-adolescence. This corresponds to the observations on
the Achilles tendon by Waugh et al. (2012), who found that
the differences in Achilles tendon material properties between
younger (5–7 years) and older pre-pubertal children (aged 8–
10 years) were of similar order as the differences between the
latter group and the notably older adults (∼26 years). Thus, the
material properties of tendons might demonstrate their most
pronounced development early in youth (i.e., before the growth
spurt at the onset of adolescence), while it seems that tendon
hypertrophy progresses further throughout adolescence (Kubo
et al., 2014). This assumption also parallels observations in
rodent models (Ansorge et al., 2011; Miller et al., 2012). The
development can probably be attributed to a great extent to
the increase of mechanical loading due to gains in body mass
and muscle strength, as predicted by Waugh et al. (2012) using
a stepwise multiple regression model and data of the Achilles
tendon properties of children and adults. Interestingly, age was
shown to be an additional significant predictor of elastic modulus
in the regression model, independent of body mass and tendon
stress, explaining 31 and 52% of the variance of the elastic
modulus in children and both age groups combined, respectively.
Thus, it seems very likely that maturation is a separate factor for
tendon development, besides the effects of increased mechanical
loading. Indeed, several hormones and growth factors that are
involved in the regulation of somatic growth (see Murray and
Clayton, 2013 for review) have been shown to mediate tendon
metabolism as well. For instance, growth hormone and IGF-I
stimulate gene expression, collagen synthesis and cross-linking
(Abrahamsson et al., 1991; Choy et al., 2005; Doessing et al.,
2010; Nielsen et al., 2014) and thyroid hormones are involved
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
in the regulation of tenocyte proliferation, growth and collagen
synthesis (Oliva et al., 2013; Berardi et al., 2014).
Challenges to the Musculotendinous System Induced
by Maturation
Neugebauer and Hawkins (2012) reported that the longitudinal
growth of the muscle-tendon unit during adolescence can
go in line with a temporary reduction of tendon CSA. At
given tendon material properties, the resultant increase of
tendon stress would lead to higher tendon strain. However, as
Neugebauer and Hawkins (2012) found both elastic modulus
and maximum tendon strain to increase only in tendency,
the implications of the observed morphological development
of tendons during the adolescent growth spurt still need to
be elucidated. Similarly, little information is available on the
effects of the rapid increase of circulating sex hormones (i.e.,
testosterone in boys and estrogens in girls) during puberty
on the muscle-tendon unit. Yet, it seems possible that the
change of the endocrine milieu could affect the uniformity of
the development of muscle strength and tendon stiffness. It
is well established that testosterone is one of the most potent
hormones promoting muscle hypertrophy and thus increasing
muscle strength (see Vingren et al., 2010 for review). Its role
in the development of tendinous tissue on the other hand
is basically unknown to date (Hansen and Kjaer, 2014). In
adults it has been shown that anabolic-androgenic steroid
supplementation stimulates collagen synthesis (Pärssinen et al.,
2000) and increases tendon stiffness (Inhofe et al., 1995; Marqueti
et al., 2011; Seynnes et al., 2013), but impairs tissue remodeling
(Marqueti et al., 2006) and reduces ultimate stress and strain
(Inhofe et al., 1995; Marqueti et al., 2011; Tsitsilonis et al.,
2014). Though it seems likely that steroid supplementation is
not necessarily representative of the physiological mechanisms
of testosterone action, it can at least be concluded that
the anabolic and strength-promoting effects of testosterone
are more clearly established for muscle than tendon tissue.
The effects of estrogens on muscle and tendon metabolism
have been studied more extensively. In a recent review,
Hansen and Kjaer (2014) concluded that current scientific
evidence from studies on humans renders estrogens as muscle-
anabolic, since they decrease protein turnover and increase
the responsiveness to mechanical loading. Conversely, estrogens
seem to reduce tendon collagen synthesis and the plasticity of
tendon mechanical properties in response to exercise (Miller
et al., 2007; Hansen et al., 2009). While it must be stated
clearly that our current understanding of the effects of sex
hormones on the muscle-tendon unit is based primarily on
studies administering exogenous hormones to adults, these
findings allow the hypothesis that the change of endogenous
sex hormone levels in child to adulthood development could
contribute to an imbalanced adaptation of muscle and tendon in
youth athletes.
Evidence of Imbalanced Muscle and Tendon
Development in Adolescent Athletes
A first series of studies that explicitly investigated the uniformity
of muscle and tendon development and adaptation during
adolescence supports the idea that the two-fold stimulus of
(a) maturation and (b) a predominantly plyometric loading
profile can lead to a musculotendinous imbalance that increases
the load (i.e., stress) and internal demand (i.e., strain) for
the tendon. Mersmann et al. (2014) compared mid-adolescent
to middle-aged elite volleyball athletes, which were subjected
to many years of sport-specific loading. While there were
no significant differences in vastus lateralis PCSA and in
the force applied to the patellar tendon during maximum
isometric knee extension contractions, the adolescents had a
deficit with regard to patellar tendon CSA compared to the
adult counterparts and, as a consequence, were subjected to
increased levels of tendon stress and strain. The conclusion
that the morphological plasticity of the tendon unfolds at
later stages during development was supported by the results
of a subsequent 2-year longitudinal study. The observations
suggested that the muscular development was already far
progressed in the mid-adolescent athletes, demonstrating only
minor changes until the end of adolescence, while the tendon
still showed remarkable radial growth and an associated increase
of stiffness (Mersmann et al., 2017a). Finally, the time course
of muscle and tendon development in mid-adolescent athletes
was investigated in five measurement sessions over 1 year in
more detail and the effects of maturation and mechanical loading
were differentiated by including a similar-aged control group
of non-athletes (Mersmann et al., 2016). It was found that
the development in elite volleyball athletes was characterized
by significantly greater fluctuations in muscle strength and a
non-uniformity of muscle and tendon adaptation. Consequently,
tendon strain during maximum contractions was not only
increased chronically in comparison to controls, but also
demonstrated significantly greater fluctuations during the period
of investigation (Figure 2). In addition to the discordant changes
of muscle strength and tendon stiffness that occur during a
training process, results of a very recent study indicate that also
the adaptive potential, at least in response to predominantly
plyometric long-term loading, is lower with regard to tendon
stiffness compared to muscle strength in both adolescent boys
and girls (Mersmann et al., 2017b). Though from this study
it still remains an assumption that maturation contributed
to the development musculotendinous imbalance in addition
to the unfavorable type of loading, the increased stress and
strain observed in the earlier study (Mersmann et al., 2014)
in adolescent athletes compared to the adults, which were
habitually subjected to intense plyometric loading as well,
carefully suggest that the risk might be increased during
adolescence.
Summary
Collectively, the evidence reviewed in this chapter strongly
suggests that muscle and tendon show differences in the
time course of adaptation to mechanical loading and in
the types of mechanical stimulation that effectively elicits
adaptive processes. Maturation acts as an additional stimulus
on the muscle-tendon unit of young athletes and could
further contribute to a development of an imbalance of
muscle strength and tendon stiffness. Adolescence could
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
FIGURE 2 | On-year development (in 3-month intervals) of knee extensor muscle strength (MVC; A,B), patellar tendon stiffness (C,D) and tendon strain during
maximum contractions (E,F) in adolescent volleyball athletes (n = 12; A,C,E; white symbols show mean values) and controls (n = 8; B,D,F; black symbols show
mean values), including individual data of female (light gray) and male participants (dark gray) in both groups. *Significant difference between groups (i.e., intercept;
p < 0.05); #significant change over time (i.e., slope; p < 0.05). Note that differences between groups were not tested for MVC and stiffness. The data shows greater
fluctuations of muscle strength in the athletes and, as a result of an imbalanced adaptation of muscle and tendon, both greater average tendon strain during maximum
contractions as well as greater fluctuations of strain over time (Mersmann et al., 2016, with permission from American Physiological Society).
be a critical phase in that context due to the associated
increase
of
sex
hormones.
However,
the
interplay
of
mechanical loading and changes of the hormonal milieu on
muscle and tendon plasticity in general, and with regard to
adolescence in particular, is still largely unknown. Similarly,
though recent evidence demonstrated that an imbalanced
musculotendinous adaptation can occur during adolescence
(Mersmann et al., 2014, 2016, 2017a,b), it is yet unclear how
the likelihood of an imbalanced adaptation develops as a
function of maturation and how it relates to specific types of
loading.
IMPLICATIONS AND CONCEPTS FOR
PREVENTION
It has been described above that muscle and tendon properties
might not develop homogeneously during a training process.
The
following
chapter
provides
an
overview
about
the
potential implications for the risk of tendon injury based
on experimental and epidemiological observations. Finally, we
give recommendations for the design of preventive interventions
and critically discuss the current lack of knowledge with regard
to the efficacy and timing of such preventive measures.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Potential Implications for the Risk of
Tendinopathy
Experimental Observations
An imbalanced adaptation of muscle and tendon—when the
development of the force generating capacity of a muscle
is not paralleled by an adequate change of the properties
of the associated tendon—increases the mechanical demand
placed upon the tendon at a given activation of the muscle
and, therefore, might impose a challenge for the integrity
of the tendinous tissue (especially during maximum efforts).
Though tendinopathy has certainly a multifactorial etiology,
the mechanical strain theory is currently considered the most
probable injury mechanism and attributes the histological,
molecular and functional changes of the affected tissue to
mechanical overload (Archambault et al., 1995; Fredberg and
Stengaard-Pedersen, 2008; Magnusson et al., 2010; Legerlotz,
2013). There is convincing evidence that repetitive loading
of tendon tissue at high strain magnitudes (Butler et al.,
1978; Lavagnino et al., 2006; Legerlotz et al., 2013) leads to
cumulative damage in the extracellular matrix by successive
collagen denaturation and fibril tears (Woo, 1982; Veres et al.,
2013). The subsequent load redistribution among intact fibrils
probably increases the risk of damage upon further loading cycles
(Neviaser et al., 2012) and might explain the associated decrease
of stiffness and ultimate stress (Schechtman and Bader, 2002;
Fung et al., 2009, 2010; Legerlotz et al., 2013). The manifestation
of tendinopathy is commonly ascribed to the progression of
cumulative microtrauma to higher structural levels of the tissue
and successive matrix breakdown (Kannus, 1997; Cook and
Purdam, 2009). The degenerative cascade might also be related
to the discontinued mechanotransduction of ruptured fibrils
(Knörzer et al., 1986) and the associated catabolic responses of
under-stimulated fibroblasts (Arnoczky et al., 2007). As both
scenarios (i.e., mechanical over- or understimulation) are based
on initial strain-induced damage, it seems plausible that an
imbalanced adaptation of muscle and tendon could increase
the risk of overload-induced tendinopathy. Wren et al. (2003)
performed static and cyclic loading experiments on human
Achilles tendons and demonstrated that the initial level of
strain induced by a given load was inversely correlated with
time or loading cycles until failure (Figure 3). This suggests
that if tendon strain increases during muscle contractions
due to an imbalanced musculotendinous adaptation, repetitive
loading could induce significant sub-rupture fatigue and trigger
pathological processes. Indeed, there are in vivo studies on
patients and athletes with tendinopathy, which report increased
levels of tendon strain during maximum voluntary contractions
(Arya and Kulig, 2010; Child et al., 2010). Though other
studies did not identify increased levels of strain—which
might be a methodological issue as pain reduces the level
of muscle activation (Hart et al., 2010; Palmieri-Smith et al.,
2013) and, thus, the tendon strain measured during voluntary
contraction—they found other indications of a mechanical
weakening of the tendon, like a decrease of stiffness (Helland
et al., 2013) or increase of tendon stress (Couppé et al.,
2013).
FIGURE 3 | Cyclic loading lifetime results of human oder AT specimen Achilles
tendons as a function of initial (peak) tendon strain during loading and
associated coefficients of determination (R2). These data demonstrate that the
tendon strain magnitude determines the challenge for the tissue integrity.
Greater tendon strain at a given load reduces the lifetime of the tendon during
cyclic loading (Wren et al., 2003, with permission from Springer).
Epidemiological Observations
The assumption that an imbalanced adaptation of the muscle-
tendon unit could contribute to the development of overuse
injuries with increasing risk during adolescence also finds
support from several epidemiological observations. First, it is
interesting to note that the probability of non-contact soft-
tissue injury rises when training loads are increased rapidly
(Gabbett, 2016). Though this increase clearly could also have
different origins, it still indicates that the differing time course
of muscle and tendon adaption (i.e., delayed tendon adaptation
compared to the increase of muscle strength) might potentially
be of clinical relevance. Second, the prevalence of tendinopathy
in both elite and recreational athletes is particularly high in
sports with predominantly plyometric loading (Lian et al.,
2005; Zwerver et al., 2011). In adolescent volleyball players,
it was found that jumping ability and the weekly hours of
volleyball training (and not strength training) increase the risk
of tendinopathy (Visnes et al., 2013). It seems that especially
the frequency of jumps during training and competition could
be a major determinant of the risk of tendon overload
(Bahr and Bahr, 2014). These observations could well be
related to the different responsiveness of muscle and tendon
to plyometric loading and increased risk of tendon fatigue
damage upon repetitive loading with high magnitude strains.
Third, a recent epidemiological meta-analysis on tendinopathy
in children and adolescents regularly participating in sports
indicated an increasing risk with age (Simpson et al., 2016),
which corresponds to the incidence of general soft-tissue
overuse injuries reported earlier (Stracciolini et al., 2014). These
findings underline the potential influence of maturation on the
balance of muscle and tendon adaptation and the necessity to
deepen our understanding of the interaction of maturation and
loading.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Summary
In summary, the pathogenesis and epidemiology of tendinopathy
provides a solid theoretical background for the hypothesis that
an imbalanced adaptation of muscle and tendon could have
consequences for the risk of tendon injury as (a) the resultant
increased mechanical demand is a candidate mechanism to
induce overload, (b) the prevalence of soft-tissue overuse
injuries is high at time-points in the training process (i.e.,
sudden increase of loading) and in sport disciplines that
favor the development of a muscle-tendon imbalance from a
mechanobiological point of view, and (c) maturation seems to be
a potential risk factor for the development of both tendinopathy
and musculotendinous imbalances in young athletes. There
certainly is a need to provide more direct support for an
association between imbalanced muscle and tendon adaptation
and overuse. Yet, it appears that the interaction of maturation
with mechanical loading could potentially increase the likelihood
of the occurrence of such imbalances, which in turn might be
related to the increasing risk of tendon overuse in adolescence.
However, these assumptions need to be supported by further
research.
Concepts for Prevention
Following the hypothesis that an imbalanced development of
muscle strength and tendon stiffness could increase the risk
for tendon overuse injury, it might be promising to target the
increase of tendon stiffness in groups at risk (e.g., athletes of jump
disciplines, adolescents commencing with resistance exercise).
The following chapter provides evidence-based suggestions for
an effective tendon training and comments on open issues.
The chapter concludes with a critical discussion of the current
evidence on the effects of preventive interventions outlines the
anticipated effects of an intervention-induced increase of tendon
stiffness on athletic performance.
Effective Tendon Training
Current evidence on human tendon adaptation in vivo (see
section Mechanotransduction in Tendon) suggests that both
contraction intensity and contraction duration need to exceed a
certain threshold to provide an efficient training stimulus. The
training intensity is considered to be optimal around 85–90%
of iMVC and the contraction duration around 3 s (Arampatzis
et al., 2010; Bohm et al., 2014, 2015; Wiesinger et al., 2015).
The contraction mode (i.e., isometric, concentric, eccentric) does
not seem to be relevant (Kjaer and Heinemeier, 2014; Bohm
et al., 2015), however, it needs to be considered that during
classic dynamic training (i.e., eccentric-concentric exercises) the
necessary high tendon forces occur only in specific ranges of
joint angles due to the change of gear ratios during movement
(e.g., between 60◦ and 100◦ of knee flexion in a parallel squat;
0◦ = full extension) (Flanagan et al., 2003; Peñailillo et al.,
2015). Therefore, it is recommendable to increase the movement
duration (e.g., to ∼6 s) when a large range of motion is used
during the exercise. Isometric training should be performed in
joint angles close to the optimum for force generation (i.e.,
∼60◦ knee flexion for patellar tendon training or ∼10◦ ankle
dorsiflexion and extended knee for the training the Achilles
tendon) and has the advantage that the training stimulus in
terms of intensity and duration can be controlled quite easily.
Moreover, it does not require the complex technical skills of
free weight training for a safe execution and can be performed
without expensive equipment (e.g., using non-elastic slings).
Figure 4 illustrates a training stimulus for increasing tendon
stiffness based on the most effective training protocol of a series
investigations that systematically modulated mechanical strain
parameters (Arampatzis et al., 2007, 2010; Bohm et al., 2014). We
suggest to apply the training protocol three times a week for at
least 12 weeks. These recommendations also correspond to the
conclusions of two recent meta-analyses on tendon adaptation
(Bohm et al., 2015; Wiesinger et al., 2015). Suggestions for
specific exercises are provided as Supplementary Material to this
review.
There are several important, but currently open issues
that need to be elucidated with regard to the stimulation
of tendon adaptation in general, its implementation in elite
athletic training as a preventive measure in particular and with
regard to its application in youth sports. There have been
experimental investigations systematically modulating strain
magnitude, rate, duration and frequency (Arampatzis et al., 2007,
2010; Kongsgaard et al., 2007; Bohm et al., 2014), however,
the effects of overall training volume, number of sessions per
week or rest between sets are basically unexplored thus far,
and meta-analyses are limited in their potential to improve
our understanding in this regard (Gentil et al., 2017) due to
the heterogeneity of intervention studies (Bohm et al., 2015).
In a recent study, Waugh et al. (2017) modulated inter-
cycle rest duration (i.e., 3 and 10 s) between two equivolume
isometric loading protocols. While the improvements of stiffness
and material properties were similar between protocols, some
potentially unfavorable structural changes were detected by
means of ultrasound tissue characterization (UTC) following the
short rest loading. It should be noted that it is still unclear if such
changes of UTC-parameters indicate overload and the overall
loading volume in the study by Waugh and colleagues was 2.5
times the volume of the program that we recommend based
on our experience. Nevertheless, these findings highlight the
necessity to deepen our understanding of tendon tissue recovery
FIGURE 4 | Evidence-based recommendations for an effective stimulus for
tendon adaptation. High intensity loading to the tendon (85–90% iMVC) should
be applied in five sets of four repetitions with a contraction and relaxation
duration of 3 s each, and an inter-set rest of 2 min. We suggest the training to
be applied three times a week for at least 12 weeks.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
during cyclic loading, especially with regard to injury prevention
and rehabilitation.
It is currently a matter of speculation when to implement the
preventive intervention during the course of athletic training,
if the training stimulus should be applied continuously or in
periods, and how a specific tendon training interferes with
training regimen that target other determinants of athletic
performance. Given the moderate overall loading volume of
the program recommended in this review, it seems realistic to
implement the tendon exercises without any major reductions of
other training contents. It can be considered that the program
increases muscle strength as well (Arampatzis et al., 2007, 2010)
and, therefore, could complement or replace some routines used
for muscle strength development. We are currently applying a
preventive tendon training in adolescent athletes to investigate
its efficacy. The overall duration of exercises implemented in
the regular training schedule that target the increase of tendon
stiffness is around 15 min. Considering this low time-effort and
the uncertainty if training at specific time-points during a season
would be equally effective, we are applying this intervention over
the whole season. Future research might help to further develop
this approach and investigate if scheduling tendon training in
advance of marked increases of loading that is assumed to
provide a more potent stimulus for muscle strength compared
to tendon stiffness development (i.e., plyometric loading or
fatiguing moderate intensity loading) yields similar results.
The recommendations given in this chapter are based on
our current knowledge on tendon adaptation, which is derived
from studies on adults. Though it is known that the tendons
of pre-pubertal children and adolescents are able to adapt
to mechanical loading (Waugh et al., 2014; Mersmann et al.,
2017b), dose-response relationships specific for the immature
tendinous system still need to be established in the future.
However, as we are convinced that the basic mechanisms of
mechanotransduction should not be profoundly different in
children and adults, we can argue that it is likely that the
characteristics of an effective stimulus for tendon adaptation (i.e.,
high strain magnitude and ∼3 s strain duration applied with
low frequency) is widely independent of age. Nevertheless, there
might be restrictions with regard to overall mechanical loading
and intensity control. The number of sets and repetitions could
then be used to adjust the overall training volume to the loading
capacity of the young athletes. Moreover, in age groups where
maximum strength testing is contraindicated, perceived exertion
scales can be used to estimate training intensity (Waugh et al.,
2014).
In conclusion, adult tendons, and likely immature tendons as
well, receive effective mechanical stimulation upon high strain
magnitude loading with an appropriate strain duration. Though
the role of recovery is widely unexplored, the recommendations
outlined above could have the potential to decrease the likelihood
of an imbalanced muscle and tendon development in a training
process. However, it needs to be stated clearly that specific
considerations for the implementation in athletic training
schedules of different sports and for the application in youth
athletes need to be elucidated in future research.
Potential Effects on Risk of Injury and Athletic
Performance
The prevention or reduction of musculotendinous imbalances
could, in our view, have beneficial effects on (a) the risk of
tendon injury and (b) athletic performance. A recent systematic
review on the effects of preventive interventions for tendinopathy
concluded that evidence for their efficacy is only limited (Peters
et al., 2016). However, the exercise interventions examined
were either not targeting the improvement of the mechanical
properties of the tendon (e.g., balance training, stretching) or
did not apply training stimuli that are in accordance with
the current view on the mechanobiological basis of human
tendon adaptation in vivo (e.g., Alfredson eccentric training or
Silbernagel’s combined concentric-eccentric exercise; Malliaras
et al., 2013a for a discussion). Conventional eccentric training
approaches, for example, are characterized by high training
volume but only moderate load intensity (i.e., body weight),
which might even increase discrepancies between muscle
strength and tendon stiffness (Arampatzis et al., 2007, 2010).
Though conventional eccentric training is associated with pain
relief in patients with tendinopathy, its application as a preventive
measure can also increase injury risk of tendons that already
feature structural abnormalities (Fredberg et al., 2008). A load-
based intervention with scientific evidence supporting its efficacy
on promoting tendon stiffness is likely to be a more effective
preventive strategy following the hypothesis that an imbalance
of muscle and tendon predispose for tendinopathy. An increase
of stiffness that parallels the increase of the force generating
capacity of the neuromuscular system would serve as a protective
mechanism against increased strain during maximum muscle
contractions. Moreover, if the increase of stiffness is governed
by radial hypertrophy upon long-term training, this would also
reduce tendon stress.
Aside from the potentially beneficial effects for the health of
young athletes, tendon stiffness and the interaction of muscle
and tendon during movement are important contributors to
movement performance. For example, increased tendon stiffness
is associated with a lower electromechanical delay, a greater rate
of force development and jump height (Bojsen-Møller et al., 2005;
Waugh et al., 2013). Certainly, the elasticity of the tendon and
the associated storage and release of mechanical strain energy are
important contributors to sportive performance as well (Roberts,
1997; Kawakami et al., 2002). Greater elongation at a given
force allows more energy to be stored in the tendon and has
been positively associated, for example, with sprint performance
(Stafilidis and Arampatzis, 2007; Kubo et al., 2011). However,
a greater muscle force output combined with higher tendon
stiffness increases the potential exchange of mechanical energy
between muscle and tendon as well (Wu et al., 2010). Moreover, if
the force production during a movement task increases due to an
increase of the muscular capacity, an increase of stiffness of the
series elastic elements is necessary to maintain fascicle kinetics
within an optimal working range (Lichtwark and Wilson, 2007).
For example, it has been recently shown that vastus lateralis
fascicles operate around optimum length and close to optimum
velocity for power production (Nikolaidou et al., 2017) during
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
vertical jumping. A change of the balance of muscle strength
and series elastic stiffness could lead to a distortion of the
musculotendinous interaction and in turn increase the demand
for neuromuscular control (i.e., due to a change of fascicle
kinetics), which could reduce the extent to which the increased
muscular capacity can be exploited. Therefore, it is likely that
a facilitation of tendon stiffness in line with muscle strength
would lead to greater improvements of movement performance
as opposed to a sole increase of muscle strength.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
Current scientific evidence strongly supports the idea that the
development of muscle strength during a training process is not
necessarily accompanied by an adequate modulation of tendon
stiffness. The differences in the time course of adaptation and
in the mechanical stimuli that trigger adaptive processes provide
two mechanisms that can account for a dissociation of the
muscular and tendinous development. Though the additional
influence of maturation is still a heavily under-investigated
topic, it is likely that an imbalanced development of muscle
strength and tendon stiffness is a relevant issue for youth
sports and it seems that the risk might even be increased
compared to adults. Adolescence, with its associated somatic
and endocrine processes, could be a critical phase in that
regard. Due to the mechanical loading profile, musculotendinous
imbalances especially concern athletes from jump disciplines
and the high prevalence of tendinopathy in those sports as
well as the increasing incidence during adolescence support
the hypothesis that imbalances of muscle strength and tendon
stiffness could have implications for the health of young athletes.
The implementation of interventions targeting the improvement
of tendon mechanical properties could be a promising approach
to prevent such imbalances, promote athletic performance and
reduce the risk of tendon injury. However, there is still a
clear lack of information on the time course of changes of
the musculotendinous system during premature development
and the interaction of maturation and mechanical loading. The
effects of changing sex hormone levels on tendon properties
and plasticity is also widely unknown. Similarly, the association
of musculotendinous imbalances with tendon overuse injury
as well as the preventive value of interventions that promote
the development of tendon mechanical properties has not been
established thus far. The effects of recovery for tendon adaptation
in general are largely unexplored and a future challenge with
regard to the application of preventive tendon training in
youth sports is the determination of age-specific dose-response
relationships and the implementation in the training schedule
in elite sports. The increasing prevalence of tendinopathy in
athletic adolescents certainly calls for further research on these
issues.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors substantially contributed to the interpretation
of the literature addressed in this review. FM drafted and
finalized the manuscript. SB and AA made important intellectual
contributions in revision of all sections of the manuscript.
AA supervised the preparation of the manuscript. All authors
approved the final version of the manuscript and agree to be
accountable for the content of the work.
FUNDING
This review was conducted within the scope of the research
project “Resistance Training in Youth Athletes” (http://www.
uni-potsdam.de/kraftprojekt/english.php) that was funded by
the German Federal Institute of Sport Science (ZMVI1-0819
0114-18).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.
2017.00987/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Aagaard, P., Andersen, J. L., Dyhre-Poulsen, P., Leffers, A. M., Wagner,
A.,
Magnusson,
S.
P.,
et
al.
(2001).
A
mechanism
for
increased
contractile strength of human pennate muscle in response to strength
training:
changes
in
muscle
architecture.
J.
Physiol.
534,
613–623.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.t01-1-00613.x
Abrahams, M. (1967). Mechanical behaviour of tendon in vitro. a preliminary
report. Med. Biol. Eng. 5, 433–443. doi: 10.1007/BF02479137
Abrahamsson, S. O., Lundborg, G., and Lohmander, L. S. (1991). Recombinant
human insulin-like growth factor-I stimulates in vitro matrix synthesis
and cell proliferation in rabbit flexor tendon. J. Orthop. Res. 9, 495–502.
doi: 10.1002/jor.1100090405
Aherne, W., Ayyar, D. R., Clarke, P. A., and Walton, J. N. (1971). Muscle fibre size
in normal infants, children and adolescents. An autopsy study. J. Neurol. Sci.
14, 171–182. doi: 10.1016/0022-510X(71)90085-2
Alexander, R., and Vernon, A. (1975). The dimensions of knee and ankle muscles
and the forces they exert. J. Hum. Mov. Stud. 1, 115–123.
Allen, D. L., Roy, R. R., and Edgerton, V. R. (1999). Myonuclear domains
in
muscle
adaptation
and
disease.
Muscle
Nerve
22,
1350–1360.
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4598(199910)22:10<1350::AID-MUS3>3.0.CO;2-8
Anderson, J. E. (2000). A role for nitric oxide in muscle repair: nitric oxide-
mediated activation of muscle satellite cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 11, 1859–1874.
doi: 10.1091/mbc.11.5.1859
Ansorge, H. L., Adams, S., Birk, D. E., and Soslowsky, L. J. (2011). Mechanical,
compositional, and structural properties of the post-natal mouse Achilles
tendon. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 39, 1904–1913. doi: 10.1007/s10439-011-0299-0
Arampatzis, A., Karamanidis, K., and Albracht, K. (2007). Adaptational responses
of the human Achilles tendon by modulation of the applied cyclic strain
magnitude. J. Exp. Biol. 210, 2743–2753. doi: 10.1242/jeb.003814
Arampatzis, A., Peper, A., Bierbaum, S., and Albracht, K. (2010). Plasticity of
human Achilles tendon mechanical and morphological properties in response
to cyclic strain. J. Biomech. 43, 3073–3079. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.08.014
Archambault, J. M., Wiley, J. P., and Bray, R. C. (1995). Exercise loading of tendons
and the development of overuse injuries. A review of current literature. Sports
Med. 20, 77–89. doi: 10.2165/00007256-199520020-00003
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Arnoczky, S. P., Lavagnino, M., and Egerbacher, M. (2007). The mechanobiological
aetiopathogenesis
of
tendinopathy:
is
it
the
over-stimulation
or
the
under-stimulation of tendon cells? Int. J. Exp. Pathol. 88, 217–226.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2613.2007.00548.x
Arnoczky, S. P., Lavagnino, M., Whallon, J. H., and Hoonjan, A. (2002). In
situ cell nucleus deformation in tendons under tensile load; a morphological
analysis using confocal laser microscopy. J. Orthop. Res. 20, 29–35.
doi: 10.1016/S0736-0266(01)00080-8
Arnoczky, S. P., Tian, T., Lavagnino, M., and Gardner, K. (2004). Ex vivo static
tensile loading inhibits MMP-1 expression in rat tail tendon cells through
a cytoskeletally based mechanotransduction mechanism. J. Orthop. Res. 22,
328–333. doi: 10.1016/S0736-0266(03)00185-2
Arya, S., and Kulig, K. (2010). Tendinopathy alters mechanical and material
properties
of
the
Achilles
tendon.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
108,
670–675.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00259.2009
Bahr, M. A., and Bahr, R. (2014). Jump frequency may contribute to risk of jumper’s
knee: a study of interindividual and sex differences in a total of 11,943 jumps
video recorded during training and matches in young elite volleyball players.
Br. J. Sports Med. 48, 1322–1326. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2014-093593
Barton-Davis, E. R., Shoturma, D. I., and Sweeney, H. L. (1999). Contribution of
satellite cells to IGF-I induced hypertrophy of skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol.
Scand. 167, 301–305. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-201x.1999.00618.x
Bénard, M. R., Harlaar, J., Becher, J. G., Huijing, P. A., and Jaspers, R.
T. (2011). Effects of growth on geometry of gastrocnemius muscle in
children: a three-dimensional ultrasound analysis. J. Anat. 219, 388–402.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01402.x
Berardi, A. C., Oliva, F., Berardocco, M., la Rovere, M., Accorsi, P., and Maffulli, N.
(2014). Thyroid hormones increase collagen I and cartilage oligomeric matrix
protein (COMP) expression in vitro human tenocytes. Muscles Ligaments
Tendons J. 4, 285–291. doi: 10.11138/mltj/2014.4.3.285
Bi, Y., Ehirchiou, D., Kilts, T. M., Inkson, C. A., Embree, M. C., Sonoyama,
W., et al. (2007). Identification of tendon stem/progenitor cells and the
role of the extracellular matrix in their niche. Nat. Med. 13, 1219–1227.
doi: 10.1038/nm1630
Biolo, G., Maggi, S. P., Williams, B. D., Tipton, K. D., and Wolfe, R. R. (1995).
Increased rates of muscle protein turnover and amino acid transport after
resistance exercise in humans. Am. J. Physiol. 268, E514–E520.
Blazevich, A. J., Cannavan, D., Coleman, D. R., and Horne, S. (2007).
Influence of concentric and eccentric resistance training on architectural
adaptation in human quadriceps muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. 103, 1565–1575.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00578.2007
Bohm, S., Mersmann, F., and Arampatzis, A. (2015). Human tendon adaptation
in response to mechanical loading: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of exercise intervention studies on healthy adults. Sports Med. Open 1:7.
doi: 10.1186/s40798-015-0009-9
Bohm, S., Mersmann, F., Tettke, M., Kraft, M., and Arampatzis, A. (2014). Human
Achilles tendon plasticity in response to cyclic strain: effect of rate and duration.
J. Exp. Biol. 217, 4010–4017. doi: 10.1242/jeb.112268
Bojsen-Møller, J., Magnusson, S. P., Rasmussen, L. R., Kjaer, M., and Aagaard,
P. (2005). Muscle performance during maximal isometric and dynamic
contractions is influenced by the stiffness of the tendinous structures. J. Appl.
Physiol. 99, 986–994. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01305.2004
Bottinelli, R. (2001). Functional heterogeneity of mammalian single muscle
fibres: do myosin isoforms tell the whole story? Pflugers Arch. 443, 6–17.
doi: 10.1007/s004240100700
Bowden, D. H., and Goyer, R. A. (1960). The size of muscle fibers in infants and
children. Arch. Pathol. 69, 188–189.
Burgess, K. E., Connick, M. J., Graham-Smith, P., and Pearson, S. J. (2007).
Plyometric vs. isometric training influences on tendon properties and muscle
output. J. Strength Cond. Res. 21, 986–985. doi: 10.1519/R-20235.1
Butler, D. L., Grood, E. S., Noyes, F. R., and Zernicke, R. F. (1978). Biomechanics
of ligaments and tendons. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 6, 125–181.
Butterfield, T. A., Leonard, T. R., and Herzog, W. (2005). Differential
serial
sarcomere
number
adaptations
in
knee
extensor
muscles
of
rats is contraction type dependent. J. Appl. Physiol. 99, 1352–1358.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00481.2005
Campos, G. E., Luecke, T. J., Wendeln, H. K., Toma, K., Hagerman, F. C.,
Murray, T. F., et al. (2002). Muscular adaptations in response to three different
resistance-training regimens: specificity of repetition maximum training zones.
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 88, 50–60. doi: 10.1007/s00421-002-0681-6
Carroll, C. C., Dickinson, J. M., LeMoine, J. K., Haus, J. M., Weinheimer, E. M.,
Hollon, C. J., et al. (2011). Influence of acetaminophen and ibuprofen on in
vivo patellar tendon adaptations to knee extensor resistance exercise in older
adults. J. Appl. Physiol. 111, 508–515. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01348.2010
Cheek, D. B., Holt, A. B., Hill, D. E., and Talbert, J. L. (1971). Skeletal muscle cell
mass and growth: the concept of the deoxyribonucleic acid unit. Pediatr. Res. 5,
312–328. doi: 10.1203/00006450-197107000-00004
Child,
S.,
Bryant,
A.
L.,
Clark,
R.
A.,
and
Crossley,
K.
M.
(2010).
Mechanical properties of the achilles tendon aponeurosis are altered in
athletes with achilles tendinopathy. Am. J. Sports Med. 38, 1885–1893.
doi: 10.1177/0363546510366234
Chiquet,
M.
(1999).
Regulation
of
extracellular
matrix
gene
expression
by
mechanical
stress.
Matrix
Biol.
18,
417–426.
doi: 10.1016/S0945-053X(99)00039-6
Choy, V. E., Kyparos, A., Vailas, A. C., Crenshaw, T. D., and Martinez, D. A. (2005).
The biphasic response of porcine tendon to recombinant porcine growth
hormone. Growth Horm. IGF Res. 15, 39–46. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2004.11.003
Cook, J. L., and Purdam, C. R. (2009). Is tendon pathology a continuum?
A pathology model to explain the clinical presentation of load-induced
tendinopathy. Br. J. Sports Med. 43, 409–416. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2008.051193
Couppé, C., Kongsgaard, M., Aagaard, P., Hansen, P., Bojsen-Moller, J., Kjaer, M.,
et al. (2008). Habitual loading results in tendon hypertrophy and increased
stiffness of the human patellar tendon. J. Appl. Physiol. 105, 805–810.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.90361.2008
Couppé, C., Kongsgaard, M., Aagaard, P., Vinther, A., Boesen, M., Kjaer, M.,
et al. (2013). Differences in tendon properties in elite badminton players
with or without patellar tendinopathy. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor. 23, e89–e95.
doi: 10.1111/sms.12023
D’Antona, G., Lanfranconi, F., Pellegrino, M. A., Brocca, L., Adami, R., Rossi,
R., et al. (2006). Skeletal muscle hypertrophy and structure and function
of skeletal muscle fibres in male body builders. J. Physiol. 570, 611–627.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.101642
DeFreitas, J. M., Beck, T. W., Stock, M. S., Dillon, M. A., and Kasishke,
P. R. (2011). An examination of the time course of training-induced
skeletal
muscle
hypertrophy.
Eur.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
111,
2785–2790.
doi: 10.1007/s00421-011-1905-4
Doessing, S., Heinemeier, K. M., Holm, L., Mackey, A. L., Schjerling, P., Rennie,
M., et al. (2010). Growth hormone stimulates the collagen synthesis in human
tendon and skeletal muscle without affecting myofibrillar protein synthesis. J.
Physiol. 588, 341–351. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.179325
Dotan, R., Mitchell, C., Cohen, R., Klentrou, P., Gabriel, D., and Falk, B. (2012).
Child-adult differences in muscle activation–a review. Pediatr. Exerc. Sci. 24,
2–21. doi: 10.1123/pes.24.1.2
Duclay, J., Martin, A., Duclay, A., Cometti, G., and Pousson, M. (2009).
Behavior of fascicles and the myotendinous junction of human medial
gastrocnemius following eccentric strength training. Muscle Nerve 39, 819–827.
doi: 10.1002/mus.21297
Erskine, R. M., Jones, D. A., Williams, A. G., Stewart, C. E., and Degens, H.
(2010). Resistance training increases in vivo quadriceps femoris muscle specific
tension in young men. Acta Physiol. 199, 83–89. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2010.
02085.x
Farup, J., Kjølhede, T., Sørensen, H., Dalgas, U., Møller, A. B., Vestergaard,
P. F., et al. (2012). Muscle morphological and strength adaptations to
endurance vs. resistance training. J. Strength Cond. Res. 26, 398–407.
doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e318225a26f
Flanagan, S., Salem, G. J., Wang, M.Y., Sanker, S. E., and Greendale, G. A. (2003).
Squatting exercises in older adults: kinematic and kinetic comparisons. Med.
Sci. Sport. Exer. 35, 635–643. doi: 10.1249/01.MSS.0000058364.47973.06
Folland, J. P., and Williams, A. G. (2007). The adaptations to strength training:
morphological and neurological contributions to increased strength. Sports
Med. 37, 145–168. doi: 10.2165/00007256-200737020-00004
Fouré, A., Nordez, A., and Cornu, C. (2010). Effects of plyometric training
on plantar flexor mechanical properties. Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed.
Engin. 13, 57–59. doi: 10.1080/10255842.2010.493723
Fouré, A., Nordez, A., Guette, M., and Cornu, C. (2009). Effects of plyometric
training on passive stiffness of gastrocnemii and the musculo-articular
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
complex of the ankle joint. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor. 19, 811–818.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2008.00853.x
Franchi, M. V., Atherton, P. J., Reeves, N. D., Flück, M., Williams, J., Mitchell,
W. K., et al. (2014). Architectural, functional and molecular responses to
concentric and eccentric loading in human skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol. 210,
642–654. doi: 10.1111/apha.12225
Fredberg, U., Bolvig, L., and Andersen, N. T. (2008). Prophylactic training in
asymptomatic soccer players with ultrasonographic abnormalities in Achilles
and patellar tendons: the Danish super league study. Am. J. Sports Med. 36,
451–460. doi: 10.1177/0363546507310073
Fredberg,
U.,
and
Stengaard-Pedersen,
K. (2008). Chronic
tendinopathy
tissue
pathology,
pain
mechanisms,
and
etiology
with
a
special
focus
on
inflammation.
Scand.
J.
Med.
Sci.
Spor.
18,
3–15.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2007.00746.x
Fung, D. T., Wang, V. M., Andarawis-Puri, N., Basta-Pljakic, J., Li, Y.,
Laudier, D. M., et al. (2010). Early response to tendon fatigue damage
accumulation
in
a
novel
in
vivo
model.
J.
Biomech.
43,
274–279.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.08.039
Fung, D. T., Wang, V. M., Laudier, D. M., Shine, J. H., Basta-Pljakic, J., Jepsen, K.
J., et al. (2009). Subrupture tendon fatigue damage. J. Orthop. Res. 27, 264–273.
doi: 10.1002/jor.20722
Gabbett,
T.
J.
(2016). The
training—injury
prevention
paradox:
should
athletes be training smarter and harder? Br. J. Sports Med. 50, 273–280.
doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095788
Gentil, P., Arruda, A., Souza, D., Giessing, J., Paoli, A., Fisher, J., et al. (2017). Is
there any practical application of meta-analytical results in strength training?
Front. Physiol. 8:1. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00001
Goldberg, A. L., Etlinger, J. D., Goldspink, D. F., and Jablecki, C. (1975).
Mechanism of work-induced hypertrophy of skeletal muscle. Med. Sci. Sports
7, 185–198.
Goldspink, G. (1970). The proliferation of myofibrils during muscle fibre growth.
J. Cell. Sci. 6, 593–603.
Goldspink, G. (1985). Malleability of the motor system: a comparative approach. J.
Exp. Biol. 115, 375–391.
Gonzalez, A. M., Hoffman, J. R., Stout, J. R., Fukuda, D. H., and Willoughby, D.
S. (2016). Intramuscular anabolic signaling and endocrine response following
resistance exercise: implications for muscle hypertrophy. Sports Med. 46,
671–685. doi: 10.1007/s40279-015-0450-4
Grohmann, M., Foulstone, E., Welsh, G., Holly, J., Shield, J., Crowne, E., et al.
(2005). Isolation and validation of human prepubertal skeletal muscle cells:
maturation and metabolic effects of IGF-I, IGFBP-3 and TNFalpha. J. Physiol.
568, 229–242. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.093906
Häkkinen, K., Kallinen, M., Izquierdo, M., Jokelainen, K., Lassila, H., Mälki,ä,
E., et al. (1998). Changes in agonist-antagonist EMG, muscle CSA, and force
during strength training in middle-aged and older people. J. Appl. Physiol. 84,
1341–1349.
Hansen, K. A., Weiss, J. A., and Barton, J. K. (2002). Recruitment of tendon crimp
with applied tensile strain. J. Biomech. Eng. 124, 72–77. doi: 10.1115/1.1427698
Hansen, M., and Kjaer, M. (2014). Influence of sex and estrogen on
musculotendinous protein turnover at rest and after exercise. Exerc. Sport Sci.
Rev. 42, 183–192. doi: 10.1249/JES.0000000000000026
Hansen, M., Kongsgaard, M., Holm, L., Skovgaard, D., Magnusson, S. P., Qvortrup,
K., et al. (2009). Effect of estrogen on tendon collagen synthesis, tendon
structural characteristics, and biomechanical properties in postmenopausal
women. J. Appl. Physiol. 106, 1385–1393. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.90935.2008
Hart, J. M., Pietrosimone, B., Hertel, J., and Ingersoll, C. D. (2010). Quadriceps
activation following knee injuries: a systematic review. J. Athl. Train. 45, 87–97.
doi: 10.4085/1062-6050-45.1.87
Haxton, H. A. (1944). Absolute muscle force in the ankle flexors of man. J. Physiol.
103, 267–273. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1944.sp004075
Heinemeier, K. M., and Kjaer, M. (2011). In vivo investigation of tendon responses
to mechanical loading. J. Musculoskelet. Neuronal Interact. 11, 115–123.
Heinemeier, K., Langberg, H., Olesen, J. L., and Kjaer, M. (2003). Role of TGF-
beta1 in relation to exercise-induced type I collagen synthesis in human
tendinous tissue. J. Appl. Physiol. 95, 2390–2397. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00
403.2003
Heinemeier, K. M., Bjerrum, S. S., Schjerling, P., and Kjaer, M. (2011). Expression
of extracellular matrix components and related growth factors in human
tendon and muscle after acute exercise. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor. 23, e150–e161.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2011.01414.x
Heinemeier, K. M., Olesen, J. L., Haddad, F., Langberg, H., Kjaer, M., Baldwin,
K. M., et al. (2007a). Expression of collagen and related growth factors in rat
tendon and skeletal muscle in response to specific contraction types. J. Physiol.
582, 1303–1316. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.127639
Heinemeier, K. M., Olesen, J. L., Schjerling, P., Haddad, F., Langberg, H.,
Baldwin, K. M., et al. (2007b). Short-term strength training and the
expression of myostatin and IGF-I isoforms in rat muscle and tendon:
differential effects of specific contraction types. J. Appl. Physiol. 102, 573–581.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00866.2006
Heinemeier, K. M., Schjerling, P., Heinemeier, J., Magnusson, S. P., and Kjaer, M.
(2013). Lack of tissue renewal in human adult Achilles tendon is revealed by
nuclear bomb (14)C. FASEB J. 27, 2074–2079. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-225599
Helland, C., Bojsen-Møller, J., Raastad, T., Seynnes, O. R., Moltubakk, M. M.,
Jakobsen, V., et al. (2013). Mechanical properties of the patellar tendon in elite
volleyball players with and without patellar tendinopathy. Br. J. Sports Med. 47,
862–868. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2013-092275
Hirayama, K., Iwanuma, S., Ikeda, N., Yoshikawa, A., Ema, R., and Kawakami, Y.
(2017). Plyometric training favors optimizing muscle-tendon behavior during
depth jumping. Front. Physiol. 8:16. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00016
Hornberger, T. A., Chu, W. K., Mak, Y. W., Hsiung, J. W., Huang, S. A., and Chien,
S. (2006). The role of phospholipase D and phosphatidic acid in the mechanical
activation of mTOR signaling in skeletal muscle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
103, 4741–4746. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0600678103
Houghton, L. A., Dawson, B. T., and Rubenson, J. (2013). Effects of plyometric
training on achilles tendon properties and shuttle running during a
simulated cricket batting innings. J. Strength Cond. Res. 27, 1036–1046.
doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e3182651e7a
Ingelmark, B. E. (1945). Über den bau der sehnen während verschiedener
altersperioden und unter verschiedenen funktionellen bedingungen. eine
untersuchung der distalen sehnen des musculus biceps brachii und musculus
semitendineus des menschen sowie der achillessehnen von kaninchen und
weissen mäusen. Uppsala Läk-Fören Förh. 50, 357–395.
Ingelmark, B. E. (1948). Der bau der sehnen während verschiedener altersperioden
und unter wechselnden funktionellen Bedingungen. Acta Anat. 6, 113–140.
doi: 10.1159/000140347
Inhofe, P. D., Grana, W. A., Egle, D., Min, K. W., and Tomasek, J.
(1995). The effects of anabolic steroids on rat tendon. An ultrastructural,
biomechanical, and biochemical analysis. Am. J. Sports Med. 23, 227–232.
doi: 10.1177/036354659502300217
Ippolito, E., Natali, P. G., Postacchini, F., Accinni, L., and De Martino, C.
(1980). Morphological, immunochemical, and biochemical study of rabbit
achilles tendon at various ages. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 62, 583–598.
doi: 10.2106/00004623-198062040-00014
Johnson, T. L., and Klueber, K. M. (1991). Skeletal muscle following tonic
overload: functional and structural analysis. Med. Sci. Sport. Exer. 23, 49–55.
doi: 10.1249/00005768-199101000-00009
Jones, E. R., Jones, G. C., Legerlotz, K., and Riley, G. P. (2013). Cyclical
strain modulates metalloprotease and matrix gene expression in human
tenocytes via activation of TGFβ. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1833, 2596–2607.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.06.019
Józsa, L. G., and Kannus, P. (1997). Human Tendons. Champaign, IL: Human
Kinetics Publishers.
Kameyama, T., and Etlinger, J. D. (1979). Calcium-dependent regulation
of protein synthesis and degradation in muscle. Nature 279, 344–346.
doi: 10.1038/279344a0
Kanehisa, H., Ikegawa, S., Tsunoda, N., and Fukunaga, T. (1995a). Strength and
cross-sectional areas of reciprocal muscle groups in the upper arm and thigh
during adolescence. Int. J. Sports Med. 16, 54–60. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-972964
Kanehisa, H., Yata, H., Ikegawa, S., and Fukunaga, T. (1995b). A cross-sectional
study of the size and strength of the lower leg muscles during growth. Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol. 72, 150–156. doi: 10.1007/BF00964130
Kannus,
P.
(1997).
Etiology
and
pathophysiology
of
chronic
tendon
disorders
in
sports.
Scand.
J.
Med.
Sci.
Spor.
7,
78–85.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.1997.tb00123.x
Kastelic, J., Palley, I., and Baer, E. (1980). A structural mechanical model for tendon
crimping. J. Biomech. 13, 887–893. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(80)90177-3
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Kawakami, Y., Abe, T., Kuno, S. Y., and Fukunaga, T. (1995). Training-induced
changes in muscle architecture and specific tension. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 72,
37–43. doi: 10.1007/BF00964112
Kawakami, Y., Muraoka, T., Ito, S., Kanehisa, H., and Fukunaga, T. (2002). In
vivo muscle fibre behaviour during counter-movement exercise in humans
reveals a significant role for tendon elasticity. J. Physiol. 540, 635–646.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2001.013459
Kim, K., Hong, S., and Kim, E. Y. (2016). Reference values of skeletal muscle
mass for Korean children and adolescents using data from the Korean national
health and nutrition examination survey 2009–2011. PLoS ONE 11:e0153383.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153383
Kjaer, M., and Heinemeier, K. M. (2014). Eccentric exercise: acute and chronic
effects on healthy and diseased tendons. J. Appl. Physiol. 116, 1435–1438.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01044.2013
Knörzer, E., Folkhard, W., Geercken, W., Boschert, C., Koch, M. H., Hilbert, B.,
et al. (1986). New aspects of the etiology of tendon rupture. An analysis of time-
resolved dynamic-mechanical measurements using synchrotron radiation.
Arch. Orthop. Trauma. Surg. 105, 113–120. doi: 10.1007/BF00455845
Kongsgaard, M., Aagaard, P., Kjaer, M., and Magnusson, S. P. (2005). Structural
Achilles tendon properties in athletes subjected to different exercise modes
and in Achilles tendon rupture patients. J. Appl. Physiol. 99, 1965–1971.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00384.2005
Kongsgaard, M., Kovanen, V., Aagaard, P., Doessing, S., Hansen, P., Laursen, A.
H., et al. (2009). Corticosteroid injections, eccentric decline squat training and
heavy slow resistance training in patellar tendinopathy. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor.
19, 790–802. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00949.x
Kongsgaard, M., Reitelseder, S., Pedersen, T. G., Holm, L., Aagaard, P.,
Kjaer, M., et al. (2007). Region specific patellar tendon hypertrophy
in humans following resistance training. Acta Physiol. 191, 111–121.
doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2007.01714.x
Kubo, K., Ikebukuro, T., Maki, A., Yata, H., and Tsunoda, N. (2012). Time
course of changes in the human Achilles tendon properties and metabolism
during training and detraining in vivo. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 112, 2679–2691.
doi: 10.1007/s00421-011-2248-x
Kubo, K., Ikebukuro, T., Yata, H., Tomita, M., and Okada, M. (2011).
Morphological and mechanical properties of muscle and tendon in highly
trained sprinters. J. Appl. Biomech. 27, 336–344. doi: 10.1123/jab.27.4.336
Kubo, K., Ikebukuro, T., Yata, H., Tsunoda, N., and Kanehisa, H. (2010a). Effects
of training on muscle and tendon in knee extensors and plantar flexors in vivo.
J. Appl. Biomech. 26, 316–323. doi: 10.1123/jab.26.3.316
Kubo, K., Ikebukuro, T., Yata, H., Tsunoda, N., and Kanehisa, H. (2010b).
Time
course
of
changes
in
muscle
and
tendon
properties
during
strength training and detraining. J. Strength Cond. Res. 24, 322–331.
doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181c865e2
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., and Fukunaga, T. (2002). Effects of resistance and
stretching training programmes on the viscoelastic properties of human tendon
structures in vivo. J. Physiol. 538, 219–226. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2001.012703
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., Ito, M., and Fukunaga, T. (2001a). Effects of isometric
training on the elasticity of human tendon structures in vivo. J. Appl. Physiol.
91, 26–32.
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., Kawakami, Y., and Fukanaga, T. (2001b). Growth changes
in the elastic properties of human tendon structures. Int. J. Sports Med. 22,
138–143. doi: 10.1055/s-2001-11337
Kubo, K., Morimoto, M., Komuro, T., Yata, H., Tsunoda, N., Kanehisa, H.,
et al. (2007). Effects of plyometric and weight training on muscle-tendon
complex and jump performance. Med. Sci. Sport. Exer. 39, 1801–1810.
doi: 10.1249/mss.0b013e31813e630a
Kubo, K., Teshima, T., Hirose, N., and Tsunoda, N. (2014). Growth changes in
morphological and mechanical properties of human patellar tendon in vivo. J.
Appl. Biomech. 30, 415–422. doi: 10.1123/jab.2013-0220
Kumar, V., Atherton, P., Smith, K., and Rennie, M. J. (2009). Human muscle
protein synthesis and breakdown during and after exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 106,
2026–2039. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.91481.2008
LaCroix, A. S., Duenwald-Kuehl, S. E., Lakes, R. S., and Vanderby, R. (2013).
Relationship between tendon stiffness and failure: a metaanalysis. J. Appl.
Physiol. 115, 43–51. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01449.2012
Laitinen, O. (1967). The metabolism of collagen and its hormonal control in the rat
with special emphasis on the interactions of collagen and calcium in the bones.
Acta Endocrinol. 56(Suppl. 120), 1–86.
Langberg, H., Rosendal, L., and Kjaer, M. (2001). Training-induced changes
in peritendinous type I collagen turnover determined by microdialysis
in
humans.
J.
Physiol.
534,
297–302.
doi:
10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.
00297.x
Langberg, H., Skovgaard, D., Petersen, L. J., Bulow, J., and Kjaer, M. (1999).
Type I collagen synthesis and degradation in peritendinous tissue after exercise
determined by microdialysis in humans. J. Physiol. 521(Pt 1), 299–306.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.00299.x
Lavagnino, M., Arnoczky, S. P., Egerbacher, M., Gardner, K. L., and Burns, M.
E. (2006). Isolated fibrillar damage in tendons stimulates local collagenase
mRNA expression and protein synthesis. J. Biomech. 39, 2355–2362.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.08.008
Lavagnino, M., Arnoczky, S. P., Kepich, E., Caballero, O., and Haut, R. C.
(2008). A finite element model predicts the mechanotransduction response of
tendon cells to cyclic tensile loading. Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 7, 405–416.
doi: 10.1007/s10237-007-0104-z
Lavagnino, M., Arnoczky, S. P., Tian, T., and Vaupel, Z. (2003). Effect of amplitude
and frequency of cyclic tensile strain on the inhibition of MMP-1 mRNA
expression in tendon cells: an in vitro study. Connect. Tissue Res. 44, 181–187.
doi: 10.1080/03008200390215881
Lavagnino, M., Wall, M. E., Little, D., Banes, A. J., Guilak, F., and Arnoczky, S.
P. (2015). Tendon mechanobiology: current knowledge and future research
opportunities. J. Orthop. Res. 33, 813–822. doi: 10.1002/jor.22871
Le Gall, F., Carling, C., Reilly, T., Vandewalle, H., Church, J., and Rochcongar,
P. (2006). Incidence of injuries in elite French youth soccer players: a 10-
season study. Am. J. Sports Med. 34, 928–938. doi: 10.1177/03635465052
83271
Legerlotz, K. (2013). Rehabilitation of tendopathies in human athletes. Comp.
Exerc. Physiol. 9, 153–160. doi: 10.3920/CEP13030
Legerlotz, K., Jones, G. C., Screen, H. R., and Riley, G. P. (2013). Cyclic
loading of tendon fascicles using a novel fatigue loading system increases
interleukin-6 expression by tenocytes. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 23, 31–37.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2011.01410.x
Lexell, J., Sjöström, M., Nordlund, A. S., and Taylor, C. C. (1992). Growth
and development of human muscle: a quantitative morphological study of
whole vastus lateralis from childhood to adult age. Muscle Nerve 15, 404–409.
doi: 10.1002/mus.880150323
Lian, O. B., Engebretsen, L., and Bahr, R. (2005). Prevalence of jumper’s knee
among elite athletes from different sports: a cross-sectional study. Am. J. Sports
Med. 33, 561–567. doi: 10.1177/0363546504270454
Lichtwark, G. A., and Wilson, A. M. (2007). Is Achilles tendon compliance
optimised for maximum muscle efficiency during locomotion? J. Biomech. 40,
1768–1775. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2006.07.025
Loitz, B. J., Zernicke, R. F., Vailas, A. C., Kody, M. H., and Meals, R. A. (1989).
Effects of short-term immobilization versus continuous passive motion on the
biomechanical and biochemical properties of the rabbit tendon. Clin. Orthop.
Relat. Res. 265–271.
Lundholm, K., Edström, S., Ekman, L., Karlberg, I., Walker, P., and Scherstén,
T. (1981). Protein degradation in human skeletal muscle tissue: the
effect of insulin, leucine, amino acids and ions. Clin. Sci. 60, 319–326.
doi: 10.1042/cs0600319
Lynn, R., and Morgan, D. L. (1994). Decline running produces more sarcomeres in
rat vastus intermedius muscle fibers than does incline running. J. Appl. Physiol.
77, 1439–1444.
Magnusson, S. P., and Kjaer, M. (2003). Region-specific differences in Achilles
tendon cross-sectional area in runners and non-runners. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.
90, 549–553. doi: 10.1007/s00421-003-0865-8
Magnusson, S. P., Langberg, H., and Kjaer, M. (2010). The pathogenesis of
tendinopathy: balancing the response to loading. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 6,
262–268. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.43
Magnusson, S. P., Narici, M. V., Maganaris, C. N., and Kjaer, M. (2007).
Human tendon behaviour and adaptation, in vivo. J. Physiol. 586, 71–81.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.139105
Malina, R. M., Bouchard, C., and Bar-Or, O. (2004). Growth, Maturation, and
Physical Activity. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Malliaras, P., Barton, C. J., Reeves, N. D., and Langberg, H. (2013a). Achilles
and patellar tendinopathy loading programmes: a systematic review comparing
clinical outcomes and identifying potential mechanisms for effectiveness. Sports
Med. 43, 267–286. doi: 10.1007/s40279-013-0019-z
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
15
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Malliaras, P., Kamal, B., Nowell, A., Farley, T., Dhamu, H., Simpson,
V.,
et
al.
(2013b).
Patellar
tendon
adaptation
in
relation
to
load-intensity
and
contraction
type.
J.
Biomech.
46,
1893–1899.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.04.022
Marqueti, R. C., Parizotto, N. A., Chriguer, R. S., Perez, S. E., and Selistre-
de-Araujo, H. S. (2006). Androgenic-anabolic steroids associated with
mechanical loading inhibit matrix metallopeptidase activity and affect the
remodeling of the Achilles tendon in rats. Am. J. Sports Med. 34, 1274–1280.
doi: 10.1177/0363546506286867
Marqueti, R. C., Prestes, J., Wang, C. C., Ramos, O. H., Perez, S. E. A., Nakagaki,
W. R., et al. (2011). Biomechanical responses of different rat tendons to
nandrolone decanoate and load exercise. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor. 21, e91–e99.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2010.01162.x
McCarthy, H. D., Samani-Radia, D., Jebb, S. A., and Prentice, A. M. (2014). Skeletal
muscle mass reference curves for children and adolescents. Pediatr. Obes. 9,
249–259. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00168.x
McDougall, J. D., Elder, G., Sale, D. G., and Moroz, J. R. (1980). Effects of strength
training and immobilization on human muscle fibers. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 43,
25–34. doi: 10.1007/BF00421352
McGlory,
C.,
Devries,
M.
C.,
and
Phillips,
S.
M.
(2017).
Skeletal
muscle and resistance exercise training; the role of protein synthesis
in
recovery
and
remodeling.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
122,
541–548.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00613.2016
Mersmann, F., Bohm, S., Schroll, A., Boeth, H., Duda, G., and Arampatzis,
A.
(2014).
Evidence
of
imbalanced
adaptation
between
muscle
and
tendon in adolescent athletes. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor. 24, E283–E289.
doi: 10.1111/sms.12166
Mersmann, F., Bohm, S., Schroll, A., Boeth, H., Duda, G. N., and Arampatzis, A.
(2017a). Muscle and tendon adaptation in adolescent athletes: a longitudinal
study. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor. 27, 75–82. doi: 10.1111/sms.12631
Mersmann,
F.,
Bohm,
S.,
Schroll,
A.,
Marzilger,
R.,
and
Arampatzis,
A.
(2016).
Athletic
training
affects
the
uniformity
of
muscle
and
tendon adaptation during adolescence. J. Appl. Physiol. 121, 893–899.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00493.2016
Mersmann, F., Charcharis, G., Bohm, S., and Arampatzis, A. (2017b). Muscle
and tendon adaptation in adolescence: elite volleyball athletes compared to
untrained boys and girls. Front. Physiol. 8:417. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00417
Miller, B. F., Hansen, M., Olesen, J. L., Schwarz, P., Babraj, J. A., Smith, K., et al.
(2007). Tendon collagen synthesis at rest and after exercise in women. J. Appl.
Physiol. 102, 541–546. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00797.2006
Miller, B. F., Olesen, J. L., Hansen, M., Døssing, S., Crameri, R. M., Welling, R.
J., et al. (2005). Coordinated collagen and muscle protein synthesis in human
patella tendon and quadriceps muscle after exercise. J. Physiol. 567, 1021–1033.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.093690
Miller, K. S., Connizzo, B. K., and Soslowsky, L. J. (2012). Collagen fiber re-
alignment in a neonatal developmental mouse supraspinatus tendon model.
Ann. Biomed. Eng. 40, 1102–1110. doi: 10.1007/s10439-011-0490-3
Mitchell, C. J., Churchward-Venne, T. A., West, D. W. D., Burd, N. A., Breen,
L., Baker, S. K., et al. (2012). Resistance exercise load does not determine
training-mediated hypertrophic gains in young men. J. Appl. Physiol. 113,
71–77. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00307.2012
Morse, C. I., Tolfrey, K., Thom, J. M., Vassilopoulos, V., Maganaris, C. N., and
Narici, M. V. (2008). Gastrocnemius muscle specific force in boys and men. J.
Appl. Physiol. 104, 469–474. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00697.2007
Moss, B. M., Refsnes, P. E., Abildgaard, A., Nicolaysen, K., and Jensen, J. (1997).
Effects of maximal effort strength training with different loads on dynamic
strength, cross-sectional area, load-power and load-velocity relationships. Eur.
J. Appl. Physiol. 75, 193–199. doi: 10.1007/s004210050147
Murray, P. G., and Clayton, P. E. (2013). Endocrine control of growth. Am. J. Med.
Genet. C Semin. Med. Genet. 163C, 76–85. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31357
Neu, C. M., Rauch, F., Rittweger, J., Manz, F., and Schoenau, E. (2002). Influence
of puberty on muscle development at the forearm. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metab. 283, E103–E107. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00445.2001
Neugebauer, J. M., and Hawkins, D. A. (2012). Identifying factors related
to Achilles tendon stress, strain, and stiffness before and after 6 months
of growth in youth 10-14 years of age. J. Biomech. 45, 2457–2461.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2012.06.027
Neviaser, A., Andarawis-Puri, N., and Flatow, E. (2012). Basic mechanisms
of
tendon
fatigue
damage.
J.
Shoulder
Elbow
Surg.
21,
158–163.
doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2011.11.014
Nielsen, R. H., Clausen, N. M., Schjerling, P., Larsen, J. O., Martinussen, T., List,
E. O., et al. (2014). Chronic alterations in growth hormone/insulin-like growth
factor-I signaling lead to changes in mouse tendon structure. Matrix Biol. 34,
96–104. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.09.005
Nigg, B. M., and Herzog, W. (2007). Biomechanics of the Musculo-Skeletal System,
3rd Edn. Chichester: Wiley.
Nikolaidou, M. E., Marzilger, R., Bohm, S., Mersmann, F., and Arampatzis, A.
(2017). Operating length and velocity of human M. vastus lateralis fascicles
during vertical jumping. R. Soc. Open Sci. 4:170185. doi: 10.1098/rsos.170185
O’Brien, T. D., Reeves, N. D., Baltzopoulos, V., Jones, D. A., and Maganaris, C. N.
(2009). Moment arms of the knee extensor mechanism in children and adults.
J. Anat. 215, 198–205. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2009.01088.x
O’Brien, T. D., Reeves, N. D., Baltzopoulos, V., Jones, D. A., and Maganaris, C. N.
(2010a). In vivo measurements of muscle specific tension in adults and children.
Exp. Physiol. 95, 202–210. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2009.048967
O’Brien, T. D., Reeves, N. D., Baltzopoulos, V., Jones, D. A., and Maganaris, C. N.
(2010b). Mechanical properties of the patellar tendon in adults and children. J.
Biomech. 43, 1190–1195. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.11.028
O’Brien, T. D., Reeves, N. D., Baltzopoulos, V., Jones, D. A., and Maganaris, C.
N. (2010c). Muscle-tendon structure and dimensions in adults and children. J.
Anat. 216, 631–642. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2010.01218.x
Oertel, G. (1988). Morphometric analysis of normal skeletal muscles in infancy,
childhood and adolescence. An autopsy study. J. Neurol. Sci. 88, 303–313.
doi: 10.1016/0022-510X(88)90227-4
Olesen, J. L., Heinemeier, K. M., Haddad, F., Langberg, H., Flyvbjerg, A., Kjaer,
M., et al. (2006). Expression of insulin-like growth factor I, insulin-like growth
factor binding proteins, and collagen mRNA in mechanically loaded plantaris
tendon. J. Appl. Physiol. 101, 183–188. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00636.2005
Oliva, F., Berardi, A. C., Misiti, S., Verga Falzacappa, C., Falzacappa, C. V., Iacone,
A., et al. (2013). Thyroid hormones enhance growth and counteract apoptosis
in human tenocytes isolated from rotator cuff tendons. Cell Death Dis. 4:e705.
doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.229
Ozaki, H., Loenneke, J. P., Buckner, S. L., and Abe, T. (2016). Muscle growth across
a variety of exercise modalities and intensities: contributions of mechanical and
metabolic stimuli. Med. Hypotheses 88, 22–26. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.12.026
Palmieri-Smith, R. M., Villwock, M., Downie, B., Hecht, G., and Zernicke, R.
(2013). Pain and effusion and quadriceps activation and strength. J. Athl. Train.
48, 186–191. doi: 10.4085/1062-6050-48.2.10
Pansarasa, O., Rinaldi, C., Parente, V., Miotti, D., Capodaglio, P., and Bottinelli,
R. (2009). Resistance training of long duration modulates force and unloaded
shortening velocity of single muscle fibres of young women. J. Electromyogr.
Kinesiol. 19, e290–e300. doi: 10.1016/j.jelekin.2008.07.007
Pärssinen, M., Karila, T., Kovanen, V., and Seppälä, T. (2000). The effect
of supraphysiological doses of anabolic androgenic steroids on collagen
metabolism. Int. J. Sports Med. 21, 406–411. doi: 10.1055/s-2000-3834
Peacock, E. E. (1959). A study of the circulation in normal tendons and healing
grafts. Ann. Surg. 149, 415–428. doi: 10.1097/00000658-195903000-00011
Peñailillo, L., Blazevich, A. J., and Nosaka, K. (2015). Muscle fascicle behavior
during eccentric cycling and its relation to muscle soreness. Med. Sci. Sport.
Exer. 47, 708–717. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000473
Perrone, C. E., Fenwick-Smith, D., and Vandenburgh, H. H. (1995). Collagen
and stretch modulate autocrine secretion of insulin-like growth factor-1 and
insulin-like growth factor binding proteins from differentiated skeletal muscle
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 2099–2106. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.5.2099
Peters, J. A., Zwerver, J., Diercks, R. L., Elferink-Gemser, M. T., and van den Akker-
Scheek, I. (2016). Preventive interventions for tendinopathy: a systematic
review. J. Sci. Med. Sport 19, 205–211. doi: 10.1016/j.jsams.2015.03.008
Phillips, S. M., Tipton, K. D., Aarsland, A., Wolf, S. E., and Wolfe, R. R. (1997).
Mixed muscle protein synthesis and breakdown after resistance exercise in
humans. Am. J. Physiol. 273, E99–E107.
Potier, T. G., Alexander, C. M., and Seynnes, O. R. (2009). Effects of eccentric
strength training on biceps femoris muscle architecture and knee joint range
of movement. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 105, 939–944. doi: 10.1007/s00421-008-
0980-7
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
16
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Reeves, N. D., Maganaris, C. N., Longo, S., and Narici, M. V. (2009).
Differential adaptations to eccentric versus conventional resistance training
in older humans. Exp. Physiol. 94, 825–833. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2009.
046599
Rennie, M. J., Edwards, R. H., Halliday, D., Matthews, D. E., Wolman, S. L., and
Millward, D. J. (1982). Muscle protein synthesis measured by stable isotope
techniques in man: the effects of feeding and fasting. Clin. Sci. 63, 519–523.
doi: 10.1042/cs0630519
Roberts, T. J. (1997). Muscular force in running Turkeys: the economy of
minimizing work. Science 275, 1113–1115. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5303.1113
Rooney,
K.
J.,
Herbert,
R.
D.,
and
Balnave,
R.
J.
(1994).
Fatigue
contributes to the strength training stimulus. Med. Sci. Sport. Exer. 26,
1160–1164.
Rosager, S., Aagaard, P., Dyhre-Poulsen, P., Neergaard, K., Kjaer, M., and
Magnusson, S. P. (2002). Load-displacement properties of the human triceps
surae aponeurosis and tendon in runners and non-runners. Scand. J. Med. Sci.
Spor. 12, 90–98. doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0838.2002.120205.x
Round, J. M., Jones, D. A., Honour, J. W., and Nevill, A. M. (1999). Hormonal
factors in the development of differences in strength between boys and
girls during adolescence: a longitudinal study. Ann. Hum. Biol. 26, 49–62.
doi: 10.1080/030144699282976
Sackin, H. (1995). Mechanosensitive channels. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 57, 333–353.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.ph.57.030195.002001
Sáez-Sáez de Villarreal, E., Requena, B., and Newton, R. U. (2010). Does plyometric
training improve strength performance? A meta-analysis. J. Sci. Med. Sport 13,
513–522. doi: 10.1016/j.jsams.2009.08.005
Schechtman, H., and Bader, D. L. (2002). Fatigue damage of human tendons. J.
Biomech. 35, 347–353. doi: 10.1016/S0021-9290(01)00177-4
Schoenfeld, B. J. (2013). Potential mechanisms for a role of metabolic stress
in hypertrophic adaptations to resistance training. Sports Med. 43, 179–194.
doi: 10.1007/s40279-013-0017-1
Schoenfeld, B. J., Peterson, M. D., Ogborn, D., Contreras, B., and Sonmez, G. T.
(2015). Effects of Low- vs. high-load resistance training on muscle strength
and hypertrophy in well-trained men. J. Strength Cond. Res. 29, 2954–2963.
doi: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000000958
Schoenfeld, B. J., Wilson, J. M., Lowery, R. P., and Krieger, J. W. (2016). Muscular
adaptations in low- versus high-load resistance training: a meta-analysis. Eur.
J. Sport Sci. 16, 1–10. doi: 10.1080/17461391.2014.989922
Schott, J., McCully, K., and Rutherford, O. M. (1995). The role of metabolites in
strength training. II. Short versus long isometric contractions. Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol. 71, 337–341. doi: 10.1007/BF00240414
Seynnes, O. R., de Boer, M., and Narici, M. V. (2007). Early skeletal
muscle hypertrophy and architectural changes in response to high-intensity
resistance training. J. Appl. Physiol. 102, 368–373. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.007
89.2006
Seynnes, O. R., Erskine, R. M., Maganaris, C. N., Longo, S., Simoneau, E.
M., Grosset, J. F., et al. (2009). Training-induced changes in structural
and mechanical properties of the patellar tendon are related to muscle
hypertrophy but not to strength gains. J. Appl. Physiol. 107, 523–530.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00213.2009
Seynnes, O. R., Kamandulis, S., Kairaitis, R., Helland, C., Campbell, E. L., Brazaitis,
M., et al. (2013). Effect of androgenic-anabolic steroids and heavy strength
training on patellar tendon morphological and mechanical properties. J. Appl.
Physiol. 115, 84–89. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01417.2012
Sharifnezhad, A., Marzilger, R., and Arampatzis, A. (2014). Effects of load
magnitude, muscle length and velocity during eccentric chronic loading on the
longitudinal growth of the vastus lateralis muscle. J. Exp. Biol. 217, 2726–2733.
doi: 10.1242/jeb.100370
Shepherd, J. H., and Screen, H. R., (2013). Fatigue loading of tendon. Int. J. Exp.
Pathol. 94, 260–270. doi: 10.1111/iep.12037
Simpson, M., Rio, E., and Cook, J. (2016). At what age do children and adolescents
develop lower limb tendon pathology or tendinopathy? A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Sports Med. 46, 545–557. doi: 10.1007/s40279-015-0438-0
Smith, J. W. (1965). Blood supply of tendons. Am. J. Surg. 109, 272–276.
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9610(65)80073-3
Smith, R. C., and Rutherford, O. M. (1995). The role of metabolites in strength
training. I. A comparison of eccentric and concentric contractions. Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol. 71, 332–336. doi: 10.1007/BF00240413
Stafilidis, S., and Arampatzis, A. (2007). Muscle - tendon unit mechanical and
morphological properties and sprint performance. J. Sports Sci. 25, 1035–1046.
doi: 10.1080/02640410600951589
Stracciolini, A., Casciano, R., Levey Friedman, H., Stein, C. J., Meehan, W. P., and
Micheli, L. J. (2014). Pediatric sports injuries: a comparison of males versus
females. Am. J. Sports Med. 42, 965–972. doi: 10.1177/0363546514522393
Tanimoto, M., and Ishii, N. (2006). Effects of low-intensity resistance exercise with
slow movement and tonic force generation on muscular function in young men.
J. Appl. Physiol. 100, 1150–1157. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00741.2005
Thorpe, C. T., Streeter, I., Pinchbeck, G. L., Goodship, A. E., Clegg, P. D., and Birch,
H. L. (2010). Aspartic acid racemization and collagen degradation markers
reveal an accumulation of damage in tendon collagen that is enhanced with
aging. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 15674–15681. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.077503
Tidball,
J.
G.
(2005).
Mechanical
signal
transduction
in
skeletal
muscle
growth
and
adaptation.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
98,
1900–1908.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01178.2004
Toigo, M., and Boutellier, U. (2006). New fundamental resistance exercise
determinants of molecular and cellular muscle adaptations. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.
97, 643–663. doi: 10.1007/s00421-006-0238-1
Tonson, A., Ratel, S., Le Fur, Y., Cozzone, P., and Bendahan, D. (2008).
Effect of maturation on the relationship between muscle size and force
production. Med. Sci. Sport. Exer. 40, 918–925. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31
81641bed
Tsitsilonis, S., Panayiotis, C. E., Athanasios, M. S., Stavros, K. K., Ioannis, V. S.,
George, A., et al. (2014). Anabolic androgenic steroids reverse the beneficial
effect of exercise on tendon biomechanics: an experimental study. Foot Ankle
Surg. 20, 94–99. doi: 10.1016/j.fas.2013.12.001
Urlando, A., and Hawkins, D. (2007). Achilles tendon adaptation during
strength training in young adults. Med. Sci. Sport. Exer. 39, 1147–1152.
doi: 10.1249/mss.0b013e31805371d1
Vandenburgh, H., and Kaufman, S. (1979). In vitro model for stretch-
induced
hypertrophy
of
skeletal
muscle.
Science
203,
265–268.
doi: 10.1126/science.569901
Veres, S. P., Harrison, J. M., and Lee, J. M. (2013). Repeated subrupture overload
causes progression of nanoscaled discrete plasticity damage in tendon collagen
fibrils. J. Orthop. Res. 31, 731–737. doi: 10.1002/jor.22292
Vingren, J. L., Kraemer, W. J., Ratamess, N. A., Anderson, J. M., Volek, J. S.,
and Maresh, C. M. (2010). Testosterone physiology in resistance exercise
and training: the up-stream regulatory elements. Sports Med. 40, 1037–1053.
doi: 10.2165/11536910-000000000-00000
Visnes, H., Aandahl, H. Å., and Bahr, R. (2013). Jumper’s knee paradox–jumping
ability is a risk factor for developing jumper’s knee: a 5-year prospective study.
Br. J. Sports Med. 47, 503–507. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2012-091385
Wang, J. (2006). Mechanobiology of tendon. J. Biomech. 39, 1563–1582.
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.05.011
Waugh, C. M., Alktebi, T., de Sa, A., and Scott, A. (2017). Impact of rest duration
on Achilles tendon structure and function following isometric training. Scand.
J. Med. Sci. Spor. doi: 10.1111/sms.12930. [Epub ahead of print].
Waugh, C. M., Blazevich, A. J., Fath, F., and Korff, T. (2012). Age-related
changes in mechanical properties of the Achilles tendon. J. Anat. 220, 144–155.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01461.x
Waugh, C. M., Korff, T., Fath, F., and Blazevich, A. J. (2013). Rapid force
production in children and adults. Med. Sci. Sport. Exer. 45, 762–771.
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31827a67ba
Waugh, C. M., Korff, T., Fath, F., and Blazevich, A. J. (2014). Effects of
resistance training on tendon mechanical properties and rapid force
production
in
prepubertal
children.
J.
Appl.
Physiol.
117,
257–266.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00325.2014
Wernbom, M., Augustsson, J., and Thomeé, R. (2007). The influence of
frequency, intensity, volume and mode of strength training on whole
muscle
cross-sectional
area
in
humans.
Sports
Med.
37,
225–264.
doi: 10.2165/00007256-200737030-00004
Widrick, J. J., Stelzer, J. E., Shoepe, T. C., and Garner, D. P., (2002). Functional
properties of human muscle fibers after short-term resistance exercise training.
Am. J. Physiol. 283, R408–R416. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00120.2002
Wiesinger, H. P., Kösters, A., Müller, E., and Seynnes, O. R. (2015). Effects of
increased loading on in vivo tendon properties: a systematic review. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 47, 1885–1895. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000603
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
17
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
 Mersmann et al.
Imbalanced Musculotendinous Adaptation in Youth
Woo, S. L. (1982). Mechanical properties of tendons and ligaments. I.
Quasi-static and nonlinear viscoelastic properties. Biorheology 19, 385–396.
doi: 10.3233/BIR-1982-19301
Wren, T. A. L., Lindsey, D. P., Beaupré, G. S., and Carter, D. R. (2003). Effects
of creep and cyclic loading on the mechanical properties and failure of
human Achilles tendons. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 31, 710–717. doi: 10.1114/1.
1569267
Wu, Y. K., Lien, Y. H., Lin, K. H., Shih, T. T., Wang, T. G., and
Wang, H. K. (2010). Relationships between three potentiation effects of
plyometric training and performance. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Spor. 20, e80–e86.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00908.x
Zhang, J., Pan, T., Liu, Y., and Wang, J. H. C. (2010). Mouse treadmill running
enhances tendons by expanding the pool of tendon stem cells (TSCs) and
TSC-related cellular production of collagen. J. Orthop. Res. 28, 1178–1183.
doi: 10.1002/jor.21123
Zwerver, J., Bredeweg, S. W., and van den Akker-Scheek, I. (2011). Prevalence
of Jumper’s knee among nonelite athletes from different sports: a cross-
sectional survey. Am. J. Sports Med. 39, 1984–1988. doi: 10.1177/0363546511
413370
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Mersmann, Bohm and Arampatzis. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
18
December 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 987
