 Implementation of Rapid Molecular
Infectious Disease Diagnostics: the Role
of Diagnostic and Antimicrobial
Stewardship
Kevin Messacar,a,b Sarah K. Parker,b James K. Todd,b Samuel R. Dominguezb
Section of Hospital Medicinea and Section of Infectious Diseases,b Department of Pediatrics, Children's
Hospital Colorado-University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA
ABSTRACT New rapid molecular diagnostic technologies for infectious diseases en-
able expedited accurate microbiological diagnoses. However, diagnostic stewardship
and antimicrobial stewardship are necessary to ensure that these technologies con-
serve, rather than consume, additional health care resources and optimally affect pa-
tient care. Diagnostic stewardship is needed to implement appropriate tests for the
clinical setting and to direct testing toward appropriate patients. Antimicrobial stew-
ardship is needed to ensure prompt appropriate clinical action to translate faster di-
agnostic test results in the laboratory into improved outcomes at the bedside. This
minireview outlines the roles of diagnostic stewardship and antimicrobial steward-
ship in the implementation of rapid molecular infectious disease diagnostics.
KEYWORDS rapid diagnostics, diagnostic stewardship, antimicrobial stewardship,
implementation, utilization, appropriate use criteria
T
he clinical microbiology laboratory is in the midst of a diagnostic revolution. New
molecular diagnostic technologies have the potential to transform the modern
microbiology laboratory and the care of patients with suspected infections by provid-
ing more rapid and robust microbiological diagnoses. However, these technological
advances come with practical challenges for the laboratory and for clinicians.
Many of the challenges we face today with molecular diagnostics were first noted
by Dr. Raymond C. Bartlett, a visionary clinical pathologist, in the era of conventional
culture-based microbiology (1). In 1974, Dr. Bartlett observed that “our technical
capabilities are exceeding our ability to apply them effectively and economically to
human problems” (2). Similar to Dr. Bartlett’s observation, the microbiology laboratory
today is exceedingly “faced with a superabundance of academic information and
pressure to perform exhaustive, expensive, clinically irrelevant [testing],” which, when
misguided, “misleads physicians into erroneous diagnosis and inappropriate therapy”
(2). These observations have become more relevant than ever in the emerging era of
rapid molecular diagnostics. The time has come to heed Dr. Bartlett’s call for a “more
practical, economical, clinically meaningful approach” (2). This minireview introduces
the role of diagnostic and antimicrobial stewardship in the implementation of rapid
molecular infectious disease diagnostics, echoing the timeless principles of Dr. Bartlett.
OVERVIEW OF RAPID MOLECULAR INFECTIOUS DISEASE DIAGNOSTICS
Clinicians seek three basic truths from the clinical microbiology laboratory, i.e., (i)
whether the patient is infected, (ii) if so, with what, and (iii) what will treat it (3). In the
window between specimen collection, organism identification, and antimicrobial sus-
ceptibility determination, broad empirical antimicrobials are given to many patients to
avoid the grave consequences of untreated infections in a few. Properly implemented
Accepted manuscript posted online 28
December 2016
Citation Messacar K, Parker SK, Todd JK,
Dominguez SR. 2017. Implementation of rapid
molecular infectious disease diagnostics: the
role of diagnostic and antimicrobial
stewardship. J Clin Microbiol 55:715–723.
https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.02264-16.
Editor Colleen Suzanne Kraft, Emory University
Copyright © 2017 American Society for
Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
Address correspondence to Kevin Messacar,
kevin.messacar@childrenscolorado.org.
MINIREVIEW
crossm
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
715
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 and applied, molecular diagnostic technologies enable the microbiology laboratory to
provide these three basic truths faster and more accurately than ever before. The ability
of rapid diagnostics to shrink the window creates the potential to provide earlier
effective, targeted antimicrobials and to decrease the use of unnecessary empirical
therapies.
Bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites can now be rapidly identified using molecular
methods, to diagnose causative agents in infections of the bloodstream, respiratory
tract, urinary tract, gastrointestinal tract, and central nervous system. Similarly, new
gene-based resistance detection platforms are rapidly emerging to guide antimicrobial
use. New techniques used in these rapid diagnostic technologies include nucleic
acid-based diagnostics (such as monoplex PCR testing and multiplex PCR panels) (4–8),
microarray panels (9), peptide nucleic acid fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
technologies (10), magnetic resonance-based testing (11), matrix-assisted laser desorp-
tion ionization–time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) (12), and next-
generation sequencing (13). The scope of these technologies ranges from single-target
pathogen-specific or resistance gene-specific testing to syndromic panels containing
many common pathogens causing a disease process to unbiased sequencing with the
ability to detect unsuspected or novel pathogens, as topically reviewed elsewhere. This
minireview aims to introduce concepts in diagnostic and antimicrobial stewardship that
can be applied to implement these technologies in the clinical setting to optimally
affect patient care (Fig. 1).
DIAGNOSTIC STEWARDSHIP
The goal of diagnostic stewardship is to select the right test for the right patient,
generating accurate, clinically relevant results at the right time to optimally influence
clinical care and to conserve health care resources. The process of diagnostic steward-
ship begins with evaluation, selection, and implementation of appropriate diagnostic
tests for the clinical setting, incorporates guidance for health care providers regarding
judicious use of testing for appropriate patients, and ensures timely sample collection,
transport, and processing and timely reporting of results. Key considerations and
strategies for each step of the diagnostic stewardship process are outlined below and
summarized in Table 1.
Selecting the right test for the clinical setting involves the evaluation of test
performance, laboratory feasibility, and cost versus value. Evaluation of basic intrinsic
test characteristics, such as sensitivity and specificity, is essential, but findings can be
challenging to interpret when there is no clear “gold standard.” This is a particular
FIG 1 Roles of diagnostic and antimicrobial stewardship in the implementation of rapid molecular
infectious disease diagnostics in the clinical setting.
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
716
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 challenge for molecular methods when conventional culture-based or serological
techniques are unable to confirm the presence of infection and reliance on clinical
findings may be necessary. For instance, a multiplex PCR assay detecting pneumococcal
DNA in a spinal fluid sample from a patient with suspected meningitis who was
pretreated with antibiotics and has negative culture results could indicate a true-
positive result or a false-positive result, depending on the clinical scenario. Even more
important than sensitivity and specificity in predicting clinical utility are the positive
and negative predictive values of a test, specific to the local incidence of disease.
Clinically, these statistics assess whether a clinician can trust a positive test result and
whether the test can be used to rule out an infection. Multiplex panels, however,
challenge traditional notions of positive and negative predictive values, as values can
be calculated for individual pathogens, for all pathogens in the panel, or for a clinical
syndrome. While a rapid multiplex PCR assay may have a high negative predictive value
for an individual pathogen or for all pathogens included in the panel, it may have a low
overall negative predictive value for the clinical condition of meningitis if bacteria that
commonly cause meningitis are not included in the panel, limiting the clinical utility of
the assay for ruling out bacterial meningitis.
To ensure that the diagnostic technology selected is appropriate for the clinical
setting, it is important to consider testing volumes, diagnostic yield, and the feasibility
of performing the test in the laboratory setting. Clinician guidance can be useful to
determine the potential utility of newly emerging diagnostic tests with regard to medical
decision-making in a particular setting. Retrospective data can be collected to predict
testing volumes and diagnostic yield in that setting. For instance, a single-pathogen,
point-of-care, influenza PCR test may be appropriate to triage and to treat patients with
respiratory symptoms in an outpatient setting, whereas a more extensive rapid multi-
plex PCR assay for respiratory pathogens may be appropriate to diagnose ventilator-
associated pneumonia in the critical care unit of a tertiary care referral center. Factors
determining the laboratory feasibility of implementing a new rapid diagnostic test
include the technologist training required, the hands-on time for performing the test,
and the way in which testing would fit into the laboratory workflow. It is important to
consider whether the testing would supplant or be conducted in addition to existing
diagnostic tests. For example, with multiplex PCR platforms for cerebrospinal fluid
testing, culture is still needed for detection of bacterial pathogens not detected by the
TABLE 1 Key diagnostic stewardship considerations for implementation of rapid infectious
disease diagnostics
Goal
Key question
Key considerations and potential
strategies
Right test
Is the test appropriate for the
clinical setting?
Sensitivity and specificity
Predictive values
Testing volumes
Diagnostic yield
Laboratory feasibility
Cost
Clinical impact
Right patient
Will the clinical care of the patient
be affected by the test result?
Laboratory test utilization committee
Automatic laboratory reflex
CPOE decision support
Appropriate use criteria
Indication selection
Prior authorization
Benchmarking
Specimen rejection
Right time
Will the result be available in time
to optimally affect care?
Time to specimen receipt
Centralized vs point-of-care testing
On-demand vs batched testing
Specimen preparation time
Run time
Result reporting time
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
717
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 panel, confirmation of positive results, and susceptibility testing. However, multiplex
PCR assays for stool testing may supplant monoplex PCR assays for viral and parasitic
pathogens and save the time and expense of conducting multiple monoplex tests with
a single sample.
Cost-effectiveness and potential clinical impact are important factors for deciding
whether to adopt an emerging diagnostic technology in the clinical microbiology
laboratory. Cost analysis is often a priority of hospital administrators but can be
challenging, given the paucity and lag in timing of published cost-effectiveness data
(14). While a simple analysis can be used to compare costs and charges for existing
diagnostic tests versus new rapid diagnostic tests, a true cost-value analysis should
include “back-end” cost savings of decreases in resource utilization (antimicrobials,
unnecessary admissions, and lengths of stays), as well as effects on morbidity and
mortality rates (14). Assuming reported turnaround times for the rapid diagnostic
technology, the potential clinical impact can be estimated by using minimal chart
reviews to determine what changes in medical decision-making could occur if results
were available at that time point. For instance, a rapid multiplex PCR test of spinal fluid
for which results were available in 2 h was predicted to decrease acyclovir exposure by
2 to 3 days for nearly one-half of children undergoing lumbar punctures at our
institution (15).
Once the appropriate rapid diagnostic test has been selected for implementation,
the next step in diagnostic stewardship is directing testing toward the right patients, for
whom the test results will affect clinical care. Overuse of rapid diagnostic tests can add
to health care costs without having a significant impact on patient care, whereas
underuse may lead to suboptimal clinical outcomes. Inappropriate use of these tests in
cases with low pretest probability can lead to misinformation from false-positive results
potentially misleading clinicians. Laboratory test utilization committees, modeled after
pharmacy and therapeutics committees, with clinical content experts and key stake-
holders have been successful in implementing and overseeing many diagnostic stew-
ardship strategies (16).
Provider education efforts are essential for introducing end users to new diagnostic
tests being offered and can be used to suggest appropriate testing strategies. Targeted
educational interventions can be used to reduce overutilization among providers and
trainees who are high test users, as has been demonstrated for Clostridium difficile PCR
testing in pediatric populations (17, 18). Provider education is most effective when
conducted as one component of a multifaceted approach to diagnostic stewardship.
Automatic laboratory reflex testing without requiring clinician ordering is appropri-
ate for organism identification technologies that are used when culture or initial Gram
stain results are positive. For instance, laboratories may choose to automatically
perform multiplex PCR, microarray, or FISH testing for rapid identification of organisms
in blood cultures that are flagged positive with positive Gram stain results. Similarly,
MALDI-TOF MS may be used as a tool for rapid identification of pure organism colony
growth on solid media, from a variety of specimen sources.
Diagnostic stewardship is more challenging for direct-from-specimen rapid diag-
nostic tests, for which the responsibility for appropriate ordering traditionally rests on
the clinician. Development of diagnostic algorithms and inclusion of computerized
order entry (CPOE) decision support can be used to direct clinicians toward the
appropriate test for the clinical situation and curb unnecessary duplication of diagnos-
tic testing (19–21). For example, a diagnostic algorithm can require negative culture
results and multiplex PCR panel testing of spinal fluid before next-generation sequenc-
ing. CPOE decision support can recommend more cost-effective test ordering, such as
a multiplex PCR panel in place of multiple monoplex PCR tests, or highlight redundant
testing, such as an order for a monoplex PCR and a multiplex panel that includes the
monoplex PCR.
Criteria for appropriate use can be developed as a mechanism to identify clinical
situations in which a diagnostic test has significant clinical impact, for inclusion in
clinical practice guidelines (22). Indication selection can be used in CPOE decision
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
718
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 support, requiring clinicians to input an approved indication from a list of appropriate
use criteria before ordering the diagnostic test, to prevent overutilization of tests by
clinicians in low-impact situations. Prior authorization by infectious disease or antimi-
crobial stewardship providers can be required for testing in cases that do not meet
appropriate use criteria. For instance, to order a rapid multiplex gastrointestinal diag-
nostic panel, a provider could be required to select an indication from the approved use
criteria of bloody diarrhea, concern for bacterial enteritis, or travel outside the United
States. If requesting this test for a patient who does not meet any of those criteria, the
provider must call an infectious disease physician for prior authorization. Benchmarking
with provider-specific feedback on diagnostic test ordering not meeting appropriate
use criteria, compared to that of peers, can be used to curb overutilization by individual
providers. For example, a monthly email with the percentage of children with bron-
chiolitis for whom the provider ordered a respiratory pathogen multiplex PCR panel,
compared to the provider’s peers, could be used to decrease test overutilization and
encourage compliance with national guidelines. Adding measures of test order appro-
priateness to the existing systems of laboratory benchmarking of quality measures
would allow institution-level comparisons of diagnostic stewardship (23). Lastly, labo-
ratory rejection of samples can be used to decrease testing of low-yield samples, based
on objective cutoff values. For instance, in one study, implementing a cutoff value of
10 white blood cells (WBCs) in cerebrospinal fluid led to a 46% reduction in herpes
simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, enterovirus, and cytomegalovirus testing without
affecting the diagnostic yield (24).
The selection of the right test for the right patient does not affect clinical care unless
the result is reported at the right time to influence medical decision-making. Turn-
around time is critical for the clinical impact of rapid diagnostic tests. The first factor to
consider is the time to specimen receipt in the clinical microbiology laboratory. Sending
samples to reference laboratories for testing often negates the potential impact of
rapid diagnostic technologies due to transport time alone. While centralization of
microbiological testing allows more rapid diagnostic technologies to be offered, this
must be balanced against logistical delays in receiving samples that could be mitigated
by point-of-care testing, if available, at the bedside or in the clinic. The successful
execution of on-demand testing, in contrast to batched testing, in the microbiology
laboratory requires appropriate staffing models with trained personnel who are able to
perform expedient testing regardless of the time of day. Considerations of specimen
preparation time, run-time on the rapid diagnostic platform, and result reporting time
are also important considerations in turnaround time. The timely communication of
test results, once testing is complete, is a responsibility that requires collaboration
between the laboratory and antimicrobial stewardship groups, as outlined below.
ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP
The goal of antimicrobial stewardship for rapid diagnostic implementation is to
ensure that the right interpretation of the result occurs at the right time, leading to the
right antimicrobial therapy to improve clinical outcomes and to decrease unnecessary
antimicrobial use. A functioning collaborative partnership between diagnostic stew-
ardship in the laboratory and antimicrobial stewardship on the clinical side is essential
for successful implementation of rapid diagnostic technologies to achieve this goal.
Antimicrobial stewardship strategies to ensure rapid communication, correct interpre-
tation, and appropriate adjustment of antimicrobial regimens to translate rapid diag-
nostic test results into improved patient care are outlined below and summarized in
Table 2.
For a rapid diagnostic test to have rapid impact, it is essential that providers be
alerted to results in real time. Active readback reporting ensures that results have been
received in a timely manner and is superior to passive reporting that requires the
clinician to continually check the medical record for results. A rapid diagnostic test
result that remains unchecked in the medical record is the tree that falls in the forest
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
719
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 with no one around to hear it, wasting expensive health care resources and potentially
leading to delayed optimization of care.
As the complexity of molecular diagnostic testing for infectious diseases increases,
the communication of clinically relevant results becomes more important in ensuring
proper interpretation by clinicians. A recent survey of infectious disease physicians
demonstrated that 67.5% think that new diagnostic testing is becoming too complex
for non-infectious disease physicians (25). The reporting of increasingly specific,
species-level identification of pathogens not widely familiar to general clinicians can
create confusion. This confusion may be avoided by grouping species and using more
familiar, clinically relevant nomenclature or providing interpretive decision support. For
example, a report of Streptococcus sobrinus from MALDI-TOF MS analysis may be better
communicated as the more familiar viridans Streptococcus group. A report of parecho-
virus detection in cerebrospinal fluid may be better interpreted if the results are
accompanied by a description of parechoviruses in the comments or are communi-
cated by an antimicrobial steward with contextual interpretation and decision support.
Clinicians may also require decision support to navigate some of the pitfalls in the
interpretation of rapid molecular infectious disease diagnostics. The detection of
nucleic acids by molecular diagnostics does not always equate to detection of a viable
organism that is the cause of the patient’s disease process. Pathogens detected may
represent colonization, asymptomatic infection, reactivation in the setting of acute
infection, chromosomal integration, or prolonged shedding after an unrelated prior
infection. For instance, detection of a rhinovirus/enterovirus in a respiratory pathogen
panel for a febrile infant without respiratory symptoms may reflect shedding from a
prior respiratory infection, an asymptomatic infection, or a true source of fever. With
more broadly based syndromic testing panels and next-generation sequencing, patho-
gens that are unlikely to be the cause of disease may be detected, creating clinical
confusion. For instance, gastrointestinal panels may detect Escherichia coli species that
are asymptomatically carried in a large portion of the population or Clostridium difficile
in children less than 1 year of age, for whom this result more likely represents carriage
than infection requiring treatment. Selective reporting of relevant pathogens is one
approach to deal with these issues, but it requires full disclosure of the pathogens
being reported versus withheld from reporting for the panel. The detection of multiple
pathogens within a single specimen, some of which may be causing disease and others
of which may be contaminants or innocent bystanders, can also be challenging for
clinicians to interpret. The decision support strategies outlined below can assist clini-
cians in dealing with these new challenges posed by rapid molecular diagnostics.
Once a test result is rapidly communicated and properly interpreted, prompt and
appropriate clinical action must be taken to optimally affect care. The first step in this
process is creating evidence-based clinical practice guideline recommendations based
on test results. National guidelines and local antibiogram data can be useful in creating
consensus empirical treatment recommendations to standardize care. Providing anti-
TABLE 2 Key antimicrobial stewardship considerations for implementation of rapid infectious disease diagnostics
Goal
Key question
Key considerations and potential strategiesa
Right interpretation
Will the clinician understand the test result?
Result report language
Selective reporting of relevant results
AS prospective audit and feedback
AS real-time decision support
Right antimicrobial
Will the clinician appropriately modify antimicrobials
based on the test result?
Clinical practice guidelines
EMR-based decision support with result reporting
AS prospective audit and feedback
AS real-time decision support
Right time
Will the clinician act upon the test result promptly?
EMR reporting
Results called with readback reporting
AS prospective audit and feedback
AS real-time decision support
aAS, antimicrobial stewardship.
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
720
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 microbial stewardship decision support tools with rapid diagnostic results is more
effective than traditional methods of reporting results alone in the electronic medical
record (EMR) or having microbiology laboratory technicians call providers with results
(26). Templated comments, with evidence-based clinical practice guideline recommen-
dations to guide antimicrobial prescribing, accompanying results have been used
successfully in settings with few antimicrobial stewardship resources (27). However,
direct contact with real-time antimicrobial stewardship decision support appears to be
a superior approach (26).
Rapid diagnostic technologies present unique opportunities and unique challenges
for antimicrobial stewardship programs. Current guideline-recommended antimicrobial
stewardship strategies include formulary restriction or prior authorization requirements
targeting specific antimicrobials and prospective auditing and feedback, i.e., reviewing
antimicrobial prescriptions at specified time points (typically 48 and 72 h after treat-
ment initiation) and intervening when antimicrobial modifications are warranted (28).
Interventions based on these strategies are triggered by antimicrobial use rather than
rapid diagnostic test results. Alternatively, a proactive strategy of real-time antimicro-
bial stewardship decision support is optimized when used with rapid diagnostic
technologies, providing intervention at the time of rapid diagnostic test result report-
ing, which often is the time of medical decision-making. Incorporating real-time
decision support at the time of result reporting ensures that the right interpretation of
the test result leads to the right antimicrobial being prescribed from the start, rather
than correcting misinterpretations and rectifying suboptimal antimicrobial use after
treatment has reached the patient. This approach has been shown to be acceptable to
providers and has not led to decreases in infectious disease consultations (29). Al-
though this approach requires a significant investment of antimicrobial stewardship
resources, it capitalizes on the investment made in expensive rapid diagnostic tech-
nologies, ensuring that these laboratory tests are optimally influencing patient care.
One advantage of providing personalized antimicrobial stewardship decision sup-
port is the adaptability of these standardized recommendations to specific patient
situations. For instance, although cefazolin may be first-line therapy for methicillin-
susceptible Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia in a guideline, this would not be an ideal
therapy for central nervous system penetration in a patient with brain abscesses and
bacteremia, which may be caught only through direct personalized antimicrobial
stewardship intervention. Drug allergies, drug-drug interactions, and dosing modifica-
tions are other examples of antimicrobial stewardship support factors that can be
individualized by antimicrobial stewardship intervention but may not be easily com-
municated in clinical practice guidelines. The “handshake stewardship” approach of
engaging in a two-way conversation, with an infectious disease-trained physician or
pharmacist learning about the specific patient scenario from the provider directly
caring for the patient and providing specialized antimicrobial recommendations, allows
for the optimal exchange of information (30).
As new molecular diagnostic tests for infectious diseases are implemented, real-time
feedback from end users and troubleshooting mechanisms are needed to optimize
practices. Stakeholder involvement in the implementation planning process assists in
designing protocols and algorithms that take into account the diverse perspectives of
the microbiology laboratory, antimicrobial stewardship, infectious diseases, infection
control, and, most importantly, end user clinicians. These stakeholder liaisons can be
helpful in gathering ongoing feedback during the implementation process. Provider
surveys are another method to obtain ongoing feedback regarding the accuracy,
timeliness, impact, and acceptability of the newly implemented test (29). During the
rollout period, telephone and email hotlines can be helpful for troubleshooting un-
foreseen issues and providing education and support for end users who may not be
familiar with the new technology.
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
721
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although rapid molecular infectious disease diagnostics are revolutionizing the
ability of the microbiology laboratory to more rapidly provide the three basic truths
required by clinicians, unmet challenges remain. Current technologies are excellent at
affirmatively answering the questions of whether the patient is infected and, if so, with
what, by identifying organisms directly from specimens using syndromic panels,
MALDI-TOF MS, and next-generation sequencing. However, technology currently can-
not, and perhaps will never be able to, provide a definitive negative result to rule out
infection. There will always be a need for clinicians, infectious disease specialists, and
antimicrobial stewards to take into account the clinical history, examination, biomarker,
and imaging findings to determine the patient’s risk of an infection not detected by
microbiological testing of the biological specimens obtained. In the future, instead of
looking for an organism causing infection, there may be a role for analyzing the host
response to infection. Promising preliminary studies of RNA biosignature profiles have
been successful in differentiating bacterial infections, viral infections, and other non-
infectious processes. More attainable, but lagging significantly behind the advances
made in organism identification, is the ability of rapid diagnostic technologies to
answer the question of what will treat the infection. Infectious disease physicians
ranked resistant Gram-negative infections as the most important unmet need in
pathogen diagnosis (25). With the increasing incidence and complexity of antimicrobial
resistance, more rapid susceptibility data have great potential to have large impacts on
antimicrobial stewardship and patient outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS
Dr. Raymond Bartlett had great foresight in 1974 when he adapted the classic adage
of “just because you can does not necessarily mean you should” to the microbiology
laboratory by stressing the importance of “careful integration of what is technically
feasible with what is clinically important” (2). As increasing numbers of diagnostic
technologies emerge from research laboratories into the clinical realm, it is essential to
conduct clinical impact and cost-effectiveness analyses prior to adoption in the clinical
setting, to avoid Dr. Bartlett’s fear of “production of a substantial amount of useless
information at considerable cost” (31). Rapid molecular diagnostics have the potential
to revolutionize the clinical care of patients with suspected infections. However, careful
diagnostic and antimicrobial stewardship is essential for successful implementation in
the clinical setting. As Dr. Bartlett noted, “It has long been recognized, that frequent
contact between the microbiologist and the clinician results in a free exchange of
information which facilitates both laboratory and clinical decisions” (2). The concepts of
diagnostic and antimicrobial stewardship outlined in this minireview will help to ensure
that clinical relevance remains the driving force during this diagnostic revolution in the
microbiology laboratory and that we never forget that “good [microbiology] is clinically
relevant [microbiology].”
REFERENCES
1. Onderdonk AB. 2015. Biographical feature: Raymond C. Bartlett, MD. J
Clin Microbiol 53:1464–1466. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.00167-15.
2. Bartlett RC. 1974. Medical microbiology: quality cost and clinical rele-
vance. Wiley, New York, NY.
3. Baron EJ, Miller JM, Weinstein MP, Richter SS, Gilligan PH, Thomson RB,
Jr, Bourbeau P, Carroll KC, Kehl SC, Dunne WM, Robinson-Dunn B,
Schwartzman JD, Chapin KC, Snyder JW, Forbes BA, Patel R, Rosenblatt
JE, Pritt BS. 2013. A guide to utilization of the microbiology laboratory
for diagnosis of infectious diseases: 2013 recommendations by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the American Society
for Microbiology (ASM). Clin Infect Dis 57:e22–e121. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cid/cit278.
4. Poritz MA, Blaschke AJ, Byington CL, Meyers L, Nilsson K, Jones DE,
Thatcher SA, Robbins T, Lingenfelter B, Amiott E, Herbener A, Daly J,
Dobrowolski SF, Teng DH, Ririe KM. 2011. FilmArray, an automated
nested multiplex PCR system for multi-pathogen detection: develop-
ment and application to respiratory tract infection. PLoS One 6:e26047.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026047.
5. Blaschke AJ, Heyrend C, Byington CL, Fisher MA, Barker E, Garrone NF,
Thatcher SA, Pavia AT, Barney T, Alger GD, Daly JA, Ririe KM, Ota I, Poritz
MA. 2012. Rapid identification of pathogens from positive blood cultures
by multiplex polymerase chain reaction using the FilmArray system.
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 74:349 –355. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.diagmicrobio.2012.08.013.
6. Buss SN, Leber A, Chapin K, Fey PD, Bankowski MJ, Jones MK, Ro-
gatcheva M, Kanack KJ, Bourzac KM. 2015. Multicenter evaluation of the
BioFire FilmArray gastrointestinal panel for etiologic diagnosis of infec-
tious gastroenteritis. J Clin Microbiol 53:915–925. https://doi.org/
10.1128/JCM.02674-14.
7. Leber AL, Everhart K, Balada-Llasat JM, Cullison J, Daly J, Holt S, Lephart
P, Salimnia H, Schreckenberger PC, DesJarlais S, Reed SL, Chapin KC,
LeBlanc L, Johnson JK, Soliven NL, Carroll K, Miller JA, Dien Bard J, Mestas
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
722
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
 J, Bankowski M, Enomoto T, Hemmert AC, Bourzac K. 2016. Multicenter
evaluation of BioFire FilmArray meningitis/encephalitis panel for detec-
tion of bacteria, viruses and yeast in cerebrospinal fluid specimens. J Clin
Microbiol 54:2251–2261. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.00730-16.
8. Claas EC, Burnham CA, Mazzulli T, Templeton K, Topin F. 2013. Perfor-
mance of the xTAG(R) gastrointestinal pathogen panel, a multiplex
molecular assay for simultaneous detection of bacterial, viral, and par-
asitic causes of infectious gastroenteritis. J Microbiol Biotechnol 23:
1041–1045. https://doi.org/10.4014/jmb.1212.12042.
9. Buchan BW, Ginocchio CC, Manii R, Cavagnolo R, Pancholi P, Swyers L,
Thomson RB, Jr, Anderson C, Kaul K, Ledeboer NA. 2013. Multiplex
identification of Gram-positive bacteria and resistance determinants
directly from positive blood culture broths: evaluation of an automated
microarray-based nucleic acid test. PLoS Med 10:e1001478. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001478.
10. Stender H. 2003. PNA FISH: an intelligent stain for rapid diagnosis of
infectious diseases. Expert Rev Mol Diagn 3:649–655. https://doi.org/
10.1586/14737159.3.5.649.
11. Mylonakis E, Clancy CJ, Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Garey KW, Alangaden GJ,
Vazquez JA, Groeger JS, Judson MA, Vinagre YM, Heard SO, Zervou FN,
Zacharioudakis IM, Kontoyiannis DP, Pappas PG. 2015. T2 magnetic
resonance assay for the rapid diagnosis of candidemia in whole blood:
a clinical trial. Clin Infect Dis 60:892–899. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/
ciu959.
12. Seng P, Drancourt M, Gouriet F, La Scola B, Fournier PE, Rolain JM, Raoult
D. 2009. Ongoing revolution in bacteriology: routine identification of
bacteria by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight
mass spectrometry. Clin Infect Dis 49:543–551. https://doi.org/10.1086/
600885.
13. Naccache SN, Federman S, Veeraraghavan N, Zaharia M, Lee D, Samayoa
E, Bouquet J, Greninger AL, Luk KC, Enge B, Wadford DA, Messenger SL,
Genrich GL, Pellegrino K, Grard G, Leroy E, Schneider BS, Fair JN, Martinez
MA, Isa P, Crump JA, DeRisi JL, Sittler T, Hackett J, Jr, Miller S, Chiu CY.
2014. A cloud-compatible bioinformatics pipeline for ultrarapid patho-
gen identification from next-generation sequencing of clinical samples.
Genome Res 24:1180–1192. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.171934.113.
14. Caliendo AM, Gilbert DN, Ginocchio CC, Hanson KE, May L, Quinn TC,
Tenover FC, Alland D, Blaschke AJ, Bonomo RA, Carroll KC, Ferraro MJ,
Hirschhorn LR, Joseph WP, Karchmer T, MacIntyre AT, Reller LB, Jackson
AF. 2013. Better tests, better care: improved diagnostics for infectious
diseases. Clin Infect Dis 57(Suppl 3):S139–S170. https://doi.org/10.1093/
cid/cit578.
15. Messacar K, Breazeale G, Robinson CC, Dominguez SR. 2016. Potential
clinical impact of the film array meningitis encephalitis panel in children
with suspected central nervous system infections. Diagn Microbiol Infect
Dis 86:118–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2016.05.020.
16. Warren JS. 2013. Laboratory test utilization program: structure and
impact in a large academic medical center. Am J Clin Pathol 139:
289–297. https://doi.org/10.1309/AJCP4G6UAUXCFTQF.
17. Kociolek LK, Bovee M, Carter D, Ciolino JD, Patel R, O’Donnell A, Rupp
AH, Zheng X, Shulman ST, Patel SJ. 2016. Impact of a healthcare provider
educational intervention on frequency of Clostridium difficile polymerase
chain reaction testing in children: a segmented regression analysis. J
Pediatr Infect Dis Soc https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/piw027.
18. Klatte JM, Selvarangan R, Jackson MA, Myers AL. 2016. Reducing over-
utilization of testing for Clostridium difficile infection in a pediatric
hospital system: a quality improvement initiative. Hosp Pediatr 6:9–14.
https://doi.org/10.1542/hpeds.2015-0116.
19. Krasowski MD, Chudzik D, Dolezal A, Steussy B, Gailey MP, Koch B,
Kilborn SB, Darbro BW, Rysgaard CD, Klesney-Tait JA. 2015. Promoting
improved utilization of laboratory testing through changes in an
electronic medical record: experience at an academic medical center.
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 15:11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911
-015-0137-7.
20. Bates DW, Kuperman GJ, Rittenberg E, Teich JM, Fiskio J, Ma’luf N,
Onderdonk A, Wybenga D, Winkelman J, Brennan TA, Komaroff AL,
Tanasijevic M. 1999. A randomized trial of a computer-based interven-
tion to reduce utilization of redundant laboratory tests. Am J Med
106:144–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9343(98)00410-0.
21. Wilson ML. 2015. Decreasing inappropriate laboratory test utilization:
controlling costs and improving quality of care. Am J Clin Pathol 143:
614–616. https://doi.org/10.1309/AJCPHQODM9XYWLZ9.
22. Bhatia RS, Alabousi M, Dudzinski DM, Weiner RB. 2016. Appropriate use
criteria: a review of need, development and applications. Expert Rev Car-
diovasc Ther 14:281–290. https://doi.org/10.1586/14779072.2016.1131125.
23. Shahangian S, Snyder SR. 2009. Laboratory medicine quality indicators:
a review of the literature. Am J Clin Pathol 131:418–431. https://doi.org/
10.1309/AJCPJF8JI4ZLDQUE.
24. Wilen CB, Monaco CL, Hoppe-Bauer J, Jackups R, Jr, Bucelli RC, Burnham
CA. 2015. Criteria for reducing unnecessary testing for herpes simplex
virus, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, and enterovirus in cerebro-
spinal fluid samples from adults. J Clin Microbiol 53:887–895. https://
doi.org/10.1128/JCM.03161-14.
25. Blaschke AJ, Hersh AL, Beekmann SE, Ince D, Polgreen PM, Hanson KE.
2015. Unmet diagnostic needs in infectious disease. Diagn Microbiol
Infect Dis 81:57–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2014.10.005.
26. Banerjee R, Teng CB, Cunningham SA, Ihde SM, Steckelberg JM, Moriarty
JP, Shah ND, Mandrekar JN, Patel R. 2015. Randomized trial of rapid
multiplex polymerase chain reaction-based blood culture identification
and susceptibility testing. Clin Infect Dis 61:1071–1080. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cid/civ447.
27. Dekmezian M, Beal SG, Damashek MJ, Benavides R, Dhiman N. 2015. The
SUCCESS model for laboratory performance and execution of rapid
molecular diagnostics in patients with sepsis. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent)
28:144–150.
28. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, MacDougall C, Schuetz AN, Septimus
EJ, Srinivasan A, Dellit TH, Falck-Ytter YT, Fishman NO, Hamilton CW,
Jenkins TC, Lipsett PA, Malani PN, May LS, Moran GJ, Neuhauser MM,
Newland JG, Ohl CA, Samore MH, Seo SK, Trivedi KK. 2016. Implementing
an antibiotic stewardship program: guidelines by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of
America. Clin Infect Dis 62:e51–e77. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw118.
29. Messacar K, Hurst AL, Child J, Campbell K, Palmer C, Hamilton S, Dowell
E, Robinson CC, Parker SK, Dominguez SR. 2016. Clinical impact and
provider acceptability of real-time antimicrobial stewardship decision
support for rapid diagnostics in children with positive blood culture
results. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/piw047.
30. Hurst AL, Child J, Pearce K, Palmer C, Todd JK, Parker SK. 2016. Hand-
shake stewardship: a highly effective rounding-based antimicrobial op-
timization service. Pediatr Infect Dis J 35:1104–1110. https://doi.org/
10.1097/INF.0000000000001245.
31. Bartlett RC. 1974. A plea for clinical relevance in medical microbiology.
Am J Clin Pathol 61:867–872. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcp/61.6.867.
Minireview
Journal of Clinical Microbiology
March 2017
Volume 55
Issue 3
jcm.asm.org
723
 on June 4, 2019 by guest
http://jcm.asm.org/
Downloaded from 
