 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 27 March 2019
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00277
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
1
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
Edited by:
Francisco R. Nieto,
University of Granada, Spain
Reviewed by:
Bin Gu,
University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, United States
Stephanie Carreiro,
University of Massachusetts Medical
School, United States
Samba Reddy,
Texas A&M Health Science Center,
United States
*Correspondence:
Cameron S. Metcalf
cameron.s.metcalf@utah.edu
Grzegorz Bulaj
bulaj@pharm.utah.edu
†Present Address:
Merodean Huntsman,
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA,
United States
Tristan Underwood,
BioFire Diagnostics, Salt Lake, UT,
United States
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neuropharmacology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neurology
Received: 30 November 2018
Accepted: 04 March 2019
Published: 27 March 2019
Citation:
Metcalf CS, Huntsman M, Garcia G,
Kochanski AK, Chikinda M,
Watanabe E, Underwood T,
Vanegas F, Smith MD, White HS and
Bulaj G (2019) Music-Enhanced
Analgesia and Antiseizure Activities in
Animal Models of Pain and Epilepsy:
Toward Preclinical Studies Supporting
Development of Digital Therapeutics
and Their Combinations With
Pharmaceutical Drugs.
Front. Neurol. 10:277.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00277
Music-Enhanced Analgesia and
Antiseizure Activities in Animal
Models of Pain and Epilepsy: Toward
Preclinical Studies Supporting
Development of Digital Therapeutics
and Their Combinations With
Pharmaceutical Drugs
Cameron S. Metcalf 1*, Merodean Huntsman 2†, Gerry Garcia 3, Adam K. Kochanski 4,
Michael Chikinda 5,6, Eugene Watanabe 5, Tristan Underwood 1†, Fabiola Vanegas 1,
Misty D. Smith 1,7, H. Steve White 8 and Grzegorz Bulaj 2*
1 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, United States, 2 Department of Medicinal
Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, United States, 3 Greatful Living Productions, Salt Lake, UT, United States,
4 Department of Atmospheric Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, United States, 5 The Gifted Music School, Salt
Lake, UT, United States, 6 The School of Music, University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, United States, 7 The School of Dentistry,
University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, United States, 8 School of Pharmacy, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
Digital therapeutics (software as a medical device) and mobile health (mHealth)
technologies offer a means to deliver behavioral, psychosocial, disease self-management
and music-based interventions to improve therapy outcomes for chronic diseases,
including
pain
and
epilepsy.
To
explore
new
translational
opportunities
in
developing digital therapeutics for neurological disorders, and their integration with
pharmacotherapies, we examined analgesic and antiseizure effects of specific musical
compositions in mouse models of pain and epilepsy. The music playlist was created
based on the modular progression of Mozart compositions for which reduction of
seizures and epileptiform discharges were previously reported in people with epilepsy.
Our results indicated that music-treated mice exhibited significant analgesia and
reduction of paw edema in the carrageenan model of inflammatory pain. Among
analgesic drugs tested (ibuprofen, cannabidiol (CBD), levetiracetam, and the galanin
analog NAX 5055), music intervention significantly decreased paw withdrawal latency
difference in ibuprofen-treated mice and reduced paw edema in combination with CBD or
NAX 5055. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first animal study on music-enhanced
antinociceptive activity of analgesic drugs. In the plantar incision model of surgical pain,
music-pretreated mice had significant reduction of mechanical allodynia. In the corneal
kindling model of epilepsy, the cumulative seizure burden following kindling acquisition
was lower in animals exposed to music. The music-treated group also exhibited
significantly improved survival, warranting further research on music interventions for
preventing Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy (SUDEP). We propose a working
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
model of how musical elements such as rhythm, sequences, phrases and punctuation
found in K.448 and K.545 may exert responses via parasympathetic nervous system and
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Based on our findings, we discuss: (1) how
enriched environment (EE) can serve as a preclinical surrogate for testing combinations
of non-pharmacological modalities and drugs for the treatment of pain and other chronic
diseases, and (2) a new paradigm for preclinical and clinical development of therapies
leading to drug-device combination products for neurological disorders, depression and
cancer. In summary, our present results encourage translational research on integrating
non-pharmacological and pharmacological interventions for pain and epilepsy using
digital therapeutics.
Keywords: neuropathic pain, cancer pain, arthritis, opioids, inflammation, refractory epilepsy, epileptic seizures,
mobile medical apps
INTRODUCTION
Pain and epilepsy are distinct neurological conditions which
share unmet needs for innovating treatments. People living with
chronic pain have limited options for pain relief. Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are commonly used to treat
chronic pain, despite their gastrointestinal and cardiovascular
toxicities. Opioid-based pain management has considerable
adverse effects, in addition to abuse potential [e.g., the opioid
epidemic in the US resulted in over 47,000 deaths in 2017
due to overdosing opioids (1)]. People with epilepsy also face
multiple challenges including: (1) seizure control (estimated 30%
are refractory to current antiseizure drugs), (2) medication non-
adherence, tolerability and adverse effects related to antiseizure
drugs, (3) significantly higher mortality, and (4) co-morbidities
requiring additional therapies. Taken together, novel approaches
to chronic pain management and control of epileptic seizures
will benefit millions of people living with epilepsy and pain
worldwide (2, 3).
To innovate treatments for neurological disorders, we have
been studying diverse strategies to integrate digital health
technologies with CNS drugs (4–6). Digital health is a
branch of healthcare that employs internet, digital, and mobile
technologies for improving health and/or treating diseases. Non-
pharmacological modalities such as behavioral therapies, music
and disease self-management can be delivered by mobile health
(mHealth) apps (focused on self-managements and well-being),
while digital therapeutics (mobile medical apps) are intended
to treat specific medical conditions. Several mobile apps and
video games (Table S1) received approval, or clearance, from
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) using software as a
medical device (SaMD) regulatory mechanism (7, 8). There are
also increased interests in developing mobile apps for people
living with chronic pain (9–16) and epilepsy (6, 17–19).
Abbreviations: BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; CBD, cannabidiol; EE,
enriched environment; HPA, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal; IND, investigational
new drug; KA, kainic acid; LEV, levetiracetam; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline;
PFC, prefrontal cortex; PWL, paw withdrawal latency; SaMD, software as medical
device; SUDEP, Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy; TMEV, Theiler’s murine
encephalomyelitis virus; TPE, time-to-peak effect.
Since
digital
technologies
can
deliver
music-based
interventions
(20),
these
opportunities
are
relevant
for
treatments of pain, epilepsy, stroke, dementia, and other
chronic medical conditions (21–27). Music showed clinical
benefits of reducing acute and chronic pain (25–27). For
epilepsy, there is clinical and preclinical evidence that specific
musical compositions exert anticonvulsant effects (4, 28–32).
Clinical studies showed that exposure to Mozart’s K.448 sonata
in pediatric epilepsy patients, even those with refractory
seizures, caused a significant reduction of seizure frequency and
epileptiform discharges (33–39). These antiseizure effects were
also observed in patients with their first unprovoked seizure
(40), in those with drug-refractory epileptic encephalopathies
(41), and in adult patients with epilepsy (42). In addition, the
antiseizure effects of Mozart’s K.448 have been confirmed in a rat
model of acquired epilepsy (34). From a translational research
perspective, there is a gap between clinical and preclinical studies
on music-based interventions with only few reports describing
effects of music in animal models of epilepsy (34), cancer pain
(43), or affective disorders (44).
Preclinical studies on non-pharmacological interventions
include environmental enrichment (EE) and exposure to music.
EE comprises animal housing conditions which provide physical
exercise, cognitive stimulation, and also favor social interactions
(45, 46). EE can exert such effects as reduction and prevention
of epileptic seizures, as well as analgesic effects in various
neuropathic pain models in rats and mice (45, 47–51). Similarly
to EE, music produces diverse physiological responses in
rodents including improved memory, analgesia, antidepressant
and antiseizure activities, as illustrated in Table 1. Music-based
interventions in rodents affect neuroplasticity, neurochemical
changes, immune responses, and the parasympathetic nervous
system (59). Positive effects of EE and music suggest that
preclinical studies on these non-pharmacological modalities
can lead to novel combination therapies with pharmacological
treatments (60, 61). In this work, we explored this repositioning
(repurposing) strategy by testing how antiseizure musical
compositions can also exert analgesic effects. Our present study
of music-based intervention in mouse models of epilepsy and
pain also serves as a preclinical surrogate for development of
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
2
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
TABLE 1 | Examples of music-based interventions studied in rodents.
Species
Main outcomes
References
Mouse
Modification of expression of multiple genes and
improved memory
(52)
Mouse
Decreased anxiety in some genotypes and increased
TrkB in all genotypes
(44)
Mouse
Antidepressant activity in combination with enriched
environment housing
(53)
Rats
Higher pain thresholds and smaller tumors in bone
cancer model
(43)
Rat
Significantly improved spatial memory impairment
caused by status epilepticus
(54)
Rat
Decreased seizure frequency and number of
high-frequency EEG spikes
(34)
Rat
Lowered heart rate in hypertensive animals
(55)
Rat
Modulation of BDNF expression in the hippocampus and
hypothalamus
(56, 57)
Rat
Reduced metastatic nodules in animals injected with
carcinosarcoma cells
(58)
music-based digital therapeutics and their combinations with
neuropharmacological therapies.
METHODS
Animals
Adult male CF-1, CD-1, and C57Bl/6 mice (Charles River,
Kingston, NY, United States) or adult male Sprague-Dawley
rats (Charles River, Raleigh, NC, United States) were used in
specific experiments, as described below. Animals were housed in
a temperature-, humidity-, and light-controlled (12 h light:dark
cycle) facility. Animals were group housed and permitted free
access to food and water. All experimental procedures were
performed in accordance with the guidelines established by
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and approved by the
University of Utah’s Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).
Music Intervention
The playlist used in the experiments comprised the Mozart
compositions previously studied in clinical trials in people with
epilepsy (4, 8–14, 16, 22). All compositions were in Major
keys and included concertos, sonatas, and symphonies featuring
varied types of instrumentation. The playlist was organized
with a symphonic-based structure made up of two faster-paced
“allegro” sections separated by a slower “adagio” section. The
order of compositions was selected to balance arousal and
optimize transitions between individual musical pieces. The first
movement of the K.448 has been the most frequently studied
of all the pieces, and was therefore featured multiple times
throughout the playlist including the beginning and end of the
first and third sections, as well as in the middle of the first section
where it would normally be placed due to key (D major).
Each musical piece, with the exception of K.448, was featured
once and arranged by key within the movement corresponding
to its tempo. This arrangement corresponded to the “Circle
of Fifths,” which is also commonly used in the modulatory
progressions of Mozart and his contemporaries. The pieces were
arranged in order of increasing number of sharps and decreasing
number of flats in the key signature. The rationale for this
order was to minimize any jarring transitions, with the intent to
optimize entrainment and minimize any potential stress on the
mice. The total playtime for the list was 3 h 4 min. The playlist
was repeated three times separated by 1-h silence over 12-h dark-
cycle at the average loudness of 64 dB with 71 dB peaks. The
daily exposure to music was similar to that reported previously
(19), except that Xing and colleagues used only K.448 in their
experiments. The final order of musical compositions delivered
in three parts was: Part 1: Sonata for Two Pianos in D Major,
K.448: I. Allegro con spirit; Symphony No. 41 in C Major K.551
Jupiter III; Symphony No. 41 in C Major K.551 Jupiter IV; Piano
Sonata No. 15 in C Major Sonata Semplice K545 III; Violin
Concerto No.4 in D Major, K.218: I. Allegro; Sonata for Two
Pianos in D Major, K.448: I. Allegro con spirit; Flute Concerto
No.2 in D Major, K.314: I. Allegro aperto; Piano Concerto No.22
in E Flat, K.482: 1. Allegro; Piano Concerto No.22 in E Flat,
K.482: 3. Allegro; Violin Concerto No. 1 in B Flat K.207 I; Violin
Concerto No. 1 in B Flat K.207 III; Sonata for Two Pianos in D
Major, K.448: I. Allegro con spiri. Part 2. Symphony No. 41 in C
Major K.551 Jupiter II; Piano Sonata No. 15 in C Major Sonata
Semplice K.545 II; Sonata for Two Pianos in D Major, K.448:
II. Andante; Piano Concerto No.22 in E Flat, K.482: 2. Andante;
Violin Concerto No. 1 in B Flat K.207 II Adagio. Part 3. Sonata
for Two Pianos in D Major, K.448: I. Allegro con spirit; Mozart:
Symphony #41 In C, K.551, “Jupiter”-3. Menuet & Trio; Piano
Sonata No. 15 in C Major Sonata Semplice K.545 I; Symphony
No. 46 in C K.96 I; Symphony No. 41 in C Major K.551 Jupiter
I; Symphony No. 41 ’Jupiter’
, K.551: 4th movement; Sonata for
Two Pianos in D Major, K.448: I. Allegro con spirit; Sonata for
Two Pianos in D Major, K.448: III. Molto allegro.
Music-exposed animals were kept in a separate room during
the dark cycle in order to undergo music exposure, and were
moved to normal housing facilities during the light cycle.
Kindling animals were exposed to music beginning at the onset
of kindling. All animals were exposed to music for a minimum
of 3 weeks before testing. In order to assure music delivery at
the proper volume, prior to the experiments the volume has
been adjusted so that the average sound level during the playlist
was 70 dB. The measurements, performed using the dB Meter
iPhone app, were taken in the cages with fixed location of
the speakers (Bose Companion20). The volume was optimized
and the playlist delivered using a Mac laptop computer. The
automation of music delivery was facilitated using the Apple
Automator script. This program was responsible for setting the
volume at the predetermined level and playing the music each
day at the exact same time. The script was also set up to send
out e-mail notifications each time when the music was played so
that in case of a computer failure the lab personnel could start
the playlist manually. Additionally, the Apple Remote Desktop
was configured to enable remote computer control without
disturbing the experimental environment. Mice in the control
group were exposed to normal ambient noise continually. To
control for daily transferring between music exposure rooms and
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
3
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
standard housing rooms, control mice were transferred between
testing rooms once daily.
Drug Preparation
All test compounds were administered to mice in a volume
of 10 ml/kg. Ibuprofen. Ibuprofen was suspended in 0.5%
methylcellulose (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and vortexed
prior to administration to ensure complete dissolution or
micronized suspension. It was concentrated to 2.5 mg/ml and
given at a dose of 25 mg/kg body weight by intraperitoneal
(i.p.) injection. Testing occurred 30 min following treatment.
Levetiracetam (LEV). LEV was suspended in 0.5% methylcellulose
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and vortexed at least 15 min
prior to administration to ensure complete dissolution or a
micronized suspension. It was concentrated at a 40 mg/ml, and
given at a dose of 400 mg/kg body weight. Testing occurred 1 h
after i.p. injection. CBD. CBD was suspended in a suspension
of 1:1:18 (ethanol, cremaphor, and phosphate-buffered saline,
PBS) by initial dissolution in ethanol followed by addition of
cremaphor and slow (drop-wise) addition of PBS. Each step
included vigorous mixing (by vortex) for several minutes to
ensure dissolution. The final test solution was prepared at a
concentration of 10 mg/ml and was administered at a dose of
100 mg/kg. Testing occurred 2 h after injection. NAX 505-5.
NAX 505-5 was suspended in a 1.0% (w/v) Tween 20 solution
(prepared in PBS) and mixed gently prior to administration to
ensure complete dissolution or a micronized suspension. It was
prepared at a concentration of 0.4 mg/ml, and administered at a
dose of 4 mg/kg. Testing occurred 1 h after i.p. injection.
Carrageenan Assay
Localized inflammation in the hindpaw of mice was induced
by injecting carrageenan (25 µl, 2% in 0.9% NaCl, λ-
carrageenan; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) subcutaneously
into the plantar surface of the right (ipsilateral) hindpaw, as
previously described (62). Carrageenan-induced inflammation
was verified (3 h post-carrageenan) using a caliper to assess paw
edema across the dorso-ventral aspect of both the carrageenan-
injected (ipsilateral) and the non-injected (left paw, contralateral)
hindpaw. Paw withdrawal responses from thermal stimulation
were assessed according to previously described methods
(63–65). Approximately 2.5 h after carrageenan injection, mice
were placed in plexiglass chambers on top of a heated glass
surface (30◦C) (IITC, Woodland Hills, CA, United States).
Testing coincided with the time of peak hyperalgesia following
carrageenan, as previously described (62, 66), 3 h following
carrageenan. Thermal stimulation was applied with a projection
bulb (IITC, Woodland Hills, CA, United States; 53 mJ, 35%
of maximal stimulus intensity) below the heated glass surface.
Latency to paw withdrawal was measured from the onset of
thermal stimulation until a full paw withdrawal occurred. Three
measurements were obtained from each paw, with at least 1 min
between assessments, and subsequently averaged to obtain the
mean paw withdrawal latency. Because of the ease of testing and
positive, reproducible data in music vs. control studies in both
CF-1 and CD-1 strains, this model was chosen to determine
drug efficacy in combination with music in the CD-1 strain.
In drug treated groups, LEV, CBD, or 505-5 were administered
by i.p. injection, 2 h following carrageenan paw injection and
IBU was administered by subcutaneous injection 2.5 h following
carrageenan paw injection such that the time-to-peak effect
(TPE) would match the time of peak inflammation following
carrageenan (1 h post LEV, CBD, 505-5 or 30 min post IBU; 3 h
post-carrageenan). Separate groups of mice were also treated with
Veh, and Veh-treated mice were pooled (N = 8) comprising
individual groups of Veh-treated mice (N = 2) that were treated
alongside each drug group.
Plantar Incision Assay
The CD-1 mouse plantar incision assay was performed in a
similar manner to previously described methods (66). Mice were
anesthetized using 0.4–0.5% isoflurane and received a 5 mm
incision on the plantar surface of the left hindpaw as well as
separation and elevation of the underlying plantaris muscle. The
muscle was replaced and the wound sutured. We previously
determined that mechanical allodynia following plantar incision
were comparable both 1 and 2 days following the initial injury
but that responses were more consistent on the second day
(data not shown). Hyperthermia latency was comparable from
4 h to 2 days after surgery (data not shown), and so was tested
the afternoon after morning surgery. Hyperthermia. Test was
performed on the day of surgery, allowing at least 4 h of recovery
time. Paw withdrawal responses from thermal stimulation were
assessed according to methods described above for thermal
testing in the carrageenan model. Von Frey Filaments. Two
days following surgery, mice were placed on an elevated wire
mesh rack (∼24 inches high) in plexiglass cages. This allowed
for access of the plantar surface of the hindpaw and testing
using von-Frey monofilaments. Filaments (10 g maximum fiber
stimulation) were applied to the mid paw plantar surface near
the incision. Individual paw responses to mechanical stimulation
were quantified using the Dixon up-down method and allowed
for determination of the 50% paw withdrawal threshold (PWT).
Corneal Kindling Assay
CF-1 mice were kindled according to the optimized protocol
defined by Matagne and Klitgaard (67) and Rowley and White
(68). Briefly, mice were stimulated twice daily (5 days/week)
with a corneal stimulation of 3 mA (60 Hz) for 3 s. Prior to each
stimulation, a drop of 0.9% saline containing 0.5% tetracaine
hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States)
was applied to the cornea to ensure local anesthesia and
good electrical conductivity. Stimulations were delivered 4 h
apart. Animals were considered kindled when they displayed
five consecutive stage five seizures according to the Racine
scale (69, 70).
Viral Infection-Induced Seizure Assay
Mice (C57Bl/6J; The Jackson Laboratory) exposed to the music
intervention for 21 days, or to the standard housing conditions
(control), were infected with Theiler’s Murine Encephalomyelitis
Virus (TMEV) by intracortical administration as described
elsewhere (71, 72). During the 7-day post viral infection
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
4
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
period, the animals were evaluated for acute handling-induced
seizure severity.
Statistical Analysis
Single group comparisons were made using a t-test. Multiple
group comparisons were made using a one-way or a two-way
ANOVA followed by a Newman-Keuls or a Bonferroni post-
hoc test. Data analysis were completed using statistical software
(GraphPad Prism). A p< 0.05 was considered significant. Data
are presented as means ± standard error. Animals protected
(without seizure) were compared to those with seizures by the
Fisher’s exact test (corneal kindling). Survival in the kindling
model was evaluated using the Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) and
Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon tests. In the TMEV model, behavioral
seizures were evaluated using the Mann-Whitney U-test.
RESULTS
In order to test effects of music on analgesia and antiseizure
activity in animal models of epilepsy and pain, we created a
playlist comprising Mozart compositions previously shown to
reduce epileptic seizures or epileptiform discharges in PWE
(28, 31, 35, 36, 41, 42, 73, 74). The playlist was prepared and
delivered as described in the Methods section. Mice were either
exposed daily to music for at least 21 consecutive days (the
music-treated group), or maintained under ambient noise in the
standard housing conditions (the control group).
Analgesic Assays
In CD-1 mice, we first determined whether hyperalgesia
following intraplantar carrageenan would be reduced in music-
exposed animals. CD-1 mice (N = 5–8 per group) were evaluated
for thermal hyperalgesia following carrageenan administration
and, as shown Figure 1A and Table 2, there were no significant
differences in PWL between music-treated and control groups.
We then selected several analgesic compounds, including
approved analgesic drugs or novel analgesic drug candidates,
to be evaluated in control and music-exposed mice. Moderate
or sub-therapeutic doses of each compound (data not shown)
were therefore evaluated in combination with music treatment.
Mice receiving an acute dose of ibuprofen showed a significant
reduction in hyperalgesia when treated in combination with
music, as demonstrated by an increase in post-carrageenan PWL
in ibuprofen + music-exposed mice, whereas other compounds
did not significantly reduce this hyperalgesic response to
carrageenan (Figure 1B and Table 2). Plantar edema was also
evaluated in all carrageenan-treated mice and it was observed
that edema was reduced when music exposure was paired with
specific compounds. As illustrated in Figure 2 and Table 2,
we observed a reduction in post-carrageenan paw thickness
in music-exposed mice co-treated with the galanin analog
NAX 5055 or cannabidiol. This anti-edema effect was not
observed with other drugs tested. In addition to testing in
CD-1 mice, CF-1 mice were also evaluated in the carrageenan
assay following exposure to music. The CF-1 animal strain was
used for evaluation of anti-seizure effects of music exposure
and therefore this animal strain was also included in analgesic
FIGURE 1 | Analgesic effects of music-based intervention in the carrageenan
model of inflammatory pain in CD-1 mice. (A)—effects of 21-day exposure to
the Mozart playlist (MUSIC–blue; CONTROL–white) on paw withdrawal latency.
Carrageenan-injected (ipsilateral paws) show thermal hyperalgesia (reduced
withdrawal latency) in comparison to non-injected (contralateral) paws.
(B)—effects of music (MUSIC–blue; CONTROL–white) on activity of ibuprofen
following i.p. administration. Ibuprofen was administered at a dose of 25
mg/kg, 30 min prior to testing. Hyperalgesia was observed in animals exposed
to control conditions whereas music-exposed and ibuprofen-treated animals
show a normalized response to thermal stimulation (reduction of hyperalgesia).
N = 5–8 per group. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Data were analyzed
using a two-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni post-hoc test.
testing in the carrageenan assay. In CF-1 animals, a moderate
analgesic effect of music was observed, as the difference score
of PWL (contralateral latency—ipsilateral latency) was reduced
in music-exposed mice (Figure 3A). Furthermore, there was
a reduction in carrageenan-induced edema in music-treated
mice (Figure 3B).
In addition to the inflammatory model of pain, we evaluated
thermal pain and mechanical allodynia in music-exposed
mice in a model of post-surgical pain. Incisional pain results
from a combination of innate factors responding to this
acute tissue injury, and involves both peripheral and central
pain pathways. There were no significant differences in PWL
to thermal stimulus between the music and control groups
(Figure 4A), whereas we observed significant increase in the paw
withdrawal threshold (incised (ipsilateral) paw normalized to
contralateral paw) following mechanical (von Frey) stimulation
(Figure 4B).
The
variance
in
response
following
plantar
incision suggests a greater benefit of music exposure in
mechanical
stimulation
rather
than
thermal
stimulation.
Additional studies are needed to further explore the mechanisms
whereby music preferentially affects mechanical allodynia in
this model.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
5
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
TABLE 2 | Latency and edema differences (vs. contralateral) for both the control (ambient noise) and music-exposed CD-1 mice treated with various analgesic
compounds and evaluated in the carrageenan model of inflammatory pain.
Compound
Latency difference (sec)
% of Contralateral paw thickness
Control
Music
Control
Music
Vehicle
3.68 ± 0.68
2.79 ± 0.69
149.9 ± 5.6
137.6 ± 7.5
Galanin analog NAX 5055, 4 mg/kg
2.91 ± 0.61
1.65 ± 0.60
130.7 ± 2.5
119.5 ± 3.6*
Levetiracetam, 400 mg/kg
2.30 ± 0.58
2.07 ± 0.50
158.7 ± 5.8
137.9 ± 10.50
Cannabidiol, 100 mg/kg
2.18 ± 0.50
1.39 ± 0.64
167.0 ± 9.34
133.2 ± 1.83**
Ibuprofen, 25 mg/kg
2.57 ± 0.90
0.18 ± 0.48*
143.0 ± 4.60
135.9 ± 1.6
Means ± standard error, N = 5–8 per group. *P < 0.05 compared to control. **P < 0.01 compared to control. Data were analyzed by t-test (music-exposed vs. control for each
treatment arm).
FIGURE 2 | Effects of music-based intervention on paw thickness (edema)
following carrageenan administration in CD-1 mice. (A)—Carrageenan-injected
(ipsilateral paws) show increased thickness (caliper measurement across the
dorso-ventral aspect of the paw) compared to non-injected (contralateral)
paws (MUSIC–blue; CONTROL–white). (B)—effects of music (MUSIC–blue;
CONTROL–white) on activity of Cannabidiol (CBD, 100 mg/kg) following i.p.
administration. CBD was administered 120 min prior to testing. Edema was
observed following carrageenan in animals exposed to control conditions
whereas music-exposed and CBD-treated animals show a diminished edema.
N = 6–8 per group. ***P < 0.001. Data were analyzed using a two-way
ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni post-hoc test.
Epilepsy Studies
Previous studies suggested that exposure to the Mozart music
had antiseizure effects in rat model of absence seizures (34),
and can reduce cognitive impairment in rat model of status
epilepticus (54). We tested effects of the Mozart playlist on
seizures in the corneal kindling model of epilepsy in CF-1 mice.
Exposure to music did not affect the rate of kindling. There were
no significant differences between music-exposed and control
mice in acquisition of a fully kindled state (data not shown).
The mean number of stimulations required for the first seizure
to be observed was 4.2 ± 0.7 and 4.5 ± 0.5 for the control
and music-exposed groups, respectively. Similarly, there were
no differences in the number of stimulations to reach the first
generalized seizure (11.1 ± 2.3 and 11.1 ± 1.2 for control
and music-exposed groups, respectively). It also took a similar
number of stimulations to achieve a fully kindled status (33.6
± 2.9 and 37.5 ± 2.6 for control and music-exposed groups,
respectively). Interestingly, as summarized in Figure 5, though
there were no significant differences in the number of animals
that reached a fully kindled state (Figure 5A), once kindling was
established there was a significant reduction of seizure burden
(cumulative score of behavioral seizures) in music-exposed mice
(Figure 5B). Furthermore, music-exposed CF-1 mice had a
significantly higher survival rate (Figure 6).
In order to evaluate the potential effects of music exposure in
an inflammatory model of epilepsy, we also tested control and
music-treated mice for the presence of handling-induced seizures
in the TMEV model of epilepsy. Prior exposure to music did not
have an effect on the presence of handling-induced seizures in
this model. Therefore, following intracortical administration of
TMEV, which produces a period (5–10 days) of increased seizure
susceptibility, both music-exposed and control mice show similar
handling-induced seizure burden (see Figure 7). Although there
were no significant differences in seizure burden observed in
the TMEV assay, it is noteworthy that music exposure was
stopped on the evening prior to inoculation. Therefore, given
the potential for music exposure to mediate central inflammatory
responses, additional work is needed in this model that includes
music exposure throughout the acute infection period.
DISCUSSION
There is an increasing interest in non-pharmacological therapies
for the treatment of a number of disease states, including
chronic pain management. For example, the American College
of Physicians updated clinical guidelines recommending physical
exercise and yoga as the first line therapy for lower back
pain (75). While there are many animal studies on exercise-
induced analgesia (76, 77), analgesic properties of music
have been sparsely investigated in animal models (43) in
contrast to growing clinical evidence (22, 24–26, 78–82).
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
6
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
FIGURE 3 | Analgesic effects of music-based intervention in the carrageenan model of inflammatory pain in CF-1 mice. (A)—effects of 21-day exposure to the Mozart
playlist (MUSIC–blue; CONTROL–white) on paw withdrawal latency difference. Latency differences (contralateral PWL–ipsilateral PWL) show that hyperalgesia was
observed in animals exposed to control conditions and music-exposed mice show a reduced latency difference.*P < 0.05. (B)—Effects of music-based intervention
on paw thickness (edema) following carrageenan administration in CF-1 mice. Edema was observed following carrageenan in animals exposed to control conditions
whereas music-exposed animals show a diminished edema (MUSIC–blue; CONTROL–white). **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. N = 5–8 per group. Data were analyzed using
either a t-test (A) or a two-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni post-hoc test (B).
FIGURE 4 | Effects of music intervention in plantar incision model of surgical
pain in CD-1 mice. (A)—Paw withdrawal latency (PWL; sec) following thermal
stimulation in mice following plantar incision. Incised paws (ipsilateral) show a
greatly diminished PWL as compared to non-incised (contralateral) paws.
****P < 0.0001. (B)—Paw withdrawal threshold to mechanical stimulation
following plantar incision. Thresholds in ipsilateral paws are shown as a
percentage (%) of the contralateral paw withdrawal threshold. *P < 0.05. N =
13–15. Data were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni
post-hoc test (A) or a t-test (B).
To
the
best of
our
knowledge,
this is the
first study
in animal models of pain illustrating how exposure to
music can enhance the antinociceptive activities of analgesic
drugs. Given gastrointestinal and cardiovascular toxicity of
NSAIDs, and liabilities of opioid-based analgesics, our current
work supports further investigation of combining music-based
interventions with analgesic compounds to develop novel
FIGURE 5 | Antiseizure effects of music-based intervention in the corneal
kindling model of epilepsy in CF-1 mice. (A)—The percentage of fully kindled
animals, as well as the number of fully kindled animals (number reaching fully
kindled status / N; e.g., 7/11 and 5/15 for CONTROL- (white) and MUSIC
(blue)-treated groups, respectively), is shown for each treatment group.
(B)—The cumulative seizure burden (sum of all Racine scores for each
stimulation) for all animals following achievement of fully kindled status. Mice
exposed to music showed a lower post-kindling seizure burden. *P < 0.05
compared to control kindled. Data were compared by a Fisher’s exact test
(A) or a t-test (B).
therapies for pain. Our preliminary results that music treatment
concurrently reduced pain and paw edema in the inflammatory
model of pain warrants more studies in arthritis-related
animal models.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
7
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
FIGURE 6 | Reduced mortality in animals exposed to daily music during
kindling development. A survival analysis was conducted for all animals (N =
20 per group at study start) during kindling acquisition in CF-1 mice. While
nearly 50% of control kindled animals die by the end of kindling acquisition, a
significantly lower portion of mice in the music (music + kindling) died during
this period. Groups were compared by Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) and
Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon tests.
FIGURE 7 | Evaluation of the effects of music treatment on handling-induced
seizures in the TMEV model of acquired epilepsy. Groups of mice (N = 10)
were exposed to either control conditions or music for a 3-week period prior to
inoculation with TMEV. Daily handling sessions occurred during day 3—day 7
post-inoculation wherein seizures were scored (Racine scale). The cumulative
seizure burden during this time is shown in (A). The final cumulative seizure
burden, expressed as a percentage of control-treated animals, is shown in
(B). Groups were compared by a Mann-Whitney U-test.
The antiseizure effects of the Mozart music in mice models
of epilepsy confirmed previously published observations in
rats (34). Given the clinical evidence supporting antiseizure
effects of Mozart music in patients with epilepsy (28, 33, 35–
42, 83), and preclinical evidence that the Mozart music can
upregulate expression of BDNF in the rat hippocampus and
reduce cognitive impairment in status epilepticus model in rats
(54, 84, 85), our findings warrant further investigation in other
models of epilepsy and epileptogenesis. This work also supports
research on the Mozart music in canine epilepsy (86). The
decrease in the kindling-related mortality in CF-1 strain of
mice (but not CD-1) was significant and unexpected, although
the Mozart music as a preventive therapy for SUDEP was
previously suggested (87). One possible mechanism by which
Mozart music may improve mortality is via cardiovascular effects
(33, 55, 83, 88), also relevant in the kindling experiments (89).
Our current results encourage more in-depth studies in SUDEP
animal models.
In these studies, we utilized multiple strains of mice to
evaluate the effect of music exposure on evoked pain and seizure
acquisition. CD-1 mice are commonly used for pharmacologic
and behavioral testing and therefore this strain was used for
analgesia assays. However, we observed that this strain of mice
does not survive kindling stimulation and therefore was not
evaluated in this model (data not shown). By contrast, CF-1
mice are routinely used in the kindling model and demonstrate
a robust and reproducible kindling acquisition rate (68, 90).
The reduction in mortality and post-kindling seizure burden in
the kindling model suggests the potential for music-mediated
disease burden and validates use of this strain for additional
testing. Therefore, we also evaluated this strain following music
exposure in pain models. Beneficial effects of music in the
kindling and pain models is suggestive of a potential anti-
inflammatory effect. Therefore, we also sought to evaluate anti-
seizure effects of music exposure in the TMEV model of epilepsy.
This model requires C57Bl/6J mice and therefore this strain was
used (91, 92).
We acknowledge many limitations of this present study which
was focused on surveying music effects in mouse pain and
epilepsy models, rather than in-depth mechanistic studies. Daily
exposure to the Mozart music was limited to only 3 weeks
prior to most tests, and this duration was based on previous
studies in rats (34). However, it is unclear if longer durations
could have more pronounced effects given that we observed
variations in effects of music depending on a strain of mice (CD-
1 vs. CF1). In pilot experiments, we did not observe significant
differences in seizure thresholds in the 6 Hz, MES and minimal
clonic seizure models in the CD-1 strain, and no additional
antiseizure effects were observed in the presence of levetiracetam
and clobazam (data not shown). Another limitation was the use
of ambient noise for the control group instead of a “negative”
control (e.g., playing another type of music or white noise).
However, a negative control (retrograde inversion of Mozart’s
K.448) was previously used to show that specific musical
structures in Mozart’s K.448, such as rhythm, could account
for an increased expression of BDNF in the rat hippocampus
(85). Also specific physiological effects of the Mozart’s music
(as compared to “other” music) were reported elsewhere (55,
93), while there were no differences in expression of BDNF
between control (no sound) and the white noise as compared
to music intervention in mice (44). Further optimization of
exposure to music (daily exposure, total duration, volume,
compilation of specific musical compositions) is essential before
more conclusions can be drawn regarding what types of epileptic
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
8
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
seizures and what types of pain are most sensitive to the music-
based intervention.
Mechanisms of Analgesic and Antiseizure
Effects of Music
Functional effects of music on the nervous system have been
extensively studied (56, 94–99). Music is complex by nature thus
creating additional challenges when dissecting a mechanism of
action for its analgesic and antiseizure properties. Herein, we
hypothesize that neuroactive effects of music may involve: (1)
the brain neuroplasticity through upregulation of BDNF (84,
85), (2) modulation of the parasympathetic tone (28, 33, 83),
and (3) possible contributions from the dopaminergic system
(4, 28, 100) and opioid receptors (101). Since music was shown
to decrease stress hormone cortisol (94, 102, 103), an additional
target for music-evoked antiseizure and analgesic activities can
be modulation of the HPA axis (103–108) and proinflammatory
cytokines such as IL-6 (94, 95, 109–112). However, it is important
to note that these potential mechanisms were not evaluated in
the current study and further investigation is required to test this
underlying hypothesis.
Our experiments showed more profound outcomes of music
in pain models as compared to those in epilepsy models.
These observations can be accounted for by numerous factors.
For example, our study protocol using a 3-week exposure
to music could favor responses associated with sub-chronic
modulation of the HPA axis and a reduction in post-insult
cytokine release. Further, anti-inflammatory effects of music
exposure may have multiple sites of action, including central
(spinal) and peripheral (dorsal root ganglion and nociceptor-
mediated) effects. If neuroplasticity-based changes in excitatory
and inhibitory pathways in the brain play a significant role in
music-evoked antiseizure effects, then longer-term exposure to
music may produce more outcomes in epilepsy animal models.
Noteworthy, Mozart music was shown to yield time-dependent
increase in the BDNF expression in the rat hippocampus with the
highest levels after 98 days (85). Due to limited data, it is currently
too speculative to infer differences in mechanisms involved in
music-mediated analgesia and antiseizure effects.
Interestingly, the Mozart music was shown to be “active”
in both humans and rodents, suggesting that a more universal
model may explain its “medicinal” properties. As illustrated
in Figure 8, our long term goal is to delineate how specific
musical structures (auditory stimulation) can be translated into
electrical patterns in the brain and the peripheral nervous
system, and subsequently into neurochemical signaling pathways
leading to reduction of seizures or antinociception. From a
translational perspective, interspecies differences in processing
sound must be taken into account. For example, mice hearing
extends into the ultrasonic frequencies and ranges from 1 to
ca. 100 kHz; by contrast, human hearing ranges from 20 to
20 kHz. In addition, “Hearing is most sensitive for humans
at frequencies of approximately 1 to 4 kHz and approximately
16 kHz for mice. Misunderstanding of the differences in
sensitivity to sound of different frequencies across species
could lead to the incorrect assumption that if humans can
hear a sound, mice can hear it as well.” (117). Studies
suggest that rodents may evolved the ability to process musical
rhythms via midbrain (118). Since the antiseizure effects of
the Mozart music were also observed in people with epilepsy
when music was delivered during sleep (42), we hypothesize
that rhythmic and melodic structures may exert diverse and
overlapping effects when processed by the brainstem, midbrain
and forebrain.
Likely musical elements in the Mozart K.448 that can in
part account for the observed effects are rhythm and tempo,
phrase structure and punctuation (or cadence). Indeed, this
may be due to the fact that there is a connection between a
basic periodic pulse in perception and physical and physiological
activities. “Many activities, such as sucking in newborn infants,
rocking, walking, and beating of the heart, occur with periods
of approximately 500 ms to 1 s.” (119) The notion of periodicity
is important because the Mozart’s music is replete with periodic
repetition. Next, another of Mozart’s pieces, the piano sonata
in C Major, K.545 has also been found to have similar effects.
Accordingly, a comparative analysis of the first movement
of each piece yielded the following features that align with
periodic repetition: rhythm (via use of a rhythm schemata),
phrase length (specifically the Classical ideal of the four-bar
phrase) and the related phenomenon of punctuation, and
melodic sequences. In regards to rhythm, the first movement
of both pieces have a continuous flow of sixteen notes.
However, both pieces have objective rhythmization (in the
case of K.545—for instance—there is an eighth note on each
downbeat throughout the transition). The four-bar phrase and
melodic sequence demonstrate periodicity at a higher level
(i.e., there is more content). It seems likely that the periodic
structure present in both pieces may exert their physiological
effects, but more experiments are needed in order to support
this hypothesis.
Translational Implications of Studying
Enriched Environment
Digital
therapeutics
including
mobile
medical
apps
and
video games have been developed and already received the
regulatory approval for the treatment of diabetes, addiction,
stroke and traumatic brain injury (Table S1). For example,
following a pivotal clinical study, the music-based video
game, MusicGlove, received regulatory clearance by the Food
and Drug Administration as a stroke therapy (120, 121).
Positive data from clinical studies of digital technologies
for the treatment of pain suggest an emergence of “digital
analgesics” (11, 13, 14). Using digital therapeutics to deliver
non-pharmacological
interventions
such
as
music
and/or
physical exercise creates new opportunities for combining
these
modalities
with
pharmacotherapies
and
clinically-
validated natural products (4–6). While development of digital
therapeutics does not require preclinical testing (in contrast
to regulatory requirements for investigational new drug (IND)
enabling studies), translational implications of our study include:
(1) using EE as a preclinical surrogate for testing combinations
of non-pharmacological modalities for the treatment of pain
and other chronic diseases, and (2) preclinical testing and
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
9
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
FIGURE 8 | Working model of mechanisms by which musical compositions can exert their analgesic and anticonvulsant activities. This model serves as a platform for
testing a number of specific hypotheses; not addressed in the present investigation. The auditory system processes acoustic waves with specific rhythm, sequences,
phrases and punctuation which generate action potentials in the nervous system. The role of specific musical structures (rhythm and pitch) in K.448 was studied in
rodents and humans (85), whereas high periodicity was proposed to account for the antiseizure effects (73). Musical tempo modulate emotions (113) which can in turn
affect pain processing (114, 115). Exposure to K.448 was shown to activate the parasympathetic nervous system (33). Music was shown to modulate the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, decrease stress hormone cortisol and increase expression of BDNF in the hippocampus (44, 57, 85, 94, 95, 103). The roles
of prefrontal cortex (PFC) in pain processing (116) and music processing (97) have been studied. Further studies are required to test mechanism(s) of action of
music-enhanced analgesia and antiseizure activities.
TABLE 3 | Feasibility of using preclinical studies to support development of drug-device combinations of digital therapeutics with respective pharmacotherapies for
chronic diseases.
Indication
Non-pharmacological intervention
Pharmacotherapy
Modality
Preclinical study
Digital technology
Pain
Music
This work
Cancer pain model (43)
Mobile app delivering music (16)
Analgesics
Pain
Physical exercise
Exercise-induced analgesia (123, 124)
Mobile app delivering exercise (125)
Analgesics
Epilepsy
Music
This work
Absence seizures model (34)
Mobile app delivering music and self-care (6)
Antiseizure drugs
Depression
Cognitive stimulation
Enriched environment (61)
Mobile app delivering behavioral intervention (126)
Antidepressants
Cancer
Physical exercise
Gentle stretches (127)
Enriched environment (128)
Exercise-empowerment video game (129)
Anticancer drugs
Multiple sclerosis
Physical exercise
Enriched environment (130)
Mobile health exercise app (131)
Immunomodulators
development of drugs in the presence of non-pharmacological
interventions (e.g. music, physical exercise, nutritional therapy,
EE) eventually leading to novel drug-device combination
products for the treatment of pain, epilepsy, depression, cancer
and other chronic diseases. Many failures of investigational
new drugs to reach primary end points in pivotal clinical
studies underscore opportunities for co-development of digital
therapeutics as innovative combination therapies. Given parallel
advances in developing new analgesics (122) and mobile
apps for pain (15), drug-device combination products offer
seamless integration and delivery of two modes of action
simultaneously. This paradigm is further illustrated in Table 3
and Figure 9.
Table 3 demonstrates how employing EE can be useful for
testing combinations of non-pharmacological interventions and
pharmacological compounds, thus potentially improving their
efficacy and potency. For pain, preclinical and clinical studies
suggest that EE and behavioral interventions exert analgesic
effects (45, 132, 133). Music has been shown to produce analgesia
in humans (25–27, 80, 82, 134) and in rats (43). Recent studies
also suggest analgesic activities of exposure to light in both
humans and rats (135, 136). The antinociceptive effects of
the green LED light were associated with down-regulation of
N-type calcium channels in dorsal root ganglion neurons, as
well as were reversed by naloxone, thus also implicating the
opioid-based analgesic mechanism (136). Herein, we propose
that studying combinations of multiple non-pharmacological
modalities can lead to non-invasive and non-addictive treatments
of pain (“digital analgesics”) which can also result in lowering
effective doses of analgesics and improving pain relief. To the best
of our knowledge, there are no published results on combining
analgesics with EE, except those studies indirectly suggesting
beneficial interactions between analgesic neuropeptide galanin
and physical exercise (137–139).
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
10
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
FIGURE 9 | Developing music-based and behavioral interventions and their combinations with pharmaceutical drugs using digital therapeutics strategy. Streaming of
patient-preferred music can be combined with disease self-management and behavioral therapy yielding a mobile app for non-pharmacological interventions. Step 1:
Once the mobile app is clinically tested for efficacy in pivotal randomized controlled trial (RCT) and receives the regulatory approval or clearance, it becomes a mobile
medical app (software as a medical device). Step 2: testing clinical efficacy of combining a pharmaceutical drug (ibuprofen structure is shown as an example of an
analgesic drug) with the mobile medical app can lead to premarket application for the regulatory approval of drug-device combination product in which the mobile
medical app is a medical device.
As illustrated in Figure 9, behavioral therapies, music
and disease self-management can be combined with specific
prescription
medications
using
drug-device
combination
product regulatory mechanism, perhaps leading to reducing
adverse effects and improving patient engagement in therapies
(4). This drug-device combination strategy has apparent
benefits to treat pain or epilepsy because digital therapeutics
can simultaneously target depression as a comorbidity. Since
antidepressants and psychotherapies have comparably low
remission rates (30–40%) in patients with depression (140),
delivering depression-related digital content (e.g., physical
exercise
and
music)
may
help
to
ameliorate
depressive
symptoms (20, 23, 126, 141–143). From preclinical development
perspectives, it is worth mentioning that EE was shown
to reduce seizures in temporal lobe epilepsy model in rats
(144) and depressive symptoms after seizures (49). Our study
also has implications for other chronic medical conditions
including cancer. Music and EE-based interventions may
serve as preclinical surrogate for developing adjunct digital
therapeutics for cancer patients (43, 58, 127), since music can
lower cancer-treatment biomarker IL-6 (94, 112, 145) while
EE and physical exercise can reduce tumor size and increase
lifespan in cancer animal models (127, 128, 146). Other clinical
opportunities to combine non-pharmacological modalities with
pharmaceutical drugs and biologics include Parkinson’s and
Alzheimer’s diseases (21), asthma (147), arthritis (148) and
affective disorders (143, 149).
From a drug development perspective, preclinical studies of
non-pharmacological intervention (e.g., music, physical exercise)
to improve potency, efficacy and therapy outcomes of IND
candidates can be translated into randomized controlled trails
in which IND candidates are clinically tested in conjunction
with digital therapeutic delivering the same type of non-
pharmacological intervention. Such innovative approaches to
developing drug-device combination therapies may be further
incentivized by unique ability of mobile apps to harness
GPS data for just-in-time adaptive interventions adjusted for
weather, air quality, or even seasonal changes (150–154). The
opportunity to tailor digital content based on forecast and
current atmospheric conditions was mentioned as a qualitative
feedback from a patient when testing a mobile app for
pain self-management (155). Taken together, delivering non-
pharmacological interventions by mobile technologies offers
innovative means to improve therapy outcomes for pain, epilepsy
and other chronic disorders.
CONCLUSION
Our current study suggest that music-enhanced analgesia may
lead to novel combination therapies comprising music and
analgesic drugs, whereas similar combinations for the treatment
of epileptic seizures need to be further investigated. Music-based
intervention can be integrated with other non-pharmacological
modalities and delivered as digital therapeutics for pain,
epilepsy, depression and other chronic medical conditions.
This work opens new opportunities for employing music and
EE as surrogate for discovering synergistic effects between
non-pharmacological and pharmacological interventions and
leading to innovative drug-device combination therapies for
chronic disorders.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
manuscript and/or the supplementary files.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
CM, MH, MDS, HSW, and GB designed experiments. MH
and GG designed music based intervention. MH, GG, MC,
and EW analyzed music. CM, MH, AK, TU, FV, and GB
performed experiments. CM, MH, MDS, HSW, and GB
analyzed and discussed results. CM, MH, AK, MC, EW, and
GB wrote the manuscript. CM, MDS, HSW, and GB edited
the manuscript.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
11
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
FUNDING
This work was performed using volunteer time and institutional
development funds from the University of Utah.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. Karen Wilcox for helpful discussion
and for sharing her laboratory and supplies necessary for the
experiments. We would like to thank Kristi Johnson, Thomas
Newell, Tim Pruess, Carlos Rueda and Dr. Kyle Thomson
for their generous help and support during pilot experiments.
Figure 9 was created using graphic files available under Creative
Commons.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fneur.
2019.00277/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Available online at: https://www.cdc.gov/
2. Andrews P, Steultjens M, Riskowski J. Chronic widespread pain prevalence
in the general population: a systematic review. Eur J Pain. (2018) 22:5–18.
doi: 10.1002/ejp.1090
3. Fiest KM, Sauro KM, Wiebe S, Patten SB, Kwon CS, Dykeman J,
et al. Prevalence and incidence of epilepsy: A systematic review and
meta-analysis of international studies. Neurology. (2017) 88:296–303.
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003509
4. Bulaj
G.
Combining
non-pharmacological
treatments
with
pharmacotherapies for neurological disorders: a unique interface of
the brain, drug-device, and intellectual property. Front Neurol. (2014) 5:126.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00126
5. Bulaj G, Ahern MM, Kuhn A, Judkins ZS, Bowen RC, Chen Y.
Incorporating natural products, pharmaceutical drugs, self-care and
digital/mobile health technologies into molecular-behavioral combination
therapies for chronic diseases. Curr Clin Pharmacol. (2016) 11:128–45.
doi: 10.2174/1574884711666160603012237
6. Afra P, Bruggers CS, Sweney M, Fagatele L, Alavi F, Greenwald M, et al.
Mobile Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) for the treatment of epilepsy:
development of digital therapeutics comprising behavioral and music-based
interventions for neurological disorders. Front Hum Neurosci. (2018) 12:171.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00171
7. Shuren J, Patel B, Gottlieb S. FDA Regulation of mobile medical apps. JAMA.
(2018) 320:337–8. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.8832
8. Lee TT, Kesselheim AS. U.S. Food and Drug Administration precertification
pilot
program
for
digital
health
software:
weighing
the
benefits
and
risks.
Ann
Intern
Med.
(2018)
168:730–2.
doi:
10.7326/M1
7-2715
9. Hunter JF, Kain ZN, Fortier MA. Pain relief in the palm of your hand:
harnessing mobile health to manage pediatric pain. Paediatr Anaesth. (2019)
29:120–4. doi: 10.1111/pan.13547
10. Chi B, Chau B, Yeo E, Ta P. Virtual reality for spinal cord injury-associated
neuropathic pain: systematic review. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. (2019) 62:49–
57. doi: 10.1016/j.rehab.2018.09.006
11. Dascal J, Reid M, IsHak WW, Spiegel B, Recacho J, Rosen B, et al. Virtual
reality and medical inpatients: a systematic review of randomized, controlled
trials. Innov Clin Neurosci. (2017) 14:14–21. Available online at: http://
innovationscns.com/virtual-reality-and-medical-inpatients-a-systematic-
review-of-randomized-controlled-trials/
12. Jin W, Choo A, Gromala D, Shaw C, Squire P. A Virtual reality
game
for
chronic
pain
management:
a
randomized,
controlled
clinical
study.
Stud
Health
Technol
Inform.
(2016)
220:154–60.
doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-625-5-154
13. Tashjian VC, Mosadeghi S, Howard AR, Lopez M, Dupuy T, Reid M,
et al. Virtual reality for management of pain in hospitalized patients:
results of a controlled trial. JMIR Ment Health. (2017) 4:e9. doi: 10.2196/
mental.7387
14. Won AS, Bailey J, Bailenson J, Tataru C, Yoon IA, Golianu B.
Immersive virtual reality for pediatric pain. Children. (2017) 4:E52.
doi: 10.3390/children4070052
15. Thurnheer
SE,
Gravestock
I,
Pichierri
G,
Steurer
J,
Burgstaller
JM.
Benefits
of
mobile
apps
in
pain
management:
systematic
review.
JMIR
Mhealth
Uhealth.
(2018)
6:e11231.
doi:
10.2196/
11231
16. Chai PR, Schreiber KL, Taylor SW, Jambaulikar GD, Kikut A, Hasdianda
MA, et al. The feasibility and acceptability of a smartphone-based
music intervention for acute pain. Proc Annu Hawaii Int Conf Syst Sci.
(2019) 2019:3917–25.
17. Pandher PS, Bhullar KK. Smartphone applications for seizure management.
Health Informatics J. (2016) 22:209–20. doi: 10.1177/1460458214540906
18. DiIorio C, Bamps Y, Walker ER, Escoffery C. Results of a research study
evaluating WebEase, an online epilepsy self-management program. Epilep
Behav. (2011) 22:469–74. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2011.07.030
19. Escoffery C, McGee R, Bidwell J, Sims C, Thropp EK, Frazier C, et al. A review
of mobile apps for epilepsy self-management. Epile Behav. (2018) 81:62–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.12.010
20. Schriewer K, Bulaj G. Music streaming services as adjunct therapies
for depression, anxiety, and bipolar symptoms: convergence of digital
technologies, mobile apps, emotions, and global mental health. Front Public
Health. (2016) 4:217. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2016.00217
21. Sihvonen AJ, Sarkamo T, Leo V, Tervaniemi M, Altenmuller E, Soinila
S. Music-based interventions in neurological rehabilitation. Lancet Neurol.
(2017) 16:648–60. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30168-0
22. Garza-Villarreal EA, Wilson AD, Vase L, Brattico E, Barrios FA, Jensen TS,
et al. Music reduces pain and increases functional mobility in fibromyalgia.
Front Psychol. (2014) 5:90. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00090
23. Leubner
D,
Hinterberger
T.
Reviewing
the
effectiveness
of
music
interventions
in
treating
depression.
Front
Psychol.
(2017)
8:1109.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01109
24. Chai PR, Carreiro S, Ranney ML, Karanam K, Ahtisaari M, Edwards R,
et al. Music as an adjunct to opioid-based analgesia. J Med Toxicol. (2017)
13:249–54. doi: 10.1007/s13181-017-0621-9
25. Garza-Villarreal EA, Pando V, Vuust P, Parsons C. Music-induced analgesia
in chronic pain conditions: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain
Physician. (2017) 20:597–610. doi: 10.1101/105148
26. Martin-Saavedra JS, Vergara-Mendez LD, Pradilla I, Velez-van-Meerbeke A,
Talero-Gutierrez C. Standardizing music characteristics for the management
of pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. Complement
Ther Med. (2018) 41:81–9. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2018.07.008
27. Lunde
SJ,
Vuust
P,
Garza-Villarreal
EA,
Vase
L.
Music-
induced
analgesia:
how
does
music
relieve
pain?
Pain.
(2018).
doi: 10.1097/00006396-900000000-98808. [Epub ahead of print].
28. Dastgheib SS, Layegh P, Sadeghi R, Foroughipur M, Shoeibi A, Gorji A. The
effects of Mozart’s music on interictal activity in epileptic patients: systematic
review and meta-analysis of the literature. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. (2014)
14:420. doi: 10.1007/s11910-013-0420-x
29. Liao H, Jiang G, Wang X. Music therapy as a non-pharmacological
treatment
for
epilepsy.
Exp
Rev
Neurother.
(2015)
15:993–1003.
doi: 10.1586/14737175.2015.1071191
30. Hughes JR. The mozart effect: additional data. Epilep Behav. (2002) 3:182–4.
31. Hughes
JR,
Daaboul
Y,
Fino
JJ,
Shaw
GL.
The
“Mozart
effect”
on
epileptiform
activity.
Clin
Electroencephalogr.
(1998)
29:109–19.
doi: 10.1006/ebeh.2002.0329
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
12
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
32. Hughes JR, Fino JJ, Melyn MA. Is there a chronic change of the “Mozart
effect” on epileptiform activity? A case study. Clin Electroencephalogr. (1999)
30:44–5. doi: 10.1177/155005949903000204
33. Lin LC, Chiang CT, Lee MW, Mok HK, Yang YH, Wu HC, et al.
Parasympathetic activation is involved in reducing epileptiform discharges
when listening to Mozart music. Clin Neurophysiol. (2013) 124:1528–35.
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2013.02.021
34. Lin LC, Juan CT, Chang HW, Chiang CT, Wei RC, Lee MW, et al. Mozart
K.448 attenuates spontaneous absence seizure and related high-voltage
rhythmic spike discharges in Long Evans rats. Epilep Res. (2013) 104:234–40.
doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2012.11.005
35. Lin LC, Lee MW, Wei RC, Mok HK, Wu HC, Tsai CL, et al. Mozart
k.545 mimics mozart k.448 in reducing epileptiform discharges in epileptic
children. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. (2012) 2012:607517.
doi: 10.1155/2012/607517
36. Lin LC, Lee WT, Wang CH, Chen HL, Wu HC, Tsai CL, et al. Mozart K.448
acts as a potential add-on therapy in children with refractory epilepsy. Epilep
Behav. (2011) 20:490–3. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2010.12.044
37. Lin LC, Lee WT, Wu HC, Tsai CL, Wei RC, Jong YJ, et al. Mozart K.448 and
epileptiform discharges: effect of ratio of lower to higher harmonics. Epilep
Res. (2010) 89:238–45. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2010.01.007
38. Lin LC, Lee WT, Wu HC, Tsai CL, Wei RC, Mok HK, et al. The
long-term effect of listening to Mozart K.448 decreases epileptiform
discharges in children with epilepsy. Epilep Behav. (2011) 21:420–4.
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2011.05.015
39. Lin LC, Ouyang CS, Chiang CT, Wu HC, Yang RC. Early evaluation of the
therapeutic effectiveness in children with epilepsy by quantitative EEG: a
model of Mozart K.448 listening–a preliminary study. Epilep Res. (2014)
108:1417–26. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2014.06.020
40. Lin LC, Lee MW, Wei RC, Mok HK, Yang RC. Mozart K.448 listening
decreased seizure recurrence and epileptiform discharges in children with
first unprovoked seizures: a randomized controlled study. BMC Complement
Altern Med. (2014) 14:17. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-17
41. Coppola G, Toro A, Operto FF, Ferrarioli G, Pisano S, Viggiano A, et al.
Mozart’s music in children with drug-refractory epileptic encephalopathies.
Epilep Behav. (2015) 50:18–22. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.05.038
42. Bodner M, Turner RP, Schwacke J, Bowers C, Norment C. Reduction of
seizure occurrence from exposure to auditory stimulation in individuals with
neurological handicaps: a randomized controlled trial. PLoS ONE. (2012)
7:e45303. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045303
43. Gao J, Chen S, Lin S, Han H. Effect of music therapy on pain behaviors in
rats with bone cancer pain. J BUON. (2016) 21:466–72.
44. Li WJ, Yu H, Yang JM, Gao J, Jiang H, Feng M, et al. Anxiolytic effect of music
exposure on BDNFMet/Met transgenic mice. Brain Res. (2010) 1347:71–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.05.080
45. Bushnell MC, Case LK, Ceko M, Cotton VA, Gracely JL, Low LA, et al. Effect
of environment on the long-term consequences of chronic pain. Pain. (2015)
156 (Suppl. 1):S42–9. doi: 10.1097/01.j.pain.0000460347.77341.bd
46. van
Praag
H,
Kempermann
G,
Gage
FH.
Neural
consequences
of
environmental
enrichment.
Nat
Rev
Neurosci.
(2000)
1:191–8.
doi: 10.1038/35044558
47. Young D, Lawlor PA, Leone P, Dragunow M, During MJ. Environmental
enrichment inhibits spontaneous apoptosis, prevents seizures and is
neuroprotective. Nat Med. (1999) 5:448–53. doi: 10.1038/7449
48. Fares RP, Belmeguenai A, Sanchez PE, Kouchi HY, Bodennec J, Morales
A, et al. Standardized environmental enrichment supports enhanced brain
plasticity in healthy rats and prevents cognitive impairment in epileptic rats.
PLoS ONE. (2013) 8:e53888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053888
49. Koh S, Magid R, Chung H, Stine CD, Wilson DN. Depressive behavior
and selective down-regulation of serotonin receptor expression after early-
life seizures: reversal by environmental enrichment. Epilep Behav. (2007)
10:26–31. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2006.11.008
50. Kimura LF, Mattaraia VGM, Picolo G. Distinct environmental enrichment
protocols reduce anxiety but differentially modulate pain sensitivity in rats.
Behav Brain Res. (2017). doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2017.11.012
51. Tai LW, Yeung SC, Cheung CW. Enriched environment and effects on
neuropathic pain: experimental findings and mechanisms. Pain Pract. (2018)
18:1068–82. doi: 10.1111/papr.12706
52. Meng B, Zhu S, Li S, Zeng Q, Mei B. Global view of the mechanisms of
improved learning and memory capability in mice with music-exposure by
microarray. Brain Res Bull. (2009) 80:36–44. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2009.
05.020
53. Flores-Gutierrez E, Cabrera-Munoz EA, Vega-Rivera NM, Ortiz-Lopez L,
Ramirez-Rodriguez GB. Exposure to patterned auditory stimuli during
acute stress prevents despair-like behavior in adult mice that were
previously housed in an enriched environment in combination with
auditory stimuli. Neural Plast. (2018) 2018:8205245. doi: 10.1155/2018/
8205245
54. Xing Y, Qin Y, Jing W, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Guo D, et al. Exposure
to
mozart
music
reduces
cognitive
impairment
in
pilocarpine-
induced
status
epilepticus
rats.
Cogn
Neurodyn.
(2016)
10:23–30.
doi: 10.1007/s11571-015-9361-1
55. Lemmer B. Effects of music composed by Mozart and Ligeti on blood
pressure and heart rate circadian rhythms in normotensive and hypertensive
rats. Chronobiol Int. (2008) 25:971–86. doi: 10.1080/07420520802539415
56. Angelucci F, Fiore M, Ricci E, Padua L, Sabino A, Tonali PA. Investigating
the neurobiology of music: brain-derived neurotrophic factor modulation in
the hippocampus of young adult mice. Behav Pharmacol. (2007) 18:491–6.
doi: 10.1097/FBP.0b013e3282d28f50
57. Angelucci F, Ricci E, Padua L, Sabino A, Tonali PA. Music exposure
differentially alters the levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and nerve
growth factor in the mouse hypothalamus. Neurosci Lett. (2007) 429:152–5.
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.10.005
58. Nunez MJ, Mana P, Linares D, Riveiro MP, Balboa J, Suarez-Quintanilla
J, et al. Music, immunity and cancer. Life Sci. (2002) 71:1047–57.
doi: 10.1016/S0024-3205(02)01796-4
59. Kuhlmann AYR, de Rooij A, Hunink MGM, De Zeeuw CI, Jeekel J. Music
affects rodents: a systematic review of experimental research. Front Behav
Neurosci. (2018) 12:301. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00301
60. Rief W, Barsky AJ, Bingel U, Doering BK, Schwarting R, Wohr M, et al.
Rethinking psychopharmacotherapy: The role of treatment context and
brain plasticity in antidepressant and antipsychotic interventions. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev. (2016) 60:51–64. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.11.008
61. Branchi I, Santarelli S, Capoccia S, Poggini S, D’Andrea I, Cirulli F,
et al. Antidepressant treatment outcome depends on the quality of the
living environment: a pre-clinical investigation in mice. PLoS ONE. (2013)
8:e62226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062226
62. Metcalf CS, Klein BD, McDougle DR, Zhang L, Smith MD, Bulaj G, et al.
Analgesic properties of a peripherally acting and GalR2 receptor-preferring
galanin analog in inflammatory, neuropathic, and acute pain models. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther. (2015) 352:185–93. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.219063
63. Hargreaves K, Dubner R, Brown F, Flores C, Joris J. A new and sensitive
method for measuring thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia. Pain.
(1988) 32:77–88. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(88)90026-7
64. Dirig DM, Salami A, Rathbun ML, Ozaki GT, Yaksh TL. Characterization
of
variables
defining
hindpaw
withdrawal
latency
evoked
by
radiant
thermal
stimuli.
J
Neurosci
Methods.
(1997)
76:183–91.
doi: 10.1016/S0165-0270(97)00097-6
65. Hua XY, Svensson CI, Matsui T, Fitzsimmons B, Yaksh TL, Webb
M. Intrathecal minocycline attenuates peripheral inflammation-induced
hyperalgesia by inhibiting p38 MAPK in spinal microglia. Eur J Neurosci.
(2005) 22:2431–40. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04451.x
66. Metcalf CS, Smith MD, Klein BD, McDougle DR, Zhang L, Bulaj
G.
Preclinical
Analgesic
and
Safety
Evaluation
of
the
GalR2-
preferring Analog, NAX 810–2. Neurochem Res. (2017) 42:1983–94.
doi: 10.1007/s11064-017-2229-5
67. Matagne A, Klitgaard H. Validation of corneally kindled mice: a sensitive
screening model for partial epilepsy in man. Epilep Res. (1998) 31:59–71.
doi: 10.1016/S0920-1211(98)00016-3
68. Rowley NM, White HS. Comparative anticonvulsant efficacy in the
corneal kindled mouse model of partial epilepsy: Correlation with
other
seizure
and
epilepsy
models.
Epilep
Res.
(2010)
92:163–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2010.09.002
69. Racine R, Okujava V, Chipashvili S. Modification of seizure activity by
electrical stimulation. 3. Mechanisms. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol.
(1972) 32:295–9. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(72)90178-2
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
13
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
70. Racine RJ. Modification of seizure activity by electrical stimulation. II.
Motor seizure. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. (1972) 32:281–94.
doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(72)90177-0
71. Stewart KA, Wilcox KS, Fujinami RS, White HS. Theiler’s virus infection
chronically alters seizure susceptibility. Epilepsia. (2010) 51:1418–28.
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02405.x
72. Stewart
KA,
Wilcox
KS,
Fujinami
RS,
White
HS.
Development
of
postinfection
epilepsy
after
Theiler’s
virus
infection
of
C57BL/6
mice.
J
Neuropathol
Exp
Neurol.
(2010)
69:1210–9.
doi: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181ffc420
73. Hughes
JR.
The
Mozart
Effect.
Epilep
Behav.
(2001)
2:396–417.
doi: 10.1006/ebeh.2001.0250
74. Coppola G, Operto FF, Caprio F, Ferraioli G, Pisano S, Viggiano
A, et al. Mozart’s music in children with drug-refractory epileptic
encephalopathies: comparison of two protocols. Epilep Behav. (2018) 78:100–
3. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.09.028
75. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, McLean RM, Forciea MA, Clinical Guidelines
Committee of the American College of P. Noninvasive treatments for acute,
subacute, and chronic low back pain: a clinical practice guideline from
the american college of physicians. Ann Intern Med. (2017) 166:514–30.
doi: 10.7326/M16-2367
76. Pitcher MH. The impact of exercise in rodent models of chronic pain. Curr
Osteoporos Rep. (2018) 16:344–59. doi: 10.1007/s11914-018-0461-9
77. Senba E, Kami K. A new aspect of chronic pain as lifestyle-related disease.
Neurobiol Pain. (2017) 1:6–15. doi: 10.1016/j.ynpai.2017.04.003
78. Bradshaw DH, Chapman CR, Jacobson RC, Donaldson GW. Effects of
music engagement on responses to painful stimulation. Clin J Pain. (2012)
28:418–27. doi: 10.1097/AJP.0b013e318236c8ca
79. Bradshaw DH, Donaldson GW, Jacobson RC, Nakamura Y, Chapman
CR.
Individual
differences
in
the
effects
of
music
engagement
on
responses
to
painful
stimulation.
J
Pain.
(2011)
12:1262–73.
doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2011.08.010
80. van der Heijden MJ, Oliai Araghi S, van Dijk M, Jeekel J, Hunink MG. The
effects of perioperative music interventions in pediatric surgery: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS ONE. (2015)
10:e0133608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133608
81. Bernatzky
G,
Presch
M,
Anderson
M,
Panksepp
J.
Emotional
foundations of music as a non-pharmacological pain management
tool in modern medicine. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. (2011) 35:1989–99.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.06.005
82. Lee JH. The effects of music on pain: a meta-analysis. J Music Ther. (2016)
53:430–77. doi: 10.1093/jmt/thw012
83. Lin LC, Ouyang CS, Chiang CT, Wu RC, Wu HC, Yang RC. Listening to
Mozart K.448 decreases electroencephalography oscillatory power associated
with an increase in sympathetic tone in adults: a post-intervention study.
JRSM Open. (2014) 5:2054270414551657. doi: 10.1177/2054270414551657
84. Xing Y, Chen W, Wang Y, Jing W, Gao S, Guo D, et al. Music
exposure improves spatial cognition by enhancing the BDNF level of dorsal
hippocampal subregions in the developing rats. Brain Res Bull. (2016)
121:131–7. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.01.009
85. Xing Y, Xia Y, Kendrick K, Liu X, Wang M, Wu D, et al. Mozart, Mozart
rhythm and retrograde mozart effects: evidences from behaviours and
neurobiology bases. Sci Rep. (2016) 6:18744. doi: 10.1038/srep18744
86. Packer RMA, Hobbs SL, Blackwell EJ. Behavioral interventions as an
adjunctive treatment for canine epilepsy: a missing part of the epilepsy
management toolkit? Front Vet Sci. (2019) 6:3. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2019.00003
87. Scorza
FA,
Arida
RM,
de
Albuquerque
M,
Cavalheiro
EA.
The
role of Mozart’s music in sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: a
new open window of a dark room. Epilep Behav. (2008) 12:208–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2007.09.014
88. Koelsch S, Jancke L. Music and the heart. Eur Heart J. (2015) 36:3043–9.
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv430
89. Bealer SL, Little JG. Seizures following hippocampal kindling induce QT
interval prolongation and increased susceptibility to arrhythmias in rats.
Epilep Res. (2013) 105:216–9. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2013.01.002
90. Metcalf CS, Klein BD, McDougle DR, Zhang L, Kaufmann D, Bulaj G, et al.
Preclinical evaluation of intravenous NAX 810–2, a novel GalR2-preferring
analog, for anticonvulsant efficacy and pharmacokinetics. Epilepsia. (2017)
58:239–46. doi: 10.1111/epi.13647
91. DePaula-Silva AB, Hanak TJ, Libbey JE, Fujinami RS. Theiler’s murine
encephalomyelitis virus infection of SJL/J and C57BL/6J mice: models
for multiple sclerosis and epilepsy. J Neuroimmunol. (2017) 308:30–42.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2017.02.012
92. Broer S, Kaufer C, Haist V, Li L, Gerhauser I, Anjum M, et al.
Brain
inflammation,
neurodegeneration
and
seizure
development
following
picornavirus
infection
markedly
differ
among
virus
and
mouse
strains
and
substrains.
Exp
Neurol.
(2016) 279:57–74.
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.02.011
93. Aoun P, Jones T, Shaw GL, Bodner M. Long-term enhancement of maze
learning in mice via a generalized Mozart effect. Neurol Res. (2005) 27:791–6.
doi: 10.1179/016164105X63647
94. Chanda ML, Levitin DJ. The neurochemistry of music. Trends Cogn Sci.
(2013) 17:179–93. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.007
95. Fancourt D, Ockelford A, Belai A. The psychoneuroimmunological effects
of music: a systematic review and a new model. Brain Behav Immun. (2014)
36:15–26. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.10.014
96. Koelsch S. Towards a neural basis of music-evoked emotions. Trends Cogn
Sci. (2010) 14:131–7. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.002
97. Koelsch S. Brain correlates of music-evoked emotions. Nat Rev Neurosci.
(2014) 15:170–80. doi: 10.1038/nrn3666
98. Salimpoor VN, Benovoy M, Larcher K, Dagher A, Zatorre RJ. Anatomically
distinct dopamine release during anticipation and experience of peak
emotion to music. Nat Neurosci. (2011) 14:257–62. doi: 10.1038/nn.2726
99. Salimpoor VN, van den Bosch I, Kovacevic N, McIntosh AR, Dagher
A,
Zatorre
RJ.
Interactions
between
the
nucleus
accumbens
and
auditory cortices predict music reward value. Science. (2013) 340:216–9.
doi: 10.1126/science.1231059
100. Tasset I, Quero I, Garcia-Mayorgaz AD, del Rio MC, Tunez I, Montilla P.
Changes caused by haloperidol are blocked by music in Wistar rat. J Physiol
Biochem. (2012) 68:175–9. doi: 10.1007/s13105-011-0129-8
101. Mallik A, Chanda ML, Levitin DJ. Anhedonia to music and mu-opioids:
Evidence from the administration of naltrexone. Sci Rep. (2017) 7:41952.
doi: 10.1038/srep41952
102. Finn S, Fancourt D. The biological impact of listening to music in clinical and
nonclinical settings: A systematic review. Prog Brain Res. (2018) 237:173–
200. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2018.03.007
103. Ooishi Y, Mukai H, Watanabe K, Kawato S, Kashino M. Increase in salivary
oxytocin and decrease in salivary cortisol after listening to relaxing slow-
tempo and exciting fast-tempo music. PLoS ONE. (2017) 12:e0189075.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189075
104. Maguire J, Salpekar JA. Stress, seizures, and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis targets for the treatment of epilepsy. Epilep Behav. (2013) 26:352–62.
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.09.04
105. Hooper A, Paracha R, Maguire J. Seizure-induced activation of the HPA axis
increases seizure frequency and comorbid depression-like behaviors. Epilep
Behav. (2018) 78:124–33. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.10.025
106. Castro OW, Santos VR, Pun RY, McKlveen JM, Batie M, Holland KD,
et al. Impact of corticosterone treatment on spontaneous seizure frequency
and epileptiform activity in mice with chronic epilepsy. PLoS ONE. (2012)
7:e46044. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046044
107. Nees
F,
Loffler
M,
Usai
K,
Flor
H.
Hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal
axis
feedback
sensitivity
in
different
states
of
back
pain.
Psychoneuroendocrinology.
(2018)
101:60–6.
doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2018.10.026
108. Wulsin AC, Solomon MB, Privitera MD, Danzer SC, Herman JP.
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis dysfunction in epilepsy. Physiol
Behav. (2016) 166:22–31. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.05.015
109. Benson S, Rebernik L, Wegner A, Kleine-Borgmann J, Engler H, Schlamann
M, et al. Neural circuitry mediating inflammation-induced central pain
amplification in human experimental endotoxemia. Brain Behav Immun.
(2015) 48:222–31. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.03.017
110. Wegner A, Elsenbruch S, Maluck J, Grigoleit JS, Engler H, Jager
M, et al. Inflammation-induced hyperalgesia: effects of timing, dosage,
and negative affect on somatic pain sensitivity in human experimental
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
14
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
endotoxemia. Brain Behav Immun. (2014) 41:46–54. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.
05.001
111. Schaible HG. Nociceptive neurons detect cytokines in arthritis. Arthritis Res
Ther. (2014) 16:470. doi: 10.1186/s13075-014-0470-8
112. Stefano GB, Zhu W, Cadet P, Salamon E, Mantione KJ. Music alters
constitutively expressed opiate and cytokine processes in listeners. Med Sci
Monit. (2004) 10:MS18–27.
113. Fernandez-Sotos A, Fernandez-Caballero A, Latorre JM. Influence of tempo
and rhythmic unit in musical emotion regulation. Front Comput Neurosci.
(2016) 10:80. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00080
114. Navratilova E, Morimura K, Xie JY, Atcherley CW, Ossipov MH, Porreca F.
Positive emotions and brain reward circuits in chronic pain. J Comp Neurol.
(2016) 524:1646–52. doi: 10.1002/cne.23968
115. Porreca
F,
Navratilova
E.
Reward,
motivation,
and
emotion
of
pain
and
its
relief.
Pain.
(2017)
158
(Suppl.
1):S43–9.
doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000798
116. Ong WY, Stohler CS, Herr DR. Role of the prefrontal cortex in pain
processing. Mol Neurobiol. (2019) 56:1137–66.
117. Reynolds RP, Kinard WL, Degraff JJ, Leverage N, Norton JN. Noise in a
laboratory animal facility from the human and mouse perspectives. J Am
Assoc Lab Anim Sci. (2010) 49:592–7.
118. Rajendran VG, Harper NS, Garcia-Lazaro JA, Lesica NA, Schnupp JWH.
Midbrain adaptation may set the stage for the perception of musical beat.
Proc Biol Sci. (2017) 284:20171455. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2017.145
119. Krumhansl CL. Rhythm and pitch in music cognition. Psychol Bull. (2000)
126:159–79. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.126.1.159
120. Friedman N, Chan V, Reinkensmeyer AN, Beroukhim A, Zambrano
GJ, Bachman M, et al. Retraining and assessing hand movement
after stroke using the MusicGlove: comparison with conventional hand
therapy and isometric grip training. J Neuroeng Rehabil. (2014) 11:76.
doi: 10.1186/1743-0003-11-76
121. Zondervan
DK,
Friedman
N,
Chang
E,
Zhao
X,
Augsburger
R,
Reinkensmeyer DJ, et al. Home-based hand rehabilitation after chronic
stroke: randomized, controlled single-blind trial comparing the MusicGlove
with a conventional exercise program. J Rehabil Res Dev. (2016) 53:457–72.
doi: 10.1682/JRRD.2015.04.0057
122. Knezevic NN, Yekkirala A, Yaksh TL. Basic/translational development
of forthcoming opioid- and nonopioid-targeted pain therapeutics. Anesth
Analg. (2017) 125:1714–32. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000002442
123. Kami K, Tajima F, Senba E. Exercise-induced hypoalgesia: potential
mechanisms in animal models of neuropathic pain. Anat Sci Int. (2017)
92:79–90. doi: 10.1007/s12565-016-0360-z
124. Kami K, Tajima F, Senba E. Activation of mesolimbic reward system
via laterodorsal tegmental nucleus and hypothalamus in exercise-induced
hypoalgesia. Sci Rep. (2018) 8:11540. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-29915-4
125. Shebib R, Bailey JF, Smittenaar P, Perez DA, Mecklenburg G, Hunter S.
Randomized controlled trial of a 12-week digital care program in improving
low back pain. NPJ Digit Med. (2019) 2:1.
126. Roepke AM, Jaffee SR, Riffle OM, McGonigal J, Broome R, Maxwell B.
Randomized controlled trial of superbetter, a smartphone-based/internet-
based self-help tool to reduce depressive symptoms. Games Health J. (2015)
4:235–46. doi: 10.1089/g4h.2014.0046
127. Berrueta L, Bergholz J, Munoz D, Muskaj I, Badger GJ, Shukla A, et al.
Stretching reduces tumor growth in a mouse breast cancer model. Sci Rep.
(2018) 8:7864. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-26198-7
128. Garofalo S, D’Alessandro G, Chece G, Brau F, Maggi L, Rosa A,
et al. Enriched environment reduces glioma growth through immune
and non-immune mechanisms in mice. Nat Commun. (2015) 6:6623.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms7623
129. Bruggers CS, Baranowski S, Beseris M, Leonard R, Long D, Schulte
E, et al. A Prototype exercise-empowerment mobile video game for
children with cancer, and its usability assessment: developing digital
empowerment interventions for pediatric diseases. Front Pediatr. (2018)
6:69. doi: 10.3389/fped.2018.00069
130. Xiao R, Bergin SM, Huang W, Mansour AG, Liu X, Judd RT, et al. Enriched
environment regulates thymocyte development and alleviates experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice. Brain Behav Immun. (2019) 75:137–
48. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2018.09.028
131. Thirumalai M, Rimmer JH, Johnson G, Wilroy J, Young HJ, Mehta T, et al.
TEAMS (Tele-Exercise and Multiple Sclerosis), a Tailored Telerehabilitation
mHealth app: participant-centered development and usability study. JMIR
Mhealth Uhealth. (2018) 6:e10181. doi: 10.2196/10181
132. Gabriel AF, Marcus MA, Honig WM, Joosten EA. Preoperative housing in
an enriched environment significantly reduces the duration of post-operative
pain in a rat model of knee inflammation. Neurosci Lett. (2010) 469:219–23.
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.11.078
133. Gabriel AF, Paoletti G, Della Seta D, Panelli R, Marcus MA, Farabollini
F, et al. Enriched environment and the recovery from inflammatory pain:
Social versus physical aspects and their interaction. Behav Brain Res. (2010)
208:90–5. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.11.015
134. Dabu-Bondoc S, Vadivelu N, Benson J, Perret D, Kain ZN. Hemispheric
synchronized sounds and perioperative analgesic requirements. Anesth
Analg. (2010) 110:208–10. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e3181bea424
135. Leichtfried V, Matteucci Gothe R, Kantner-Rumplmair W, Mair-Raggautz
M, Bartenbach C, Guggenbichler H, et al. Short-term effects of bright light
therapy in adults with chronic nonspecific back pain: a randomized
controlled
trial.
Pain
Med.
(2014)
15:2003–12.
doi:
10.1111/pme.
12503
136. Ibrahim MM, Patwardhan A, Gilbraith KB, Moutal A, Yang X, Chew LA,
et al. Long-lasting antinociceptive effects of green light in acute and chronic
pain in rats. Pain. (2017) 158:347–60. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000767
137. Sciolino NR, Smith JM, Stranahan AM, Freeman KG, Edwards GL,
Weinshenker D, et al. Galanin mediates features of neural and behavioral
stress resilience afforded by exercise. Neuropharmacology. (2015) 89:255–64.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.09.029
138. Epps SA, Kahn AB, Holmes PV, Boss-Williams KA, Weiss JM, Weinshenker
D. Antidepressant and anticonvulsant effects of exercise in a rat model
of epilepsy and depression comorbidity. Epilep Behav. (2013) 29:47–52.
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.06.023
139. Holmes PV. Trophic Mechanisms for Exercise-Induced Stress Resilience:
Potential Role of Interactions between BDNF and Galanin. Front Psychiatry.
(2014) 5:90. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00090
140. Dunlop BW, Rajendra JK, Craighead WE, Kelley ME, McGrath CL, Choi
KS, et al. Functional connectivity of the subcallosal cingulate cortex and
differential outcomes to treatment with cognitive-behavioral therapy or
antidepressant medication for major depressive disorder. Am J Psychiatry.
(2017) 174:533–45. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16050518
141. McKennon S, Levitt SE, Bulaj G. Commentary: a breathing-based meditation
intervention
for
patients
with
major
depressive
disorder
following
inadequate response to antidepressants: a randomized pilot study. Front
Med. (2017) 4:37. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2017.00037
142. Birney AJ, Gunn R, Russell JK, Ary DV. MoodHacker mobile web
app with email for adults to self-manage mild-to-moderate depression:
randomized
controlled
trial.
JMIR
Mhealth
Uhealth.
(2016)
4:e8.
doi: 10.2196/mhealth.4231
143. Ben-Zeev D, Brian RM, Jonathan G, Razzano L, Pashka N, Carpenter-Song
E, et al. Mobile Health (mHealth) versus clinic-based group intervention for
people with serious mental illness: a randomized controlled trial. Psychiatr
Serv. (2018) 69:978–85. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201800063
144. Vrinda
M,
Sasidharan
A,
Aparna
S,
Srikumar
BN,
Kutty
BM,
Shankaranarayana Rao BS. Enriched environment attenuates behavioral
seizures and depression in chronic temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia. (2017)
58:1148–58. doi: 10.1111/epi.13767
145. Unver N, McAllister F. IL-6 family cytokines: Key inflammatory mediators
as biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.
(2018) 41:10–7. doi: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2018.04.004
146. Bice BD, Stephens MR, Georges SJ, Venancio AR, Bermant PC, Warncke
AV, et al. Environmental enrichment induces pericyte and iga-dependent
wound repair and lifespan extension in a colon tumor model. Cell Rep. (2017)
19:760–73. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.04.006
147. Holtz BE, Murray K, Park T. Serious games for children with chronic
diseases:
a
systematic
review.
Games
Health
J.
(2018)
7:291–301.
doi: 10.1089/g4h.2018.0024
148. Cai RA, Beste D, Chaplin H, Varakliotis S, Suffield L, Josephs F,
et al. Developing and Evaluating JIApp: Acceptability and usability of
a smartphone app system to improve self-management in young people
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
15
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
 Metcalf et al.
Music-Enhanced Analgesic and Antiseizure Activities
with juvenile idiopathic arthritis. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. (2017) 5:e121.
doi: 10.2196/mhealth.7229
149. Mantani A, Kato T, Furukawa TA, Horikoshi M, Imai H, Hiroe T, et al.
Smartphone cognitive behavioral therapy as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy
for refractory depression: randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res.
(2017) 19:e373. doi: 10.2196/jmir.8602
150. Reade S, Spencer K, Sergeant JC, Sperrin M, Schultz DM, Ainsworth J, et al.
Cloudy with a chance of pain: engagement and subsequent attrition of daily
data entry in a smartphone pilot study tracking weather, disease severity,
and physical activity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. JMIR Mhealth
Uhealth. (2017) 5:e37. doi: 10.2196/mhealth.6496
151. Stewart S, Keates AK, Redfern A, McMurray JJV. Seasonal variations
in
cardiovascular
disease.
Nat
Rev
Cardiol.
(2017)
14:654–64.
doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2017.76
152. Cioffi I, Farella M, Chiodini P, Ammendola L, Capuozzo R, Klain C,
et al. Effect of weather on temporal pain patterns in patients with
temporomandibular disorders and migraine. J Oral Rehabil. (2017) 44:333–9.
doi: 10.1111/joor.12498
153. Bolay
H,
Rapoport
A.
Does
low
atmospheric
pressure
independently
trigger
migraine?
Headache.
(2011)
51:1426–30.
doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2011.01996.x
154. Timmermans EJ, Schaap LA, Herbolsheimer F, Dennison EM, Maggi
S, Pedersen NL, et al. The influence of weather conditions on joint
pain in older people with osteoarthritis: results from the european
project on osteoarthritis. J Rheumatol. (2015) 42:1885–92. doi: 10.3899/
jrheum.141594
155. Rabbi M, Aung MS, Gay G, Reid MC, Choudhury T. Feasibility and
Acceptability of mobile phone-based auto-personalized physical activity
recommendations for chronic pain self-management: pilot study on adults. J
Med Internet Res. (2018) 20:e10147. doi: 10.2196/10147
Conflict of Interest Statement: GB is a co-founder, officer and the board
member in Epicadence, Public Benefit Corporation, focused on development
of mobile software for people with epilepsy. GB is a co-inventor on patent-
pending “Multimodal Platform for Treating Epilepsy” licensed to Epicadence
PBC. CM, GB, and HSW are co-inventors on patented technology related to
engineering galanin analogs including NAX-5055 and their use as analgesics and
anticonvulsant drugs. The patents are owned by the University of Utah. GG is a
founder and owner of Greatful Living Productions.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Metcalf, Huntsman, Garcia, Kochanski, Chikinda, Watanabe,
Underwood, Vanegas, Smith, White and Bulaj. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
16
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 277
