 Possible superconductivity in brain 
P. Mikheenko* 
Department of Physics, University of Oslo,  P.O.Box 1048, Blindern, 0316, Oslo, Norway 
*pavlo.mikheenko@fys.uio.no 
 
The unprecedented power of brain suggests that it may process information quantum-mechanically. Since 
quantum processing is already achieved in superconducting quantum computers, it may imply that 
superconductivity is the basis of quantum computation in brain too. Superconductivity could also be responsible 
for long-term memory. Following these ideas, the paper reviews the progress in the search for superconductors 
with high critical temperature and tries to answer the question about the superconductivity in brain. It focuses on 
recent electrical measurements of brain slices, in which graphene was used as a room-temperature quantum 
mediator, and argues that these measurements could be regarded as evidence of superconductivity in the neural 
network of mammalian brains. The estimated critical temperature of superconducting network in the brains is 
rather high: 2063±114 K. A similar critical temperature was predicted in the Little’s model for one-dimensional 
organic chains linked to certain molecular complexes. A reasonable suggestion is that superconductivity 
develops in microtubules inside the neurons of brain. 
 
Introduction 
Superconductivity in brain was suggested in 1972 in 
order to explain long-time memory and following a general 
argument that if room-temperature superconductivity is 
existing, it should be in a system with high level of 
organization [1]. In recent advance, superconductivity proved 
to be successful in quantum computing [2-4]. Combining 
these facts with novel idea that brain is quantum computer 
[5,6], one could deduce that superconductivity might be at 
work in brain too. A problem with this statement is that 
superconductivity was not yet proven to exist at room 
temperature. There is, however, no reason to believe that it 
cannot exist at this temperature. Recent progress in search for 
superconductivity in hydrates [7] shows that room-
temperature superconductivity is quite realistic [8,9]. Broadly 
speaking, brain can also be classified as complex, well-
organized hydrates-based material. There is, however, 
substantial difference between brain structures and already 
analyzed superconducting hydrates. This difference will be 
discussed in the review and its implication for possible room-
temperature superconductivity will be outlined. 
I. Search for superconductors with higher 
critical temperature 
Since its discovery in 1911 [10] (Nobel Prize in physics 
for the year 1913), superconductivity was considered to be 
essentially 
low-temperature 
phenomenon. 
The 
critical 
temperature (Tc) of the first superconducting material, Hg, 
was about 4 K, and during next 75 years, in spite of intensive 
search for materials with higher critical temperature, it 
increased only by 20 K. There were many reasons for such 
apparently slow progress. As it is seen from Fig. 1, where a 
sketch of the increase in critical temperature is outlined, first, 
quite logical, elemental materials were explored. The highest 
Tc was found in Nb (9.3 K [11], 8.4 K in first measurements 
[12]). Surprisingly, most conductive materials: Ag, Au and 
Cu did not show superconductivity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. A sketch of the progress in increasing critical temperature of 
superconducting materials. The dashed line shows boiling temperature of 
liquid nitrogen. 
At about 1940, the complexity of investigated materials 
was increased and the efforts were concentrated on binary 
compounds, mainly on those containing Nb, as this element 
showed the highest critical temperature. There was immense 
progress in mastering Nb-based materials. They are up to 
now 
most-used 
compounds 
in 
applications 
of 
superconductivity.  In these materials, Tc increased to 23.2 K 
in Nb3Ge [13]. However, due to this focus, one very 
important binary compound, MgB2, with Tc of 39 K [14], 
which could form basis of renewal hydrogen economy [15], 
was lost for about five decades. One could also wonder if 
superconductivity in binary compound Au-Ag was also lost, 
following 
recent 
claim 
of 
nearly 
room-temperature 
superconductivity in this material [16,17].  
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
0
50
100
150
200
H3S
HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8+x
YBa2Cu3O7-x
(LaBa)3CuO4
Nb3Ge
Nb3Al
VSi
NbN
Nb
Pb
Hg
 
 
Tc(K)
Year
Liquid N2
 
 The discovery of high-temperature superconductors seen 
on Fig. 1 as sharp increase in Tc in 1986 (Nobel Prize in 
physics to Bednortz and Muller in 1987) that crossed the line 
of boiling temperature of liquid nitrogen, most abundant gas 
in Earth’s atmosphere, is very important milestone. Finding 
this whole new class of materials could be considered as a 
result of increasing complexity, i.e. moving in research from 
binary compounds to compounds with four elements. A 
strategy leading to discovery of superconductivity in these 
materials was, however, different, namely searching for 
strong polarizability and polaronic effects [18]. This search 
for specific physical effects that could be precursors of 
superconductivity is perhaps most important principle able to 
lead to breakthroughs.  Most recent example, featuring 
record-high Tc in the family of hydrates [7-9] is very good 
illustration of this principle. In this case, increase of Tc is due 
to the presence of light atom (hydrogen) and the shift of the 
mechanism of pairing from acoustic to optical phonons [9].  
Getting knowledge about specific physical effects, modern 
physics is now able to predict superconducting properties of 
materials before their experimental study [8].  
Analyzing mechanisms leading to superconductivity, 
several pathways to 
materials 
with possible room-
temperature superconductivity are outlined [19]. For 
successful research, one should choose a right combination of 
these paths, perhaps switching from one to another on a way 
to a new compound. A specific guideline highlighted in this 
review is reduction of dimensionality of the materials, in 
which one hopes to find extra high Tc.   
This suggestion may sound not logical, since it is well 
known that in lower-dimension materials, i.e. one- and two-
dimensional (1D, 2D), fluctuations of the order parameter are 
so strong that they prevent long-range quantum order [20,21], 
including that responsible for superconductivity. However, 
lower-dimension systems offer greater flexibility and the 
superconductivity could be possible if one manages to tackle 
these fluctuations.  
Among the pioneers of research in low-dimensional 
materials were Kosterlitz and Thouless [22], who proved that 
superconductivity is possible in two dimensions. In this case, 
fluctuations (vortices and antivortices) are bound together 
below Tc. In 2016, Kosterlitz and Thouless were awarded the 
Nobel Prize in physics. It is interesting that earlier mentioned 
Nobel Prize awarded to Bednortz and Muller was also for 
materials with reduced dimensionality. After the discovery, it 
was soon found that superconductivity in this class of 
materials is quasi-two dimensional. Tc in these materials 
reached 164 K at high pressure [23], which was much higher 
than in known that time 3D systems. Using high pressure, 
however, would allow  to have very high Tc in 3D also [8,9], 
although practicality of high-pressure materials is currently 
questionable. 
Following pathway of reduced dimensionality, one may 
ask about possible high Tc in quasi-1D systems. This case 
was, again, analyzed theoretically. As early as in 1964, Little 
[24] showed that superconductivity in linear chains of 
organic molecules linked to certain molecular complexes 
could have Tc of 2200 K. It does not mean that one could 
observe superconducting transition directly, as the system 
would be destroyed long before reaching Tc, but this does not 
prevent 
existence 
of 
superconductivity 
at 
ambient 
temperature, at which organic molecular chains are stable.  
It is important to note that in the model of Little the 
superconducting pairing is provided by electron-electron 
interaction, in contrast to more common electron-phonon 
interaction (Nobel Prize in Physics to Bardeen, Cooper and 
Schrieffer for the year 1972). In case of Little’s model, at 
least three particular paths: lower dimensionality, specific 
pairing interaction and increased complexity were followed.  
To display such high Tc as in the model of Little, one 
needs to modify Fig. 1, for example, presenting y-axis in the 
logarithmic scale, as shown in Fig.2. The highest point in this 
figure belongs to main experimental result of the review, 
which appears to be very close to the prediction of Little. The 
rest of the paper will be focused on the activity related to this 
result, namely on hypothesized superconductivity in brain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. A logarithmic presentation of the critical temperature growth for 
milestone superconducting materials. The highest point belongs to main 
material discussed in this review. 
 
II. Superconductivity in brain  
Increasing complexity, which is important pathway to 
superconductivity with high Tc, inevitably leads to most-
organized structures of living organisms: nervous system and 
brain [1]. While humans are consciously experimenting with 
superconductivity for about 100 years, nature might be doing 
this subconsciously for billions of years, perfecting molecular 
structures from generation to generation and arriving to most 
efficient coherent structures able to process information in 
quantum-mechanical way.  
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
10
100
1000
Hydrate quasi-1D
-H-O-C- (Brain)
Hydrate 3D
Compounds quasi-2D
Compounds 3D
H3S
HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8+x
YBa2Cu3O7-x
(LaBa)3CuO4
Nb3Ge
Nb3Al VSi
NbN
Nb
Pb
Hg
 
 
Tc(K)
Year
Elements 3D
 
 Search for superconductivity in organic and biological 
materials was active for a long time [24-28]. Specific recent 
examples can be found in [19] and references therein. There 
are, 
however, 
currently 
no 
convincing 
experimental 
evidences of superconductivity in brain and nervous system. 
In order to provide such evidence, specific experimental 
techniques need to be developed. These should allow 
quantum-mechanical study of strongly fluctuating systems at 
room temperature. One of such techniques was, in fact, 
already developed. In [29], it was argued that for electrical 
transport measurements of room-temperature superconductor, 
a mediator that behaves quantum-mechanically at room 
temperature is needed. In application to biological systems, 
such mediator should also be highly conductive and able to 
penetrate membranes to provide connections to organic 
molecular chains. Such a mediator became available only 
recently. It is graphene, the Nobel Prize winning (2010) 
material [30]. Graphene can be prepared in aqueous solutions 
compatible with the natural environment of brain cells.  
The graphene-based technique was already applied to a 
rat’s brain slice [29]. Since it is not possible to measure 
superconducting transition directly due to expected very high 
Tc, the study was focused on current-voltage (IV) 
characteristics. IV curves of a formaldehyde-fixed brain slice 
measured at room temperature, indeed, showed similarity 
with IV curves of a superconductor [29]. Later this activity 
was extended to pigs’ brains. The obtained data could be 
considered 
as 
evidence 
of 
room 
temperature 
superconductivity in brain. To proceed further, it is necessary 
to describe this experimental technique in more detail. 
 
III. Experiments on brain slices   
The electrical measurements of the slices of pigs’ (Sus 
domesticus) brains were carried out by four-electrode 
technique designed to connect (via the nano-plates of 
graphene) conductive channels in the brain. The possible 
types of connection are schematically shown in Fig. 3 
together 
with 
photos 
displaying 
contact 
wires 
(d), 
investigated brains (e) and a sketch of neural network in a  
brain slice attached to the contacts (f).  
The measurement system features large-area contacts of 
neural network to thick (0.2-0.5 mm in diameter) current and 
potential wires shown in Fig 3d. The length of the wires is 
about 1 cm. Several millions microtubules are connected in 
parallel to the wires via graphene nanoflakes, as shown 
schematically in Fig. 3f. The slices of the brains were pressed 
to the contacts after being wrapped in a plastic film to reduce 
evaporation of water. The measurements give statistically 
averaged values of voltage and current in the network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Schematic representation of the arrangement of current (I1, I2) 
and potential (V1, V2) electrodes during measurements of brains’ slices 
(horizontal rectangles).  Possible suppression of superconductivity (S) by 
potential electrodes resulting in normal region/s (N) is taken into account. In 
a), there is no suppression. In b), superconductivity is suppressed close to V1 
only, and in c), superconductivity is suppressed close to both potential 
electrodes. d) A photo of contact wires to which the slices of brain were 
pressed. e) The pigs’ brains used in experiments. f) Schematic picture 
showing connection of neurons to electrodes. 
The central feature of the technique is use of graphene as 
a room-temperature quantum mediator, which allows 
transferring information from a quantum object to the 
classical measurement system. The water suspension of 
graphene became recently available from commercial 
suppliers. Graphene is an exciting novel material (the Nobel 
Prize in physics for the year 2010). It is a highly conductive 
single-atom thick nano-material with carbon atoms arranged 
in a honeycomb lattice. In the solution used in these 
experiments (Sigma-Aldrich, graphene nanoplatelets 1 
mg/mL, dispersion in H2O), graphene is present in the form 
of flakes with a range of in-plane sizes from fractions of 
micron to a few microns.  
A range of current and potential wires made of copper, 
copper covered with a Pb-Sn alloy and gold were used as 
electrodes. Altogether, 26 slices of the thickness of about 1 
mm of Sus domesticus’ brains from the samples shown in 
 
N 
N 
N 
S 
S 
S 
I1 
V2 
I2 
V1 
I1 
V2 
I2 
V1 
I1 
V2 
I2 
V1 
a) 
b) 
c) 
 
3 cm 
e) 
f) 
d) 
 
 Fig. 3e were measured. The brains were fast-delivered (in 3 
hours) from a meat-supplying company and measured fresh 
after being exposed to graphene solution for different periods 
of time. Some brains were fixed with formaldehyde and used 
in the experiments later. Control measurements of filter paper 
soaked in graphene and brain’s slices without graphene were 
also carried out. Complementary measurements of a dry 
sample of bacterial derivative, to check operation of system, 
and non-brain (muscle) wet tissues of Gallus gallus 
domesticus were carried out earlier and reported in [29]. No 
features of superconductor-like behaviour have been 
observed in control samples. Magneto-optical images 
obtained in [29] showed diamagnetic response, which could 
be expected from a sample containing superconducting 
network.  
The carried transport measurements rely on possibility 
that nano-structures in the brain responsible for hypothesized 
superconductivity are preserved after the preparation of slices 
and the samples remain in superconducting state for 
sufficiently long time to be measured. It is also taken into 
account that superconductivity could be suppressed in the 
vicinity of electrodes. Following these suggestions, in 
Figs.3a-c possible outcomes of measurements are outlined. In 
the best case (a), connections between one-dimensional 
channels of the superconducting network and potential 
electrodes are intact, superconductivity is not suppressed and 
one would expect to obtain standard current-voltage 
characteristic of a superconductor with a dissipationless part.  
 
If the superconductivity is suppressed close to one of the 
potential electrodes (b), a finite resistance should always be 
present in the measurement. The largest contribution to it 
may come from the superconductor-normal metal (SN) 
interface, on which the current flow is strongly suppressed 
for voltages below /e, where  is the energy gap of the 
superconductor. At /e, a decrease in resistance should take 
place, because at this voltage charge carriers are allowed to 
fill empty states above the energy gap.  
 
In the third case, superconductivity is suppressed close to 
both electrodes (c). Resistance is, again, finite, but it is 
expected to decrease at voltage 2/e corresponding to two NS 
boundaries. In the case of a 1D superconducting network, 
there is a very large number of connections to both 
electrodes, and the configurations outlined in Fig. 3 give 
statistically averaged features. In an experiment, one could 
expect fluctuating behavior between configurations b) and c), 
i.e. a partial decrease in resistance at both voltages: /e and 
2/e. To access pure superconducting state, configuration a) 
should be realized.  
 
The simplicity of outlined description comes from 
expected large value of , in which case serial resistance of 
the normal phase N in Fig. 3 could be neglected. The energy-
gap anomalies, if observed, could be a good argument in 
favor of superconductivity. The value of gap, when 
determined, would also allow estimating Tc. 
 
IV. Measurements of energy gap and estimation 
of critical temperature  
Current-voltage (IV) characteristics of a formaldehyde-
fixed slice of rat’s brain of the thickness of 40 microns 
exposed to graphene solution for 1 minute and recorded at 
room temperature in two areas of different width are shown 
in Fig. 4. The set of curves for the larger cross-section (black 
line, blue points, right axis) is scaled in current by a factor of 
600 (refer to the left axis for the curves with smaller cross-
section). IV curves for both cross-sections were recorded 
during an increase and decrease of voltage and showed good 
reproducibility. A specific feature for IV curves in both 
cross-sections are large voltage jumps of equal length shown 
by the horizontal arrows in the main plot and in the inset, 
where IV curves of the higher-current part of the sample with 
the larger cross-section are plotted separately for clarity.  
A remarkable fact is that in spite of a nearly three order 
of magnitude difference in current, the voltage jumps are of 
the same magnitude, about 0.6 V. For the IV curve of a 
superconductor, 
such 
jumps 
could 
appear 
during 
thermomagnetic instability-driven local suppression of 
superconductivity. The minimum voltage jump for the 
instabilities is 2/e [31], which is the energy per unit of 
charge necessary to cross two NS boundaries. With this 
interpretation and following similarity of recorded IV curves 
with those in thin-film conventional superconductors [31], 
Fig. 4 provides an estimate of the energy gap. Moreover, 
since there is a direct link between the energy gap and critical 
temperature, Tc could be estimated too. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Current-voltage characteristics of a slice of rat’s brain of the 
thickness of 40 microns recorded at room temperature in two areas of 
different width. The scale for the larger cross-section (black line, blue points) 
is on the right axis and for the smaller cross-section on the left one. At the 
same voltages, the current through the larger cross-section is about 600 times 
higher than through the smaller cross-section. Curves for both cross-sections 
are recorded during an increase and decrease of voltage, as shown by the 
small arrows. In spite of the large difference in current, the two large voltage 
jumps shown by the horizontal arrows are of the same magnitude in both sets 
of curves. The inset shows the low-voltage parts of the IV curves for the 
larger cross-section, illustrating the magnitude of the voltage jumps. A thin 
line in the main plot is drawn for the guide of eye. 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
31
63
94
125
156
188
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
20
40
60
 
 
I (mA)
V (V)
I (mA)
 
 
I (A)
V (V)
 
 To link  and Tc, one can use standard formula for 
phonon-mediated superconductivity [19]: 
                     2(0)/e = 3.53 kBTc,                                 (1) 
where kB is the Boltzman constant and (0) is the energy gap 
at zero temperature. Suggesting that Tc is much higher than 
room temperature, the measured at 297 K 2/e  0.6 V 
should be close to 2(0). Then, from (1) one obtains Tc of 
about 2000 K, which is in good agreement with the model of 
Little [24] and points out to quasi-1D character of 
superconductivity. Later in the paper, Tc will be estimated 
more accurately, taking into account temperature dependence 
of the energy gap. Although exact mechanism of 
superconductivity in the case of neural network is not known, 
equation (1) still should be valid, at least to some 
approximation, as it comes from the competition between 
superconducting condensation and thermal energies.  
 The quasi-1D nanostructures in neurons, in which one 
could expect superconductivity, are microtubules. It is 
interesting that they were already suggested as structures 
responsible for quantum processing of information [5,33,34]. 
In the nerve cells, microtubules are packed together with 
shorter neurofilaments [35]. The latter may provide electron-
electron interaction necessary to form superconducting state, 
similar to what is described in the model of Little.  
Another suggestion is that superconductivity is the 
property of water inside the microtubules.  The microtubules 
are hollow tubes with the inner diameter of 14 nm. It is 
currently not known in what state water is present there. 
According to a recent analysis of the possibility of room-
temperature superconductivity [19], the highest probability to 
find it is in hydrates. Indeed, the current record-high Tc 
belongs to H3S [7]. The presence of hydrogen and other light 
elements seems to be essential for high Tc, but the sulfur in 
H3S is not light element.  In the periodical table of elements, 
just above it is similar but lighter element - oxygen. Then, in 
a certain state, perhaps confined to nano-tubes, H2O, or rather 
HnO with n larger than 2 might be superconducting with Tc 
higher than in H3S. 
The importance of water was revealed earlier in 
experiments performed in [29]. Due to its evaporation, the IV 
curves plotted in Fig. 2 lasted less than one hour, after which 
the sample became semiconducting. The 
underlying 
experimental reason for such a drawback was small thickness 
of brain slice (40 micrometers), which, on the other hand, 
was necessary for formation of local thermo-magnetic 
instabilities with characteristic double-gap jumps in IV 
curves 
[31]. 
In 
order 
to 
extend 
the 
duration 
of 
superconducting state, even for the price of losing 
characteristic jumps, the brain slices of Sus domesticus were 
cut with much higher thickness than rat’s brain slices, about 1 
mm. Being pressed to current and potential leads, the 
thickness was, however, somewhat reduced. 
The short, one minute, exposure to graphene used in 
[29], however, did not gave reproducible results for fresh 
non-preserved Sus domesticus’ brain slices of this thickness. 
The IV curves became reproducible only after three hours of 
exposure to the graphene solution. A set of such curves, 
recorded one after another with a period of about 2 minutes, 
for a sample from the outer part of Sus domesticus’ brain, is 
shown in the inset of Fig. 5. In spite of some hysteresis, an 
increase in conductance is seen in most of the curves, and it is 
centered at about 0.6 V, as marked by the large tilted red 
arrows.  
To better reveal this anomaly in conductance, IV curves 
in the inset were approximated by polynomials of 9th order 
and differentiated.  Several derivatives at both positive and 
negative voltages are shown in the main plot of Fig. 5 as 
black lines. It is seen that the main peak in the differential 
conductance for the majority of the curves (marked with 
black vertical arrows) is centered at about 0.6 V. If one 
assumes that the type of connection to the potential electrodes 
in this experiment is as in Fig. 3c, i.e. with suppressed 
superconductivity close to both of them, then the maximum 
conductance should be at the voltage 2/e of 0.6 V. This is 
in good agreement with the double-gap voltage jumps found 
in experiments in Fig. 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Differential conductance as function of voltage for a 1-mm thick slice 
of Sus domesticus’ brain. The main peak in conductance centered at double-
gap voltage 2/e is marked by black arrows. Red arrows mark multiple gap 
peaks. The red curve shows differential conductance for another sample. The 
straight red line at the bottom shows the value of the superconducting 
conductance quantum. Conductance should be above this value to reveal 
superconductivity as decrease of resistance in the system. The inset shows IV 
curves at positive voltage corresponding to the black curves of conductance 
in the main plot. 
In addition to the main peak, derivatives reveal other 
peaks, which are integer multiples of /e and likely to reflect 
the 
appearance 
of 
the 
regions 
of 
suppressed 
superconductivity inside the central area labeled S in Fig. 3c. 
-2
-1
0
1
2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 
 
I(mA)
V(V)
G0 = 4e
2/h
 
 
dI/dV(mS)
V(V)
 
 These peaks are of smaller amplitude than the main peak and 
are marked with vertical red arrows.   
The small unmarked peak close to V = 0 seen on most of 
the curves could be the feature of graphene itself or evidence 
of two-gap superconductivity common to hydrates [8]. The 
red curve in Fig. 5 belongs to a different sample from the 
inner part of Sus domesticus’ brain, which was fixed in 
formaldehyde and treated with graphene solution for 1 min. 
Although the brain samples were cut from different regions 
and received very different treatment (fresh vs. fixed), 
derivatives are very similar, with nearly identical positions of 
peaks.  
The straight red line at the bottom of Fig. 5 corresponds 
to superconducting conductance quantum S0 = 4e2/h, where h 
is the Planck`s constant. In [36], it was shown that for one-
dimensional nano-channels cut from the 2D layers, 
superconductivity is only revealed through the decrease in 
resistance for conductance values above S0. Most of the lines 
in Fig. 5 are well above S0.  
The shape of the red curve in Fig. 5 shows that treatment 
in formaldehyde preserves superconductor-like gap features 
of the sample. More than that, after the treatment, the 
exposure to graphene solution could be reduced to just one 
minute.  Derivatives of IV curves for yet another sample, 
fixed in formaldehyde, after one-minute exposure to 
graphene solution, are shown in Fig. 6. The evidence of the 
peak at 2/e is overwhelming (marked by black arrow), 
except for the very first recorded curve (red points), the main 
peak of which is centered at /e.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Differential conductance as function of voltage for the fixed in 
pharmaldegyde slice of Sus domesticus’ brain exposed to graphene solution 
for one minute. Most of the peaks are centered at 2/e (marked by black 
arrow) except for the very first recorded curve (red points), main peak of 
which is centered at /e. The straight red line at the bottom of the plot is 
positioned at the level of the superconducting conductance quantum.  
The latter corresponds to the type of connection shown 
in Fig. 3b.  Evidently, during the first measurement, 
connections of superconducting channels to one of the 
potential electrodes were without suppression. However, they 
quickly deteriorated, making more-common connection of 
the type shown in Fig. 3c. In Fig. 6, it is also noticeable that 
conductivity tends to increase towards V = 0 for the majority 
of the curves, which increases the probability of observing 
dissipation-free part in IV curves at low voltages.  
To improve connections of conducting channels to 
electrodes, the exposure to graphene was combined with a 
30-minute ultrasound treatment at the end of the 3-hour 
graphene exposure of the sample. The result of such 
treatment is shown in the inset in Fig. 7. The main peak 
becomes very stable at /e. After many measurements, as it is 
shown in the main plot of Fig. 7, the 2/e peak appears 
(black curve). Its amplitude later becomes dominant (red and 
green curves), and the integer peaks of /e appear too (green 
and blue curves). Eventually, conductance approaches G0, 
becoming 
nearly 
featureless 
and 
voltage-independent 
(corresponding to the Ohm’s law).  
The results presented above reveal that using graphene, 
it is possible to observe superconducting gap corresponding 
to extremely high Tc of about 2000 K. More accurate value of 
Tc could be found from (1) taking into account temperature 
dependence of energy gap. It is also important to make 
statistical treatment of experimental data starting with 
double-gap voltage defined as position of peaks in S(V) in 
Figs. 5-7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Differential conductance as a function of voltage for a 1-mm 
thick slice of Sus domesticus’ brain treated with ultrasound during the 
exposure to graphene. All peaks for initial curves are centered at /e, as it is 
marked by the black arrow in the inset. After a certain time, the 2/e peak 
appears (black curve in the main plot). Its amplitude becomes dominant (red 
and green curves), and the integer peaks of /e appear too (green and blue 
curves). 
Eventually, 
conductance 
approaches 
the 
superconducting 
conductance quantum, which results in nearly featureless and voltage-
independent curves.  
The mean value of the double-gap voltage for each 
experiment with its number on the x-axis corresponding to 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
 
 
G(mS)
V(V)
G0 = 4e
2/h
 
 
G(mS)
V(V)
 
 
0,0
0,5
1,0
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
 
 
G(mS)
V(V)
G0 = 1.55 10
-4 mS
 
 
 the number of the figure, on which experiment is presented in 
this paper, together with the standard error in mean is shown 
in Fig. 8. In experiment 7 (Fig.7), only the curves shown in 
the inset are analyzed. The single-gap voltage values are also 
taken into account being multiplied by coefficient of 2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Mean value of the double-gap voltage together with standard 
error in mean for experiments in Figs. 4-7 with the number on the x-axis 
corresponding to the number of the figure, in which corresponding 
experiment is presented in this paper.  
From the Fig.8, one can see that standard error in mean 
for double-gap voltage is not large, and there is a band 
ranging from 0.586 to 0.618 V, in which all error bars are 
overlapped. Since the experiments are of different nature, 
with results coming from the thermo-magnetic instabilities 
(experiment 4) and conductance anomalies on NS boundaries 
(experiments 5-7), and since they are made on brain slices of 
different mammals and on samples treated in different way, it 
gives confidence that the observed behaviour is universal and 
corresponds to real phenomenon that has deep roots in 
functioning of nervous system.  
To estimate critical temperature of superconductor, the 
mean value of the double-gap voltage, averaged for all four 
experiments shown in Fig. 8, with the largest error bars 
encompassing all smaller error bars, are taken for further 
calculations. These values, which were measured at 
temperature of 297 K, were fitted to the formula that 
expresses temperature dependence of the gap [32]:  
 (T) =  (0)*(1-(T/Tc)2)2,                       (2) 
combining it with the formula (1) for  (0). The result of this 
fit is shown in Fig. 9. 
The treatment in Fig. 9 gives Tc of 2063 ± 114 K. This 
value is the main result of the review. If superconductivity in 
the brain does exist, it is likely to have this critical 
temperature. The value could be somewhat exaggerated, 
because in the calculations the possible contribution to gap 
value from the normal resistance in the areas N shown in Fig. 
3 was neglected. Still, it is surprisingly close to the value 
predicted for the quasi-1D superconductivity in the model of 
Little [24]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Measured value of the double-gap voltage fitted to the 
temperature dependence of the gap given by equation (2) to find mean value 
and standard error in mean for the critical temperature.  
 
V. Superconductor-like current-voltage 
characteristics in brain slices 
Whereas extracting gap and estimating Tc was relatively 
simple, obtaining genuine superconductor-like IV curves for 
thick slices of pig’s brains appeared to be more difficult than 
for the rat’s brain slice, primarily because difficulties of 
incorporating graphene nanoflakes into the samples. Such 
difficulties 
would 
be 
expected, 
because 
if 
the 
superconductivity in the network enables quantum processing 
of information, it should be well protected from the 
environment and the superconductivity could be easily 
destroyed when this protection is lifted, i.e. in the attempt to 
connect 
electrodes 
to 
the 
network. 
Still, 
genuine 
superconductor-like IV curves were seen for a short time in 
in the rat’s brain in [29], and this gives hope to observe them 
in the pig’s brain slices too.  
To address this challenge, different (both fresh and 
fixed) slices of pig’s brains with different exposure to 
graphene were measured with different materials for 
electrodes and different distances between them. From the 26 
measured samples, superconductor-like IV curves have been 
observed in 5 samples. In one of the samples, due to its large 
thickness in comparison with the rat’s brain slice measured in 
[29], such curves lasted for 7 days. Some of these IV curves 
are shown in Fig. 10 together with the information about the 
days (in year 2018) on which they were recorded.  
 
4
5
6
7
0,54
0,56
0,58
0,60
0,62
0,64
0,66
2/e (V)
Experiment number
0.618 V
0.586 V
 
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
1800
2100
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
2/e (V)
T (K)
Tc
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10. IV curves of the Sus domesticus’ brain sample showing 
superconductor-like features. Information about the dates, on which curves 
were recorded, is presented in the legend. On the 7th day, too large a current 
was passed (red curve) and the IV curves became nearly linear (black). In the 
inset, the low-current parts of the curves are shown to reveal their low-
dissipation behaviour. 
In the inset, the low-current parts of IV curves are shown 
to demonstrate their low-dissipation behavior. One can see 
from the main plot that the critical current density is slightly 
improving with time, until, on the seventh day, too large a 
current was passed (red curve) and the IV curves lost their 
superconducting features (black).  
In the measurements above, the influence of a 
magnetic field of few hundreds of mT on the IV curves was 
also tested. It was found that a sudden increase in magnetic 
field frequently lead to an increase of resistance and produced 
jumps between the resistive states, as shown, for example, by 
the blue curves in the main plot of Fig. 10 at positive 
voltages. The amplitude of the voltage jumps was typically 
bigger than 2/e. This behaviour, again, is in agreement with 
superconductivity in the sample, but also indicates that the 
system is sufficiently-well protected from the influence of 
magnetic field. 
 
VI. Control experiments 
To finalize the description of the results, it is important 
to compare the recorded IV curves with those in the control 
samples. One of the control samples was a piece of filter 
paper soaked in graphene solution. It was measured in the 
same way as the brain slices. The results of its measurements 
are shown in Fig. 11.  
The main plot of Fig. 11 shows voltage dependence of 
the conductance, and the inset shows IV curves of the 
sample. IV curves are nonlinear, with a significant increase in 
resistance at high voltages. The resistance also strongly 
increases with time, eventually reaching the red line 
representing superconducting conductance quantum. The 
2/e or /e anomalies are not seen in the plot. There is, 
however, a systematic kink-like anomaly appearing when 
voltage is lowered down. There is also a strong increase of 
conductance at low voltages, which, overlapping with the IV 
curves of biological samples, may produce the low-voltage 
peak found in the brain curves. During the degradation, the 
conductance of the sample quickly drops to G0, but the 
conductance at low voltages on most curves is high enough to 
provide a tool for measuring biological samples.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11. Conductance as function of voltage for the control sample, 
filter paper soaked in the graphene solution, measured in the same way as the 
slices of brain. Inset shows IV curves corresponding to the conductance 
curves of the main plot. The red line shows the value of the superconducting 
conductance quantum. 
The voltage dependence of conductance for another 
control sample, a brain slice without graphene, is shown in 
Fig. 12. Although some wide peaks in conductance as 
function of voltage are observed, the conductance is too close 
to the superconducting conductance quantum, and it is 
difficult to extract any useful information from the plot. Thus, 
graphene is essential for the experiments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12. Conductance as function of voltage for two consecutive 
increases and decreases of V for a brain slice measured without graphene. 
The conductance is close to its superconducting quantum value shown by the 
red line.  
-14 -12 -10 -8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
1
2
3
4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
 
 
I(A)
V(V)
 February 24
 February 25
 March 1
 March 2
 March 2
 
 
I(A)
V(V)
297 K
 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
 
 
I(mA)
V(V)
 
 
G(mS)
V(V)
G0 = 4e
2/h
 
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
1,2
1,4
0,00
0,05
0,10
0,15
0,20
0,25
 
 
G(mS)
V(V)
G0 = 4e
2/h
 
 VII. Possible origin of superconductivity in 
brain 
Overall, experiments show that superconductivity with 
very high Tc is likely to be present in the neural network of 
the brain. Although it is well protected, it still could be 
measured using graphene as quantum mediator.  
There are indications that water could play essential 
role in superconductivity. For example, it was shown 
previously that superconductivity could appear in 3D form at 
high pressure when ice is doped with nitrogen or other 
elements [37]. The possibility of superconductivity in 
confined quasi-1D channels with water was not analyzed. 
In the very tightly confined space inside microtubules, 
water is likely to be structured in a specific way or be in the 
form of entangled H-O chains, which are schematically 
shown in Fig. 13. Such chains could have dangling electron 
bonds linked to well-ordered tubulin proteins [33]. This could 
provide strong electron-electron interaction necessary for 
superconductivity with very high Tc, like it is in the model of 
Little [24]. The electron-electron interaction may also come 
from neurofilaments as was described above. 
Alternative explanation is that in the confined space of 
microtubules, each atom of oxygen is surrounded by several 
atoms of hydrogen. It was already demonstrated that in 
hydrates, Tc is dramatically increasing with hydrogen 
coordination number [9]. The confinement into nano-
channels is the main difference between brain structures and 
already studied hydrates. Such confinement may lead to 
extremely high critical temperature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 13. Schematic representation of a microtubule with a water 
channel (blue), which could be responsible for superconductivity, and 
several graphene nanoflakes providing electrical connection to the channel.  
The properties of individual microtubules with and 
without water were measured in [38,39]. It was shown that 
water is responsible for high conductivity of microtubules, 
and 
their 
coherent 
electrical 
behaviour 
was 
also 
demonstrated. These measurements, however, are very 
complicated and strongly influenced by the measuring circuit. 
The approach in this paper is very different. Firstly, a very 
large number of microtubules is measured simultaneously, 
which greatly reduces measurement error. Secondly, in these 
measurements, the structure of neural connections is closer to 
that operating in the living brains. Finally, and most 
important, graphene is used to extract possible quantum 
features of the neural network. 
While 
the 
search 
for 
the 
room-temperature 
superconductivity continues, nature may have discovered it a 
long time ago in water, one of the most abundant substances 
in the universe, and it might be in use to enable, through the 
enhanced coherence, quantum processing of information.  In 
this sense, intelligent life might be literally dependent on 
water. 
Since it is evident [7,19,37] that high pressure is 
beneficial for superconductivity, one can speculate that initial 
structures leading to intelligent life appeared first in the 
depths of oceans, where the right combination of high 
pressure, ambient temperature and abundance of water is 
present. If the mechanism of superconductivity is linked to 
high coordination number of hydrogen atoms, an extra 
oxygen from water could be released, which might explain 
initial high concentration of oxygen on early stages of the 
evolution of life on the planet.  
One could even claim that the nano-scale jigsaw 
puzzle of intelligent life might be close to completion with 
realizing that the hydrates-based superconductivity in 
microtubules could be responsible for quantum processing of 
information.  With superconductivity, quantum processing 
could follow one of already suggested mechanisms, for 
example, that described by S. Hameroff and R. Penrose 
[5,33,34], giving the brain unprecedented computational 
power.  
 
Summary  
In summary, there is immense progress in search for 
superconductors with high critical temperature. In particular, 
graphene-mediated experiments could be treated as providing 
evidence for superconductivity in brain with extremely high 
critical temperature of 2063 ± 114 K. Such a high Tc would 
enable quantum processing of information at room 
temperature if the temperature of biological structures is kept 
stable within a modest temperature interval, as it takes place 
in natural brains. As a coherent quantum phenomenon, 
superconductivity 
could 
be 
responsible 
for 
coherent 
behaviour of living organisms and even consciousness [1].  
The implications of the findings described in the 
review could be very diverse. Superconductivity, for 
example, may provide explanation for long-term memory. As 
 the quantum coherent phenomenon, it could form basis of the 
coherent behavior of living organisms. Finally, the coherent 
features of the brain and nervous system could be analyzed 
using well developed and constantly improving models 
developed for superconductivity.  
 
Acknowledgments 
Author thanks Prof. M. Fyhn, D. O. Ø. Mjærum and 
Dr. I. Mikheenko for providing samples for measurements. 
Dr. Y. Mikheenko is acknowledged for critically reading the 
paper, and D. O. Ø. Mjærum for useful discussions and help 
with experiments. 
References 
1. Halperin, E.H., Wolf, A.A.: Speculations of 
superconductivity in biological and organic systems. In: 
Advances in cryogenic engineering, vol. 17, Timmerhaus, 
K.D. (ed) Springer Science + Business Media LLC (1972) 
2. Castelvecchi, D.: Nature 543,  159 (2017) 
3. Shim, Y.-P., Tahan C.: Nat. Commun. 7, 11059 
(2016) 
4. Albarrán-Arriagada, F., Barrios, G. A., Sanz, M., 
Romero, G., Lamata, L., Retamal, J. C., Solano E.: Phys. 
Rev. A 97, 032320 (2018) 
5. Hameroff, S.: Cogn. Sci. 31, 1035 (2007) 
6. Weingarten, C.P., Doraiswamy, P.M., Fisher, M.P.A.: 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 10, 541 (2016)  
7. Drozdov, A. P., Eremets, M. I., Troyan, I. A., 
Ksenofontov, V., Shylin, S. I.: Nature 525, 73 (2015) 
8. Gor’kov, L. P., Kresin, V.Z.: Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 
011001 (2018) 
9. Kresin, V.Z.: J. of Supercond. and Novel Magn. 31, 
3391 (2018) 
10. Delft, D. van, Kes, P.: Physics Today, September, 
38 (2010) 
11. Eisenstein, J. Rev. Mod. Phys. 26, 277 (1954) 
12. Daunt, J. G., Horseman, A., Mendelssohn, K.: Phil. 
Mag. 27, 754 (1939) 
13. Testardi, L. R., Wernick, J. H., Royer, W. A.: Solid 
State Comm. 15, 1 (1974) 
14. Nagamatsu, J., Nakagawa, N., Muranaka, T., 
Zenitani, Y., Akimitsu, J.: Nature 410, 63 (2001) 
15. Mikheenko, P.: Journ. Phys. Conference Series 286, 
012014 (2011) 
16. Thapa, D.K., Pandey, A.: arXiv:1807.08572 (2018) 
17. Awana, V. P. S.: J. of Supercond. and Novel Magn. 
31, 3387 (2018) 
18. 
Kresin, 
V.Z., 
Morawitz, 
V.H., 
Wolf, 
S.: 
Superconducting State; Mechanisms and Properties. Oxford 
Press, Oxford (2014) 
19. Kresin, V.Z.: J. of Supercond. and Novel Magn. 31, 
611 (2018) 
20. Mermin, N. D., Wagner, H.: Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 
1136 (1966) 
21. Hohenberg, P. C.: Phys. Rev. 158, 383 (1967) 
22. Kosterlitz, J.M., Thouless, D.J.: J. Phys. C 6, 1181 
(1973) 
23. Gao, L., Xue, Y. Y., Chen, F., Xiong, Q., Meng, R. 
L., Ramirez, D., Chu, C. W., Eggert, J. H., Mao, H. K.: Phys. 
Rev. B 50, 4260 (1994) 
 24. Little, W. A.: Phys. Rev. 134, A1416 (1964) 
25. Kresin, V., Litovchenko, C., Panasenko, A.: J. 
Chem. Phys. 63, 3613 (1975) 
26. 
Kresin, 
V., 
Little, 
W. 
(eds.): 
Organic 
Superconductivity. Plenum, NY (1990); Davydov A. S.: 
Solitons in Molecular Systems. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht 
(1991) 
27. 
Mourachkine, 
A.: 
Room-Temperature 
Superconductivity. 
Cambridge 
International 
Science 
Publishing (2004) 
28. Lebed, A.G. (ed.): The Physics of Organic 
Superconductors and Conductors. Springer Series in 
Materials Science 110, Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg (2008) 
29. Mikheenko, P.: IEEE Xplore Digital Library 
7757272 (2016) 
30. Geim, A.K., Novoselov, K.S.: Nature Materials 6, 
183 (2007) 
31. Ivanchenko, Yu.M., Mikheenko, P.N., Khirnyi, 
V.F.: Sov. Phys JETP 53, 86 (1981) 
32. Tinkham, M.: Introduction to Superconductivity. 
McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York (1996) 
33. Hameroff, S.: Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., Ser A, 
Math. Phys. Sci. 356, 1869 (1998) 
34. Hameroff, S., Penrose, R.: Physics of Life Reviews 
11, 39 (2014) 
35. Fletcher, D.A., Mullins, R.D.: Nature 463, 485 
(2010) 
36. Mikheenko, P., Deng, X., Gildert, S., Colclough, 
M.S., Smith, R. A., Muirhead, C.M., Prewett, P.D., Teng, J.: 
Phys. Rev. B 72, 174506 (2005) 
37. Flores-Livas, J. A., Sanna, A., Graužinytė, M., 
Davydov, A., Goedecker S., Marques, M. A. L.: Scientific 
Reports 7, 6825 (2017) 
38. Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Hirata, K., Fujita, D., 
Bandyopadhyay, A.: Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 123701 (2013) 
39. Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Ghosh , B., Aswani, K., Hirata, 
K., Fujita, D., Bandyopadhyay, A.: Biosensors and 
Bioelectronics 47, 141 (2013) 
 
