 Transcription elongation factors represent in vivo cancer 
dependencies in glioblastoma
Tyler E. Miller1,2,3,4, Brian B. Liau5,6,7, Lisa C. Wallace1, Andrew R. Morton1,4, Qi Xie1, 
Deobrat Dixit1, Daniel C. Factor3, Leo J. Y. Kim1,2,3, James J. Morrow3, Qiulian Wu1, 
Stephen C. Mack1,2, Christopher G. Hubert1,2, Shawn M. Gillespie5,6,7, William A. 
Flavahan1,2, Thomas Hoffmann8, Rohit Thummalapalli5,6,7, Michael T. Hemann9, Patrick J. 
Paddison10, Craig M. Horbinski11, Johannes Zuber8, Peter C. Scacheri4, Bradley E. 
Bernstein5,6,7, Paul J. Tesar4,*, and Jeremy N. Rich1,2,*,#
1Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA
2Department of Molecular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA
3Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44106, USA
4Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA
5Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA
6Epigenomics Program, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA
7Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA
8Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria
9The Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence: drjeremyrich@gmail.com (J.N.R) or paul.tesar@case.edu (P.J.T).
#Current address: Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of California at San Diego, San Diego, 
California 92093, USA
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to drjeremyrich@gmail.com (J.N.R) or paul.tesar@case.edu (P.J.T).
Author Contributions
T.E.M., P.J.T. and J.N.R designed the overall screening strategy. T.H., J.Z., P.J.P. and M.T.H provided technical expertise, unpublished 
reagents and methods for the screen. T.E.M., S.C.M., C.G.H. and L.W. performed the screen. T.E.M., L.C.W. and S.C.M. produced 
and sequenced screening libraries. T.E.M., P.J.T. and J.N.R. processed and analysed screening results. T.E.M., L.C.W. and D.C.F. 
generated and analysed RNA-seq data. T.E.M., B.B.L., S.M.G., R.T., B.E.B., L.C.W. and S.C.M. generated ChIP-seq data. T.E.M., 
B.B.L, A.R.M., B.E.B., J.J.M. and P.C.S. analysed and interpreted ChIP-seq data. T.E.M., L.K., and W.A.F. performed bioinformatic 
analysis of published expression datasets. T.E.M, D.D., Q.X., L.C.W. and L.W. performed functional knockdown and CRISPR 
knockout studies. C.H. created and analysed tissue microarray for JMJD6 expression. T.E.M., P.J.T. and J.N.R. analysed all data and 
wrote the paper. All authors provided intellectual input, edited and approved the final manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 July 20; 547(7663): 355–359. doi:10.1038/nature23000.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 
98109, USA
11Departments of Pathology and Neurosurgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA
Abstract
Glioblastoma is a universally lethal cancer with a median survival of approximately 15 months1. 
Despite substantial efforts to define druggable targets, there are no therapeutic options that 
meaningfully extend glioblastoma patient lifespan. While previous work has largely focused on in 
vitro cellular models, here we demonstrate a more physiologically relevant approach to target 
discovery in glioblastoma. We adapted pooled RNA interference (RNAi) screening technology2–4 
for use in orthotopic patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models, creating a high-throughput negative 
selection screening platform in a functional in vivo tumour microenvironment. Using this 
approach, we performed parallel in vivo and in vitro screens and discovered that the chromatin and 
transcriptional regulators necessary for cell survival in vivo are non-overlapping with those 
required in vitro. We identified transcription pause-release and elongation factors as one set of in 
vivo-specific cancer dependencies and determined that these factors are necessary for enhancer-
mediated transcriptional adaptations that enable cells to survive the tumour microenvironment. 
Our lead hit, JMJD6, mediates the upregulation of in vivo stress and stimulus response pathways 
through enhancer-mediated transcriptional pause-release, promoting cell survival specifically in 
vivo. Targeting JMJD6 or other identified elongation factors extends survival in orthotopic 
xenograft mouse models, supporting targeting the transcription elongation machinery as a 
therapeutic strategy for glioblastoma. More broadly, this study demonstrates the power of in vivo 
phenotypic screening to identify new classes of ‘cancer dependencies’ not identified by previous 
in vitro approaches, which could supply untapped opportunities for therapeutic intervention.
Chromatin regulators have emerged as a promising class of ‘druggable’ targets for cancer 
therapy3,5,6. Chromatin regulation is often context-specific7–11, suggesting the 
microenvironment mediates cancer cell response to inhibition of specific chromatin 
regulators. Therefore, we developed an in vivo RNAi screening strategy to enable 
identification of chromatin regulators critical for survival of glioblastoma cells within a 
functional tumour microenvironment (Fig. 1a). Utilizing an advanced shRNA delivery 
vector2–4 (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c), glioblastoma PDX cells (Supplemental Table 1) were 
transduced with a pooled library containing 1,586 inducible shRNAs targeting 406 known 
chromatin and transcriptional regulators (2–4 shRNAs per gene) and controls, at efficiencies 
to achieve a single shRNA per cell. Transduced cells were selected by a constitutive green 
fluorescent reporter using fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) and employed in 
concurrent in vivo and in vitro screens. In each screen, transduced cells were split into an 
induced arm and an uninduced control arm. Cells in the induced arm were treated with 
doxycycline, which induced shRNA expression and a second fluorescent reporter, dsRED. 
After 3 weeks, induced cells (dsRED+) or uninduced control cells were sequenced and 
shRNA representation was quantified. For the in vivo screen, 61 mice were implanted with 
cells and randomly assigned to the control or induced arm. Multiple mice were grouped as 
single biological replicates, providing the fold coverage necessary to obtain reproducible 
Miller et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 results (Extended Data Fig. 2a), and enabling successful in vivo negative-selection screening 
in a solid tumour model (see Methods for full screening methods).
Genes critical for glioblastoma cell survival were prioritized by calculating depletion scores 
for each shRNA, based on the decrease in shRNA frequency in the induced arm compared to 
the uninduced control arm. Positive hits were defined as expressed genes that were targets of 
at least two non-overlapping shRNAs that effectively mediated cellular depletion (Fig. 1b 
and Supplementary Table 2). In vivo hits outnumbered in vitro hits and, surprisingly, there 
was almost no overlap between hits that caused cell depletion in vitro versus in vivo (Fig. 
1c). Genes that caused cell depletion in both screens were restricted to the positive control 
gene, replication protein A3 (RPA3) (Extended Data Fig. 2b) and two genes essential for 
transcription and maintenance of DNA methylation, POLR2B and DNMT1. Differences in 
molecular dependencies were not explained by expression of the hits, as there were no 
significant differences in the in vivo expression of the hits compared to their in vitro 
expression (Extended Data Fig. 3a, b). Collectively, these primary screen results reveal 
unique molecular dependencies for glioblastoma cells in vivo.
Gene ontology (GO) analysis of the hits revealed significantly enriched molecular classes 
that were microenvironment-specific. In vitro-specific hits were enriched for genes that 
promote cellular metabolism and macromolecule biogenesis, whereas in vivo-specific hits 
were enriched for genes controlling transcriptional elongation (Fig. 1d and Extended Data 
Fig. 3c, d). Nearly all mediators of transcriptional pause-release and elongation included in 
the screen scored as in vivo-specific hits, including recently annotated regulators, Jumonji C-
domain-containing Protein 6 (JMJD6)12, the DOT1 Like Histone Lysine Methyltransferase 
(DOT1L) complex13, and Ring Finger Protein 20 (RNF20)14 (Fig. 1e). Several primary hits 
were validated in secondary in vivo survival assays (Extended Data Fig. 3e–h).
To investigate the mechanisms underlying the selective dependency of glioblastoma cells on 
transcriptional pause-release and elongation in vivo, we derived and analysed global 
transcriptional and chromatin landscapes from cells grown in both the intracranial and cell 
culture environments (Fig. 2a). Multiple PDX models representing different molecular 
glioblastoma subtypes from our lab were included in the analysis (Supplemental Table 1), as 
were data generated by an independent lab15. Gene expression profiles were strikingly 
different when cells were grown concurrently for ~3 weeks in an intracranial xenograft 
model as compared to cell culture conditions (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b, and Supplementary 
Table 3).
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)16 coupled to Enrichment Map17 visualization was 
used to annotate differentially enriched biological pathways (Fig. 2b, c, Extended Data Fig. 
4, and Supplementary Table 4a–f). Cancer cells cultured in serum-free conditions, where 
nutrients and space are in abundant supply, were enriched for transcriptional programs of 
proliferation. In contrast, transcriptional programs associated with stress response, signalling 
response, and other stimulus response pathways were enriched in intracranial tumours, 
where nutrients and space are less abundant. The stimulus response pathways upregulated in 
the intracranial tumour environment include pause-controlled pathways comprised of genes 
with a strong reliance on transcription pause-release and elongation for their 
Miller et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expression13,18–22. Of the 55 genes that were upregulated more than 2.5 fold in tumour cells 
grown intracranially in both the proneural GBM528 and mesenchymal GBM3565 models, 
many were important transcription factors and signalling molecules regulated by Pol II 
pausing, including pause-controlled genes, such as early growth response protein 1 (EGR1) 
and FOS13,23 (Extended Data Fig. 5a–c). These 55 genes were also highly expressed in 
primary glioblastoma patient tumours (Extended Data Fig. 5d, e). Principal component 
analysis of expression profiles of matched primary tumours and derived models revealed that 
cells grown as intracranial tumours more accurately modelled the transcriptome of the 
primary patient tumour from which they were derived, as compared with cells grown in 
culture (Fig. 2d). Collectively, these data suggest that the upregulated pause-controlled gene 
programs that occur in vivo may allow the tumour cells to interact with and adapt to their 
complex microenvironment, supporting their increased dependency on transcription pause-
release and elongation factors for in vivo survival.
Enhancers act in conjunction with transcription factors to drive transcriptional changes 
through transcriptional pause-release and elongation. Leveraging chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-sequencing of the dynamic enhancer mark lysine-27 
acetylation of histone 3 (H3K27Ac), transcriptional changes in tumour cells grown 
intracranially were reflective of genome-wide alterations in enhancers in two glioblastoma 
models (Fig. 2e). Nearly 20% of all enhancer elements, including “super-enhancer” loci, 
were condition-specific, and expression of their putative target genes, as determined by 
nearest expressed gene, corresponded to the condition-dependent changes in enhancer signal 
(Extended Data Fig. 6 and Supplementary Table 5). Together, these data show that the 
microenvironment regulates the epigenome to transform the glioblastoma cell state by 
differentially activating enhancers and their target genes.
Of the in vivo-specific hits, we prioritized the 12 genes encoding transcription elongation 
factors for further consideration as therapeutic targets. Using large, independent datasets of 
primary patient tumours, we correlated expression of each of the 12 transcription elongation 
factors with the expression of the 55 genes that were consistently upregulated in vivo across 
both PDX tumour models, which we hypothesized are main drivers of the transcriptional 
programs needed by tumours to adapt and survive in the stressful and dynamic in vivo 
microenvironment. JMJD6 was the most positively correlated hit across all datasets, 
including the Ivy Glioblastoma Atlas Project dataset, which provides intratumour 
microenvironment-specific expression24 (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Fig. 7a–d), suggesting 
JMJD6 regulates many of the genes important for survival of glioblastoma cells in vivo.
To further assess the regulatory role of JMJD6 in patient tumours, we correlated the 
expression of all genes in TCGA glioblastoma tumours individually with the expression of 
JMJD6 (Extended Data Fig. 7e and Supplementary Table 6). Genes positively correlated 
with JMJD6 were enriched in pause-controlled programs, similar to those upregulated in 
intracranial tumours, whereas genes negatively correlated with JMJD6 were enriched in 
metabolic programs, similar to those upregulated in cell culture (Extended Data Fig. 7f and 
Supplementary Table 4g). These findings indicate a potential mechanism for the in vivo 
specificity of JMJD6 in the screen, and provide evidence that JMJD6 may control 
transcriptional pause-release in primary glioblastoma tumours.
Miller et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To explore the clinical significance of JMJD6, we analysed gene expression in primary 
tumours and found that JMJD6 mRNA (Fig. 3b) and protein (Fig. 3c and Extended Data Fig. 
7g) were highly expressed in gliomas, and increased with tumour grade. These data, along 
with the robust in vivo depletion of tumour cells harbouring JMJD6 shRNA in the primary 
screen (Extended Data Fig. 7h), provide further evidence that JMJD6 constitutes a strong 
lead target for further evaluation.
In HEK293T and HeLa cells, JMJD6 acts with bromodomain containing 4 (BRD4) as a key 
activator of enhancer-mediated pause-release at genes controlled by Pol II pausing12 
(Extended Data Fig. 8a). To determine if JMJD6 localizes to enhancers in glioblastoma in 
vivo, we performed JMJD6 ChIP-seq of tumour cells in intracranial tumours. Globally, 
JMJD6 was distributed throughout the genome, but strongly enriched at enhancers and 
promoters (Extended Data Fig. 8b, c and Fig. 3d). Furthermore, in the PDX models, target 
genes of JMJD6-bound enhancers were enriched for genes upregulated in vivo (Extended 
Data Fig. 8d, e) and for genes that positively correlated with JMJD6 in primary patient 
tumours (Extended Data Fig. 8f, g). These results indicate that JMJD6 may regulate the 
expression of genes targeted by JMJD6-bound enhancers through enhancer-mediated pause-
release, both in the intracranial tumour environment in our PDX models, as well as in patient 
tumours.
To investigate, we conducted ChIP-seq of RNA Pol II in GBM528 and GBM3565 cells both 
in vivo and in vitro. Transcription pause-release and elongation was measured by the 
Pausing Index (PI), which is the ratio of Pol II density surrounding the transcriptional start 
sites (TSSs) to the density of Pol II over the gene body22. The higher the PI, the more 
paused the gene transcript. Genes that were consistently upregulated in vivo in both PDX 
tumours models, such as EGR1, were transcriptionally paused in vitro and released in vivo 
(Fig. 3e and Extended Data Fig. 8h, i). To interrogate globally whether JMJD6 activity at 
enhancers promotes pause-release in vivo, we calculated the in vivo PI for all expressed 
genes with or without enhancers. Genes regulated by JMJD6-bound enhancers had lower 
PIs, or increased levels of pause-release activity, compared to genes regulated by enhancers 
not bound by JMJD6 (Fig. 3f). This effect was specific to JMJD6 binding at enhancers, as 
genes bound by JMJD6 at locations other than an enhancer did not demonstrate increased 
pause-release.
We then evaluated the activity of JMJD6-bound enhancers relative to enhancers not bound 
by JMJD6 in vivo. Building upon recent evidence that active enhancers are transcribed and 
that activity can be estimated by RNA Pol II binding25, we measured relative RNA Pol II 
binding at JMJD6-bound enhancers versus enhancers not bound by JMJD6, and found that 
JMJD6-bound enhancers had significantly higher levels of Pol II binding (Fig. 3g). 
Measurements of Pol II binding at JMJD6 sites, including outside of enhancers, revealed 
that Pol II binding was highest at JMJD6-bound enhancers. Collectively, these data provide 
evidence that JMJD6 binding is associated with increased enhancer activity and promotes 
pause-release in human glioblastoma cells within the tumour microenvironment.
We next sought to determine the potential preclinical value of JMJD6 as a therapeutic target. 
Targeting JMJD6 with an inducible shRNA distinct from the primary screen again did not 
Miller et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 alter glioblastoma cell growth or survival in vitro, but did extend survival in an orthotopic 
xenograft mouse model (Extended Data Fig. 9a–c). Furthermore, the inducible shRNA 
transgene was silenced in tumours that grew in the knockdown arm (Extended Data Fig. 9d), 
suggesting that achieving sustained JMJD6 inhibition may provide an even more striking 
therapeutic benefit.
These data prompted us to use CRISPR-Cas9 technology to create multiple clonal 
populations of glioblastoma cells in vitro in which JMJD6 expression was completely 
knocked out by expression of one of two independent guide RNAs (sgRNAs) (Fig. 4a). 
Glioblastoma cells lacking JMJD6 formed clonal populations and proliferated with little or 
no growth defect in vitro when compared to non-targeting sgRNA control cell populations 
(Fig. 4b). However, mice bearing JMJD6-deficient cells showed a striking survival 
advantage compared to mice with control cells implanted, with over 25% of mice in the 
JMJD6-deficient group tumour-free after 100 days (Fig. 4c). Similar results were found 
using an independent PDX model (Extended Data Fig. 9e–g).
To validate other screen hits using in vivo survival studies, we performed similar 
experiments targeting DOT1L, a recently discovered mediator of transcription elongation13 
and top scoring hit from the primary screen, and DPY30, another top scoring hit from the 
primary screen that is not known to be involved in transcription pause-release or elongation. 
Constitutive shRNA-mediated knockdown of these genes in glioblastoma cells from three 
independent PDX models caused no proliferation defect in vitro (Fig. 4d–e and Extended 
Data Fig. 9h–q). However, mice bearing cells with DOT1L or DPY30 knockdown survived 
significantly longer than mice implanted with cells expressing non-targeting shRNAs (Fig. 
4f and Extended Data Fig. 9r–v). These results further demonstrate the power of in vivo 
screening to identify in vivo-specific cancer dependencies and indicate that many of the 
identified hits from the primary screen are strong candidates for future investigation as 
potential therapeutic targets in glioblastoma.
Pharmaceutical approaches to cancer drug discovery typically involve high-throughput 
screening of established cell lines cultured in vitro to reveal individual targetable oncogenes 
that predominantly regulate cancer cell proliferation. However, drugs developed to modulate 
these targets have thus far achieved limited success in patients, especially for glioblastoma. 
This therapeutic roadblock prompted us to develop and validate a novel in vivo functional 
screening strategy for glioblastoma that recapitulates the majority of the stressors and 
stimuli of the tumour microenvironment. Our approach revealed a number of in vivo-specific 
biological targets for glioblastoma, including JMJD6, indicating that cancer cells are 
dependent on unique molecular effectors for growth and survival depending on the extrinsic 
factors in their microenvironment. Specifically, we found that glioblastoma cells in vivo, but 
not in vitro, were dependent on Pol II pause-release and transcription elongation machinery 
for survival (Extended Data Fig. 10). This machinery is necessary to upregulate pause-
controlled stress and signalling response pathways that promote cell survival13,18,20,21. This 
finding unexpectedly revealed that in the primary tumour, targeting the microenvironment-
induced stress response mechanisms of the cancer cell may be a more effective therapeutic 
strategy than targeting cell growth, the main target of traditional chemotherapies. Overall, 
Miller et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 our results demonstrate feasibility for direct target identification in vivo in solid tumours and 
suggest new avenues for therapeutic development.
METHODS
Human glioblastoma specimen culture conditions
All human glioblastoma tissues were obtained from excess surgical materials from 
consented patients after review from a neuropathologist and used in accordance with an 
approved protocol by the Institutional Review Board at Cleveland Clinic. As previously 
described26, glioblastoma cells were derived immediately after dissociation of primary 
patient tumour or after transient xenograft passage. For all in vitro studies, glioblastoma 
cells were cultured in Neurobasal medium (Gibco) with B27 (without vitamin A, 
ThermoFisher), basic fibroblast growth factor (20ng/ml, R&D) and epidermal growth factor 
(20ng/ml, R&D).
Primary glioblastoma models were validated to be unique by short tandem repeat (STR) 
analysis at multiple xenograft passage numbers (STR conducted by ATCC and Duke 
University, Cell Line Authentication Service). STR results are available upon request. All 
cells used were derived from primary patient tissues, and are not included in the database of 
commonly misidentified cell lines maintained by ICLAC. All lines are routinely tested for 
mycoplasma contamination and were negative.
Patient-derived orthotopic xenografts
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with Cleveland Clinic Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approved protocols. For intracranial tumours, 
size cannot be measured directly. Therefore, specific neurological signs indicating the 
presence of brain tumours (seizures, ataxia, lethargy) are monitored, in accordance with the 
IACUC approved protocol, and mice were always euthanized when these signs became 
present. The number of animals included in each of the described studies was based on 
extensive past experience in the development and use of glioblastoma xenograft models by 
our group. Each study was designed to minimize unnecessary animal use, optimize 
statistical power, and account for known variance in each model system. For all in vivo 
experiments, human glioblastoma cells were intracranially implanted into NOD SCID 
gamma (NSG, JAX Charles River) mice 4–6 weeks of age. Within this age window, mice 
were age-matched across groups. For the primary screen, mice were randomized by cage 
into control or induced group. The xenograft implantations were performed blinded to 
group. Researchers were not blinded during the rest of the experiment as no subjective 
measurements were used. 31 female mice and 30 male mice were used in the screen, with an 
even split between control and induced populations. For individual shRNA or CRISPR 
survival analysis, xenograft implantations were performed blinded to group, and the gender 
of the mice in a given study were kept identical to maintain consistency across experimental 
and control groups. See individual methods for number and gender of mice used. Mice were 
euthanized at the onset of neurological signs, and tumours were removed for further 
analysis.
Miller et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In vivo and in vitro inducible shRNA screens
Summary (more technical details in sections following summary)—To 
investigate the effects of targeting epigenetic regulators in glioblastoma cells within the 
tumour microenvironment, we modified an inducible in vivo RNAi screening system, 
previously used for screening in hematologic malignancies2,3, for use in solid tumours (Fig. 
1a). The advanced inducible shRNA delivery vector has high fidelity expression and dual 
fluorescent reporters to reduce the noise and bias that plague traditional shRNA screens2,4 
(Extended Data Fig. 1a–c). Our shRNA library contained 1,586 shRNAs targeting 406 
known chromatin and transcriptional regulator genes (2–4 shRNAs per gene), with positive 
and negative control shRNAs.
Well-characterized, PDX glioblastoma cells (Supplementary Table 1) were transduced with 
the shRNA library pool such and cells with genomic integration of shRNAs, as monitored by 
expression of a constitutive green fluorescent reporter, were selected using FACS. With the 
selected pool of cells, we performed an in vitro screen in previously defined serum-free cell 
culture conditions15 concurrent with an in vivo screen in intracranial mouse xenografts. 
Each screen used the same population of cells distributed across two arms: 1) control – cells 
were left uninduced (no shRNA expression), and 2) experimental – cells were treated with 
doxycycline to induce shRNA expression. Induction also led to expression of a second 
fluorescent reporter, dsRED, which allowed isolation of cells actively expressing an shRNA 
at the endpoint of the screen (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1a, b). The in vitro screen 
consisted of 3 independent replicates per arm, and cells were collected after 3 weeks. In the 
parallel in vivo screen, single animals could not be used as independent replicates as the 
maximum number of engrafted cells per animal provided insufficient fold coverage of the 
shRNA library. Therefore, 61 mice were implanted with cells and randomly assigned to the 
control (20 mice) or induced arm (41 mice). Multiple mice were then grouped together as a 
single biological replicate in order obtain 3 independent replicates for the induced arm and 2 
for the uninduced arm. This provided the fold coverage necessary to obtain reproducible 
results (Extended Data Fig. 2a), and enabled successful in vivo negative-selection screening 
in a solid tumour model. Tumours developed for 2–3 weeks until mice exhibited signs of 
neurologic dysfunction. Mice were then sacrificed, tumours excised and dissociated, and 
uninduced or induced tumour cells from the control or experimental arms, respectively, were 
collected by FACS. The representation of shRNAs from each cell population was quantified 
by high depth sequencing of lentivirally integrated shRNA barcodes.
For both screens, genes critical for glioblastoma cell survival were prioritized by calculating 
depletion scores for each shRNA, based on the decrease in shRNA frequency in the induced 
arm compared to the uninduced control arm. Positive hits were defined as expressed genes 
that were targets of at least two non-overlapping shRNAs that effectively mediated cellular 
depletion (Fig. 1b, c and Supplementary Table 2).
shRNA library generation—An all-in-one inducible retroviral vector with an optimized 
“miR-E” shRNA design (RT3REVIR)4 was used to deliver shRNAs. Briefly, this construct 
contains an optimized 3rd generation Tet-responsive element and rtTA3 to potentiate a 
positive feedback loop upon addition of doxycycline, enhancing expression of the construct 
Miller et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 upon induction and reducing construct leakiness. It also contains an enhanced design of the 
miR30 backbone to allow for more efficient shRNA processing. In addition, the second 
reporter is inducible and is expressed in conjunction with the shRNA, which allows for 
selection of cells actively expressing an shRNA at the time of collection, and significantly 
reduces the number of cells included in the final analysis that contained silenced shRNAs.
We shuttled the library of 1,568 shRNAs (shERWOOD Epigenetics-related genes library, 
transOMIC) into the RT3REVIR vector using previously published methods4. To produce 
virus, retroviral plasmid library was transfected into HEK293T Phoenix packaging cells as 
previously described2. Chloroquine (25 μM, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to enhance plasmid 
stability.
Functional screening assays—60 million patient-derived glioblastoma cells were 
transduced with the pooled inducible shRNA library at 1.1% transduction efficiency to 
ensure that cells were transduced with only 1 shRNA per cell. Protamine sulfate (Sigma-
Aldrich) was used for transduction. Successfully transduced cells were selected by a 
constitutive Venus fluorescent reporter using Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). 
Cells were allowed to recover and expand for three passages. The same population of cells at 
the same time was used for a screen completed in triplicate in standard serum free cell 
culture conditions and for a screen completed in an in vivo intracranial xenograft mouse 
model.
For the in vivo screen, each mouse was intracranially injected with 500,000 cells to 
maximize number of engrafted cells per mouse. Fold coverage of the shRNA library is 
determined by the number of engrafted cells (not number implanted). Based upon GFP 
spike-in dilution assays, we estimated between 10–20% of cells implanted are engrafted 
(50,000 – 100,000 cells per mouse). To overcome this issue of low-fold coverage when using 
a single animal, typically the limiting factor when screening in solid tumours in vivo, we 
injected 61 mice and randomly assigned them to the induced arm (41 mice) or the control 
arm (20 mice). Mice in the induced arm were maintained on doxycycline containing water 
(2 mg/ml Doxycycline and 2% sucrose, Sigma-Aldrich) for the duration of the screen. Cells 
were not exposed to doxycycline prior to being injected into the mouse, allowing us to 
screen for factors important for tumour growth rather than engraftment efficiency. When a 
mouse began to show overt neurological signs, which occurred between 2 to 3 weeks, it was 
euthanized, the tumour was harvested, macroscopically dissected, dissociated to single cells 
(Tumor Dissociation Kit, human and GentleMACS™ Octo Dissociator with Heaters, 
Miltenyi Biotech) and depleted of any remaining mouse cells using magnetic-activated cell 
sorting (MACS, Mouse Cell Depletion Kit, Miltenyi Biotech). Each mouse was processed 
independently. Tumour cells from the mice in the induced arm were sorted by FACS to 
collect Venus+dsRED+ cells (denoting shRNA expression). The average number of double 
positive cells collected across 41 mice was 229,964 (range − 12,440 to 758,143 cells). 26/41 
mice had greater than 100,000 cells collected (see source data). Mice were combined after 
sequencing into “biological replicate” groups of 13–14 mice (see source data), which 
provided, on average, about 3 million cells per biological replicate or “n”. This represented a 
fold coverage of ~2,000 per replicate. Tumour cells from mice in the uninduced control arm 
were sorted by FACS to collect Venus+dsRED− cells (shRNA integrated but not expressed). 
Miller et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The average number of single positive control cells collected across 20 mice was 851,916 
(range − 144,184 to 1.8 million cells). 16/20 mice had over 500,000 cells collected. Control 
mice were combined after sequencing into two biological replicate groups of 10 mice (see 
source data), which provided on average about 8 million cells per “n”. This represented a 
fold coverage of ~5,000 per replicate. The baseline induction rate of the inducible system in 
vivo is 30–40%, which limits the number of cells that can collected from mice in the 
induced arm compared to the control arm (from which we collected all cells). For this 
reason, we used more than double the number of mice in the induction arm compared to the 
control arm in order obtain similar fold coverage rates.
For the in vitro screen, 1.5 million cells were placed in serum-free sphere culture in a 15cm 
plate for each replicate. 3 replicates were used for induced arm and 3 replicates were used 
for the control arm. Doxycycline (1 μg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to cells in the induced 
arm at time of plating and cells were maintained on doxycycline for 21 days, which is the 
same amount of time that the last of the intracranial tumours were harvested for the in vivo 
screen. Cells in the uninduced control arm were also maintained for 21 days in culture with 
no doxycycline. Cells had a doubling time of 1.5 days and were passaged every 3–4 days to 
prevent cells from becoming over-confluent. During passage, at least 2 million cells were re-
seeded in the plate to maintain library representation. At the conclusion of the screen Venus
+dsRED+ cells (1.5 million for each replicate) were collected by FACS from the induced 
arm, while Venus+dsRED− cells (1.5 million for each replicate) were collected by FACS for 
the undinduced arm.
shRNA amplification and sequencing—Each mouse was processed and analysed 
separately. Genomic DNA was isolated and sequenced as described2 with slight 
modification. Genomic DNA was isolated by two rounds of phenol extraction using 
PhaseLock tubes (5prime) followed by isopropanol precipitation. Deep sequencing libraries 
were generated by PCR amplification of shRNA guide strands using barcoded primers that 
tag the product with standard Illumina adapters (p7+loop, 
CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGA-NNNN (4 nt barcode)-TAGTGAAGCCACAGATGTA; 
p5+miR3′, AATGATACGGCGACCACCGATGGATGTGGAATGTGTGCGAGG). 
Libraries were sequenced on the HiSeq 2500 platform at the Cleveland Clinic Genomics 
Core Facility. Libraries were sequenced using a primer that reads in reverse into the guide 
strand (miR30EcoRISeq, TAGCCCCTTGAATTCCGAGGCAGTAGGCA).
Sequencing analysis and shRNA scoring—Sequence processing was performed 
using two custom workflows using usegalaxy.org27. Annotated workflows are stored in the 
usegalaxy.org published workflows repository and can be accessed and utilized using the 
following links:
Workflow 1 can be found here: https://usegalaxy.org/u/tyleremiller/w/shrna-pipeline1. 
It is used first to generate an output needed for workflow 2.
Workflow 2 can be found here: https://usegalaxy.org/u/tyleremiller/w/shrnastep2.
Raw read counts were converted to RPM (Reads Per Million) to control for variations in 
total shRNA reads in each sample.
Miller et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Results from multiple mice were randomly pooled together to form replicates (n = 3 for the 
induced arm, with each replicate containing 13–14 mice, while n = 2 for the control arm, 
with each replicate containing 10 mice). To provide a sufficient baseline for detecting 
shRNA depletion (negative selection) in experimental samples, we aimed to acquire an 
average of >1,000 reads per shRNA in each replicate, which would require 1.6×106 reads 
per replicate. In practice, we achieved >1.5×107 reads for all replicates (nearly 10,000-fold 
coverage). Pooling the mice was essential for achieving proper fold coverage and highly 
correlated replicates. The average correlation score between individual mice from the 
induced groups was R = 0.24, while the average correlation value between the 3 combined 
replicates was R = 0.80.
shRNAs were scored using RIGER, and extension of the GENE-E package (Broad 
Institute)28. Median RPM value for each replicate was used for analysis. Signal to Noise of 
replicates was used to calculate individual shRNA score based on their ability to deplete 
cells in the induced arm compared to the control arm and 2nd-Best shRNA score was used to 
rank genes. Expressed genes with a RIGER depletion score ≥ 2 were considered hits.
Gene ontology enrichment analysis and visualization
Analysis for screen hits—Gene ontology analysis for screen hits (Fig. 1 and Extended 
Data Fig. 3) was conducted using background correction in order to understand what is 
enriched above what would be expected for a list comprised of chromatin modifiers. 
Specifically, the gene list of in vivo or in vitro hits was imported into gProfiler29 to generate 
enrichment scores for all gene ontology (GO) gene sets according to recommended settings 
for gProfiler http://baderlab.org/Software/EnrichmentMap/GProfilerTutorial, with the 
exception that we used the full list of genes included in the screen as a background list 
(“Gene list as a stat. background” feature) to control for bias towards chromatin modifiers.
Analysis when starting with whole transcriptome data—For gene ontology 
analysis when analysing whole transcriptome data (Fig. 2, and Extended Data Fig. 4), data 
were imported into Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)16 software to generate 
enrichment scores for gene sets in Hallmark, C2.all and C5.all MSigDB datasets. Exact 
settings are listed in Supplemental Table 4. Cytoscape (v3.2.1) and the Enrichment Map17 
plug-in was used to generate networks for gene sets enriched with an FDR cut-off of < 0.05. 
For GSEA analysis in Extended Data Fig. 7, ranked lists were generated from whole 
transcriptome expression data of GBM528 or GBM3565 cells grown in vivo versus in vitro 
(for Extended Data Fig. 8d, e) or from the correlations of genes with JMJD6 in glioblastoma 
tumours from TCGA database (for Extended Data Fig. 8f, g). These ranked lists were run 
against a Gene Set comprised of genes targeted by JMJD6-bound enhancers in GBM528 
cells or GBM3565 cells. Normalized Enrichment scores and False Discovery Rate was 
generated by GSEA software.
Global characterization of glioblastoma cells grown in vivo and in vitro
To characterize the cell state of human tumour cells grown in vivo and compare it to those 
grown in culture, we used the same experimental setup as was done in the screen (schematic 
in Fig. 2a). We took patient-derived glioblastoma cells growing in vitro and split them in 
Miller et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 half. We injected half into 20 mice per glioblastoma model and maintained the other half in 
culture in independently maintained replicates. Multiple PDX models representing different 
molecular glioblastoma subtypes were included in the analysis, including our primary screen 
model, the proneural model GBM528, and the mesenchymal model GBM3565 
(Supplemental Table 1). We also analysed data obtained from an independent lab from two 
other PDX models, GBM1228 and GBM0308, which were grown similarly in vivo and in 
vitro15. In addition, these two models had matched data from the corresponding primary 
tumour15. For the in vivo arm, each mouse was intracranially implanted with 500,000 cells. 
When a mouse began to show overt neurological signs, which occurred between 2 to 3 
weeks, it was euthanized, the tumour was harvested, macroscopically dissected, dissociated 
to single cells (Tumor Dissociation Kit, human and GentleMACS™ Octo Dissociator with 
Heaters, Miltenyi Biotech) and depleted of any remaining mouse cells using magnetic-
activated cell sorting (MACS, Mouse Cell Depletion Kit, Miltenyi Biotech). We used two 
rounds of mouse cell depletion to ensure only human tumour cells were used in the analysis. 
We consistently were able to obtain greater than 98% purity of human cells with this 
method. Each mouse was processed independently. For RNA-seq samples, cells from 2–3 
mice were pooled together to form each replicate. For ChIP-seq samples, many mice were 
pooled together for ChIP-seq as cell number was a limiting factor. Cells grown in culture 
were maintained for 3 weeks and then harvested for RNA-seq and ChIP-seq.
RNA-sequencing
RNA was extracted from human glioblastoma cells with TRIzol (ThermoFisher), separated 
using Phase Lock Gel tubes (5 Prime), and purified using the miRNAeasy kit (Qiagen) 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Total RNA was prepared for sequencing by 
Beckman-Coulter Genomics using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Library Prep 
Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA-seq libraries were sequenced on the 
Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform by Beckman-Coulter Genomics. For gene expression 
analysis, reads were aligned to the hg19 genome build (retrieved from http://
cufflinks.cbcb.umd.edu/igenomes.html), using Tophat30 v2.0.6. The distribution of 
alignments was analysed using the CollectRnaSeqMetrics module of Picard v1.89 (http://
picard.sourceforge.net/). FPKM (Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript per Million mapped 
reads) values for known genes were calculated using Cufflinks31 v2.0.2 provided with the 
GTF file via the −G (known genes only) option. FPKM values were quantile normalized. 
Differential expression testing was performed using Cuffdiff v2.0.2; however, all FPKM 
values provided are those calculated by Cufflinks. To generate an expressed genes list, an 
average of replicates for each condition was calculated and genes with FPKM value >0.25 in 
either intracranial sample or culture sample were considered expressed. Genes that did not 
meet this expression cut-off (Replicate average FPKM <0.25 in Intracranial and in Culture 
conditions) were removed as not expressed. Expressed genes were tabled by converting 
FPKMs <0.25 to 0.25. Private link to raw and processed RNA-seq data: http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?token=sfopmemwjxgzhyb&acc=GSE74529
Exome-sequencing
DNA was harvested from GBM528, GBM3565 and GBMcw1919 cells using standard 
techniques. The Case Genomics Core processed the DNA using the Illumina Nextera Rapid 
Miller et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Capture Exome kit and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform at greater than 100X 
coverage. Data was processed by the Case Genomics Core to generate variant call format 
(VCF) files and clinical variant calls were made using Omicia Opal Software (http://
www.omicia.com/).
ChIP-sequencing
ChIP-seq—Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed as previously 
described32. For histone modification and transcription factor ChIP-Seq, 2 million cells 
(H3K27Ac), 15–20 million cells (JMJD6), or 5 million cells (Pol2) were crosslinked in PBS 
+ 1% fresh formaldehyde for 10 minutes at 25 C, quenched for 5 minutes with 125 mM 
glycine, washed twice in cold PBS with protease inhibitors (complete PI, Roche), and stored 
at −80 C. Briefly, formaldehyde-fixed cells were lysed and sheared (Branson S220) on wet 
ice. The sheared chromatin was cleared and incubated overnight at 4°C with the following 
antibodies: H3K27ac (Active Motif, 39133), JMJD6 (Abcam, ab64575, lot GR54735-1), and 
total Pol II (Santa Cruz, sc-899-X, lot H0510). Antibody-chromatin complexes were 
immunoprecipitated with protein G magnetic Dynal beads (Life Technologies), washed, 
eluted, reverse crosslinked, and treated with RNAse A followed by proteinase K. ChIP DNA 
was purified using Ampure XP beads (Beckmann Coulter) and then used to prepare 
sequencing libraries for sequencing with the Next-Seq Illumina genome analyser.
Peak calling—Reads were aligned to hg19 using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA)33 and 
identical ChIP-seq sequence reads were collapsed to a single read to avoid PCR duplicates. 
Peaks were called using HOMER v4.634 using matched inputs with the following 
parameters:
H3K27ac, –histone –tagThreshold 50 was used for enhancer analysis.
JMJD6, –factor.
Private link to raw and processed ChIP-seq data: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/
acc.cgi?token=sfopmemwjxgzhyb&acc=GSE74529
Enhancer Landscape Analysis
To generate enhancer loci lists for each condition, H3K27Ac ChIP-seq peak files were 
filtered to remove all peaks overlapping ENCODE blacklisted regions for functional 
genomics analysis (https://sites.google.com/site/anshulkundaje/projects/blacklists) as well as 
peaks with any overlap occurring within +/−1kb from transcription start sites (TSSs) of all 
annotated RefSeq genes to exclude promoters. To call target genes of enhancers, enhancer 
loci were mapped to the nearest expressed gene within the glioblastoma cells. An expressed 
gene had to be within 200kb for an enhancer loci to be mapped to a gene. The expressed 
gene list was the same as described in the RNA-seq methods section above. Peaks were 
visualized with the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV, Broad Institute).
To call condition-specific enhancers—H3K27Ac ChIP-seq enhancer lists from in vivo 
intracranial xenograft and in vitro cultured cells were merged to create a single peak file. 
RPKM (Reads Per Kilobase per Million) values within merged peaks were calculated. In 
Miller et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vivo-specific or in vitro-specific enhancers were called as peaks with 3-fold increased or 
decreased RPKM values in vivo relative to in vitro, respectively.
Enhancer data presentation—Heatmaps, Aggregate plots and motif analysis were 
conducted using the Cistrome35 galaxy instance. Heatmaps were created using the Heatmap 
tool, with 5000 bp upstream and downstream, 200 bp step and saturation of 0.05. 
Aggregative plots were created using the Aggregation Plot tool, using a Span of 3000 bp and 
resolution of 200 bp.
Super-enhancers (SEs)
In vivo and in vitro SEs were identified using the dynamicEnhancer software (retrieved from 
https://github.com/BradnerLab/pipeline). H3K27Ac peaks identified as enhancers and 
separated by less than 12.5 kb were stitched together. All stitched peaks were then ranked by 
the density of H3K27Ac minus input. Peaks higher than the inflection point on the density 
curve were designated SEs. To call condition-specific SEs, SEs from in vivo and in vitro 
conditions were merged and H3K27Ac signals for all merged SEs in each cell line were 
calculated. To be considered specific to in vivo or in vitro, SEs had to be only called a SE in 
a single condition and had to have at least 1.5-fold change in H3K27Ac signal between 
conditions.
JMJD6 binding analysis
Genomic distribution of JMJD6 (Extended Data Fig. 8c)—To call the genomic 
distribution of JMJD6 binding, each JMJD6 ChIP-seq binding peak was assigned to the 
underlying genomic element. Enhancers were defined as above, areas surrounding TSS’s 
were defined as +/− 1Kb of all annotated TSS’s in hg19, and other elements were defined by 
hg19 annotation. Each peak was assigned to a single element. In the cases in which a JMJD6 
binding peak overlapped with two elements (e.g., enhancer and intron), priority was 
assigned in the following order: Enhancer > TSS +/− 1Kb > 5′ UTR > 3′ UTR > Exons > 
Introns > Intergenic.
Enrichment analysis of JMJD6 binding (Fig. 3d)—To determine enrichment scores 
of JMJD6 peaks at a particular genomic element (e.g. exons), a null binding distribution of 
JMJD6 peaks for each element was generated by randomizing the peaks throughout the 
genome 1000 times using bedtools shuffle. A z-score enrichment value at each genomic 
element was calculated using the actual number of JMJD6 peaks assigned to the genomic 
element compared to the average number of JMJD6 peaks and standard deviation from the 
null distribution. P-values were obtained from this z-score using the standard normal 
distribution.
JMJD6, Enhancer and Pol II binding data presentation (Fig. 3g)—Aggregate plots 
were constructed using the Cistrome35 galaxy instance with the Aggregation Plot tool, using 
a Span of 3000 bp and resolution of 200 bp. P-values were calculated using Mann-Whitney-
U test of RPKM values of Pol II at each set of loci.
Miller et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pausing Index Calculation
RPKM values were generated for all hg19 TSS loci (from 50 bp upstream to 200 bp 
downstream of TSS (−50, +200)) and for the gene body of these transcripts (from 500 bp 
downstream of TSS to transcription termination site (TTS) (+500, TTS)) by first using the 
Galaxy 27 tool “Count intervals in one file overlapping intervals in another file” to obtain 
total read counts for each TSS loci and gene body. Total Pol II reads were aligned to hg19 as 
above to create the necessary BAM file. RPKM values were then calculated using the 
formula: ((number_of_reads +1)/(size_of_peak_in_bp/1000)) /
number_of_aligned_reads_in_millions.
Results were filtered as follows to ensure only high confidence calls were considered in the 
downstream analysis:
•
Transcripts <750 bp were removed
•
Transcripts overlapping any of the ENCODE blacklisted regions were removed
•
Transcripts with Pol II density < 3.0 RPKM in the TSS region in either in vivo 
OR in vitro condition were removed
•
Transcripts with Pol II density < p0.4 RPKM in the BODY region in both in vivo 
AND in vitro conditions were removed
•
For genes with multiple TSS’s, only the transcript with the highest occupied TSS 
(by RPKM) was used
•
Any gene that was not expressed at 0.25 FPKM by RNA-seq was removed
•
Any transcript that overlapped other transcripts at this step was removed to avoid 
potential artefacts that occur by including reads from other TSS regions within 
the gene BODY region
These filtering steps resulted in ~9,000 transcripts for GBM528 and ~8,000 transcripts for 
GBM3565. Pausing Index (PI) was then calculated for each transcript using the formula: PI 
= (RPKM TSS)/(RPKM Body).
Individual gene knockdown studies by shRNA
For inducible shRNA knockdown studies of JMJD6 (Extended Data Fig. 9a–d), LT3REVIR, 
a lentiviral version of the same inducible RT3REVIR delivery vector used in the primary 
screen was used4. Glioblastoma cells were infected in culture and Venus+ cells harbouring 
the shRNA were selected by FACS. Cells were induced with doxycycline for 48 hr and 
dsRED+ cells expressing the shRNA were then selected by FACS. For in vitro studies, 
dsRED+ cells were plated in 96-well plates on Geltrex™ LDEV-Free hESC-qualified 
Reduced Growth Factor Basement Membrane Matrix (ThermoFisher) and maintained in 
doxycycline containing media. Cells were imaged using an Operetta High Content Imaging 
System (Perkin Elmer) on indicated days. Number of dsRED+ cells for each well was 
calculated using Harmony High Content Image Analysis (Perkin Elmer). For in vivo studies, 
dsRED+ cells were intracranially implanted into age-matched female NSG mice. Animals in 
the induced arm were maintained on doxycycline containing water (2mg/ml Doxycycline 
Miller et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and 2% sucrose, Sigma) for the duration of the experiment. Mice in the uninduced control 
arm were maintained on water containing 2% sucrose. The induced shJMJD6 group 
contained 5 mice, while non-targeting (shREN) and uninduced shJMJD6 control groups 
each contained 3 mice, for a total of 6 control mice. All mice were monitored daily until 
development of neurological signs, at which time they were euthanized.
shRNA sequences:
JMJD6.1005: 
TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGACAGCAAGACGAAGCTATTACATAGTGAAGCCA
CAGATGTATGTAATAGCTTCGTCTTGCTGGTGCCTACTGCCTCGGA
REN.713: 
TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCAGGAATTATAATGCTTATCTATAGTGAAGCCAC
AGATGTATAGATAAGCATTATAATTCCTATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA
Validation studies of in vivo screen hits—We used the constitutive shRNA vector 
SGEP4, which is a constitutive version of the lentiviral vector used above. It allows for 
puromycin selection and has a constitutive GFP fluorescent reporter. For validation of 9 
primary screen hits (Extended Data Fig. 3e–h), including the positive control, patient-
derived glioblastoma GBM528 cells were transduced with individual shRNAs targeting 
primary screen hits, or 2 independent negative controls (totalling 11 independent transduced 
populations, each transduced with a single shRNA). Infected populations of GBM528 cells 
were selected by 1 ug/ml puromycin for 3 days and immediately intracranially implanted 
into age-matched female NSG mice; 4 mice were used for each experimental and control 
group. All mice were monitored daily until development of neurological signs, at which time 
they were euthanized.
In parallel, we conducted more in-depth validation of a top scoring transcription elongation 
factor in the primary screen, DOT1L, as well as another top screen hit that was not a 
transcription elongation factor, DPY30 (Fig. 4c, d and Extended Data Fig. 9i–x). We used 
the top two scoring shRNAs from the screen for each gene and used three independent 
glioblastoma models, GBM3565, GBM528 and GBMcw1919. As above, we transduced 
cells with shRNAs targeting DOT1L, DPY30, or a non-targeting shRNA. Infected 
populations were selected by 1 ug/ml puromycin for 5 days and knockdown of target was 
confirmed by qRT-PCR. To determine the effect of target knockdown on cells in vitro and in 
vivo, the same populations of cells harvested at the same time point were used in in vitro 
proliferation assays and for in vivo survival studies in intracranial PDX models. For in vitro 
studies, cells were plated in 96 well plates on Geltrex™ as above and maintained in standard 
serum free media. Cell proliferation was measured using Cell-Titer Glow (Promega). For in 
vivo studies, cells were intracranially implanted into age-matched NSG mice. All mice were 
monitored daily until development of neurological signs, at which time they were 
euthanized.
shRNA sequences:
Miller et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DPY30.00786: 
TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGACAGAAAAGTCATCAAAGCAGATAGTGAAGCC
ACAGATGTATCTGCTTTGATGACTTTTCTGCTGCCTACTGCCTCGGA
DPY30.00781: 
TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCCAACGTTGAGAGAATAGTAGATAGTGAAGCCA
CAGATGTATCTACTATTCTCTCAACGTTGTTGCCTACTGCCTCGGA
DOT1L.19417: 
TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGACGCGAGTTCAGGAAGTGGATATAGTGAAGCCA
CAGATGTATATCCACTTCCTGAACTCGCGGTGCCTACTGCCTCGGA
DOT1L.00642: 
TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCTCAGAATAAACAGTAGAAACATAGTGAAGCCA
CAGATGTATGTTTCTACTGTTTATTCTGAATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA
CRISPR-mediated JMJD6 knockout studies
CRISPR design and construction—The CRISPR design tool from Broad institute 
(http://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design) was used to design 
the guide-RNA (gRNA). Oligonucleotides were purchased from Fisher, annealed and cloned 
into LentiCRISPR v2 plasmid, which was a gift from Dr. Feng Zhang (Addgene plasmid 
#52961). The oligonucleotides used were as follows:
JMJD6.454 Forward:CACCGTTAATTCCCTCAGGATAACG
JMJD6.454 Reverse:AAACCGTTATCCTGAGGGAATTAAC
JMJD6.712 Forward:CACCGCTGCTGTCAAAGATGTAAAG
JMJD6.712 Reverse:AAACCTTTACATCTTTGACAGCAGC
Experimental design for complete knockout in clonal populations—For 
complete knockout studies (Fig. 4a–c), GBM528 cells were transduced with 1 of 2 
independent CRISPR-Cas9 constructs targeting JMJD6 or a non-targeting (NT) control and 
selected for integration of the lentiviral construct by puromycin. Single cells were expanded 
in vitro to obtain clonal populations and knockout was confirmed by Western-blot (see 
below for methods). Two clonal populations per sgRNA were subjected to parallel in vitro 
proliferation assays and in vivo survival assays. For in vitro studies, cells were plated in 96 
well plates on Geltrex™ as above and maintained in standard serum free media. Cell 
proliferation was measured using AlamarBlue® cell viability reagent (ThermoFisher). For in 
vivo studies, cells were intracranially implanted into age-matched female NSG mice. 5 mice 
for each clone, or 10 mice for each sgRNA construct were used. All mice were monitored 
daily until development of neurological signs, at which time they were euthanized.
Experimental design for knockout in bulk populations without clonal selection
—Due to knockout efficiency being extremely high in the experiment above, we used 
CRISPR-mediated knockout of JMJD6 on a population of cells without clonal selection to 
confirm our results in another PDX glioblastoma model (Extended Data Fig. 9e–g). 
GBMcw1919 cells were transduced as above, selected by puromycin, subjected to Western 
Miller et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 blot to confirm population based knockdown, and then assayed in vitro and in vivo as above. 
For in vivo survival studies, 5 age-matched female NSG mice were used for each sgRNA 
construct.
Western Blotting for JMJD6 to determine knockout—Cells were collected and lysed 
in hypotonic buffer with nonionic detergent (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5% 
NP-40; 50 mM NaF with protease inhibitors), incubated on ice for 15 minutes, and cleared 
by centrifugation at 10,000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. Protein concentration was determined 
using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Equal amounts of protein were mixed with 
reducing Laemmli loading buffer, boiled, and electrophoresed in NuPAGE Gels 
(ThermoFisher), and then transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore). Blocking was 
performed for 30 minutes with 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST and blotting performed with 
primary JMJD6 antibody (Active Motif, 61494) for 16 hours at 4°C.
Tissue processing, histology and imaging
Tissues for histological sections was performed as reported previously36. Primary antibodies 
used: GFP to stain for Venus (1:250; Aves Labs Cat# GFP-1020), mCherry to stain for 
dsRED (1:250; Abcam Cat# Ab167453) and human nuclear antigen to stain for human cells 
(1:250; NovusBio clone 235-1 Cat# NBP2-34525V3). Species-specific Alexa-Fluor-
conjugated secondary antibodies were used for detection (1:500; ThermoFisher).
Tissue microarray immunohistochemistry and analysis
Briefly, deidentified tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed from gliomas after 
obtaining University of Kentucky Institutional Review Board Approval. Three 2-mm 
diameter cores per tumour were obtained, with each core embedded in a separate TMA 
block. A total of 104 cases comprised the TMAs, including 9 nonneoplastic controls 
(cortical dysplasias), 9 grade II astrocytomas, 11 grade III astrocytomas, 12 anaplastic 
oligodendrogliomas, 16 grade II oligodendrogliomas, and 47 grade IV glioblastomas 
(GBMs). Immunohistochemistry was performed for each core as described previously37, but 
using an antibody towards JMJD6 (Abcam, ab64575). Briefly, each core was semiquantified 
on a relative scale from 0 to 3, with 0 = negative and 3 = strongest. Results from all 3 cores 
were averaged together to produce a final score for a tumour. Results were plotted based on 
WHO grade and differences were calculated via Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon Test.
Retrospective analysis of gene expression in human gliomas
Gene expression correlations across primary patient glioblastoma tumours, expression of 
individual genes or gene signatures in primary patient gliomas, and patient survival were 
determined through analysis of the Allen Institute’s Ivy Glioblastoma Atlas Project 
(IvyGAP; http://glioblastoma.alleninstitute.org), the National Cancer Institute’s Repository 
for Molecular Brain Neoplasia Data (REMBRANDT, https://caintegrator.nci.nih.gov/
rembrandt/), or The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/). 
Normalized Ivy Glioblastoma Atlas Project (Ivy GAP; http://glioblastoma.alleninstitute.org) 
and REMBRANDT datasets were downloaded from GlioVis (http://gliovis.bioinfo.cnio.es/), 
and TCGA GBM RNAseqV2 dataset was downloaded from the Broad Institute GDAC 
Firehose via the TCGA2STAT package on R38.
Miller et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Correlation analysis of gene expression and gene signature scores (Fig. 3a 
and Extended Data Fig. 7a–d)—We created a gene signature of the 55 genes 
upregulated in vivo >2.5 fold in both GBM528 and GBM3565 models. Gene signature 
scores within Ivy GAP samples were analysed via single-sample GSEA on GenePattern and 
normalized as Z-scores across all samples in the given dataset16,39. Correlation between 
gene signature Z-scores and median-centred gene expression was determined as Pearson 
coefficient (r)-values. Associated FDR-adjusted p-values were calculated using the 
Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. MatLab (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) was used to 
determine correlation values and p-values.
Individual gene correlation with JMJD6 (Extended Data Fig. 7e)—To test 
correlation of all genes with JMJD6 across glioblastoma tumours, TCGA RNAseqV2 data 
were downloaded and analysed using R (www.r-project.org). The function ggpairs, available 
through the GGally package, was utilized to generate plots and determine pairwise 
correlation coefficients (http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=GGally). All glioblastoma 
tumours in the TCGA with RNA-seq data available were used.
Survival Analysis—For gene expression changes, high and low groups were defined as 
above and below the median, respectively. Kaplan–Meier curves were generated and log-
rank (Mantel-Cox) analysis was performed using GraphPadPrism software (GraphPad 
Software, La Jolla, CA, USA).
Direct comparison of TCGA RNAseq gene expression data to our RNAseq 
data (Extended Data Fig. 5d, e)—In order to directly evaluate the expression/activity 
level of genes in an existing glioblastoma gene expression databases, we utilized the 
RNAseqV2 TCGA database of glioblastoma tumours that were characterized by mRNA-
sequencing. FPKM data for RNAseqV2 were downloaded from https://gdc-
portal.nci.nih.gov/. We compared this data to our mRNA-sequencing data from both 
intracranial and culture conditions in two glioblastoma tumour models. In order to directly 
compare values, we took the raw FPKM values from the 166 TCGA tumours and our data 
and quantile normalized them together. We evaluated expression of the 55 genes that were 
upregulated in vivo in both GBM3565 and GBM528 or all genes.
Statistical Analysis
Analysis for each plot is listed in figure legend and/or in corresponding methods above. 
Briefly, all grouped data are presented as mean +/− S.D. All box and whisker plots of 
expression data are presented as median (middle line of box) +/− 25 percentile (top and 
bottom line of box, respectively). P-values presented are calculated by 2-sided Mann-
Whitney-U Test. Kaplan–Meier curves were generated and log-rank (Mantel-Cox) analysis 
was performed to generate P-values using GraphPadPrism software (GraphPad Software, La 
Jolla, CA, USA). Sample sizes for each experiment are given in corresponding figures 
and/or methods above. Sizes were chosen based on previous experience with given 
experiments, or in the case of retrospective analysis, all available samples were included.
Miller et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data Availability
The datasets generated during and analysed during the current study are included within the 
published article (and supplemental information tables) or have been deposited in Gene 
Expression Omnibus (RNA-seq and ChIP-seq Data) under accession number GSE74529 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE74529
Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. shRNA delivery vector performance
Miller et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Schematic of the RT3REVIR shRNA delivery vector (Top). Once integrated into cells, a 
constitutive PGK promoter drives Venus-fluorescent reporter and rtTA through an IRES 
element, creating an All-in-One inducible vector (Middle). When doxycycline is introduced 
to cells, it binds to rtTA and drives activity of the 3rd generation TET-inducible promoter. 
This drives dsRED-fluorescent reporter and shRNA expression. In addition, it drives higher 
rtTA transcription through the IRES element, creating a positive-feedback loop that 
increases rtTA expression in the cell resulting in higher expression of inducible elements 
(Bottom). b, The inducible shRNA delivery vector displays almost no unintended induction. 
Representative FACS plots from the parallel screen of cells infected with RT3REVIR with 
and without doxycycline treatment in vitro (Left) and in vivo (Right). c, RT3REVIR robustly 
expresses shRNAs and depletes cells expressing cell-lethal shRNAs in a competitive 
proliferation assay. Representative FACS plots over time of cells infected with a positive 
control shRNA against RPA3 and induced (Left). Quantification of fluorescent cells in the 
representative competitive proliferation assay. Empty = cells with vector that had no shRNA. 
REN.713 = cells with vector containing a negative control shRNA targeting the Renilla 
protein (not expressed in human cells). Bars represent percent of cells actively expressing 
the shRNA within the total infected population from a single dish (Right).
Miller et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Importance of combining multiple mice to achieve increased 
reproducibility
a, Correlation (r) values between individual mice (41 pair-wise comparisons for induced 
mice and 20 pair-wise comparisons for control uninduced mice) or of grouped replicates 
containing multiple mice (3 pair-wise comparisons for triplicate induced arm replicates and 
1 pair-wise comparison for the duplicate control uninduced replicates). b, Positive control 
gene RPA3 was effectively depleted from cell populations in both in vivo and in vitro 
screens using grouped replicates for the in vivo screen. Four shRNAs targeting RPA3 were 
included in the shRNA screening library. At least 2 of 4 shRNAs achieved a RIGER 
depletion score of 2.0 or greater.
Miller et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Validation of in vivo screen results
a, b, Average mRNA expression of intracranial-specific (a) or cell culture-specific hits (b) in 
vivo and in vitro. P-values calculated by 2-sided Mann-Whitney U Test and were >0.05. c, d, 
Screen hits were analysed for enrichment of GO gene sets, using the screened library gene 
list as background to control for bias toward chromatin modifiers. All results with an FDR of 
0.05 or lower for in vivo-specific hits are presented (c). Top 10 results with an FDR of 0.05 
or lower for in vitro-specific hits are presented (d). Significance calculated by Benjamini-
Hochberg FDR. e–h, Validation of elongation factor hits by in vivo survival assays. shRNAs 
from the primary screen were used to transduce GBM528 cells using a constitutive 
Miller et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expression vector. Primary screen hits that led to an increase survival with knockdown, with 
at least 2/4 mice surviving longer than all 9 negative control mice, were considered 
validated. e, f, Target mRNA knockdown by qRT-PCR (e) and Kaplan-Meier survival curve 
(f) of validated hits. Black lines and bars represent two independent negative control 
shRNAs. Purple/pink lines/bars represent validated in vivo-specific hits and blue lines/bars 
represent validated common hits found in both in vivo and in vitro screen. g, h, Target 
mRNA knockdown by qRT-PCR (g) and Kaplan-Meier survival curve (h) of primary screen 
hits that did not validate (green lines/bars).
Extended Data Figure 4. Independent models confirm stimulus-controlled and stress response 
programs upregulated in vivo and in primary tumours
a, b, Genes with average of >2.5 fold expression change between conditions in GBM528 (a) 
GBM3565 (b) cells, as determined by RNA-seq. GBM528 heatmap associated with Main 
Miller et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2b, c. c, d, Cellular programs enriched by GSEA in cells grown in each condition. 
Representation of all enriched programs in vitro and in vivo using Enrichment Map (c). 
Example GSEA plots for cells grown in vitro and in vivo (d). FDR calculated by GSEA 
software. d–g, In the same manner as in (b–d), GSEA was performed using data generated 
from 2 independent models by Lee and colleagues15 on cells grown in vitro vs. in vivo 
intracranial xenograft tumours (e, g or in vitro vs. the primary glioblastoma from which the 
cells were derived (f, h). Cellular programs enriched in cells grown in each condition are 
presented using Enrichment Map. FDR calculated by GSEA software.
Extended Data Figure 5. Transcription factors and signalling molecules that drive stimulus-
controlled programs consistently upregulated in vivo
a, Transcription factors upregulated in GBM528 cells upon growth in vivo. Values are mean 
FPKM +/− s.d from biological duplicates. b, Cell signalling programs regulated by pause-
control that are enriched for upregulated transcription factors in (a). FDR calculated by 
MSigDB for enrichment against all genes. c, 55 genes upregulated more than 2.5-fold in 
both GBM528 and GBM3565 upon growth in vivo. d, Expression of those 55 genes in vivo 
and in vitro in GBM528 and GBM3565 compared to expression in primary glioblastoma 
tumours from the TCGA RNAseqV2 database. Data was FPKM quantile normalized across 
all datasets before plotting. e, All genes in datasets shown to confirm normalization.
Miller et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Epigenomic regulation of glioblastoma cells is microenvironment-
specific
a–h, Global enhancer landscape of GBM528 (a) and GBM3565 (d) cells in both conditions 
and microenvironment-specific enhancers. b–h, Browser track examples (b, e), aggregate 
plots (c, f), and gene expression fold change of target genes (nearest expressed gene) (g, h) 
of microenvironment-specific enhancer loci from (a, d). i, Super-enhancers identified in vivo 
in GBM528. j, Browser track examples of condition-specific SEs. k, Super-enhancers 
specific to each condition were identified. l, Expression of condition-specific super-enhancer 
target genes. Boxplot P-values calculated by 2-sided Mann-Whitney U Test.
Miller et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Prioritization of JMJD6 as lead target
a, Expression across all Ivy GAP samples of gene signature of 55 genes upregulated in vivo 
in both PDX models (top), and of elongation factor hits (middle). Corresponding 
histological tumour structure and TCGA molecular subtype of each sample represented 
below (bottom). The signature and JMJD6 expression is highest in hypoxic regions, which 
also corresponds to more Mesenchymal-like regions of the tumour. b, Expression correlation 
dotplot for JMJD6 data represented in (a). c–d, Expression correlation of each elongation 
factor hit with gene signature of 55 genes upregulated in vivo in both PDX models across all 
REMBRANDT (c) and TCGA (d) Glioblastoma tumours (bulk tumour expression. Ivy Gap 
Miller et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 data in (a) and (Main Figure 3a) is microenvironment-specific expression). P-value (a–d) by 
FDR-adj. B–H procedure. e, JMJD6 mRNA-seq correlation with each gene across TCGA 
GBM tumours. f, Example plots from GSEA of using the gene correlations in (b) and a pre-
rank list. e, Representative images from tissue microarray analysis of JMJD6 protein 
expression in (Main Fig. 3c). h, Primary screen results for the 4 shRNAs targeting JMJD6. 
Only 2 of the 4 shRNAs were represented in the library at appreciable levels, and both led to 
a RIGER depletion score of greater than 2. Values are median RPM +/− s.d. of 3 biological 
replicates for induced populations and 2 biological replicates for the uninduced population.
Extended Data Figure 8. JMJD6 regulates enhancer mediated pause-release in GBM
a, Known role of JMJD6 in transcription pause-release. In HEK293T and HeLa cells, 
JMJD6 acts with bromodomain containing 4 (BRD4) as a key activator of enhancer-
Miller et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mediated pause-release at genes controlled by Pol II pausing12. Upon enhancer activation, 
JMJD6 demethylates 7SK RNA releasing positive transcription elongation factor (P-TEFb) 
inhibition from the 7SK/HEXIM complex12 b, Browser tracks of JMJD6 at enhancers and 
TSS’s. c, Global distribution of genomic elements as determined by Hg19 reference genome 
and H3K27Ac ChIP-seq (left) and global distribution of JMJD6 binding peaks per genomic 
element as determined by JMJD6 ChIP-seq (right). Enrichments shown in (Main Fig. 3d). 
d–g, GSEA enrichment plots of genes with JMJD6-bound enhancers in the GBM528 (d) or 
GBM3565 (e) PDX model against differential expression of genes between in vivo and in 
vitro conditions (expression from Main Fig. 2b for GBM528 and Ext. Data Fig. 4a for 
GBM3565). GSEA enrichment plots of genes with JMJD6-bound enhancers in the GBM528 
(f) or GBM3565 (g) PDX model against gene correlations with JMJD6 in TCGA tumours 
(correlations from Ext. Data Fig. 7e). h, i, Distribution of pausing-index of the common in 
vivo upregulated genes from Extended Data Fig. 5c for which pausing index could be 
determined in GBM528 (h) and GBM3565 (i). All P-values calculated by 2-sided Mann-
Whitney U Test.
Miller et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Validation of JMJD6 and other hits in multiple PDX models of 
glioblastoma
a, JMJD6 mRNA expression by qRT-PCR after inducible shRNA knockdown of JMJD6. b, 
In vitro proliferation and c, in vivo survival compared to uninduced and induced non-
targeting controls. Values are mean +/− s.d. of 3 technical replicates. d, Endpoint tumours 
harvested from the induced arm of (c) stained to show human tumour cells (human nuclear 
antigen) that harbour a JMJD6 shRNA (Venus+) or harbour and express a JMJD6 shRNA 
(Venus+dsRED+). The vast majority of tumour cells at endpoint had silenced the shRNA 
(Venus+dsRED−). Scale bar: 200 μM. e, CRISPR mediated knockout of JMJD6 in a bulk 
Miller et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 population of GBMcw1919 cells in vitro. f–g, Parallel in vitro proliferation assay (f) and in 
vivo survival assay (g) of cells from (e). h–l, Constitutive shRNA knockdown of DOT1L and 
DPY30 in vitro. m–v, Parallel in vitro proliferation assays (m–q) and in vivo survival assays 
(r–v) of cells from (h–l), respectively. Error bars of bar graphs +/− s.d. of at least triplicates.
Extended Data Figure 10. Summary Figure
Overview summary of results. The in vivo tumour microenvironment, both in primary 
glioblastoma tumours and intracranial xenograft tumours, is complex and stressful for cells. 
Tumour cells must appropriately interact with and respond to a large number of other cells, 
both cancerous and non-cancerous, in order to survive. They also must activate response 
pathways to survive in the face of reduced nutrient availability, including hypoxic and low 
glucose conditions, and in the face of increased cell stress due to immune regulators, and 
debris and signalling from apoptotic cells. Thus, slower growth is seen as the cells expend 
energy on responding to these microenvironmental stimuli in order to survive. Due to the 
large number of pause-controlled genes needed to appropriately respond to the cell stresses 
in vivo, cells are dependent on transcriptional pause-release and elongation. In contrast, cell 
culture conditions are optimized to reduce cell stress and drive growth by providing a 
surplus of all required nutrients for cell growth. Cells are largely homogenous and 
cancerous. Together, these in vitro conditions lead to rapid cell growth and little need for 
pause-controlled pathways that respond to environmental stimuli and stress. Therefore, in 
vitro cells are not as dependent on transcriptional pause-release and elongation for growth 
and survival.
Miller et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Hemann, Paddison, and Zuber labs, along with Kareem Alazem for technical help with RNAi 
screening. We thank Bjarne Kristensen and Ann Mari Rosager for input on histological analysis and Alina 
Saiakhova, E. Ricky Chan, Massimo Squatrito and Wen Liu for bioinformatic support. Additional support was 
provided by the Cytometry & Imaging Microscopy and Genomics core facilities of the Case Comprehensive Cancer 
Center at Cleveland Clinic and Case Western (P30CA043703), respectively. We also thank members of the Rich, 
Tesar and Scacheri labs for input on the project and discussion about the manuscript. This work was supported by 
Velosano (J.N.R.); New York Stem Cell Foundation-Robertson Investigator Award (P.J.T.); CIHR Banting 
Fellowship (S.C.M.); National Institutes of Health grants CA183510 (T.E.M.); GM007250 (T.E.M., A.R.M., 
L.J.Y.K., J.J.M.); CA189647 (C.G.H.); CA154130, CA169117, CA197718, CA171652, NS087913, and NS089272 
(J.N.R.).
LITERATURE CITED
1. Stupp R, et al. Effects of radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide versus 
radiotherapy alone on survival in glioblastoma in a randomised phase III study: 5-year analysis of 
the EORTC-NCIC trial. The lancet oncology. 2009; 10:459–466. DOI: 10.1016/
S1470-2045(09)70025-7 [PubMed: 19269895] 
2. Zuber J, et al. Toolkit for evaluating genes required for proliferation and survival using tetracycline-
regulated RNAi. Nature biotechnology. 2011; 29:79–83. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.1720
3. Zuber J, et al. RNAi screen identifies Brd4 as a therapeutic target in acute myeloid leukaemia. 
Nature. 2011; 478:524–528. DOI: 10.1038/nature10334 [PubMed: 21814200] 
4. Fellmann C, et al. An optimized microRNA backbone for effective single-copy RNAi. Cell reports. 
2013; 5:1704–1713. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.11.020 [PubMed: 24332856] 
5. Dawson MA, Kouzarides T. Cancer epigenetics: from mechanism to therapy. Cell. 2012; 150:12–27. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.013 [PubMed: 22770212] 
6. Helin K, Dhanak D. Chromatin proteins and modifications as drug targets. Nature. 2013; 502:480–
488. DOI: 10.1038/nature12751 [PubMed: 24153301] 
7. Polak P, et al. Cell-of-origin chromatin organization shapes the mutational landscape of cancer. 
Nature. 2015; 518:360–364. DOI: 10.1038/nature14221 [PubMed: 25693567] 
8. Adam RC, et al. Pioneer factors govern super-enhancer dynamics in stem cell plasticity and lineage 
choice. Nature. 2015; 521:366–370. DOI: 10.1038/nature14289 [PubMed: 25799994] 
9. Brown JD, et al. NF-kappaB directs dynamic super enhancer formation in inflammation and 
atherogenesis. Molecular cell. 2014; 56:219–231. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.024 [PubMed: 
25263595] 
10. Suva ML, Riggi N, Bernstein BE. Epigenetic reprogramming in cancer. Science. 2013; 339:1567–
1570. DOI: 10.1126/science.1230184 [PubMed: 23539597] 
11. Akhtar-Zaidi B, et al. Epigenomic enhancer profiling defines a signature of colon cancer. Science. 
2012; 336:736–739. DOI: 10.1126/science.1217277 [PubMed: 22499810] 
12. Liu W, et al. Brd4 and JMJD6-associated anti-pause enhancers in regulation of transcriptional 
pause release. Cell. 2013; 155:1581–1595. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.056 [PubMed: 24360279] 
13. Jonkers I, Lis JT. Getting up to speed with transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II. Nature 
reviews. Molecular cell biology. 2015; 16:167–177. DOI: 10.1038/nrm3953 [PubMed: 25693130] 
14. Wu L, Li L, Zhou B, Qin Z, Dou Y. H2B ubiquitylation promotes RNA Pol II processivity via 
PAF1 and pTEFb. Molecular cell. 2014; 54:920–931. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.04.013 
[PubMed: 24837678] 
15. Lee J, et al. Tumor stem cells derived from glioblastomas cultured in bFGF and EGF more closely 
mirror the phenotype and genotype of primary tumors than do serum-cultured cell lines. Cancer 
cell. 2006; 9:391–403. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.03.030 [PubMed: 16697959] 
Miller et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. 2005; 102:15545–15550. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0506580102 [PubMed: 
16199517] 
17. Merico D, Isserlin R, Stueker O, Emili A, Bader GD. Enrichment map: a network-based method 
for gene-set enrichment visualization and interpretation. PloS one. 2010; 5:e13984. [PubMed: 
21085593] 
18. Williams LH, et al. Pausing of RNA polymerase II regulates mammalian developmental potential 
through control of signaling networks. Molecular cell. 2015; 58:311–322. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.
2015.02.003 [PubMed: 25773599] 
19. Adelman K, Lis JT. Promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II: emerging roles in 
metazoans. Nature reviews. Genetics. 2012; 13:720–731. DOI: 10.1038/nrg3293
20. Gilchrist DA, et al. Regulating the regulators: the pervasive effects of Pol II pausing on stimulus-
responsive gene networks. Genes & development. 2012; 26:933–944. DOI: 10.1101/gad.
187781.112 [PubMed: 22549956] 
21. Galbraith MD, et al. HIF1A employs CDK8-mediator to stimulate RNAPII elongation in response 
to hypoxia. Cell. 2013; 153:1327–1339. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.048 [PubMed: 23746844] 
22. Muse GW, et al. RNA polymerase is poised for activation across the genome. Nature genetics. 
2007; 39:1507–1511. DOI: 10.1038/ng.2007.21 [PubMed: 17994021] 
23. Schroder S, et al. Acetylation of RNA polymerase II regulates growth-factor-induced gene 
transcription in mammalian cells. Molecular cell. 2013; 52:314–324. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.
2013.10.009 [PubMed: 24207025] 
24. Nameeta Shah, PD., Feng, Xu, Ph.D, Lankerovich, Michael, Ph.D, Puchalski, Ralph B., Ph.D, 
Keogh, Bart, M.D., Ph.D. 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.7937/K9/TCIA.2016.XLwaN6nL
25. Kim TK, et al. Widespread transcription at neuronal activity-regulated enhancers. Nature. 2010; 
465:182–187. DOI: 10.1038/nature09033 [PubMed: 20393465] 
26. Bao S, et al. Glioma stem cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation of the DNA 
damage response. Nature. 2006; 444:756–760. DOI: 10.1038/nature05236 [PubMed: 17051156] 
27. Goecks J, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J, Galaxy T. Galaxy: a comprehensive approach for supporting 
accessible, reproducible, and transparent computational research in the life sciences. Genome 
biology. 2010; 11:R86. [PubMed: 20738864] 
28. Luo B, et al. Highly parallel identification of essential genes in cancer cells. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008; 105:20380–20385. DOI: 
10.1073/pnas.0810485105 [PubMed: 19091943] 
29. Reimand J, Arak T, Vilo J. g:Profiler--a web server for functional interpretation of gene lists (2011 
update). Nucleic acids research. 2011; 39:W307–315. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr378 [PubMed: 
21646343] 
30. Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1105–1111. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp120 [PubMed: 19289445] 
31. Trapnell C, et al. Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated 
transcripts and isoform switching during cell differentiation. Nature biotechnology. 2010; 28:511–
515. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.1621
32. Suva ML, et al. Reconstructing and reprogramming the tumor-propagating potential of 
glioblastoma stem-like cells. Cell. 2014; 157:580–594. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.02.030 [PubMed: 
24726434] 
33. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324 [PubMed: 19451168] 
34. Heinz S, et al. Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-
regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Molecular cell. 2010; 38:576–
589. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004 [PubMed: 20513432] 
35. Liu T, et al. Cistrome: an integrative platform for transcriptional regulation studies. Genome 
biology. 2011; 12:R83. [PubMed: 21859476] 
36. Miller TE, et al. Lgr5 Marks Post-Mitotic, Lineage Restricted Cerebellar Granule Neurons during 
Postnatal Development. PloS one. 2014; 9:e114433. [PubMed: 25493560] 
Miller et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 37. Gilbert MR, et al. Autophagy and oxidative stress in gliomas with IDH1 mutations. Acta 
neuropathologica. 2014; 127:221–233. DOI: 10.1007/s00401-013-1194-6 [PubMed: 24150401] 
38. Wan YW, Allen GI, Liu Z. TCGA2STAT: simple TCGA data access for integrated statistical 
analysis in R. Bioinformatics. 2016; 32:952–954. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv677 [PubMed: 
26568634] 
39. Barbie DA, et al. Systematic RNA interference reveals that oncogenic KRAS-driven cancers 
require TBK1. Nature. 2009; 462:108–112. DOI: 10.1038/nature08460 [PubMed: 19847166] 
Miller et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Parallel in vivo and in vitro screen identifies environment-specific cancer dependencies 
and reveals transcriptional pause-release and elongation as an in vivo-specific target
a, Schematic diagram depicting screen. b, Plot of score of 2nd best shRNA targeting each 
gene in each screen as calculated by RIGER28. Boxes indicate target gene ‘hits’ that caused 
depletion of the cell population when inhibited. c, Venn diagram of hits from each screen. d, 
Enrichment of hits in GO gene sets, using the screened library gene list as background to 
control for bias toward chromatin modifiers. Significance calculated by Benjamini-Hochberg 
FDR. e, Schematic of transcription elongation machinery, highlighting in vivo-specific hits.
Miller et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Transcription of pause-controlled programs is upregulated in the in vivo tumour 
microenvironment
a, Workflow for global analysis of glioblastoma cells. b, Cellular programs enriched by 
GSEA in cells grown in each condition represented using Enrichment Map. c, Example 
GSEA plots. FDR calculated by GSEA software. d, Principle component analysis of 
matched glioblastoma cells in primary tumours, intracranial tumours and cell culture. e, Fold 
change of H3K27Ac signal at enhancers of genes with >2.5 fold mRNA expression change 
between conditions, or 0.9–1.1 fold change (stable). P-values by 2-sided Mann-Whitney (M-
W) U Test.
Miller et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. JMJD6 is top hit and regulates enhancer mediated pause-release in GBM
a, Correlation across all Ivy GAP samples of elongation factor hits with gene signature of 
genes upregulated in vivo in both PDX models. P-value by FDR-adj. B-H procedure. b, 
JMJD6 mRNA expression across all gliomas in REMBRANDT database. c, Tissue 
microarray analysis of JMJD6 protein expression in over 100 gliomas. d, Global enrichment 
Z-scores of JMJD6 binding by JMJD6 ChIP-seq. e, Browser track example for (f). Pausing 
index of target genes (nearest expressed gene) (f) or aggregate plots of ChIP-seq signal (g) 
of JMJD6-bound and unbound enhancers, and of JMJD6-bound sites outside of enhancers. 
P-values (b–c, f–g) by 2-sided M-W U Test.
Miller et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. JMJD6 and other hits are potential therapeutic targets in GBM
a, CRISPR mediated knockout of JMJD6 in GBM528 cells. b–c, Parallel in vitro 
proliferation assay (b) and in vivo survival assay (c) of cells from (a). d, Constitutive shRNA 
knockdown of DOT1L. e–f, Parallel in vitro proliferation assay (e) and in vivo survival assay 
(f) of cells from (d). Error bars of bar graphs +/− s.d. of at least triplicates.
Miller et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
