 850 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017
Articles
Workplace mental health training for managers and its 
effect on sick leave in employees: a cluster randomised 
controlled trial
Josie S Milligan-Saville, Leona Tan, Aimée Gayed, Caryl Barnes, Ira Madan, Mark Dobson, Richard A Bryant, Helen Christensen, Arnstein Mykletun, 
Samuel B Harvey
Summary
Background Mental illness is one of the most rapidly increasing causes of long-term sickness absence, despite 
improved rates of detection and development of more effective interventions. However, mental health training for 
managers might help improve occupational outcomes for people with mental health problems. We aimed to 
investigate the effect of mental health training on managers’ knowledge, attitudes, confidence, and behaviour towards 
employees with mental health problems, and its effect on employee sickness absence.
Methods We did a cluster randomised controlled trial of manager mental health training within a large Australian fire 
and rescue service, with a 6-month follow-up. Managers (clusters) at the level of duty commander or equivalent were 
randomly assigned (1:1) using an online random sequence generator to either a 4-h face-to-face RESPECT mental 
health training programme or a deferred training control group. Researchers, managers, and employees were not 
masked to the outcome of randomisation. Firefighters and station officers supervised by each manager were included 
in the study via their anonymised sickness absence records. The primary outcome measure was change in sickness 
absence among those supervised by each of the managers. We analysed rates of work-related sick leave and standard 
sick leave seperately, with rate being defined as sickness absence hours divided by the sum of hours of sickness 
absence and hours of attendance. This trial was registered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry 
(ACTRN12613001156774).
Findings 128 managers were recruited between Feb 18, 2014, and May 17, 2014. 46 (71%) of 65 managers allocated to 
the intervention group received the intervention, and 42 (67%) of 63 managers allocated to the control group were 
entered in the deferred training group. Managers and their employees were followed up and reassessed at 6 months 
after randomisation. 25 managers (1233 employees) in the intervention group and 19 managers (733 employees) in 
the control group provided data for the primary analysis. During the 6-month follow-up, the mean rate of work-related 
sick leave decreased by 0·28 percentage points (pp) from a pre-training mean of 1·56% (SE 0·23) in the intervention 
group and increased by 0·28 pp from 0·95% (0·20) in the control group (p=0·049), corresponding to a reduction of 
6·45 h per employee per 6 months. The mean percentage of standard sick leave increased by 0·48 pp from 4·97% 
(0·22) in the intervention group and by 0·31 pp from 5·27% (0·21) in the control group (p=0·169).
Interpretation A 4-h manager mental health training programme could lead to a significant reduction in work-related 
sickness absence, with an associated return on investment of £9.98 for each pound spent on such training. Further 
research is needed to confirm these findings and test their applicability in other work settings.
Funding NSW Health and Employers Mutual Ltd.
Introduction
Mental illness is one of the most rapidly growing causes of 
long-term sickness absence across developed countries.1,2 
Evidence suggests that this increase is not due to a change 
in the underlying prevalence of mental ill health among 
the working age population,3 but is related to changes in 
the way society and workplaces perceive mental illness 
and its effect on work capacity.2,4 Around half of individuals 
with a diagnosis of mental illness have moderate or severe 
occupational impairment, leading to social exclusion, 
poor self-esteem, and financial hardship.5,6 Standard, 
symptom-based treatments in isolation have inadequate 
effects on occupational outcomes,7 leading many 
individuals to conclude that work outcomes for people 
with mental illness can be improved only by increased 
involvement of workplaces in support, management, and 
rehabilitation plans.8,9
Managers in the workplace have a key role in 
determining the occupational outcomes of workers who 
become unwell.10,11 Managers hold an understanding of 
workplace issues, are aware of the duties required of the 
job, and have the authority to implement adjustments to 
working conditions.12 Managers can use their knowledge 
and ability to prevent long-term disability, but are also in 
a position to do harm with inappropriate responses or 
inaction.13 Observational studies12,14 showed that early and 
regular contact from managers during a sickness absence 
episode was associated with a more rapid return to work 
Lancet Psychiatry 2017; 
4: 850–58
Published Online 
October 11, 2017 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2215-0366(17)30372-3
See Comment page 821
School of Psychiatry, University 
of New South Wales, Randwick, 
NSW, Australia 
(J S Milligan-Saville BPsych, 
L Tan MPsych, A Gayed MCrim, 
Prof A Mykletun PhD, 
Prof S B Harvey PhD); Black Dog 
Institute, Randwick, NSW, 
Australia (C Barnes MD, 
Prof H Christensen PhD, 
Prof S B Harvey); Occupational 
Health Department, The 
Education Centre, Guy’s and 
St Thomas’ NHS Trust, London, 
UK (I Madan MD); Division of 
Health and Social Care 
Research, King’s College 
London, London, UK (I Madan); 
Fire and Rescue NSW, Public 
Safety Office, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia (M Dobson BArts); 
School of Psychology, 
University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia 
(Prof R A Bryant DSc); School of 
Medicine, University of 
New South Wales, Randwick, 
NSW, Australia 
(Prof H Christensen); Norwegian 
Institute of Public Health, 
Bergen, Norway 
(Prof A Mykletun); Centre for 
Research and Education in 
Forensic Psychiatry and 
Psychology, Haukeland 
University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway (Prof A Mykletun); 
Department of Community 
Medicine, University of 
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway 
(Prof A Mykletun); and 
Nordland Hospital Trust, Bodø, 
Norway (Prof A Mykletun)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Samuel B Harvey, School of 
Psychiatry, University of 
New South Wales, Randwick, 
NSW 2031, Australia 
s.harvey@unsw.edu.au
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017 
851
for employees. However, many managers feel reluctant 
or underskilled to contact an employee who is on sick 
leave or showing signs of ill health, especially if the 
illness concerned is a mental disorder, as they might fear 
contact could cause harm or lead to complaints.15
To address this issue, several organisations are 
implementing training for managers to promote their 
understanding of mental health problems among 
workers. Evidence suggests that managers value such 
initiatives and feel more confident in discussing mental 
health matters after receiving training.16,17 Some research 
evidence exists to suggest employees of managers who 
have received mental health training might have reduced 
levels of psychological distress and greater wellbeing.16–19 
However, to date, the key question of whether manager 
mental health training reduces the occupational impact 
of mental disorders and reduces sickness absence has 
remained unanswered. One pilot study20 has assessed the 
effect of online manager mental health training on the 
sickness absence of employees, but no significant effect 
on this objective occupational outcome was found. 
Without a robust evidence base it is difficult for the 
mental health community to argue that employers need 
to provide this type of training for their managers.
In this study, we aimed to investigate manager mental 
health training via a randomised controlled trial (RCT) 
within one of the world’s largest urban fire and rescue 
services. As a high-risk workforce with a clear managerial 
hierarchy,21 an emergency service organisation provides 
an ideal setting for evaluation of manager mental health 
interventions. To our knowledge, this study is the first 
RCT to directly test the effect of manager mental health 
training on managers’ behaviour and employees’ 
sickness absence.
Methods
Study design and participants
We did a cluster RCT within Fire and Rescue New South 
Wales (FRNSW), Sydney, NSW, Australia. FRNSW is the 
seventh largest urban fire service in the world, and 
responds to fire, rescue, and hazardous material 
emergencies across metropolitan Sydney and surrounding 
regional areas.
For the purposes of this study, we defined managers 
(clusters) as being at the level of duty commander (DC) 
or equivalent. These individuals are uniformed on-shift 
managers who are responsible for several different fire 
stations, and tend to have primary responsibility for 
sickness absence management or dealing with staff who 
are unwell. We aimed to include all employed managers 
at the level of DC or equivalent. We included data for the 
firefighters and station officers supervised by each of the 
consenting managers via their sickness absence records. 
FRNSW removed the names of all firefighters and station 
officers before providing our research team with these 
administrative data. All managers gave written informed 
consent. DCs who did not provide informed consent 
were excluded from the study. The study protocol was 
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Mental illness continues to be one of the most rapidly growing 
causes of long-term sickness absence and labour market 
exclusion across developed countries, despite improved rates of 
detection and development of increasingly effective 
interventions. Observational studies have suggested that mental 
health training for managers might help improve occupational 
outcomes for employees with mental health problems. However, 
randomised controlled trials of manager mental health training 
on objective occupational and public health outcomes are scarce. 
For the purposes of an, as yet unpublished, but related meta-
analysis, we searched PubMed, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, Embase, and 
the Cochrane database, with no language restrictions, from 
inception until July 21, 2016, with search terms including 
“manager*”, “intervention”, “mental health”, and “controlled 
trial”. This search identified eight controlled trials of manager 
mental health training, only one of which assessed an objective 
outcome. No randomised controlled trials of manager mental 
health training were identified that showed a significant 
reduction in employees’ sickness absence.
Added value of this study
Our findings show that, over the 6-month follow-up period, 
4-h face-to-face RESPECT mental health training for 
managers in a large Australian fire and rescue service 
significantly reduced rates of work-related sick leave among 
employees, but not standard sick leave, in the generalised 
estimating equation model, and reduced the odds of 
employees taking standard sick leave in a post hoc 
zero-inflated negative binomial model. At the 6-month 
follow-up, managers who received RESPECT training reported 
improved confidence in communicating with their employees 
and an increased likelihood of having contacted an employee 
suffering from mental illness or stress. Cost-benefit analysis 
based on the generalised estimating equation model suggests 
a return on investment of £9·98 for each pound spent on 
such training.
Implications of all the available evidence
This cluster randomised controlled trial shows, for the first time 
to our knowledge, that simple mental health training for 
managers in the workplace can generate meaningful public 
health and individual benefits. These findings provide an 
economic argument in favour of organisations providing 
managers with mental health training. Further studies are 
needed to test similar interventions in other workplace 
settings.
For the study protocol see 
http://www.wmh.unsw.edu.au/
projects/new-mental-health-
training-fire-rescue-nsw-
managers
 Articles
852 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017
For the online random 
sequence generator see 
http://www.random.org/
sequences/
approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of 
the University of New South Wales (HC12562).
Randomisation and masking
A research assistant from an independent research team 
based at the University of New South Wales 
randomised (1:1) all eligible managers to receive mental 
health training immediately or to receive the same 
training after a 6-month delay, by use of an online 
random sequence generator. The employees whose 
manager received the training immediately were 
classified as being in the intervention group, and the 
employees whose manager received the training after a 
6-month delay were classified as being in the control 
group. Because of logistical reasons relating to the 
organisational planning of training, participants were 
randomised before consent and baseline information 
were obtained (ie, all 128 managers in FRNSW were 
randomly allocated). Researchers and managers were not 
masked to the outcome of randomisation, but it is 
unlikely employees were aware of the research project or 
the condition to which their manager was allocated.
Procedures
Managers in the intervention group received the 
RESPECT 
Manager 
Training 
Programme, 
which 
combined mental health knowledge and communication 
training. The training consisted of three main topics: key 
features and effects of common mental health issues in 
the workplace; roles and responsibilities of senior officers 
in terms of employee mental health; and development of 
effective skills for discussing mental health matters with 
staff. The face-to-face training was designed to be 
interactive and was delivered in a single 4-h session at a 
training facility operated by the fire and rescue service. 
Seven small groups of managers (ranging in size from 
7–15 people) received the training in seven separate 
sessions. These sessions occurred across a 2-month 
period, with the first taking place on Feb 18, 2014, and the 
last on April 29, 2014. The intervention was provided by 
either a clinical psychologist or a consultant psychiatrist, 
with experience in mental health-related educational 
programmes for workplace settings. In the 8 weeks after 
completion of training, managers in the intervention 
group received a single phone call from an employee 
assistance programme representative specialising in 
manager assistance to answer any outstanding questions.
The first phase of training focused on the symptoms of 
depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress, and alcohol 
misuse, and how these conditions can be recognised in 
the workplace. During the second phase of training, 
helpful responses towards a subordinate with an 
identified mental health problem were contrasted with 
poor management practices. Positive communication 
techniques were then implemented in group discussions. 
An important component of the third phase of training 
was learning how to implement the RESPECT principles 
outlined below when contacting a worker who might be 
suffering from mental health problems. The RESPECT 
principles are as follows: Regular contact is essential; 
the Earlier the better; Supportive and empathetic 
communication; Practical help, not psychotherapy; 
Encourage help-seeking; Consider return to work 
options; Tell them the door is always open and arrange 
next contact (appendix).
Managers in the control group were emailed a link to 
an online version of the baseline questionnaire by a 
researcher from our research team approximately 
2 weeks after the first training session. They could 
complete the baseline questionnaire across a 2-month 
period, between March 11, 2014, and May 17, 2014. 
Managers in the control group continued to be offered as 
much contact with the standard employee assistance 
programme manager support as needed. Within FRNSW, 
employee assistance programme specialist advisers are 
available for managers to contact anytime via phone. 
These advisers can provide assistance across a broad 
range of management issues, including the sickness 
absence of employees.
The pre-intervention period was set as the 6 months 
before Feb 18, 2014 (the date on which the first group of 
managers undertook training) for all participants. The 
follow-up was set as 6 months from the dates of the 
seven training sessions (between Feb 18, 2014, and 
April 29, 2014) for managers in the intervention group, 
which is when they also completed their baseline 
assessments. These seven post-intervention dates were 
also assigned to subgroups of control managers, which 
were approximately equal in number to those who 
received training on these dates. This strategy was used to 
minimise potential seasonal differences in sickness 
absence between the groups, resulting from any 
differences in when the baseline assessments were 
completed. We assessed managers’ knowledge, attitudes, 
confidence, and communication behaviours at baseline, 
immediately after training, and at the 6-month follow-up 
assessment via a combination of paper and online 
questionnaires. Mental health knowledge was assessed 
with a series of true-or-false questions about mental 
disorders. We assessed stigmatising attitudes towards 
mental illness using a modified version of previously 
published 
measures 
of 
personal 
stigma 
towards 
depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder;22–24 
a higher score showed greater non-stigmatising attitudes. 
Managers’ knowledge of their role in dealing with 
employees on sickness absence was assessed by a 
questionnaire based on the core competencies outlined in 
published guidance on managers’ role in supporting 
return to work after ill health.14 Confidence in 
communicating with employees on sickness absence was 
assessed by presenting managers with various situations 
and asking them to indicate their level of confidence on a 
five-point scale. We converted all responses on the 
knowledge, attitude, and confidence scales to percentages. 
See Online for appendix
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017 
853
We assessed self-reported communication behaviours 
with employees on sickness absence using a modified 
version of previously published supervisor interviews.12 
Managers were asked to think of the most recent case in 
which an employee was on long-term sickness absence 
(ie, ≥96 consecutive hours or eight consecutive shifts) 
because of mental illness, and whether they initiated 
contact with the employee. Other questions about the 
managers’ communication behaviours towards staff on 
sickness absence for reasons of stress or physical illness 
were asked, but are not reported in this paper as they form 
the basis of an as yet unpublished cross-sectional survey.
We also did a cost-benefit analysis considering the 
costs and savings from the perspective of the employer. 
Costs considered included the payment of facilitators to 
deliver the training, the travel and salary costs of 
managers attending the training, and the payment of 
employee assistance programme staff making the phone 
call after training. The cost or saving of any change in 
sickness absence rate over the 6-month follow-up was 
calculated based on the average hourly wage of a 
firefighter in New South Wales (AUD$35·77, equivalent 
to £22·00 per h).
Outcomes
The primary outcome was the change in rate of sickness 
absence from the 6 months before the intervention, 
compared with the 6 months after the intervention. We 
assessed sickness absence records of the firefighters 
and station officers supervised by each of the managers 
for the 6 months before and after the intervention by 
use of administrative data provided by FRNSW. 
Administrative sickness absence records were available 
only for employees working for managers who had 
consented to be involved in the study. Firefighters and 
station officers who changed groups during the period 
of interest were excluded. Two types of sickness absence 
were recorded in this administrative data: work-related 
sick leave and standard sick leave. Work-related 
sick leave, which relates to Australia’s Workers’ 
Compensation scheme, is taken when an employee 
sustains an injury at work or suffers an illness due to 
work. Standard sick leave is used when an employee is 
ill or injured in a manner that is not related to their 
work. Importantly, the role of the manager and the 
remuneration of employees are identical for both types 
of leave. The original study protocol approved by the 
university ethics committee stated that the primary 
outcome measure was intended to be the change in the 
number of hours of sickness absence. However, because 
some participants were not working full time, we 
redefined the primary outcome to assess the change in 
the rate of each type of sickness absence (ie, hours of 
sickness absence divided by the sum of hours of 
sickness absence and hours of attendance). This 
measure, which represents a slight deviation from our 
published protocol but was selected a priori, is one of 
the most common methods used to assess sickness 
absence in occupational medicine literature.
Secondary outcomes were change in managers’ 
knowledge, attitudes, confidence, and communication 
behaviours.
Statistical analysis
The original study protocol included a power calculation 
based on the total number of hours of sickness absence. 
As noted, to allow for part-time workers, the primary 
outcome was modified to change in sickness absence 
before the analysis. As the intervention was delivered at 
the level of managers, but the primary outcome was 
change in sickness absence among employees, the 
potential clustering of sickness absence needed to be 
accounted for in the power calculations. Based on a mean 
45 staff members per manager and an intragroup 
correlation of 0·05, recruiting 3600 employees (via 
80 managers) would allow adequate power (0·8) to detect 
an effect size of 0·2 in terms of change in sickness 
absence, with an α value of 0·05.
We calculated differences between the intervention and 
control groups using t tests for normally distributed 
continuous variables, Wilcoxon rank sum tests for non-
normally distributed continuous variables, and χ² tests 
for categorical variables. For our a-priori primary 
outcome measure, the change from pre-training sickness 
absence rate was computed for each group. In non-
randomised studies, which have the potential to be 
affected by pre-existing group differences, analysis of 
change from baseline has been found to be less biased 
than analysis of post-intervention scores, when adjusted 
for pre-intervention scores.25 Whether the same 
observation holds true for RCTs is not clear. However, 
given our small number of clusters and the potential for 
large variation in sickness absence, we decided a priori 
that change in sickness absence would be the primary 
outcome measure. Differences in the change in absences 
between the intervention and control groups were then 
assessed using linear regression with generalised 
estimating equations and robust SEs to adjust for 
clustering at the manager level. Absolute change in 
sickness absence was used as the dependent variable, 
with intervention group or control group used as the 
independent variable. Individual employees were level 
one in the data structure and managers were level two.
A series of zero-inflated models were also created using 
the number of hours of work-related sick leave and 
standard sick leave in the post-training period as the 
outcome measures. Because these models were not part 
of the original registered protocol, we will refer to these 
as post-hoc analyses. We analysed our post-hoc outcome 
measure—number of hours of sickness absence in the 
post-training period—as count data using random-
effects zero-inflated Poisson and negative binomial 
distributions. We used an offset term to adjust for the 
differing numbers of hours of attendance plus sickness 
 Articles
854 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017
absence in the post-training period. The zero-inflated 
models were constructed using SAS with coding 
described elsewhere.26,27
For the secondary outcomes, a change from baseline 
score for each measure was computed and differences 
between the intervention group and control group were 
assessed using t tests. Differences between the inter-
vention 
and 
control 
groups 
in 
communication 
behaviours with employees were assessed using χ² tests.
Data were analysed using STATA 12.1 for the a-priori 
analyses, and SAS version 9.4 for the post-hoc analyses. 
The trial was prospectively registered with the 
Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry 
(ACTRN12613001156774).
Role of the funding source
This project was supported by funding from NSW Health 
and Employers Mutual Ltd, a regulated workers com-
pensation insurer that provides workers’ compensation 
claims management for various government agencies, 
including FRNSW. The funder of the study had no role 
in study design, data collection, data analysis, data 
interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding 
author had full access to all the data in the study and had 
final responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication.
Results
Managers were recruited for the study between Feb 18, 2014, 
and May 17, 2014 and the 6-month follow-up occurred 
between Aug 18, 2014, and Nov 17, 2014 (figure). All 
currently employed managers at the level of DC or 
equivalent who were assessed for eligibility (n=128) were 
eligible for inclusion in the study, and were randomly 
assigned to either the intervention group (n=65) or control 
group (n=63). 46 (71%) of 65 managers in the intervention 
group received the training (19 declined to participate in 
the study) and completed baseline questionnaires, and 
42 (67%) of 63 managers in the control group completed 
the baseline questionnaire (ten declined to participate in 
the study, and 11 mistakenly attended the wrong training 
after receiving an email from FRNSW mistakenly 
instructing them to do so). 44 (50%) of 88 participating 
managers (in the intervention group and the control 
group) completed the 6-month follow-up questionnaire. 
Three managers (one from the intervention group and two 
from the control group) withdrew consent. Sickness 
absence records of 2298 fire fighters were obtained; 
however, following exclusion of those who moved team 
during the study (n=117), data from 2181 employees (95%) 
remained. Because some individuals did not work for 
FRNSW in both the pre-intervention and post-intervention 
periods, they dropped out of the analysis, leaving data from 
1966 employees. Each participant in the control group 
managed a mean 45 employees, and in the intervention 
group each participant managed 44 employees. The 
Figure: Trial profile
0 ineligible
128 managers assessed for eligibility
19 declined to participate
in study
25 managers included in primary 
analysis of sickness absence data
(1233 employees)
21 excluded from the primary analysis
20 not able to define employees
being managed
1 withdrew consent
19 managers completed the follow-up
survey (secondary outcome)
27 excluded from secondary analysis
26 did not complete the follow-up
questionnaire
1 withdrew consent
19 managers included in primary 
analysis of sickness absence data
(733 employees)
23 excluded from the primary analysis
21 not able to define employees
being managed
2 withdrew consent
25 managers completed the follow-up
survey (secondary outcome)
17 excluded from secondary analysis
15 did not complete the follow-up
questionnaire
2 withdrew consent
46 underwent training
65 allocated to intervention group
63 allocated to control group
21 excluded
10 declined to participate
in the study
11 mistakenly attended
wrong training
42 placed on training wait list
Intervention 
group (n=45)
Control group 
(n=40)
Age, years
49·3 (5·4)
49·1 (5·6)
Number of staff
74 (50–150)
58 (16–145)
Sex
··
··
Male
45 (100%)
40 (100%)
Female
0
0
Length of employment at Fire and 
Rescue NSW
··
··
>10–15 years
1 (2%)
0
>15 years
44 (98%)
40 (100%)
Length of employment as an 
inspector or above
··
··
<1 year
4 (9%)
4 (10%)
1–5 years
10 (22%)
14 (35%)
>5–10 years
22 (49%)
16 (40%)
>10–15 years
4 (9%)
3 (8%)
>15 years
2 (4%)
2 (5%)
NA
3 (7%)
1 (3%)
Previous mental health training
··
··
Yes
5 (11%)
4 (10%)
No
40 (89%)
36 (90%)
Data are mean (SD), median (IQR), or n (%). NA=did not provide this information, 
as we included managers who were inspectors or equivalent, but this question 
only referred to inspectors specifically.
Table 1: Baseline characteristics of managers
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017 
855
11 managers from the control group who mistakenly 
attended the first RESPECT training session were excluded 
from the study, meaning no data was available for them or 
their subordinates. Furthermore, employees’ sickness 
absence data were not available for 41 (48%) of 85 managers 
who consented to participate, because it was not possible to 
define which employees they managed.
Managers in the intervention group and the control 
group seemed similar in terms of the demographic 
characteristics examined (table 1; appendix), as did rates 
of work-related and standard sick leave of employees 
supervised by the managers in the 6 months before the 
intervention.
Table 2 shows rates of both types of sickness absence 
in the 6 months before the intervention and during the 
6-month follow-up period. Standard sick leave increased 
in the control group, probably because the follow-up 
period occurred during the winter months. Over the 
same period, the increase in standard sick leave in the 
intervention group was similar and did not differ 
between groups. However, work-related sick leave 
decreased in the intervention group and increased in 
the control group, and this group difference was 
significant (table 2). The intragroup correlations for 
standard (r<0·0001) and work-related (r=0·0013) sick 
leave were negligible.
Results of the post-hoc analyses are supplied in the 
appendix. The zero-inflated negative binomial model 
showed that the intervention significantly reduced the 
odds of an employee taking any standard sick leave, with 
employees in the intervention group having 0·34 lower 
odds of taking standard sick leave than those in the control 
group (odds ratio 0·66, 95% CI 0·48–0·93, p=0·02). 
However, among employees who did take standard sick 
leave, number or incidence of standard sick leave hours 
did not differ between the intervention and control groups 
(incidence rate ratio 1·19, 95% CI 0·94–1·48, p=0·14). 
Unlike the a-priori analysis, the zero-inflated negative 
binomial model for work-related sick leave was not 
significant. The Akaike information criteria and the 
Bayesian information criteria values suggested that the 
zero-inflated negative binomial models were substantially 
better fitting for sick leave data than were the zero-inflated 
Poisson models. Therefore, we have not reported the 
results of the zero-inflated Poisson models, although it 
should be noted that they produced the same overall 
findings as the zero-inflated negative binomial models.
After receiving training, managers in the intervention 
group had significantly higher levels of mental health 
knowledge (mean difference 13·5 percentage points [pp], 
95% CI 8·47 to 18·5, p<0·0001) than they did before 
training (appendix). Although there was no significant 
change in non-stigmatising attitudes towards mental 
illness (–0·09, –2·07 to 1·88, p=0·93), managers in the 
intervention group had significantly higher levels of 
knowledge of the manager’s role (5·17, 2·99 to 7·35, 
p<0·0001) and confidence in communicating with 
employees (8·82, 4·32 to 13·3, p=0·01) regarding mental 
illness after receiving training.
At the 6-month follow-up, intervention and control 
groups did not differ in scores for mental health knowledge 
(–7·66 pp, 95% CI –19·17 to 3·84, p=0·18), non-stigmatising 
attitudes towards mental illness (–0·34, –5·27 to 4·59, 
p=0·89), and knowledge of manager’s role regarding 
sickness absence (–1·71, –7·48 to 4·05, p=0·55). However, 
the mean improvement in baseline confidence when 
communicating with employees regarding mental illness 
and sickness absence remained, and was significantly 
greater in the intervention (11·6 pp) group than it was 
in the control (0·5 pp) group (difference −11·1, 
−19·4 to −2·82, p=0·01).
At baseline, 38 (76%) of 50 managers had initiated 
contact with the most recent employee on long-term 
sickness absence due to mental illness or stress. At the 
6-month follow-up, all ten (100%) managers in the 
intervention group who indicated that they had an 
employee on long-term sickness absence due to mental 
illness or stress reported having initiated early contact 
with them, compared with eight (67%) of 12 managers in 
the control group (p=0·044).
The total cost of delivering the training was 
AUD$1017·13, equivalent to £625·55, per manager. 
Using the β coefficients listed in table 2 from the a-priori 
analysis and the average hourly wage of a fire fighter in 
Intervention
Control
Unstandardised 
β coefficient
Effect size* (hours 
of sickness absence 
per employee over 
6 months)
p value
Pre-training, 
mean (SE)
Post-training, 
mean (SE)
Absolute percentage 
point change 
(relative to baseline)
Pre-training, 
mean (SE)
Post-training, 
mean (SE)
Absolute percentage 
point change 
(relative to baseline)
Work-related sick leave
1·56% (0·23)
1·28% (0·23)
−0·28 (−18%)
0·95% (0·20)
1·23% (0·28)
0·28 (29%)
−0·580
−6·45
0·049
Standard sick leave
4·97% (0·22)
5·45% (0·25)
0·48 (10%)
5·27% (0·21)
5·58% (0·30)
0·31 (6%)
0·169
1·89
0·73
The rate of each type of sick leave is defined as the number of hours of sickness absence presented as a percentage of the total hours of rostered or planned attendance. *Effect sizes were calculated by multiplying 
the unstandardised β coefficient by the number of hours of expected attendance for a full-time employee to reveal the estimated reduction in the number of hours of sickness absence per employee in the 
intervention group compared with the control group.
Table 2: Employees’ rates of work-related and standard sick leave before and after intervention
 Articles
856 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017
NSW (AUD$35·77, equivalent to £22·00 per h), the cost 
of work-related sickness absence was AUD$10 151·53 
(£6243·60) per manager less in the intervention group 
compared with the control group. This cost reduction 
equates to a return on investment of £9·98 for every 
pound spent on manager mental health training.
Discussion
Our results show the potential public health and 
economic benefits of a brief workplace mental health 
intervention. We showed that a 4-h manager mental 
health training programme can have a significant effect 
on managers’ confidence and behaviour in dealing with 
mental health matters among their staff over a 6-month 
follow-up period. We also showed a significant effect of 
the intervention on sickness absence using a range of 
statistical models, with substantial return on investment 
estimates. As different models produced various 
conclusions regarding a possible differential effect on 
work-related sick leave as opposed to standard sick leave, 
it is difficult to reach firm conclusions on the true effect 
on different types of employee sickness absence from 
this single trial.
To date, efforts to improve occupational outcomes for 
those with mental illness have focused on modification 
of the care and rehabilitation provided by mental health 
services.1 Although these efforts are undoubtedly 
important,8 our results suggest that simple interventions 
within the workplace could make a difference to patient 
outcomes. The body of research on workplace mental 
health interventions has often ignored measures of work-
related functioning, such as absenteeism, presenteeism, 
and job performance, instead focusing solely on 
symptom reduction.9 Similarly, previous studies of 
mental health training programmes for managers17,28 
have tended to focus on outcomes such as reduction of 
employees’ mental health symptoms. To our knowledge, 
only one previous study20 has examined the effect of 
manager mental health training on objective occupational 
outcomes. Online mental health education led to minor 
improvements in employees’ psychological wellbeing; 
however, the human resources data obtained showed no 
significant effect on sickness absence.20 The much larger 
size of our study, the face-to-face interactive nature of our 
training, and our ability to examine work-related absence 
and standard sickness absence separately might all 
account for the significant effect on sickness absence.
The differing results of the a-priori generalised 
estimating equations modelling of sickness absence data 
and the zero-inflated negative binomial modelling make 
it difficult to know whether manager mental health 
training has more of an effect on standard sickness 
absence 
or 
work-related 
sickness 
absence. 
The 
intervention might reduce the odds of employees taking 
standard sickness absence in the first instance, as the 
results of the post-hoc zero-inflated negative binomial 
modelling suggest. Most episodes of standard sickness 
absence are of short duration and due to minor physical 
illnesses or infections,29 but are also influenced by non-
illness factors, such as coping behaviours.30 As a result, 
RESPECT manager training might be unlikely to reduce 
the length of these brief episodes of standard sickness 
absence, but could influence the number of absences 
initiated. Alternatively, or perhaps additionally, the 
intervention might be effective at reducing the overall 
amount of work-related sickness absence, as suggested 
by the generalised estimating equations models. It is 
possible that any episode of illness that is directly related 
to the occupational environment should be more 
amenable to change by an intervention aimed at key 
workplace factors, such as manager support.
The exact mechanisms underlying the reduction in 
sick leave of employees whose manager underwent 
mental health training in the present study remain 
unclear. Managers’ increased confidence and greater 
likelihood of communicating with employees on or at 
risk of sickness absence might have played an important 
mediating role. Early and frequent contact from 
managers once an employee has begun an episode of 
sickness absence is associated with a faster time to full 
return to work.12 However, the results of the post-hoc 
zero-inflated negative binomial modelling suggest that 
the intervention might also have a preventive effect, 
reducing the odds of employees initiating episodes of 
standard sick leave. Although there were some immediate 
improvements in mental health knowledge and 
understanding of the manager’s role in sickness absence, 
these differences were not sustained at 6-month follow-
up, suggesting that changes in these knowledge-based 
measures might be less important in influencing 
behavioural change than the more lasting improvements 
in confidence.
The main strength of this study is its clustered 
randomised controlled design and use of an objective 
occupational measure—administrative sickness absence 
data—as the primary outcome. However, the different 
statistical approaches used produced differing results, 
with our a-priori generalised estimating equations model 
showing a significant reduction in work-related sick leave 
for the intervention group, whereas the zero-inflated 
negative binomial model showed a significant reduction 
in the odds of employees taking standard sick leave in 
the intervention group. There are strengths and 
limitations to each of these analytical approaches. Our 
a-priori primary outcome measure for the generalised 
estimating 
equations 
model 
analysis—change 
in 
sickness absence rate—was not normally distributed. 
Although use of a change score allowed for an equal 
distribution either side of the mean, the large numbers 
of individuals with little or no change in their sickness 
absence led to some deviation from a true Gaussian 
distribution. Although this violation of the assumption 
of normality limits the interpretation of data from a 
generalised estimating equations model, such models 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017 
857
have been shown usually to be robust to these assumption 
violations, provided the sample size is sufficiently large.31 
Because of this assumption violation, we did post-hoc 
testing with zero-inflated models using negative binomial 
regression to account for the disproportionate number of 
employees with minimal changes in sickness absence. 
The zero-inflated negative binomial model showed a 
significant reduction in the odds of taking standard sick 
leave in the intervention group, but not work-related sick 
leave, which casts some doubt on the strength of our 
original finding. We are not able to make a definitive 
statement about which model is the most appropriate, 
although we note there is often debate surrounding the 
reanalysis of data, with different analytical methods 
sometimes producing different findings.32
The study has other important limitations. The 
completion rate for the 6-month follow-up questionnaire 
was lower than ideal (44 [50%] of 88), although this level 
of drop-out is typical of prospective studies carried out in 
young, male-dominated workforces.33 The similar drop-
out rates in both the intervention and control groups 
suggests significant bias is unlikely, and thus loss to 
follow-up is most likely to underestimate the true effect 
of the intervention. Additional reassurance in this regard 
is provided by post-hoc analyses, which revealed no 
significant differences in demographic characteristics 
between managers who did or did not complete the 
follow-up questionnaire (data not shown). Unfortunately, 
the administrative database used does not register the 
reasons for an employee’s sickness absence, and so it is 
unknown whether there was a differential effect of the 
intervention on sickness absence due to mental health 
problems compared with other reasons. However, mental 
health problems tend to be one of the commonest 
reasons for work-related sick leave, particularly in 
firefighters.21,34,35 Additionally, stated reasons for sickness 
absence might not reflect the true underlying causes, 
with official diagnoses often underestimating the role of 
mental illness.36 Furthermore, 11 managers from the 
control group were excluded from the study after 
receiving an email from FRNSW mistakenly telling them 
to attend the first RESPECT training session. This error 
created the potential for bias between the groups and 
compromised both the randomisation process and plans 
for an intention-to-treat analysis.
Five other limitations related to the design of this study 
require mentioning. First, for logistical reasons relating to 
the organisational planning of training, we were required 
to randomise at the level of managers before obtaining 
consent and baseline information. Therefore, a full 
intention-to-treat analysis was not possible. Second, we did 
not collect demographic information from the employees, 
therefore, it is possible that pre-existing group differences 
in managerial style or employees’ health contributed to the 
results, although the randomisation process should ensure 
an even distribution of both known and unknown 
confounders. Third, the training programme, including 
the follow-up phone call, was provided as an integrated 
intervention, meaning it is not possible to know which 
components were essential. Fourth, as expected there was 
a seasonal influence on the amount of sickness absence 
taken, with increased amounts of sick leave in the winter 
months. Use of change in sickness absence as our primary 
outcome and the fact that both groups were followed over 
the same seasons should have reduced any potential bias 
from this. Finally, staff at FRNSW, like other emergency 
services organisations, operate within a well defined 
hierarchical structure, in which managers work in close 
quarters with their subordinates. Mental health is an issue 
that is frequently discussed in both formal and informal 
settings among emergency workers because of their 
routine exposure to critical incidents. The uniqueness of 
the study’s workplace environment might limit the 
generalisability of the results to other occupational groups.
In this study, we have shown, for the first time to our 
knowledge, that a modest investment in mental health 
training for workplace managers might have measurable 
benefits. In addition to creating lasting changes in 
managers’ confidence regarding discussing mental 
health, manager mental health training had a significant 
effect on the amount of sickness absence in the two 
statistical models analysed, although whether the 
intervention 
effect 
is 
via 
a 
reduction 
in 
the 
commencement of standard sick leave, a reduction in 
overall rates of work-related leave, or a combination of 
the two remains unclear. The economic effect of this 
simple intervention was large, with a return of investment 
of £9·98 for every pound spent on manager mental 
health training, based on the results of the a-priori 
analysis. The potential financial benefit for the employer 
could allow for an economic argument in favour of 
organisations providing this mental health training for 
managers, with employees and society hopefully gaining 
meaningful public mental health benefits.
Contributors
SBH and MD had the original idea for the study and, with CB and IM, 
designed the intervention and trial. JSM-S, LT, and AG acquired the data. 
SBH, AM, and JSM-S did the statistical analysis. JSM-S, AG, and SBH 
drafted the manuscript, which was revised for additional interpretation 
by all authors. SBH is guarantor.
Declaration of interests
CB, HC, and SBH are employed by the Black Dog Institute, which 
provides mental health training to workplaces. MD is employed by Fire 
and Rescue NSW. All other authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dusan Hadzi-Pavlovic (School of Psychiatry, 
University of New South Wales, Randwick, NSW, Australia) for his 
assistance with the post-hoc statistical analysis.
References
1 
Harvey SB, Henderson M, Lelliott P, Hotopf M. Mental health and 
employment: much work still to be done. Br J Psychiatry 2009; 
194: 201–03.
2 
OECD. Sick on the job? Myths and realities about mental health 
and work. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development Publishing, 2012.
3 
Kessler RC, Demler O, Frank RG, et al. Prevalence and treatment of 
mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 2515–23.
 Articles
858 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 4   November 2017
4 
Henderson M, Harvey SB, Overland S, Mykletun A, Hotopf M. 
Work and common psychiatric disorders. J R Soc Med 2011; 
104: 198–207
.
5 
Modini M, Joyce S, Mykletun A, et al. The mental health benefits of 
employment: results of a systematic meta-review. 
Australas Psychiatry 2016; 24: 331–36.
6 
Ormel J, VonKorff M, Ustun TB, Pini S, Korten A, Oldehinkel T. 
Common mental disorders and disability across cultures. Results 
from the WHO Collaborative Study on Psychological Problems in 
General Health Care. JAMA 1994; 272: 1741–48.
7 
Nieuwenhuijsen K, Bültmann U, Neumeyer-Gromen A, 
Verhoeven AC, Verbeek JH, van der Feltz-Cornelis CM. 
Interventions to improve occupational health in depressed people. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008; 2: CD006237
.
8 
Modini M, Tan L, Brinchmann B, et al. Supported employment for 
people with severe mental illness: systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the international evidence. Br J Psychiatry 2016; 
209: 14–22.
9 
Joyce S, Modini M, Christensen H, et al. Workplace interventions 
for common mental disorders: a systematic meta-review. 
Psychol Med 2016; 46: 683–97
.
10 
Kuoppala J, Lamminpää A, Liira J, Vainio H. Leadership, job 
well-being, and health effects—a systematic review and a 
meta-analysis. J Occup Environ Med 2008; 50: 904–15.
11 
Harvey SB, Joyce S, Tan L, et al. Developing a mentally healthy 
workplace: a review of the literature. Sydney, NSW: National Mental 
Health Commission and Mentally Healthy Workplace Alliance, 
2014.
12 
Nieuwenhuijsen K, Verbeek JH, de Boer AG, Blonk RW, 
van Dijk FJ. Supervisory behaviour as a predictor of return to work 
in employees absent from work due to mental health problems. 
Occup Environ Med 2004; 61: 817–23.
13 
Nishiuchi K, Tsutsumi A, Takao S, Mineyama S, Kawakami N. 
Effects of an education program for stress reduction on supervisor 
knowledge, attitudes, and behavior in the workplace: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Occup Health 2007; 49: 190–98.
14 
CIPD. Manager support for return to work following long-term 
sickness absence. Guidance. June 2010. https://www.cipd.co.uk/
Images/manager-support-for-return-to-work-following-long-term-
sickness-absence_2010_tcm18-10818.pdf (accessed Feb 17, 2017).
15 
Johnston V, Way K, Long MH, Wyatt M, Gibson L, Shaw WS. 
Supervisor competencies for supporting return to work: 
a mixed-methods study. J Occup Rehabil 2015; 25: 3–17
.
16 
McLellan RK, Pransky G, Shaw WS. Disability management 
training for supervisors: a pilot intervention program. 
J Occup Rehabil 2001; 11: 33–41.
17 
Tsutsumi A. Development of an evidence-based guideline for 
supervisor training in promoting mental health: literature review. 
J Occup Health 2011; 53: 1–9.
18 
Takao S, Tsutsumi A, Nishiuchi K, Mineyama S, Kawakami N. 
Effects of the job stress education for supervisors on psychological 
distress and job performance among their immediate subordinates: 
a supervisor-based randomized controlled trial. J Occup Health 
2006; 48: 494–503.
19 
Tsutsumi A, Takao S, Mineyama S, Nishiuchi K, Komatsu H, 
Kawakami N. Effects of a supervisory education for positive mental 
health in the workplace: a quasi-experimental study. J Occup Health 
2005; 47: 226–35.
20 Stansfeld SA, Kerry S, Chandola T, et al. Pilot study of a cluster 
randomised trial of a guided e-learning health promotion 
intervention for managers based on management standards for the 
improvement of employee well-being and reduction of sickness 
absence: GEM Study. BMJ Open 2015; 5: e007981.
21 
Harvey SB, Milligan-Saville JS, Paterson HM, et al. The mental 
health of fire-fighters: an examination of the impact of repeated 
trauma exposure. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2015; 50: 649–58.
22 Greenberg N, Gould M, Langston V, Brayne M. Journalists’ and 
media professionals’ attitudes to PTSD and help-seeking: 
A descriptive study. J Ment Health 2009; 18: 543–48.
23 Griffiths KM, Crisp DA, Jorm AF, Christensen H. Does stigma 
predict a belief in dealing with depression alone? J Affect Disord 
2011; 132: 413–17
.
24 
Griffiths KM, Christensen H, Jorm AF, Evans K, Groves C. Effect of 
web-based depression literacy and cognitive-behavioural therapy 
interventions on stigmatising attitudes to depression: randomised 
controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 2004; 185: 342–49.
25 Van Breukelen GJ. ANCOVA versus change from baseline: more 
power in randomized studies, more bias in nonrandomized studies 
[corrected]. J Clin Epidemiol 2006; 59: 920–25.
26 Neelon B, O’Malley AJ, Smith VA. Modeling zero-modified count 
and semicontinuous data in health services research part 2: case 
studies. Stat Med 2016; 35: 5094–112.
27 
Neelon B, O’Malley AJ, Smith VA. Modeling zero-modified count 
and semicontinuous data in health services research part 1: 
background and overview. Stat Med 2016; 35: 5070–93.
28 Kuehnl A, Rehfuess E, von Elm E, Nowak D, Glaser J. Human 
resource management training of supervisors for improving health 
and well-being of employees. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 
1: CD010905.
29 CIPD. Absence management. 2015. https://www.cipd.co.uk/
knowledge/fundamentals/relations/absence/absence-management-
surveys (accessed Feb 17, 2017).
30 Rael EG, Stansfeld SA, Shipley M, Head J, Feeney A, Marmot M. 
Sickness absence in the Whitehall II study, London: the role of social 
support and material problems. J Epidemiol Community Health 1995; 
49: 474–81.
31 
Hox J. Multilevel analysis: techniques and applications. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002.
32 The Lancet Psychiatry. The great curve: statistics and psychiatry. 
Lancet Psychiatry 2017; 4: 347
.
33 Fear NT, Jones M, Murphy D, et al. What are the consequences of 
deployment to Iraq and Afghanistan on the mental health of the UK 
armed forces? A cohort study. Lancet 2010; 375: 1783–97
.
34 
Safe Work Australia. The incidence of accepted workers’ 
compensation claims for mental stress in Australia. Canberra: Safe 
Work Australia, 2013.
35 Audit Office of New South Wales. New South Wales 
Auditor-General’s Report. Performance Audit. Preventing and 
managing worker injuries: NSW police force and fire & rescue 
NSW. Sydney, NSW: Audit Office of New South Wales, 2016.
36 Knudsen AK, Øverland S, Aakvaag HF, Harvey SB, Hotopf M, 
Mykletun A. Common mental disorders and disability pension 
award: seven year follow-up of the HUSK study. J Psychosom Res 
2010; 69: 59–67
.
