  
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Multiple Imputation of Family Income and Personal 
Earnings in the National Health Interview Survey:
 
Methods and Examples
 
Division of Health Interview Statistics
 
National Center for Health Statistics
 
AUGUST 2016
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

 
  

 
  


 
  

 

 

 

 
  

 
  


 

 

 

 
Contents 
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................... iii
 
1. Introduction................................................................................................................................. 1
 
1.1 
Questions on Family Income and Personal Earnings in the NHIS............................... 1
 
1.2 
Missing Data on Family Income and Personal Earnings.............................................. 8
 
1.3 
Multiple Imputation of Income and Earnings Items..................................................... 8
 
1.4 
Objective and Contents of this Report.......................................................................... 9
 
2. Multiple Imputation .................................................................................................................... 9
 
2.1 
Overview of Multiple Imputation................................................................................. 9
 
2.2 
Analyzing Multiply Imputed Data.............................................................................. 11
 
2.2.1  
General Procedures ................................................................................................. 11
 
2.2.2  
Combining Data Across Years of the NHIS ........................................................... 12
 
2.3 
Analyzing Only a Single Completed Data Set ........................................................... 13
 
3. Procedure for Creating Imputations for the NHIS.................................................................... 13
 
3.1 
Overview of the Imputation Procedure ...................................................................... 14
 
3.1.1 
Steps in the Imputation Procedure .......................................................................... 14
 
3.1.2 
Sequential Regression Multivariate Imputation...................................................... 15
 
3.1.3 
Reflecting the Sample Design in Creating the Imputations.................................... 17
 
3.2 
Further Details of the Imputation Procedure .............................................................. 17
 
3.2.1  
Step 1: Imputing Person-Level Covariates for Adults............................................ 17
 
3.2.2  
Step 2: Creating Family-Level Covariates.............................................................. 18
 
3.2.3  
Step 3: Imputing Family Income and Family Earnings (and Family-Level 
Covariates).............................................................................................................. 18
 
3.2.4  
Step 4: Imputing Personal Earnings........................................................................ 19
 
3.3 
Inconsistencies Between Family Income and Family Earnings ................................. 20
 
4. Software for Analyzing Multiply Imputed Data....................................................................... 21
 
4.1 
Analysis Using SAS-Callable SUDAAN................................................................... 24
 
4.1.1  
SUDAAN Version 9.0 with a Built-In Option for Multiple Imputation................. 24
 
4.1.2  
SAS Commands for Use with SUDAAN Version 7 or Higher without a Built-In 
Option for Multiple Imputation.............................................................................. 25
 
4.2 
Analysis Using SAS-Callable IVEware ..................................................................... 25
 
Appendix A. Technical Details for Analyzing Multiply Imputed Data........................................ 27
 
Appendix B. Variables Included in the Imputation Process ......................................................... 30
 
i 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 


 

 





 

 

 

 
Appendix C. SAS Code for the Examples in Section 4................................................................ 42
 
C.1 Code for Creating Completed Data Sets ........................................................................... 42
 
C.2 Code for Use with SAS-Callable SUDAAN 9.0 with a Built-In Option for Multiple
 
Imputation......................................................................................................................... 47
 
C.3 Code for Use with SAS-Callable SUDAAN Version 7 or Higher without a Built-In 
Option for Multiple Imputation ........................................................................................ 48
 
C.4 Code for Use with SAS-Callable IVEware ....................................................................... 52
 
Appendix D. Sample Output from SAS-Callable SUDAAN Version 9.0 with a Built-in Option 

Appendix E. Sample Output from SAS Commands for Use with SUDAAN Version 7 or Higher 

for Multiple Imputation .......................................................................................... 53
 
without a Built-in Option for Multiple Imputation ................................................ 65
 
Appendix F. Sample Output from SAS-Callable IVEware .......................................................... 72
 
References..................................................................................................................................... 78
 
ii 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Abstract 
The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) provides a rich source of data for studying 
relationships between income and health and for monitoring health and health care for persons at 
different income levels.  However, the nonresponse rates are high for two key items, total family 
income in the previous calendar year and personal earnings from employment in the previous 
calendar year.  To handle the problem of missing data on family income and personal earnings in 
the NHIS, multiple imputation of these items was performed for the survey years 1997 – 2015. 
(There are plans to create multiple imputations for the years 2016 and beyond as well, as the data 
become available.) For each survey year, data sets containing the imputed values, along with 
related documentation, can be obtained from the NHIS Web site 
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm). The objective of this report is to describe the approach 
used to create the multiple imputations and methods for analyzing the multiply imputed data. 
iii 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1. Introduction 
The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) is a multi-purpose health survey and is the 
principal source of information on the health of the civilian, noninstitutionalized household 
population of the United States (National Center for Health Statistics 2016). The NHIS provides 
a rich source of data for studying relationships between income and health and for monitoring 
health and health care for persons at different income levels. There is particular interest in the 
health of vulnerable populations such as those with low income, as well as their access to health 
care and their use of health care. However, the nonresponse rates are high for two key items, 
total family income in the previous calendar year and personal earnings from employment in the 
previous calendar year. 
1.1 Questions on Family Income and Personal Earnings in the NHIS 
In 1997, the NHIS questionnaire underwent a major revision. The redesigned questionnaire 
consists of a Basic Module or Core as well as variable Supplements. The Basic Module, which 
remains largely unchanged from year to year, consists of three components: the Family Core; the 
Sample Adult Core; and the Sample Child Core. Data are collected through personal household 
interviews. 
For the Family Core component, all members of the household 17 years of age and over who are 
at home at the time of the interview are invited to participate and to respond for themselves. For 
those under 17 years of age and those not at home during the interview, information is provided 
by a knowledgeable adult (18 years of age or over) family member residing in the household. 
The Family Core component collects information on everyone in the family and includes 
sections on family relationships, health status and limitations of activities, injuries, health care 
access and utilization, health insurance, socio-demographic background, and income and assets. 
The questions on personal earnings and total family income are in different sections (socio-
demographic background and income and assets, respectively). 
The socio-demographic background section includes a question on total earnings in the last 
calendar year for each adult (18 years of age or over) who had at least one job or business: 
“What is your best estimate of {your/subject name’s} earnings {including hourly wages, salaries, 
1
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
tips and commissions} before taxes and deductions from all jobs and businesses in {last calendar 
year}?”1 The response to this question is not taken into account or used in the next section 
(income and assets). 
In the section on income and assets, the respondent is first asked whether any family members of 
any age (and if so, who) received income from each of several different sources.2 In the 1997 to 
2006 NHIS, the respondent was then asked about total combined family income for all family 
members including children as follows: “Now I am going to ask about the total combined 
income of your family in {last calendar year}, including income from all sources we have just 
talked about such as wages, salaries, Social Security or retirement benefits, help from relatives 
and so forth.  Can you tell me that amount before taxes?” If the respondent did not know the 
amount, the following question was asked: “You may not be able to give us an exact figure for 
your total combined family income, but can you tell me if your income was $20,000 or more or 
less than $20,000?”  If one of these two income groups was specified by the respondent, a card 
was shown to the respondent with the goal of placing the income into one of 44 detailed income 
categories, and the respondent was asked which category best represents the total combined 
family income. 
In the 2007 to 2010 NHIS, the respondent was asked about total combined family income for all 
family members including children as follows: “What is your best estimate of {your total 
income/the total income of all family members} from all sources, before taxes, in {last calendar 
year}?” If the respondent refused or did not know the amount, the following question was asked: 
“Was your total {family} income from all sources less than $50,000 or $50,000 or more?” If one 
of these two income groups was specified by the respondent, follow up questions of income 
ranges were asked based on the respondent’s answer. Figure 1 presents a diagram of these sets of 
income questions that were implemented in the 2007 to 2010 NHIS for collecting income ranges. 
1 Earnings include wages, salaries, tips, commissions, Armed Forces pay and cash bonuses, and subsistence 
allowances, as well as net income from unincorporated businesses, professional practices, farms, or rental property 
(where “net” means after deducting business expenses, but before deducting personal taxes). 
2 Sources of income about which the respondent is questioned are: wages and salaries; self-employment including 
business and farm income; Social Security or Railroad Retirement; disability pension; retirement or survivor 
pension; Supplemental Security Income; cash assistance from a welfare program; other kind of welfare assistance; 
interest; dividends; net rental income; child support; and other sources. 
2
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 1. Family income questions for nonresponders to exact family income 
for collecting family income ranges, 2007-2010 NHIS 
In the 2011-2015 NHIS, the respondent was asked about total combined family income for all 
family members including children as follows: “What is your best estimate of {your total 
income/the total income of all family members} from all sources, before taxes, in {last calendar 
year}?” If the respondent refuses or does not know the amount, the following question is asked: 
“Was your total {family} income from all sources less than $50,000 or $50,000 or more?” 
Similar to the 2007 to 2010 NHIS, if one of these two income groups is specified by the 
3
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 

 
respondent, follow up questions of income ranges were asked. However, in the 2011-2015 NHIS 
additional income range questions were asked that allow for further detail to be obtained. These 
questions were asked not only based on the respondent’s answer, but also on the size of their 
family and poverty threshold. As the poverty threshold dollar amounts are adjusted each year, the 
specific families who received these follow-up questions may vary slightly between the years of 
2011-2015. Figure 2 to Figure 5 present the flow charts for questions that were implemented in 
the 2015 NHIS for collecting income ranges. Note that the total combined income of all family 
members is estimated by the respondent. An estimate of family income is not obtained by 
summing responses to more detailed questions, as is done in some surveys that include more 
extensive questions on income, such as the Current Population Survey, a monthly survey of 
households conducted by the Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
Figure 2. Family Income Range Questions for Non-responders to Family Income Question 
(FINCTOT) in the 2015 NHIS, Where Total Family Income From All Sources is Less than 
250% of the Poverty Threshold 
START 
Income < 200% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
Income < 250% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
Income < 100% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
Yes 
END 
Yes, no 
Yes, no 
Yes 
Income < 138% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
No 
4
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 

 
Figure 3. Family Income Range Questions for Non-responders to Family Income Question 
(FINCTOT) in the 2015 NHIS, Where Total Family Income From All Sources is Greater 
than or Equal to 250% of the Poverty Threshold and Family Size is 1 or 2 Persons 
Income < 250% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
No 
Family size 1, 2? 
START 
Yes 
Yes 
Income < $75,000? 
Income < 400% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
Income < $100,000? 
No 
END 
Yes 
No 
Income < $150,000? 
Yes, No 
Yes, No 
5
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Yes, No 
Family size 
1,2,3,7+? 
Yes 
Income < $150,000? 
No 
Figure 4. Family Income Range Questions for Non-responders to Family Income Question 
(FINCTOT) in the 2015 NHIS, Where Total Family Income from All Sources is Greater 
than or Equal to 250% of the Poverty Threshold and Family Size is 4, 7, 8 or 9+ Persons 
Income < 250% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
Income < 400% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
Income < $150,000? 
Family size >= 9? 
Yes 
No 
Family size 4, 7, 8 
or 9+? 
Yes 
No 
START 
END 
Yes 
No 
Yes, No 
END 
6
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 5. Family Income Range Questions for Non-responders to Family Income Question 
(FINCTOT) in the 2015 NHIS, Where Total Family Income from All Sources is Greater 
than or Equal to 250% of the Poverty Threshold and Family Size is 3, 5, or 6 Persons 
Income < 250% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
No 
Family size 3,5,6? 
START 
Income < $100,000? 
Yes 
Family size = 3? 
No 
Income < 400% of 
the poverty 
threshold? 
Family size = 3? 
Yes 
No 
Yes, No 
Yes, No 
END 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Income < $150,000? 
7
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1.2 Missing Data on Family Income and Personal Earnings 
For the years 1997 – 2006, the weighted percentages of persons with unknown family income 
were within the following ranges: 24-34% for the “exact” value; 20-31% for the detailed 
categorical (44 categories) value; and 6-11% for the two-category ($20,000 or more, or less than 
$20,000) value. For the years 2007 – 2015, the weighted percentages of persons with unknown 
family income were within the following ranges: 33% and 22% for the “exact” value; 15% and 
4% for any of the family income ranges questions; and 9% and 5% for the two-category (i.e., 
$50,000 or more, or less than $50,000) income range value respectively. For the years 1997 – 
2015, the weighted percentages of employed adults with unknown personal earnings were within 
23-33%.  (The weighted missing-data rates given in this paragraph are all close to their 
unweighted counterparts.)  There is evidence that the nonresponse on family income and 
personal earnings was related to several person-level and family-level characteristics, including 
items pertaining to health.  Thus, the respondents cannot be treated as a random subset of the 
original sample.  It follows that the most common method for handling missing data in software 
packages, “complete-case analysis” (Little and Rubin 2002, Section 3.2), also known as “listwise 
deletion,” which deletes cases that are missing any of the variables involved in the analysis, will 
generally be biased.  Moreover, since deletion of incomplete cases discards some of the observed 
data, complete-case analysis is generally inefficient as well; that is, it produces inferences that 
are less precise than those produced by methods that use all of the observed data. 
1.3 Multiple Imputation of Income and Earnings Items 
As discussed in Schenker et al. (2006), to handle the problem of missing data on family income 
and personal earnings in the NHIS, multiple imputation of these items was performed for the 
survey years 1997 – 2015, with five sets of imputed values created to allow the assessment of 
variability due to imputation. (There are plans to create multiple imputations for the years 2016 
and beyond as well, as the data become available.) Since personal earnings were only collected 
for employed adults, employment status was imputed as well for the small percentage (less than 
2%) of adults for whom employment status was unknown.  Finally, the ratio of family income to 
the applicable Federal poverty thresholds was derived for families with missing incomes, based 
8
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
on the imputed income values. The imputation procedure incorporated a large number of 
predictors, including demographic and health-related variables. 
For each year in 1997 – 2015, the data base for the NHIS multiply imputed data includes five 
files, one for each set of imputed values. For each person, each file contains: the values of 
family income, personal earnings, employment status, and the poverty ratio; flags indicating 
whether the value of each variable was imputed; and information for linking the data to other 
data from the NHIS. In the public-use version of the multiply imputed data, family income, 
personal earnings, and poverty ratio values are given. Both the family income and personal 
earnings variables are top-coded at the 95th percentile, and the top five percent of values are set 
to this top-coded value. This top-coded family income variable and the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
poverty thresholds are then used to generate a poverty ratio value for each person. 
For each survey year, data sets containing the imputed values, along with related documentation, 
can be obtained from the NHIS Web site (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm). 
1.4 Objective and Contents of this Report 
The objective of this report is to describe the approach used to multiply impute income and 
earnings items in the NHIS and methods for analyzing the multiply imputed data. Sample 
program code and output are also provided. 
Section 2 provides an overview of multiple imputation and a discussion of how multiply imputed 
data are analyzed.  Section 3 contains a description of the imputation procedure that was used in 
this project. Finally, in Section 4, two examples are discussed to illustrate how to analyze the 
multiply imputed NHIS data using the software packages SAS-callable SUDAAN and SAS-
callable IVEware. 
2. Multiple Imputation 
2.1 Overview of Multiple Imputation 
Imputation is a popular approach to handling nonresponse on items in a survey for several 
reasons.  First, imputation adjusts for observed differences between nonrespondents and 
respondents; such an adjustment is generally not made by complete-case analysis. Second, 
9
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
imputation results in a completed data set, so that the data can be analyzed using standard 
software packages without discarding any observed values.  Third, when a data set is being 
produced for analysis by the public, imputation by the data producer allows the incorporation of 
specialized knowledge about the reasons for missing data in the imputation procedure, including 
confidential information that cannot be released to the public. Moreover, the nonresponse 
problem is addressed in the same way for all users, so that analyses will be consistent across 
users. 
Although single imputation, that is, imputing one value for each missing datum, enjoys the 
positive attributes just mentioned, analysis of a singly imputed data set using standard software 
fails to reflect the uncertainty stemming from the fact that the imputed values are plausible 
replacements for the missing values but are not the true values themselves. As a result, such 
analyses of singly imputed data tend to produce estimated standard errors that are too small, 
confidence intervals that are too narrow, and significance tests that reject the null hypothesis too 
often when it is true. For example, large-sample results reported in Rubin and Schenker (1986) 
suggest that when the rate of missing information is 20% to 30%, nominal 95% confidence 
intervals computed from singly imputed data have actual coverage rates between 85% and 90%. 
Moreover, the performance of single imputation can be even worse when inferences are desired 
for a multi-dimensional quantity. For example, large-sample results reported in Li, 
Raghunathan, and Rubin (1991) demonstrate that for testing hypotheses about multi-dimensional 
quantities, the actual rejection rate under the null hypothesis increases as the number of 
components being tested increases, and the actual rate can be much larger than the nominal rate. 
Multiple imputation (Rubin 1978, 1987) is a technique that seeks to retain the advantages of 
single imputation while also allowing the uncertainty due to imputation to be reflected in the 
analysis.  The idea is to simulate M > 1 plausible sets of replacements for the missing values, 
thereby generating M completed data sets.  The M completed data sets are analyzed separately 
using a standard method for analyzing complete data, and then the results of the M analyses are 
combined in a way that reflects the uncertainty due to imputation. Details of how to analyze 
multiply imputed data are provided in Section 2.2 and Appendix A. For public-use data, M is 
not usually larger than five, which is the value that has been used in multiply imputing missing 
data for the NHIS. Rubin (1996) argues that a small value of M is appropriate for multiple 
imputation, because the simulation involved in multiple imputation is only being used to handle 
10
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
the missing information, whereas the observed information is handled by the complete-data 
method used to analyze the completed data sets. 
With multiple imputation, the M sets of imputations for the missing values are ideally 
independent draws from the predictive distribution of the missing values conditional on the 
observed values.  Consider, for example, the simple case in which there are two variables, X and 
Y, with Y subject to nonresponse and X fully observed.  Suppose further that the imputation 
model specifies that: Y has a normal linear regression on X, that is, Y=β0+ β1X+ε, where ε has a 
normal distribution with mean 0 and variance ζ2; and given X, the missing values of Y are only 
randomly different from the observed values of Y. After the regression of Y on X is fitted to the 
complete cases, a single set of imputations for the missing Y-values can be generated in two 
steps. First, values of β0, β1, and ζ2 are drawn randomly from the joint posterior distribution of 
the regression parameters.  For example, the appropriately scaled chi-square distribution could be 
used for drawing ζ2, and the appropriate bivariate normal distribution could be used for drawing 
β0 and β1 given ζ2. Second, for each nonrespondent, say nonrespondent i, the missing value of Y 
is drawn randomly as β0+ β1Xi+ε, where Xi is the X-value for nonrespondent i, and ε is a value 
drawn from a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance ζ2. The first step reflects the 
uncertainty due to the fact that the regression model was fitted to just a sample of data, and the 
second step reflects the variability of the Y-values about the regression line. Multiple 
imputations of the missing Y-values are generated by repeating the two steps independently M 
times.  Although most imputation problems, including the imputation of missing data in the 
NHIS, are much more complicated than the simple example just presented, the basic principle 
illustrated by the simple example, that is, reflecting all of the sources of variability across the M 
sets of imputations, still applies. 
2.2 Analyzing Multiply Imputed Data 
2.2.1 General Procedures 
Suppose that the primary interest is in estimating a scalar population quantity, such as a mean, a 
proportion, or a regression coefficient. The analysis of the M completed data sets resulting from 
multiple imputation proceeds as follows: 
 Analyze each of the M completed data sets separately using a suitable software package 
designed for complete data (for example, SUDAAN or Stata). 
11
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Extract the point estimate and the estimated standard error from each analysis. 
 Combine the point estimates and the estimated standard errors to arrive at a single point 
estimate, its estimated standard error, and the associated confidence interval or 
significance test. 
Technical details of how to analyze multiply imputed data are given in Appendix A. Briefly, 
however, the combined point estimate is the average of the point estimates obtained from the M 
completed data sets.  The estimated variance of the combined point estimate is computed by 
adding two components.  The first component is the average of the estimated variances obtained 
from the M completed data sets. The second component is the variation among the point 
estimates obtained from the M completed data sets.  The latter component represents the 
uncertainty due to imputing for the missing values. Confidence intervals and significance tests 
are constructed using a t reference distribution. 
One can carry out a multiple-imputation analysis by using any appropriate software package for 
analyzing the completed data sets and then using a spreadsheet program, a SAS macro, a 
specially written program, or even just a calculator to combine the results of the analyses. 
However, it can be quite time consuming to perform the multiple-imputation analysis, especially 
if many quantities of interest are involved. Fortunately, several software packages are available 
that implement the combining rules for a variety of analytical techniques.  Section 4 provides 
information about some of these software packages. 
2.2.2 Combining Data Across Years of the NHIS 
A common practice with the NHIS, especially when rare events or small subsets of the 
population are being studied, is to combine more than one year of data in order to increase the 
sample size.  For analyses of the combined data, the data files are typically concatenated and the 
analysis weights adjusted accordingly.  Botman and Jack (1995) and National Center for Health 
Statistics (2016, Appendix IV) provide further information on how to conduct such analyses as 
well as on issues that arise. 
With the NHIS multiply imputed data, there are M=5 completed data sets for each year.  
If it is desired to combine more than one year of data, then the corresponding completed data sets 
from the years in question can be concatenated to obtain M=5 concatenated completed data sets.  
Suppose, for example, that the data from 1999 and 2000 were to be combined.  Then the first 
completed data set from 1999 and the first completed data set from 2000 would be concatenated 
12
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
to create the first concatenated completed data set for 1999 – 2000. The analogous 
concatenations would be carried out for the second through fifth completed data sets, with the 
end result being M=5 concatenated completed data sets for 1999 – 2000. 
After M=5 concatenated completed data sets have been created by combining data across years, 
each of the concatenated completed data sets is analyzed using the standard techniques for 
concatenated data from multiple years of the NHIS, as described by Botman and Jack (1995) and 
National Center for Health Statistics (2016, Appendix IV).  The results of the five analyses are 
then combined using the rules given in Section 2.2.1 and Appendix A. . 
2.3 Analyzing Only a Single Completed Data Set 
Users of the multiply imputed NHIS data who are unfamiliar with multiple imputation or who 
find the analysis of multiply imputed data cumbersome might be tempted to analyze only a 
single completed data set, such as the first of the five. Such an analysis, which is equivalent to 
using single imputation, would produce point estimates that are unbiased (under the assumption 
that the imputation model is correct). However, as discussed in Section 2.1, it would produce 
underestimates of variability and resultant inferences that may be inaccurate, since it would not 
account for the additional variability due to imputation. 
When applying a model-selection procedure such as stepwise regression, it is not clear how to 
formally combine the results from M completed data sets. Therefore, an analyst might decide to 
apply the model-selection procedure to, for example, just the first completed data set. Since 
variability would be underestimated, such an approach would tend to judge more variables as 
“statistically significant” than would be the case if variability were estimated correctly. Thus, 
fewer variables would tend to be eliminated from the model under single imputation. 
3. Procedure for Creating Imputations for the NHIS 
The imputation of family income and personal earnings in the NHIS was complicated by several 
issues. First, these variables are hierarchical in nature, since one is reported at the family level 
whereas the other is reported at the person level. Second, there are structural dependencies 
among the variables in the survey.  For example, individuals can only have earnings (given by 
one variable) if they are employed (as indicated by other variables).  Third, in some cases, the 
13
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 
income and earnings items needed to be imputed within bounds.  For example, as discussed in 
Section 1.2, some families did not report exact income values but did report coarser income 
categories; such categories were used to form bounds for imputing exact income.  Finally, there 
were several variables that were used as predictors in the imputation procedure.  Such variables 
were of many types (e.g., categorical, continuous, count, ...), and they often had small 
percentages of missing values that needed to be imputed as well. 
The following two sections describe the imputation procedure.  Section 3.1 provides an overview 
of the steps in the procedure, the general algorithm used, and how features of the sample design 
were incorporated into the procedure.  In Section 3.2, some additional details of the steps in the 
imputation procedure are described. 
Note that in the process of imputing family income and personal earnings, missing values of 
several additional variables were imputed, and several new variables were created as well. These 
additional variables and imputed values were not retained in the final public-use data base for the 
NHIS multiply imputed data, except for the adult employment status and family poverty ratio 
that were mentioned in Section 1.3. 
3.1 Overview of the Imputation Procedure 
3.1.1 Steps in the Imputation Procedure 
To handle the hierarchical nature of family income and personal earnings, it was decided to first 
impute the missing values of family income, together with the “family earnings,” that is, the 
family total of personal earnings, for each family that had any employed adults with unknown 
personal earnings. Once these family-level items were imputed, missing values of personal 
earnings were imputed via imputation of the proportion of family earnings to be allocated to 
those family members with missing personal earnings. 
Family income and family earnings were imputed first because there were other variables 
available that were expected to be especially useful in predicting these items. For example, as 
described in Sections 1.2, although exact family income was not reported for 22% to 33% of the 
families, either a fine or coarse categorical income value was available for the majority of these 
families.  In addition, some families with missing values of family income had information 
available on family earnings and vice versa, and these two family-level variables were expected 
to be highly correlated with each other. Finally, the (log) mean and (log) standard deviation of 
14
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
reported family incomes were calculated by secondary sampling unit (SSU), and these contextual 
variables were used as predictors. (The SSUs in the NHIS were small clusters of housing units.) 
In the imputation of family income and family earnings, several family-level covariates were 
used, including many summaries of the person-level covariates within each family. Most of the 
person-level covariates had very low rates of missingness. To facilitate their use, their missing 
values were imputed for adults (since employment and earnings items, as well as many of the 
person-level covariates, apply only to adults in the NHIS) prior to the imputation of family 
income and family earnings. Any remaining missing values in the family-level covariates, due to 
missingness in person-level covariates for children, were imputed together with family income 
and family earnings. 
To summarize, the sequence of steps in the imputation procedure was as follows: 
 Impute missing values of person-level covariates for adults. 
 Create family-level covariates. 
 Impute missing values of family income and family earnings, and any missing values of 
family-level covariates due to missing person-level covariates for children. 
 Impute the proportion of family earnings to be allocated to each employed adult with 
missing personal earnings, and calculate the resulting personal earnings. 
The income and earnings items were not used in the initial imputation of covariates in step 1.  To 
incorporate any relationships between the income and earnings items and the covariates into the 
imputations, after steps 3 and 4 were carried out, the procedure cycled through steps 1 – 4 five 
more times, with the income and earnings items (including the imputed values) now included as 
predictors in step 1.  In each of these five additional cycles, the SSU-level (log) mean and (log) 
standard deviation of family incomes were also recalculated, with the imputed values included in 
the calculations. 
To create multiple imputations, the entire imputation process described above was repeated 
independently five times. 
3.1.2 Sequential Regression Multivariate Imputation 
The imputations in each of steps 1 – 4 described in Section 3.1.1 were created using sequential 
regression multivariate imputation (SRMI) (Raghunathan et al. 2001), as implemented by the 
module IMPUTE in the software package IVEware (http://www.isr.umich.edu/src/smp/ive). 
15
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
A brief description of SRMI is as follows; see Raghunathan et al. (2001) for details. Let X 
denote the fully-observed variables, and let Y1,Y2,...,Yk denote k variables with missing values, 
ordered by the amount of missingness, from least to most. The imputation process for 
Y1,Y2,...,Yk proceeds in c rounds.  In the first round: Y1 is regressed on X, and the missing values 
of Y1 are imputed (using a process analogous to that described in the simple example of Section 
2.1); then Y2 is regressed on X and Y1 (including the imputed values of Y1), and the missing 
values of Y2 are imputed;  and so on, until Yk is regressed on X,Y1,Y2,...,Yk-1, and the missing 
values of Yk are imputed. 
In rounds 2 through c, the imputation process carried out in round 1 is repeated, except that now, 
in each regression, all variables except for the variable to be imputed are included as predictors.  
Thus: Y1 is regressed on X,Y2,Y3,...,Yk, and the missing values of Y1 are re-imputed; then Y2 is 
regressed on X,Y1,Y3,...,Yk, and the missing values of Y2 are re-imputed; and so on.  After c 
rounds, the final imputations of the missing values in Y1,Y2,...,Yk are used. 
For the regressions in the SRMI procedure, IVEware allows the following models: 
 A normal linear regression model if the Y-variable is continuous; 
 A logistic regression model if the Y-variable is binary; 
 A polytomous or generalized logit regression model if the Y-variable is categorical with 
more than two categories; 
 A Poisson loglinear model if the Y-variable is a count; 
 A two-stage model if the Y-variable is mixed (i.e., semi-continuous), where logistic 
regression is used to model the zero/non-zero status for Y, and normal linear regression is 
used to model the value of Y conditional upon its being non-zero. 
In addition, IVEware allows restrictions and bounds to be placed on the variables being imputed.  
As an example of a restriction, the imputation of family earnings was restricted to families with 
one or more employed adults (see Section 3.2.3). As an example of bounds, if a category rather 
than an exact value was reported for a family’s income, the category’s bounds were used in the 
imputation (see Section 3.2.3). 
Because SRMI requires only the specification of individual regression models for each of the Y-
variables, it does not necessarily imply a joint model for all of the Y-variables conditional on X.  
The decision to use SRMI and IVEware to create the imputations for the NHIS was influenced in 
large part by the complicating factors summarized at the beginning of Section 3 and discussed 
16
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

 
further in Section 3.2, specifically, the structural dependencies, the bounds, and the large number 
of predictors of varying types that had missing values.  These complicating factors would be very 
difficult to handle using a method based on a full joint model. Moreover, without the 
complicating factors, the SRMI-based imputation procedure used in this project would actually 
be equivalent to the following two steps, corresponding to steps 3 and 4 in Section 3.1.1: 
i.  Impute the missing values of family income and family earnings based on a bivariate 
normal model (given predictors and transformations). 
ii.  Impute the proportion of family earnings to be allocated to each employed adult with 
missing personal earnings, based on a normal linear regression model for the logit of the 
proportion, and calculate the resulting personal earnings. 
3.1.3 Reflecting the Sample Design in Creating the Imputations 
When using multiple imputation in the context of a sample survey with a complex design, it is 
important to include features of the design in the imputation model, so that approximately valid 
inferences will be obtained when the multiply imputed data are analyzed (Rubin 1996). 
The sample design of the NHIS was reflected in the imputations for this project via the inclusion 
of the following covariates: indicators for the distinct combinations of stratum and primary 
sampling unit (PSU); the survey weights; and SSU-level summaries of family income, as 
mentioned in Section 3.1.1. 
3.2 Further Details of the Imputation Procedure 
Additional details of the steps outlined in Section 3.1.1 are now described. 
3.2.1 Step 1: Imputing Person-Level Covariates for Adults 
The variables included in the imputation of person-level covariates for adults are listed in Table 
1 of Appendix B. The imputation of person-level covariates was carried out in two parts, 
because imputed values from the first part were needed to set restrictions for the imputations in 
the second part. In the first part, the variables for whether a person has a limitation of activity 
(LIM_ACT), for whether specific conditions caused the limitation (LA_GP01, LA_GP02, ..., 
LA_GP09), and for number of hours worked per week (WRKHRS), were omitted, and any 
missing values on the other variables were imputed.  Then, the variable LIM_ACT was created 
from the individual items on limitations of activity (PLAADL, PLAIADL, etc.).  In the second 
17
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
part, any missing values on WRKHRS and LA_GP01, LA_GP02, ..., LA_GP09 were imputed, 
conditional on the values from the first part.  An upper bound of 95 was set for WRKHRS. 
Along with the person-level covariates, the log mean (SSUFINL) and the log standard deviation 
(SSUSTDL) of reported family incomes within the SSU were treated as person-level variables 
and imputed if necessary.  Missing values in SSUFINL occurred if no families in the SSU had 
reported incomes, if the mean reported family income was 0, or if the mean reported family 
income was top-coded (at $999,995), in which case the log top-code value was used as a lower 
bound in the imputation.  Missing values in SSUSTDL occurred if fewer than two families in the 
SSU had reported incomes.  If this was the case, the largest observed log standard deviation 
among the SSUs was used as an upper bound in the imputation.  After the missing values of 
SSUFINL and SSUSTDL were imputed, averages of the values within each SSU were computed 
for use in subsequent steps. 
3.2.2 Step 2: Creating Family-Level Covariates 
The person-level variables from step 1 were summarized, by family, to create family-level 
covariates for use in imputing family income and family earnings.  These family-level covariates 
are included in the listing in Table 2 of Appendix B. Examples include the total number of 
earners in a family (FM_EARN) and an indicator for whether a family has at least one person with 
Medicaid coverage (FM_MCAID). 
After imputation of the person-level covariates for adults in step 1, some of the family-level 
covariates that were created still had small residual levels of missingness, due to missing values 
of some person-level covariates for children.  These missing values in the family-level covariates 
were imputed together with family income and family earnings in step 3. 
3.2.3 Step 3: Imputing Family Income and Family Earnings (and Family-Level Covariates) 
The variables included in the imputation at the family level are listed in Table 2 of Appendix B. 
To determine a good transformation for family income and family earnings to conform to the 
normality assumption in the imputation model, Box-Cox transformations (Box and Cox 1964) 
were estimated from the complete cases for the regressions predicting family income and family 
earnings. The closest simple transformation suggested by the Box-Cox analysis was the cube-
root transformation, which is also close to and consistent with the optimal transformation (the 
power 0.375) found by Paulin and Sweet (1996) in modeling income data from the Consumer 
18
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Expenditure Survey of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. After the imputation procedure was 
completed, the variables were transformed back to their original scale. 
The imputation of family earnings was restricted to families with one or more adult earners. For 
many families, there was partial information available on family earnings, because personal 
earnings were observed for some family members and missing for others. For each family with 
such partial information, the sum of the observed personal earnings was used as the lower bound 
in imputing the family earnings.  With regard to family income, as mentioned previously, there 
were several families for which an exact income was not reported, but an income category was 
reported.  In each such case, the bounds specified by the reported category were used in imputing 
the family income.  In addition to the bounds just described, when a reported family income or 
family earnings value was top-coded, an exact value at least as large as the top-code value 
($999,995 for income and $999,995 for earnings) was imputed. The imputation for top-coded 
values was just an intermediate step that was carried out so that the distribution from which other 
values were imputed would not be distorted by the top-coding. After the entire imputation 
process was completed, the top-coding of family income values larger than $999,996 was 
reinstated. 
3.2.4 Step 4: Imputing Personal Earnings 
For any family that had only one employed adult with missing personal earnings, once the family 
earnings were imputed in step 3, the person’s missing earnings could be determined by 
subtracting the observed personal earnings for members of the family from the imputed family 
earnings. 
For families that had more than one employed adult with missing personal earnings, in the 
imputation of the proportion of family earnings to be allocated to each employed adult with 
missing personal earnings, the logit (log-odds) transformation was applied to the proportions, 
and a normal linear regression model was used for the logit.  The variables included in this 
imputation step are listed in Table 3 of Appendix B. 
After the logits were imputed, they were transformed back to proportions. Then, within each 
family, the proportions for the employed adults with missing personal earnings were rescaled so 
that they would sum to the total proportion of family earnings not accounted for by persons 
whose earnings had been observed. Imputed personal earnings were calculated from an imputed 
proportion via multiplication of the proportion by the family earnings. 
19
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 
During the imputation process, the imputed proportion corresponding to each top-coded reported 
value of personal earnings was bounded below so that the resulting imputed personal earnings 
value would be at least as large as the top-code value ($999,995). As with family incomes (see 
Section 3.2.3), after the entire imputation process was carried out, the top-coding of personal 
earnings values larger than $999,995 was reinstated. 
3.3 Inconsistencies Between Family Income and Family Earnings 
Because the items suggested to be included in family income in the NHIS questionnaire are all 
nonnegative and include the personal earnings of family members (see Section 1.1), it follows 
that family income should ideally be at least as large as family earnings. However, as noted in 
Section 1.1, family income in the NHIS is estimated by the respondent rather than being 
constructed by summing responses to more detailed questions, such as the question about 
personal earnings of members of the family. Thus, some inconsistencies between family income 
and family earnings, in terms of the former being lower than the latter, might be expected. 
In the 1997 – 2015 NHIS, 5% to 10% of responding families per year had reported family 
incomes that were lower than the reported family earnings. (The percentages presented in this 
section are weighted. As was the case in Section 1.2, the unweighted percentages are close to 
their weighted counterparts.) Moreover, the imputation procedure results in a larger percentage 
of families with family incomes lower than family earnings; 12% to 19% of the families in a 
completed data set (including both observed and imputed values) have such inconsistencies. 
A reason for the higher rate of inconsistencies in the imputed data is as follows. In addition to 
the 5% to 10% inconsistency rate in the reported data from which the imputation model is 
estimated, 36% to 44% of responding families had reported family incomes exactly equal to their 
reported family earnings. Since the imputation model does not force equality of family income 
and family earnings for any families, the imputation procedure tends to produce differences 
between family income and family earnings that are close to zero for a large percentage of 
families, but several such differences will be positive and several others will be negative. 
As part of this project, research has been conducted on restricting the imputed value of family 
income to be at least as large as the imputed value of family earnings, as well as on imputing 
new values of family income for those families whose reported family incomes and family 
earnings are inconsistent. The methods that have been developed to date tend to distort the 
20
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
marginal distribution of family income and the marginal distribution of family earnings. Given 
that the primary interest of data analysts is in each variable on its own, especially family income 
and its ratio to the poverty threshold, it was decided that family income and family earnings 
would be imputed without imposing consistency. Research into resolving the issue of 
inconsistency will continue. 
4. Software for Analyzing Multiply Imputed Data 
As mentioned in Section 2.2.1, after analyzing each of the M completed data sets resulting from 
multiple imputation, one can combine the results of the M analyses by using a spreadsheet 
program, a SAS macro, a specially written program, or even just a calculator. However, the 
increasing availability of software packages that implement the combining rules is helping to 
facilitate multiple-imputation analyses. 
In this section, two examples are considered to illustrate analyses of the multiply imputed NHIS 
data using both SAS-callable SUDAAN and SAS-callable IVEware. Stata procedures for 
performing multiple-imputation analyses are available (StataCorp LP 2009), although examples 
of analyses using these procedures are not given here. The Stata procedures can be used to fit 
regression models with complex survey data. Obtaining multiple-imputation estimates and 
estimated standard errors based on cross-tabulations or descriptive measures is not possible 
without framing them as regression problems. 
Both of the examples use data from the 2000 NHIS. The analyses of interest for the two 
examples, in terms of variables defined in the table on the next page, are as follows: 
Example 1: Cross-tabulation of POVERTYI and NOTCOV 
Example 2: Logistic regression of the outcome HSTAT on the predictors POVERTYI, AGEGR6R, 
HPRACE, USBORN, MSAR, REGIONR, and SEX 
The SAS code given in Appendix C. , Section C.1 was used to create five completed data sets 
(ANAL1-5) containing only the variables used in the two example analyses.  The process 
involved in creating these data sets is as follows: 
a)  Extract the income-related variables from the files containing the five sets of imputations 
(INCMIMP1-5). 
21
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

 
b) Extract the other necessary variables, including the design variables STRATUM, PSU, and 
WTFA, from the NHIS person-level file (e.g., PERSONSX). 
c)  Merge each of the five sets of income-related variables from step a with the other 
variables from step b, and perform the necessary recodes to create each of the five 
completed data sets for analysis. 
22
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                      
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
                    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 

 
Definitions of Variables Used in the Examples 
Variable Namea 
Definition 
Code 
STRATUM 
Stratum 
PSU 
Primary Sampling Unit 
WTFA 
Survey Weight 
AGEGR6R 
Age Category 
(Recode of variable AGE_P 
from file PERSONSX) 
1 = <18 
2 = 18-24 
3 = 25-34 
4 = 35-44 
5 = 45-54 
6 = 55-64 
7 = 65+ 
SEX 
Gender 
1 = male 
2 = female 
HPRACE 
Race/Ethnicity Category 
(Recode of variables 
ORIGIN_I and RACEREC_I 
from file PERSONSX) 
1 = Hispanic 
2 = black, non-Hispanic 
3 = other, non-Hispanic 
4 = white, non-Hispanic 
REGIONR 
Region of the Country 
(Recode of variable REGION 
from file PERSONSX) 
1 = northeast 
2 = south 
3 = west 
4 = midwest 
MSAR 
Residence in MSA 
(Recode of variable MSASIZEP 
from file PERSONSX) 
1 = MSA 
2 = not MSA 
USBORN 
Country of Birth 
(Recode of variable USBIRTH_P 
from file PESONSX) 
1 = not born in US 
2 = born in US 
POVERTYI 
Poverty Ratio Category 
(Recode of variable RAT_CATI 
from each of files 
INCMIMP1 – INCMIMP5) 
1 = <100% 
2 = 100-199% 
3 = 200-399% 
4 = 400%+ 
NOTCOV 
Health Insurance Coverage 
1 = uninsured 
2 = insured 
HSTAT 
Health Status 
(Recode of variable PHSTAT 
from file PERSONSX) 
1 = excellent to good 
2 = fair/poor 
a Except for POVERTYI, the variable name is either the same as in the 2000 public-use file PERSONSX, 
or is a recode of the variable(s) in PERSONSX specified in the Definition column. POVERTYI is a 
recode of a variable in the public-use files INCMIMP1 – INCMIMP5 that contain the NHIS multiply 
imputed data. 
23
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4.1 Analysis Using SAS-Callable SUDAAN 
SAS-callable SUDAAN is a versatile software package for analyzing data from complex 
surveys.  This section provides relevant code for carrying out the analyses for Examples 1 and 2 
using SUDAAN Version 9.0, which includes a built-in option for analyzing multiply imputed 
data. For those who do not have access to this recent version of SUDAAN, an example is also 
provided of SAS commands to be used with SAS Version 6.12 or higher and SUDAAN Version 
7 or higher, without a built-in option for analyzing multiply imputed data. Note that the 
examples of code provided in this section have to be modified for particular needs. 
SUDAAN version 9.0 can process the NHIS multiply imputed data either from five 
separate files, or from a single file containing the five sets of imputed values, with each set in a 
separate variable.  The examples described in this section are based on using five separate files. 
However, it may be more efficient to create a single file with the five sets of imputed values, and 
merge this file with the other analysis variables of interest before calling the SUDAAN 
procedure.  SUDAAN processes the single file with a MI_VAR statement to identify the five 
variables containing the imputed values.  An advantage of this approach is that it requires less 
storage space because it avoids replication of the variables that are not imputed.  For more 
information on this approach and the MI_VAR statement see the section “Using multiple 
variables on the same data set” in the SUDAAN 9.0 documentation. 
4.1.1 SUDAAN Version 9.0 with a Built-In Option for Multiple Imputation 
The multiple files for the completed data sets can be identified in two different ways in 
SUDAAN Version 9.0. The first is to name the completed data sets with consecutive numbers at 
the end of the name as was done with ANAL1-5 above. Setting the system variable MI_COUNT 
via the option: MI_COUNT=count, indicates the number of completed data sets, count, to be 
analyzed. Upon encountering this option, SUDAAN will automatically perform the multiple-
imputation analysis. Note that count must be at least 2; otherwise, SUDAAN will produce an 
error message and halt.  In addition, the files containing the completed data sets must all be 
located in the same directory and must be numbered consecutively.  Each data set must be sorted 
by the "NEST" variables. 
24
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
The second approach to identifying multiply imputed data is useful when the files containing the 
completed data sets either are not numbered consecutively or reside in different directories. The 
command 
MI_FILES=file names; 
identifies the completed data sets.  For example, suppose that the SAS files were named 
one, two, three, four, and five and were located in the same directory, C:\NHIS. Then 
the following commands would be used: 
proc anyprocedure data="c:\nhis\one" filetype=sas design=wr; 
mi_files="c:\nhis\two" "c:\nhis\three" "c:\nhis\four" 
"c:\nhis\five"; 
The first approach to identifying multiply imputed data will be followed here. For Example 1, 
PROC CROSSTAB is used (although PROC DESCRIPT could also be used after the recoding of 
NOTCOV as a binary variable).  The syntax is the same as usual except that the multiple-
imputation analysis is requested via a specification of the system variable MI_COUNT as one of 
the options. Without this option, SUDAAN will perform an analysis of only the first completed 
data set. For Example 2, the logistic regression model is fitted using PROC RLOGIST. The 
SUDAAN code for both examples is given in Appendix C. , SectionC.2 , and the output is 
inAppendix D. . 
4.1.2  SAS Commands for Use with SUDAAN Version 7 or Higher without a Built-In Option for 
Multiple Imputation 
The logistic regression analysis (i.e., Example 2) is now illustrated using commands in SAS and 
SAS-callable SUDAAN, for those who do not have access to SUDAAN Version 9.0. The three 
steps outlined in Section 2.2.1 are carried out. That is, each completed data set is analyzed; the 
point estimates and the estimated standard errors are stored; and the point estimates and 
estimated standard errors are combined using the rules given in Section 2.2.1 and Appendix A. 
The first two steps are performed by one macro, and then the combining of estimates is 
performed by further commands. The full set of commands is shown in Appendix C. , Section 
C.3 , and the output is in Appendix E. 
4.2 Analysis Using SAS-Callable IVEware 
SAS users can download IVEware, a free SAS-callable software package, from the Web site 
25
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
http://www.isr.umich.edu/src/smp/ive. IVEware has three modules for performing various 
multiple-imputation analyses incorporating complex sample designs. DESCRIBE performs 
descriptive analyses such as the estimation of means, proportions, and contrasts. It uses Taylor 
series methods to estimate variances in the analysis of each completed data set. REGRESS 
performs linear, logistic, polytomous, Poisson, Tobit and proportional hazards regression 
analyses.  Variance estimates in the analysis of each completed data set are obtained using the 
jackknife repeated replication technique. SASMOD performs various other analyses such as 
CALIS (structural equation models), CATMOD (categorical data analysis), MIXED (random 
effects models), NLIN (nonlinear regression models), and GENMOD (generalized linear 
regression and GEE models), to name a few. Again, variance estimates for each completed data 
set are based on the jackknife repeated replication technique.  Multiple-imputation analyses in 
IVEware are performed using the combining rules described in Rubin and Schenker (1986) and 
summarized in Section 2.2.1 and Appendix A. 
IVEware also contains a fourth module, IMPUTE, which actually performs multiple imputation 
for missing data.  As discussed in Section 3.1.2, this module performs sequential regression 
multivariate imputation, and it was used to create the multiple imputations for the NHIS. 
Details about the features of IVEware are provided in the documentation, “IVEware: Imputation 
and Variance Estimation Software User Guide,” which can be downloaded from the Web site 
given above. 
Code for using IVEware to perform analyses for Examples 1 and 2 is illustrated in Appendix C. , 
Section C.4, with the corresponding output given in Appendix F. 
26
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
Appendix A. Technical Details for Analyzing Multiply Imputed Data 
Suppose that M completed data sets have been generated via multiple imputation, and let Q 
denote the scalar population quantity of interest.  Application of the chosen method of analysis to 
the lth completed data set yields the point estimate 
and its estimated variance (square of the 
estimated standard error) Ul, where l=1,2,...,M.  It is important to analyze each data set separately 
to derive the M point estimates and estimated variances. 
The combined multiple-imputation point estimate is 
l
Q
ˆ



M
l
l
M
Q
M
Q
1
ˆ
1
. 
(1)
 
The estimated variance of this point estimate consists of two components. The first component, 
the “within-imputation variance” 



M
l
l
M
U
M
U
1
1
, 
is, approximately, the variance that one would have obtained had there been no missing data.  
The second component, the “between-imputation variance” 





M
l
M
l
M
Q
Q
M
B
1
2
)
ˆ
(
1
1
, 
is the component of variation due to differences across the M sets of imputations. 
The total estimated variance of the multiple-imputation point estimate 
M
Q
is 
M
M
M
B
M
M
U
T
1



. 
(2)
 
The factor (M+1)/M is a correction for small M.  Furthermore, it is shown in Rubin and 
Schenker (1986) and Rubin (1987, Section 3.3) that, approximately, 

t
Q
Q
T
M
M
~
)
(
2
/
1


where the degrees of freedom ν for the t distribution are given by 
2
ˆ
)
1
(



M
M


, 
with 
27
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
M
M
M
T
B
M
M
1
ˆ



. 
The quantity 
M

ˆ
measures the proportionate share of 
M
T
that is due to between-imputation 
variability; it is also approximately the fraction of information about Q that is missing due to 
nonresponse (Rubin 1987, p. 93). 
For a multi-dimensional population quantity Q, Li, Raghunathan, and Rubin (1991) developed 
multiple-imputation procedures for significance testing when the hypothesis to be tested involves 
several components of Q simultaneously.  In addition, Li, Meng, Raghunathan, 
and Rubin (1991) developed procedures for combining test statistics and p-values (rather than 
point estimates and estimated variances) computed from multiply imputed data. 
The procedures described above assume that the degrees of freedom that would be used for 
analyzing the complete data if there were no missing values, i.e., the “complete-data degrees of 
freedom,” are large (or infinite); that is, a large-sample normal approximation would be valid for 
constructing confidence intervals or performing significance tests if there were no missing data.  
This is clearly not true in many survey settings, where the number of sampled PSUs may be 
small, and a t reference distribution would be used if there were no missing data. For example, 
for a survey involving H strata with 2 PSUs selected from each stratum, the complete-data 
degrees of freedom for inferences about the population mean are H. 
Barnard and Rubin (1999) relaxed the assumption of large complete-data degrees of freedom and 
suggested the use of 
1
1
1










k


for the multiple-imputation analysis, where 
)
ˆ
1
(
3
)
1
(
M
df
df
df
k





, 
and df are the complete-data degrees of freedom. 
For the NHIS multiply imputed data, M=5, and the complete-data degrees of freedom, df, are 
300 or more for many analyses. For ν' or ν greater than 100, the normal approximation is 
generally valid.  To assess how different ν' and ν are when they are smaller, Figure 6 below 
28
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
provides a plot of ν and ν' as functions of 
when ν'<=100. From the plot, it appears that, for 
many analyses of the NHIS data, use of either ν or ν' should give similar results, although use of 
ν' will be slightly more conservative (smaller degrees of freedom). 
Figure 6 Rubin-Schenker (solid curve) and Barnard-Rubin (dashed curve) degrees of 
freedom as a function of the approximate fraction of missing information 
, when the 
complete-data degrees of freedom are equal to 339 
29
 

ˆ 
M 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
         
    
                            
 
    
                            
 
    
                            
 
                                         
 
 
 
    
   
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 

 
Appendix B. Variables Included in the Imputation Process 
TABLE 1
 
Variables included in imputation of person-level
 
covariates for adults (Step 1).
 
Variable Name 
Label and Code values 
SEX 
Sex 
1 = male 
2 = female 
AGEGROUP 
Recoded age group 
0 = under 18 years old 
1 = 18 - 24 years old 
2 = 25 – 44 years old 
3 = 45 - 64 years old 
4 = 65+ years old 
ORIGIN 
Ethnic origin 
1 = Hispanic 
2 = Non-Hispanic 
RACEREC 
Race recode (year 1997-2005) 
Race recode (year 2006+) 
1 = white 
1 = white 
2 = black 
2 = black 
3 = other 
3 = Asian 
4 = other 
MARRY 
Marital status recode 
1 = married 
1 = married with or without spouse in HH, or living w/ 
partner 
2 = divorced, widowed, separated 
3 = never married 
4 = 14 or fewer years old 
FM_SIZER 
Family size recode 
1 = 1 person family 
2 = 2 person family 
3 = 3 person family 
4 = 4+ person family 
URB_RRL 
Urban/Rural 
1 = Urban 
2 = Rural 
*MSA 
MSA/non-MSA residence (From 2007, MSA is created from recoding CBSASTAT and 
CBSASIZE) 
1 = in MSA; in central city 
2 = in MSA, not in central city 
3 = not in MSA 
WTFA 
Final person weight 
STRATPSU 
Stratum by PSU combination (year 1997 – 2005) 
Stratum and PSU combination recoded based on STRAT_I, STRAT_D, PSU_I from the 
NHIS inhouse data file.(year 2006+) 
PLAADL 
Needs help with ADL (age >= 3) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLAIADL 
Needs help with chores, shopping, etc. (age >= 5) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLAWKNOW 
Unable to work due to health problem (age >= 18) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLAWKLIM 
Limited kind/amount of work due to health problem (age >= 18) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = unable to work (PLAWKNW = 1) 
PLAWALK 
Has difficulty walking without equipment 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
30
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 

 
PLAREMEM 
Limited by difficulty remembering 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLIMANY 
Limited in any other way 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = limitation previously mentioned 
LIM_ACT 
Limited in any way (at least mentioned one limitation) 
1 = at least 1 limitation 
2 = no limitation 
3 = under 18 years old 
LA_GP01 
Vision or hearing problem causes limitation recode (18+ with at least 1 
limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP02 
Arthritis/rheumatism, back/neck, or muscular-skeletal problem causes limitation 
recode (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP03 
Fracture/bone/joint injury, other injury, or missing limb/finger causes 
limitation recode (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP04 
Heart, stroke, hypertension, or circulatory problem causes limitation recode 
(18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP05 
Diabetes or endocrine problem causes limitation recode (18+ with at least 1 
limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP06 
Lung/breath problem causes limitation recode (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP07 
Senility or nervous system condition causes limitation recode (18+ with at least 
1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP08 
Depression/anxiety/emotion, alcohol, drug, or other mental problem causes 
limitation recode (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP09 
Other problem causes limitation recode (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
PHSTAT 
Recoded health status 
1 = excellent 
2 = very good 
3 = good 
4 = fair 
5 = poor 
PDMED12M 
Delayed medical care due to cost in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PNMED12M 
Did not get medical care due to cost in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PHOSPYR 
In a hospital overnight in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
31
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
P10DVYR 
Received health care from doctor 10+ times in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
M_CARE 
Medicare coverage recode 
1 = yes (covered, with or without information) 
2 = no (not covered) 
M_CAID 
Medicaid coverage recode 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
MILITRY 
Military coverage recode 
1 = yes (military/VA/CHAMPUS/TRICARE/don’t know type) 
2 = no 
PRIVATW 
Private insurance coverage recode; at least 1 plan is paid by employer 
1 = at least 1 private plan was obtained through employer 
2 = all the private plans were not obtained through employer 
PRIVATS 
Private insurance coverage recode; at least 1 plan is paid by self 
1 = at least 1 private plan was obtained through self 
2 = all the private plans were not obtained through self 
USBRTH 
Born in US 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
EDUCR 
Education recode 
1 = high school or less 
2 = HS grad or equiv 
3 = some college 
4 = college graduate 
5 = more than college 
6 = professional degree 
EMPSTAT 
Last year’s employment status recode 
1 = 18+, worked for pay last year 
2 = 18+, not worked for pay last year 
3 = under 18 years old 
WRKHRS 
Hours worked per week 
1 – 95 = worked 1 to 95+ hours 
SSUFINL 
Logarithm of mean family income in SSU 
0 – 13.816 = logarithm of mean 
SSUSTDL 
Logarithm of (standard deviation + 1) of family income in SSU 
0 – 13.199 = logarithm of standard deviation 
PSAL 
Person received income from wage/salary 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = under 18 
PSEINC 
Person received income from self-employment 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = under 18 
PSSRR 
Person received income from Social Security 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PPENS 
Person received income from other pension 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PSSI 
Person received income from Supplement Security Income (SSI) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PSSRRDB 
Person received income from Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = ineligible due to age (65+), or received social security 
PTANF 
Person received income from welfare/AFDC 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PINTRST 
Person received income from interest 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PDIVD 
Person received income from dividend 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
32
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 

 
PCHLDSP 
Person received child support 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PINCOT 
Person received income from other sources 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
HOUSER 
House ownership recode 
1 = owned or being bought 
2 = rented or other arrangement 
PSSID 
Receive SSI due to a disability 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = did not receive SSI 
PSSAPL 
Person not receiving SSI and has ever applied for SSI 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = received SSI 
PSSRRD 
Receive SSDI due to a disability 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = AGE > 65 or did not receive SSDI 
PSDAPL 
Person not receiving SSDI and has ever applied for SSDI 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = received SSDI 
PFSTP 
Person was authorized to receive food stamps (year 1997-2010) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
* Variable was recoded using CBSASTAT and CBSASIZE, so it is comparable to 
the definition of MSA which is used in the 1997-2005 files.  
33
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
  
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
     
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 

 

 
 

 
TABLE 2
 
Variables included in imputation at the family level (Steps 2 & 3).
 
Variable Name 
Label and Code values 
URB_RRL 
Urban/Rural 
1 = Urban 
2 = Rural 
*MSA 
MSA/non-MSA residence (From 2007, MSA is created from recoding CBSASTAT and 
CBSASIZE) 
1 = in MSA; in central city 
2 = in MSA, not in central city 
3 = not in MSA 
WTFA_FAM 
Final family weight 
**STRATPSU 
Stratum by PSU combination (year 1997 – 2005) 
Stratum and PSU combination recoded based on STRAT_I, STRAT_D, PSU_I from the 
NHIS inhouse data file.(year 2006+) 
ADULT 
Total number of adults in a family 
CHILD 
Total number of children in a family 
M_TWRKHR 
Total number of work hours of male family members 
F_TWRKHR 
Total number of work hours of female family members 
M_ERNAGE 
Average age of male earners in a family 
F_ERNAGE 
Average age of female earners in a family 
FM_EARN 
Total number of earners in a family 
P_HISP 
Proportion of Hispanics in a family 
P_WHITE 
Proportion of whites in a family 
P_BLACK 
Proportion of blacks in a family 
FM_ADL1 
Family having family members (age >= 3) with PLAADL = 1 
(Needs help with ADL) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_IADL1 
Family having family members (age >= 5) with PLAIADL = 1 
(Needs help with chores, shopping, etc.) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_WKNW1 
Family having family members (age >=18) with PLAWKNOW = 1 
(Unable to work due to health problem) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_WKLM1 
Family having family members (age >=18) with PLAWKLIM = 1 
(Limited kind/amt of work due to health problem) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_WALK1 
Family having family members with PLAWALK = 1 
(Has difficulty walking without equipment) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_REM1 
Family having family members with PLAREMEM = 1 
(Limited by difficulty remembering) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_MANY1 
Family having family members with PLIMANY = 1 
(Limited in any other way) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP011 
Family having family members with LA_GP01 = 1 
(Vision or hearing problem causes limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP021 
Family having family members with LA_GP02 = 1 
(Arthritis/rheumatism, back/neck, or muscular-skeletal problem causes 
limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
34
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 

 
FM_GP031 
Family having family members with LA_GP03 = 1 
(Fracture/bone/joint injury, other injury, or missing limb/finger causes 
limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP041 
Family having family members with LA_GP04 = 1 
(Heart, stroke, hypertension, or circulatory problem causes limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP051 
Family having family members with LA_GP05 = 1 
(Diabetes or endocrine problem causes limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP061 
Family having family members with LA_GP06 = 1 
(Lung/breath problem causes limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP071 
Family having family members with LA_GP07 = 1 
(Senility or nervous system condition causes limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP081 
Family having family members with LA_GP08 = 1 
(Depression/anxiety/emotion, alcohol, drug, or other mental problem causes 
limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_GP091 
Family having family members with LA_GP09 = 1 
(Other problem causes limitation) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_DMED 
Family having family members with PDMED12M = 1 
(Delayed medical care due to cost in the past 12 month) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_NMED 
Family having family members with PNMED12M = 1 
(Did not get medical care due to cost in the past 12 month) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_HOSP 
Family having family members with PHOSPYR = 1 
(In a hospital overnight in the past 12 months) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_DVYR 
Family having family members with P10DVYR = 1 
(Received health care from doctor 10+ times in the past 12 months) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_MCARE 
Family having family members with M_CARE = 1 
(Recoded Medicare coverage) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_MCAID 
Family having family members with M_CAID = 1 
(Recoded Medicaid coverage) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_MILIT 
Family having family members with MILITRY = 1 
(Military coverage recode) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_PRIVW 
Family having family members with PRIVATW = 1 
(Private insurance coverage; at least 1 plan is paid by employer) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_PRIVS 
Family having family members with PRIVATS = 1 
(Private insurance coverage; at least 1 plan is paid by self) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_USBRN 
Family having family members with USBRTH = 1 
(Born in US) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
35
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 

 
FM_HLTH1 
Family having family members with PHSTAT = 1 or 2 
(Excellent or very good health) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_HLTH2 
Family having family members with PHSTAT = 3 
(Good health) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_HLTH3 
Family having family members with PHSTAT = 4 or 5 
(Fair or poor health) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_HIEDU 
Highest education attainment of family members 
1 = high school or less (1-12, 96) 
2 = HS grad or equiv (13,14) 
3 = Some college (15-17) 
4 = College graduate (18) 
5 = more than college or prof. degrees (19-21) 
6 = all family members are under 18 
FM_SSRR 
Family having family members with PSSRR = 1 
(Person received income from Social Security) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_PENS 
Family having family members with PPENS = 1 
(Person received income from other pension) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_SSI 
Family having family members with PSSI = 1 
(Person received income from Supplement Security Income (SSI)) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_SSDI 
Family having family members with PSSRRDB = 1 
(Person received income from Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI)) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_AFDC 
Family having family members with PAFDC = 1 
(Person received income from welfare/AFDC) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_INST 
Family having family members with PINTRST = 1 
(Person received income from interest) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_DIVD 
Family having family members with PDIVD = 1 
(Person received income from dividend) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_CHSP 
Family having family members with PCHLDSP = 1 
(Person received child support) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_INCO 
Family having family members with PINCOT = 1 
(Person received income from other sources) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_HOUS 
Family having family members with HOUSER = 1 
(Recoded house ownership) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_RSSI 
Family having family members with PSSID = 1 
(Receive SSI due to a disability) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_ASSI 
Family having family members with PSSAPL = 1 
(Person not receiving SSI and has ever applied for SSI) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
36
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 

 
FM_RSSD 
Family having family members with PSSRRD = 1 
(Receive SSDI due to a disability) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_ASSD 
Family having family members with PSDAPL = 1 
(Person not receiving SSDI and has ever applied for SSDI) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
FM_FSTP 
Family having family members with PFSTP = 1 (year 1997-2010) 
Family having family members with FSNAP = 1 (year 2011+) 
(Person was authorized to receive food stamps) 
1 = at least one family member has 
2 = none of the family members has 
PHONSRV 
Phone service 
1 = yes (has phone service) 
2 = no (no phone service or working phone) 
INTV_LNG 
Interview language 
1 = English only 
2 = Not English only 
FM_INCB 
Cube root of total male and female earnings 
FAMINB 
Cube root of total family income 
SSUFINWL 
Logarithm of mean family income in SSU (recalculated after imputation step 1) 
SSUSDNWL 
Logarithm of standard deviation of family income in SSU (recalculated after 
imputation step 1) 
P_F_EARN 
Proportion of female earners to the total family earners 
* Variable was recoded using CBSASTAT and CBSASIZE, so it is comparable to 
the definition of MSA which is used in the 1997-2005 files. 
** Variable definition changed starting with the 2006 NHIS. 
37
 
                           
                          
                          
   
 
 
 
                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
         
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
                                         
 
 
  
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 

 
TABLE 3 
Variables included in imputation of person-level 
earnings proportions (Step 4). 
Variable Name 
Label and Code values 
SEX 
Sex 
1 = male 
2 = female 
AGEGROUP 
Recoded age group 
0 = under 18 years old 
1 = 18 - 24 years old 
2 = 25 - 44years old 
3 = 45 - 64 years old 
4 = 65+ years old 
ORIGIN 
Ethnic origin 
1 = Hispanic 
2 = Non-Hispanic 
**RACEREC 
Race recode (year 1997-2005) 
Race recode (year 2006+) 
1 = white 
1 = white 
2 = black 
2 = black 
3 = other 
3 = Asian 
4 = other 
MARRY 
Marital status recode 
1 = married 
1 = married with or without spouse in HH, or living w/ 
partner 
2 = divorced, widowed, separated 
3 = never married 
4 = 14 or fewer years old 
FM_SIZER 
Family size recode 
1 = 1 person family 
2 = 2 person family 
3 = 3 person family 
4 = 4+ person family 
URB_RRL 
Urban/Rural 
1 = Urban 
2 = Rural 
*MSA 
MSA/non-MSA residence (From 2007, MSA is created from recoding CBSASTAT and 
CBSASIZE) 
1 = in MSA; in central city 
2 = in MSA, not in central city 
3 = not in MSA 
WTFA 
Final person weight 
*STRATPSU 
Stratum by PSU combination (year 1997 – 2005) 
Stratum and PSU combination recoded based on STRAT_I, STRAT_D, PSU_I from the 
NHIS inhouse data file.(year 2006+) 
PLAADL 
Needs help with ADL (age >= 3) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLAIADL 
Needs help with chores, shopping, etc. (age >= 5) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLAWKNOW 
Unable to work due to health problem (age >= 18) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLAWKLIM 
Limited kind/amt of work due to health problem (age >= 18) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = unable to work (PLAWKNW = 1) 
PLAWALK 
Has difficulty walking without equipment 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLAREMEM 
Limited by difficulty remembering 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PLIMANY 
Limited in any other way 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = limitation previously mentioned 
38
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
  
 
    
 
    
 
 

 
LIM_ACT 
Limited in any way (at least mentioned one limitation) 
1 = at least 1 limitation 
2 = no limitation 
3 = under 18 years old 
. = don’t know/refused/not ascertained 
LA_GP01 
Vision or hearing problem causes limitation (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP02 
Arthritis/rheumatism, back/neck, or muscular-skeletal problem causes limitation 
(18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP03 
Fracture/bone/joint injury, other injury, or missing limb/finger causes 
limitation (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP04 
Heart, stroke, hypertension, or circulatory problem causes limitation (18+ with 
at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP05 
Diabetes or endocrine problem causes limitation (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP06 
Lung/breath problem causes limitation (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP07 
Senility or nervous system condition causes limitation (18+ with at least 1 
limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP08 
Depression/anxiety/emotion, alcohol, drug, or other mental problem causes 
limitation (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
LA_GP09 
Other problem causes limitation (18+ with at least 1 limitation) 
1 = mentioned 
2 = not mentioned 
3 = no limitation or under 18 years old 
PHSTAT 
Recoded health status 
1 = excellent 
2 = very good 
3 = good 
4 = fair 
5 = poor 
PDMED12M 
Delayed medical care due to cost in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PNMED12M 
Did not get medical care due to cost in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PHOSPYR 
In a hospital overnight in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
P10DVYR 
Received health care from doctor 10+ times in the past 12 months 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
M_CARE 
Medicare coverage recode 
1 = yes (covered, with or without information) 
2 = no (not covered) 
M_CAID 
Medicaid coverage recode 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
39
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 

 
MILITRY 
Military coverage recode 
1 = yes (military/VA/CHAMPUS/TRICARE/don’t know type) 
2 = no 
PRIVATW 
Private insurance coverage recode; at least 1 plan is paid by employer 
1 = at least 1 private plan was obtained through employer 
2 = all the private plans were not obtained through employer 
PRIVATS 
Private insurance coverage recode; at least 1 plan is paid by self 
1 = at least 1 private plan was obtained through self 
2 = all the private plans were not obtained through self 
USBRTH 
Born in US 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
EDUCR 
Education recode 
1 = high school or less 
2 = HS grad or equiv 
3 = some college 
4 = college graduate 
5 = more than college 
6 = professional degree 
EMPSTAT 
Last year’s employment status recode 
1 = 18+, worked for pay last year 
2 = 18+, not worked for pay last year 
3 = under 18 years old 
WRKHRS 
Hours worked per week 
1 - 95 = worked 1 to 95+ hours 
SSUFINWL 
Logarithm of mean family income in SSU 
0 - 13.816 = logarithm of mean (re-calculated after imputation) 
SSUSDNWL 
Logarithm of (standard deviation + 1) of family income in SSU 
0 - 13.406 = logarithm of standard deviation 
(re-calculated after imputation) 
PSAL 
Person received income from wage/salary 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = under 18 
PSEINC 
Person received income from self-employment 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = under 18 
PSSRR 
Person received income from Social Security 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PPENS 
Person received income from other pension 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PSSI 
Person received income from Supplement Security Income (SSI) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PSSRRDB 
Person received income from Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = ineligible due to age (65+) or received social security 
PTANF 
Person received income from welfare/AFDC 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PINTRST 
Person received income from interest 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PDIVD 
Person received income from dividend 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PCHLDSP 
Person received child support 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
PINCOT 
Person received income from other sources 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
HOUSER 
House ownership recode 
1 = owned or being bought 
2 = rented or other arrangement 
40
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PSSID 
Receive SSI due to a disability 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = do not receive SSI 
PSSAPL 
Person not receiving SSI and has ever applied for SSI 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = receive SSI 
PSSRRD 
Receive SSDI due to a disability 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = AGE > 65 or do not receive SSDI 
PSDAPL 
Person not receiving SSDI and has ever applied for SSDI 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
3 = receive SSDI 
PFSTP 
Person was authorized to receive food stamps 
1 = yes 
2 = no 
M_ERNAGE 
Average age of male earners in a family 
0 – 95 = age of male earners 
F_ERNAGE 
Average age of female earners in a family 
0 – 95 = age of female earners 
PHONSRV 
Phone service in the household 
1 = yes (has phone service) 
2 = no (no phone service or working phone) 
INTV_LN 
Interview language 
1 = English only 
2 = Not English only 
FM_EARN 
Total number of earners in the family 
0 – 9 = number of earners 
P_F_EARN 
Proportion of female earners to the total family earners 
0 – 1 = proportion of female earners 
ADULT 
Total number of adults in a family 
CHILD 
Total number of children in a family 
FAMINB 
Cube root of total family income 
0 – 101.283 = cube root of family income 
FM_INCB 
Cube root of total family earnings 
0 – 101.283 = cube root of family earnings 
LOG_PFM 
Logit transformation of proportion of individual earnings to the total family 
earnings 
-12.78 – 12.33 = logit transformation of proportion of individual earnings 
* Variable was recoded using CBSASTAT and CBSASIZE, so it is comparable to the definition of MSA 
which is used in the 1997-2005 files 
** Variable definition changed starting with the 2006 NHIS 
41
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
       
   
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
       
 
       
   
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
       
   
 
      
 
      
 
       
   
 
      
 
      
 
       
   
 
      
 
      
 
       
   
 
      
 
      
 
       
   
 
      
 
       
 
       
   
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
       
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Appendix C. SAS Code for the Examples in Section 4 
C.1 Code for Creating Completed Data Sets 
title 'SAS code for creating completed data sets'; 
libname nhis 'd:\stat\sas\sas files\nhis2000'; 
proc format; 
value povertyi
 
1 = '(1) <100%'
 
2 = '(2) 100-199%'
 
3 = '(3) 200-399%'
 
4 = '(4) 400%+'
 
;
 
value agegr6r
 
1 = '(1) <18'
 
2 = '(2) 18-24'
 
3 = '(3) 25-34'
 
4 = '(4) 35-44'
 
5 = '(5) 45-54'
 
6 = '(6) 55-64'
 
7 = '(7) 65+'
 
;
 
value hprace
 
1 = '(1) Hispanic'
 
2 = '(2) Black'
 
3 = '(3) Other'
 
4 = '(4) White'
 
;
 
value notcov
 
1 = '(1) Uninsured'
 
2 = '(2) Insured'
 
;
 
value hstat
 
1 = '(1) Excellent to good'
 
2 = '(2) Fair/poor'
 
;
 
value usborn
 
1 = '(1) Not born in US'
 
2 = '(2) Born in US'
 
;
 
value sex
 
1 = '(1) Male'
 
2 = '(2) Female'
 
;
 
value msar
 
1 = '(1) MSA'
 
2 = '(2) Not MSA'
 
;
 
value regionr
 
1 = '(1) Northeast'
 
2 = '(2) South'
 
3 = '(3) West'
 
4 = '(4) Midwest'
 
;
 
run; 
42 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
                   
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
/* EXTRACT VARIABLES FROM PERSON LEVEL FILE */ 
data temp1 (keep = hhx fmx px age_p sex origin_i 
racrec_i notcov msasizep phstat usbrth_p 
stratum psu wtfa region); 
set nhis.personsx; 
run; 
proc sort; 
by hhx fmx px; 
run; 
/* MACRO TO REPEAT THE RECODES FOR ALL THE IMPUTED DATA SETS */ 
%macro subset; 
%do impno=1 %to 5; 
/* EXTRACT RELEVANT INCOME VARIABLES FROM EACH IMPUTED FILE */ 
data temp2; 
set nhis.incmimp&impno (drop=rectype srvy_yr);
 
run;
 
proc sort;
 
by hhx fmx px;
 
run;
 
/* MERGE THE TWO TEMPORARY FILES, CREATE RECODES AND STORE THEM AS 
PERMANENT SAS DATA SETS */ 
data nhis.anal&impno;
 
merge temp1 temp2;
 
by hhx fmx px;
 
43
 
  
 
 
   
 
           
    
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
                             
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
           
 
      
 
      
 
      
                    
 
 
 
   
 
 
           
 
 
 
   
 
 
           
 
      
 
      
                         
 
 
      
 
          
 
 
          
 
 
      
 
          
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
   
 
 
           
 
      
 
      
               
 
 
 
   
 
 
      
 
      
         
 
 
 
   
 
 
           
 
      
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
*** recode age group ***; 
if ( 
 age_p <  18) then  agegr6r = 1; 
else if (18 <= age_p <= 24) then  agegr6r = 2; 
else if (25 <= age_p <= 34) then  agegr6r = 3; 
else if (35 <= age_p <= 44) then  agegr6r = 4; 
else if (45 <= age_p <= 54) then  agegr6r = 5; 
else if (55 <= age_p <= 64) then  agegr6r = 6; 
else 
agegr6r = 7; 
*** recode race/ethnicity groups ***; 
if (origin_i = 1) then  hprace = 1;
 
else if (racrec_i = 2) then  hprace = 2;
 
else if (racrec_i = 3) then  hprace = 3;
 
else 
    hprace = 4;
 
*** recode health insurance ****; 
if notcov in (7, 8, 9) then  notcov = .; 
*** recode health status ***; 
if phstat in (1, 2, 3) then hstat = 1;
 
else if phstat in (4, 5)    then hstat = 2;
 
else 
   hstat = .;
 
*** create 0-1 health status variable for predicting fair-poor health 
using SUDAAN logistic regression procedure ***; 
hstat_sud=hstat-1; 
*** create 1-0 health status variable for predicting fair-poor health 
using IVEware logistic regression procedure ***; 
hstat_ive=2-hstat; 
*** recode born in the US ***; 
if usbrth_p=1 then usborn = 2;
 
else if usbrth_p=2 then usborn = 1;
 
else 
    usborn = .;
 
*** recode MSA ***; 
if msasizep=7 then msar = 2; 
else 
     msar = 1; 
*** recode region ***; 
if region=1 then regionr = 1;
 
else if region=3 then regionr = 2;
 
44
 
  
 
 
      
 
      
 
else if region=4 then regionr = 3; 
else regionr = 4; 
45 
  
 
 
   
 
 
           
    
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
 
      
                                   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
*** recode poverty status ***; 
if rat_cati in (1, 2, 3) 
 then povertyi = 1; 
else if rat_cati in (4, 5, 6, 7)   then povertyi = 2; 
else if rat_cati in (8, 9, 10, 11) then povertyi = 3; 
else if rat_cati in (12, 13, 14)  then povertyi = 4; 
else 
povertyi = .; 
*** labels ***; 
label povertyi = 'Poverty status';
 
label agegr6r = 'Age groups (7)';
 
label hprace =  'Race/ethnicity';
 
label hstat = 'Health status';
 
label notcov = 'Health insurance coverage';
 
label usborn = 'Born in US';
 
label regionr = 'Region';
 
label msar = 'MSA';
 
*** formats ***; 
format povertyi povertyi.
 
agegr6r  agegr6r.
 
hprace   hprace.
 
hstat    hstat.
 
notcov   notcov.
 
usborn   usborn.
 
sex      sex.
 
regionr  regionr.
 
msar     msar.;
 
run;
 
%end;
 
%mend;
 
%subset;
 
%macro sortall;
 
%do impno=1 %to 5;
 
proc sort data=nhis.anal&impno;
 
by stratum psu;
 
run;
 
%end;
 
%mend;
 
%sortall;
 
46
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
C.2 Code for Use with SAS-Callable SUDAAN 9.0 with a Built-In Option for Multiple 
Imputation 
/* SAS-CALLABLE SUDAAN CODE TO ANALYZE ACROSS ALL 5 IMPUTATIONS
 
USING SUDAAN v9.0 WITH MI_COUNT OPTION */
 
/* Example 1: Crosstab */ 
title "Example 1: Crosstab";
 
proc crosstab data=nhis.anal1 filetype=sas design=wr mi_count=5;
 
rtitle "Example 1: Crosstab";
 
nest stratum psu / missunit;
 
weight wtfa;
 
subgroup povertyi notcov;
 
levels 4  2;
 
tables povertyi*notcov;
 
test chisq;
 
print nsum wsum sewgt rowper serow totper setot/style=nchs WSUMFMT=F13.2;
 
run;
 
/* Example 2: Logistic regression */ 
title "Example 2: Logistic regression";
 
proc rlogist data=nhis.anal1 filetype=sas design=wr mi_count=5;
 
rtitle "Example 2: Logistic regression";
 
nest stratum psu / missunit;
 
weight wtfa;
 
subgroup  povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar;
 
levels
 4 
7 
4 
2 
2 
4 
2;
 
reflevel povertyi=4 agegr6r=7 hprace=4 usborn=2 sex=2 regionr=4 msar=2;
 
model hstat_sud = povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar;
 
print /ddfbetafmt=f16.3;
 
run;
 
47
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
C.3 Code for Use with SAS-Callable SUDAAN Version 7 or Higher without a Built-In Option 
for Multiple Imputation 
/* SAS-CALLABLE SUDAAN MACRO TO PERFORM LOGISTIC REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
USING VERSIONS OF SUDAAN (v7.0 OR HIGHER) WITHOUT BUILT-IN 
MULTIPLE IMPUTATION OPTION */ 
/* Example 2: Logistic regression */ 
%macro milogit; 
/* STEP 1: ANALYZE EACH DATA SET SEPARATELY */ 
%do impno=1 %to 5; 
data temp; 
set nhis.anal&impno; 
run; 
/* PERFORM LOGISTIC REGRESSION ON EACH DATA SET AND STORE THE ESTIMATES */ 
proc rlogist data=temp filetype=sas design=wr noprint;
 
rtitle "Example 2: Logistic regression";
 
nest stratum psu / missunit;
 
weight wtfa;
 
subgroup  povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar;
 
levels
 4 
7 
4 
2 
2 
4 
2;
 
reflevel povertyi=4 agegr6r=7 hprace=4 usborn=2 sex=2 regionr=4 msar=2;
 
model hstat_sud = povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar;
 
output/betas=default filename=est filetype=sas replace;
 
run;
 
/* STEP 2: STORE THE RELEVANT OUTPUT FROM EACH DATA SET */ 
data est&impno;
 
set est;
 
beta&impno=beta;
 
sebeta&impno=sebeta;
 
keep modelrhs beta&impno sebeta&impno;
 
run;
 
/* SORT THE OUTPUT FOR LATER MERGING */ 
proc sort data=est&impno;
 
by modelrhs;
 
run;
 
%end;
 
%mend;
 
%milogit;
 
48
 
  
 
 
 

 
49
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
/* STEP 3: COMBINE THE RESULTS. 
THIS EXAMPLE ILLUSTRATES BOTH RUBIN-SCHENKER AND
 
BARNARD-RUBIN DEGREES OF FREEDOM.
 
IN PRACTICE ONE WOULD COMPUTE ONLY ONE OF THEM */
 
/* MERGE THE FIVE SETS OF ESTIMATES */ 
data all;
 
merge est1 est2 est3 est4 est5;
 
by modelrhs;
 
/* COMPUTE THE COMBINED ESTIMATE, ITS VARIANCE,
 
THE DEGREES OF FREEDOM AND CONFIDENCE INTERVAL */
 
/* COMPUTE QBAR_M */ 
qbar_m=mean(beta1,beta2,beta3,beta4,beta5); 
/* COMPUTE UBAR_M */ 
ubar_m=mean(sebeta1**2,sebeta2**2,sebeta3**2,sebeta4**2,sebeta5**2); 
/* COMPUTE B_M */ 
b_m= var(beta1,beta2,beta3,beta4,beta5); 
/* COMPUTE TOTAL ESTIMATED VARIANCE, T_M, AND ESTIMATED STANDARD ERROR, 
SE_MI */ 
t_m=ubar_m+(1+1/5)*b_m; 
se_mi=sqrt(t_m); 
/* RUBIN-SCHENKER DEGREES OF FREEDOM, NU */ 
if t_m ne 0 then gammah_m=(1+1/5)*b_m/t_m;  /* t_m=0 for reference groups */
 
if gammah_m ne 0 then nu=(5-1)/gammah_m**2;
 
else nu=100000;
 
/* BARNARD-RUBIN DEGREES OF FREEDOM, NUPRIME */ 
df=339; 
k=(df*(df+1)/(df+3))*(1-gammah_m); 
nuprime=1/(1/nu+1/k); 
50
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
/* CALCULATE THE T-RATIO AND THE P-VALUES */ 
if se_mi ne 0 then tratio=qbar_m/se_mi;  /* se_mi=0 for reference groups */ 
pval_rs=2*(1-probt(abs(tratio),nu)); 
pval_br=2*(1-probt(abs(tratio),nuprime)); 
/* CALCULATE CONFIDENCE INTERVAL FOR ODDS RATIO USING RUBIN-SCHENKER */ 
or_mi=exp(qbar_m); 
ll95_rs=exp(qbar_m-tinv(0.975,nu)*se_mi); 
ul95_rs=exp(qbar_m+tinv(0.975,nu)*se_mi); 
/* CALCULATE CONFIDENCE INTERVAL USING BARNARD-RUBIN */ 
ll95_br=exp(qbar_m-tinv(0.975,nuprime)*se_mi); 
ul95_br=exp(qbar_m+tinv(0.975,nuprime)*se_mi); 
run; 
/* PRINT OUT THE RESULTS */ 
proc print data=all;
 
title1 "Multiple Imputation Analysis for Logistic Regression Model";
 
title2 "Estimates, Standard errors, t ratios, and p-values";
 
var modelrhs qbar_m se_mi tratio pval_rs pval_br;
 
run;
 
proc print data=all;
 
where modelrhs>1;
 
title2 "Odds ratios and confidence intervals";
 
var modelrhs or_mi ll95_br ul95_br ll95_rs ul95_rs;
 
run;
 
51
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
C.4 Code for Use with SAS-Callable IVEware 
/* SAS-CALLABLE IVEWARE CODE FOR EXAMPLES IN SECTION 4 */ 
/* Example 1: Crosstab */ 
title "IVEware Example 1: Crosstab";
 
%describe(setup=new,name=dessetup,dir=d:\stat\sas\sas files\nhis2000);
 
datain nhis.anal1 nhis.anal2 nhis.anal3 nhis.anal4 nhis.anal5;
 
stratum stratum;
 
cluster psu;
 
weight wtfa;
 
table povertyi*notcov;
 
run;
 
/* Example 2: Logistic regression */ 
title "IVEware Example 2: Logistic regression";
 
%regress(setup=new,name=regsetup,dir=d:\stat\sas\sas files\nhis2000);
 
datain nhis.anal1 nhis.anal2 nhis.anal3 nhis.anal4 nhis.anal5;
 
stratum stratum;
 
cluster psu;
 
weight wtfa;
 
link logistic;
 
dependent hstat_ive;
 
predictor  povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar;
 
categorical povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar hstat_ive;
 
run;
 
52
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
            
 
           
      
    
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
Appendix D. Sample Output from SAS-Callable SUDAAN Version 9.0 with a Built-in Option for Multiple 
Imputation 
Example 1: Crosstab 
S U D A A N
 
Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data
 
Copyright
  Research Triangle Institute 
July 2004
 
Release 9.0
 
Processing data for set 1 of imputed variables: 
Number of observations read    : 100355    Weighted count :274018975 
Number of observations skipped :    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Denominator degrees of freedom :   339 
Processing data for set 2 of imputed variables: 
Number of observations read    : 100355    Weighted count :274018975 
Number of observations skipped :    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Denominator degrees of freedom :    339 
Processing data for set 3 of imputed variables: 
Number of observations read    : 100355    Weighted count :274018975 
Number of observations skipped :    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Denominator degrees of freedom :    339 
Processing data for set 4 of imputed variables: 
Number of observations read    : 100355    Weighted count :274018975 
Number of observations skipped :    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Denominator degrees of freedom :    339 
Processing data for set 5 of imputed variables: 
Number of observations read    : 100355    Weighted count :274018975 
53 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
Number of observations skipped : 
263
 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive)
 
Denominator degrees of freedom : 
339
 
54 
  
Date: 02-03-2005                            Research Triangle Institute 
                                Page  : 1 
 
Time: 14:54:37                                The CROSSTAB Procedure                                   Table : 1 
 
 
Variance Estimation Method: Taylor Series (WR) Using Multiply Imputed Data 
 
Results for Summary Over All Imputations 
 
by: 
 Poverty status, Health insurance coverage. 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Poverty status 
 
   Health insurance    Sample                     SE        
Row        SE Row 
Tot        SE Tot 
 
     coverage          Size       Weighted Size   Weighted     Percent    Percent    Percent    Percent 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Total 
 
   Total                  99272    271135638.00   2229205.41 
100.00       0.00     100.00       0.00 
 
   (1) 
 Uninsured 
          17500 
     40484575.00    720600.13 
      14.93       0.22      14.93       0.22 
 
   (2) 
 Insured            81772    230651063.00   1917400.17 
      85.07       0.22      85.07       0.22 
 
(1) <100% 
 
   Total                  15622 
     34492808.80    842954.98 
100.00       0.00      12.72       0.29 
 
   (1) 
 Uninsured           5253 
     10522088.00    351141.75 
      30.51       0.71 
       3.88       0.12 
 
   (2) 
 Insured            10369 
     23970720.80    639643.61 
      69.49       0.71       8.84       0.22 
 
(2) 100-199% 
 
   Total                  20728 
     51627593.80   1006238.61 
100.00       0.00      19.04       0.33 
 
   (1) 
 Uninsured           5887 
     13168341.20    402170.15 
      25.51       0.56       4.86       0.14 
 
   (2) 
 Insured            14841 
     38459252.60    783658.23 
      74.49       0.56      14.18       0.26 
 
(3) 200-399% 
 
   Total                  30607 
     85884217.20   1199479.08 
100.00       0.00      31.68       0.35 
 
   (1) 
 Uninsured           4461 
     11384821.60    397324.06 
      13.26       0.38       4.20       0.14 
 
   (2) 
 Insured            26146 
     74499395.60   1015930.76 
      86.74       0.38      27.48       0.30 
 
(4) 400%+ 
 
   Total                  32315 
     99131018.20   1393716.99 
100.00       0.00      36.56       0.44 
 
   (1) 
 Uninsured           1899      5409324.20    217723.08       5.46       0.21       2.00       0.08 
 
   (2) 
 Insured            30416 
     93721694.00   1347608.79 
      94.54       0.21      34.57       0.43 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
55 
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
            
 
           
      
    
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example 2: Logistic regression 
S U D A A N 
Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data 
Copyright
  Research Triangle Institute 
July 2004 
Release 9.0 
Processing data for set 1 of imputed variables: 
Processing data for set 2 of imputed variables: 
Processing data for set 3 of imputed variables: 
Processing data for set 4 of imputed variables: 
Processing data for set 5 of imputed variables: 
56 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Processing data for set 1 of imputed variables: 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File NHIS.ANAL1 contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105144 
57 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Processing data for set 2 of imputed variables: 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File NHIS.ANAL2 contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105782 
58 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Processing data for set 3 of imputed variables: 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File NHIS.ANAL3 contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105506 
59 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Processing data for set 4 of imputed variables: 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File NHIS.ANAL4 contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105770 
60 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
                               
    
 
 
 
      
 
Processing data for set 5 of imputed variables: 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File NHIS.ANAL5 contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105145 
Overall degrees of freedom (Rubin): 30.96 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood with Intercepts Only : 59620.63 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood Full Model
 : 48521.49 
Approximate Chi-Square (-2 * Log-L Ratio)
 : 11099.14 
Degrees of Freedom  
: 
18 
Note: The approximate Chi-Square is not adjusted for clustering. 
Refer to hypothesis test table for adjusted test. 
61 
  
 
 
                              
 
                                 
  
                                   
                                    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Independent 
                                                                             P-value 
 
  Variables 
 and        Beta                      Lower 95% 
    Upper 95%                 T-Test 
 
  Effects              Coeff.          SE Beta   Limit Beta   Limit Beta 
   T-Test B=0   B=0                DDF Beta 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Intercept 
                   -1.96 
         0.07 
        -2.09        -1.84 
       -30.00     0.0000            164.500 
 
Poverty status 
 
  (1) <100% 
                  1.83 
         0.05 
         1.72         1.94 
        33.82     0.0000            109.630 
 
  (2) 100-199% 
               1.38 
         0.05 
         1.28         1.48 
        26.92     0.0000            133.114 
 
  (3) 200-399% 
               0.79 
         0.06 
         0.67         0.90 
        14.20     0.0000             30.957 
 
  (4) 400%+ 
                  0.00 
         0.00 
         0.00         0.00 
          .       . 
                339.000 
 
Age groups (7) 
 
  (1) <18 
                   -3.33 
         0.06 
        -3.45        -3.21 
       -54.59     0.0000            333.220 
 
  (2) 18-24 
                 -2.64 
         0.07 
        -2.77        -2.50 
       -38.07     0.0000            333.215 
 
  (3) 25-34 
                 -2.11 
         0.06 
        -2.22        -2.01 
       -38.29     0.0000            331.255 
 
  (4) 35-44 
                 -1.50 
         0.04 
        -1.59 
        -1.42 
       -34.63     0.0000            321.390 
 
  (5) 45-54 
                 -0.74 
         0.04 
        -0.83        -0.65 
       -16.76     0.0000            289.338 
 
  (6) 55-64 
                 -0.32 
         0.04 
        -0.40        -0.23 
        -7.41     0.0000            282.767 
 
  (7) 65+ 
                    0.00 
         0.00 
         0.00         0.00 
          .       . 
                339.000 
 
Race/ethnicity 
 
  (1) Hispanic 
               0.37 
         0.05 
         0.27         0.48         6.91     0.0000            316.355 
 
  (2) Black 
                  0.44 
         0.05 
         0.35         0.54         9.37     0.0000            304.406 
 
  (3) Other 
                  0.25 
         0.09 
         0.08         0.42         2.96     0.0033            335.040 
 
  (4) White 
                  0.00 
         0.00 
         0.00         0.00 
          .       . 
                339.000 
 
Born in US 
 
  (1) Not born in US 
        -0.30 
         0.06 
        -0.41        -0.19 
        -5.30     0.0000            333.009 
 
  (2) Born in US 
             0.00 
         0.00 
         0.00         0.00 
          .       . 
                339.000 
 
SEX 
 
  (1) male                   0.02 
         0.02 
        -0.03         0.07         0.85     0.3956            335.232 
 
  (2) female 
                 0.00 
         0.00 
         0.00         0.00 
          .       . 
                339.000 
 
Region 
 
  (1) Northeast             -0.01 
         0.06 
        -0.12         0.10 
        -0.20     0.8427            335.694 
 
  (2) South 
                  0.20 
         0.05 
         0.11         0.29         4.41     0.0000            334.248 
 
  (3) West                   0.07 
         0.05 
        -0.02         0.17         1.47     0.1426            319.804 
 
  (4) Midwest                0.00 
         0.00 
         0.00         0.00 
          .       . 
                339.000 
 
MSA 
 
  (1) MSA 
                   -0.18 
         0.04 
        -0.26        -0.10 
        -4.19     0.0000            334.995 
 
  (2) Not MSA                0.00 
         0.00 
         0.00         0.00 
          .       . 
                339.000 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date: 02-03-2005
 Research Triangle Institute 
 Page  : 1 
Time: 14:54:57 
The LOGISTIC Procedure 
 Table : 1 
Variance Estimation Method: Taylor Series (WR) Using Multiply Imputed Data 
SE Method: Robust (Binder, 1983) 
Working Correlations: Independent 
Link Function: Logit 
Response variable HSTAT_SUD: HSTAT_SUD 
Results for Summary Over All Imputations 
by: Independent Variables and Effects. 
62 
  
 
 
                               
 
                                 
  
                                  
                                    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
                       
                     
 
                       
       
  
 
 
               
       
    
 
 
  
                  
       
    
 
                    
         
         
                    
       
    
 
                      
       
    
 
                        
      
    
 
                       
       
    
 
                         
         
    
 
                      
         
    
 
                         
        
    
 
 
Date: 02-03-2005 
Research Triangle Institute 
 Page  : 2 
Time: 14:54:57
 The LOGISTIC Procedure 
 Table : 1 
Variance Estimation Method: Taylor Series (WR) Using Multiply Imputed Data 
SE Method: Robust (Binder, 1983) 
Working Correlations: Independent 
Link Function: Logit 
Response variable HSTAT_SUD: HSTAT_SUD 
Results for Summary Over All Imputations 
by: Contrast. 
-------------------------------------------------------
Contrast 
 Degrees 
of
 P-value 
Freedom 
Wald F
 Wald F 
-------------------------------------------------------
OVERALL MODEL 
19 
977.44
 0.0000 
MODEL MINUS 
INTERCEPT 
18 
354.66
 0.0000 
INTERCEPT
 .
 . 
. 
POVERTYI 
3 
446.44
 0.0000 
AGEGR6R
 6 
736.79
 0.0000 
HPRACE 
3 
 34.44
 0.0000 
USBORN
 1
 28.09
 0.0000 
SEX 
1 
0.72
 0.4015 
REGIONR
 3 
9.28
 0.0002 
MSAR
 1 
17.54
 0.0002 
-------------------------------------------------------
63 
  
 
 
                              
 
                                 
  
                                  
                                    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                    
  
 
  
             
   
 
    
 
 
                    
         
         
 
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
               
         
         
 
  
               
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
 
  
                    
         
         
 
  
                  
         
        
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
 
  
                    
         
         
 
 
  
               
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
 
  
         
         
         
 
  
             
         
         
 
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
                 
         
         
 
 
  
             
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
                  
         
         
 
  
               
         
         
 
 
  
                    
         
         
 
  
               
         
         
 
----------------------------------------------------------- 
Date: 02-03-2005
 Research Triangle Institute 
 Page  : 3 
Time: 14:54:57
 The LOGISTIC Procedure 
 Table : 1 
Variance Estimation Method: Taylor Series (WR) Using Multiply Imputed Data 
SE Method: Robust (Binder, 1983) 
Working Correlations: Independent 
Link Function: Logit 
Response variable HSTAT_SUD: HSTAT_SUD 
Results for Summary Over All Imputations 
by: Independent Variables and Effects. 
-----------------------------------------------------------
Independent 
Variables and 
Lower 95% 
 Upper 95% 
Effects
 Odds Ratio 
Limit OR
 Limit OR 
-----------------------------------------------------------
Intercept 
0.14 
0.12 
0.16 
Poverty status 
(1) <100% 
6.25 
5.61 
6.95 
(2) 100-199% 
3.98 
3.60 
4.41 
(3) 200-399% 
2.19 
1.96 
2.45 
(4) 400%+ 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
Age groups (7) 
(1) <18 
0.04 
0.03 
0.04 
(2) 18-24 
0.07 
0.06 
0.08 
(3) 25-34 
0.12 
0.11 
0.13 
(4) 35-44 
0.22 
0.20 
0.24 
(5) 45-54 
0.48 
0.44 
0.52 
(6) 55-64 
0.73 
0.67 
0.79 
(7) 65+ 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
Race/ethnicity 
(1) Hispanic 
1.45 
1.31 
1.61 
(2) Black 
1.56 
1.42 
1.71 
(3) Other 
1.29 
1.09 
1.52 
(4) White 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
Born in US 
(1) Not born in US 
0.74 
0.67 
0.83 
(2) Born in US 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
SEX 
(1) male 
1.02 
0.97 
1.07 
(2) female 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
Region 
(1) Northeast 
0.99 
0.89 
1.10 
(2) South 
1.22 
1.12 
1.34 
(3) West 
1.07 
0.98 
1.18 
(4) Midwest 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
MSA 
(1) MSA 
0.84 
0.77 
0.91 
(2) Not MSA 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
64 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
            
 
           
      
    
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
                               
    
 
 
 
      
 

 

 

 

 
Appendix E. Sample Output from SAS Commands for Use with SUDAAN Version 7 or Higher without a Built-in 
Option for Multiple Imputation 
Example 2: Logistic regression 
S U D A A N
 
Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data
 
Copyright
  Research Triangle Institute 
July 2004
 
Release 9.0
 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File TEMP contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105144 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood with Intercepts Only : 59620.63 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood Full Model
 : 48521.57 
Approximate Chi-Square (-2 * Log-L Ratio)
 : 11099.05 
Degrees of Freedom  
: 
18 
Note: The approximate Chi-Square is not adjusted for clustering. 
Refer to hypothesis test table for adjusted test. 
65 
  
 
 
                                  
 
            
 
           
      
    
 
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
                               
    
 
 
 
      
 
S U D A A N 
Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data 
Copyright
  Research Triangle Institute 
July 2004 
Release 9.0 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File TEMP contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105782 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood with Intercepts Only : 59620.63 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood Full Model
 : 48450.36 
Approximate Chi-Square (-2 * Log-L Ratio)
 : 11170.27 
Degrees of Freedom  
: 
18 
Note: The approximate Chi-Square is not adjusted for clustering. 
Refer to hypothesis test table for adjusted test. 
66 
  
 
 
                                  
 
            
 
           
      
    
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
                               
    
 
 
 
      
 
S U D A A N 
Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data 
Copyright
  Research Triangle Institute 
July 2004 
Release 9.0 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File TEMP contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105506 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood with Intercepts Only : 59620.63 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood Full Model
 : 48481.20 
Approximate Chi-Square (-2 * Log-L Ratio)
 : 11139.43 
Degrees of Freedom  
: 
18 
Note: The approximate Chi-Square is not adjusted for clustering. 
Refer to hypothesis test table for adjusted test. 
67 
  
 
 
                                  
 
            
 
           
      
    
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
                                
    
 
 
 
      
 
S U D A A N 
Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data 
Copyright
  Research Triangle Institute 
July 2004 
Release 9.0 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908  
Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File TEMP contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105770 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood with Intercepts Only : 59620.63 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood Full Model
 : 48451.73 
Approximate Chi-Square (-2 * Log-L Ratio)
 : 11168.90 
Degrees of Freedom  
: 
18 
Note: The approximate Chi-Square is not adjusted for clustering. 
Refer to hypothesis test table for adjusted test. 
68 
  
 
 
                                  
 
            
 
           
      
    
 
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
                               
    
 
 
 
      
 
S U D A A N 
Software for the Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data 
Copyright
  Research Triangle Institute 
July 2004 
Release 9.0 
Number of zero responses     : 90708 
Number of non-zero responses : 9200 
Independence parameters have converged in 7 iterations 
Number of observations read       : 100355    Weighted count:274018975 
Number of observations skipped 
:    263 
(WEIGHT variable nonpositive) 
Observations used in the analysis :  99908    Weighted count:272718013 
Denominator degrees of freedom 
:    339 
Maximum number of estimable parameters for the model is 19 
File TEMP contains  678 Clusters 
678 clusters were used to fit the model 
Maximum cluster size is 389 records 
Minimum cluster size is  19 records 
Sample and Population Counts for Response Variable HSTAT_SUD 
0: Sample Count    90708    Population Count 248661451 
1: Sample Count     9200    Population Count  24056562 
R-Square for dependent variable HSTAT_SUD (Cox & Snell, 1989): 0.105145 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood with Intercepts Only : 59620.63 
-2 * Normalized Log-Likelihood Full Model
 : 48521.49 
Approximate Chi-Square (-2 * Log-L Ratio)
 : 11099.14 
Degrees of Freedom  
: 
18 
Note: The approximate Chi-Square is not adjusted for clustering. 
Refer to hypothesis test table for adjusted test. 
69 
  
 
 
Multiple Imputation Analysis for Logistic Regression Model 
 
Estimates, Standard errors, t ratios, and p-values 
 
 
Obs 
 MODELRHS     qbar_m       se_mi  
tratio    pval_rs    pval_br 
 
 
  1 
     1 
   -1.96467    0.065479    -30.0045    0.00000    0.00000 
 
  2 
     2 
    1.83210    0.054165     33.8245    0.00000    0.00000 
 
  3 
     3 
    1.38247    0.051350     26.9227    0.00000    0.00000 
 
  4 
     4 
    0.78531    0.055299     14.2013    0.00000    0.00000 
 
  5 
     5 
    0.00000    0.000000       . 
     . 
      . 
 
  6 
     6 
   -3.32730    0.060946    -54.5938    0.00000    0.00000 
 
  7 
     7 
   -2.63543    0.069228    -38.0690    0.00000    0.00000 
 
  8 
     8 
   -2.11470    0.055227    -38.2907    0.00000    0.00000 
 
  9 
     9 
   -1.50435    0.043436    -34.6338    0.00000    0.00000 
 
 10 
    10       -0.74168    0.044261    -16.7569    0.00000    0.00000 
 
 11 
    11       -0.31558    0.042604     -7.4072    0.00000    0.00000 
 
 12 
    12        0.00000    0.000000       . 
     . 
      . 
 
 13 
    13        0.37293    0.053986 
6.9078    0.00000    0.00000 
 
 14 
    14        0.44469    0.047446 
9.3725    0.00000    0.00000 
 
 15 
    15        0.25133    0.085009 
2.9565    0.00311    0.00333 
 
 16 
    16        0.00000    0.000000       . 
     . 
      . 
 
 17 
    17       -0.29668    0.055972     -5.3004    0.00000    0.00000 
 
 18 
    18        0.00000    0.000000       . 
     . 
      . 
 
 19 
    19        0.02037    0.023943 
0.8506    0.39499    0.39560 
 
 20 
    20        0.00000    0.000000       . 
     . 
      . 
 
 21 
    21       -0.01103    0.055538     -0.1987    0.84253    0.84265 
 
 22 
    22        0.20279    0.045940 
4.4141    0.00001    0.00001 
 
 23 
    23        0.07180    0.048855 
1.4697    0.14167    0.14262 
 
 24 
    24        0.00000    0.000000       . 
     . 
      . 
 
 25 
    25       -0.17951    0.042864     -4.1880    0.00003    0.00004 
 
 26 
    26        0.00000    0.000000       . 
     . 
      . 
 
70 
  
Multiple Imputation Analysis for Logistic Regression Model 
 
Odds ratios and confidence 
 intervals 
 
 
Obs 
 MODELRHS     or_mi     ll95_br    ul95_br    ll95_rs    ul95_rs 
 
 
  2 
     2 
   6.24697    5.61112    6.95487    5.61368    6.95170 
 
  3 
     3 
   3.98474    3.59990    4.41073    3.60141    4.40887 
 
  4 
     4 
   2.19309 
    1.95917    2.45493    1.96040    2.45339 
 
  5 
     5 
   1.00000 
     . 
    
. 
     
.     
. 
 
  6 
     6 
   0.03589    0.03184    0.04046    0.03185    0.04044 
 
  7 
     7 
   0.07169    0.06256    0.08215    0.06259    0.08211 
 
  8 
     8 
   0.12067    0.10825    0.13452    0.10829    0.13446 
 
  9 
     9 
   0.22216    0.20396    0.24198    0.20403    0.24190 
 
 10 
    10       0.47631    0.43657    0.51967    0.43672    0.51950 
 
 11 
    11       0.72937    0.67070    0.79317    0.67091    0.79292 
 
 12 
    12       1.00000 
     . 
    
. 
     
.     
. 
 
 13 
    13       1.45198    1.30566    1.61469    1.30617    1.61406 
 
 14 
    14       1.56000    1.42095    1.71267    1.42144    1.71207 
 
 15 
    15       1.28574    1.08775    1.51976    1.08841    1.51884 
 
 16 
    16       1.00000 
     . 
    
. 
     
.     
. 
 
 17 
    17       0.74329    0.66579    0.82980    0.66606    0.82947 
 
 18 
    18       1.00000 
     . 
    
. 
     
.     
. 
 
 19       19       1.02057    0.97362    1.06979    0.97379    1.06961 
 
 20 
    20       1.00000 
     . 
    
. 
     
.     
. 
 
 21 
    21       0.98903    0.88667    1.10320    0.88702    1.10276 
 
 22 
    22       1.22481    1.11898    1.34065    1.11934    1.34021 
 
 23 
    23       1.07444    0.97598    1.18284    0.97632    1.18243 
 
 24 
    24       1.00000 
     . 
    
. 
     
.     
. 
 
 25 
    25       0.83568    0.76810    0.90919    0.76834    0.90892 
 
 26 
    26       1.00000 
     . 
    
. 
     
.     
. 
 
 
 
71 
  
Appendix F. Sample Output 
 
 from 
 SAS-Callable IVEware 
 
 
Example 1: Crosstab 
 
 
IVEware Setup Checker, Wed Nov 05 10:20:18 2003                                 1 
 
 
Setup listing: 
 
 
datain nhis.anal1 nhis.anal2 nhis.anal3 nhis.anal4 nhis.anal5;
 

 
 
stratum stratum;
 

 
 
cluster psu;
 

 
 
weight wtfa;
 

 
 
table povertyi*notcov;
 

 
 
run; 

 

 
 
 
 
IVEware Design-Based Descriptive Statistics Procedure, Wed Nov 05 10:21:35 2003 
1
 

 
 
 
Stratum variable:       STRATUM  Stratum for Variance
 

 
 
Cluster variable:       PSU  PSU 

 

 
Weight variable:        WTFA  WEIGHT 
 - FINAL ANNUAL
 

 
 
 
Analysis description:
 

 
 
 
         6  Variables
 
 

 
       339  Strata 

 

 
       678  Secus 

 

 
 
    Strata  Model 
 
       339  Multiple PSU
 

 
 
         0  Paired Selection
 

 
 
         0  Successive Differences
 

 
 
 
    501775  Cases Read 
 
 
 
 
72 
  
IVEware Design-Based Descriptive Statistics Procedure, Wed Nov 05 10:21:35 2003 
2 
 
 
All imputations 
 
 
     Problem  1 
 
 
                  Degrees of freedom 
 
                       15.9247 
 
 
         Factor   Covariance of denominator 
 
           None        0.00822 
 
 
          Table                     Number of         Sum of       Weighted       Standard 
 
       povertyi         NOTCOV          Cases        Weights 
Proportion     
Error 
 
              1           
1           5253  1.052209e+007        0.03881        0.00123 
 
              1           
2          10369  2.397072e+007        0.08841        0.00224 
 
              2           
1          5887  1.316834e+007        0.04857        0.00142 
 
              2              2          14841  3.845925e+007        0.14185        0.00258 
 
              3           
1          4461  1.138482e+007        0.04199        0.00140 
 
              3           
2          26146   7.44994e+007        0.27477        0.00301 
 
              4           
1          1899        5409324        0.01995        0.00078 
 
              4           
2          30416  9.372169e+007        0.34566        0.00438 
 
 
                                        Lower          Upper         T Test     Prob > |T| 
 
                                        Bound          Bound 
 
              1           
1        0.03621        0.04141       31.62450        0.00000 
 
              1           
2        0.08366        0.09316       39.46063        0.00000 
 
              2           
1        0.04556        0.05157       34.29998        0.00000 
 
              2           
2        0.13638        0.14731       54.99516        0.00000 
 
              3           
1        0.03903        0.04495       30.05772        0.00000 
 
              3           
2        0.26838        0.28116       91.22695        0.00000 
 
              4           
1        0.01829        0.02161       25.42298        0.00000 
 
              4           
2        0.33637        0.35495       78.91966        0.00000 
 
 
                                   Unweighted           Bias         Design 
 
                                   Proportion                        Effect 
 
              1           
1        0.05292       36.36357        1.89990 
 
              1           
2        0.10445       18.14052        3.81654 
 
              2           
1        0.05930       22.10615        1.83799 
 
              2              2        0.14950        5.39552        3.12661 
 
              3           
1        0.04494        7.01542        1.49306 
 
              3           
2        0.26338       -4.14554        3.14061 
 
              4           
1        0.01913       -4.13716        2.52326 
 
              4           
2        0.30639      -11.36046        6.15126 
 
 
 
 
73 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
    
 
 
         
 
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
 
                        
   
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
                        
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
Example 2: Logistic regression 
IVEware Setup Checker, Wed Nov 05 10:21:36 2003    
1 
Setup listing: 
datain nhis.anal1 nhis.anal2 nhis.anal3 nhis.anal4 nhis.anal5; 
stratum stratum; 
cluster psu; 
weight wtfa; 
link logistic; 
dependent hstat_ive; 
predictor   povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar; 
categorical povertyi agegr6r hprace usborn sex regionr msar hstat_ive; 
run; 
IVEware Jackknife Regression Procedure, Wed Nov 05 10:23:03 2003  
1 
Regression type: 
Dependent variable: 
Predictors: 
Cat. var. ref. codes:  
Stratum variable:   
Cluster variable:   
Weight variable:
    Logistic 
    hstat_ive 
    povertyi  Poverty status 
agegr6r  Age groups (7) 
hprace  Race/ethnicity 
usborn  Born in US 
SEX 
regionr  Region 
msar  MSA 
SEX  2 
agegr6r 7 
hprace 4 
hstat_ive  1 
usborn 2 
msar  2 
regionr  4 
povertyi  4 
    STRATUM  Stratum for Variance 
    PSU  PSU 
    WTFA  WEIGHT - FINAL ANNUAL 
74 
  
IVEware Jackknife Regression Procedure, Wed Nov 05 11:25:34 2003                 2 
 
 
All imputations 
 
 
Valid cases 
         
99908 
 
Sum weights 
          272718013 
 
 
Degr freedom       16.46093837 
 
 
-2 LogLike         132349824.5 
 
 
Variable              Estimate         Std Error         Wald test        Prob > Chi 
 
Intercept           -1.9646743         0.0654952         899.83227           0.00000 
 
povertyi.1           1.8320965         0.0541827        1143.33931           0.00000 
 
povertyi.2           1.3824722         0.0513700         724.25942           0.00000 
 
povertyi.3           0.7853111         0.0553181         201.53444           0.00000 
 
agegr6r.1           -3.3272968         0.0609781        2977.39121           0.00000 
 
agegr6r.2           -2.6354280         0.0692151        1449.77603           0.00000 
 
agegr6r.3           -2.1147002         0.0552570        1464.61299           0.00000 
 
agegr6r.4           -1.5043548         0.0434417        1199.18474           0.00000 
 
agegr6r.5           -0.7416825         0.0442917         280.40819           0.00000 
 
agegr6r.6           -0.3155753         0.0426026          54.86973           0.00000 
 
hprace.1             0.3729262         0.0540541          47.59795           0.00000 
 
hprace.2             0.4446873         0.0474451          87.84693           0.00000 
 
hprace.3             0.2513328         0.0850379           8.73520           0.00312 
 
usborn 
              -0.2966752         0.0560029          28.06349           0.00000 
 
SEX 
               0.0203657         0.0239452           0.72337           0.39504 
 
regionr.1           -0.0110329         0.0555605           0.03943           0.84260 
 
regionr.2            0.2027855         0.0459095          19.51051           0.00001 
 
regionr.3            0.0718029         0.0488095           2.16409           0.14127 
 
msar               -0.1795138         0.0428418          17.55737           0.00003 
 
 
 
75 
  
Variable                  Odds             95% Confidence Interval 
 
                         Ratio             Lower            Upper 
 
Intercept 
 
povertyi.1           6.2469697         5.5705566         7.0055174 
 
povertyi.2           3.9847405         3.5744806         4.4420879 
 
povertyi.3           2.1930892         1.9509339         2.4653014 
 
agegr6r.1            0.0358900         0.0315472         0.0408306 
 
agegr6r.2            0.0716883         0.0619254         0.0829903 
 
agegr6r.3            0.1206695         0.1073593         0.1356298 
 
agegr6r.4            0.2221606         0.2026574         0.2435406 
 
agegr6r.5            0.4763118         0.4337167         0.5230902 
 
agegr6r.6            0.7293691         0.6665208         0.7981436 
 
hprace.1             1.4519772         1.2951114         1.6278429 
 
hprace.2             1.5600022         1.4110533         1.7246741 
 
hprace.3             1.2857379         1.0740855         1.5390971 
 
usborn               0.7432854         0.6602567         0.8367551 
 
SEX 
               1.0205745         0.9701732         1.0735942 
 
regionr.1            0.9890277         0.8793709         1.1123586 
 
regionr.2            1.2248097         1.1114690         1.3497082 
 
regionr.3            1.0744435         0.9690552         1.1912932 
 
msar                0.8356764         0.7632816         0.9149377 
 
 
 
 
76 
  
IVEware Jackknife Regression Procedure, Wed Nov 05 11:25:34 2003              
 
Variable                Design          
SRS             % Diff 
 
                        Effect          Estimate         SRS v Est 
 
Intercept              1.51026        -1.9287906          -1.82645 
 
povertyi.1             1.49136         1.7978198          -1.87090 
 
povertyi.2             1.38702         1.3683918          -1.01850 
 
povertyi.3             1.32103         0.7724658          -1.63570 
 
agegr6r.1              1.41998        -3.3338239           0.19617 
 
agegr6r.2              1.20875        -2.6557082           0.76952 
 
agegr6r.3              1.32854        -2.1683692           2.53790 
 
agegr6r.4              1.24336        -1.5161737           0.78564 
 
agegr6r.5              1.46884        -0.7409085          -0.10436 
 
agegr6r.6              1.27075        -0.2915744          -7.60545 
 
hprace.1               1.90751         0.3671522          -1.54831 
 
hprace.2               1.84684         0.4718635           6.11132 
 
hprace.3               1.49689         0.2193086         -12.74176 
 
usborn                 2.09977        -0.2861391          -3.55142 
 
SEX 
                 0.99894        -0.0045110        -122.14999 
 
regionr.1              1.95092         0.0318232        -388.43891 
 
regionr.2              1.90428         0.1565690         -22.79084 
 
regionr.3              1.59708         0.0664275          -7.48634 
 
msar                  2.07600        -0.1684320          -6.17324 
 
 
 
  
 
 3 
77 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
Barnard, J., and Rubin, D.B. (1999), “Small-Sample Degrees of Freedom with Multiple 
Imputation,” Biometrika, 86, 948-955. 
Botman, S.L., and Jack, S.S. (1995), “Combining National Health Interview Survey Datasets: 
Issues and Approaches,” Statistics in Medicine, 14, 669-677. 
Box, G.E.P., and Cox, D.R. (1964), “An Analysis of Transformations,” Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society, Series B, 26, 211-243. 
Li, K.H., Meng, X.L., Raghunathan, T.E., and Rubin, D.B. (1991), “Significance Levels from 
Repeated p values with Multiply-Imputed Data,” Statistica Sinica, 1, 65-92. 
Li, K.-H., Raghunathan, T.E., and Rubin, D.B. (1991), “Large Sample Significance Levels from 
Multiply-Imputed Data Using Moment-Based Statistics and an F Reference Distribution,” 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 86, 1065-1073. 
Little, R.J.A., and Rubin, D.B. (2002), Statistical Analysis with Missing Data, 2nd edition, 
Hoboken: Wiley. 
National Center for Health Statistics (2016), “2015 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) 
Public Use Data Release: Survey Description,” Division of Health Interview Statistics, 
National Center for Health Statistics.  Available from the NHIS Web site 
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm). 
Paulin, G.D., and Sweet, E.M. (1996), “Modeling Income in the U.S. Consumer Expenditure 
Survey,” Journal of Official Statistics, 12, 403-419. 
Raghunathan, T.E., Lepkowski, J.M., Van Hoewyk, J., and Solenberger, P. (2001), “A Multivariate 
Technique for Multiply Imputing Missing Values Using a Sequence of Regression Models, 
Survey Methodology, 27, 85-95. 
Rubin, D.B. (1978), “Multiple Imputation in Sample Surveys – A Phenomenological Bayesian 
Approach to Nonresponse,” in Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, 
American Statistical Association, pp. 20-34. 
Rubin, D.B. (1987), Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys, New York: John Wiley. 
Rubin, D.B. (1996), “Multiple Imputation After 18+ Years,” Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 91, 473-489. 
Rubin, D.B., and Schenker, N. (1986), “Multiple Imputation for Interval Estimation from Simple 
Random Samples with Ignorable Nonresponse,” Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 81, 366-374. 
Schenker, N., Raghunathan T.E., Chiu, P.-L., Makuc D.M., Zhang G., and Cohen A.J. (2006), 
“Multiple Imputation of Missing Income Data in the National Health Interview Survey,” 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101, 924-933. 
StataCorp LP. (2009), Stata Multiple Imputation Reference Manual: Release 11, College Station: 
Stata Press. 
78 
