 Cadherins mediate cocaine-induced synaptic plasticity and 
behavioral conditioning
Fergil Mills†,1, Andrea K. Globa†,1, Shuai Liu3, Catherine M. Cowan1, Mahsan Mobasser1, 
Anthony G. Phillips2, Stephanie L. Borgland3,*, and Shernaz X. Bamji1,*
1Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences and Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
2Department of Psychiatry and Djavad Mowafaghian Centre for Brain Health, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
3Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Abstract
Drugs of abuse alter synaptic connections in the ‘reward circuit’ of the brain, which leads to long-
lasting behavioral changes that underlie addiction. Here we show that cadherin adhesion molecules 
play a critical role in mediating synaptic plasticity and behavioral changes driven by cocaine. We 
demonstrate that cadherin is essential for long-term potentiation (LTP) in the ventral tegmental 
area (VTA), and is recruited to the synaptic membrane of excitatory inputs onto dopaminergic 
neurons following cocaine-mediated behavioral conditioning. Furthermore, we show that 
stabilization of cadherin at the membrane of these synapses blocks cocaine-induced synaptic 
plasticity, leading to a significant reduction in conditioned place preference induced by cocaine. 
Our findings identify cadherins and associated molecules as targets of interest for understanding 
pathological plasticity associated with addiction.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence should be addressed to either of the following: Dr. Shernaz X. Bamji, Department of Cellular and Physiological 
Sciences, University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, Canada, shernaz.bamji@ubc.ca; or Dr. Stephanie L. 
Borgland, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada, 
s.borgland@ucalgary.ca.
†These authors contributed equally to this work
Author Contributions: F.M. and A.K.G. performed all behavioral, immunogold electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry 
experiments. S.L. performed all electrophysiological experiments under S.L.B.’s supervision. C.M.C assisted with EM sample 
processing and immunoelectron microscopy and performed biochemical experiments. M.M. assisted with data analysis and 
genotyping of mice. A.G.P. provided experimental reagents. F.M., A.K.G. and S.X.B designed all experiments, interpreted the results 
and wrote the paper.
Competing Financial Interests Statement: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 April ; 20(4): 540–549. doi:10.1038/nn.4503.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Drugs of abuse induce widespread alterations to the neural circuits that mediate reward 
learning in the brain. Cocaine exposure drives the strengthening of excitatory inputs onto 
dopaminergic neurons of the ventral tegmental area (VTA)1–4, and causes increased release 
of dopamine from the VTA onto corticolimbic structures, including the nucleus accumbens 
(NAc), the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and the dorsal striatum5,6. Drug-evoked synaptic 
plasticity in the VTA is believed to underlie behavioural changes that lead to addiction. The 
potentiation of excitatory inputs to dopaminergic neurons is increased following associative 
learning of reward-predicting cues7, and intact glutamatergic synapse function in the VTA is 
required for the formation of cocaine-induced conditioned place preference (CPP)8, 
indicating that plasticity at these synapses may contribute to the learned association between 
environmental cues and the rewarding effects of cocaine. Electrophysiological studies have 
shown that cocaine-induced potentiation of VTA synapses is mediated by the insertion of 
Ca2+-permeable, GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors (AMPARs) to the synaptic membrane9,10. 
In order to determine how drugs of abuse alter synapses within the reward circuit and cause 
behavioural changes underlying addiction, it is important to further understand the molecular 
mechanisms that mediate drug-induced plasticity at synapses in the VTA.
Cadherin adhesion molecules have been shown to play a critical role in synaptic plasticity 
underlying different forms of learning and memory. Cadherins mediate adhesion at synapses 
through homophilic trans interactions across the synaptic membrane and associate with 
AMPARs through direct and indirect interactions with both GluA1 and GluA2 AMPAR 
subunits11–13. In the hippocampus, cadherins are essential for long-term potentiation (LTP) 
and long-term depression (LTD). Following enhanced activity, cadherins are increasingly 
localized to the synaptic membrane14, leading to increased synapse stability15,16 and the 
stabilization of AMPAR at the synaptic membrane17. In contrast, during LTD the 
internalization of cadherin from the synaptic membrane is required for the removal of 
AMPARs from the postsynaptic membrane18. Disruption of trans-synaptic cadherin 
interaction in the hippocampus has been shown to abolish the acquisition of context-
dependent memory formation20, while aberrant increases in cadherin stability at the 
membrane leads to impaired in behavioural flexibility on hippocampal-dependent tasks19.
Due to their role in regulating AMPAR trafficking and stability at synapses, cadherins are 
strong candidate molecules for mediating plasticity in the VTA underlying behavioural 
changes driven by drugs of abuse. In the context of addiction, genome-wide association 
studies have identified mutations in cadherin adhesion complex proteins as risk factors for 
substance abuse21. However, very little is known about the expression of cadherins in the 
VTA, and their potential function in synaptic plasticity in this region has not been examined.
In the present study, we show that cadherin plays a key role in synaptic plasticity in the VTA 
and behavioural changes driven by cocaine. We demonstrate that cadherins are widely 
expressed in dopaminergic neurons and are essential for long-term potentiation (LTP) of 
synapses in the VTA. We further demonstrate that recruitment of cadherin to excitatory 
inputs onto dopaminergic neurons is correlated with cocaine-mediated conditioned place 
preference (CPP). Finally, we demonstrate that stabilization of cadherin at the synaptic 
Mills et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 membrane of synapses onto dopaminergic neurons can completely block cocaine-induced 
changes in AMPAR localization and LTP, and greatly reduce behavioural conditioning 
driven by cocaine.
Results
Cadherins are expressed in dopaminergic neurons and required for LTP
We first examined the expression of several classical cadherins and found that cadherins are 
widely expressed in both dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic neurons in the VTA (Fig. 1a, 
Supplementary Fig. 1). Nearly all dopaminergic cells were immunopositive for N-cadherin, 
R-cadherin, cadherin-7, cadherin-8, and cadherin-11, isoforms whose mRNA had previously 
been detected in this region22,23.
We next investigated the role of cadherins in activity-induced potentiation of excitatory 
synapses onto dopaminergic neurons in the VTA. We used an HAV antagonistic peptide that 
blocks cadherin interactions in trans to reduce cadherin stability at the synaptic membrane. 
Indeed, it has previously been shown that disrupting cadherin trans interactions, significantly 
attenuates cadherin membrane stability24. Treatment of VTA slices with the HAV peptide 
abolished spike-timing-dependent (STD) LTP at excitatory synapses onto dopaminergic 
neurons (Fig. 1b). STD LTP is mediated by the insertion of Ca2+-permeable GluA1 
homomers similar to potentiation of VTA synapses induced by cocaine9,25. As cadherin can 
stabilize AMPARs through its association with GluA111 and/or GluA212,13 subunits, this 
suggested that peptide treatment disrupted STD LTP by decreasing cadherin membrane 
stability and thus prevents the stabilization of newly-inserted GluA1 homomers at the 
synaptic membrane. We therefore next sought to investigate the relationship between 
cadherin localization and AMPAR trafficking in synaptic plasticity and behavioural 
conditioning driven by cocaine.
Cadherins are recruited to VTA synapses during cocaine CPP
Drugs of abuse such as cocaine potentiate excitatory synapses onto dopaminergic neurons by 
promoting the insertion of Ca2+-permeable GluA1 homomers into synaptic membranes, 
which contributes to the formation and expression of drug-induced behaviours3,24,25. After 
demonstrating that cadherin is required for LTP at synapses in the VTA (Fig. 1b), we 
examined the role of cadherins in conditioned place preference (CPP), a behavioral assay 
that models the learned preference for previously neutral contextual cues driven by drugs of 
abuse26. In other brain regions, enhanced synaptic activity is associated with increased 
recruitment of cadherins to the synapse15,16 as well as increased stability of cadherin at the 
synaptic membrane18. Intact cadherin adhesion at synapses is also required for the 
acquisition of new memories20. We therefore hypothesized that the acquisition of cocaine-
induced CPP is associated with increased insertion of cadherin to the synaptic membrane of 
VTA synapses. We used immunogold electron microscopy (EM) (validated in 
Supplementary Fig. 2) to examine nanometer-scale changes in the localization of cadherins 
and AMPAR subunits at synapses of the VTA following cocaine-induced CPP.
Mills et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 CPP was induced in a three-chamber apparatus (Fig. 2a), producing a robust increase in 
preference for the cocaine-paired, conditioned chamber (Fig. 2b). Mice were then sacrificed 
and the VTA isolated by microdissection for immunogold EM (Fig. 2c). We found that 
cocaine-induced CPP results in a striking redistribution of cadherin at excitatory synapses 
onto dopaminergic neurons in the VTA (Fig. 2d). Indeed, the proportion of cadherin 
localized to the synaptic membrane increased by 86% after CPP (number of immunolabelled 
beads within 40 nm of the synaptic membrane divided by total beads at the pre and 
postsynaptic compartments; Fig. 2e), though no changes in total levels of cadherin at 
synaptic compartments were detected (Supplementary Fig. 3). Moreover, analysis of 
individual mice demonstrated a strong positive correlation between the amount of cadherin 
at the synaptic membrane and time spent in the cocaine-paired conditioned chamber (r = 
+0.66, Fig. 2f). The increased localization of cadherin to the synaptic membrane was 
observed at both pre- and post-synaptic compartments following cocaine CPP 
(Supplementary Fig. 4), which is consistent with increased trans-synaptic adhesion between 
cadherins.
Importantly, we saw no significant change in cadherin localization in control mice which 
received the same schedule of cocaine and saline administration in their home cages rather 
than in a novel environment (Fig. 2e, Supplementary Fig. 5 or in mice where CPP was 
induced using palatable food rewards instead of cocaine (Fig. 2e, Supplementary Fig. 6). 
This suggested that the effects observed after cocaine CPP were not due to general effects of 
cocaine or non-specific learning-induced plasticity, but were specifically attributable to the 
formation of drug-associated memories. Together, these findings indicate that insertion of 
cadherin into the synaptic membrane specifically occurs following the learned association 
between novel contextual cues and the effects of cocaine during behavioral conditioning. 
These changes in cadherin localization were also transient, and returned to baseline levels 
following active extinction of CPP or return of mice to home cages for an equivalent period 
of time without re-exposure to the CPP apparatus (Fig. 2e). At inhibitory synapses, no 
changes in cadherin distribution were observed following cocaine CPP, extinction of cocaine 
CPP, food CPP or in home cage controls (Fig. 2g, h, i, Supplementary Fig. 5, Supplementary 
Fig. 6). Additionally, no changes in cadherin localization were observed at excitatory or 
inhibitory synapses onto glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons in the VTA following CPP 
(Supplementary Fig. 7), indicating the increase in cadherin localization to the synaptic 
membrane was specific to excitatory synapses onto dopaminergic neurons in the VTA.
GluA1 is recruited to VTA synapses during cocaine CPP
We then used immunogold labelling to identify GluA1-containing AMPARs, and found that 
they exhibited the same pattern of insertion and removal from the synaptic membrane as 
cadherin in each of the behavioral conditions (Fig. 2j). The proportion of GluA1-containing 
AMPARs localized to the post-synaptic density (PSD) membrane was significantly 
increased following CPP (121% increase, Fig. 2k), though total levels of GluA1 were 
unchanged at synaptic compartments (Supplementary Fig. 3). Similar to cadherin, there was 
a strong positive correlation between the amount of GluA1 at the synaptic membrane and 
time spent in the cocaine-paired chamber for individual mice (r = +0.66, Fig. 2l), and 
GluA1-containing AMPAR localization was also unchanged compared to saline controls 
Mills et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 following extinction of CPP, in home cage controls, or following CPP using palatable food 
(Fig. 2k, Supplementary Fig. 5, Supplementary Fig. 6). These data directly demonstrate that 
cocaine CPP drives the insertion of GluA1-containing AMPARs to the PSD membrane, 
which is thought to contribute to the cocaine-mediated increase in AMPA:NMDA ratio at 
VTA synapses previously observed using electrophysiological techniques1,9,27.
We also examined co-immunolabelling of GluA1 and cadherin together at individual VTA 
synapses following cocaine CPP and found that individual synapses with a greater 
proportion of cadherin localized to the synaptic membrane also had significantly more 
GluA1 localized to the membrane (Supplementary Fig. 8). This correlation between 
cadherin and GluA1 levels at individual synapses provided further support that cadherin acts 
to stabilize GluA1 homomers at potentiated synapses, consistent with our 
electrophysiological data demonstrating that cadherin stability was essential for STD LTP at 
VTA synapses (Fig. 1b).
Cadherin stabilization at VTA synapses reduces cocaine CPP
Given the strong correlation between CPP acquisition and cadherin localization at excitatory 
synaptic membranes in the VTA, we hypothesized that subcellular changes in cadherin 
localization may regulate cocaine-induced synaptic plasticity and behavioral conditioning. 
To test this, we increased cadherin at the synaptic membrane using a transgenic mouse line 
in which β-catenin levels are increased in dopaminergic neurons (‘DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3’ 
mice, Fig. 3a)28,29. β-catenin is the major intracellular binding partner of all classical 
cadherins, and we have previously shown that elevating β-catenin levels using this approach 
significantly increases the stabilization of cadherin and AMPARs at the synaptic membrane 
in hippocampal neurons in vivo19.
DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice exhibited a 48% reduction in cocaine-induced CPP compared to 
control mice (Fig. 3b, Day 8). There was no significant difference between groups in the rate 
of extinction from day 8 to 9 (p>0.05, two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s test post hoc). 
However, due to the decreased magnitude of CPP, DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice returned to 
baseline levels of preference for the conditioned chamber after 1 day of extinction (day 9), 
compared to 3 days in controls (day 11). Behavioral changes in these mice were specific to 
cocaine-mediated CPP; DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice appeared phenotypically normal, exhibited 
no changes in exploratory behaviour or basal locomotion (Fig. 3c), and showed intact 
locomotor sensitization to repeated cocaine administration (Fig. 3d). DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 
mice also showed no change in motor learning (Fig. 3e), contextual fear conditioning (Fig. 
3f), food consumption (Supplementary Fig. 9), or CPP driven by food rewards (Fig 3g). The 
lack of change in tasks which require intact recognition of a novel context (contextual fear 
learning and food CPP) also indicated that impairments in spatial memory were not 
responsible for the reduction in cocaine CPP observed in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice. We also 
verified that, following β-catenin stabilization in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice, no subsequent 
changes in Wnt pathway targets were observed in dopaminergic neurons in the VTA, 
indicating that the observed effects on CPP were not due to alterations in Wnt signalling 
(Supplementary Fig. 10).
Mills et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Cadherin stabilization at VTA synapses blocks synaptic plasticity
To determine why there was a marked attenuation of cocaine CPP in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 
mice, we used immunogold EM to examine the distribution of cadherin, GluA1 and GluA2 
at excitatory synapses onto VTA dopaminergic neurons after CPP. We found that the 
proportion of cadherin localized to the synaptic membrane was significantly increased in 
DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice under basal conditions (~77% increase) (Fig. 4a, b). However, 
unlike control mice, DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice did not exhibit additional recruitment of 
cadherin to the synaptic membrane during cocaine-mediated CPP. Additionally, both the 
removal of GluA2-containing AMPARs and the insertion of GluA1-containing AMPARs 
driven by cocaine CPP were blocked in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice (Fig. 4c, d, e, f). There 
was also no significant change in total levels of cadherin, GluA1 or GluA2 in DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3 mice (Supplementary Fig. 10c, d, e).
In addition to interacting with GluA111, cadherins can also interact directly and indirectly 
with the GluA2 subunit of AMPARs 12,13. Consequently, these data indicate that aberrantly 
increasing cadherin localization to the synaptic membrane prior to CPP stabilizes GluA1/2 
heteromers present at VTA synapses under basal conditions, which blocks cocaine-induced 
insertion of GluA1 homomers and results in significantly reduced cocaine CPP.
To functionally verify these changes in AMPAR trafficking, we also examined spike-timing-
dependent LTP at synapses in the VTA and found that this form of LTP was abolished in 
DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice (Fig. 5a). Additionally, treatment with NASPM (1-naphthyl acetyl 
spermine trihydrochloride), a selective antagonist of GluA2-lacking AMPARs, reduced 
EPSP amplitude back to basal levels in control mice, indicating that the enhanced EPSP 
amplitude observed following LTP induction was the result of the insertion of GluA2-
lacking AMPARs. In contrast, NASPM treatment had no effect on EPSP amplitude in DAT-
Cre;β-catΔex3 mice, demonstrating that GluA2-lacking AMPARs were not recruited to these 
synapses following the spike-timing-dependent LTP protocol (Fig. 5a). These data 
confirmed that increasing cadherin at the synaptic membrane in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice 
results in the retention of GluA2-containing AMPARs at the membrane and prevents the 
insertion of GluA2-lacking AMPARs which are crucial for the strengthening of these 
synapses.
We then examined changes in AMPA/NMDA ratio and inward rectification of AMPA 
EPSCs 24 hours after cocaine administration in control and DAT:Cre;βcatΔex3 mice. In 
control mice we found that, consistent with previous studies, cocaine administration caused 
a significant increase in AMPA/NMDA ratio (Fig. 5b) and inward rectification of AMPA 
EPSCs (Fig. 5c) indicating increased insertion of GluA2-lacking AMPARs at synapses onto 
VTA DA neurons30. However, these increases were completely absent in DAT:Cre;βcatΔex3 
mice (Fig. 5b, c), consistent with our immuno EM data showing that GluA1 at the synaptic 
membrane is increased in control mice but not DAT:Cre;βcatΔex3 mice following cocaine 
CPP. To confirm that these changes were not due to earlier, developmental disruptions, we 
also examined the morphology, density and function and VTA synapses in DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3 mice. EM analysis demonstrated that the size and density of excitatory and 
inhibitory synapses in the VTA was unchanged in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice compared to 
controls (Supplementary Fig. 11). We also found no differences in the frequency or 
Mills et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 amplitude of mEPSCs or mIPSCs onto VTA dopaminergic neurons in DAT:Cre;βcatΔex3 
mice compared to control mice (Fig. 5d, e). Together, these data demonstrate that increasing 
cadherin at the synaptic membrane prior to behavioural training results in a significant 
reduction in cocaine CPP through the aberrant retention of GluA1/2 AMPARs, and the 
prevention of GluA1 homomer membrane insertion to VTA synapses (Fig. 6).
Discussion
In the present study, we demonstrate that cadherin plays a critical role in synaptic plasticity 
in the VTA and behavioral conditioning driven by cocaine. We show that cadherins are 
widely expressed in the VTA, and are essential for the potentiation of excitatory synapses 
onto dopaminergic neurons. Using immunogold EM, we observed a strong correlation 
between cocaine-induced CPP in wildtype mice and the insertion of cadherin and GluA1-
containing AMPARs into the synaptic membrane of these synapses. These changes in 
cadherin and AMPAR localization were specific to cocaine-induced CPP, and were not 
observed when mice were given the same schedule of cocaine and saline administration in 
their home cage, nor following CPP induced by palatable food rewards. In DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3 mice, we found that stabilization of cadherin at VTA synapses was sufficient to 
significantly reduce the magnitude of cocaine-induced CPP. This behavioural effect was 
associated with disruptions in the plasticity of excitatory synapses formed onto 
dopaminergic neurons; stabilization of cadherin led to the abolishment of LTP induced by 
both cocaine administration and spike timing-dependent stimulation in these mice. Indeed, 
our immunogold EM data demonstrate that cocaine-induced internalization of GluA2-
containing AMPARs and the subsequent insertion of GluA2-lacking AMPARs into the 
membrane was blocked in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice.
Our findings suggest that, in wildtype mice, increased cadherin at the synaptic membrane 
acts to stabilize newly inserted GluA1 homomers during cocaine CPP. This is supported by 
evidence that cadherin interacts with the GluA1 subunit and stabilizes GluA1-containing 
AMPARs11, and by our data showing that intact cadherin adhesion is required for STD LTP 
at VTA synapses, which is also mediated by insertion of GluA1-homomers similar to 
potentiation of these synapses by cocaine. Cadherin-mediated stabilization of GluA1 
homomers may therefore contribute to increased strength of excitatory synapses onto 
dopaminergic neurons, as well as prolonged postsynaptic Ca2+ influx through these 
AMPARs. Potentiation of these synapses is also likely to enhance the activity of 
dopaminergic neurons and increase dopamine release onto target structures of the 
mesocortiolimbic system, leading to further downstream changes in synaptic plasticity and 
circuit activity that contribute to addiction.
Excitatory synapses onto dopaminergic neurons have previously been implicated in 
contextual conditioning and reward learning7,8, and our data demonstrate a strong 
relationship between increased cadherin at these synapses and drug-induced behavioural 
changes in wildtype mice. Increased cadherin at the synaptic membrane was correlated with 
the magnitude of CPP in individual mice, which suggests that increased cadherin adhesion 
may be a mechanism that contributes to drug-induced increases in the stability and 
potentiation of VTA synapses, promoting the ‘hard-wiring’ of synaptic traces of drug-
Mills et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 associated memories and behaviours. We speculate that increased strength and stability of 
VTA synapses mediated by cadherin adhesion may also contribute to sensitization to drug-
associated cues, which can trigger relapse both in humans and animal models of addiction 
even after extended periods of abstinence from drug-taking33.
In DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice, stabilization of cadherin at VTA synapses prior to cocaine 
administration prevented the removal of GluA2-containing AMPARs and blocked the 
insertion of GluA1-containing AMPARs. This disruption of cocaine-induced changes in 
AMPAR localization was associated with significantly attenuated CPP, and the abolishment 
of STD LTP. These impairments contrast with observations in the hippocampus, where 
stabilization of cadherin led to impairments in LTD and behavioural flexibility but had no 
effect on LTP or acquisition of spatial memory19. The key difference in plasticity between 
these regions appears to be the requirement for removal of GluA2-containing AMPARs for 
LTP at VTA synapses. It has been proposed that the number of AMPARs at synapses onto 
dopaminergic neurons is limited by the number of ‘slots’ where receptors can associate with 
scaffold proteins in the PSD31,32. Indeed, inhibiting the internalization of GluA2-containing 
AMPARs by disrupting GluA2/PICK1 (protein interacting with C kinase-1) interactions 
abolishes cocaine-induced increases in AMPA:NMDA ratio that are typically mediated by 
the insertion of GluA2-lacking AMPARs31. Since cadherin can stabilize AMPARs at 
synapses through interaction with both the GluA1 and GluA2 subunits11–13, this suggests 
that in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice increased cadherin at the synaptic membrane stabilized 
GluA2-containing AMPARs that occupied available slots in the PSD and prevented the 
insertion of GluA1 homomers. Our electrophysiological data confirmed the functional 
identity of AMPARs at VTA synapses in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice, demonstrating that 
GluA2-containing AMPARs were indeed retained at these synapses and insertion of GluA2-
lacking AMPARs was blocked, leading to abolishment of LTP.
Our findings also show that the timing of cadherin stabilization at the synaptic membrane 
had a critical effect on AMPAR trafficking and plasticity at VTA synapses. In wildtype mice, 
increased cadherin localization to the synaptic membrane during CPP resulted in the 
stabilization of GluA1 homomers that were also inserted during CPP. However, in 
DAT:Cre;βcatΔex3 mice, increased cadherin localization to the synaptic membrane occurred 
before CPP, which resulted in the stabilization of GluA1/2 heteromers present under basal 
conditions. In both cases, the effect of cadherin was consistent: increased cadherin at the 
synaptic membrane was found to stabilize the AMPARs that were present at that time. 
However, the differences in timing of when cadherin was stabilized, and the type of AMPAR 
subunits present at each time, led to different effects in LTP and CPP observed between 
DAT:Cre;βcatΔex3 mice and controls.
Interestingly, while CPP was significantly reduced in DAT:Cre;βcatΔex3 mice, we observed 
no changes in cocaine-induced locomotor sensitization in these mice compared with 
controls. This finding is consistent with studies showing that CPP and sensitization are not 
necessarily directly correlated, and may be mediated by distinct circuits and neural 
adaptations in the brain driven by cocaine. Disruption of the dopaminergic projections from 
the substantia nigra, but not VTA, has been shown to abolish locomotor sensitization to 
cocaine while leaving CPP intact33. Additionally, an analysis of CPP and locomotor 
Mills et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 sensitization in different inbred mouse lines found no correlation between the two 
behaviours, with some strains exhibiting robust CPP but no locomotor sensitization, or vice 
versa34. Finally, no correlation was found to exist between CPP and sensitization within 
individual mice in a behavioural task designed to test both parameters simultaneously35.
Our findings also demonstrate interesting differences in CPP driven by cocaine and food 
rewards. Cocaine CPP, but not food CPP, increased both cadherin and GluA1 localization to 
the synaptic membrane at excitatory synapses onto dopaminergic neurons in the VTA. 
Consistent with this, stabilization of cadherin (and GluA1/2 heteromers) at the synaptic 
membrane of these synapses in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice markedly decreased the magnitude 
of cocaine CPP, but had no effect on food CPP. These findings are consistent with a number 
of studies indicating that changes in dopaminergic neuron activity and behaviour driven by 
food rewards may be mediated by mechanisms other than increased LTP at VTA synapses. 
Food-related peptide hormones have been shown to play a major role in mediating 
behavioural changes driven by food 36, in some cases by acting directly on VTA dopamine 
neurons to regulate their activity37. Additionally, pharmacological disruption of NMDARs 
and mGluRs have both been shown to have opposite effects on CPP driven by food rewards 
and CPP driven by drugs of abuse38,39, which further suggests that major differences exist in 
the mechanisms underlying these different forms of CPP.
What are the molecular mechanisms responsible for the changes in cadherin localization 
observed following CPP? In hippocampal neurons, cadherins have been shown to undergo 
constitutive turnover at the synaptic membrane under basal conditions18. We have previously 
shown that synaptic activity leads to post-translational changes in the cadherin-binding 
protein, δ-catenin, increasing its association with cadherin and augmenting cadherin’s 
retention at the synaptic membrane17. This results in increased trans-synaptic adhesion and 
the stabilization of postsynaptic AMPARs by cadherin, causing long-lasting increases in 
synapse strength, size and stability over time. An important direction for future research will 
be to determine whether these same mechanisms drive changes in cadherin localization 
during activity- and drug-induced plasticity at synapses in the VTA.
The finding that cadherins regulate AMPAR trafficking at synapses in the VTA supports an 
emerging view that structural and scaffolding proteins may be of central importance in 
synaptic plasticity due to their role in mediating the recruitment and removal of postsynaptic 
receptors40,41. Since the finding that LTP can be induced at synapses as long as 
extrasynaptic glutamate receptors are present40, there has been a shift of focus to identify the 
proteins that control the insertion, removal and stabilization of AMPARs during different 
forms of synaptic plasticity. The present study provides further evidence that cadherins are 
key molecules that control AMPAR trafficking during plasticity underlying different forms 
of learning and memory. Additionally, our findings demonstrate that cadherins play a critical 
role in synaptic plasticity outside of the hippocampus, where they have typically been 
studied, and likely play specialized roles in mediating different forms of synaptic plasticity 
throughout the CNS. Another important goal for future studies will be determining the 
specific cadherin subtypes responsible for mediating different forms of synaptic plasticity 
throughout the brain. In the VTA, N-cadherin likely plays a major role in activity and 
cocaine-induced plasticity examined in the present study, as the HAV peptide used to block 
Mills et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 spike-timing-dependent LTP at VTA synapses has been shown to specifically disrupt N-
cadherin trans interactions 42, and N-cadherin plays a critical role in plasticity at excitatory 
synapses in other brain regions such as the hippocampus15,16,42,43. However, cadherins have 
highly similar structure and functional redundancy, and other cadherin subtypes expressed in 
dopaminergic neurons may therefore contribute as well.
Finally, our study provides new mechanistic insight into how mutations in cadherin adhesion 
complex proteins could contribute to susceptibility or resilience to addiction. Genome-wide 
association studies in substance abusers have identified increased prevalence of clustered 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in δ-catenin, which stabilizes cadherin at synapses, 
and α-catenin, which tethers the cadherin adhesion complex to the actin cytoskeleton21. 
While the function of these SNPs is currently unknown, we speculate that changes in the 
function or expression levels of δ-catenin or α-catenin could affect the stabilization of 
cadherin and AMPARs at the synaptic membrane of VTA synapses, which our findings 
show is sufficient to alter drug-induced synaptic plasticity and behavioural changes. 
Cadherins adhesion complex proteins may therefore be targets of interest for future studies 
investigating genetic risk factors for addiction.
Online Methods
Animals
Male C57BL/6 mice between 6–8 weeks old were used in all experiments, unless stated 
otherwise. For experiments examining the effects of cadherin stabilization of cocaine-
induced plasticity and behavioral conditioning, we used mice Slc6a3:Cre/
+;Ctnnb1lox(ex3)/lox(ex3) mice (termed DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice for brevity), which are 
homozygous for a loxP-flanked exon 3 transgene28 and express Cre recombinase in 
dopaminergic neurons29. Littermates lacking the Slc6a3:Cre/+ transgene (+/
+;Ctnnb1lox(ex3)/lox(ex3) mice) were used as controls. Mice were housed in reverse day/night 
cycle and given ad libitum access to food and water. Experimental procedures and animal 
housing conditions were approved by The UBC Animal Care Committee, and were in 
accordance with Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC) guidelines. All mice were 
housed with littermates in groups of 2–5 and were only used for one behavioral test, unless 
otherwise noted.
Immunoblot Analysis
Mice were anesthetized by cervical dislocation and their brains quickly removed, then sliced 
into 300 μm thick horizontal sections by vibratome. The VTA was dissected from the slices, 
with the VTAs of 5 mice being pooled and homogenized in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 
137 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 10% glycerol) with protease and phosphatase inhibitor tablets 
(Roche) and cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 40 min at 4°C. VTA lysates were 
separated by SDS-PAGE and probed with antibodies against N-cadherin (mouse, BD 
Transduction, CAT# 610920, predicted band size 130 kDa, 1:1000), R-cadherin (rabbit, 
Novus, CAT# NBP2-27372, predicted band size 130 kDa, 1:1000), cadherin-7 (rabbit, Santa 
Cruz, CAT# sc-68422, predicted band size 90 kDa, 1:500), cadherin-8 (rabbit, Abcam, 
CAT# ab97268, predicted band sizes 150 kDa precursor and 90 kDa protein, 1:1000), and 
Mills et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 cadherin-11 (mouse, Invitrogen, CAT# 321700, predicted band size 110 kDa, 1:1000). 
Proteins were visualized by chemiluminesence on a Bio-Rad Versadoc 4000 (Bio-Rad 
Laboratories (Canada) Ltd., Mississauga, ON). Immunoblot experiments were repeated at 
least twice to ensure reproducibility.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (120 mg/kg), transcardially perfused by 
PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. Brains were removed and post-fixed 
in 4% PFA for two hours, then cryoprotected by saturation with 30% sucrose, frozen, and 
sliced into 20 μm thick coronal sections by cryostat. For immunolabelling of target proteins, 
sections were first placed in a blocking buffer containing 10% goat serum, 0.1% bovine 
serum albumin and 0.1% Triton-X-100 in PBS. Primary antibodies against DAT (dopamine 
transporter) (rat, Millipore, CAT# MAB369, 1:500), N-cadherin (mouse, BD Transduction, 
CAT# 610920, 1:250), R-cadherin (rabbit, Novus, CAT# NBP2-27372, 1:250), cadherin-7 
(rabbit, Santa Cruz, CAT# sc-68422, 1:250), cadherin-8 (rabbit, Abcam, CAT# ab97268, 
1:250), cadherin-11 (rabbit, Santa Cruz, CAT# sc-28643, 1:250), β-catenin (mouse, BD 
Transduction, CAT# 610153, 1:250), Axin2, (rabbit, Abcam, CAT# ab109307, 1:250), LEF1 
(rabbit, Abcam, CAT# ab137872, 1:250), c-Myc (rabbit, Cell Signaling, CAT# 5605S, 
1:250), c-Jun (rabbit, Cell Signaling, CAT# 9165P, 1:250), and GAD67 (chicken, Abcam, 
CAT# ab75712, 1:250) were diluted in this buffer, added to sections and incubated overnight 
at 4°C. The following day, samples were washed three times with PBS, and secondary 
antibodies diluted in the blocking buffer were added to sections and incubated for 1–2 hours 
at room temperature. Slides were washed again with PBS and stained with DAPI (0.5 μg/
mL). Sections were mounted with ProLong Gold (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), and 
were imaged on an Olympus Fluoview FV1000 confocal microscope using Fluoview 
software (Olympus, Melville, NY). Immunostaining experiments were repeated at least 
twice to ensure reproducibility. The brightness and contrast of entire images was moderately 
adjusted using Photoshop (Adobe Systems Canada, Toronto, ON) following recommended, 
scientifically acceptable procedures, and no information was obscured or eliminated from 
the original images. Immunohistochemical experiments were repeated on brain slices from 
at least 2 mice per genotype to ensure reproducibility.
Electrophysiology
Electrophysiological recordings were taken from dopaminergic cells within the VTA of male 
and female mice ranging from postnatal day 21 (P21) to P30. Horizontal slices of mouse 
midbrain were cut with a vibratome (Leica, Nussloch, Germany), and slices (250 μm) were 
equilibrated in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) containing (in mM): 126 NaCl, 1.6 KCl, 
1.1 NaH2PO4, 1.4 MgCl2, 2.4 CaCl2, 26 NaHCO3, 11 glucose (32°C–34°C) and saturated 
with 95% O2/5% CO2. Cells were visualized using infrared differential contrast video 
microscopy and whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings were made using a MultiClamp 700B 
amplifier (Axon Instruments, Union City, CA). Putative dopaminergic cells were identified 
by the presence of a large hyperpolarization-activated cation current, Ih 46,47, fusiform shape 
and location in the lateral VTA proximal to the medial terminalis of the optic nucleus48. In 
this VTA subregion, Ih is a reliable predictor of dopamine neurons49,50,51. A subset of 
dopaminergic neurons was further confirmed by post-hoc immunostaining for tyrosine 
Mills et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 hydroxylase after recording as described previously52. 99/131 post-hoc stained neurons were 
identified as TH positive. The remaining 32 were unable to be recovered. In the spike 
timing-dependent plasticity experiments, neurons were patch clamped in current-clamp 
mode with electrodes containing, (in mM): K-Methanesulfonate 125mM, KCl 5mM, HEPES 
10mM, EGTA 0.2mM, MgCl26H2O 2mM, 2.5 mg/ml MgATP, 0.25 mg/ml GTP, and 0.2% 
Biocytin, pH 7.2–7.4, 275–285 mOsm and picrotoxin (100 μM) in the external aCSF 
solution. Slices were preincubated in 200 μM HAV peptide, 200 μM scrambled control 
peptide, or vehicle. The spike-timing-dependent protocol for LTP induction was carried out 
as previously described53. Briefly, the protocol consisted of 20 bursts of EPSP-spike pairs, 
with each burst consisting of 5 paired stimuli at 10 Hz (100 ms intervals), with an interburst 
interval of 5 s. Postsynaptic spikes were evoked by injection of depolarizing current pulses, 
with the onset of EPSPs preceding the peak of postsynaptic spikes by 5 ms. Evoked EPSPs 
were sampled at 0.1 Hz before and after LTP induction. In experiments where NASPM (1-
Naphthyl acetyl spermine trihydrochloride, Tocris, Bristol, UK) was used, 100 μM of 
NASPM in aCSF was added to slices 25 min after STDP LTP induction to inhibit GluA2-
lacking AMPA receptors. For the rest of experiments, electrodes (3–5MΩ) contained (in 
mM) 117 Cesium methanesulfonate, 20 HEPES, 0.4 EGTA, 2.8 NaCl, 5 TEA-Cl, 2.5 Mg-
ATP and 0.25 Na-GTP (pH 7.2–7.3, 270–280 mOsm). To calculate AMPAR/NMDAR ratio, 
neurons were voltage clamped at 40 mV and an average of 30 EPSCs were measured before 
and after the application of AP-5 (50 μM) for 5 minutes. NMDAR responses were calculated 
by subtracting the average response in the presence of AP-5 (AMPAR-mediated only) from 
that recorded in its absence. The peak of the AMPAR EPSC was divided by the peak of the 
NMDAR EPSC in order to compute the AMPAR/NMDAR ratio. Experiments measuring the 
I–V relationship were carried out in the presence of picrotoxin (100 μM) and when indicated 
in the presence of AP-5 (50 μM) to block GABAA and NMDA receptors, respectively. The 
holding potentials were −70 mV, 0 mV and +40 mV. Synaptic currents were evoked by 
stimuli at 0.1 Hz, and the rectification index was calculated by dividing the gradient of the 
slope at negative potentials by the gradient of the slope at positive potentials. Excitatory and 
inhibitory transmission were recorded in cells voltage-clamped at −67 mV for mEPSCs and 
+10 for IPSCs in TTX (500 nM). AMPAR mEPSCs were selected based on their amplitude 
(>12 pA), decay time (<3 ms), and rise time (<1 ms) using the Mini60 MiniAnalysis 
program (Synaptosoft). Similarly, GABAA mIPSCs were selected for amplitude (>12 pA), 
rise time (<4 ms), and decay time (<10 ms).
TH Immunocytochemistry
Brain slices from patch-clamp recording were fixed overnight in cold 4% paraformaldehyde, 
rinsed in phosphate buffer solution (PBS), blocked in 10% normal donkey serum, incubated 
with monoclonal mouse anti-TH antibody (Sigma, Oakville ON, 1:1000) for 48 hours at 
4°C. Secondary donkey anti-mouse fluorescein isothiocyanate antibody (Cedarlane, 
Burlington, ON, 1:50) was applied for 2 hours at 4°C. DyLight 594 streptavidin (Jackson 
ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, Pennsylvania; 1:200) was applied overnight at 
4°C. Slices were mounted using Fluoromount (Sigma, Oakville ON).
Mills et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Conditioned Place Preference (CPP)
CPP was induced using a standard three-chambered apparatus, consisting of two 
conditioning compartments and a middle, connecting compartment (Stoelting Co., Wood 
Dale, IL). The two conditioning compartments had distinct wall patterns and floor textures 
to allow mice to distinguish between them. Naïve mice were first allowed to habituate to the 
entire apparatus during a 30-minute session on day 1. On day 2, mice in the conditioned 
group received a 15 mg/kg injection of cocaine, and placed in a ‘conditioned’ chamber for 
15 minutes. Mice were assigned to receive cocaine in one compartment or the other using an 
unbiased design. Individual mice were removed from the experiment if they showed a strong 
baseline preference (>70%) for the conditioned chamber. The following day, these mice 
received an equivalent volume of saline, and were placed in the opposite ‘non-conditioned’ 
compartment. This alternating pattern of conditioning was repeated three times (6 days 
total). On test day, place preference was assayed by giving each mouse with a priming 
injection of saline, placing them in the middle connecting compartment, and recording the 
amount of time spent in the two conditioning compartments over a 30 minute period. If mice 
underwent the extinction of CPP, the test day protocol was repeated each day until the drug 
group’s preference for the conditioned chamber had returned to habituation levels. In the 
CPP + homecage extinction experiment (‘CPP + HC’) mice underwent CPP as described 
above, and were then returned to their home cages without any re-exposure to the test 
apparatus for 6 days (the same duration of time as was required for extinction of CPP in the 
previous experiments). CPP using a palatable food reward (‘Food CPP’) was induced using 
similar apparatus and methodology. Mice were food restricted for one week before the start 
of testing, such their weight was maintained at 85% of their baseline weight, and were 
introduced to the palatable food 5 days before the start of testing so that they were familiar 
with the food. During conditioning 2–3 grams of palatable food (Bacon Softies™, VWR) 
was placed in the ‘conditioned’ chamber, and mice were given access to the food in this 
chamber for 30 minutes. The food pellet was weighed before and after the conditioning 
sessions so that the amount of food consumed could be determined. Mice received no food 
reward in the unconditioned chamber during the 30 minute conditioning session. A control 
group received no food in either conditioning chamber. The alternating pattern of 
conditioning was repeated for 10 days before place preference was assayed on test day. All 
experiments were performed in dim lighting conditions, during the dark (wake) cycle. In 
Figure 2b, we present conditioned place preference data for n = 6 mice per condition. The 
data presented is from the mice that were used for the subsequent immunoelectron 
microscopy experiments (specifically the CPP+Extinction experiment). In Supplementary 
Figure 6a, we present conditioned place preference data for n = 6 mice per condition. The 
data presented is from the mice that were used for the subsequent immunoelectron 
microscopy experiments (specifically the Food CPP experiment). Experimenters were 
always blind to the genotype of the animal during testing, but not to the drug condition or 
food treatment group during cocaine-induced CPP or food CPP, respectively.
Electron Microscopy Sample Preparation
Mice were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (120 mg/kg), transcardially perfused by 
PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) as described above, then post-fixed in 4% 
PFA overnight. Brains were then cut into 250 μm thick horizontal sections by vibratome. 
Mills et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Small pieces of VTA tissue (<1mm in any dimension) were dissected from these slices and 
cryoprotected in 30% glycerol overnight at 4 °C. Samples were then plunge frozen in liquid 
ethane at −170 °C in an EM cryopreparation chamber (Leica), and transferred to a 1.5% 
Uranyl Acetate solution in 100% Methanol, kept at −90 °C in a Leica EM AFS for 30 hours. 
The temperature was increased to −45 °C over 11 hours. Next, samples were rinsed in 100% 
Methanol, and infiltrated with HM-20 acrylic resin (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, 
PA) by increasing the resin to methanol ratio in 2-hour steps while maintaining the 
temperature at −45 °C. Samples were set up in capsules containing pure resin and 
polymerized under UV light for 24 hours at −45 °C, after which the temperature was slowly 
increased to 0 °C. Tissue sections were cut at 85 nm using a Diatome diamond knife and a 
Leica Ultramicrotome. Sections were collected on 300-mesh, formvar-coated Nickel grids.
Immunogold Electron Microscopy
Grids were rinsed with distilled water and subsequently immersed in a bead of TTBS with 
0.1% Triton-X with 0.1% Sodium Borohydride and 50 mM glycine. The grids were then 
rinsed with TTBS with 0.1% Triton-X three times. Following this, nonspecific binding was 
blocked by immersing grids in a bead of 2% BSA in TTBS with 0.1% Triton-X for 10 
minutes. Primary antibodies against DAT (dopamine transporter) (rat, Millipore, CAT# 
MAB369), PSD-95 (rabbit, Frontier Institute, CAT# Af628), pan-cadherin (mouse, Sigma, 
CAT# C1821), GluA1 (rabbit, Millipore, CAT# ABN241), GluA2 (rabbit, NeuroMab/
Antibodies Inc, CAT# 75-002), GAD67 (chicken, Abcam, CAT# ab75712), and VGLUT2 
(guinea pig, Synaptic Systems, CAT#124014) were diluted in 2% BSA in TTBS with 0.1% 
Triton-X. Grids were immersed in 15 μl beads of diluted primary antibody overnight, at 
room temperature in a humidity chamber. The following day, grids were thoroughly rinsed 
by immersion in vials of TTBS with 0.1% Triton-X three times. Secondary antibodies were 
diluted in 2% BSA in TTBS with 0.1% Triton-X, and 0.05% Polyethyleneglycol (PEG) was 
added to prevent aggregation of gold beads. Grids were immersed in 15 μl beads of 
secondary antibody for 1.5 hours. Following this step, grids were repeatedly rinsed in TTBS 
with 0.1% Triton-X, and then rinsed in Milli-Q H2O and dried. Grids were then lightly 
counterstained with with 2% uranylacetate and Reynold’s lead citrate. Images were collected 
at 98000X magnification on a Tecnai G2 Spirit transmission electron microscope (FEI 
Company, Eindhoven, Netherlands). To analyze immunogold labeling, cell types were first 
identified by the presence of DAT, VGLUT2 or GAD67 markers, and synapse types were 
identified by the presence or absence of PSD-95 markers. The distance of all immungold-
labelled cadherin from the synaptic membrane, or all immungold labelled GluA1 or GluA2 
to the postsynaptic active zone membrane was measured. Due to the sizes of proteins and 
reagents involved54 (see also Results section and Supplementary Fig. 2) the maximum cutoff 
of immunogold particles considered to be labelling target proteins at the synaptic membrane 
was 40 nm for cadherin, 30 nm for GluA1, and 35 nm for GluA2. The percentage of 
immungold particles localized to these regions was determined by [# immungold beads at 
target membrane]/[total # immunogold beads within 500 nm of target membrane at pre and 
post-synaptic compartments], and expressed as a percentage relative to saline-only controls 
which were processed and labelled in parallel. All images were acquired and analyzed blind 
to the genotype of each mouse. In each experiment, greater than 100 synapses were analyzed 
for each condition.
Mills et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Rotarod
Mice were trained on an accelerating rotarod apparatus (Mouse Rota-Rod, Ugo Basile) for 
five trials per day for two days. The rotarod accelerated from 4 to 400 rotations per minute 
over 5 minutes. Mice were scored on the latency of time until falling from the rotarod 
apparatus, with five-minute breaks between trials to allow for recovery. Experiments were 
performed during the dark (wake) cycle. Experimenters were blind to the genotype of the 
animal during testing and scoring. One cohort of mice completed the rotarod test, followed 
by context dependent fear conditioning.
Context-dependent Fear Conditioning
Mice were placed in the conditioning chamber for 5 minutes, and after 3 minutes received an 
unconditioned foot shock stimulus (1 mA, 50 Hz) lasting 3 seconds. The next day mice were 
placed in the same chamber for 4 minutes, but did not receive an additional foot shock. 
Freezing behavior was determined by quantifying laser beam breaks in the conditioning 
chamber due to mouse activity, and total time % freezing was compared between groups. 
Experiments were performed during the dark (wake) cycle. Experimenters were blind to the 
genotype of the animal during testing and video scoring. One cohort of mice performed the 
context dependent fear conditioning experiment after completing the rotarod test.
Locomotor sensitization to cocaine
During the habituation phase (day 1–2), mice were given an injection of saline (12 uL/g) and 
were placed in a 20 cm2 open field apparatus for 15 minutes. During cocaine sensitization 
testing (day 3–7), mice were instead given 15 mg/kg cocaine and placed in the apparatus. 
After a 10 day rest period, mice were given a 15 mg/kg ‘challenge’ dose of cocaine and re-
introduced to the apparatus. During all phases of testing, mouse locomotion in the open field 
apparatus was recorded and then analyzed using Phenotracker software (TSE Systems, 
Hamburg, Germany). Experimenters were blind to the genotype of the animal during testing.
Food consumption testing
Mice were given pre-weighed pellets of low-fat (10% fat, Research Diets Inc, CAT# 
D12450B) or high-fat (60% fat, Research Diets Inc, CAT# D12492) food to consume over a 
24-hour period. The food given was in excess of what the mouse could consume in this 
period, so they were not food restricted. Pellets were weighed after the 24-hour period so 
that the amount of food consumed could be calculated. Experimenters were blind to the 
genotype of the animal during testing.
Statistical analysis
Unless otherwise noted, statistical analysis was done using unpaired Student’s t-test (two 
tailed) and two-way ANOVA. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not 
formally tested. Correlative data examining the relationship between behavioural data and 
immunoEM data was analyzed using linear regression. Data from STDP LTP 
electrophysiology experiments was analyzed by two way repeated measures (RM) ANOVA, 
and post-hoc analysis was done using Bonferroni’s test. Data from CPP experiments was 
also analyzed by two-way RM ANOVA with genotype as the between-subjects factor and 
Mills et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 time as the within-subjects factor. For comparisons between genotypes and within days, 
Bonferroni’s test was used. For comparisons to baseline within genotypes, Dunnett’s test 
was used. Correlative data examining the relationship between pre- and postsynaptic 
cadherin localization and CPP was analyzed using linear regression. No statistical methods 
were used to pre-determine sample sizes, but our sample sizes are similar to those reported 
in previous publications19,26,49,52. Results were considered significant when p<0.05. 
Analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the UBC Bioimaging Facility for use of shared equipment for sample processing; S.B. Floresco for 
extensive discussion and comments on the manuscript; C.A. Winstanley, T.P. O’Connor, K. Haas and D.W. Allan 
for comments on the manuscript, and K. Goodwin for assistance with data analysis. This work was supported by 
grants from Canadian Institutes of Health Research MOP-130526 to S.X.B. and MOP-102617 to S.L.B.
References
1. Ungless MA, Whistler JL, Malenka RC, Bonci A. Single cocaine exposure in vivo induces long-
term potentiation in dopamine neurons. Nature. 2001; 411:583–586. [PubMed: 11385572] 
2. Saal D, Dong Y, Bonci A, Malenka RC. Drugs of Abuse and Stress Trigger a Common Synaptic 
Adaptation in Dopamine Neurons. Neuron. 2003; 37:577–582. [PubMed: 12597856] 
3. Mameli M, Lüscher C. Synaptic plasticity and addiction: learning mechanisms gone awry. 
Neuropharmacology. 2011; 61:1052–1059. [PubMed: 21277315] 
4. Luscher C. Cocaine-evoked synaptic plasticity of excitatory transmission in the ventral tegmental 
area. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2013; 3:a012013. [PubMed: 23637310] 
5. Nestler EJ. Is there a common molecular pathway for addiction? Nat Neurosci. 2005; 8:1445–1449. 
[PubMed: 16251986] 
6. Pierce RC, Kumaresan V. The mesolimbic dopamine system: the final common pathway for the 
reinforcing effect of drugs of abuse? Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2006; 30:215–238. [PubMed: 
16099045] 
7. Stuber GD, et al. Reward-predictive cues enhance excitatory synaptic strength onto midbrain 
dopamine neurons. Science. 2008; 321:1690–2. [PubMed: 18802002] 
8. Harris GC, Aston-Jones G. Critical role for ventral tegmental glutamate in preference for a cocaine-
conditioned environment. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003; 28:73–6. [PubMed: 12496942] 
9. Argilli E, Sibley DR, Malenka RC, England PM, Bonci A. Mechanism and time course of cocaine-
induced long-term potentiation in the ventral tegmental area. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:9092–100. 
[PubMed: 18784289] 
10. Mameli M, Bellone C, Brown MT, Luscher C. Cocaine inverts rules for synaptic plasticity of 
glutamate transmission in the ventral tegmental area. Nat Neurosci. 2011; 14:414–6. [PubMed: 
21336270] 
11. Nuriya M, Huganir RL. Regulation of AMPA Receptor Trafficking by N-cadherin. J Neurochem. 
2006; 97:652–661. [PubMed: 16515543] 
12. Saglietti L, et al. Extracellular interactions between GluR2 and N-cadherin in spine regulation. 
Neuron. 2007; 54:461–77. [PubMed: 17481398] 
13. Silverman JB, et al. Synaptic anchorage of AMPA receptors by cadherins through neural 
plakophilin-related arm protein AMPA receptor-binding protein complexes. J Neurosci. 2007; 
27:8505–16. [PubMed: 17687028] 
Mills et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 14. Tanaka H, et al. Molecular modification of N-cadherin in response to synaptic activity. Neuron. 
2000; 25:93–107. [PubMed: 10707975] 
15. Bozdagi O, et al. Persistence of coordinated long-term potentiation and dendritic spine enlargement 
at mature hippocampal CA1 synapses requires N-cadherin. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:9984–9. 
[PubMed: 20668183] 
16. Mendez P, De Roo M, Poglia L, Klauser P, Muller D. N-cadherin mediates plasticity-induced long-
term spine stabilization. J Cell Biol. 2010; 189:589–600. [PubMed: 20440002] 
17. Brigidi GS, et al. Palmitoylation of delta-catenin by DHHC5 mediates activity-induced synapse 
plasticity. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:522–32. [PubMed: 24562000] 
18. Tai CY, Mysore SP, Chiu C, Schuman EM. Activity-regulated N-cadherin endocytosis. Neuron. 
2007; 54:771–85. [PubMed: 17553425] 
19. Mills F, et al. Cognitive flexibility and long-term depression (LTD) are impaired following beta-
catenin stabilization in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U A. 2014; 111:8631–6.
20. Schrick C, et al. N-cadherin regulates cytoskeletally associated IQGAP1/ERK signaling and 
memory formation. Neuron. 2007; 55:786–98. [PubMed: 17785185] 
21. Liu QR, et al. Addiction molecular genetics: 639,401 SNP whole genome association identifies 
many ‘cell adhesion’ genes. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006; 141B:918–25. 
[PubMed: 17099884] 
22. Obst-Pernberg K, Medina L, Redies C. Expression of R-cadherin and N-cadherin by cell groups 
and fiber tracts in the developing mouse forebrain: relation to the formation of functional circuits. 
Neuroscience. 2001; 106:505–33. [PubMed: 11591453] 
23. Hertel N, Krishna K, Nuernberger M, Redies C. A Cadherin-Based Code for the Divisions of the 
Mouse Basal Ganglia. J Comp Neurol. 2008; 508:511–528. [PubMed: 18383505] 
24. Delva E, Kowalczyk AP. Regulation of Cadherin Trafficking. Traffic. 2009; 10:259–267. [PubMed: 
19055694] 
25. Engblom D, et al. Glutamate Receptors on Dopamine Neurons Control the Persistence of Cocaine 
Seeking. Neuron. 2008; 59:497–508. [PubMed: 18701074] 
26. Tzschentke TM. Measuring reward with the conditioned place preference (CPP) paradigm: update 
of the last decade. Addict Biol. 2007; 12:227–462. [PubMed: 17678505] 
27. Borgland SL, Malenka RC, Bonci A. Acute and chronic cocaine-induced potentiation of synaptic 
strength in the ventral tegmental area: electrophysiological and behavioral correlates in individual 
rats. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:7482–90. [PubMed: 15329395] 
28. Harada N, et al. Intestinal polyposis in mice with a dominant stable mutation of the beta-catenin 
gene. EMBO J. 1999; 18:5931–42. [PubMed: 10545105] 
29. Bäckman CM, et al. Characterization of a mouse strain expressing Cre recombinase from the 3′ 
untranslated region of the dopamine transporter locus. Genes N Y N 2000. 2006; 44:383–390.
30. Wolf ME, Tseng KY. Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors in the VTA and nucleus accumbens 
after cocaine exposure: when, how, and why? Front Mol Neurosci. 2012; 5:72. [PubMed: 
22754497] 
31. Bellone C, Lüscher C. Cocaine triggered AMPA receptor redistribution is reversed in vivo by 
mGluR-dependent long-term depression. Nat Neurosci. 2006; 9:636–641. [PubMed: 16582902] 
32. Kessels HW, Malinow R. Synaptic AMPA receptor plasticity and behavior. Neuron. 2009; 61:340–
50. [PubMed: 19217372] 
33. Beeler JA, Cao ZFH, Kheirbek MA, Zhuang X. Loss of cocaine locomotor response in Pitx3-
deficient mice lacking a nigrostriatal pathway. Neuropsychopharmacol Off Publ Am Coll 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009; 34:1149–1161.
34. Eisener-Dorman AF, Grabowski-Boase L, Tarantino LM. Cocaine locomotor activation, 
sensitization and place preference in six inbred strains of mice. Behav Brain Funct. 2011; 7:29. 
[PubMed: 21806802] 
35. Seymour CM, Wagner JJ. Simultaneous expression of cocaine-induced behavioral sensitization and 
conditioned place preference in individual rats. Brain Res. 2008; 1213:57–68. [PubMed: 
18455710] 
Mills et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 36. Meye FJ, Adan RAH. Feelings about food: the ventral tegmental area in food reward and emotional 
eating. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2014; 35:31–40. [PubMed: 24332673] 
37. Abizaid A, et al. Ghrelin modulates the activity and synaptic input organization of midbrain 
dopamine neurons while promoting appetite. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:3229–3239. [PubMed: 
17060947] 
38. Yonghui L, Xigeng Z, Yunjing B, Xiaoyan Y, Nan S. Opposite effects of MK-801 on the 
expression of food and morphine-induced conditioned place preference in rats. J Psychopharmacol 
Oxf Engl. 2006; 20:40–46.
39. Herzig V, Capuani EMI, Kovar KA, Schmidt WJ. Effects of MPEP on expression of food-, 
MDMA- or amphetamine-conditioned place preference in rats. Addict Biol. 2005; 10:243–249. 
[PubMed: 16109585] 
40. Granger AJ, Nicoll RA. LTD expression is independent of glutamate receptor subtype. Front 
Synaptic Neurosci. 2014; 6:15. [PubMed: 25071549] 
41. Sheng M, Malinow R, Huganir R. Neuroscience: Strength in numbers. Nature. 2013; 493:482–3. 
[PubMed: 23344353] 
42. Tang L, Hung CP, Schuman EM. A role for the cadherin family of cell adhesion molecules in 
hippocampal long-term potentiation. Neuron. 1998; 20:1165–75. [PubMed: 9655504] 
43. Benson DL, Tanaka H. N-cadherin redistribution during synaptogenesis in hippocampal neurons. J 
Neurosci. 1998; 18:6892–904. [PubMed: 9712659] 
44. Gorski JA, Gomez LL, Scott JD, Dell’Acqua ML. Association of an A-kinase-anchoring protein 
signaling scaffold with cadherin adhesion molecules in neurons and epithelial cells. Mol Biol Cell. 
2005; 16:3574–90. [PubMed: 15930126] 
45. Mameli M, Balland B, Lujan R, Lüscher C. Rapid Synthesis and Synaptic Insertion of GluR2 for 
mGluR-LTD in the Ventral Tegmental Area. Science. 2007; 317:530–533. [PubMed: 17656725] 
46. Lacey MG, Mercuri NB, North RA. Actions of cocaine on rat dopaminergic neurones in vitro. Br J 
Pharmacol. 1990; 99:731–735. [PubMed: 2361170] 
47. Johnson SW, North RA. Opioids excite dopamine neurons by hyperpolarization of local 
interneurons. J Neurosci. 1992; 12:483–488. [PubMed: 1346804] 
48. Lammel S, Lim BK, Ran C, Huang KW, Betley MJ, Tye K, Deisseroth K, Malenka RC. Input-
specific control of reward and aversion in the ventral tegmental area. Nature. 2012; 491:212–217. 
[PubMed: 23064228] 
49. Lammel S, Ion DI, Roeper J, Malenka RC. Projection-specific modulation of dopamine neuron 
synapses by aversive and rewarding stimuli. Neuron. 2011; 70:855–862. [PubMed: 21658580] 
50. Wanat MJ, Hopf FW, Stuber GD, Phillips PE, Bonci A. Corticotropin-releasing factor increases 
mouse ventral tegmental area dopamine neuron firing through a protein kinase C-dependent 
enhancement of Ih. J Physiol. 2008; 586:2157–2170. [PubMed: 18308824] 
51. Lammel S, Hetzel A, Hackel O, Jones I, Liss B, Roeper J. Unique properties of mesoprefrontal 
neurons within a dual mesocorticolimbic dopamine system. Neuron. 2008; 57:760–773. [PubMed: 
18341995] 
52. Liu S, Globa AK, Mills F, Naef L, Qiao M, Bamji SX, Borgland SL. Consumption of palatable 
food primes food approach behavior by rapidly increasing synaptic density in the VTA. PNAS. 
2016; 113:2520–2525. [PubMed: 26884159] 
53. Liu QS, Poo MM. Repeated cocaine exposure in vivo facilitates LTP induction in midbrain 
dopamine neurons. Nature. 2005; 437:1027–1031. [PubMed: 16222299] 
54. Mathiisen, T., et al. Postembedding Immunogold Cytochemistry of Membrane Molecules and 
Amino Acid Transmitters in the Central Nervous System. In: Zaborszky, L.Wouterlood, F., 
Lanciego, J., editors. Neuroanatomical Tract-Tracing 3. Springer; US: 2006. p. 72-108.
55. Huber AH, Weis WI. The structure of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex and the molecular basis 
of diverse ligand recognition by beta-catenin. Cell. 2001; 105:391–402. [PubMed: 11348595] 
56. Song I, Huganir RL. Regulation of AMPA receptors during synaptic plasticity. Trends Neurosci. 
2002; 25:578–88. [PubMed: 12392933] 
57. Kratz JE, et al. Expression of stabilized beta-catenin in differentiated neurons of transgenic mice 
does not result in tumor formation. BMC Cancer. 2002; 2:33. [PubMed: 12460454] 
Mills et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 58. Schmeisser MJ, Grabrucker AM, Bockmann J, Boeckers TM. Synaptic cross-talk between N-
methyl-D-aspartate receptors and LAPSER1-beta-catenin at excitatory synapses. J Biol Chem. 
2009; 284:29146–57. [PubMed: 19703901] 
Mills et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Cadherins are expressed in dopaminergic neurons and are essential for LTP in the VTA
(a) VTA neurons co-immunostained for cadherins (green), dopamine transporter (DAT; 
magenta) and DAPI (blue). Arrowheads indicate neurons positive for both cadherin and 
DAT, asterisks indicate neurons which are positive for cadherin but not DAT. Scale bar = 10 
μm. (b) Spike-timing-dependent LTP in the VTA was abolished by treatment with a peptide 
containing an HAV motif (His-Ala-Val) that disrupts N-cadherin extracellular interactions 
(### p<0.0001, significant interaction between peptide treatment and time, two-way RM 
ANOVA, F(78,624) = 4.037, *p< 0.05, Bonferroni’s test post hoc, n=8 cells/8 mice vehicle, 
6 cells/6 mice HAV, 5 cells/5 mice HAV-S). Vehicle-only and scramble peptide (HAV-S) had 
no effect on LTP. Data shown as mean ± SEM.
Mills et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Cocaine-induced conditioned place preference (CPP) leads to recruitment of cadherin 
and GluA1 to excitatory synapses onto dopaminergic neurons in the VTA
(a) Experimental schedule for CPP and extinction experiments. (b) Cocaine administration 
produced robust CPP (#p<0.001, significant interaction between treatment and test day, two-
way RM ANOVA, F(6,60) = 4.422, **p<0.01, Bonferroni’s test post hoc) that extinguished 
over 5 days. (c) Electron micrograph of VTA synapse showing immunogold-labelled DAT, 
PSD-95 and cadherin (Scale bar = 100 nm). (d) Cadherin localization shifted to the synaptic 
membrane of excitatory synapses following cocaine CPP (20 nm bins). (e) The relative 
percentage of cadherin at the synaptic membrane at excitatory synapses ([#cadherin beads 
within 40 nm of the pre and postsynaptic membrane]/[# beads within 500 nm of the synaptic 
membrane], expressed as a percent relative to saline controls) was significantly increased 
compared to saline controls following cocaine-induced CPP, (p<0.01, significant interaction, 
two-way ANOVA, F(4,41) = 4.999, **p< 0.01, Bonferroni’s test post hoc), but not in home 
cage controls, following extinction of CPP, following return to home cage for 6 days after 
CPP (CPP + HC), or following food CPP (NF: No food, PF: Palatable food, see also 
Supplementary Fig. 6). CPP: n = 6 mice saline, 6 mice cocaine; HC: n = 4 mice saline, 3 
mice cocaine; CPP+Extinction: n = 5 mice saline, 6 mice cocaine; CPP+HC: n = 6 mice 
saline, 5 mice cocaine; Food CPP: n = 4 mice NF, 6 mice PF. (f) The percentage of cadherin 
localized to the synaptic membrane at excitatory synapses was significantly correlated with 
time spent in conditioned chamber following cocaine CPP (Linear regression, p<0.05, 
F(1,10) = 7.758), 6 mice per condition. (g) No change in cadherin localization was observed 
Mills et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 at inhibitory synapses following cocaine CPP. (h) The relative percentage of cadherin at the 
synaptic membrane was not changed at inhibitory synapses following cocaine CPP, home 
cage controls, extinction of CPP, or Food CPP. CPP: n = 6 mice saline, 6 mice cocaine; HC: 
n = 4 mice saline, 3 mice cocaine; CPP+Extinction: n = 4 mice saline, 5 mice cocaine; CPP
+HC: n = 6 mice saline, 6 mice cocaine; Food CPP: n = 4 mice NF, 6 mice PF (i) Cadherin 
localized to synaptic membrane at inhibitory synapses was not correlated with time spent in 
conditioned chamber following CPP. (j) GluA1 localization shifted towards the PSD 
(postsynaptic density) membrane following cocaine CPP. (k) The relative percentage of 
GluA1 at the PSD membrane ([# GluA1 beads within 30nm of the PSD membrane]/[# beads 
within 500nm of the PSD membrane], expressed as a percent relative to saline controls) was 
significantly increased at excitatory synapses following cocaine-induced CPP (p<0.01, 
significant interaction, two-way ANOVA, F(4,44) = 4.049, **p< 0.01, Bonferroni’s test post 
hoc), but not in home cage controls, following extinction of CPP, following return to home 
cage for 6 days after CPP, or following food CPP. CPP: n = 6 mice saline, 6 mice cocaine; 
HC: n = 4 mice saline, 3 mice cocaine; CPP+Extinction: n = 6 mice saline, 6 mice cocaine; 
CPP+HC: n = 6 mice saline, 6 mice cocaine; Food CPP: n = 6 mice NF, 5 mice PF (l) 
Percentage of GluA1 localized to the PSD membrane was significantly correlated with time 
spent in conditioned chamber following cocaine-induced CPP (Linear regression, p<0.05, 
F(1,10) = 7.848), n = 6 mice per condition. >100 synapses were analyzed per group. Data 
shown as mean ± SEM with individual mice (circles) overlaid.
Mills et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Stabilization of cadherin by β-catenin at synapses in the VTA reduces cocaine-induced 
CPP
(a) β-catenin levels were significantly increased in DAT+ neurons (arrowheads) in the VTA 
of DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice compared to adjacent DAT- cells (asterisks) and DAT+ neurons 
in control mice (p<0.001, significant interaction between genotype and cell type, two-way 
ANOVA, F(1,48) = 38.13, ***p<0.001 Bonferroni’s test post hoc, WT: n=14 cells non-DAT, 
10 cells DAT+, DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3: 16 cells non-DAT, 12 cells DAT+). (b) Cocaine-induced 
CPP was significantly reduced in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice compared to controls (#p<0.05, 
significant interaction between genotype and test day, two-way RM ANOVA, F(6,264) = 
2.194, * p<0.05, Bonferroni’s test post hoc, n=23 mice per genotype). Preference for the 
cocaine-paired chamber returned to baseline after 3 days of extinction in control mice and 1 
day of extinction in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice (+p<0.01, ++p<0.0001, significantly different 
from day 1, Dunnett’s test post hoc). DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice showed no differences in 
average speed (c) in the three-chamber CPP apparatus during habituation or after CPP (n=10 
mice control, 14 mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3), and no differences in locomotor sensitization to 
cocaine (d) compared to littermate controls (n = 16 mice control, 16 mice DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3). (e) DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice showed normal coordination and motor learning on 
an accelerating rotarod task (n=13 mice control, 15 mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3). (f) DAT-
Cre;β-catΔex3 mice showed no change in the acquisition of contextual fear memory 
following a foot shock in a novel environment compared to littermate controls, indicating 
intact spatial memory formation (n=16 mice control, 16 mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3) (g) DAT-
Cre;β-catΔex3 mice showed no impairments in CPP driven by palatable food rewards (n = 
17 mice control, 12 mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3). Data shown as mean ± SEM,.
Mills et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Stabilization of cadherin at synapses in the VTA prevents the removal of GluA2-
containing AMPARs, and blocks the insertion of GluA1-containing AMPARs
Immunogold EM was used to identify differences in cadherin, GluA2, and GluA1 
localization after cocaine CPP in wildtype and DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3. (a, b) Cadherin 
localization to the synaptic membrane was increased under basal conditions in DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3 mice, and recruitment of additional cadherin to the synaptic membrane during CPP 
was blocked (p<0.05, significant interaction between treatment and genotype, two-way 
ANOVA, F(1,8) = 5.613, n=3 mice per condition. >100 synapses were analyzed per group). 
(c, d) The removal of GluA2 from the PSD membrane at excitatory synapses following CPP 
was blocked in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice (p<0.01, significant interaction between treatment 
and genotype, two-way ANOVA, F(1,8) = 22.07, n=3 mice per condition). (e, f) The 
insertion of GluA1 to the PSD membrane at excitatory synapses onto dopaminergic neurons 
following CPP was blocked in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice (p<0.01, significant interaction 
between treatment and genotype, two-way ANOVA, F(1,11) = 10.75, n=3 mice control 
saline, n=3 mice control cocaine; n=5 DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice saline, 4 DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3 mice cocaine). a, c, e: *p< 0.05, **p< 0.01 Bonferroni’s test post hoc. Data shown 
as mean ± SEM with individual mice (circles) overlaid.
Mills et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Stabilization of cadherin at synapses in the VTA blocks LTP by retaining GluA2-
containing AMPARs and preventing the insertion of GluA2-lacking AMPARs
(a) Spike-timing-dependent LTP in the VTA was abolished in naïve DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 
mice (#p<0.001, significant interaction between genotype and time, two-way RM ANOVA, 
F(52, 468) = 2.644, * p<0.05, Bonferroni’s test post hoc, n=5 cells/5 mice WT, 6 cells/6 
mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3). Treatment with NASPM reversed LTP in control mice, but had 
no effect on EPSP amplitude in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice. (b) Increased AMPAR/NMDAR 
ratio 24 h after cocaine administration observed in control mice was abolished in DAT-
Cre;β-catΔex3 mice (p<0.05, two-way ANOVA, significant interaction between genotype 
and drug treatment, F(1,39) = 5.143, *p<0.05, Bonferroni’s test post hoc, n = 10 cells/4 mice 
control saline, 11 cells/5 mice control cocaine, 12 cells/6 mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 saline, 
10 cells/5 mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 cocaine). (c) Increased rectification index of AMPAR 
EPSCs 24 h after cocaine administration observed in control mice was absent in DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3 mice (p<0.01, two-way ANOVA, significant interaction between genotype and drug 
treatment, F(1,31) = 7.641, **p<0.01 Bonferroni’s test post hoc, n = 9 cells/3 mice control 
saline, 8 cells/3 mice control cocaine, 9 cells/3 mice DAT-Cre; β-catΔex3 saline, 9 cells/3 
mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 cocaine). The frequency and amplitude of miniature excitatory 
postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) (d) and miniature inhibitory postsynaptic currents 
(mIPSCs) (e) onto dopaminergic neurons in the VTA were unchanged in DAT-Cre;β-
catΔex3 mice compared to controls, indicating that basal excitatory and inhibitory synaptic 
Mills et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 transmission at these synapses was unaltered in the VTA of DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice (n = 9 
cells/3 mice control, 8 cells/3 mice DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3, unpaired t-tests, p>0.05). Data 
shown as mean ± SEM with individual cells (circles) overlaid.
Mills et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Model of changes in cadherin and AMPAR subunit localization in control and DAT-
Cre;β-catΔex3 mice during conditioned place preference (CPP)
(a–b) Wildtype mice. (a) Under basal conditions, the population of AMPARs at excitatory 
inputs to dopaminergic neurons is composed of GluA1/2 heteromers9. Cadherins regulate 
the dynamic localization of AMPARs through direct and indirect interactions with GluA1 
and GluA2 11–13,44. (b) During cocaine-mediated CPP, activity is enhanced at excitatory 
inputs to dopaminergic neurons, driving the removal of GluA1/2 heteromers and the 
insertion of Ca2+-permeable GluA1 homomers into AMPA receptor ‘slots’ within the 
PSD31,45. Enhanced synaptic activity also leads to increased levels of cadherin at the 
synaptic membrane. Cadherins are then situated to associate with and stabilize GluA1 
homomers at the synaptic membrane, contributing to the potentiation of these synapses 
underlying behavioral changes in CPP.
(c–d) DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice. (c) Under basal conditions, elevated levels of β-catenin 
promote the stability of cadherin, resulting in a significant increase in cadherin localized to 
the synaptic membrane. Cadherins associate with GluA1/2 heteromers11–13, enhancing their 
stability at the synaptic membrane. (d) During cocaine-mediated CPP, the removal of 
GluA1/2 heteromers is prevented due to their stabilization by increased synaptic cadherin in 
DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice. GluA1/2 heteromers are retained in available AMPAR ‘slots’, 
preventing the insertion of GluA1-containing AMPARs and the potentiation of these 
synapses. Thus, stabilizing synaptic cadherin in DAT-Cre;β-catΔex3 mice disrupts the 
cocaine-induced switch in AMPAR composition and significantly reduces CPP.
Mills et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
CIHR Author Manuscript
