 3D-printed vascular networks direct therapeutic angiogenesis in 
ischaemia
T. Mirabella1, J.W. MacArthur2, D. Cheng1, C.K. Ozaki3, Y.J. Woo4, M. Yang5, and C.S. 
Chen1,*
1Department of Bioengineering and the Biological Design Center, Boston University; The Wyss 
Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA
2Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
3Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA
4Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA
5Innolign Biomedical, Boston, MA
Abstract
Arterial bypass grafts remain the gold standard for the treatment of end-stage ischaemic disease. 
Yet patients unable to tolerate the cardiovascular stress of arterial surgery or those with 
unreconstructable disease would benefit from grafts that are able to induce therapeutic 
angiogenesis. Here, we introduce an approach whereby implantation of 3D-printed grafts 
containing endothelial-cell-lined lumens induces spontaneous, geometrically guided generation of 
collateral circulation in ischaemic settings. In rodent models of hind-limb ischaemia and 
myocardial infarction, we demonstrate that the vascular patches rescue perfusion of distal tissues, 
preventing capillary loss, muscle atrophy and loss of function. Inhibiting anastomoses between the 
construct and the host’s local capillary beds, or implanting constructs with unpatterned endothelial 
cells, abrogates reperfusion. Our 3D-printed grafts constitute an efficient and scalable approach to 
engineer vascular patches able to guide rapid therapeutic angiogenesis and perfusion for the 
treatment of ischaemic diseases.
Ischaemic cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the 
United States and continues to grow at an alarming rate worldwide (1,2). Impaired blood 
circulation to different organs and tissues underlies debilitating conditions such as limb 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence should be directed to chencs@bu.edu. 
Author contributions: T.M., J.W.M., D.C., K.C.O, J.W.Y, M.Y. and C.S.C. conceived, developed and mentored the project. T.M., 
J.W.M., D.C. and M.Y. performed experiments. T.M. and J.W.M, analyzed the data. T.M. and C.S.C. wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests: C.S.C. is a cofounder of, and owns equity in, Innolign Biomedical, a company that is developing tissue 
engineered products.
Data Availability
The authors declare that all data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its supplementary information.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Biomed Eng. 2017 ; 1: . doi:10.1038/s41551-017-0083.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ischaemia, heart failure and stroke (3–5). While percutaneous revascularization and artery 
bypass surgery continue to remain mainstay treatments for alleviating ischaemia in large 
vessel occlusive artery disease, the generation of collateral circulation via the recruitment of 
small vessels, or therapeutic angiogenesis, could offer an additional (even adjunctive) 
approach that would address an unmet need. Traditional open surgical bypass is not well 
tolerated in many ischaemic patients due to co-morbidities that drive peri-procedural 
complications (6–11), and anatomic and durability barriers continue to limit more 
widespread application of endovascular therapies. Furthermore, in many instances disease is 
not limited to large arteries and additional approaches are needed to enhance perfusion at the 
level of the microvasculature (12–14).
Initial efforts to develop pro-angiogenic therapies focused on the delivery of angiogenic 
growth factors (e.g. VEGF, FGF) to an ischaemic site (15–17). However, it was quickly 
realized that such soluble factors are rapidly extracted and eliminated from a site. Moreover, 
the disappointing results of pro-angiogenic VEGF therapy have been linked to a significant 
increase in edema (18). Subsequent attempts used controlled-release biomaterials or 
expression vectors delivered to either local cells or injected engineered cells (15, 19–22). 
Cytokine and cell based micro-revascularization showed remarkable initial experimental 
promise, but then clinically insignificant benefits in prospective randomized clinical trials 
(23). Recent studies in rodents have shown that injection of vascular endothelial cells and 
stromal cells attract host vessels to invade into a site to form new vessels. However, the 
invasion process takes weeks and the resultant vasculature is randomly organized unlike 
native capillary networks (24,25). Thus, no current therapies to restore microcirculation have 
reached mainstream clinical practice.
Within the tissue engineering field, recent studies have demonstrated that pre-organizing 
endothelial cells into defined network architectures within small tissue engineered constructs 
can significantly enhance the speed and extent of vascularization of the construct upon 
implantation (26–28). However, the extent to which such an approach could be scaled and 
adapted to treat ischaemia of endogenous mammalian tissues remains unclear.
Here, we present an approach using 3D printing to pre-organize endothelial cells into 
patterned channels within a fibrin patch, which upon implantation, facilitated rapid invasion 
and integration of small collaterals from the host to generate perfused, functional blood 
vessels that mirrored the architecture of the implanted grafts. By using constructs containing 
long, centimetre-scale channels oriented in parallel as means to direct revascularization from 
well-perfused sites into surrounding ischaemic tissues, we demonstrate the potential utility 
of the approach in two relevant models of ischaemic disease.
Results
3D printed vascular patches functionally engraft in vivo and rescue perfusion and function 
of ischaemic tissues
In this study, we set out to test whether organizing endothelial cells into patterned channels 
within an implantable, fully degradable fibrin patch would enhance perfusion in rodent 
models of ischaemia. To engineer endothelial networks, we used a recently described 
Mirabella et al.
Page 2
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 method to 3D print a network of sugar filaments into a network, encapsulate the network in a 
fibrin gel, dissolve the sugar to leave behind channels, and then inject endothelial cells to fill 
the channels (Fig. 1a) (29); To assess in vivo the efficacy and translational value of these 
patterned constructs, we implanted them in a mouse model of hind limb ischaemia and 
tracked perfusion of distal limbs from 5 to 21 days. In this model, occlusion of the left 
femoral artery distal to the inferior epigastric and profunda femoris arteries (injury site) 
caused a 50% post-operative decrease in perfusion of the distal ischaemic limb as measured 
by laser Doppler imaging (Fig. 1b). In mice implanted at the injury site with vascular 
patches (VP), perfusion measured distally at the feet progressively increased over time, to 
reach the value of the contralateral, non-ischaemic limb by 5 days post operatively (Fig. 1b). 
In the sham group, perfusion did not substantially improve from the post-operative levels.
Ischaemia experienced in the limb distal to the site of artery occlusion induced, as expected, 
an angiogenic response in the gastrocnemius (GC) muscle of the lower limb, as indicated by 
the number of vessels normalized to the number of muscle fibres (Fig. 1c). The number of 
capillaries normalized to the number of muscle fibres, was abnormally high in the sham 
group compared to the VP group (Fig. 1d). Upon closer examination of histologic sections, 
we also observed a substantial increase in apoptotic ECs within capillaries of the sham 
group but not in the VP group. In VP implanted mice, muscle fibres appeared healthy with a 
characteristic distribution of diameters (Fig. 1d). While in the sham group, there was 
observed degeneration of muscle tissue. Fibres were smaller (area < 1800 um2) and showed 
a diffuse hypercellularity indicative of early fibrosis (Fig. 1e). Thus the implanted vascular 
patches appeared to restore perfusion to distal tissues and rescue ischaemic muscle damage.
Direct anastomoses of vascular patches with host vasculature drives functional perfusion
To better understand how the vascular patches restored distal perfusion, we examined the 
vasculature at the site of implantation. Laser Doppler imaging revealed progressively 
improved perfusion both up- and downstream of the VP by day 3, suggestive of the 
establishment of collateral circulation through the construct (Suppl. Fig. 1). Upon retrieval at 
5 days, approximately two thirds of the endothelialized channels originally implanted were 
visibly present in constructs, with the attrition likely due to partial resorption of the fibrin 
patch. Histology of the explanted construct confirmed the presence of host capillary vessels 
directly connecting to the pre-patterned endothelial channels, with new smooth muscle actin-
positive mural cells lining the patterned vessels and blood perfused within them (Fig. 2a). To 
further confirm perfusion of channels via direct anastomosis to the systemic circulation, dye-
labeled dextran was perfused systemically by tail vein injection minutes before tissue 
explantation. The presence of dye within the channels confirmed perfusion by the host 
vasculature (Fig. 2a). About 90% of the retrieved channels were functional (dextran 
perfused). Labeling with monoclonal anti-mouse CD31 revealed that these capillaries were 
of host origin at the interface between the implant and the surrounding tissue (Fig. 2b). Long 
and branched capillaries transited across the implant and reached the patterned construct, 
lining the edges of the channels. The vascular walls of the patterned vasculature were found 
to be chimerically occupied by both implanted endothelial cells and host endothelial cells, 
and coupled to host capillaries. EphrinB2 and EphB4 staining further confirmed that most 
endothelial cells within the microchannels expressed the vein marker EphB4, and only a 
Mirabella et al.
Page 3
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 small subset of endothelial cells expressed ephrinB2 consistent with the nature of the 
implanted HUVECs and host capillary endothelial cell invasion (Suppl Fig. 2).
While connectivity between host and implant vasculature could be critical to the therapeutic 
effect of the constructs, another possibility is that the implanted endothelial cells simply 
provide paracrine support for host vasculature. To test this, we implanted constructs 
containing endothelial cells in which the expression of the sprout-inducing GTPase, CDC42, 
was silenced by siRNA. SiRNA treated cells (siCDC42) were confirmed to lack expression 
of CDC42, reduced invasive sprouting in vitro, but retain normal viability (Suppl Fig. 3). In 
vivo, siCDC42 versus control VP revealed substantially reduced integration between host 
capillaries and patterned engineered vasculature (Fig. 2c), with less vessels arising from the 
implanted VP (parent vessels) and lower anastomotic connections between parent and host 
vessels. Channels where CDC42 was silenced still recruited host mural cells, though with 
decreased coverage (Fig. 2d). Anastomosis between channels and host capillaries were fewer 
in number, with systemically injected lectin still found within the channel walls (Fig. 2d). 
However, at a functional level, LDI showed a significant decrease of distal perfusion to 
ischaemic limbs in mice implanted with siCDC42 VP, compared to scrambled control VP 
(Fig. 2e). Thus, bio-integration of vascular graft and functional recovery result from local 
connection between host and implant vasculature to give rise to a functionally significant 
collateral circulation.
Patterning of vascular architecture is critical to therapeutic benefit
To clarify whether the therapeutic effect of the implant was merely due to the presence of 
the exogenous endothelial cells secreting angiocrine cues, or rather ECs patterned in a 
certain architecture, we compared constructs containing endothelialized channels in vascular 
patches (VP, as before) with constructs carrying the same number of endothelial cells 
randomly embedded into fibrin not patterned with channels (endothelial patches, EP) and 
with fibrin patterned with channels but not seeded with cells (acellular patches, AP). Mice 
implanted with constructs lacking cells (AP) or organized features (EP) were not able to 
rescue perfusion of the ischaemic limb and were comparable to non-treated shams, even in 
21 days long term studies (Fig. 3a, Suppl. Fig. 4). Moreover, the histology of EP confirmed a 
lack of substantial invasion or anastomosis of host vessels with implant vessels as compared 
to the patterned constructs (Suppl. Fig. 5). These results suggest that merely the presence of 
endothelial cells without concomitant organization into vessel-like structures fails to 
establish the organized collateral circulation needed to perfuse distal ischaemic sites.
We next examined whether changes in the geometry of the vascular channels, rather than 
their presence or absence, could impact their therapeutic function. Decreasing the diameter 
of the 3D printed channels from 400 μm (VP) to 200 μm (Sm_D VP), while keeping 
constant the amount of HUVECs seeded (e.g., by increasing the number of channels per 
patch), decrease the ability of the patch to rescue perfusion of distal limbs to the extent that 
the effect was no longer significantly different from negative control groups (EP and AP). 
We also generated constructs where microchannels were arranged in a grid shape (Grid VP) 
compared to our standard constructs where microchannels run parallel to each other (Par 
VP), keeping constant the number of channels present in each patch. Grid VP implants 
Mirabella et al.
Page 4
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exhibited reduced efficacy in rescuing perfusion compared to Par VP to the extent that they 
were not significantly different from negative control groups. Together, these results suggest 
that the geometric design of the vascular channels within the patch impacts its ability to 
rescue perfusion, perhaps by affecting the efficiency of directing blood volume and flow 
from non-ischaemic to ischaemic regions, a parameter critical for recovery of distal 
perfusion and function.
3D printed vascular patches rescue cardiac function in a model of myocardial infarction
Given the potential utility of VP to rescue perfusion in the ischaemic limb, we then sought to 
investigate whether the approach could improve outcomes in the more demanding setting of 
cardiac infarction, where perfusion deficits lead to irreversible damage. A well-defined 
myocardium infarction (MI) was generated by ligation of the left anterior descending 
coronary artery in athymic rats (30–34). Constructs patterned with aligned channels of 
endothelial cells (VP) were placed on the surface of the heart spanning over the border 
between non-ischaemic and ischaemic zones of the underlying heart (Fig. 4a). Healthy rats 
(no MI) and infarcted rats receiving saline injections following artery ligation (Sham) were 
used as treatment controls. At 4 weeks after the surgeries, both non-invasive functional 
measurements and terminal histology assessment were performed in the ischaemic region of 
the rat hearts. Gross analysis of the explanted rat hearts revealed increased vascularization 
throughout the implant and surrounding native tissue. The vasculature within the explanted 
patch was comprised of dense networks of host capillaries connecting with long segments of 
parent channels, which were functionally integrated as they were DiI perfused after systemic 
infusion (Fig. 4a). Immunohistochemical staining of vWF positive vessels in the ischaemic 
zone of cardiac tissue indicated loss of capillaries in untreated infarcted hearts compared to 
healthy controls, and a substantial increase in capillary densities following treatment with 
VP (Fig. 4b). Aortic flow probe and intraventricular pressure-volume conductance 
measurements were obtained to determine cardiac output and other functional parameters 
(Fig. 4c–e). Analysis of the measurements indicated that hearts from the sham group 
exhibited half the ejection fraction and cardiac output of no MI controls (Fig. 4d,e). In 
contrast, VP resulted in partial rescue of cardiac function, with an ejection fraction and a 
cardiac output close to that measured in healthy controls (Fig. 4d,e). Moreover, using 
transthoracic echocardiographic analysis, the left ventricular internal dimension could be 
non-invasively measured for hearts in diastole (LVIDd) and systole (LVIDs) (Fig. 4f). 
Untreated ischaemic hearts exhibited substantial increases in LVIDd and LVIDs compared to 
healthy controls, while rats treated with VP implants substantially did not develop 
significant ventricle dilation (Fig. 4f). Together, these results demonstrate substantial 
functional rescue of cardiac function following a major ischaemic injury.
Discussion
Previous work has demonstrated that one can induce robust elaboration of capillary beds 
simply by injecting a variety of pro-angiogenic growth factors, gene therapy vectors, cells, 
and/or biomaterials (15–22). Here, by implanting a patch containing pre-engineered vessels, 
we not only observed enhanced angiogenesis, but also the engineered vessels became 
integrated with the host vasculature and resulted in significant perfusion of distal ischaemic 
Mirabella et al.
Page 5
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tissues. The demonstration that the therapeutic effect required anastomosis between host and 
engineered vasculature suggests that the larger calibre (150–400 μm diameter) engineered 
vessels may significantly enhance the volume of blood delivered distally. Indeed, to deliver 
blood across centimetre distances only via the highly branched, cascading structure of 
capillary beds is biomechanically highly inefficient (35,36). It is thus not entirely surprising 
that we observed that constructs containing disorganized endothelial cells—previously 
shown to give rise to highly branched capillary beds (25)—fail to rescue sufficient 
circulation to meet the demands of a major artery. The fact that capillaries may not be well 
suited to address ischaemia, except in cases where low capillary density is the primary 
limitation to tissue perfusion, could contribute to the lack of success of therapeutic 
angiogenesis in clinical ischaemia despite promise in small rodent studies. Nevertheless, 
further studies in larger animal models demanding rescue of perfusion across larger scale 
ischaemic territories will be required in order to evaluate whether the strategy of implanting 
oriented patterns of engineered vessels would ultimately have therapeutic merit at the 
clinical scale.
Additive manufacturing, or 3D printing, has rapidly advanced as an approach to fabricate 
numerous types of complex structures across research and industry sectors (37). 3D printing 
has been adopted to fabricate various types of engineered tissue structures, primarily through 
the use of low-pressure nozzles to print natural or synthetic hydrogels in the presence or 
absence of suspended cells (38). We and others have recently extended these efforts by using 
3D printing to generate microvessel networks in vitro to allow one to model or grow thicker 
tissues that require perfusion (29,39). Here, by using 3D printing to generate patterns of 
vasculature in vitro, we are able to provide a path for engineering host vasculature in vivo. 
Given that vascular architecture follows specific patterns conserved across many species 
(35,36), but is also distinct in different tissue settings, it is not surprising that our studies 
demonstrate that geometry of the channels is a design parameter that impacts functionality 
of the implant, and we anticipate that the pattern of engineered vasculature used in 
constructs could dramatically impact its performance in promoting circulation in different 
contexts. Thus, this vascular guidance technology could provide a means not only to re-wire 
circulatory pathways for a variety of applications, but that each application may need to be 
customized with different architectural and functional outcomes depending on the host 
vascular context.
Given the loss of rescue in acellular implants or those containing cdc42-deficient cells, the in 
vivo dynamic vascular remodelling activity of the constructs appears to require functional 
endothelial cells. Beyond remodelling activity, a polarized endothelium prevents direct 
contact of materials with blood, which otherwise has shown to lead to rapid vessel occlusion 
(14, 40, 41). The current proof-of-concept study used a construct containing human 
endothelial cells implanted in immunocompromised rodents, an approach that takes into 
consideration the post-surgery medications that bypass candidate patients undergo. While 
innate immunity is intact in these models, a fully immunocompetent host might be expected 
to modulate the response to the implant. Immune cells have been shown to contribute to 
angiogenesis, vascular remodelling, and inflammation (42), each of which could either 
improve or mute the therapeutic benefits of the approach. Thus, a study using autologous 
cells in an immunocompetent host or heterologous cells in larger immunosuppressed 
Mirabella et al.
Page 6
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 animals, is warranted to further evaluate the possible clinical outcomes of this approach. 
Moreover, because of the multifactorial nature of ischaemic cardiovascular diseases, the 
choice of animal model (small versus large animals, obesity/diabetes and aging versus no 
risk factors) and endpoint are considerations that could impact outcomes, and in part the lack 
of significant clinical successes in this arena to date speak to the uncertain nature of the 
extent to which preclinical models predict outcomes of revascularization therapies in 
humans (43). Even with these clinical development challenges met, it should be recognized 
that a cell-based therapy ultimately remains a resource intensive endeavour that is only 
considered given that acellular alternatives may not be as effective.
Although treatment of focal blockages in large arteries has largely been addressed through a 
combination of percutaneous interventions and surgical bypass grafts (6–14), approaches to 
enhance development of collateral circulation at the level of small vessels as demonstrated 
here could provide additional therapeutic benefit. Not only may such approaches help to 
address the many patients that also experience small vessel disease, but it also could be used 
to induce additional collaterals in at-risk patients to prophylaxis against progression of organ 
malperfusion. In addition, for inoperable patients (due to anatomic factors or medical 
comorbidities (6–10)), induction of collateral circulation could be an alternative to relieve 
ischaemia.
Methods
Cell culture and Matrigel™ assay
Primary human umbilical endothelial cells (HUVECs; Lonza) were cultured up to 7 
passages on 0.1% (wt/vol) gelatin-coated dishes in EGM-2 (Lonza), maintained at 37°C in 
100% humidified air containing 5% CO2 with medium changed every other day. Certificate 
of analysis for source, identity and infective agents screening was provided by the vendor, 
and mycoplasma testing was routinely run as a lab good practice. HUVECs labeled with 
mCherry (generous gift from Dr. Roger Tsien) were used for ex-vivo imaging purposes.
To assess in vitro vascular network formation, HUVECs were plated onto a thin layer (50 μl/
cm2) of Matrigel™ (Basement Membrane Matrix, BD Biosciences) at a density of 10,000 
cells/cm2 and cultured in EGM2 medium for 16h in presence of 10 μM Y27632, 30 μM 
ML141, 50 μM NSC23766 (Sigma).
CDC42 Knock-Down
For silencing CDC42, sixty percent confluent HUVECs were transfected for 6 h with 20nM 
CDC42 siRNA (Hs_CDC42_7 FlexiTube siRNA, Qiagen) or Scrambled, in a solution of 
Lipofectamine™ RNAiMAX (invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 
Expression levels of CDC42 were assessed by Real time PCR (qScript™ cDNA SuperMix, 
Quanta Bioscience for cDNA synthesis, and QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR Kit, Qiagen for 
PCR reaction) and by antibody staining (mouse anti-CDC42, Clone 44, BD Biosciences). 
GAPDH primers used: Fw (5′-3′) GTCTCCTCTGACTTCAACAGCG and Rv (3′-5′) 
ACCACCCTGTTGCTGTAGCCAA). Human CDC42 primers used: Fw (5′-3′) 
TGACAGATTACGACCGCTGAGTT and Rv (3′-5′) 
Mirabella et al.
Page 7
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GGAGTCTTTGGACAGTGGTGAG). Channels within molds were seeded with transfected 
HUVECs and either left in culture for apoptosis and sprouting assay, or implanted in vivo in 
a model of hind limb ischaemia. Active caspase 3 (Rb pAb, Abcam ) staining was used to 
determine the percentage of apoptotic cells within channels. The growth of angiogenic 
sprouts from patterned vessels was tested after a four day culture in fibroblast conditioned 
media-EGM2 medium (1:1), followed by fixation in 4% PFA for 30 min and phalloidin 
(Invitrogen) staining for 1h.
3D printing of carbohydrate glass patterns
A mixture of 100 g isomalt, 10 g dextran (86 kDa), and 60 ml reverse osmosis water (≥18 
MΩ; Millipore) was warmed to 155° C to remove most of the water and form a liquid glass. 
The hot mixture was poured into a 50 ml syringe that was maintained at 110° C. The syringe 
was mounted on a ShopBot Desktop custom-modified 3D printer to use for additive layer 
manufacturing with an added RAMBo 1.3 (Ultimachine) circuit board. Carbohydrate-glass 
lattices were printed at 110° C under nitrogen pressure with pneumatic control through an 
18-gauge (0.84 mm ID) steel nozzle, vitrified to 50° C, and then air-sprayed (Badger Air-
Brush Co. Model 175-7) with a 5 mg ml−1 solution of PDLGA (Purac) in chloroform. Glass 
molds were either immediately encapsulated in ECM or stored at 90° F until use to protect 
hygroscopic properties.
Casting of vascular structures
A fibrin gel solution (10 mg ml−1) was generated by mixing fibrinogen, thrombin (2.5U/ml 
final concentration) and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and then dispensed to encapsulate 
the printed carbohydrate glass molds. Fibrin gels were allowed to polymerize for 15 min at 
37 °C then placed in PBS and washed until the carbohydrate glass was completely dissolved. 
The encapsulated patterns were then ported at each corner using a 2mm biopsy punch and 
the dissolved sugar solution was flushed out with PBS. A suspension of 3.5×106 cells ml−1 
HUVECs in medium was injected into the ports of the hollow mold architecture and allowed 
to attach to channel lumens in static culture for one hour before placing on a platform rocker 
in a humidified 37°C incubator to induce gravity-driven flow overnight. In some cases, 
HUVECs were co-injected with 1 mg/mL type I collagen into the molds with similar 
bioactivity following implantation. For experiments with randomly-patterned HUVECs, 
cells were mixed into a bulk fibrin gel as it polymerized, and then similarly placed on a 
platform rocker in a humidified 37°C incubator overnight prior to implantation.
Mouse ischemic hind limb model
Seven to ten weeks old female nude mice (Taconic) were anesthetized with 1–3% isoflurane 
at flow rate of 1 l min−1 and body temperature was maintained on a circulating heated water 
pad, during both the surgical procedure and Laser Doppler Imaging (LDI) monitoring. 
Following skin incision, the femoral neurovascular pedicle was visualized under a 
stereoscope and the left femoral nerve and vein were carefully separated from the femoral 
artery. The femoral artery abscission was executed below the deep branch by 
electrocauterization. In this mild moderate model of hind limb ischaemia, the perfusion of 
operated distal limb was assessed in the immediate post-op to be half of the contralateral. 
This model did not develop spontaneous limb necrosis or self-amputation for the duration of 
Mirabella et al.
Page 8
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the study mirroring symptoms of significant ischaemia, such as ABI index and 
histopathological features, in patients with peripheral artery disease (PAD). Once the artery 
was occluded, implants were positioned with channels in parallel to the downward running 
femoral artery, the surgical site was sutured and inspected for infection and scarring for the 
duration of the study. Mice of the sham group underwent electrocauterization of femoral 
artery to generate ischaemia, no implant was inserted, and the site was sutured. Laser 
Doppler Imaging (Moor Instrument Inc.) was performed as described previously (48–50), at 
16h, day 3, day 5 after surgery. Mice were scanned at a standardized working distance of 32 
cm. Blood flow through the feet and the supine inferior limbs was documented as 2D color-
coded image (setting of scan modus 4–10 ms/pixel with resolution at 256×256 pixels). 
Results are expressed as fold increase/decrease of perfusion units (PU) with respect to the 
contralateral foot (= 1). Lamorte power calculation was adopted to estimate sample size to 
detect a specific effect. All data points collected were included in the analysis. Animals were 
randomly assigned to groups. All outcomes were assessed disregarding to group allocation. 
All animal procedures were performed at the Charles River campus animal Facility, Boston 
University, under a protocol approved by the institutional IACUC. All experiments 
pertaining to this investigation conformed to the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory 
Animals,” published by the US National Institutes of Health (Eighth Edition, 2011).
Rat myocardium infarction model
Athymic male RNU rats weighing 170–190g were obtained from Charles River Labs. The 
continuous delivery of 3% isofluorane was used to anesthetize rats. A 16-gauge 
angiocatheter was used for endotracheal intubation and connected to mechanical ventilation 
(Hallowell EMC) where 1% isoflurane was maintained throughout the operation. A 
thoracotomy was performed through the left 4th intercostal space, the heart was exposed, 
and a 7-0 polypropylene suture was placed around the left anterior descending artery 2mm 
below the left atrium. The suture was briefly snared to verify the size and location of 
myocardial ischaemia based on color change, and permanently tied down to produce a large 
anterolateral MI. The animals were then randomized to 3 different groups: healthy rats (no 
myocardial infarction, no MI), untreated operated rats injected with saline (Sham), rats 
implanted with patterned constructs (affixed with 7-0 polypropylene suture to the center of 
the infarct). The thoracotomy was closed in multiple layers and tissue adhesive (VetBond, 
3M) was applied over the incision, followed by recovery from anesthesia. Buprenorphine 
(0.5mg/kg) was administered for post-operative pain control. Lamorte power calculation was 
adopted to estimate sample size to detect a specific effect. All data points collected were 
included in the analysis. Animals were randomly assigned to groups. All outcomes were 
assessed disregarding to group allocation. All experiments pertaining to this investigation 
conformed to the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals,” published by the US 
National Institutes of Health (Eighth Edition, 2011). The protocol was approved by the 
Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee of the University of Pennsylvania.
Echocardiographic and Hemodynamic Assessment
LV geometry and function were evaluated pre-operatively and at 4 weeks in all animals. A 
Phillips Sonos 5500 revD ultrasound system (Philips Medical Systems, Amsterdam, ND) 
was used, utilizing a 12-MHz transducer at an image depth of 2cm. Left ventricular 
Mirabella et al.
Page 9
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 parasternal short axis 2D and M-mode images at the level of the papillary muscle were used 
to obtain echocardiographic data.
Four weeks after LAD ligation, all three groups of animals underwent invasive 
hemodynamic measurements with a pressure-volume (P-V) conductance catheter (SPR-869; 
Millar Instruments, Inc.). The catheter was calibrated via 5 point cuvette linear interpolation 
with parallel conductance subtraction by the hypertonic saline method. Rats were 
anesthetized as above, and the catheter was introduced into the LV utilizing a closed-chest 
approach via the right carotid artery. Measurements were obtained before and during inferior 
vena cava occlusion to produce static and dynamic P-V loops under varying load conditions. 
Data were recorded and analyzed with LabChart version 7 software (AD instruments). 
Finally, cardiac output was assessed by placing a 2.5mm peri-aortic Doppler flow probe 
(Transonic Systems) around the ascending aorta.
Visualization and functional assessment of perfusion in the implanted vasculature
Five days following implantation, mice were anesthetized with 3% isoflurane continuously 
delivered and i.v. injected with 200 μl of UEA-1 lectin solution (Rhodamine or FITC-
conjugated, Vectors Lab) or 500 μl of 1mg/mL Dextran70KDa (FITC or Texas Red 
conjugated, Molecular probes). Mice were kept under anesthesia (1% isoluorane) for 15 
minutes, then euthanized by cervical dislocation. Implants were harvested in 4 % PFA, and 
either whole-mount imaged or submerged in OCT (TissueTek), frozen and stored in a −80°C 
until imaging. Four weeks after implantation, a subset of rats was anesthetized with 3% 
isoflurane continuously delivered, endotracheally intubated with a 16-gauge angio catheter 
connected to mechanical ventilation (Hallowell EMC). A median sternotomy was 
performed, exposing the heart and ascending aorta. The ascending aorta was clamped, and a 
16-gauge needle was inserted into the proximal ascending aorta and connected to pressure 
tubing with a three way stopcock at its end. An atriotomy was made in the right atrium with 
scissors, and PBS was infused through the aortic needle until effluent from the right atrium 
was clear. Next,10cc of DiI solution (D-282, Invitrogen) was infused through the aortic 
needle. Hearts were explanted, submerged in OCT (TissueTek), frozen and stored at −80°C. 
Assessment for blood vessels was conducted on cryosections of 100–200 μm thickness.
Post-mortem tissue preparation, Staining and Imaging
Animals were euthanized according to protocols approved by the institutional IACUC. 
Tissues and implanted constructs were dissected, OCT-embedded and snap frozen in liquid 
nitrogen. Histology sections (15 to 100 μm thickness), whole mount preparation, and 
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) were performed by standard procedures. A solution of 5% 
goat serum, 0.1% Triton X-100, in PBS 1X was used for the 2h, RT blocking prior to 
staining. Primary antibodies were incubated at 4 degrees C, overnight. Rat anti-mouse 
Ter-119 (BD Pharmingen, 1:100), monoclonal rat anti-mouse PECAM-1 (BD Pharmingen, 
1:100), sheep anti-VWF (conjugated to FITC, Abcam, 1:100), goat polyclonal anti-EphB4 
(N-19, Santa Cruz, 1:100), rabbit polyclonal Ephrin B2 (Novus Biologicals, 1:100). 
Secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa -488, -555, -647 from Molecular Probes were 
used at 1:300 dilution, 2h incubation at RT. Isolectin B4 (Vector Labs, 1:200) and Cy3 and 
FITC-conjugated anti-αSMA mouse mAb (Sigma Aldrich, 1:300) were used at the same 
Mirabella et al.
Page 10
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conditions of secondary Abs. Images were acquired with an LD C-Apochromat 40×, 1.1 
N.A. water-immersion objective attached to an Axiovert 200M inverted microscope (Zeiss) 
equipped with a CSU10 spinning disk confocal scan head (Yokogawa Electric Corp.) and an 
Evolve EMCCD camera (Photometrics). A DF5000B Leica fluorescent microscope was 
used to image 10μm thick heart sections. Image processing and analysis was performed with 
by Fiji/ImageJ software.
Statistical analysis
Normality of data distribution was evaluated by Shapiro-Wilk test. Mann-Whitney U test 
was used accordingly to determine statistical significant differences between groups. 
Statistical significance threshold for this test was set at p ≤ 0.05. For data assumed to be 
normally distributed, either a two sided T-test or a one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-
hoc correction were used, with statistical significance threshold set at p ≤ 0.01.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank J. Eyckmans, R. Chaturvedi, and M. Shockley for helpful discussions. This work was supported in part by 
grants from the National Institutes of Health (EB00262, EB08396, HL118851), the Biological Design Center of 
Boston University, and the BU-Coulter Foundation Translational Partnership Program. D.C. is supported by the 
National Science Foundation, and K.O. by the American Heart Association Grant-in-Aid (16GRNT27090006). 
YJW is supported by NIH grant 1R01 (HL089315-01). JWM is supported by AHA (12POST11620024).
References
1. CDC, NCHS. Underlying Cause of Death 1999–2013 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released 
2015. Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1999–2013, as compiled from data provided 
by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program. [Accessed 
Feb. 3, 2015]
2. CDC. Deaths, Percent of Total Deaths, and Death Rates for the 15 Leading Causes of Death: United 
States and Each State, 1999–2014. 
3. Mozaffarian D, et al. American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics 
Subcommittee Heart disease and stroke statistics-2015 update: a report from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2015; 131:29–322.
4. Fryar CD, Chen TC, Li X. Prevalence of uncontrolled risk factors for cardiovascular disease: United 
States, 1999–2010. NCHS Data Brief. 2012; 103:1–8.
5. Fowkes FG, et al. Comparison of global estimates of prevalence and risk factors for peripheral artery 
disease in 2000 and 2010: a systematic review and analysis. Lancet. 2013; 382:1329–1340. 
[PubMed: 23915883] 
6. Hall MJ, DeFrances CJ, Williams SN, Golosinskiy A, Schwartzman A. National Hospital Discharge 
Survey: 2007 summary. Natl Health Stat Report. 2010; 29:1–20.
7. Conte MS. Bypass versus Angioplasty in Severe Ischaemia of the Leg (BASIL) and the (hoped for) 
dawn of evidence-based treatment for advanced limb ischaemia. J Vasc Surg. 2010; 51:69S–75S. 
[PubMed: 20435263] 
8. Salacinski HJ, et al. The mechanical behavior of vascular grafts: a review. J Biomater Appl. 2001; 
15:241–278. [PubMed: 11261602] 
9. Slovut DP, Lipsitz EC. Surgical technique and peripheral artery disease. Circulation. 2012; 
126:1127–1138. [PubMed: 22927475] 
Mirabella et al.
Page 11
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Kakkar AM, Abbott JD. Percutaneous versus surgical management of lower extremity peripheral 
artery disease. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2015; 17:479. [PubMed: 25612856] 
11. Kappetein AP, Van Mieghem NM, Head SJ. Revascularization options: coronary artery bypass 
surgery and percutaneous coronary intervention. Cardiol Clin. 2014; 32:457–461. [PubMed: 
25091970] 
12. L’Heureux N, et al. Human tissue-engineered blood vessels for adult arterial revascularization. Nat 
Med. 2006; 12:361–365. [PubMed: 16491087] 
13. Dahl SL, et al. Readily available tissue-engineered vascular grafts. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:68ra9.
14. Quint C, et al. Decellularized tissue-engineered blood vessel as an arterial conduit. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2011; 108:9214–9219. [PubMed: 21571635] 
15. Henry TD, et al. The VIVA trial: Vascular endothelial growth factor in Ischaemia for Vascular 
Angiogenesis. Circulation. 2003; 107:1359–1365. [PubMed: 12642354] 
16. Simons M, et al. Pharmacological treatment of coronary artery disease with recombinant fibroblast 
growth factor-2: double-blind, randomized, controlled clinical trial. Circulation. 2002; 105:788–
793. [PubMed: 11854116] 
17. Giacca M, Zacchigna S. VEGF gene therapy: therapeutic angiogenesis in the clinic and beyond. 
Gene Ther. 2012; 19:622–629. [PubMed: 22378343] 
18. Ferrara N. The role of vascular endothelial growth factor in pathological angiogenesis. Breast 
Cancer Res Treat. 1995; 36:127–137. [PubMed: 8534862] 
19. Peters MC, Polverini PJ, Mooney DJ. Engineering vascular networks in porous polymer matrices. J 
Biomed Mater Res. 2002; 60:668–678. [PubMed: 11948526] 
20. Ehrbar M, et al. Cell-demanded liberation of VEGF121 from fibrin implants induces local and 
controlled blood vessel growth. Circ Res. 2004; 94:1124–1132. [PubMed: 15044320] 
21. Phelps EA, Landázuri N, Thulé PM, Taylor WR, García AJ. Bioartificial matrices for therapeutic 
vascularization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:3323–3328. [PubMed: 20080569] 
22. Sadr N, et al. SAM-based cell transfer to photopatterned hydrogels for microengineering vascular-
like structures. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:7479–7490. [PubMed: 21802723] 
23. Gupta R, Tongers J, Losordo DW. Human studies of angiogenic gene therapy. Circ Res. 2009; 
105:724–736. [PubMed: 19815827] 
24. Koike N, et al. Tissue engineering: creation of long-lasting blood vessels. Nature. 2004; 428:138–
139. [PubMed: 15014486] 
25. Au P, Tam J, Fukumura D, Jain RK. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells facilitate 
engineering of long-lasting functional vasculature. Blood. 2008; 111:4551–4558. [PubMed: 
18256324] 
26. Kusuma S, et al. Self-organized vascular networks from human pluripotent stem cells in a synthetic 
matrix. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:12601–12606. [PubMed: 23858432] 
27. Levenberg S, et al. Engineering vascularized skeletal muscle tissue. Nat Biotechnol. 2005; 23:879–
884. [PubMed: 15965465] 
28. Baranski JD, et al. Geometric control of vascular networks to enhance engineered tissue integration 
and function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:7586–7591. [PubMed: 23610423] 
29. Miller JS, et al. Rapid casting of patterned vascular networks for perfusable engineered three-
dimensional tissues. Nat Mater. 2012; 11:768–774. [PubMed: 22751181] 
30. Hiesinger W, et al. Computational protein design to reengineer stromal cell-derived factor-1α 
generates an effective and translatable angiogenic polypeptide analog. Circulation. 2011; 124:S18–
26. [PubMed: 21911811] 
31. MacArthur JW, et al. Mathematically engineered stromal cell-derived factor-1α stem cell cytokine 
analog enhances mechanical properties of infarcted myocardium. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013; 
145:278–284. [PubMed: 23244259] 
32. MacArthur JW, et al. Sustained release of engineered stromal cell-derived factor 1-α from 
injectable hydrogels effectively recruits endothelial progenitor cells and preserves ventricular 
function after myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2013; 128:S79–86. [PubMed: 24030424] 
Mirabella et al.
Page 12
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 33. Shudo Y, et al. A Tissue-Engineered Chondrocyte Cell Sheet Induces Extracellular Matrix 
Modification to Enhance Ventricular Biomechanics and Attenuate Myocardial Stiffness in 
Ischaemic Cardiomyopathy. Tissue Eng Part A. 2015; 19–20:2515–2525.
34. Rodell CB, et al. Shear-Thinning Supramolecular Hydrogels with Secondary Autonomous 
Covalent Crosslinking to Modulate Viscoelastic Properties In Vivo. Adv Funct Mater. 2015; 
25:636–644. [PubMed: 26526097] 
35. Murray CD. The Physiological Principle of Minimum Work: I. The Vascular System and the Cost 
of Blood Volume. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1926; 12:207–214. [PubMed: 16576980] 
36. Kassab GS. Scaling laws of vascular trees: of form and function. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2006; 290:H894–903. [PubMed: 16143652] 
37. Atala, A., Yoo, JJ., editors. Essentials of 3D Biofabrication and Translation. London (UK): 
Elsevier/Academic Press; 2015. p. 179-186.
38. Visconti RP, et al. Towards organ printing: engineering an intra-organ branched vascular tree. 
Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2010; 10:409–420. [PubMed: 20132061] 
39. Sydney Gladman A, Matsumoto EA, Nuzzo RG, Mahadevan L, Lewis JA. Biomimetic 4D printing. 
Nat Mater. 2016; 15:413–418. [PubMed: 26808461] 
40. Moroni F, Mirabella T. Decellularized matrices for cardiovascular tissue engineering. Am J Stem 
Cells. 2014; 13:1–20.
41. Sooppan R, et al. In Vivo Anastomosis and Perfusion of a Three-Dimensionally-Printed Construct 
Containing Microchannel Networks. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2016; 22:1–7. [PubMed: 
26414863] 
42. Jaipersad AS, Lip GY, Silverman S, Shantsila E. The role of monocytes in angiogenesis and 
atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014; 63:1–11. [PubMed: 24140662] 
43. Waters RE, Terjung RL, Peters KG, Annex BH. Preclinical models of human peripheral arterial 
occlusive disease: implications for investigation of therapeutic agents. J Appl Physiol (1985). 
2004; 97:773–80. [PubMed: 15107408] 
44. Hall MJ, et al. National Hospital Discharge Survey: 2007 summary. Natl Health Stat Report. 2010; 
24:1–20.
45. Norgren L, et al. Inter-Society Consensus for the Management of Peripheral Arterial Disease 
(TASC II). J Vasc Surg. 2007; 45:S5–67. [PubMed: 17223489] 
46. Belch JJ, et al. Critical issues in peripheral arterial disease detection and management: a call to 
action. Arch Intern Med. 2003; 163:884–892. [PubMed: 12719196] 
47. Al Amjad, M. Peripheral artery disease. Cleveland Clinic Center for Continuing Education; 2009. 
48. Hoefer IE, et al. Arteriogenesis proceeds via ICAM-1/Mac-1- mediated mechanisms. Circ Res. 
2004; 94:1179–1185. [PubMed: 15059933] 
49. Mirabella T, Cilli M, Carlone S, Cancedda R, Gentili C. Amniotic liquid derived stem cells as 
reservoir of secreted angiogenic factors capable of stimulating neo-arteriogenesis in an ischaemic 
model. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:3689–3699. [PubMed: 21371750] 
50. Mirabella T, et al. Proangiogenic soluble factors from amniotic fluid stem cells mediate the 
recruitment of endothelial progenitors in a model of ischaemic fasciocutaneous flap. Stem Cells 
Dev. 2012; 21:2179–2188. [PubMed: 22225409] 
Mirabella et al.
Page 13
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Fabricated vascular patches rescue perfusion in hind limb ischaemia
(a) Schematic of VP (vascular patches) fabrication (i). Carbohydrate glasses are 3D printed 
as parallel filament. After PDGLA-coating and fibrin (10mg/ml) bulking, the sacrificial 
sugar are removed by overnight washings in PBS. The remaining channels are 
endothelialized by flowing HUVECs and shear-conditioning the confluent monolayer for an 
overnight, before implantation in ischaemic hind limb mice. In ii), representation of the 
patches implantation site within the cauterized femoral artery space. In iii, representation of 
patches retrieved after 5 days from implantation (stars mark collateral arteries and veins). (b) 
Laser Doppler Imaging (Moor Instrument™) of distal limbs over time (post-surgery, day 3 
and day5) in the two groups (VP vs Sham). Histograms for quantification of perfusion levels 
of the ischaemic limb. Perfusion units (P.U.) of ischaemic limb were normalized to P.U. of 
contralateral not ischaemic limb (C.L. norm, considered=1) and expressed as fold change. 
Data expressed as mean ± S.D. N=6 animals per group. T-test for comparison between two 
groups. * p-value < 0.01. (c) Staining of Gastrocnemius muscle (GC) sections (25 um thick) 
with phalloidin (cytoarchiteture), IB4 (capillaries) and activated caspase 3 (apoptosis). 
Mirabella et al.
Page 14
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Representative images (Spin Disk Confocal, 20um stack) for the two groups (VP vs Sham). 
Arrow points at apoptotic EC. (d) Quantifications of capillary density (#vessels / #muscle 
fibers), capillary degeneration (% apoptotic ECs in capillaries) and muscle atrophy 
(distribution of muscle fiber area expressed as percentage of frequency for each area 
subgroup, with range 0–60 equal to 0–6000 um2) in the GC of the two groups (VP vs Sham). 
Total number of capillaries analyzed is 55 and 211 respectively for VP and Sham group. 
Data expressed as mean ± S.E.M. Three animals per group, three GC sections per mouse. 
Mann-Whitney U test for comparison between two groups. * p-value < 0.02. (e) 
Hematoxilyn&Eosin (H&E) staining of 15 um sections of GC muscles in the two groups 
(VP vs Sham) revealing hypercellularization and fibrosis initiation in the not implanted 
mice.
Mirabella et al.
Page 15
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. Host-driven biointegration of grafts drives perfusion of ischaemic limb
(a) VP explanted at day 5 are stained for Isolectin B4 (IB4) labeling both host capillary and 
VP endothelium), mouse specific smooth muscle actin-alpha (SMA) labeling host-derived 
smooth muscle cells, and Ter119 labeling red blood cells. The lower right panel shows a 
channel perfused by host vasculature as demonstrated by dye localization immediately 
following systemic perfusion of dye-labeled dextran (b–c) Explanted VP at day 5 are stained 
for host vessels (mouse CD31). Endogenous red fluorescence of implanted mCherry 
HUVECs is also shown. In (b), upper panels show a low magnification of a channel (dashed 
lines) within the VP implant. Lower panel shows the high magnification of the channel, 
Mirabella et al.
Page 16
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which is chimeric (wall covered by both Host CD31 and implanted mCherry HUVECs) and 
anastomosed to a host capillary (arrow). In (c), 5 days ex vivo VP (scrambled and silenced 
for CDC42), with left panels showing the patterned channels (dashed lines) as mosaic 
multicellular composites (endogenous fluorescence for implanted mCherry-HUVECs and 
mouse CD31-stained host ECs); and panels on the right showing anastomosis between host 
capillaries and parental VP-derived vessels (ChHUVECs). In histograms, the number of VP-
derived vessels (Parent vessels), and the number of anastomotic points between parent and 
host vessels was quantified in 9 fields from VP explanted from 3 mice per group (SCR vs 
siCDC42). Data expressed as mean ± S.E.M. Mann-Whitney U test for comparison between 
two groups. * p-value < 0.04. In (d), CDC42-silenced VP explanted at day 5 were stained 
with mouse specific smooth muscle actin-alpha (SMA) labeling host-derived smooth muscle 
cells, and with UAE-1 lectin, as a systemically injected dye labeling human endothelial cells 
of the implanted channels to demonstrate vascular integrity and function. Panels a, b, c, d are 
representative 100 μm stack images. In (e), Laser Doppler Imaging (Moor Instrument™) of 
distal limbs over time (post-surgery, day 3 and day5) in the two groups: control VP 
(scrambled) versus VP where CDC42 has been knocked down (siCDC42). Histograms for 
quantification of perfusion levels of the ischaemic limb. Perfusion units (P.U.) of ischaemic 
limb were normalized to P.U. of contralateral non ischaemic limb (C.L. norm, considered=1) 
and expressed as fold change. Data expressed as mean ± S.D. N=4 animals per group. T-test 
for comparison between two groups. * p-value < 0.05.
Mirabella et al.
Page 17
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. Geometric patterning within vascular patches impacts perfusion performance
Laser Doppler Imaging of distal limbs over time (post-surgery, day 3 and day 5) in the five 
groups: vascular patches where channels were oriented parallel to each other (Par VP), or 
orthogonally to each other to form a grid (Grid VP), vascular patches with parallel channels 
of smaller diameter (Sm-D VP), endothelial patches where HUVECs were randomly 
embedded into fibrin matrix (EP), and acellular patches (AP) containing patterned not 
endothelialized channels. Histograms for quantification of perfusion levels of the ischaemic 
limb. Perfusion units (P.U.) of ischaemic limb were normalized to P.U. of contralateral not 
ischaemic limb (C.L. norm, considered=1) and expressed as fold change. Data expressed as 
mean ± S.D. N=5 animals per group. Anova test with Bonferroni correction for comparison 
between groups. ** p-value < 0.01.
Mirabella et al.
Page 18
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. Fabricated vascular patches rescue cardiac function after myocardial infarction in rats
(a) Angled view of a rat undergoing implantation of vascular patches (VP, dashed circle), 
placed on the left ventricle of the infarcted heart. An explanted heart shows the vascularized 
region where the implant was placed 4 weeks prior (Inset, dashed circle). The DiI infused 
vasculature within the explanted patch is showed in red, with channel borders marked with 
dashed lines and point of connections between the channel and capillaries marked by stars. 
(b) Immunofluorescence images of explanted heart sections (15um thick) stained for vWF 
(green). The relative histogram shows vascular density for the indicated groups (no MI, 
sham, and VP groups) quantified as number of vWF-positive capillaries per mm2 of cardiac 
tissue. Heart capillaries were quantified in 3 fields per heart, from 8 explanted hearts in 
Sham group, and 10 explanted hearts in noMI and VP groups. N=8–10. Data expressed as 
mean ± S.E.M. Mann-Whitney U test for comparison between two groups. * p-value < 0.03, 
** p-value < 0.01. (c) Representative pressure-volume loop for infarcted hearts that received 
either no treatment or VP. (d) Ejection fraction of infarcted hearts in the no MI, sham and 
VP groups. (e) Cardiac output of infarcted hearts in the no MI, sham and VP groups. (f) Left 
Mirabella et al.
Page 19
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ventricular internal dimension for hearts in diastole (LVIDd) and systole (LVIDs) in the no 
MI, sham and VP groups. In D, E, F, data are expressed as mean ± S.E.M. One way ANOVA 
followed by Bonferroni correction was performed to seek significance between groups, with 
noMI group containing 11 rats, and Sham and VP groups containing 13 rats. N=11–13. * 
indicates p-value <0.01, while “n.s.” refers to no significant difference between groups.
Mirabella et al.
Page 20
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
