 A new two-step algorithm for the
treatment of COPD
To the Editor:
The pharmacological treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is quite uniformly based
on long-acting bronchodilators (LABD), either a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) or a
long-acting β-agonist (LABA), and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Moreover, most patients are eventually
treated with a combination of all three (LAMA/LABA/ICS or “triple therapy”) irrespective of their severity
and level of risk. Furthermore, a large proportion of patients receive triple therapy as the initial treatment
[1]. We propose a new simple treatment algorithm based on the severity of symptoms and phenotypes or
treatable traits (figure 1).
Once the diagnosis of COPD has been confirmed by spirometry, the first decision is whether to prescribe
either one LABD or dual bronchodilation (LABA/LAMA) therapy. This decision should be based on the
level of dyspnoea (as measured by the modified Medical Research Council dyspnoea scale; mMRC) and
the frequency of exacerbations. Patients with an mMRC score of one and zero or one exacerbation during
the previous year may start treatment with a LAMA, whereas patients with either an mMRC score higher
than one or with more than one exacerbation in the previous year should start with a LABA/LAMA
combination. It is very unusual for a patient to be diagnosed with COPD at a stage of the disease so severe
that it would require more intensive initial therapy. In any case, even under such circumstances, it seems
reasonable to initiate treatment with a LABA/LAMA combination and observe the response before
introducing other second-line therapies. We recommend initial therapy with a LAMA because, despite the
similar bronchodilatory efficacy of LABAs, LAMAs provide superior protection against exacerbations [2].
However, LABAs can be an option particularly if there is no history of previous exacerbations.
The selection of initial therapy with a LABA/LAMA combination for patients with more intense dyspnoea
(mMRC 2+) is based on the better results obtained with this combination versus bronchodilator
monotherapy in patients with an mMRC dyspnoea score higher than one in terms of lung function,
symptoms and quality of life [3]. Furthermore, this combination is preferred over an LABA/ICS
combination as the initial therapy because it provides significantly better lung function improvement
without the risk of side effects associated with long-term use of ICS, such as pneumonia [4]. It should be
noted, however, that information about the long-term safety of LAMA/LABA combinations is still lacking.
The recommendation of initial therapy with a LABA/LAMA combination in patients with more than one
exacerbation during the previous year is justified by its higher efficacy versus LAMA monotherapy in the
prevention of exacerbations [5] and especially for its superiority versus LABA/ICS combinations in the
prevention of exacerbations [6].
After initiation of therapy with a LAMA, a patient with mild COPD may remain stable with improved
dyspnoea and no exacerbations. In this case treatment must be continued; however, if dyspnoea does not
improve or deteriorates over time, or if exacerbations become frequent, then treatment should be
stepped-up to a LABA/LAMA combination. On treatment with a LAMA/LABA combination, either as
initial therapy or after step-up, patients may remain stable and must continue with the same therapy. This
includes the presence of one ambulatory exacerbation a year. Obviously this is an arbitrary threshold but
we believe that presenting one mild or moderate exacerbation a year should not be a reason to add a
second-line drug (usually an anti-inflammatory) due to the associated risk of side effects. However, this
decision should be made by the physician on a case by case basis taking into account the balance between
the expected benefits and risks.
@ERSpublications
Treatment of COPD can be simplified with a two-step algorithm according to severity and phenotype
http://ow.ly/iJUN306DEHU
Cite this article as: Miravitlles M, Anzueto A. A new two-step algorithm for the treatment of COPD.
Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1602200 [https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02200-2016].
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02200-2016
Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1602200
|
AGORA
RESEARCH LETTER
 If there is deterioration in symptoms, or if the patient experiences more than one exacerbation in a year or
requires hospitalisation for an exacerbation while on LABA/LAMA therapy, a step-up in treatment should
be considered. These patients are very challenging and should be treated by experienced professionals in
settings in which the appropriate diagnostic tests are available. The reason for this is that no single
approach is valid for all patients in this category [7].
The most frequent complaint among COPD patients is an increase in the number of exacerbations or
their severity, in which case a specific therapeutic pharmacological approach must be established based
on the phenotype. ICS are the most extensively studied and the most widely used anti-inflammatory
drugs for COPD. They are indicated for the prevention of exacerbation in combination with
bronchodilators. Recent data suggest that the preventive effects of ICS on COPD exacerbation are higher
in patients with an eosinophilic (i.e. Th2 type) inflammatory profile, which can be demonstrated by
elevated concentrations of eosinophils in peripheral blood [8], although these data must be confirmed in
prospective studies. There is also consensus that patients with COPD and characteristics of asthma
(asthma–COPD overlap (ACO)) should be treated with ICS in addition to bronchodilators [9]. In
contrast, the insignificantly small efficacy levels of ICS on top of bronchodilators in patients with low
levels of blood eosinophils, together with the risk of side-effects associated with their long-term use,
advise against their indication in this context.
However, ICS are not the only option after dual bronchodilators. Roflumilast is an effective oral
anti-inflammatory drug that has been demonstrated to reduce exacerbation in patients with severe COPD
and chronic bronchitis when used in combination with a LABD, a LABA/ICS combination, or even in
addition to triple therapy [10]. Unfortunately, its use is associated with frequent adverse events such as
weight loss, nausea and diarrhoea that may limit the tolerability of the drug.
Although the Broncus trial with N-acetylcystein (NAC) was negative, recent studies performed in Asia
have shown significantly reduced exacerbations with mucolytics such as carbocystein or NAC at high doses
(600 mg twice daily), particularly in patients at high risk as defined in the Global Initiative for Chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) strategy (i.e. those with forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) <50%
of predicted, or with two or more frequent exacerbations in the previous year, or both) [11].
The use of macrolides has been associated with a variety of effects beyond their anti-infective activity. The
most widely used macrolide is azithromycin and several trials have demonstrated the efficacy of its
long-term administration in the prevention of exacerbations [12], in particular in patients with severe
COPD who suffer frequent exacerbations (more than three episodes a year) despite optimal-inhalation
therapy [13]. However, the long-term use of macrolides may be associated with important side-effects and
the risk of developing of bacterial resistance [12].
COPD
Step 2: specialised
assessment
Step 1: initial
treatment
Add ICS
Consider roflumilast
Consider mucolytics
Consider mucolytics
Consider azithromycin
High blood 
eosinophil count
(eosinophilia)
Chronic bronchitis
If >1 exacerbation
LABA/LAMA
LAMA
mMRC 2+ or 
>1 exacerbation·year–1
mMRC 1 and 0-1 
exacerbation·year–1
If not adequately 
controlled
Frequent infections 
and/or bronchiectasis
FIGURE 1 A two-step algorithm for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). mMRC:
modified Medical Research Council dyspnoea scale; LABA: long-acting β-agonist; LAMA: long-acting
muscarinic antagonist; ICS: inhaled corticosteroids.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02200-2016
2
RESEARCH LETTER | M. MIRAVITLLES AND A. ANZUETO
 Recently, CABRERA et al. [14] demonstrated that a simple algorithm based on dyspnoea and the frequency
of exacerbations classified patients in a similar manner to the new GOLD strategy; however, they also used
the frequency of exacerbations as an indicator for the introduction of ICS. Interestingly, they used the
same cut-off point as in our algorithm (that of an mMRC score of 2+) to recommend dual
bronchodilators. It is of note that their algorithm was published before the results of the FLAME trial
became available [6]. The algorithm published by COOPER and BARJAKTAREVIC [15] is very similar to our
own proposal and suggests the use of dual bronchodilation in all cases before other drugs are considered.
Furthermore, they propose a phenotype-oriented therapy in addition to a LABA/LAMA combination for
the more severe cases, such as those patients who suffer exacerbations despite maximal bronchodilation.
We have extended this algorithm by proposing the use of phenotype-oriented therapy for those who
exacerbate on top of dual bronchodilators, based on a previous algorithm developed exclusively for
exacerbators [7]. This proposal can also be considered as an approach based on phenotypes because it
selects the different treatments based on patient characteristics that identify responders to the drugs.
Marc Miravitlles1 and Antonio Anzueto2,3
1Dept of Pneumology, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. 2Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, School of
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. 3Audie L. Murphy Memorial VA
Hospital, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
Correspondence: Marc Miravitlles, Dept of Pneumology, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, P. Vall d’Hebron 119-129,
ES–08035, Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: mmiravitlles@vhebron.net
Received: Sept 21 2016 | Accepted after revision: Nov 20 2016
Conflict of interest: Disclosures can be found alongside this article at erj.ersjournals.com
References
1
Barrecheguren M, Monteagudo M, Ferrer J, et al. Treatment patterns in COPD patients newly diagnosed in
primary care. A population-based study. Respir Med 2016; 111: 47–53.
2
Vogelmeier C, Hederer B, Glaab T, et al. Tiotropium versus salmeterol for the prevention of exacerbations of
COPD. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 1093–1103.
3
Buhl R, Maltais F, Abrahams R, et al. Tiotropium and olodaterol fixed-dose combination versus mono-
components in COPD (GOLD 2-4). Eur Respir J 2015; 45: 969–979.
4
Vogelmeier C, Paggiaro PL, Dorca J, et al. Efficacy and safety of aclidinium/formoterol versus salmeterol/
fluticasone: a phase 3 COPD study. Eur Respir J 2016; 48: 1030–1039 [DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00216-2016].
5
Wedzicha JA, Decramer M, Ficker JH, et al. Analysis of chronic obstructive pulmonar disease exacerbations with
the dual bronchodilator QVA149 compared with glycopyrronium and tiotropium (SPARK): a randomised,
double-blind, parallel-group study. Lancet Respir Med 2013; 1: 199–209.
6
Wedzicha JA, Banerji D, Chapman KR, et al. Indacaterol-Glycopyrronium versus Salmeterol-Fluticasone for
COPD. N Engl J Med 2016; 374: 2222–2234.
7
Miravitlles M, D’Urzo A, Singh D, et al. Pharmacological strategies to reduce exacerbation risk in COPD:
a narrative review. Respir Res 2016; 17: 112.
8
Pavord ID, Lettis S, Locantore N, et al. Blood eosinophils and inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β-2 agonist
efficacy in COPD. Thorax 2016; 71: 118–125.
9
Sin DD, Miravitlles M, Mannino DM, et al. What is asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS)? Towards a
consensus definition from a roundtable discussion. Eur Respir J 2016; 48: 664–673.
10
Martinez FJ, Calverley PM, Goehring UM, et al. Effect of roflumilast on exacerbations in patients with severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease uncontrolled by combination therapy (REACT): a multicentre randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 385: 857–866.
11
Tse HN, Raiteri L, Wong KY, et al. Benefits of high-dose N-acetylcysteine to exacerbation-prone patients with
COPD. Chest 2014; 146: 611–623.
12
Miravitlles M, Anzueto A. Antibiotics for acute and chronic respiratory infection in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 188: 1052–1057.
13
Uzun S, Djamin RS, Kluytmans JA, et al. Azithromycin maintenance treatment in patients with frequent
exacerbations
of
chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease
(COLUMBUS):
a
randomised,
double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2: 361–368.
14
Cabrera C, Casanova C, Martín Y, et al. Agreement between a simple dyspnea-guided treatment algorithm for
stable COPD and the GOLD guidelines: a pilot study. Int J Chron Obst Pulm Dis 2016; 11: 1217–1222.
15
Cooper CB, Barjaktarevic I. A new algorithm for the management of COPD. Lancet Respir Med 2015; 3: 266–268.
Copyright ©ERS 2017
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02200-2016
3
RESEARCH LETTER | M. MIRAVITLLES AND A. ANZUETO
