 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
Introduction
Despite improved detection and therapies, nearly 30,000 men 
continue to die of prostate cancer (PCa) in the United States and 
over 300,000 globally every year (1, 2). Currently, all therapeutic 
approaches for metastatic PCa involve interference of androgen 
signaling; however, none are curative. Examination of mecha-
nisms of androgen signaling deprivation therapy (ADT) resistance 
point to a cell-autonomous process associated with expansion of a 
resistant clonal population, as other sensitive cells die off, and an 
adaptation process, in which stromal and epithelial cells coevolve 
to support tumor survival. The cell-autonomous processes can be 
a direct result of spontaneous somatic mutations favorable for an 
androgen-deprived environment. Evidence for stromal changes 
induced by ADT is associated with expression of paracrine growth 
factors in support of stromal-epithelial adaptation to therapeu-
tic pressures (3, 4). The autocrine and paracrine processes are 
not mutually exclusive. Although prostatic cancer-associated 
fibroblasts (CAF) are not subject to somatic mutations, epigen-
etic changes can be used for the prediction of disease progression 
(5–7). We functionally differentiated CAF from their counterpart, 
normal associated fibroblasts (NAF), as cells that can induce 
tumorigenesis in nontumorigenic prostatic epithelia. NAF, also 
derived from prostatectomy tissues, are unable to induce tumori-
genesis, as Cunha and colleagues have previously described (8, 
9). Interestingly, the expression patterns of oncogenes and tumor 
suppressors in CAF have emerged as tumor promoting and tumor 
inhibitory, respectively. As an example, loss of the tumor sup-
pressors phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and the TGF-β 
receptor type II (TGFBR2) in fibroblastic cells is tumorigenic in 
breast and PCa (10–12). Similarly, the expression of oncogenes 
cyclin D1 (CCND1) and CMYC in the CAF has been associated 
with its tumorigenicity in PCa (13–15). Here, we explored how epi-
genetic changes can mediate oncogenic signaling in CAF and epi-
thelial metabolic reprogramming.
Stromal-epithelial interactions can dictate cancer progression, 
differentiation, and even therapeutic responsiveness. The high 
glucose consumption of cancer cells described for many cancers is 
not commonly observed in PCa, as lactate generated by CAF is an 
important source of energy in disease progression through a famil-
iar reverse Warburg process (16, 17). Interestingly, pancreatic can-
cer epithelia are prominently found to engulf extracellular mate-
rial through a process of macropinocytosis to generate glutamine 
through lysosomal breakdown of serum components. Macropino-
cytosis is the result of activated Ras signaling endemic to pancreatic 
cancer, in which the glutamine generated is taken up by neighbor-
ing cells, serving to support active TCA-cycle activity (18, 19). Ras 
family proteins are small GTPases that cycle between the inactive 
GDP-bound and activated GTP-bound states. This cycling occurs 
with the help of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (RasGEFs) 
Prostate cancer is an androgen-dependent disease subject to interactions between the tumor epithelium and its 
microenvironment. Here, we found that epigenetic changes in prostatic cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) initiated a cascade 
of stromal-epithelial interactions. This facilitated lethal prostate cancer growth and development of resistance to androgen 
signaling deprivation therapy (ADT). We identified a Ras inhibitor, RASAL3, as epigenetically silenced in human prostatic 
CAF, leading to oncogenic Ras activity driving macropinocytosis-mediated glutamine synthesis. Interestingly, ADT further 
promoted RASAL3 epigenetic silencing and glutamine secretion by prostatic fibroblasts. In an orthotopic xenograft model, 
subsequent inhibition of macropinocytosis and glutamine transport resulted in antitumor effects. Stromal glutamine served 
as a source of energy through anaplerosis and as a mediator of neuroendocrine differentiation for prostate adenocarcinoma. 
Antagonizing the uptake of glutamine restored sensitivity to ADT in a castration-resistant xenograft model. In validating 
these findings, we found that prostate cancer patients on ADT with therapeutic resistance had elevated blood glutamine 
levels compared with those with therapeutically responsive disease (odds ratio = 7.451, P = 0.02). Identification of epigenetic 
regulation of Ras activity in prostatic CAF revealed RASAL3 as a sensor for metabolic and neuroendocrine reprogramming in 
prostate cancer patients failing ADT.
Stromal epigenetic alterations drive metabolic and 
neuroendocrine prostate cancer reprogramming
Rajeev Mishra,1 Subhash Haldar,1 Veronica Placencio,1 Anisha Madhav,2 Krizia Rohena-Rivera,1 Priyanka Agarwal,1  
Frank Duong,1 Bryan Angara,1 Manisha Tripathi,1 Zhenqiu Liu,1 Roberta A. Gottlieb,1,2 Shawn Wagner,2 Edwin M. Posadas,1  
and Neil A. Bhowmick1,2,3
1Department of Medicine, and 2Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA. 3Department of Research, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Administration, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: January 2, 2018; Accepted: July 18, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(10):4472–4484. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI99397.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
dinucleotide methylation of RASAL3 in CAF, compared with 37.1% 
CpG methylation in NAF, confirming the methylome analysis 
(Figure 1B). Accordingly, RASAL3 mRNA expression was found to 
be significantly downregulated in CAF from 5 patients compared 
with NAF from 3 patients, as determined by quantitative reverse-
transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) (Figure 1D). However, Oncomine 
analysis demonstrated no significant difference in RASAL3 
expression in normal and PCa tumor tissues from either PRAD/
Broad or Taylor data sets (24, 25) Figures 1, E and F). RASAL3 was 
epigenetically silenced in human CAF compared with NAF, but 
was not differentially expressed in the epithelial compartment.
Ras signaling activation in prostatic fibroblast leads to 
macropinocytosis. Since the RasGAPs are negative regulators of Ras 
and their loss contributes to Ras pathway activation, we tested Ras 
activity in CAF and NAF. We found RASAL3 protein expression to 
be less in the primary CAF population compared with that in NAF; 
this was accompanied by a substantial increase in Ras-GTP (active 
Ras), phosphorylated c-Raf, and phosphorylated ERK (Figure 
2A). Total Ras and cRaf protein expression remained unchanged 
in NAF and CAF. We reasoned that the role of epigenetically 
induced Ras activation in CAF could trigger an endocytic process 
of macropinocytosis similar to that reported in pancreatic cancer 
epithelia (18). The uptake of fluorescent dextran beads (TMR-
dextran [dextran is 70 kDa]) in NAF and CAF populations was 
visualized. Interestingly, dextran-labeling experiments illustrated 
a large number of macropinosomes in CAF, with no detectible 
uptake of fluorescence in NAF (Figure 2B). TMR-dextran uptake by 
CAF was inhibited by the macropinocytosis inhibitor 5-(N-ethyl-
N-isopropyl) amiloride (EIPA) as well as the DNA demethylase 
5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine, in support of epigenetic regulation of 
macropinocytosis in these fibroblasts (Supplemental Figure 2A). 
We further found that macropinosomes in CAF trafficked to 
lysosomes while undergoing a process of maturation characterized 
by vesicular size reduction concomitant with membrane fusion 
visualized by colocalization of TMR-dextran and lysotracker 
(Supplemental Figure 2B). To identify albumin proteolysis in CAF, 
we used self-quenching BODIPY dye conjugated to BSA (DQ-BSA), 
which emits green fluorescence following proteolytic digestion. 
The colocalization of TMR-dextran and DQ-BSA indicated 
degraded BSA was compartmentalized in macropinocytic vesicles 
within CAF (Figure 2C). The epigenetic silencing of RASAL3 
in CAF correlated with Ras-mediated macropinocytosis and 
subsequent degradation of BSA.
To directly determine whether Ras signaling confers a tumor-
supportive role associated with CAF, we used CRISPR/Cas9 to 
knock out Rasal3 in mouse prostatic fibroblasts. Compared with 
the expression of Cas9 fibroblasts (control), Ras activity and ERK 
phosphorylation were elevated in Rasal3-KO fibroblasts (Figure 
2D). Rasal3-KO fibroblasts took up TMR-dextran, whereas it was 
undetectable in the control fibroblasts (Figure 2E). The exogenous 
expression of active RasV12 (Gly12Val12) in WT mouse prostatic 
fibroblasts replicated the downstream ERK activation and mac-
ropinocytosis observed in CAF and Rasal3-KO cells (Figure 2, F 
and G). Thus, epigenetic RASAL3 silencing of prostatic fibroblasts 
promoted familiar signaling and macropinocytosis associated 
with Ras transformation (18). Conversely, PCa epithelial cell lines 
CWR22Rv1 and C4-2B were not found to exhibit macropinocyto-
that promote activation and GTPase-activating proteins (RasGAPs) 
that inactivate Ras by catalyzing GTP hydrolysis. Although Ras 
mutations are common oncogenic drivers in many cancer types, 
these are infrequent in prostate tumor cells. We identified a role of 
Ras signaling–mediated macropinocytosis in PCa.
Oncogenic Ras promotes metabolic reprogramming of can-
cer epithelia by enhancing glucose uptake, glycolytic activity, and 
a shift to glutamine metabolism in a cell-autonomous manner. 
Glutamine is considered a conditionally essential amino acid, 
particularly for cells under stressed conditions, such as cancer. To 
maintain tumor growth, the carbon and nitrogen from glutamine 
become essential for active biosynthesis. The additional conver-
sion of glutamine to glutamate, available through glutaminase 
activity (GLS and GLS2), can support the high energy needs of 
cancer cells, as its subsequent metabolism to α-ketoglutarate is 
an entry point for the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. 
Elevated blood glutamate is reported to be associated with higher 
grade PCa (20). Nevertheless, the role of glutamine/glutamate 
in energetics and cellular biomass does not seem to address its 
association with tumor aggressiveness. It is not clear whether 
ADT is selective or causative of aggressive recurrent PCa. Our 
study explores the expanding role of ADT on stromal epigenetic 
changes and paracrine glutamine signaling contributing to epi-
thelial therapeutic resistance.
Results
DNA methylome analysis revealed epigenetic silencing of RASAL3 in 
prostatic CAF. To identify differences in the methylation status 
of prostate fibroblasts from human benign and PCa tissues, 
we performed whole-genome methylation analysis by reduced 
representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS). To determine 
differentially methylated CpG sites, we analyzed, in a pairwise 
fashion, sequencing data from 10 primary prostatic NAF and 
CAF samples. The RRBS analysis led to a list of 2,000 genes 
that displayed differential promoter methylation in the NAF and 
CAF populations (Supplemental Table 1; supplemental material 
available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI99397DS1). Among the top 20 hypermethylated promoters 
in CAF, 4 genes appeared to top the list and were tested: CD74, 
RASAL3, B3GNT1, and NTRK1 (Figure 1A and Supplemental 
Figure 1A). Out of the 4 genes, CD74, neurotrophic receptor 
tyrosine kinase 1 (NTRK1), and β-1,4-glucuronyltransferase 1 
(B3GNT1), part of the glycosaminoglycan metabolism pathway, 
have established roles in promoting tumor progression (21–23). 
The RAS protein activator–like 3 (RASAL3), located at the 19p13.12 
locus, is a RasGAP demonstrated to antagonize RAS signaling not 
previously studied with respect to its role in tumor progression. 
The RASAL3 exon 2 was found to be hypermethlated in CAF (P < 
0.002; Figure 1, B and C). We selected RASAL3 as a candidate gene 
for further study, as promoter hypermethylation and silencing of a 
tumor suppressor in CAF may have a tumorigenic effect.
To confirm the methylation status of the RASAL3 promoter, 
methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite genomic sequencing 
were performed in NAF and CAF primary lines. Greater exon 2 
methylation was found in the CAF compared with the NAF, as 
determined by methylation-specific PCR (Supplemental Figure 
1B). Bisulfite sequencing of exon 2 demonstrated 73.3% CpG 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
expression of a panel of CAF marker genes compared with WT 
fibroblasts, inclusive of tenascin C (Tnc), Fap, Mmp1, and Mmp3 
(2-way ANOVA, P < 0.0001; Figure 3A). Because reactive fibro-
blasts are recognized as potentiating adjacent epithelial expansion, 
epithelial proliferation was tested in 3D cocultures with fibroblasts. 
PCa epithelia CWR22Rv1 and C4-2B were found to be significantly 
more proliferative when cultured with RasV12 fibroblasts, compared 
with WT fibroblasts (Figure 3B). To determine whether a soluble 
factor was involved in the paracrine process, a Transwell assay was 
performed with Cas9 or Rasal3-KO fibroblasts in the upper cham-
ber and CWR22Rv1 in the lower well (Supplemental Figure 3C). 
We found a significant proliferative induction of the epithelia when 
associated with Rasal3-KO fibroblasts, compared with Cas9 con-
trol fibroblasts (P < 0.0001). To correlate the uptake of albumin in 
fibroblasts and elevated Ras activity with epithelial proliferation, 
we tested to determine whether the stromal media affected epithe-
lial ATP generation. Conditioned media (CM) from RasV12 fibro-
sis, based on TMR-dextran uptake (Supplemental Figure 2C). To 
test the role of stromal Ras-mediated macropinocytosis on tumor 
development, orthotopic PCa xenograft models were used. Tis-
sue recombinants of RasV12-expressing fibroblasts and CWR22Rv1 
epithelia were grafted into the anterior prostates of SCID mice. 
Two weeks later, mice were treated with vehicle control or EIPA 
for 1 week to suppress macropinocytosis (Figure 2H). We found 
that mice treated with EIPA had dramatically reduced tumor size 
compared with the control group. Treatment with EIPA had no sig-
nificant effect on the viability of the CWR22Rv1 or WT fibroblasts, 
but EIPA reduced the viability of the Rasal3-KO fibroblasts (P < 
0.001, Supplemental Figure 3A). Thus, glutamine uptake by the 
tumor was necessary for its expansion.
Uptake of fibroblast-derived glutamine by PCa epithelia affects its 
metabolism. To establish the role of Ras on the reactive properties 
of fibroblasts, we tested its role on the expression of a panel of CAF-
defining genes. RasV12 fibroblasts had 2.5- to 140-fold elevated 
 
Figure 1. Epigenetic downregulation of RASAL3 in prostatic CAF. (A) Heatmap summarizing DNA methylation levels of CpG repeats (blue color indicates 
hypomethylation, and brown represents hypermethylation). Top 20 methylated genes significantly differentially expressed between NAF and CAF. 
Each column represents a fibroblast sample, and each row represents the methylation level of indicated gene (n = 5). (B) Top: University of California 
at Santa Cruz Genome Browser screen shot of the indicated region of chromosome 19 showing the positions of the RASAL3 gene, histone 3 lysine 27 
acetylation, and human mRNA. Bottom: locations of predicted CpG sites in exon 2 by bisulfite sequencing, represented as black (methylated) or white 
circle (unmethylated, n = 5). The number of methylated CpGs divided by the total number of true CpGs analyzed is given as a percentage on the pie chart. 
(C) Box plots representing the difference in methylation states of the RASAL3 gene promoter between NAF and CAF as measured by RRBS analysis (n = 5). 
(D) RASAL3 mRNA expression in a panel of primary fibroblast was examined by quantitative RT-PCR, normalizing to GAPDH mRNA expression. rel. mRNA 
expr., relative mRNA expression. (E and F) Box plots show relative gene expression level (log2) of the RASAL3 in normal and PCa patients from indicated 
data sets. Data represent mean ± SD. *P < 0.05, 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
tion. These results suggested that Ras-induced macropinocytosis 
in stromal fibroblasts confers a change in tumor-energy metabo-
lism via a paracrine soluble factor.
As it was clear that epigenetically transformed stromal fibro-
blasts provided the energy needs of the epithelia, the nature of 
blast induced ATP production in CWR22Rv1 and C4-2B more than 
CM from the WT counterpart (Figure 3C and Supplemental Figure 
4A). Similar ATP generation was observed in CWR22Rv1 in the 
context of CAF CM compared with NAF CM. The ATP synthase 
inhibitor oligomycin served as the negative control for ATP detec-
Figure 2. Ras activation stimulates macropinocytosis in prostatic fibroblasts and potentiates growth of adjacent epithelial. (A) Representative 
Western blots of RASAL3, Ras, and Ras effectors in prostatic human NAF/CAF (n = 3). See complete unedited blots in the supplemental material. (B) 
TMR-dextran (red) uptake by CAF shows elevated levels of macropinocytosis compared with NAF. DAPI staining (blue) identifies nuclei. (C) CAF that 
were coincubated with fluorescent DQ-BSA (green) and TMR-dextran (red) were fixed after 1-hour chase. The fluorescent signal emanating from DQ-BSA 
with TMR-dextran–positive staining (arrowheads) indicates albumin uptake by macropinosomes and subsequent breakdown. (D) Representative 
Western blots of RASAL3, total Ras, Ras-GTP, and phosphorylated ERK (phos-ERK) expression by Rasal3-KO and Cas9 control mouse prostatic 
fibroblasts are shown (n = 3). (E) Representative images show TMR-dextran–positive macropinosomes (arrowheads) in Rasal3-KO prostatic mouse 
fibroblasts compared with Cas9. (F) Representative Western blots of mouse prostatic fibroblasts, WT and expressing RasV12, indicate total Ras, Ras-
GTP, and phosphorylated ERK status (n = 3). (G) Representative images show TMR-dextran–positive macropinosomes (arrowheads) in RasV12 prostatic 
mouse fibroblasts (expressing GFP) compared with their WT counterparts. (A–G) Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (H) 
Schematic illustrates orthotopic tissue recombinant xenograft models of CWR22Rv1 and RasV12 mouse fibroblasts allowed to grow for 2 weeks, followed 
by treatment with vehicle or 10 mg/kg EIPA (n = 8). Representative gross tumor images are shown with a graph of all the tumor volumes. P value was 
calculated using 2-tailed Student’s t test. Data are represented as mean ± SD. **P < 0.01. Scale bars: 30 μm (B, C, E, G); 3 mm (H).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
taminase (i.e., GLS or GLS2) to replenish the TCA cycle. Glutamine 
uptake was able to promote both GLS and GLS2 mRNA expression 
within 6 hours of treatment in C4-2B cells (Supplemental Figure 
4H). We found GLS mRNA expression levels were also elevated in 
the CAF CM–treated group compared with the NAF CM–treated 
group in both CWR22Rv1 (P < 0.0001) and C4-2B (P < 0.01) cells 
(Supplemental Figure 4I). GLS2 mRNA expression was, however, 
downregulated in CWR22Rv1 cells (P < 0.001) and upregulated in 
C4-2B cells (P < 0.0001) by CAF CM treatment when compared 
with NAF CM treatment (Supplemental Figure 4J). These data dem-
onstrated that glutamine taken up by the epithelia are metabolized 
through a seemingly positive feedback mechanism to support the 
elevated energy needs of cancer epithelia.
We found that glutamine uptake provided energy and medi-
ated differentiation signaling for the prostatic epithelia. The 
 
prostatic CAF potentiated epithelial TCA flux, resulting in a mito-
chondrial response in CWR22Rv1 cells by the administration of 
exogenous glutamine (Figure 4A). Similarly, RasV12 fibroblast CM 
upregulated basal oxygen consumption, ATP generation, and 
maximal mitochondrial respiration in CWR22Rv1 and C4-2B, 
compared with WT fibroblast CM (Figure 4B and Supplemental 
Figure 5A). Glutamine deprivation by treatment with an SLC1A5 
inhibitor, l-γ-glutamyl-p-nitroanilide (GPNA), on CWR22Rv1 and 
C4-2B in the context of RasV12 fibroblast CM restored basal respi-
ration, ATP, and maximal respiration to that observed with WT 
fibroblast CM. To determine the impact of stromal-derived glu-
tamine on epithelial proliferation, we blocked glutamine uptake 
and utilization with selective inhibitors in 3D cocultures of pri-
mary human CAF and CWR22Rv1 cells. We found that blocking 
SLC1A5 (i.e., GPNA) and GLS (i.e., bis-2-[5–phenylacetamido-1, 
2, 4-thiadiazol-2-yl] ethyl sulfide [BPTES]) function significantly 
decreased epithelial proliferation, as determined by quantitat-
ing Ki-67 staining of EpCAM+ cells through FACS analysis (P < 
0.05 and P < 0.001, respectively; Figure 4C). Thus, the stromal 
epigenetic modification resulted in glutamine production for the 
maintenance of ATP levels and proliferation in cancer cells. Given 
that mTOR is a nutrient sensor for glutamine, we reasoned that 
the same pathway may affect mechanisms of PCa differentiation 
(30, 31). We found mTOR to be activated in CWR22Rv1 cells incu-
bated with RasV12 fibroblast CM (Figure 4D). Moreover, expression 
of forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), a key signal downstream of mTOR 
and a critical transcription factor in multiple poorly differentiated 
cancer types (32–34), was upregulated in CWR22Rv1 cells incu-
bated with RasV12 fibroblast CM. FOXM1 was also found to inter-
act with multiple neuroendocrine differentiation factors, as shown 
by STRING analysis (Figure 4E) (35). Remarkably, the incubation 
of CWR22Rv1 cells with RasV12 fibroblast CM resulted in a signifi-
cant increase in neuroendocrine differentiation genes shown in a 
heatmap (F test, P < 0.0001; Figure 4F and Supplemental Table 
2). Similarly, the addition of l-glutamine alone upregulated a 
panel of neuroendocrine genes in CWR22Rv1 epithelia (F test, P 
< 0.0001), with the inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin restoring its 
expression to control levels (Figure 4G). The sufficiency for gluta-
mine alone to induce neuroendocrine differentiation was further 
confirmed in C4-2B cells (P < 0.0001, Supplemental Figure 5B). 
Finally, we found that the knockdown of either SLC1A5 or GLS by 
siRNA was able to reverse the effect of glutamine-induced neu-
these metabolic changes was explored. Metabolome analysis of 
CWR22Rv1 demonstrated glutamine and glutamate to be signifi-
cantly elevated when exposed to CAF CM compared with NAF 
CM (P < 0.01, Figure 3D). This was consistent with macropinocy-
tosis of albumin, as previously reported in pancreatic cancer (26). 
Consequently, succinate, fumarate, and malate levels were sig-
nificantly elevated in the CAF CM–treated group, compared with 
those in the NAF CM group, consistent with glutamine metabo-
lism (P < 0.05). However, there was no significant difference in 
the levels of acetyl-CoA, α-ketoglutarate, and 2-hydroxyglutarate, 
but there were decreased levels of citrate in the epithelia treated 
with CM from CAF compared with NAF. The lack of a difference 
in α-ketoglutarate levels could be a result of increased flux to its 
metabolites (i.e., succinate, fumarate, malate). Further, there was 
an observed increase in levels of the nucleotide precursor aspartate 
(P < 0.05) and oxidized glutathione (GSH) (P < 0.01), metabolites 
that are downstream of glutamate metabolism (Figure 3E). Com-
pared with NAF CM, CAF CM did not significantly change reduced 
GSH levels, which are associated with increased mitochondrial 
activity and reactive oxygen in cancer cells.
In agreement with past reports of macropinocytosis-induced 
glutamine generation (18, 27), we found that, like CAF, Rasal3-KO 
and RasV12 mouse fibroblasts secreted significantly more glutamine 
into the media than their NAF or WT counterparts (Figure 3F and 
Supplemental Figure 4B). To support the role of stromal-derived 
glutamine on epithelial proliferation, we supplemented NAF 
CM with 0.4 mM glutamine and found it restored CWR22Rv1 
proliferation to a level similar to that of CAF CM, based on 
direct measurement of glutamine generated by CAF (Figure 3G). 
Developments in magnetic resonance imaging technology have 
enabled glutamine/glutamate imaging with improved spatial and 
temporal resolution. However, its application has been relegated 
to glioblastoma/medulloblastoma imaging, as they are commonly 
Ras-driven cancers with an abundance of glutamine and glutamate 
in the tissue (27–29). We were able to identify the presence of 
glutamine/glutamate in a tissue recombination xenograft model 
of CWR22Rv1 and RasV12 mouse fibroblasts. To validate the 
specificity of the glutamine/glutamate signal, macropinocytosis 
was inhibited by administering EIPA to the mice and reimaged 
(using simulated echo acquisition; Figure 3H). Stromal fibroblastic 
Ras-driven macropinocytosis results in glutamine production and 
is utilized by cancer epithelia to promote the expansion of cancer.
To corroborate the observed epithelial accumulation of glu-
tamine and its downstream metabolites, we tested to determine 
whether CAF CM regulated the expression of amino acid trans-
porters and glutaminase expression in CWR22Rv1 and C4-2B cells. 
Specifically, glutamine importer SLC1A5 mRNA expression was 
upregulated in CWR22Rv1 (P < 0.0001) and C4-2B (P < 0.001) by 
CAF CM compared with NAF CM (Supplemental Figure 4C). Sup-
plementing basal media with l-glutamine consistently increased the 
expression of glutamine importers SLC1A5 and SCL38A2 in both 
CWR22Rv1 and C4-2B cells in a time-dependent manner (Supple-
mental Figure 4, D–G). While the SLC38A1 transporter did not seem 
to be regulated by exogenous glutamine in either epithelial line, 
CWR22Rv1 cells expressed SLC38A4 in a glutamine-dependent 
manner. Once the glutamine enters the epithelia, it can undergo 
anaplerosis, by which glutamine is converted to glutamate by glu-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
Figure 3. Ras activation in CAF drives glutamine metabolism in epithelia. (A) Relative mRNA expression levels of CAF-marker genes in WT and RasV12 
mouse fibroblasts determined by quantitative RT-PCR and analyzed using 2-way ANOVA (n = 3). (B) EpCAM-positive cancer epithelium was quantitated 
by FACS of 3D cocultures of human epithelial (CWR22Rv1) cells and WT or RasV12 mouse fibroblasts. Statistical analysis was performed using 2-tailed 
Student’s t test (n = 3). (C) ATP was measured in CWR22Rv1 after incubation with CM human NAF or CAF or mouse WT or RasV12 fibroblast or oligomycin in 
glutamine-free media (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using 1-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons. (D) Diagram represents the TCA cycle in 
CWR22Rv1 cells treated with NAF or CAF CM for 72 hours prior to metabolome analysis (n = 3). (E) Metabolome analysis further indicated differential flux 
to aspartate, oxidized GSH, and GSH reduced in CWR22Rv1 cells incubated with NAF or CAF CM. (F) Glutamine concentrations (Gln conc.) were measured 
in the CM from indicated mouse fibroblasts cultured for 72 hours. cond, conditioned. (D–F) Statistical analysis was performed using 2-tailed Student’s t 
test (n = 3). (G) CWR22Rv1 proliferation was measured by cell counting following incubation with NAF and CAF CM for 72 hours in glutamine-free media. 
NAF CM was supplemented with 0.4 mM glutamine to mimic the glutamine levels expressed by CAF (see Supplemental Figure 4B). Statistical analysis 
was performed using 1-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons (n = 3). (H) Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy data were acquired from orthotopically 
xenografted mice before and after EIPA administration. Spectra of the unfiltered data are superimposed using simulated echo acquisition (n = 3–4 per 
group). Glu, gllutamate; ppm, parts per million. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
roendocrine differentiation of CWR22Rv1 (Supplemental Figure 
5C and Supplemental Table 5). Taken together, these results dem-
onstrated that stromal glutamine was sufficient and necessary for 
epithelial proliferation and differentiation to a more aggressive 
PCa phenotype mediated by stromal Ras activity.
Epigenetic alteration of RASAL3 mRNA expression by androgen 
signaling affects glutamine-driven tumor progression. Neuroendocrine 
PCa is rare; however, neuroendocrine differentiation is more com-
monly observed as a potential adaptive response to newer, more 
potent ADT (ref. 36; Figure 4G and Supplemental Table 3). To 
explore the possible involvement of androgen signaling on pros-
tatic stromal epigenetic alteration, we initially measured RASAL3 
mRNA expression in the context of androgen and androgen recep-
tor antagonists. As before, we found that NAF populations had 
greater RASAL3 mRNA expression compared with CAF (Figure 5A 
and Supplemental Figure 6A). The treatment with the stable andro-
gen analog R1881 had no effect on RASAL3 mRNA expression levels 
in NAF; however, it markedly elevated RASAL3 mRNA expression 
in CAF. Conversely, androgen receptor antagonists bicalutamide 
and enzalutamide downregulated RASAL3 mRNA expression in 
NAF, yet had little effect on the already low basal mRNA expres-
sion of RASAL3 in CAF. As evidence of epigenetic alteration of CAF 
by androgen signaling, we found that the demethylating agent 5- 
aza-2′-deoxycytidine restored RASAL3 mRNA expression in CAF, 
similar to that found with R1881. The expression data were supp-
orted by methylation-specific PCR, demonstrating the hypermeth-
ylation of the RASAL3 promoter by bicalutamide and enzalutamide 
and hypomethylation by R1881, similar to that seen with 5-aza-2′-
deoxycytidine treatment (Supplemental Figure 6B). To quantitate 
methylation status of the RASAL3 exon 2 region, we performed 
bisulfite sequencing of CAF treated with R1881. Androgen signal-
ing was found to prevent CpG methylation of RASAL3 by 2.6-fold 
over that seen with vehicle-treated CAF (Figure 5B).
To determine the role of resulting glutamine on neuroendo-
crine differentiation, 3D cocultures of CAF-CWR22Rv1 were 
 
treated with glutamine uptake or conversion blockers GPNA or 
BPTES in the context of enzalutamide. The administration of 
either BPTES or GPNA significantly reduced the mRNA expres-
sion of the panel of neuroendocrine biomarker genes to well below 
control levels (F test P < 0.0001, Figure 5C and Supplemental Table 
4). As neuroendocrine differentiation can potentiate PCa castrate 
resistance, in the next set of mouse studies, we tested the role of 
glutamine uptake on tumor expansion. In tissue-recombinant 
xenograft models, mice were either left intact or castrated, then 
Figure 4. Stromal-derived glutamine induces mitochondrial bioenergetics and PCa neuroendocrine differentiation. (A) Kinetic OCR response in CWR22Rv1 cells 
exposed to 2 mM glutamine and rotenone along with antamycin. The OCR values were normalized to total protein. (B) Bioenergetic parameters of CWR22Rv1 cells 
incubated with WT or RasV12 fibroblast CM in the presence or absence of GPNA. Left: OCR trace for all 3 groups. Right: basal OCR, ATP
, and maximal respiration 
(max. resp.) are separately represented. (C) CWR22Rv1 cells were cocultured with WT and RasV12 mouse prostatic fibroblasts in 3D and treated with vehicle, BPTES, 
or GPNA. Box plot of epithelial proliferation was measured by FACS analysis of EpCAM+Ki67+ cells. Statistical analysis was performed using 2-tailed Student’s t 
test. (D) Phosphorylated mTOR and FOXM1 protein levels were measured in CWR22Rv1 cells incubated with either WT or RasV12 CM for 3 days. (A–D) Representa-
tive data from 3 independent experiments are shown. (E) STRING analysis of a PCa neuroendocrine gene signature demonstrates direct or indirect interactions 
with FOXM1. (F) Heatmap summarizing the quantitative PCR results comparing CWR22Rv1 expression of neuroendocrine marker genes following treatment with 
CM from WT or RasV12 fibroblasts or (G) l-glutamine (Gln) alone or l-glutamine in combination with rapamycin relative to vehicle. rap, rapamycin. Two-way ANOVA 
analysis indicates overall P value with F test showing P < 0.0001 for both experiments (n = 3; F, G). Epithelial and stromal cells were grown in either glutamine-free 
DMEMF12 or RPMI media. Data are represented as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 7 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
ment. Accordingly, the localization 
of phosphorylated mTOR (Ser-2481) 
was reduced (P < 0.05) and cell death 
(TUNEL, P < 0.001) was elevated 
 
by the combination treatment com-
pared with treatment with ADT alone 
(Figure 6B). However, blocking both 
androgen signaling and glutamine 
uptake did not significantly change the 
mitotic index of the tumors compared 
with androgen signaling blockage 
alone, as localized by phosphorylated 
histone H3 staining. These data argue 
that using ADT potentiates glutamine 
expression by prostatic fibroblasts via 
RASAL3 epigenetic silencing and that 
limiting the uptake of glutamine by the 
epithelia can curb the ramifications of 
stromal Ras activity, including the sup-
port of the epithelial energy needs and 
neuroendocrine differentiation.
Plasma glutamine levels may be prog-
nostic for ADT sensitivity. Considering 
the striking finding that glutamine can 
induce ADT resistance, we tested to 
determine whether glutamine concen-
trations can be associated with ADT 
sensitivity in PCa patients. We mea-
sured blood plasma glutamine concen-
trations in 28 PCa patients that received 
ADT (Table 1). Of note, the specific 
androgen-signaling axis interventions 
in the patient pool included androgen 
receptor 
antagonists 
bicalutamide, 
enzalutamide, and apalutamide as well 
as androgen synthesis inhibitors leup-
rolide, goserelin, triptorelin, and abi-
raterone. Of the patients whose sam-
ples were analyzed, 18 were responsive 
and 10 were not responsive to ADT, 
based on serum prostate-specific anti-
gen (PSA) regulation (Figure 7A). The 
waterfall plot illustrates that glutamine 
concentrations above 2 mM corresponded to disease progression 
on ADT and that glutamine values at or below the threshold cor-
responded to treatment response (Fisher’s exact test odds ratio = 
7.451, P = 0.02). Compared with baseline glutamine concentrations 
of 0.4–0.7 mM in normal subjects, the PCa patients in this small 
cohort overall had markedly elevated glutamine concentrations 
(average = 1.8 mM), in agreement with previously reported eleva-
tions in glutamate levels in high-grade PCa subjects (20). These 
results support the concept that reduced ADT sensitivity is associ-
ated with elevated circulating glutamine concentrations.
Discussion
This study reports that ADT can induce epigenetic alteration of 
the stromal fibroblasts to promote PCa progression to a more 
treated with enzalutamide, followed by administration of vehicle 
or GPNA, as outlined in Figure 5D and Supplemental Figure 7A. 
In intact mice, the administration of GPNA resulted in reduced 
tumor volume (P < 0.001) and mitotic index, as determined by 
phosphorylated histone H3 immunolocalization (P < 0.0001, Sup-
plemental Figure 7, B–D). In the castrated, enzalutamide-treated 
mice, we found that these tissue-recombinant tumors expanded 
despite ADT, but that the added treatment with GPNA signifi-
cantly reduced tumor size (Figure 5, E and F; P < 0.0001). Histo-
logical analysis revealed that ADT resulted in solid sheets of cells, 
whereas the addition of GPNA treatment was associated with 
karyolytic cells (Figure 6A). In agreement with the results of the 
neuroendocrine gene panel, GPNA treatment reduced chromo-
granin A expression induced by castration and enzalutamide treat-
Figure 5. Androgen-mediated epigenetic regulation of RASAL3 expression in CAF determines PCa 
neuroendocrine differentiation and tumor growth in castrate-resistant xenograft models. (A) RT-PCR 
analysis of RASAL3 mRNA expression in NAF and CAF was performed following 5-day treatment with 
bicalutamide (Bic) (10-5 M), enzalutamide (Enza) (10-5 M), R1881 (10-9 M), or 5-azacytadine (5-Aza) (5 
mmol/l). β-Actin was used as a loading control. Representative image of 3 independent experiments 
is shown. (B) Bisulfide sequencing of the RASAL3 exon 2 was performed on CAF following treatment 
with vehicle or R1881 for 5 days. The methylation status of the individual CpG dinucleotides is shown by 
unmethylated (white) or methylated (black) circles (n = 5). (C) 3D cocultures of human CWR22Rv1 with CAF 
were treated with vehicle, enzalutamide, BPTES, or GPNA for 3 days in glutamine-free media and subjected 
to quantitative RT-PCR for the expression of a neuroendocrine PCa gene panel (n = 3, see Supplemental 
Table 4). Heatmap generated relative to vehicle treatment. (D) Schematic diagram of the experimental 
design of castration, enzalutamide, and GPNA treatment of a castrate-resistant xenograft model. 
Subrenal capsule xenografts contained tissue recombinants of CWR22Rv1 and CAF. (E) Gross images of 
representative tumors (dashed circles) as shown on host kidneys. (F) Quantitated tumor volumes are 
represented as the mean ± SD, analyzed by 2-tailed Student’s t test (n ≥ 8). ****P < 0.0001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 8 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
to our knowledge, of epigenetic Ras regulation in CAF consequen-
tly contributing to cancer progression. Targeting Ras signaling via 
RasGAPs has been a focus of many laboratories. We demonstrated 
that human CAFs have low expression of RASAL3 due to exon 2 
hypermethylation, resulting in Ras-signaling activation. We fur-
ther found that elevated Ras activity in prostatic mouse WT fibro-
blasts was sufficient to promote differentiation states analogous to 
those of the tumor-promoting CAF (8, 9). Others have identified 
epigenetic silencing of RASAL isoforms associated with aberrant 
Ras activation in cancer epithelial subtypes (37, 38). RASAL1 hyper-
methylation, mediated by DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), is 
also reported to promote renal fibrosis (39). Our findings provide 
evidence for RasGAP gene methylation and Ras signaling in CAF. 
Silencing of RASAL3 contributed to downstream cRaf and ERK 
activation in the absence of a change in Ras expression. So the com-
mon loss of PTEN expression in PCa epithelia is not necessarily the 
only determinant for elevated PI3K activity in tumor tissues (40).
A key finding of the present work adds a dimension to 
the previously recognized epigenetic regulation by androgen 
signaling. Gravina et al. showed that the androgen receptor is a 
key regulator of DNMT expression in some PCa cell models (41). 
They demonstrated that PCa epithelia treated with bicalutamide 
or cultured in androgen-depleted medium progressively acquire 
greater DNMT activity compared with cells cultured under 
standard conditions. Conversely, 10−12 M dihydrotestosterone 
was able to reduce DNMT activity. As prostatic fibroblasts also 
express the androgen receptor (42, 43), it was consistent with 
the observed RASAL3 promoter hypermethylation (Figure 5). 
The subsequent activation of Ras signaling suggested the testing 
of macropinocytosis based on the seminal identification of this 
process in pancreatic cancer with high Ras mutation frequency 
(18). The knockout of Rasal3 and overexpression of RasV12 in 
WT mouse prostatic fibroblasts recapitulated the observation of 
macropinocytosis strikingly prevalent in primary human prostatic 
CAF derived from multiple patient tissues (Figures 1 and 2). 
Uniquely, the activation of Ras signaling in prostatic fibroblasts 
demonstrated elevated expression of a gene panel associated with 
a reactive fibroblastic state. This was not entirely surprising, since 
we and others have previously demonstrated the downregulation 
of tumor suppressors (e.g., TGFBR2, PTEN) and upregulation of 
oncogenes (e.g., MYC, CCND1) in CAF to have protumorigenic 
capacity (10, 11, 13–15). What was not predicted, however, was that 
androgen deprivation further silenced RASAL3 in NAF and was 
coincident with acquisition of the CAF features (Figures 3 and 5). 
Thus, epigenetic modification of tumor-associated fibroblasts can 
be initiated by ADT and drive a mechanism of resistance to ADT 
in a paracrine manner.
Cancer cells survive and even thrive under hypoxic and in 
what are thought to be nutrient-deprived conditions. However, 
glutamine, a conditionally essential amino acid that is the most 
commonly depleted amino acid in solid tumors, can serve as a car-
bon source for the TCA cycle and as a nitrogen source for nucleo-
tide biosynthesis (44). Like glucose, amino acids cannot cross the 
lipid bilayer without transporter proteins, and amino acid trans-
porter expression is positively correlated with growth and cancer 
(45). We found the expression levels of glutamine transporters and 
glutaminase in CWR22RV1 and C4-2B cells are potentiated by glu-
aggressive differentiation state. Based on our earlier report that 
prostatic CAF have elevated DNA hypermethylation due to 
 
epithelia-derived paracrine signals (6), we performed a whole-
genome methylome analysis to reveal the silencing of a tumor sup-
pressor, RASAL3. The outcomes of our interrogation of stromal- 
epithelial interactions are summarized in Figure 7B, where the 
hypermethylation of the RASAL3 promoter in CAF induced RAS-
dependent macropinocytosis for the lysosomal catabolism of 
albumin and generation of glutamine. Metabolomic profiling 
uncovered the role of stromal glutamine as an underlying meta-
bolic controller facilitating cell survival and proliferation. Gluta-
mine transporter–facilitated uptake and subsequent metabolism of 
 
stromal glutamine into epithelia for utilization by the TCA cycle 
and mTOR activation contribute to the energy needs of the cancer 
and its differentiation, respectively. This is the first demonstration, 
Figure 6. Glutamine uptake promotes tumor neuroendocrine differen-
tiation and survival in the context of ADT. (A) H&E and chromogranin A 
(CHGA) staining of PCa xenografts indicates regulation by glutamine uptake 
antagonist GPNA. (B) Representative staining for phosphorylated mTOR, 
phosphorylated histone H3, and TUNEL are shown for the PCa xenografts. 
Quantification of positive staining demonstrated significant differences 
when mice were treated with GPNA and ADT, compared with ADT alone. 
Scale bars: 50 μm (n ≥ 8). Data represent mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was 
performed using 2-tailed Student’s t test. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 8 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
targeting glutamine metabolism 
may serve as a therapeutic means 
of limiting neuroendocrine dif-
ferentiation in sensitizing PCa to 
ADT. Importantly, stromal glu-
tamine was necessary and suf-
ficient to promote PCa neuroen-
docrine differentiation (Figures 
4–6). As ADT potentiated stro-
mal glutamine secretion, com-
bination therapy of castration/ 
enzalutamide and targeting glu-
tamine uptake by cancer cells 
with GPNA could serve as a via-
ble synthetic lethal approach. As 
with pharmacologic inhibition 
in a mouse model of castrate-
resistant disease, the knockdown 
of SLC1A5 limited ADT-induced 
neuroendocrine 
differentiation 
(Figures 5 and 6 and Supple-
mental Figure 5). Previous find-
ings supported SLC1A5 as highly 
expressed in PCa and breast 
cancer tissues and showed that 
their inhibition led to reduced cell 
growth (53, 56). However, as this 
was the first demonstration, to our knowledge, of such a direct role 
of the tumor microenvironment in promoting PCa neuroendocrine 
differentiation, we sought to validate the findings in PCa patient 
blood samples. Our data suggested that plasma glutamine can be 
used as a prognostic marker following ADT response and devel-
opment of resistance (Figure 7). The importance of the work here 
involves the mechanism for ADT-induced PCa neuroendocrine 
differentiation and further clinical validation through the measure-
ment of plasma glutamine. Furthermore, ADT can induce epigen-
etic alteration of the stromal fibroblasts to promote PCa neuroen-
docrine differentiation in a glutamine-dependent manner.
The elevated glutamine levels detected in the blood of patients 
on ADT suggest that nearly any metastatic site would be exposed 
to this amino acid in support of elevated energy needs as well as 
neuroendocrine differentiation. Adjuvant ADT is commonly 
administered to patients with recurrent PCa. As most PCa 
recurrence is local, the orthotopic grafts in our studies provide a 
relevant basis for blocking glutamine uptake and/or metabolism. 
As far as distant metastasis, one could extrapolate that local tumor 
expansion can affect distant metastatic progression via glutamine. 
Future studies could include testing the role of circulating 
glutamine on bone and visceral metastatic progression of PCa.
Methods
Cell culture. Prostatic fibroblasts from PCa patients and mouse pros-
tates were cultured in high-glucose DMEM-F12 supplemented with 
5% FBS, 5% Nu-Serum, Antibiotic-Antimycotic (all from Thermo 
Fisher Scientific), and 10-9 M testosterone (57). In order to test the 
tumor-inductive capacity of the primary human prostatic fibroblasts, 
they were xenografted with nontumorigenic BPH1 prostatic epithelia 
tamine secreted from CAF, allowing its own uptake (Supplemental 
Figure 4). Within the epithelia, glutamine conversion to glutamate 
could be metabolized into α-ketoglutarate, aspartate, and GSH 
(Figure 3). The lack of observed α-ketoglutarate accumulation was 
likely due to its oxidation to succinate, fumarate, and malate to 
address the energy needs by oxidative phosphorylation. However, 
glutamate conversion to significantly elevated oxidized GSH was 
a further indication of accumulated oxidative stress mediated by 
active mitochondrial electron transport (46). The prominent lev-
els of the glutamine derivative aspartate found in the epithelia 
when exposed to CAF represent a key oxidized precursor for both 
purines and pyrimidines, which further support cell proliferation 
(47). Thus, the androgen-dependent switch of the tumor microen-
vironment that regulates glutamine acts through RASAL3 epigen-
etic silencing. More practically, therapeutic approaches targeting 
hormone signaling must consider these metabolic adaptations as 
a means of resistance.
The precedence of PCa neuroendocrine differentiation asso-
ciated with next-generation ADT administration is a prominent 
manifestation of late-stage disease (36, 48). However, mecha-
nisms for ADT induction of neuroendocrine PCa are less well 
understood. An example involving paracrine IL-8 derived from 
neuroendocrine PCa cells was found to promote neuroendocrine 
differentiation (49). The impact of autocrine adrenomedullin 
and IL-6 in neuroendocrine differentiation is also described (50, 
51). Here, we defined an androgen-dependent mechanism for 
CAF-mediated neuroendocrine differentiation of adjacent pros-
tatic epithelia. It is known that glutamine sensing triggers mTOR 
activity (52, 53). mTOR signaling is associated with PCa neuroen-
docrine differentiation (28, 54, 55). Therefore, we reasoned that 
Figure 7. Sensitivity to ADT correlating with blood glutamine levels is in support of a model of epigenetic 
Ras activation in prostatic fibroblasts and glutamine-mediated paracrine activity on PCa epithelia. (A) 
Waterfall plot of plasma glutamine concentration in PCa patients on ADT correlated to therapeutic response 
(n = 28; see Table 1). Based on serum PSA detection, patients were determined to be responsive (green 
bars) and nonresponsive (red bars) to ADT. The threshold of 2 mM glutamine was chosen as a determinant 
of ADT responsiveness. Fisher’s exact test was used to determine odds ratio. (B) While RASAL3 promoter 
hypermethylation and gene silencing are observed in CAF compared with NAF, androgen-targeted therapy furthers 
this epigenetic Ras activation process that induces macropinocytosis in stromal fibroblasts for the uptake of 
albumin. Albumin is degraded by the lysosomes to generate glutamine and shuttled into epithelia through the 
glutamine transporter SLC1A5. Glutamine is converted to glutamate and α-ketoglutarate (αKG) in entering the 
TCA cycle in support of PCa epithelial proliferation. Glutamine also contributes to mTOR activation, leading to 
neuroendocrine differentiation (NED).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 8 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
the NAF and CAF samples and 200 ng of DNA was bisul-
fite converted by using the EZ DNA Methylation-Gold Kit 
(Zymo Research) according to the manufacturer’s proto-
col. Three overlapping primers were used for amplifica-
tion of the exon 2 region of RASAL3 by ZymoTaq DNA 
polymerase (Zymo Research) and subsequently cloned 
into the pCR2.1-TOPO vector (Invitrogen, Life Technolo-
gies). The primer sequences used to amplify the 3 regions 
were designed by using the MethPrimer program (http:/
/
www.urogene.org/methprimer/) and are listed in Sup-
plemental Table 6. Five clones from each sample were 
sequenced by using Sanger’s method.
Macropinocytosis assay. Fibroblasts and PCa epithe-
lia were grown on coverslips and serum-starved for 18 
hours prior to TMR-dextran incubation (1 mg/ml; 70 kDa, 
FITC-labeled, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 minutes at 
37°C for macropinosome labeling (18). After removing the 
dextran-containing medium, cells were rinsed 5 times in 
cold PBS and fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde. Coverslips in 
DAPI-containing mounting medium (Vectashield) were 
mounted onto slides. Images were captured using laser 
confocal scanning microscopy (Leica) and analyzed via 
LASX software. To determine whether the macropino-
somes colocalize with lysosomes, LysoTracker Green 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added in cells along with 
TMR-dextran for 30 minutes. To determine whether the 
internalized albumin was degraded, we utilized a self-
quenching fluorescent dye, DQ-BSA (10 μg/ml for 30 
minutes), with which lysosomal proteases enable fluores-
cent visualization by confocal microscopy.
3D organotypic coculture. A modified version of the 3D 
organotypic coculture system was performed in a collagen 
matrix similar to that previously reported (59). Matrices 
were prepared by mixing 5 volumes of rat tail collagen with 
2 volumes of Matrigel in 1 volume of ×10 DMEM medium 
and 1 volume of FBS. CWR22Rv1 or C4-2B epithelia and 
primary mouse prostatic fibroblasts (WT or RasV12) were combined 
in a 1:3 ratio in the matrix. Nylon squares were coated with collagen 
and placed on metal grids in a 6-well plate. Matrix plugs containing 
cells formed in 96-well plates (150 μl) were transferred onto the nylon 
squares, and medium was added to the level of the nylon mesh. Fol-
lowing treatments, the cells were dissociated from the matrix with 
 
collagenase and dispase for FACS analysis.
Seahorse XF-24 metabolic flux analysis. Oxygen consumption rate 
(OCR) (pmol/min−1) was measured with the Seahorse Bioscience 
XF24 extracellular flux analyzer. Cells were incubated in a CO2-
free incubator for 1 hour at 37°C to allow for temperature and pH 
equilibration prior to loading into the XF24 apparatus. Initial assays 
were performed to optimize cell number, FCCP concentration, and 
oligomycin concentration (data not shown). We used GPNA (10 μM, 
Sigma-Aldrich), a glutamine transporter inhibitor.
Spectral magnetic resonance for glutamine/glutamate. Chemical 
exchange saturation transfer effect of amine protons was used to 
image glutamine and glutamate, using a 9.4T micro-MRI in orthotopic 
prostate xenografts in mice, similar to that previously described 
(29). The mice were imaged before and 1 hour after intraperitoneal 
administration of the macropinocyosis inhibitor EIPA.
(gift of Simon W. Hayward, NorthShore University, Chicago Illinois, 
USA) under the renal capsule, as previously described (8, 9). The fibro-
blasts were termed CAF only if tumors developed within 4 weeks of 
grafting; otherwise, the non–tumor inductive fibroblasts were termed 
NAF. CWR22Rv1 and C4-2B cells (ATCC) were maintained in RPMI-
1640 medium with 5% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. All cul-
tures were grown in a humidified 5% CO2 environment at 37°C.
DNA methylation analysis. Libraries were prepared from 200–500 
ng genomic DNA digested with 60 units of TaqαI and 30 units of MspI 
(NEB) sequentially and then extracted with Zymo Research DNA 
Clean & Concentrator 5 Kit. Fragments were ligated to preannealed 
adapters containing 5′-methyl-cytosine instead of cytosine according 
to Illumina’s specified guidelines. Adaptor-ligated fragments of 150–
250 bp and 250–350 bp in size were recovered from a 2.5% NuSieve 
1:1 agarose gel (Zymo Research). The fragments were then bisulfite 
treated using the EZ DNA Methylation-Lightning Kit. Preparative-
scale PCR was performed, and the resulting products were purified for 
sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq. Further details of DNA methalome 
analysis are provided in the Supplemental Methods.
Bisulfite sequencing. Bisulfite sequencing was performed as 
described previously (58). Briefly, genomic DNA was extracted from 
Table 1. Association of patient androgen-targeted therapy responsiveness 
and plasma glutamine levels
Patient
Treatment
CRPC
PSA  
baseline
PSA  
on treatment
Outcome
Glutamine 
(μmol/l)
1
A
Yes
16.4
6.4
Responsive
64.6
2
B+L
No
52.2
0.75
Responsive
198.4
3
L
No
1.6
0.2
Responsive
337.5
4
B
No
21.3
11.3
Responsive
458. 3
5
L
No
6.5
<0.1
Responsive
539. 8
6
A+A5
Yes
9.2
0.1
Responsive
870.4
7
B+L
No
16.2
2.3
Responsive
901.9
8
L+T
No
10.7
0.2
Responsive
901
9
E
No
0.2
0.1
Responsive
903
10
B+L
No
0.2
0.1
Responsive
906.9
11
E
Yes
284.7
344.3
Nonresponsive
1035
12
A+A5
Yes
63.5
116.5
Nonresponsive
1037.6
13
L
Yes
7.3
7.8
Nonresponsive
1305
14
E+R
Yes
51.9
71.5
Nonresponsive
1338
15
A+A5
Yes
218
522.3
Nonresponsive
1359
16
E
Yes
0.8
<0.1
Responsive
1650
17
L
No
14.3
0.1
Responsive
1809.5
18
A
Yes
28.5
26.2
Nonresponsive
2030
19
A+A5
Yes
4.2
0.8
Responsive
2090
20
L
No
5.3
1.1
Responsive
2394
21
B+L+R
No
5.7
0.1
Responsive
2535
22
B+G
No
17.9
5.7
Nonresponsive
2982
23
A+A5
Yes
61.5
19.8
Responsive
3184.4
24
A+R
Yes
17.7
25.6
Nonresponsive
3613.5
25
B+L
Yes
0.4
3.7
Nonresponsive
3751.1
26
L
Yes
0.9
1.2
Nonresponsive
3870
27
E
Yes
61.3
116.7
Nonresponsive
4369.8
28
B+L
Yes
4.4
0.8
Nonresponsive
4989
A, abiraterone; A5, apalutamide; B, bicalutamide; E, enzalutamide; G, goserelin; L, 
leuprolide; R, radiation; T, triptorelin.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 8 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
rection for the multiplicity problem. Repeated-measures 2-way ANOVA 
 
with post hoc analyses was also used where appropriate. P values of less 
than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Data presented in 
figure legends are represented as mean ± SD unless otherwise stated. 
Statistical tests utilized are reported in the figure legends, along with 
the associated P values.
Study approval. All mouse studies were approved by the Cedars-
Sinai Animal Care and Use Committee. All PCa patients treated with 
ADT in this study, detailed in Table 1, provided informed consent for 
blood analysis according to requirements of the Institutional Review 
Board of Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
Author contributions
RM and NAB conceived the study. RM developed methodology and 
provided project administration. RM, SH, VP, AM, PA, KRR, FD, BA, 
SW, and MT performed experiments. RM, FD, and ZL performed 
formal analysis. RM, RAG, AM, and NAB wrote the paper. NAB, 
RAG, and EMP supervised the study and acquired funding.
Acknowledgments
We thank the patients that contributed to this study. Matrigel 
was acquired from the National Cancer Institute/NIH Tumor 
Microenvironment Network. Spectral MR studies were per-
formed at the Cedars-Sinai Imaging Institute with the support 
of the UCLA CTSI (UL1TR001881). This work was supported 
by grants from the National Cancer Institute (CA108646 and 
CA098912) and Veterans Affairs (BX001040) to NAB.
Address correspondence to: Neil A. Bhowmick, Cedars-Sinai 
Medical Center, 8750 Beverly Boulevard, Atrium 103, Los Ange-
les, California 90048, USA. Phone: 310.423.5589; Email: bhow-
mickn@cshs.org.
Tissue recombination mouse models. Cell recombinants were 
prepared by mixing 2 × 105 epithelial (CWR22Rv1) cells with 6 × 
105 CAF or stromal cells expressing RasV12 per site in collagen, as 
described before (6). Orthotopic grafting constituted the placing 
of the collagen plugs in the 2 anterior lobes of the prostate, and 
kidney grafts were placed under the renal capsule of C57BL/6 
male 8-week-old mice, as described previously (3, 6). The mice 
were either left intact or castrated 1 week after grafting. The intact 
mice were randomly divided into 2 groups, one of which received 
intraperitoneal injection of 3 mg/kg EIPA (Sigma-Aldrich) or vehicle 
control every other day for 1 week. Castrated mice were treated with 
enzalutamide (5 mg/kg) either alone or in combination with GPNA 
(10 mg/kg) for 3 weeks. The tumor volumes were measured using 
digital calipers and calculated using the following formula: length 
(mm) × width (mm) × width (mm) × 0.52. Mice were sacrificed, and 
tumors were excised and photographed. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded (FFPE) xenograft tumor tissue was sectioned and 
stained with H&E and also stained for chromogranin A, TUNEL, 
phosphorylated histone H3, and phosphorylated mTOR.
Statistics. RRBS BaseClear DNA-based analysis was performed for 
quality control, sequence processing, and mapping of sequence reads 
per their EpiQuest Genome-Wide Basic Service package. Sequence 
depth was determined per CpG dinucleotide as the number of reads 
for which methylation status could be determined. CpGs with a depth 
of less than 10 reads in either condition were excluded. Methylation 
status of the remaining CpGs was calculated as the percentage of 
methylcytosine in total cytosine. The heatmap was made using Metabo 
Analyst software using the top 25 genes analyzed by ANOVA. Statistical 
significance of differences between control and experimental groups 
was assessed by unpaired Student’s t test (2 tailed); for multiple com-
parisons, 1-way ANOVA was followed by Šidák’s multiple-comparison 
tests. P values reported in the manuscript were based on the Šidák cor-
 1. Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 
2014. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014;64(1):9–29.
 2. Ferlay J, et al. Cancer incidence and mortality  
worldwide: sources, methods and major 
patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J Cancer. 
2015;136(5):E359–E386.
 3. Placencio VR, et al. Stromal transforming growth 
factor-beta signaling mediates prostatic response 
to androgen ablation by paracrine Wnt activity. 
Cancer Res. 2008;68(12):4709–4718.
 4. Singh M, Jha R, Melamed J, Shapiro E, Hayward  
SW, Lee P. Stromal androgen receptor in 
prostate development and cancer. Am J Pathol. 
2014;184(10):2598–2607.
 5. Bianchi-Frias D, et al. Cells comprising the pros-
tate cancer microenvironment lack recurrent 
clonal somatic genomic aberrations. Mol Cancer 
Res. 2016;14(4):374–384.
 6. Banerjee J, Mishra R, Li X, Jackson RS, Sharma 
A, Bhowmick NA. A reciprocal role of prostate 
cancer on stromal DNA damage. Oncogene. 
2014;33(41):4924–4931.
 
7. Zong Y, et al. Stromal epigenetic dysregulation 
is sufficient to initiate mouse prostate cancer via 
paracrine Wnt signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012;109(50):E3395–E3404.
 8. Olumi AF, Grossfeld GD, Hayward SW, Carroll 
PR, Tlsty TD, Cunha GR. Carcinoma-associated 
fibroblasts direct tumor progression of initiated  
human prostatic epithelium. Cancer Res. 
1999;59(19):5002–5011.
 9. Hayward SW, et al. Malignant transformation in 
a nontumorigenic human prostatic epithelial cell 
line. Cancer Res. 2001;61(22):8135–8142.
 10. Trimboli AJ, et al. Pten in stromal fibroblasts  
suppresses mammary epithelial tumours. Nature. 
2009;461(7267):1084–1091.
 11. Bhowmick NA, et al. TGF-beta signaling in fibro-
blasts modulates the oncogenic potential of adja-
cent epithelia. Science. 2004;303(5659):848–851.
 12. Cheng N, et al. Loss of TGF-beta type II receptor 
in fibroblasts promotes mammary carcinoma 
growth and invasion through upregulation of 
TGF-alpha-, MSP- and HGF-mediated signaling 
networks. Oncogene. 2005;24(32):5053–5068.
 13. He Y, et al. Tissue-specific consequences of cyclin 
D1 overexpression in prostate cancer progres-
sion. Cancer Res. 2007;67(17):8188–8197.
 14. Valencia T, et al. Metabolic reprogramming 
of stromal fibroblasts through p62-mTORC1 
signaling promotes inflammation and 
tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2014;26(1):121–135.
 15. Minciacchi VR, et al. MYC mediates large  
oncosome-induced fibroblast reprogramming in 
prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2017;77(9):2306–2317.
 16. Fiaschi T, et al. Reciprocal metabolic repro-
gramming through lactate shuttle coordinately 
influences tumor-stroma interplay. Cancer Res. 
2012;72(19):5130–5140.
 17. Sotgia F, Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Pavlides S, 
Howell A, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP. Understanding  
the Warburg effect and the prognostic value 
of stromal caveolin-1 as a marker of a lethal 
tumor microenvironment. Breast Cancer Res. 
2011;13(4):213.
 18. Commisso C, et al. Macropinocytosis of protein 
is an amino acid supply route in Ras-transformed 
cells. Nature. 2013;497(7451):633–637.
 19. Perera RM, Bardeesy N. Pancreatic cancer 
metabolism: breaking it down to build it back up. 
Cancer Discov. 2015;5(12):1247–1261.
 20. Koochekpour S, et al. Serum glutamate levels 
correlate with Gleason score and glutamate 
blockade decreases proliferation, migration, and 
invasion and induces apoptosis in prostate cancer 
cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18(21):5888–5901.
 21. Afratis N, et al. Glycosaminoglycans: key players  
in cancer cell biology and treatment. FEBS J. 
2012;279(7):1177–1197.
 22. Schröder B. The multifaceted roles of the invari-
ant chain CD74--More than just a chaperone. Bio-
chim Biophys Acta. 2016;1863(6 Pt A):1269–1281.
 23. Vaishnavi A, et al. Oncogenic and drug-sensitive 
NTRK1 rearrangements in lung cancer. Nat Med. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 4 8 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 10   October 2018
2013;19(11):1469–1472.
 24. Taylor BS, et al. Integrative genomic profiling  
of human prostate cancer. Cancer Cell. 
2010;18(1):11–22.
 25. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. The 
molecular taxonomy of primary prostate cancer. 
Cell. 2015;163(4):1011–1025.
 26. Davidson SM, et al. Direct evidence for cancer-cell-
autonomous extracellular protein catabolism in 
pancreatic tumors. Nat Med. 2017;23(2):235–241.
 27. Tardito S, et al. Glutamine synthetase activity  
fuels nucleotide biosynthesis and supports 
growth of glutamine-restricted glioblastoma.  
Nat Cell Biol. 2015;17(12):1556–1568.
 28. Wilson M, Gill SK, MacPherson L, English M, 
Arvanitis TN, Peet AC. Noninvasive detection of 
glutamate predicts survival in pediatric medullo-
blastoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;20(17):4532–4539.
 29. Cai K, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of glu-
tamate. Nat Med. 2012;18(2):302–306.
 30. Wu C, Huang J. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT-
mammalian target of rapamycin pathway is essen-
tial for neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate 
cancer. J Biol Chem. 2007;282(6):3571–3583.
 31. Qian ZR, et al. Prognostic significance of MTOR 
pathway component expression in neuroendo-
crine tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(27):3418–3425.
 32. Kalin TV, et al. Increased levels of the FoxM1 
transcription factor accelerate development 
and progression of prostate carcinomas in both 
TRAMP and LADY transgenic mice. Cancer Res. 
2006;66(3):1712–1720.
 33. Andersson E, et al. Expression profiling of small 
intestinal neuroendocrine tumors identifies 
subgroups with clinical relevance, prognostic 
markers and therapeutic targets. Mod Pathol. 
2016;29(6):616–629.
 34. Chan DW, et al. DLX1 acts as a crucial target of 
FOXM1 to promote ovarian cancer aggressive-
ness by enhancing TGF-β/SMAD4 signaling. 
Oncogene. 2017;36(10):1404–1416.
 35. Szklarczyk D, et al. The STRING database in 
2017: quality-controlled protein-protein associa-
tion networks, made broadly accessible. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2017;45(D1):D362–D368.
 36. Beltran H, et al. Aggressive variants of castration-
resistant prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 
2014;20(11):2846–2850.
 37. Jin H, et al. Epigenetic silencing of a Ca(2+)-
regulated Ras GTPase-activating protein RASAL 
defines a new mechanism of Ras activation 
in human cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2007;104(30):12353–12358.
 38. McLaughlin SK, et al. The RasGAP gene, 
RASAL2, is a tumor and metastasis suppressor. 
Cancer Cell. 2013;24(3):365–378.
 39. Bechtel W, et al. Methylation determines fibro-
blast activation and fibrogenesis in the kidney. 
Nat Med. 2010;16(5):544–550.
 40. Cairns P, et al. Frequent inactivation of PTEN/
MMAC1 in primary prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 
1997;57(22):4997–5000.
 41. Gravina GL, et al. Hormonal therapy promotes 
hormone-resistant phenotype by increasing 
DNMT activity and expression in prostate cancer 
models. Endocrinology. 2011;152(12):4550–4561.
 42. Cunha GR, Hayward SW, Wang YZ, Ricke 
WA. Role of the stromal microenvironment 
in carcinogenesis of the prostate. Int J Cancer. 
2003;107(1):1–10.
 43. Prins GS, Birch L, Greene GL. Androgen receptor 
localization in different cell types of the adult rat 
prostate. Endocrinology. 1991;129(6):3187–3199.
 44. Wise DR, Thompson CB. Glutamine addiction: a 
new therapeutic target in cancer. Trends Biochem 
Sci. 2010;35(8):427–433.
 45. Marshall AD, et al. ASCT2 regulates glutamine 
uptake and cell growth in endometrial carci-
noma. Oncogenesis. 2017;6(7):e367.
 46. Shih AY, Erb H, Sun X, Toda S, Kalivas PW,  
Murphy TH. Cystine/glutamate exchange modu-
lates glutathione supply for neuroprotection from 
oxidative stress and cell proliferation. J Neurosci. 
2006;26(41):10514–10523.
 47. Rabinovich S, et al. Diversion of aspartate in 
ASS1-deficient tumours fosters de novo pyrimi-
dine synthesis. Nature. 2015;527(7578):379–383.
 48. Beltran H, et al. Challenges in recognizing  
treatment-related neuroendocrine prostate can-
cer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(36):e386–e389.
 49. Huang J, et al. Differential expression of 
interleukin-8 and its receptors in the neu-
roendocrine and non-neuroendocrine com-
partments of prostate cancer. Am J Pathol. 
2005;166(6):1807–1815.
 50. Aaronson DS, et al. An androgen-IL-6-Stat3 auto-
crine loop re-routes EGF signal in prostate cancer 
cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007;270(1-2):50–56.
 51. Fina F, et al. Molecular profile of androgen- 
independent prostate cancer xenograft LuCaP 23.1.  
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005;96(5):355–365.
 52. Tolhurst G, Zheng Y, Parker HE, Habib AM, 
Reimann F, Gribble FM. Glutamine triggers and 
potentiates glucagon-like peptide-1 secretion by 
raising cytosolic Ca2+ and cAMP. Endocrinology. 
2011;152(2):405–413.
 53. Wang Q, et al. Targeting ASCT2-mediated 
glutamine uptake blocks prostate cancer 
growth and tumour development. J Pathol. 
2015;236(3):278–289.
 54. Moore SR, et al. Glutamine and alanyl-glutamine 
promote crypt expansion and mTOR signaling in 
murine enteroids. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver 
Physiol. 2015;308(10):G831–G839.
 55. Kanayama M, et al. Hyperactive mTOR induces 
neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate  
cancer cell with concurrent up-regulation of 
IRF1. Prostate. 2017;77(15):1489–1498.
 56. van Geldermalsen M, et al. ASCT2/SLC1A5 
controls glutamine uptake and tumour growth 
in triple-negative basal-like breast cancer. Onco-
gene. 2016;35(24):3201–3208.
 57. Tuxhorn JA, McAlhany SJ, Dang TD, Ayala GE, 
Rowley DR. Stromal cells promote angiogenesis 
and growth of human prostate tumors in a dif-
ferential reactive stroma (DRS) xenograft model. 
Cancer Res. 2002;62(11):3298–3307.
 58. Haldar S, et al. Histone deacetylase inhibitors 
mediate DNA damage repair in ameliorating 
hemorrhagic cystitis. Sci Rep. 2016;6:39257.
 59. Stark HJ, Baur M, Breitkreutz D, Mirancea N, 
Fusenig NE. Organotypic keratinocyte cocultures 
in defined medium with regular epidermal mor-
phogenesis and differentiation. J Invest Dermatol. 
1999;112(5):681–691.
