 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
JNK1 controls adult hippocampal neurogenesis and imposes
cell-autonomous control of anxiety behaviour from the
neurogenic niche
H Mohammad1,5, F Marchisella1,5, S Ortega-Martinez1,5, P Hollos1, K Eerola2, E Komulainen1, N Kulesskaya3, E Freemantle1,
V Fagerholm1, E Savontous2, H Rauvala3, BD Peterson4, H van Praag4 and ET Coffey1
Promoting adult hippocampal neurogenesis is expected to induce neuroplastic changes that improve mood and alleviate anxiety.
However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown and the hypothesis itself is controversial. Here we show that mice
lacking Jnk1, or c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor-treated mice, display increased neurogenesis in adult hippocampus
characterized by enhanced cell proliferation and survival, and increased maturation in the ventral region. Correspondingly, anxiety
behaviour is reduced in a battery of tests, except when neurogenesis is prevented by AraC treatment. Using engineered
retroviruses, we show that exclusive inhibition of JNK in adult-born granule cells alleviates anxiety and reduces depressive-like
behaviour. These data validate the neurogenesis hypothesis of anxiety. Moreover, they establish a causal role for JNK in the
hippocampal neurogenic niche and anxiety behaviour, and advocate targeting of JNK as an avenue for novel therapies against
affective disorders.
Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23, 362–374; doi:10.1038/mp.2016.203; published online 15 November 2016
INTRODUCTION
Anxiety and depression are highly prevalent, complex disorders
involving multiple brain regions and feedback loops.1 During 2010
alone, anxiety and depressive disorders together comprise the
second largest cause of years lived with disability globally,
thereby posing a major economic burden.2 Yet, these conditions
are mostly undiagnosed and remain untreated because of lack of
effective therapies. Anxiety disorders represent a maladaptive
state of a normal response to threat, marked by excessive fear and
avoidance in the absence of real danger. The hippocampus,
classically associated with memory and learning, also controls
emotional behaviour, in particular fear and anxiety responses.3–6 It
responds to glucocorticoid stress by exerting neuronal feedback
inhibition of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis endocrine response.7
The hippocampus extends dense ventral connections to the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and the basolateral amygdala and shows
selective ventral control of the endocrine stress response.8,9
Moreover, these highly conserved connections are required for
anxiety responses.10,11 These studies, among others,12 have led to
the association of the ventral hippocampus with emotional
regulation.
Generation of new neurons in the hippocampus throughout
adult life (adult hippocampal neurogenesis) is believed to
suppress anxiety behaviour.13–15 Studies in mice have shown that
different classes of antidepressant drugs or electroconvulsive
seizures (to mimic therapy) enhance levels of neurogenesis in the
dentate gyrus (DG) subregion.16–18 Reports showing that neuro-
genesis is required for antidepressant drug action13,19,20 have led
to the theory that promotion of adult hippocampal neurogenesis
may alleviate anxiety and depressive disorders. However, this
theory remains controversial as other studies have shown
beneficial effects of antidepressants independent of new neuron
generation,21–23 calling into doubt the role of new granule cells in
regulating mood.
When functioning normally, neurogenesis is an essential part of
an adaptive response that buffers the main stress hormone
system, the hypothalamic–pituitary axis, and thereby controls
behavioural
responses
in
mice8,18,24
and
in
non-human
primates.12,25 Neurogenesis is impaired upon prolonged exposure
to excessive glutamate or stress hormones as occurs with anxiety
and depression. Its inhibition following prolonged stress results in
maladaptive neuroplasticity and reinforces the disease state.1,26 It
is expected therefore that elucidation of the molecular mechan-
isms that control adult hippocampal neurogenesis will provide
new targets for antidepressant and anxiolytic drug therapy. In
particular, it has been rationalized that drugs that act on the
ventral hippocampus would be of benefit for treatment of anxiety
and depression.18 However the intracellular signalling mechan-
isms governing hippocampal neurogenesis have not been widely
explored.
The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are known for their
regulation of apoptotic cell death in a variety of cell types.27
Nevertheless, JNK1 is physiologically active in the developing
brain where it controls many aspects of cortical development,
neuronal differentiation and maturation,28–34 although its role in
adult neurogenesis has not been addressed. More recently,
genetic anomalies on the JNK pathway have been associated
with psychiatric disorders, although the mechanism is completely
1Turku Centre for Biotechnology, Åbo Akademi University and University of Turku, Turku, Finland; 2University of Turku, Turku, Finland; 3University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland and
4Neuroplasticity and Behavior Unit, Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence: Dr E Coffey, Turku Centre for Biotechnology,
Åbo Akademi University and University of Turku, Turku 20520, Finland.
E-mail: ecoffey@btk.fi
5These three authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 4 May 2016; revised 3 October 2016; accepted 4 October 2016; published online 15 November 2016
Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23, 362–374
www.nature.com/mp
 unknown.35–40 Thus, understanding the function of JNK in adult
brain has profound implications for the treatment of mental
illness.
Here we show that genetic deletion of Jnk1 or intracerebral
ventricular infusion with a JNK inhibitor increases neurogenesis in
the hippocampus and produces a low anxiety phenotype. Specific
retroviral targeting of inhibitor to the hippocampal neurogenic
niche cells is sufficient to produce both anxiolytic and antide-
pressant responses in mice, thereby establishing a causal link.
These findings identify JNK1 as a central repressor of neurogenesis
and promoter of anxiety and depressive-like behaviour in the
adult hippocampus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plasmid construction
To prepare replication-incompetent Moloney murine leukemia virus
retroviral vectors expressing cytosolic and nuclear targeted inhibitors of
JNK, GFP-NES-JBD and GFP-NLS-JBD (previously described30) were ligated
into the AgeI and DraI sites of CAG-GFP (previously described41) to yield
CAG-GFP-NES-JBD and CAG-GFP-NLS-JBD.
Reagents
DJNKI-1 peptide inhibitor of JNK was synthesized by Gene Cust, Custom
Services for Research (Laboratoire de Biotechnologie du Luxembourg,
Dudelange, Luxemburg). Arabinocyl-cytosine (AraC) was from Sigma (St
Louis, MO, USA).
Behavioural tests
Adult (8–12-week-old male mice for wild-type/knockout experiments, and
12–16-week-old for chronically infused or retrovirus expressing mice) male
C57BL/6J wild-type (WT) and Jnk1 − / − mice were maintained on a 12 h
light/dark cycle and supplied with food and water ad libitum. Behavioural
tests were performed between 0800 and 1500 h in the order described
below with 2-day interval between tests. For all procedures experimenters
were blind to the genotype or treatments. The number of animals used in
each experiment is indicated in the legends. For experiments using
Jnk1 − / − mice, the cohort numbers are somewhat lower because of the
fact that they are poor breeders. Our recount efficiency for behavioural
tests with independent experimenters is within 10% variance.
Elevated plus maze
Unconditioned anxiety-like behaviours were monitored using an elevated
plus maze (EPM) with two closed (35 × 5 × 15 cm) and two open (35 × 5 cm)
arms made of opaque grey plastic elevated at a height of 50 cm above the
floor. Mice were placed in the centre of the maze facing a closed arm and
allowed to explore freely for 5 min. Behaviour was recorded using the
Ethovision
video
tracking
system
(Noldus
Information
Technology,
Wageningen, The Netherlands). Automated tracking was used for the
analysis of time spent and number of entries to the open and closed arms.
Head dipping, rearing and stretched attend postures (risk assessment
behaviour) were scored manually from the same videos. Grooming was
scored as previously described.42 Note that the behavioural tests in
Figure 1 were carried out in Helsinki, whereas behavioural tests in the
remaining figures were carried out in Turku. The EPM apparatus in Helsinki
had slightly different arm dimensions (30 × 5 × 15 cm).
Light/dark
This test was performed in the Helsinki mouse behavioural unit using an
Activity Monitor system (for Figure 1) modified with a dark box insert that
was opaque to visible light and covered half the area of the open field
arena (an opening of 5.5 × 7 cm allowed free movement between the
compartments). Animals were placed in the light part of the arena and
monitored for 10 min. Time spent in the light and dark areas was
calculated. For Figures 2 and 4, a box (30 × 45 × 30 cm), partitioned equally,
with opaque black plastic walls (dark) and white walls without roof (light)
and an opening (5.5 × 7 cm) between partitions was used. Mice were video
monitored for 10 min and analysed manually and also with Ethovision
software.
Open field
Activity in the open field was obtained using the Activity Monitor System
(MedAssociates, St Albans, VT, USA). Mice were released in the corner of
the open field arena (30 × 30 cm) facing the wall. Horizontal and vertical
activities were recorded during 30 min. For the analysis, the arena was
divided into a central (18 × 18 cm) and a peripheral zone, and latency to
enter the centre, distance travelled in the centre and total distance
travelled were scored.
Sucrose preference test
The 8-week-old or 16-week old (for retroviral tranduced mice) singly
housed mice were exposed to two drinking tubes in the cage for
3 days. For the test period, bottles containing 12 ml of water or 2%
sucrose were placed on opposite sides of the feeding grid. Bottle
positions were swapped after weighing at 24 h intervals. Percent
sucrose
intake
was
calculated
as
follows:
(Δweightsucrose)/
(Δweightsucrose + Δweightwater) × 100.
Forced swim test
At 48 h following the previous test, mice were acclimatized (1 h) and
placed in a glass cylinder (18 cm wide × 27 cm deep) filled with 23–25 °C
water. Behaviour was recorded using a Samsung SMX-F300BP camera
(Suwon, South Korea) for 6 min. Time spent immobile (motionless or only
little movements to prevent sinking) was scored from the last 4 min of the
recording.
Acute and chronic intracranial infusions
The 8–12-week-old male C57Bl/6J mice were injected intraperitoneally
with 0.1 mg kg − 1 of buprenorphine hydrochloride (Temgesic, Reckitt
Benckiser Pharmaceuticals, Basel, Switzerland), anaesthetized with 4%
isoflurane and maintained with 2.5% isoflurane. Viscotears gel (Novartis,
Basel, Switzerland) was applied to the eyes to avoid dryness. Local
anaesthetic (0.1 ml of 1 mg per 1 μg lidocaine) was subcutaneously
injected, before cutting the scalp. For acute intracranial treatments, a CX
guide cannula (Agnthos, Lidingö, Sweden) was implanted to the lateral
ventricle at the following coordinates, anterior–posterior = − 0.6 mm,
medial–lateral = 1.5 mm and dorsoventral = − 2.0 mm, using a stereotaxic
alignment instrument (Kopf, Lidingö, Sweden). The guide cannula was
fixed to the skull with two screws and dental cement. At 7 days after
surgery, 2 μl of DJNKI-1 (100 μM) in saline was injected using a CXMI-5
microinjection cannula (Agnthos) at a rate of 0.25 μl min − 1. Behaviour was
tested 6 h later. For long-term intracranial infusion of DJNKI-1 or carrier, a
small mini-osmotic pump (Alzet Model 2006, Cupertino, CA, USA) was
inserted subcutaneously at the back of the neck and attached to a cannula
that was implanted into the cerebral ventricle, according to the
coordinates above. Mini-osmotic pumps infused DJNKI-1 or TAT (100 μM)
at a rate of 0.15 μl h − 1. After 6 weeks, mice underwent behavioural testing.
BrdU administration
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU; Sigma) was prepared on the day of use by
dissolving in saline and injected intraperitoneally 4 times at 2 h intervals to
2-month-old mice (male) at a dose of 75 mg kg − 1, as previously
described.
43 At the designated time, mice were perfused with 4%
paraformaldehyde as described below.
Perfusion and tissue processing
Mice were terminally anaesthetized by intraperitoneal injection with
pentobarbital (30 mg ml − 1 Mebunate, Orion Pharma, Espoo, Finland) and
underwent intracardial perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde as previously
described.
32 Brains were post-fixed in paraformaldehyde (4%) for 24 h at 4 °
C (for all antibodies except doublecortin (DCX) that was post-fixed at room
temperature). Sections (40 μm) were cut and collected into phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) using a vibratome (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany), or after
cryoprotection in 30% sucrose and freezing in isopentane (Sigma), on a
cryostat microtome (CM1950, Leica Biosystems, Nussloch, Germany).
Immunohistochemistry
Free floating sections were immersed in 50% ethanol in PBS followed by
permeabilization with Triton X-100 (0.4%) in PBS for 10 min. Endogenous
peroxidase was blocked by incubating with H2O2 (3%) in methanol (10%)
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
363
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 for 30 min. For BrdU detection, sections were additionally treated with 50%
formamide (v/v) in 2 × sodium citrate buffer (0.3 M NaCl and 0.03 M sodium
citrate) at 65 °C for 2 h, and then incubated in 2N HCl at 37 °C for 30 min
and rinsed in 0.1 M boric acid (pH 8.5) for 10 min as previously described.32
To reduce nonspecific binding, sections were incubated for 1 h with goat
serum (10%) in PBS containing Tween-20 (0.2%) or (for green fluorescent
protein (GFP) detection) with bovine serum albumin (1%) in PBS
containing Triton-X-100 (0.4%). Slices were incubated for 24–72 h at 4 °C
with primary antibodies as follows: 1:500 rabbit anti-DCX (Cell Signaling
Technologies, Denvars, MA, USA), 1:1000 anti-Prox1 (Millipore, Darmstadt,
Germany), 1:100 rabbit anti-Ki67 (#NCL-Ki67, Novocastra, Leica Biosystems,
Leica), 1:2000 rabbit anti-GFP (#632460, Cell Signaling Technologies) or
1:200 mouse IgG2a anti-BrdU (#MA3-071, Thermofisher Scientific, Waltham,
MA, USA). Biotinylated anti-mouse IgG2a (1:1000) or biotinylated anti-
rabbit secondary antibody (1:1000, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA,
USA) followed by streptavidin horseradish peroxidase (1:2000) (Invitrogen,
Burlingame, CA, USA) were used for signal amplification. For detection, the
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
364
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 K3468 kit (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) was used according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Immunofluorescence staining
Floating sections were rinsed 3 × 5 min in PBS and incubated for 1 h at
room temperature in PBS containing 1% bovine serum albumin and 0.1%
Triton-X-100, followed by 72 h of incubation with primary antibody. For
BrdU, the formamide treatment described above was also applied. The
following primary antibody dilutions were used: 1:1000 mouse anti-BrdU
(#AB6326, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), 1:500 mouse anti-NeuN (#MAB377,
Millipore),
1:300
rabbit
anti-cleaved
caspase-3
(#2305-PC,
Trevigen,
Gaithersburg, MD, USA), 1:2000 anti-GFP (#A6455, Thermofisher, Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and 1:500 goat polyclonal anti-DCX
(#8066, Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA). Detection was with Alexa dye-
conjugated antibodies (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA, Thermofisher,
Waltham, MA, USA) at a concentration of 1:500. Nuclei were visualized with
Hoechst-33342 (1:1000). Tiled images were acquired with a LSM-780
confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using 10 × , 20 ×
and
40 ×
objectives.
Images
shown
are
typically
from
maximum
projections of 5 × z-planes.
Stereological analysis
An unbiased estimate of DCX/Ki67/BrdU/GFP or cleaved caspase-3-positive
cell number in the subgranular zone of the DG was acquired using every
fifth section throughout the rostral–caudal extent of the hippocampus.
Exhaustive counting was used for BrdU and cleaved caspase-3, whereas
the optical fractionator was used for DCX and Ki67. For fractionator
analysis, a 100 × objective, 50 × 50 μm frame size and 220 × 130 μm
random sampling grid and 2 μm guard zone were used with the
StereoInvestigator (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT, USA) and Olympus B53
bright-field microscope (Tokyo, Japan). The coefficient of error was o0.1
throughout. For cleaved caspase-3, counting was done from whole right
DG using a Leica DMRE fluorescence microscope. Dorsal sections of the DG
were defined as sections with coordinates: anterior–posterior = − 1.06 mm
to – 2.80 mm from Bregma and ventral-posterior = − 2.80 mm to − 3.80 mm
from Bregma.
Dendrite analysis
For Sholl analysis, 200 μm coronal sections were cut with a vibratome.
Nuclei were visualized with DAPI (4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Invitro-
gen). Lucifer yellow dye (Invitrogen) was injected into CA3 pyramidal
Figure 2.
Acute treatment with c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor does not alter anxiety related behaviour. (a) The timeline of DJNKI-1
inhibitor or vehicle treatment and behaviour tests are shown along with guide cannula coordinates. DJNKI-1 (100 μM) or vehicle (control) was
injected to the ventricles using CMA (Agnthos, Lidingö, Sweden) dialysis at the given coordinates. (b) Hippocampus (HC) and prefrontal cortex
(PFC) were isolated from sham operated (control, n = 5) and DJNKI-1 (n = 5)-treated mice and levels of PSD95 Ser295, PSD95, JNK1 and 2
(JNK1/2) and tubulin were determined by immunoblotting. Representative blots are shown. (c) Quantitative data from multiple immunoblots
indicate that PSD95 phosphorylation is significantly reduced in the HC, but not the PFC. NS, not significant. (d–h) Mice treated with vehicle
(control, n = 5) or 100 μM DJNKI-1 (n = 6) were subjected to the elevated plus maze (EPM) test. Behaviour was scored as in Figure 1. (i) Time
spent by sham operated (control, n = 5) and DJNKI-1-treated mice (n = 6) in the light and dark box is plotted.
Figure 1.
Jnk1 − / − mice exhibit low anxiety in an aversive environment and increased adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Wild-type (WT)
(n = 10) and Jnk1 − / − (n = 8) mice were tested in the elevated plus maze (EPM), light/dark test and open field test. Several parameters
indicative of anxiety behaviour were scored. (a) Jnk1 − / − mice spent more time than WT in the open arms of the EPM and less time in the
closed arms, indicating reduced anxiety. JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase. (b) Representative traces of WT and Jnk1 − / − mouse movement on the
EPM are shown. (c) Jnk1 − / − mice entered the open arms more frequently than WT mice. (d, e) Jnk1 − / − mice showed increased head
dipping and rearing compared with WT. (f) The average time spent in a light or dark enclosed area is shown. Jnk1 − / − mice spent more time
in the light area indicating reduced anxiety. In the open field test, Jnk1 − / − mice showed (g) reduced latency to enter the centre of the arena
and (h) increased time in the centre (shown for six repeated trials per mouse). (i) The overall percent of distance travelled in the centre of the
arena is shown. (j) Immobility time in the forced swim test is shown. Jnk1 − / − spent significantly less time immobile. (k) The preference of WT
(n = 12) and Jnk1 − / − (n = 11) mice for sucrose was tested. Jnk1 − / − mice showed a trend towards increased sucrose preference (P = 0.05). (l)
A representative contour map depicts the dentate gyrus (DG) granular layer region used for Cavalieri volumetric analysis. (m) Quantitative
data from Cavalieri estimation of granule layer volume in WT (n = 5) and Jnk1 − / − (n = 5) mice is shown. (n) Representative images of
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) immunoreactivity in the DG of WT and Jnk1 − / − mice 28 days following labelling are shown. (o) Stereological
estimate of BrdU-positive cell number in the DG shows a significant increase in Jnk1 − / − mice (n = 3). (p) The number of doublecortin (DCX)-
positive cells in the DG of WT (n = 6) and Jnk1 − / − (n = 7) mice is shown. (q) Representative maximum projection images of DCX staining in
the hippocampus of WT and Jnk1 − / − illustrates the substantial increase in neurogenic cells in knockout mice. (r) Representative single plane
confocal images of BrdU/NeuN labeling in WT and Jnk1 − / − mice. Dual-labelled cells are indicated with arrows. (s) The number of BrdU/NeuN
double-labelled cells from WT and Jnk1 − / − mice is shown (n = 3). (t) Representative images of cleaved caspase-3 immunofluorescence
staining in the DG of WT and Jnk1 − / − mice are shown. Hoechst-33342 (white) and cleaved caspase-3 (green). (u) Quantitated data depicting
the number of cleaved caspase-3 cells in WT (n = 4) and Jnk1 − / − (n = 4) mice is shown.
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
365
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 neurons using a pulled borosilicate glass tube (World Precision Instru-
ments, Sarasota, FL, USA) and a dual μ-iontophoresis current generator
(World Precision Instruments, Model 260), with a DC current of 2–6 nA. The
three-dimensional images were acquired with a 20 × objective on the
Leica TCS SP2 confocal microscope. Sholl analysis was performed using
Neurolucida software (Williston, VT, USA) as previously described.33
Dendrite maturation in DCX-positive cells was analysed using the Stereo
Investigator (MBF Bioscience) (for DJNKI-1-treated mice) or the LSM-Zeiss-
780 (for WT and Jnk1 − / − mice). Cells with tertiary dendrites were scored.
The maturation index was calculated as follows: (number of DCX-positive
cells with tertiary dendrites/number of DCX-positive cells).
Immunoblotting
Brain tissues were snap frozen and stored at − 80 °C until denatured using
the Denator device (Denator, Uppsala, Sweden). Tissues were homo-
genized and fractionated on SDS-polyacrylamide gels as previously
described.28 For immunoblotting, the following antibody dilutions were
used: 1:2000 anti-Ser295-Phospho PSD95 and 1:2000 anti-PSD95 (#3450,
Millipore), 1:1000 anti-JNK1/2 (#554285, Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA)
and 1:10 000 anti-tubulin (#KMX-1, Millipore). Densitometry was performed
using the Chemidoc (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Retroviral production
Viral vectors were produced in HEK-293FT (Thermofisher Scientific) cells as
previously described.41 Briefly, 10–12 × 10 cm plates containing 50–70%
confluent human embryonic kidney (HEK-293 FT) cells were transfected
with retroviral constructs and packaging plasmids pCMV-VSVG and pCMV-
GP using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). At 5 h after transfection, 10 ml
of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium was replaced with the same
volume of fresh, warmed Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium. After 48 h,
virus-containing media were collected and briefly centrifuged using an
Eppendorf 5804R (Hamburg, Germany) Centrifuge at 2000 r.p.m. for 3 min.
The supernatant was filtered using a 0.2 μm Minisart filter (Sartorius,
Göttingen, Germany) and centrifuged using a SW32Ti rotor at 19 400 r.p.m.
(RCFavg 46 220) in a Beckman Coulter Optima L-90K Ultracentrifuge
(Vantaa, Finland) for 2 h at 4 °C. The viral pellet was resuspended in 2 ml
sterile PBS and the centrifugation was repeated. The viral pellet was gently
resuspended in 100 μl sterile PBS and divided in 10 μl aliquots, snap-frozen
in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80 °C until use. Virus titre was determined
by seeding HEK-293FT in 24-well plates. When 50–70% confluent, serial
dilutions (1:102 to 1:107) of retroviruses were added in 10 μl volumes to
wells (in duplicate). Plates were gently rocked before incubation at 37 °C
and 5% CO2. After 48 h, wells were rinsed 1 × with sterile PBS, fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde, pH 7.4, for 15–20 min and rinsed 1 × with PBS. Viral
titre was obtained by counting the number of cells with detectable GFP
using an Olympus IX70 fluorescence microscope. Viral titre, the number of
transducing units (TU) per ml, was calculated. Titres ranging from 108 to
1010 TU ml − 1 were used for in vivo experiments.
Stereotactic injection of retroviruses
The 8–10-week-old male C57Bl/6J mice were anaesthetized as described
above for mini-pump implantations. After 0.1 mg kg− 1 of buprenorphine
hydrochloride and 4% isoflurane (as above), mice were transferred to a
stereotaxic frame (Kopf instruments) and maintained with 2.5% isoflurane
and local anaesthetic (0.1 ml of 1 mg per 1 μg lidocaine) was subcutaneously
injected, before cutting the scalp. Retroviruses carrying transgenes CAG-GFP,
CAG-GFP-NES-JBD and CAG-GFP-NLS-JBD were mixed with polybrene
(10 μg ml − 1) and injected bilaterally (2 μl per site at a rate of 0.1 μl min − 1)
at the following coordinates for whole DG injections: anterior–posterior
=− 2.5 mm from Bregma; medial lateral =1.8 mm; dorsoventral= −2.0 mm
and for ventral injections; anterior–posterior= −3.1 mm from Bregma; medial
lateral= 2.8 mm; dorsoventral= −3.1. The needle was kept in place for
20 min following injection before being withdrawn slowly. The skin was
sutured and mice were injected intraperitoneally with saline before being
placed on a heating pad until awake. After surgery, animals were single
housed and monitored for 4 or 8 weeks as described before behavioural
testing. All surgical procedures and behavioural tests were carried out under
the approval of the Animal Experiment Board in Finland.
Statistical analysis
P-values were calculated using Student’s two-tailed t-test where two
conditions were compared or by one-way analysis of variance (as
indicated). In every case, error bars depict s.e.m. P-values are indicated
on the graphs. N-values, defined as the number of animals used, are
indicated in the legends. Sufficiency of sample size was estimated by post
hoc power analysis.
Replication and randomization of animal experiments
Behavioural tests in Jnk1 − / − mice were replicated by two independent
experimenters on at least two separate cohorts. Stereological data on DCX
and BrdU/NeuN in Jnk1 − / − mice and following chronic infusion of
DJNKI-1 were reproduced by two independent experimenters on at least
two separate cohorts. Behavioural data in mice following chronic
infusion with DJNKI-1 were reproduced by two independent experimen-
ters on two separate cohorts. Maturity index from DJNKI-1-treated mice
was from one animal cohort. Maturity index from WT and Jnk1 − / − mice
was carried out on one cohort. Sholl analysis of CA3 hippocampal neurons
was carried out over a period of ∼ 2 months as mice became available.
Data using retroviruses (Figures 6c–f) came from two separate cohorts
carried out by a single experimenter. For some parameters, the phenotype
was a trend and became significant when cohorts were merged.
Randomization of animals was achieved by assignment of mice to
barcoded cages. The log of barcode assignment was only consulted by the
experimenter after behavioural testing and/or stereological analysis was
completed.
RESULTS
Genetic deletion of Jnk1 reduces anxiety-like behaviour and
increases hippocampal neurogenesis in adult mice
Gene anomalies along the JNK pathway have been associated
with psychiatric disorders,40 but this finding has not been followed
up in mice. We therefore tested whether mice lacking Jnk1
displayed any behavioural irregularities by subjecting them to a
battery of tests. This identified a notable low anxiety phenotype.
Jnk1 − / − mice spent more time in the open arms and less time in
the closed arms of an EPM (Figures 1a and b), entered the open
arms more frequently (Figure 1c) and displayed increased head
dipping and rearing, traits associated with low levels of anxiety
(Figures 1d and e). When mice were given the choice between an
uncomfortable ‘light’ and customarily preferred, ‘dark’ environ-
ment, Jnk1 − / − mice showed no preference for the safe dark
area. Instead, they spent substantially more time in the illuminated
area, indicating a reduced level of anxiety compared with WT mice
(Figure 1f). Finally, in the open field test, Jnk1 − / − mice exhibited
reduced latency to enter the centre of the arena (Figure 1g) and
displayed reduced anxiety by spending a greater proportion of
time in the centre and travelling a greater distance there
(Figures 1h and i). Notably, there was no difference in total
distance travelled by Jnk1 − / − mice in the EPM, light/dark or
open field tests (Supplementary Figures 1a–d). Together, these
results demonstrate that mice lacking Jnk1 exhibit a low anxiety
phenotype compared with WT mice upon placement in an
aversive environment.
We next tested the response of Jnk1 − / − mice in the forced
swim test, a commonly used test that is interpreted as behavioural
despair, with predictive validity for screening of antidepressant
drugs.44 Mice lacking Jnk1 showed significantly reduced immobi-
lity indicating a low level of depressive-like behaviour (Figure 1j).
When tested for sucrose preference, an indicator of anhedonic
state in rodents, Jnk1 − / −
mice showed a trend towards
increased sucrose intake (Figure 1k). Together, these results
indicate a lower level of depressive-like behaviour in these mice,
and that it would be of interest to investigate JNK inhibitors more
broadly in depression models.
Anxiety, as well as major depressive disorder, is associated with
decreased volume of the hippocampus45 and DG.46 We therefore
estimated the volume of the DG granule cell layer in WT and
Jnk1 − / − mice using the Cavalieri estimator (Figures 1l and m).
There was a trend towards increased volume in mice lacking Jnk1.
Although this increase remained a trend, the extent of change
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
366
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 (6%) precisely matched the proportional decrease observed in the
DG volume of patients suffering with major depressive disorder.46
Although it would be of interest to determine whether this has
disease relevance, the size effect is small, and a large cohort
analysis that is beyond the scope of this study would be required.
Moreover, we did not find a correlation between DG volume
change and proliferating cells (not shown).
Increased production of new-born granule cells in the DG is
associated with reduced anxiety behaviour in mice.14,15 We
therefore tested whether mice lacking Jnk1 displayed altered
hippocampal neurogenesis. Dividing cells were labelled in adult
mice using the thymidine analogue BrdU, and the number of
BrdU-positive cells in the DG was counted 28 days later. This
showed an increase in the number of BrdU-positive cells in the DG
of Jnk1 − / − mice compared with WT mice (Figures 1n and o),
suggesting that either cell proliferation and/or survival was
enhanced in the absence of Jnk1. In addition, there was a 30%
increase in the number of cells committed to a neuronal lineage in
the DG of Jnk1-deficient mice revealed by counting the number of
cells that stained positive for the neuroblast marker DCX
(Figures 1p and q). The regulation of emotional and cognitive
function by adult-born neurons dissociates along the dorsal/
ventral axis of the DG.18,47 We therefore examined neuroblast
number in dorsal and ventral dentate gyrus. DCX cell number was
significantly increased in both regions in mice lacking Jnk1
(Figure 1p). To determine whether there was an increase in newly
generated neurons in these mice, we measured the number of
BrdU-positive cells that expressed the mature neuronal marker
NeuN at 28 days after labelling. This revealed that the total
number of adult-born neurons increased in the DG of Jnk1 − / −
mice (Figures 1r and s).
Promoting the survival of adult-born neurons in the DG is
essential if they are to integrate and contribute functionally to the
hippocampal circuitry. Therefore, to specifically evaluate survival
Figure 3.
Longitudinal treatment with DJNKI-1 lowers anxiety-like behaviour and increases adult hippocampal neurogenesis. (a) A schematic
of experimental timeline for treatments is shown. Mice were implanted with osmotic mini-pumps filled with vehicle or DJNKI-1 (100 μM). (b)
The effect of inhibitor treatment on c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) substrate phosphorylation was tested by immunoblotting for PSD95-S295
phosphorylation. Representative blots are shown. (c) DJNKI-1 significantly inhibited PSD95-S295 phosphorylation in the hippocampus (HC)
but not in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) (n = 3 respectively). NS, not significant. (d) The effect of long-term treatment with DJNKI-1 (n = 17) or
vehicle (n = 16) on mice subjected to the elevated plus maze (EPM) was scored, as in Figure 1. The number of entries to the open arms (e, f)
and time spent in the arms including representative traces are shown. (g) Head dipping, stretch attend (Str. Attend), rearing and grooming
behaviour were scored from the same mice while undergoing EPM testing. (h) Representative maximum projection images from the dentate
gyrus of control (n = 5) and DJNKI-1 (n = 5)-treated mice immunostained for doublecortin (DCX). Scale bar, 100 μm. (i) The estimated total
number of DCX-positive cells in the dentate gyrus (DG) in vehicle and inhibitor-treated mice is shown. (j) The estimated number of DCX-
positive cells in the dorsal and ventral DG is shown. (k) The number of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)/NeuN-positive neurons in the entire DG, (l)
and in the dorsal and ventral DG from control (n = 5) and DJNKI-1 infused (n = 5) mice is indicated. (m) A representative confocal section
through nuclei of BrdU/NeuN-stained control and DJNKI-1-treated mouse DG is presented. (n) The number of cleaved caspase-3-positive cells
in the entire DG (o) and the dorsal and ventral DG is shown for vehicle (n = 4) and DJNKI-1-infused (n = 4) mice. (p) A representative image of
cleaved caspase-3 staining is shown.
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
367
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 in the hippocampal niche, we used an antibody that recognized
the cleaved form of caspase-3, but not the pro-enzyme, to
measure the extent of apoptotic death. As expected,48 cleaved
caspase-3-positive cells were mostly observed in the subgranular
zone. Stereological examination revealed a significantly reduced
number of cleaved caspase-3-positive cells in Jnk1 − / − mice. This
result (Figures 1t and u), together with the significant increase in
BrdU-positive cell number (Figure 1o), provides a strong indication
that survival is increased in the absence of Jnk1 in the
hippocampal neurogenic niche.
Acute inhibition of JNK1 does not alter anxiety behaviour
Developmental irregularities in the central nervous system of
Jnk1 − / − mice are well characterized. These include cortical
migration and commissure defects,29,32,49 structural changes that
could in principle influence behaviour. To overcome this limitation
with Jnk1 knockout mice, we utilized a peptide inhibitor of JNK to
directly inhibit the kinase in adult brain. We started by examining
the effect of acute inhibition of JNK on anxiety-like behaviour.
Mice underwent intracerebral–ventricular infusion with vehicle or
with a D-amino acid retro-inverso inhibitor of JNK tethered to a TAT
delivery sequence. This peptide binds to JNK1 with high affinity
providing specific inhibition of kinase activity.50 DJNKI-1 (100 μM)
was delivered directly to the ventricles 1 week following cannula
implantation, and behaviour was tested 6 h after injection
(Figure 2a). The inhibitor effectively blocked JNK substrate
phosphorylation
in
the
hippocampus,
as
monitored
by
phosphorylation of the JNK1 substrate PSD95 on S295, but robust
inhibition was not detected in the PFC (Figures 2b and c).
Even though DJNKI-1 diminished S-295 phosphorylation of PSD95
in the hippocampus, this acute treatment did not significantly
alter behaviour of mice subjected to the EPM or light/dark test
(Figures 2d–i). These data suggested that another process
such as neurogenesis, which takes place over a period of
several weeks, may underlie the low anxiety behaviour in
Jnk1 − / − mice.
Long-term infusion with a JNK inhibitor (DJNKI-1) increases
neurogenesis in the ventral DG and lowers anxiety
We next tested whether chronic treatment with DJNKI-1 altered
anxiety-like behaviour in mice exposed to aversive conditions.
Mice were fitted with mini-pump implants and infused with
DJNKI-1 or vehicle for 6 weeks (Figure 3a). DJNKI-1 effectively
reduced JNK activity in the hippocampus but not in the PFC, as
assessed from PSD95-S295 phosphorylation (Figures 3b and c).
One possible reason for this absence of effect in the PFC is a
deficiency of DJNKI-1 binding sites in that region compared with
the hippocampus. This would be consistent with low JNK
expression in the cortical lobes in general compared with the
hippocampal formation.51 When the effect of inhibitor on anxiety
responses was tested, DJNKI-1-treated mice exhibited several
behavioural traits symptomatic of low anxiety (Figures 3d–g). They
entered the open arms of the EPM more frequently and spent
more time there than did vehicle-treated mice (Figures 3d–f).
Figure 4.
Treatment with the mitotic inhibitor AraC blocks neurogenesis and the anxiolytic effect of DJNKI-1. (a) A schematic of the
experimental set-up showing the timeline of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) and inhibitor infusions. The 2-month-old mice were implanted with
osmotic mini-pumps filled with vehicle (control) (n = 6), 100 μM DJNKI-1 (n = 7), 2% AraC (n = 6) or 100 μM DJNKI-1 and 2% AraC combined
(n = 7). After 6 weeks of infusion, mice were subjected to behaviour testing. Behaviour in the elevated plus maze was scored according to the
(b) number of entries to the open arms, (c) time spent in the arms, (d) the number of head dips, (e) the number of grooming events and (f) the
number of stretch-attend postures. NS, not significant. (g, h) The time spent by mice in the light arena and the latency to enter the dark arena
is shown. (i, j) The estimated number of doublecortin (DCX)-positive cells in the dorsal and ventral dentate gyrus is show. (k) The estimated
total number of DCX-positive cells following DJNKI-1 infusion is shown. DJNKI induced a significant increase in DCX-positive cell number. P-
values were calculated by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
368
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 Inhibitor-treated mice also showed increased head dipping and
fewer stretch-attend postures than control mice. They reared more
often and groomed less, activities indicative of low anxiety
(Figure 3g).
In addition to its anxiolytic effect, DJNKI-1 increased the number
of DCX-positive neuroblasts in the DG (Figures 3h and i),
consistent
with
the
increase
observed
in
Jnk1 − / −
mice
(Figures 1p and q). In contrast to Jnk1 − / − mice, however, the
increase in neuroblast number was only apparent in the ventral
hippocampus (Figure 3j). The proportional increase upon DJNKI-1
treatment was very similar to that observed in Jnk1 − / − mice
(Figures 1p and q), indicating that JNK1 represses neurogenesis.
There was also an increase in BrdU/NeuN-positive cells in
DJNKI-1-treated mice compared with vehicle-treated controls
(Figure 3k), indicating that survival and/or maturation of neurons
was increased following infusion with JNK inhibitor. When we
examined the spatial distribution of these newly generated
neurons along the dorsal ventral axis, we found that the increase
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
100
200
300
400
Intersections
Radius (μm)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
100
200
300
400
Intersections
Radius (μm)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
100
200
300
400
Length
Radius (μm)
CA3 Apical
CA3 Basal
WT
WT
WT
Jnk1-/-
Jnk1-/-
Jnk1-/-
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
0
100
200
300
400
Length
Radius (μm)
WT
Jnk1-/-
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Dendritic Length (μm)
WT
Jnk1-/-
0
5
10
15
20
Number of nodes per
dendrite
WT
Jnk1-/-
Basal
Basal
Apical
Apical
# DCX +ve cells
with dendrites
TAT
DJNKI-1
p=0.003
p=0.028
p=0.042
WT
Jnk1-/-
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
# DCX +ve cells
with dendrites 
WT
Jnk1-/-
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
WT
Jnk1-/-
Dorsal
Ventral
Dorsal
Ventral
p=0.0001
p=0.04
p=0.003
p=0.002
p=0.014
Dorsal
Ventral
Maturation index
Dorsal
Ventral
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Control
DJNKI-1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Maturation index
Control
DJNKI-1
WT, n=15; Jnk1-/-, n=15
WT, n=15; Jnk1-/-, n=15
WT, n=32; Jnk1-/-, n=32
WT, n=32; Jnk1-/-, n=32
Basal: WT, n=32; Jnk1-/-, n=32
Apical: WT, n=15; Jnk1-/-, n=36
Basal: WT, n=32; Jnk1-/-, n=32
Apical: WT, n=15; Jnk1-/-, n=36
p=0.00126 (Fv= 10,47; Fc=6,66)
p=0.0001 (Fv= 15; Fc=6,66)
p=0.002 (Fv= 8,91; Fc=3,86)
p=0.0004 (Fv= 12,54; Fc=6,66)
Figure 5.
Dendrite arborization is increased in the ventral dentate gyrus (DG) of DJNKI-1-treated mice. (a, b) The number of doublecortin
(DCX)-positive cells with tertiary dendrites is shown from the dorsal and ventral DG in sham operated (control, n = 4) and D-JNKI-1-treated
(n = 5) mice. JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase. The ‘maturation index’ (the number of DCX-positive cells with tertiary dendrites/number of
DCX-positive cells) is also plotted. (c) Representative images of DCX staining from the ventral hippocampus are shown. Scale bar, 50 μm.
(d) The number of DCX-positive cells with dendrites or (e) the maturation index in wild-type (WT; n = 4) and Jnk1 − / − (n = 4) mice is shown.
P-values (a–d) were calculated using Student’s t-test. (f) A representative image of DCX staining in the ventral hippocampus. Scale bar, 20 μm.
Sholl analysis performed on slices from WT and Jnk1 − / − hippocampal CA3 pyramidal cells depicts the number of intersections, and length
of apical (g, h) and basal (i, j) dendrites. (k) Total dendritic field length and (l) the number of nodes per dendrite is shown. The number of cells
analysed for WT and Jnk1 − / − mice (g–l) are indicated on the figure. For CA3 apical dendrites, 15 cells each from 4 WT and 4 Jnk1 − / − mice
were analysed. For CA3 basal dendrites, 32 cells each from 3 WT and 3 Jnk1 − / − mice were analysed. P-values were calculated with one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA). Fv (values of variance) and Fc (critical F-values) are shown.
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
369
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 in BrdU/NeuN-positive cell number was restricted to the ventral
DG (Figures 3l and m). Interestingly however, when we examined
cell survival in DJNKI-1-treated mice, we observed that DJNKI-1
exerted a more or less uniform neuroprotective effect throughout
the dorsal and ventral regions of the DG (Figures 3n–p). Taken
together, these data indicate that JNK inhibition increases
neurogenesis in the ventral hippocampus and reduces anxiety-
like behaviour in response to an aversive environment.
The anxiolytic effect of DJNKI-1 is dependent on adult
neurogenesis
To determine whether increased neurogenesis was critical for the
low anxiety behaviour, we infused mice with the mitotic inhibitor
AraC at 2%, a dose that blocks cell division, without interfering
with the survival of nondividing cells52 (Figure 4a). Infusion with
AraC prevented the anxiolytic effect of DJNKI-1 in the elevated
plus maze (Figures 4b and c). AraC also prevented the DJNKI-1-
evoked anxiolytic effect measured by head dips (Figure 4d) and
grooming (Figure 4e). Interestingly though, AraC alone reduced
scores for risk assessment behaviour (Figure 4f), it did not increase
willingness to explore an unprotected (Figures 4b–e) or illumi-
nated (Figures 4g and h) area, key indicators of lower anxiety.
Thus, the effect of AraC on stretch attend postures alone cannot
be interpreted as anxiolytic. Together, these results suggest that
the
anxiety-lowering
effect
of
DJNKI-1
is
dependent
on
neurogenesis.
To determine whether AraC infusion had efficiently blocked cell
proliferation as intended, we analysed the number of cells that
were positive for Ki67 that marks active phases of the cell cycle.
AraC efficiently ablated cell proliferation throughout the DG, as
expected.
Interestingly,
DJNKI-1
increased
cell
proliferation
throughout
the
dorsal–ventral
axis
of
the
hippocampus
(Supplementary Figures 2a–c). As seen earlier (Figure 3j), DCX-
positive cells were prominently increased in the ventral region by
DJNKI-1 (Figures 4i–k, Supplementary Figure 2d). Taken together,
these results indicate that DJNKI-1 increases the proliferating pool
of cells equally in the dorsal and ventral dentate gyrus, whereas
promotion of neurogenesis is graded along the dorsal–ventral
axis, the largest increase being observed in the ventral region.
JNK inhibition promotes maturation of newborn neurons in the
adult DG
Dendritic branching is a fundamental feature of maturing neurons
that enables propagation of electrochemical signals and neuro-
plastic changes.53 Given that JNK1 regulates dendrite arborization
in the cortex and cerebellum,30,33,38 we investigated whether
inhibition of JNK promoted dendritic arborization of adult-born
neurons
in
the
DG.
To
do
this,
the
number
of
DCX-positive
cells
with
third-order
dendrites
was
counted
(Figures 5a–f). DJNKI-1 treatment enhanced the maturation index
of new neurons in the ventral but not the dorsal hippocampus
(Figures 5a–c), whereas in Jnk1 − / − mice, the complexity of DCX
cell
dendrites
was
increased
in
both
dorsal
and
ventral
hippocampus (Figures 5d–f), consistent with the uniform regula-
tion of neuroblast number along the longitudinal axis in these
mice (Figures 1p and q). Newborn granule cells, upon maturation,
provide excitatory input to CA3 pyramidal neuron apical (and to a
lesser extent basal) dendrites (as well as to interneurons in the
hilus), thereby forming the second synapse of the hippocampal
trisynaptic circuit.54 As synaptic innervation provides a stimulus
that maintains and elaborates dendritic arbors,55 we measured
CA3 pyramidal cell dendritic complexity as an indirect measure of
innervation. Consistent with the increased number of newborn
granule cells in Jnk1 − / − mice (Figure 1r), the dendritic field size
of CA3 pyramidal neurons was increased (Figures 5g–l). This
suggests functional integration of the newborn neurons. None-
theless, we do not exclude the possibility that JNK1 regulation of
CA3 dendrites has an intrinsic component as we and others have
previously shown in the cerebellum and cortex.29,30,33
Inhibition of JNK in adult-born neurons of the hippocampus using
a retroviral delivery elicits an anxiolytic response
The use of the mitotic inhibitor AraC (Figure 4) to determine a
causal relationship between adult-born hippocampal neurons and
behaviour is not unequivocal as infused inhibitor is not restricted
to the DG and AraC is associated with other nonspecific effects in
neurons.56 To establish more specifically whether new neurons in
the hippocampus contribute to behaviour, we generated retroviral
tools that deliver JNK inhibitor to dividing cells in the hilus. Under
the control of a CAG promoter, viral transgene expression is
restricted to proliferating cells destined to become new neurons
(Figure 6).57 We utilized both nuclear and cytosolic-targeted JNK
inhibitor sequences (previously characterized),30,58 as JNK1 is
known
to
phosphorylate
nuclear
transcription
factors
and
cytoskeletal regulator targets in the cytoplasm.34 Compartment-
specific localization of tagged inhibitors was first validated in
293FT cells that had been virally transduced (Figure 6a). Similarly,
stereotactic injection of viruses to the DG followed 5 weeks later
by
analysis
of
labelled
cells
showed
compartment-specific
labelling
of
cells
in
the
dorsal
and
ventral
hippocampus
(Figures 6b and c, insets). Behavioural testing 4 weeks following
injection revealed a significant effect of GFP-NLS-JBD on anxiety-
like behaviour in the EPM. Inhibition of JNK in the nuclear
compartment induced a significant anxiolytic response (Figures 6d
and e), whereas GFP-CAG-NES-JBD did not significantly alter EPM
behaviour, with the exception of rearing (Figure 6e). These results
indicate that JNK activity in the nucleus of adult-born hippocam-
pal neurons serves a critical function in the promotion of anxiety
behaviour in mice.
Retroviral-based inhibition of JNK in adult-born granule cells
reduces depressive behaviour
Given that Jnk1 − / − mice exhibited a low depressive phenotype
(Figure 1j), we next tested the effect of retroviral JNK inhibitors on
mice undergoing the forced swim test of behavioural despair. The
4-week expression of GFP-CAG-NLS-JBD or GFP-CAG-NES-JBD did
not alter immobility time in this test of behavioural despair
(Figure 6f), although there was a slight trend. We therefore tested
the impact of 8 weeks of inhibitor expression. Following 8 weeks
of expression, the nuclear JNK inhibitor significantly reduced
immobility
time
(Figure
6h),
indicating
reduced
depressive
behaviour. Consistent with this, mice expressing the nuclear JNK
inhibitor in newly generated neurons only showed a significant
increase in sucrose preference with no increase in overall liquid
intake (Figure 6i), indicating a lower anhedonic state. Interestingly,
expression of the cytosolic JNK inhibitor showed a trend towards
lower depressive activity in both tests (Figures 6h and i), possibly
indicating a secondary role. To determine the number of adult-
born neurons that were targeted using this approach, we carried
out a stereological count of GFP-positive cells in the DG of
infected mice. These numbers (Figure 6j), illustrate that o200
new neurons per DG was sufficient to elicit a significant change in
behaviour. Together, these data indicate that inhibiting of JNK1
activity in the nucleus of just a few hundred newly generated
neurons in the hippocampus alleviates anxiety and depressive-
type behaviour in mice. This identifies the JNK pathway as a novel
target worthy of further exploration for treatment of anxiety and
depressive disorders.
DISCUSSION
Here we identify that Jnk1 − / − mice display a low anxiety
phenotype and increased hippocampal neurogenesis. Intracereb-
ral infusion of adult mice with a specific JNK inhibitor50 also lowers
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
370
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 anxiety and enhances neurogenesis and dendrite elaboration,
essential adaptive responses to stress. Remarkably, targeted
inhibition of JNK in just a few hundred newly born granule cells
of the DG using retroviruses is sufficient to lower anxiety and
depressive
behaviour.
Together,
these
data
emphasize
the
importance of adult-born granule cells in the hippocampus for
the control of anxiety and depressive-like behaviour and identify
that JNK controls these behaviours centrally from the hippocam-
pal neurogenic niche. We propose therefore that inhibition of
JNK1 should be considered as a new avenue for therapeutic
targeting of affective state disorders.
Neurogenesis can be broken down into several stages: cell
proliferation, differentiation, neuronal maturation and survival.59
We find that all four processes are promoted by genetic deletion
of Jnk1 or peptide inhibition. Cell proliferation is increased by 80%
and survival by 200% at 6 weeks following JNK1 inhibitor
treatment (Figure 3 and Supplementary Figure 2). These changes
occur in both the dorsal and ventral hippocampus. Although all
neurogenesis stages are expected to contribute to the anxiolytic
effect, survival promotion upon JNK inhibition is likely to be
critical,59 and is reminiscent of classical JNK action in developing
brain where it elicits pro-apoptotic effects that fine-tune cell
number.60,61 This neuroprotective effect of JNK inhibition com-
bined with enhanced progenitor cell proliferation provides a
powerful neurogenic stimulus that ameliorates anxiety behaviour.
Functional
integration
of
adult-born
neurons
within
the
hippocampal circuitry defined by dendritic innervation is impor-
tant if these cells are to effect hippocampal function.62,63 It is
Figure 6.
Inhibition of nuclear c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in adult-born neurons of the hippocampus produces an anxiolytic effect.
(a) Representative confocal micrographs of HEK-293-FT cells infected with retroviruses encoding nuclear (CAG-NLS-JBD) and cytosolic
(CAG-NES-JBD) targeted JNK inhibitor transgenes or CAG-GFP are shown (green). Hoechst-33342-stained nuclei (blue). Scale bar, 50 μm. (b) A
schematic representation depicting the experimental timeline. Mice were injected with high titre (108–1010 TU) retroviruses (encoding
CAG-GFP, CAG-NLS-JBD or CAG-NES-JBD) at day 0. After 4 weeks, mice were tested in the elevated plus maze (EPM) or forced swim test (FST).
After killing, bilateral expression of viral inserts was validated using green fluorescent protein (GFP) detection. (c) Maximum projection images
of coronal sections through the dentate gyrus (DG) from mice expressing CAG-GFP (upper panels), CAG-NLS-JBD (middle panels) or CAG-NES-
JBD (lower panels) are shown. Scale bar, 50 μm. Insets show single plane confocal sections through the nucleus. (d, e) The behaviour of
retrovirus-infected mice on the EPM is shown, as before. Mice expressing the nuclear JNK inhibitor display a range of low anxiety behaviour
compared with control mice expressing CAG-GFP. The number of mice scored was as follows: CAG-GFP; n = 13; CAG-NLS-GFP; n = 14; GFP-NES-
JBD; n = 11. (f) The immobility of mice in the FST following 4 weeks of transgene expression is shown. (g) A schematic representation
depicting the 8-week experimental timeline. (h) The immobility behaviour of retrovirus-transduced mice in the FST is shown. The number of
mice scored for this timeline was as follows: CAG-GFP; n = 8; CAG-NLS-JBD; n = 10; CAG-NES-JBD; n = 7. (i) The sucrose preference of these mice
is shown. (j) The total count of GFP-positive cells in the DG of retrovirus-infected mice whose behaviour was described (g–i) is indicated. For all
behaviour experiments, only mice showing bilateral GFP expression were included in final scoring. No other exclusions were made.
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
371
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 significant therefore that we detect enhanced arborization of
newly generated granule cells following infusion with inhibitor for
6 weeks. This enlarged dendritic field will maximize the potential
for innervation of newborn granule cells by excitatory input from
the entorhinal cortex.57 In addition, that we observe enhanced
arborization of CA3 pyramidal cell dendrites in Jnk1 − / − mice
indicates that functional integration is increased upon loss of JNK1
signalling.
Using retroviruses to singly target JNK in newly generated
neurons of the hippocampus, we show that inhibition of nuclear
JNK lowers anxiety (EPM), behavioural despair (forced swim test)
and anhedonia. Thus, inhibition of JNK in a few hundred adult-
born granule cells is sufficient to evoke behavioural improvement,
even without expansion of the granule cell population. To our
knowledge, this is the first time that the adult-born granule cell
population has been singly targeted enabling precise definition of
its role in anxiolytic and antidepressant outcomes. Previous
approaches, thymidine kinase/ganciclovir-induced apoptosis or
irradiation, have targeted dividing cells of the niche,15,64 whereas
here JNK inhibitor expression is introduced to the hilar cells using
replication-incompetent retroviruses, thereby avoiding the need
for frequent ganciclovir injections or more invasive strategies.
Retroviruses only infect dividing cells and JNK inhibitor expression,
driven by a CAG promoter, is strongly induced once dividing
cells become neurons.57,65,66 In this way, selective labelling of
adult-born neurons is achieved and post-mitotic early-born
neurons or astrocytes do not receive inhibitor. Consistent with
this, we only observe GFP expression in cells of the granule cell
layer that display granule cell morphology (including mossy fibre
labelling), and are positive for Prox1, a marker of granule cells67
(Supplementary Figure 1). Thus, it seems improbable that the
anxiolytic effect of CAG-NLS-JBD in retroviral labelling experiments
emanates from dividing progenitors. We would like to point out
however that the overall effect size of JNK inhibition on anxiety
behaviour is larger when the proliferating cells of the niche are
also targeted, leading to increased numbers of adult-born neurons
(Figures 1 and 3). Together, these findings suggest two molecular
checkpoints at which JNK regulates affective behaviour from
the hippocampal neurogenic niche. First, it acts to repress
proliferation and survival of the dividing cell population; second,
it acts within the newly generated post-mitotic granule cells to
regulate anxiety and depressive behaviour.
The dominant effect of nuclear JNK revealed by this study is
consistent with the previously reported neuroprotective action of
nuclear, not cytosolic, JNK inhibition.68,69 This defines a primarily
nuclear locus for the antidepressant and anxiolytic action of JNK
inhibitors in the hippocampal neurogenic niche. Similarly, the
anxiolytic outcome upon infusion with DJNKI-1 is likely to depend
on nuclear JNK inhibition, as DJNKI-1 accumulates passively in
neuronal nuclei.70 Although we observe decreased phosphoryla-
tion of the cytosolic JNK1 target PSD95 upon inhibitor treatment,
the less prominent effect on behaviour of cytosolic JNK inhibitors
suggests that this is not the principal mechanism whereby JNK
regulates anxiety. The importance of nuclear JNK in regulating
adult neurogenesis is entirely consistent with the many transcrip-
tion factor targets of JNK.71 These include several members of the
bZIP and bHLH families as well as the glucocorticoid receptor71
that together can lead to complex gene regulation with diverse
cellular outcomes. Nuclear JNK most probably acts via transcrip-
tional programs to suppress the different stages of neurogenesis
noted here, that is, proliferation, differentiation, survival and
maturation, as inhibition of JNK in the cytosol is insufficient to
evoke a significant amelioration of behaviour.
The hippocampus is functionally divided along its dorsoventral
axis. The ventral (corresponding to anterior in primates) subregion
connects to the amygdala and PFC12,72 and is associated with
emotional behaviour and affective disorders,5,8,47,73 whereas the
dorsal
region
(corresponding
to
posterior
in
primates)
is
associated with spatial learning.74,75 In non-human primates,
elevated activity in the lateral anterior hippocampus is associated
with anxiety in individuals that display increased hypothalamic–
pituitary
axis
activity,25
consistent
with
the
ventral-specific
endocrine regulation. In humans with both global and somatic
anxiety, increased connectivity is observed between the anterior
hippocampus and the amygdala.76 These studies provide impetus
to examine dorsal and ventral hippocampus in rodent studies,
where causative associations can be tested. Consistent with the
clinical findings, we detect a more prominent increase in the
generation and maturation of neurons in ventral hippocampus
following inhibitor treatment, even though proliferation and
survival increase throughout the dorsoventral axis. One possible
explanation for this ventral bias could be an opposing contribu-
tion from JNK1 and JNK2/3 isoforms towards later stages of
neurogenesis. By homology to LJNKI-1, DJNKI-1 should inhibit all
JNK isoforms.77 JNK2/3 isoforms, like JNK1, are physiologically
active in adult hippocampus,78 where they are required for stress-
induced amnesia,79 a process
requiring adult
hippocampal
neurogenesis in the dorsal hippocampus.80 In support of this
proposal, there is a less prominent dorsal–ventral gradient for
elevated neurogenesis in Jnk1 − / −
mice as compared with
inhibitor treated. Regardless of differential JNK isoform contribu-
tions, the ventral bias following inhibitor treatment indicates that
JNK inhibition provides an ideal approach to preferentially
promote neurogenesis in the ventral hippocampus, with potential
benefit for the treatment of affective disorders.18
The ventral hippocampus has reciprocal connections to the
medial PFC.81 Abnormal interaction between the ventral hippo-
campus and the medial PFC is not only associated with
depression, but also with schizophrenia and post-traumatic stress
disorder.72 Interestingly therefore, sequence variation in MKK7, an
upstream JNK pathway regulator, have been associated with
schizophrenia.39 Although it is not clear whether these anomalies
result in a gain or loss of JNK function, the hippocampal
connection described here may contribute.
Here we report that JNK is a dominant controller of anxiety and
depressive behaviour and that inhibition of the JNK pathway is
accompanied by increased neurogenesis and relief from depres-
sive and anxiety-like behaviour. The graded plasticity changes
upon JNK inhibition, highest in ventral hippocampus, may be
disease relevant as neuroimaging studies have revealed increased
functional connectivity in the anterior hippocampus and amyg-
dala of patients with anxiety, implicating this region in the
pathophysiology of mood disorders.76,82 Consistent with this
proposal,
neuronal
JNK
is
activated
by
stressors
that
are
considered central in anxiety and depressive disorders including
corticosterone83 and glutamate, acting via NMDA (N-methyl-D-
aspartate) or AMPA receptors.77,84,85 Significantly, glutamate and
cortisol
in
humans
and
corticosterone
in
rodents
impair
neurogenesis.1,86 In addition, JNKs are activated in animal models
of depression and regulate glucocorticoid receptor signalling.86–88
Our data identify a mechanism whereby JNK may play a central
role in the signalling events underlying affective disorders and
highlight a new benefit of targeting a protein kinase that is widely
associated with apoptotic signalling.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Petteri Piepponen, Jaakko Kopra and Juho-Matti Renko at the
University of Helsinki for training HM to carry out cannulation and mini-pump
implant surgeries. We thank the Cell Imaging Core at Turku Centre for Biotechnology
for providing devices and technical support. This work was funded by EU FP7 ITN
608346 r’BIRTH and Academy of Finland Grants 135090 and 255537 to ETC that
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
372
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 supported HM, FM, E F and SO-M, and the Sigrid Juselius Foundation Grant to ETC
that funded PH. In addition, we thank the Doctoral Network in Molecular Biosciences
at Åbo Akademi University for funding HM and PH and the Finnish Graduate School
of Neuroscience for funding EK. This research was funded in part by the National
Institute on Aging, Intramural Research Program (to BDP and HvP).
REFERENCES
1 Gold PW. The organization of the stress system and its dysregulation in depres-
sive illness. Mol Psychiatry 2015; 20: 32–47.
2 Vos T, Flaxman AD, Naghavi M, Lozano R, Michaud C, Ezzati M et al. Years lived
with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 diseases and injuries 1990-2010: a
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2012;
380: 2163–2196.
3 Bremner JD, Randall P, Scott TM, Bronen RA, Seibyl JP, Southwick SM et al. MRI-
based measurement of hippocampal volume in patients with combat-related
posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry 1995; 152: 973–981.
4 MacMillan S, Szeszko PR, Moore GJ, Madden R, Lorch E, Ivey J et al. Increased
amygdala: hippocampal volume ratios associated with severity of anxiety in
pediatric major depression. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 2003; 13: 65–73.
5 Kjelstrup KG, Tuvnes FA, Steffenach HA, Murison R, Moser EI, Moser MB. Reduced
fear expression after lesions of the ventral hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2002; 99: 10825–10830.
6 Kheirbek MA, Drew LJ, Burghardt NS, Costantini DO, Tannenholz L, Ahmari SE
et al. Differential control of learning and anxiety along the dorsoventral axis of the
dentate gyrus. Neuron 2013; 77: 955–968.
7 Radley JJ, Kabbaj M, Jacobson L, Heydendael W, Yehuda R, Herman JP. Stress risk
factors and stress-related pathology: neuroplasticity, epigenetics and endophe-
notypes. Stress 2011; 14: 481–497.
8 Bannerman DM, Rawlins JN, McHugh SB, Deacon RM, Yee BK, Bast T et al. Regional
dissociations within the hippocampus--memory and anxiety. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev 2004; 28: 273–283.
9 Strange BA, Witter MP, Lein ES, Moser EI. Functional organization of the
hippocampal longitudinal axis. Nat Rev Neurosci 2014; 15: 655–669.
10 Forster GL, Novick AM, Scholl JL, Watt MJ. The role of the amygdala in anxiety
disorders. In: Ferry B (ed). The Amygdala - A Discreet Multitasking Manager.
In-tech, Rijeka, Croatia, 2012, pp 61–102.
11 Padilla-Coreano N, Bolkan SS, Pierce GM, Blackman DR, Hardin WD, Garcia-Garcia
AL et al. Direct ventral hippocampal-prefrontal input is required for anxiety-
related neural activity and behavior. Neuron 2016; 89: 857–866.
12 O'Leary OF, Cryan JF. A ventral view on antidepressant action: roles for adult
hippocampal neurogenesis along the dorsoventral axis. Trends Pharmacol Sci
2014; 35: 675–687.
13 David DJ, Samuels BA, Rainer Q, Wang JW, Marsteller D, Mendez I et al.
Neurogenesis-dependent and -independent effects of fluoxetine in an animal
model of anxiety/depression. Neuron 2009; 62: 479–493.
14 Revest JM, Dupret D, Koehl M, Funk-Reiter C, Grosjean N, Piazza PV et al. Adult
hippocampal neurogenesis is involved in anxiety-related behaviors. Mol Psychiatry
2009; 14: 959–967.
15 Snyder JS, Soumier A, Brewer M, Pickel J, Cameron HA. Adult hippocampal neu-
rogenesis buffers stress responses and depressive behaviour. Nature 2011; 476:
458–461.
16 Malberg JE, Eisch AJ, Nestler EJ, Duman RS. Chronic antidepressant treatment
increases neurogenesis in adult rat hippocampus. J Neurosci 2000; 20: 9104–9110.
17 Surget A, Tanti A, Leonardo ED, Laugeray A, Rainer Q, Touma C et al.
Antidepressants recruit new neurons to improve stress response regulation.
Mol Psychiatry 2011; 16: 1177–1188.
18 Tanti A, Belzung C. Neurogenesis along the septo-temporal axis of the
hippocampus: are depression and the action of antidepressants region-specific?
Neuroscience 2013; 252: 234–252.
19 Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C, Surget A, Battaglia F, Dulawa S et al. Requirement of
hippocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepressants. Science
2003; 301: 805–809.
20 Schloesser RJ, Orvoen S, Jimenez DV, Hardy NF, Maynard KR, Sukumar M et al.
Antidepressant-like
effects
of
electroconvulsive
seizures
require
adult
neurogenesis in a neuroendocrine model of depression. Brain Stimul 2015; 8:
862–867.
21 Bessa JM, Ferreira D, Melo I, Marques F, Cerqueira JJ, Palha JA et al. The mood-
improving actions of antidepressants do not depend on neurogenesis but are
associated with neuronal remodeling. Mol Psychiatry 2009; 14: 764–773, 739.
22 Marlatt MW, Lucassen PJ, van Praag H. Comparison of neurogenic effects of
fluoxetine, duloxetine and running in mice. Brain Res 2010; 1341: 93–99.
23 Deng W, Gage FH. The effect of immature adult-born dentate granule cells on
hyponeophagial behavior is related to their roles in learning and memory.
Front Syst Neurosci 2015; 9: 34.
24 Fanselow MS, Dong HW. Are the dorsal and ventral hippocampus functionally
distinct structures? Neuron 2010; 65: 7–19v.
25 Shackman AJ, Fox AS, Oler JA, Shelton SE, Davidson RJ, Kalin NH. Neural
mechanisms underlying heterogeneity in the presentation of anxious tempera-
ment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110: 6145–6150.
26 Musazzi L, Treccani G, Mallei A, Popoli M. The action of antidepressants on the
glutamate system: regulation of glutamate release and glutamate receptors. Biol
Psychiatry 2013; 73: 1180–1188.
27 Xia Z, Dickens M, Raingeaud J, Davis RJ, Greenberg ME. Opposing effects of ERK
and JNK-p38 MAP kinases on apoptosis. Science 1995; 270: 1326–1331.
28 Coffey ET, Hongisto V, Dickens M, Davis RJ, Courtney MJ. Dual roles for c-Jun
N-terminal kinase in developmental and stress responses in cerebellar granule
neurons. J Neurosci 2000; 20: 7602–7613.
29 Chang L, Jones Y, Ellisman MH, Goldstein LS, Karin M. JNK1 is required for
maintenance
of
neuronal
microtubules
and
controls
phosphorylation
of
microtubule-associated proteins. Dev Cell 2003; 4: 521–533.
30 Björkblom B, Ostman N, Hongisto V, Komarovski V, Filén JJ, Nyman TA et al.
Constitutively active cytoplasmic c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 is a dominant
regulator of dendritic architecture: role of microtubule-associated protein 2 as an
effector. J Neurosci 2005; 25: 6350–6361.
31 Oliva AA, Atkins CM, Copenagle L, Banker GA. Activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase is
required for axon formation. J Neurosci 2006; 26: 9462–9470.
32 Westerlund N, Zdrojewska J, Padzik A, Komulainen E, Björkblom B, Rannikko E
et al. Phosphorylation of SCG10/stathmin-2 determines multipolar stage exit and
neuronal migration rate. Nat Neurosci 2011; 14: 305–313.
33 Komulainen E, Zdrojewska J, Freemantle E, Mohammad H, Marchisella F, Hollos P
et al. JNK1 regulates dendrite architecture in the motor cortex and alters fine
motor function. Front Cell Neurosci 2014; 8: 272.
34 Coffey ET. Nuclear and cytosolic JNK signalling in neurons. Nat Rev Neurosci 2014;
15: 285–299.
35 Baptista J, Mercer C, Prigmore E, Gribble SM, Carter NP, Maloney V et al.
Breakpoint mapping and array CGH in translocations: comparison of a phenoty-
pically normal and an abnormal cohort. Am J Hum Genet 2008; 82: 927–936.
36 McCarthy SE, Makarov V, Kirov G, Addington AM, McClellan J, Yoon S et al.
Microduplications of 16p11.2 are associated with schizophrenia. Nat Genet 2009;
41: 1223–1227.
37 Pavlowsky A, Gianfelice A, Pallotto M, Zanchi A, Vara H, Khelfaoui M et al.
A postsynaptic signaling pathway that may account for the cognitive defect due
to IL1RAPL1 mutation. Curr Biol 2010; 20: 103–115.
38 de Anda FC, Rosario AL, Durak O, Tran T, Gräff J, Meletis K et al. Autism spectrum
disorder susceptibility gene TAOK2 affects basal dendrite formation in the
neocortex. Nat Neurosci 2012; 15: 1022–1031.
39 Winchester CL, Ohzeki H, Vouyiouklis DA, Thompson R, Penninger JM, Yamagami
K et al. Converging evidence that sequence variations in the novel candidate
gene MAP2K7 (MKK7) are functionally associated with schizophrenia. Hum Mol
Genet 2012; 21: 4910–4921.
40 Marchisella F, Coffey ET, Hollos P. Microtubule and microtubule associated
protein anomalies in psychiatric disease. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken) 2016; 73:
596–611.
41 van Praag H, Schinder AF, Christie BR, Toni N, Palmer TD, Gage FH. Functional
neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature 2002; 415: 1030–1034.
42 Smolinsky AM, Bergner CL, LaPorte JL, Kalueff AV Analysis of grooming
behavior and its utility in studying animal stress, anxiety and depression. In: Gould
TD (ed). Mood and Anxiety Related Phenotypes in Mice. vol. 42. Humana Press:
New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp 1–20.
43 Kuhn HG, Dickinson-Anson H, Gage FH. Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the
adult rat: age-related decrease of neuronal progenitor proliferation. J Neurosci
1996; 16: 2027–2033.
44 Krishnan V, Berton O, Nestler E. The use of animal models in psychiatric research
and treatment. Am J Psychiatry 2008; 165: 1109.
45 Bremner JD, Narayan M, Anderson ER, Staib LH, Miller HL, Charney DS. Hippocampal
volume reduction in major depression. Am J Psychiatry 2000; 157: 115–118.
46 Frodl T, Carballedo A, Frey EM, O'Keane V, Skokauskas N, Morris D et al. Expression
of glucocorticoid inducible genes is associated with reductions in cornu ammonis
and dentate gyrus volumes in patients with major depressive disorder.
Dev Psychopathol 2014; 26(4 Pt 2): 1209–1217.
47 Wu MV, Hen R. Functional dissociation of adult-born neurons along the dorso-
ventral axis of the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus 2014; 24: 751–761.
48 Sun H, Kennedy PJ, Nestler EJ. Epigenetics of the depressed brain: role of histone
acetylation and methylation. Neuropsychopharmacology 2013; 38: 124–137.
49 Myers AK, Meechan DW, Adney DR, Tucker ES. Cortical interneurons require Jnk1 to
enter and navigate the developing cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 2014; 34: 7787–7801.
50 Bonny C, Oberson A, Negri S, Sauser C, Schorderet DF. Cell-permeable
peptide inhibitors of JNK: novel blockers of beta-cell death. Diabetes 2001; 50:
77–82.
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
373
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
 51 Lee JK, Park J, Lee YD, Lee SH, Han PL. Distinct localization of SAPK isoforms in
neurons of adult mouse brain implies multiple signaling modes of SAPK pathway.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1999; 70: 116–124.
52 Doetsch F, García-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A. Regeneration of a germinal layer
in the adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96: 11619–11624.
53 Jan YN, Jan LY. Branching out: mechanisms of dendritic arborization. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2010; 11: 316–328.
54 Henze DA, Urban NN, Barrionuevo G. The multifarious hippocampal mossy fiber
pathway: a review. Neuroscience 2000; 98: 407–427.
55 McAllister AK. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of dendrite growth. Cereb
Cortex 2000; 10: 963–973.
56 Courtney MJ, Coffey ET. The mechanism of Ara-C-induced apoptosis of
differentiating cerebellar granule neurons. Eur J Neurosci 1999; 11: 1073–1084.
57 Zhao C, Teng EM, Summers RG, Ming GL, Gage FH. Distinct morphological stages
of dentate granule neuron maturation in the adult mouse hippocampus.
J Neurosci 2006; 26: 3–11.
58 Tararuk T, Ostman N, Li W, Björkblom B, Padzik A, Zdrojewska J et al. JNK1
phosphorylation
of
SCG10
determines
microtubule
dynamics
and
axodendritic length. J Cell Biol 2006; 173: 265–277.
59 Kempermann G. Seven principles in the regulation of adult neurogenesis.
Eur J Neurosci 2011; 33: 1018–1024.
60 Kuan CY, Yang DD, Samanta Roy DR, Davis RJ, Rakic P, Flavell RA. The Jnk1 and
Jnk2 protein kinases are required for regional specific apoptosis during early brain
development. Neuron 1999; 22: 667–676.
61 Ben-Zvi A, Yagil Z, Hagalili Y, Klein H, Lerman O, Behar O. Semaphorin 3A and
neurotrophins: a balance between apoptosis and survival signaling in embryonic
DRG neurons. J Neurochem 2006; 96: 585–597.
62 Scharfman HE. The CA3 "backprojection" to the dentate gyrus. Prog Brain Res
2007; 163: 627–637.
63 Vivar C, Potter MC, Choi J, Lee JY, Stringer TP, Callaway EM et al. Monosynaptic
inputs to new neurons in the dentate gyrus. Nat Commun 2012; 3: 1107.
64 Lacefield CO, Itskov V, Reardon T, Hen R, Gordon JA. Effects of adult-generated
granule cells on coordinated network activity in the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus
2012; 22: 106–116.
65 Niwa H, Yamamura K, Miyazaki J. Efficient selection for high-expression
transfectants with a novel eukaryotic vector. Gene 1991; 108: 193–199.
66 Zhao C. Retrovirus-mediated cell labeling. In: Fred Gage GK, Song Hongjun (eds).
Adult Neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press: New York, NY, USA,
2008, pp 101–117.
67 Yu DX, Di Giorgio FP, Yao J, Marchetto MC, Brennand K, Wright R et al. Modeling
hippocampal neurogenesis using human pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cell Rep
2014; 2: 295–310.
68 Björkblom B, Vainio JC, Hongisto V, Herdegen T, Courtney MJ, Coffey ET. All JNKs
can kill, but nuclear localization is critical for neuronal death. J Biol Chem 2008;
283: 19704–19713.
69 Charalampopoulos I, Vicario A, Pediaditakis I, Gravanis A, Simi A, Ibáñez CF.
Genetic dissection of neurotrophin signaling through the p75 neurotrophin
receptor. Cell Rep 2012; 2: 1563–1570.
70 Repici M, Centeno C, Tomasi S, Forloni G, Bonny C, Vercelli A et al. Time-course of
c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation after cerebral ischemia and effect of D-JNKI1 on
c-Jun and caspase-3 activation. Neuroscience 2007; 150: 40–49.
71 Yang SH, Sharrocks AD, Whitmarsh AJ. Transcriptional regulation by the MAP
kinase signaling cascades. Gene 2003; 320: 3–21.
72 Jin J, Maren S. Prefrontal-hippocampal interactions in memory and emotion. Front
Syst Neurosci 2015; 9: 170.
73 Tannenholz L, Jimenez JC, Kheirbek MA. Local and regional heterogeneity
underlying hippocampal modulation of cognition and mood. Front Behav
Neurosci 2014; 8: 147.
74 Maguire EA, Gadian DG, Johnsrude IS, Good CD, Ashburner J, Frackowiak RS et al.
Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000; 97: 4398–4403v.
75 Sahay A, Scobie KN, Hill AS, O'Carroll CM, Kheirbek MA, Burghardt NS et al.
Increasing adult hippocampal neurogenesis is sufficient to improve pattern
separation. Nature 2011; 472: 466–470.
76 Andreescu C, Mennin D, Tudorascu D, Sheu LK, Walker S, Banihashemi L et al.
The many faces of anxiety-neurobiological correlates of anxiety phenotypes.
Psychiatry Res 2015; 234: 96–105.
77 Borsello T, Clarke PG, Hirt L, Vercelli A, Repici M, Schorderet DF et al. A peptide
inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase protects against excitotoxicity and cerebral
ischemia. Nat Med 2003; 9: 1180–1186.
78 Brecht S, Kirchhof R, Chromik A, Willesen M, Nicolaus T, Raivich G et al. Specific
pathophysiological functions of JNK isoforms in the brain. Eur J Neurosci 2005; 21:
363–377.
79 Sherrin T, Blank T, Hippel C, Rayner M, Davis RJ, Todorovic C. Hippocampal c-Jun-
N-terminal kinases serve as negative regulators of associative learning. J Neurosci
2010; 30: 13348–13361.
80 Akers KG, Martinez-Canabal A, Restivo L, Yiu AP, De Cristofaro A, Hsiang HL et al.
Hippocampal neurogenesis regulates forgetting during adulthood and infancy.
Science 2014; 344: 598–602.
81 Thierry AM, Gioanni Y, Dégénétais E, Glowinski J. Hippocampo-prefrontal cortex
pathway: anatomical and electrophysiological characteristics. Hippocampus 2000;
10: 411–419.
82 Satpute AB, Mumford JA, Naliboff BD, Poldrack RA. Human anterior and posterior
hippocampus respond distinctly to state and trait anxiety. Emotion 2012; 12:
58–68.
83 Qi AQ, Qiu J, Xiao L, Chen YZ. Rapid activation of JNK and p38 by glucocorticoids
in primary cultured hippocampal cells. J Neurosci Res 2005; 80: 510–517.
84 Mukherjee PK, DeCoster MA, Campbell FZ, Davis RJ, Bazan NG. Glutamate
receptor signaling interplay modulates stress-sensitive mitogen-activated protein
kinases and neuronal cell death. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 6493–6498.
85 Thomas GM, Lin DT, Nuriya M, Huganir RL. Rapid and bi-directional regulation of
AMPA receptor phosphorylation and trafficking by JNK. EMBO J 2008; 27:
361–372.
86 Egeland M, Zunszain PA, Pariante CM. Molecular mechanisms in the regulation of
adult neurogenesis during stress. Nat Rev Neurosci 2015; 16: 189–200.
87 Rogatsky I, Logan SK, Garabedian MJ. Antagonism of glucocorticoid receptor
transcriptional activation by the c-Jun N-terminal kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998; 95: 2050–2055.
88 Adzic M, Djordjevic J, Djordjevic A, Niciforovic A, Demonacos C, Radojcic M et al.
Acute or chronic stress induce cell compartment-specific phosphorylation of
glucocorticoid receptor and alter its transcriptional activity in Wistar rat brain.
J Endocrinol 2009; 202: 87–97.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under
the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license
holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2018
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Molecular Psychiatry website (http://www.nature.com/mp)
JNK controls anxiety from the hippocampus
H Mohammad et al
374
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 362 – 374
