 By Manoj Mohanan, Katherine Hay, and Nachiket Mor
ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY
Quality Of Health Care In India:
Challenges, Priorities, And The
Road Ahead
ABSTRACT India’s health care sector provides a wide range of quality of
care, from globally acclaimed hospitals to facilities that deliver care of
unacceptably low quality. Efforts to improve the quality of care are
particularly challenged by the lack of reliable data on quality and by
technical difficulties in measuring quality. Ongoing efforts in the public
and private sectors aim to improve the quality of data, develop better
measures and understanding of the quality of care, and develop
innovative solutions to long-standing challenges. We summarize priorities
and the challenges faced by efforts to improve the quality of care. We also
highlight lessons learned from recent efforts to measure and improve
that quality, based on the articles on quality of care in India that are
published in this issue of Health Affairs. The rapidly changing profile of
diseases in India and rising chronic disease burden make it urgent for
state and central governments to collaborate with researchers and
agencies that implement programs to improve health care to further the
quality agenda.
O
ne of the striking features of In-
dia’s health care sector is the
range of quality in available ser-
vices. Indiais hometo global lead-
ers in innovation in and quality of
health care such as the Narayana Hospitals,
known for providing high-quality cardiovascular
surgery at low cost, and the Aravind Eye Care
System, whose hospitals provide a high volume
of cataract surgery, as well as globally renowned
medical teaching institutions such as the All In-
dia Institute of Medical Sciences, in New Delhi.1,2
Simultaneously, many Indians—especially the
poor—receive unacceptably low-quality primary
and hospital care.3,4 The rapidly growing burden
of chronic diseases in India makes the low quali-
ty of care highly salient for health policy.
The challenge of low quality in health care is
not unique to India. Studies from a range of
developed and developing countries have dem-
onstrated widespread problems with providers
who make little effort to ensure that patients
receive high-quality care, geographic variations
in the quality of health care services, and high
levels of medical errors.5–9
Efforts to improve the quality of health care
services in low-resource settings, including In-
dia, have typically focused on structural con-
straints.10 Recent studies in low-income coun-
tries have documented low levels of provider
knowledge, in both the public and the private
sectors, and have found evidence of large gaps
between providers’ knowledge and the care pro-
vided, sometimes called “know-do gaps.”11,12 In
addition to providers’ lack of capacity or knowl-
edge in such settings, low quality of care could
also be due to the lack of incentives in the health
system or information problems in the health
care market, combined with a lack of account-
ability among providers and poorly functioning
governance systems in the health system. It is
important to understand the process of deliver-
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0676
HEALTH AFFAIRS 35,
NO. 10 (2016): 1753–1758
This open access article is
distributed in accordance with the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license.
Manoj Mohanan (manoj
.mohanan@duke.edu) is an
assistant professor of public
policy and economics in the
Sanford School of Public
Policy at Duke University, an
assistant research professor
at the Duke Global Health
Institute, and faculty research
scholar at the Duke
Population Research Institute,
all in Durham, North Carolina.
Katherine Hay is deputy
director of the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation India, in
New Delhi.
Nachiket Mor is director of
the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation India.
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1753
Quality Of Care In India
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 ing health care services and the factors that can
limit providers’ effectiveness.
A cluster of articles in this issue of Health Af-
fairs focuses on challenges related to the quality
of health care in India. The cluster includes ar-
ticles that describe challenges in using data from
household surveys and hospital administrative
records to measure the quality of care, examine a
deliverymodel for high-quality surgical care, and
evaluate a state-run ambulance service program
designed to improve access to and use of care, as
well as a DataWatch article on trends in state-
level maternal and child health indicators. In
addition to reviewing the state of research and
evidence on the quality of health care in India,
this article discusses critical challenges related
to scaling up promising innovations and gover-
nance issues related to the quality of care.
Measurement Of Quality
Efforts to improve the quality of health care in
India and attempts to evaluate the impact of
these efforts invariably face challenges because
of the lack of reliable administrative data. Of the
three categories of Avedis Donabedian’s mea-
sures of the quality of health care (structure,
process, and outcomes),13,14 structural measures
have traditionally received the most attention in
the form of government surveys of health facili-
ties and recordkeeping to track the availability of
resources such as numbers of hospital beds and
personnel and quantities of supplies. Whether
these resources can be used productively in de-
livering high-quality care to patients depends on
the process aspects of care, including the capaci-
ty of health-sector workers. Measuring the qual-
ity of the process of delivering health care and
the resulting health outcomes is especially chal-
lenging, requiring methods and approaches that
go beyond standard service statistics and facility
surveys.
Research Methods Recent studies in India
and elsewhere that employed research methods
such as observations of health care providers’
performance,
exit
interviews
of
patients,
vignette-based interviews of providers, and stan-
dardized patients who present unannounced to
assess the experience of real patients demon-
strate the potential of research methods to mea-
sure quality for a range of illnesses in primary
care settings.11,12,15–20 However, these research
methods of quality assessment have limitations.
For example, measuring the quality of care in
settings where providers are aware that they
are being assessed (such as through methods
of direct observation or patient exit interviews)
could bias results because of the so-called Haw-
thorne effect, with providers changing their be-
havior because they know that they are being
observed or evaluated.21
Using standardized patients who are incogni-
to can help circumvent concerns about differenc-
es in the composition of the patient populations
of various providers, Hawthorne effects, and
know-do gaps that would be limitations with
other methods.11,12,16,19 The standardized patient
method is considered a gold standard for the
measurement of quality. However, it is limited
in the types of cases that can be presented to
providers and the settings in which the method
can be used without potentially harming the
standardized patient or revealing that he or
she is not a real patient.
Furthermore, the research methods described
above are often inadequate for quality measure-
ment in hospitals, where the process of health
care delivery is even more difficult to observe
than itisin primarycaresettings. Thelimitations
of the methods underscore the importance of
high-quality administrative data for both policy
makers and researchers trying to identify quality
gaps or to evaluate the impact of efforts to
improve quality. For example, the article by
Kimberly Babiarz and coauthors in this issue
of Health Affairs describes one of the first evalu-
ations of the Emergency Management and Re-
search Institute’s 108-ambulance system in In-
dia; the authors report challenges in directly
measuring the quality of care because of data
limitations.22
Promising Efforts There are several promis-
ing efforts to create new data sources to address
this specific data gap in the direct measurement
of the quality of care.23 For example, the Indian
government’s proposal to increase the frequency
of the National Family Health Survey—moving
from a ten-year cycle to a three-year one24—holds
the promise of generating more timely district-
level data on the quality of health care and on
health outcomes.
While the availability of new administrative
data from hospital records and new household
surveys presents unique opportunities to under-
stand issues related to the quality of care inIndia,
the use of new data to measure that quality is also
a challenge. Two articles in this issue use data
from household surveys and hospital adminis-
trative records to present findings from new data
sets. Jishnu Das and Aakash Mohpal analyze a
unique data set that matched 23,275 households
across 100 villages to health care providers in
each of the villages, to document the quality of
rural health carein the state of Madhya Pradesh.4
The authors find no within-village association
between residents’ socioeconomic characteris-
tics and the quality of health care providers. Im-
portantly, the article also highlights how using
Quality Of Care In India
1754
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 quality measures based on random samples of
providers will not reflect the quality of providers
used by households, especially in settings with
large variations in patient loads or with house-
holds whose members seek care outside of sam-
pling areas.
Another article in this issue, by Matthew
Morton and coauthors, analyzes claims data in
the context of hospitals’ quality of care in a dis-
trict in the state of Orissa.25 Although India’s
National Accreditation Board of Hospitals and
Healthcare Providers has developed recommen-
dations for administrative data requirements,
it has not been possible to analyze the quality
of care nationally using hospital data, because
of a lack of availability of data from many hos-
pitals. To address this major gap, the Govern-
ment of India is considering a national-level
initiative to measure hospital quality in a stan-
dardized manner.
Similarly, the advent in 2008 of the Rashtriya
Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY; the National
Health Insurance Plan) in India, with its stan-
dardized reporting requirement, has the poten-
tial to significantly change this limitation. The
article by Morton and coauthors reports findings
from an attempt to develop quality metrics using
RSBYclaims data.25 The authors find several lim-
itations in currently available data, such as lack
of completeness and mismatches, and problems
with different systems of patient identification
that prevent records’ being linked across govern-
ment programs, and they provide recommenda-
tions that could significantly improve data qual-
ity and completeness in future.
Strategies To Improve Quality
A unique aspect of India’s health care sector is
the limited availability of formally trained health
care providers—those with at least a bachelor of
medicine and bachelor of surgery (MBBS) de-
gree, the equivalent of an MD in the United
States—in rural areas, which is partly due to
the challenges of recruiting and retaining quali-
fied staff in the public sector in such areas.26 As a
result, most health care in rural areas of India,
where 75 percent of the country’s population
lives, is delivered by providers who do not have
formal medical training.4 Perhaps even more
concerning is the fact that empirical studies have
found that providers in such rural areas in India
with formal medical training do not provide sig-
nificantly higher-quality care compared to infor-
mal providers—which suggests that increasing
the supply of formally trained providers alone
might not solve the problem.11,12,16,27
An alternative strategy for improving the qual-
ity of care, in the interim, might be to increase
the capacity of the existing supply of informal
providers in rural areas by providing them with
tools and incentives to deliver better care. How-
ever, empirical evidence on the impact of strate-
gies to engage with informal-sector providers to
improve the quality of care remains scarce.
In an experimental intervention in 2013 in
West Bengal, the Liver Foundation—in collabo-
ration with researchers—offered more than sev-
enty sessions of training (covering a range of
critical topics in health and health care) to infor-
mal-sector providers over a period of nine
months.28 Not only did the intervention signifi-
cantly improve the quality of care in terms of
providers’ correctly managing cases, but it also
improved
adherence
to
checklists
for
best
practices.
In contrast, another large-scale effort to en-
gage with informal private providers—this one
in the state of Bihar—relied on the use of social
franchising and telemedicine to create a large
network of health care providers in rural areas.
Despite training thousands of informal pro-
viders and incorporatingtheminto thisnetwork,
the program failed to improve the quality of care
or to achieve any of the target health outcomes at
the population level.18,29
Lessons Learned These diverse experiences
hold valuable lessons both for efforts to improve
quality and for evidence-based policy. One key
lesson is that improving the quality of care deliv-
ered by informal providers who are already pro-
viding health services requires intensive efforts
over a sustained period of time to change pro-
viders’ practices. A second lesson is that the ef-
fectiveness of new approaches to improve the
quality of care needs to be demonstrated empiri-
cally before they are scaled up. In a positive ex-
ample of evidence-based policy, building on the
success of the Liver Foundation’s training pro-
gram, the government of the state of West Bengal
has recently approved a statewide scaling-up of
the training program, in which the government
will conduct once-a-week training for seven
thousand providers for a period of six months.30
Efforts In The Formal Care Sector In ad-
dition to improving the quality of care provided
in rural areas by informal-sector providers, there
are several major ongoing quality improvement
efforts in both public and private institutions in
the formal sector.
▸ PUBLIC SECTOR: Several state governments
in India have undertaken quality improvement
initiatives (mostly focused on maternal and child
health), combined with independent evalua-
tions of the performance and impact of these
initiatives. For example, the states of Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh, two of the largest states in
India that also have some of the worst health
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1755
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 indicators, are collaborating with external do-
nors and researchers to implement strategies
such as nurse mentoring and direct observation
of deliveries—where trained observers watch
and document the quality of services provided
during delivery. With more than eight thousand
deliveries observed since 2012, these efforts are
currently being evaluated. The Uttar Pradesh
government
is
also
conducting
a
large-
scale randomized implementation and evalua-
tion of social accountability interventions to
monitor and improve the delivery of health care
services at the village level. Efforts such as these
signal increasing interest from state govern-
ments in improving the quality of care and, im-
portantly, increasing openness to adopting
innovative methods to improve quality and eval-
uating them rigorously. Finally, efforts to invest
in better data, support evaluations, and promote
accountability also reflect governance improve-
ments in the health sector.
▸ PRIVATE SECTOR: Similarly, innovations in
the formal private sector can make major contri-
butions to improving the quality of health care.
The experience of innovators such as the Aravind
Eye Care System has several lessons for the man-
agement of health systems in the public and pri-
vate sector. As Hong-Gam Le and coauthors re-
port in this issue of Health Affairs,1 the system
adopted widespread task shifting, using para-
professionals to conduct most pre- and periop-
erative tasks to deliver high-quality cataract sur-
gery at low cost. However, efficiency-enhancing
strategies such as having paraprofessionals dis-
cuss surgical options with patients and not re-
quiring surgeons to change gloves or operating
gowns between patients are not without peril.
While they might have been implemented suc-
cessfully in the highly controlled environment of
the Aravind Eye Care System, expanding these
methods broadly to other settings could pose
significant risks to patients and patient satisfac-
tion. Empirical evidence is critical for policy
makers to decide whether models such as that
used by the system can be replicated in other
settings, applied to other health care services,
or scaled up nationally to meet population health
care needs in India.
Given that the majority of health care in India
is obtained not in the public sector but in the
private sector,27 engaging with private providers
is strategically important for health policy.While
public-private partnerships in health care have
received considerable attention, previous large-
scale efforts have not yielded significant im-
provements in targeted health outcomes or
out-of-pocket spending.31,32
Performance incentive contracts for health
care providers are another promising option to
improve quality through engagement with the
private sector.33 Although governments in devel-
oping countries have been eager to experiment
with performance-based contracts in health care
delivery, most performance incentive programs
do not reward health improvements directly.34
Furthermore, evidence on the impact on
health outcomes of programs that reward the
provision of inputs has been mixed.34–36 A field
experiment in the state of Karnataka randomly
assigned obstetric care providers to receive con-
tracts with performance incentives based on
either inputs (adherence to best-practice guide-
lines for obstetric care issued jointly by the Gov-
ernment of India and the World Health Organi-
zation) or health outcomes, and researchers
found that both types of contracts reduced rates
of postpartum hemorrhage by 20 percent, rela-
tive to the control arm.37 The study also found
that input-based contracts required smaller in-
centive payments to achieve these reductions
than output-based contracts did, but implement-
ing input-based contracts required reliable ad-
ministrative data on the inputs provided that are
not routinely available. These data were collected
with intensive fieldwork as part of this experi-
ment. A significant area of investment for state
and central governments in coming years will be
to improve the quality of administrative data, as
Morton and coauthors point out.25 Ongoing ef-
forts in various states in India to strengthen their
health management information systems are
promising steps in this direction.
Scaling Up A related and equally important
issue in quality improvement concerns scaling
up quality initiatives that are often developed in
small-scale controlled settings. This is especially
pertinent for innovations with demonstrated ef-
ficacy, but not effectiveness, in real-world set-
tings. Successfully scaling up such innovations
requires a careful assessment of underlying mar-
ket demand, an understanding of how the inno-
vations might evolve or need to evolve during
implementation, and an understanding of how
the key market actors (providers and patients)
respond to changing market conditions during
the scaling up. Examples such as the Assess,
Innovate, Develop, Engage, Devolve (AIDED)
model of scaling up family health programs38
could be adapted for use in India to help policy
makers as they prepare to implement large inno-
vative programs that require implementing
agencies to adapt dynamically in a complex en-
vironment.
A more cautious approach to scaling up suc-
cessful pilot programs, given the scarcity of
resources in countries such as India, would be
to require evidence of effectiveness before scal-
ing up a program—insofar as that is possible.
Quality Of Care In India
1756
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 Even when innovative programs have evidence
of effectiveness, it would be prudent to rigorous-
ly evaluate the impact of their scaled-up imple-
mentation. Another critical reason to invest in
generating robust empirical evidence on pro-
gram effectiveness is that such evidence could
prevent successful innovative programs from be-
ing discontinued for reasons of political econo-
my or because of evolving trends in global health
priorities.
Moving Forward On Improving
Health Care Quality
This cluster of Health Affairs articles examines
issues central to the quality of health care in
India against a background of significant ongo-
ing reforms that create new opportunities for
states to change their allocations of resources
to the health sector. Given the measurement
and data challenges that these articles address,
it is important to note that even with improved
data to clarify the problems and challenges in
providing high-quality health care, the ability
of national and state governments to take appro-
priate action to improve the quality of care is
related to overall governance and accountability.
In India’s federalist structure, health is a matter
of state jurisdiction. Although the central gov-
ernment has traditionally tried to influence
health-sector priorities through policies and ver-
tical programs, states are ultimately responsible
for how their respective health systems function.
A significant recent financial development in
India was the fiscal federalism reform in 2015
that was part of the Fourteenth Finance Commis-
sion’s effort to give states more control of spend-
ing. India’s central government decided to in-
crease the share of total tax revenue to be
returned to individual states from 32 percent
to 42 percent—an annual increase of approxi-
mately $16 billion that states will have full auton-
omy in deciding how to allocate.39 However, ma-
jor federally funded central programs such as the
National Health Mission, an initiative to address
the health needs of underserved and vulnerable
population groups in India, witnessed reduc-
tions in federal commitments of funds, raising
concerns that the health sector might be receiv-
ing fewer financial resources under the current
administration than in the past.40,41
Nonetheless, with increased autonomy as a
result of the fiscal decentralization, state govern-
ments have the opportunity to respond to the
needs of their respective populations and allo-
cate resources as needed. Depending on states’
ability and capacity to identify such needs and
adequately address them with policy reforms,
topics such as the quality of health care could
receive timely attention. While multiple models
of resource allocation and heterogeneity in state
priorities are bound to emerge,42 we hope that
policy makers and researchers in India will direct
more attention to issues related to the quality of
care in the health system.
Conclusion
Improving the quality of health care at the sys-
tem level requires a focus on governance issues,
including improving public-sector management,
building institutional capacity, and promoting a
culture of data-driven policies. Ideally, state and
local governments and local health facilities
would use data from administrative sources
and household surveys for quality improvement
efforts and for accountability in health care de-
livery. This use of evidence in making policy de-
cisions would require institutional incentives
and targeted capacity building in addition to in-
vestments in creating standardized and more
reliable data sets. It is critical for governments,
implementing agencies, and researchers work-
ing in India to collaborate on evidence-based
approaches to improve the quality of health care
and health outcomes. ▪
Funding was provided by the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation. The authors
are grateful to Jerry La Forgia, Joanna
Maselko, and two anonymous reviewers
for helpful comments. This is an open
access article distributed in accordance
with the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0)
license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt and build upon
this work, for commercial use, provided
the original work is properly cited. See:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/.
NOTES
1 Le H-G, Ehrlich JR, Venkatesh R,
Srinivasan A, Kolli A, Haripriay A,
et al. A sustainable model for deliv-
ering high-quality efficient cataract
surgery in southern India. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2016;25(10):1783–90.
2 Khanna T, Rangan VK, Manocaran
M. Narayana Hrudayalaya Heart
Hospital: cardiac care for the poor
(A). Cambridge (MA): Harvard
Business School; revised 2011 Aug.
(Harvard Business School Case
505-078).
3 Scott KW, Jha AK. Putting quality on
the global health agenda. N Engl J
Med. 2014;371(1):3–5.
4 Das J, Mohpal A. Socioeconomic
status and quality of care in rural
India: new evidence from provider
and household surveys. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2016;35(10):1764–73.
5 Jha AK, Larizgoitia I, Audera-Lopez
C, Prasopa-Plaizier N, Waters H,
Bates DW. The global burden of un-
safe medical care: analytic modelling
of observational studies. BMJ Qual
Saf. 2013;22(10):809–15.
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1757
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 6 Berendes S, Heywood P, Oliver S,
Garner P. Quality of private and
public ambulatory health care in low
and middle income countries: sys-
tematic review of comparative stud-
ies. PLoS Med. 2011;8(4):e1000433.
7 Institute of Medicine. Crossing the
quality chasm: a new health system
for the 21st century. Washington
(DC): National Academies Press;
2001.
8 Newhouse JP, Garber AM. Geo-
graphic variation in health care
spending in the United States: in-
sights from an Institute of Medicine
report. JAMA. 2013;310(12):1227–8.
9 Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical
error—the third leading cause of
death in the US. BMJ. 2016;353:
i2139.
10 Das J, Hammer J. Quality of primary
care in low-income countries: facts
and economics. Annu Rev Econ.
2014;6:525–53.
11 Das J, Kwan A, Daniels B,
Satyanarayana S, Subbaraman R,
Bergkvist S, et al. Use of standar-
dised patients to assess quality of
tuberculosis care: a pilot, cross-
sectional study. Lancet Infect Dis.
2015;15(11):1305–13.
12 Mohanan M, Vera-Hernández M,
Das V, Giardili S, Goldhaber-Fiebert
JD, Rabin TL, et al. The know-do gap
in quality of health care for child-
hood diarrhea and pneumonia in
rural India. JAMA Pediatr. 2015;
169(4):349–57.
13 McDonald KM, Sundaram V, Bravata
DM, Lewis R, Lin N, Kraft S, et al.
Technical Review 9: Closing the
quality gap: a critical analysis of
quality improvement strategies: vol-
ume 7—care coordination [Internet].
Rockville (MD): Agency for Health-
care Research and Quality; 2007 Jun
[cited 2016 Aug 22]. (AHRQ Publi-
cation No. 04[07]-0051-7). Available
from: http://www.ahrq.gov/
downloads/pub/evidence/pdf/care
gap/caregap.pdf
14 Donabedian A. The quality of medi-
cal care. Science. 1978;200(4344):
856–64.
15 Das J, Hammer JS. Which doctor?
Combining vignettes and item re-
sponse to measure clinical compe-
tence. J Dev Econ. 2005;78(2):
348–83.
16 Das J, Holla A, Das V, Mohanan M,
Tabak D, Chan B. In urban and rural
India, a standardized patient study
showed low levels of provider train-
ing and huge quality gaps. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2012;31(12):2774–84.
17 Das J, Hammer J, Leonard K. The
quality of medical advice in low-
income countries. J Econ Perspect.
2008;22(2):93–114.
18 Mohanan M, Giardili S, Das V,
Goldhaber-Fiebert J, Miller G, Rabin
T, et al. The effect of social fran-
chising and telemedicine on health
provider knowledge and quality of
care: evidence from Bihar, India.
(Unpublished paper, Durham, NC,
2016).
19 Sylvia S, Shi Y, Xue H, Tian X, Wang
H, Liu Q, et al. Survey using incog-
nito standardized patients shows
poor quality care in China’s rural
clinics. Health Policy Plan. 2015;
30(3):322–33.
20 Currie J, Lin W, Zhang W. Patient
knowledge and antibiotic abuse: ev-
idence from an audit study in China.
J Health Econ. 2011;30(5):933–49.
21 Leonard K, Masatu MC. Outpatient
process quality evaluation and the
Hawthorne effect. Soc Sci Med.
2006;63(9):2330–40.
22 Babiarz KS, Mahadevan SV, Divi N,
Miller G. Ambulance service associ-
ated with reduced probabilities of
neonatal and infant mortality in two
Indian states. Health Aff (Millwood).
2016;35(10):1774–82.
23 Dandona R, Pandey A, Dandona L. A
review of national health surveys in
India. Bull World Health Organ.
2016;94(4):286–96A.
24 Minutes of a meeting held between
the Government of India and key
development partners, 2016 Apr 8.
Available from the authors on
request.
25 Morton M, Nagpal S, Sadanandan R,
Bauhoff S. India’s largest hospital
insurance program faces challenges
in using claims data to measure
quality. Health Aff (Millwood).
2016;35(10):1792–99.
26 Rao M, Rao KD, Kumar AKS,
Chatterjee M, Sundararaman T.
Human resources for health in India.
Lancet. 2011;377(9765):587–98.
27 Das J, Holla A, Mohpal A,
Muralidharan K. Quality and ac-
countability in healthcare delivery:
audit-study evidence from primary
care in India. Am Econ Rev. Forth-
coming.
28 Das J. Improving quality of care
(slide presentation) [Internet].
Washington (DC): Institute of Med-
icine; 2015 Jan [cited 2016 Sep 1].
Available from: https://www
.nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/
media/Files/Activity%20Files/
Global/USAIDstandingcomm/Jan
%2028-29/3a%20Das.pdf
29 Mohanan M, Babiarz KS, Goldhaber-
Fiebert JD, Miller G, Vera-
Hernández M. Effect of a large-scale
social franchising and telemedicine
program on childhood diarrhea and
pneumonia outcomes in India.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2016;35
(10):1800–09.
30 Cousins S. Healing India’s tradi-
tional healers. Medium [serial on the
Internet]. 2016 Mar 9 [cited 2016
Sep 2]. Available from: https://
medium.com/the-development-set/
healing-india-s-traditional-healers-
31f55fc9749b
31 Mohanan M, Bauhoff S, La Forgia G,
Babiarz KS, Singh K, Miller G. Effect
of Chiranjeevi Yojana on institu-
tional deliveries and neonatal and
maternal outcomes in Gujarat, India:
a difference-in-differences analysis.
Bull World Health Organ. 2014;
92(3):187–94.
32 Temin M. Learning from disap-
pointment: reducing the cost of in-
stitutional delivery in Gujarat, India.
In: Glassman A, Temin M, editors.
Millions saved: new cases of proven
success in global health.Washington
(DC): Center for Global Develop-
ment; 2016.
33 Rosenthal MB, Fernandopulle R,
Song HR, Landon B. Paying for
quality: providers’ incentives for
quality improvement. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2004;23(2):127–41.
34 Miller G, Babiarz KS. Pay-for-per-
formance incentives in low- and
middle-income country health pro-
grams. In: Culyer AJ, editor. Ency-
clopedia of health economics. Am-
sterdam: Elsevier; 2014. Vol. 2,
p. 457–66.
35 Sherry TB, Bauhoff S, Mohanan M.
Paying for performance when health
care production is multi-dimension-
al: the impact of Rwanda’s national
program on rewarded services,
multitasking and health outcomes.
Am J Health Econ. Forthcoming.
36 Dupas P, Miguel E. Impacts and
determinants of health levels in low-
income countries [Internet]. Cam-
bridge (MA): National Bureau of
Economic Research; 2016 May [cited
2016 Aug 23]. (NBER Working Paper
No. 22235). Available from: http://
www.nber.org/papers/w22235.pdf
37 Mohanan M, Miller G, Donato K,
Truskinovsky Y, Vera-Hernández M.
The cost of asymmetric information
in performance contracts: experi-
mental evidence on input- and out-
put-based contracts for maternal and
child health care in India. (Unpub-
lished paper, Durham, NC, 2016).
38 Bradley EH, Curry LA, Taylor LA,
Pallas SW, Talbert-Slagle K, Yuan C,
et al. A model for scale up of family
health innovations in low-income
and middle-income settings: a mixed
methods study. BMJ Open. 2012;
2(4):e000987.
39 Center for Global Development.
Power to the states: making fiscal
transfers work for better health
[Internet]. Washington (DC): CGD;
2015 [cited 2016 Aug 23]. Available
from: http://www.cgdev.org/sites/
default/files/India-fiscal-transfers-
CGD-working-group-report.pdf
40 Sharma DC. India’s BJP government
and health: 1 year on. Lancet. 2015;
385(9982):2031–2.
41 Sundararaman T, Mukhopadhyay I,
Muraleedharan VR. No respite for
public health. Econ Polit Wkly.
2016;51(16):10–11.
42 Reddy KS. India’s aspirations for
universal health coverage. N Engl J
Med. 2015;373(1):1–5.
Quality Of Care In India
1758
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 06, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
