 At the Intersection of Health, Health Care and Policy
doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0481
35, no.10 (2016):1800-1809
Health Affairs 
Childhood Diarrhea And Pneumonia Outcomes In India
Effect Of A Large-Scale Social Franchising And Telemedicine Program On
and Marcos Vera-Hernández
Manoj Mohanan, Kimberly S. Babiarz, Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, Grant Miller
Cite this article as:
 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/35/10/1800
available at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is
 
Permissions :
For Reprints, Links &
http://content.healthaffairs.org/1340_reprints.php
 
 
Email Alertings : http://content.healthaffairs.org/subscriptions/etoc.dtl
 
 
To Subscribe :
https://fulfillment.healthaffairs.org
 
without prior written permission from the Publisher. All rights reserved.
or mechanical, including photocopying or by information storage or retrieval systems, 
may be reproduced, displayed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
States copyright law (Title 17, U.S. Code), no part of 
by Project HOPE - The People-to-People Health Foundation. As provided by United
Suite 600, Bethesda, MD 20814-6133. Copyright © 
 is published monthly by Project HOPE at 7500 Old Georgetown Road,
Health Affairs
Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 By Manoj Mohanan, Kimberly S. Babiarz, Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, Grant Miller, and
Marcos Vera-Hernández
Effect Of A Large-Scale Social
Franchising And Telemedicine
Program On Childhood Diarrhea
And Pneumonia Outcomes In India
ABSTRACT Despite the rapid growth of social franchising, there is little
evidence on its population impact in the health sector. Similar in many
ways to private-sector commercial franchising, social franchising can be
found in sectors with a social objective, such as health care. This article
evaluates the World Health Partners (WHP) Sky program, a large-scale
social franchising and telemedicine program in Bihar, India. We studied
appropriate treatment for childhood diarrhea and pneumonia and
associated health care outcomes. We used multivariate difference-in-
differences models to analyze data on 67,950 children ages five and under
in 2011 and 2014. We found that the WHP-Sky program did not improve
rates of appropriate treatment or disease prevalence. Both provider
participation and service use among target populations were low. Our
results do not imply that social franchising cannot succeed; instead, they
underscore the importance of understanding factors that explain
variation in the performance of social franchises. Our findings also
highlight, for donors and governments in particular, the importance of
conducting rigorous impact evaluations of new and potentially innovative
health care delivery programs before investing in scaling them up.
T
he private sector delivers a large
share of primary health care ser-
vices in many low-income coun-
tries, particularly in rural areas,
where public-sector providers are
scarce.1–6 In India, the private sector provides
about 70–80 percent of these services, and the
vast majority of private services are provided by
unqualified
informal-sector
providers.4,7,8
Health care service quality in rural settings is
often poor.5,9,10 Partly as a result, preventable
childhood illnesses cause persistently high rates
of mortality across India despite being inexpen-
sive to treat.11 Diarrheal diseases and respiratory
infections alone accounted for nearly half a mil-
lion deaths in children under age five in 2013.12
Strategies to improve the quality of health care
services in low-resource settings increasingly fo-
cus on new organizational models and technol-
ogies that are scalable and financially sustain-
able. Within this landscape, social franchising
models have become prominent. In 2014 alone,
social franchising firms in developing countries
provided health care services to almost twenty-
eight million people for a range of conditions,
including family planning, reproductive health,
and pediatric care.13
Social franchising adapts the tools of private-
sector commercial franchising to social sectors
in which governments also play a role, such as
health care.14,15 Although heterogeneous, all so-
cial franchising programs include a franchisor,
which creates a brand and defines a bundle of
services and delivery protocols, and franchisees,
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0481
HEALTH AFFAIRS 35,
NO. 10 (2016): 1800–1809
Published by Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
Manoj Mohanan (manoj
.mohanan@duke.edu) is an
assistant professor of public
policy and economics in the
Sanford School of Public
Policy at Duke University, an
assistant research professor
at the Duke Global Health
Institute, and faculty research
scholar at the Duke
Population Research Institute,
all in Durham, North Carolina.
Kimberly S. Babiarz is a
research associate in the
Center for Primary Care and
Outcomes Research (CHP/
PCOR), School of Medicine, at
Stanford University, in
California.
Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert
is an associate professor of
medicine at the CHP/PCOR,
Stanford University.
Grant Miller is an associate
professor at the School of
Medicine, Stanford University;
director of the Stanford
Center for International
Development; senior fellow,
Freeman Spogli Institute for
International Studies; senior
fellow, Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research; and
a research associate at the
National Bureau of Economic
Research, in Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Marcos Vera-Hernández is a
reader in economics at
University College London and
a research fellow at the
Institute for Fiscal Studies,
both in the United Kingdom.
1800
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
Quality Of Care In India
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 who affiliate themselves with the brand but op-
erate independently (within parameters estab-
lished by the franchisor). Franchisees pay a sub-
scription fee, and in return, the franchisor
provides brand-name marketing and standardi-
zation of service delivery through explicit proto-
cols for service delivery, training, and supply
chain management (in franchises related to
health care, this involves drugs, diagnostics,
and other products). By incorporating existing
providers into the franchise, a franchisor has the
potential to quickly reach large populations with
health care services of improved quality.
New technologies are also often an integral
part of efforts to improve health service delivery
in low-resource settings. These technologies in-
clude telemedicine, which enables patients in
remote areas to consult directly with highly
trained clinicians in distant locations.16 Similar-
ly, mobile decision support technologies can
help health workers who may have gaps in their
training deliver timely and appropriate care,
thus raising the quality of the care.
The theory of change embedded in social fran-
chising as it is applied to the WHP-Sky program
includes a number of assumptions. First, even if
a new technology (broadly defined to include
devices, process improvements, and organiza-
tional changes) can solve a problem faced by
end users, the theory of change assumes that
there is adequate demand for that technology.
Second, the theory assumes either that the fran-
chisee has a sufficiently large market share or
that the adoption of the new technology will
increase the use of franchisee health providers.
Third, the theory assumes that franchisee health
care providers will effectively use the technology
in a way that actually improves service quality.
Finally, the theory assumes that these improve-
ments in quality will translate into improve-
ments in population health.
Despite the rapid growth of social franchising
programs and their use of new technologies,
there is little rigorous evidence on their impact
on population health at scale17,18—or even on the
individual assumptions embedded in the under-
lying theory of change that are summarized
above. Many studies have focused on improve-
ments in the quality of care19,20 or increases in
service use.21–24 However, almost none have em-
ployed sufficiently rigorous methods to justify
inclusion in Cochrane reviews.14,25,26 One recent
exception is a social franchising and health care
workforce expansion program in Myanmar that
increased the treatment of diarrheal illness with
oral rehydration solution containing zinc.27
In this study we evaluated the impact of the
World Health Partners (WHP) Sky program, a
prominent social franchising program operating
in twelve districts across the Indian state of Bihar
(which has a population of over 100 million), on
the appropriate treatment and prevalence of
childhood diarrhea and pneumonia. The two pri-
mary outcomes of our study were established by
WHP and the program’s major funder, the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation.
Launched in 2011 with over $23 million in
funding from the Gates Foundation, the WHP-
Sky Program has been recognized international-
ly and is being considered for scaling up in India
and other settings, such as Kenya.28–31 The foun-
dation also funded this independent evaluation
of the program’s impact.
Evolution Of The WHP-Sky Program
Original Hub-And-Spoke Model In 2011 WHP
launched a hub-and-spoke model of its Sky pro-
gram, with the goal of developing a network of
20,000 health care providers (or franchisees)
who had previously worked in the informal sec-
tor across twelve districts in Bihar. Specifically,
WHP aimed to recruit into the network informal-
sector providers who would establish SkyHealth
telemedicine facilities (the hubs) in villages with
Internet connectivity and recruit affiliated rural
health care providers from peripheral areas (the
spokes), who would provide referrals to these
telemedicine facilities for a fee.
SkyHealth providers would be trained to pro-
vide a range of primary care services, including
diagnostic consultations and drug prescriptions.
The SkyHealth telemedicine technology would
also allow patients to consult with highly trained
physicians at WHP’s central medical facilities in
New Delhi and Patna. Providers in the central
medical facilities would also be able to talk di-
rectly with patients through an Internet-based
audio or video interface; listen to chest ausculta-
tion; and remotely assess patients’ blood pres-
sure, pulse, and electrocardiography.
In addition to training peripheral rural health
providers to refer more complicated cases to the
hubs, WHP would train the providers to deliver
basic primary care for common illnesses. The
program also provided drugs carrying its brand
name through WHP’s own supply chain and a
network of labs, and it conducted mass media
campaigns to increase awareness about the ser-
vices offered in the WHP-Sky program.
Current Two-Tier Model Over time, WHP
shifted from the hub-and-spoke model to a mod-
el with two tiers of independent franchisees.32
The first tier consists of SkyHealth providers,
who have facilities with telemedicine computer
terminals (essentially, the hubs in the previous
model). The second tier consists of SkyCare pro-
viders (the spokes in the previous model), who
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1801
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 are rural health care providers with modest fa-
cilitiesand infrastructurewho alsohaveaccess to
decision support from physicians in the central
medical facilities via mobile phones.
In this two-tier model, a large share of all Sky
network providers are SkyCare providers. Both
SkyCare and SkyHealth providers charge pa-
tients a fee for each visit, ranging from 50 rupees
(approximately $1) for a normal SkyHealth con-
sultation to 200 rupees ($4) for consultation
with a specialist (with subsidies for individuals
classified by the government to be below the
poverty line).33,34
Both tiers of providers received training on
protocols for basic service delivery and access
to marketing services and a predictable supply
of brand-name adequate-quality drugs (Sky-
Meds) and diagnostics through SkyLab services.
WHP also conducted marketing campaigns to
advertise the availability of the telemedicine pro-
viders in their area.
Study Data And Methods
Data The Bihar Evaluation of Social Franchising
and Telemedicine Survey collected detailed data
from randomly sampled households with chil-
dren ages five and under in 360 study clusters
across eleven districts in which WHP planned to
implement the Sky program (for a map of the
districts and study clusters, see online Appendix
Exhibit 1).35 (Study clusters were defined as sets
of villages surrounding a central village that met
eligibility criteria for a telemedicine center—the
primary criteria being the availability of Internet
connectivity and potential franchisees, with in-
frastructure such as dedicated space.)36 Baseline
data collection was conducted in all of the study
clusters in 2011, before implementation of the
program, and the collection of follow-up data
was conducted in the same study clusters in
2014, after the program had been implemented
in 153 of the 360 clusters. Before each wave,
enumerators conducted a census of households
in each study cluster, identifying all households
with at least one child under age five.
Within each cluster, among households meet-
ing our inclusion criteria, we randomly selected
sixty-three to survey. We chose that number
based on calculations showing that doing so
would give us 90 percent power to detect 5-
percentage-point improvements in key study
outcomes, even after we accounted for multiple
hypothesis testing. Response rates were high,
with 95 percent of households responding in
2011 and 94 percent in 2014. This gave us a final
sample of 36,315 children living in 21,646 house-
holds in 2011 and 31,635 children living in
21,367 households in 2014.
Defined by the Gates Foundation in consulta-
tion with WHP, our primary study outcomes
were the appropriate treatment of childhood di-
arrhea and pneumonia (the most common child-
hood illnesses in rural Bihar) and their preva-
lence. Appropriate treatments for diarrhea are
zinc therapy in combination with oral rehydra-
tion solution. For pneumonia, the appropriate
treatment is a five-day course of antibiotics. Prev-
alence of diarrhea was defined as the presence of
any loose or watery stool in the preceding fifteen
days.37 Because pneumonia is frequently undiag-
nosed, to determine its presence we relied on the
following symptoms: the presence of fever,
cough, and difficulty breathing. Alternative
methods of identifying potential pneumonia
are explored in online Appendix 1.35
For all children under five, using answers to
prespecified survey questions, we determined
whether or not they had been ill with diarrhea,
coughing, fever, or difficulty breathing in the
fifteen days before the survey. In those cases,
enumerators collected detailed information, in-
cluding symptoms, treatments administered at
home without consultation, and whether care
had been sought from any source. If care had
been sought, enumerators collected information
about each visit to any type of health care pro-
vider, including provider type, treatments and
medications prescribed, and costs associated
with care. The enumerators also recorded socio-
demographic information about the sampled
households, including household composition,
age and education of each household member,
caste, religion, and assets (for summary house-
hold statistics, see Appendix Exhibit A1.1).35
We also examined secondary outcomes that
the WHP-Sky program might have influenced.
For example, we examined changes in the likeli-
hood that parents would seek care for their chil-
dren when sick, and we estimated changes in the
Understanding why
the WHP-Sky program
failed to produce any
measurable impact is
critical for the design
of future social
franchising programs.
Quality Of Care In India
1802
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 overall share of sick children who received ap-
propriate
treatment.
Alternatively,
parents
might have learned about the appropriate home
management of childhood diarrhea and sus-
pected pneumonia from health care providers
over time. Hence, we also examined the likeli-
hood that parents implemented appropriate
treatment on their own.
The summary statistics at baseline show con-
siderable room for improvement under the
WHP-Sky Program. For example, among the
21.4 percent of children who had had symptoms
of diarrhea in the fifteen days before the survey at
baseline, 69.4 percent sought care, but only
1.4 percent of those children received both zinc
and oral rehydration solution treatment (Appen-
dix Exhibit A1.1).35 Similarly, although 84.5 per-
cent of children with symptoms of pneumonia
had received care at baseline, the share of those
receiving appropriate treatment (the five-day
course of antibiotics) was 31.6 percent.
Statistical Analysis To estimate popula-
tion-level effects of the WHP-Sky program, we
used
multivariate
difference-in-differences
models fitted by ordinary least squares regres-
sion.38–44 Specifically, we regressed each primary
outcome on an indicator denoting whether or
not the study cluster had at least one SkyHealth
or SkyCareprovider, interacted with an indicator
of baseline or follow-up survey wave—which de-
noted the period before or the one after the
intervention—and a set of covariates described
below. In this way, our difference-in-differences
measured
covariate-adjusted
differences
in
changes in the outcome variables between clus-
ters where the program had been implemented
and clusters where it had not, while netting out
any preexisting differences between the two
types of clusters in the period before implemen-
tation.
To explore potential dose-response relation-
ships between outcomes and the intensity of pro-
gram implementation (measured by the number
of WHP-Sky providers within a cluster), we also
estimated models that related primary outcomes
to the program intensity within each cluster.
We controlled for a number of potentially con-
founding variables. These were the child’s age
(using indicators for one-year age categories),
the child’s sex, the age and literacy of the child’s
mother, the number of other children in the
household, household religion (using 1 if the
household wasHindu, and 0if it wasnot), house-
hold caste (using 1 if the household members
belonged to a scheduled caste, scheduled tribe,
or other backward class, and 0 if not), whether
the household income was below poverty, and
wealth quintile (estimated using a principal-
components analysis of household assets).45
To account for unobserved differences across
districts in each survey wave, we included dis-
trict-year fixed effects in all models.We calculat-
ed robust standard errors clustered at the study
cluster level to take into account the dependence
of observations within clusters.
To assess the sensitivity of our results, we first
examined the robustness of our findings to a
range of alternative regression specifications
(including tertiary outcomes that were not spec-
ified in our analysis plan, different groups of
control variables, and using alternative methods
of identifying pneumonia cases). (For the results
from all of our sensitivity analyses, see Ap-
pendix 2).35
Second, because our primary analysis used
linear probability models for discrete outcomes
(allowing us to estimate consistent fixed effects
while avoiding concerns about incidental param-
eters),46 we repeated our analyses using nonlin-
ear probit models fitted by maximum likelihood
estimation.
Third, our analysis relied on classifying clus-
ters
into
intervention
and
nonintervention
groups based on the verified location of WHP-
Sky network providers through our own provid-
er census (the enumerators visited every provid-
er in all of the study clusters to verify both the
providers’ presence and their affiliation with the
WHP-Sky program). Because in a number of in-
stances the provider census found that pro-
viders’ locations differed from those in WHP’s
records, we also repeated our analysis using the
locations in the records instead of those in the
census.
Finally, to assess the sensitivity of our results
to departures from asymptotic normality, we
randomly drew an additional thousand treat-
ment and control assignments (using the same
proportion of treatment and control clusters in
both our census and the WHP rosters) and gen-
erated distributions of treatment effects from
these thousand random draws.
We note that the Bihar Evaluation of Social
Franchising and Telemedicine evaluation was
originally designed in 2011 as a cluster random-
ized controlled trial.37 However,WHP’s program
implementation deviated substantially from the
original plan, which necessitated the current ob-
servational study design (for example, it was not
possible for us to conduct an instrumental vari-
able analysis using the original random assign-
ment to treatment or control status as an instru-
ment for actual implementation status).47 Our
revised quasi-experimental design and analysis
plan are available online.48
Limitations Our study had several limita-
tions. First, as noted above, although the evalu-
ation was originally designed as a randomized
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1803
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 controlled trial, program implementation in
practice deviated substantially from the original
implementation plan, which rendered the origi-
nal study design unusable. Our difference-in-
differences observational study design relied
on an assumption of parallel trends in primary
outcomes between treatment and control areas
absent the intervention. However, as described
in our original plan, we tested for the presence of
preexisting trend differences in primary out-
comes before the implementation of the WHP-
Sky Program and found no significant evidence
of
such
differences
(for
details,
see
Ap-
pendix 3).35
Second, it was not feasible to conduct com-
plete diagnostic evaluations of health outcomes
in our large sample. Instead, we relied on survey-
based measures of recall of childhood health out-
comes and health care use in the previous fifteen
days to minimize loss of recall, and we also used
the Child Health Epidemiology Research Group
(CHERG) method of using video demonstration
of pneumonia symptoms to improve the speci-
ficity of measurement of pneumonia.49
Third, as mentionedabove, therewas disagree-
ment between our field observations of the loca-
tions of the WHP-Sky program providers and the
locations reported by WHP. Our finding that the
program’s effects were small and not significant
persisted, regardless of whether we used our
field observations or WHP reports of providers’
locations.
Study Results
Market Share And Utilization By early 2015,
the WHP-Sky program included 8,822 SkyCare
providers and 746 SkyHealth providers in its
network. At follow-up in 2014, we found that
program providers accounted for a very small
share of providers in the study areas—only
3.5 percent of all providers and 6.0 percent of
private providers (data not shown). The number
of private providers per study cluster ranged
from six to seventy (Exhibit 1), and the number
of program providers per cluster ranged from
one to six (mean: 1.6; median: 1) (data not
shown). This implies that program providers
had smaller market shares than other private
providers, on average.
Furthermore, as we have reported elsewhere,50
providers in the WHP network had fewer years of
experience and lower patient volumes, com-
pared to those who were not in the network.
Thus, they accounted for an even smaller share
of services delivered than their share of pro-
viders implied.50
Among all child visits to health providers in
the study clusters, only 2.9 percent of children
with symptoms of diarrhea and 2.7 percent of
children with symptoms of pneumonia were tak-
en to Sky providers (Exhibit 2). The vast majority
of parents instead continued to consult unaffili-
ated informal providers (for 40 percent of pa-
tient visits for diarrhea and 39.9 percent of pa-
tient visits
for
pneumonia) or
unaffiliated
private providers with a bachelor of medicine
and bachelor of surgery (MBBS) degree—equiv-
Exhibit 1
Numbers of private providers in the 360 study clusters in Bihar, India, 2014
SOURCE Authors’ analysis. NOTE There were 360 study clusters (sets of villages surrounding a central village that met eligibility criteria
described in the text).
Quality Of Care In India
1804
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 alent to an MD in the United States (38 percent
and 42.8 percent, respectively).
Appropriate Treatment The WHP-Sky pro-
gram had no overall significant effects on the
provision of appropriate treatment for either
childhood diarrhea or pneumonia, conditional
on seeking care. Specifically, there was no sig-
nificant effect of implementation of the program
on the likelihood that a child with diarrhea re-
ceived treatment with either zinc or zinc in com-
bination with oral rehydration solution. The es-
timated effect sizes were −1.4 percentage points
(95% confidence interval: −5.0, 2.1) for proba-
bility of treatment of diarrhea with zinc and
−0.79 percentage points (95% CI:−3.5, 1.9] for
probability of treatment with both zinc and oral
rehydration solution (Exhibit 3). Similarly,
there was no significant effect of program imple-
mentation on the likelihood that a child with
pneumonia received a five-day course of antibiot-
ics (−1.7 percentage points; 95% CI: −8.9, 5.6)
(Exhibit 4).
Themaximum sizes of effects supported by our
estimates were a 2.1-percentage-point increase
for diarrhea treatment with zinc therapy, a 1.9-
percentage-point increase for treatment with
zinc and oral rehydration solution (relative to
baseline levels of 2.0 percent and 1.9 percent,
respectively), and a 5.6-percentage-point in-
crease for pneumonia treatment with five days
of antibiotics (relative to a baseline level of
11.5 percent) (for baseline levels, see Appendix
Exhibit A1.1).35
When we examined program intensity (using
numbers of WHP-Sky providers), we also found
no evidence of a dose-response relationship to
appropriate treatment. Having an additional
WHP-Sky provider in the implementation areas
had no significant effect on the probability of
treatment of diarrhea with zinc or zinc in com-
bination with oral rehydration solution: The ef-
fect sizes were −0.7 percentage points and −0.3
percentage points, respectively (Exhibit 3). Like-
wise, there was no significant effect on the prob-
ability of treatment of pneumonia with a five-day
course of antibiotics: The effect size was 0.06
percentage points (Exhibit 4).
Even if the WHP-Sky providers had a very low
market share, if the quality of their services was
better than that of other available services,
dynamics in a competitive market could con-
ceivably improve the quality of care in clusters
with WHP-Sky providers. However, using data
from vignette-based interviews and standard-
ized patients, we found no improvements in pro-
vider knowledge or quality of care in clusters
with WHP-Sky providers relative to control
areas.50 These results are consistent with the null
effects that we found on the likelihood of receiv-
ing appropriate treatment for diarrhea and
pneumonia.
We also evaluated the WHP-Sky program’s ef-
fects on secondary outcomes and found no evi-
dence of any program impact. Parents were not
Exhibit 2
Percentages of patient visits for diarrhea or pneumonia to certain types of health care providers in Bihar, India, 2014
SOURCE Authors’ analysis. NOTES Percentages are unadjusted and reported by survey respondents. Informal refers to providers in the
informal sector. ANM/ASHA/AWW refers to the following village-level health care workers: auxilary nurse midwife, accredited social
health activist, and Anganwadi worker (community health workers in the public health care system). WHP-Sky refers to providers in the
World Health Partners Sky program. AYUSH refers to providers with training in the following types of traditional medicine: Ayurveda,
Unani, Siddhi, or homeopathy. MBBS refers to a bachelor of medicine and bachelor of surgery degree—equivalent to an MD in the
United States.
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1805
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 significantly more likely to seek care for their
children’s diarrhea (effect size: 1.9 percentage
points; Exhibit 3) or pneumonia (effect size:
−0.6 percentage point; Exhibit 4) under the pro-
gram. Similarly, parents were not significantly
more likely to treat their children with diarrhea
at home using zinc therapy or using both zinc
and oral rehydration solution or to treat their
children with pneumonia at home with a five-
day course of antibiotics.
Prevalence Of Childhood Pneumonia And
Diarrhea We also found no significant effect
of the WHP-Sky program on population health
outcomes. Estimated program effects on the
prevalence of diarrhea (a 1.5-percentage-point
change) and the prevalence of pneumonia (a
0.1-percentage-point) were statistically indistin-
guishable from zero (Exhibits 3 and 4).
Sensitivity Analyses We performed a wide
range of sensitivity analyses, including a variety
of regression specifications (such as using ter-
tiary outcomes and changing groups of control
variables), and we used alternative approaches
to identifying pneumonia cases (see Appen-
dix 1).35 We found that our results were robust
across all of these analyses.
Furthermore, as noted above, to rule out the
possibility that our findings of null effects were
driven by a non-normal asymptotic distribution
of the estimated effects, we ran a thousand iter-
ations of our analyses using clusters that were
randomly assigned to implementation and non-
implementation groups in the same proportion
as the clusters in our field data (for the results,
see Exhibit Figures 1–10 in Appendix 2).35 We
found that our estimated treatment effects fell
well within the distribution of treatment effects
estimated under the null hypotheses of no pro-
gram impact. For example, the 0.79-percentage-
point change in appropriate treatment of diar-
rhea using zinc and oral rehydration solution
from our main analysis fell in the middle of
the distribution of possible effects (see Exhibit
Figure 6 in Appendix 2).35
Discussion
This article presents one of the first evaluations
of a large-scale social franchising program de-
signed to deliver health care services in a low-
resource setting. Despite considerable enthusi-
asm for social franchising (and the WHP pro-
gram in particular) on the part of some interna-
tional organizations and policy makers, the
WHP-Sky Program did not improve rates of ap-
propriate treatment for childhood diarrhea and
pneumonia or related health care outcomes in
Bihar. These illnesses continue to be an impor-
tant priority in Bihar and other Indan states.
Consistent with our 2014 follow-up data, the
most recent National Family Health Survey sug-
gests that 10.7 percent of children suffered from
diarrhea in the two weeks before the survey, and
6.8 percent suffered from acute respiratory ill-
nesses.51
The results of our evaluation should not be
interpreted to imply that social franchising can-
not improve health care delivery or health out-
comes in low-income countries, however. To-
gether with the use of new technologies, social
franchising is a potentially promising approach
to improving the quality and reach of primary
health services in such countries, leveraging the
widespread presence in rural areas of private-
sector providers—many of whom are informal
providers. Instead, understanding why the WHP-
Sky program, which managed to attract early
investments in excess of $23 million, failed to
produce any measurable impact is critical for the
design of future social franchising programs and
for global public health in general.
Our study suggests several potential reasons
why the WHP-Sky program failed to improve the
Exhibit 3
Effects of the World Health Partners Sky (WHP-Sky) Program on the appropriate treatment,
use of health care services, and prevalence of childhood diarrhea in Bihar, India, 2011–14
SOURCE Authors’ analysis. NOTES For each outcome, the point estimates and 95 percent confidence
intervals (indicated by the whiskers) correspond to program effect sizes estimated using multivari-
ate difference-in-differences models fitted using ordinary least squares regression. For regression
details, see the text. The point estimates for effect of number of WHP-Sky providers shown in the
exhibit are interpreted as the effect of having an additional provider. “Self-treatment” refers to
treatment administered at home without consultation. ORS is oral rehydration solution.
Quality Of Care In India
1806
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 rate of appropriate treatment of majorchildhood
illnesses or to produce population health bene-
fits. Improving these outcomes depended criti-
cally on WHP’s ability to reach a large share of its
target populations, but its market share in tar-
geted study areas was only 3 percent. Poor pop-
ulation coverage presumably reflects interrelat-
ed demand- and supply-side challenges.
On the demand side, the assumption that res-
idents of rural Bihar would consider WHP-Sky
services to be of better quality than those other-
wise available to them was not adequately tested
before implementation and scale-up of the pro-
gram. Relatedly, the assumption that intended
beneficiaries would be willing to pay more than
they
otherwise
would
to
receive
WHP-Sky
services—or at least the same amount—was also
not adequately tested before implementation.
An empirically grounded view of what intended
beneficiaries value in health care is required at
the outset and cannot be assumed to be based
solely on technical clinical quality.52
On the supply side, WHP struggled to recruit
informal-sector providers into its network, and
some of the providers who joined the franchise
network were relatively new health care pro-
viders. This difficulty is likely related to a poor
understanding of demand: Local providers pre-
sumably have better information than program
planners about what their patients value in
health care and might have recognized that
WHP’s services would not be embraced as of-
fered. In the end, the WHP network included
only 6 percent of all private providers in the
study clusters.
More generally, we consider there to be three
essential requirements for adequately under-
standing local conditions (or local markets) at
the design stage—that is, before implementa-
tion. The first is a careful understanding of what
community members and patients value and are
willing to pay for. The second is an understand-
ing of what incentives these demand conditions
create for local providers to join a social fran-
chise network. Third, even if a new technology or
delivery strategy can in principle solve a problem
faced by end users, an understanding of how an
innovation can be translated into improved ser-
vice quality in practice is essential. Finally, an
organization must understand how other mar-
ket actors will respond to the innovation’s im-
plementation or entry into a local market—for
example, how they will react to the new availabil-
ity of services of improved quality.
Conclusion
We conclude with a brief observation about the
difficult political economy of impact evaluation.
Despite growing emphasis on rigorous evalua-
tion (which we believe is appropriate), the in-
centives for evaluation are complex and often
misaligned.53 An organization being evaluated
may consider the risk of negative findings to
outweigh the benefits of positive findings sub-
stantially, creating understandable antagonism
between the organization and the evaluators or
donors. A related point is that evaluationsshould
be conducted at the appropriate stage in an or-
ganization’s life cycle—after it has had an oppor-
tunity to learn from initial experience and to
refine its approach before scaling it up. A funder
may require an evaluation as a condition of fi-
nancial support, but in such cases, funders them-
selves often have a stake in the findings. These
difficulties need to be understood and addressed
more thoroughly. Although funders and organ-
izations that deliver health care services should
not be afraid to fail, learn, and improve, existing
incentives are often inconsistent with this ap-
proach. ▪
Exhibit 4
Effects of the World Health Partners Sky (WHP-Sky) Program on the appropriate treatment,
use of health care services, and prevalence of childhood pneumonia in Bihar, India, 2011–14
SOURCE Authors’ analysis. NOTES For each outcome, the point estimates and 95 percent confidence
intervals shown correspond to program effect sizes, as explained in the Notes to Exhibit 3. Further
regression details are in the text. The point estimates for effect of number of WHP-Sky providers
shown in the exhibit are interpreted as the effect of having an additional provider. “Treatment” refers
to a five-day course of antibiotics.
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1807
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 This study was funded by the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation (Grant
No. OPP1025880). The funders had no
role in study design (with the exception
of identifying key outcomes), data
collection, analysis, interpretation,
writing of the manuscript, or decision to
submit the manuscript for publication.
Results were previously presented at
the biennial meeting of the International
Health Economics Association, Milan,
Italy, July 12–15, 2015; the Harvard–
O. P. Jindal India Health Policy
Conference, New Delhi, India,
January 23–24, 2016; and the Asian
Development Research Insititute–
International Growth Center–World Bank
International Development Economics
Conference, Patna, India, March 26,
2016. They also were presented at
seminars at the Indian Institute of
Management, Bangalore, India, July 8,
2016; and the Public Health Foundation
of India, Delhi, July 7, 2016. The authors
are grateful to Bhartendu Trivedi,
Manveen Kohli, and Margaret Pendzich
for project management and to
Sambodhi Research and Communications
Pvt. Ltd. for fieldwork and data
collection. The authors also thank for
helpful comments, support, and advice
Chanchal Kumar, Jerry La Forgia,
colleagues at the Gates Foundation (Guy
Stallworthy, James Moore, Katherine
Hay, Saul Morris, Usha Tarigopula, and
Yamini Atmavilas) and at World Health
Partners (Anna Stratis, Gopi
Gopalakrishnan, Prachi Shukla, and Lou
Apicella), and audiences at the meetings
listed above.
NOTES
1 High Level Expert Group for Uni-
versal Health Coverage. High Level
Expert Group Report on universal
health coverage for India [Internet].
New Delhi: Public Health Founda-
tion of India; 2011 Nov [cited 2016
Aug 19]. Available from: http://
planningcommission.nic.in/
reports/genrep/rep_uhc0812.pdf
2 MAQARI Team. Mapping medical
providers in rural India: four key
trends [Internet]. New Delhi: Centre
for Policy Research; 2011 Feb [cited
2106 Aug 19]. (Policy Brief). Avail-
able from: http://www.cprindia.org/
sites/default/files/policy-briefs/
policy%20brief_1%20%281%29
.pdf
3 Rao M, Rao KD, Kumar AK,
Chatterjee M, Sundararaman T.
Human resources for health in India.
Lancet. 2011;377(9765):587–98.
4 Gautham M, Shyamprasad KM,
Singh R, Zachariah A, Singh R,
Bloom G. Informal rural healthcare
providers in North and South India.
Health Policy Plan. 2014;
29(Suppl 1):i20–9.
5 Das J, Hammer J, Leonard K. The
quality of medical advice in low-
income countries. J Econ Perspect.
2008;22(2):93–114.
6 Das J. The quality of medical care in
low-income countries: from pro-
viders to markets. PLoS Med. 2011;
8(4):e1000432.
7 Grepin KA. Private sector an impor-
tant but not dominant provider of
key health services in low- and
middle-income countries. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2016;35(7):1214–21.
8 Das J, Holla A, Mohpal A,
Muralidharan K. Quality and ac-
countability in health care delivery:
audit-study evidence from primary
care in India [Internet]. Cambridge
(MA): National Bureau of Economic
Research; 2015 Jul [cited 2106
Aug 19]. (NBER Working Paper
No. 21405). Available for download
(fee required) from: http://www
.nber.org/papers/w21405.pdf
9 Mohanan M, Vera-Hernández M,
Das V, Giardili S, Goldhaber-Fiebert
JD, Rabin TL, et al. The know-do gap
in quality of health care for child-
hood diarrhea and pneumonia in
rural India. JAMA Pediatr. 2015;
169(4):349–57.
10 Das J, Hammer J. Money for noth-
ing: the dire straits of medical
practice in Delhi, India. J Dev Econ.
2007;83(1):1–36.
11 Office of the Registrar General and
Census Commissioner, India. Annu-
al Health Survey 2012–13 Fact Sheet:
Bihar [Internet]. New Delhi: The
Office; [cited 2016 Aug 19]. Available
from: http://www.censusindia.gov
.in/vital_statistics/AHSBulletins/
AHS_Factsheets_2012-13/FACT
SHEET-Bihar.pdf
12 Lahariya C, Paul VK. Burden, differ-
entials, and causes of child deaths in
India. Indian J Pediatr. 2010;77(11):
1312–21.
13 Viswanathan R, Seefeld CA. Clinical
social franchising compendium: an
annual survey of programs: findings
from 2014 [Internet]. San Francisco
(CA): University of California, San
Francisco, Global Health Sciences
Global Health Group; 2015 Jul [cited
2016 Aug 19]. Available from: http://
www.sf4health.org/sites/sf4health
.org/files/wysiwyg/Social-
Franchising-Compendium-2015.pdf
14 Beyeler N, York De La Cruz A,
Montagu D. The impact of clinical
social franchising on health services
in low- and middle-income coun-
tries: a systematic review. PLoS One.
2013;8(4):e60669.
15 Prata N, Montagu D, Jefferys E.
Private sector, human resources, and
health franchising in Africa. Bull
World Health Organ. 2005;83(4):
274–9.
16 Dasgupta A, Deb S. Telemedicine: a
new horizon in public health in In-
dia. Indian J Community Med.
2008;33(1):3–8.
17 Huntington D, Sulzbach S,
O’Hanlon B. Public policy and fran-
chising reporductive health: current
evidence and future directions:
guidance from a technical consulta-
tion meeting [Internet]. Geneva:
World Health Organization; c 2007
[cited 2016 Aug 19]. Available from:
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/
10665/43735/1/9789241596021_
eng.pdf
18 Montagu D. Franchising of health
services in low-income countries.
Health Policy Plan. 2002;17(2):
121–30.
19 Bishai DM, Shah NM, Walker DG,
Brieger WR, Peters DH. Social fran-
chising to improve quality and ac-
cess in private health care in devel-
oping countries. Harvard Health
Policy Rev. 2008;9(1):184–97.
20 Shah NM, Wang W, Bishai DM.
Comparing private sector family
planning services to government and
NGO services in Ethiopia and Paki-
stan: how do social franchises com-
pare across quality, equity and cost?
Health Policy Plan. 2011;
26(Suppl 1): i63–71.
21 Berk J, Adhvaryu A. The impact of a
novel franchise clinic network on
access to medicines and vaccinations
in Kenya: a cross-sectional study.
BMJ Open. 2012;2(4):e000589.
22 Huntington D, Mundy G, Hom NM,
Li Q, Aung T. Physicians in private
practice: reasons for being a social
franchise member. Health Res Policy
Syst. 2012;10:25.
23 Kozhimannil KB, Valera MR, Adams
AS, Ross-Degnan D. The population-
level impacts of a national health
insurance program and franchise
midwife clinics on achievement of
prenatal and delivery care standards
in the Philippines. Health Policy.
2009;92(1):55–64.
24 Ngo AD, Alden DL, Pham V, Phan H.
The impact of social franchising on
the use of reproductive health and
family planning services at public
commune health stations in Viet-
nam. BMC Health Serv Res. 2010;
10:54.
25 Koehlmoos TP, Gazi R, Hossain SS,
Rashid M. Social franchising evalu-
ations: a scoping review [Internet].
London: EPPI-Centre, Social Science
Research Unit, Institute of Educa-
tion, University of London; 2011 Jun
[cited 2016 Aug 19]. Available from:
https://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Portals/
0/PDF%20reviews%20and%20
Quality Of Care In India
1808
Health Affairs
October 2016
35:10
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
 summaries/Social%20Franchising
%202011Koehlmoos%20report
.pdf?ver=2011-06-06-160355-757
26 Koehlmoos TP, Gazi R, Hossain SS,
Zamak K. The effect of social fran-
chising on access to and quality of
health services in low- and middle-
income countries. Cochrane Data-
base Syst Rev. 2009;(1):CD007136.
27 Aung T, Montagu D, Su Su Khin H,
Win Z, San AK, McFarland W. Im-
pact of a social franchising program
on uptake of oral rehydration solu-
tion plus zinc for childhood diarrhea
in Myanmar: a community-level
randomized controlled trial. J Trop
Pediatr. 2014;60(3):189–97.
28 Asian Awards. Chivas social entre-
preneur of the year [Internet]. Lon-
don: Asian Awards; c 2016 [cited
2016 Aug 19]. Available from: http://
www.theasianawards.com/gopi-
gopalakrishnan.html
29 Schwab Foundation for Social En-
trepreneurship. Social entrepre-
neurs of the year 2013 [Internet].
Geneva: The Foundation; 2013
Mar 20 [cited 2016 Sep 1]. Available
from: http://www.schwabfound
.org/content/social-entrepreneurs-
year-2013
30 Skoll Foundation. World Health
Partners [Internet]. Palo Alto (CA):
Skoll Foundation; c 2015 [cited 2106
Aug 19]. Available from: http://www
.skollfoundation.org/entrepreneur/
gopi-gopalakrishnan/
31 Oketch A. Telemedicine networks
improve healthcare in rural areas.
Business Daily [serial on the Inter-
net]. 2015 Nov 25 [cited 2016
Aug 19]. Available from: http://
www.businessdailyafrica.com/Tele
medicine-networks-improve-health
care/1248928-2971612-4orr94z/
index.html
32 World Health Partners. The WHP
model [Internet]. Washington (DC):
WHP; [cited 2016 Sep 1]. Available
from: http://worldhealthpartners
.org/Resources/report_26.pdf
33 Chavali A. 2011: World Health Part-
ners [Internet]. Hyderabad: Indian
School of Business, Centre for
Emerging Markets Solutions, AC-
CESS Health International; [cited
2016 Aug 19]. Available from: http://
www.sf4health.org/sites/sf4health
.org/files/reports/WorldHealth
Partners.pdf
34 Schwab Foundation for Social En-
trepreneurship. Krishnamurthy
(Gopi) Gopalakrishnan [Internet].
Geneva: The Foundation; [cited 2016
Aug 19]. Available from: http://
www.schwabfound.org/content/
krishnamurthy-gopi-gopalakrishnan
35 To access the Appendix, click on the
Appendix link in the box to the right
of the article online.
36 ClinicalTrials.gov. Bihar Evaluation
of Social Franchising and Telemedi-
cine (BEST) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Institutes of Health;
[cited 2016 Aug 19]. Available from:
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/
NCT01345695
37 Fischer Walker CL, Fontaine O, Black
RE. Measuring coverage in MNCH:
current indicators for measuring
coverage of diarrhea treatment in-
terventions and opportunities for
improvement. PLOS Med. 2013;
10(5):e1001385.
38 Sutton M, Nikolova S, Boaden R,
Lester H, McDonald R, Roland M.
Reduced mortality with hospital pay
for performance in England. N Engl
J Med. 2012;367(19):1821–8.
39 Babiarz KS, Miller G, Yi H, Zhang L,
Rozelle S. New evidence on the im-
pact of China’s New Rural Coopera-
tive Medical Scheme and its impli-
cations for rural primary healthcare:
multivariate difference-in-difference
analysis. BMJ. 2010;341:c5617.
40 Farrar S,Yi D, Sutton M, Chalkley M,
Sussex J, Scott A. Has payment by
results affected the way that English
hospitals provide care? Difference-
in-differences analysis. BMJ. 2009;
339:b3047.
41 Craig P, Cooper C, Gunnell D, Haw S,
Lawson K, Macintyre S, et al. Using
natural experiments to evaluate
population health interventions:
new Medical Research Council
guidance. J Epidemiol Community
Health. 2012;66(12):1182–6.
42 Basinga P, Gertler PJ, Binagwaho A,
Soucat AL, Sturdy J, Vermeersch CM.
Effect on maternal and child health
services in Rwanda of payment to
primary health-care providers for
performance: an impact evaluation.
Lancet. 2011;377(9775):1421–8.
43 Wooldridge JM. Econometric analy-
sis of cross section and panel data.
2nd ed. Cambridge (MA): MIT
Press; 2010.
44 Angrist JD, Pischke J-S. Mostly
harmless econometrics: an empiri-
cist’s companion. Princeton (NJ):
Princeton University Press; 2009.
45 Filmer D, Pritchett LH. Estimating
wealth effects without expenditure
data—or tears: an application to ed-
ucational enrollments in states of
India. Demography. 2001;38(1):
115–32.
46 Neyman J, Scott EL. Consistent es-
timates based on partially consistent
observations. Econometrica. 1948;
16(1):1–32.
47 An important aspect of the WHP-Sky
program was that it continuously
evolved between 2011 and 2014 (the
time frame of the evaluation), mov-
ing from a hub-and-spoke model to
the current two-tier model and un-
dergoing several modifications and
additions to program components.
The results we report are impacts of
the entire bundle of what was done
in the program between our baseline
and follow-up surveys—including
organizational learning and adjust-
ments over time.
48 COHESIVE-India. Documentation
for Bihar Evaluation of Social Fran-
chising and Telemedicine [Internet].
Durham (NC): The Collaboration;
2013 Jun 13 [cited 2016 Sep 1].
Available from: http://www.cohesive
india.org/documentationbest
49 Hazir T, Begum K, El Arifeen S,
Khan AM, Huque MH, Kazmi N,
et al. Measuring coverage in MNCH:
a prospective validation study in
Pakistan and Bangladesh on mea-
suring correct treatment of child-
hood pneumonia. PLoS Med.
2013;10(5):e1001422.
50 Mohanan M, Giardili S, Das V, Rabin
T, Raj S, Schwartz J, et al. The effect
of social franchising and telemedi-
cine on health provider knowledge
and quality of care: evidence from
Bihar, India. Unpublished paper.
51 Ministry of Health and Family Wel-
fare. National Family Health Survey-
4, 2015–16: State Fact Sheet: Bihar
[Internet]. Mumbai: International
Institute for Population Sciences;
[cited 2016 Aug 19]. Available from:
http://rchiips.org/nfhs/pdf/
NFHS4/BR_FactSheet.pdf
52 Another potentially related factor is
that household awareness about
WHP-Sky providers at the time of
follow-up was poor, which suggests
that outreach and marketing may
have been ineffective.
53 The ultimate test of success for many
private organizations is, of course,
the market test. Impact evaluation
has a critical role to play when some
of the social benefits of an organi-
zation’s activities are not reflected in
private-market returns.
October 2016
35:10
Health Affairs
1809
 on November 23, 2016 by HW Team
Health Affairs
 by 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
Downloaded from 
