 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Evaluation of a Portable Artificial Vision Device
Among Patients With Low Vision
Elad Moisseiev, MD; Mark J. Mannis, MD
L
ow vision is a major disability and has obvious implica-
tions on patients’occupational and social lives. Pa-
tients with low vision have a lower quality of life.1 In the
absence of any medical measures to improve vision, aids for
low vision and occupational therapy interventions can im-
prove patients’quality of life.2-4
One portable artificial vision device (OrCam)5 is an optical
characterrecognitiondevice,capableofrecognizingtext,mon-
etarydenominations,andfaces,andcanbeprogrammedtorec-
ognize other objects. It is activated by the user either pointing,
pressing a trigger button, or tapping on the device. The OrCam
was recently made commercially available in the United States
and is a potentially useful, intuitive, and interactive tool for pa-
tients with low vision (current price, $2500-$3500).
Interestisincreasingamongpatientsandphysiciansinpor-
table electronic low-vision aids, and these devices warrant fur-
ther evaluation.6 The purpose of this study was to perform a
preliminary evaluation of this portable artificial vision de-
vice’
s potential use in patients with low vision.
Methods
Patient Selection
This was a short-term prospective study that included
patients with low vision seen in the Department of Ophthal-
mology and Vision Science, University of California Davis, Sac-
ramento. The study protocol was approved by the University
IMPORTANCE Low vision is irreversible in many patients and constitutes a disability. When no
treatment to improve vision is available, technological developments aid these patients in
their daily lives.
OBJECTIVE To evaluate the usefulness of a portable artificial vision device (OrCam) for
patients with low vision.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS A prospective pilot study was conducted between July 1
and September 30, 2015, in a US ophthalmology department among 12 patients with visual
impairment and best-corrected visual acuity of 20/200 or worse in their better eye.
INTERVENTIONS A 10-item test simulating activities of daily living was used to evaluate
patients’functionality in 3 scenarios: using their best-corrected visual acuity with no
low-vision aids, using low-vision aids if available, and using the portable artificial vision device.
This 10-item test was devised for this study and is nonvalidated. The portable artificial vision
device was tested at the patients’first visit and after 1 week of use at home.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Scores on the 10-item daily function test.
RESULTS Among the 12 patients, scores on the 10-item test improved from a mean (SD) of 2.5
(1.6) using best-corrected visual acuity to 9.5 (0.5) using the portable artificial vision device at
the first visit (mean difference, 7.0; 95% CI, 6.0-8.0; P < .001) and 9.8 (0.4) after 1 week
(mean difference from the first visit, 7.3; 95% CI, 6.3-8.3; P < .001). Mean (SD) scores with
the portable artificial vision device were also better in the 7 patients who used other
low-vision aids (9.7 [0.5] vs 6.0 [2.6], respectively; mean difference, 3.7; 95% CI, 1.5-5.9;
P = .01).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE When patients used a portable artificial vision device, an
increase in scores on a nonvalidated 10-item test of activities of daily living was seen. Further
evaluations are warranted to determine the usefulness of this device among individuals with
low vision.
JAMA Ophthalmol. 2016;134(7):748-752. doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.1000
Published online May 5, 2016.
Video at
jamaophthalmology.com
Author Affiliations: Department of
Ophthalmology and Vision Science,
University of California Davis Eye
Center, Sacramento.
Corresponding Author: Elad
Moisseiev, MD, Department of
Ophthalmology and Vision Science,
University of California Davis Eye
Center, 4860 Y St, Ste 2400,
Sacramento, CA 95817
(elad_moi@netvision.net.il).
Research
Original Investigation
748
JAMA Ophthalmology
July 2016
Volume 134, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
of California Davis Office of Human Research, and all partici-
pants signed an informed consent before inclusion. All pa-
tientswereolderthan18yearsandwerelegallyblind,withbest-
correctedvisualacuity(BCVA)of20/200orworseintheirbetter
eye. Patients with low vision owing to any cause were in-
cluded. Exclusion criteria included documented cognitive im-
pairment and hearing loss since these conditions would pre-
ventpatientsfromusingtheOrCam.Thestudygroupconsisted
of 12 consecutive patients who met all inclusion criteria and
consented to participate. Patients were recruited between July
1 and September 30, 2015.
Portable Artificial Vision Device
The OrCam unit includes a miniature camera and a bone con-
duction earpiece, which can be mounted to the right side of
any spectacle frame (Figure, A). A cord connects the unit to a
pack that houses the device’
s battery and computer. This pack
can be held in the user’
s hand, clipped on a belt, or put in a
pocket. It has 3 buttons that are recognized by touch (a but-
ton to turn the device on and off, a volume control button, and
a trigger button) (Figure, B). The OrCam is portable and can
be used anywhere. It can be activated by pressing the trigger
button, by pointing at a target item, or by tapping the device.
When activated, the OrCam takes a picture of whatever it is
pointedat,whichcorrespondstowheretheuserisfacing.Using
opticalcharacterrecognitiontechnology,thedevicethenreads
aloud any text found in the picture that was taken, which is
heard only by the user via the earpiece and not by others
nearby. The OrCam can also recognize monetary bill denomi-
nations and can be programmed to recognize faces and prod-
ucts. The device has some technical limitations: it cannot rec-
ognize special fonts and may be unable to recognize text if the
contrast with its background is poor or under insufficient light-
ing conditions.
The units used in this study were supplied as a loan from
the OrCam Company and were returned at its conclusion. The
company was not otherwise involved in this study.
Study Design
At the time of enrollment, patients underwent a 90- to 120-
minute training session on the use of the OrCam by an expe-
rienced instructor (E.M.). After explanation of the device and
itsuse,patientscompleteda10-itemtestsimulatingdailyfunc-
tions. They were asked to complete these items 3 times: with-
out using any low-vision aids, using their own low-vision aids
if they had any, and using the OrCam. The patients were then
given the portable artificial vision device to use in their regu-
lar settings for a week, along with the user manual and a tele-
phone contact in case of any technical or operational difficul-
ties.Patientswerealsocalledduringthetestweektomakesure
they were using the OrCam for at least 1 hour per day and to
ask if they were experiencing any technical difficulties. After
1 week, patients returned to the clinic and completed the 10-
item test again with the OrCam. After completion of the 10-
item test, they also completed a questionnaire and provided
feedback on the portable artificial vision device.
Daily Function Test and Questionnaire
The daily function test was developed for this study and was
designed to include daily activities that are difficult for a pa-
tient with low vision and may be improved by the portable ar-
tificial vision device. These activities included reading from
an electronic device, recognizing monetary bills, reading a
newspaper article, finding a specific headline in a newspa-
per, reading a menu, recognizing a product, reading a letter,
reading a page from a book, reading wall-mounted signs, and
reading a distant sign. A detailed description of the test items
is provided in Table 1. The patients’performance was moni-
tored by an observer, and for each item, a score of 1 was given
if the patient could complete the task and 0 if not, yielding a
total score of 0 to 10 for each test. Patients took the test at the
first visit without using any low-vision aids to establish their
Key Points
Question Does a portable artificial vision device aid patients with
low vision?
Findings In a prospective pilot study of 12 patients with visual
impairment, results of a 10-item daily function test indicated an
improvement in activities of daily living using a portable artificial
vision device vs other available low-vision aids.
Meaning These results suggest that this portable artificial vision
device may be an effective aid for patients with low vision.
Figure. Portable Artificial Vision Device
OrCam unit mounted on glasses frame
A
OrCam unit connected to the battery and computer pack
B
A, The OrCam unit, a miniature camera (on eyepiece of glasses), and a bone
conduction earpiece (in front of ear) are mounted on the right side of a glasses
frame. A cord connects the unit to a portable battery and computer pack.
B, The OrCam unit connected to the battery and computer pack.
Evaluation of a Portable Artificial Vision Device
Original Investigation Research
jamaophthalmology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Ophthalmology
July 2016
Volume 134, Number 7
749
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
baseline ability, then with any low-vision aids they had, with
the OrCam, and again after 1 week with the OrCam.
At the end of the study, patients also completed a short sat-
isfaction survey on their experience with the portable artifi-
cial vision device (Table 2). The 10-item test and question-
naire were developed for this study and are nonvalidated.
Statistical Analysis
Apaired2-tailedttestwasusedtocomparemeansoftestscores
takenwithandwithouttheOrCamandatdifferenttimes.Pear-
son correlations were used to determine associations be-
tween parametric variables. Data were analyzed using SPSS for
Windows, version 17 (SPSS, Inc).
Results
Twelve patients were included in this pilot study: 6 men and
6women,withamean(SD)ageof62.0(18.6)years(range,27-93
years). Causes of low vision were diverse and included a va-
riety of corneal, retinal, and optic nerve diseases. A summary
of the patients’ocular pathologic conditions and BCVA is pro-
vided in Table 3.
Test Results at First Visit
At the first visit, all participants completed the 10-item test
without use of any low-vision aids, using only their eye-
glasses to establish their baseline BCVA. The mean (SD) test
score was 2.5 (1.6) (range, 0-5). None of the patients could per-
form 5 of the tasks, which included reading a message on an
electronicdevice,readinganewspaperarticle,readingamenu,
reading a letter, and reading a page from a book. In contrast,
11 patients (92%) could recognize bill denominations, 8 (67%)
were able to locate a specific room in a hallway by using wall-
mounted signs, and 7 (58%) were able to recognize products
and tell the difference between similarly shaped and sized ce-
real boxes. Higher test scores were correlated with BCVA of the
better-seeing eye (R = 0.77).
After initial instruction on using the OrCam, all partici-
pants completed the 10-item test using the device. The mean
(SD) test score significantly improved to 9.5 (0.5) (range, 9-10),
for a mean difference of 7.0 (95% CI, 6.0-8.0; P < .001).
Seven participants (58%) also completed the 10-item test
using available low-vision aids that they use in daily life, in-
cluding magnifying lenses, electronic magnifiers, and smart-
phone applications for reading text. For these 7 patients, the
mean (SD) test score using low-vision aids was 6.0 (2.6)
(range, 2-9), which was significantly improved vs their scores
without using these aids (mean [SD], 3.0 [1.6]), for a mean dif-
ference of 3.0 (95% CI, 0.5-5.5; P = .02). Using the portable ar-
tificial vision device, these 7 patients’mean (SD) test scores
improved to 9.7 (0.5), which was significantly better than both
the baseline score (mean improvement, 6.7; 95% CI, 5.3-8.1;
P < .001) and the score achieved with the use of low-vision aids
(mean improvement, 3.7; 95% CI, 1.5-5.9; P = .01).
Test Results at End of Study
After using the OrCam for 1 week, the mean (SD) score on the
10-item test was 9.8 (0.4) (range, 9-10). This result was sig-
nificantly better than the baseline score (mean difference, 7.3;
95% CI, 6.3-8.3; P < .001) but no different than the score
achieved using the portable artificial vision device at the first
visit (mean difference, 0.3; 95% CI, 0.1-0.7; P = .16).
Only 1 report of a technical difficulty was made during the
study. Participants’responses on the questionnaire indicated
that they found the OrCam to be simple to understand (mean
[SD] score, 3.9 [1.1] of a possible 5), easy to use (4.1 [0.9]), and
a useful aid in daily life (3.9 [0.7]). They reported that they
would use it in their daily lives (3.1 [1.3]) and would recom-
mend it to other patients with low vision (3.9 [1.3]).
Discussion
Patients with low vision are often dependent on aids to maxi-
mize their ability to orient themselves and perform activities
of daily living. Technological advances have led to the devel-
opment of many types of low-vision aids that do not rely on
Table 1. The 10-Item Functional Testa
Item
No.
Detailed Description
1
Reading an email message displayed on an electronic device
(smartphone or tablet computer). The patient was handed a device
and asked to read aloud.
2
Recognizing money. Patients were given 3 different bills and asked
to tell their value; 3 different bills were used each time, including
$1, $5, $10, $20, and $100.
3
Reading a newspaper article. Patients were given a newspaper and
asked to read aloud a specific article.
4
Finding a specific headline in a newspaper. Patients were given the
front page of a newspaper and asked to find a specific story in it and
read the headline aloud.
5
Reading a menu. Patients were given a menu from a local restaurant
and asked to read it aloud and make a selection.
6
Product recognition. Patients were given 3 cereal boxes of similar
size and shape but different brands and asked to tell them apart and
identify each of them.
7
Reading a letter. Patients were given an envelope with a single-page
letter in it and were asked to read it aloud.
8
Reading a page from a book. Patients were given a printed book (font
size 11) and asked to open it and read a page aloud.
9
Reading signs on the wall. Patients were asked to find a specific
room in a hallway by using the room number signs by the doors.
10
Reading a distant sign. A sign reading “STOP” was held 8 feet from
the patients and they were asked to read it aloud.
a A score of 1 was given for each item successfully completed and 0 if not. The
total score varied from 0 to 10.
Table 2. The 5-Item End-of-Study Questionnairea
No.
Item
1
I found the OrCam to be simple to understand.
2
I found the OrCam to be easy to use.
3
I think the OrCam may be a useful tool to aid patients with low vision
in daily life.
4
If available, I would use the OrCam in my daily life.
5
I would recommend OrCam to other patients with low vision.
a For each item, patients were asked to choose a score from 1 to 5, where
1 indicates strongly disagree; 2, somewhat disagree; 3, neither agree nor
disagree; 4, somewhat agree; and 5, strongly agree.
Research Original Investigation
Evaluation of a Portable Artificial Vision Device
750
JAMA Ophthalmology
July 2016
Volume 134, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
lenses for magnification, such as electronic magnifiers, digi-
tal image processing tools, and optical character recognition.7
Over the past 3 decades, although the demographics of pa-
tients with low vision have remained constant, the number of
spectacle-mounted optical devices has declined in correspon-
dence with a rise in availability of newer technologies and elec-
tronic devices.8
Our results indicate that the OrCam is an effective low-
vision aid that is simple to understand and easy to use. In this
study of 12 patients with low vision using a nonvalidated 10-
item test, we found that, after an initial training session, pa-
tients were able to perform tasks simulating those of daily liv-
ing significantly better when using the portable artificial vision
device. There was a difference in the patients’ability to per-
formthetestitemswhenusingtheOrCamcomparedwithusing
only their BCVA and no other aid. Unaided, no patient was able
to read a message on an electronic device, a newspaper ar-
ticle, a menu, a letter, or a page from a book, which are all com-
mon activities impeded by low vision. The only item that most
patients could perform by using only their BCVA without any
other aid was recognizing monetary bill denominations since,
at present, the monetary denomination is marked by a large,
more easily recognized figure at 1 corner of the bill. Using the
OrCam, all patients could perform at least 9 of the 10 items on
the test, demonstrating the efficacy and usefulness of the de-
vice for them.
Limitations of this study include its sample size of 12 and
the use of the 10-item test, which is not validated. However,
we developed the test for this study and used it because we
believe it allowed for a more robust evaluation of visual func-
tions than a test that focuses on parameters, such as reading
speed only. This assessment may be better to evaluate the
broader functionality in activities of daily living when using
the portable artificial vision device as an aid to patients with
low vision. In addition, to prevent a learning effect that could
bias the results in favor of the OrCam, test items were deliv-
ered in a random order, and the portable artificial vision de-
vice was not always the last to be tested. It is difficult to de-
termine from this study if patients would be satisfied with this
device. With only 12 individuals evaluated in this study, even
if none of the participants were dissatisfied, one could be rea-
sonably confident (95% of the time) that the true rate of dis-
satisfaction in the population is no more than 25%.
Inaseparatesubanalysisof7patientswhowereusingother
low-vision aids, we found that their test scores were better
when using the OrCam at the first visit than when using their
previous low-vision aids. This finding suggests that the por-
table artificial vision device may have advantages over other
low-vision aids.
Most studies on electronic low-vision aids have used read-
ing speed as the primary outcome measure. In most of these
studies, reading speed was faster using stationary devices than
withhead-mounteddevices.9,10Themethodsusedinourstudy
provide a broader assessment of the OrCam as a low-vision aid
since it is not focused solely on reading but on a broader range
of visual functions. Stationary magnifiers and reading aids are
usually heavy and remain in the patients’homes, while the
OrCamisahighlyportabledevicethatindividualscantakeany-
where. In addition, reading speed is not an issue since optical
character recognition technology recognizes text immedi-
ately, and the speed at which it is read aloud can be con-
trolled and adjusted by the user.
This portable artificial vision device may have advan-
tages in addition to text recognition and reading at normal
speed. It may enable the user to recognize products, distant
signs, and even faces. Using BCVA, only 7 patients (58%) could
recognize a specific brand of cereal by its box compared with
all 12 patients when using the OrCam. A sign held 8 feet away
was only recognized by 1 patient (8%) without the portable ar-
tificial vision device compared with 11 patients (92%) when
using the device. The fact that optical character recognition
is immediate with the OrCam may also allow users to func-
tion at a “physiological” speed. For example, even when the
patient with low vision can recognize monetary denomina-
tions using BCVA, he or she must turn the bill right side up and
hold it very close to the eyes, while the OrCam user can rec-
ognize it faster, from a greater distance, and in any orienta-
tion (Video).
Table 3. Patient Characteristics
Patient No./
Sex/Age, y
Cause of Low Vision
BCVA
OD
OS
1/F/73
Keratoconus; had undergone multiple penetrating
keratoplasties and keratoprothesis in both eyes
20/400
CF
2/F/56
Retinitis pigmentosa
LP
LP
3/F/37
Stargardt disease
20/400
20/200
4/F/70
Congenital aniridia keratopathy; had undergone multiple
penetrating keratoplasties and keratoprothesis in both eyes
CF
20/200
5/M/62
Stargardt disease
20/400
20/400
6/F/93
Age-related macular degeneration
CF
HM
7/M/27
Retinitis pigmentosa
HM
CF
8/F/63
Severe myopic degeneration
20/400
CF
9/M/86
Age-related macular degeneration
CF
20/200
10/M/60
Recurrent multiple retinal detachments in both eyes
20/200
20/400
11/M/49
Best disease
CF
20/400
12/M/68
End-stage glaucoma
20/400
20/400
Abbreviations: BCVA, best-corrected
visual acuity; CF, counting fingers;
HM, hand motion; LP, light
perception.
Evaluation of a Portable Artificial Vision Device
Original Investigation Research
jamaophthalmology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Ophthalmology
July 2016
Volume 134, Number 7
751
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Conclusions
This pilot study demonstrates that the portable artificial
vision device may be an effective low-vision aid. It is highly
portable and intuitive to use and may be more effective
than other low-vision aids available to these patients. We
believe it may be a useful tool for patients with low vision
that may allow them to enjoy improved functionality and
independence.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Submitted for Publication: November 17, 2015;
final revision received March 17, 2016; accepted
March 18, 2016.
Published Online: May 5, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.1000.
Author Contributions: Dr Moisseiev had full access
to all the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Both authors.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Moisseiev.
Drafting of the manuscript: Moisseiev.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Mannis.
Statistical analysis: Moisseiev.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Both
authors.
Study supervision: Mannis.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and no
conflicts were reported.
Additional Contributions: The OrCam units used in
this study were loaned to the department by the
OrCam Company and were returned at the
conclusion of the study. We thank the patients for
granting permission to publish this information.
REFERENCES
1. Stelmack J. Quality of life of low-vision patients
and outcomes of low-vision rehabilitation. Optom
Vis Sci. 2001;78(5):335-342.
2. Liu CJ, Brost MA, Horton VE, Kenyon SB,
Mears KE. Occupational therapy interventions to
improve performance of daily activities at home for
older adults with low vision: a systematic review.
Am J Occup Ther. 2013;67(3):279-287.
3. Berger S, McAteer J, Schreier K, Kaldenberg J.
Occupational therapy interventions to improve
leisure and social participation for older adults with
low vision: a systematic review. Am J Occup Ther.
2013;67(3):303-311.
4. Renieri G, Pitz S, Pfeiffer N, Beutel ME, Zwerenz
R. Changes in quality of life in visually impaired
patients after low-vision rehabilitation. Int J Rehabil
Res. 2013;36(1):48-55.
5. OrCam. See for yourself. http://www.orcam.com.
Accessed October 31, 2015.
6. Taylor J, Bambrick R, Dutton M, et al.
The p-EVES study design and methodology:
a randomised controlled trial to compare portable
electronic vision enhancement systems (p-EVES) to
optical magnifiers for near vision activities in visual
impairment. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2014;34(5):
558-572.
7. Moshtael H, Aslam T, Underwood I, Dhillon B.
High tech aids low vision: a review of image
processing for the visually impaired. Transl Vis Sci
Technol. 2015;4(4):6.
8. Crossland MD, Silver JH. Thirty years in an urban
low vision clinic: changes in prescribing habits of
low vision practitioners. Optom Vis Sci. 2005;82(7):
617-622.
9. Virgili G, Acosta R, Grover LL, Bentley SA,
Giacomelli G. Reading aids for adults with low
vision. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;10:
CD003303.
10. Peterson RC, Wolffsohn JS, Rubinstein M,
Lowe J. Benefits of electronic vision enhancement
systems (EVES) for the visually impaired. Am J
Ophthalmol. 2003;136(6):1129-1135.
Research Original Investigation
Evaluation of a Portable Artificial Vision Device
752
JAMA Ophthalmology
July 2016
Volume 134, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
