 Page 1 of 6 
 
 
 
 
Submission template for full cases 
 
 
All case reports MUST be submitted online 
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/bmjcasereports using this Word template 
o 
You will be asked for more detailed information on submission where you can 
also upload images, tables, multimedia files, etc 
o 
More information is available in the Instructions for authors 
http://casereports.bmj.com/instructions-for-authors 
 
You must have signed informed consent from patients (or relatives/guardians) before 
submitting to BMJ Case Reports. Please anonymise the patient’s details as much as 
possible, eg, specific ages, occupations. Blank consent forms are available online 
http://casereports.bmj.com/instructions-for-authors/consentform.pdf 
 
Individuals pay an annual fellowship fee of £95; US$180; €130. During your 12 month 
Fellowship period you can submit as many cases as you like, access all the published 
material, and re-use any published material for personal use and teaching without further 
permission.  
 
Institutional Fellowships are also available 
 
For more information visit http://casereports.bmj.com/misc/becomeafellow.dtl 
 
 
 Page 2 of 6 
 
TITLE OF CASE  
Cold forced open-water swimming: A natural intervention to improve postoperative pain and 
mobilisation outcomes? 
AUTHORS OF CASE Please indicate corresponding author by *(after the author’s 
name) 
Tom B. Mole1* 
Pieter Mackeith2 
*Corresponding Author: Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Douglas House, 
18D Trumpington Road, Cambridge, CB2 8AH 
SUMMARY Up to 150 words summarising the case presentation and outcome 
Postoperative neuropathic pain exacerbated by movement is poorly understood and difficult 
to treat but a relatively common complication of surgical procedures such as endoscopic 
thoracic sympathectomy. Here, we describe a case of unexpected, immediate, complete and 
sustained remission of postoperative intercostal neuralgia after the patient engaged in an 
open-water swim in markedly cold conditions. Though an incidental chance association is 
possible, the clear temporal proximity linking the swim with pain remission make a causal 
relationship possible. We discuss plausible mechanisms that may underlie the relationship and 
discuss the potential implications for postoperative pain management and patient-centred 
mobilisation. We recommend further evaluation of cold forced open-water swimming as a 
mobility-pain provocation challenge to see if the observed unexpectedly positive outcome, can 
be replicated. With the poor response to traditional management, there is a need for novel, 
curative interventions for postoperative neuropathic pain and associated impaired mobility. 
BACKGROUND Why you think this case is important – why you decided to write it up 
Damage to peripheral nerves and chronic pain is a known complication of surgical procedures 
such as endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy [1].  Intraoperatively, trocars are inserted 
through the intercostal space, which may damage surrounding intercostal nerves resulting in 
stabbing neuropathic pain experienced in the overlying chest region postoperatively. This pain 
is also a significant treatment challenge, as it may not respond well to analgesics and carries 
significant psychosocial morbidity. Hence there is a need to develop novel interventions for 
disabling neuropathic pain conditions after surgery. 
CASE PRESENTATION Presenting features, medical/social/family history 
A 28 year old male presented with ongoing intercostal neuralgia following endoscopic thoracic 
sympathectomy for severe primary facial blushing refractory to conservative management. 
There was no other significant past medical history.  As per national guidelines [2], 
endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy was performed uneventfully at a tertiary centre and 
there were no postoperative complications other than severe bilateral radiating T5 intercostal 
pain. The patient was discharged with a course of physiotherapy and combination analgesics 
including paracetamol, non-steroidal and opiate medication. Analgesics provided limited 
improvement, reducing pain on a visual analogue scale from 6/10 to 4/10. After 10 weeks, 
the patient was found unresponsive to a standard physiotherapy regime with typical graded 
activity increases. The patient reported that exercise and movement exacerbated the 
intercostal neuralgia and prevented full engagement in mobilisation and the physiotherapy 
rehabilitation program. The patient reported pain was associated with significant distress, 
prevented return to preoperative levels of recreational sport, and impaired quality of life. 
INVESTIGATIONS If relevant 
n/a 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS If relevant 
n/a 
TREATMENT If relevant  
Ten weeks postoperatively, the patient continued to report a limited benefit from analgesics 
and graded physiotherapy. With a history of recreational triathlon competition, the patient 
exposed himself to open-water swimming in an attempt to manage the pain through 
distraction. This occurred without the knowledge of health professionals. The characteristics 
of this activity are atypical of traditional postoperative, incremental pain rehabilitation 
approaches and are characterised in table 1. Because of the rocky, costal geographical layout 
where swimming took place, the patient stated that water-entry necessitated jumping and 
plunging into markedly cold water. Once in the water, swimmers were forced to swim for a 
period of approximately 60 seconds in order to reach somewhere to safely climb back ashore.  
 Page 3 of 6 
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP 
Interestingly, contrary to the patient’s expectation of severe pain, the patient unexpectedly 
reported no provocation of pain during swimming. Since the point of water-entry, the patient 
has reported no further episodes of intercostal neuralgia and reports being able to move and 
exercise freely without pain. Exposure to cold open-water swimming appeared to provide 
immediate and lasting analgesia, during which time pain was undetectable. Since exposure to 
the swimming event, there has been a full return to preoperative levels of mobility, sport and 
quality of life. Regular opiate and simple non-steroidal analgesics have since been 
discontinued by the primary care provider. 
DISCUSSION including very brief review of similar published cases (how many 
similar cases have been published?)  
Neuropathic pain is a significant disorder which can be difficult to treat and may be associated 
with structural changes in the brain[3]. Aside from postoperative interventions to avoid 
neuropathic pain, previous authors have highlighted several intraoperative factors, including 
the number and size of port incisions and methods used to manipulate tissues surrounding 
nerves in ways to minimise local nerve damage [1,4,5]. 
 
After reviewing the literature, no similar case reports of cold open-water swimming curtailing 
postoperative pain and associated immobility could be found. Although there is considerable 
literature on aquatic rehabilitation [6] and cold-water baths in sports medicine [7], cold-water 
swimming as described in Table 1, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, has not been 
described in the context of postoperative care. A forced swimming task [8], which shares 
similarities to the exposure seen in this case, has been extensively used in rodents because of 
its ability to enforce mobilisation and investigate neurochemical systems implicated in 
depression and pain [9]. No previous reports of forced swimming in cold water could be found 
with human subjects, presumably because of ethical implications.  
 
 
Due to the nature of retrospective case reports, it is unclear without further evidence, 
whether the exposure to forced cold-water swimming is causally and specifically related to 
pain remission. However, the temporal proximity, the patient’s subjective attribution, low 
patient expectations and the absence of likely alternative explanations (beyond coincidental 
spontaneous remission) increase the likelihood of a specific causal relationship beyond 
placebo. In addition, though specific mechanisms remain unclear, plausible mechanisms for 
short-term relief and sustained longterm remission could underlie the relationship: 
Biologically, the shock of sudden cold-water immersion combined with the potential threat of 
drowning may induce a surge of sympathetic activity upon water-entry. The cold shock 
response has also been linked to reduced cerebral perfusion and altered level of 
consciousness [10]. These processes may potentially lead to altered pain perception that 
could explain the reported short-term ‘endogenous’ analgesia. In addition, forced cold 
swimming may provide markedly high intensity distractor stimuli. New inputs are received 
from a range of novel, unhabituated mechanoreceptor, thermoreceptor and proprioceptor 
afferents that may out-compete nociceptors for attentional capture and conscious awareness 
and influence the pain gate to prevent perception of pain. There is also the possibility that 
post-sympathectomy pain has an autonomic nervous system component, and this may have 
been disrupted by a surge of sympathetic activity during swimming.  
 
It is unclear why the pain remained in remission beyond the acute period of cold activity. One 
possibility is that the acute endogenous analgesic state challenged reduced mobility which 
was maintaining the pain, which would otherwise have been intolerable due to movement-
related pain. Moreover, the extent of mobilisation may have been increased and enforced 
through potent primitive escape behaviours associated with forced swimming [8].  As such, 
the exposure in this report offers overlap with the clinical procedure of ‘manipulation under 
anaesthesia’ that is well-established in relieving postoperative pain seen postoperatively in 
adhesive capsulitis. In contrast to this procedure however, the anesthesia in the case here is 
endogenous rather than exogenous in origin. Musculoskeletally, if there was a component of 
pain related to postoperative tissue inflammation and adhesions affecting peripheral 
intercostal nerves, it is possible that the high range of movement involved in swimming 
manipulated tissues surrounding peripheral nerves in such a way as to mechanically free 
adhesions and resolve pain.  Psychologically, ‘flooding’ with intense activity may have 
abruptly broken maladaptive cycles of movement avoidance and withdrawal from exercise 
and its associated pain relieving properties.  
 Page 4 of 6 
 
This case also raises principles of patient-centred postoperative care. Behaviourally, the 
patient reported a history of recreational athleticism and novelty-seeking traits. These 
personality factors may have combined to manifest in the behaviour observed. This case 
reinforces the importance of individualising postoperative care so that it is compatible with 
and complementary to the individual patient: Suggesting intense swimming exercises to some 
patients may not be appropriate or safe, and hypothermia brings significant risk [11]. In 
addition there is the risk associated with the acute cold shock response, which may 
disproportionately affect the arm muscles whilst swimming and can lead to incapacitation and 
potential drowning within minutes if unsupervised.  It also needs to be highlighted that such a 
response occurs long before the onset of core hypothermia [12].  
 
Equally however, it is important professionals do not withhold the choice of treatments, 
should they be proven effective, if benefits outweigh rare theoretical risks [13]. More 
aggressively paced rehabilitation may suit certain patients more than others, for example 
those with elevated impulsivity [14] may be predisposed to wanting short-term rewards, and 
therefore may engage better in single-session rehabilitation approaches if available. Where 
possible, interventions should be tailored to the person and their temperament [15] and 
within reasonable limits of patient-centredness [16] so treatment is contextually balanced 
with the patient’s needs [17]. Overall, this case challenges conventional postoperative pain 
management protocols that emphasise pharmacological analgesics and incremental physical 
activity. Traditional multisession physiotherapy was experienced negatively as cumbersomely 
ineffective and was not successful in engaging this patient.  As with all interventions, ethical 
and cultural factors deserve further open and transparent consideration. Specifically in this 
intervention, the fact that the swimming was “forced” raises ethical challenges over patient 
autonomy. In order to systematize the intervention ethically in the future, patients need to 
provide fully informed consent that was entirely voluntary prior to the activity and ideally 
have a way of stopping swimming in case they changed their mind and wanted to withdraw 
their consent at any time. 
 
 
In summary, this case reports describes exposure to a single-session sudden immersion in 
extreme cold water that was associated with an unexpectedly positive outcome of remission 
of intercostal neuralgia and associated reduced mobility.  Treatment-resistant neuralgia 
appeared to resolve in a cost-effective and rapid manner that could be acceptable to future 
patients.  Further prospective explorative investigation is needed to assess the replicability 
and feasibility of forced cold-water swimming as a potentially effective, natural intervention to 
enhance recovery outcomes from common postoperative compilations. 
LEARNING POINTS/TAKE HOME MESSAGES 3 to 5 bullet points 
 
Damage to peripheral nerves after surgery can lead to postoperative neuropathic pain 
that is difficult to treat and can lead to immobility and worsened quality of life 
 
Here, we describe the first known immediate remission of intercostal neuralgia 
following exposure to patient-initiated singe-session open-water swimming in extreme 
cold conditions 
 
Forced cold-water swimming may trigger a surge of sympathetic activity and 
catecholamines that may provide short-term endogenous analgesia and allow 
aggressive manipulation of the kinetic chain under pain-free conditions  
 
Forced cold swimming overcame reluctance to engage in pain-provoking postoperative 
mobilisation and curtailed chronification of pain and reduced mobility 
 
Future studies are recommended that need to be developed in a rigorously ethical 
way, in order to attempt replication of positive outcomes after exposure to cold water 
swimming for postoperative neuropathic pain and immobility 
 Page 5 of 6 
REFERENCES Vancouver style (Was the patient involved in a clinical trial? Please 
reference related articles) 
1  
Ojimba TA, Cameron AEP. Drawbacks of endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy. Br J Surg 
2004;91:264–9. 
2  
NICE. NICE Interventional procedures guidance [IPG480]: Endoscopic thoracic 
sympathectomy for primary facial blushing. Published Online First: 
2014.https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg480 
3  
Mole TB, MacIver K, Sluming V. Specific brain morphometric changes in spinal cord 
injury with and without neuropathic pain. NeuroImage Clin 2014. 
4  
Schmidt J, Bechara FG, Altmeyer P, et al. Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy for 
severe hyperhidrosis: impact of restrictive denervation on compensatory sweating. Ann 
Thorac Surg 2006;81:1048–55. 
5  
Drott C. Results of endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy (ETS) on hyperhidrosis, facial 
blushing, angina pectoris, vascular disorders and pain syndromes of the hand and arm. 
Clin Auton Res 2003;13. 
6  
Becker BE. Aquatic therapy: scientific foundations and clinical rehabilitation 
applications. PM&R 2009;1:859–72. 
7  
Cochrane DJ. Alternating hot and cold water immersion for athlete recovery: a review. 
Phys Ther Sport 2004;5:26–32. 
8  
Slattery DA, Cryan JF. Using the rat forced swim test to assess antidepressant-like 
activity in rodents. Nat Protoc 2012;7:1009. 
9  
Lee Y-C, Chen P-P. A review of SSRIs and SNRIs in neuropathic pain. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother 2010;11:2813–25. 
10  
Mantoni T, Belhage B, Pedersen LM, et al. Reduced cerebral perfusion on sudden 
immersion in ice water: a possible cause of drowning. Aviat Space Environ Med 
2007;78:374–6. 
11  
Mole TB, Kennedy N, Ndoya N, et al. ThermoSpots to Detect Hypothermia in Children 
with Severe Acute Malnutrition. PLoS One 2012. 
12  
Ducharme MB, Lounsbury DS. Self-rescue swimming in cold water: the latest advice. 
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2007;32:799–807. 
13  
Mole TB, Appleton R, Marson A. Withholding the choice of sodium valproate to young 
women with generalised epilepsy: Are we causing more harm than good? Seizure 
2015;24:127–30. 
14  
Mole T, Irvine M, Worbe Y, et al. Impulsivity in disorders of food and drug misuse. 
American Psychiatric Press: Washington, DC: 2014. 
http://europepmc.org/abstract/med/25118940 (accessed 27 Aug 2014). 
15  
Van Dam NT, Brown A, Mole TB, et al. Development and Validation of the Behavioral 
Tendencies Questionnaire. PLoS One 2015;10:e0140867. 
16  
Mole TB, Begum H, Cooper-Moss N, et al. Limits of ‘patient-centredness’: Valuing 
contextually specific communication patterns. Med Educ 2016;50:359–69. 
doi:10.1111/medu.12946 
17  
Wass V, Mole TB. Contextually balanced medical education: realigning with global 
health care delivery. Med Educ 2017;51:773–5. 
 
Figure captions 
n/a 
Copyright Statement 
I, Dr Tom Mole, The Corresponding Author, has the right to assign on behalf of all authors and does 
assign on behalf of all authors, a full assignment of all intellectual property rights for all content within 
the submitted case report (other than as agreed with the BMJ Publishing Group Ltd) (“BMJ Group”)) in 
any media known now or created in the future, and permits this case report  (if accepted) to be 
published on BMJ Case Reports and to be fully exploited within the remit of the assignment as set out in 
the assignment which has been read. (http://casereports.bmj.com/instructions-for-
authors/copyright.pdf)." 
Date: 30/07/2017 
PLEASE SAVE YOUR TEMPLATE WITH THE FOLLOWING FORMAT: 
Corresponding author’s last name and date of submission, eg,  
Smith_May_2009.doc 
 
 Page 6 of 6 
Table 1. Characteristics of Exposure to Cold Forced Open-Water Swimming Activity 
 
Intervention Variable 
 
Operative Status 
10 weeks post-sympathectomy 
Activity conception 
Patient-initiated (unsanctioned by health professionals) 
Patient-predicted efficacy 
Uncertain: “I wasn’t sure if it would help the pain – I just 
wanted to do it – I though at best it was a long-shot, but 
I was desperate to get some relief.” 
Approximate Ambient Temperature 
8°C 
Estimated Sea Temperature 
11°C 
Wetsuit / thermal clothing 
Nil 
Anticipated level of pain during 
activity 
9-10: “excruciating” 
Actually perceived level of pain 
during activity 
0: “just numb” 
Volitional Nature of Activity 
Initiation of water-entry: Voluntary 
Subsequent sustained swimming: Forced 
Duration of Swimming 
Approximately 1 minute 
Accompanying 
swimmers/observers 
Nil – patient was alone 
Aerobic intensity / Perceived 
Exertion 
Extremely high (9-10/10) 
Exercise Type / Joint Range of 
Movement 
Front Crawl / Compound movements with high ranges of 
motion across all limb joints 
Activity increase relative to 
baseline function 
Non-incremental ‘flooding’: Extreme – step change 
Retrospective self-report during 
Swimming 
“I initially thought – ‘damn this is so cold I’m going to 
die!’ I just swam for my life – Once I was in the water, I 
had tunnel vision – for the first time in months, I 
completely forgot about the pain or the fear of shootings 
pains in my chest if I moved. My entire body tingled with 
the cold.  I just knew if I didn’t keep swimming, I’d soon 
freeze. After a few moments I actually enjoyed it - it was 
just an immersive rush of adrenaline. I bet I couldn’t 
have felt my pain, even if I tried.” 
Retrospective self-report 
immediately after Swimming 
“When I came out of the water, I realised the 
neuropathic pain had gone away. I couldn’t believe it.” 
Total duration whilst disrobed and 
number of sessions ‘intervention’ 
Approximately 10 minutes; single-session 
 
