 I N F E C T I O U S D I S E AS E S
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Metabolic differentiation of early Lyme disease from
southern tick–associated rash illness (STARI)
Claudia R. Molins,1 Laura V. Ashton,1,2 Gary P. Wormser,3 Barbara G. Andre,2 Ann M. Hess,4
Mark J. Delorey,1 Mark A. Pilgard,1 Barbara J. Johnson,1 Kristofor Webb,2 M. Nurul Islam,2
Adoracion Pegalajar-Jurado,1 Irida Molla,3 Mollie W. Jewett,5 John T. Belisle2*
Lyme disease, the most commonly reported vector-borne disease in the United States, results from infection with
Borrelia burgdorferi. Early clinical diagnosis of this disease is largely based on the presence of an erythematous skin
lesion for individuals in high-risk regions. This, however, can be confused with other illnesses including southern
tick−associated rash illness (STARI), an illness that lacks a defined etiological agent or laboratory diagnostic test,
and is coprevalent with Lyme disease in portions of the eastern United States. By applying an unbiased metabolomics
approach with sera retrospectively obtained from well-characterized patients, we defined biochemical and diagnostic
differences between early Lyme disease and STARI. Specifically, a metabolic biosignature consisting of 261 molecular
features (MFs) revealed that altered N-acyl ethanolamine and primary fatty acid amide metabolism discriminated
early Lyme disease from STARI. Development of classification models with the 261-MF biosignature and testing
against validation samples differentiated early Lyme disease from STARI with an accuracy of 85 to 98%. These
findings revealed metabolic dissimilarity between early Lyme disease and STARI, and provide a powerful and new
approach to inform patient management by objectively distinguishing early Lyme disease from an illness with nearly
identical symptoms.
INTRODUCTION
Lyme disease is a multisystem bacterial infection that, in the United
States, is primarily caused by infection with Borrelia burgdorferi sensu
stricto. More than 300,000 cases of Lyme disease are estimated to occur
annually in the United States, with more than 3.4 million laboratory di-
agnostic tests performed each year (1, 2). Symptoms associated with this
infection include fever, chills, headache, fatigue, muscle and joint aches,
and swollen lymph nodes; however, the most prominent clinical mani-
festation in the early stage is the presence of one or more erythema mi-
grans (EM) skin lesions (3). This annular, expanding erythematous skin
lesionoccursatthesite of thetickbitein 70to80%of infectedindividuals
andistypically5cmormoreindiameter(4,5). Althoughan EMlesion is
a hallmark for Lyme disease, other types of skin lesions can be confused
with EM (3, 5, 6). These include rashes caused by tick bite hyper-
sensitivity reactions, certain cutaneous fungal infections, bacterial cellu-
litis, and the rash of southern tick−associated rash illness (STARI) (7, 8).
STARI is associated with a bite from the lone star tick (Amblyomma
americanum), and in addition to the development of an EM-like skin
lesion,individualswithSTARIcanpresentwithmildsystemicsymptoms
(including muscle and joint pains, fatigue, fever, chills, and headache)
thataresimilartothose occurring in patientswithLyme disease (7,9,10).
These characteristics of STARI have led some to postulate that the
etiology of this illness is a Borrelia species, including B. burgdorferi
(10, 11) or B. lonestari (12–15); however, multiple studies have refuted
that STARI is caused by B. burgdorferi (7, 16–19), and additional cases as-
sociatingB.lonestariwithSTARIhavenotemerged(20,21).Additionally,
STARIpatientshavebeenscreenedserologicallyforreactivitytorickettsial
agents, but no evidence was obtained to demonstrate that rickettsia
causes this illness (10, 22). At present, no infectious etiology is known
forSTARI,andnolaboratorytestisavailabletosupportaclinicaldiagnosis
based on symptoms, geographic location, and history of a tick bite.
STARI cases occur over the geographic region where the lone star
tickispresent.Thisincludesaregionthatcurrentlyexpandsfromcentral
Texas and Oklahoma upward into the Midwestern states and eastward,
including the southern states and along the Atlantic coast into Maine
(23). Unlike STARI, Lyme disease is transmitted to humans through
the bite of the blacklegged tick (Ixodes scapularis), which is present in
the northeastern, mid-Atlantic, and north-central United States, and
the western blacklegged tick (Ixodes pacificus), which is present on the
Pacific Coast (24). The geographic distribution of human Lyme disease
and the vectors for this disease is expanding (24–26), and there is a
similar expansion of areas inhabited by the lone star tick (23). A strict
geographic segregation of Lyme disease and STARI does not exist, be-
cause there are regionswhere STARI and Lyme disease are coprevalent
(25).Thus,thereisagrowingneedfordiagnosticmethodstodifferentiate
between Lyme disease and STARI and that facilitate proper treatment,
patient management, and disease surveillance.
Clinically, the skin lesions of STARI and early Lyme disease are
indistinguishable, and the only biomarkers evaluated for differential
diagnosis of early Lyme disease and STARI have been serum antibodies
to B. burgdorferi (10, 16). However, these tests have poor sensitivity for
early stages of Lyme disease, and thus, a lack of B. burgdorferi antibodies
cannot be used as a reliable differential marker for STARI. Metabolic
profiling allows definition of the current physiological state of an indi-
vidual, including the underlying biochemistry of disease pathology.
Thus,the ability toevaluate large numbersofsmall-molecule metabolites
in a single analysis has become an attractive approach for defining
biomarkers of health and diagnosis of disease (27, 28). We previously
demonstrated that metabolic profiling of sera provided a high level of
accuracy in differentiating early Lyme disease patients from healthy in-
dividuals and those with diseases or conditions that are confounders for
existing serological-based laboratory tests of Lyme disease (29). Thus,
1Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort
Collins, CO 80521, USA. 2Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA. 3Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.
4Department of Statistics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA. 5Division
of Immunology and Pathogenesis, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: john.belisle@colostate.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
1 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 we now postulate that a metabolomics-driven approach could identify
biomarkers that discriminate early Lyme disease from STARI and
provide evidence that these two diseases are biochemically distinct. A
retrospective cohort of well-characterized sera from patients with early
Lyme disease and STARI was evaluated to identify a differentiating
metabolic biosignature. Using statistical modeling, this metabolic bio-
signature accurately classifiedtestsamplesthatincludedhealthy controls,
and revealed differences in metabolic pathways.
RESULTS
Clinical samples
A total of 220 retrospective serum samples from three different reposi-
toriesandcollectedon thebasisofcriteriadescribedintable S1wereused
to develop and test a metabolic biosignature that accurately classifies
early Lyme disease and STARI. All samples from Lyme disease patients
wereculture-confirmedand/orpolymerasechainreaction(PCR)–positive
forB.burgdorferi.ThemedianageforearlyLymediseasepatients(n=70)
was 45 years, and 74% were males. STARI patients (n = 55) had an
overall median age of 45 years, and 55% were males. All samples used
inbiosignaturediscoveryandclassificationmodeldevelopmentincluding
healthy controls from Colorado and New York(n = 58) were divided into
Discovery/Training-Sets and Test-Sets, as described in the study design.
To establish a Lyme disease diagnostic baseline, we performed the
recommendedtwo-tieredserologytestingforLymediseaseonallsamples.
First-tier testing was performed using the C6 enzyme immunoassay
(EIA) and was positive for 66% of Lyme disease samples; two STARI
samples (2%) and five healthy controls (9%) also tested positive or
equivocal. Two-tiered testing using immunoglobulin M (IgM) and
IgG immunoblots as the second-tier test after a positive or equivocal
first-tier assay resulted in a sensitivity of 44% for early Lyme disease
samples (duration of illness was not considered for IgM immunoblot
testing). The sensitivity of two-tiered testing for early Lyme disease
samples included in the Discovery/Training-Sets and the Test-Sets was
40 and 50%, respectively. All STARI and healthy control samples were
negative by two-tiered testing (table S1).
Development of a metabolic biosignature for early Lyme
disease and STARI differentiation
Metabolic profiling by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
(LC-MS) of a retrospective cohort of well-characterized sera from pa-
tients with early Lyme disease (n = 40) and STARI (n = 36) (table S1
and Fig. 1A) comprising the Discovery-Set resulted in a biosignature
of 792 molecular features (MFs) that differed significantly (adjusted
P < 0.05), with a ≥2-fold change in relative abundance between early
Lyme disease and STARI. Down-selection of MFs based on their ro-
bustness in replicate analyses of the same sera produced a refined bio-
signature of 261 MFs (Fig. 1A and table S2). Of these 261 MFs, 60 and
201 displayed an increased and decreased abundance, respectively, in
early Lyme disease as compared to STARI. The large number of MFs
that differed significantly (P < 0.05) between early Lyme disease and
STARI patients indicated that these two patient groups had
distinguishing biochemical profiles. These variances could be applied
to define alterations of specific metabolic pathways (Fig. 1A) and used
to develop diagnostic classification models (Fig. 1B).
In silico analysis of metabolic pathways
Presumptive chemical identification was applied to the 261 MFs. This
yielded predicted chemical formulas for 149 MFs, and 122 MFs were
assigned a putative chemical structure based on interrogation of each
MF’smonoisotopicmass[±15partspermillion(ppm)]againsttheMetlin
database and the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) (table S2).
An in silico interrogation of potentially altered metabolic pathways
was performed using the presumptive identifications for the 122 MFs
and MetaboAnalyst (30). Four differentiating pathways were predicted
to have the greatest impact, with glycerophospholipid and sphingolipid
metabolism having the most number of assigned metabolites (Fig. 2 and
tableS3).Specifically,theMetaboAnalystanalysisindicatedthatdifferences
in phosphatidic acid, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylcholine,
and lysophosphatidylcholine were the major contributors to altered
glycerophospholipid metabolism between STARI and early Lyme disease
(table S3). Altered sphingolipid metabolism between these two groups
was attributable to changes in the relative abundances of sphingosine,
dehydrosphinganine, and sulfatide (table S3). Manual interrogation
of the predicted structural identifications revealed that 26 and 7 of
the 122 MFs assigned a putative structural identification were associated
with glycerophospholipid and sphingolipid metabolism, respectively.
Elucidation of altered N-acylethanolamine metabolism
The prediction ofalteredmetabolicpathwayswasbasedonthepresump-
tive structural identification of the early Lyme disease versus STARI dif-
ferentiating MFs. Thus, to further define the metabolic differences
between these two patient groups, LC-MS/MS was appliedfor structural
confirmation of selected MFs. Two MFs that displayed relatively large
abundancedifferences[mass/charge ratio (m/z), 300.2892andretention
time(RT), 19.66;m/z, 328.3204andRT,20.72] were putatively identified
as sphingosine-C18 or 3-ketosphinganine, and sphingosine-C20 or
N,N-dimethyl sphingosine, respectively. However, both of these MFs
hadalternativepredictedstructuresofpalmitoylethanolamideandstearoyl
ethanolamide, respectively. The interrogation of authentic standards
against these two serum MFs revealed RTs and MS/MS spectra that
identified the m/z 300.2892 and m/z 328.3204 products as palmitoyl
ethanolamide(Fig.3,AandB)andstearoylethanolamide(fig.S1),respec-
tively. These two products, as well as other N-acylethanolamines (NAEs),
are derived from phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylcholine,
and represent a class of structures termed endocannabinoids and
endocannabinoid-like (Fig. 3C) (31). Further analysis of the 122 MFs
identified five additional MFs with predicted structures that mapped
to the NAE pathway. Specifically, MF with an m/z of 286.2737 and an
RT of 19.08 was putatively identified as a sphingosine-C17 or pentade-
canoyl ethanolamide and was confirmed to be the latter (fig. S2). MF
with an m/z of 356.3517 and an RT of 21.67 was putatively identified
and confirmed to be eicosanoyl ethanolamide (fig. S3), and MF with an
m/zof454.2923andanRTof18.08wasconfirmedtobeglycerophospho-
N-palmitoyl ethanolamine (fig. S4), an intermediate in the formation of
palmitoyl ethanolamide. A second group of lipids, the primary fatty acid
amides (PFAMs) that act as signaling molecules and that are potentially
associated with the metabolism of NAEs, was also identified as having
significant (P < 0.05) relative abundance differences between the early
Lyme disease and STARI patient samples. Specifically, MFs with an
m/z of 256.2632 and an RT of 20.08, an m/z of 284.2943 and an RT of
21.15, and an m/z of 338.3430 and an RT of 22.14 were confirmed to
be palmitamide (Fig. 3, D and E), stearamide (fig. S5), and erucamide
(fig. S6), respectively.
The large number of differentiating MFs associated with NAE
metabolism suggested that this is a major biological difference between
STARI andearly Lyme disease (Fig.3Cand table S2). FouradditionalMFs
ofthe261-MFbiosignatureandthatfitknownhostbiochemicalpathways
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
2 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 werealsostructurallyconfirmed.Theseincluded L-phenylalanine(fig.S7),
nonanedioic acid (fig. S8), glycocholic acid (fig. S9), and 3-carboxy-4-
methyl-5-propyl-2-furanpropanoic acid (CMPF) (fig. S10). Additionally,
two MFs that provided strong matches to MS/MS spectra in the Metlin
databases were putatively identified as arachidonoyl lysophosphatidic
acid [Lyso PA (20:4)] (fig. S11) and 3-ketosphingosine (fig. S12).
Metabolic dissimilarity between Lyme disease and STARI,
as related to healthy controls
We hypothesized that early Lyme disease and STARI represent distinct
metabolic states that would be reflected in a comparison of MFs’ relative
abundances in these two disease states to those of healthy controls. This
provided evidence for metabolic separation of early Lyme disease and
STARI patient samples (Fig. 4A). For three MFs (3-ketosphingosine,
CMPF, and Lyso PA 20:4), their abundances in early Lyme disease were
increased as compared to the healthy controls, whereas their abundances
in STARI were decreased. Additionally, all of the NAEs and PFAMs had
relative abundances in early Lyme disease patients that were closer to
those of healthy controls, whereas the relative abundances in STARI
were greatly increased.
This analysis wasexpandedto all 261MFs of the early Lyme disease–
STARI biosignature. The total number of MFs with increased and
decreased abundances relative to healthy
controls was similar for both early Lyme
disease and STARI within the different
abundance fold change ranges (Fig. 4B).
However, when individual MFs with in-
creased or decreased abundances relative
to healthy controls were compared be-
tween early Lyme disease and STARI, a
strong difference emerged, with only 0
to 30% of MFs shared between early Lyme
diseaseandSTARIyieldingthesamedirec-
tional and similar abundance fold change
(Fig. 4C). Thisindicatedthat the metabolic
changes in early Lyme disease and STARI
as compared to healthy controls differed.
Diagnostic classification of early
Lyme disease versus STARI
Classification models were used to deter-
mine whether the 261-MF biosignature
could be applied to discriminate early
Lyme disease from STARI (Table 1). Spe-
cifically, two classification models, LASSO
and RF, were trained with the 261-MF
biosignature using abundance data from
the Training-Set samples only. Test-Set
samples were not used for MF selection
or to train the classification models. The
LASSO model selected 38 MFs, and RF by
default does not perform feature selection
and thus used all 261 MFs for classifica-
tion of the STARI and early Lyme disease
patient populations. Table S4 provides the
regression coefficients for the 38 MFs
selectedbyLASSO.WhenTest-Setsamples
were tested in duplicate, early Lyme dis-
ease samples (n = 30) were classified by
RF and LASSO with an accuracy of 97 and 98%, respectively. The
STARI samples (n = 19) had a classification accuracy of 89% with both
models (Table 1 and table S5). A depiction of the LASSO scores for the
Test-Set data showed segregation of the early Lyme disease and STARI
patient samples and demonstrated the discriminating power of the
38 MFs selected by the LASSO model (Fig. 5A). A receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve was plotted to demonstrate the performance
of the LASSO model for differentiating early Lyme disease from STARI
patients. The area under the curve (AUC) was calculated to be 0.986
(Fig. 5B). The 38 MFs of the LASSO model encompassed 4 of the
14structurallyconfirmedmetabolites:CMPF, L-phenylalanine,palmitoyl
ethanolamide, and Lyso PA.
Diagnostic classification of early Lyme disease versus STARI
versus healthy controls
Separate three-way classification models using LASSO and RF were de-
veloped by including LC-MS data collected for healthy controls (n = 38)
in the Training-Set samples. For model training, LASSO selected 82 MFs
(table S2). The regression coefficients for the 82 MFs selected by LASSO
are provided in table S6. Evaluation of the RF and LASSO three-way
classification models with Test-Set samples revealed classification ac-
curacies of 85 and 92% for early Lyme disease and STARI, respectively.
B
Pathway
analysis
261-MF
biosignature
Test for robustness: 
• Remove MFs with
>20% missing values
• Limit MFs based on 
≥2-fold change in 
50% of samples within 
a group
Select MFs consistent 
between two LC-MS runs
runs 1 and 2)
EL samples, n = 40
STARI samples, n = 36
runs 1 and 2)
EL samples, n = 40
STARI samples, n = 36
HC samples, n = 38
Statistical model training
(RF and LASSO models)
Two-way modeling:
EL vs. STARI
Three-way modeling:
EL vs. STARI vs. HC
runs 1 and 2) 
EL samples, n = 30
STARI samples, n = 19
runs 1 and 2) 
EL samples, n = 30
STARI samples, n = 19
HC samples, n = 20
Quantitative LC-MS data
A
Analysis by MPP: 
• Select MFs present in 
50% of samples in at 
least one group 
• 600-ion count 
minimum
• P < 0.05
Remove duplicate MFs
792 Discovery MF list
EL samples, n = 40 
STARI samples, n = 36
runs 1 and 2)
(n = 152 data files;
EL samples, n = 40 
STARI samples, n = 36
run 1)
Fig. 1. Metabolic profiling for the identification and application of differentiating MFs. (A) LC-MS data from an
initial Discovery-Set of early Lyme disease (EL) and STARI samples were used to identify a list of MFs that were targeted in a
second LC-MS run. The data from both LC-MS runs were combined to form the Targeted-Discovery-Set. The MFs were then
screened for consistency and robustness, and this resulted in a final early Lyme disease–STARI biosignature of261 MFs. This
biosignature was used for downstream pathway analysis and for classification modeling. MPP, Mass Profiler Pro. (B) Two
training-sets along with the 261-MF biosignature list were used to train multiple classification models, random forest (RF),
and least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO). Data from samples of two Test-Sets (not included for the
Discovery/Training-Set data) were blindly tested against the two-way (early Lyme disease versus STARI) and three-way
[early Lyme disease versus STARI versus healthy controls (HC)] classification models. The regression coefficients used for
each MF in the LASSO two-way and three-way classification models are provided in tables S4 and S6, respectively.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
3 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Healthy controls (n = 20), a group not included for biosignature devel-
opment, were classified with accuracies of 95 and 93% with the RF and
LASSO models, respectively (Table 1 and table S7). Plotting of LASSO
scores calculated for Test-Set data revealed three groupings that corre-
sponded with early Lyme disease, STARI, and healthy controls (Fig. 5C).
Of the early Lyme disease sample data files that were misclassified with
the RF model (n = 9), all were predicted to be healthy controls; of those
misclassified by the LASSO model (n = 9), three were classified as STARI
and six as healthy controls. Of the STARI samples that were misclassified
by the RF and LASSO models (n = 3 for both models), all samples were
misclassified as early Lyme disease. When healthy controls were misclas-
sified using the RF model (n = 2) and LASSO model (n = 3), all were
misclassified as early Lyme disease.
Of the 38 MFs selected by LASSO for the two-way classification
model, 33 were included in the 82 MFs of the LASSO three-way
classification model (table S2). The 82 MFs of the LASSO three-way
classification included 7 of the 14 structurally confirmed metabolites:
3-ketosphingosine, glycocholic acid, and pentadecanoyl ethanolamide,
as well as the 4 included in the LASSO two-way classification model
(table S2).
Assessment of geographic variability
Because retrospective samples collected by multiple laboratories were
used in these studies, we assessed whether a geographic bias was intro-
duced. Pairwise comparisons, by sample source, of mean LASSO scores
and mean RF probabilities of STARI and healthy control Test-Set data
were performed with analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by
computation of simultaneous confidence intervals using Tukey’s
method (tables S8 and S9). These results demonstrated that all STARI
samples grouped together regardless of source and differ from healthy
controls. Likewise, the healthy controls from Colorado and New York
were considered a single group that differed from STARI based on the
LASSO healthy control or STARI scores, and the RF classification prob-
abilities for healthy controls. The only outlier noted in these analyses
wasthe New Yorkhealthy controls,butthiswasonly whenthe ANOVA
was performed with RF classification probabilities for STARI.
The grouping of the samples based on disease state and not geo-
graphic distribution was also evaluated by linear discriminant analysis
using the 82 MFs of the LASSO three-way classification model (Fig. 6).
For this analysis, healthy controls from Florida, a region with low prev-
alence for Lyme disease and reported to have STARI cases, were in-
cluded to evaluate whether samples collected in the southern United
States would differ from those collected in New York or Colorado.
For STARI, three patient sample groups collected in Missouri, North
Carolina, and other states (including Virginia, Georgia, Kentucky,
Tennessee, Alabama, Iowa, and Nebraska) were compared. The linear
discriminant analysis demonstrated that although slight variation exists
between the three healthy control groups (New York, Colorado, and
Florida), there is greater variability between all healthy controls and
all STARI samples than within healthy controls or STARI samples
based on geographic location of collection (Fig. 6).
DISCUSSION
The inability to detect B. burgdorferi by PCR or culture, no serological
response to B. burgdorferi antigens in STARI patients, and transmission
by different tick species are accepted as evidence that the etiologies of
STARI and Lyme disease differ (7, 8, 16, 25). Nevertheless, an overlap in
clinicalsymptoms,including the developmentofan EM-likeskin lesion,
creates confusion and controversy for the clinical differentiation of
STARI and Lyme disease (32). The data reported here demonstrated
marked differences between the metabolic profiles of early Lyme disease
and STARI patients, and thus provide compelling positive data to
support the concept that these two illnesses are distinct entities.
Metabolic pathway analyses and the structural identification of sev-
eral MFs with significant (P < 0.05) abundance differences between
early Lyme disease and STARI identified multiple NAEs. These en-
dogenous lipid mediators are derived from phosphatidylcholine and
phosphatidylethanolamine via the endocannabinoid system (31).
AEA, a widely studied endocannabinoid, is an endogenous agonist of
the cannabinoid receptors; however, it is a minor component of animal
tissues. In contrast, congeners of AEA, such as the NAEs identified in
the early Lyme disease–STARI biosignature, are significant products of
animal tissues, including the skin (31, 33). The serum levels of NAEs
having long-chain saturated fatty acids were significantly (P < 0.05)
increased in the serum of STARI patients. These are produced in re-
sponse to inflammation and act in an anti-inflammatory manner as
agonists of PPAR-a or by enhancing AEA activity (34, 35). The
NAEs can be converted to N-acylglycine structures via an alcohol
dehydrogenase and further degraded to PFAMs (36). Our data demon-
strated a STARI-associated increase in PFAMs and the corresponding
NAEs with saturated fatty acids. Our studies did not address the
underlying mechanism for the increased NAE and PFAM levels in
STARI patients; however, a decrease in fatty acid amide hydrolase
activity that liberates fatty acids from both NAEs and PFAMs (37)
Pathway impact
–Log (P)
Fig. 2. Pathways differentially regulated in patients with early Lyme disease and
STARI. The 122 presumptively identified MFs were analyzed using MetaboAnalyst to
identify perturbed pathways between early Lyme disease and STARI. The color and
size of each circle are based on P values and pathway impact values. Pathways with a
>0.1 impact were considered to be perturbed and differentially regulated between
patients with early Lyme disease and STARI. A total of four pathways were affected: (i)
glycerophospholipid metabolism; (ii) sphingolipid metabolism; (iii) valine, leucine,
and isoleucine biosynthesis; and (iv) phenylalanine metabolism.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
4 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 A
N-palmitoyl ethanolamide standard
Relative abundance (counts)
Relative abundance (%)
Relative abundance (counts)
Pooled sera + N-palmitoyl ethanolamide standard
Pooled sera
D
×106
×106
×104
2
1
4
0.5
1
0
0
2
0
1.5
×107
×106
×106
1
2
4
1
0.5
0
0
2
0
Counts vs. acquisition time (min)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Counts vs. acquisition time (min)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
N-palmitoyl ethanolamide standard
Pooled sera
Pooled sera
Palmitamide standard
Mass-to-charge (m/z)
Mass-to-charge (m/z)
Relative abundance (%)
62.0598
283.2637
300.2892
71.0852
95.0852
109.1003 
50
50
100
100
E
B
100
100
20
0
7.5
50
70
90
110
130
150
170
190
210
230
250
270
50
70
90
110
130
150
170
190
210
230
250
270
290
Phosphatidylethanolamine
PAM 
Cytochrome c
PLD
PLA
N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine
Glycerophospho-N-acyl ethanolamine (Gp-PEA)
N-acyl ethanolamine (AEA, PEA)
N-acyl glycine
Primary fatty acid amide (PFAM)
Phosphatidylcholine
+
Phospho-N-acyl ethanolamine
ADH
OH
OH
O
OH
C
O
N
H
OR2
C
C
O
P
O
O
OH
C
OR1
PLC
O
P
N
H
C
C
O
O
C
O
N
H
O
N
H
OH
O
O
OH
P
O
O
N
H
O
OH
NH2
256.2664
88.0762
57.0700
102.0918
130.1235
186.1857
214.2165
238.2568
74.0603
0
Palmitamide standard
Pooled sera + palmitamide standard
Pooled sera
Fig. 3. MetaboliteidentificationandassociationwithNAEandPFAM
metabolism. Structural identification of palmitoyl ethanolamide
(A and B) and palmitamide (D and E) in the 261-MF biosignature
is part of NAE and PFAM metabolism (C). Structural identification
was achieved by RT alignment (A and D) of authentic standard
(top panel), authentic standard spiked in pooled patient sera (mid-
dle panel), and the targeted metabolite in pooled patient sera
(bottom panel), and by comparison of MS/MS spectra (B and E) of
the authentic standards (top) and the targeted metabolites in pa-
tient sera (bottom). RT alignments for palmitoyl ethanolamide (A) and palmitamide (D) were generated with extracted ion chromatograms for m/z of 300.2892 and
256.2632, respectively. The relationship of PFAM formation to NAE metabolism is highlighted in light green in (C). PLA, phospholipase A; PLC, phospholipase C; PLD,
phospholipase D; ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; PAM, peptidylglycine a-amidating monooxygenase; AEA, arachidonoyl ethanolamide.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
5 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 is one potential cause for increase in abun-
dance of these metabolites. The anti-
inflammatory activity of the NAEs also
raisesthepossibilitythatthesemetabolites
are partially responsible for the milder
symptoms associated with STARI (9). Be-
cause the enzymes involved with the gen-
esis and degradation of NAEs and PFAMs
are known (31, 38), studies can be con-
structed to elucidate the mechanism(s)
by which NAEs and PFAMs accumulate
in the sera of STARI patients.
We previously demonstrated proof of
concept for a discriminating metabolic
biosignature of early Lyme disease (29).
This current work expands on the utility
of this approach by demonstrating the
ability to distinguish early Lyme disease
from an illness with nearly identical
symptoms or what would be considered
a Lyme disease–like illness (39). The ex-
isting diagnostic algorithm for Lyme
diseaseusesanEIAorimmunofluorescence
assay as a first-tier test followed by IgM and
IgG immunoblotting as a second-tier test
(40). For early Lyme disease, the sensitivity
of this diagnostic algorithm is 29 to 40%,
and the specificity is 95 to 100% (41) and
does not distinguish between active and
previous infections, an important limita-
tion. Here, all of the STARI samples were
negative by two-tiered testing, and only
2% were positive by the first-tier EIA. Early
Lyme disease samples were 44% positive by
two-tiered testing. In contrast, classification
modeling with the 261 MFs of the early
Lyme disease–STARI biosignature marked-
ly increased diagnostic accuracy for early
Lyme disease (85 to 98% accuracy de-
pending on the model). Classification by
RF or LASSO was overall highly accu-
rate for early Lyme disease and STARI, in
A
B
C
0
10
20
30
40
50
>3.5
3.0–3.4
2.5–2.9
2.0–2.4
1.5–1.9
1.0–1.4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
>3.5
3.0–3.4
2.5–2.9
2.0–2.4
1.5–1.9
1.0–1.4
Abundance fold change from healthy controls
Abundance fold change from healthy controls
Percent of MFs with increased 
or decreased abundance
Percent overlap of MFs in early Lyme disease
and STARI relative to healthy controls
Log2 abundance fold change
normalized to healthy controls 
STARI
Lyme disease
–2
0
2
4
6
Glycocholic acid
L-phenylalanine
3-Ketosphingosine
GP-NPEA
Eicosanoyl ethanolamide
Palmitoyl ethanolamide
Pentadecanoyl ethanolamide
Stearoyl ethanolamide
Erucamide
Palmitamide
Stearamide
Lyso PA (20:4)
Nonanedioic acid
CMPF
STARI
Lyme
disease
Increased
Decreased
Increased
Decreased
Increased
Decreased
Fig. 4. Comparison of MF abundances from the Lyme disease–STARI biosignature against healthy controls.
(A) Fourteen of the metabolites with level 1 or level 2 structural identifications were evaluated for abundance differences
between early Lyme disease (green squares) and STARI (blue triangles) normalized to the metabolite abundance in healthy
controls. Metabolites identified for NAE and PFAM metabolism are included. GP-NPEA, glycerophospho-N-palmitoyl eth-
anolamine. The relative mean abundance and 95% confidence intervals are shown for each metabolite. (B) Abundance
fold change ranges (x axis) plotted against the percent of MFs from the 261-MF early Lyme disease–STARI biosignature
that have increased (dark blue) or decreased (light blue) abundances in STARI relative to healthy controls and increased
(dark green) or decreased (light green) abundances in early Lyme disease relative to healthy controls. (C) Percentage of
identical MFs in STARI and early Lyme disease that had the same directional and similar abundance fold change
difference relative to healthy controls (y axis). MFs were grouped on the basis of abundance fold change ranges: 1.0
to 1.4, 1.5 to 1.9, 2.0 to 2.4, 2.5 to 2.9, 3.0 to 3.4, and ≥3.5 (x axis). MFs with increased fold changes relative to healthy
controls are indicated in dark purple, and those with decreased fold changes are indicated in light purple.
Table 1. Classification modeling using the 261-MF biosignature list.
Classification
model
Test-Set sample
group
Number of data
files*
RF (261 MFs)
LASSO (38/82 MFs†)
Number correctly
predicted
% Classification
accuracy
Number correctly
predicted
% Classification
accuracy
1. Two-way model
Early Lyme disease
60
58
97
59
98
STARI
38
34
89
34
89
2. Three-way model
Early Lyme disease
60
51
85
51
85
STARI
38
35
92
35
92
Healthy controls
40
38
95
37
93
*Samples were analyzed in duplicate by LC-MS.
†A total of 38 MFs were selected by the LASSO model for two-way modeling, and 82 MFs were selected by
the LASSO model for three-way modeling.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
6 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 particular when using the two-way classification models. When healthy
controls were introduced and used to develop a three-way classification
model, there was a slight increase in the accuracy for STARI and de-
crease in the accuracy for early Lyme disease, but healthy controls were
classified with a 93 to 95% accuracy. This also supports the conclusion
that STARI and early Lyme disease are metabolically distinct from
healthy controls, but in different ways.
To date, the development of a diagnostic tool for STARI or differ-
entiation of early Lyme disease and STARI has received little attention.
As the geographic distribution of Lyme disease continues to expand
(25, 26), so will the geographic range where there is overlap of Lyme
disease and STARI. Thus, a diagnostic tool that accurately differentiates
these two diseases could have a major impact on patient management.
Lyme disease is treatedwithantibiotics, and although there isno defined
infectious etiology for STARI, this illness is also commonly treated in a
similar manner (7, 20, 42). Establishment of a robust diagnostic tool
would not only facilitate antibiotic stewardship but also allow for proper
studies to assess the true impact of thera-
pies for STARI. Lyme disease is also a re-
portable disease, and to maintain accurate
disease surveillance in low-incidence
areas, it is essential that diseases such as
STARI be excluded (32). Additionally,
vaccines are currently being developed
for Lyme disease (43–45), and as these
are tested, it will be important to distin-
guish STARI patients to properly assess
vaccine efficacy.
To apply the discoveries of this work
toward the development of an assay that
can be used for the clinical differentiation
of early Lyme disease and STARI, it must
first be determined whether an emphasis
should be placed on the diagnosisof Lyme
disease or STARI. Because there is no
defined etiology of STARI, and Lyme dis-
ease is not necessarily self-limiting with-
out antibiotics and can have subsequent
complications if untreated, we envision
that the final assay would focus on being
highly sensitive for early Lyme disease
and be primarily applied in regions where
Lyme disease and STARI overlap. Al-
though existing laboratory tests for Lyme
disease emphasize specificity, this strategy
needs to be reconsidered for a differential
diagnostic test of STARI and early Lyme
disease, because any illness presenting
with an EM in a region with a known
incidence of Lyme disease would likely
be treated with antibiotics (7, 20, 42).
As with all diagnostic tests, use of a
metabolic biosignature for differentia-
tion of early Lyme disease and STARI
would need to be performed in conjunc-
tion with clinical evaluation of the pa-
tient, and consideration of their medical
history and epidemiologic risk for these
two diseases.
The approach outlined in this study applies biochemical signatures
derived by semiquantitative MS for the classification of patients. A lim-
itation of the current study is that the most accurate quantification of
metabolites by MS is achieved by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)
assays (46). MS assays currently used in clinical laboratories for the
analyses of small-molecule metabolites typically apply MRM assays.
Most of these tests are under Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments guidelines, but a U.S. Food and Drug Administration–
cleared MS-based test for inborn metabolic errors is in use (47). MRM
assays are developed with the knowledge of an MF’s chemical structure.
To this end, we have identified the chemical structure of 14 MFs and are
continuing to identify those that have the greatest fold change difference
and reproducibility. It is noted that the NAEs and PFAMs revealed via
our pathway analyses are amenable to MRM assays (48). These metab-
olites are now being investigated for their ability to accurately classify
STARI and early Lyme disease. Any MS-based diagnostic assay for Lyme
disease and STARI would likely occur in a specialized clinical diagnostic
10
LASSO scores
5
0
–5
–10
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Sensitivity
0.0
B
A
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–10 –5 0 5 10
EL LASSO score
STARI LASSO score
HC LASSO score
C
Fig. 5. Evaluation of classification models’
performance. (A) LASSO scores (Xb, that is, the
linear portion of the regression model) were
calculated for Test-Set data of early Lyme disease
(green dots) and STARI (blue triangles) serum
samples by multiplying the transformed abun-
dances of the 38 MFs identified in the two-way
LASSO model by the LASSO coefficients of the
model and summing for each sample. Scores are
plotted along the y axis; serum samples are plotted
randomly along the x axis for easier viewing. (B) An
ROC curve demonstrates the level of discrimination
that is achieved between early Lyme disease and
STARI using the 38 MFs of the two-way LASSO clas-
sification model by depicting a true-positive rate
(sensitivity; early Lyme disease) versus a false-
positive rate (specificity; STARI) for the Test-Set
samples (table S6). The AUC was calculated to be
0.986. The diagonal line represents an AUC value
of 0.5. The performance of two-tiered testing (red
dot) on the same sample set (Test-Set 1) was included as a reference for the sensitivity and specificity of the current
clinical laboratory test for Lyme disease. (C) LASSO scores (Xbi) were calculated for the Test-Set data of early Lyme
disease (green spheres), STARI (blue spheres), and healthy control (black spheres) serum samples by multiplying
the transformed abundances of the 82 MFs identified in the three-way LASSO model by each of three LASSO
coefficients used in the model. Each axis represents the sample score in the direction of one of the three sample
groups. Scores are used in calculation of probabilities of class membership, with highest probability determining
the predicted class.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
7 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 laboratory. At this point, it is difficult to accurately assess the cost
benefits of an MS-based assay; however, it should be noted that the
second-tier immunoblot assays for the serological diagnosis of Lyme
disease are already performed in specialized laboratories (1, 49, 50).
Further, an LC-MS assay for a single sample performed as described
in this work takes about 1.5 hours from sample processing to data
collection.
The data reported here were generated from the analysis of retro-
spectively collected serum samples from various repositories that have
been archived for different lengths of time. To reduce the impact of the
potential variability associated with these samples, we applied stringent
criteria to the data analysis. In addition to the requirement of a signif-
icant (P < 0.05) fold change, those MFs selected for the final early Lyme
disease–STARI biosignature were required to be present in at least 80%
of samples within a sample group and maintain the median fold change
difference in atleast 50% of samples within a group. Whereasthe STARI
and healthy control sera were collected by multiple laboratories and
from multiple geographic locations, the early Lyme disease sera were
obtained from a single laboratory. This is a potential limitation of the
study. However, linear discriminate analysis was applied to assess the
variability within the healthy control and STARI samples collected by
different laboratories. This analysis demonstrated little to no variability
among the STARI or healthy control samples, indicating that the crite-
ria used for MF selection effectively reduced nonbiological variability.
As we have noted, data were collected by nonabsolute semiquantitative
MS. Nevertheless, this is a common practice applied in the development
of differentiating biosignatures for infectious diseases (27, 51–54), and
our workflow ensured that the most robust MFs were selected and used
for classification modeling. This included the use of full technical repli-
cates that controlled for potential variability introduced during sample
processing and LC-MS analyses. Although the use of replicate samples
could have biased the discriminating power of the classification models
for the Training-Set data and the number of samples used was relatively
small, the use of an independent hold-out Test-Set prevented this from
being a major limitation for model testing.
Without knowledge of a known etiologic agent, we recognize that
STARI simply encompasses a clinical syndrome. The STARI samples
used in this current work included those collected in studies used to
define this illness (9), as well as samples collected outside those original
studies. The diagnostic accuracy achieved with these samples provides
justification for prospective studies to an expanded number of early
Lyme disease and STARI samples and to assess the applicability of
the current metabolic biosignature for patients with other non-Lyme
EM-like lesions, including tick bite hypersensitivity reactions, certain
cutaneous fungal infections, and bacterial cellulitis. Additionally, other
factorssuch asLyme disease confections with othervector-borne patho-
gens should be addressed. In the southeastern United States, there is
evidence for enzootic transmission of B. burgdorferi; however, it is de-
batable whether Lyme disease occurs in this region (11, 32, 55, 56). The
current study was not designed to provide evidence for or against the
presence of Lyme disease in the southern United States. Nevertheless,
metabolic profiling offers a novel approach that is orthogonal to
methods currently used to address this issue.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
STARI is a confounding factor in diagnosing early Lyme disease in areas
where both illnesses overlap and contributes to the debate surrounding
the presence of Lyme disease in the southern United States. No diagnos-
tic tool exists for STARI or for differentiating early Lyme disease from
STARI. On the basis of documented differences between early Lyme
disease and STARI (9, 16, 57), we hypothesized that metabolic profiling
of serum would permit development of a biochemical biosignature that,
when applied, could accurately classify early Lyme disease and STARI
patients. For this reason, we designed an unbiased metabolomics study
to directly compare the metabolic host responses between these two ill-
nesses and to subsequently evaluate how this metabolic biosignature
distinguishes these two illnesses. The use of unbiased metabolomics
for biosignature discovery does not lend itself to power calculations
to determine sample size. Thus, sample sizes were selected on the basis
of our previous studies (29, 51, 52). To obtain a sufficient number of
well-characterized STARI sera, retrospectively collected samples from
two separate studies were used. Specifically, the first set of STARI serum
samples(n= 33) was obtainedfrom the Centersfor Disease Controland
Prevention (CDC) repository. These samples were collected through a
prospective study performed between 2007 and 2009 (58). The states
where patients were recruited included the following: North Carolina,
18; Virginia, 4; Tennessee, 3; Kentucky, 2; Georgia, 2; Iowa, 2; Alabama,
1; and Nebraska, 1. All samples were collected before treatment with the
exception of one patient who was treated with doxycycline 1 to 2 days
before the serum sample was obtained. The second set of STARI
samples (n = 22) was obtained from the New York Medical College
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Healthy controls
CO
FL
NY
Density
Density
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
STARI
MO
NC
Other
Linear discriminant
Fig. 6. Evaluation of intra- and intergroup variability. Linear discriminant anal-
ysis was performed using the 82 MFs picked by LASSO in the three-way classification
model to assess the intragroup variability based on the geographical region or lab-
oratory from which healthy control (CO, blue, solid; FL, green, dotted; and NY, red,
dashed) and STARI (MO, dark blue, solid; NC, light blue, dotted; and Other, green,
dashed) sera were obtained.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
8 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 serum repository (20). These samples were collected between 2001
and 2004 from patients living in Missouri.
Sufficient numbers of well-characterized early Lyme disease serum
samples were acquired from New York, an area of high incidence for
Lyme disease and low incidence of STARI (9). Specifically, all early
Lyme disease samples (n = 70) were culture- and/or PCR-positive for
B. burgdorferi and were collected before treatment. To ensure appropri-
ate representation of both nondisseminated and disseminated forms of
early EM Lyme disease, samples from patients with a single EM that
were skin culture– and/or PCR-positive for B. burgdorferi and blood
culture–negative (n = 35) and patients with multiple EMs or a single
EM that were blood culture–positive (n = 35) were used. Early Lyme
disease samples were collected between 1992 and 2007, and 1 to 33 days
after onset of symptoms. To understand the relationship of our findings
to a healthy control population, serum samples from healthy donors
were also included in the study. These were procured from repositories
at New York Medical College, the CDC, and the University of Central
Florida (UCF). A detailed description of inclusion and exclusion criteria
for each patient and donor population is provided in table S1. All
participating institutions obtained institutional review board (IRB)
approval for this study. IRB review and approval for this study ensured
that the retrospective samples used had been collected under informed
consent.
All samples were analyzed in duplicate and were randomized before
processing for LC-MS analyses. Healthy control sera were used as
quality control samples for each LC-MS experiment. The serum
samples and respective LC-MS data files of each patient group and
healthy controls were randomly separated into a Discovery-Set/
Training-Sets 1 and 2, and Test-Sets 1 and 2. Specifically, 40 of the
70 early Lyme disease and 36 of the 55 STARI samples were randomly
selected as the Discovery-Set samples. This sample set was used for MF
selection. To train the classification models, two training sets were used.
The first, Training-Set 1, was identical to the Discovery-Set, and the
second, Training-Set 2, consisted of the same samples as Training-Set
1withthe addition of38of the58healthycontrolsamplesfromColorado
and New York. Last, Test-Sets 1 and 2 were created. Test-Set 1 was com-
posed of 30 early Lyme disease and 19 STARI samples that were not
included in the Discovery/Training sample sets. Test-Set 2 consisted
of the same samples as those used in Test-Set 1 with the addition of
20 healthy control samples that were not included in the Training-Set
2 samples. Test-Sets 1 and 2 were exclusively used for blinded testing of
the classification models.
Randomization into Discovery/Training-Sets or Test-Sets was done
in a manner that ensured that bias was not introduced based on the
repository from which STARI samples were obtained or on whether
the early Lyme disease samples were from a nondisseminated or dis-
seminated case. Biosignature development was performed by screening
MFs based on stringent criteria outlined in Fig. 1A and detailed in the
“Biosignature development” section.
Lyme disease serologic testing of all serum samples
Standard two-tiered testing was performed on all samples (40). The
C6 B. burgdorferi (Lyme) ELISA (Immunetics) was used as a first-tier
test, and any positive or equivocal samples were subjected to Marblot
IgM and IgG immunoblots (MarDx Diagnostics) as the second-tier test.
Serologic assays were performed according to the manufacturer’s in-
structions, and the data were interpreted according to established
CDC guidelines (40). Duration of illness was not considered for test
interpretation.
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
Serum samples were randomized before extraction of small-molecule
metabolites and LC-MS analyses. Small-molecule metabolites were
extracted from sera as previously reported (29). An aliquot (10 ml) of
the serum metabolite extract was applied to a Poroshell 120, EC-C8,
2.1 × 100 mm, 2.7 mm LC column (Agilent Technologies). The metabo-
lites were eluted with a 2 to 98% nonlinear gradient of acetonitrile in
0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 ml/min with an Agilent 1200 Series
LC system. The eluent was introduced directly into an Agilent 6520
quadrupole–time-of-flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer, and MS was
performed as previously described (29, 51). LC-MS and LC-MS/MS
data were collected under the following parameters: gas temperature,
310°C; drying gasat10liters/min; nebulizerat 45lb/in2;capillary voltage,
4000 V; fragmentation energy, 120 V; skimmer, 65 V; and octopole RF
setting, 750 V. The positive-ion MS data for a mass range of 75 to
1700 Da were acquired at a rate of 2 scans/s. Data were collected
in both centroid and profile modes in 4-GHz high-resolution mode.
Positive-ion reference masses of 121.050873 and 922.009798 m/z
were introduced to ensure mass accuracy. To monitor instrument
performance, quality control samples consisting of a metabolite extract
of healthy control serum (BioreclamationIVT) were analyzed in
duplicate at the beginning of each analysis day and every 20 samples
during the analysis day.
Biosignature development
LC-MS data from an initial Discovery-Set of samples composed of ran-
domly selected early Lyme disease (n = 40) and randomly selected
STARI patients (n = 36) that were exclusively used for MF selection
and classification model training were processed with the Molecular
Feature Extractor algorithm tool of the Agilent MassHunter Qualitative
Analysis software version B.05.00 (Agilent Technologies). The MFs
were aligned between data files with a 0.25-min RT window and
15-ppm mass tolerance. Comparative analyses of differentiating
MFs between patient groups were performed using the workflow
presented in Fig. 1A. Specifically, the Discovery-Set data were analyzed
using MPP software version B.12.05 (Agilent Technologies). Using
MPP, a univariate, unpaired t test was performed on each metabolite
to test for a difference in mean (standardized) abundance between early
Lyme disease and STARI groups. Multiple testing was accounted for by
computing false discovery rate–adjusted P values (59). To prevent selec-
tion of MFs biased by uncontrolled variables (diet, other undisclosed
illnesses, etc.), only MFs present in 50% or more of samples in at least
one group and that differed between the groups with a significance of
adjusted P < 0.05 were selected. Quantitative Analysis software version
B.05.01 (Agilent Technologies) was used to extract area abundance
values for all differentially selected MFs from the MS data files.
Duplicate MFs were removed by assessing adduct ions, as well as mass,
RT, and abundance similarities; this resulted in the Discovery MF List.
A duplicate LC-MS analysis of the Discovery-Set samples was per-
formed, and the area abundance for MFs of the discovery MF List
was extracted using the Quantitative Analysis software. These data with
those from the first LC-MS analysisformed the Targeted-Discovery-Set.
Abundance data from the Targeted-Discovery-Set data files
were normalized using a two-step method. First, abundances (area
under the peak for the monoisotopic mass) of each Discovery MF
were normalized by the median intensity of the stable MFs detected in
each individual sample (60). Stable MFs were those identified in the
original extraction of LC-MS data files with the Agilent MassHunter
Qualitative Analysis software and present in at least 50% of all sample
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
9 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 data files. Second, median fold changes of stable MFs between the ini-
tial quality control sample (applied at the beginning of the LC-MS
analysis) and each of the subsequent quality control samples (applied
every 20 clinical samples throughout the LC-MS analysis) were
calculated. The median fold change calculated for the quality control
sample that directly followed each series of 20 clinical samples was
multiplied against the normalized Discovery MF abundances in the
clinical samples of that series. This second normalization step was per-
formed to correct for instrument variability. To apply stringency to
the development of a final early Lyme disease–STARI biosignature,
MFs were filtered on the basis of consistency in the duplicate LC-MS
data sets by requiring the same directional abundance change between
the patient groups. Specifically, MFs with at least a ≥2-fold abundance
difference and a 1.5-fold abundance difference between the medians of the
two groups (early Lyme disease and STARI) for LC-MS analysis-1 and
LC-MS analysis-2, respectively, were selected. Further criteria applied
to ensure that the most robust MFs were being selected included re-
moving MFs with >20% missing values in both groups and selecting
only MFs where at least 50% of the samples within a patient group
produced a fold change of ≥2 in comparison to the mean of the other
patient group. This selection process resulted in the MFs included in
the early Lyme disease–STARI biosignature.
Prediction and verification of MF chemical structure
Confirmation of the chemical structures of selected MFs was performed
by LC-MS/MS to provide level 1 or level 2 identifications (61). Com-
mercial standards palmitoyl ethanolamide, stearoyl ethanolamide,
eicosanoyl ethanolamide, glycerophospho-N-palmitoyl ethanolamine,
pentadecanoyl ethanolamide, and erucamide were obtained from
Cayman Chemical. Commercial standards piperine and nonanedioic
acid were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Commercial standards methyl
oleate, stearamide, palmitamide, CMPF, and glycocholic acid were
obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. The LC conditions
used were the same as those used for the LC-MS analyses of serum
metabolites. MS/MS spectra of the targeted MFs and commercial
standards were obtained with an Agilent 6520 Q-TOF mass spectrom-
eter. Electrospray ionization was performed in the positive-ion mode as
described for MS analyses, except that the mass spectrometer was
operated in the 2-GHz extended dynamic range mode. The positive
ion MS/MS data (50 to 1700 Da) were acquired at a rate of 1 scan/s.
Precursor ions were selected by the quadrupole and fragmented via
collision-induced dissociation with nitrogen at a collision energy of
10, 20, or 40 eV. To provide a level 1 identification, the MS/MS spectra
of the targeted metabolites were compared to spectra of commercial
standards. Additionally, LC RT comparisons between the targeted MF
and the respective standard were made. An RT window of ±5 s was ap-
plied as a cutoff for identification. The MS/MS spectra of selected serum
metabolites were compared to spectra in the Metlin database for a level 2
identification.
Metabolic pathway analysis by MetaboAnalyst
The experimentally obtained monoisotopic masses corresponding to
the 261 MFs of the biosignature list were searched against HMDB using
a 15-ppm window. The resulting list of potential metabolite structures
was applied to the MetaboAnalyst pathway analysis tool (30). Settings
for pathway analysis consisted of applying Homo sapiens pathway
library, the hypergeometric test for the overrepresentation analysis,
and relative betweenness centrality to estimate node importance in
the pathway topology.
Statistical analyses
Methods to filter the list of MFs and to normalize abundances are de-
scribed in the “Biosignature development” section. Before analysis, the
normalized abundances were log2-transformed, and each MF was
scaled to have a mean of 0 and an SD of 1. Statistical analyses were per-
formed using R software (62).
Classification modeling
For classification modeling, Training-Set and Test-Set samples
were used as previously described (29, 51) and as shown in Fig. 1B.
Separate classification analyses were performed for comparison of two
groups (early Lyme disease and STARI) and three groups (early Lyme
disease, STARI, and healthy controls). For each scenario, two classifi-
cation approaches were applied: RF using the randomForest package
(63), with 16 features randomly selected for each clade and a total of
500 trees, and LASSO logistic (two-way) and multinomial (three-way)
regression analysis using the glmnet package (64), with the tuning
parameter chosen for minimum misclassification error over a 10-fold
cross-validation. The ROC curve and AUC were generated for pre-
dicted responses on the Test-Set samples only using the pROC package
(65). For the purpose of visualization, LASSO scores for individual
patient samples were calculated by multiplying the respective regres-
sion coefficients (tables S4 and S6) resulting from LASSO analysis by
the transformed abundance of each MF in the biosignature (38 MFs
in the case of two-way classification and 82 MFs in the case of three-
way classification) and summing for each sample. The rgl package
was used to generate the three-dimensional scatterplot of LASSO
scores (66).
Linear discriminant analysis
A linear discriminant analysis was performed with the 82 MFs selected
by the three-way LASSO model using linear discriminant analysis
function in R. MF abundance data included in the linear discriminant
analysis were from healthy controls from Colorado, Florida, and New
YorkandfromSTARIpatientsfromNorthCarolina,Missouri,andother
states. Before linear discriminant analysis, data were transformed by
taking the log2 value and standardizing to the mean 0 and variance
1 within each MF. Samples were differentiated by healthy controls
and STARI.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/403/eaal2717/DC1
Fig. S1. Level 1 identification of stearoyl ethanolamide.
Fig. S2. Level 1 identification of pentadecanoyl ethanolamide.
Fig. S3. Level 1 identification of eicosanoyl ethanolamide.
Fig. S4. Level 1 identification of glycerophospho-N-palmitoyl ethanolamine.
Fig. S5. Level 1 identification of stearamide.
Fig. S6. Level 1 identification of erucamide.
Fig. S7. Level 1 identification of L-phenylalanine.
Fig. S8. Level 1 identification of nonanedioic acid.
Fig. S9. Level 1 identification of glycocholic acid.
Fig. S10. Level 1 identification of CMPF.
Fig. S11. Level 2 identification of Lyso PA (20:4) by MS/MS spectral matching.
Fig. S12. Level 2 identification of 3-ketosphingosine by MS/MS.
Table S1. Serum samples used in this study.
Table S2. 261-MF biosignature list.
Table S3. MetaboAnalyst results.
Table S4. Regression coefficients (b) of the LASSO two-way statistical model.
Table S5. LASSO and RF two-way model classification probability scores.
Table S6. Regression coefficients (b) of the LASSO three-way statistical model.
Table S7. LASSO and RF three-way model classification probability scores.
Table S8. ANOVA results on LASSO and RF scores with sample source as the explanatory
variable.
Table S9. Grouping indicated by the ANOVA results.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
10 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. A. F. Hinckley, N. P. Connally, J. I. Meek, B. J. Johnson, M. M. Kemperman, K. A. Feldman,
J. L. White, P. S. Mead, Lyme disease testing by large commercial laboratories in the
United States. Clin. Infect. Dis. 59, 676–681 (2014).
2. C. A. Nelson, S. Saha, K. J. Kugeler, M. J. Delorey, M. B. Shankar, A. F. Hinckley, P. S. Mead,
Incidence of clinician-diagnosed Lyme disease, United States, 2005–2010.
Emerg. Infect. Dis. 21, 1625–1631 (2015).
3. G. Stanek, G. P. Wormser, J. Gray, F. Strle, Lyme borreliosis. Lancet 379, 461–473 (2012).
4. A. C. Steere, S. E. Malawista, J. A. Hardin, S. Ruddy, P. W. Askenase, W. A. Andiman,
Erythema chronicum migrans and Lyme arthritis: The enlarging clinical spectrum.
Ann. Intern. Med. 86, 685–698 (1977).
5. G. P. Wormser, Clinical practice. Early Lyme disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 2794–2801 (2006).
6. R. B. Nadelman, Erythema migrans. Infect. Dis. Clin. North Am. 29, 211–239 (2015).
7. E. J. Masters, H. D. Donnell, Epidemiologic and diagnostic studies of patients with
suspected early Lyme disease, Missouri, 1990–1993. J. Infect. Dis. 173, 1527–1528 (1996).
8. E. Masters, S. Granter, P. Duray, P. Cordes, Physician-diagnosed erythema migrans and
erythema migrans-like rashes following Lone Star tick bites. Arch. Dermatol. 134, 955–960
(1998).
9. G. P. Wormser, E. Masters, J. Nowakowski, D. McKenna, D. Holmgren, K. Ma, L. Ihde,
L. F. Cavaliere, R. B. Nadelman, Prospective clinical evaluation of patients from Missouri
and New York with erythema migrans–like skin lesions. Clin. Infect. Dis. 41, 958–965
(2005).
10. G. L. Campbell, W. S. Paul, M. E. Schriefer, R. B. Craven, K. E. Robbins, D. T. Dennis,
Epidemiologic and diagnostic studies of patients with suspected early Lyme disease,
Missouri, 1990–1993. J. Infect. Dis. 172, 470–480 (1995).
11. K. L. Clark, B. Leydet, S. Hartman, Lyme borreliosis in human patients in Florida and
Georgia, USA. Int. J. Med. Sci. 10, 915–931 (2013).
12. R. M. Bacon, R. D. Gilmore Jr., M. Quintana, J. Piesman, B. J. B. Johnson, DNA Evidence of
Borrelia lonestari in Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae) in Southeast Missouri.
J. Med. Entomol. 40, 590–592 (2003).
13. A. S. Varela, M. P. Luttrell, E. W. Howerth, V. A. Moore, W. R. Davidson, D. E. Stallknecht,
S. E. Little, First culture isolation of Borrelia lonestari, putative agent of southern tick-
associated rash illness. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42, 1163–1169 (2004).
14. A. M. James, D. Liveris, G. P. Wormser, I. Schwartz, M. A. Montecalvo, B. J. B. Johnson,
Borrelia lonestari infection after a bite by an Amblyomma americanum tick. J. Infect. Dis.
183, 1810–1814 (2001).
15. C. N. Grigery, P. Moyer, S. E. Little, E. J. Masters, Bacteriocidal activity of lizard and mouse
serum for Borrelia lonestari, putative agent of a Lyme-like illness (AKA STARI or Masters
disease) in Missouri. Mo. Med. 102, 442–446 (2005).
16. M. T. Philipp, E. Masters, G. P. Wormser, W. Hogrefe, D. Martin, Serologic evaluation of
patients from Missouri with erythema migrans-like skin lesions with the C6 Lyme test.
Clin. Vaccine Immunol. 13, 1170–1171 (2006).
17. M. W. Felz, F. W. Chandler Jr., J. H. Oliver Jr., D. W. Rahn, M. E. Schriefer, Solitary erythema
migrans in Georgia and South Carolina. Arch. Dermatol. 135, 1317–1326 (1999).
18. K. B. Kirkland, T. B. Klimko, R. A. Meriwether, M. Schriefer, M. Levin, J. Levine,
W. R. Mac Kenzie, D. T. Dennis, Erythema migrans-like rash illness at a camp in North
Carolina: A new tick-borne disease?. Arch. Intern. Med. 157, 2635–2641 (1997).
19. S. M. Rich, P. M. Armstrong, R. D. Smith, S. R. Telford III, Lone star tick-infecting borreliae
are most closely related to the agent of bovine borreliosis. J. Clin. Microbiol. 39, 494–497
(2001).
20. G. P. Wormser, E. Masters, D. Liveris, J. Nowakowski, R. B. Nadelman, D. Holmgren,
S. Bittker, D. Cooper, G. Wang, I. Schwartz, Microbiologic evaluation of patients from
Missouri with erythema migrans. Clin. Infect. Dis. 40, 423–428 (2005).
21. E. J. Masters, H. D. Donnell, Lyme and/or Lyme-like disease in Missouri. Mo. Med. 92,
346–353 (1995).
22. W. L. Nicholson, E. Masters, G. P. Wormser, Preliminary serologic investigation of
’Rickettsia amblyommii’ in the aetiology of Southern tick associated rash illness (STARI).
Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 15 (suppl. 2), 235–236 (2009).
23. Y. P. Springer, C. S. Jarnevich, D. T. Barnett, A. J. Monaghan, R. J. Eisen, Modeling the
present and future geographic distribution of the Lone star tick, Amblyomma
americanum (Ixodida: Ixodidae), in the Continental United States. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg.
93, 875–890 (2015).
24. M. B. Hahn, C. S. Jarnevich, A. J. Monaghan, R. J. Eisen, Modeling the geographic
distribution of Ixodes scapularis and Ixodes pacificus (Acari: Ixodidae) in the Contiguous
United States. J. Med. Entomol. 53, 1176–1191 (2016).
25. K. J. Kugeler, G. M. Farley, J. D. Forrester, P. S. Mead, Geographic distribution and
expansion of human Lyme disease, United States. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 21, 1455–1457
(2015).
26. P. M. Lantos, L. E. Nigrovic, P. G. Auwaerter, V. G. Fowler Jr., F. Ruffin, R. J. Brinkerhoff,
J. Reber, C. Williams, J. Broyhill, W. K. Pan, D. N. Gaines, Geographic expansion of Lyme
disease in the southeastern United States, 2000–2014. Open Forum Infect. Dis. 2, ofv143
(2015).
27. R. K. Naviaux, J. C. Naviaux, K. Li, A. T. Bright, W. A. Alaynick, L. Wang, A. Baxter, N. Nathan,
W. Anderson, E. Gordon, Metabolic features of chronic fatigue syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 113, E5472–E5480 (2016).
28. L. Guo, M. V. Milburn, J. A. Ryals, S. C. Lonergan, M. W. Mitchell, J. E. Wulff, D. C. Alexander,
A. M. Evans, B. Bridgewater, L. Miller, M. L. Gonzalez-Garay, C. T. Caskey, Plasma
metabolomic profiles enhance precision medicine for volunteers of normal health.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, E4901–E4910 (2015).
29. C. R. Molins, L. V. Ashton, G. P. Wormser, A. M. Hess, M. J. Delorey, S. Mahapatra,
M. E. Schriefer, J. T. Belisle, Development of a metabolic biosignature for detection of
early Lyme disease. Clin. Infect. Dis. 60, 1767–1775 (2015).
30. J. Xia, I. V. Sinelnikov, B. Han, D. S. Wishart, MetaboAnalyst 3.0—Making metabolomics
more meaningful. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, W251–W257 (2015).
31. F. A. Iannotti, V. Di Marzo, S. Petrosino, Endocannabinoids and endocannabinoid-related
mediators: Targets, metabolism and role in neurological disorders. Prog. Lipid Res. 62,
107–128 (2016).
32. J. D. Forrester, M. Brett, J. Matthias, D. Stanek, C. B. Springs, N. Marsden-Haug, H. Oltean,
J. S. Baker, K. J. Kugeler, P. S. Mead, A. Hinckley, Epidemiology of Lyme disease in
low-incidence states. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 6, 721–723 (2015).
33. M. Dalle Carbonare, E. Del Giudice, A. Stecca, D. Colavito, M. Fabris, A. D’Arrigo,
D. Bernardini, M. Dam, A. Leon, A saturated N-acylethanolamine other than N-palmitoyl
ethanolamine with anti-inflammatory properties: A neglected story. J. Neuroendocrinol.
20 (suppl. 1), 26–34 (2008).
34. V. Di Marzo, D. Melck, P. Orlando, T. Bisogno, O. Zagoory, M. Bifulco, Z. Vogel,
L. de Petrocellis, Palmitoylethanolamide inhibits the expression of fatty acid amide
hydrolase and enhances the anti-proliferative effect of anandamide in human breast
cancer cells. Biochem. J. 358, 249–255 (2001).
35. J. Lo Verme, J. Fu, G. Astarita, G. La Rana, R. Russo, A. Calignano, D. Piomelli, The nuclear
receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a mediates the anti-inflammatory
actions of palmitoylethanolamide. Mol. Pharmacol. 67, 15–19 (2005).
36. H. B. Bradshaw, N. Rimmerman, S. S.-J. Hu, V. M. Benton, J. M. Stuart, K. Masuda,
B. F. Cravatt, D. K. O’Dell, J. M. Walker, The endocannabinoid anandamide is a precursor
for the signaling lipid N-arachidonoyl glycine by two distinct pathways. BMC Biochem.
10, 14 (2009).
37. B. F. Cravatt, D. K. Giang, S. P. Mayfield, D. L. Boger, R. A. Lerner, N. B. Gilula, Molecular
characterization of an enzyme that degrades neuromodulatory fatty-acid amides. Nature
384, 83–87 (1996).
38. E. B. Divito, M. Cascio, Metabolism, physiology, and analyses of primary fatty acid amides.
Chem. Rev. 113, 7343–7353 (2013).
39. E. J. Masters, C. N. Grigery, R. W. Masters, STARI, or Masters disease: Lone Star tick-
vectored Lyme-like illness. Infect. Dis. Clin. North Am. 22, 361–376 (2008).
40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Recommendations for test
performance and interpretation from the Second National Conference on Serologic
Diagnosis of Lyme Disease. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 44, 590–591 (1995).
41. M. E. Aguero-Rosenfeld, G. Wang, I. Schwartz, G. P. Wormser, Diagnosis of Lyme
borreliosis. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 18, 484–509 (2005).
42. E. J. Masters, Lyme-like illness currently deserves Lyme-like treatment. Clin. Infect. Dis. 42,
580–581 (2006).
43. P. Comstedt, M. Hanner, W. Schüler, A. Meinke, R. Schlegl, U. Lundberg, Characterization
and optimization of a novel vaccine for protection against Lyme borreliosis. Vaccine 33,
5982–5988 (2015).
44. N. Wressnigg, P. N. Barrett, E.-M. Pöllabauer, M. O’Rourke, D. Portsmouth, M. G. Schwendinger,
B. A. Crowe, I. Livey, T. Dvorak, B. Schmitt, M. Zeitlinger, H. Kollaritsch, M. Esen,
P. G. Kremsner, T. Jelinek, R. Aschoff, R. Weisser, I. F. K. Naudts, G. Aichinger, A novel
multivalent OspA vaccine against Lyme borreliosis is safe and immunogenic in an adult
population previously infected with Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato. Clin. Vaccine Immunol. 21,
1490–1499 (2014).
45. M. Gomes-Solecki, Blocking pathogen transmission at the source: Reservoir targeted
OspA-based vaccines against Borrelia burgdorferi. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 4, 136
(2014).
46. N. R. Kitteringham, R. E. Jenkins, C. S. Lane, V. L. Elliott, B. K. Park, Multiple reaction
monitoring for quantitative biomarker analysis in proteomics and metabolomics.
J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 877, 1229–1239 (2009).
47. F. G. Strathmann, A. N. Hoofnagle, Current and future applications of mass spectrometry
to the clinical laboratory. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 136, 609–616 (2011).
48. D. S. Dumlao, M. W. Buczynski, P. C. Norris, R. Harkewicz, E. A. Dennis, High-throughput
lipidomic analysis of fatty acid derived eicosanoids and N-acylethanolamines.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1811, 724–736 (2011).
49. B. J. B. Johnson, in Lyme Disease: An Evidence-Based Approach, J. J. Halperin, Ed.
(CAB International, 2011), chap. 4, pp. 73–87.
50. G. P. Wormser, A. Levin, S. Soman, O. Adenikinju, M. V. Longo, J. A. Branda, Comparative
cost-effectiveness of two-tiered testing strategies for serodiagnosis of lyme disease
with noncutaneous manifestations. J. Clin. Microbiol. 51, 4045–4049 (2013).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
11 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 51. S. Mahapatra, A. M. Hess, J. L. Johnson, K. D. Eisenach, M. A. DeGroote, P. Gitta,
M. L. Joloba, G. Kaplan, G. Walzl, W. H. Boom, J. T. Belisle, A metabolic biosignature of
early response to anti-tuberculosis treatment. BMC Infect. Dis. 14, 53 (2014).
52. N. V. Voge, R. Perera, S. Mahapatra, L. Gresh, A. Balmaseda, M. A. Loroño-Pino,
A. S. Hopf-Jannasch, J. T. Belisle, E. Harris, C. D. Blair, B. J. Beaty, Metabolomics-based
discovery of small molecule biomarkers in serum associated with dengue virus infections
and disease outcomes. PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10, e0004449 (2016).
53. L. Tritten, J. Keiser, M. Godejohann, J. Utzinger, M. Vargas, O. Beckonert, E. Holmes, J. Saric,
Metabolic profiling framework for discovery of candidate diagnostic markers of malaria.
Sci. Rep. 3, 2769 (2013).
54. N. Vinayavekhin, G. Mahipant, A. S. Vangnai, P. Sangvanich, Untargeted metabolomics
analysis revealed changes in the composition of glycerolipids and phospholipids in
Bacillus subtilis under 1-butanol stress. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 99, 5971–5983 (2015).
55. K. L. Clark, B. F. Leydet, C. Threlkeld, Geographical and genospecies distribution of Borrelia
burgdorferi sensu lato DNA detected in humans in the USA. J. Med. Microbiol. 63,
674–684 (2014).
56. J. H. Oliver Jr., T. Lin, L. Gao, K. L. Clark, C. W. Banks, L. A. Durden, A. M. James,
F. W. Chandler Jr., An enzootic transmission cycle of Lyme borreliosis spirochetes in the
southeastern United States. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 11642–11645 (2003).
57. H. M. Feder Jr., D. M. Hoss, L. Zemel, S. R. Telford III, F. Dias, G. P. Wormser, Southern
Tick-Associated Rash Illness (STARI) in the North: STARI following a tick bite in Long
Island, New York. Clin. Infect. Dis. 53, e142–e146 (2011).
58. M. F. Vaughn, P. D. Sloane, K. Knierim, D. Varkey, M. A. Pilgard, B. J. Johnson, Practice-
Based Research Network Partnership with CDC to acquire clinical specimens to study the
etiology of southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI). J. Am. Board Fam. Med. 23,
720–727 (2010).
59. Y. Benjamini, Y. Hochberg, Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful
approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B 57, 289–300 (1995).
60. W. Wang, H. Zhou, H. Lin, S. Roy, T. A. Shaler, L. R. Hill, S. Norton, P. Kumar, M. Anderle,
C. H. Becker, Quantification of proteins and metabolites by mass spectrometry without
isotopic labeling or spiked standards. Anal. Chem. 75, 4818–4826 (2003).
61. R. M. Salek, C. Steinbeck, M. R. Viant, R. Goodacre, W. B. Dunn, The role of reporting
standards for metabolite annotation and identification in metabolomic studies.
Gigascience 2, 1–3 (2013).
62. R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, 2016); www.R-project.org/.
63. A. Liaw, M. Wiener, Classification and regression by randomForest. R News 3,
18–22 (2002).
64. J. H. Friedman, T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, Regularization paths for generalized linear models
via coordinate descent. J. Stat. Softw. 33, 1–22 (2010).
65. X. Robin, N. Turck, A. Hainard, N. Tiberti, F. Lisacek, J.-C. Sanchez, M. Müller, pROC: An
open-source package for R and S+ to analyze and compare ROC curves.
BMC Bioinformatics 12, 77 (2011).
66. D. Murdoch, D. Adler, rgl: 3D Visualization Using OpenGL. R Package Version 0.96.0 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank T. Jewett and M. Halpern for assistance in the collection of
healthy control sera at UCF, and D. Garcia at the Colorado State University (CSU) for graphics.
Control sera from Florida were made available for the studies performed under a material
transfer agreement between the UCF and CDC. Funding: This work was supported by the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH grants R21/R33 AI100228 (to J.T.B.
and G.P.W.) and R01 AI099094 (to M.W.J.), the UCF College of Medicine (to M.W.J.), and the
CDC. Author contributions: C.R.M., J.T.B., G.P.W., B.J.J., L.V.A., and M.N.I. designed the
experiments. A.M.H., M.J.D., and B.G.A. performed statistical analyses that included linear
discriminant analyses, ROC generation, and statistical modeling. L.V.A., K.W., and A.P.-J.
performed the metabolomics analyses and data processing. M.A.P., B.J.J., G.P.W., I.M., and
M.W.J. helped with serum sample collections, clinical data extraction, and compilation of
patient data. Competing interests: G.P.W. reports receiving research grants from Immunetics
Inc., Institute for Systems Biology, RareCyte Inc., and Quidel Corporation. He owns equity in
Abbott, has been an expert witness in malpractice cases involving Lyme disease, and is an
unpaid board member of the American Lyme Disease Foundation. J.T.B., C.R.M., and G.P.W. are
inventors on a provisional patent application #US 62/516,824 submitted by CSU that covers
the use of a metabolic profiling and specific metabolites as a diagnostic method to objectively
differentiate early Lyme disease from STARI and healthy controls. All other authors declare
that they have no competing interests.
Submitted 26 October 2016
Accepted 28 June 2017
Published 16 August 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aal2717
Citation: C. R. Molins, L. V. Ashton, G. P. Wormser, B. G. Andre, A. M. Hess, M. J. Delorey,
M. A. Pilgard, B. J. Johnson, K. Webb, M. N. Islam, A. Pegalajar-Jurado, I. Molla, M. W. Jewett,
J. T. Belisle, Metabolic differentiation of early Lyme disease from southern tick–associated rash
illness (STARI). Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2717 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Molins et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaa12717 (2017)
16 August 2017
12 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 illness (STARI)
associated rash
−
Metabolic differentiation of early Lyme disease from southern tick
and John T. Belisle
Pilgard, Barbara J. Johnson, Kristofor Webb, M. Nurul Islam, Adoracion Pegalajar-Jurado, Irida Molla, Mollie W. Jewett 
Claudia R. Molins, Laura V. Ashton, Gary P. Wormser, Barbara G. Andre, Ann M. Hess, Mark J. Delorey, Mark A.
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aal2717
, eaal2717.
9
Sci Transl Med 
diseases are quite distinct. Moreover, use of the signature could help guide diagnosis and patient treatment.
associated rash illness. Their findings confirm that these
−
distinguish early Lyme disease from southern tick
 set out to define a metabolic signature that would be able to 
et al.
yet been tied to a specific pathogen. Molins 
associated rash illness, which has not
−
 infection, such as southern tick
Borrelia burgdorferi
illnesses not caused by 
The iconic bulls eye rash is associated with Lyme disease, but similar symptoms are observed in other
Avoiding rash decisions
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/403/eaal2717
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/08/14/9.403.eaal2717.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/367/367ra169.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/382/eaaf1283.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/403/eaal2717#BIBL
This article cites 63 articles, 13 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
