 See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298727861
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito
Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States
Article  in  PLoS Currents · March 2016
DOI: 10.1371/currents.outbreaks.50dfc7f46798675fc63e7d7da563da76
CITATIONS
76
READS
295
12 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
On the Edge: Climate and Dengue View project
GEO Global Urban Observation and Information: Monitoring Urban Assets in Support of Sustainable Cities View project
Cory W Morin
NASA
9 PUBLICATIONS   435 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Olga V. Wilhelmi
National Center for Atmospheric Research
69 PUBLICATIONS   1,519 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Mary H. Hayden
University of Colorado Colorado Springs
34 PUBLICATIONS   379 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Dale Quattrochi
NASA
130 PUBLICATIONS   3,044 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Cory W Morin on 24 March 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
1/30
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance
of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes
Aegypti in the Contiguous United States
March 16, 2016 · Research Article
Tweet
Monaghan AJ, Morin CW, Steinhoff DF, Wilhelmi O, Hayden M, Quattrochi DA, Reiskind M,
Lloyd AL, Smith K, Schmidt CA, Scalf PE, Ernst K. On the Seasonal Occurrence and
Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United
States. PLOS Currents Outbreaks. 2016 Mar 16 . Edition 1. doi :
10.1371/currents.outbreaks.50dfc7f46798675fc63e7d7da563da76.
Citation
Authors
Andrew J. Monaghan
Cory W. Morin
Daniel F. Steinhoff
Olga Wilhelmi
Mary Hayden
Dale A. Quattrochi
Michael Reiskind
Alun L. Lloyd
Kirk Smith
Chris A. Schmidt
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Research Applications Laboratory, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
NASA, Marshall Space Flight Center, Earth Science Office, Hunstville, Alabama, USA.
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Research Applications Laboratory, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Research Applications Laboratory, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Research Applications Laboratory, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
NASA, Marshall Space Flight Center, Earth Science Office, Hunstville, Alabama, USA.
North Carolina State University, Department of Entomology, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
North Carolina State University, Biomathematics Graduate Program and Department of Mathematics, Raleigh,
North Carolina, USA.
Maricopa County, Environmental Services Department, Vector Control Division, Pheonix, Arizona, USA.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
2/30
Introduction: An ongoing Zika virus pandemic in Latin America and the Caribbean has raised
concerns that travel­related introduction of Zika virus could initiate local transmission in the United
States (U.S.) by its primary vector, the mosquito Aedes aegypti.
Methods: We employed meteorologically driven models for 2006­2015 to simulate the potential
seasonal abundance of adult Aedes aegypti for fifty cities within or near the margins of its known U.S.
range. Mosquito abundance results were analyzed alongside travel and socioeconomic factors that
are proxies of viral introduction and vulnerability to human­vector contact.    
Results: Meteorological conditions are largely unsuitable for Aedes aegypti over the U.S. during
winter months (December­March), except in southern Florida and south Texas where comparatively
warm conditions can sustain low­to­moderate potential mosquito abundance. Meteorological
conditions are suitable for Aedes aegypti across all fifty cities during peak summer months (July­
September), though the mosquito has not been documented in all cities. Simulations indicate the
highest mosquito abundance occurs in the Southeast and south Texas where locally acquired cases
of Aedes­transmitted viruses have been reported previously. Cities in southern Florida and south
Texas are at the nexus of high seasonal suitability for Aedes aegypti and strong potential for travel­
related virus introduction. Higher poverty rates in cities along the U.S.­Mexico border may correlate
with factors that increase human exposure to Aedes aegypti.    
Discussion: Our results can inform baseline risk for local Zika virus transmission in the U.S. and the
optimal timing of vector control activities, and underscore the need for enhanced surveillance for
Aedes mosquitoes and Aedes­transmitted viruses.
This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01 AI091843/AI/NIAID;
AI044793/AI/NIAID; R01 AI091980/AI/NIAID; P01 AI098670/AI/NIAID) and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration via an Early Career Investigator Award (NNX14AI89G) and a NASA
Postdoctoral Program Fellowship. Funding was also provided by the NASA Marshall Space Flight
Center Science Innovation Fund and NASA Center Innovation Fund projects. The National Science
Foundation sponsors the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The funders had no role in
study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Zika virus (ZIKAV), a flavivirus, was first isolated from a primate in 1947 in the Zika forest of Uganda
and in 1948 from Aedes (Ae.) africanus mosquitos in the same location . Serological evidence of
Abstract
Funding Statement
Introduction
1
Paige E. Scalf
Kacey Ernst
The University of Arizona, Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
Durham University, Department of Psychology, Durham, County Durham, UK.
The University of Arizona, Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
3/30
ZIKAV transmission in humans has been reported since 1951, but until recently, transmission was
confined to ecological niches in the equatorial regions of Africa and Asia . In 2007, an outbreak of
ZIKAV in Yap State, Federated States of Micronesia, was the first documented epidemic outside
Africa or Asia
. Over 28,000 cases were reported in 2013­2014 in French Polynesia, and nearby
island nations followed
. Introduced into Brazil in 2015, ZIKAV has spread explosively across Latin
America and the Caribbean, and is now pandemic, with over 20 countries reporting autochthonous
transmission
. This follows the introduction and subsequent pandemic of chikungunya virus
(CHIKV) in the Western Hemisphere in late 2013
. Aedes mosquitoes transmit ZIKAV and CHIKV,
as well as dengue (DENV) and yellow fever (YFV) viruses. Over the past several decades the range
of Aedes mosquitoes has expanded across the Americas
. Although Ae. albopictus is thought to
be a competent vector of ZIKAV
, Ae. aegypti has been implicated as the primary transmitter of the
virus in human populations in the ongoing outbreak in the Americas
.
ZIKAV infections are commonly characterized by fever, maculopapular rash, arthralgia or
conjunctivitis. Clinical illness is usually mild, occurs in approximately 20% of people infected with
ZIKAV, and symptoms typically last for a week . However, in mid­November 2015, the Pan American
Health Organization issued an epidemiological alert
 based on an unusual increase in the number of
children born with microcephaly in northeast Brazil that coincided with the arrival of ZIKAV
. Although
no causal links have been established, in the aftermath of a previous outbreak of ZIKAV in French
Polynesia during 2014­2015, a notable increase in central nervous system malformations in
newborns and infants was also registered
. Additionally, in both Brazil and French Polynesia,
following recent illnesses with ZIKAV­like symptoms, authorities detected patients with neurological
syndromes such as Guillain­Barré
.
As of 22 February 2016, all cases of ZIKAV reported in the contiguous United States were associated
with travel or sexual transmission
. Given the potential link between exposure to ZIKAV during
pregnancy and microcephaly, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has
recommended pregnant women consider postponing non­essential travel and urges all travelers to
take enhanced precautions in areas where ZIKAV is circulating
. The risk for local transmission of
ZIKAV has been discussed widely in the media and scientific and public health communities. Sporadic
outbreaks of DENV and CHIKV have already occurred in the United States and there is concern that
local outbreaks of ZIKAV could follow
. Prior DENV outbreak investigations in the U.S.­Mexico
border region suggest improved socioeconomic conditions in the United States may minimize vector­
human contact and reduce the risk of Aedes­transmitted arboviruses
. Aside from sexual
transmission that has been reported in comparatively few instances
, for local transmission to occur
ZIKAV would have to be introduced by infected travelers or infected mosquitoes and become
sustained in local Aedes mosquito populations. While Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus are established
across much of the southern United States (Fig. 1), mosquito populations in many areas are only
present seasonally. This seasonality varies according to local meteorological conditions, and thus can
provide one measure of potential for ZIKAV transmission (i.e., local transmission may not be
sustained if competent vector mosquitoes are not present). In addition, assuming transmission
dynamics are similar to DENV, risk of ZIKAV introduction can be modulated by population travel
patterns, human exposure to Aedes mosquitoes, and vector control response to travel­associated
cases
. To better understand the risk for local ZIKAV transmission in the United States, we
simulated the potential abundance of adult Ae. aegypti mosquitoes across fifty cities using
meteorologically­driven life cycle models, and identified proxies of travel­related introduction and of
human exposure to vectors to provide context for the model results.
2
3,4
5,6
7,8,9
10,11
12,13
14
15
8
16
17
18
18
72
19
20,21,22
20,23,24
25
26,27
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
4/30
Fig. 1. U.S. map showing 1) Ae. aegypti potential abundance for Jan/July (colored circles), 2) approximate
maximum known range of Ae. aegypti (shaded regions) and Ae. albopictus (gray dashed lines), and 3)
monthly average number arrivals to the U.S. by air and land from countries on the CDC Zika travel
advisory. Additional details can be found in the text.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
5/30
Cities
We chose fifty U.S. cities within and near the known range of Ae. aegypti (Fig. 1, Table 1). These
cities were selected because they may be meteorologically suitable for Ae. aegypti for at least part of
the year, though not all have recorded the presence of Ae. aegypti to date. In general, seasonal and
annual temperatures within the study cities decrease from south­to­north, and precipitation decreases
from east­to­west. These gradients are modified in the vicinity of the Appalachian and Rocky
Mountains, and by proximity to the ocean.
Data and Methods
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
6/30
Table 1. Coordinates, population  and climate characteristics
 for the 50 study cities.
28
30,31
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
7/30
Ae. aegypti life cycle modeling
To estimate the seasonal abundance of adult Ae. aegypti we employed two life cycle models, Skeeter
Buster
 and DyMSiM
. Both models simulate the egg, larval, pupal and adult life stages as a
function of daily meteorological inputs and user specified information about container habitats. Using
two models enabled the quantification and reduction of model uncertainty; previous studies have
shown that model ensembles provide a more accurate result than those from individual
models
. Both models simulated daily counts of adult Ae. aegypti mosquitoes per 1 m  of water
surface for a multi­year period, as described below. The amount of water in containers was
modulated primarily by rainfall and evaporation, but a fraction of water representing about 5­10% of
the maximum due to rainfall was made available in containers year­round to account for the
possibility that water may be available even during periods of little or no rainfall due to humans filling
containers intentionally (e.g., via birdbaths, kiddie pools, etc.) or unintentionally (e.g., during lawn
irrigation). Human­filled containers can represent an important source of water for Ae. aegypti habitat
in arid and semi­arid regions
. For both models, releasing new cohorts of eggs each month
prevented extinction of mosquitoes, or (in the case of DyMSiM) when the population of any life stage
reduced to zero. Releases ranged from 80­100 eggs per container. This choice essentially assumes
that Aedes eggs are frequently reintroduced into areas through transportation networks
 or that
eggs are able to survive through periods when weather is unfavorable for development. There is
strong evidence that Ae. aegypti eggs are capable of surviving even in harsh winter conditions as a
result of being laid in favorable cryptic environments such as subterranean habitats
.
The DyMSiM and Skeeter Buster models differ primarily in their treatments of containers and
stochasticity. DyMSiM assumes one large water­filled container per city
; in this study a surface area
of 1 m  was specified for each DyMSiM container, and water volume fluctuated as a function of
rainfall and evaporation but did not drop below 0.001 m  or rise above 0.02 m . Skeeter Buster
operates at the level of individual containers, and therefore was configured to simulate 10 adjacent
households per city, each having numerous containers with a surface area totaling 1 m . Each
container had a surface area of 0.01 m  and could be filled to a maximum depth of 0.2 m. As with
DyMSiM, Skeeter Buster water depth was allowed to vary as a function of rainfall and evaporation,
and manual filling was performed randomly for 5% of containers on average every 7 days. The
resulting simulated Ae. aegypti adult counts were then averaged over the 10 homes. In this manner,
the initial adult mosquito abundance results for both DyMSiM and Skeeter Buster were expressed for
each 1 m  of water surface area per city; these values were then normalized for presentation, as
described below. Sheltering of containers (via shading) was also considered for both models because
Ae. aegypti prefers shaded environments
. DyMSiM treated sheltering by reducing evaporation
among 50% of containers and limiting the maximum water temperature to <34 C. Skeeter Buster
assumed a sun exposure of 0.1 (i.e., 90% shade) for containers. Additional descriptions of both
models can be found in the publications cited above, and model inputs and other study­specific
details are described below.
Simulations were conducted with both models for the most recent eleven years, 2005­2015. The
meteorological fields needed to drive the models – daily precipitation, humidity and maximum and
minimum near­surface temperature – were derived from the 1/8  degree hourly meteorological
forcing dataset for the North American Land Data Assimilation Phase 2 (NLDAS­2)
. The widely
used NLDAS­2 forcing data have been employed for numerous health­related applications over North
America requiring high fidelity meteorological data
. The NLDAS­2 data were bilinearly
interpolated to the coordinates of each city from the four nearest grid points.
Once the simulations were complete, the results for year 2005 were discarded to allow for model
32
33
34,35,36
2
73
37
38
33
2
3
3
2
2
2
29
o
th
30,31
39,40
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
8/30
burn­in. Then, for each city (n=50) and each day of the year (n=365) the mean adult Ae. aegypti
abundance was computed from the remaining 10­year sample (2006­2015) for each model.
Ensemble mean values were computed by taking the geometric mean of the daily mosquito
abundance values from both models. Using a geometric mean rather than an arithmetic mean allows
the two models to be weighted equally despite having different mean Ae. aegypti abundance values.
Next, the average daily abundance was computed for Miami for May­October (Julian days 121­304)
for both models and the ensemble mean, and then the mean daily abundance for each city and day
of year was expressed as a percentage of this average. In this manner, the potential abundance
patterns across cities and for each day were normalized with respect to the average warm season
conditions for Miami. Finally, these normalized daily values were averaged for each month and city for
both models and the ensemble mean. We chose Miami and the May­October period because it is the
warmest and wettest time of year in south Florida, a time when Ae. aegypti is known to be abundant
and when most transmission of Ae. aegypti­borne viruses has occurred in the past
. May­October in
Miami thus represents high environmental suitability for Ae. aegypti.
The normalized daily values of adult Ae. aegypti potential abundance were placed into four categories
to facilitate comparison across space and time: 1) “None to low” for normalized abundances <2% the
value of the May­Oct Miami mean; 2) “Low to moderate” (2­25%); 3) “Moderate to high” (25­75%);
and 4) “High” (>75%). These cut points were chosen to provide a proxy of the lower quartile, the
interquartile range, and the upper quartile with respect to Miami values. The “None to low” cut­point
of 2% rules out extremely low abundance values that are unlikely to be sufficient to generate
substantial risk for human contact.
Results of simulations of adult Ae. aegypti populations are referred to in terms of potential abundance
in order to emphasize that they indicate meteorological suitability for the mosquito but not necessarily
that it is present or will occur in a given location. For example, we find that Denver, CO has low­to­
moderate potential abundance for the mosquito during the summer months, however as of this
writing presence of the mosquito has not been detected there. Possible reasons that Ae. aegypti does
not occur in some cities that exhibit meteorological suitability during part of the year include a lack of
eggs being introduced during the warm months, or a lack of water availability (particularly in western
U.S. cities).
Model validation data
Validating the simulations of potential seasonal abundance of Ae. aegypti was challenging because
there are few observational records of seasonally­resolved Ae. aegypti abundance (for any life stage)
that can provide comparative benchmarks. Focks et al.
 present graphical records of weekly ovitrap
accumulations of Ae. aegypti eggs for 1981­1985 from a number of southeastern U.S. cities, based
on unpublished data from CDC. We were unable to obtain the ovitrap data from Focks et al.
 at the
time this manuscript was submitted, which limited us to a qualitative comparison of our simulated
adult abundance to the ovitrap data. However, we did find quantitative seasonal records for two cities,
in two different climatic settings and compared the seasonality of observed vs. modeled Ae. aegypti
abundance. The first dataset contains Ae. aegypti immature abundance collected from 30 sites
covering a 675 km  area of Palm Beach, FL, collected over 27 four­week periods from 2006­2008
.
Aedes aegypti immature abundance was determined from samples collected in the field from ovitraps
(eggs) or from water in containers (larvae), and reared in a laboratory to fourth­instar larvae or pupal
stages for identification to species. A comparison of results from a variety of adult and egg trapping
methods for Ae. aegypti
 showed that the seasonal cycle of abundance for trapped adults versus
trapped eggs was similar, suggesting that validating our normalized simulated adult abundance
results to normalized egg/larval abundance results
 is a reasonable approach. Palm Beach is
located just north of Miami, FL and has similar climatic conditions; therefore we consider this dataset
41
42
43
43
2
41
44
41
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous­...
9/30
to be representative of Miami. The second dataset contains unpublished monthly adult abundance for
750 trapping sites across Phoenix, AZ collected over 10 years from 2006­2015 by co­author KAS and
colleagues. Samples were collected with CDC light traps baited with CO2 and laboratory­identified to
species. Miami has a warm humid climate, and Phoenix has a warm desert climate. Both cities have
distinct wet and dry seasons.
Transportation data
To understand the potential for human introduction of ZIKAV, we determined the number of air
travelers arriving in the U.S. from airports in Latin American countries and territories listed on the
CDC Zika travel advisory as of 29 January 2016
. These countries and territories included the U.S.
Virgin Islands, Dominican Republic, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil,
Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Martinique, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Saint Martin, Suriname, and Venezuela. We did not include
Cape Verde and Samoa, two countries not in Latin America that account for a very small fraction of
passengers into the United States. Monthly estimated passenger counts on outbound international
flights to airports in these countries originating from the U.S. were obtained for year 2014 from a
database maintained by the U.S. Department of Transportation
. Inbound passenger counts were
not available, however the data curator confirmed that they are approximately equal to outbound
counts (personal communication, Michael Lane, USDOT); we confirmed this by analyzing
international flight data for domestic carriers only (for which both inbound and outbound counts exist)
and found that inbound and outbound passenger counts differ by <1% for monthly and longer
timescales
. Passenger data were only available for the international leg of each flight and therefore
do not indicate the number of passengers traveling on to secondary and tertiary U.S. destinations.
Therefore, it is likely that passenger numbers are overestimated for large international hubs (e.g.,
Miami, Atlanta, New York, Los Angeles) and underestimated for smaller airports that primarily serve
domestic passengers (e.g., New Orleans, Nashville, Jacksonville). Additionally, it is probable that
some passengers were from Latin American countries not on the CDC ZIKAV travel advisory (e.g.,
Argentina, Chile) who had traveled through major international airports in countries on the advisory.
Because Mexico shares a border with the U.S. and is on the CDC ZIKAV travel advisory, we also
obtained year 2014 estimates of the monthly number of persons crossing into the U.S. from Mexico
along the land border by passenger vehicle, bus, train or as pedestrians
.
We did not obtain data for cruise ship arrivals, though a number of ports along the Gulf of Mexico and
the eastern seaboard depart to areas of the Caribbean with ongoing Zika transmission
.
DENV and CHIKV transmission data
To provide information about the location of Aedes­transmitted virus outbreaks we mapped counties
with confirmed local DENV and CHIKV transmission in the contiguous U.S. from 1 January 2010–6
February 2016. Data were obtained from The Florida Department of Health
 and from the CDC
ArboNET via the United States Geological Survey Disease Mapper
. It is noteworthy that DENV
transmission occurred in the contiguous U.S. prior to 2010, however those reported cases were more
difficult to confirm and additionally were mainly from counties in Florida and Texas already identified
as having DENV transmission using the (more reliable) data from 2010 onward.
Human exposure data
Vector­human contact is likely modulated by socioeconomic factors. Impoverished communities are at
higher risk of introduction of infectious diseases
. Poverty has been linked to a number of indicators
of elevated exposure to mosquitoes such as lower usage rates of air conditioning and less efficient
cooling options
, poorer housing infrastructure such as screening of windows
, as well as
45
46
47
48
49
42
50
51
52
53
54
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
10/30
decreased access to safe water and sanitation
. To better understand potential human exposure to
adult Ae. aegypti, we obtained and mapped 2014 county­level data for the percentage of households
living below the poverty line from the U.S. Census Bureau
. The poverty line varies according to the
size of a family and ages of its members. Thresholds do not vary geographically but they are updated
annually for inflation. In 2014, the poverty line was (for example) defined by an annual income of
$12,316 for a household with a single adult under 65 years, and $24,008 for a household with two
adults and two children under 18 years.
Maximum Aedes geographic range data
A recent compendium of observed Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus presence locations collected
between 1960­2014
 was used to provide background information on the maximum known
geographic range of both mosquitoes in the U.S. (Fig. S1). These data were augmented by
surveillance data of both Aedes species across southern and central California
. Known ranges for
both species were then established by outlining areas in which presence locations were recorded
(Fig. 1). Such information is useful for placing our results for simulated seasonal potential abundance
of Ae. aegypti into context, as the mosquito may not exist in some cities where seasonally suitable
meteorological conditions exist, for example because eggs are unable to overwinter
. Additionally,
mapping known occurrences of Aedes mosquitoes enables comparison of the simulated potential
range of Ae. aegypti to the known range of Ae. albopictus, which is also a competent vector of ZIKAV
in some regions
. This is important because Ae. albopictus (which was not simulated in this study)
has greater cold tolerance than Ae. aegypti, and therefore could facilitate seasonal ZIKAV
transmission risk in more northerly U.S. cities where Ae. aegypti is not found
.
Simulated potential abundance of Ae. aegypti adults is zero or near­zero throughout the U.S. in
January except in southern Florida and Texas (Fig. 1). By mid­July, all fifty cities are meteorologically
suitable for Ae. aegypti, with far southeastern cities being suitable for high abundance, and other
eastern cities being suitable for moderate­to­high abundance. Cities in the western U.S. are suitable
for low­to­moderate abundance of Ae. aegypti. Some cities that are suitable in mid­summer are not
within the present known range for Ae. aegypti (e.g., Denver, Albuquerque, Louisville). As the season
progresses from winter to summer Ae. aegypti potential abundance begins to increase in April in the
southeastern U.S. and some cities in Arizona (Fig. 2). By June nearly all cities exhibit the potential for
at least low­to­moderate abundance, and most eastern cities are suitable for moderate­to­high
abundance. Conditions are most suitable in July, August and September during the warmest (and in
many cities wettest) time of year. Conditions in the southern and western states remain suitable
through November, and by December are largely unsuitable again, except for southern Florida and
Texas.
54
55
56,57,58
59
60
14
61
Results
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
11/30
Fig. 2.The 2006­2015 ensemble mean monthly average Ae. aegypti potential abundance.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
12/30
Model results demonstrated a similar seasonal cycle compared to the observed Ae. aegypti
abundance at our two validation sites (Fig. 3). However, in Miami the observed onset and cessation
of peak summer abundance in June­July occurs more rapidly than in the simulations, which have a
broader peak that extends later into the summer. Interestingly, our climate data indicate that daily
maximum and minimum temperatures and rainfall in August­September are similar to June­July
conditions, suggesting that very high abundance might otherwise be expected to extend into these
later summer months. The difference between peak and off­season abundance in Miami is also more
pronounced in the observations. A qualitative comparison of simulated adult abundance to observed
average weekly ovitrap accumulations in Tampa
 (not shown) similarly indicates a more pronounced
difference between peak and off­season abundance than is simulated. However, for Southeast cities
with somewhat cooler winters like Jacksonville and New Orleans the seasonal cycle of simulated adult
Ae. aegypti abundance is similar to the observed ovitrap accumulations. It is possible that the
broader, lower amplitude seasonality of Ae. aegypti abundance that is simulated in the warmer
Southeast cities like Miami and Tampa occurs because the models do not account for interspecies
competition between Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus, which may favor Ae. albopictus in areas with
longer warm and wet periods
. Or, it is also possible that monthly egg introductions specified in the
model simulations may lead to broader peaks in adult Ae. aegypti abundance (i.e., more eggs may be
available in the models compared to reality). In Phoenix the observed peak abundance in August,
during the monsoon season, is resolved by the simulations, as is the substantial difference between
peak and off­season abundance (off­season abundance is basically zero in both the observations
and simulations). An early­season peak in the simulations during April­May, which is not observed, is
due to the small amount of water maintained in the simulated containers during dry periods to
accommodate the potential for manual filling of containers. In reality manually filled containers may be
relatively uncommon in Phoenix, though allowing for a modest amount of human­mediated water
availability in simulations during the dry season can be useful for determining when conditions are
warm enough for Ae. aegypti development and survival. Additionally, the models may underestimate
the effects of low humidity (i.e., desiccation) during the dry season on adult survival, which may be
particularly important in arid environments
. Vector control activities likely also lead to differences
between observed and simulated Ae. aegypti populations in both cities (the simulations do not
account for mosquito control). Given the uncertainty in the observations and the limitations of the
models, the objective of the comparison in Fig. 3 is to evaluate whether the models can simulate the
general seasonal cycle including higher abundances during observed peak months, and lower
abundances during observed off­peak months, for these two cities that represent different climatic
settings; we conclude that the model simulations meet this basic objective.
43
41
62
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
13/30
Fig. 3. 2006­2015 average simulated monthly Ae. aegypti potential abundance versus average observed
abundance for Miami (2006­2008; top) and Phoenix (2006­2015; bottom). Results are expressed as a
fraction of the maximum monthly abundance for each dataset in order to facilitate comparison (otherwise
abundance measures will vary widely due to how simulated versus observed mosquitoes are quantified
and the areal extents they represent).
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
14/30
The estimated monthly average number of persons arriving by air from countries on the CDC Zika
virus travel advisory – which provides a proxy for the potential for virus introduction – is greatest in
large cities with major international airports (Fig. 1). Cities having both high potential Ae. aegypti
abundance and large volumes of air passengers include Miami, Houston and Orlando. It is also
noteworthy that nearly five times as many persons cross the U.S.­Mexico border per month than
arrive by air in all fifty cities combined.
Travel patterns fluctuate seasonally (Fig. 4). Importantly, July and August are the two months with the
highest estimated number of passengers arriving by air from countries on the CDC Zika travel
advisory. These months fall within the season of highest meteorological suitability for Ae. aegypti
across the fifty cities. These months also have comparatively high traffic across the U.S.­Mexico
border. The holiday months of December and January also have relatively high estimated numbers of
persons arriving both by air and across the U.S.­Mexico border; these are months having no­to­low
Ae. aegypti potential abundance in most cities, although there may be low­to­moderate potential
abundance in cities like Brownsville, Miami and Orlando. Although rare in winter, one case of locally­
acquired DENV was reported in January 2011 in Miami­Dade county
, indicating that in some years
off­season Aedes populations may be abundant enough in these cities to enable virus transmission.
42
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
15/30
Fig. 4. 2014 monthly number of persons arriving by air from Latin American countries on the CDC Zika
travel advisory (top), and by land from Mexico (bottom). Sources for data can be found in the text.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
16/30
High poverty rates, an indicator of potential vector­human contact, are particularly prevalent in the
southern U.S. where seasonal abundance of Ae. aegypti is simulated to be highest (Fig. 5). Many of
the poorest counties across the geographic area under study are rural and unlikely to be inhabited by
Ae. aegypti given its proclivity for urban areas
. Ae. albopictus, however, is present across the rural
South (Fig. S1) and may be a competent vector of Zika virus
. The poorest urban areas include the
counties that encompass Laredo, TX and Brownsville, TX, where poverty rates are >30%, as well as
Yuma, AZ and Miami, FL (>20%). A number of other southern cities in this study are situated within
counties having poverty rates > 15%.
55
14
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
17/30
Fig. 5. 2014 percentage of households below the poverty line by U.S. county. Source of data can be found
in text.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
18/30
Numerous studies have produced global maps of general climatic suitability for Ae. aegypti
.
Our results for peak warm season Ae. aegypti potential abundance over the U.S. compare
reasonably with the maps published in these previous studies. Fewer studies have explored seasonal
suitability for Ae. aegypti. Brady et al.
 mapped weekly temperature­based suitability for Ae. aegypti
and Ae. albopictus oviposition globally (they also examined weekly temperature suitability for
introduction and persistence of DENV transmission for both mosquitoes). Here, we employ
temperature, precipitation and humidity fields to drive two process­based life cycle models and
simulate the daily potential abundance of Ae. aegypti for the most recent ten years at fifty cities
across the U.S. While these simulations are subject to limitations as discussed below, they are an
important step toward improved understanding of the spatial and seasonal variability of Ae. aegypti in
the U.S. and the periods of higher risk of ZIKAV introduction.
We find that meteorological conditions are largely unsuitable for Ae. aegypti over the U.S. during
winter months (December­March), except in southern portions of Florida and Texas that can sustain
low­to­moderate potential mosquito abundance compared to summer (Fig. 2). Meteorological
conditions are suitable for Ae. aegypti across all fifty cities during peak summer months (July­
September), though the mosquito has not been observed in all cities. Highest potential mosquito
abundances is simulated in the Southeast and south Texas where local cases of other Aedes­
transmitted viruses have been reported previously, a result that is consistent with the suitability
mapping studies noted above.
Introduction of the virus into local Ae. aegypti populations is more likely in cities with high volumes of
people arriving from areas where transmission is ongoing (Fig. 1). This could include introduction by
persons arriving in the U.S. by air, land (cross­border traffic by vehicles or walking) and sea (cruise
ship passengers). Higher risk is thus implied for U.S.­Mexico border cities and neighboring areas,
where population movement is high, and larger air traffic hubs such as Houston, Los Angeles or
Miami. In Mexico, most reported Zika cases are in southern states, however cases have been
reported further north in Sinaloa and Nuevo Leon by the Health Ministry of Mexico as of 22 February
2016. The potential for introduction in the U.S. may be highest during summer months when Ae.
aegypti populations are abundant, particularly if Zika transmission increases in the northern Mexican
states.
Multiple factors determine when and where arboviruses emerge; vector presence is only one factor
that needs to be evaluated to assess the potential for disease emergence. Socioeconomic conditions
that modulate human exposure to vectors play a role in population vulnerability to arboviruses
.
Poverty is associated with lower air­conditioning use and less efficient cooling options
; such
conditions can lead to open windows and doors and raise the probability of human­vector contact.
Disparities in income have been associated with intermittent or no access to piped water in
unregulated communities (colonias) in the U.S.­Mexico border region
; such conditions can
necessitate water storage that in turn provides oviposition opportunities for Ae. aegypti. Intermittent
garbage collection may also contribute to the provision of important oviposition sites along the U.S.­
Mexico border. For example, discarded tires provide ideal habitat for Ae. aegypti due to their dark
color, water holding capacity, and thermal insulation
. Additionally, the condition of housing
infrastructure such as door and window screens may be lower in impoverished communities
. Areas
in the southern parts of Texas demonstrated higher rates of poverty than some other regions under
study (Fig. 3). Coupled with the higher levels of travel from areas where transmission is occurring and
the history of Ae. aegypti –borne virus outbreaks, this suggests that southern Texas may be a
Discussion
56,63,64
60
23
52
65
66
53
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
19/30
vulnerable region for Zika transmission.
Even if Zika virus arrives in the United States, transmission can be mitigated and reduced through the
use of vector control strategies. As part of our investigation we initially undertook a review of all vector
control activities being conducted within these fifty cities. Due to the lack of standardization of
reporting of Ae. aegypti­related activities in each jurisdiction we have not presented those results in
this paper. It is clear, however, that vector control and public health interventions should consider
tailoring their messages to the local communities. The provision of geographically referenced Ae.
aegypti data to the public could assist in raising public awareness about the vector and motivate
action when neighboring communities have Ae. aegypti activity
.
This study has numerous limitations related to the model simulations. We do not account for vector
control practices in the simulations and thus abundance may be overestimated (as suggested during
the off­peak months in Miami and Phoenix in the validation). There is incomplete understanding of
how temperature may limit population dynamics at the geographic margins of Ae. aegypti survival
,
where sensitivity to poorly­constrained meteorological thresholds may hamper model performance.
For example, because knowledge of egg survival during winter in marginal areas is limited
, we
artificially introduce eggs into the simulations each month, which keeps eggs from becoming extinct in
cities that have seasonal Ae. aegypti populations, but likely causes egg availability/viability to be
overestimated. Cryptic habitats that are not represented in models may enhance environmental
suitability during winter; an overwintering Ae. aegypti population was recently found in Washington,
D.C.
, suggesting that Aedes mosquitoes are adept at ovipositing in semi­concealed places that stay
relatively warm year­round (e.g., subterranean habitats). Likewise, during the warm season it is likely
that mosquitoes are adept at finding suitable microclimates in sheltered areas that aren’t explicitly
accounted for in the models
, particularly in challenging environments such as desert cities where
high temperatures and low humidity may otherwise inhibit mosquito survival. The influence of
humidity in the simulations may not be adequately represented, which could be an important issue in
arid regions where desiccation may substantially impact adult survival
. Little is known of the
geographic distribution of container characteristics such as type, quantity and degree of shading, all
factors that regulate water temperature and amount available for immature development. Additionally,
the degree and frequency of manual filling of potential container habitats by humans is virtually
unknown and may be over­ or understated in the models. Intra­city climatic variability is not
accounted for, which may be important in cites with sharp elevation gradients or heterogeneous
urban land use patterns. Furthermore, the models do not allow for interaction between Ae. aegypti
and other container dwelling invertebrates, including the competitor Ae. albopictus. This competitive
interaction has been shown to determine the distribution of Ae. aegypti in Florida at scales of less
than 5km
, and suggests the importance of understanding the local distribution of these
mosquitoes in assessing risk. The competitive interaction may also affect the seasonality of Ae.
aegypti due to increased competition late in the wet season
. The limitations noted here are the
primary reason we refer to simulated Ae. aegypti abundance as potential abundance. Despite these
limitations, our validation indicates that overall the Skeeter Buster and DyMSiM simulations, as well as
their ensemble mean, resolve the seasonal cycle of Ae. aegypti abundance in Phoenix and Miami.
Importantly, the simulations capture the months of peak abundance in both cities. We also find that
Skeeter Buster and DyMSiM have similar seasonal cycles of abundance at most U.S. cities (Figs. S2
and S3).
Study limitations not related to the model simulations include incomplete information about travel from
areas of ongoing Zika transmission. In particular, our air travel data set does not provide information
on “thru­travelers” proceeding on to secondary and tertiary destinations from their U.S. port­of­entry.
This likely leads to overestimated numbers for large international airports and underestimated
67
68
68
38
29
62
41,69
41,70
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
20/30
numbers at smaller domestic airports. Additionally, though there are high numbers of travelers
crossing the U.S.­Mexico border, many of the same individuals cross regularly, so actual unique
individuals crossing is lower. As of February 2016 no Mexican cities along the border had local ZIKAV
transmission, which suggests a low probability of introduction. Finally, our study region does not
include non­contiguous U.S. states and territories where risk for transmission of Aedes­transmitted
viruses is high: Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and areas in the South Pacific.
Though we do not explicitly address whether the potential abundance of Ae. aegypti may be lower or
higher than normal in the forthcoming months of 2016 due to anomalous meteorological conditions
(perhaps linked to the strong El Niño conditions occurring at the time of writing), it is noteworthy that a
seasonal climate forecast initialized in February 2016 and valid for June­August 2016 suggests a 40­
45% probability of above­normal temperatures over the entire contiguous U.S. for the upcoming
summer of 2016
. This is compared to a 20­25% probability of below­normal temperatures, and a
35% probability of normal conditions. Therefore, it is possible that above­normal temperatures will
lead to increased suitability for Ae. aegypti throughout much of the U.S. in summer 2016, though in
some of the hottest regions of Texas, Arizona and California above­normal temperatures may lead to
decreased suitability.
Despite the limitations, our analysis is a step towards simultaneously mapping the geographic and
seasonal suitability of the vector mosquito Ae. aegypti in the contiguous United States. There is a
need for enhanced, long­term, nationally­coordinated, local­level surveillance of both Aedes
mosquitoes and Aedes­transmitted viruses, particularly in areas where simulations indicate Ae.
aegypti populations may be high and coincide with more frequent travel between the U.S. and
countries where Zika is circulating.
The authors declare no competing interests.
71
Competing Interests
Appendix
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
21/30
Fig. S1. Locations of know occurrences of Ae. aegypti and Ae. albpictus in the U.S. for 1960­2014
reproduced from Kraemer et al.
 and updated with collections in California for 2011­2015  .
56,57,58
59
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
22/30
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
23/30
Fig. S2. The 2006­2015 Skeeter Buster mean monthly average Ae. aegypti potential abundance.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
24/30
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
25/30
Fig. S3. The 2006­2015 DyMSiM mean monthly average Ae. aegypti potential abundance.
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
26/30
The authors thank Dr. Fred Gould (North Carolina State University) and Dr. Chet Moore (Colorado
State University) for useful comments and suggestions.
1. Dick, G. W. A., Kitchen, S. F., & Haddow, A. J. (1952). Zika virus (I). Isolations and serological
specificity. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 46(5), 509­520.
2. Pierson, T. C., Diamond, M. S. (2013). Flaviviruses In: Knipe DM, Howley PM, editors. Fields
Virology.
3. Lanciotti, R. S., Kosoy, O. L., Laven, J. J., Velez, J. O., Lambert, A. J., Johnson, A. J., ... & Duffy, M.
R. (2008). Genetic and serologic properties of Zika virus associated with an epidemic, Yap State,
Micronesia, 2007. Emerging infectious diseases, 14(8), 1232.
4. Hayes, E. B. (2009). Zika virus outside Africa. Emerging infectious diseases, 15(9), 1347.
5. Cao­Lormeau, V.M., Roche, C., Teissier, A. et al. Zika virus, French polynesia, South pacific, 2013.
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 20,1084­1086.
6. Besnard, M., Lastère, S., Teissier, A., Cao­Lormeau, V., & Musso, D. (2014). Evidence of perinatal
transmission of Zika virus, French Polynesia, December 2013 and February 2014. Euro Surveill,
19(13), 20751.
7. Zanluca, C., Melo, V. C. A. D., Mosimann, A. L. P
., Santos, G. I. V. D., Santos, C. N. D. D., & Luz, K.
(2015). First report of autochthonous transmission of Zika virus in Brazil. Memórias do Instituto
Oswaldo Cruz, 110(4), 569­572.
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2016a, Jan 30). Zika virus. Retrieved from
www.cdc.gov/zika.
9. Fauci, A. S., & Morens, D. M. (2016). Zika Virus in the Americas—Yet Another Arbovirus Threat.
New England Journal of Medicine. doi :10.1056/NEJMp1600297.
10. Cauchemez, S., Ledrans, M., Poletto, C., Quenel, P
., De Valk, H., Colizza, V., & Boëlle, P
. Y
.
(2014). Local and regional spread of chikungunya fever in the Americas. Euro surveillance: bulletin
Europeen sur les maladies transmissibles= European communicable disease bulletin, 19(28), 20854.
11. Fischer, M., & Staples, J. E. (2014). Notes from the field: chikungunya virus spreads in the
Americas—Caribbean and South America, 2013–2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 63(22), 500­1.
12. Gubler, D. J. (2002). Epidemic dengue/dengue hemorrhagic fever as a public health, social and
economic problem in the 21st century. Trends in microbiology, 10(2), 100­103.
13. Lambrechts, L., Scott, T. W., & Gubler, D. J. (2010). Consequences of the expanding global
distribution of Aedes albopictus for dengue virus transmission. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 4(5), e646.
14. Grard, G., Caron, M., Mombo, I. M., Nkoghe, D., Ondo, S. M., Jiolle, D., ... & Leroy, E. M. (2014).
Zika virus in Gabon (Central Africa)–2007: a new threat from Aedes albopictus?. PLoS Negl Trop Dis,
8(2), e2681.
15. Hennessey, M., Fischer, M., & Staples, J. E. (2016). Zika virus spreads to new areas—region of
the Americas, May 2015–January 2016. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 65(3), 5­58.
Acknowledgements
References
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
27/30
16. Pan American Health Organization (2016, Jan 30). Epidemiological alert. Increase in
microcephaly in the northeast of Brazil—epidemiological alert. Retrieved from
http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?
option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=32636&lang=en.
17. Schuler­Faccini, L. (2016). Possible Association Between Zika Virus Infection and Microcephaly—
Brazil, 2015. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 65(3), 59­62.
18. Pan American Health Organization (2015, Dec 1). Neurological syndrome, congenital
malformations, and Zika virus infection. Implications for public health in the Americas—
epidemiological alert. Retrieved from http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?
option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=32405&lang=en.
19. Petersen, E. E. (2016). Interim guidelines for pregnant women during a Zika virus outbreak—
United States, 2016. MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 65(2), 30­33.
20. Kendrick, K., Stanek, D., Blackmore, C. (2014). Notes from the field: transmission of chikungunya
virus in the continental United States—Florida, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 63(48), 1137.
21. Trout, A., Baracco, G., Rodriguez, M., Barber, J., Leal, A., Radke, E., ... & Sauber­Schatz, E.
(2010). Locally Acquired Dengue­Key West, Florida, 2009­2010. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 59(19), 577­581.
22. Ramos, M. M., Mohammed, H., Zielinski­Gutierrez, E., Hayden, M. H., Lopez, J. L. R., Fournier,
M., ... & Waterman, S. H. (2008). Epidemic dengue and dengue hemorrhagic fever at the Texas–
Mexico border: results of a household­based seroepidemiologic survey, December 2005. The
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 78(3), 364­369.
23. Reiter, P
., Lathrop, S., Bunning, M., Biggerstaff, B., Singer, D., Tiwari, T., ... & Hayes, E. (2003).
Texas lifestyle limits transmission of dengue virus. Emerging infectious diseases, 9(1), 86­89.
24. Brunkard, J. M., Robles Lopez, J. L., Ramirez, J., Cifuentes, E., Rothenberg, S. J., Hunsperger,
E. A., ... & Haddad, B. M. (2007). Dengue fever seroprevalence and risk factors, Texas­Mexico
border, 2004. Emerg Infect Dis, 13(10), 1477­1483.
25. McCarthy, M. (2016). Zika virus was transmitted by sexual contact in Texas, health officials report.
BMJ, 352, i720.
26. Koopman, J. S., Prevots, D. R., Mann, M. A. V., Dantes, H. G., Aquino, M. L. Z., Longini, I. M., &
Amor, J. S. (1991). Determinants and predictors of dengue infection in Mexico. American journal of
epidemiology, 133(11), 1168­1178.
27. Eisen, L., & Lozano­Fuentes, S. (2009). Use of mapping and spatial and space­time modeling
approaches in operational control of Aedes aegypti and dengue. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 3(4), e411.
28. United States Census Bureau (2016a, Feb 20). Population Estimates: Metropolitan and
Micropolitan Statistical Areas. Retrieved from: http://www.census.gov/popest/data/metro/totals/2014/.
29. Russell, R. C., Webb, C. E., Williams, C. R., & Ritchie, S. A. (2005). Mark–release–recapture
study to measure dispersal of the mosquito Aedes aegypti in Cairns, Queensland, Australia. Medical
and veterinary entomology, 19(4), 451­457.
30. Cosgrove, B. A., Lohmann, D., Mitchell, K. E., Houser, P
. R., Wood, E. F., Schaake, J. C., ... &
Ming, J. (2003). Real‐time and retrospective forcing in the North American Land Data Assimilation
System (NLDAS) project. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 108(D22).
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
28/30
31. Xia, Y
., Mitchell, K., Ek, M., Sheffield, J., Cosgrove, B., Wood, E., ... & Mocko, D. (2012).
Continental‐scale water and energy flux analysis and validation for the North American Land Data
Assimilation System project phase 2 (NLDAS‐2): 1. Intercomparison and application of model
products. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 117(D3).
32. Magori, K., Legros, M., Puente, M. E., Focks, D. A., Scott, T. W., Lloyd, A. L., & Gould, F. (2009).
Skeeter Buster: a stochastic, spatially explicit modeling tool for studying Aedes aegypti population
replacement and population suppression strategies. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 3(9), e508.
33. Morin, C. W., Monaghan, A. J., Hayden, M. H., Barrera, R., & Ernst, K. (2015). Meteorologically
driven simulations of dengue epidemics in San Juan, PR. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 9(8), e0004002.
34. Semenov, M. A., & Stratonovitch, P
. (2010). Use of multi­model ensembles from global climate
models for assessment of climate change impacts. Climate research (Open Access for articles 4
years old and older), 41(1), 1.
35. Tebaldi, C., & Knutti, R. (2007). The use of the multi­model ensemble in probabilistic climate
projections. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 365(1857), 2053­2075.
36. Xu, C., Legros, M., Gould, F., & Lloyd, A. L. (2010). Understanding uncertainties in model­based
predictions of Aedes aegypti population dynamics. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 4(9), e830.
37. Tatem, A. J., Hay, S. I., & Rogers, D. J. (2006). Global traffic and disease vector dispersal.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(16), 6242­6247.
38. Lima, A., Lovin, D. D., Hickner, P
. V., & Severson, D. W. (2016). Evidence for an Overwintering
Population of Aedes aegypti in Capitol Hill Neighborhood, Washington, DC. The American journal of
tropical medicine and hygiene, 94(1), 231­235.
39. Hahn, M. B., Monaghan, A. J., Hayden, M. H., Eisen, R. J., Delorey, M. J., Lindsey, N. P
., ... &
Fischer, M. (2015). Meteorological conditions associated with increased incidence of West Nile virus
disease in the United States, 2004–2012. The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene,
92(5), 1013­1022.
40. Moore, S. M., Eisen, R. J., Monaghan, A., & Mead, P
. (2014). Meteorological influences on the
seasonality of Lyme disease in the United States. The American journal of tropical medicine and
hygiene, 90(3), 486­496.
41. Reiskind, M. H., & Lounibos, L. P
. (2013). Spatial and temporal patterns of abundance of Aedes
aegypti L.(Stegomyia aegypti) and Aedes albopictus (Skuse)[Stegomyia albopictus (Skuse)] in
southern Florida. Medical and veterinary entomology, 27(4), 421­429.
42. Florida Department of Health (2016, Feb 6). Mosquito­Borne Disease Surveillance. Retrieved
from: http://www.floridahealth.gov/diseases­and­conditions/mosquito­borne­
diseases/surveillance.html.
43. Focks, D. A., Haile, D. G., Daniels, E., & Mount, G. A. (1993). Dynamic life table model for Aedes
aegypti (Diptera: Culicidae): simulation results and validation. Journal of Medical Entomology, 30(6),
1018­1028.
44. Codeço, C. T., Lima, A. W., Araújo, S. C., Lima, J. B. P
., Maciel­de­Freitas, R., Honório, N. A., ... &
Valle, D. (2015). Surveillance of Aedes aegypti: Comparison of house index with four alternative traps.
PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 9(2), e0003475.
45. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2016b, Jan 29). Zika Travel Information. Retrieved
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
29/30
from: http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/zika­information.
46. United States Department of Transportation (2016a, Jan 29). U.S. International Air Passenger
and Freight Statistics Report. Retrieved from https://www.transportation.gov/policy/aviation­policy/us­
international­air­passenger­and­freight­statistics­report.
47. United States Department of Transportation (2016b, Feb 24). T­100 International Segment
Database (U.S. Carriers Only). Retrieved from: http://www.transtats.bts.gov/Fields.asp?
Table_ID=307.
48. United States Department of Transportation (2016c, Feb 10). Border Crossing/Entry Data.
Retrieved from:
http://transborder.bts.gov/programs/international/transborder/TBDR_BC/TBDR_BC_Index.html.
49. United States Department of Transportation (2016d, Feb 24). North America Cruise Detail Data.
Retrieved from: http://www.marad.dot.gov/wp­
content/uploads/xls/north_america_cruise_detail_data.xls.
50. United States Geological Survey (2016, Feb 6). Disease Maps Dynamic Map Application.
Retrieved from: http://diseasemaps.usgs.gov/mapviewer/.
51. Hotez, P
. J., Murray, K. O., & Buekens, P
. (2014). The Gulf Coast: a new American underbelly of
tropical diseases and poverty. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 8(5), e2760.
52. United States Energy Information Administration (2016, Feb 6). 2009 Residential Energy
Consumption Survey Data. Retrieved at: https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/2009/.
53. Hotez, P
. J. (2011). America’s most distressed areas and their neglected infections: the United
States Gulf Coast and the District of Columbia. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 5(3), e843.
54. Wescoat, J. L., Headington, L., & Theobald, R. (2007). Water and poverty in the United States.
Geoforum, 38(5), 801­814.
55. United States Census Bureau (2016b, Feb 6). Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates: State
and County Estimates 2014. Retrieved from:
http://www.census.gov/did/www/saipe/data/statecounty/data/2014.html.
56. Kraemer, M. U., Sinka, M. E., Duda, K. A., Mylne, A. Q., Shearer, F. M., Barker, C. M., ... & Hay,
S.I. (2015a). The global distribution of the arbovirus vectors Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus. Elife,
4, e08347.
57. Kraemer, M. U., Sinka, M. E., Duda, K. A., Mylne, A., Shearer, F. M., Brady, O. J., ... & Hay, S. I.
(2015b). The global compendium of Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus occurrence. Scientific data, 2.
58. Kraemer, M. U., Sinka, M. E., Duda, K. A., Mylne, A., Shearer, F. M., Brady, O. J., ... & Hay, S. I.
(2015c). Data from: The global compendium of Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus occurrence. Dryad
Digital Repository. Retrieved from http://dx. doi .org/10.5061/dryad.47v3c.
59. California Department of Public Health (2016, Feb 17). Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus
mosquitoes detection sites in California, 2011­2015. Retrieved from
https://www.cdph.ca.gov/HealthInfo/discond/Documents/AedesDistributionMap.pdf.
60. Brady, O. J., Golding, N., Pigott, D. M., Kraemer, M. U., Messina, J. P
., Reiner Jr, R. C., ... & Hay,
S. I. (2014). Global temperature constraints on Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus persistence and
competence for dengue virus transmission. Parasit Vectors, 7(338), 1­4.
61. Bogoch, I. I., Brady, O. J., Kraemer, M. U., German, M., Creatore, M. I., Kulkarni, M. A., ... &
 3/23/2016
On the Seasonal Occurrence and Abundance of the Zika Virus Vector Mosquito Aedes Aegypti in the Contiguous United States – PLOS Currents Outb...
http://currents.plos.org/outbreaks/article/on­the­seasonal­occurrence­and­abundance­of­the­zika­virus­vector­mosquito­aedes­aegypti­in­the­contiguous...
30/30
Khan, K. (2016). Anticipating the international spread of Zika virus from Brazil. The Lancet.
62. Lucio, P
. S., Degallier, N., Servain, J., Hannart, A., Durand, B., de Souza, R. N., & Ribeiro, Z. M.
(2013). A case study of the influence of local weather on Aedes aegypti (L.) aging and mortality.
Journal of Vector Ecology, 38(1), 20­37.
63. Capinha, C., Rocha, J., & Sousa, C. A. (2014). Macroclimate determines the global range limit of
Aedes aegypti. EcoHealth, 11(3), 420­428.
64. Khormi, H. M., & Kumar, L. (2014). Climate change and the potential global distribution of Aedes
aegypti: spatial modelling using GIS and CLIMEX. Geospatial health, 8(2), 405­415.
65. Parcher, J. W., & Humberson, D. G. (2007). CHIPS: a new way to monitor colonias along the
United States­Mexico border (No. 2007­1230). Geological Survey (US).
66. Uejio, C. K., Hayden, M. H., Zielinski­Gutierrez, E., Lopez, J. L. R., Barrera, R., Amador, M., ... &
Waterman, S. H. (2014). Biological Control of Mosquitoes in Scrap Tires in Brownsville, Texas, USA
and Matamoros, Tamaulipas, Mexico. Journal of the American Mosquito Control Association, 30(2),
130­135.
67. Gubler, D. J., & Clark, G. G. (1996). Community involvement in the control of Aedes aegypti. Acta
tropica, 61(2), 169­179.
68. Eisen, L., & Moore, C. G. (2013). Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti in the continental United States: a
vector at the cool margin of its geographic range. Journal of medical entomology, 50(3), 467­478.
69. Rey, J. R., Nishimura, N., Wagner, B., Braks, M. A., O'Connell, S. M., & Lounibos, L. P
. (2006).
Habitat segregation of mosquito arbovirus vectors in south Florida. Journal of Medical entomology,
43(6), 1134­1141.
70. Leisnham, P
. T., LaDeau, S. L., & Juliano, S. A. (2014). Spatial and temporal habitat segregation
of mosquitoes in urban Florida. PloS one, 9(3), e91655.
71. International Research Center for Climate and Society (2016, Feb 19). Seasonal Climate
Forecasts. Retrieved from http://iri.columbia.edu/our­expertise/climate/forecasts/seasonal­climate­
forecasts/.
72. Hills, S. L., Russell, K., Hennessey, M., Williams, C., Oster, A. M., Fischer, M., and Mead, P
.
(2016). Transmission of Zika Virus Through Sexual Contact with Travelers to Areas of Ongoing
Transmission—Continental United States, 2016. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 65.
73. Beebe, N. W., Cooper, R. D., Mottram, P
., & Sweeney, A. W. (2009). Australia's dengue risk driven
by human adaptation to climate change. PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 3(5), e429.
View publication stats
View publication stats
