 Pericyte degeneration causes white matter dysfunction in the 
mouse CNS
Axel Montagne1,2,‡, Angeliki M. Nikolakopoulou1,2,‡, Zhen Zhao1,2,‡, Abhay P. Sagare1,2, 
Gabriel Si1, Divna Lazic1,2,3, Samuel R. Barnes4, Madelaine Daianu5, Anita Ramanathan1,2, 
Ariel Go1, Erica J. Lawson1,2, Yaoming Wang1,2, William J. Mack6, Paul M. Thompson5, 
Julie A. Schneider7, Jobin Varkey1,2, Ralf Langen1,2, Eric Mullins8, Russell E. Jacobs1,2,4, 
and Berislav V. Zlokovic1,2,*
1Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA 90089, USA
2Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
3Department of Neurobiology, Institute for Biological Research, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, 
Republic of Serbia
4Biological Imaging Center, Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 
91101, USA
5Imaging Genetics Center, Mark & Mary Stevens Neuroimaging & Informatics Institute, University 
of Southern California, Marina del Rey, CA 90292, USA
6Department of Neurological Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
7Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA
8Division of Hematology and Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039
Abstract
Diffuse white matter disease associated with small vessel disease and dementia is prevalent in the 
elderly. The biological mechanisms, however, remain elusive. Using pericyte-deficient mice, 
magnetic resonance imaging, viral-based tract-tracing, behavior and tissue analysis, here we show 
that pericyte degeneration disrupts white matter microcirculation causing accumulation of toxic 
blood-derived fibrin(ogen) deposits and blood flow reductions, which triggers loss of myelin, 
axons and oligodendrocytes. This disrupts brain circuits leading to white matter functional deficits 
before neuronal loss occurs. Fibrinogen and fibrin fibrils initiated autophagy-dependent cell death 
*Correspondence to: zlokovic@usc.edu.
‡Equally contributed co-first authors.
Author Contributions: A.M., A.M.N., and Z.Z. designed and performed experiments, analyzed data and contributed to writing the 
paper. A.P.S., G.S., D.L., S.R.B., M.D., A.R., A.G., E.J.L., Y.W., J.V., M.H., and R.L. performed experiments and analyzed data. 
W.J.M., P.M.T., J.A.S., R.E.J., and E.M. provided guidance for some experiments and edited the paper. B.V.Z. designed all 
experiments and wrote the paper.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2018 March ; 24(3): 326–337. doi:10.1038/nm.4482.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in oligodendrocyte and pericyte cultures, whereas pharmacological and genetic manipulations of 
systemic fibrinogen levels in pericyte-deficient, but not control mice, influenced the degree of 
white matter fibrin(ogen) deposition, pericyte degeneration, vascular pathology and white matter 
changes. Thus, pericytes control white matter structure and function, which has implications for 
the pathogenesis and treatment of human white matter disease associated with small vessel 
disease.
Introduction
White matter is composed of myelinated axon tracts that maintain connections between 
individual neurons in different grey matter regions. Diffuse white matter disease is prevalent 
in the elderly, and is associated with small vessel disease1, which contributes to 
approximately 50% of all dementias worldwide including Alzheimer's disease (AD)2–4 
Individuals with AD develop early white matter changes5,6 with loss of oligodendrocytes 
and axons7 concomitant with cerebral vessel pathology, loss of vascular integrity, and blood 
flow reductions8–11. Despite the prevalence and clinical significance of age-related white 
matter disease associated with small vessel disease, the underlying biological mechanisms 
remain elusive.
Here, we investigated whether brain capillary pericytes embedded in the wall of smallest 
brain vessels12–14 play a role in white matter health and disease. Pericytes control 
microvascular functions in neuron-dense grey matter regions including blood-brain barrier 
(BBB) permeability15–17 and cerebral blood flow18–22. They die in AD10,23–26 mild 
dementia27, stroke19,20 and cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical 
infarcts (CADASIL), the most common genetic ischemic small vessel disease associated 
with cognitive impairment28. Nonetheless, the role of pericytes in the pathogenesis of these 
disorders, particularly the white matter lesions, is still poorly understood. It is also unclear if 
pericytes can control vascular integrity and blood flow in white matter axon tracts, which 
lack neuronal cell bodies.
To address these questions, we studied microcirculatory changes in relation to white matter 
integrity in pericyte-deficient mice carrying seven point mutations in platelet-derived growth 
factor receptor β (PDGFRβ), which disrupts PDGFRβ signaling in vascular mural cells 
causing pericyte loss29. Adult PdgfrbF7/F7 mice are viable15,17, but develop early pericyte 
loss causing BBB breakdown and microvascular reductions15,17,29, without appreciable 
early involvement of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs)30, making them a valuable 
model to study effects of pericyte loss on neurovascular and brain functions.
Results
Loss of white matter pericyte coverage and capillary integrity in AD
Consistent with previous reports examining grey matter brain regions in post-mortem AD 
tissue23–26 here we observed a 50% loss of pericyte coverage and a 3-fold greater 
accumulation of blood-derived extravascular fibrin(ogen) deposits (indicative of capillary 
leakage and loss of vascular integrity) in the subcortical white matter of AD patients 
Montagne et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 compared to controls (Fig 1a-c; Table S1). This has been shown by immunostaining for 
pericyte marker PDGFRβ14,17, fluorescent staining of endothelial-specific marker lectin17, 
and immunostaining of fibrin(ogen), with quantification analysis of pericyte coverage and 
fibrin(ogen) extravascular deposits. The microvascular pathology in AD white matter was 
associated with 50% loss of oligodendrocytes, as shown by immunostaining for 
oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (Olig2)31, as well as loss of myelin, as 
indicated by immunostaining for myelin basic protein (MBP)31 (Fig. S1), consistent with 
previous findings in the white matter in AD7.
Blood-axon barrier and blood flow disruptions in white matter of pericyte-deficient mice
To assess whether pericyte loss causes white matter vascular pathology and degeneration, we 
employed the pericyte-deficient PdgfrbF7/F7 (F7/F7) mouse model16,17,30,32. Using a 
dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI protocol with the postprocessing Patlak analysis27, 
we quantified regional white matter tract vascular permeability to intravenously injected 
gadolinium-based contrast agent. In white matter tracts including corpus callosum (Fig. 
1d,e), internal capsule, cingulum and external capsule (Fig. S2a-d), we found a progressive 
increase in the capillary permeability transfer constant (Ktrans) in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-
week old F7/F7 mice compared to age-matched Pdgfrβ+/+ littermate controls. We also 
observed a progressive loss of white matter capillary pericyte coverage in the corpus 
callosum (Fig. 1f,g) and other white matter tracts (Fig. S3c,d) of 2-, 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-
week old F7/F7 mice, along with a loss of total pericyte numbers (Fig. S3a,b). Blood-
derived fibrin(ogen) extravascular deposits progressively accumulated in the corpus 
callosum and other white matter tracts of 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. 
1f,h,I; Fig. S4a,b). White matter fibrin(ogen) deposits were not detectable, however, in 2-
week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. 1h; Fig. S4a,b), despite the presence of circulating exogenous 
tracer Alexa Fluor 555-cadaverin in white matter (Fig. 1i) and its cellular uptake by 
oligodendrocytes, pericytes and microglia (Fig. S4c,d), indicative of disrupted white matter 
vascular integrity.
In contrast, cadaverine uptake in littermate controls was undetectable, suggesting that 
pericyte loss and blood-axon barrier breakdown precede white matter accumulation of 
fibrin(ogen) in F7/F7 mice. Beginning at 4-6 weeks of age the degree of fibrinogen deposits 
correlated with the loss of pericyte coverage (Fig. 1j; Fig. S4e,f). Compared to grey matter 
regions (e.g., cortex, hippocampus), the white matter tracts of young 12-16-week old F7/F7 
mice accumulated substantially higher levels of blood-derived fibrin(ogen) (Fig. 1k) and 
hemosiderin deposits (Fig. 1l,m).
Using a modified dynamic susceptibility-contrast (DSC)-MRI technique originally 
developed for cerebral blood flow measurements in humans (see Methods), we quantified 
local blood flow in white matter tracts in mice. The blood flow maps and quantification 
showed progressive blood flow reductions in the corpus callosum (Fig. 1n,o), internal 
capsule, cingulum and external capsule (Fig. S5a-d) of F7/F7 mice compared to controls. 
The white matter tracts in F7/F7 mice developed greater absolute blood flow reductions than 
the grey matter regions (Fig. S5e-h). Interestingly, we did not find changes in the white 
matter blood flow in 2-week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. S5i), suggesting that pericyte loss and 
Montagne et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 disruption of vascular integrity in the present model precede blood flow changes. 
Quantitative 14C-iodoantipyrine autoradiography, a “gold-standard” for regional cerebral 
blood flow analysis in mice17,33, corroborated DSC-MRI findings showing comparable 
blood flow reductions in the white matter tracts of F7/F7 mice (Fig. S6a-d). Vascular density 
in the white matter regions of control mice was approximately 2-3-fold lower than in the 
grey matter regions (Fig. S7a,b) consistent with lower blood flow values. The capillary 
density in white matter was further reduced in F7/F7 mice compared to controls, as shown in 
12-16-week old animals (Fig. S7a,b). Loss of white matter microvascular density positively 
correlated with the loss of pericyte coverage (Fig. S7c), similar as reported for grey matter 
regions in pericyte-deficient mice17,30. Moreover, white matter blood flow reductions 
correlated positively with losses of pericyte coverage and microvascular density, as 
illustrated in the corpus callosum (Fig. S7d,e).
White matter structural changes and loss of connectivity in pericyte-deficient mice
High-resolution diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)-MRI (Fig. S8a) did not reveal changes in the 
white matter, cortical, or hippocampal volumes in 4-6-week old F7/F7 mice compared to 
controls (Fig. 2a-c). However, at 12-16 weeks of age F7/F7 mice developed white matter 
atrophy which worsened by age (Fig. 2a). In contrast, no detectable changes were found in 
the cortex (Fig. 2b) or hippocampus (Fig. 2c) volumes in 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice. A 
moderate loss of grey matter volume was found in 36-48-week old F7/F7 mice compared to 
their age-matched controls (Fig. 2b,c). Consistent with these findings, post-processing DTI 
analysis showed no detectable changes in the white matter structure in 4-6-week old F7/F7 
mice as indicated by normal fractional anisotropy (Fig. 2d; Fig. S8b) and mean, radial and 
axial diffusivity values (Fig. S8b,c). However, 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice showed white 
matter disorganization and damage, as demonstrated in several regions displaying decreased 
fractional anisotropy (Fig. 2e; Fig. S8d) and changes in radial, axial and mean diffusivity 
values (Fig. S8d,e), respectively. These changes worsened with age, as shown in 36-48-week 
old F7/F7 mice (Fig. 2f; Fig. S8f,g). Using high resolution DTI-based tractography34 (Fig. 
2g), we found 30-40% fiber loss and detected shorter, unorganized fibers throughout the 
white matter tracts, as illustrated in the corpus callosum and cingulum in 12-16-week old 
F7/F7 mice (Fig. 2g-i). These changes worsened with age, as shown in 36-48-week old 
F7/F7 mice (Fig. 2g-i). No detectable changes were found in younger 4-6-week old F7/F7 
mice (Fig. 2g-i).
Next, we performed anterograde tract-tracing with a fluorescent adeno-associated virus 
expressing green fluorescent protein (AAV-eGFP)35. The AAV-eGFP construct was injected 
stereotaxically into the primary somatosensory barrel cortex (Fig. 2j). After 21 days, 12-16-
week old F7/F7 mice showed reductions in the integrated projection density towards the 
contralateral somatosensory barrel primary cortex, throughout the corpus callosum and 
towards the internal capsule (Fig. 2j,k; Fig. S9a-d). Quantification of viral-based tract-
tracing data corroborated DTI-tractography results by indicating 30-40% decrease in the 
fiber density in the studied white matter tracts in 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice, and a greater 
loss of projections by 45-70% in 36-48-week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. 2k; Fig. S9a-d).
Montagne et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 White matter-related functional deficits in pericyte-deficient mice
Behavior testing revealed white matter-related functional deficits (see Methods for details) 
beginning in 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice, consistent with reported white matter structural 
changes (Fig. 2). These animals exhibited reduced maximum velocity on the complex 
running wheel test (Fig. 3a), and a specific impairment in spatial working memory on 8-arm 
radial maze test showing an increase in revisiting errors (Fig. 3b,c). In contrast, younger 4-6-
week old F7/F7 mice performed similarly to controls on both tests (Fig. 3a,c), as expected 
based on the lack of white matter structural changes on MRI and connectomics analysis at 
this early stage (Fig. 2). White matter-related deficits worsened with age, as shown by a 
substantial decrease in velocity on the complex running wheel test in 36-48-week old F7/F7 
mice compared to age-matched controls (Fig. 3a). Tests involving hippocampus-dependent 
behavior such as novel object recognition and fear conditioning, and daily activity tests such 
as nesting and burrowing (Fig. 3d-g), were not different between 4-6- and 12-16-week old 
F7/F7 mice compared to their respective age-matched controls, consistent with undetectable 
changes in the hippocampus volume (Fig. 2c) and normal neuron numbers (see below). 
However, these tests showed deficits at a later stage in older F7/F7 mice at 36-48 weeks of 
age (Fig. 3d,f,g), consistent with much greater (40%) white matter total loss (Fig. 2a), and a 
substantial loss of the white matter fibers (Fig. 2g-i,k) associated with a moderate 
hippocampal and cortical atrophy (Fig. 2b,c) and detectable neuronal loss (see below).
Loss of myelin and axons in pericyte-deficient mice
Electron microscopy analysis showed loss of myelin and axon degeneration in the corpus 
callosum of 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice, and worsening with age compared to age-matched 
controls, as demonstrated by increased number of degenerated axons, substantial axon loss, 
and an increase in g-ratio indicating thinner myelin sheaths (see Methods) (Fig. 4a-d). 
Similar changes were found in other white matter regions (Fig. S10a-d). Immunostaining for 
MBP and axon neurofilament marker SMI-312 confirmed loss of myelin and axons in 
several white matter regions in 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice, and worsening with age (Fig. 
4e-g; Fig. S10e-g). Luxol fast blue staining, and quantification of white matter damage by 
Fazekas scale (see Methods), confirmed disarrangement of white matter tracts and 
appearance of vacuoles in different white matter regions of 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. 
4h,i; Fig. S10h,i). At this time, F7/F7 mice also displayed a 4-6-fold increase in the number 
of enlarged perivascular spaces in different white matter regions (Fig. 4j,k; Fig. S10j,k). 
These enlarged perivascular spaces have been strongly associated with small vessel disease 
and white matter injuries1,2,36. Immunoblotting of the corpus callosum homogenates (Fig. 
4l,m) confirmed reduced MBP levels in 16-week old F7/F7 mice. No white matter changes 
were found in 4-6-week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. 4a-d,f,g,i,k-m).
Importantly, there was no neuron loss in the cortex or hippocampus in 12-16-week old F7/F7 
mice, as shown by hematoxylin staining and counting of NeuN-positive (neuron marker) 
neurons (Fig. 4n,o; Fig. S11a-d). However, there was approximately 28% and 27% loss of 
neurons in the cortex and the CA1 hippocampus subfield, respectively, in 36-48-week old 
F7/F7 mice consistent with previous findings showing neuronal loss in pericyte-deficient 
mice at a later stage17.
Montagne et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Loss of oligodendrocytes in pericyte-deficient mice
Triple staining for Olig231, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling 
(TUNEL), and MBP (Fig. 5a) in the corpus callosum of 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice 
compared to controls indicated >7-fold increase in dying oligodendrocytes and 
approximately 30% decrease in oligodendrocyte density (Fig. 5b,c). Dying oligodendrocytes 
and oligodendrocyte loss were also found in other white matter regions of 12-16-week old 
F7/F7 mice, which worsened in 36-48-week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. 5b,c; Fig. S12a-c). No 
changes were observed in 4-6-week old F7/F7 mice. Since oligodendrocytes support axons 
with myelin sheaths31,37, loss of oligodendrocytes in F7/F7 mice was consistent with myelin 
loss and white matter damage (Fig. 4a-g).
Triple immunostaining for multiple oligodendrocyte markers, including platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor α (PDGFRα), Olig2, and cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 
(CNPase) in the corpus callosum (Fig. 5d), indicated that the number of Olig2 and PDGFRα 
double-positive oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs)31 did not change in 4-6- or 12-16-
week old F7/F7 mice, whereas the number of Olig2 and CNPase double-positive mature 
oligodendrocytes31 was substantially decreased in 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice compared 
with age-matched littermate controls, which worsened with age (Fig. 5e,f). Similar results 
were found in other white matter regions (Fig. S12d-f). Loss of mature white matter 
oligodendrocytes in 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice compared to controls was confirmed by 
flow cytometry using anti-MBP and anti-proteolipid protein (PLP) antibodies31, while no 
changes were found at 4-6 weeks of age (Fig. 5g,h; Fig. S12g). Since genetic ablation of 
adult oligodendrocytes results in loss of myelin and axon damage38, these data support the 
link between the observed loss of oligodendrocytes, loss of myelin and axon degeneration in 
F7/F7 mice.
Cerebral white matter and myelinated oligodendrocytes are highly vulnerable to hypoxic and 
ischemic insults39,40. Consistent with early and substantial white matter blood flow 
reductions (Fig. 1n,o), Hypoxyprobe-1 (pimonidazole) indicated early hypoxic changes in 
the white matter (Fig. 5i,j), but not grey matter regions (Fig. S12h-j) of 12-16-week old 
F7/F7 mice compared to controls, suggesting that hypoxia may contribute to 
oligodendrocyte cell death and loss. Indeed, hypoxia (i.e., oxygen and glucose deprivation) 
compared to normoxia rapidly killed cultured mouse oligodendrocytes within 6 h as shown 
by TUNEL staining (Fig. 5k,l). Consistent with high susceptibility of pericytes to hypoxic 
and ischemic injury18–20, hypoxia also led to cell death of mouse cultured pericytes (not 
shown).
Fibrinogen toxicity
Fibrin(ogen) accelerates neurovascular damage, BBB breakdown and neuroinflammation in 
mouse models of AD41, and contributes to cognitive impairment in mice and humans42, and 
neuron degeneration in AD brains43. Soluble fibrinogen inhibits axon outgrowth44 and leads 
to CNS inflammatory demyelination45. Similarly, fibrin inhibits peripheral nerve 
remyelination46 and promotes inflammatory demyelination in models of multiple 
sclerosis47,48. Since fibrin(ogen) accumulation in the white matter (Fig. 1f,h,j,k; Fig. 
S4a,b,e,f) correlated with loss of pericyte coverage (Fig. 1j; Fig. S4e,f) and was associated 
Montagne et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with loss of mature oligodendrocytes (Fig. 5a-h), we next studied whether soluble fibrinogen 
and fibrin fibrils are toxic to mouse oligodendrocyte and pericyte cultures, and whether 
pharmacological or genetic manipulations of fibrinogen systemic levels influence white 
matter fibrinogen deposition, vascular pathology and white matter integrity in F7/F7 mice.
In vitro studies—Soluble fibrinogen (1.5 mg/mL) did not kill oligodendrocytes within 6 
or 12 h of treatment (Fig. 5l), but accumulated intracellularly, as demonstrated at 6 h (Fig. 
5m), which activated autophagy, a cell degrading process associated with metabolic stress 
and cell death49. Activation of autophagy was obvious within 12 h of fibrinogen treatment, 
as indicated by the appearance of autophagy markers such as an elevated microtubule-
associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3 (LC3) ratio (LC3 II/LC3 I), and a decrease in p62 
levels50 (Fig. 5n-p).
Consistent with findings that autophagy often precedes cell death51, we also found that 
within 12 h of treatment fibrinogen did not lead to cell death of oligodendrocytes (Fig. 5l) or 
activation of caspase 3 (Fig. 5q), but at 24 h of treatment fibrinogen increased substantially 
caspase 3 activity (Fig. 5q; Fig. S13c) and killed dose-dependently oligodendrocytes (Fig. 
S13a,b; Fig. 5r). MHY1485, a mTOR activator with inhibitory effect on authophagy52 and 
tetrahydroacridinamine-derived autophagy inhibitor VII53, blocked not only development of 
the autophagy markers at 12 h of fibrinogen treatment (Fig. 5n-p), but also inhibited at 24 h 
of fibrinogen treatment activation of caspase 3 and cell loss (Fig. 5q-r; Fig. S13c), 
suggesting autophagy-dependent cell death of oligodendrocytes. As reported54, fibrinogen 
was not toxic to cultured astrocytes (Fig. 5r), indicating differential responses of cell cultures 
to fibrinogen.
Fibrin fibrils (0.1 mg/mL) prepared and characterized as described in Methods (Fig. S13d,e) 
were similarly taken up by oligodendrocytes at 6 h (Fig. S13f). Fibrin fibrils also activated 
autophagy within 12 h of treatment as indicated by an increase in LC3 II/LC3 I ratio, and a 
decrease in p62 levels (Fig. S13g; Fig. 5o-p), and a later time point within 24 h of treatment 
fibrin fibrils increased caspase 3 activity (Fig. 5q) and led to cell death (Fig. 5r MHY1485 
blocked the formation of autophagosomes and activation of caspase 3 at 12 and 24 h of 
treatment with fibrin fibrils, respectively (Fig. S13c), suggesting autophagy-dependent cell 
death. At 24 h, fibrin fibrils at a relatively low concentration range killed dose-dependently 
mature oligodendrocytes (Fig. S13h). Addition of fibrin fibrils did not interfere with oxygen 
delivery to cells and/or cellular uptake from the medium, as shown by Image-iT hypoxia 
probe, and Alexa 594-transferrin cellular uptake assay, respectively (Fig. S14a-d), both 
indicating no change compared to vehicle-treated controls.
Pericytes are also highly susceptible to cellular stress by various endogenous and exogenous 
toxins12,14 including amyloid-β, which upon intracellular accumulation can lead to pericyte 
cell death55 Consistent with these findings, we found that cultured mouse pericytes 
accumulated soluble fibrinogen and fibrin fibrils, which initially activated autophagy as 
indicated by the appearance of autophagosomes, but did not activate caspase 3 and/or killed 
pericytes at early stages; however, at a later stage, as for example within 24 h of treatment, 
both fibrinogen and fibrin fibrils led to activation of caspase 3 in pericytes and cell death, 
Montagne et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which was blocked by autophagy inhibitors MHY1485 or autophagy inhibitor VII (Fig. 
S13i-l), suggesting autophagy-dependent cell death.
In vivo studies—We next treated 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice with ancrod (the snake 
venom enzyme), which has been previously shown to reduce fibrinogen brain levels in 
mouse models of multiple sclerosis47 and AD41, both exhibiting BBB breakdown. 
Compared to vehicle, ancrod substantially reduced fibrinogen plasma levels (Fig. S15a), and 
fibrin(ogen) white matter deposits (Fig. 6a-b), which was associated with improved pericyte 
coverage in corpus callosum (Fig. 6c), improvement in the blood-axon barrier integrity to 
circulating MRI tracer gadolinium (Fig. 6d), substantial reduction in white matter 
hemosiderin deposits (Fig. 6d-f), and improvement in blood flow (Fig. 6g).
MRI analysis indicated large structural improvements in the white matter of ancrod-treated 
compared to vehicle-treated F7/F7 mice including recovery of the white matter volume (Fig. 
6h), and normalized fractional anisotropy (Fig. S15b) and mean diffusivity value (Fig. 
S15c). This was associated with increased number of Olig2-positive cells (Fig. 6i), 
decreased number of TUNEL-positive mature oligodendrocytes31 (Fig. S15g,h), increased 
number of Olig2 and CNPase double-positive mature oligodendrocytes (Fig. S15i), and no 
change in the number of Olig2 and PDGFRα double-positive OPCs31 (Fig. S15j). These 
data suggest that lowering systemic fibrinogen levels improves the function of mature 
oligodendrocyte pool, but does not affect OPCs pool in vivo. We also found reduced loss of 
MBP (Fig. S15d,e) and SMI-312 axon neurofilament staining (Fig. S15d,f).
F7/F7—We then treated 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice with plasmin-inhibitor tranexamic acid 
(TXA), which leads to increased fibrin(ogen) deposition in the brain in animal models with 
pre-existing brain vascular lesions, such as AD mice41. TXA compared to vehicle increased 
plasma fibrinogen levels (Fig. S15a) and white matter fibrin(ogen) deposits (Fig. 6a,b) in 
F7/F7 mice with disrupted BBB, but in littermate controls with intact BBB. Consistent with 
neurovascular toxicity of fibrin(ogen) in vivo41 and toxicity of soluble fibrinogen and fibrin 
fibrils to cultured pericytes (Fig. S13i-l), TXA treatment accelerated loss of pericyte 
coverage in the white matter microvessels (Fig. 6c) and the blood-axon barrier breakdown 
(Fig. 6d), increased the number of hemosiderin deposits (Fig. 6c,d), and reduced white 
matter blood flow (Fig. 6e). As expected, MRI analysis revealed a greater loss of white 
matter volume (Fig. 6h), lower fractional anisotropy (Fig. S15b) and increased mean 
diffusivity (Fig. S15c), suggesting augmented white matter damage. Immunostaining for 
Olig2, MBP and SMI-312 demonstrated accelerated loss of Olig2-positive oligodendrocytes 
(Fig. 6i), myelin (Fig. S15d,e) and axon degeneration (Fig. S15d,f), respectively. Triple 
immunostaining for TUNEL, Olig2 and CNPase indicated an increase in TUNEL-positive 
mature oligodendrocytes in TXA-treated compared to vehicle-treated F7/F7 mice (Fig. 
S15g,h), which was associated with reduced number of Olig2 and CNPase double-positive 
mature oligodendrocytes (Fig. S15i), but did not influence the number of OPCs (Fig. S15j). 
These data indicate that increasing systemic fibrinogen levels kills mature oligodendrocytes, 
but does not affect OPCs pool. Neither ancrod nor TXA treatment influenced white matter 
fibrin(ogen) levels in control animals with intact BBB (Fig. 6b), and neither ancrod nor TXA 
were directly toxic to cultured oligodendrocytes and pericytes (not shown).
Montagne et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To confirm our findings with pharmacological inhibitors, we next performed studies in 
fibrinogen alpha-chain (encoded by Fga gene) deficient mice56 crossed with F7/F7 mice. 
These fibrinogen-deficient mice have been previously used to study the role of fibrinogen 
deficiency on defects in the AD mouse BBB41 and in an experimental autoimmune 
encephalitis model57. We found that F7/F7; Fga+/- mice compared to F7/F7; Fga+/+ 
littermate controls develop substantial reductions in fibrinogen plasma levels (Fig. S15a) and 
fibrin(ogen) white matter deposits (Fig. 6a-b). This was associated with improvements in 
pericyte coverage (Fig. 6c) and the blood-axon barrier integrity (Fig. 6d), substantial 
reduction in hemosiderin deposits (Fig. 6f), improvement in blood flow (Fig. 6g), recovery 
in the white matter volume (Fig. 6h), and normalized fractional anisotropy (Fig. S15b) and 
mean diffusivity (Fig. S15c). Tissue analysis confirmed increased number of 
oligodendrocytes (Fig. 6i) and reduced loss of MBP (Fig. S15d,e) and SMI-312 axon 
neurofilament staining (Fig. S15d,f) compared to littermate controls.
To genetically knockdown plasminogen (encoded by Plg gene), we employed small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) to short-term silence Plg expression, which has been previously 
shown to effectively down-regulate gene expression in vivo through the RNA-induced 
silencing complex58. Since Plg is expressed mainly in the liver, but is also detectable in the 
brain, we performed both siRNA systemic administration via tail vein injection and central 
administration by bilateral intracerebroventricular injection (see Methods). The knockdown 
efficiency of Plg-specific siRNA compared to Scrambled siRNA was confirmed by qRT-
PCR and western blot analysis (Fig. S16a-d), and by substantially lower plasminogen 
plasma levels in control and F7/F7 mice (Fig. S16e,f).
Treatment of F7/F7 mice with Plg siRNA compared to Scrambled siRNA, increased 
considerably fibrinogen plasma levels (Fig. S15a) and white matter fibrin(ogen) 
accumulation (Fig 6a-b), which was associated with increased loss of white matter pericyte 
coverage, (Fig. 6c), accelerated blood-axon barrier breakdown (Fig. 6d), increased 
hemosiderin deposits (Fig. 6f), and reduced white matter blood flow (Fig. 6e). Accelerated 
vascular pathology led to a greater loss of white matter volume (Fig. 6h), lower fractional 
anisotropy (Fig. S15b) and increased mean diffusivity (Fig. S15c) indicating greater white 
matter damage. Immunostaining for Olig2, MBP and SMI-312 demonstrated accelerated 
loss of Olig2-positive oligodendrocytes (Fig. 6i), myelin (Fig. S15d,e) and axon 
degeneration (Fig. S15d,f).
Discussion
Our findings demonstrate that pericytes maintain the physiological environment in the white 
matter, which is required for fully functional neuronal connectivity. We show that pericyte 
degeneration leads to early breakdown of the blood-axon barrier causing early accumulation 
of blood-derived toxic fibrin(ogen) deposits in the white matter. This is associated with 
increases in fluid-filled enlarged perivascular spaces and diminished blood flow leading to 
white matter hypoxia in young pericyte-deficient mice (Fig. S18), at the time when hypoxic 
changes are undetectable in the cortex and hippocampus. This aggressive white matter 
vascular phenotype led to a loss of myelin, axons and oligodendrocytes, causing disruption 
of neural circuits and white matter-related functional deficits long before neuronal loss 
Montagne et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 occurred. As F7/F7 mice have normal hemodynamic, physiological and biochemical 
parameters, and do not develop a general systemic perfusion deficit and/or an apparent 
cardiovascular insufficiency, as reported17, the white matter vascular phenotype is therefore 
mainly of local character.
By manipulating pharmacologically or genetically systemic fibrinogen levels, we show that 
lowering plasma fibrinogen reduces the degree of white matter fibrin(ogen) deposits, 
pericyte degeneration, vascular pathology, and white matter degeneration, whereas 
increasing plasma fibrinogen has the opposite effects. These data suggest that accumulation 
of white matter fibrin(ogen) provides an important pathogenic link to pericyte loss, 
microvascular dysfunction, white matter pathology and oligodendrocyte loss. Consistent 
with these data, we also show high vulnerability of oligodendrocyte and pericyte cultures to 
soluble fibrinogen and fibrin fibrils in vitro that both when added to the culture medium 
independently triggered autophagy-dependent cell death. In contrast, astrocytes remained 
unaffected, as previously shown54. These data suggest that fibrinogen and fibrin may exert 
differential cell-specific effects, but their effects could be additionally influenced by 
experimental conditions, such as for example whether cells were cultured on fibrin-coated 
matrices, as opposed to adding fibrin fibrils to the culture medium.
In contrast to studies demonstrating that fibrin promotes neuroinflammation and microglia 
activation in animal models of AD41 and multiple sclerosis47 and stimulates activation and 
induction of antigen presenting genes in primary microglia and bone marrow-derived 
macrophages45, we failed to detect changes in the number of white matter astrocytes and 
microglia in 4 to 48-week old F7/F7 mice (Fig. S19a-h) or changes in cytokine and 
chemokine expression levels (Fig. S19i). The present data are consistent, however, with 
previous findings in pericyte-deficient mice showing no changes in astrocyte, microglia and 
macrophage responses after white matter injury, or changes in pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cell profiles59, and/or numbers of astrocytes and microglia at the resting 
state17. Pericytes can also interact with different cell types, as for example supporting OPCs 
differentiation into oligodendrocytes as shown in cultures in vitro, but do not influence 
remyelination from OPCs in vivo, as shown in pericyte-deficient mice with diminished 
PDGF-BB bioavailability after spinal cord white matter injury59.
Despite a lack of direct evidence supporting a relationship between age-dependent white 
matter disease and PDGFRb deficiency in humans14, a recent study has shown that 
PDGFRbPro584Arg point mutation leads to a rare human disease with a complex syndrome 
including neurological deterioration and extensive white matter lesions60. This study did not 
attempt to elucidate, however, whether white matter lesions in these PDGFRbPro584Arg 
carriers were caused by pericyte degeneration or not.
In summary, our findings indicate that pericytes play an important role in white matter 
health and disease. We show that pericyte degeneration leads to phenotypic changes in mice 
similar to those described in the white matter disease associated with small vessel disease 
contributing to dementia in humans1–4. Additionally, neurological disorders associated with 
cognitive impairment, cerebrovascular dysfunction, and white matter lesions, including 
AD23–26, mild dementia27, stroke14,16, and CADASIL28, exhibit pericyte degeneration 
Montagne et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 including loss of pericyte coverage in the white matter, as we show in AD. Therefore, the 
present findings may have important implications for the pathogenesis and treatment of 
small vessel disease and age-related white matter disease, and suggest pericytes as a trigger, 
and potential therapeutic target, for white matter disease.
Online Methods
Human Postmortem Studies
Tissue Samples—Post-mortem paraffin embedded human brain samples (Brodmann area 
9/10, with subcortical white matter) were obtained from the Rush University Medical Center 
and the University of Southern California, as we previously described61. Informed consent 
was obtained and the study approved by the Institutional Review Board of Rush University 
Medical Center and the University of Southern California. All autopsy cases underwent 
neuropathological evaluation of AD including assignment of Braak stages. Aged subjects 
that did not carry diagnosis of AD or another neurodegenerative disease and showed 
neuropathological findings within the normal range for age were used as age-matched 
controls. Mini-Mental State Examination information was available for most but not all 
individuals. A total of 15 controls and 16 AD individuals were used for histopathological 
analyses. The demographic information of all cases is provided in Supplementary Table 1. 
All procedures performed in this manuscript were in accordance with the ethical standards 
of both Rush University Medical Center and University of Southern California.
Histopathological Analyses—All analyses on human tissue were performed as we 
previously described61. Heat-induced antigen retrieval was performed following Dako's 
protocol. For immunofluorescence analysis, we used the following primary antibodies: for 
pericyte coverage - polyclonal goat anti-human PDGFRβ (R&D systems, AF385; 1:100), 
for fibrinogen and fibrin extravascular deposits - polyclonal rabbit anti-human fibrinogen 
(Dako, A0080; 1:500), and species-specific fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies 
were incubated (see table below) for 1 h at room temperature. Blood vessel endothelial 
profiles were stained by Dylight 488-conjugated L. esculentum lectin (Vector Labs, 
DL-1174; 1:200) for 1 h at room temperature. All slices were scanned using Zeiss 510 
confocal microscope with Zeiss Apochromat water immersion objectives (Carl Zeiss 
MicroImaging Inc., Thornwood, NY, USA).
Primary Antibody/Lectin (manufacture, catalog#, dilution used)
Secondary Antibody (manufacture, catalog#; 
dilution used)
Pericyte Marker
Goat anti-human platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta 
(PDGFRβ; R&D Systems, AF385; 1:100)
Alexa fluor 568-conjugated donkey anti-goat 
(Invitrogen, A-11057; 1:500)
Fibrinogen/Fibrin
Rabbit anti-human fibrinogen (Dako, A0080; 1:500)
Alexa fluor 568-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-10042; 1:500)
Vasculature
Montagne et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dylight 488-conjugated L. esculentum lectin (Vector Labs, 
DL-1174; 1:200)
N/A
Animals
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor β mutant mice, PdgfrbF7/F7 (F7/F7), were generated 
by point mutations that disrupt the following residues and designated signal transduction 
pathways; residue 578 (Src), residue 715 (Grb2), residues 739 and 750 (PI3K), residue 770 
(RasGAP), residue 1008 (SHP-2), by changing the tyrosine to phenylalanine, and residue 
1020 (PLCγ), where tyrosine was mutated to isoleucine29 F7/F7 mice were maintained on a 
129S1/SvlmJ background and were shown to express PDGFRβ in the brain exclusively in 
perivascular mural cells including pericytes, and not in neurons, astrocytes or endothelial 
cells17,32. Because previous studies in mice with deficient PDGFRβ signaling did not find 
the effect of gender on pericyte coverage, BBB integrity or blood flow regulation17,22,30,32 
both male and female mice at 2, 4-6, 12-16, and 36-48 weeks of age were used in the study. 
To determine the role for fibrinogen in F7/F7 mice we carried out pharmacological studies 
with ancrod and tranexamic acid (TXA) and genetic studies using fibrinogen-deficient and 
plasminogen-deficient mice, as described below. All procedures were approved by the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Southern California using 
US National Institutes of Health guidelines. All animals were randomized for their genotype 
information and were included in the study. The operators responsible for experimental 
procedure and data analysis were blinded and unaware of group allocation throughout the 
experiments.
Pharmacological Studies with Ancrod and TXA—For fibrinogen depletion 
experiments, ancrod- or saline-filled mini-pumps (Alzet, Mini-osmotic pump, Model 2002) 
were implanted in the back of 12-week old F7/F7 and age-matched control (+/+) littermate 
mice. Ancrod (NIBSC, cat #74-581; 55 IU/ampoule; total volume 250 μL) was delivered at a 
rate of 0.52 μL/h or approximately 2.75 IU/day for 14 days. After 14 days, animals were 
used for MRI studies, and then sacrificed for immunocytochemistry studies, as described 
below.
Deficiency in fibrinolysis was accomplished pharmacologically in 12-week old F7/F7 and 
control (+/+) mice by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of TXA (#1672745, Sigma-Aldrich), as 
reported41. We used a 3-day protocol with approximately 6,500 mg TXA/kg/day i.p. (200 
mg daily per mouse), which was comparable to TXA protocol recommended for humans 
undergoing cardiac surgery. Animals also received TXA dissolved in drinking water at 25 
mg/mL, as previously reported41. Previous studies in AD mice used somewhat lower dose of 
TXA (approximately 100 mg per mouse), but for longer periods of time of 14 days41. After 
3 days, animals were used for MRI studies, and then sacrificed for immunohistochemistry 
studies, as described below.
Studies with Fibrinogen-Deficient and Plasminogen-Deficient Mice—To 
genetically lower fibrinogen levels in F7/F7 mice, fibrinogen alpha chain (encoded by Fga 
gene) deficient heterozygous mice (Fga+/-)56 maintained on a mixed genetic background 
were crossed with F7/F7 mice. Double transgenic F7/F7; Fga+/- mice and their F7/F7; Fga
Montagne et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 +/+ littermate controls were compared and used for MRI studies at 12-16 weeks of age, and 
then sacrificed for immunocytochemistry studies, as described below. To genetically lower 
plasminogen (encoded by Plg gene) levels we used small interfering RNA (siRNA)58 in 
12-16-week old F7/F7 mice. F7/F7 mice were treated with either Plg siRNA or scrambled 
siRNA, and were used for MRI studies 7 days after treatment, and then sacrificed for 
immunocytochemistry studies, as described below.
SiRNA Gene Silencing—To knockdown Plg in F7/F7 mice, we used Plg-specific 
chemically modified, 21-mer, double-stranded Ambion® In Vivo siRNA (ThermoFisher), 
which has superior effectiveness and stability in vivo and can effectively suppress gene 
expression within 24 h with the effect lasting for more than two weeks after a single 
injection when used with Invivofectamine reagent. Since Plg is expressed mainly in the liver, 
but is also detectable in the brain62 we performed both systemic administration via tail vein 
injection and central administration by bilateral intracerebroventricular injection63 Ambion® 
In Vivo siRNA was reconstituted in Invivofectamine 3.0 reagent and diluted in PBS; a final 
dose of 1.5 nmol (equivalent to 1 mg/kg) in 100 μL was used for tail vein injection, and a 
final dose of 0.1 nmol in 1 μL was delivered to both ventricles using a Hamilton syringe over 
5 min. The knockdown efficiency of Plg-specific siRNA compared to scrambled siRNA was 
confirmed by qRT-PCR and western blot analysis, which indicated 82% and 95% inhibition 
of Plg mRNA and protein levels in the liver, respectively, and 81% inhibition of Plg mRNA 
in the brain, whereas Plg protein was undetectable in the brain (Fig. S16a-d).
Fibrinogen and Plasminogen Plasma Levels—Mouse plasma fibrinogen levels were 
determined by mouse fibrinogen enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit 
(Immunology Consultants Laboratory, Inc, E-90FIB, Portland, OR). Blood was collected in 
EDTA prior to cardiac perfusion via cardiac puncture. Plasma was separated by 
centrifugation at 2,000 g for 10 min. Plasma fibrinogen concentrations are given in mg/mL 
for a plasma dilution of 1:20,000. Mouse plasma plasminogen levels were determined by 
mouse plasminogen ELISA kit (Immunology Consultants Laboratory, Inc, E-90PMG). 
Plasma plasminogen concentrations are given in μg/mL for a plasma dilution of 1:5,000.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
In Vivo MRI—F7/F7 mice and littermate controls were scanned with a Biospec 7T system 
(300 MHz, Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) at the California Institute of Technology (Pasadena, 
CA, USA). The magnet is equipped with the standard B-GA12 gradient set (∼12-mm inner 
diameter; 400 mT.m-1 maximum gradient) and a 35-mm internal diameter quadrature 
volume coil was used (M2M Imaging, Cleveland, OH). Fibrinogen-deficient and 
plasminogen-deficient F7/F7 mice and their littermate controls were scanned with our new 
MR Solutions 7T PET-MR system (MR Solutions Ltd., Guildford, UK) at the Zilkha 
Neurogenetic Institute (University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA). The MR 
Solutions magnet is equipped with the MRS cryogen-free MRI system (bore size ∼24-mm, 
up to 600 mT.m-1 maximum gradient) and a 20-mm internal diameter quadrature bird cage 
mouse head coil. Comparable sequences and parameters were used with both MR scanners, 
as described below.
Montagne et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mice were anesthetized by 1-1.5% isoflurane/air. Respiration rate (80-120 breaths per 
minute) and body temperature (36.5 ± 0.5°C) are monitored during the experiments using an 
abdominal pressure-sensitive probe and a rectal temperature probe. The isoflurane dose and 
heated air flow was adjusted continuously to ensure stable and reproducible depth of 
anesthesia. The sequences are collected in the following order: diffusion tensor imaging 
(2D-echo planar imaging (EPI), TR/TE 5,000/28 ms, 30 directions, b-value 670 s/mm2 
diffusion gradient duration/separation 5/10 ms, resolution 170×170×750 μm3) to study 
structural white matter changes; T2*-weighted imaging (3D-gradient echo with flow 
compensation (GEFC), TR/TE = 32/15 ms, averages 6, flip angle 12°, resolution 80×80×300 
μm3) to detect hemosiderin deposits; T2-weighted imaging (2D-RARE factor 2, TR/TE = 
2,742/11 ms, averages 2, resolution 125×100×500 μm3) to obtain structural images; dynamic 
contrast-enhanced (DCE) protocol for the capillary permeability assessment; and finally, 
dynamic susceptibility-contrast (DSC) imaging for regional blood flow and blood volume 
measurements. Total imaging time was approximately 1.5 h per mouse.
The DCE-MRI imaging protocol is performed on two brain slices (within the dorsal 
hippocampus territory and the prefrontal cortex), and includes measurement of pre-contrast 
T1-values using a variable time repetition (VTR) spin-echo sequence (TR = 5000, 3000, 
1500, 800, 400, and 200 ms, RARE factor 3, TE = 11 ms, 1 average, resolution 0.2×0.2×1 
mm3), followed by a dynamic series of 800 T1-weighted images with identical geometry 
and a temporal resolution of 2.6 s (fast low angle shot (FLASH), TR/TE = 20.6/3.2 ms, 2 
averages, flip angle 15°, 200×200×1000 μm3). Using a power injector, a bolus dose of 0.5 
mmol/kg Gd-DTPA (Gadolinium-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid, Magnevist®, diluted 
in saline 1:5) is injected via the tail vein (rate of 600 μL/min) at 5 min (volume injected 140 
μL) and DCE images are collected for an additional 30 min after the injection. The DSC-
MRI imaging is performed on the exact same geometry. A dynamic series of 160 T2*-
weighted images is used, with a temporal resolution of 600 ms (FLASH, TR/TE = 18.9/5 
ms, 1 average, flip angle 15°, resolution 200×200×1000 μm3). A second bolus dose of Gd-
DTPA (Magnevist®; 1:1) is injected via the tail vein (rate of 1000 μL/min) at 18 s (volume 
injected 140 μL) and DSC images are collected for an additional 80 s after the injection.
Ex Vivo Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)-MRI—An 11.7T 89 mm vertical bore Bruker 
BioSpin Avance DRX500 scanner (Bruker BioSpin Inc., Billerica, MA) equipped with a 
Micro 2.5 gradient system was used to acquire all diffusion weighted images (DWIs) of the 
mouse brains. Fixed brains were kept within the skull, all skin and cartilaginous tissue were 
removed, and brains were soaked at 4°C in 5 mM Gadolinium contrast ProHance (Bracco 
Diagnostics, Inc., Princeton, NJ) for 4 days prior to scanning to minimize the T1 relaxation 
effect on the tissue. For each scan, two intact fixed heads were secured in a Teflon® holder, 
submerged in Galden® (perfluoropolyether with same magnetic susceptibility as water) 
(Fomblin®, Solvay Solexis, Inc., Thorofare, NJ). This ensured that no leakage would occur 
and that the signal would not change during acquisition in a 20-mm linear birdcage radio 
frequency (RF) coil. First, 3D-rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement (RARE) 
anatomical images were acquired (TR/TE = 250/9 ms; RARE factor 8; 140×80×80 matrix; 
28×16×16 mm FOV, 200 μm isotropic voxel size; 1 average). Then, DWIs were acquired 
using a conventional pulsed-gradient spin echo (PGSE) sequence (TR/TE = 300/16.2 ms, 
Montagne et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 350×200×200 matrix, 28×16×16 mm FOV, 80 μm isotropic voxel size, 1 average, δ = 3 ms, 
Δ = 8 ms, Gd = 1000 mT/m, nominal b-factor = 3000 s/mm2). Six diffusion weighted images 
were acquired in addition to one volume with no diffusion sensitization using an optimized 
six points icosahedral encoding scheme for a total imaging time of 24 h.
Ex Vivo T2*-weighted-MRI—An 11.7T 89 mm vertical bore Bruker BioSpin Avance 
DRX500 scanner (Bruker BioSpin Inc., Billerica, MA) equipped with a Micro 2.5 gradient 
system was used to acquire high resolution T2*-weighted images. Fixed brains were kept 
within the skull, all skin and cartilaginous tissue were removed, and brains were soaked at 
4°C in 2 mM Gadolinium contrast ProHance (Bracco Diagnostics, Inc., Princeton, NJ) for 2 
days prior to scanning to minimize the T1 relaxation effect on the tissue. For each scan, two 
intact fixed heads were secured in a Teflon® holder, submerged in Galden® 
(perfluoropolyether with same magnetic susceptibility as water) (Fomblin®, Solvay Solexis, 
Inc., Thorofare, NJ). This ensured that no leakage would occur and that the signal would not 
change during acquisition in a 20-mm linear birdcage radio frequency (RF) coil. First, 3D-
rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement (RARE) anatomical images were acquired 
(TR/TE = 250/9 ms; RARE factor 8; 140×80×80 matrix; 28×16×16 mm FOV, 200 μm 
isotropic voxel size; 1 average). Then, high-resolution T2*-weighted images were acquired 
using a FLASH sequence (TR/TE = 50/5.19 ms, 400×200×240 matrix, 28×16×16 mm FOV, 
50 μm isotropic voxel size, averages 18) for a total imaging scan of 12 h.
MRI Post-Processing Analysis
Capillary Permeability Assessment
T1 Mapping: T1 relaxation times were estimated using the VTR method, prior to Gd-DTPA 
injection, with a series of spin-echo images with varying TR and constant TE using the 
standard saturation recovery equation 1:
(Eq.1)
Where SI is the signal intensity and ρ is the spin density. Non-linear least-squares fitting is 
used to fit MRI data to equation 1. The accuracy of the T1 mapping method is a critical step 
for converting intensity data to concentration versus time curves, as well as selection of the 
arterial input function (AIF) or brain regions-of-interest, noise filtering, and signal intensity 
drift correction over the dynamic time course64,65.
Capillary Permeability Ktrans Mapping: We determined the capillary permeability 
transfer constant, Ktrans, to intravenously injected gadolinium-based contrast agent in 
different white matter tracts in mice using a modified method as we reported in humans with 
the post-processing Patlak analysis27,64 We analyzed the following white matter tracts: 
corpus callosum, internal capsule, cingulum, and external capsule. For comparison, we also 
analyzed grey matter regions including dorsal hippocampus, posterior thalamus, primary 
somatosensory barrel cortex, and anterior cingulate cortex. We employed high spatial and 
temporal resolutions that allowed us to accurately identify the Ktrans maps in anatomical 
Montagne et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regions as small as the corpus callosum or cingulum. We determined the AIF in each mouse 
from the common carotid artery, as previously reported in humans27 Individual AIF curves 
are particularly important for calculating accurately the Ktrans values if blood flow and 
volume are influenced by age or a pathological process.
The present Patlak analysis27,64 requires that the tracer's diffusion (Gd-DTPA) across the 
capillary vessel wall remains unidirectional during the acquisition time. The total tracer 
concentration in the tissue, Ctissue (t), can be described as a function of the vascular 
concentration CAIF (t), the intravascular blood volume vp, and a transfer constant Ktrans that 
represents the flow from the intravascular to the extravascular space using equation 2 below.
(Eq.2)
Post-processing of the collected DCE-MRI data were done using in-house DCE processing 
software (Rocketship) implemented in Matlab65. The DCE-MRI test conditions have been 
developed to calculate the transfer capillary permeability constant Ktrans for each voxel and 
each brain region. Data from standard anatomical atlases of the mouse brain were used as 
guidelines to determine the boundaries of all brain regions on T1-weighted images.
Blood Flow Assessment—DSC-MRI typically makes use of rapidly acquired MR 
images after an intravenous bolus injection of a paramagnetic contrast agent66 Besides the 
earlier mentioned T1-shortening effect using DCE techniques, paramagnetic contrast agents 
such as Gd-DTPA also induce T2*-shortening via magnetic susceptibility effects. The 
temporary T2*-shortening, caused by passage of MR contrast agent through the 
microvascular bed, can be measured with a FLASH gradient-echo T2*-weighted MRI 
sequence.
Following collection of the DSC-MRI data, quantitative post-processing analysis was 
performed. Analysis routines were written in-house, implemented using Matlab, and 
described by the equations below. For each voxel, the signal drop after injection depends on 
the local concentration of contrast agent. We analyzed the following white matter tracts: 
corpus callosum, internal capsule, cingulum, and external capsule. For comparison, we also 
analyzed grey matter regions including dorsal hippocampus, posterior thalamus, primary 
somatosensory barrel cortex, and anterior cingulate cortex. Assuming a linear relationship 
between signal drop and concentration, these quantities can be related via:
(Eq.3)
Where S(t) is the signal intensity at time t after bolus injection for any given voxel, S0 is the 
mean pre-contrast signal intensity, r2* relaxivity constant of the contrast agent used, C(t) is 
the concentration of gadolinium as a function of time, and TE is the time echo of the 
acquisition sequence.
Montagne et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 From the previous formula, the conversion from signal to contrast agent concentration is 
straightforward, and occurs via:
(Eq.4)
The profile of this concentration curve is heavily influenced by the manner in which the 
tracer bolus is injected into the mouse. To define the shape of the bolus curve, a 
representative AIF was obtained for each mouse individually. The AIF was obtained from 
the image data via manual delineation, typically from the common carotid arteries (same as 
for Ktrans mapping). By defining the residual function, R(t), which represents the fraction of 
tracer presently circulating at time t, the relationship between tracer concentration and blood 
flow can be modeled as a convolution between R(t) and the AIF67:
(Eq.5)
Where Ct(t) is the concentration of contrast agent in the tissue, F is parameter that scales 
R(t) to fit Ct(t) - and is proportional to blood flow (BF) -, κH is the ratio of capillary to artery 
hematocrit (a value of 0.42 was used), ρ is tissue density (1.04 g/mL), Ca(t) is AIF time 
course. To solve equation 5, we evoked numerical standard singular value deconvolution 
approach, as reported68 Using this deconvolution, R(t) and F values were obtained, and 
regional blood flow (BF; mL/100g/min) was computed using the equation:
(Eq.6)
DTI Metrics and Tractography—To pre-process the raw ex vivo DWIs, we first 
corrected for eddy current distortions using the “eddy correct” tool in FSL 
(www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl). Extra cerebral tissue was removed using the “skull-stripping” 
Brain Extraction Tool from BrainSuite (http://brainsuite.org/). All resulting volumes were 
visually inspected and manually edited as needed. Then, all images were linearly aligned 
using FSL's “flirt” function with 12 degrees of freedom to allow for rotation, translation, 
scaling, and skewing in 3D. The gradient direction tables were rotated accordingly after each 
linear registration for the 6 diffusion volumes. Furthermore, each skull-stripped b0 images 
were elastically registered to a minimum deformation template created using all linearly 
registered images for both +/+ and F7/F7 mice. This was done to ensure that all scans were 
in the same space for further analysis.
We applied the DTI model using the FSL's “dtifit” tool to compute fractional anisotropy 
(FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD), and radial diffusivity (RD) maps. The 
diffusion tensor was computed using the eddy corrected and elastically registered DWI 
Montagne et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 scans. A Gaussian low-pass filter with kernel size 3 (i.e., 3×3×3 voxel) was applied to all 
maps. To test for group differences, a voxel-wise linear regression was run, with F7/F7 mice 
coded as 1 and +/+ mice coded as 0. We ran this for 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old 
animals separately. A regional false discovery rate (FDR) correction was used to correct for 
multiple comparisons across voxels. Additionally, searchlight-based multivoxel pattern 
statistics were performed on the resulting probabilistic p-value maps from the regression in 
all cohorts. As we published previously34, tractography maps were then performed on the 
eddy corrected DWI scans aligned to the Mori atlas using a deterministic fiber 
reconstruction method, FACT, in Trackvis (http://trackvis.org/).
Volumetric Analysis—Volumetric analyses were performed using trace weighted images 
(TWI; obtained from ex vivo DTI data) and SPM8 software running with Matlab (The 
MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA). The brain regions-of-interest boundaries were manually 
drawn for each slice using ImageJ. We studied the total white matter (including corpus 
callosum and external capsule), cortical mantles, and hippocampus volumes in each group of 
mice including 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old age-matched controls (+/+) and pericyte-
deficient F7/F7 animals.
Fiber Density Analysis—To illustrate changes in white matter fiber density, we traced 
the fiber pathways within each age group in control (+/+) and F7/F7 mice. To do this, we 
manually created regions-of-interest within the corpus callosum and cingulum using the raw 
DWI scans to best portray the alterations in the organization of the fibers over time.
Hemosiderin Deposits—Hemosiderin deposition was performed using an automatic 
modified Otsu-thresholding protocol on sagittal T2*-weighted images (see Ex Vivo T2*-
weighted-MRI above). The areas of low intensity that appear on T2*-weighted MRI are 
larger than the corresponding hemosiderin deposits, representing the so-called “blooming” 
effect. This allows the detection of micro-hemosiderin deposits as small as 5-10 μm. Two 
white matter regions of interest (i.e., corpus callosum and internal capsule), and two grey 
matter regions (i.e., primary somatosensory cortex and hippocampus), were quantified with 
percentage signal voids (i.e., dark voxels containing iron) per brain regions.
Quantitative [14C]-Iodoantipyrine Autoradiography
To measure regional blood flow, we utilized 14C-iodoantipyrine (14C-IAP) method in 
combination with blood sampling from the heart as previously reported17. In brief, mice 
were anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane in 30% oxygen/70% nitrous oxide. Radiolabeled 
14C-IAP (20 μCi, American Radiolabeled Chemicals, Inc., St. Louis, MO) diluted in 200 μL 
saline was injected intraperitoneally. Precisely 30 s following 14C-IAP injection, mice were 
immersed in liquid nitrogen until completely frozen. Frozen blood from the left ventricle of 
the heart was carefully removed in the cold room (about 0°C) and placed in pre-weighed 
microcentrifuge tubes. Blood samples were decolorized with hydrogen peroxide to reduce 
quenching and dissolved overnight in 1 mL aqueous based tissue solubilizer (SolvableTM, 
PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences). Following addition of 5 mL high flash-point 
LSC-cocktail (Ultima GoldTM, PerkinElmer), samples were analyzed for 14C-IAP 
radioactivity with a liquid scintillation counter (Tri-Carb® 2700 TR, Packard Instrument 
Montagne et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Company). The frozen brains were carefully removed in the cold room and embedded in 
cold OCT embedding medium on dry ice. Brains were cryosectioned at 20 μm, mounted on 
glass slides, dried on a hot plate at 55°C for 10 min and exposed to BioMax MR 
autoradiographic film (Kodak) along with calibrated autoradiographic 14C standards (GE 
Healthcare UK Ltd.). After 1-4 weeks of exposure, the film was developed and resulting 
images were analyzed on an MCID imaging analyzer (InterFocus Imaging Ltd.) to 
quantitatively determine levels of 14C-IAP in different brain regions. Equation 7 was used to 
calculate the regional blood flow, BF (mL/100g/min) through different white matter regions 
as previously described17:
(Eq.7)
Where CI(T) is 14C-IAP radioactivity disintegrations per minute (dpm)/g of brain tissue; T is 
the experimental time in s; CA(T) is 14C-IAP radioactivity dpm/g plasma determined as 14C-
IAP integrated plasma concentration (0∫T) from 14C-tracer lag time after 14C-IAP 
intraperitoneal injection (zero time) to the value measured in the frozen blood sample from 
the heart at the end of the experiment (at time T), by assuming a linear rise or ramp function 
over T; λ is 14C-IAP central nervous system tissue to blood partition coefficient, 0.8 mL/g. 
The regional blood flow was calculated with the MCID program.
Viral Cortical Injections
Surgery—Surgical procedures were performed under general anesthesia with isoflurane 
(1–1.5%) using the SomnoSuite Small Animal Anesthesia System (Kent Scientific, CO). 
Rectal temperature was monitored and maintained at 36.5 ± 0.5°C. Heads were shaved to 
remove hair in a surgical preparation area and bland ophthalmic ointment were placed on the 
eyes. A midline incision was made above the scalp with a sterile scalpel blade, the 
underlying periosteum was dissected using blunt dissection techniques, and the skull was 
cleaned. A small cranial window was opened at coordinates -1.6, -3.2, -0.4 mm (x,y,z) with a 
3 mm diameter stainless steel drill under a surgery microscope, leaving the dura intact. 
Recombinant Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) serotype 2/9 (Penn VectorCore, AV-9-
PV2177), viral titer was 2.18×1013 viral genomes/mL, was withdrawn into a pulled 0.5 mm 
diameter glass pipette filled with mineral oil. The needle was inserted into the cranial 
window at the rate of 1 mm/min; 2 min were allowed to elapse for the parenchyma to seal 
over the needle, then 60 nL of the virus solution was pressure injected at the rate of 12 
nL/min via a MicroSyringe Pump controller (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL). 
Five min were allowed to elapse for viral diffusion and the needle was withdrawn at the rate 
of 1 mm/min with a minute pause halfway into withdrawal. Following injection, the wound 
was cleaned, the cranial window was sealed with bone wax (Lukens), and the skin incision 
was closed using nylon sutures. Animals were housed for recovery and virus propagation for 
21 days before histological analysis.
Montagne et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quantification—Animals were anesthetized intraperitoneally with 100 mg/kg ketamine 
and 10 mg/kg xylazine and transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.01 
M phosphate buffer saline (PBS), pH=7.4, containing 0.005 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
acid (EDTA). Brains were extracted and post-fixed in 4% PFA overnight. Brains were 
serially sectioned on a vibratome (Leica VT100S) at 40 μm intervals. Sections were serially 
mounted and sealed onto slides with 80% PBS, 20% glycerol and 1:5,000 4′,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole (Dapi) stain medium mix. Sections were imaged (Leica DM600B) at 5× 
magnification at 5 regions: primary somatosensory barrel cortex injection site (iS1BF), 
corpus callosum (CC), ipsilateral dorsal and ventral internal capsule (ICd and ICv, 
respectively), and contralateral primary somatosensory barrel cortex (cS1BF). Images were 
taken using consistent parameters across animals. Sequential images were compiled into 
image stacks for each brain region using ImageJ. Integrated fluorescence density was 
calculated for each image stack (integrated density of total image – integrated density of 
background). Results are presented as percentage projection density changes for each brain 
regions35 The integrated density of each region was then normalized to the iS1 BF injection 
site of each individual animal35.
Behavior
Complex Wheel-Running Assay—The complex running wheel test is specific for the 
mouse corpus callosum injury70. Animals were isolated in transfer cages measuring 40 cm 
by 20 cm with a running wheel measuring 12.5 cm in diameter (Amazon #B0002DGSEC). 
Animals were trained on the ‘regular’ wheel with evenly spaced rungs (34 rungs, spaced 1.1 
cm apart) for 2 weeks (day 1 to 14). After the 2-week training period, mice were introduced 
to the ‘complex’ wheel with 20 random rungs missing (14 rungs total, 2.2 and 3.3 cm apart). 
The mice ran spontaneously, without artificial reward, on both regular and complex wheels 
for the equivalent of 5 to 7 km per night. Number of wheel revolutions was recorded 
throughout 30 min intervals during the light phase by a Micrologix 1000 programmable 
controller (Allen-Bradley Cat# 1761-L10BWB F purchased from Royal Wholesale Electric) 
and measured via a presence/absence laser (Keyence #LR-ZB240CB). Results from each 24 
h period were exported to a Microsoft Excel file in which total distance run and maximum 
velocity were calculated for each mouse: 3 consecutive ‘regular’ trials (days 15, 16, and 17), 
followed by 3 consecutive ‘complex’ trials (days 18, 19, and 20). The highest number of 
revolutions within each day was converted to obtain maximum velocity reached in that day 
in meters/min68. All mice showed spontaneous running activity so that none were excluded 
on this basis.
Radial Arm Maze—Specific impairment in spatial working memory on 8-arm radial maze 
test reflects deficits in the cortico-callosal projections in animals with white matter damage 
but without hippocampal damage69. Prior to testing, mice were subjected to food deprivation 
(to reduce their initial body weight by 10-15%) since the test performance was dependent on 
a food reward; the restricted diet was maintained until the end of testing. Mice were pre-
trained for 5 min on two consecutive days to familiarize with the experimental environment, 
maze, food (Fruity Pebbles cereal), and the behavioral task. On pre-training day 1, the cereal 
was scattered throughout the maze with all 8 doors open and each animal was left to explore 
freely for 5 min. On pre-training day 2, a single piece of cereal was placed at the end of each 
Montagne et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 arm. The mouse was placed in the central platform and allowed to consume the food in each 
arm in turn. The doors were automatically controlled.
Seven consecutive days of testing began the day after the second pre-training day. The 
following procedure was performed on each day of testing. A single piece of cereal was 
placed at the end of each arm. The mouse was placed in the central platform with all arms 
open and allowed to choose which arm to enter. Once the mouse entered any of the arms, the 
7 other doors were closed. Upon returning to the central platform from the first arm visit, the 
arm door closed and the animal was confined to the central platform for 5 s. After the 5 s 
delay, all arm doors opened and the animal was allowed to make a new choice. The trial 
ended when the mouse retrieved all 8 pieces of cereal or 25 min had elapsed, whichever 
occurred first. After each trial, the maze was cleaned with 70% ethanol solution. Trials were 
recorded with webcam and the number of errors was measured manually by analyzing 
recorded videos. For each of the 7 trials (performed on 7 consecutive days), we analyzed the 
number of revisited arms (considered ‘errors’) and total time to enter all 8 arms. The results 
were analyzed by comparing learning ability of each group on day 1 and day 7.
Novel Object Recognition—A hippocampus-dependent novel object recognition test 
(NOR) was performed as we have previously reported with modifications17,55. Animals 
were placed in a 30 cm3 box and allowed to habituate to the testing area for 10 min. Animals 
were then placed back in their cages and 2 identical approximately 5×5 cm objects were 
placed in the top left and right corner of the testing area. Animals were allowed to explore 
the two objects in the testing area for 5 min before being returned to their cages. After 1 h 
interval, one of the objects was replaced with a new object (different shape and color) and 
the animals were allowed to explore the testing area once again for 3 min. After each trial, 
the testing area and the objects was thoroughly cleaned with 70% ethanol solution. All the 
trials, including habituation, were recorded with a high-resolution camera and the amount of 
time each animal spent exploring the objects was analyzed. Any animals that presented a 
preference for either of the two identical objects, before replacement with the novel object/
location, were eliminated from the analysis.
Contextual and Cued Fear Conditioning—A hippocampus-dependent fear 
conditioning tests were performed as previously described69. The experiments were 
performed using standard conditioning chambers housed in a soundproof isolation cubicle 
and equipped with a stainless-steel grid floor connected to a solid-state shock scrambler. The 
scrambler was connected to an electronic constant-current shock source that was controlled 
via an interface connected to a Windows XP computer running FreezeFrame software 
(Coulbourn Instruments, Allentown, PA, USA). A digital camera was mounted on the steel 
ceiling and behavior was monitored. During training, mice were placed in the conditioning 
chamber for 4 min and received two footshocks (0.25 mA, 2 s) paired with 15 s tone (80 dB) 
at 1 min interval starting 2 min after placing the mouse in the chamber. The footshock was 
applied during the last 2 s of the 15 s tone duration. Contextual memory was tested in the 
same chamber 6 h after the training without footshock or tone applied. Cued memory was 
tested the next day in the chamber with only the tone applied, and the grid floor was changed 
to avoid contextual recognition. Hippocampus-dependent fear memory formation was 
Montagne et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 evaluated by scoring freezing behavior (the absence of all movement except for respiration). 
For the two fear conditioning paradigms, the automated FreezeFrame system was used to 
score the percentage of total freezing time with a threshold set at 10%.
Nesting—Nest construction test was performed as previously reported55,70. Two hours 
after the beginning of the dark cycle, the animals were individually placed in clean home 
cages with a single nestlet. Nests were assessed the next morning and evaluated following 
the five-point scale as we described in detail70.
Burrowing—Burrowing test was performed as described previously55. To assess burrowing 
behavior, mice were individually placed in cages equipped with a burrow made from a 200-
mm long and 70-mm diameter tube of polyvinyl chloride plastic with one end enclosed. The 
burrow was filled with 200 g of mouse food pellets, and the mice were allowed to burrow for 
2 h right before the beginning of the dark cycle. The weight of the remaining food pellets 
inside the burrow was determined to obtain a measurement of the food amount burrowed.
Gender—We did not find significant gender differences in behavioral tests between males 
and females within either F7/F7 group and control (+/+) group of mice (distributed 
approximately in a 1:1 gender ratio in all studied age groups) including the running wheel 
and radial 8-arm maze tests, hippocampal-dependent tests such as novel object recognition 
and fear conditioning, and/or activity of daily living tests such as nesting and burrowing. 
Therefore, for analysis data from both male and female mice were pooled together within 
each studied age groups of F7/F7 mice and the corresponding age-matched controls.
Electron Microscopy (EM)
EM Procedure—Animals were sacrificed and transcardially perfused with 2% 
glutaraldehyde/2% PFA in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH=7.4). Brains were then postfixed for 
4 h in the same fixative and were sliced at 50 μm thickness using a Leica vibratome. 
Sections were postfixed in 2% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated, and flat embedded in 100% 
Epon between Aclar sheets (Ted Pella, Inc.). With the use of a stereoscope, parts of the 
corpus callosum and internal capsule were carefully dissected and placed on Epon blocks. 
Blocks were coded, and all subsequent procedures were performed blind to genotypes. 
Seventy-nanometer thin sections were obtained on copper mesh grids using a Reichert 
ultramicrotome with a diamond knife (Diatome, Biel, Switzerland) and counterstained with 
2% uranyl acetate. Ultrastructural analysis was performed using a JEOL JEM-2100 
transmission electron microscope. Electron micrographs were captured at ×2 – 3K 
magnifications using a Bio-Scan CCDTV and were saved as high-resolution TIFF files 
(2048×2048 pixels). Digital images were optimized for image resolution (final resolution 
350 dpi), brightness, and contrast in Photoshop CS6.
Negatively stained fibrin specimens were prepared by floating carbon-coated formvar films 
mounted on copper grids (EMS) on 10 μL droplets of sample for 5 min. The excess liquid 
was blotted-off followed by staining with 1% uranyl acetate. Imaging was performed on a 
JEOL JEM-2100 transmission electron microscope operated at 100 kV.
Montagne et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quantification—For myelin thickness and axon diameter quantification, electron 
micrographs from four F7/F7 and four age-matched littermate control (+/+) mice were 
analyzed. G-ratios were quantified from 300 axons per mouse using ImageJ software and 
were measured as the axon diameter/total diameter of the axon plus the myelin sheath71. 
Degenerated axons were identified by their lack of myelin and distortion (swelling) of the 
axoplasm and mitochondria as shown in Figures 4a and S10a with purple stars.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were anesthetized intraperitoneally with 100 mg/kg ketamine and 10 mg/kg xylazine 
and transcardially perfused with 20 mL phosphate buffer saline (PBS) containing 0.005 M 
EDTA followed by 20 mL of 4% PFA. Brains were sectioned at a thickness of 30 μm. 
Sections were blocked with 5% normal donkey serum (Vector Laboratories)/0.1%Triton-X/
0.01 M PBS for 1 h and incubated with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution 
overnight at 4°C. We used the following primary antibodies: for pericyte coverage - 
polyclonal goat anti-mouse aminopeptidase N/ANPEP (CD13; R&D systems, AF2335; 
1:100); for fibrinogen and fibrin extravascular deposits -polyclonal rabbit anti-human 
fibrinogen (Dako, A0080; 1:500) which recognizes both monomeric form of fibrinogen as 
well as fibrinogen-derived fibrin polymers and cross reacts with mouse fibrinogen and 
fibrin17; for myelin basic protein (MBP) - polyclonal goat anti-human MBP (Santa Cruz, 
sc-13914-R; 1:500,) which cross reacts with mouse MBP; for axons SMI-312 neurofilament 
- monoclonal mouse anti-mouse SMI-312 (SMI-312; BioLegend, SMI312; 1:500); for 
oligodendrocytes - polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse Olig2 (Millipore, AB9610; 1:200) or 
monoclonal mouse anti-Olig2 (ThermoFisher, MA5-15810; 1:200); for myelinated mature 
oligodendrocytes - monoclonal mouse anti-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (CNPase; 
Abcam, ab6319; 1:500); for oligodendrocyte progenitor cells - monoclonal rabbit anti-
platelet-derived growth factor receptor α (PDGFRα; Cell Signaling, #3174; 1:200); for 
neurons - polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse NeuN (Millipore, ABN78; 1:500); for microglia - 
rabbit anti-mouse ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba-1; Wako, 019-19741; 
1:1,000); for astrocytes - rabbit anti-Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP; Dako, z0334; 
1:500). For cultured pericytes, we used a goat anti-human platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor beta (PDGFRβ; R&D Systems, AF385; 1:100). After incubation in primary 
antibodies, sections were washed in PBS and incubated with fluorophore-conjugated 
secondary antibodies (see table below), and then mounted onto slides with fluorescence 
mounting medium (Dako). To visualize brain microvessels, sections were incubated with 
Dylight 488-conjugated L esculentum lectin (Vector Labs, DL-1174; 1:200) for 1 h. For 
cellular uptake analysis of exogenous circulating tracers by the white matter tracts, F7/F7 
and +/+ littermate controls were assessed by retro-orbital injection of Alexa fluor 555-
conjugated Cadaverine (Invitrogen, A30677; 10 μg/g) allowed to circulate for 2 h, as 
previously described33. All images were taken with a Zeiss 510 confocal microscopy and 
analyzed using ImageJ software (US National Institutes of Health). Gain, digital offset, and 
laser intensity were kept standardized.
Primary Antibody/Lectin (manufacture, catalog#, 
dilution used)
Secondary Antibody (manufacture, catalog#; dilution 
used)
Montagne et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pericyte Marker
Goat anti-mouse aminopeptidase N/ANPEP (CD13; 
R&D systems, AF2335; 1:100)
Alexa fluor 488- or 568-conjugated donkey anti-goat 
(Invitrogen, A-11055 or A-11057; 1:500)
Goat anti-human platelet-derived growth factor receptor 
beta (PDGFRβ; R&D Systems, AF385; 1:100)
Alexa fluor 568-conjugated donkey anti-goat 
(Invitrogen, A-11057; 1:500)
Fibrinogen/Fibrin
Rabbit anti-human fibrinogen (Dako, A0080; 1:500)
Alexa fluor 568-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-10042; 1:500)
Myelin
Goat anti-human myelin basic protein (MBP; Santa Cruz, 
sc-13914-R; 1:500)
Alexa fluor 488- or 568-conjugated donkey anti-goat 
(Invitrogen, A-11055 or A-11057; 1:500)
Axons
Mouse anti-mouse axonal SMI-312 neurofilament 
marker (SMI-312; BioLegend, SMI312; 1:500)
Alexa fluor 568-conjugated donkey anti-mouse 
(Invitrogen, A-10037; 1:500)
Oligodendrocytes
Rabbit anti-mouse Olig2 (Millipore, AB9610; 1:200)
Alexa fluor 488- or 568-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-21206 or A-10042; 1:500)
Monoclonal mouse anti-Olig2 (ThermoFisher, 
MA5-15810; 1:200)
Alexa fluor 488- or 568-conjugated donkey anti-mouse 
(Invitrogen, A-21202 or A-10037; 1:500)
Mature Oligodendrocytes
Mouse anti-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 
(CNPase; Abcam, ab6319; 1:500)
Alexa fluor 647-conjugated donkey anti-mouse 
(Invitrogen, A-31571; 1:500)
Oligodendrocyte Progenitor Cells
Rabbit anti-platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha 
(PDGFRα; Cell Signaling, #3174; 1:200)
Alexa fluor 568-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-10042; 1:500)
Neurons
Rabbit anti-mouse NeuN (Millipore, ABN78; 1:500)
Alexa fluor 568- or 647-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-10042 or A-31573; 1:500)
Vasculature
Dylight 488-conjugated L. esculentum lectin (Vector 
Labs, DL-1174; 1:200)
N/A
Microglia
Rabbit anti-mouse ionized calcium binding adaptor 
molecule 1 (Iba-1; Wako, 019-19741; 1:1,000)
Alexa fluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-21206; 1:500)
Astrocytes
Rabbit anti-Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP; Dako, 
z0334; 1:500)
Alexa fluor 647-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-31573; 1:500)
Flow Cytometry & In Vitro Mature Oligodendrocytes
Montagne et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Rabbit anti-proteolipid protein (PLP; Abcam, ab105784; 
1:2,000)
Alexa fluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit 
(Invitrogen, A-21206; 1:200)
Mouse anti-myelin basic protein (SMI-99; BioLegend; 
1:500)
Alexa fluor 647-conjugated donkey anti-mouse 
(Invitrogen, A-21202 or A-31571; 1:200)
Confocal Microscopy Analysis
Lasers and Band Pass (bp) Filters—We used a 488-nm argon laser to excite Alexa 
Fluor and Dylight 488, and the emission was collected through a 500-550 nm bp filter; a 543 
HeNe laser to excite Alexa Fluor 568 and Cy3 the emission was collected through a 
560-615nm bp filter; a 633 HeNe laser to excite Alexa fluor 649 and the emission was 
collected through a 650-700 nm bp filter.
Pericyte Coverage—The quantification analysis of pericyte coverage and numbers was 
restricted to CD13-positive perivascular mural cells that were associated with brain 
capillaries defined as vessels with < 6 μm in diameter, as previously described17,30 For 
pericyte coverage, ten-micron maximum projection z-stacks (area 640 × 480 μm) were 
reconstructed, and the areas occupied by CD13-positive (pericyte) and lectin-positive 
(endothelium) fluorescent signals on vessels < 6 μm were subjected separately to threshold 
processing and analyzed using ImageJ. First, black and white 8-bit images for CD13 and 
lectin signals were thresholded separately using Otsu's thresholding plugin that minimize the 
intra-class variance of the thresholded black and white pixels. After thresholding, the 
integrated signal density for each thresholded image was calculated. In order to express the 
integrated signal density as the area of the image (in pixels) occupied by the fluorescent 
signal, the integrated signal density was divided by 255 (the maximum pixel intensity for an 
8-bit image). The integrated pixel-based area ratios of CD13 and lectin fluorescent signals 
were used to determine pericyte coverage as a percentage (%) of CD13-positive surface area 
covering lectin-positive endothelial capillary surface area per field, as previously reported17. 
In each animal, 4-6 randomly selected fields in the corpus callosum (CC), internal capsule 
(IC) and cingulum (Cing) were analyzed in 4 non-adjacent sections (∼100 μm apart), and 
averaged per mouse.
Pericyte numbers—For pericyte numbers, ten-micron maximum projection z-stacks were 
reconstructed, and the number of CD13-positive perivascular cell bodies that co-localized 
with DAPI-positive nuclei on the abluminal side of lectin-positive endothelium on vessels ≤ 
6 μm counted using ImageJ Cell Counter plug-in, as we have previously described17,30. In 
each animal, 4-6 randomly selected fields (640 × 480 μm) in the corpus callosum were 
analyzed in 4 non-adjacent sections (∼100 μm apart), and averaged per mouse. The number 
of pericytes was expressed per mm2 of tissue.
Extravascular Fibrinogen and Fibrin Deposits—For quantification of extravascular 
fibrinogen and fibrin deposits with an antibody that detects both monomeric fibrinogen and 
fibrinogen-derived fibrin polymers. Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were 
reconstructed, and the fibrinogen and fibrin-positive perivascular signal on the abluminal 
side of lectin-positive endothelial profiles on microvessels ≤ 6 μm in diameter was subjected 
to threshold processing and analyzed using ImageJ17 In each animal, 4-6 randomly selected 
Montagne et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fields in the corpus callosum, internal capsule, and cingulum were analyzed in 4 non-
adjacent sections (∼100 μm apart).
MBP-Positive Myelin—Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were reconstructed, 
and MBP-positive signal was subjected to threshold processing and was analyzed using 
ImageJ. In each animal, 4-6 randomly selected fields in the corpus callosum and internal 
capsule were analyzed in 4 non-adjacent sections (∼100 μm apart).
SMI-312-Positive Axons—As previously described17, ten microns maximum projection 
z-stacks were reconstructed, and SMI-312-positive signal was subjected to threshold 
processing and was analyzed using ImageJ. In each animal, 4-6 randomly selected fields in 
the corpus callosum and internal capsule were analyzed in 4 non-adjacent sections (∼100 μm 
apart).
Enlarged Perivascular Spaces (EPVS)—Brain sections were stained with MBP and 
endothelial lectin. Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were reconstructed, and the 
perivascular space between lectin-positive endothelial microvessel profiles and MBP-
positive myelin were manually determined using ImageJ. As reported with modifications17, 
EPVS was defined as a perivascular space over 3 μm, and was quantified in the corpus 
callosum and external capsule regions, and expressed as the number of vessels with EPVS 
per mm2.
NeuN-Positive Neuron Counts—Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were 
reconstructed, and the number of NeuN-positive neurons per mm2 was determined as 
previously described using the ImageJ Software Cell Counter plugin analysis tool18. In each 
animal, 4-6 randomly selected fields (420 × 420 μm) from primary somatosensory barrel 
cortex (layer IV-V) and dorsal hippocampus (CA1 subfield) were analyzed in 4 non-adjacent 
sections (∼100 μm apart).
Oligodendrocytes Counts—Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were 
reconstructed, and the number of oligodendrocytes (Olig2-positive cells), myelinated mature 
oligodendrocytes (CNPase-positive cells), oligodendrocytes progenitor cells (PDGFRα-
positive cells), as well as oligodendrocytes death (TUNEL- and Olig2-double positive cells) 
in the corpus callosum and internal capsule per mm2 were determined as previously 
described using the ImageJ Software cell counter plugin analysis tool. In each animal, 4-6 
randomly selected fields (420 × 420 μm) from corpus callosum and internal capsule were 
analyzed in 4 non-adjacent sections (∼100 μm apart).
Cell Death Assay—For quantification of cell death, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase 
dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay was performed following the manufacturer's 
instructions (Roche) and as we previously reported17.
Hypoxyprobe-1 Tissue Staining and Analysis—For determination of hypoxic tissue 
mice were injected intraperitoneally with 60 mg/kg hypoxyprobe-1 pimonidazole 
(Hypoxyprobe-1™) 4 h before harvesting brains for tissue processing and staining according 
to the manufacturer's instructions. Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were 
Montagne et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reconstructed, and hypoxic area of the hypoxyprobe-1 positive signal obtained from the 
cortex and hippocampus was quantified using ImageJ, as we previously reported17.
Microvascular Density—Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were reconstructed, 
and the length of lectin-positive microvasculature profiles was measured using the ImageJ 
plugin “Neuro J” length analysis tool from 3-6 randomly selected fields in the corpus 
callosum, internal capsule, primary somatosensory barrel cortex, and dorsal hippocampus 
(420 × 420 μm) per section from 4 non-adjacent (∼100 μm apart) sections per animal, as we 
described17. The length was expressed in mm of lectin-positive vascular profiles per mm3 of 
brain tissue.
Microglia and Astrocytes Counts—Ten microns maximum projection z-stacks were 
reconstructed, and the number of Iba-1-positive microglia and GFAP-positive astrocytes per 
mm2 were determined using the ImageJ Software Cell Counter plugin analysis tool, as we 
previously described17. In each animal, 4-6 randomly selected fields (420 × 420 μm) from 
corpus callosum were analyzed in 4 non-adjacent sections (∼100 μm apart). In a separate 
experiment, we performed immunostaining for microglia (Iba-1) and fibrin(ogen), and 
astrocytes (GFAP) and fibrin(ogen), and determined the numbers of microglia and astrocytes 
at sites with no fibrin deposition compared to sites with a different degree of fibrin 
deposition at early (4-6 weeks of age) and later (36-48 weeks of age) time points in F7/F7 
mice. In each mouse, 50 randomly selected 50 × 50 μm-sized boxes in areas with and 
without fibrin(ogen) deposition derived from 6 adjacent tissue sections 100 μm apart was 
taken for analysis. For each age group, 150 individual points per group in areas with and 
without fibrin(ogen) deposition were analyzed from 3 mice per group.
Bright-field Microscopy Analysis
Luxol Fast Blue Staining—Animals were anesthetized and perfused as described above 
and brains were immersed in 4% PFA overnight. Brains were paraffin embedded, and 
sectioned on a microtome (Leica RM2125) at 6 μm intervals. Sections were mounted on 
slides, air-dried and stained with Luxol Fast Blue/CE Violet Kit (American mastertech, 
Catalog: KTLFB) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Slides were covered and 
sealed with Cytoseal 60 (American MasterTech). Sections were imaged under a light 
microscope (Keyence BZ-9000). Severity of white matter damage was graded, following the 
Fazekas scale72 in the medial corpus callosum as normal (grade 0); disarrangement of nerve 
fibers (grade 1); formation of marked vacuoles (grade 2); and the disappearance of 
myelinated fibers (grade 3).
Hematoxylin Staining—Animals were anesthetized and perfused as described above and 
brains were immersed in 4% PFA overnight. Brains were paraffin embedded, and sectioned 
on a microtome (Leica RM2125) at 6 μm intervals. Brain sections were then rehydrated and 
stained with FD Hematoxylin solution according to the manufacturer's instructions (FD 
Neurotechnologies). Representative images were taken in the primary somatosensory barrel 
cortex (S1Cx) and CA1 hippocampal subfield in coronal sections at 2 mm posterior to the 
Bregma.
Montagne et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Flow Cytometry
Animals were transcardially perfused with 0.01 M PBS and brains immediately removed. 
White matter tissue (corpus callosum, internal capsule, cingulum, and external capsule) was 
isolated from the brains, trypsinized for 30 min in 0.25% trypsin at 37°C and then further 
dissociated using a glass homogenizer. Cells were fixed in 4% PFA for 10 min, blocked in 
10% NDS/0.1% Triton-X/1X PBS, stained with mature oligodendrocyte markers rabbit 
proteolipid protein (PLP; Abcam, ab105784; 1:2000) and mouse MBP (SMI-99; BioLegend; 
1:500), followed by incubation in secondary 488-(Invitrogen; 1:200) and 647-Alexa Fluor 
(Invitrogen; 1:200) respectively. Cells were then sorted using BD SORP FACSAria I 
(Becton-Dickinson). Control stains (unstained and MBP- or PLP- single stained cells) were 
used to set gates. All samples were then FSC-A and SSC-A gated, followed by FSC-A/FSC-
H gating to select singlet cells. Subsequent relevant gating was conducted. Ten thousand 
events were originally collected from which positively-gated cells showed 95-98% purity. 
Data was acquired with FACSDiva 8.0.1 software and analyzed with FlowJo V10 for 
quantification of mature oligodendrocytes.
Immunoblotting
White matter tissue (i.e., corpus callosum, internal capsule, cingulum, and external capsule) 
was lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Sodium Dodecyl 
Sulfate (SDS), 1.0% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and Roche protease inhibitor 
cocktail). Samples were then subjected to bis-tris-SDS-PolyAcrylamide Gel Electrophoresis 
(SDS-PAGE) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were blocked with 
5% milk, incubated with anti-MBP (Santa Cruz, sc-13914; 1:1,000), and then incubated with 
HRP-conjugated donkey anti-goat secondary antibody (Invitrogen, A16005; 1:5,000). 
Membranes were then treated with Immobilon Western ECL detection buffers (Millipore), 
exposed to CL-XPosure film (Thermo Scientific) and developed in a X-OMAT 3000 RA 
film processor (Kodak).
Cytokine and Chemokine Expression
In addition to quantifying Iba1-positive microglia and GFAP-positive astrocytes, we 
analyzed relative abundance of several neuroinflammatory cytokines and chemokines [i.e., 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (Tnf-α), interleukin 6 (Il-6), interleukin 1 beta (Il-1β), 
chemokine C-C motif ligand 2 (Ccl2), and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (Icam-1)] 
through quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction using ribonucleic acid (RNA) 
isolated from snap-frozen brain samples as we previously described17 Gene expression was 
normalized to the house-keeping gene 18S ribosomal RNA (rRNA). The following primers 
were used:
Tnf-α,
Forward
5′-CTTCTGTCTACTGAACTTCGGG-3′
Reverse
5′-TGATCTGAGTGTGAGGGTCTG-3′
Il-6,
Forward
5′-CAAAGCCAGAGTCCTTCAGAG-3′
Reverse
5′-GTCCTTAGCCACTCCTTCTG-3′
Il-1β,
Forward
5′-AAGGGCTGCTTCCAAACCTTTGAC-3′
Reverse
5′-ATACTGCCTGCCTGAAGCTCTTGT-3′
Ccl2,
Forward
5′-CATCCACGTGTTGGCTCA-3′
Montagne et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Reverse
5′-GATCATCTTGCTGGTGAATCAGT-3′
Icam-1,
Forward
5′-AAGGAGATCACATTCACGGTG-3′
Reverse
5′-TTTGGGATGGTAGCTGGAAG-3′
18S rRNA,
Forward
5′-GTAACCCGTTGAACCCCATT-3′
Reverse
5′-CCATCCAATCGGTAGTAGCG-3′
Cell Cultures
Mouse Oligodendrocytes—A2B5-positive oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) were 
isolated from cortices of 129S1/Svlmj P3-P6 mouse pups by magnetic cell sorting (MACS, 
Miltenyi Biotec), as previously described73. Briefly, brains were removed, minced, and 
further processed using Neural Dissociation Kit following the manufacturer's instructions 
(#130-092-628, Miltenyi Biotec). Tissue was first digested in warm solution of enzyme P, 
reaction was quenched with enzyme A buffer and tissue was manually dissociated using 
three fire-polished Pasteur pipettes with decreasing diameter. Cells were then filtered, 
centrifuged and resuspended in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen) 
containing 1% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone), placed in blocking reagent followed by 
magnetic labeling using anti-A2B5 microbeads (#130-093-392, Miltenyi Biotec), and 
washed and magnetically sorted using MACS LS columns (#130-042-401, Miltenyi Biotec). 
OPCs were plated at a density of 5×104 cells on poly-D-lysine (PDL)-coated coverslips for 
cell viability and immunocytochemistry experiments or on PDL-coated 6-well dishes for 
western blotting and caspase-3 activity assays. OPCs were allowed to differentiate into 
mature oligodendrocytes in medium containing DMEM-SATO based growth medium
+Forskolin+NT3+T3 (T3 is the active hormone, 3,5,30-tri-iodothyronine), which has been 
shown to promote oligodendrocyte differentiation from OPCs73,74. Experiments were 
performed on 7 days in vitro (DIV) mature oligodendrocyte cultures that were 
approximately 90% positive for myelin basic protein (MBP, a marker of mature 
oligodendrocytes)74 and negative for O4, a marker for an intermediate transitional cell type 
(pre-immature oligodendrocytes) between OPCs and mature oligodendrocytes. 
Oligodendrocytes were arborized in shape74. The cultures did not contain astrocytes 
(negative for GFAP) or microglia (negative for Iba-1). Mature oligodendrocytes were 
exposed to either hypoxic conditions (oxygen and glucose deprivation)75 or treated with 
soluble fibrinogen or fibrin, as described below.
Mouse Pericytes—Brain microvascular pericytes were purchased from ScienCell 
(#M1200). Cells were cultured in mouse pericyte medium (#1231, ScienCell) in 5% CO2 at 
37°C. Pericyte cultures were positive for pericyte markers PDGFRβ, NG2 and CD13, and 
negative for GFAP (astrocytes), CD31 (endothelial cells) and CD11b (microglia). Early 
passage (P2-3) cultures were used in the study.
Oxygen and Glucose Deprivation (OGD)—For OGD experiment, oligodendrocytes 
were cultured in DMEM without glucose (Invitrogen) in a humidified incubator chamber 
(Billups-Rothenberg, Inc.) with 1% O2 at 37°C for 6 h, as previously described75 After 6 h, 
cells were removed from the chamber and processed for immunocytochemistry. Pericyte 
cultures were subjected to OGD as described above at 70% confluence.
Montagne et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fibrinogen and Fibrin Treatment—In all studies, we used highly purified fibrinogen 
that was plasminogen-depleted and > 95% clottable (Cat. # 341578, EMD Millipore, 
Sigma). Fibrinogen (0.25, 0.5, 1 and 1.5 mg/mL) was added to mouse mature 
oligodendrocyte cultures, 70% confluent pericyte cultures or 70% confluent astrocyte 
cultures followed by the addition of 4 U/mL hirudin (Cat. # 377853-2000U, Calbiochem). 
To generate fibrin, fibrinogen (0.01, 0.025 and 0.1 mg/mL) was added to Eppendorf tubes 
containing oligodendrocyte or pericyte culture media with 1.8 mM CaCl2. To convert 
fibrinogen to fibrin, we added 0.1 U/mL of thrombin (T-4393, Sigma) for 60 min. Thrombin 
activity was inhibited by hirudin (4 U/mL). The formation of fibrin polymers has been 
demonstrated by 4-12% bis-tris-SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining showing cross-
linked fibrinogen γ-chains, and transmission electron microscopy showing fibrin polymers 
(fibrils) ranging from 200 nm to 2 |jm in size76. We did not see fibrin fibrils crisscrossing 
and forming a mesh. Cultured medium containing fibrin polymers was added to 
oligodendrocyte or pericyte cultures. In a separate experiment, inactivated thrombin 
(thrombin + hirudin) was added to cell cultures as an independent control.
Immunocytochemistry—After OGD (hypoxia), mature oligodendrocytes were detected 
with an anti-mouse myelin basic protein (MBP) monoclonal antibody (SMI-99; Covance; 
1:500), and pericytes with a goat anti-mouse PDGFRβ polyclonal antibody (R&D Systems, 
#AF1042; 1:500), followed by TUNEL and Dapi-Fluoromount-G (SouthernBiotech) 
staining. Secondary antibodies were donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor IgG 568 (Invitrogen; 
1:500) for MBP-positive oligodendrocytes, and anti-goat Alexa Fluor IgG 568 (Invitrogen; 
1:500) for PDGFRβ-positive pericytes. TUNEL assay (Roche) was performed after SMI-99 
or PDGFRβ immunostaining. Oligodendrocyte and pericyte cell death after OGD was 
expressed as the percentage of TUNEL-positive cells of MBP-positive oligodendrocytes or 
PDGFRβ-positive pericytes, respectively.
Double immunostaining for fibrin(ogen) (rabbit anti-human polyclonal antibody cross reacts 
with mouse fibrinogen, DAKO, #A0080; 1:500) and MBP (as above) was performed to 
determine fibrin(ogen) accumulation in oligodendrocytes. Secondary antibodies were 
donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor IgG 568 (Invitrogen; 1:500) for MBP-positive cells and 
donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor IgG 488 (Invitrogen; 1:500) for fibrinogen. To verify 
intracellular uptake of fibrin(ogen) by mature oligodendrocytes, orthogonal projection views 
of MBP+/Fibrin(ogen)+ cells were created from fifteen-micron maximum projection 
intensity z-stacks using ImageJ.
Triple staining with CytoID Autophagy Kit (ENZO Life Sciences, ENZ-51031-K200) on 
live cells followed by immunostaining for the active form of caspase 3 (rabbit anti-mouse 
polyclonal, Abcam, ab13847; 1:250) and MPB or PDGFRβ (as above) was done to visualize 
the formation of autophagosomes and activation of caspase 3 in oligodendrocyte and 
pericyte cultures, respectively, at different time points. Secondary antibody for active 
caspase 3 was donkey anti-rabbit 647 Alexa Fluor (Invitrogen; 1:500); secondary antibodies 
for MBP-positive oligodendrocytes and PDGFRβ-positive pericytes were as described 
above. In some experiments, the autophagy inhibitors, mTOR activator MHY1485 
(Calbiochem, # 500554, 2 μM)52 and autophagy inhibitor VII (Calbiochem, # 534360, 100 
μM)53 were added to the culture media simultaneously with fibrin (ogen).
Montagne et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To access availability of oxygen to cultured oligodendrocytes in the presence of fibrin (0.1 
mg/mL; i.e., the highest concentration used to treat cells), we employed Image-iT Hypoxia 
Reagent for live cells (5 μM, ThermoFisher, H10498), and determined whether fibrin can 
interfere with oxygen delivery to cells making them hypoxic. We also used Alexa 594-
conjugated transferrin (25 μg/mL; ThermoFisher, T13343) to determine whether fibrin (0.01 
and 0.1 mg/mL) or fibrinogen (1.5 mg/mL) interfere with uptake of transferrin from the 
culture medium by plated oligodendrocytes. Transferrin was added for 20 min at indicated 
time points.
Live/Dead Assay—Mature oligodendrocytes and pericytes were treated with different 
concentrations of fibrinogen (0.25-1.5 mg/mL), fibrin (0.01-0.1 mg/mL), ancrod (0.004 
IU/mL) as previously reported77, or TXA (640 μM), as previously reported78, and cell 
viability was determined by live/dead assay (ThermoFisher, L3224), as per manufacturer's 
instructions.
Immunoblotting—The autophagy markers were analyzed in oligodendrocytes 12 and 24 h 
after treatment with 1.5 mg/mL fibrinogen or 0.1 mg/mL fibrin, with or without mTOR 
activator MHY1485 (#500554, Calbiochem) or autophagy inhibitor VII (#534360, 
Calbiochem). Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% 
SDS, 1.0% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and Roche protease inhibitor cocktail). 
Samples were then subjected to NuPAGE 4-12% bis-tris-SDS-PAGE (ThermoFisher) and 
transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were blocked with SuperBlock 
(ThermoFisher), incubated with anti-p62 (Cell Signaling, #5114; 1:1,000) or anti-LC3 (Cell 
Signaling, #4108; 1:1,000) rabbit polyclonal antibodies, and then incubated with HRP-
conjugated donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody (ThermoFisher, #A16023; 1:5,000). 
Membranes were then treated with SuperSignal™ West Pico PLUS chemiluminescent 
substrate (#34580, ThermoFisher), exposed to CL-XPosure film (#34097, Thermo 
Scientific) and developed in a X-OMAT 3000 RA film processor (Kodak). Relative 
abundance of the LC3-II/I ratio was quantified against the loading control β-actin as 
described79.
Caspase 3 Activity—Caspase 3 activity was measured 12 and 24 h after treatment of 
oligodendrocytes with 1.5 mg/mL fibrinogen or 0.1 mg/mL fibrin, with or without mTOR 
activator MHY1485 (#500554, Calbiochem) or autophagy inhibitor VII (#534360, 
Calbiochem). Cells were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline and the activity 
assay was performed as per manufacturer's instructions (ApoAlert™ caspase-3 fluorescent 
assay kit #630215, Clontech), as we previously reported80.
Statistical Analysis
Sample sizes were calculated using nQUERY assuming a two-sided alpha-level of 0.05, 
80% power, and homogeneous variances for the 2 samples to be compared, with the means 
and common standard deviation for different parameters predicted from published data and 
our previous studies. The Ktrans constant and blood flow measurements from the pilot 
experiments indicated that the sample sizes from 5-7 are sufficient to detect a significant 
effect ≥ 20% between the studied groups. Our actual sample sizes for both in vivo and ex 
Montagne et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vivo MRI parametric maps were 5-7. For comparison between two groups, F test was 
conducted to determine the similarity in the variances between the groups that are 
statistically compared, and statistical significance was analyzed by Student's t-test. Lilliefors 
test was used to test normality of the data (XLSTAT). For multiple comparisons, the F test 
was also used to determine the equality of variances between the groups compared and one-
way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni's post hoc test was used to test 
statistical significance between control and mutant mice as well as to test for age-related 
differences within the mutant group. All analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 
7.04v software and by an investigator blinded to the experimental conditions. Data are 
presented as mean ± SD, or mean ± SEM as indicated in the figure legends. A p value > 0.05 
was considered statistically non-significant (ns).
Life Sciences Reporting Summary
Further information on experimental design and reagents is available in the Life Sciences 
Reporting Summary.
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request. Uncropped western blots are available in Supplementary Figure 17.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Institute of Health grants NS100459, AG039452, NS034467 and 
AG023084 to B.V.Z., the Foundation Leducq Transatlantic Network of Excellence for the Study of Perivascular 
Spaces in Small Vessel Disease reference no. 16 CVD 05, and ES024936 to W.J.M. The authors thank M.T. 
Huuskonen for assistance with MRI scanning sessions.
References
1. Wardlaw JM, et al. Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel disease and its 
contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol. 2013; 12:822–838. [PubMed: 
23867200] 
2. Iadecola C. The pathobiology of vascular dementia. Neuron. 2013; 80:844–866. [PubMed: 
24267647] 
3. Snyder HM, et al. Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia including 
Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc. 2015; 11:710–717.
4. Hachinski V. World Stroke Organization. Stroke and Potentially Preventable Dementias 
Proclamation: Updated World Stroke Day Proclamation. Stroke J Cereb Circ. 2015; 46:3039–3040.
5. Phillips OR, et al. The superficial white matter in Alzheimer's disease. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016; 
37:1321–1334. [PubMed: 26801955] 
6. Lee S, et al. White matter hyperintensities are a core feature of Alzheimer's disease: Evidence from 
the dominantly inherited Alzheimer network. Ann Neurol. 2016; 79:929–939. [PubMed: 27016429] 
7. Behrendt G, et al. Dynamic changes in myelin aberrations and oligodendrocyte generation in 
chronic amyloidosis in mice and men. Glia. 2013; 61:273–286. [PubMed: 23090919] 
Montagne et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. Schuff N, et al. Cerebral blood flow in ischemic vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease, 
measured by arterial spin-labeling magnetic resonance imaging. Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers 
Assoc. 2009; 5:454–462.
9. Hanaoka T, et al. Relationship between white matter lesions and regional cerebral blood flow 
changes during longitudinal follow up in Alzheimer's disease. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2016; 16:836–
842. [PubMed: 26245516] 
10. Miners JS, Schulz I, Love S. Differing associations between Aβ accumulation, hypoperfusion, 
blood-brain barrier dysfunction and loss of PDGFRB pericyte marker in the precuneus and parietal 
white matter in Alzheimer's disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2017; 271678X17690761. doi: 10.1177/0271678X17690761
11. Arvanitakis Z, Capuano AW, Leurgans SE, Bennett DA, Schneider JA. Relation of cerebral vessel 
disease to Alzheimer's disease dementia and cognitive function in elderly people: a cross-sectional 
study. Lancet Neurol. 2016; 15:934–943. [PubMed: 27312738] 
12. Zhao Z, Nelson AR, Betsholtz C, Zlokovic BV. Establishment and Dysfunction of the Blood-Brain 
Barrier. Cell. 2015; 163:1064–1078. [PubMed: 26590417] 
13. Attwell D, Mishra A, Hall CN, O'Farrell FM, Dalkara T. What is a pericyte? J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2016; 36:451–455.
14. Sweeney MD, Ayyadurai S, Zlokovic BV. Pericytes of the neurovascular unit: key functions and 
signaling pathways. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:771–783. [PubMed: 27227366] 
15. Daneman R, Zhou L, Kebede AA, Barres BA. Pericytes are required for blood-brain barrier 
integrity during embryogenesis. Nature. 2010; 468:562–566. [PubMed: 20944625] 
16. Armulik A, et al. Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature. 2010; 468:557–561. [PubMed: 
20944627] 
17. Bell RD, et al. Pericytes control key neurovascular functions and neuronal phenotype in the adult 
brain and during brain aging. Neuron. 2010; 68:409–427. [PubMed: 21040844] 
18. Peppiatt CM, Howarth C, Mobbs P, Attwell D. Bidirectional control of CNS capillary diameter by 
pericytes. Nature. 2006; 443:700–704. [PubMed: 17036005] 
19. Hall CN, et al. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease. Nature. 2014; 
508:55–60. [PubMed: 24670647] 
20. Yemisci M, et al. Pericyte contraction induced by oxidative-nitrative stress impairs capillary reflow 
despite successful opening of an occluded cerebral artery. Nat Med. 2009; 15:1031–1037. 
[PubMed: 19718040] 
21. Mishra A, et al. Astrocytes mediate neurovascular signaling to capillary pericytes but not to 
arterioles. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:1619–1627. [PubMed: 27775719] 
22. Kisler K, et al. Pericyte degeneration leads to neurovascular uncoupling and limits oxygen supply 
to brain. Nat Neurosci. 2017; 20:406–416. [PubMed: 28135240] 
23. Farkas E, Luiten PG. Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and Alzheimer's disease. Prog 
Neurobiol. 2001; 64:575–611. [PubMed: 11311463] 
24. Baloyannis SJ, Baloyannis IS. The vascular factor in Alzheimer's disease: a study in Golgi 
technique and electron microscopy. J Neurol Sci. 2012; 322:117–121. [PubMed: 22857991] 
25. Sengillo JD, et al. Deficiency in mural vascular cells coincides with blood-brain barrier disruption 
in Alzheimer's disease. Brain Pathol Zurich Switz. 2013; 23:303–310.
26. Halliday MR, et al. Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain barrier breakdown in 
apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer's disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015; doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.44
27. Montagne A, et al. Blood-brain barrier breakdown in the aging human hippocampus. Neuron. 
2015; 85:296–302. [PubMed: 25611508] 
28. Ghosh M, et al. Pericytes are involved in the pathogenesis of cerebral autosomal dominant 
arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy. Ann Neurol. 2015; 78:887–900. 
[PubMed: 26312599] 
29. Tallquist MD, French WJ, Soriano P. Additive effects of PDGF receptor beta signaling pathways in 
vascular smooth muscle cell development. PLoS Biol. 2003; 1:E52. [PubMed: 14624252] 
Montagne et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 30. Nikolakopoulou AM, Zhao Z, Montagne A, Zlokovic BV. Regional early and progressive loss of 
brain pericytes but not vascular smooth muscle cells in adult mice with disrupted platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor-β signaling. PloS One. 2017; 12:e0176225. [PubMed: 28441414] 
31. Baumann N, Pham-Dinh D. Biology of oligodendrocyte and myelin in the mammalian central 
nervous system. Physiol Rev. 2001; 81:871–927. [PubMed: 11274346] 
32. Winkler EA, Bell RD, Zlokovic BV. Pericyte-specific expression of PDGF beta receptor in mouse 
models with normal and deficient PDGF beta receptor signaling. Mol Neurodegener. 2010; 5:32. 
[PubMed: 20738866] 
33. Bell RD, et al. Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A. Nature. 2012; 
485:512–516. [PubMed: 22622580] 
34. Daianu M, et al. 7T Multi-shell Hybrid Diffusion Imaging (HYDI) for Mapping Brain Connectivity 
in Mice. Proc SPIE-- Int Soc Opt Eng. 2015:9413.
35. Zingg B, et al. Neural networks of the mouse neocortex. Cell. 2014; 156:1096–1111. [PubMed: 
24581503] 
36. Potter GM, et al. Enlarged perivascular spaces and cerebral small vessel disease. Int J Stroke. 2015; 
10:376–381. [PubMed: 23692610] 
37. Trapp BD, Nave KA. Multiple sclerosis: an immune or neurodegenerative disorder? Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2008; 31:247–269. [PubMed: 18558855] 
38. Pohl HBF, et al. Genetically induced adult oligodendrocyte cell death is associated with poor 
myelin clearance, reduced remyelination, and axonal damage. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 
2011; 31:1069–1080.
39. Dewar D, Underhill SM, Goldberg MP. Oligodendrocytes and ischemic brain injury. J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2003; 23:263–274.
40. Rosenzweig S, Carmichael ST. Age-dependent exacerbation of white matter stroke outcomes: a 
role for oxidative damage and inflammatory mediators. Stroke J Cereb Circ. 2013; 44:2579–2586.
41. Paul J, Strickland S, Melchor JP. Fibrin deposition accelerates neurovascular damage and 
neuroinflammation in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease. J Exp Med. 2007; 204:1999–2008. 
[PubMed: 17664291] 
42. Cortes-Canteli M, et al. Fibrinogen and beta-amyloid association alters thrombosis and 
fibrinolysis: a possible contributing factor to Alzheimer's disease. Neuron. 2010; 66:695–709. 
[PubMed: 20547128] 
43. Cortes-Canteli M, Mattei L, Richards AT, Norris EH, Strickland S. Fibrin deposited in the 
Alzheimer's disease brain promotes neuronal degeneration. Neurobiol Aging. 2015; 36:608–617. 
[PubMed: 25475538] 
44. Schachtrup C, et al. Fibrinogen inhibits neurite outgrowth via beta 3 integrin-mediated 
phosphorylation of the EGF receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:11814–11819. 
[PubMed: 17606926] 
45. Ryu JK, et al. Blood coagulation protein fibrinogen promotes autoimmunity and demyelination via 
chemokine release and antigen presentation. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8164. [PubMed: 26353940] 
46. Akassoglou K, Yu WM, Akpinar P, Strickland S. Fibrin inhibits peripheral nerve remyelination by 
regulating Schwann cell differentiation. Neuron. 2002; 33:861–875. [PubMed: 11906694] 
47. Akassoglou K, et al. Fibrin depletion decreases inflammation and delays the onset of 
demyelination in a tumor necrosis factor transgenic mouse model for multiple sclerosis. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:6698–6703. [PubMed: 15096619] 
48. Adams RA, et al. The fibrin-derived gamma377-395 peptide inhibits microglia activation and 
suppresses relapsing paralysis in central nervous system autoimmune disease. J Exp Med. 2007; 
204:571–582. [PubMed: 17339406] 
49. Altman BJ, Rathmell JC. Metabolic stress in autophagy and cell death pathways. Cold Spring Harb 
Perspect Biol. 2012; 4:a008763. [PubMed: 22952396] 
50. Mizushima N, Yoshimori T, Levine B. Methods in mammalian autophagy research. Cell. 2010; 
140:313–326. [PubMed: 20144757] 
51. McIlwain DR, Berger T, Mak TW. Caspase functions in cell death and disease. Cold Spring Harb 
Perspect Biol. 2013; 5:a008656. [PubMed: 23545416] 
Montagne et al.
Page 34
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 52. Choi YJ, et al. Inhibitory effect of mTOR activator MHY1485 on autophagy: suppression of 
lysosomal fusion. PloS One. 2012; 7:e43418. [PubMed: 22927967] 
53. Wang T, et al. Synthesis of improved lysomotropic autophagy inhibitors. J Med Chem. 2015; 
58:3025–3035. [PubMed: 25793774] 
54. Schachtrup C, et al. Fibrinogen triggers astrocyte scar formation by promoting the availability of 
active TGF-beta after vascular damage. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2010; 30:5843–5854.
55. Sagare AP, et al. Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice. Nat Commun. 
2013; 4:2932. [PubMed: 24336108] 
56. Suh TT, et al. Resolution of spontaneous bleeding events but failure of pregnancy in fibrinogen-
deficient mice. Genes Dev. 1995; 9:2020–2033. [PubMed: 7649481] 
57. Shaw MA, et al. Plasminogen Deficiency Delays the Onset and Protects from Demyelination and 
Paralysis in Autoimmune Neuroinflammatory Disease. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2017; 
37:3776–3788.
58. Wittrup A, Lieberman J. Knocking down disease: a progress report on siRNA therapeutics. Nat 
Rev Genet. 2015; 16:543–552. [PubMed: 26281785] 
59. De La Fuente AG, et al. Pericytes Stimulate Oligodendrocyte Progenitor Cell Differentiation 
during CNS Remyelination. Cell Rep. 2017; 20:1755–1764. [PubMed: 28834740] 
60. Takenouchi T, et al. Novel overgrowth syndrome phenotype due to recurrent de novo PDGFRB 
mutation. J Pediatr. 2015; 166:483–486. [PubMed: 25454926] 
61. Zhao Z, et al. Central role for PICALM in amyloid-β blood-brain barrier transcytosis and 
clearance. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:978–987. [PubMed: 26005850] 
62. Basham ME, Seeds NW. Plasminogen expression in the neonatal and adult mouse brain. J 
Neurochem. 2001; 77:318–325. [PubMed: 11279287] 
63. Ma Q, et al. NLRP3 inflammasome contributes to inflammation after intracerebral hemorrhage. 
Ann Neurol. 2014; 75:209–219. [PubMed: 24273204] 
64. Barnes SR, et al. Optimal acquisition and modeling parameters for accurate assessment of low 
Ktrans blood-brain barrier permeability using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI. Magn Reson Med. 
2015; doi: 10.1002/mrm.25793
65. Barnes SR, et al. ROCKETSHIP: a flexible and modular software tool for the planning, processing 
and analysis of dynamic MRI studies. BMC Med Imaging. 2015; 15:19. [PubMed: 26076957] 
66. Muir ER, et al. Quantitative cerebral blood flow measurements using MRI. Methods Mol Biol 
Clifton NJ. 2014; 1135:205–211.
67. Ostergaard L, Weisskoff RM, Chesler DA, Gyldensted C, Rosen BR. High resolution measurement 
of cerebral blood flow using intravascular tracer bolus passages.Part I: Mathematical approach and 
statistical analysis. Magn Reson Med. 1996; 36:715–725. [PubMed: 8916022] 
68. Schalomon PM, Wahlsten D. Wheel running behavior is impaired by both surgical section and 
genetic absence of the mouse corpus callosum. Brain Res Bull. 2002; 57:27–33. [PubMed: 
11827734] 
69. Shibata M, et al. Selective impairment of working memory in a mouse model of chronic cerebral 
hypoperfusion. Stroke J Cereb Circ. 2007; 38:2826–2832.
70. Winkler EA, et al. GLUT1 reductions exacerbate Alzheimer's disease vasculo-neuronal 
dysfunction and degeneration. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:521–530. [PubMed: 25730668] 
71. Fyffe-Maricich SL, Schott A, Karl M, Krasno J, Miller RH. Signaling through ERK1/2 controls 
myelin thickness during myelin repair in the adult central nervous system. J Neurosci Off J Soc 
Neurosci. 2013; 33:18402–18408.
72. Fazekas F, et al. Pathologic correlates of incidental MRI white matter signal hyperintensities. 
Neurology. 1993; 43:1683–1689. [PubMed: 8414012] 
73. Cizkova D, et al. Enrichment of rat oligodendrocyte progenitor cells by magnetic cell sorting. J 
Neurosci Methods. 2009; 184:88–94. [PubMed: 19664656] 
74. Zuchero JB, et al. CNS myelin wrapping is driven by actin disassembly. Dev Cell. 2015; 34:152–
167. [PubMed: 26166300] 
Montagne et al.
Page 35
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 75. Zhu H, et al. Effect of hypoxia/reoxygenation on cell viability and expression and secretion of 
neurotrophic factors (NTFs) in primary cultured schwann cells. Anat Rec Hoboken NJ 2007. 2010; 
293:865–870.
76. Gorkun OV, Veklich YI, Weisel JW, Lord ST. The conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin: recombinant 
fibrinogen typifies plasma fibrinogen. Blood. 1997; 89:4407–4414. [PubMed: 9192765] 
77. Liu S, et al. Ancrod and fibrin formation: perspectives on mechanisms of action. Stroke. 2011; 
42:3277–3280. [PubMed: 21868728] 
78. Lu Z, Korotcova L, Murata A, Ishibashi N, Jonas RA. Aprotinin, but not ε-aminocaproic acid and 
tranexamic acid, exerts neuroprotection against excitotoxic injury in an in vitro neuronal cell 
culture model. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014; 147:1939–1945. [PubMed: 24237885] 
79. Liang Q, et al. Zika Virus NS4A and NS4B Proteins Deregulate Akt-mTOR Signaling in Human 
Fetal Neural Stem Cells to Inhibit Neurogenesis and Induce Autophagy. Cell Stem Cell. 2016; 
19:663–671. [PubMed: 27524440] 
80. Guo H, et al. Neuroprotective activities of activated protein C mutant with reduced anticoagulant 
activity. Eur J Neurosci. 2009; 29:1119–1130. [PubMed: 19302148] 
Montagne et al.
Page 36
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. White matter microvascular changes in Alzheimer's disease and pericyte-deficient mice
(a) PDGFRβ-positive pericyte coverage (magenta), lectin-positive endothelial profiles 
(green), and extravascular fibrin(ogen) deposits (red) in the prefrontal subcortical white 
matter of an age-matched control (Braak I, upper) and AD case (Braak V–VI, lower) (bar = 
20 μm). (b, c) Quantification of pericyte coverage (b) and fibrin(ogen)-positive extravascular 
deposits (c) in the prefrontal subcortical white matter of controls (n=15) and AD cases 
(n=16). Mean ± SEM. See Supplementary Table 1 for clinical and neuropathological 
characteristics. (d) Representative blood-axon barrier permeability constant (Ktrans) maps in 
the corpus callosum (CC) of 16-week old F7/F7 and age-matched littermate control (+/+) 
mice generated from dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. 
(e) The regional Ktrans CC values in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and 
age-matched littermate control (+/+; blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=6 4-6-week old mice per 
group; n=7 12-16-week old mice per group; n=5 36-48-week old mice per group. (f, g) 
CD13-positive pericyte coverage (magenta) and lectin-positive endothelial profiles (blue) in 
the CC of 12-week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice (f, bar = 40 μm), and quantification of 
pericyte coverage in the CC of 2-, 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and 
control (+/+, blue) mice (g). Mean ± SEM; n=6 mice per group. (f, h) Fibrin(ogen)-positive 
extravascular deposits (green) and lectin-positive endothelial profiles (blue) in the CC of 12-
Montagne et al.
Page 37
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice (f, bar = 40 μm), and quantification of fibrin(ogen) 
deposits in the CC of 2-, 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, 
blue) mice (h). Mean ± SEM; n=6 mice per group. (i) Representative images of 5 
independent replicates of the CC showing lectin-positive endothelial profiles (white) and 
cellular uptake of Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated cadaverine (red) in 2-week old F7/F7 and 
control (+/+) mice (bar = 20 μm). (j) Negative correlation between fibrin(ogen) extravascular 
deposits and pericyte coverage in the CC; n=36 individual points from F7/F7 and control 
(+/+) mice at different age; r2, Pearson's coefficient. (k) Fibrin(ogen) deposits in the CC and 
internal capsule (IC), and the primary somatosensory barrel cortex (S1Cx) and dorsal 
hippocampus (Hipp) of the grey matter in 12-16-week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice. 
Mean ± SEM; n=6 mice per group for CC and n=5 mice per group for IC, S1Cx and Hipp. 
(l, m) High-resolution T2*-weighted images (sagittal plane) of iron-containing hemosiderin 
deposits (red dots) in 16-week old F7/F7 (upper) and control (+/+, lower) mice (l), and 
quantification of hemosiderin deposits in the white matter (CC and IC) and grey matter (Cx 
and Hipp) regions in 12-16-week old F7/F7 mice and control (+/+) mice (m). Mean ± SEM; 
n=6 mice per group. (n) The blood flow maps in the CC in 16-week old F7/F7 and littermate 
control (+/+) mice generated from dynamic contrast-susceptibility MRI scans. (o) The 
regional blood flow values in CC in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and 
littermate control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=6 4-6-week old mice per group; n=7 
12-16-week old mice per group; n=5 36-48-week old mice per group. In e, g, h, and o, one-
way ANOVA and Bonferroni's post hoc tests were used. Unpaired two-tailed Student's t-tests 
were used for panels b, c, k and m; ns=non-significant (p>0.05).
Montagne et al.
Page 38
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. White matter structural changes and loss of connectivity in pericyte-deficient mice
(a-c) Total white matter (a), cortical mantles (b), and hippocampus (c) volumes in 4-6-, 
12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and age-matched littermate control (+/+, blue) 
mice. Mean ± SD; n=6 4-6-week old mice per group; n=7 12-16-week old mice per group; 
n=7 36-48-week old mice per group. (d-f) Probabilistic P-value maps for fractional 
anisotropy generated from diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)-MRI scans in 4-6- (d), 12-16- (e), 
and 36-48-week (f) old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice. Yellow-Red voxels, statistically 
significant changes in the white matter tracts in 12-16-week old (e) and 36-48-week old (f) 
F7/F7 mice compared to their age-matched littermate controls (+/+) by searchlight-based 
multivoxel pattern analysis (see Online Methods). No changes were found in younger 4-6-
week old (d) F7/F7 mice. P-value color scale from 0.01 to 1×10-4; n=6 4-6-week old mice 
per group; n=7 12-16-week old mice per group; n=7 36-48-week old mice per group. (g) 
Fiber tract maps of the corpus callosum (CC, red) and cingulum (Cing, green) generated 
from DTI-MRI scans in 16-week old control (+/+, upper), 16-week old F7/F7 (middle), and 
48-week old F7/F7 (lower) mice. (h-i) Fiber density quantification in the CC (h) and Cing 
(i) from reconstructed tract maps. Mean ± SEM; n=5 mice per group. (j) A diagram showing 
the injection site in the ipsilateral primary somatosensory barrel cortex (iS1Cx) of adeno-
associated virus expressing green fluorescent protein (AAV-eGFP) used for the anterograde 
Montagne et al.
Page 39
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tract-tracing, and the studied labeled fiber projections from the iS1Cx to the contralateral 
S1Cx cortex (cS1Cx), through the CC, and towards the internal capsule (IC). Lower panels 
denote 3D-labeled projections towards the contralateral cS1Cx 21 days after injection of 
AAV-eGFP neuron labeling in the ipsilateral iS1Cx of 16-week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) 
mice (bar = 100 μm). (k) Quantification of integrated projection density of indicated brain 
regions in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. 
Mean ± SD; n=5 mice per group. In panels a, b, c, h, i, and k, one-way ANOVA and 
Bonferroni's post hoc tests were used; ns=non-significant (p>0.05).
Montagne et al.
Page 40
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. White matter-related functional deficits in pericyte-deficient mice
(a) Maximum velocity on regular and complex running wheel in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-
week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=8 mice per group. (b, 
c) Diagram showing the number of revisiting errors for baiting on radial 8-arm maze test in 
4- and 16-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice (b; solid lines, first entries; 
dotted lines, revisiting errors), and quantification (c) in 4-6- and 12-16-week old F7/F7 
(green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=8 mice per group. (d) Novel object 
recognition (NOR) in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and +/+ control (blue) 
mice. Mean ± SEM; n=8 4-6-week old mice per group; n=11 12-16-week old mice per 
group; n=8 36-48-week old mice per group. (e) Cued and contextual fear conditioning tests 
in 4-6 and 12-16-week old F7/F7 (green) and +/+ control (blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=8 
4-6-week old mice per group; n=11 (cued) and 8 (contextual) 12-16-week old mice per 
group. (f, g) Nesting (f) and burrowing (g) tests in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 
(green) and +/+ control (blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=8 4-6-week old mice per group; n=11 
12-16-week old mice per group; n=8 36-48-week old mice per group. In panels a and c-g, 
one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni's post hoc tests were used.
Montagne et al.
Page 41
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Pericyte-deficient mice develop an early axon degeneration and loss of myelin
(a) Electron microscopy analysis of the medial corpus callosum (CC) in 4-, 16-, and 48-
week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice. Yellow arrowheads, thinner myelin sheaths; purple 
stars, degenerated axons (bar = 0.5 μm). (b-d) Quantification of the number of degenerated 
axons (b), total number of axons (c), and g-ratio (d) in the CC of 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-
week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per group. (e) 
Immunostaining of myelin basic protein (MBP), neuritic marker SMI-312, and 4′,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (Dapi) nuclear stain in the CC (coronal sections) of 36-week old 
F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice (bar = 100 μm); white bars illustrate CC thickness; stars show 
MBP and SMI-312 loss. (f, g) Quantification of MBP (f) and SMI-312 (g) immunoreactivity 
in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and +/+ (blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=5 
mice per group. (h) Luxol fast blue and cresyl violet staining in the CC of 36-week old 
F7/F7 and +/+ control mice (bar = 100 μm); stars, vacuoles. Representative of 3 independent 
replicates. (i) Fazekas score for white matter damage in the CC of in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 
36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per 
group. (j) Immunostaining for MBP and endothelial lectin in the anterior cingulum (AC) 
tract of 16-week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice (bar = 20 μm); yellow arrows, enlarged 
perivascular spaces (EPVS). Insets, high magnification boxed regions; white star, EPVS. (k) 
Montagne et al.
Page 42
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quantification of EPVS per mm2 CC tissue in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 
(green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per group. (l) MBP 
immunoblotting of white matter homogenates (pooled corpus callosum, internal capsule, 
external capsule, cingulum) from 4-6, 12-16, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 and +/+ mice. β-
tub, β-tubulin loading control. (m) MBP relative abundance in 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week 
old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per group. (n) 
Bright field microscopy (hematoxylin staining) of the primary somatosensory barrel cortex 
(S1Cx) and CA1 hippocampus subfield (Hipp) in 16-week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice 
(bar = 50 μm). Representative of 3 independent replicates. (o) Quantification of NeuN-
positive neurons in the S1Cx region (layers IV-V) and CA1 hippocampus subfield in 4-6-, 
12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=5 
mice per group. In panels b-d, f, g, i, k, m, and o, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni's post 
hoc tests were used. See Fig. S17 for full scans of all western blots for MBP shown in panel 
l.
Montagne et al.
Page 43
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Loss of mature oligodendrocytes in pericyte-deficient mice and fibrinogen and fibrin 
toxicity to mouse oligodendrocytes
(a) Confocal images (bar = 20 μm) of Olig2 (oligodendrocyte marker), myelin basic protein 
(MBP), and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) 
staining in the CC of 16-week old F7/F7 and control (+/+) mice. Arrows, Olig2- and 
TUNEL-double positive cells. (b, c) Quantification of Olig2- and TUNEL-double positive 
cells (b) and Olig2-positive cells (c) in the CC of F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice 
from 4-6, 12-16, and 36-48 weeks of age. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per group. (d) Confocal 
images (bar = 20 μm) of Olig2, platelet-derived growth factor receptor α (PDGFRα) and 
cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (CNPase) in the CC of 16-week old F7/F7 and control 
(+/+) mice). (e, f) Quantification of Olig2- and PDGFRα -double positive oligodendrocyte 
progenitor cells (e) and Olig2- and CNPase-double positive myelinated mature 
oligodendrocytes (f) in the CC of 4-6-, 12-16-, and 36-48-week old F7/F7 (green) and +/+ 
control (blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per group. (g, h) Representative dot plots of the 
flow cytometry analysis of MBP-Alexa647 positive and proteolipid protein (PLP)-Alexa488 
positive myelinated mature oligodendrocytes (OLs) (isolated from white matter) from 3 
independent experiments in 12-16-week old F7/F7 and +/+ mice (g), and quantification of 
MBP- and PLP-double positive myelinated mature OLs (h) in 4-6, 12-16, and 36-48-week 
old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) animals. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per group. (i, j) 
Montagne et al.
Page 44
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Confocal analysis of hypoxyprobe-1 (pimonidazole)-positive hypoxic tissue (O2<10 mmHg) 
in the CC in 16-week old F7/F7 and +/+ mice (i, bar = 5 μm), and quantification of 
hypoxyprobe-1-positive area (j) expressed as the percentage of total tissue in the CC of 4-6- 
and 12-16-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SEM; n=3 mice per 
group. (k, l) Confocal images of MBP- and TUNEL-double positive cultured primary mouse 
OLs subjected to oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) or vehicle for 6 h (k, bar = 20 μm), 
and quantification of MBP- and TUNEL-double positive OLs subjected to OGD or vehicle 
for 6 h, or treated with fibrinogen (1.5 mg/mL) for 6 h (light grey) and 12 h (dark grey) (l). 
Mean ± SEM from 3 independent experiments (each 5 coverslips averaged per experiment). 
(m) Representative images (bar = 10 μm) of two MBP- and fibrinogen-double positive OLs. 
Orthogonal views show internalization of fibrinogen 6 hours after treatment (1.5 mg/mL). 
Representative of 5 independent replicates. (n-p) Western blots of autophagy markers LC3-I, 
LC3-II, and p62 (n) and their quantification (o, p) in primary mouse OLs cell lysates after 
treatment with fibrinogen (1.5 mg/mL), fibrin fibrils (0.1 mg/mL, see Fig. S13g) or vehicle 
for 12 h with or without MHY1485 (2 μM), a mTOR activator which inhibits autophagy. 
Western blots are representative of 3 independent experiments. Scanning densitometry of 
LC3-I, LC3-II, and p62 bands, and LC3-II/LC3-I ratio (o) and p62 relative abundance (p) 
normalized with β-actin. For o and p, mean ± SEM are from 3 independent experiments. (q) 
Caspase 3 activity at 12 and 24 h after treatment with vehicle, fibrinogen (1.5 mg/mL) or 
fibrin fibrils (0.1 mg/mL) with and without autophagy inhibitors MHY1485 (2 μM) or 
inhibitor VII (100 μM). Mean ± SEM; n=3 independent experiments. (r) Live cells 
quantified by live and dead assay 24 h after treatment of mature OLs and astrocytes with 
vehicle, fibrinogen (1.5 mg/mL) or fibrin fibrils (0.1 mg/mL). OLs were also treated with 
autophagy inhibitors MHY1485 (2 μM) or inhibitor VII (100 μM). Hirudin (4 U/mL) was 
added to all cultures except in vehicle-control (grey filled circles). Mean ± SEM; n=5 
independent experiments (each 3 coverslips averaged per experiment). In all panels, one-way 
ANOVA and Bonferroni's post hoc tests were used; ns=non-significant (p>0.05). See Fig. 
S17 for full scans of all western blots for LC3-I, LC3-II, and p62 shown in panel n.
Montagne et al.
Page 45
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. White matter changes in pericyte-deficient mice after pharmacological or genetic 
manipulations of systemic fibrinogen levels
(a) Extravascular fibrin(ogen) deposits in the corpus callosum (CC) of 12-week old F7/F7 
mice treated with vehicle, ancrod and tranexamic acid (TXA) (upper panels); or F7/F7 mice 
crossed with fibrinogen-(Fga) deficient +/- mice compared to littermate Fga+/+ controls 
(middle panels); or F7/F7 mice treated with control scrambled siRNA or plasminogen (Plg) 
siRNA for 7 days (lower panels), as described in Methods (bar = 10 μm). (b-c) 
Quantification of fibrin(ogen)-positive extravascular deposits (b) and CD13-positive pericyte 
coverage (c) in the CC of 12-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± 
SD; n=5 vehicle +/+ and 6 F7/F7 mice; n=6 ancrod-treated +/+ and 5 ancrod-treated F7/F7 
mice; n=5 TXA-treated +/+ and F7/F7 mice; n=5 F7/F7; Fga+/+, F7/F7; Fga+/-, F7/F7 + 
scrambled siRNA, and F7/F7 + Plg siRNA. (d) The Ktrans capillary permeability constant in 
the CC of 12-week old F7/F7 (green) and littermate control (+/+, blue). Values were 
generated from dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI scans. Mean ± SD; n=6 vehicle +/+ and 
F7/F7 mice; n=6 ancrod-treated +/+ and F7/F7 mice; n=5 TXA-treated +/+ and F7/F7 mice; 
n=6 F7/F7; Fga+/+, F7/F7; Fga+/-, F7/F7 + scrambled siRNA, and F7/F7 + Plg siRNA. (e, f) 
High-resolution T2*-weighted images (sagittal plane) of iron-containing hemosiderin 
deposits (red dots) in the CC of 12-week old F7/F7 mice treated with ancrod, TXA or 
vehicle, crossed with Fga+/- compared to littermate Fga+/+ control mice, and treated with 
scrambled siRNA or Plg siRNA (e), and quantification of hemosiderin deposits in the CC of 
12-week old F7/F7 (green) and control (+/+, blue) mice (f). Mean ± SD; n=6 vehicle +/+ and 
Montagne et al.
Page 46
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 F7/F7 mice; n=6 ancrod-treated +/+ and F7/F7 mice; n=5 TXA-treated +/+ and F7/F7 mice; 
n=6 F7/F7; Fga+/+, F7/F7; Fga+/-, F7/F7 + scrambled siRNA, and F7/F7 + Plg siRNA. (g) 
The blood flow values in the CC of 12-week old F7/F7 (green) and littermate control (+/+, 
blue) mice generated from dynamic susceptibility-contrast MRI scans. Mean ± SD; n=6 
vehicle +/+ and F7/F7 mice; n=6 ancrod-treated +/+ and F7/F7 mice; n=5 TXA-treated +/+ 
and F7/F7 mice; n=6 F7/F7; Fga+/+, F7/F7; Fga+/-, F7/F7 + scrambled siRNA, and F7/F7 + 
Plg siRNA. (h) Total white matter volume in the CC of 12-week old F7/F7 (green) and 
littermate control (+/+, blue) mice. Values were generated from diffusion tensor imaging 
MRI scans. Mean ± SD; n=6 vehicle +/+ and F7/F7 mice; n=6 ancrod-treated +/+ and F7/F7 
mice; n=5 TXA-treated +/+ and F7/F7 mice; n=6 F7/F7; Fga+/+, F7/F7; Fga+/-, F7/F7 + 
scrambled siRNA, and F7/F7 + Plg siRNA. (i) Quantification of Olig2-positive cells in the 
CC of 12-week old F7/F7 (green) and littermate control (+/+, blue) mice. Mean ± SD; n=5 
mice per group. All data were compared by one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni's post hoc; 
ns=non-significant (p>0.05).
Montagne et al.
Page 47
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
