 Commentary
The UN Decade of Nutrition, the NOVA food classification and
the trouble with ultra-processing
Carlos Augusto Monteiro1,2,*, Geoffrey Cannon2, Jean-Claude Moubarac2,3,
Renata Bertazzi Levy2,4, Maria Laura C Louzada2 and Patrícia Constante Jaime1,2
1Department of Nutrition, School of Public Health, University of São Paulo, Av. Dr Arnaldo 715, São
Paulo 01246-904, Brazil: 2Center for Epidemiological Research in Nutrition and Health, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil: 3Département de Nutrition, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada: 4Department of Preventive
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Submitted 27 October 2016: Final revision received 18 January 2017: Accepted 23 January 2017: First published online 21 March 2017
Abstract
Given evident multiple threats to food systems and supplies, food security, human
health and welfare, the living and physical world and the biosphere, the years
2016–2025 are now designated by the UN as the Decade of Nutrition, in support of
the UN Sustainable Development Goals. For these initiatives to succeed, it is
necessary to know which foods contribute to health and well-being, and which
are unhealthy. The present commentary outlines the NOVA system of food
classification based on the nature, extent and purpose of food processing.
Evidence that NOVA effectively addresses the quality of diets and their impact on
all forms of malnutrition, and also the sustainability of food systems, has now
accumulated in a number of countries, as shown here. A singular feature of NOVA
is its identification of ultra-processed food and drink products. These are not
modified
foods,
but
formulations
mostly
of
cheap
industrial
sources
of
dietary energy and nutrients plus additives, using a series of processes (hence
‘ultra-processed’). All together, they are energy-dense, high in unhealthy types of
fat, refined starches, free sugars and salt, and poor sources of protein, dietary fibre
and micronutrients. Ultra-processed products are made to be hyper-palatable and
attractive, with long shelf-life, and able to be consumed anywhere, any time. Their
formulation, presentation and marketing often promote overconsumption. Studies
based on NOVA show that ultra-processed products now dominate the food
supplies of various high-income countries and are increasingly pervasive in lower-
middle- and upper-middle-income countries. The evidence so far shows that
displacement of minimally processed foods and freshly prepared dishes and meals
by ultra-processed products is associated with unhealthy dietary nutrient profiles
and several diet-related non-communicable diseases. Ultra-processed products are
also troublesome from social, cultural, economic, political and environmental
points of view. We conclude that the ever-increasing production and consumption
of these products is a world crisis, to be confronted, checked and reversed as part
of the work of the UN Sustainable Development Goals and its Decade of Nutrition.
Keywords
Sustainable Development Goals
Decade of Nutrition
Food processing
Ultra-processed food
NOVA
The Anthropocene
On 1 April 2016 the UN General Assembly proclaimed the
Decade of Nutrition, to run from 2016 to 2025 as part of
the UN Sustainable Development Goals initiative(1). It will
be guided by the FAO, the WHO and other UN agencies,
with support requested from civil society and the private
sector. All concerned repeatedly emphasize that this work
is crucial, because of the evident multiple worsening
threats to food systems and supplies, and thus to food
security, human health and welfare, the living and physical
world and the biosphere. At the General Assembly
Public Health Nutrition: 21(1), 5–17
doi:10.1017/S1368980017000234
*Corresponding author: Email carlosam@usp.br
© The Authors 2017
 meeting, FAO Director-General José Graziano da Silva
stated: ‘This Resolution puts nutrition at the heart of
sustainable development’.
Identification of ultra-processed food and drink
products
In support of the UN initiatives, in September 2016 the
Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutri-
tion, an independent expert group one of whose members
is the FAO director-general, published its ‘Foresight’ report
on Food Systems and Diets: Facing the Challenges of the
21st Century(2). This ‘includes important recommenda-
tions and advice for leaders at the most senior levels in
countries and international organizations’. Its findings
‘constitute a stark warning for all countries ... the situation
is set to worsen dramatically over the next 20 years as
powerful drivers of change such as population growth,
climate change and urbanization converge on food
systems’. As an example:
‘If the direction of current policies remains the same,
then estimates suggest that by 2030, the number of
overweight and obese people will have increased
from 1·33 billion in 2005 to 3·28 billion, around
one third of the projected global population. This is a
major concern as no country to date has success-
fully reversed growth in obesity once it has been
allowed to develop.’
In this context, specific reference is made to production
and consumption of ultra-processed food and drink
products as a reason for the rise in obesity:
‘In
2000,
sales
of
ultra-processed
foods
and
beverages in the upper-middle-income countries
were one third of those in the high-income countries.
Fifteen years later, they were more than half.’
The term ‘ultra-processed’ was explained and given a
context:
‘The term “ultra-processed” was coined to refer to
industrial formulations manufactured from sub-
stances derived from foods or synthesized from other
organic sources. They typically contain little or no
whole foods, are ready-to-consume or heat up, and
are fatty, salty or sugary and depleted in dietary fibre,
protein, various micronutrients and other bioactive
compounds. Examples include: sweet, fatty or salty
packaged snack products, ice cream, sugar-sweetened
beverages, chocolates, confectionery, French fries,
burgers and hot dogs, and poultry and fish nuggets.’
As also stated in a 2015 report published by the Pan
American Health Organization (PAHO) of the WHO(3):
‘The most striking change in food systems of high-
income countries, and now of low- and middle-
income countries, is displacement of dietary patterns
based on meals and dishes prepared from unprocessed
or minimally processed foods by those that are
increasingly based on ultra-processed food and drink
products. The result is diets with excessive energy
density, high in free sugars and unhealthy fats and
salt, and low in dietary fiber that increase the risk of
obesity and other diet-related non-communicable
diseases. The proportion of ultra-processed products in
food supplies can be seen as a measure of overall
population diet quality.’
The September 2016 ‘Foresight’ report, which ends with
an annex listing all types of ultra-processed food products,
goes on to state(2):
‘Sales of ultra-processed food and sugar-sweetened
beverages
are
growing.
This
growth
is almost
exclusively found in lower-middle income and
upper-middle-income countries ... Sales of ultra-
processed foods in East and South East Asia are
expected to approach those of high-income countries
by 2035.’
The concept of ultra-processing, developed by a team at
the University of São Paulo of which we are members, was
first proposed in a Public Health Nutrition commentary in
2009(4). It was created as part of the thesis that the nature,
extent and purpose of food processing explain what is
now the relationship between food, nutrition, health and
disease. This thesis is now acknowledged in reports,
statements and commentaries from the FAO(5,6) and
PAHO(3,7), and in leading scientific journals(8,9). It has
been used in an official national set of food-based dietary
guidelines(10,11) and by many investigators in several
countries (see later). It was initially summarized as
follows(4):
‘The most important factor now, when considering
food, nutrition and public health, is not nutrients,
and is not foods, so much as what is done to food-
stuffs and the nutrients originally contained in
them, before they are purchased and consumed.
That is to say, the issue is food processing – or, to be
more precise, the nature, extent and purpose of
processing, and what happens to food and to us as a
result of processing.’
The present commentary has five main sections. First, we
give reasons why proper understanding of the relationship
between diet and public health now needs to emphasize
food processing. Second, we specify the need to make
precise definitions of food processing and to distinguish
between different types of processing. Third, we present
NOVA, the food classification based on the nature, extent
and purpose of food processing that places foodstuffs in
four groups, one of which is specified as ultra-processed
food and drink products. Fourth, we summarize the use of
NOVA in a number of countries to describe and monitor
6
CA Monteiro et al.
 population dietary patterns and to assess the impact of
ultra-processed products on the quality of diets and health
outcomes. Fifth, we summarize some health, social, eco-
nomic, political and environmental consequences of
replacing minimally processed foods and freshly prepared
meals by ultra-processed products. Then finally, we pro-
pose that the rapidly increasing production and con-
sumption of ultra-processed food and drink products,
which is contributing to climate disruption and also to pol-
lution, degradation and depletion of air, land, water and
sources of energy, is in itself now a world crisis to be con-
fronted, checked and reversed as part of the UN Sustainable
Development Goals and its Decade of Nutrition.
Reasons to emphasize food processing
Special attention to food processing is now crucial in order
to understand the connection between diet and public
health. Here are five reasons that justify this statement.
They explain why the NOVA classification has been
developed and why it is necessary to identity the sources
of ultra-processed products.
One. Conventional food classifications no longer work
well. They usually group foods and foodstuffs in terms of
their botanical origin or animal species and according to
nutrients they contain. In this way they often group
together foods that have different effects on health and
disease. So ‘cereals and cereal products’ often group
whole grains together with sugared ‘breakfast cereals’ and
cookies (biscuits), and ‘meat and meat products’ often
group fresh chicken together with ‘nuggets’. This side-
lining of food processing has serious consquences, as
shown below.
Two. Evidence on the relationship between food pro-
cessing and health outcomes has been increasing steadily.
An obvious example is industrial trans-fats, produced by
the partial hydrogenation process in the manufacture of a
vast number of fatty branded packaged products, includ-
ing margarines, biscuits and other ‘long-life’ baked goods.
Trans-fats are now known to be a cause of CVD(12).
Reports issued by UN agencies and other authoritative
organizations(13,14) list some processed foods and drinks
as certainly or probably implicated in obesity and chronic
diseases. These include energy-dense food products, fast
foods, soft drinks, sugary drinks, refined starchy foods,
processed meat and salt-preserved foods. But such reports
apparently do not see any pattern, and stop short of
examining processing as such. Both the US 2010 and the
2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans reports(15,16)
advise less consumption of common ingredients of pro-
cessed foods such as sodium, added sugars, trans-fats,
refined grains and processed meats. Yet these reports
also do not examine processing as such, and the term
‘processing’ is not even included in their glossaries of
terms. Also, concern about food additives is usually limited
and confined to issues of contamination; much less
attention is given to the use of cosmetic food additives
(notably, flavours and colours) that are used in order to
make combinations of cheap processed oils, refined
sugars and starches palatable and attractive.
Three. Food systems and supplies are changing globally
and are determining changes in food purchase and con-
sumption. Specialist food retailers are being rapidly dis-
placed
by
supermarkets
whose
central
aisles
are
dominated by branded packaged products. Home cooking
has decreased in favour of snacking on processed pro-
ducts, consumption of pre-prepared dishes, and the very
rapid rise of franchised fast-food caterers selling processed
meat products, French fries and sugared soft drinks.
Branded products such as fatty, sugary or salty snack
foods and sugared soft drinks are available in all sorts of
retail outlets, often round the clock(2,6,17).
Four. All these phenomena are being driven by trans-
national corporations. These corporations are identified in
a 2012 PLoS Medicine series, and in 2014 by Margaret
Chan, Director-General of the WHO, as ‘Big Food’(18,19).
Since the 1980s they have taken advantage of the freedom
to make foreign direct investments, an engine of economic
growth, which, as reported by the Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development, have risen from
$US 61 million in 1985 to $US 1 068 000 million in 2000 –
and to $US 1 730 000 million in 2015(20,21). This has dra-
matically changed food supplies in middle- and low-
income countries, as shown elsewhere(22,23). The annual
turnovers of a number of corporations exceed the gross
national product of mid-range countries and, unlike many
national governments, they can divert or invest billions of
dollars in new technologies and markets(24). As stated in a
2000 report by the Global Policy Forum(25):
‘Although TNCs [transnational corporations] are
collectively the world’s most powerful economic
force, no intergovernmental organisation is charged
with governing their behaviour. The unwillingness
or inability of governments to control TNCs in a
period of deregulated global trade and investment
does not bode well [is not good] for people’s health or
the environment.’
Five, and related. It is now becoming increasingly well
known that transnational food corporations have colossal
resources to manufacture, market, promote and lobby for
their packaged branded products. Their impact is most
evident in the middle- and low-income countries they
have penetrated since the 1980s, where they often plan
‘double-digit’ growth, meaning 10 % or more increase in
annual
sales(24).
As
pointed
out
in
the
September
2016 ‘Foresight’ report(2):
‘Food and beverage companies spend large amounts
on
advertising,
accounting
(including
alcohol
retail) for 17 % of global media spending in 2012.
Coca Cola and Nestle, which were among the top ten
UN, NOVA and the trouble with ultra-processing
7
 largest global advertisers in 2014, together spent US
$6·21 billion – equivalent in size to almost two-
thirds of the entire UK overseas aid budget.
A recent review of food marketing practices con-
cludes that food promotion in high-income coun-
tries has been geared towards increased access to
cheaper, bigger and tastier calorie-dense food. Much
consumer influencing is conducted “below the
radar” using less obvious methods than advertising,
such as brand association, sensory complexity, the
size and shape of portions, packages and serving
containers. These practices are also following simi-
lar patterns in low- and middle-income countries.
There
is
convincing
evidence
that
advertising
influences food choice among children.’
Taken all together, these and other factors, including the
impact of ultra-processed food and drink products on
social life, culture, employment and the environment, of
which more below, show that in this 21st century it is
necessary to pay special attention to food processing and
to ultra-processed products (see Box 1).
Food processing as such is not the issue
So, what does ‘processing’ mean? Organizations that
represent the interests of food and drink corporations(26,27)
or professional organizations(28–30) that are supported by
food product manufacturers(31) have published reports,
brochures or papers between 2010 and 2014 on food
processing. These use very broad characterizations, such
as ‘food processing is any deliberate change made in a
food from the time of origin to the time of consump-
tion’(26), or ‘a variety of operations by which raw foodstuffs
are made suitable for consumption, cooking, or sto-
rage’(27), or else ‘food processing is the alteration of foods
from the state in which they are harvested or raised to
better preserve them and feed consumers’(30).
Additives are explained with statements such as(27):
‘Food additives are added for a particular purpose
whether it is to ensure food safety, to add nutritional
value or to improve food quality. They play an
important role in preserving the freshness, safety,
taste, appearance and texture of foods. For example,
antioxidants prevent fats and oils from becoming
rancid whereas emulsifiers stop peanut butter from
separating into solid and liquid fractions. Food
additives keep bread free of mould for longer and
allow fruit jams to “gel” so they can be spread onto
bread.’
It is also true in a broad sense that(27):
‘We all process foods everyday when preparing a
meal for ourselves or our family and virtually all
Box 1 The food industry is essential
It is sometimes thought that concerns about food processing amount to some sort of attack on the food industry in
general. Indeed, public statements made about food, nutrition and health often refer critically to ‘the food industry’
without giving any clear idea of what is being referred to.
This practice is unhelpful. The food industry as a whole is obviously essential for the welfare and survival of the
human race, for the sustenance of civilizations, and now for the reliable supply of food to rapidly growing urban
populations. Food production, preservation, manufacture, distribution and sale create safe, secure and convenient
food supplies for all populations and communities with adequate and stable disposable incomes, all over the world.
The food industry includes farmers and other food and drink producers, manufacturers, distributors, retailers and
caterers, and associated industries, of all sizes, and their unions and trade organizations(9). These and other workers,
cooperatives, tradesmen, shopkeepers, entrepreneurs, industrialists, and their representatives, are all together the
true food system ‘private sector’. It is practically meaningless to characterize ‘the food industry’, a very broad term, as
if any critical judgement could be made of industry as a whole.
Any meaningful critical judgement on the present role played by the food industry within food systems needs to
isolate the transnational and other very large corporations and companies whose profits depend on food and drink
products which, consumed at levels now usual in many countries, and projected to be so in most countries, are a
major cause of concern for global public health. Specifically, the critical focus needs to be on the lightly regulated
transnational manufacturing and catering corporations and their trade, representative and allied organizations that
dominate the market for ultra-processed food products. These corporations and organizations are often identified and
treated as if they are ‘the food industry’ or even ‘the private sector’. But they do not and cannot represent the interests
of the food industry as a whole.
Singling out transnational corporations does not mean that they are solely responsible. They have been enabled to
grow very fast and to become very powerful because of political and economic trade policies agreed at global level
that have given them extraordinary freedom to do what they want within existing laws.
8
CA Monteiro et al.
 foods undergo some form of processing before they
are ready to eat … Processing spans the whole food
chain from harvesting on the farm to different forms
of culinary preparation in the home.’
Practically all food is processed in some sense and in some
way, including by ‘other procedures’ not mentioned above
such as hydrogenation, hydrolysation and extrusion. Thus
the term ‘processing’ (like the term ‘industry’) is very general
and therefore not helpful. It is a mistake to make any jud-
gement of food supplies or foods simply because they are
‘processed’.
Further,
attempts
to
distinguish
between
different types of processing by using undefined terms such
as ‘highly’ or ‘heavily’ processed, or ‘fast’, ‘convenience’,
‘snack’ or ‘junk’ food, are also unhelpful.
Verdicts on food processing as such have little or no
meaning. Food scientists and technologists and food
manufacturers rightly emphasize the benefits of originally
ancient and also relatively novel processes such as drying,
non-alcoholic fermentation, chilling and freezing, pas-
teurization and vacuum-packing. But on the other hand –
just to take two examples – evidence on the harm done by
partial hydrogenation is now conclusive, and on sugaring
(notably with soft drinks or ‘soda’) is very strong(12–14).
It is possible to make sense of food processing and its
effects on human health only when analysis and assess-
ment are discriminating and precise, with terms defined
and with types, uses and effects of processing identified
and distinguished. Definitions need to be meaningful,
detailed and objective, which is to say specific, coherent,
clear, comprehensive and workable. This is part of the
purpose of the NOVA food classification(4,5,11,32–35).
The NOVA classification
NOVA (which is not an acronym) groups foods according
to the nature, extent and purpose of the industrial pro-
cessing they undergo. Food processing as identified by
NOVA involves physical, biological and chemical pro-
cesses used after foods are separated from nature, and
before being consumed or prepared as dishes and meals.
Foods may be consumed by themselves (such as fruits,
nuts, milk); or as a main item or accompanying items of
dishes and meals (such as grains, flours, vegetables, meat,
eggs); or as food products used in making these dishes and
meals (such as oils, butter, sugar, salt). Or, they may be food
products ready to consume or heat (such as bread, cheese,
ham; packaged snacks, soft drinks, pre-prepared frozen
dishes). NOVA classifies all foods and food products into
four groups. See the Appendix for detailed lists of foods and
food products in each of the four groups.
Group 1. Unprocessed or minimally processed foods
Unprocessed (or natural) foods are edible parts of plants
(seeds, fruits, leaves, stems, roots) or of animals (muscle,
offal, eggs, milk), and also fungi, algae and water, after
separation from nature. Minimally processed foods are
natural foods altered by processes that include removal
of inedible or unwanted parts, and drying, crushing,
grinding, fractioning, filtering, roasting, boiling, non-alcoholic
fermentation, pasteurization, refrigeration, chilling, freezing,
placing
in
containers
and
vacuum-packaging.
These
processes are designed to preserve natural foods, to make
them suitable for storage, or to make them safe or edible or
more pleasant to consume. Many unprocessed or minimally
processed foods are prepared and cooked at home or in
restaurant kitchens in combination with processed culinary
ingredients as dishes or meals.
Group 2. Processed culinary ingredients
Processed culinary ingredients, such as oils, butter, sugar
and salt, are substances derived from Group 1 foods or
from nature by processes that include pressing, refining,
grinding, milling and drying. The purpose of such pro-
cesses is to make durable products that are suitable for use
in home and restaurant kitchens to prepare, season and
cook Group 1 foods and to make with them varied and
enjoyable hand-made dishes and meals, such as stews,
soups and broths, salads, breads, preserves, drinks and
desserts. They are not meant to be consumed by them-
selves, and are normally used in combination with Group
1 foods to make freshly prepared drinks, dishes and meals.
Group 3. Processed foods
Processed foods, such as bottled vegetables, canned fish,
fruits in syrup, cheeses and freshly made breads, are made
essentially by adding salt, oil, sugar or other substances
from Group 2 to Group 1 foods. Processes include various
preservation or cooking methods, and, in the case of
breads and cheese, non-alcoholic fermentation. Most
processed foods have two or three ingredients, and are
recognizable as modified versions of Group 1 foods. They
are edible by themselves or, more usually, in combination
with other foods. The purpose of processing here is to
increase the durability of Group 1 foods, or to modify or
enhance their sensory qualities.
Group 4. Ultra-processed foods
Ultra-processed foods, such as soft drinks, sweet or
savoury packaged snacks, reconstituted meat products
and pre-prepared frozen dishes, are not modified foods
but formulations made mostly or entirely from substances
derived from foods and additives, with little if any intact
Group 1 food.
Ingredients of these formulations usually include those
also used in processed foods, such as sugars, oils, fats or
salt. But ultra-processed products also include other
sources of energy and nutrients not normally used in
culinary preparations. Some of these are directly extracted
from foods, such as casein, lactose, whey and gluten.
Many are
derived
from
further processing
of
food
constituents, such as hydrogenated or interesterified oils,
UN, NOVA and the trouble with ultra-processing
9
 hydrolysed proteins, soya protein isolate, maltodextrin,
invert sugar and high-fructose corn syrup.
Additives in ultra-processed foods include some also
used in processed foods, such as preservatives, anti-
oxidants and stabilizers. Classes of additives found only in
ultra-processed products include those used to imitate or
enhance the sensory qualities of foods or to disguise
unpalatable aspects of the final product. These additives
include dyes and other colours, colour stabilizers; flavours,
flavour enhancers, non-sugar sweeteners; and processing
aids such as carbonating, firming, bulking and anti-bulking,
de-foaming, anti-caking and glazing agents, emulsifiers,
sequestrants and humectants.
A multitude of sequences of processes is used to
combine the usually many ingredients and to create the
final product (hence ‘ultra-processed’). The processes
include several with no domestic equivalents, such as
hydrogenation and hydrolysation, extrusion and mould-
ing, and pre-processing for frying.
The overall purpose of ultra-processing is to create
branded, convenient (durable, ready to consume), attrac-
tive (hyper-palatable) and highly profitable (low-cost
ingredients) food products designed to displace all other
food groups. Ultra-processed food products are usually
packaged attractively and marketed intensively.
NOVA in use
The NOVA classification has now been applied world-
wide. Uses so far include description of population dietary
patterns, assessments of changes over time in the dietary
share of ultra-processed products, and analyses of the
association of this share with the nutrient profile of diets
and with health outcomes.
In
Brazil,
NOVA
has
been
used
to
assess:
the
socio-economic and demographic distribution of dietary
patterns(36,37); time changes in dietary patterns(36,38); the
impact of the dietary share of ultra-processed products on
the dietary content of macronutrients(39–41) and micro-
nutrients(42); and the association of consumption of
ultra-processed products with obesity(43,44), metabolic
syndrome(45) and dyslipidaemias(46). NOVA has also been
used in Brazil to study the relationship between household
food purchase patterns and relative prices of ultra-
processed and all other food items(47), as well as the
influence of the food environment(48–50) and of food
advertising(51) on the consumption of ultra-processed
products; and to evaluate the impact of a nutrition
education intervention(52).
In the USA, NOVA has been used to describe popula-
tion dietary patterns and to assess the impact of ultra-
processed products on the overall consumption of added
sugar(53), on the dietary content of other critical macro-
nutrients and micronutrients(54), and on urinary levels of
phyto-oestrogens(55). With some adaptation, it has been
used also to evaluate the nutritional quality of packaged
foods purchased by US households and to study differ-
ences in purchase according to race/ethnicity(56,57). In
Canada, it has been used to assess secular trends in
national dietary patterns(58) and the impact of ultra-
processed products on indicators of nutrient profile of
diets(59,60). In the UK, NOVA has been used to describe
population dietary patterns and to study the relationship
between household food purchase patterns and relative
prices of ultra-processed and all other food items(47), and
to estimate the potential for reduction of CVD by reducing
consumption of ultra-processed products(61). In Australia,
it has been used to assess dietary sodium intake and food
sources of sodium(62), to study national time trends in
aspects of food practices implicated in diet-related health
risks(63), and to build a tool to measure healthy and sus-
tainable dietary behaviours(64).
In Chile, NOVA has been used to describe population
dietary patterns and to assess the impact of the consumption
of ultra-processed products on the nutritional quality of
diets(65,66). It has been used in Mexico to describe popula-
tion dietary patterns and determinants of consumption of
ultra-processed food products(67). In Norway, it has been
used to assess the participation of ultra-processed foods in
national food sales(68); in New Zealand, to describe the
nutrient profile of supermarket foods(69); and in Sweden to
study time trends in consumption of ultra-processed pro-
ducts and in adult obesity(70). In Spain, the association
between the consumption of ultra-processed foods and the
9-year incidence of obesity and hypertension was tested in a
cohort of middle-aged adults(71,72).
Studies on time trends in sales of ultra-processed pro-
ducts have covered seventy-nine middle- and high-income
countries(73) and fourteen countries in Asia(74). A paper
published in The Lancet in 2013(9) compared strategies
used by the manufacturers of tobacco, alcohol and ultra-
processed products, with implications for prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases. A PAHO report
described
socio-economic
determinants
of
sales
of
selected ultra-processed products in fifteen Latin American
countries and analysed the association between annual
changes in sales of these products and annual changes in
population mean BMI(3). A WHO report has used NOVA to
assess and compare the impact of the dietary share of
ultra-processed products on the excessive overall intake of
free sugars in the USA, Canada, Brazil and Colombia(75).
Altogether, studies based on NOVA show exponential
growth in consumption of ultra-processed products and
confirm that they displace unprocessed or minimally pro-
cessed foods and freshly prepared dishes and meals made
from these foods together with processed culinary ingre-
dients. For example, between 1998 and 2012, per head sales
of sweet or savoury snacks and soft drinks increased by
50 % in upper-middle-income countries and by 100 and
300 %, respectively, in lower-middle-income countries(73). In
Brazilian
urban
households,
ultra-processed
products
10
CA Monteiro et al.
 represented 18·7 % of total energy of food baskets in 1988,
increasing by 50 % to 29·6 % in 2009, while minimally
processed foods declined from 44·0 to 38·9 % and processed
culinary ingredients from 35·7 to 28·9 %(38).
Studies based on NOVA also show that the consump-
tion of ultra-processed products increases the overall
energy density of diets and their content of saturated and
trans-fats and free sugars, and decreases dietary fibre,
phyto-oestrogens, magnesium, potassium, vitamin A, iron
and zinc, among other key micronutrients. For instance,
the average content of added sugars in the US diet is
19·5 % among the highest consumers of ultra-processed
products (upper quintile) and 7·5 % among the lowest
consumers (lower quintile)(53). In the Brazilian diet, the
content of vitamin A, iron and zinc among the lowest
consumers of ultra-processed products exceeds by 5, 15
and 25 %, respectively, the same content among the
highest consumers(42).
Ecological
studies
and
cross-sectional
and
cohort
studies have documented a direct association between
ultra-processed products and obesity(3,43,44,70,71), hyper-
tension(72), metabolic syndrome(45) and dyslipidaemias(46).
NOVA has also been used to orient the nutrient profile
model developed by the PAHO for the region of the
Americas(7). The dietary share of ultra-processed products
has been recommended by a leading international orga-
nization as a way to monitor the overall quality of national
diets(76).
The NOVA four food groups are also the basis for the
four main recommendations of the current official national
Brazilian dietary guidelines(10), recognized by the FAO(6)
as the first food-based dietary guidelines that take social,
cultural, economic and other aspects of sustainability into
account. The main recommendations of the national
dietary guidelines of Uruguay, published in December
2016, are also based on the NOVA four food groups(77).
The main recommendations of the Brazilian guidelines are:
1. Make natural or minimally processed foods, in great
variety, mainly of plant origin, and preferably produced
with agro-ecological methods, the basis of your diet.
2. Use oils, fats, salt and sugar in small amounts for
seasoning and cooking foods and to create culinary
preparations.
3. Limit the use of processed foods, consuming them in
small amounts as ingredients in culinary preparations
or as part of meals based on natural or minimally
processed foods.
4. Avoid ultra-processed products.
The trouble with ultra-processing
As stated, ultra-processed products are not modified
foods, recognizable as such, but formulations of industrial
sources of dietary energy and nutrients, particularly
unhealthy types of fat, starches, free sugars and salt, plus
additives including those designed to intensify sensory
impact. They typically contain little or even no intact food.
The ingredients of ultra-processed products make them
fatty, sugary or salty, often high in saturated fats or trans-
fats, and depleted in dietary fibre and various micro-
nutrients and other bioactive compounds. This is why, in
several countries, as shown above, higher consumption of
these products is associated with unhealthy dietary nutri-
ent profiles and several diet-related non-communicable
diseases.
When solid, because of their main ingredients and the
lack of dietary fibre and water, the energy density of ultra-
processed products ranges from fairly high (about 940–
1150 kJ (225–275 kcal) per 100 g for baked products) to
high (about 1460–1675 kJ (350–400 kcal) per 100 g for
‘energy’ bars) or very high (1675–2090 kJ (400–500 kcal)
per 100 g for most biscuits and for chips (crisps))(10).
When formulated as drinks, ultra-processed products are
often sugared, and are usually depleted in or devoid of
nutrients. These attributes make most ultra-processed
products prone to cause inadvertent overconsumption of
dietary energy, and thus overweight and obesity(14,78).
They also typically have high glycaemic loads(79). This
makes them liable to disturb and even derange endo-
genous processes in the nervous system that signal satiety
and control appetite, and thus increase the risk of obesity
and diabetes(13).
Ultra-processed products are often formulated to be
habit-forming, and are sometimes even quasi-addictive,
which makes it hard to make healthy choices and to avoid
overconsumption(80,81).
Many ultra-processed products create a false impression
of being healthy by, for example, the addition of dietary
fibre and some micronutrients and the replacement of
sugar by artificial sweeteners, or the reduction of sodium,
enabling manufacturers to make health claims despite the
product remaining unhealthy(82,83). Vast sums of money
are spent by the biggest corporations on advertising and
promotion of regular or reformulated products, including
cross-advertising between brands, to make them attractive,
exciting and even glamorous, especially to children and
young people(84–86). All these practices impede ability to
make healthy choices.
Ultra-processed products now dominate the food sup-
plies of various high-income countries. For instance, they
made up 57·9 % of the US food supply in 2009–2010(53)
and 47·7 % of the total dietary energy intake in Canada in
2004(60). In middle-income countries, figures are lower, for
instance 29·8 % in Mexico(67), 28·6 % in Chile(66) and
21·5 % in Brazil(39); but, as shown by sales data in Latin
American countries(3), they are rising rapidly. Estimates of
the contribution of ultra-processed products to the total
dietary energy intake in low-income countries are not yet
available, but the highest proportional increase in sales of
sweet and savoury snacks and sugary soft drinks is seen in
lower-middle-income countries(73).
UN, NOVA and the trouble with ultra-processing
11
 Thus,
ultra-processed
products
have
troublesome
effects on global nutrition and health. The evidence so far
indicates that the displacement of unprocessed or mini-
mally processed foods and freshly prepared dishes and
meals by ultra-processed food and drink products is
driving the high and increasing global burden of obesity
and other diet-related chronic non-communicable dis-
eases(87). The evidence also indicates that this change in
dietary patterns can worsen the still relevant burden of
micronutrient deficiencies in low- and middle-income
countries(87), notwithstanding the fortification of some
ultra-processed products with some micronutrients.
Ultra-processed products and their makers are also
causing social, cultural, economic, political, environmental
and other problems. Much of what follows is obvious or
common sense, and is much discussed in the literature.
Some invites further research, which should not delay
action to slow, stop and reverse the increases in produc-
tion and consumption of ultra-processed products.
Social life in and out of the home is weakened by ultra-
processed products. Because they are convenient, being
formulated as ready-to-consume snacks and drinks and
ready-to-heat items, they displace dishes and meals made
at home. The shared experiences of acquiring, preparing,
cooking and enjoying food together, part of our evolution
as humans(88,89), with all the knowledge this brings of the
nature, meaning and value of food, become increasingly
lost. Meal tables and all that goes with them are used less
often, or even not at all. The kitchen becomes less used
and the dining room, a special place for people who live
in the same place to come together and share in one
another’s lives, may disappear. Instead, people at home
get into the habit of eating alone, at different times, inat-
tentively, often when doing something else. Children and
young people eat while using their computer or playing
video games. Out of the house, ultra-processed products
are consumed anywhere, any time, while working,
walking or driving, or when using cell phones. These are
generally isolated situations, concealed by advertisements
and
other
marketing
suggesting
that
ultra-processed
products enhance social interaction(11,90,91).
Culture, national and local, is also harmed by ultra-
processed products. Transnational ultra-processed food
and drink manufacturers, distributors and caterers are
increasingly oligopolistic(17,18,22), and work in concert, as
is evident from joint trade organizations set up to defend
their shared interests(24). Supported by international free
trade agreements(92), they displace authentic established
varied food systems and cultures, and generate uniform
consumer habits. Their strategy in effect is to teach the
world to snack(93). Everywhere, food customs that are part
of the identity of countries and regions, and food cultures
based on shared meals, are being undermined by ultra-
processed products, with their branding, promotion,
packaging and labelling. The contents of any type of
product – the soft drinks and burgers and many other
ultra-processed products made by giant corporations – are
much the same everywhere. The impression of variety is
given by marketing campaigns with vast sums spent on
them worldwide using multimedia, social media, the
Internet and television, as well as all sorts of printed
advertisements, which further invalidate what have been
established dietary patterns, culinary knowledge and
skills, and social cultures. This has an alienating effect on
children and young people, who get the impression that
the culture and nature of their own country and location,
ethnicity and tradition are boring(11,94,95).
Production and consumption of ultra-processed pro-
ducts also have troublesome economic consequences.
Transnational and other big corporations using cheap
ingredients for their products operate economies of scale
and have huge reserves of money for investment and
development. They may take over national and local
businesses, including the makers, distributors and sellers
of minimally processed foods(24,25). In order to join in the
market and to compete, national and regional manu-
facturers increasingly produce their own variations of
ultra-processed products. Demand for cheap oils, sugar,
starches and other common ingredients of ultra-processed
products creates crop monocultures in many countries in
order to produce raw materials usually for export and not
foods for direct human consumption. Judgements vary on
the economic effects. Some national and local businesses
and family farmers adapt and flourish, but livelihoods
especially of the most impoverished vulnerable and
impoverished communities can be made even more
insecure(96–98). In high- and middle-income countries, the
price of most ultra-processed food products has decreased
relative to that of most minimally processed foods(99). But
varied freshly prepared meals made from minimally pro-
cessed foods with processed culinary ingredients can
readily be made to be cheaper than ultra-processed pro-
ducts(47,100–102).
Ultra-processed
products
also
carry
another cost: obesity and related chronic diseases such as
diabetes are debilitating and impede ability to work, and
their treatment, for those without health insurance or
access to publicly funded health services, can mean
financial catastrophe(96,103).
There are also political consequences. Ultra-processed
products have made the fortunes of the transnational food
and drink corporations, of which, as mentioned, the
largest have annual turnovers the size of middle-ranked
national
economies(24,25).
The
deregulation
that
has
enabled transnational corporations to grow exponentially,
their ability to move into the countries that give them most
scope and their freedom to act as they choose within the
law, all give them more power and elected national gov-
ernments less ability to act in the public interest(9,19,24,25).
Thus, it becomes difficult for governments, should they
wish to do so, to enact fiscal and other statutory policies
designed to make unprocessed and minimally processed
foods more available and cheaper, and ultra-processed
12
CA Monteiro et al.
 products less available and relatively or absolutely more
expensive. WHO Director-General Margaret Chan has
explained(19):
‘Efforts to prevent noncommunicable diseases go
against the business interests of powerful economic
operators…. It is not just Big Tobacco anymore.
Public health must also contend with Big Food, Big
Soda, and Big Alcohol. All of these industries fear
regulation, and protect themselves by using the same
tactics. Research has documented these tactics well.
They include front groups, lobbies, promises of self-
regulation, lawsuits, and industry funded research
that confuses the evidence and keeps the public in
doubt. Tactics also include gifts, grants, and con-
tributions to worthy causes that cast these industries
as respectable corporate citizens in the eyes of poli-
ticians and the public. They include arguments that
place the responsibility for harm to health on indi-
viduals, and portray government actions as inter-
ference in personal liberties and free choice.
This is formidable opposition. Market power readily
translates into political power. Few governments
prioritize health over big business. As we learned
from experience with the tobacco industry, a pow-
erful corporation can sell the public just about
anything. Let me remind you. Not one single
country has managed to turn around its obesity
epidemic in all age groups. This is not a failure of
individual will-power. This is a failure of political
will to take on big business.’
Production and consumption of ultra-processed pro-
ducts are also damaging the environment. For example in
the USA, food packaging is about half of total packaging
by weight and accounts for almost two-thirds of total
packaging waste by volume(104). Bottles, containers,
wrappings and other packaging of ultra-processed pro-
ducts create colossal amounts of garbage, some not bio-
gradable, thrown away in the street and countryside,
washed out of sewers, and disposed of in landfill sites. The
manufacture and distribution of ultra-processed products
and their ingredients often involve long international
transport routes and therefore excessive use of non-
renewable energy, which contributes to climate disrup-
tion(105). Intensive breeding of animals for human food is
especially prodigal in its use of energy. Cattle bred for the
burger trade require animal feed produced by mono-
cultures such as of soyabeans and corn, and many other
inputs including antibiotics, and in countries such as Brazil
involve the destruction of great tracts of rainforest and
savannah(106,107). All this, in common with other forms of
industrial agriculture, contributes to climate disruption,
causes pollution, loss of biodiversity, and depletion,
degradation and losses of water, soil, energy and other
non-renewable natural resources.
Living in the Decade of Nutrition
The Anthropocene, generally agreed as beginning in the
1950s, is the epoch in which human activities are disturbing
natural planetary balance to an extent that may well become
irreversible. Concerted public policies and actions are needed
very urgently, to make life on Earth sustainable(108,109).
Human
activities
that
are
thwarting
sustainability
include those leading to climate disruption; precipitate
urbanization; the pollution, degradation and depletion of
air, land, water and sources of energy; gross abuses and
waste caused by mass production of animals; and food
and nutrition insecurity(110).
We propose that the ever-increasing production and
consumption of ultra-processed food and drink products
should be identified as one of the human activities leading
to the crises listed above. We also propose that the impact
of ultra-processed products on human health is itself a
world crisis, to be confronted, checked and reversed as
part of the UN Sustainable Development Goals and its
Decade of Nutrition.
Acknowledgements
Financial support: This work was supported by the
Conselho
Nacional
de
Desenvolvimento
Científico
e Tecnológico (CNPq; grant number 443477/2014-0) and the
Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo
(FAPESP; grant number 2015/14900-9). CNPq and FAPESP
had no role in the design, analysis or writing of this article.
Conflict of interest: The authors declare that there are no
conflicts of interests. Authorship: All authors participated in
the conception and drafting of the commentary. Ethics of
human subject participation: Not applicable.
References
1.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(2016) UN General Assembly proclaims Decade of Action
on
Nutrition.
http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/
408970/icode/ (accessed March 2017).
2.
Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutri-
tion (2016) Food Systems and Diets: Facing the Challenges
of the 21st Century. London: Global Panel; available at
http://glopan.org/sites/default/files/ForesightReport.pdf
3.
Pan American Health Organization of the World Health
Organization (2015) Ultra-Processed Food and Drink
Products in Latin America: Trends, Impact on Obesity,
Policy Implications. Washington, DC: PAHO; available at
http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&
view=article&id=11153%3Aultra-processed-food-and-drink-
products&catid=4999%3Adocuments&lang=em
4.
Monteiro CA (2009) Nutrition and health. The issue is not
food, nor nutrients, so much as processing. Public Health
Nutr 12, 729–731.
5.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(2015) Guidelines on the Collection of Information on Food
Processing Through Food Consumption Surveys. Rome:
FAO; available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4690e.pdf
UN, NOVA and the trouble with ultra-processing
13
 6.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
&
Food
Climate
Research
Network
(2016)
Plates,
Pyramids, Planet. Developments in National Healthy
and Sustainable Dietary Guidelines: A State of Play
Assessment. Rome/Oxford: FAO/University of Oxford;
available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5640e.pdf
7.
Pan American Health Organization of the World Health
Organization (2016) Nutrient Profile Model. Washington,
DC: PAHO.
8.
Ludwig D (2011) Technology, diet, and the burden of
chronic disease. JAMA 305, 1352–1353.
9.
Moodie R, Stuckler D, Monteiro CA et al. (2013) Profits and
pandemics: prevention of harmful effects of tobacco,
alcohol, and ultra-processed food and drink industries.
Non-communicable
Diseases
Series
4.
Lancet
381,
670–679.
10.
Brazilian Ministry of Health (2014) Dietary Guidelines for
the Brazilian Population. Brasília: Ministry of Health;
available
at
http://189.28.128.100/dab/docs/portaldab/
publicacoes/guia_alimentar_populacao_ingles.pdf
11.
Monteiro CA, Cannon G, Moubarac J-C et al. (2015)
Dietary guidelines to nourish humanity and the planet in
the twenty-first century. A blueprint from Brazil. Public
Health Nutr 18, 2311–2322.
12.
de Souza R, Mente A, Maroleanu A et al. (2015) Intake of
saturated and trans unsaturated fatty acids and risk of
all cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, and type 2
diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis of obser-
vational studies. BMJ 351, h3978.
13.
World Health Organization (2003) Diet, Nutrition and the
Prevention of Chronic Diseases. Report of a Joint WHO/
FAO Expert Consultation. WHO Technical Report Series
no. 916. Geneva: WHO; available at http://www.who.int/
dietphysicalactivity/publications/trs916/en
14.
World
Cancer
Research
Fund/American
Institute
for
Cancer Research (2007) Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity
and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective.
Washington, DC: AICR; available at http://www.aicr.org/
assets/docs/pdf/reports/Second_Expert_Report.pdf
15.
US Department of Agriculture & US Department of Health
and
Human
Services
(2010)
Dietary
Guidelines
for
Americans, 2010, 7th ed. Washington, DC: USDA/DHSS;
available at http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/sites/default/files/
dietary_guidelines_for_americans/PolicyDoc.pdf
16.
US Department of Agriculture & US Department of Health
and Human Services (2015) 2015–2020 Dietary Guide-
lines for Americans, 8th ed. Washington DC: USDA/DHSS;
available
at
https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/
resources/2015-2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf.
17.
Monteiro CA, Cannon G, Levy RB et al. (2012) The big
issue for nutrition, disease, health, well-being. World Nutr
3, 527–569.
18.
Stuckler D & Nestle M (2012) Big food, food systems, and
global health. PLoS Med 9, 6.
19.
World Health Organization (2013) WHO Director-General
addresses health promotion conference. http://www.
who.int/dg/speeches/2013/health_promotion_20130610/
en/ (accessed March 2017).
20.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (2002) Foreign Direct Investment for Development.
Paris:
OECD;
http://www.oecd.org/investment/investment
fordevelopment/foreigndirectinvestmentfordevelopmentmaxi
misingbenefitsminimisingcosts.htm
21.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (2016) Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Statistics –
OECD Data, Analysis and Forecasts. Paris: OECD; http://
www.oecd.org/corporate/mne/statistics.htm
22.
Wilkinson J (2004) The food processing industry, globali-
zation, and developing countries. Electron J Agric Dev
Econ 1, 184–201.
23.
Hawkes C (2005) The role of foreign direct investment in
the nutrition transition. Public Health Nutr 8, 357–365.
24.
Monteiro CA & Cannon G (2012) The impact of transna-
tional ‘Big Food’ companies on the South: a view
from Brazil. PLoS Med 9, e1001252.
25.
Greer J & Singh K (2000) A brief history of transnational
corporations. Global Policy Forum. https://www.global
policy.org/empire/47068-a-brief-history-of-transnational-
corporations.html (accessed March 2017).
26.
European Food Information Council (2010) The Greatest
Thing Since Sliced Bread? A Review of the Benefits of
Processed Foods. Brussels: EUFIC; available at: http://
www.eufic.org/article/en/expid/benefits-processed-food-
review/
27.
International Food Information Council (2010) Under-
standing our Food Information Communications Tool Kit.
Washington,
DC:
IFIC
Foundation;
http://www.food
insight.org/press-releases/international-food-information-
council-foundation-introduces-understanding-our-food
28.
Eicher-Miller H, Fulgoni V & Keast D (2012) Contributions
of processed foods to dietary intake in the US from 2003–
2008: a report of the Food and Nutrition Science Solutions
Joint Task Force of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics,
American Society for Nutrition, Institute of Food Tech-
nologists, and International Food Information Council.
J Nutr 142, issue 11, 2065S–2072S.
29.
Dwyer J, Fulgoni V, Clemens R et al. (2012) Is ‘processed’
a four-letter word? The role of processed foods in
achieving dietary guidelines and nutrient recommenda-
tions. Adv Nutr 3, 536–548.
30.
Weaver C, Dwyer J, Fulgoni V et al. (2014) Processed
foods: contributions to nutrition. Scientific Statement from
the American Society for Nutrition. Am J Clin Nutr 99,
1525–1542.
31.
Eat Drink Politics, Simon M (2015) Nutrition Scientists on
the Take from Big Food. Has the American Society for
Nutrition Lost All Credibility? Oakland, CA: Eat Drink
Politics; available at http://www.eatdrinkpolitics.com/wp-
content/uploads/ASNReportFinal.pdf
32.
Monteiro CA, Levy RB, Claro RM et al. (2010) A new
classification of foods based on the extent and purpose of
their processing. Cad Saude Publica 26, 2039–2049.
33.
Moubarac
J-C,
Parra
D,
Cannon
G
et
al.
(2014)
Food classification systems based on food processing:
significance and implications for policies and actions: a
systematic literature review and assessment. Curr Obes
Rep 3, 256–272.
34.
Monteiro
CA,
Cannon
G,
Levy
RB
et
al.
(2015)
Ultra-processing and a new classification of foods. In
Introduction to the US Food System: Public Health,
Environment, and Equity, pp. 338–339 [R Neff, editor].
San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass/John Wiley.
35.
Monteiro CA, Cannon G, Levy RB et al. (2016) NOVA. The
star shines bright. World Nutr 7, 28–38.
36.
Monteiro CA, Levy RB, Claro RM et al. (2011) Increasing
consumption of ultra-processed foods and likely impact
on human health: evidence from Brazil. Public Health
Nutr 14, 5–13.
37.
Sparrenberger K, Friedrich R, Schiffner M et al. (2015)
Ultra-processed food consumption in children from a
Basic Health Unit. J Pediatr (Rio J) 91, 535–542.
38.
Martins AP, Levy RB, Claro RM et al. (2013) Increased con-
tribution of ultra-processed food products in the Brazilian
diet (1987–2009). Rev Saude Publica 47, 656–665.
39.
Louzada ML, Martins AP, Canella DS et al. (2015)
Ultra-processed foods and the nutritional dietary profile
in Brazil. Rev Saude Publica 49, 38.
40.
Barcelos GT, Rauber F & Vitolo MR (2014) Processed
and ultra-processed food products and nutrient intake in
children. Rev Cienc Saude 7, 155–161.
14
CA Monteiro et al.
 41.
Bielemann R, Santos Motta J, Minten G et al. (2015)
Consumption of ultra-processed foods and their impact on
the diet of young adults. Rev Saude Publica 49, 28.
42.
Louzada ML, Martins AP, Canella DS et al. (2015) Impact of
ultra-processed foods on micronutrient content in the
Brazilian diet. Rev Saude Publica 49, 45.
43.
Canella DS, Levy RB, Martins AP et al. (2014) Ultra-
processed food products and obesity in Brazilian house-
holds (2008–2009). PLoS One 9, e92752.
44.
Louzada ML, Baraldi LG, Martinez Steele E et al. (2015)
Consumption of ultra-processed foods and obesity in
Brazilian adolescents and adults. Prev Med 81, 9–15.
45.
Tavares L, Fonseca S, Garcia Rosa L et al. (2012)
Relationship between ultra-processed foods and metabolic
syndrome in adolescents from a Brazilian family doctor
program. Public Health Nutr 15, 82–87.
46.
Rauber F, Campagnolo P, Hoffman D et al. (2015)
Consumption of ultra-processed food products and its
effects on children’s lipid profiles: a longitudinal study.
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 25, 116–122.
47.
Moubarac J-C, Claro RM, Baraldi LG et al. (2013)
International differences in cost and consumption of ready-
to-consume food and drink products: United Kingdom and
Brazil, 2008–2009. Glob Public Health 8, 845–856.
48.
Leite FH, Oliveira MA, Cremm EC et al. (2012) Availability
of processed foods in the perimeter of public schools in
urban areas. J Pediatr (Rio J) 88, 328–334.
49.
Costa JC, Claro RM, Martins AP et al. (2013) Food pur-
chasing sites. Repercussions for healthy eating. Appetite
70, 99–103.
50.
Vedovato GM, Trude AC, Kharmats AY et al. (2015)
Degree of food processing of household acquisition
patterns in a Brazilian urban area is related to food buying
preferences and perceived food environment. Appetite 87,
296–302.
51.
Mallarino C, Gomez L, Gonzalez-Zapata L et al. (2013)
Advertising of ultra-processed foods and beverages: chil-
dren as a vulnerable population. Rev Saude Publica 47,
1006–1010.
52.
Franco P, Rosa G, Luiz R et al. (2015) Assessment of the
quality of hypoenergetic diet in overweight women. Int J
Cardiovasc Sci 28, 244–250.
53.
Martinez Steele E, Baraldi LG, Louzada ML et al. (2015)
Ultra-processed foods and added sugars in the US diet:
evidence
from
a
nationally
representative
cross-
sectional study. BMJ Open 5, e009892.
54.
Martinez Steele E, Popkin B, Swinburn B et al. (2017) The
share of ultra-processed foods and the overall nutritional
quality of diets in the US: evidence from a nationally
representative cross-sectional study. Popul Health Metr
15, 6.
55.
Martinez Steele E & Monteiro CA (2017) Association
between dietary share of ultra-processed foods and
urinary concentrations of phytoestrogens
in the US
population. Nutrients 9, 3.
56.
Poti JM, Mendez MA, Ng SW et al. (2015) Is the degree of
food processing and convenience linked with the nutri-
tional quality of foods purchased by US households? Am J
Clin Nutr 101, 1251–1262.
57.
Poti JM, Mendez MA & Ng SW (2016) Highly processed
and ready-to-eat packaged food and beverage purchases
differ by race/ethnicity among US households. J Nutr 146,
1722–1730.
58.
Moubarac J-C, Batal M, Martins AP et al. (2014) Processed
and ultra-processed food products: consumption trends in
Canada from 1938 to 2011. Can J Diet Pract Res 75, 15–21.
59.
Moubarac J-C, Martins AP, Claro RM et al. (2013)
Consumption of ultra-processed foods and likely impact
on human health. Evidence from Canada. Public Health
Nutr 16, 2240–2248.
60.
Moubarac J-C, Batal M, Louzada ML et al. (2017) Con-
sumption of ultra-processed foods predicts diet quality
in Canada. Appetite 108, 512–520.
61.
Moreira P, Baraldi LG, Moubarac J-C et al. (2015) Comparing
different policy scenarios to reduce the consumption of
ultra-processed foods in UK: impact on cardiovascular dis-
ease mortality using a modelling approach. PLoS One 10,
e0118353.
62.
O’Halloran SA, Grimes CA, Lacy KE et al. (2016) Dietary
sources and sodium intake in a sample of Australian pre-
school children. BMJ Open 6, e008698.
63.
Venn D, Banwell C & Dixon J (2016) Australia’s evolving
food practices: a risky mix of continuity and change.
Public Health Nutr (Epublication ahead of print version).
64.
Harray AJ, Boushey CJ, Pollard CM et al. (2015) A novel
dietary assessment method to measure a healthy and
sustainable diet using the mobile food record: protocol
and methodology. Nutrients 7, 5375–5395.
65.
Crovetto M, Uauy R, Martins AP et al. (2014) Household
availability of ready-to-consume food and drink products
in Chile: impact on nutritional quality of the diet. Rev Med
Chile 142, 850–858.
66.
Cediel G, Reyes M, Louzada MLC et al. (2017) Contribution
of ultra-processed foods to total energy and added sugars
in Chilean diet. Public Health Nutr (under review).
67.
Marrón-Ponce JA, Sánchez-Pimienta T, Louzada ML et al.
(2017) Energy contribution of ultra-processed foods and
sociodemographic determinants in the Mexican popula-
tion. Public Health Nutr (under review).
68.
Solberg SL, Terragni L & Granheim SI (2016) Ultra-
processed food purchases in Norway: a quantitative
study on a representative sample of food retailers. Public
Health Nutr 19, 1990–2001.
69.
Luiten C, Steenhuis I, Eyles H et al. (2016) Ultra-processed
foods have the worst nutrient profile, yet they are the most
available packaged products in a sample of New Zealand
supermarkets. Public Health Nutr 19, 530–538.
70.
Juul F & Hemmingsson E (2015) Trends in consumption of
ultra-processed foods and obesity in Sweden between
1960 and 2010. Public Health Nutr 18, 3096–3107.
71.
Mendonça
R,
Pimenta
A,
Gea
A
et
al.
(2016)
Ultra-processed foods consumption and risk of over-
weight/obesity: the SUN cohort study. Am J Clin Nutr 104,
1433–1440.
72.
Mendonça R, Lopes A, Pimenta A et al. (2016) Ultra-
processed
food
consumption
and
the
incidence
of
hypertension in a Mediterranean cohort: the Seguimiento
Universidad de Navarra Project. Am J Hypertens (Epub-
lication ahead of print version).
73.
Monteiro CA, Moubarac J-C, Cannon G et al. (2013) Ultra-
processed products are becoming dominant in the global
food system. Obes Rev 14, Suppl. 2, 21–28.
74.
Baker P, Kay A & Walls H (2014) Trade and investment
liberalization
and
Asia’s
noncommunicable
disease
epidemic: a synthesis of data and existing literature.
Global Health 10, 66.
75.
World Health Organization (2017) The Influence of Ultra-
processed Foods on the Dietary Content of Free Sugars in
the US, Canada, Brazil and Colombia. Geneva: WHO
(In the Press).
76.
Vandevijvere S, Monteiro CA, Krebs-Smith S et al. (2013)
Monitoring and benchmarking population diet quality
globally: a step-wise approach. Obes Rev 14, Suppl. 1,
135–149.
77.
Ministerio de Salud (2016) Guía Alimentaria para la
Población Uruguaya. http://msp.gub.uy/sites/default/files/
archivos_adjuntos/MS_guia_web.pdf (acessed March 2017).
78.
Prentice A & Jebb S (2003) Fast foods, energy density
and obesity: a possible mechanistic link. Obes Rev 4,
187–194.
UN, NOVA and the trouble with ultra-processing
15
 79.
Fardet A (2016) Minimally processed foods are more
satiating and less hyperglycemic than ultra-processed
foods: a preliminary study with 98 ready-to-eat foods.
Food Funct 7, 2338–2346.
80.
Brownell K & Gold M (2012) Food and Addiction. A
Comprehensive Handbook. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
81.
Gearhardt A (2015) The science behind food and addic-
tion and the potential effect on the food system. In
Introduction to the US Food System: Public Health,
Environment, and Equity, pp. 405–406 [R Neff, editor].
San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass/John Wiley.
82.
La Fontaine HA, Crowe TC, Swinburn BA et al. (2004) Two
important exceptions to the relationship between energy
density and fat content: foods with reduced-fat claims and
high-fat vegetable based dishes. Public Health Nutr 7,
563–568.
83.
Scrinis G (2016) Reformulation, fortification and functio-
nalization: Big Food corporations’ nutritional engineering
and marketing strategies. J Peasant Stud 43, 17–37.
84.
Chandon P & Wansink B (2012) Does food marketing
need to make us fat? A review and solutions. Nutr Rev 70,
571–593.
85.
Taylor A & Jacobson M (2016) Carbonating the World:
The Marketing and Health Impact of Sugar Drinks in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Washington, DC:
Center for Science in the Public Interest.
86.
Cairns G, Angus K & Hastings G (2009) The Extent, Nature
and Effects of Food Promotion to Children: A Review of the
Evidence to December, 2008. Geneva: WHO.
87.
Global Burden of Disease Risk Factors Collaborators
(2016)
Global,
regional,
and
national
comparative
risk assessment of 79 behavioural, environmental and
occupational and metabolic risks or clusters of risks,
1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of
Disease Study 2015. Lancet 388, 1659–1724.
88.
Wrangham R (2009) Catching Fire: How Cooking Made
Us Human. New York: Basic Books; available at https://
archive.org/stream/pdfy-DDoNCJJ_Wt0qOH7e/Catching%
20Fire%20[How%20Cooking%20Made%20Us%20Human]_
djvu.txt
89.
Garner D (2009) Why are humans different from all other
apes? It’s the cooking, stupid. The New York Times,
26 May. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/27/books/27
garn.html (accessed March 2017).
90.
Pollan M (2013) Cooked. A Natural History of Transfor-
mation. New York: The Penguin Press; available at
https://www.amazon.co.uk/Cooked-Natural-Transformation-
Michael-Pollan/dp/0141975628
91.
Schlosser E (2000) Fast Food Nation. The Dark Side of
the All-American Meal. New York: Houghton Mifflin;
available
at
https://www.nytimes.com/books/first/s/
schlosser-fast.html
92.
Hawkes C (2006) Uneven dietary development: linking
the policies and processes of globalization with the nutri-
tion transition, obesity and diet-related chronic diseases.
Global Health 2, 4.
93.
Monteiro
CA,
Gomes
F
&
Cannon
G
(2010)
The
snack attack. Am J Public Health 100, 975–981.
94.
Story M & French S (2004) Food advertising and marketing
directed at children and adolescents in the US. Int J Behav
Nutr Phys Act 1, 3.
95.
World Health Organization (2014) Protecting children
from the harmful effects of food and drink marketing.
http://www.who.int/features/2014/uk-food-drink-marketing/
en/ (accessed March 2017).
96.
Rockefeller
Foundation
(2013)
Unhealthy
Developing
World Food Markets. New York: Rockefeller Foundation;
available at https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/app/
uploads/Unhealthy-Developing-World-Food-Markets.pdf
97.
International Food Policy Research Institute (2016) Global
Nutrition Report 2016. From Promise to Impact: Ending
Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC: IFPRI.
98.
Black E (2016) Globalization of the Food Industry:
Transnational Corporations, the Spread of Processed
Food, and their Implications for Food Security and
Nutrition. Independent Study Project (ISP) Collection no.
2353. Brattleboro, VT: SIT Graduate Institute; available at
http://digitalcollections.sit.edu/isp_collection/2353
99.
Brown L (2013) Good and cheap. Eat well on $4 a
day. https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/490865454/good-
and-cheap (accessed March 2017).
100.
Monroe J (2014) A Girl Called Jack. 100 Delicious Budget
Recipes. London: Penguin.
101.
Wiggins S, Keats S, Han E et al. (2015) The Rising Cost of a
Healthy Diet. Changing Relative Prices of Foods in High-
income and Emerging Economies. London: Overseas
Development Institute.
102.
Claro RM, Maia EG, Costa BVL et al. (2016) Preço dos
alimentos no Brasil: prefira preparações culinárias a ali-
mentos ultraprocessados (Food prices in Brazil: prefer
cooking to ultra-processed foods). Cad Saude Publica 32,
e00104715.
103.
American Diabetes Association (2013) Economic costs of
diabetes in the US in 2012. Diabetes Care 36, 1033–1046.
104.
Institute of Food Technologists (2007) Food packaging and
its environmental impact. Food Technol April issue, 46–50;
available
at
http://www.ift.org/knowledge-center/read-
ift-publications/science-reports/scientific-status-summaries/
editorial/food-packaging-and-its-environmental-impact.aspx
105.
Natural Resources Defense Council (2007) Food Miles.
How Far Your Food Travels has Serious Consequences for
Your Health and the Climate. New York: NRDC; available
at https://food-hub.org/files/resources/Food%20Miles.pdf
106.
Union of Concerned Scientists (2016) Hidden costs of
industrial agriculture. http://www.ucsusa.org/food_and_
agriculture/our-failing-food-system/industrial-agriculture/
hidden-costs-of-industrial.html#.V_2BRfkrLIU
(accessed
January 2017).
107.
Spanne A (2014) Fighting climate change in Brazil isn’t just
about the Amazon. The Daily Climate, 10 November.
http://www.dailyclimate.org/tdc-newsroom/2014/11/brazil-
meat-cerrado-deforestation (accessed March 2017).
108.
Rockstrom J, Steffen W, Noone K et al. (2009) Planetary
boundaries:
exploring
the
safe
operating
space
for
humanity. Ecol Soc 14, 32.
109.
Crutzen P & Schwägerl C (2011) Living in the Anthro-
pocene: towards a new global ethos. http://e360.yale.edu/
feature/living_in_the_anthropocene_toward_a_new_global_
ethos/2363/ (accessed March 2017).
110.
Carrington D (2016) The Anthropocene epoch: scientists
declare dawn of human-influenced age. The Guardian,
29 August. https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/
aug/29/declare-anthropocene-epoch-experts-urge-geological-
congress-human-impact-earth (accessed March 2017).
Appendix
The NOVA classification
The NOVA classification, outlined above, groups foods
according to the nature, extent and purpose of the
industrial processing they undergo. Food processing as
identified by NOVA involves physical, biological and
chemical processes used after foods are separated from
nature, and before being consumed or prepared as dishes
and meals. Methods used in the culinary preparation of
16
CA Monteiro et al.
 food at home or in restaurant kitchens are not industrial,
by definition, and so are not taken into account by NOVA,
which classifies all foods, including culinary ingredients
and other food products, into the following four groups.
This Appendix lists the main items in the four groups.
Group 1. Unprocessed or minimally processed foods
This first NOVA group of unprocessed and minimally
processed foods includes fresh, squeezed, chilled, frozen
or dried fruits and leafy and root vegetables; grains such as
brown, parboiled or white rice, corn cob or kernel, wheat
berry or grain; legumes such as beans of all types, lentils,
chickpeas; starchy roots and tubers such as potatoes and
cassava, in bulk or packaged; fungi such as fresh or dried
mushrooms; meat, poultry, fish and seafood, whole or in
the form of steaks, fillets and other cuts, or chilled or
frozen without added salt or oil; eggs; milk, pasteurized or
powdered; fresh or pasteurized fruit or vegetable juices
without added sugar, sweeteners or flavours; grits, flakes
or flour made from corn, wheat, oats or cassava; pasta,
couscous and polenta made with flours, flakes or grits and
water without added salt or oil; tree and ground nuts and
other oilseeds without added salt or sugar; spices such as
pepper, cloves and cinnamon and herbs such as thyme
and mint, fresh or dried; plain yoghurt with no added
sugar or artificial sweeteners; tea and coffee with no added
sugar; drinking-water.
Group 2. Processed culinary ingredients
This second NOVA group of processed culinary ingre-
dients includes vegetable oils crushed from various seeds
or nuts, or fruits such as olives; butter and lard obtained
from milk and pork; starches extracted from corn and
other plants; sugar and molasses obtained from cane or
beet; honey extracted from combs and syrup from maple
trees; and salt mined or from seawater.
Group 3. Processed foods
This third NOVA group of processed foods includes
canned or bottled vegetables, fruits and legumes; salted or
sugared nuts and seeds; salted, pickled, cured or smoked
meats and other animal foods; canned fish; fruits in syrup;
cheeses; and unpackaged freshly made breads.
Group 4. Ultra-processed foods
This fourth NOVA group of ultra-processed food products
includes carbonated drinks; sweet or savoury packaged
snacks; ice cream, chocolate, candies (confectionery);
mass-produced packaged breads, buns, cookies (biscuits),
pastries, cakes and cake mixes; breakfast ‘cereals’, ‘cereal’
and ‘energy’ bars; margarines and spreads; processed
cheese; ‘energy’ drinks; sugared milk drinks, sugared ‘fruit’
yoghurts and ‘fruit’ drinks; sugared cocoa drinks; meat and
chicken extracts and ‘instant’ sauces; infant formulas,
follow-on milks and other baby products (which may
include expensive ingredients); ‘health’ and ‘slimming’
products such as powdered or ‘fortified’ meal and dish
substitutes; and many ready-to-heat products including
pre-prepared pies and pasta and pizza dishes; poultry
and fish ‘nuggets’ and ‘sticks’; sausages, burgers, hot dogs
and other reconstituted meat products; and powdered and
packaged ‘instant’ soups, noodles and desserts.
UN, NOVA and the trouble with ultra-processing
17
