 Patients’ Experiences With Communication-and-Resolution
Programs After Medical Injury
Jennifer Moore, LLB, MA, PhD; Marie Bismark, LLB, MPH, MD; Michelle M. Mello, JD, PhD, MPhil
IMPORTANCE Dissatisfaction with medical malpractice litigation has stimulated interest by
health care organizations in developing alternatives to meet patients’needs after medical
injury. In communication-and-resolution programs (CRPs), hospitals and liability insurers
communicate with patients about adverse events, use investigation findings to improve
patient safety, and offer compensation when substandard care caused harm. Despite
increasing interest in this approach, little is known about patients’and family members’
experiences with CRPs.
OBJECTIVE To explore the experiences of patients and family members with medical injuries
and CRPs to understand different aspects of institutional responses to injury that promoted
and impeded reconciliation.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS From January 6 through June 30, 2016, semistructured
interviews were conducted with patients (n = 27), family members (n = 3), and staff (n = 10)
at 3 US hospitals that operate CRPs. Patients and families were eligible for participation if they
experienced a CRP, spoke English, and could no longer file a malpractice claim because they
had accepted a settlement or the statute of limitations had expired. The CRP administrators
identified hospital and insurer staff who had been involved in a CRP event and had a close
relationship with the injured patient and/or family. They identified patients and families by
applying the inclusion criteria to their CRP databases. Of 66 possible participants, 40
interviews (61%) were completed, including 30 of 50 invited patients and families (60%)
and 10 of 16 invited staff (63%).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Patients’reported satisfaction with disclosure and
reconciliation efforts made by hospitals.
RESULTS A total of 40 participants completed interviews (15 men and 25 women; mean
[range] age, 46 [18-67] years). Among the 30 patients and family members interviewed,
27 patients experienced injuries attributed to error and received compensation. The CRP
experience was positive overall for 18 of the 30 patients and family members, and 18 patients
continued to receive care at the hospital. Satisfaction was highest when communications
were empathetic and nonadversarial, including compensation negotiations. Patients and
families expressed a strong need to be heard and expected the attending physician to listen
without interrupting during conversations about the event. Thirty-five of the 40 respondents
believed that including plaintiffs’attorneys in these discussions was helpful. Sixteen of the
30 patients and family members deemed their compensation to be adequate but 17 reported
that the offer was not sufficiently proactive. Patients and families strongly desired to know
what the hospital did to prevent recurrences of the event, but 24 of 30 reported receiving
no information about safety improvement efforts.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE As hospitals strive to provide more patient-centered care,
opportunities exist to improve institutional responses to injuries and promote reconciliation.
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(11):1595-1603. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.4002
Published online October 9, 2017.
Invited Commentary
page 1603
Author Audio Interview
Author Affiliations: Faculty of Law,
University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia (Moore); School of
Population and Global Health,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia (Bismark); Stanford Law
School, Stanford University, Stanford,
California (Mello); Department of
Health Research and Policy, Stanford
University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California (Mello).
Corresponding Author: Michelle M.
Mello, JD, PhD, MPhil, Stanford Law
School, Stanford University, 559
Nathan Abbott Way, Stanford, CA
94305 (mmello@law.stanford.edu).
Research
JAMA Internal Medicine | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
1595
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 T
he misery of medical malpractice litigation for all
involved1-3 has made hospitals keenly interested in re-
solving medical injuries with patients before claims are
filed. Among the strategies receiving attention are communi-
cation-and-resolution programs (CRPs), in which hospitals
disclose adverse events, investigate, apologize, explain
what happened, and when appropriate, proactively offer
compensation.4-6 Several reports suggest that CRPs can im-
provepatientsafetyandreduceliabilitycosts7-9;however,some
commentators question whether they treat patients fairly.10,11
The literature about the needs of injured patients high-
lights that poor responses from health care providers can ex-
acerbate the psychological, physical, and financial effects of
adverse events.12,13 Researchers have occasionally described
patients’experiences of medical injuries, highlighting that in-
stitutions’responses frequently fail to meet expectations.14,15
Applying these findings to CRPs is challenging, however, be-
causetheresults“lackthegranularitynecessarytoidentifyspe-
cific improvements” to serve the needs of the patients.16(p2)
Despite investment by the Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality in disseminating the CRP model,17,18 pa-
tients’experienceswithCRPshavenotbeeninvestigated.Such
research presents challenges19; hospitals worry that asking pa-
tients about their experiences could provoke distress or law-
suits. The resulting knowledge gap impedes development of
patient-centered responses to medical injury.
Through interviews with patients and others, we ex-
plored what hospitals need to do to promote reconciliation af-
ter injury, what existing CRPs are doing well, and what hospi-
tals could do better. We define reconciliation as engaging with
patientsandfamiliesaboutanunexpectedoutcomeofcareand
offering remediation, with the goals of acknowledging and re-
dressing emotional, physical, and financial harm; expressing
anethicofcontinuingcareforthepatient;andrestoringtrust.16
Methods
Sites
We conducted interviews at Stanford University Medical Cen-
ter, Stanford, California; Baystate Medical Center, Spring-
field, Massachusetts; and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Cen-
ter (BIDMC), Boston, Massachusetts (Table 1). These academic
medical centers were selected because they operate CRPs that
maintain patient contact information. Baystate Medical Cen-
terandBIDMCcollaborativelyimplementedsimilarCRPs20and
were treated as a single unit of analysis. The study was ap-
proved by the institutional review boards of Stanford Univer-
sity, Baystate Medical Center, and BIDMC, and all partici-
pants gave written informed consent.
Key Informants
We recruited injured patients or their family members for key
informant interviews, along with administrators and clini-
cians involved with the CRPs. Patients and families were eli-
gibleforparticipationiftheyhadexperiencedaCRP,spokeEng-
lish, and could no longer file a malpractice claim because they
had accepted a settlement or the statute of limitations had ex-
pired. The last criterion addressed hospitals’concerns about
prompting lawsuits. The focus of this study was the experi-
ences of patients and families with CRPs. Therefore, we pri-
marily recruited patients and families rather than administra-
tors and clinicians.
TheCRPadministratorsidentifiedhospitalandinsurerstaff
who had been involved in a CRP event and had a close rela-
tionship with the injured patient and/or family. The adminis-
trators identified patients and families by applying the inclu-
sion criteria to their CRP databases. Family members were
invited if the patient was deceased or a minor. Hospitals sent
the study invitations, which stated that external researchers
were conducting the study and allowed key informants to
choose whether to share interview transcripts with CRP staff.
Key Points
Question Do patients’and families’experiences with
communication-and-resolution programs suggest aspects of
institutional responses to injury that could better promote
reconciliation after medical injuries?
Findings This interview study of 40 patients, family members,
and hospital staff found that patients have a strong need to be
heard after medical injury that is often unmet. Although 18 of 30
patient and family participants (60%) reported positive
experiences with communication-and-resolution programs overall
and continued to receive care at the hospital, they reported that
hospitals rarely communicated information about efforts to
prevent recurrences.
Meaning Opportunities are available to provide institutional
responses to medical injuries that are more patient centered.
Table 1. Study Site Characteristics
Characteristic
Stanford University
Medical Center
BIDMC
Baystate Medical Center
Hospital type
Teaching hospital and
level I trauma center
Teaching hospital and level I
trauma center
Teaching hospital and level I
trauma center
No. of beds
613
672
716
Liability insurance
arrangement
Self-insured
Risk retention group
Self-insured
CRP name
Process for Early
Assessment and
Resolution of Loss
Communication, Apology,
and Resolution
Communication, Apology,
and Resolution
Years since CRP
implemented
9
3.5
3.5
Abbreviations: BIDMC, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center;
CRP, communication-and-resolution
program.
Research Original Investigation
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
1596
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Interviews
Interviews were semistructured and used an interview guide
informed by a prior study of injured patients from New Zea-
land (NZ).16 Questions focused on the patient’
s injury experi-
ence, the hospital’
s response, and relationships between pa-
tients and individual clinicians as well as hospitals after the
injury.
One of us (J.M.) conducted the interviews from January 6
throughJune31,2016.Interviewswithstaffandinsurerslasted
45 to 90 minutes. Interviews with patients and families lasted
60 to 180 minutes, at the key informant’
s discretion. Eleven
key informants chose telephone interviews and 29 chose face-
to-face interviews at their home or workplace. Interviews were
audio recorded and transcribed.
Data Analysis
Datawereanalyzedfollowingtheprinciplesofgroundedtheory
using NVivo (version11; QSR International).21 Using tran-
scripts from the first 6 interviews, 2 of us (J.M. and M.B.) used
thematiccontentanalysis21toindependentlyidentifythemain
themes, which formed the basis of a coding scheme. The 2 cod-
ing trees were discussed in detail, and any differences were re-
solved by negotiated agreement. One of us (J.M.) then coded
the remaining transcripts, generating initial theories and con-
tinually comparing them against newly coded data.22 For some
questions, frequencies of responses were tabulated.
Results
We completed interviews with 40 of 66 identified infor-
mants (61%) (15 men and 25 women; mean [range] age, 46 [18-
67] years). These participants included 30 of 50 invited
patients or family members (60%) and 10 of 16 staff (63%).
Participant Characteristics
Distribution of the key informants across hospitals was fairly
even (Table 2). Nearly all were working-aged adults, and 3 were
parents of injured children. Staff respondents included 4 phy-
sicians and 6 CRP staff. Risk managers judged 27 of 30 patient
injuries to have been attributable to error. Of the 30 patients
and family members, 26 had received settlements, 1 had medi-
cal bills waived, and 3 had received no compensation.
Aspects of Hospitals’ Responses to Injuries
That Promote Reconciliation
Initial Approach
Of the several features of CRPs that promote reconciliation re-
vealed by the interviews (Table 3), 29 patients or family mem-
bers reported that the hospital’
s initial approach after the in-
jury set a tone that heavily influenced further interactions.
When the approach was mishandled, hospital staff struggled
to remediate the strain that ensued. Four elements were par-
ticularly important for making a successful approach.
First, 22 of 30 patients and families wanted the hospital’
s
first contact after the initial disclosure conversation to be by
letter or email rather than telephone. Written contact felt less
intrusive, provided space to process the information, and al-
lowed patients and families to contact staff when they be-
lieved they were ready.
Table 2. Interview Respondent Characteristics
Characteristic
Patients and Family
Members
(n = 30)
Healthcare Institution
Staff and Insurers
(n = 10)
CRP
PEARL
11
5
CARe
19
5
Classification
Error
27
NA
Nonerror
3
NA
Severity rating
Death
3
NA
Permanent physical harm
8
NA
Temporary physical harm
19
NA
Clinical area
Surgery
14
NA
Obstetrics
1
NA
Gynecology
1
NA
Hematology and oncology
3
NA
Pediatrics
3
NA
Radiology
3
NA
Emergency medicine
5
NA
Age group, y
18-20
1
0
21-39
1
0
40-64
26
9
≥65
2
1
Sex
Female
21
4
Male
9
6
Race/ethnicity
European
27
8
Hispanic
2
0
Asian
1
0
Other
0
2
Educational level
High school
1
0
Trade school
6
1
College
16
1
Graduate school
7
8
Time since initial injury, y
2-3
20
NA
4-6
10
NA
Professional role
CRP leader
NA
1
CRP staff membera
NA
4
CRP patient liaison
NA
1
Physician
NA
4
Abbreviations: BIDMC, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center;
CARe, Communication, Apology, and Resolution (Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center); CRP, communication-and-resolution program; NA, not applicable;
PEARL, Process for Early Assessment and Resolution of Loss (Stanford
University Medical Center).
a Includes risk managers and claims handlers.
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
1597
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Table 3. Aspects of CRPs That Promoted Reconciliation
Aspect Cited
Illustrative Interview Quotations (Informant)
The initial approach
Emotional space
“I call the patient or family. I’
m introducing myself to them. I’
m explaining that we want to
understand what happened [and] ask them if they have any specific questions or concerns. I follow
up with a letter.” (CRP staff member)
“I think they should start with an email or a letter, instead of the phone call, because everybody has
different things they’
re dealing with.” (patient)
Physical space
“I think everybody that they injure should get a private room…because when you’
re that upset and
confused, and things didn’
t go right, the last thing you need is to deal with other people in the
room.” (family member)
Right office
“The first letter I got I was pretty cynical about because the letterhead was [the risk management
office]….They want to be really nice to me—yeah, sure….Even a different letterhead that doesn’
t
say [Risk Management] would be good.” (patient)
Right people
“A patient said to me, ‘
The physician has not come back and said anything to me. So this isn’
t ever
going to end for me’
.” (CRP staff member)
“I would have liked to only have the surgeon come in when he first met with us and maybe a
resident…, but no hospital administrator and definitely no social worker …. I assumed my child was
dead, because otherwise what do you need a social worker for?” (family member)
Patient liaison
“When I finally hit [the patient liaison], it did feel like a kindred spirit. It felt safe. I felt at least it
would be looked at….There is a relationship there where you are part of a club that you don’
t want
to be a part of.” (family member)
Communication practices
Clinicians
“What meant something to us was people, like the resident, who actually cared….He wrote [my
daughter] a letter and came to visit her….He wasn’
t afraid to actually reach out….That meant
something to us, more than an apology.” (family member)
“The doctor listened and let me talk and talk and talk. I almost cried because it was the first time
anyone had heard how I felt. He talked when I was done. It changed how I felt about the hospital.”
(patient)
“The attending should be in the room, no matter how upset he is. I’
m not half as upset as the
patient or the family. This isn’
t about me….The attending is the person the patient has a
relationship with. That is the person to whom you have given your trust….That’
s the person who
needs to sit in front of you and look you in the eye and say, ‘
I’
m sorry, this is what happened.’
”
(physician)
Attorneys
“[My lawyer] spent lots of time hearing what I’
d been through….He helped me through it all and
gave me good advice. He’
s wonderful, very kind….And he’
s an expert on this subject. I was so
pleased he was in the meeting with me.” (patient)
“I saw the hospital as my enemy and the doctor as evil. My attorney asked how I’
d like the outcome
to look and how I saw the relationship with the hospital as part of that. It made me realize that they
didn’
t go into work that day to hurt me and it was the mistake that needed fixing, because they
weren’
t evil people. I was able to trust them again and get more treatment there. I don’
t know if I’
d
have got to that point without my attorney, or it’
d probably take a lot more time.” (patient)
CRP staff
“[The patient liaison] was very good at…helping you feel like you were really heard.” (patient)
“It only takes one emotionally unintelligent comment and the entire process is derailed.” (patient)
Relaying safety improvement efforts
“We tell patients what remedial action has been taken. Ideally, that is done before we meet.” (CRP
staff member)
“I shouldn’
t have to keep putting my hand up to discover what patient safety policies and practices
were put in place.” (patient)
“They’
re all about ‘
Hospital of the Future,’but it’
s like, ‘
Don’
t forget about your hospital of the
past’
….I just want to know how they’
ve learned from it and if they’
ve put any measures in place…
or if they have forgotten.” (patient)
“They never gave us the report about improvements. It made me feel like only talking to them
again through my attorney.” (family member)
Compensation
Proactive payment
“It was stressful. The hospital didn’
t want to give us money right away, even though they admitted
they’
d made an error.” (patient)
Personal touch
“The claims agent came to my house. She was sensitive and personally felt bad about it and that
helped humanize the whole experience.” (patient)
“[The insurer representative] and I ended up going back and forth for a long time….From my
perspective, I also wanted to make sure I understood the full range of whatever the consequences
were going to be….[W]e wanted to keep things kind of open until we figured out the overall
impact….It was…probably a year or more [until] we finally settled on what the compensation
would be.” (male patient in his 40s)
Emotional needs of affected children
“I was 14 (a few days from 15) at the time….I never got the apology….I’
ve never seen the
collection of those doctors and nurses ever again and that upsets me….There has just been little to
no closure.” (patient)
“My son is…having a hard time. He watched [his sister] go through [the operation]….He said, ‘
Why
am I not invited to talk? I was affected by all this.’I mean, he’
s 11.” (family member)
Feedback
“I’
ve always wanted to give feedback to the hospital, not just about their mistake, but also how
they were with me after the fact.” (patient)
“I would like to see [the providers] now….It’
s almost like a reminder to say, ‘
I’
m still a real person
that walks around, too.’(patient)
“I always leave it open….Occasionally I hear back from families months or a year later….They just
wish to go over the same territory again and again and again because it allows them some type of
connection.” (physician)
Abbreviation: CRP, communication-and-resolution program.
Research Original Investigation
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
1598
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Second, 19 of 30 patients and families highlighted the im-
portance of physical privacy in the aftermath of injury, which
was scarce for hospitalized patients. One patient reported the
following interaction:
The risk management people came to see me….There was a
patient in the bed opposite me who was trying to pull his tubes
out, so there was a swarm of nurses around that bed.…It was just
noisy chaos....It’s not a conversation about the weather, you
know; it’s…very upsetting.
Private space was important for the sensitive discussions and
for the emotional response. Respondents suggested that hos-
pitals provide patients with a private room at no cost.
A third suggestion was to have someone with a role in
patient services or safety and quality communicate with the
patient or the family after the initial disclosure. Nineteen of
30 patients and family members commented that outreach
from risk management made them suspicious about the
hospital’
s intentions. They questioned whether CRP
staff “were really there to help the patient or just limit their
liability.
”
Fourth, all respondents (patients, family members, and
staff) stressed the importance of having the right people pre-
sent for the early disclosure conversation(s), including the at-
tending physician. Patients were unsympathetic to excuses,
such as “he is not a people person” or “he is too traumatized
to talk to you.” Seven of 10 staff respondents also recollected
that the conversations that went poorly were those in which
the involved clinician was absent. One reported, “I hear things
like ‘
I almost wanted to come and bring the money back…
because to this day, I still have not heard from that doctor.’
”
Eleven patients and family members mentioned that social
workersshouldnotbepartofinitialconversationsbecausethey
cannot answer medical questions, and their presence trig-
gered fears that the patient had died.
Communication Practices
Participants mentioned several communication practices
that facilitated reconciliation. First, patients and families
needed to be heard during disclosure discussions—not just re-
ceive information. They wanted clinicians and CRP staffers to
listen attentively without taking notes, interrupting, or ask-
ing that patients confine themselves to clinically relevant
information.
Second, 35 of 40 participants said that plaintiff’
s attor-
neys can be useful during the CRP process, to provide sup-
port and help ensure that patients are treated fairly. Eight pa-
tients and family members received attorney advice or
representation, and 18 of the 22 who did not wished they had.
The CRP staff and physicians were less uniformly enthusias-
tic about plaintiff attorneys than patients and families; one
stated that attorneys may be a “blessing or a curse,” and oth-
ers distinguished between good attorneys who understood
CRPs and others who were less knowledgeable. However, most
staff endorsed plaintiff attorney involvement. As one noted,
CRPs are sometimes criticized for trying to “cheat the patient
out of his legal right or entitlement,
” and that having compen-
sation offers evaluated by attorneys reassures everyone. It
“makes us feel better,” she continued, and “We’
ve had attor-
neys say to the patients, ‘
No, that’
s fair, what you are being of-
fered.’And it makes them feel better.”
Participantsdescribedthefollowingspecificattorneyprac-
tices that facilitated reconciliation: (1) allowing patients to tell
their story, which had therapeutic value; (2) avoiding an ad-
versarial posture during discussions with the hospital; and
(3) asking patients about the outcomes that they hoped for, in-
cluding the relationship that they wanted with the clinician
going forward. One patient credited these practices with en-
abling him to regain trust in clinicians who he had previously
viewed as “evil.”
Third, 28 of 30 patients and family members reported that
they “hate that word, resolution,” and 23 of 30 preferred an
alternative such as “reconciliation.” A patient explained, “It’
s
not resolved, because I’
ve lost a loved one.
” Participants in the
prior study of injured patients in NZ16 also disliked references
to “resolution.”
Relaying Safety Information
Although all 10 hospital and insurer staff said they told pa-
tients and families about efforts undertaken to prevent recur-
rencesoftheevent,24of30patientsandfamilymemberscom-
plained that this had not occurred. One family member
recalled, “The hospital administrator risk guy…said, ‘
We’
re do-
ing a full report on this. We’
ll give it to you before you leave
the hospital’
.…We never got anything. That was very disap-
pointing.” For many patients and families, omitting safety in-
formation impeded reconciliation: “It’
s not resolved because
I don’
t know if there was change.” To ensure that this loop is
closed every time, hospitals should document follow-up items
promised to patients and review the list when the incident file
is closed.
Compensation
Of 27 patients and family members who reported that they re-
ceivedcompensation,16feltsatisfiedwithit.Thosewhofound
it to be inadequate also described dissatisfaction with the over-
all communication process.
Participantsidentifiedthefollowing2elementsofthecom-
pensation process that contributed to successful reconcilia-
tion: proactive payment and a personal touch. Twenty-two of
30 patients and families experienced financial stress after the
injury; thus, rapid compensation was critical. Patients wanted
hospitals to inquire about looming bills, especially for low-
income families, and offer help with them.
A gap occurred in perceptions about how proactive hos-
pitals’offers of compensation were. The CRP staff said their
philosophy was, “Don’
t wait for the demand, present the of-
fer.” However, 17 patients and families wished that the offer
had come sooner without their having to specifically ask for
compensation. When the offer was proactive, patients ex-
pressed appreciation; for instance, “They said, ‘
I know you are
out of vacation time, you’
re losing your pay…we are going to
buy you back [vacation] time.’
”
Twenty-six patients and families discussed the need for
a personal touch to ensure a humanized compensation pro-
cess. One recommended practice was conducting face-to-
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
1599
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 face meetings or home visits, rather than using letters or
email, after the initial written communication. Another was
keeping communications nonadversarial. Some CRP staff
garnered more positive reviews than others. For example, 1
patient described her compensation negotiations as “break-
ing the illusion that we’
re in this cooperative, collaborative
process together” because when communication turned to
money matters, “the iron fist came out of the velvet glove.
”
A parent reported that they “did not even make an offer-
.…they were so frugal and so aggressive with their media-
tion.” Such experiences compounded patients’ sense of
victimization. Finally, participants emphasized that com-
pensation discussions must be emotionally intelligent and
compassionate.
Emotional Needs of Affected Children
Although few of the injuries in our sample involved minors,
comments from parents of injured children and from 1 young
woman injured at 14 years of age revealed frustration at the
inattentiveness of the CRP process to children’
s needs. For ex-
ample, the adolescent believed that she should have received
an apology and been given a chance to express her feelings;
the brother of an injured patient had wanted to share how the
injury had affected him.
Patients’ Overall Experiences
Based on an overall review of the transcripts, the CRP expe-
rience was positive overall for 18 of 30 patients and family
members. For those who were dissatisfied, the wider process
aggrieved them, not just the compensation aspect. Only 2 re-
spondents characterized the programs as unfair.
Preserving the Therapeutic Relationship
One marker of the success of CRPs is patients’reported satis-
faction with the process; another is whether they are willing
to receive care at the hospital afterward. Eighteen patients and
family members said they did (or would) receive ongoing care
there. Some reasoned that errors can occur anywhere; others
credited the CRP with restoring their confidence. One ex-
plained, “I had trusted [the hospital]....But I could tell that the
doctor felt really, really bad. They treated me real nice.… I con-
tinued on with [the hospital].
” All 8 patients and family mem-
bers with attorneys chose to receive ongoing care at the hos-
pital, and some specifically credited their attorney for
facilitating the reconciliation. Among the 12 patients and fam-
ily members who discontinued the therapeutic relationship,
the main reason was that the hospital had not communicated
any patient safety efforts.
Discussion
This exploratory project is the first, to our knowledge, to in-
vestigate patients’and families’experiences of CRPs. The key
informants’accounts revealed several recommendations for
hospitals’responses to patients and family members affected
by medical injuries (Table 4). Our findings suggest some prac-
tices that serve patients’needs.
Consistently Communicate Patient Safety Efforts
Patients and families should be told at the conclusion of the
investigation what, if anything, the hospital will do to pre-
vent recurrences. Our findings, along with other research,23-26
Table 4. Recommendations for CRPs Emerging From Key Informant Interviews
Question
Recommendation
How should CRPs conduct the initial approach
to the patient and family?
Ask patients what form of communication (telephone, letter, or face to face) they prefer after the initial
disclosure conversation.
Ensure that hospitalized injured patients and their families are immediately given a private room, if
possible.
Consider having the quality/patient safety office, not risk management or claims, make the initial, written
approach to the patient or the family.
Strongly encourage the attending physician to lead the initial disclosure conversation and participate in
other discussions with the patient aside from compensation discussions.
Avoid sending social workers to participate in the initial disclosure conversation with the patient and
family.
Encourage attorneys and other hospital representatives to adopt a nonadversarial style at all times.
Recruit CRP staff with emotional intelligence, an ability to project authenticity, high empathy, and deep
belief in the CRP’
s mission to advance patient-centered care and patient safety.
Involve a patient liaison or similar person to help the patient and family navigate the process and provide
continuity of communication.
How can CRPs meet patients’and families’
emotional needs during the communication
process and restore trust?
Create an opportunity for the patient and family to be heard, and be prepared to listen at length. Allow
the patient’
s priorities to lead the discussion.
Ensure that patient safety efforts are communicated to patients and family members. If learning takes
place over a long timeframe, actively keep in touch with patients and families to share new steps taken.
Use the term reconciliation instead of resolution.
How can institutions best conduct
compensation discussions?
Where compensation is merited, offer it without waiting for the patient or family to ask for it.
Notify patients that they may consult an attorney.
Use face-to-face meetings and telephone calls to conduct compensation communications.
Maintain a nonadversarial style.
Anticipate the family’
s immediate financial needs and stressors, such as unpaid bills, and offer proactive
assistance. Do not wait to receive a final tally of expenses long after the event occurs.
What ongoing contact, if any, should CRPs have
with patients and families?
Routinely invite patients and families to provide feedback on their CRP experience a few months after
CRP completion.
Talk with parents about whether and how to involve children and siblings in discussions about the injury.
Reach out to patients on the anniversary of the event to update them on what the hospital is doing to
improve safety and assure them that they have not been forgotten.
Abbreviation: CRP, communication-and-resolution program.
Research Original Investigation
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
1600
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 establish that safety improvement is a central concern for in-
jured patients and that failure to communicate safety efforts
exacerbates the harm. Therefore, the recommendation to con-
sistently communicate patient safety efforts is well estab-
lished and essential to undertake.
Although staff in our study claimed that they communi-
cated safety efforts, accounts from patients and families sug-
gest that this communication is sometimes overlooked. Hos-
pitals may be concerned that acknowledgment of systemic
weaknesses could expose them to legal action. However, our
study and others27-30 suggest that failing to communicate ef-
fortstopreventrecurrencesmaymotivatepatientstosue.Other
barrierstocommunicatingsafetyeffortsarethattheeventmay
not have been preventable31 or no remedial actions could be
identified. Effective CRPs should help patients and family
members understand these realities. They need to hear that
hospitals have taken their experience seriously and made dili-
gent efforts to determine whether care can be made safer. Hos-
pital representatives can also talk about “what we have
learned” from the event, because some type of learning can
always be identified from a patient’
s adverse experience.
Get the Right People in the Room
Consistent with the recent study of the needs of injured pa-
tients in NZ16 and other prior research,19 all patients and fam-
ily members in our sample reported a strong need to hear di-
rectly from the person responsible for their care. Therefore,
the recommendation to strongly encourage the attending cli-
nician to lead the initial disclosure conversation should be con-
sidered as essential practice.
Patients and family members had negative reactions to as-
sertions that the clinician was not good at difficult conversa-
tionsortooupsettotalk,andtheydidnotbelievethatthepres-
ence of a division chief or an offer of compensation was an
acceptable substitute. Although patients and family mem-
bers occasionally mentioned other clinicians, such as social
workers, their primary concern was that the attending physi-
cians should be involved in the reconciliation process.
Two measures may assist when tension exists between the
patients’desire to talk to the responsible clinician and their
desire to talk with persons with high emotional intelligence.
First, prior research and expert recommendations suggest that
providing disclosure training or “just-in-time” coaching can
improvetheprospectsforsuccessfuldialogue.32,33Second,hos-
pitals can remind clinicians that their most important role in
these conversations is to listen. The recent report about in-
jured patients in NZ16 revealed the patients’strong desire to
be heard.34 In addition, the literature on narrative and restor-
ative competency confirms that listening to patients’stories
without interrupting plays a critical role in fostering under-
standing and restoring trust.35-38 Therefore, creating space for
injured patients and families to be heard should be consid-
ered as an essential practice.
Patients’and families’accounts also reveal a desire to
have a skilled support person, such as a patient advocate or
attorney, present during conversations about the adverse
event. Although only 8 patients and family members in our
study had attorneys, they all reported positive experiences,
and most of those without attorneys wished that they had
obtained representation. The CRP leaders also increasingly
recognize the value that the right kind of attorney can add to
the process.39 Such attorneys ensure that patients are
treated fairly,10,11 and they may facilitate restoration of the
therapeutic relationship by asking the right questions when
families are overwhelmed and provide another outlet for
patients to be heard.
Connectingpatientswithattorneyswhoexcelintheseroles
is challenging.4,39 When an adverse event is not attributable to
error, CRPs do not compensate the patient; thus, no pool of re-
sources is available to pay the attorney. Hospital referrals to at-
torneys present a conflict of interest. However, CRPs can part-
nerwithattorneyorganizationstoprovideeducationontheCRP
approach and develop a list of qualified, interested lawyers.
Anticipate Families’ Immediate Financial Needs
Our findings, along with recent research,4,23 illuminate the im-
portance of institutions and insurers offering financial repa-
ration to injured patients and families. In our study, 22 of 30
patients and family members reported financial stress in the
aftermath of error. Bills that were due while the patient recu-
perated were a major concern, and patients expressed frus-
tration that the hospital had not anticipated that they would
need immediate relief while their case was evaluated. The CRP
staff thought that they made proactive compensation offers,
but to families, these offers did not come quickly enough.
In offering compensation, CRP representatives must keep
the tenor of communications collaborative. Face-to-face com-
munication during negotiations is desired by patients and may
help preserve the right tone.
Ask About Involving Children
The small sample of cases (n = 3) in our study that involved in-
juredchildrenrevealedsomeprovocativefindings.Childrenwho
experience medical errors or whose siblings or parents do may
want to be included in communications about what hap-
pened. Hospitals should consider asking parents whether and
how they think their children should be included. Models for
family conferences can be found in the criminal justice do-
main, where family members of victims are invited to partici-
pate in reconciliation meetings with offenders.40 More re-
search is required before robust recommendations about
children’
s involvement can be formulated.
The Value of Small Gestures
Other, small gestures can make a difference to families cop-
ing with medical injuries. The following 5 practices are sup-
ported by our interviews: (1) asking patients what form of com-
munication (telephone, letter, or face to face) they prefer after
the initial disclosure conversation, (2) giving injured patients
aprivateroomfortheremainderoftheirstay,(3)usingtheterm
reconciliation instead of resolution, (4) asking patients a few
monthsafterthereconciliationprocessconcludeswhetherthey
wish to provide feedback, and (5) reaching out to patients on
the anniversary of the event to update them on what the hos-
pital is doing to improve safety and assure them that they have
not been forgotten.
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
1601
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Limitations
The primary limitation of our study relates to generalizabil-
ity. Although well suited to yield insights about difficult CRP
cases, our sample is not representative of all CRP events. Most
of the patients and families that we interviewed experienced
medical errors, but only a minority of all CRP events involved
error. Furthermore, our hospitals restricted the sample to pa-
tients who could no longer bring a malpractice claim because
they had already settled a claim or because the statute of limi-
tations had expired. Patients who experienced adverse events
notduetoerrororwhoseinjuriesoccurredmorerecentlymight
have answered interview questions differently. We also can-
not rule out selection bias; hospitals may have selected pa-
tientswhotheythoughtweresatisfiedwithhowtheyhadbeen
treated. However, interview responses did not fit this profile.
Finally, selective recall may have affected key informants’
reports.
Conclusions
As hospitals strive to provide more patient-centered care, op-
portunities exist to improve the care that is provided after an
adverse event. Even in hospitals with deep commitments to
operating CRPs that serve patients’needs, only 18 of 30 pa-
tients and family members reported positive overall experi-
ences. The CRP movement is young with much room to grow.
Listening to patients illuminates the way forward.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: June 27, 2017.
Published Online: October 9, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.4002
Author Contributions: Drs Moore and Mello had
full access to all the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: All authors.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Moore.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Obtained funding: Moore.
Study supervision: Bismark, Mello.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Mello reports
receiving grant funding from Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Baystate Health for other
evaluations of their communication-and-resolution
programs and from The Risk Authority for a project
on an unrelated topic. No other disclosures were
reported.
Funding/Support: This study was supported by
The Commonwealth Fund, a private independent
foundation based in New York City.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The sponsor had no
role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Disclaimer: The views presented herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of The
Commonwealth Fund, its directors, officers, or
staff.
Additional Contributions: The authors thank the
study participants for sharing their experiences;
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, The Risk
Authority, and Baystate Health for facilitating
access to participants; and participants in the
Massachusetts Alliance for Communication and
Resolution Following Medical Injury for thoughtful
comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Bismark M, Dauer EA. Motivations for
medico-legal action: lessons from New Zealand.
J Leg Med. 2006;27(1):55-70.
2. Atiyah P. The Damages Lottery. Oxford, England:
Hart; 1997.
3. Studdert DM, Mello MM, Brennan TA. Medical
malpractice. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(3):283-292.
4. Mello MM, Senecal SK, Kuznetsov Y, Cohn JS.
Implementing hospital-based communication-and-
resolution programs: lessons learned in New York
City. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33(1):30-38.
5. Mello MM, Boothman RC, McDonald T, et al.
Communication-and-resolution programs: the
challenges and lessons learned from six early
adopters. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33(1):20-29.
6. Collaborative for Accountability and
Improvement. Communication and resolution
programs: what are they and what do they require?
http://communicationandresolution.org
/communication-and-resolution-programs.
Accessed November 14, 2016.
7. Boothman RC, Imhoff SJ, Campbell DA Jr.
Nurturing a culture of patient safety and achieving
lower malpractice risk through disclosure: lessons
learned and future directions. Front Health Serv
Manage. 2012;28(3):13-28.
8. Robeznieks A. Full disclosure first: alternative
med-mal approaches show promise. Mod Healthc.
2013;43(5):32-33.
9. Lambert BL, Centomani NM, Smith KM, et al.
The “Seven Pillars” response to patient safety
incidents: effects on medical liability processes
and outcomes. Health Serv Res. 2016;51(suppl 3):
2491-2515.
10. Teninbaum GH. How medical apology
programs harm patients. Chapman Law Rev. 2011;15
(2):307-337.
11. Doroshow J. Patient safety takes a back seat,
once again. Huffington Post. http://www
.huffingtonpost.com/joanne-doroshow/patient
-safety-takes-a-ba_b_4598745.html. Updated
March 22, 2014. Accessed August 24, 2017.
12. Iedema R, Sorensen R, Manias E, et al. Patients’
and family members’experiences of open
disclosure following adverse events. Int J Qual
Health Care. 2008;20(6):421-432.
13. O’
Connor E, Coates HM, Yardley IE, Wu AW.
Disclosure of patient safety incidents:
a comprehensive review. Int J Qual Health Care.
2010;22(5):371-379.
14. Vincent CA, Pincus T, Scurr JH. Patients’
experience of surgical accidents. Qual Health Care.
1993;2(2):77-82.
15. Southwick FS, Cranley NM, Hallisy JA.
A patient-initiated voluntary online survey of
adverse medical events: the perspective of 696
injured patients and families. BMJ Qual Saf. 2015;24
(10):620-629.
16. Moore J, Mello MM. Improving reconciliation
following medical injury: a qualitative study of
responses to patient safety incidents in New
Zealand [published online March 9, 2017]. BMJ Qual
Saf. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005804
17. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Request for task order: comprehensive patient
safety and medical liability communication and
resolution program educational toolkit.
https://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/quality-
patient-safety/patient-safety-resources/resources
/liability/liability_initiative.html. Reviewed July
2015. Accessed March 3, 2017.
18. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Communication and optimal resolution (CANDOR)
toolkit. https://www.ahrq.gov/professionals
/quality-patient-safety/patient-safety-resources
/resources/candor/introduction.html. Reviewed
May 2016. Accessed October 11, 2016.
19. Iedema R, Allen S, Britton K, et al. Patients’and
family members’views on how clinicians enact and
how they should enact incident disclosure: the “100
patient stories” qualitative study. BMJ. 2011;343
(d4423):d4423.
20. Mello MM, Armstrong SJ, Greenberg Y,
McCotter PI, Gallagher TH. Challenges of
implementing a communication-and-resolution
program where multiple organizations must
cooperate. Health Serv Res. 2016;51(3)(suppl 3):
2550-2568.
21. Glaser B, Strauss A. The Discovery of Grounded
Theory. Chicago, IL: Aldine; 1967.
22. Becker H. Tricks of the Trade: How to Think
About Research as You’re Doing it. Chicago, IL:
Chicago University Press; 1998.
23. Hannawa AF. What constitutes “competent
error disclosure”? insights from a national focus
group study in Switzerland. Swiss Med Wkly. 2017;
147(1112):w14427.
24. Wears RL, Wu AW. Dealing with failure: the
aftermath of errors and adverse events. Ann Emerg
Med. 2002;39(3):344-346.
25. Manser T, Staender S. Aftermath of an adverse
event: supporting health care professionals to meet
Research Original Investigation
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
1602
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 patient expectations through open disclosure. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2005;49(6):728-734.
26. Wu AW, McCay L, Levinson W, et al. Disclosing
adverse events to patients: international norms and
trends. J Patient Saf. 2017;13(1):43-49.
27. Vincent C, Young M, Phillips A. Why do people
sue doctors? a study of patients and relatives taking
legal action. Lancet. 1994;343(8913):1609-1613.
28. Gallagher TH, Waterman AD, Ebers AG,
Fraser VJ, Levinson W. Patients’and physicians’
attitudes regarding the disclosure of medical errors.
JAMA. 2003;289(8):1001-1007.
29. Hickson GB, Clayton EW, Githens PB, Sloan FA.
Factors that prompted families to file medical
malpractice claims following perinatal injuries. JAMA.
1992;267(10):1359-1363.
30. Beckman HB, Markakis KM, Suchman AL,
Frankel RM. The doctor-patient relationship and
malpractice: lessons from plaintiff depositions. Arch
Intern Med. 1994;154(12):1365-1370.
31. Thomas EJ, Studdert DM, Burstin HR, et al.
Incidence and types of adverse events and
negligent care in Utah and Colorado. Med Care.
2000;38(3):261-271.
32. White AA, Brock DM, McCotter PI, Shannon SE,
Gallagher TH. Implementing an error disclosure
coaching model: a multicenter case study. J Healthc
Risk Manag. 2017;36(3):34-45.
33. National Quality Forum. Safe Practices for
Better Healthcare–2010 Update: A Consensus
Report. Washington, DC: National Quality Forum;
2010.
34. Acclaim Otago Inc. Understanding the
Problem: An Inductive Analysis of ACC
Appeals—Access to Justice for Injured New
Zealanders. Dunedin, New Zealand: New Zealand
Law Foundation; 2015.
35. Charon R. Narrative medicine: attention,
representation, affiliation. Narrative. 2005;13(3):
261-270.
36. Brookbanks W. Narrative medical competence
and therapeutic jurisprudence: moving towards a
synthesis. Law Context. 2003;20(2):74-94.
37. Duncan D. The narrative lawyer: exploring
narrative competence in legal practice. In:
Therapeutic Jurisprudence: New Zealand Perspectives.
Auckland, New Zealand: Thomson Reuters; 2015:
21-44.
38. Frank A. The Wounded Storyteller: Body, Illness
and Ethics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press;
1995.
39. Van Neil MB, DeVoe T, Shah R, Sands K. Patient
representation in communication and resolution
programs: what is the best model? Healthcare Prof
Liability Rev. http://flbog.sip.ufl.edu/wp-content
/uploads/2016/12/HPLR-Article003.pdf. December
2016. Accessed August 28, 2017.
40. Maxwell GM, Morris A. Family, Victims and
Culture: Youth Justice in New Zealand. Eugene, OR:
Wipf and Stock Publishers; 2010.
Invited Commentary
Communication-and-Resolution Programs
The Jury Is Still Out
Kathryn Zeiler, JD, PhD
Genuine concern for patients and an intrinsic drive to pro-
vide high-quality care are primary motivators for individuals
and institutions to take steps to avoid iatrogenic injuries. De-
spite these drivers, a recent estimate suggests that prevent-
able medical error is the third most common cause of death
in the United States.1
The medical malpractice liability system is not only a
mechanism for compensating injured patients but also a mo-
tivationalbackstop.Whenfunctioningproperly,thesystemap-
plies external pressure on
physicians and hospitals to
expend resources to reduce
the number of negligently
caused injuries. It complements intrinsic incentives and at-
tempts to weed out those who repeatedly inflict preventable
injuries.
Although other types of regulatory intervention are pos-
sible (eg, information disclosure, accreditation processes, and
incentivepaymentstructures),theyrelyontheregulator’
sabil-
ity to detect negligence, which is limited. The liability system
has a built-in detection mechanism. It encourages injured pa-
tientstoseekrecoveryforlossesthatnegligentclinicianscause.
External pressure from the system is perfectly calibrated only
when all negligently injured patients file claims.
Calibration also relies on the court’
s ability to determine
accurately and without cost whether negligence occurred and
whether it caused the patient’
s harm. Recent evidence sug-
gests that the system produces a substantial number of false-
positive and false-negative findings.2 In addition, eviden-
tiary requirements impose heavy litigation costs on plaintiffs,
distorting the system’
s incentives. Because plaintiffs’attor-
neys work on a contingency fee basis, injured patients are un-
able to secure a lawyer if the expected cost of litigation, cov-
ered by the lawyer, exceeds the lawyer’
s expected contingency
fee, typically one-third of the recovery. An increase in plain-
tiff litigation costs reduces the likelihood that he or she will
pursue a claim, which in turn reduces external pressure on cli-
nicians and hospitals.
Theoppositeistruewhenitcomestodefensecostsofthese
health care providers. High defense costs, including psychic
and reputation costs, may compel clinicians and hospitals to
settle claims and in some cases take undesirable steps to avoid
claims. At least some physicians administer medically unnec-
essary care to avoid medical malpractice claims.3 Although es-
timates of the total cost of defensive medicine are relatively
low,limitationsinmeasurementmethodscloudtheactualcost.
Early evidence from communication-and-resolution pro-
grams (CRPs) suggests that they succeed in reducing defense
costs and compensation paid to negligently injured patients,4
potentially reducing direct and indirect health care costs. In
this issue of JAMA Internal Medicine, Moore et al5 aptly argue
that the program’
s success relies on patient satisfaction. Un-
derstanding the factors that drive satisfaction, therefore, is vi-
tal. Moore et al5 give us a glimpse into the patient’
s perspec-
tive using sophisticated empirical methods.
Althoughtheauthorswarnusofpotentialsamplingmethod
weaknesses,otherweaknessesmightfurtherlimitgeneralizabil-
ity.First,thewidevariationinviewpointssuggeststhatasample
size of 30 patients might be inadequate to give a good sense of
theunderlyingpopulation’
sperspective.Second,the3hospitals
Related article page 1595
Patients’Experiences With Institutional Responses to Medical Injury
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
November 2017
Volume 177, Number 11
1603
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
