 Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy newborn
infants
Elizabeth R Moore1, Gene C Anderson2, Nils Bergman3, and Therese Dowswell4
1School of Nursing, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
2Case Western Reserve University, Professor Emerita, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA.
3School of Child and Adolescent Health, and Department of Human Biology, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
4Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, The
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Abstract
Background—Mother-infant separation postbirth is common in Western culture. Early skin-to-
skin contact (SSC) begins ideally at birth and involves placing the naked baby, head covered with
a dry cap and a warm blanket across the back, prone on the mother’s bare chest. According to
mammalian neuroscience, the intimate contact inherent in this place (habitat) evokes
neurobehaviors ensuring fulfillment of basic biological needs. This time may represent a
psychophysiologically ‘sensitive period’ for programming future physiology and behavior.
Objectives—To assess the effects of early SSC on breastfeeding, physiological adaptation, and
behavior in healthy mother-newborn dyads.
Search methods—We searched the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group’s Trials
Register (30 November 2011), made personal contact with trialists, and consulted the bibliography
on kangaroo mother care (KMC) maintained by Dr. Susan Ludington.
Selection criteria—Randomized controlled trials comparing early SSC with usual hospital care.
Data collection and analysis—We independently assessed trial quality and extracted data.
Study authors were contacted for additional information.
Copyright © 2012 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Contact address: Elizabeth R Moore, School of Nursing, Vanderbilt University, 314 Godchaux Hall, 21st Avenue South, Nashville,
Tennessee, 37240-0008, USA. elizabeth.moore@vanderbilt.edu.
CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS: For this update, Dr Elizabeth Moore wrote the first draft of the review and revised subsequent
drafts in response to extensive feedback. Dr Gene Anderson and Dr Nils Bergman commented on the first draft of the updated review
and contributed to the writing of the final draft. Therese Dowswell contributed to study assessment, analysis and drafting text.
Editorial group: Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group.
Publication status and date: New search for studies and content updated (no change to conclusions), published in Issue 5, 2012.
Review content assessed as up-to-date: 15 March 2012.
DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST: Three of the review authors have been active trialists in this area and have personal contact
with many groups in this field, including the International Network for Kangaroo Mother Care based in Trieste, Italy; Bogota,
Colombia; and Cleveland, Ohio. Dr Bergman has received reimbursement for lectures that he has conducted on Kangaroo Mother
Care and from the sale of KMC related products.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW: The protocol has been updated. We have modified outcomes and used
updated methods. Quasi- randomized controlled trials are no longer part of the inclusion criteria so Anisfeld 1983 has now been
excluded.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
Published in final edited form as:
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. ; 5: CD003519. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003519.pub3.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Main results—Thirty-four randomized controlled trials were included involving 2177
participants (mother-infant dyads). Data from more than two trials were available for only eight
outcome measures. For primary outcomes, we found a statistically significant positive effect of
early SSC on breastfeeding at one to four months postbirth (13 trials; 702 participants) (risk ratio
(RR) 1.27, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.06 to 1.53, and SSC increased breastfeeding duration
(seven trials; 324 participants) (mean difference (MD) 42.55 days, 95% CI −1.69 to 86.79) but the
results did not quite reach statistical significance (P = 0.06). Late preterm infants had better
cardio-respiratory stability with early SSC (one trial; 31 participants) (MD 2.88, 95% CI 0.53 to
5.23). Blood glucose 75 to 90 minutes following the birth was significantly higher in SSC infants
(two trials, 94 infants) (MD 10.56 mg/dL, 95% CI 8.40 to 12.72).
The overall methodological quality of trials was mixed, and there was high heterogeneity for some
outcomes.
Authors’ conclusions—Limitations included methodological quality, variations in intervention
implementation, and outcomes. The intervention appears to benefit breastfeeding outcomes, and
cardio-respiratory stability and decrease infant crying, and has no apparent short- or long-term
negative effects. Further investigation is recommended. To facilitate meta-analysis, future research
should be done using outcome measures consistent with those in the studies included here.
Published reports should clearly indicate if the intervention was SSC with time of initiation and
duration and include means, standard deviations and exact probability values.
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
*Breast Feeding; *Object Attachment; *Skin Physiological Processes; Infant, Newborn;
Kangaroo-Mother Care Method [*methods]; Mother-Child Relations; Mothers; Randomized
Controlled Trials as Topic; Touch [*physiology]
MeSH check words
Female; Humans; Infant
BACKGROUND
Description of the condition
In humans, routine mother-infant separation shortly after birth is unique to the 20th century.
This practice diverges from evolutionary history, where neonatal survival depended on close
and virtually continuous maternal contact. Although from an evolutionary perspective skin-
to-skin contact (SSC) is the norm, separating the newborn from its mother soon after birth
has now become common practice in many industrialized societies. Therefore, for the
purpose of this review, SSC has to be the experimental intervention. Ironically, and
importantly, the experimental intervention in studies with all other mammals is to separate
newborns from their mothers.
Description of the intervention
Early SSC is the placing of the naked baby prone on the mother’s bare chest at birth or soon
afterwards. In the evolutionary context, this would have been “immediate and continuous”.
In the current care context, initiation and duration are not defined. The concept of “care”
does not change; only the place where such care is provided changes. Further, although a
dose-response effect has not been documented in randomized controlled trials (RCTs), the
general belief is that SSC should continue until the end of the first successful breastfeeding
to show an effect and to enhance early infant self-regulation (Widstrom 2011).
Moore et al.
Page 2
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 How the intervention might work
The rationale for SSC comes from animal studies in which some of the innate behaviors of
neonates that are necessary for survival are shown to be habitat dependent (Alberts 1994). In
mammalian biology, maintenance of the maternal milieu following birth is required to elicit
innate behaviors from the neonate and the mother that lead to successful breastfeeding, and
thus survival. Separation from this milieu results in immediate distress cries (Alberts 1994)
and “protest-despair” behavior. Human infants placed in a cot cry 10 times more than SSC
infants. Their cry is similar to the vocalizations of separated rat pups (Michelsson 1996). In
rodent studies, the pups who had the least attentive contact from their mothers were the ones
whose health and intelligence were compromised across the lifespan (Francis 1999; Liu
1997; Liu 2000; Meaney 2005; Plotsky 2005). Also in the report by Liu 2000 a cross-
fostering study provided evidence for a direct relationship between maternal behavior and
hippocampal development in the offspring.
Healthy, full term infants employ a species-specific set of innate behaviors immediately
following delivery when placed in SSC with the mother (Righard 1990; Varendi 1994;
Varendi 1998; Widstrom 1987; Widstrom 1990). They localize the nipple by smell and have
a heightened response to odor cues in the first few hours after birth (Porter 1999; Varendi
1994; Varendi 1997). More recently Widstrom 2011 described the sequence of nine innate
behaviors as the birth cry, relaxation, awakening and opening the eyes, activity (looking at
the mother and breast, rooting, hand to mouth movements, soliciting sounds), a second
resting phase, crawling towards the nipple, touching and licking the nipple, suckling at the
breast and finally falling asleep. This ‘sensitive period’ predisposes or primes mothers and
infants to develop a synchronous reciprocal interaction pattern, provided they are together
and in intimate contact. Infants who are allowed uninterrupted SSC immediately after birth
and who self-attach to the mother’s nipple may continue to nurse more effectively. Effective
nursing increases milk production and infant weight gain (De Carvalho 1983; Dewey 2003).
Anderson 2004a used SSC as an intervention for 48 healthy mother/full term infant dyads
with breastfeeding problems identified between 12 to 24 hours postbirth. SSC was provided
during the next three consecutive breastfeedings. Breastfeeding was successful, even in this
racially disparate sample (Chiu 2008) and was exclusive in 81% of these dyads at hospital
discharge, 73% at one week, and 52% at one month postbirth. Temperatures were taken
before (baseline), during, and after each SSC breastfeeding. Baseline temperatures reached,
and remained in thermoneutral range (Chiu 2005) suggesting that mothers have the ability to
modulate infant temperature if given the opportunity to breastfeed in SSC. Because these
mothers and their infants were having breastfeeding difficulties, hospital staff and parents
can logically be reassured that healthy newborn infants, with or without breastfeeding
difficulties, may safely breastfeed in SSC so far as temperature is concerned. In a study of
infrared thermography of the whole body during the first hour postbirth, Christidis 2003
found that SSC was as effective as radiant warmers in preventing heat loss in healthy full
term infants.
SSC through sensory stimuli such as touch, warmth, and odor is a powerful vagal stimulant,
which among other effects releases maternal oxytocin (Uvnas-Moberg 1998; Winberg
2005). Oxytocin causes the skin temperature of the mother’s breast to rise, providing
warmth to the infant (Uvnas-Moberg 1996). When operating in a safe environment,
oxytocin, and direct SSC stimulation of vagal efferents, are probably part of a broader
neuro-endocrine milieu (Porges 2007). A global physiological regulation of the autonomic
nervous system is achieved, supporting growth and development, (homeorhesis). Under
conditions perceived by the newborn to be dangerous, stress mechanisms come into
operation, with the focus on survival rather than development (allostasis). The theory of
allostasis is the relationship between psycho-neurohormonal responses to stress and physical
and psychological manifestations of health and illness (McEwen 1998; Shannon 2007).
Moore et al.
Page 3
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Allostasis is necessary, and it can be viewed as beneficial, because its goal is to bring
aberrant physiology closer to normal; however, an allostatic response comes with a
physiological cost referred to as allostatic load. The higher the allostatic load the greater the
damage from stress, because allostatic load is cumulative. SSC also lowers maternal stress
levels. Handlin 2009 found a dose-response relationship between the amount of SSC and
maternal plasma cortisol two days postbirth. A longer duration of SSC was correlated with a
lower median level of cortisol (r = − 0.264, P = 0.044).
Oxytocin antagonizes the flight-fight effect, decreasing maternal anxiety and increasing
calmness and social responsiveness (Uvnas-Moberg 2005). During the early hours after
birth, oxytocin may also enhance parenting behaviors (Uvnas-Moberg 1998; Winberg 2005).
SSC outcomes for mothers suggest improved bonding/attachment (Affonso 1989); other
outcomes are increased sense of mastery and self-enhancement, resulting in increased
confidence. Sense of mastery and confidence are relevant outcomes because they predict
breastfeeding duration (Dennis 1999). Women with low breastfeeding confidence have three
times the risk of early weaning (O’Campo 1992) and low confidence is also associated with
perceived insufficient milk supply (Hill 1996).
Marin 2010 found that time to expulsion of the placenta was shorter (M = 409 ± 245 sec.) in
mothers of SSC infants than in control mothers (M = 475 ± 277 sec., P = 0.05). When SSC
on the mother’s abdomen, the infant’s knees and legs press into her abdomen in a massaging
manner which would logically induce uterine contractions and thereby reduce risk of
postpartum hemorrhage. Mothers who experience SSC have reduced bleeding (Dordevic
2008) and more rapid delivery of the placenta (Marin 2010).
In previous meta-analyses with full term infants, early contact was associated with continued
breastfeeding (Bernard-Bonnin 1989; Inch 1989; Perez-Escamilla 1994). Just altering
hospital routines can increase breastfeeding levels in the developed world (Rogers 1997).
Conde-Agudelo 2011 conducted a Cochrane review of 16 randomized clinical trials of
kangaroo mother care (KMC), a strategy of continuous or intermittent SSC with exclusive or
nearly exclusive breastfeeding and early hospital discharge of infants less than 2500 g at
birth in settings with limited resources. KMC was associated with reductions in several
clinically important adverse infant outcomes, including mortality at hospital discharge and at
latest follow-up, nosocomial infection/sepsis at hospital discharge and severe infection/
sepsis at latest follow-up, hypothermia and hospital length of stay. SSC mothers were more
satisfied with the method of care, and more likely to be exclusively breastfeeding at hospital
discharge. In another meta-analysis of 24 studies (13 case-series, five RCT’s, one cross-over
and four cohort), Mori 2010 evaluated outcomes in both low and normal birthweight infants
up to 28 days old. Infant body temperature increased 0.22 °C during and 0.14 °C after SSC
(P < 0.001, 21 studies); heart rate increased 2.04 beats per minute (bpm) during (P = 0.05)
and decreased 0.07 bpm after SSC (P = 0.95, 12 studies); oxygen saturation decreased
0.60% (three/fifths of 1%) during (P = 0.01) and 0.48% (essentially one-half of 1%) after
SSC (P = 0.06, 10 studies). These decreases in oxygen saturation are too small to be of
clinical significance.
Why it is important to do this review
Separation of mothers from their newborn infants at birth has become standard practice,
despite mounting evidence that this may have harmful effects. However, delivery room and
postpartum hospital routines may significantly disrupt early maternal-infant interactions
including breastfeeding (Anderson 2004a; Odent 2001; Winberg 1995). The possibility
exists that postnatal separation of human infants from their mothers is stressful (Anderson
1995) and might result in harmful effects that persist across the lifespan, if the studies with
laboratory animals cited earlier hold true for humans. This possibility needs careful
Moore et al.
Page 4
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 evaluation using the allostatic theoretical framework (McEwen 1998) as well as new
epigenetic findings (Meaney 2005).
A concurrent widespread decline in breastfeeding is of major public health concern.
Although more women are initiating breastfeeding, fewer are breastfeeding exclusively.
Using data from the Infant Feeding Practices Study II conducted in the United States by the
Food and Drug Administration in 2005 to 2007, Grummer-Strawn 2008 found that 83% of
mothers initiated breastfeeding, but only 48% exclusively breastfed during their hospital
stay. These innate behaviors can be disrupted by early post-partum hospital routines as
shown experimentally by Widstrom 1990 and in descriptive studies by Gomez 1998;
Jansson 1995 and Righard 1990. Gomez 1998 found that infants were eight times more
likely to breastfeed spontaneously if they spent more than 50 minutes in SSC with their
mothers immediately after birth, and concluded that the dose of SSC might be an essential
component regarding breastfeeding success. Bramson 2010 showed a clear dose-response
relationship between SSC in the first three hours postbirth and exclusive breastfeeding at
discharge in a large (N = 21,842 mothers) hospital-based cohort study, (odds ratio (OR) for
exclusive breastfeeding = 1.665 if in SSC for 16 to 30 minutes, and OR = 3.145 for more
than 60 minutes of SSC).
The purpose of this review is to examine the available evidence of the effects of early SSC
on breastfeeding exclusivity and duration and other outcomes in mothers and their healthy
full term and late preterm newborn infants. Although our intent is to examine all clinically
important outcomes, breastfeeding is the predominant outcome investigated so far in healthy
newborns. Hence, our emphasis is on breastfeeding, although we also will examine
maternal-infant physiology and behavior. Because the focus of this review is on mothers and
their healthy infants, potential effects of early SSC on father-infant attachment and also the
resistance of staff to this intervention are beyond the scope of this review. Maternal feelings
about early SSC and satisfaction with the birth experience are important and relevant but
require more qualitative methods. The focus of this review is on randomized controlled trials
used to test the effects of early SSC. This is an update of a Cochrane review first published
in 2003 and previously updated in 2007.
OBJECTIVES
To assess the effects of early skin-to-skin contact for healthy newborn infants compared to
standard contact (infants held swaddled or dressed in their mothers arms, placed in open
cribs or under radiant warmers).
The three main outcome categories include:
a.
establishment and maintenance of breastfeeding/lactation;
b.
infant physiology - thermoregulation, respiratory, cardiac, metabolic function,
neurobehavior;
c.
maternal-infant bonding/attachment.
METHODS
Criteria for considering studies for this review
Types of studies—All randomized controlled trials in which the active encouragement of
early skin-to-skin contact (SSC) between mothers and their healthy newborn infants was
compared to usual hospital care. We have not included quasi-randomized trials (e.g. where
assignment to groups was alternate or by day of the week, or by other non-random methods).
Moore et al.
Page 5
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Types of participants—Mothers and their healthy full term or late preterm newborn
infants (34 to less than 37 completed weeks’ gestation) having early SSC starting less than
24 hours after birth, and controls undergoing standard patterns of care.
Types of interventions—Early SSC for term or late preterm infants can be divided into
several subcategories.
a.
In ‘birth SSC’, the infant is placed prone skin-to-skin on the mother’s abdomen or
chest during the first minute postbirth. The infant is suctioned while on the
mother’s abdomen or chest, if medically indicated, thoroughly dried and covered
across the back with a prewarmed blanket. To prevent heat loss, the infant’s head
may be covered with a dry cap that is replaced when it becomes damp. Ideally, all
other interventions are delayed until at least the end of the first hour postbirth or the
first successful breastfeeding.
b.
In ‘very early SSC’, beginning approximately 30 to 40 minutes postbirth, the naked
infant, with or without a cap, is placed prone on the mother’s bare chest. A blanket
is placed across the infant’s back.
c.
’Early SSC’ can begin anytime between one and 24 hours postbirth. The baby is
naked (with or without a diaper and cap) and is placed prone on the mother’s bare
chest between the breasts. The mother may wear a blouse or shirt that opens in
front, or a hospital gown worn backwards, and the baby is placed inside the gown
so that only the head is exposed. What the mother wears and how the baby is kept
warm and what is placed across the baby’s back may vary. What is most important
is that the mother and baby are in direct ventral-to-ventral SSC and the infant is
kept dry and warm.
In the future these groups may be analyzed separately. However, at present, not enough
studies are available for subgroup analysis. Standard contact includes a number of diverse
conditions, infants held swaddled or dressed in their mothers arms, or infants placed in open
cribs or under radiant warmers in the mother’s room or elsewhere with no holding allowed.
Types of outcome measures
Primary outcomes
Breastfeeding outcomes:
1.
Number of mothers breastfeeding (any breastfeeding) one month to four months
postbirth
2.
Duration of breastfeeding
Infant outcomes:
1.
Infant stabilization during the transition to extra-uterine life Measured by the
SCRIP score (e.g. stability of the cardio-respiratory system - a composite score of
heart rate, respiratory status and arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation (SaO2),
range of scores = 0-6 (Fischer 1998)
2.
Blood glucose levels during/after SSC compared to standard care
3.
Infant thermoregulation = temperature changes during/ after SSC compared to
standard care (measured by axillary temperature)
Secondary outcomes
Breastfeeding outcomes (secondary):
Moore et al.
Page 6
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 1.
Effective breastfeeding (Infant Breastfeeding Assessment Tool (IBFAT) (Matthews
1988; Matthews 1991)
2.
Breastfeeding rates/exclusivity (using either the Labbok 1990 Index of
Breastfeeding Status or the Thulier 2010 five-point scale) at hospital discharge up
to two weeks postbirth
3.
Breastfeeding rates/exclusivity (using either the Labbok 1990 Index of
Breastfeeding Status or the Thulier 2010 five-point scale) three to six months
postbirth
4.
Maternal breast temperature during and after SSC
5.
Breast engorgement
Infant outcomes (secondary):
1.
Infant heart rate during/after SSC compared to standard care
2.
Respiratory status - respiratory rate during/after SSC compared to standard care
3.
Neonatal intensive care unit admissions
4.
Infant weight changes/rate of growth in gm/kg/day (daily weight change, change in
weight over days of study) (Hill 2007)
5.
Length of hospital stay
6.
Duration of infant crying
Maternal outcomes:
1.
Maternal perceptions of bonding/connection to her infant
2.
Maternal pain post cesarean
3.
Maternal sensitivity to her infant’s cues
4.
Maternal anxiety
5.
Maternal parenting confidence
Search methods for identification of studies
Electronic searches—We searched the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group’s
Trials Register by contacting the Trials Search Co-ordinator (30 November 2011).
The Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group’s Trials Register is maintained by the Trials
Search Co-ordinator and contains trials identified from:
1.
quarterly searches of the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials
(CENTRAL);
2.
weekly searches of MEDLINE;
3.
weekly searches of EMBASE;
4.
handsearches of 30 journals and the proceedings of major conferences;
5.
weekly current awareness alerts for a further 44 journals plus monthly BioMed
Central email alerts.
Details of the search strategies for CENTRAL, MEDLINE and EMBASE, the list of
handsearched journals and conference proceedings, and the list of journals reviewed via the
Moore et al.
Page 7
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 current awareness service can be found in the ‘Specialized Register’ section within the
editorial information about the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group.
Trials identified through the searching activities described above are each assigned to a
review topic (or topics). The Trials Search Co-ordinator searches the register for each
review using the topic list rather than keywords.
Searching other resources—The first three review authors have been active trialists in
this area and have personal contact with many groups in this field including the International
Network for Kangaroo Mother Care, based in Trieste (see Appendix 1).
We did not apply any language restrictions.
Data collection and analysis
For the methods used when assessing the trials identified in the previous version of this
review, see Appendix 2.
For this update we used the following methods when assessing the reports identified by the
updated search.
Selection of studies—Two review authors independently assessed for inclusion all the
potential studies we identified as a result of the search strategy. First, we screened titles and
abstracts of all the retrieved studies. Two review authors independently assessed full text
articles for inclusion in the review. We resolved any disagreement through discussion or, if
required, we consulted a third individual. We have listed studies that did not meet the
inclusion criteria for the review in the Characteristics of excluded studies tables along with
the reasons for their exclusion.
Data extraction and management—We designed a form to extract data. For eligible
studies, at least two review authors extracted the data using the agreed form. We resolved
discrepancies through discussion or, if required, we consulted a third person. We entered
data into Review Manager software (RevMan 2011) and checked for accuracy.
When information regarding any of the above was unclear, we attempted to contact authors
of the original reports to provide further details.
Assessment of risk of bias in included studies—Two review authors independently
assessed risk of bias for each study using the criteria outlined in the Cochrane Handbook for
Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011). We resolved any disagreement by
discussion or by involving a third assessor. We used the electronic ‘Risk of bias’ form in
RevMan 2011 to describe study methodological quality.The following criteria were
assessed.
(1) Sequence generation (checking for possible selection bias): We described for each
included study the method used to generate the allocation sequence in sufficient detail to
allow an assessment of whether it produced comparable groups.
We assessed the method as:
•
low risk of bias (any truly random process, e.g. random number table; computer
random number generator);
•
high risk of bias (any non-random process, e.g. odd or even date of birth; hospital
or clinic record number);
Moore et al.
Page 8
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 •
risk of bias unclear.
(2) Allocation concealment (checking for possible selection bias): We described for each
included study the method used to conceal the allocation sequence and determined whether
intervention allocation could have been foreseen in advance of, or during recruitment, or
changed after assignment.
We assessed the methods as:
•
low risk of bias (e.g. telephone or central randomization; consecutively numbered
sealed opaque envelopes);
•
high risk of bias (open random allocation; unsealed or non-opaque envelopes,
alternation; date of birth);
•
risk of bias unclear.
(3) Blinding (checking for possible performance and detection bias): We described for
each included study the methods used, if any, to blind study participants and personnel from
knowledge of which intervention a participant received. We considered that studies were at
low risk of bias if they were blinded, or if we judged that the lack of blinding could not have
affected the results. We assessed blinding separately for different outcomes or classes of
outcomes. We assessed the methods as:
•
low, high or unclear risk of bias for participants;
•
low, high or unclear risk of bias for personnel;
•
low, high or unclear risk of bias for outcome assessors.
(4) Incomplete outcome data (checking for possible attrition bias through withdrawals,
dropouts, protocol deviations): We described for each included study, and for each
outcome or class of outcomes, the completeness of data including attrition and exclusions
from the analysis. We stated whether attrition and exclusions were reported, the numbers
included in the analysis at each stage (compared with the total randomized participants),
reasons for attrition or exclusion where reported, and whether missing data were balanced
across groups or were related to outcomes. Where sufficient information was reported, or
could be supplied by the trial authors, we re-included missing data in the analyses. We
assessed methods as:
•
low risk of bias where loss was low and was balanced across groups;
•
high risk of bias where attrition was high or unbalanced across groups;
•
unclear risk of bias.
(5) Selective reporting bias: We described for each included study how we investigated the
possibility of selective outcome reporting bias and what we found. We assessed the methods
as:
•
low risk of bias (where it was clear that all of the study’s prespecified outcomes
and all expected outcomes of interest to the review had been reported);
•
high risk of bias (where not all the study’s prespecified outcomes had been
reported; one or more reported primary outcomes were not prespecified; outcomes
of interest were reported incompletely and so could not be used; study failed to
include results of a key outcome that would have been expected to have been
reported);
Moore et al.
Page 9
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 •
unclear risk of bias.
(6) Other sources of bias: We described for each included study any important concerns we
had about other possible sources of bias.
We assessed whether each study was free of other problems that could put it at risk of bias:
•
low, high or unclear risk of other bias.
(7) Overall risk of bias: We made explicit judgements about whether studies were at high
risk of bias, according to the criteria given in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic
Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011). With reference to (1) to (6) above, we assessed the
likely magnitude and direction of the bias and whether we considered it is likely to impact
on the findings. We explored the impact of the level of bias through undertaking sensitivity
analysis.
Measures of treatment effect
Dichotomous data: For dichotomous data, we have presented results as summary risk ratio
with 95% confidence intervals.
Continuous data: For continuous data, we used the mean difference if outcomes were
measured in the same way between trials. We used the standardized mean difference to
combine trials that measured the same outcome, but used different methods.
Unit of analysis issues—The unit of analysis was the healthy newborn infant receiving
SSC or standard care.
We did not identify any cluster-randomized trials in this version of the review. If we identify
such trials in future updates we will include them in the review along with individually
randomized trials.
To take account of design effect, provided sufficient information is available, we will adjust
the sample sizes and event rates from cluster-randomized studies using the methods
described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins
2011). We will use an estimate of the intracluster correlation coefficient (ICC) derived from
the trial (if possible), or from another source. If ICCs from other sources are used, we will
report this and will conduct sensitivity analyses to investigate the effect of variation in the
ICC.
We will consider that it is reasonable to combine the results from both individually and
cluster-randomized trials if there is little heterogeneity between the study designs and the
interaction between the effect of intervention and the choice of randomization unit is
considered to be unlikely.
Dealing with missing data—For included studies, we noted levels of attrition and have
described in the Characteristics of included studies tables the levels of loss to follow up at
each data collection point.
For all outcomes, we carried out analyses, as far as possible, on an intention-to-treat basis,
i.e. we attempted to include all participants randomized to each group in the analyses, and
all participants were analyzed in the group to which they were allocated, regardless of
whether or not they received the allocated intervention. The denominator for each outcome
Moore et al.
Page 10
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 in each trial was the number randomized minus any participants whose outcomes were
known to be missing.
Assessment of heterogeneity—We assessed statistical heterogeneity in each meta-
analysis using the I2 and Chi2 statistics. We regarded heterogeneity as substantial if either I2
was greater than 40% or there was a low P value (less than 0.10) in the Chi2 test for
heterogeneity.
Assessment of reporting biases—If there were 10 or more studies in the meta-analysis
we planned to investigate reporting biases (such as publication bias) using funnel plots. In
this version of the review insufficient studies contributed data to allow us to carry out this
analysis for all but one of the outcomes. In future updates, if more studies become available
we will assess funnel plot asymmetry visually, and will use formal tests for funnel plot
asymmetry. For continuous outcomes, we will use the test proposed by Egger 1997, and for
dichotomous outcomes, we will use the test proposed by Harbord 2006. If asymmetry is
detected in any of these tests or is suggested by a visual assessment, we will perform
exploratory analyses to investigate it.
Data synthesis—We carried out statistical analysis using the Review Manager software
(RevMan 2011). We used fixed-effect meta-analysis for combining data when it was
reasonable to assume that studies were estimating the same underlying treatment effect: i.e.
where trials were examining the same intervention, and the trials’ populations and methods
were judged sufficiently similar. If there was clinical heterogeneity sufficient to expect that
the underlying treatment effects differed between trials, or if substantial statistical
heterogeneity was detected, we used random-effects meta-analysis to produce an overall
summary if an average treatment effect across trials was considered clinically meaningful.
The random-effects summary was treated as the average range of possible treatment effects
and we have discussed the clinical implications of treatment effects differing between trials.
If the average treatment effect was not clinically meaningful, we did not combine trials.
If we used random-effects analyses, the results have been presented as the average treatment
effect with its 95% confidence interval, along with estimates of I2.
Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity—For primary outcomes we
planned subgroup analysis by:
1.
gestational age at birth; infants born at term (greater than 37 weeks) versus later
preterm (greater than 34 to 37 weeks);
2.
type of SSC (at birth, very early SSC, and early SSC).
We planned to assess differences between subgroups by using the interaction tests available
in RevMan 2011. In this version of the review insufficient studies contributed data to allow
us to carry out the planned analysis. In future updates, as more data become available, we
hope to be able to look for possible differences between subgroups.
Sensitivity analysis—We planned to carry out sensitivity analysis to look at whether the
methodological quality of studies had an impact on results; however, none of the included
studies met all criteria for low risk of bias and we therefore did not carry out this analysis in
this version of the review. In view of the mixed methodological quality of trials we advise
caution in the interpretation of results. For our two primary outcomes there were high levels
of heterogeneity; much of the variation was due to a single study; we therefore carried out
sensitivity analysis excluding this study from the analysis to examine the impact on results
Moore et al.
Page 11
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (Sosa 1976a). For infant physiological outcomes, we also carried out sensitivity analysis to
explore high levels of heterogeneity.
RESULTS
Description of studies
See: Characteristics of included studies; Characteristics of excluded studies; Characteristics
of ongoing studies.
Results of the search
Included studies: Thirty-four studies with 2177 mother-infant dyads met the inclusion
criteria. None of the 34 studies met all of the methodological quality criteria (see Figure 1
and Figure 2). The total sample sizes in the studies ranged from eight to 204 mother-infant
pairs. The studies represented very diverse populations in Canada, Chile, Germany,
Guatemala, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Nepal, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Taiwan, Thailand, the United Kingdom, and the United States. All but four of the 34 studies
included only healthy full term infants. Four studies (Anderson 2003; Bergman 2004; Chwo
1999; Syfrett 1996) were done with healthy late preterm infants who were assigned to the
normal newborn nursery. Three studies (Gouchon 2010; McClellan 1980; Nolan 2009) were
conducted with mothers scheduled for repeat cesarean birth using regional anesthesia. One
study (Huang 2006) was conducted with hypothermic, but otherwise healthy, newborns
postcesarean birth with spinal anesthesia. One paper reported results for studies carried out
in three different sites and we have treated these as three different studies in the data and
analysis (Sosa 1976a; Sosa 1976b; Sosa 1976c). A large number of outcomes (31) have been
reported in the analysis, but only 15 included multiple trials and for many of the other
outcomes only a relatively small number of studies (two or three) contributed data. Four of
the 34 included studies did not report data on our prespecified primary and secondary
outcomes and data from these studies have not been included in the analysis (Curry 1982;
Fardig 1980; Ferber 2004; Hales 1977). Details of all included studies are set out in the
Characteristics of included studies tables.
The characteristics of the intervention varied greatly between studies. Duration of skin-to-
skin (SSC) ranged from approximately 15 minutes (De Chateau 1977; Svejda 1980;
Thomson 1979; Vaidya 2005) to a mean of 37 of 48 hours (84%) of continuous SSC (Syfrett
1996); in this study all dyads received 24 minutes of SSC before randomization. Hake-
Brooks 2003 (under Anderson 2003) reported that SSC mothers gave SSC 22% of the time
and held their wrapped infants for 11.6% of the observation period. Although SSC began by
0 to 15 minutes postbirth in 18 of the 34 studies, the SSC dyads in the study by Shiau 1997
could not begin until four hours postbirth because of hospital policy. SSC did not begin until
a mean of 21.3 hours postbirth in the study by Chwo 1999 of late preterm infants 34 to 36
weeks’ gestational age. In 22 of the 34 studies the infants were given the opportunity to
suckle during SSC but only five studies (Carfoot 2004; Carfoot 2005; Gouchon 2010;
Khadivzadeh 2008; Moore 2005) documented the success of the first breastfeeding using a
validated instrument, the Infant Breastfeeding Assessment Tool. The amount of assistance
the mothers received with breastfeeding during SSC was unclear in many of the research
reports.
Substantial differences were found between studies in the amount of separation that
occurred in the control group. In eight studies (Chwo 1999; Hales 1977; Huang 2006;
Mizuno 2004; Shiau 1997; Sosa 1976a; Sosa 1976b; Sosa 1976c), infants were removed
from their mothers immediately postbirth and reunited 12 to 24 hours later. In five studies
(Carlsson 1978; Craig 1982; Gouchon 2010; Svejda 1980; Thomson 1979), the mothers held
Moore et al.
Page 12
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 their swaddled infants for about five minutes soon after birth and then were separated from
their infants. Control mothers held their swaddled infants six times for 60 minutes in Chwo
1999, 20 minutes in Kastner 2005, 60 minutes in Moore 2005 and for two hours in the
recovery room in Punthmatharith 2001. The swaddled control infants in Khadivzadeh 2008
were reunited with their mothers after the episiotomy repair. Control infants in Nolan 2009
were separated from their mothers for a mean of 21 minutes and in Gouchon 2010 for a
mean of 51 minutes post-cesarean birth. There were four groups in the study by Bystrova
2003; an SSC group, a mother’s arms group where the infants were held swaddled or
dressed, a nursery group and a reunion group where the infants were taken to the nursery
immediately postbirth for 120 minutes but reunited with their mothers for rooming-in on the
postpartum unit. In Hake-Brooks 2003 (under Anderson 2003) control mothers held their
wrapped infants 13.9% of the time (M = 6.67 hours).
Excluded studies: Fifty studies were assessed and excluded from the review. The primary
reason for exclusion was that the investigators did not state that the infants in the
intervention group received early SSC with their mothers. When the information in the
research report was unclear, where possible we contacted the investigators, to determine
whether the early contact was indeed skin-to-skin (see the table of Characteristics of
excluded studies).
New studies found at this update: Five randomized controlled trials have been added to
the review. Two of the new studies (Gouchon 2010; Nolan 2009) were conducted with
mothers scheduled for repeat cesarean birth using regional anesthesia. One study (Huang
2006) was conducted with hypothermic, but otherwise healthy, newborns post-cesarean birth
with spinal anesthesia. The results from four additional reports involving the data set from
Bystrova 2003, two additional reports from Anderson 2003 and one additional report from
Bergman 2004 have been added to this update.
Risk of bias in included studies
Allocation—The overall methodological quality of the included studies was mixed and
many studies did not provide clear information on the way the that the randomization
sequence was generated, or on the methods used to conceal group allocation at the point of
randomization. In 18 of the 34 studies the way the randomization sequence was produced
was not clearly described and in 22 of the 34 studies, not enough information was provided
to determine if the method of random assignment was robust before allocation of the
participants to groups occurred. In two studies (De Chateau 1977; McClellan 1980),
allocation concealment was at high risk of bias because the researchers used an open table of
random numbers. In seven studies (Anderson 2003; Bergman 2004; Chwo 1999; Moore
2005; Punthmatharith 2001; Shiau 1997; Syfrett 1996), allocation concealment was
controlled by using a computer program to assign women to groups (the minimization
method). Although the Syfrett 1996 study was small (n = 8), the recruiter was naive to the
minimization method of random assignment. In 12 studies (Carlsson 1978; Christensson
1992; Christensson 1995; Hales 1977; Kastner 2005; Khadivzadeh 2008; Mazurek 1999;
Mizuno 2004; Svejda 1980; Thomson 1979; Vaidya 2005; Villalon 1993), the researchers
indicated that women were randomly assigned to groups but no further information was
provided about the randomization method. In eight studies (Bystrova 2003; Carfoot 2004;
Craig 1982; Curry 1982; Nolan 2009; Sosa 1976a; Sosa 1976b; Sosa 1976c), sealed
envelopes were used but the investigators do not state whether the envelopes were
sequentially numbered, although Bystrova 2003 noted that the envelopes were opened
consecutively.
Moore et al.
Page 13
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Blinding—Blinding women, clinical staff and outcome assessors to treatment group is
extremely difficult for this type of intervention, and we found it difficult to judge the impact
of lack of blinding on particular outcomes. We have provided a single assessment for
performance blinding and detection bias for these studies taking into account both the
information provided by investigators, and our assessments of the potential impact of lack of
blinding on the particular outcomes measured (i.e. we considered for example, that lack of
blinding may have had more impact on outcomes where unblinded outcome assessors
observed maternal behavior and less impact on laboratory investigations). In 28 studies we
rated the impact of lack of blinding as unclear; in studies where an unblinded investigator
provided clinical care for the treatment group and also collected outcome data, we assessed
that results may have been more susceptible to observer bias. In the Characteristics of
included studies tables we have described for each study any attempts investigators made to
blind women, staff and outcome observers.
None of the research reports stated that the delivery and postpartum staff were unaware of
the group assignment of the mothers. Ferber 2004, however, stated that the nursery staff
were blind to patient group assignment. Therefore, in the majority of studies control for
provider performance bias was difficult to determine. In the 10 studies that evaluated infant
physiological outcomes (Bergman 2004; Bystrova 2003; Christensson 1992; Fardig 1980;
Gouchon 2010; Huang 2006; Mazurek 1999; Nolan 2009; Syfrett 1996; Villalon 1993),
however, patient or provider performance bias may not be as significant an issue as it might
be with maternal attachment and breastfeeding outcomes. Surprisingly, there was more
effort made to control for patient performance bias than for provider performance bias. In
seven studies (Carlsson 1978; Craig 1982; Curry 1982; Ferber 2004; Kastner 2005; Svejda
1980; Thomson 1979), it was reported that the women were not aware that they were
receiving an experimental treatment and/or they were not informed about the true purpose of
the study. Adequate control for patient performance is problematic in the more recent
studies because of Institutional Review Board requirements that investigators disclose the
true purpose of the study or the experimental conditions, or both. In 14 of the 34 studies,
outcome assessors (whenever possible) were reported to be unaware of the woman’s group
assignment. In several studies, when infant physiological or crying data were obtained by
observation during SSC (Bergman 2004; Bystrova 2003; Christensson 1992; Christensson
1995; Fardig 1980; Gouchon 2010; Huang 2006; Mazurek 1999; Syfrett 1996; Villalon
1993), the outcome assessors could not be masked.
Incomplete outcome data—In all but one study (Carlsson 1978), outcome data were
either obtained on all the enrolled women or reasons were provided for women who
withdrew or had to be withdrawn. Six investigators (Anderson 2003; Bergman 2004;
Bystrova 2003; Carfoot 2005; Gouchon 2010; Moore 2005), utilized the Consort Guidelines
(Moher 2001; Moher 2010) to document the flow of participants through their clinical trial.
An overall summary of risk of bias for all studies is set out in Figure 1 and ‘Risk of bias’
findings for individual studies are set out in Figure 2.
Effects of interventions
All the studies reviewed were randomized controlled trials. Most of our primary and
secondary outcomes were measured in only one or two studies and where more studies
contributed data there was some heterogeneity between trials. Where we identified moderate
or high statistical heterogeneity (I2 greater than 40%), we have drawn attention to this in the
text and would urge caution in the interpretation of these results which show the average
treatment effect.
Moore et al.
Page 14
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Primary outcomes - breastfeeding rates/duration—Early SSC resulted in better
overall performance on several measures of breastfeeding status, although there was
heterogeneity between studies.
More SSC dyads were still breastfeeding one to four months postbirth (average risk ratio
(RR) 1.27, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.06 to 1.53). This meta-analysis included 13
studies and involved 702 mother-infant pairs. In 11 of the 13 studies, SSC dyads were more
likely to be breastfeeding at one to four months postbirth, although the difference reached
statistical significance in only two studies (Sosa 1976c; Thomson 1979). Overall, there were
differences in the size of the treatment effect between studies leading to moderate
heterogeneity for this outcome (T2 = 0.04, P = 0.03, I2 = 47%) (Analysis 1.1). Much of the
heterogeneity was due to a single study (Sosa 1976a) (the study author speculated that
variation in treatment effect was due to the particular population attending the study
hospital). We carried out a sensitivity analysis removing this study from the analysis; when
this study was excluded there was no evidence of statistical heterogeneity (T2 = 0.00, P =
0.52, I2 = 0%) and removing this study had very little impact on the overall treatment effect;
the difference between groups favoring the SCC group remained statistically significant (RR
1.31, 95% CI 1.16 to 1.48) (Analysis 1.31). As sufficient studies contributed data to this
outcome, we generated a funnel plot to explore whether there was any obvious small study
effect; Visual examination of the forest and funnel plots suggested that there was a greater
treatment effect associated with smaller studies and this may indicate possible publication
bias (Figure 3).
Seven studies with 324 mother/infant pairs reported data on the duration of breastfeeding in
days. Six of the seven studies (De Chateau 1977; Mizuno 2004; Shiau 1997; Sosa 1976b;
Sosa 1976c; Svejda 1980) found a longer duration of breastfeeding in the SSC dyads (mean
difference (MD) 42.55 days, 95% CI −1.69 to 86.79). However, overall, the difference
between groups did not reach statistical significance. Results from this meta-analysis should
be interpreted with caution; there was considerable heterogeneity for this outcome and some
of the findings are from studies with very small sample sizes, and although mean duration of
breastfeeding was reported this may not have been an appropriate measure in studies where
the distribution of scores was unlikely to have been normal (heterogeneity: T2 = 2216, P =
0.007, I2 = 66%) (Analysis 1.2). Again, it was clear from visual examination of the forest
plot that much of the heterogeneity was due to the Sosa 1976a study. Sensitivity analysis
excluding this study removed heterogeneity (I2 = 0%) and the difference between groups
was statistically significant with breastfeeding duration increased by an average of 64 days
in the SSC group (MD 63.73, 95% CI 37.96 to 89.5) (Analysis 1.32).
Infant primary outcomes
Infant physiological stability in the hours following birth: Bergman 2004 utilized SCRIP
scores (a measure of infant cardio-respiratory stability in preterm infants that evaluates
infant heart rate, respiratory rate and oxygen saturation) (Fischer 1998) to compare SSC in
healthy late preterm 31 SSC infants (mean gestational age (GA) = 34.2 weeks) with 13 late
preterm control infants (mean GA = 35.3 weeks) placed in a servo-controlled incubator next
to their mothers. SSC infants had higher SCRIP scores during the first six hours postbirth,
indicating better stabilization (MD 2.88, 95% CI 0.53 to 5.23) (Analysis 1.3). A subset of
infants below 1800 grams birthweight also demonstrated better stabilization (MD 4.92, 95%
CI −1.67 to 11.51) but this result did not reach statistical significance (Analysis 1.4).
Blood glucose 75 to 90 minutes following the birth was measured in two studies with 94
infants; blood glucose was higher in SSC infants (MD 10.56 mg/dL, 95% CI 8.40 to 12.72)
and this result was statistically significant (Analysis 1.5).
Moore et al.
Page 15
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Infant thermoregulation: Infant axillary temperature at 90 minutes to two hours after the
birth was reported in three studies including a total of 168 dyads. In the studies by
Christensson 1992 and Christensson 1995, infants had SSC or were placed in a ‘cot’
(bassinet) next to the mother during the first 90 minutes postbirth. Neither group of infants
was fed. In Villalon 1993 control infants were taken to the nursery. Due to heterogeneity
between studies we did not combine results in meta-analysis but results for the individual
studies are set out in Analysis 1.6. In the Christensson 1992 and Christensson 1995 studies,
results favored the SCC group (RR 0.40, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.61, and RR 0.50, 95% CI 0.17 to
0.83 respectively) whereas in the study by Villalon 1993 temperatures were on average
slightly higher for the control group at this time point (RR −0.10, 95% −0.24 to 0.04)
(although at other time points reported results favored the intervention group and therefore,
in view of these inconsistencies findings for this study, are difficult to interpret).
Secondary outcomes
Breastfeeding outcomes: Two studies with 57 women reported the number exclusively
breastfeeding at hospital discharge; there was no evidence of a difference between groups
receiving SSC compared with routine care (RR 0.99, 95% CI 0.66 to 1.47) (Analysis 1.7).
Three studies with 245 women examined breastfeeding status (using the Index of
breastfeeding status (IBS) at one month postpartum. The IBS is a single item indicator and
consists of three major levels of breastfeeding exclusivity -- full, partial, and token
breastfeeding. Full breastfeeding is divided into two sub-categories exclusive and almost
exclusive. In almost exclusive breastfeeding, the infant is given water, juice, vitamins and
minerals infrequently in addition to breast-milk. Partial breastfeeding is divided into three
sub-categories - high, medium and low. Token breastfeeding is occasional and irregular, less
than 15 minutes a day.There was no clear evidence of differences between groups for this
outcome, and results varied considerably between studies therefore the overall average
treatment effect should be interpreted with caution (mean difference (MD) 0.86, 95% CI
−0.73 to 2.44) (heterogeneity: T2 = 1.70, P < 0.0001, I2 = 90%) (Analysis 1.8).
More infants were exclusively breastfeeding up to three to six months postbirth in three
studies (n = 149) (RR 1.97, 95% CI 1.37 to 2.83) (Analysis 1.9).
Two studies reported breastfeeding at one year postbirth.There were no statistically
significant differences between groups (RR 6.91, 95% CI 0.82 to 46.78) (Analysis 1.10).
Two studies with 54 women examined breastfeeding effectiveness scores and those in the
SCC group had higher mean scores (MD in IBFAT scores 1.79, 95% CI 0.24 to 3.35)
(Analysis 1.11). The Infant Breastfeeding Assessment Tool (IBFAT) evaluates four
parameters of infant suckling competence infant state of arousal or readiness to feed; rooting
reflex; latch-on; and suckling pattern.The infant can receive a score of 0-3 on each item for a
maximum total score of 12 indicating adequate suckling competence (Matthews 1988;
Matthews 1991) .
Carfoot 2004, Carfoot 2005 and Khadivzadeh 2008 found that infants held SSC were
slightly more likely to breastfeed successfully during their first feeding postbirth than those
who were held swaddled in blankets by their mothers, although he evidence of a difference
between groups was not statistically significant and there was considerable variability
between findings in these three studies (n = 315) (average RR 1.36, 95% CI 0.95 to 1.95;
heterogeneity T2 = 0.07, P = 0.03, I2 = 72%) (Analysis 1.12). These findings were obtained
using a modification of the IBFAT.
Moore et al.
Page 16
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 In a single study with data for 88 women, Bystrova 2003 reported the number of infants that
suckled within two hours of the birth; there was no clear evidence of differences between
groups (RR 1.06, 95% CI 0.83 to 1.35) (Analysis 1.13).
Maternal breast temperature: Bystrova 2003 found significant between group differences
in the mean variation in breast temperature 30 to 120 minutes postbirth as measured by the
interquartile range between mothers who held their infants SSC and those who were
separated from their infants (MD 0.60, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.86) (Analysis 1.14). Duration of
SSC was 95 minutes. The researchers suggested that these variations in maternal breast
temperature in the SSC group may regulate infant temperature more effectively than stable
breast temperatures and help prevent neonatal hypothermia.
Breast problems: Breast engorgement pain (measured by the self-reported Six Point Breast
Engorgement Scale (Hill 1994) or by the mother’s perception of tension/hardness in her
breasts) was less for SSC than non-SSC mothers on day three postbirth (standardized mean
difference (SMD) −0.41, 95% CI −0.76 to −0.06) (Analysis 1.15) (Bystrova 2003; Shiau
1997).
Infant physiological outcomes
Infant heart rate and respiratory rate: Four studies (Christensson 1992; Mazurek 1999;
Nolan 2009; Villalon 1993) obtained data on infant respiratory rate 75 minutes to two hours
postbirth. and three studies obtained data on infant heart rate. SSC infants had a lower mean
heart rate than control infants who were separated from their mothers although the evidence
of a difference between groups did not reach statistical significance and there was high
heterogeneity for this outcome (MD −3.05 beats per minute (BPM), 95% CI −7.84 to 1.75;
183 infants); (heterogeneity: T2 = 15.26, P = 0.0005, I2 87%) (Analysis 1.16). Results also
favored SCC infants for respiratory rate but again these results did not reach statistical
significance and there was considerable variability in findings between studies (MD −3.12
RPM, 95% CI −6.61 to 0.37; 215 infants) (heterogeneity T2 = 9.24, P = 0.004, I2 = 77%)
(Analysis 1.17). Heterogeneity was mainly due to findings from the Villalon 1993 study; as
stated above, findings at different time points varied considerably in this study. We carried
out sensitivity analysis where results for this study were excluded; for both heart rate and
respiratory rate, removal of findings for Villalon 1993 resulted in statistically significant
findings favoring the SCC groups and there was no longer any evidence of between study
heterogeneity (heart rate MD −5.77, 95% CI −7.46 to −4.11; respiratory rate MD −4.76,
95% CI −6.12 to 3.41) (Analysis 1.33; Analysis 1.34).
Bergman 2004 compared the number of infants in the two groups who did not exceed
physiological parameters for stability requiring medical attention. The five parameters were
infant skin temperature less than 35.5 °C on two consecutive occasions, heart rate less than
100 or more than 180 BPM on two consecutive occasions, apnea more than 20 seconds,
oxygen saturation less than 87% on two consecutive occasions, blood glucose less than 2.6
mmol/L and FIO2 up to 0.6 with continuous positive airways pressure (CPAP) up to 5 cm of
water pressure. Fifteen of the 18 SSC and one of the 13 control infants did not exceed
parameters (RR 10.83, 95% CI 1.63 to 72.02). The most common reasons for exceeding
parameters in control infants were hypothermia, hypoglycemia, and respiratory problems
(Analysis 1.18).
Neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admissions: There were no significant differences
between groups in infant admissions to the NICU in Bergman 2004. Two SSC infants and
one control infant required CPAP and they were transferred to the NICU (RR 1.44, 95% CI
0.15 to 14.29) (Analysis 1.19).Two studies with 42 infants (Chwo 1999; Syfrett 1996)
Moore et al.
Page 17
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 examined hospital length of stay in late preterm infants 34 to 36 weeks’ GA and found no
significant between group differences and there was high heterogeneity for this outcome
(MD −95.30 hours, 95% CI −368.50 to 177.89) (Analysis 1.22).
Infant body weight change: No statistically significant differences were found in infant
body weight change day 14 postbirth; this outcome was reported in two studies with 43
infants (MD −8.00 grams, 95% CI −175.60 to 159.61) (Analysis 1.20) (Chwo 1999; Moore
2005). Infant weigh change per kilogram per day was not reported in any of the included
studies.
Infant crying/behavior: Christensson 1995 found that 12 of the 14 SSC infants cried no
more than one minute during the 90-minute observation compared with only one of the 15
control infants (RR 12.86, 95% CI 1.91 to 86.44) (Analysis 1.23). Mazurek 1999 found that
SSC infants cried for a shorter length of time during a 75-minute observation period than
control infants (MD −8.01 minutes, 95% CI −8.98 to −7.04) (Analysis 1.24).
Maternal Outcomes
Maternal-infant bonding: Bystrova 2003 used The Parent-Child Early Relational
Assessment (PCERA) in a study with data for 61 women.The PCERA (Clark 1985; Clark
1999) has eight sub-scales evaluating maternal and infant behavior and interaction. Bystrova
2003 found no evidence of significant between group differences for maternal positive
affective involvement at 12 months postbirth (MD 1.90, 95% CI −1.14 to 4.94) (Analysis
1.25) however, SSC dyads appeared more mutual and reciprocal (MD 1.30, 95% CI 0.24 to
2.36) than those who were separated immediately postbirth and later reunited for rooming-in
(Analysis 1.26). Bigelow 2010 under Bergman 2004 found significant effects of SSC during
the first 24 hours postbirth on maternal sensitivity to her infant’s behavioral cues, which
demonstrated a dose-response effect. However it was a small sub-sample (12 of 31
randomized), and the effect was related to the 24-hour dose, with participants randomized to
the control condition later receiving SSC, hence excluded from this review.
Other outcomes: Cesarean birth mothers in the SSC group also reported less postoperative
pain than mothers who were separated from their infants (MD −1.38, 95% CI −2.79 to 0.03)
(Analysis 1.27) (Nolan 2009). Mothers who held their infants SSC indicated a strong
preference for the same type of postdelivery care in the future (86%) whereas only 30% of
mothers who held their infants swaddled indicated that they would most certainly prefer this
type of care in the future (RR 2.82, 95% CI 2.08 to 3.82) (Analysis 1.28) (Carfoot 2005).
Mothers who held their infants SSC displayed less state anxiety day three postbirth (MD
−5.00, 95% CI −9.00 to −1.00) (Analysis 1.29). Parenting confidence scores were measured
in a single study with data for 20 women; there was no evidence of significant differences
between groups (MD 5.60, 95% CI −6.24 to 17.44) (Moore 2005) at one month postbirth
between mothers who held their infants SSC or swaddled (Analysis 1.30).
Non-prespecified outcomes: A large number of additional outcomes were measured in the
included studies. Most of these outcomes were measured in single studies The clinical
importance of results for many such outcomes is difficult to determine. Outcomes which
appeared similar were measured in a range of different ways, in addition, many outcomes
were reported at different or multiple time points and results may not have been consistent
within or between studies. Non-prespecified outcomes reported include observed mother and
infant behavior during the first few hours after birth, outcomes relating to breastfeeding (e.g.
duration of first feed and number of breastfeeding problems) and a range of outcomes
relating to mother-child interaction.
Moore et al.
Page 18
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 DISCUSSION
Summary of main results
The results of this review demonstrated a statistically significant positive effect of skin-to-
skin contact (SSC) on the following primary outcomes: breastfeeding one month to four
months postbirth, SCRIP score first six hours postbirth, and blood glucose mg/ dL at 75 to
90 minutes postbirth, We did not identify significant between group differences in duration
of breastfeeding, and results relating to infant axillary temperature at 90 minutes to two
hours postbirth were difficult to interpret due to high heterogeneity.
We found a statistically significant and positive effect of SSC on the following secondary
outcomes: success of the first breastfeeding (IBFAT score), mean variation in maternal
breast temperature 30 to 120 minutes postbirth, infant did not exceed physiological
parameters for stability, number of babies not crying for more than one minute during a 90-
minute observation, amount of crying in minutes during a 75-minute observation period and
PCERA dyadic mutuality and reciprocity 12 months postbirth. We did not identify
significant between group differences in successful first breastfeeding (IBFAT score 10 to
12 or BAT score 8 to 12), infant heart rate 75 minutes to two hours postbirth, infant
respiratory rate 75 minutes to two hours postbirth, infant body weight change (grams) day
14 postbirth, transfers to the neonatal intensive care unit, infant hospital length of stay in
hours, or PCERA maternal positive affective involvement and responsiveness 12 months
postbirth.
No negative outcomes associated with SSC were reported in any of the studies except Sosa
1976a, who reported a longer duration of breastfeeding in the control group.
In summation, the totality of significant outcomes relating to breastfeeding, infant
physiology and maternal neurobehavior supports the use of SSC in the early period after
birth. However, this overall finding should be treated with some caution: for many outcomes
only one or two studies contributed data, and for those outcomes where several studies were
combined in meta-analysis there was considerable heterogeneity between individual studies.
At the same time, some of those results that did not reach statistical significance were
derived from small studies which did not have the statistical power to demonstrate
differences between groups.
Breastfeeding/lactation outcomes—Only two breastfeeding meta-analyses contained
more that three studies. Thirteen studies (702 infants) reported breastfeeding rates between
one and four months postbirth (Analysis 1.1) demonstrating that mothers in the SSC group
were more likely to be breastfeeding than those in the control group. The only other
outcome with more than three studies (seven studies, 324 infants) was breastfeeding
duration (Analysis 1.2). Infants in the SSC group breastfed an average of 42.55 days longer
than control infants and when a study with inconsistent results was removed from the
analysis the difference between groups was statistically significant. Evidence for
breastfeeding exclusivity was conflicting, being no different at hospital discharge (Analysis
1.7, 2 studies) but significantly greater at three to six months postbirth (Analysis 1.9, three
studies).The findings of improved breastfeeding for the two largest meta-analyses in this
review were obtained in diverse countries and among women of low and high socio-
economic class.
Results for IBFAT scores for the first breastfeeding postbirth were conflicting with one
meta-analysis which treated this outcome as a dichotomous variable (Analysis 1.12)
demonstrating no significant between group differences and another meta-analysis which
used interval level data (Analysis 1.11) finding a significant effect of early SSC. Moore
Moore et al.
Page 19
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 2005 also found that SSC and the mother’s nipple protractility contributed equally to the
variance in infant IBFAT scores.The mother’s nipple protractility was important in relation
to the infant’s ability to establish competent suckling. Dewey 2003 reported that suboptimal
breastfeeding behavior during the first 24 hours postbirth was associated with the mother’s
flat or inverted nipples (RR 1.56). These infants were also 2.6 times more likely to have
excessive weight loss.
Timing of when this outcome is measured may be critical because most healthy full term
infants spontaneously grasp the nipple and begin to suckle by approximately 55 minutes
postbirth. During the first 30 minutes, they may only lick the nipple. Widstrom 2011 found
that some infants may take up to 45 minutes to latch after crawling towards and reaching the
nipple and recommended that this process should not be disturbed or forced. Also, the
intervention will be more successful if a clinician reassures the mother that healthy full term
babies are able to crawl to the breast and begin to nurse on their own without assistance
when they are ready. After the first two hours postbirth, infants often become sleepy and
difficult to arouse.
Babies breastfed more successfully during SSC immediately postbirth than if they were held
swaddled in blankets, probably because of the extra tactile, odor, and thermal cues provided
by SSC, but this result did not translate into significantly more mothers breastfeeding at one
to four months postbirth in two studies by the same investigator (Carfoot 2004; Carfoot
2005). Carfoot 2005 stated that barriers to long-term breastfeeding, such as returning to
work, and breastfeeding problems contributed to the minimal effect that early SSC had on
this outcome. Early SSC appears to have less of an effect on breastfeeding exclusivity or
duration in studies where control infants are held swaddled by their mothers or placed
swaddled or clothed on their mother’s naked chest and given the opportunity to breastfeed
soon after birth than in studies where control infants are separated from their mothers for 12
to 24 hours immediately postbirth. Given the strong evidence of the negative impact of early
mother-infant separation, it is noteworthy that in some hospitals usual care still includes this
practice for healthy full term newborns (Mizuno 2004).
Moore 2005 suggested that barriers to long-term breastfeeding that exist in the United
States, especially the customary absence of, or very brief, paid maternity leave, attenuated
the effectiveness of early SSC on breastfeeding status day 28 to one month postbirth
(Analysis 1.8). The mothers in Punthmatharith 2001 delivered in a Baby Friendly Hospital
in Thailand with 24-hour rooming-in. Control infants were cup fed if they needed
supplementation. In addition, most of the SSC took place in extremely warm, un-air
conditioned eight-bed postpartum rooms with frequent visitors so that contextual issues,
such as body warmth and modesty, may have changed SSC desirability and also
effectiveness.
Such factors as room temperature, lack of privacy, modesty, overcrowding, supplemental
bottle or pacifier use, and 24-hour rooming-in may play a role in the effectiveness of SSC.
Early SSC may not have as strong an effect on long-term breastfeeding in countries with a
widespread bottle feeding culture compared to countries with cultures that are supportive of
breastfeeding. In the studies by Carfoot 2004, Carfoot 2005, and Moore 2005, mothers in the
control group received extra assistance with breastfeeding, which is not always available
with usual hospital care. In Moore 2005, the investigator was an experienced lactation
consultant who assisted mothers in both groups with initiating breastfeeding. In Carfoot
2005, the midwife usually provided breastfeeding assistance, but if she was unavailable, the
research assistant often provided help with breastfeeding. More definitive results might have
been obtained if the control groups received only usual hospital care.
Moore et al.
Page 20
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Infant physiological/behavioral outcomes—The between-group differences in
SCRIP scores and maintenance of physiological parameters in late preterm infants is
certainly clinically significant, especially given the fact that SSC was compared with a
servo-controlled incubator. The clinical significance of some of the other physiological
outcomes for healthy full term infants is debatable. Full term infants in the SSC group were
less than one degree warmer than control infants. Their heart rate was three BPM slower and
their respiratory rate was three breaths less per minute, on average. However, their blood
glucose was 10.56 mg/ dL higher, a significant finding.The results suggest that early SSC is
a safe intervention for healthy infants and that it may increase cardio-respiratory stability,
thermal stability, and blood glucose in late preterm infants. Lagercrantz 1986 and
Lagercrantz 1996 found that newborn infants experience a catecholamine surge after vaginal
birth, caused by compression of the fetal head and intermittent hypoxia during contractions.
This response is felt to aid in adaptation to the extrauterine environment immediately
postbirth by causing an increase in infant level of alertness, lung compliance, blood glucose,
body temperature, and shunting of blood to the vital organs. However, this response may
become maladaptive if allowed to continue.These findings correlate accurately with findings
predicted from mammalian research on separation in the newborn period. The
neurobehavioral stabilization achieved in SSC correlates in mammalian studies with a
parasympathetically mediated allostasis, the purpose of which is growth and development.
The stabilization achieved in the separated state is mediated by a sympathetically driven
defense program, whose purpose is primarily to survive the period of separation. In so far as
the differences observed corroborate the findings from mammalian research, they can be
considered clinically significant.
The large between-group difference in the amount of crying is certainly clinically
significant. Anderson 1989 proposed an evidence-based rationale that maternal-infant
separation is associated with excessive infant crying and can be harmful because crying re-
establishes portions of the fetal circulation. Each cry cycle causes a bolus of desaturated
venous blood to shunt through the foramen ovale into the systemic circulation instead of the
lungs, creating hypoxemia. This may result in delayed closure of the foramen ovale or
explain the approximately 20% incidence in apparently normal adults of a permanently
patent foramen ovale (estimates in numerous recent studies range from 15% to 35% (Del
Sette 1998). Anderson 1989 further proposed that crying wastes calories meant for growth,
and causes increased and fluctuating cerebral blood flow, cerebral blood flow velocity, and
intracranial pressure, thereby increasing the risk of intraventricular hemorrhage in preterm
infants. Consequences for healthy full term infants are unknown, but may be similar and
correlated with gestational age.
Maternal bonding/attachment: The results of this analysis indicate that SSC may affect
maternal attachment behaviors, although the results are mixed. A dose-response relationship
may exist as well.
Bystrova 2003 found significant between group differences on two of the eight subscales of
the PCERA at 12 months postbirth. The effects of rooming-in on these outcomes did not
compensate for a short (120 minutes) period of separation.
These findings would make sense from the perspective of programming (Lucas 2005) and
early evolution, where human mothers would be expected to form a rapid attachment to their
infants to protect them from predators and to provide the high level of parental care
necessary for such physiologically immature newborns. However, it is important to
document how many infants in the SSC group breastfed and how effectively they nursed.
Breastfeeding during SSC stimulates the secretion of hormones such as oxytocin that
promote maternal attachment and prolactin which promotes lactation and, at least in rodents,
Moore et al.
Page 21
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 maternal behavior. Breastfeeding has been considered an integral part of the intervention in
Kangaroo Mother Care research in low- and middle-income countries. In this review,
breastfeeding has been considered an outcome and SSC the habitat that elicits this outcome.
However, mothers would logically nurse their infants soon after birth in early human
evolution. Early and effective breastfeeding while in SSC may increase the strength of this
intervention with respect to maternal attachment behaviors.
Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
The available evidence does address the review question, but seldom abides by any clear
definition of acceptable public health breastfeeding outcomes. Only Anderson 2003; Moore
2005; Punthmatharith 2001; and Shiau 1997 used breastfeeding status (Labbok 1990) to
measure the degree of breastfeeding exclusivity. In all the other studies, breastfeeding was
considered a dichotomous variable. The infant was either breastfeeding (yes/no) or
exclusively breastfeeding (yes/no). Further, the actual intervention in terms of timing and
duration of SSC was highly variable, and at times very short. Despite this, the evidence is
fairly consistent in supporting the effect of SSC in so far as the findings are numerous and
pooled findings were consistently in favor of SSC and show moderate effects. However, for
many outcomes findings were from individual studies: the variety of outcomes measured
and the lack of consistency in the way outcomes were measured meant that meta-analysis
was not appropriate.
The high levels of heterogeneity between studies could possibly reflect bias with selective
outcome reporting, with data reported on the basis of post-hoc observations rather than
predefined public health outcomes. Another possible source of bias concerns the quality of
breastfeeding support provided, and whether this was controlled for adequately between
groups. In some instances, co-interventions were added to SSC that make it difficult to
disentangle the effects of SSC from the other interventions.
The variability in outcomes reported, instruments used, context, and timing made it difficult
to combine many of the attachment outcomes for meta-analysis. Because of these
methodological limitations, the overall quality of the evidence is again considered moderate.
Quality of the evidence
The presently available evidence has a number of limitations.
(1) Design limitations—All studies were randomized controlled trials. However, the
methodological quality of trials was mixed. Overall, the quality of reporting on study
methods was poor. For the majority of trials we did not have sufficient information on the
methods used to carry out randomization to allow us to assess whether findings were at high
risk of bias. A particular problem in all of the included studies was the lack of blinding. SSC
cannot be implemented masked, but the assessment of physiologic changes or outcomes can
often be carried out by individuals masked to allocation but overall it is very difficult to
judge the impact of lack of blinding or only partial blinding on findings. It is possible that
differences in the care women received in SSC and control groups were not confined to
whether or not they had early SSC. In some studies the staff providing care to the two
groups were different, and in these cases it is possible that the overall care experience for
women in different arms of trials was not the same, and it may be that aspects of care other
than, or in addition to, SSC led to reported differences between groups. This may have been
compounded by the fact that in some studies the same staff delivering interventions also
measured outcomes. Outcomes such as observed maternal and infant behavior may have
been susceptible to detection bias. The impact of lack of blinding may have been less for
some of the outcomes measured, for example, some infant physiological outcomes however,
Moore et al.
Page 22
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 even outcomes such as infant temperature may be affected by bias in staff collecting
outcome data.
(2) Outcome variability—Meta-analysis was limited in this review, due to the numerous
outcomes and the limited number of randomized trials that could be included for each
outcome. Although many of the studies measured broadly similar outcomes, the outcomes
were too dissimilar to be included in a meta-analysis. In some studies, means were reported
without standard deviations, or exact P values, or both. The context, the instruments used,
and the timing of the measurement of attachment and temperature outcomes varied greatly
among studies. Breastfeeding was measured as a dichotomous variable in some studies or as
an interval level measure of breastfeeding exclusivity in four. Modality for measurement of
temperature outcomes varied between studies. These contextual and measurement
differences should be noted when considering the results of the review.
Potential biases in the review process
We are aware that the review process may be affected by bias; and we attempted to
minimize bias in a number of ways. At least two review authors independently assessed
study eligibility, carried out data extraction, and assessed risk of bias. However, some
aspects of the review process involve subjective judgements: assessing risk of bias in
included studies, for example, is not an exact science, and it is possible that a different
review team may have reached different conclusions about the quality of the evidence. We
have attempted to explain our decisions regarding study quality in the ‘Risk of bias’ tables.
We have also provided details about the participants and interventions in individual studies
and we would encourage readers to interpret results in the light of the information set out in
the Characteristics of included studies tables.
Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
The findings are in general agreement with results from other studies mentioned in this
review notably Bramson 2010. This large hospital-based study (n = 21,842) demonstrated a
clear dose-response effect on exclusive breastfeeding at hospital discharge. The data from
this review, although suggestive, are inadequate to demonstrate a dose-response effect.
Although the modality and timing of measurement of infant temperature varied between
studies, this review found minimal increases in temperature with SSC although the results
were often not statistically significant. These results support those obtained Mori 2010 who
found a mean increase of 0.22 degrees C. in a meta-analysis of 21 studies of infant
temperature pre SSC compared with during the intervention. Mori 2010 found an increase in
infant heart rate of 2.04 BPM in a meta-analysis of 12 studies of preterm infants pre versus
during SSC. The process of transferring a preterm infant from a radiant warmer or isolette to
SSC and back again can be somewhat stressful and may account for these findings. The
length of SSC in some of the included studies was very short, 15 minutes in one study, 30
minutes in another. This review found a decrease in infant heart rate of 3.05 in between
group comparisons of early SSC with usual care. However, the findings were not clinically
significant. We assess the methodological quality of the evidence as moderate because these
studies have the same limitations as those with breastfeeding outcomes; small samples,
varied contexts and heterogenous outcomes.
AUTHORS’ CONCLUSIONS
Implications for practice
Breastfeeding outcomes—this review does provide evidence to support current
practices as recommended by the UNICEF endorsed Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative, in
which SSC is encouraged for the first hour after birth. There is, however, inadequate
Moore et al.
Page 23
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 evidence with respect to details such as timing of initiation, dose of skin-to-skin contact
(SSC) and technique. This review does not address subsequent ongoing SSC as an
intervention to support breastfeeding. It is, however, noteworthy that an intervention
practiced for a short time at birth should have measurable breastfeeding effects one to four
months postbirth.
Infant outcomes—the significant increase in blood glucose, and maintenance of infant
temperature in the neutral thermal range are both clinically important, and lend support to
current American Academy of Pediatrics recommendations for the use of SSC in the first
hour after birth (American Academy of Pediatrics 2005). Clearly there is a relationship
between improved breastfeeding and higher blood glucose. In terms of evolutionary biology,
and mammalian studies, this higher value may in fact be the norm, and a lowering may
reflect the autonomic nervous system evoking a separation distress response, consuming
excess calories (Christensson 1995). This is further supported by the significantly increased
crying seen in separation versus SSC (three studies). The decreased crying is in itself
clinically important for other reasons as described in the background (Ludington-Hoe 2002).
Late-preterm infants are at increased risk for hypoglycemia and hypothermia which can
worsen any symptoms of respiratory distress (Raju 2006).
The SCRIP score attempts to provide a composite measure of cardiorespiratory stability.
Only one study reported this, with significant benefit in favor of SSC, providing further
support for the use of early SSC. While differences in particular cardiorespiratory outcomes
are evident, these are open to different interpretations, and mean little without a sense of
trend and direction in terms of stabilization and physiological self-regulation.
Although a number of the infant physiological outcomes, (except SCRIP scores, blood
glucose, infant crying, and maintenance of physiological parameters), demonstrated little or
no clinically significant differences with or without SSC, no negative short- or long-term
effects were found. Based on the available evidence, SSC appears to have some clinical
benefit, especially for temperature and cardio-respiratory stability in late preterm infants.
Attachment outcomes—despite the variability in dose and timing of the intervention,
there is at least a small effect on several dimensions of maternal neurobehavior in relation to
her infant. This is consistent with evolutionary biology theory, in which infant survival
depended on an immediate care-giving imperative. There is no benefit shown in any study
from infants being separated.
The main results of the meta-analysis, and from the single studies, indicate that SSC appears
to have a positive effect on breastfeeding one to four months postbirth, blood glucose, infant
crying and on infant temperature stability. These benefits of early SSC can be discussed with
mothers and their partners during prenatal visits and mothers can be encouraged to
incorporate early SSC into their birth plans.The timing of the intervention may be important,
because most infants are very alert in the first two hours postbirth and, if undisturbed and
unmedicated, will self-attach to the nipple, and do so correctly, at approximately 55 minutes
postbirth. However, Widstrom 2011 noted that it may take some infants up to 45 minutes to
latch after they reach the mother’s nipple.The temperature of a healthy newly delivered
infant will remain in a safe range, provided ventral-to-ventral SSC is uninterrupted; the
infant is thoroughly dried and covered across the back with a prewarmed blanket; and the
head is covered with a dry cap that is replaced if it becomes damp. These practices need to
be incorporated into hospital routines along with the stipulation that mothers and newborn
infants should not be left alone and unattended by medical personnel in the delivery or
recovery room during this transitional period (Dageville 2008).
Moore et al.
Page 24
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Implications for research
Interpreting the findings of this review was hampered by the large number of outcomes
reported in included studies and inconsistency in the way outcomes were measured. We
have reported results for 31 pre-specified outcomes, however, the included studies reported
many other outcomes, measured in different ways, reported at different (and sometimes
multiple) time points. This lack of consistency was a particular problem for outcomes
relating to mother and infant behavior and mother-infant interaction.
Breastfeeding outcomes—suggestions for improvement of clinical trials examining
early skin-to-skin contact (SSC) and breastfeeding outcomes include the following. The
mother’s prenatal breastfeeding intention (how long she planned to nurse her infant) was not
controlled in any study except Punthmatharith 2001 and Moore 2005. Only Carfoot 2004;
Carfoot 2005; Gouchon 2010; Khadivzadeh 2008 and Moore 2005 evaluated the success of
the first breastfeeding in both the SSC and control groups using a published breastfeeding
observation instrument, the IBFAT. A valid measure of effective suckling at a single feeding
remains elusive (Riordan 1997) and is needed to identify problems in time to minimize
breastfeeding attrition; this would be a major contribution to the field. It remains difficult to
disentangle the effects of early SSC from the effects of assistance provided by an
experienced nurse with the first breastfeeding. The protractility of the mother’s nipples is a
potential confounding factor that could influence breastfeeding outcomes Dewey 2003 and
should be measured in future studies that evaluate breastfeeding and infant suckling patterns.
The use of SSC to facilitate breastfeeding for mothers who are having breastfeeding
difficulties requires further evaluation. Future research should use standardized public health
measures, such as the Index of Breastfeeding Status (IBS) rather than, or in addition to,
measuring breastfeeding as a dichotomous variable.
Infant outcomes—rigorous and validated composite measures of physiological benefit
are not yet available in the literature. Until better and validated scores or measures for
stabilization are presented, we recommend the use of the SCRIP score as a primary outcome
measure in studies on early SSC. There is also a clear need for dose-response studies: the
intervention of SSC is applied in small doses in many studies. As described in the
introduction, in animal studies, the dose of separation is accurately measured and correlated
with harmful effects (Poletto 2006; Ziabreva 2003). Further, it is possible that the
physiological benefit demonstrated is only as lasting as the actual intervention; therefore,
clinical benefit may require prolonged or continuous use of SSC.
Attachment outcomes—improvement is needed in examining maternal attachment
behaviors. These studies are all weakened by the lack of consistency in the measurement of
these variables. Each research team appeared to have its own ideas about how to
operationally define attachment behavior. More recent studies (Anderson 2003; Bystrova
2003) have begun to use more rigorously validated instruments such as the NCAST feeding
and teaching scales and the PCERA. No information was provided in the research reports
about how many infants successfully breastfed in either group using a validated
measurement instrument such as the IBFAT.
Future investigations are recommended because the methodological quality of the included
studies is marginally adequate, the characteristics of the SSC and control conditions are
diverse, and many outcome measures are difficult to combine. Only four studies (Anderson
2003; Bergman 2004; Chwo 1999; Syfrett 1996) examined the effects of early SSC on late
preterm infants who were judged healthy enough to remain on the postpartum ward. The
effects of this intervention may be different in this more vulnerable population, and more
research is definitely indicated. More research needs to be conducted on the effects of early
Moore et al.
Page 25
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 SSC on mothers who deliver by cesarean birth. To facilitate meta-analysis of the data, future
research in this area should involve outcome measures consistent with the best measures
used in previous studies or measures developed recently to increase methodological rigor
(Anderson 2004b; Labbok 1990). The CONSORT guidelines (Moher 2001; Moher 2010)
should be used to document the flow of participants through all clinical trials. Studies should
make explicit SSC initiation time, frequency and duration to investigate a possible dose-
response relationship.
To improve the methodological quality and reporting in similar clinical trials would be
relatively easy. Investigators can provide more details in research reports regarding the
method and timing of random assignment, allocation concealment scheme, measures used to
control for selection bias, context, timing, and modality of outcome measurements, and
means and standard deviations for the interval or ratio level outcome variables examined.
However, control for provider and patient performance bias may continue to be problematic,
because Institutional Review Boards now require investigators to disclose the purpose of
their study to potential participants so they can be informed when they consent to random
assignment. Labor and delivery room staff often ask for group assignment of women before
delivery so that they will know how to manage the infant immediately postbirth. Outcome
assessors should be blinded, however, if at all possible (Polit 2011). Speaking more
generally, recommendations by Thomson 1984 provide guidelines for well-controlled
clinical trials that remain important to this day.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr Busakorn Punthmatharith for her contributions during the earliest phases of the literature review; Dr
Mark W Lipsey for his assistance with the categorization of outcome measures for meta-analysis; and Dr Joseph
Hepworth for his statistical assistance with the original review. We would also like to thank Anna Fangrath and
Lindsay Irish for the English translation of Kastner 2005 and Dr Sheau-Huey Chiu and Danni Li for the translation
of Huang 2006. Dr Moore would like to thank Angela Aaron, Ashley Arnold, Candice Bruce, Erin DeBruyn,
Monique Deterville, Erin Empting, Kristen McGriff, Jaclyn Miller, Shaunna Parker, Lindsay Piper, Carrie
Schrimsher, Lucie Slapnicka, Anna Storvick and Melissa Young, former Women’s Health Nurse Practitioner
students at Vanderbilt University School of Nursing, for their assistance with reviewing the articles for the updated
review, and with completing the Characteristics of included studies tables under the careful supervision and with
the guidance of Dr Moore.
SOURCES OF SUPPORT
Internal sources:
•
None, Not specified.
External sources:
•
Therese Dowswell is supported by the NIHR NHS Cochrane Collaboration Programme grant scheme
award for NHS-prioritised centrally-managed, pregnancy and childbirth systematic reviews: CPGS
10/4001/02, UK.
Appendix 1: The International Network for Kangaroo Mother Care
The International Network maintains a bibliography of all the research articles published on
KangarooMother Care. The bibliography is available from Dr Susan Ludington -
Susan.ludington@.case.edu
Appendix 2: Methods used to assess trials included in previous versions of
this review
Each study that we identified as a result of the search strategy was evaluated independently
for inclusion in the review by two review authors. We rejected trials without a concurrent
Moore et al.
Page 26
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 control group (e.g. those with historical controls). We included relatively high quality quasi-
randomized studies in the review. If the assignment to groups appeared to create equivalent
groups, then the study was included even if a truly random process was not used for group
assignment. For example, if women were alternately assigned to treatment and control
groups and there was no reason to think that this should result in nonequivalent groups, that
study was included. On the other hand, if assignment to groups was based on woman or
provider preference, the study was excluded. Studies conducted by each of the three authors
were reviewed for inclusion by the other two authors and a consensus was reached regarding
inclusion of these studies in the review. Methods used for generation of the randomization
sequence were described for each trial.
Each identified trial was assessed for methodological quality with respect to (1) selection
bias, (2) attrition bias, and (3) performance bias. We assigned a quality score for each trial,
using the following criteria.
(1) Selection bias (allocation concealment)
A.
Adequate concealment of allocation: centralized randomization, sequentially-
numbered, sealed opaque envelopes, computerized minimization technique;
B.
unclear whether adequate concealment of allocation: sealed envelopes but not
sequentially numbered or opaque, a trial in which description suggests adequate
concealment but other features suspicious, e.g. markedly different treatment and
control groups, stated random but unable to obtain further details;
C.
inadequate concealment of allocation: any allocation procedure transparent before
assignment, such as open list of random-number tables, use of case record numbers,
dates of birth or days of the week.
(2) Attrition bias
We assessed completeness to follow up using the following criteria: complete follow up of
all study participants/reasons given for attrition/NSD between participants who terminated
their involvement in the study and those who remained enrolled (yes/no/unclear).
(3) Performance bias
We assessed blinding using the following criteria:
A.
blinding of participants (yes/no/unclear);
B.
blinding of caregiver (yes/no/unclear);
C.
blinding of outcome assessment (yes/no/unclear).
We designed a form to extract data. Several review authors extracted data and assessed the
methodological quality of each study independently and compared results. Disagreements
about study inclusion and methodological quality were resolved through discussion until a
consensus was reached. We reviewed the inclusion criteria and therapeutic interventions for
each trial to see how they differed between trials. We examined the outcomes in each trial to
see how comparable they were between studies. We contacted investigators (if possible) to
obtain information about any missing data. For categorical data, we made 2 × 2 tables from
each trial for each important outcome, and used odds ratios with 95% CI in the meta-
analysis. For continuous variables, we calculated weighted mean differences with 95% CI.
We used standardized mean differences to combine trials that used different scales to
measure the same outcome. We used fixed-effect meta-analysis for combining data in the
Moore et al.
Page 27
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 absence of significant heterogeneity. We used random-effects meta-analysis for trials with
significant heterogeneity identified by using the I2 statistic. We were unable to explore
heterogeneity using subgroup analysis or sensitivity analysis because there were not enough
clinical trials included for the heterogeneous outcomes.
CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES
Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
Anderson 2003
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (computerized minimization technique)
Participants
91 healthy preterm infants 32-36 weeks’ gestation and their mothers. Only data from the 31 infants
on the postpartum unit were included in the analysis; the 60 NICU infants were excluded. Mean GA
of the included infants was 35.6 weeks. There were no significant between group differences in
socio- demographic or medical characteristics in this sub-group of infants except 5-min Apgar
scores. The mean 5-min Apgar score was 9.0 in the SSC group and 8.5 in the control group
Interventions
1) SSC group = diaper clad infants placed prone and SSC between their mother’s breasts as soon as
possible for as long as possible postbirth. Along with SSC, mothers also held their infants wrapped
in blankets. 2) Control group = infants kept warm in incubators, warmer beds, bassinets or held
wrapped in blankets
Process outcomes include mean % contact time during hours 0-48 spent in SSC or wrapped holding
by mother, father or others and mean % noncontact time (no hold) hours 0-48 postbirth
Outcomes
Mother preterm infant interaction (MPI) measured by mean scores on the Nursing Child
Assessment Satellite Training Program (NCAST) Feeding and Teaching scales at 6, 12 and 18
months postbirth (reported in Chiu 2009 using the same data set). Breastfeeding status (exclusivity)
at hospital discharge, 6 weeks, 3, 6, 12 and 18 months postbirth (reported in Hake-Brooks 2008
using the same data set)
Notes
Study was done in the USA at 2 different hospitals 1 on Cleveland, Ohio and the other in Richland,
Washington. Participants were mixed parity
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Randomization was by a computerized minimization program.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Sealed, sequentially numbered opaque envelopes containing the next group
assignment were used for the first 10 participants to prevent selection bias.
The rest of the participants were assigned to groups using the minimization
technique. Informed consent was obtained during early labor Mother-infant
dyads were randomly assigned to groups immediately postbirth
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
The research staff involved in evaluating MPI data at 6,12 and 18 months
postbirth using a videotaped infant feeding and teaching session were
unaware of the mother’s group assignment
The nurse researcher who collected Index of Breastfeeding Status (IBS)
scores was blind to participant group assignment
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
At 6 months postbirth, 2/15 infants were missing from the SSC group and
2/14 from the control group; at 12 months postbirth 2/15 infants were
missing from the SSC group and 2/14 from the control group, at 18 months
postbirth 3/15 infants were missing from the SSC group and 2/14 from the
control group. At 3 and 6 months postbirth 1/11 breastfeeding SSC infants
had missing data on the IBS. At 6 weeks postbirth 1/12 breastfeeding
control infants had data missing on the IBS, at 3 months postbirth 3/12
infants had missing data
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Low risk
Numerical data (M,SD) were reported by group assignment for the
NCAST feeding scales at 6 and 12 months, and the NCAST teaching
scales at 6, 12 and 18 months postbirth
Numerical data were reported for the IBS N,n,% in each breastfeeding
category at hospital discharge, 6 weeks postbirth and at 3,6,12 and 18
months postbirth
Moore et al.
Page 28
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Other bias
Unclear risk
In the SSC group the nurse researchers provided breastfeeding assistance
with the initial feedings. The control mothers received standard hospital
care. Lactation consultants provided breastfeeding assistance if the mother
requested help and if they were available
Bergman 2004
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (computerized minimization technique)
Participants
35 healthy late preterm infants and their mothers. Mean GA SSC group 34.2 weeks, control group
35.3 weeks
Interventions
All infants had a brief period of SSC immediately postbirth. 1) SSC group = after the 5-min Apgar
the naked infant was secured to their mother’s chest by a towel. A shirt with long ties was placed
around the mother’s waist to secure the baby below. The dyad was transferred to the observation
area of the neonatal unit at 60 min postbirth. SSC was continuous for at least 6 hours 2) Control
group = after the 5-min Apgar the infant was transferred to an incubator which remained with the
mother in the delivery room for 60 min. At 1 hour the infant in the incubator was transferred to the
observation area of the neonatal unit
Outcomes
Transfers to NICU, exceeded parameters −temp < 35.5, HR < 100 >180 BPM, Apnea > 20s, O2 sat
< 89%, blood glucose < 2.6, SCRIP score during the first 6 hours postbirth, SCRIP score in the 6th
hour postbirth
Notes
Study was done with indigent participants in 2 secondary level referral hospitals in Cape Town,
South Africa
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
“computerized minimisation method”. Range of factors taken
into account in the minimization process in an attempt to
reduce confounding
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computerized method of allocation following ascertainment
of eligibility (5-min Apgar score) by nurse researcher present
at delivery or by mobile phone.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Women and staff present during intervention would be aware
of allocation but, it is not clear whether this was likely to
have had an impact on most of the types of outcomes
measured and there was an attempt to standardize other
aspects of care. The nurse carrying out randomization was
involved in other aspects of care such as breastfeeding
instruction. For many outcomes reported (physiological
measurements) most were continuously recorded on
monitors and unlikely to have been subject to bias. Clinical
decisions re admission to NICU could not be standardized
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
35 randomized.1 woman in the intervention group was
excluded postrandomization as she was no longer eligible.
The remaining 34 remained available for the primary
outcome (NICU admission) and the remaining 31 were
followed up for 6 hour measurements. Intention-to-treat
analysis for primary outcome
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Not apparent, although risk of bias was carried out using
published study report
Other bias
Unclear risk
The initial power calculation suggested a sample size of 64
and the investigators planned to recruit 100 women. There
were logistical difficulties in recruitment that may have led
to selection biases and this may reduce the generalizability of
findings. The 2 study groups were of different sizes; this
occurred by chance. Difficulties in recruitment led to interim
analysis and as results favored the intervention group, the
study was discontinued
Baseline imbalance: not apparent.
Moore et al.
Page 29
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Bystrova 2003
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (envelope with group assignment)
Participants
176 healthy full term infants and their mothers were divided into 4 treatment groups
Interventions
All infants were immediately placed under a radiant warmer, dried, washed, weighed, given eye
prophylaxis and cord care during the first 22 min postbirth.
1) SSC group = 37 babies were placed prone and SSC on mother’s bare chest for approximately 90
min and then roomed-in (swaddled or dressed) on the maternity ward and breastfed on demand. 2)
Mother’s arms group = 40 babies were clothed (swaddled or dressed) and placed prone on their
mother’s bare chest. for approximately 90 min and then roomed-in on the maternity ward and
breastfed on demand. 3) Nursery group = 38 babies were clothed (swaddled or dressed) and taken to
the nursery immediately postbirth and remained there while their mothers were on the maternity
ward except for breastfeeding 7 times a day. 4) Reunion Group = 38 babies were clothed (swaddled
or dressed) and taken to the nursery immediately postbirth, but roomed-in with their mothers on the
maternity unit and breastfed on demand
Outcomes
Mean difference in infant axillary, interscapular, thigh temperatures and foot temperature change
from 30 to 120 min postbirth (Bystrova 2003). Amount of milk ingested (before and after
breastfeeding infant weights), volume of supplemental feedings, number and duration of
breastfeedings day 4 postbirth, recovery of infant weight loss day 3-5 postbirth (reported in Bystrova
2007a). Number of breastfeedings, physiological breast engorgement, feeling low/blue days 1-3
postbirth, duration of nearly exclusive breastfeeding (reported in Bystrova 2007b).Maternal breast
and axillary temperature, (reported in Bystrova 2007c). Assessment of mother-child interaction at 12
months postbirth using the Parent-Child Early Relational Assessment (PCERA) (reported in
Bystrova 2009).
Notes
Study was done in St Petersburg, Russia.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
An experimental 2 factor design (baby’s location, apparel) was used. The
randomization sequence was blocked for time and parity. Randomization to
the 8 treatment combinations occurred in blocks of 8 mothers independent
of the other blocks and separated by parity
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Informed consent was obtained during labor. Random assignment occurred
immediately after birth. Sealed, numbered, opaque envelopes were opened
sequentially. The research report stated that “both the researchers and the
recruited women were blind to the task”
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
The psychologists who evaluated videotaped mother-child interactions at 12
months postbirth using the PCERA were blind to group assignment. The
videotaping was also performed by a psychologist who was blind to group
assignment. No information was provided about whether the researchers
who evaluated the other outcomes in these research reports were blind to
group assignment. The evaluators of some of the outcomes, for example,
infant temperatures taken during SSC, could not be blind to group
assignment
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
176 mothers were randomly assigned to the 4 main treatment groups. 23
mothers were excluded during their stay on the maternity ward for various
reasons which were listed in the research report. There were no significant
between group differences in background variables between the 23 mothers
who were excluded and the 153 who remained in the study. 9 mothers were
lost to follow-up at 1 year. Reasons for their exclusion were provided. An
additional 20 mother-infant pairs were excluded from the PCERA
assessments 12 months postbirth. Reasons for their exclusion were provided
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Low risk
Numerical data were provided for all outcomes except recovery of infant
weight loss day 3-5 postbirth (Bystrova 2007a) however, between the 4
groups, differences were reported to be insignificant. The results of the
statistical tests and P values were reported for all outcomes in Bystrova,
IBJ, 2007). However, the M, SE was used instead of M, SD for the
descriptive statistics. Data for the mean maternal axillary and breast
temperatures were plotted on a graph for the 7 time points for data
collection in Bystrova 2007c. The SE rather than the SD was used as the
measure of dispersion. Data for the infant’s foot and axillary temperatures
were recorded in Bystrova 2003. Results of the statistical tests for the SSC
group compared with the other groups were provided for 2/8 of the PCERA
composite variables, child disregulation and irritability and dyadic
mutuality and reciprocity. The results for the other composite variables
Moore et al.
Page 30
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 were not reported but were stated as insignificant (Bystrova 2009).
Additional statistical data was obtained from the researchers
Other bias
Unclear risk
Data were reported using “per protocol” rather than “intention to treat”
analysis
Carfoot 2004
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (sealed envelopes).
Participants
26 healthy full term infants > 36 weeks’ gestation and their mothers
Interventions
1) SSC group = mothers given infants to hold prone between their breasts and covered with a
warm blanket as soon as possible postbirth. Midwives assisted with the 1st breastfeeding. 2)
Control group = babies dried, wrapped in a towel and handed to mom or dad. Midwives assisted
with the 1st breastfeeding
Outcomes
Success of the 1st breastfeeding (BAT score 8-12), type of feeding at 4 months postbirth
(exclusive breastfeeding, mixed feedings, artificial feedings)
Notes
Study was done in Cheshire, UK.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computer-generated randomization list.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Sequence of sealed envelopes (not clear if opaque) and not clear whether
the envelopes were numbered and opened in sequence.
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
There was no blinding in this study. It is possible that the lack of
blinding may have affected women’s responses and behavior, that
clinical care other than skin to skin contact may also have differed by
randomization groups and outcome assessors would be aware of
allocation during the first feed (observed) and this may have affected
their observations
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Unclear risk
Pilot study including 26 mother infant pairs looking at study feasibility
(data on review outcomes not reported).
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from published study report only.
Other bias
Low risk
Other bias not apparent.
Carfoot 2005
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (sequence of sealed envelopes containing next allocation from a
computer-generated randomization list)
Participants
204 healthy full term infants > 36 weeks’ gestation and their mothers
Interventions
1) SSC group = mothers given naked infants to hold prone between their breasts and covered with
a warm blanket as soon as possible postbirth. Midwives assisted with the 1st breastfeeding. 2)
Control group = babies dried, wrapped in a towel and handed to mom or dad. Midwives assisted
with the 1st breastfeeding
Outcomes
Success of the 1st breastfeeding (BAT score 8-12), success of a subsequent breastfeeding, mean
temperature 1 hour postbirth, maternal satisfaction with care, preference for same postdelivery
care in the future, type of feeding at 4 months (exclusive, partial breast, formula feeding)
Moore et al.
Page 31
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Notes
Study was done in Cheshire, UK.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computer-generated randomization list.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Sequence of sealed envelopes (not clear if opaque) and not clear whether
the envelopes were numbered and opened in sequence.
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection
bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
There was no blinding in this study. It is possible that the lack of blinding
may have affected women’s responses and behavior, that clinical care
other than skin to skin contact may also have differed by randomization
groups and outcome assessors would be aware of allocation during the
first feed (observed) and this may have affected their observations
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Low risk
325 women initially approached and 244 agreed to take part (75%). 204
women randomized data and 197 observed at 1st data collection point
(with analysis according to randomization group) and data available for
197 women at 4 month follow-up
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from published study report only.
Other bias
Low risk
Other bias not apparent.
Baseline characteristics appeared similar.
Carlsson 1978
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
62 healthy, full term infants. The mothers were randomized into 1 of 3 groups before delivery
Interventions
1) Extended contact-new routine group = kept their naked infants for 1 hour immediately postbirth,
mothers cared for infants. 2) Extended contact-old routine = kept their naked infants immediately
postbirth for 1 hour, staff cared for infants. 3) Limited contact-old routine group = held their
infants for 5min immediately postbirth, staff cared for infants
Outcomes
Observation of maternal behavior (contact behavior and behavior not implying contact with baby)
by videotape during breastfeeding on day 2 and 4 postbirth
Notes
Study was done with middle-income primipara in Sweden.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Method used to generate the randomization sequence were not described.
The study involved “randomly selected” women who were “randomly
assigned” to 1 of the 3 study groups
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
The method used to conceal group allocation at the point of
randomization was not described.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
It was stated that participants “were unaware of the purposes of the
study”. However, presumably women would be aware that they were
being observed when they were feeding their babies. Clinical staff caring
for women may have been aware of early contact and it was not clear
whether the staff carrying out observations were aware of group
allocation
Incomplete
outcome data
Unclear risk
62 women were randomized. 50 were available for follow up (81%) and
full observational data were available for 46 (74%). Loss appeared to be
reasonably balanced across groups.
Moore et al.
Page 32
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (attrition bias)
All outcomes
12/62 women lost to follow up and there were further missing data
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Although observation methods were described it is not clear what the
main study outcome means (frequency of mother/infant contact/not
contact during breast or bottle feeding) . The frequencies were presented
as means with SEs. The average number of observation points during a
feed would be approximately 100, but the mean figures are closer to 200
so it seems more than 1 behavior was noted in each observation period.
However, it was stated that if the same behavior (which may have been a
contact behavior) occurred more than once in any observation period it
was only recorded once. It is possible therefore that continuous high
contact behavior was rated as being of lower contact value than rapidly
changing behaviors
Several results were not presented according to randomization group and
results were difficult to interpret.
Other bias
Unclear risk
Baseline imbalance not apparent.
Other: Results were difficult to interpret and 2 groups that received
different treatments were merged for some results but not others
Christensson 1992
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
50 full term infants and their mothers randomized after the delivery
Interventions
a) 80 min of SSC with the mother, b) 80 min in a cot.
Outcomes
Axillary, thigh, and interscapular temperatures. Duration of crying. Blood glucose, base excess,
respiratory rate, HR after 90 min
Notes
Study was done in Madrid, Spain.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Methods to generate the allocation sequence were not described.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Very little information on study methods. Described as “allocated
randomly”
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Women would be aware of group allocation. It is not likely that this
affected outcomes such as temperature but it may have affected baby
behavior (it appeared that mothers in the cot group were advised not to
pick their babies up even if the baby was crying)
Clinical staff and observers were not blind to group allocation. It is
difficult to know whether this had any effect on temperature recording.
The observation of crying may have been affected by knowledge of
group allocation
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Low risk
It appeared that all women randomized were followed up,
randomization seemed to occur before delivery and it appeared that no
women were excluded following randomization (as they became
ineligible due to complications in labor, etc)
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Difficult to assess without access to study protocol. Multiple
observation points means that results for temperature are difficult to
interpret. Results for crying are also difficult to interpret as mothers in
the cot group were discouraged from picking up their babies during the
observation period even if they were crying.
Other bias
Unclear risk
No power calculations reported.
Baseline characteristics in the 2 groups appeared similar. Very little
information was provided on study methods
Christensson 1995
Moore et al.
Page 33
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
44 full term infants and their mothers immediately postbirth
Interventions
Group a) 76-85 min of SSC with the mother, b) infant in a cot for 76-85 min, c) infant in a cot
for 35 min then SSC for 45 min
Outcomes
Duration of crying, axillary temperature 90 min postbirth.
Notes
Study was done in Madrid, Spain.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation (selection
bias)
Unclear risk
Not described “allocated randomly”.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Not described (allocation was before delivery but women and staff
were not informed of the allocation until after delivery)
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Participants and staff were not blinded. It is not clear whether
knowledge of allocation would have affected maternal behavior and
responses (for those in the “cot” group, women were asked not to
move the baby). Staff providing care may have altered other aspects of
care. Outcome assessors were blinded (blind assessment of audiotapes
- although presumably they would also hear the mother and other noise
so may have been able to ascertain group assignment)
Incomplete outcome
data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Due to mechanical failures there were missing data for the primary
outcome.44 women were randomized and audiotape data were
available for 33 (75%)
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessed from published study report.
Other bias
Unclear risk
Describe any baseline in balance: Not apparent, but sample size was
small so imbalances between groups although not statistically
significant may have been important (e.g. cot group 7/14 primips, s to
s 5/15 primips)
Chwo 1999
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (computerized minimization technique)
Participants
34 healthy late preterm infants 34-36 weeks’ gestation and their mothers
Interventions
1) SSC group = SSC and on cue self-regulatory feedings during 6 1-hour feeding periods
beginning M = 21 hours postbirth. The infant, in a small diaper, was placed on the ventral surface
of their mother’s torso. 2) Control group = infants held wrapped in blankets during 6 1-hour
feeding periods beginning M = 23 hours postbirth
Outcomes
Infant body weight change day 14 and 28 postbirth, length of stay in the hospital, tympanic
temperature change and variability, behavioral state inactive awake, drowsy, crying during
feedings
Notes
Study was done in a teaching hospital near Taipei, Taiwan.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computer-generated minimization process with stratification for gender,
birthweight, mode of delivery and parity
Moore et al.
Page 34
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computerised allocation. Not clear how the process was carried out at
the point of group allocation
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
High risk
Women in both the control and intervention did not receive usual care
and would likely to have been aware of group assignment. Staff
providing care and breastfeeding advice also collected outcome data.
This may have had an impact on some outcomes - particularly the
observation of infant behavior
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Unclear risk
34 women followed up in hospital by day 14 23 infants available to
follow up and 26 on day 28
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment carried out using published study report only.
Other bias
Unclear risk
The intervention may not be generalizable to other babies in the same
study setting. The intervention was described as KC but infants were not
in SSC until 4 hours after the birth, then contact was for 1 hour at 4-
hourly intervals at specified feeding times for 6 feeds. Control infants
were offered the same contact but babies were in blankets, both groups
were given advice and support from the observer. It was not clear how
much time infants spent feeding during the observation period
Groups were reported to be similar at baseline.
Craig 1982
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (sealed envelopes prepared using a table of random numbers by
gender)
Participants
60 healthy full term infants and their mothers.
Interventions
1) Control group = mothers held their wrapped infants for 3 min then contact at feedings every 4
hours. 2) Early SSC group = infants were placed in SSC on their mother’s chests for 54 min then
contact at feedings every 4 hours
Outcomes
1) Neonatal Perception Inventory. 2) Interview of mother’s experiences during pregnancy,
delivery, 1st postpartum month. 3) Questions about infant behavior during a home visit at 1
month postbirth
Notes
Study was done with low-income primapara in the USA.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Table of random numbers.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“sealed envelopes” (not clear if opaque and used in sequential order or if
any envelopes were discarded) “Separate envelopes were prepared for
male and female infants to insure a comparable sex distribution in each
contact group”
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
“Mothers given extra contact were not aware that their care differed
from that given to other patients”. “Patients were told that the
investigators wished to study maternal-infant relationships during the
first postpartum month.”
Staff caring for women would be aware of group assignment during the
early postpartum period. The principal investigator recruited mothers
and collected most of the outcome data. An attempt was made to check
whether the data collected by this investigator and another researcher;
there was no evidence of bias.
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
High risk
There was serious attrition and missing data at some data collection
points. 60 women were recruited; outcome data at 1 month were
available for 49 (81.7%). Loss was reported to be balanced between
groups. 24 of the sample (40%) completed a behavioral record.
Moore et al.
Page 35
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Data reported as in introduction, but not clear if other data collected.
(Assessment from published paper only.)
Other bias
Unclear risk
Baseline imbalance not apparent.
Some results were difficult to interpret. It appeared that mean scores had
been calculated from a 4-point category measure
Curry 1982
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (sealed envelopes).
Participants
20 healthy full term infants randomized during the first hour postbirth
Interventions
1) Control group = held their wrapped infants for 36 min during the first hour postbirth. 2) SSC
group = held their infants in SSC for 35 min during the first hour postbirth. Both groups had 12
hours of rooming-in during the day
Outcomes
1) 7 maternal attachment behaviors (en face, kiss, hold, encompass, close contact and smile at)
measured at 36 hours and 3 months postbirth during breastfeeding. 2) The Tennessee Self
Concept measured at 2 months postbirth
Notes
Study was done with well-educated, married, middle-income, Caucasian, breastfeeding primipara
in the USA
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
In batches of 10, 5 envelopes each contained control or intervention
allocations
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Dark brown envelopes containing allocations were shuffled and an
envelope selected. When 10 envelopes had been used a further 10 were
prepared, then 1 of each allocation for last 2 random assignments
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
It was stated that mothers were not told the precise reasons for the study,
although mothers would be aware of the intervention. The staff taking
infant temperatures during the intervention period would be aware of
allocation. It was stated that the investigators collecting outcome data at
36 hours and at 3 months was not aware of group, although mothers may
have revealed this during interviews
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Unclear risk
56 women were recruited, but at the point of randomization only 20
women remained. Only women delivering while the researcher was on
the premises were included. Not clear exactly when randomization
occurred
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Used observation as main outcome which is difficult to interpret. Results
reported as mean occurrence of attachment behaviors, it is not clear
whether the same mother could exhibit lots of behaviors. Mean number
of behaviors during the same length of observation period appeared
considerably less at 3 months follow-up compared with 36 hrs.
Other bias
Unclear risk
Baseline imbalance not clear, small sample size.
Less than half of the eligible sample was recruited.
De Chateau 1977
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (open random numbers table).
Participants
62 healthy full term infants and their mothers. Group 1 primiparous mothers and their infants n =
22. Group 2 primiparous mothers and their infants n = 20. Group 3 multiparous mothers and their
infants n = 20
Moore et al.
Page 36
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Interventions
Group 1: 15-20 min of SSC during the first hour postbirth. The infants were placed on the breast at
10 min postbirth and assisted by the midwives with breastfeeding. Groups 2 and 3 = routine care.
The dressed babies were placed in a crib at the mother’s bedside or in her bed at 10 min postbirth
Outcomes
Observation of mother’s behavior during breastfeeding at 36 hours postbirth. Mother’s and infant’s
behavior at 3 months during free play.
Breastfeeding at 3 months, 1 year postbirth. Mother’s and infant’s behavior during a physical exam
and infant development at 12 months
Notes
Study was done with middle-income women in Sweden. 2-arm trial with individual randomization
(a 3rd group of women (multips) were also included as a comparison group in 1 of the reports but
this group was not randomly allocated and is not included in the analyses)
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
High risk
“Immediately after delivery, the midwife or auxiliary compared the
number on the mother’s record with a coincidence table… placed in an
office outside the delivery room - the primiparous mothers were randomly
assigned”
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
High risk
Allocation according to open list after delivery.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
It appeared that women were not aware that the intervention was part of a
study, they were told that the observation was to examine mother infant
behavior during breastfeeding. Staff providing care would be aware of the
allocation. It was stated that observation was carried out by staff who “did
not know to which group the mother-infant pairs belonged”. It was not
clear whether other data were collected by blind observers
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
 42 women were randomized. 1 woman from the intervention group was
not observed at 36 hours. At 1 year follow up there were 33 remaining; of
the 9 lost to follow up, 5 were described as belonging to the “lowest
socioeconomic category”. There were some further missing data
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Data collected by observation difficult to interpret. It appeared that
women could contribute different numbers of observations to mean
scores.
Other bias
Unclear risk
No baseline imbalance apparent.
There was some discrepancy between results in the text and tables in 1 of
the papers. Denominators for some outcomes were not clear
Fardig 1980
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (blind drawing of 1 of 3 numbers with replacement)
Participants
51 uncomplicated infants with gestation 38-42 weeks, birthweight of at least 2500 g, normal labor
and delivery and normal Apgar score
Interventions
Group 1 infants were suctioned, dried under a radiant heater for 5 min and then placed naked on
the mother’s bare chest for 25 min. The infant’s back was then covered with 2 cotton blankets.
Group 2 infants were placed naked directly on the mother’s chest for 28 min after the umbilical
cord was cut. Group 3 infants were placed under a radiant warmer without being placed on the
mother’s chest
Outcomes
Skin temperature measured on the infant’s left side every 3 min for 45 min. Rectal temperature at
21 and 45 min. Outcomes were the number of infants with skin or rectal temperature in the neutral
range at 21 or 45 min
Notes
Study was done in the USA.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Drawing numbers.
Moore et al.
Page 37
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Women were “randomly assigned to either the control group or to 1 of
the experimental groups by blind drawing of 1 of 3 numbers, with
replacement.” This suggests that group allocation could be changed by
the investigator
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection
bias)
All outcomes
High risk
“Both the couple and their caregiver were told how the baby would be
handled after delivery.” Researcher collecting outcome data would also
be aware of group assignment
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Low risk
Describe any loss of participants to follow-up at each data collection
point: It appeared that all women were accounted for at each data
collection point. It was not clear if there was any missing data
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Most outcomes appear to have been reported
Other bias
Unclear risk
Authors reported that there were no significant differences between
groups for a number of variables but the data were not shown. It was not
clear how many of those eligible were approached to take part or whether
recruitment only occurred at particular times (e.g. was the same
researcher available at night and weekend) nor whether women who had
long labors remained in the study. It is not clear whether women were
excluded postrandomization if there was any intrapartum problem
Ferber 2004
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (table of random numbers).
Participants
42 healthy full term infants 38-42 weeks’ gestation and their mothers
Interventions
All newborns were placed on mother’s chest for 5-10 min, then dried, weighed and dressed. 1) SSC
group = infants brought back to mom 15-20 min postbirth, undressed, placed SSC between the
mother’s breasts and covered with blankets for 60 min. Then the infants were taken to the newborn
nursery for 4 hours of observation. 2) Control infants were taken to the newborn nursery, placed
under a warmer for 5-10 min, swaddled and laid in a bassinet. They were brought back to their
mothers at 5 hours postbirth
Outcomes
Optimal respirations, motor disorganization, visceral stress response, optimal flexed movements,
extension movements, facial movements, sleep state, drowsy, fussy and crying states, positive
attention signs, negative attention signs
Notes
Study was done in Haifa, Israel with primarily middle- to upper-middle class European, African
and Arab mothers
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Random number tables, the sequence was generated by a different person
from the 1 carrying out recruitment and group assignment
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Not described.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
It was stated that mothers were not aware of group assignment as mothers
in each group were kept separate (it was not clear how the study was
described to mothers or how consent was obtained). Those staff caring for
mothers after the birth would be aware of group assignment and other
aspects of care may have differed. It was stated that staff in the newborn
nursery (where outcomes were assessed) were blind to group assignment
but it was not clear how effective this blinding would be as babies in the
control and intervention arms were admitted at different times after birth
(and this would be stated on notes). It was stated that outcome assessment
was done by blind observers, it was not clear whether attempted blinding
was successful
Moore et al.
Page 38
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
Randomization was carried out at the start of labor. 50 women were
randomized and there were 3 postrandomization exclusions from the
control group as women became ineligible. It was not clear whether there
were any missing data
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from published report.
Other bias
Unclear risk
No significant differences between groups at baseline on the variables
measured, although there were a greater proportion of female children in
the control group (63% vs 48%) (it is not clear whether this would be
likely to be associated with any between group differences)
Other: it was not clear whether possible confounding factors were taken
into account. The main outcome was infant sleep and movement. This is
likely to have been affected by the use of systemic opioid analgesia during
labor . It was not clear whether any women had received opioids.
Gouchon 2010
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (a computer-generated a randomization list). Mothers were
randomized using opaque, sealed envelopes containing the group allocation
Participants
34 Italian women scheduled for elective cesarean delivery using locoregional anesthesia recruited
from the maternity ward of Pinerolo Hospital, Turin, Italy and their healthy full term infants
Interventions
Both groups: physical assessment, Apgar score, infants dried, wrapped in towel, handed to mother
for brief contact and transported to neonatal ward in an incubator for inspection, bath, weight.
Mother to OB ward
Control: baby dressed, taken to mother’s room, mother instructed on how to breastfeed but she
could choose whether she wanted to breastfeed or not. Mom could keep baby in her bed, in a crib
or in the nursery during the 2-hour observation period
SSC: same treatment as control, but not dressed; fitted with disposable diaper, cap and wrapped in
a warm cloth; placed on mother’s skin between breasts, left covered with cloth, bed sheet, and
blanket for approximately 2 hours. Mother instructed about how to breastfeed
Mean duration of SSC was 82.9 + 45.9 min.
Outcomes
Newborn skin temperature using an infrared ray thermometer on the forehead, effectiveness of the
first breastfeeding, min postbirth of the first breastfeeding, exclusive or prevalent breastfeeding at
hospital discharge and at 3 months postbirth, infant crying and maternal satisfaction with SSC
Notes
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
States mothers were randomized using a computer-generated
randomization list
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
States opaque, sealed envelopes containing the next allocation were used.
The mothers were recruited prenatally, the envelopes were opened by the
nurse on the day of surgery
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
No information provided.
IBFAT scores and infant temperatures were obtained while the infants
were held either SSC or dressed so the outcome assessors could not be
blind to group assignment for these outcomes
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
36 women were randomized, 2 women did not receive their assigned
intervention and there were no losses to follow-up. Reasons were
provided for why the 2 mothers did not receive their allocated
intervention. Data were analyzed on 17 mothers in the SSC group and 17
in the control group
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Low risk
All outcomes were listed under the aims of the study. Numerical results
for all outcomes, except infant crying were reported
Moore et al.
Page 39
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Other bias
High risk
Infants in both groups were bathed in the neonatal ward before being
returned to their mothers. Bathing (as well as SSC) would influence the
temperature outcomes. Mothers in both groups were instructed about how
to breastfeed
Hales 1977
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
60 healthy full term infants randomized into 3 groups.
Interventions
1) Control group = glance at babies immediately after delivery, swaddled infants brought to
bedside at 12 hours postbirth, then daytime rooming-in.
2) Early contact group = 45 min of SSC immediately postbirth, daytime rooming-in. 3) Delayed
contact group = 45 min of SSC at 12 hours postbirth, daytime rooming-in
Outcomes
Observation of maternal affectionate, proximity maintaining and caretaking behavior at 36
hours postbirth
Notes
Study was done with low-income, urban, breastfeeding primipara in Guatemala city
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation (selection
bias)
Unclear risk
“Twenty mothers were randomly assigned to each of three groups”
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“Twenty mothers were randomly assigned to each of three groups”
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
It was not clear whether the lack of blinding would affect maternal or
clinician behavior. It was stated that observation of maternal behavior
was carried out by an investigator who was not aware of group
assignment
Incomplete outcome
data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
60 mothers were randomized and followed up at 36 hours. It appeared
that all women were accounted for, although denominators were not
provided in the results tables.
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from brief study report.
Other bias
Unclear risk
There was little information on study methods. It was stated that
groups were comparable at baseline although it appeared that groups
were not balanced in terms of infant sex; in the 2 intervention groups
14/20 and 13/20 babies were female compared with 7/20 in the control
group
Huang 2006
Methods
Randomized controlled trial, states random digit table on page 43
Participants
78 mothers who had spinal anesthesia for cesarean birth and their full term infants who were
hypothermic (body temperature < 36.5 °C) postbirth
Interventions
Control group = infants received routine care while under a radiant warmer
KC group = infants were placed skin-to-skin between their mother’s breasts after the mothers felt
comfortable approximately 50 min postcesarean birth and covered with blankets. The duration of
KC was 30 min. The infant’s rectal temperature was taken after 30 min of KC and then every hour
until the temperature was back to normal. If the rectal temperature was < 36.5, the infant was placed
under a radiant warmer. The researchers did not state how many KC infants had rectal temperatures
< 36.5 at the end of the intervention
Moore et al.
Page 40
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Outcomes
The infant’s rectal temperature was taken 30 min after KC started or after radiant warmer care.
Infant temperature was recorded hourly starting 1 hour until 6 hours postbirth and was plotted on a
graph. The number and % of infants in each group who reached normal body temperature after 4
hours was listed
Notes
Study was conducted in Taiwan.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Abstract states “randomized control trial.” States
random digit table on page 43
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
No information provided other than random digit table.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
No information provided.
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
86 mothers agreed to participate in the study but data
were analyzed for only 78 infants. 2 mothers withdrew
because they were tired. 4 mothers felt cold and began
to shiver. The other 2 mothers exhibited tachypnea. It
was not clear which of these mothers were in the KC
and control groups
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Data collected on the % of infants in each group who
achieved normal body temperature (36.5 °C.) after 1-6
hours and plotted on a graph, numerical data provided
for only hour 4
Kastner 2005
Methods
Randomized controlled trial, no other information provided.
Participants
57 vaginally delivered mothers intending to breastfeed and their healthy full term infants
Interventions
In the usual care condition the mother and her infant remained together for 20 min. immediately
postbirth. Then they were separated for routine infant care (weighing, measuring). Next the infant
was dressed and returned to the mother for the first breastfeeding In the SSC group the mother and
infant spent the first hour postbirth alone and undisturbed as much as possible
Outcomes
4 mother-child relationship scales (maternal physical contact, maternal speech/verbal
communication, maternal breastfeeding, child to mother contact), infant attempts to reach the
breast and grasp the nipple independently. 3 additional scales evaluating maternal fatigue and
anxiety, partner support, maternal medication administration
Notes
Study was conducted in Munich, Germany.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Summary states that the study was “prospective and
randomized.” No further information provided
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
No information provided.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
Low risk
Mothers were told that the study involved “observation of
healthy newborns and their behavior in the first hour after
childbirth as well as their further development in the early
weeks of the child’s life,” not the true purpose of the study
Moore et al.
Page 41
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 All outcomes
The 2 outcome assessors who evaluated the video
recordings were “blind to the group division of the mother-
child pairs,” according to the research report
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
At 3-5 days postbirth, 4/31 infants were missing from the
intervention group and 5/26 for the control group; at 5-6
weeks postbirth 7/31 infants were missing from the
intervention group and 9/26 from the control group. No
reasons were provided for participant attrition
No standard deviations were reported for mean outcome
data on scales 1-4
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
No numerical data were reported for scales 5-7 although
the results were stated as insignificant
Other bias
Unclear risk
The researchers acknowledge that video recording is a
“disturbance” to the mother. The amount that video
recording might have altered the mother’s behavior is
unknown
Khadivzadeh 2008
Methods
Randomized controlled trial. The randomization method was not described
Participants
92 primigravid mothers and their healthy full term infants delivering at Om-ol-banin Hospital in
Mashhad, Iran
Interventions
Control: the infant was shown briefly to the mother before being placed under a radiant warmer for
routine care (physical assessment, vitamin K injection). The infant was then given to the mother
wrapped in a blanket after the perineal or episiotomy repair and the mother was encouraged to start
breastfeeding
SSC: the infant was placed prone between mother’s breasts skin-to-skin immediately postbirth. The
infant’s head was covered with a hat, and the back with a warm blanket. The infant was moved next
to the breast and the mother was encouraged to start breastfeeding as soon as the infant displayed
prefeeding behaviors. The Apgar score was assessed during SSC; all routine care was delayed until
the infant was 2 hours postbirth
Outcomes
Duration from birth until the first breastfeeding, number of infants breastfeeding during the first 30
min. postbirth, success and duration of the first breastfeeding, maternal feelings about SSC during
the first 2 hours postbirth
Notes
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
States randomized controlled trial at the beginning of the
Methods section. No further information provided
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
No information provided.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
No information provided. However, IBFAT scores were
obtained during the first breastfeeding when the infants
were either SSC or wrapped in a blanket so the outcome
assessors could not be blind to group assignment for this
outcome
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
The trial included 92 mothers and their infants, 47
received SSC and 45 received routine care. Data were
analyzed on all the participants
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Numerical data were reported for all the outcomes
identified in the results section Data were also collected
on maternal attachment and anxiety, results were
reported elsewhere
Moore et al.
Page 42
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Other bias
High risk
SSC infants were placed prone between their mother’s
breasts immediately postbirth and then left undisturbed.
The control infants received a number of co-
interventions (physical assessment, vitamin K injection)
which could have been disruptive to their ability to
breastfeed
Mazurek 1999
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
66 healthy full term infants and their mothers (mean GA 39 weeks)
Interventions
After birth all infants were dried, cord blood PH was drawn and measurements were taken.
1) SSC group = the infant was placed in their mother’s arms SSC 6-8 min postbirth and both were
covered with a sheet. SSC continued for 75 min. 2) Mother’s arms group = the infant was wrapped
in a blanket and given to the mother to hold for 75 min. 3) Control group = the infant was wrapped
and kept at a distance from their mother in the same room
Outcomes
Crying time, blood glucose, HR and respiratory rate at 75 min postbirth, blood PH, skin thigh
temperature
Notes
Study was done in Warsaw, Poland.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Women were divided into “three randomised groups”.
Methods not described
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Methods not described.
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection
bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
There was no mention of blinding and some of the
outcomes (infant crying behavior) and temperature may
have been susceptible to observer bias. Other outcomes
may not have been affected by lack of blinding (arterial
blood gases)
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Low risk
66 women were randomized and all appeared to be
accounted for in the results and analyses; the period of
follow-up was short (75 min). It was not clear whether
there was any missing data.
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Large number of data collection points and measures.
Assessment from published report only
Other bias
Unclear risk
Baseline imbalance not apparent.
There was little information on study methods.
Assessment of risk of bias was from abstract and
translation notes (original paper not in English)
McClellan 1980
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (table of random numbers).
Participants
40 healthy full term infants born by repeat cesarean section (spinal anesthesia)
Interventions
1) Control group = visual contact < 5 min, holding the swaddled infant for 10-20 min in the
nursery during the first 12 hours postbirth, then rooming-in. 2) Early contact group = visual
contact for 5 to 15 min, SSC for the first hour in the recovery room, then rooming-in
Moore et al.
Page 43
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Outcomes
1) Neonatal Perception Inventory. 2) Postnatal research inventory. 3) Observation of maternal
behavior.
All variables measured on postpartum day 1 or 2 and 28-32 days postbirth
Notes
Study was done with middle-income, multipara in the USA.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Stated that a table of random numbers was used to ensure “no systematic
bias” but then went on to say that “if the woman did not meet the
characteristics of the population, she was replaced by the next woman
who qualified, until there were 20 mothers in each group”
It was not clear at what point randomization occurred or how many
women were randomized and excluded postrandomization and then
replaced
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
High risk
Women were “randomly assigned”, “if the woman did not meet the
characteristics of the population, she was replaced by the next woman
who qualified, until there were 20 mothers in each group”
It was not clear at what point randomization occurred or how many
women were randomized and excluded postrandomization and then
replaced
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Women would be aware of which group they were in and would be aware
of observations. Clinical staff would be aware of group assignment. It was
stated that the nurses carrying out observations were unaware of group
assignment
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
It was not clear how many women were randomized and then later
excluded and replaced. 40 women received the intervention and all
seemed to be accounted for in the analysis. It was not clear if there was
any missing data.
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
All outcomes specified in the introduction were reported on, it is not clear
if other outcomes were measured, we did not have access to the study
protocol.
Other bias
Unclear risk
Groups appeared similar at baseline.
It was not clear what the mean scores reported represented, e.g. a mean
mother and infant behavior score (from observation) - whether a higher
score was more positive or what was being recorded. The measure is
referenced but without knowing how scoring works it is not easy to
interpret the results
Mizuno 2004
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
60 healthy full term infants > 37 weeks’ gestation and their mothers
Interventions
1) SSC group = extensive SSC (M = 63.7 min) immediately postbirth with effective suckling.
Then mothers and infants were separated for 24 hours and infants were fed formula. After 24
hours rooming-in with q3hr breastfeedings. 2) Control group = first mother-infant contact 24
hours postbirth then rooming-in and q3hr breastfeedings. Midwives assisted both groups with the
first breastfeeding
Outcomes
Frequency of mouthing movements with exposure to own mother’s milk, another mother’s milk,
formula, orange juice, distilled water at 1 and 4 days of age. Difference in frequency of
mouthing movements between mother’s milk and another mother’s milk at 1 and 4 days of age,
duration of breastfeeding
Notes
Study was done in Chiba, Japan.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Moore et al.
Page 44
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Randomization process was not described.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“randomly assigned”.
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Main outcome was baby reaction to various odor stimuli, it is unlikely
that lack of maternal blinding would have affected this. Staff providing
care would be aware of group assignment and it was not clear whether
those carrying out infant observations were aware of group assignment,
it was stated that interviewers collecting longer term breastfeeding
outcome data were blind to group allocation
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Unclear risk
60 women were included, 30 in each group, 2 women were lost from
the control group. Denominators were not provided on tables or figures,
so it was not clear how many women were followed up after hospital
discharge
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment carried out from published report. The validity of the main
outcome measure and the method of observing infant response were not
clear.
Other bias
Unclear risk
No baseline imbalance between groups reported.
Moore 2005
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (computerized minimization technique)
Participants
20 healthy full term infants > 37 weeks’ gestation and their mothers
Interventions
1) SSC group = infant placed prone SSC on mothers abdomen. Baby moved to warmer after cord
cut. Then infant placed prone on mother’s bare chest between breasts. Moved to cross cradle nursing
position when infant displayed early hunger cues (M = 99.5 min of SSC) Breastfeeding assistance
provided by researcher. 2) Control group = infant shown briefly to mother and moved to warmer.
Then infant swaddled in blankets and held by mother. Moved to cross cradle nursing position when
infant displayed early hunger cues. Breastfeeding assistance provided by researcher
Outcomes
Success of the 1st breastfeeding, time of effective breastfeeding, body weight change day 14
postbirth, number of breastfeeding problems in the 1st postpartum month, mother’s perception of the
adequacy of her milk supply, maternal parenting confidence, breastfeeding status 1 month postbirth
Notes
Study was done in the USA with primarily Caucasian, married, college-educated primipara
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computer-generated minimization process.
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Assignment by computer minimization process.
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
This was an unblinded study. Participants were aware of
group assignment. The chief investigator provided some of
the postbirth care (including help with breastfeeding) and
collected some of the outcome data
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
20 of the 23 women randomized were followed up.
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
All outcomes appear to have been reported. Assessment from
published trial report
Moore et al.
Page 45
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Other bias
Low risk
Groups appeared similar at baseline (randomization by
minimization technique)
Nolan 2009
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (mothers were randomly assigned to the Nursing Intervention to
Minimize Maternal-Infant Separation (NIMS) or control group by a coin flip)
Participants
50 women scheduled for a repeat cesarean delivery with regional anesthesia and their healthy full
term infants
Interventions
Control: standard/usual postoperative OB care was unstructured. The mothers typically had brief
physical or no contact with their infants until they were admitted to the obstetric postanesthesia care
unit. Breastfeeding was sometimes included. SSC was not routinely encouraged in the PACU
Intervention: a minimum of 10-15 min of SSC was offered in the PACU as part of a NIMS protocol
which included a number of co-interventions such as intra-/postoperative environmental
manipulation to maintain a maternal-infant spatial distance of less than 8ft. with uninterrupted
maternal visual and auditory contact, en face presentation at birth, and intraoperative cheek-to-
cheek contact for a minimum of 3 min. The NIMS intraoperative protocol could be considered a
sensory intervention which is a preamble to SSC in a situation where it is impossible to implement
SSC immediately postbirth The mean duration of SSC was 33 + 13 min.
Outcomes
Maternal pain, anxiety, infant respiratory rate, temperature, salivary cortisol, breastfeeding initiation
in the PACU, breastfeeding at hospital discharge and at 4 weeks postbirth, maternal perception of
childbirth
Notes
This study took place in the US.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Mothers were randomly assigned to the NIMS or control group by a coin
flip
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
The researchers obtained informed consent from interested mothers when
they arrived on the obstetrics ward and then randomly assigned the mothers
to groups by a coin flip
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
The nurses who provided usual care to the control mothers were unfamiliar
with the NIMS protocol
No information was provided about whether the research nurse who
conducted the medical record reviews, and obtained salivary cortisol
samples was blind to participant group assignment
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
72 mothers were recruited to participate in the study. 23% of the mothers
did not receive their assigned intervention for various reasons such as
unplanned general anesthesia, infant medical complications, staffing
issues. There were 25 mother infant pairs in each group. 30% (n = 15) of
the mothers has some missing pain scores. The number of missing pain
scores did not differ significantly between groups. 30% (n = 15) of the
infants had some missing temperature and salivary cortisol data. More
infants in the NIMS group had missing salivary cortisol data. The number
of missing infant temperature data did not differ significantly between
groups. 36% (n = 18) of the infants had missing respiratory rate data. The
amount of missing respiratory data did not differ significantly between
groups
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Low risk
Numerical data were provided for all outcomes.
Other bias
High risk
This study was included with considerable caution due to the following
issues
Infants in the SSC group weighed significantly more (3585.40 + 546.5 g)
than those in the control group (3299.60 + 374.7 g) (P < .04).
On admission to the PACU, before SSC was initiated, infants in the NIMS
group had significantly higher salivary cortisol levels (M = 3.27 + 1.43)
than infants in the control group (M = 1.90 + 0.72).
Moore et al.
Page 46
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 There were a number of co-interventions in this study. Therefore, it is
impossible to disentangle the effects of SSC from those of the other
interventions
Usual care was unstructured. The exact conditions which the NIMS
protocol was being compared to are unknown.
Punthmatharith 2001
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (computerized minimization technique)
Participants
196 healthy full term 37-42 weeks’ gestation infants and their mothers
Interventions
All infants received standard care for the 1st 30-60 min postbirth. After the cord was clamped they
were shown briefly to mom and moved to a warmer. 1) SSC group = beginning 60 min postbirth
infants received (M = 30 min) of SSC. Mothers were encouraged to breastfeed on infant demand.
Infants and mothers transferred to the postpartum unit at 120 min postbirth for 24 hour rooming-in.
Mothers encouraged to provide SSC 15-30 min before each breastfeeding. No other fluids given to
infants. 2) Control group = swaddled infant given to mom after episiotomy repair and they were
transferred together to the recovery room for 2 hours, then to postpartum for 24 hour rooming-in.
Mothers encouraged to breastfeed on infant demand. Cup feeding was encouraged if the infant
required supplementation
Outcomes
Observation of maternal affectionate behaviors during a breastfeeding at 36-48 hours postbirth, 4
subscales of the maternal-infant bonding questionnaire (attention/connection to the infant,
preparation for nurturing the infant, role of mother, breastfeeding the infant) at 36-48 hours and
week 4 postbirth, Mother’s perception of the adequacy of her milk supply, and breastfeeding status
36-48 hours and week 4 postbirth, infant weight day 2 and 1 month postbirth
Notes
Study was done in a Baby Friendly Hospital in Songkhla, Thailand
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
Sequence generation was by computerized
minimization method with stratification for 10 factors
including parity, age, SES, medication, ward, planned
duration of breastfeeding, previous breastfeeding,
experience, infant weight and sex
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computerized minimization method but no clear
description of what happened at the point of
randomization
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Mothers would be aware of group assignment and it
was stated that because of lack of privacy and cultural
factors mothers might feel reluctant to accept the
intervention. It was not clear whether there was an
attempt to blind staff or outcome assessors and the
impact of lack of blinding is not clear
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
195 women were randomized and 167 remained
available to followup. Loss was balanced across groups
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from unpublished thesis.
Other bias
Low risk
Groups appeared comparable at baseline (stratified).
Recruitment was at convenient times, so the sample
may not have been representative of the population
Shiau 1997
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (computerized minimization technique)
Moore et al.
Page 47
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Participants
58 healthy full term infants and their mothers randomized into 1 of 2 groups 0-4 hours
postvaginal or cesarean birth
Interventions
1) KC group = mothers began SSC at 4 hours postbirth and held their infants in SSC 8 hours
daily for 3 days. Breastfeeding based on infant hunger cues during the day and every 4 hours at
night. 2) Control group = began breastfeeding 24 hours postbirth. Mothers fed their infants every
4 hours in the nursery
Outcomes
1) Mean maternal state anxiety. 2) Mean score on 6 point breast engorgement scale. 3) Chest
circumference. 4) Breastfeeding status day 3 and 28 postbirth. 5) Breast milk maturation. 6)
Breastfeeding duration
Notes
Study was done with married primipara and multipara in Taiwan. The researcher provided all
nursing care to the SSC group during the day
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
By computerized minimization technique taking account of gestational
and maternal age, infant sex, type of birth, maternal education and
previous BF experience
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Computerized assignment.
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
High risk
There was no blinding in this study and care for the intervention group
was provided by the investigator who also gave advice on breastfeeding
and collected outcome data. The control group received care from
different staff. It is likely that other aspects of care as well as SSC would
be different between the 2 groups
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Low risk
58 mother infant pairs were randomized and all were accounted for in
the analyses although there was some missing data for some outcomes.
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from unpublished dissertation.
Other bias
Unclear risk
No baseline imbalance apparent.
The fact that care for the intervention and control groups was provided
by different staff may be a serious source of bias in this study
Sosa 1976a
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (random numbers in sealed envelopes)
Participants
60 healthy full term infants and their mothers randomized immediately after delivery
Interventions
1) Experimental group = mothers held their infants in SSC for 45 min after the episiotomy repair.
They were encouraged to breastfeed. 2) Control group = infants were separated from their
mothers for 12 hours
Outcomes
1) Mean duration of breastfeeding. 2) Episodes of illness, growth and development, mortality
Notes
Study was done with poor, urban primipara from the marginal area of Guatemala city
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“Assignment of mother-infant pairs…. was made from random
numbers..”
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Allocations were concealed in sealed envelopes which were opened
immediately after delivery
Moore et al.
Page 48
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Attempts to blind mothers, staff and outcome assessors were not
mentioned. Mothers would be aware of allocation, staff were also likely
to have been aware of treatment group and may have altered other
aspects of treatment and outcome assessors accompanied the mothers
home from hospital so may well have been aware of group allocation
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Unclear risk
60 women. Denominators for longer tem outcomes were not specified so
it is not clear how many women remained available to follow-up at each
data collection point
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment made from published reports only. In this study the
intervention appeared to have a negative effect on breastfeeding duration
this was explained by possibly different populations in the control and
intervention groups (although randomization should have controlled for
this).
Other bias
Unclear risk
There was some imbalance in the socioeconomic background of women
although this was not consistent across study sites Little information was
provided on study methods.
Women were followed up for 9 months or 1 year. Duration of
breastfeeding was an outcome. It is not clear whether any women were
still breastfeeding at the final data collection point. No SDs were
provided for continuous variables so some findings were difficult to
interpret
Sosa 1976b
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (random numbers in sealed envelopes)
Participants
68 healthy full term infants and their mothers randomized immediately after delivery
Interventions
1) Experimental group = mothers held their infants in SSC for 45 min after the episiotomy
repair. They were encouraged to breastfeed. 2) Control group = infants were separated from their
mothers for 12 hours
Outcomes
1) Mean duration of breastfeeding. 2) Episodes of illness, growth and development, mortality
Notes
Study was done with poor, urban primipara from the marginal area of Guatemala city
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“Assignment of mother-infant pairs…. was made from random
numbers..”
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Allocations were concealed in sealed envelopes which were opened
immediately after delivery
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Attempts to blind mothers, staff and outcome assessors were not
mentioned. Mothers would be aware of allocation, staff were also likely
to have been aware of treatment group and may have altered other
aspects of treatment and outcome assessors accompanied the mothers
home from hospital so may well have been aware of group allocation
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Unclear risk
68 women. Denominators for longer tem outcomes were not specified
so it is not clear how many women remained available to follow-up at
each data collection point
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment made from published reports only.
Other bias
Unclear risk
There was some imbalance in the socioeconomic background of women
although this was not consistent across study sites Little information
was provided on study methods.
Women were followed up for 9 months or 1 year. Duration of
breastfeeding was an outcome. It is not clear whether any women were
still breastfeeding at the final data collection point. No SDs were
Moore et al.
Page 49
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 provided for continuous variables so some findings were difficult to
interpret
Sosa 1976c
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (random numbers in sealed envelopes)
Participants
40 healthy full term infants and their mothers randomized immediately after delivery
Interventions
1) Experimental group = mothers held their infants in SSC for 45 min after the episiotomy
repair. They were encouraged to breastfeed. 2) Control group = infants were separated from their
mothers for 24 hours
Outcomes
1) Mean duration of breastfeeding. 2) Episodes of illness, growth and development, mortality
Notes
Study was done with poor, urban primipara from the marginal area of Guatemala city
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“Assignment of mother-infant pairs…. was made from random
numbers..”
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Allocations were concealed in sealed envelopes which were opened
immediately after delivery
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Attempts to blind mothers, staff and outcome assessors were not
mentioned. Mothers would be aware of allocation, staff were also likely
to have been aware of treatment group and may have altered other
aspects of treatment and outcome assessors accompanied the mothers
home from hospital so may well have been aware of group allocation
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
Unclear risk
40 women. Denominators for longer tem outcomes were not specified
so it is not clear how many women remained available to follow-up at
each data collection point
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment made from published reports only.
Other bias
Unclear risk
There was some imbalance in the socioeconomic background of women
although this was not consistent across study sites Little information
was provided on study methods.
Women were followed up for 9 months or 1 year. Duration of
breastfeeding was an outcome. It is not clear whether any women were
still breastfeeding at the final data collection point. No SDs were
provided for continuous variables so some findings were difficult to
interpret
Svejda 1980
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
30 healthy full term infants and their mothers.
Interventions
1) Control group = held their wrapped infants briefly (< 5 min) during transfer, then 30 min of
contact at feedings every 4 hours. 2) Extra contact group = SSC for 15 min beginning 25 min
postbirth, then the gowned mothers held their nude infants for 45 min in their rooms, 90 min of
contact every 4 hours for feedings
Outcomes
Videotaped affectionate and proximity - maintaining behavior in interaction with the infant,
affectionate and caretaking behavior during breastfeeding 36 hours postbirth
Notes
Study was done with middle-income, primipara in the USA.
Moore et al.
Page 50
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
Very little information about study methods provided. Method of
sequence generation not described
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“mothers were randomly assigned”. Method not described.
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
The intervention was not explained to women. Staff providing care
would be aware of group assignment. There was an attempt to check
that the duration of time nurses spent with women was not greater for
the intervention group. Outcome data were derived from observations
of videotapes with maternal behavior coded by researchers who were
described as being blind to group assignments; inter-rater reliability
was checked
Incomplete outcome
data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk
All women were included in the analyses.
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
It was not clear how scores from observations were calculated and
whether women could contribute different numbers of observations.
Other bias
Unclear risk
It was stated that the 2 groups were comparable at baseline. Very little
information was provided on study methods
Syfrett 1996
Methods
Randomized controlled trial (computerized minimization technique)
Participants
8 healthy late preterm infants 34-36 weeks’ gestation, average for GA, Apgars 7 or more, and their
mothers
Interventions
1) Control group = 24 min of SSC during the first hour postbirth before randomization to radiant
warmer for 3 hours, double wrapped in open bassinet for 3 hours then demand feeding and
continuous rooming-in if stable. 2) KC group = 40 min of SSC during the first hour postbirth,
transferred to nursery for admission procedures, then continuous SSC (mean 37 hours) and
breastfeeding on demand
Outcomes
Temperature, temperature variability, breastfeedings/day, bottle-feedings (ml/day), IV fluids (ml/
day), weight loss (g/hr), birthweight lost (%), number of heel sticks, length of stay (total days),
breastfeeding duration
Notes
Study was done in the USA. All nursing care in the KC group was done by the researchers
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Low risk
“random assignment…. was done using the minimization technique”. The
randomization sequence took account of a relatively large number of
stratifying variable and the eventual sample size was only 8 women.
(Stratification by GA, race, sex, induction or augmentation, intrapartum
analgesia/anesthesia, maternal magnesium sulphate and previous breast
feeding experience
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Low risk
Randomization was carried out 1 hour after birth at admission to the
newborn nursery. 1 of the investigators revealed the next allocation in the
randomization sequence
Blinding
(performance
bias and
detection bias)
All outcomes
High risk
This study was at high risk of bias due to the lack of blinding. It was
stated that control group women may have been dissatisfied knowing that
the intervention group were given more infant contact. The control group
and the intervention group were cared for by different staff. The control
group received routine care while the intervention groups received special
care from the investigators - which included advice on breastfeeding and 5
min pager access to staff as well as advice on SSC. The same nurse
investigators also collected outcome data for the SSC group
Moore et al.
Page 51
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
8 infants were involved in this study and all but 1 were followed up for a
year
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from unpublished thesis. The recruitment, intervention and
data collection were carried out by the same (unblinded) investigators
Other bias
High risk
This study had a very small sample size that was recruited at times
convenient to the investigators over a 10 month period. It is not clear that
the sample was representative of the population from which it was drawn.
The intervention was delivered by the investigators and included changes
to aspects of care other than SSC (e.g. breastfeeding advice). It is difficult
to separate the effects of the intervention from the effects of other
elements within the package of care
Thomson 1979
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
34 healthy full term infants and their mothers.
Interventions
1) Control group = held their wrapped infants briefly (< 5 min), subsequent contact at 12-24
hours postbirth, then contact every 4 hours for feedings during the day. 2) Early contact group =
held infant in SSC for 15-20 min starting 15-30 min postbirth. Mothers were encouraged to
breastfeed, subsequent contact at 12-24 hours postbirth, then contact every 4 hours for feedings
during the day
Outcomes
1) Happy maternal reaction to birth. 2) Breastfeeding at hospital discharge. 3) Successful
breastfeeding 2 months postbirth
Notes
Study was done with married, primipara in Canada.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
The randomization process was not described “the observer randomly
assigned the mother-infant pair to a control or to an early-contact
group”
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
The process was not described.
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Women were not told about the study intervention but told that the
study was about infant nutrition. It was stated that only delivery room
staff caring for women were aware of group assignments, staff
thereafter were not made aware of allocation. The person carrying out
the randomization also collected delivery room data, but staff
collecting other outcome data were described as blind although women
may have revealed group status
Incomplete outcome
data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
34 women recruited. 4 lost to follow up.
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
1 outcome “Happy maternal reaction to the infant” was assessed by an
observer that had carried out the randomization and remained in the
delivery room during the intervention.
Other bias
Unclear risk
Little information on study methods was provided.
Vaidya 2005
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Moore et al.
Page 52
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Participants
110 healthy full term infants and their mothers.
Interventions
1) SSC group = the naked infant was placed on the mother’s naked chest for 10-15 min within 1
hour of birth. 2) Control group = after immediate newborn care the infants were dressed and
given to their mothers or visitors. Both groups were encouraged to initiate breastfeeding
Outcomes
Exclusive breastfeeding up to 2-4 and 4-6 months postbirth, started other feedings before 2
months of age
Notes
Study was done in Kathmandu, Nepal.
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
“…some mother-baby pairs were selected randomly and after taking
verbal consent were allowed to have skin-to-skin contact…. In the
remaining control group, babies after immediate newborn care were
dressed as usual”
Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
There was little information about study methods and the method of
randomization was not described clearly
Blinding
(performance bias
and detection bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
Blinding was not mentioned, it is likely that all groups were aware of
group assignment
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
High risk
It was stated that 110 women were included in the study and 92 were
followed up, the reasons for loss to follow up were not stated. It was not
clear where the numbers of women lost to follow up were the same in
the control and intervention groups. There was some discrepancy in
numbers in different tables; in a table setting out duration of breast
feeding by mode of delivery only 60 women were accounted for
Selective reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment from published study report.
Other bias
Unclear risk
The sample was not described and it was not clear whether the 2 groups
were balanced in terms of parity, mode of delivery, and other
potentially important variables
Very little information about study methods was provided.
Villalon 1993
Methods
Randomized controlled trial.
Participants
119 healthy full term infants and their mothers.
Interventions
SSC Group = babies were placed SSC on their mothers immediately postbirth, then dried and
given medications. Diapered infants were then placed between their mother’s breasts and covered
with a blanket. Breastfeeding was initiated or attempted. Babies stayed in contact with their
mothers for most of the following 4 hours. Control group = babies were dried, given medications,
clothed and taken to the nursery for 4 hours
Outcomes
Breastfeeding at 24 hours, hospital discharge, and 14 days postbirth, maternal parenting
confidence, temperature, HR, respiratory rate at 1,2,3 and 4 hours postbirth in a subset of 92
infants
Notes
Study was done in Coyhaique, Chile. All mothers were Hispanic with mixed parity and education.
Temperature, HR and respiratory rate data were obtained from a subset of 96 infants
Risk of bias
Bias
Authors’ judgement
Support for judgement
Random
sequence
generation
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
The randomization process was not described.
Moore et al.
Page 53
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Allocation
concealment
(selection bias)
Unclear risk
The randomization process was not described.
Blinding
(performance
bias and detection
bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk
No blinding of women, clinical staff or observers and
outcomes susceptible to response and observer bias
Incomplete
outcome data
(attrition bias) All
outcomes
High risk
Describe any loss of participants to follow-up at each
data collection point: 119 women randomized. It
appeared that outcome data were available for all
women at 24 hours. However, at 14 days data were
only available for 65 (54%) of the randomized sample
(loss was balanced across groups). There was no ITT
analysis for outcomes at 14 days.
Selective
reporting
(reporting bias)
Unclear risk
Assessment made from translation notes from
published article (protocol not available).
Other bias
Unclear risk
Baseline imbalance not apparent.
Other: risk of bias assessment from translation notes.
BAT: Breastfeeding Assessment Tool
BPM: beats per minute
GA: gestational age
HR: heart rate
IBFAT: Infant Breastfeeding Assessment Tool
IBS: Index of breastfeeding status
ITT: intention-to-treat
IV: intravenous
KC: kangaroo care
M: mean
min.: minutes
MPI: Mother preterm infant interaction
NICU: neonatal intensive care unit
NIMS: Nursing Intervention to Minimize Maternal-Infant Separation
PACU: Post-Anesthesia Care Unit
PCERA: Parent-Child Early Relational Assessment
q3hr: every 3 hours
SAT: saturation
SCRIP: stability of the cardio-respiratory system
SD: standard deviation
SE: standard error
SSC: skin-to-skin contact
Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
Study
Reason for exclusion
Abdel Razek 2009
This quasi-experimental study was conducted in 2 maternal and child health centers in Jordan.
The study was conducted on infants receiving immunization injections during their first year of
life
Moore et al.
Page 54
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Ali 1981
No mention was made regarding whether the early maternal-infant contact was skin-to-skin
Anisfeld 1983
This study was a quasi-randomized trial. Group assignment was by day of the week
Castral 2008
This study took place with stable preterm infants (at least 30 weeks’ GA) during a heel lance
procedure. All of the infants were located in the intermediary neonatal care unit; 62% of these
infants had been transferred from the NICU. Mean birthweight was 1748.8 g for the SSC
infants and 1846.2 g for the control group
Cattaneo 1998
This was not a study of early KMC. The median age of enrolment in the study was 10 days
postbirth for KMC infants and 8 days postbirth for CMC infants
Christensson 1998
Infants in the control and intervention groups were hypothermic and admitted to the NICU
before the study began
Darmstadt 2006
This was not a study of early SSC. The intervention was a community mobilization and
behavior change communication program aimed at increasing the acceptability of skin-to-skin
care for mothers who deliver at home in rural Uttar Pradesch, India
Durand 1997
Not a randomized trial, participants self-selected into the experimental or control group based
on their desire to breast or bottle feed
Erlandsson 2007
This was a study of skin-to-skin care with the father after cesarean birth
Feldman 2003
Study was not an RCT. KC infants were recruited at 1 hospital and control infants from another
hospital. Infants were cared for concurrently at the 2 hospitals. Families were recruited to
participate several days to several weeks postbirth. All infants were in the NICU. Mean GA -
30.65 weeks
Ferber 2008
This study was conducted on preterm infants in the NICU.
Gardner 1979
No information was provided about whether infants were randomized to SSC (group 1) or
standard care in a Kreisselman warmer bed (group 2). No means and standard deviations were
provided for the outcome variable rectal temperature at 17 min postbirth
Gathwala 2008
This was a study of KMC for preterm and low birthweight infants in the NICU. KMC was
initiated at a mean age of 1.72 + 0.45 days of age.
Gomes-Pedro 1984
The early contact in the intervention group was not skin-to-skin
Gray 2000
This was not a study of early SSC. Infants were between 33 and 55 hours postnatal age at study
entry
Gray 2002
Infants were between 40 and 44 hours postnatal age at study entry
Grossman 1981
A questionable quasi-randomization procedure was used - the experimental treatment and time
are confounded. No mention was made regarding whether the early contact was skin-to-skin
Hill 1979
The study was described as “experimental” with 50 infants per group but the author does not
state that infants were randomized to groups. Study compared swaddled holding (not SSC) by
the mother or father to a heated transporter
Ibe 2004
In the KMC group, infants were dressed in cotton vests and caps and placed between their
mother’s breasts. The study was not an RCT - infants served as their own controls and
alternated between KMC and incubator care. Infants were recruited between 24 hours to 30
days of age
Johanson 1992
In the KC group “the baby was placed under the mother’s clothes on her chest. If the clothing
alone was considered insufficient, the baby was swaddled in 1 of the labor room blankets and
then kept immediately against the mother” (p 860). The full term data were not reported
separately; instead they were combined with preterm data in the analyses
Johnson 1976
No mention was made regarding whether the early maternal-infant contact was skin-to-skin
Kadam 2005
Study was conducted in a level 3 NICU in Mumbai, mean age of the infants at enrolment was
3.2 days, range 1-8 days, mean GA of the KC infants was 33.3 weeks
Karlsson 1996
Not a randomized trial; a descriptive study.
Klaus 1972
The early contact in the intervention group was not skin-to-skin
Kontos 1978
This study was not a randomized trial. Mothers who chose to room in and those who did not
were alternately assigned to early SSC or usual care. No means or standard deviations were
provided for the attachment summary score or individual attachment behaviors
Lindenberg 1990
No mention was made regarding whether the early maternal-infant contact was skin-to-skin
Moore et al.
Page 55
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Ludington-Hoe 2004
This was not a study of early SSC. SSC began M =17.82 days postbirth. All infants were in the
NICU
Ludington-Hoe 2006
This study was conducted on preterm infants (mean GA 30.8 + 1.4 weeks SSC group, 30.8 +
1.1 weeks control group) in the NICU. Mean age at the time of the study was 11.6 + 5.1 days
SSC group, 12.0 + 12 days control group.
Marin 2010
The pediatricians, rather than the mothers, were randomly assigned to whether or not they
would provide early SSC immediately postbirth
Mikiel-Kostyra 2002
In this study infants were not randomly assigned to groups. Information on the care of 11,973
newborn infants from birth to hospital discharge was collected in 427 maternity wards using a
standardized questionnaire. Then a subset of 9612 newborns was created. Then 1923
participants (20% of the subset) were randomly selected by systematic sampling of every 5th
case to complete a follow-up questionnaire
Miles 2006
This study was conducted on preterm infants < 32 weeks’ GA in 2 NICUs
Nagai 2010
This study was excluded as both groups received SSC in a setting where SSC had already been
introduced as standard care; earlier and later SSC were compared. It was intended that the
“early” SSC group would begin SSC within 24 hours of the “later” SSC group. In fact there was
considerable overlap between the 2 groups and results are difficult to interpret
Neu 2010
This was not a study of early SSC. It is a study of preterm birth (mean GA at birth 33 weeks) in
NICU. Women were recruited to participate within 1 month of the birth
Ohgi 2002
This was a non-randomized intervention study of infants who received KC compared to a
historical comparison group of infants who did not receive KC. Also KC was initiated 1-3 days
postbirth
Okan 2010
This was not a study of early SSC. The infant’s mean postnatal age at the time of the
intervention hypothesized to decrease pain from a heel lance procedure was 33.1 + 5 hours
postbirth.
Ottaviano 1979
No mention was made regarding whether the early maternal-infant contact was skin-to-skin
Ramanathan 2001
This study took place in the NICU. Mean GA of the infants was 31.5 weeks
Roberts 2000
This was not a study of early KMC. SSC was started median = 11.8 days postbirth. Median GA
was 30.4 weeks in the KMC group; 30.9 weeks in the control group
Rojas 2001
This was a study of preterm infants who were < 1500 grams.
Salariya 1978
No mention was made regarding whether the early maternal-infant contact was skin-to-skin
Sloan 2008
This was a study of community-based KMC in rural Bangladesh. Half of 42 unions in 2
Bangladesh divisions were randomly assigned to community-based KMC
Suman 2008
This study enrolled low birthweight infants (< 2000 grams) in a Level III NICU
Taylor 1979
The early contact in the intervention group was not skin-to-skin
Taylor 1985
The early contact in the intervention groups was not skin-to-skin
Taylor 1986
Not a randomized trial, a descriptive study. The early contact in the intervention group was not
skin-to-skin
Tessier 2009
This study was conducted with preterm infants (mean GA KMC group 33.6 + 2.5 weeks,
control group 33. 9 + 2.7 weeks). The infants were all < 2000 grams. The median age for study
eligibility was 4 days in the KMC group and 3 days in the control group
Thukral 2010
Not enough information was provided in the research abstract to be able to evaluate the study
for methodological quality
Velandia 2010
In this study all infants received early SSC; following cesarean SSC with mothers was
compared with SSC with fathers
Wimmer 1982
No standard deviations provided for breastfeeding duration.
Worku 2005
This was not a study of late preterm infants. The mean GA was 32.45 weeks KMC and 31.59
weeks CMC infants. The mean birthweight was 1514.8 g (range 1000-1900 g) for KMC and
1471.8 g (range 930-1900 g) for CMC infants. 58% of the KMC and 52% of CMC infants were
on IV fluids and 34% of the KMC and 37% of the CMC infants were on oxygen through
nasopharyngeal catheter. In addition, these infants experienced significant morbidity; 22.5% of
the KMC infants and 38% of the CMC infants died during the study period. Infants were
randomly assigned using a list of random numbers to conventional care (n = 61, overhead lamp
warmers or a heated room, oxygen therapy, breast, tube, cup or mixed feedings) or early KMC
(n = 62) starting during the first 24 hours of life (mean age 10 h KMC, 9.8 CMC)
Moore et al.
Page 56
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 CMC: conventional method of care
GA: gestational age
h: hour
KC: kangaroo care
KMC: kangaroo mother care
min: minutes
NICU: neonatal intensive care unit
RCT: randomized controlled trial
SSC: skin-to-skin contact
Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
Keshavarz 2010
Trial name or title
Skin to skin contact with or without music and maternal state anxiety
Methods
Randomized (single blind) trial.
Participants
Healthy Iranian women 20-40 years with term, singleton pregnancy with cesarean section under
spinal anesthesia. No history of neonatal death
Interventions
Skin to skin contact for 30 minutes with music.
Outcomes
Maternal state anxiety.
Starting date
July 2009.
Contact information
Maryam Keshavarz keshavarz@iums.ac.ir m-keshir@yahoo.com
Notes
Information from a trial registration.
DATA AND ANALYSES
Comparison 1
Skin-to-skin versus standard contact healthy infants
Outcome or
subgroup title
No. of studies
No. of participants
Statistical method
Effect size
1 Breastfeeding 1
month to 4 months
postbirth
13
702
Risk Ratio (M-H,
Random, 95% CI)
1.27 [1.06, 1.53]
2 Duration of
breastfeeding in days
7
324
Mean Difference (IV,
Random, 95% CI)
42.55 [−1.69, 86.79]
3 SCRIP score first 6
hours postbirth
1
31
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
2.88 [0.53, 5.23]
4 SCRIP score first 6
hours in newborns
below 1800 g
birthweight
1
13
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
4.92 [−1.67, 11.51]
5 Blood glucose mg/
dL and mmol/L at
75-90 minutes
postbirth
2
94
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
10.56 [8.40, 12.72]
6 Infant axillary
temperature 90
minutes to 2 hours
postbirth
3
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
Totals not selected
Moore et al.
Page 57
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Outcome or
subgroup title
No. of studies
No. of participants
Statistical method
Effect size
7 Exclusive
breastfeeding at
hospital discharge
2
57
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
0.99 [0.66, 1.47]
8 Breastfeeding status
day 28 to 1 month
postbirth
3
245
Mean Difference (IV,
Random, 95% CI)
0.86 [−0.73, 2.44]
9 Exclusive
breastfeeding up to
3-6 months postbirth
3
149
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
1.97 [1.37, 2.83]
10 Breastfeeding 1
year postbirth
2
62
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
6.19 [0.82, 46.78]
11 Success of the first
breastfeeding (IBFAT
score)
2
54
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
1.79 [0.24, 3.35]
12 Successful first
breastfeeding (IBFAT
score 10-12 or BAT
score 8-12)
3
315
Risk Ratio (M-H,
Random, 95% CI)
1.36 [0.95, 1.95]
13 Suckled during the
first 2 hours postbirth
1
88
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
1.06 [0.83, 1.35]
14 Mean variation in
maternal breast temp.
30-120 minutes
postbirth
1
132
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
0.60 [0.34, 0.86]
15 Breast
engorgement - pain,
tension, hardness 3
days postbirth
2
131
Std. Mean Difference
(IV, Fixed, 95% CI)
−0.41 [−0.76, −0.06]
16 Heart rate 75
minutes to 2 hours
postbirth
3
183
Mean Difference (IV,
Random, 95% CI)
−3.05 [−7.84, 1.75]
17 Respiratory rate 75
minutes - 2 hours
postbirth
4
215
Mean Difference (IV,
Random, 95% CI)
−3.12 [−6.61, 0.37]
18 Infant did not
exceed parameters for
stability
1
31
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
10.83 [1.63, 72.02]
19 Transferred to the
neonatal intensive
care unit
1
31
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
1.44 [0.15, 14.29]
20 Infant body weight
change (grams) day
14 postbirth
2
43
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
−6.00 [−175.60, 159.
21 Infant weight gain
per kilogram per day
(in grams)
0
0
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
0.0 [0.0, 0.0]
22 Infant hospital
length of stay in hours
2
42
Mean Difference (IV,
Random, 95% CI)
−95.30 [−368.50, 177.89]
23 Not crying for > 1
minute during 90
minutes
1
29
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
12.86 [1.91, 86.44]
24 Amount of crying
in minutes during a
75-minute observation
period
1
44
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
−8.01 [−8.98, −7.04]
25 PCERA Maternal
positive affective
involvement and
1
61
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
1.90 [−1.14, 4.94]
Moore et al.
Page 58
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Outcome or
subgroup title
No. of studies
No. of participants
Statistical method
Effect size
responsiveness 12
months postbirth
26 PCERA Dydadic
mutuality and
reciprocity 12 months
postbirth
1
61
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
1.30 [0.24, 2.36]
27 Maternal pain 4
hours postcesarean
birth
1
35
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
−1.38 [−2.79, 0.03]
28 Mother’s most
certain preference for
same postdelivery
care in the future
1
199
Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,
95% CI)
2.82 [2.08, 3.82]
29 Maternal state
anxiety day 3
postbirth
1
56
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
−5.00 [−9.00, 1.00]
30 Maternal parenting
confidence at 1 month
postbirth
1
20
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
5.60 [−6.24, 17.44]
31 Breastfeeding 1
month to 4 months
post birth: Sensitivity
analysis
12
642
Risk Ratio (M-H,
Random, 95% CI)
1.31 [1.16, 1.48]
32 Duration of
breastfeeding in days:
Sensitivity analysis
6
264
Mean Difference (IV,
Random, 95% CI)
63.73 [37.96, 89.50]
33 Heart rate 75
minutes to 2 hrs post
birth: Sensitivity
analysis
2
94
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
−5.77 [−7.43, −4.11]
34 Respiratory rate 75
minutes to 2 hours
post birth: Sensitivity
analysis
3
126
Mean Difference (IV,
Fixed, 95% CI)
−4.76 [−6.12, −3.41]
WHAT’S NEW
Last assessed as up-to-date: 15 March 2012.
Date
Event
Description
7 March 2012
New search has
been performed
The search was updated to 30 November 2011 and, as a result, five
randomized controlled trials have been added to the review. Two of the
new studies (Gouchon 2010; Nolan 2009) were conducted with mothers
scheduled for repeat cesarean birth using regional anesthesia. One study
(Huang 2006) was conducted with hypothermic, but otherwise healthy,
newborns postcesarean birth with spinal anesthesia. The results from four
additional reports involving the data set from Bystrova 2003, two
additional reports from Anderson 2003 and one additional report from
Bergman 2004 have been added to this update.
In this update we have used new methods and have modified outcomes.
One trial previously included has now been excluded because quasi-
randomized trials are no longer included (Anisfeld 1983).
30 September 2011
New citation
required but
conclusions have
not changed
New author helped to update this review.
Moore et al.
Page 59
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 HISTORY
Protocol first published: Issue 1, 2002
Review first published: Issue 2, 2003
Date
Event
Description
8 May 2008
Amended
Converted to new review format.
3 April 2007
New search has
been performed
The search was updated to August 2006, as a result of which 17 studies have been
added to the review along with 23 clinical outcomes. Additional breastfeeding
outcomes include: exclusive breastfeeding up to four to six months postbirth;
starting other feedings before the infant is two months of age; success of the first
breastfeeding; time to effective breastfeeding; number of breastfeeding problems;
frequency of infant mouthing movements with exposure to mother’s own milk; and
infant body weight change. New outcomes related to maternal feelings and attitudes
include: preference for the same postdelivery care in the future; perceptions of the
adequacy of her milk supply; self-confidence about her child care ability; and
parenting confidence. Three studies with late preterm infants who were healthy
enough to remain with their mothers on the postpartum unit and between 34 to 37
weeks’ gestational age have been added to this review. Additional outcomes related
to these infants include: SCRIP scores; number of infants who did not exceed
physiological parameters; transfers to the neonatal intensive care unit; and hospital
length of stay. A new outcome related to infant behavior is optimal flexed
movements. Two outcomes have also been added evaluating maternal attachment:
mean % of maternal contact time and maternal perceptions of bonding/connection to
her infant. Although 23 outcomes have been added, there are no significant changes
from the conclusions of the previous review
3 April 2007
New citation
required but
conclusions
have not
changed
This review has been substantially updated.
References to studies included in this review
Anderson 2003. [published data only]* Anderson GC, Chiu SH, Dombrowski MA, Swinth JY, Albert
JM, Wada N. Mother-newborn contact in a randomized trial of kangaroo (skin-to-skin) care.
Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing. 2003; 32(5):604–11.Chiu SH,
Anderson GC. Effect of early skin-to-skin contact on mother-preterm infant interaction through
18 months: randomized controlled trial. International Journal of Nursing Studies. 2009; 46(9):
1168–80. [PubMed: 19361802] Hake-Brooks SJ, Anderson GC. Kangaroo care and breastfeeding
of mother-preterm infant dyads 0-18 months: a randomized, controlled trial. Neonatal Network.
2003; 27(3):151–9. [PubMed: 18557262]
Bergman 2004. [published data only]Bergman, N. Kangaroo mother care from birth compared to
conventional incubator care. 22nd Conference on Priorities in Perinatal Care in South Africa;
Free State, South Africa. 2003 March 11-14; 2003. * Bergman NJ, Linley LL, Fawcus SR.
Randomized controlled trial of skin-to-skin contact from birth versus conventional incubator for
physiological stabilization. Acta Paediatrica. 2004; 93(6):779–85. [PubMed: 15244227] Bigelow
A, Littlejohn M, Bergman N, McDonald C. The relation between early mother-infant skin-to-skin
contact and later maternal sensitivity in South African mothers of low birth weight infants. Infant
Mental Health Journal. 2010; 31(3):358–77.
Bystrova 2003. [published data only]Bystrova K, Ivanova V, Edhborg M, Matthiesen AS, Ransjo-
Arvidson AB, Mukhamedrakhimov R, et al. Early contact versus separation: effects on mother-
infant interaction one year later. Birth. 2009; 36(2):97–109. [PubMed: 19489802] Bystrova K,
Matthiesen AS, Vorontsov I, Widstrom AM, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Uvnas-Moberg K. Maternal
axillar and breast temperature after giving birth: effects of delivery ward practices and relation to
infant temperature. Birth. 2007; 34(4):291–300. [PubMed: 18021144] Bystrova K, Matthiesen
AS, Widstrom AM, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Welles-Nystrom B, Vorontsov I, et al. The effect of
Russian maternity home routines on breastfeeding and neonatal weight loss with special
Moore et al.
Page 60
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 reference to swaddling. Early Human Development. 2007; 83(1):29–39. [PubMed: 16716541]
Bystrova K, Widstrom AM, Matthiesen AS, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Welles-Nystrom B,
Vorontsov I, et al. Early lactation performance in primiparous and multiparous women in relation
to different maternity home practices. A randomised trial in St. Petersburg. International
Breastfeeding Journal. 2007; 2(1):9. [PubMed: 17488524] * Bystrova K, Widstrom AM,
Matthiesen AS, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Welles-Nystrom B, Wassberg C, et al. Skin-to-skin contact
may reduce negative consequences of “the stress of being born”: a study on temperature in
newborn infants, subjected to different ward routines in St. Petersburg. Acta Paediatrica. 2003;
92(3):320–6. [PubMed: 12725547]
Carfoot 2004. [published data only]Carfoot S, Williamson PR, Dickson R. The value of a pilot study in
breast-feeding research. Midwifery. 2004; 20(2):188–93. [PubMed: 15177863]
Carfoot 2005. [published data only]Carfoot S, Williamson P, Dickson R. A randomised controlled trial
in the north of England examining the effects of skin-to-skin care on breast feeding. Midwifery.
2005; 21(1):71–9. [PubMed: 15740818]
Carlsson 1978. [published data only]Carlsson SG, Fagerberg H, Horneman G, Hwang CP, Larsson K,
Rodholm M. Effects of various amounts of contact between mother and child on the mother’s
nursing behavior: a follow-up study. Infant Behaviour and Development. 1979; 2:209–14.*
Carlsson SG, Fagerberg H, Horneman G, Hwang CP, Larsson K, Rodholm M, et al. Effects of
amount of contact between mother and child on the mother’s nursing behavior. Developmental
Psychobiology. 1978; 11:143–50. [PubMed: 640231] Carlsson SG, Larsson K, Schaller J. Early
mother-child contact and nursing. Reproduction, Nutrition and Development. 1980; 20:881–9.
Hwang CP. Aspects of the mother-infant relationship during nursing 1 and 6 weeks after early
and extended postpartum contact. Early Human Development. 1981; 5:279–87. [PubMed:
7261991] Schaller J, Carlsson SG, Larsson K. Effects of extended post-partum mother-child
contact on the mother’s behavior during nursing. Infant Behavior and Development. 1979;
2:319–24.
Christensson 1992. [published data only]Christensson K, Siles C, Moreno L, Belaustequi A, De La
Fuente P, Lagercrantz H, et al. Temperature, metabolic adaptation and crying in healthy full-term
newborns cared for skin-to-skin or in a cot. Acta Paediatrica. 1992; 81:488–93. [PubMed:
1392359]
Christensson 1995. [published data only]* Christensson K, Cabrera T, Christensson E, Uvnas Moberg
K, Winberg J. Separation distress call in the human neonate in the absence of maternal body
contact. Acta Paediatrica. 1995; 84(5):468–73. [PubMed: 7633137] Michelsson K, Christensson
K, Rothganger H, Winberg J. Crying in separated and non-separated newborns: sound
spectrographic analysis. Acta Paediatrica. 1996; 85:471–5. [PubMed: 8740308]
Chwo 1999. [published data only]* Chwo, MJ. Early kangaroo care for 34-36 week preterm infants:
effects on temperature, weight, cortisol, and behavior [dissertation]. Case Western Reserve
University; Cleveland (OH): 1999. Chwo MJ, Anderson GC, Good M, Dowling DA, Shiau SH,
Chu DM. A randomized controlled trial of early kangaroo care for preterm infants: effects on
temperature, weight, behavior, and acuity. Journal of Nursing Research. 2002; 10(2):129–42.
[PubMed: 12119598]
Craig 1982. [published data only]Craig S, Tyson JE, Samson J, Lasky RE. The effect of early contact
on maternal perception of infant behavior. Early Human Development. 1982; 6:197–204.
[PubMed: 7094857]
Curry 1982. [published and unpublished data]* Curry, MA. The effect of skin-to-skin contact between
mother and infant during the first hour following delivery on the mother’s maternal attachment
behavior and self concept [dissertation]. University of California; San Francisco (CA): 1979.
Curry MA. Maternal attachment behaviour and the mother’s self-concept: the effect of early
skin-to-skin contact. Nursing Research. 1982; 31:73–8. [PubMed: 6926651] Curry MAH.
Contact during the first hour with the wrapped or naked newborn: effect on maternal attachment
behaviors at 36 hours and three months. Birth and the Family Journal. 1979; 6:227–35.
De Chateau 1977. [published data only]De Chateau P. Early post-partum contact and later attitudes.
International Journal of Behavioral Development. 1980; 3:273–86.De Chateau P. The first hour
after delivery - its impact on synchrony of the parent-infant relationship. Paediatrician. 1980;
9:151–68. [PubMed: 7208067] De Chateau P. The influence of early contact on maternal and
infant behaviour in primiparae. Birth and the Family Journal. 1976; 3:149–55.De Chateau P,
Moore et al.
Page 61
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Holmberg H, Jakobsson K, Winberg J. A study of factors promoting and inhibiting lactation.
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology. 1977; 19:575–84. [PubMed: 913896] * De
Chateau P, Wiberg B. Long-term effect on mother-infant behaviour of extra contact during the
first hour post partum. I. First observations at 36 hours. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica. 1977;
66:137–43. [PubMed: 842335] De Chateau P, Wiberg P. Long-term effect on mother-infant
behaviour of extra contact during the first hour post partum. II. A follow-up at three months.
Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica. 1977; 66:145–51. [PubMed: 842336] De Chateau P, Wiberg P.
Long-term effect on mother-infant behaviour of extra contact during the first hour post partum.
III. Follow-up at one year. Scandinavian Journal of Social Medicine. 1984; 12:91–103. [PubMed:
6463623] Wiberg B, Humble K, De Chateau P. Long-term effect on mother-infant behaviour of
extra contact during the first hour post partum. V. Follow-up at three years. Scandinavian Journal
of Social Medicine. 1989; 17(2):181–91. [PubMed: 2749204] Winberg, J.; De Chateau, P.
Attempts to increase breastfeeding. Proceedings of 5th International Congress on Psychosomatic
Medicine in Obstetrics and Gynaecology, “Emotion and Reproduction”; Rome, Italy. 1979. p.
851-4.
Fardig 1980. [published data only]Fardig JA. A comparison of skin-to-skin contact and radiant heaters
in promoting neonatal thermoregulation. Journal of Nurse-Midwifery. 1980; 25:19–28. [PubMed:
6898112]
Ferber 2004. [published data only]Ferber SG, Makhoul IR. The effect of skin-to-skin contact
(kangaroo care) shortly after birth on the neurobehavioral responses of the term newborn: a
randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2004; 113(4):858–65. [PubMed: 15060238]
Gouchon 2010. [published data only]Gouchon S, Gregori D, Picotto A, Patrucco G, Nangeroni M, Di
Giulio P. Skin-to-skin contact after cesarean delivery: an experimental study. Nursing Research.
2010; 59(2):78–84. [PubMed: 20179657]
Hales 1977. [published data only]Hales DJ, Lozoff B, Sosa R, Kennell JH. Defining the limits of the
maternal sensitive period. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology. 1977; 19:454–61.
[PubMed: 892242]
Huang 2006. [published data only]Huang YY, Huang CY, Lin SM, Wu SC. Effect of very early
kangaroo care on extrauterine temperature adaptation in newborn infants with hypothermia
problem. Hu Li Za Zhi. 2006; 53(4):41–8. [PubMed: 16874601]
Kastner 2005. [published data only]* Kastner R, Gingelmaier A, Langer B, Grubert TA, Hartl K,
Stauber M. Mother-child relationship before, during and after birth [Die Mutter–Kind–Beziehung
pranatal, unter der Geburt und postnatal]. Gynakologische Praxis. 2005; 29(1):109–14.Kastner R,
Gingelmaier A, Langer B, Grubert TA, Hartl K, Stauber M. Mother-child relationship before,
during and after birth [Die Mutter–Kind–Beziehung pranatal, unter der Geburt und postnatal].
Padiatrische Praxis. 2005–2006; 67(1):13–8.
Khadivzadeh 2008. [published data only]Karimi A, Khadivzadeh T, Tara F. The effect of mother-
infant skin to skin contact on mother’s attachment. International Journal of Gynecology &
Obstetrics. 2009; 107(Suppl 2):S668.Khadivzadeh T, Karimi A. Randomized controlled trial of
very early maternal infant skin-to-skin contact and successful breastfeeding. BJOG: an
international journal of obstetrics and gynaecology. 2008; 115(s1):248.* Khadivzadeh T, Karimi
A. The effects of post-birth mother-infant skin-to-skin contact on first breastfeeding.
International Journal of Nurse Midwifery Research. 2009; 14(3):111–6.
Mazurek 1999. [published data only]Mazurek T, Mikiel-Kostyra K, Mazur J, Wieczorek P,
Radwanska B, Pachuta-Wegier L. Influence of immediate newborn care on infant adaptation to
the environment [Wplyw postepowania z noworodkiem bezposrednio po porodzie na cechy jego
adaptacji do srodowiska]. Medycyna Wieku Rozwojowego. 1999; 3(2):215–24. [PubMed:
10910653]
McClellan 1980. [published data only]McClellan MS, Cabianca WA. Effects of early mother-infant
contact following cesarean birth. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 1980; 56:52–5. [PubMed: 7383488]
Mizuno 2004. [published data only]Mizuno K, Mizuno N, Shinohara T, Noda M. Mother-infant skin-
to-skin contact after delivery results in early recognition of own mother’s milk odour. Acta
Paediatrica. 2004; 93(12):1640–5. [PubMed: 15841774]
Moore 2005. [published data only]* Moore, E. Randomized controlled trial of early mother-infant
skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding success [dissertation]. Vanderbilt University; Nashville
Moore et al.
Page 62
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (TN): 2005. Moore ER, Anderson GC. Randomized controlled trial of very early mother-infant
skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding status. Journal of Midwifery and Women’s Health. 2007;
Vol. 52(issue 2):116–24.Moore ER, Anderson GC. Randomized controlled trial or early mother-
infant skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding success. Journal of Human Lactation. 2005; 21(4):
488–9.
Nolan 2009. [published data only]Nolan A, Lawrence C. A pilot study of a nursing intervention
protocol to minimize maternal-infant separation after Cesarean birth. Journal of Obstetric,
Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing. 2009; 38(4):430–42.
Punthmatharith 2001. [unpublished data only]Punthmatharith, B. Randomized controlled trial of early
kangaroo care (skin-to-skin) care: effects on maternal feelings, maternal-infant interaction and
breastfeeding success in Thailand [dissertation]. Case Western Reserve University; Cleveland
(OH): 2001.
Shiau 1997. [published and unpublished data]* Shiau, S-HH. Randomized controlled trial of kangaroo
care with full-term infants: effects on maternal anxiety, breast-milk maturation, breast
engorgement, and breastfeeding status [dissertation]. Case Western Reserve University;
Cleveland (OH): 1997. Shiau, S-HH. Randomized controlled trial of kangaroo care with full term
infants: effects on breastmilk maturation, breast engorgement, and breastfeeding status.
International Breastfeeding Conference, Australia’s Breastfeeding Association; Sydney,
Australia. 1997 October; 1997.
Sosa 1976a. [published data only]Sosa, R.; Kennell, JH.; Klaus, M.; Urrutia, JJ. The effect of early
mother-infant contact on breastfeeding, infection and growth. In: Elliott, K.; Fitzsimons, DW.,
editors. Breastfeeding and the mother: Ciba Foundation Symposium. Vol. Vol. 45. Elsevier
Excerpta Medica; New York: 1976. p. 179-93.
Sosa 1976b. [published data only]Sosa, R.; Kennell, JH.; Klaus, M.; Urrutia, JJ. The effect of early
mother-infant contact on breastfeeding, infection and growth. In: Elliott, K.; Fitzsimons, DW.,
editors. Breastfeeding and the mother: Ciba Foundation Symposium. Vol. Vol. 45. Elsevier
Excerpta Medica; New York: 1976. p. 179-93.
Sosa 1976c. [published data only]Sosa, R.; Kennell, JH.; Klaus, M.; Urrutia, JJ. The effect of early
mother-infant contact on breastfeeding, infection and growth. In: Elliott, K.; Fitzsimons, DW.,
editors. Breastfeeding and the mother: Ciba Foundation Symposium. Vol. Vol. 45. Elsevier
Excerpta Medica; New York: 1976. p. 179-93.
Svejda 1980. [published data only]Svejda MJ, Campos JJ, Emde RN. Mother-infant bonding: failure to
generalize. Child Development. 1980; 51:775–9. [PubMed: 7418513]
Syfrett 1996. [published and unpublished data]* Syfrett, EB. Very early and virtually continuous
kangaroo care for 34-36 week gestation preterm infants: effects on temperature, breastfeeding,
supplementation and weight [thesis]. University of Florida; Gainesville (FL): 1993. Syfrett, EB.;
Anderson, GC. Very early kangaroo care beginning at birth for healthy preterm infants and
mothers who choose to breastfeed: effect on outcome. A workshop on the Kangaroo-mother
method for low birthweight infants; Trieste, Italy. 1996 October; World Health Organization;
1996.
Thomson 1979. [published data only]Thomson ME, Hartsock TG, Larson C. The importance of
immediate postnatal contact: its effect on breastfeeding. Canadian Family Physician. 1979;
25:1374–8. [PubMed: 21297814]
Vaidya 2005. [published data only]Vaidya K, Sharma A, Dhungel S. Effect of early mother-baby close
contact over the duration of exclusive breastfeeding. Nepal Medical College Journal: NMCJ.
2005; 7:138–40. [PubMed: 16519083]
Villalon 1993. [published data only]Villalon HU, Alvarez PC. Short term effects of early skin-to-skin
contact (kangaroo care) on breastfeeding in healthy full-term newborns [Efecto a corto plazo del
contacto precoz piel a piel sobre la lactancia materna en recien nacidos de termino sanos].
Revista Chilena de Pediatria. 1993; 64(2):124–8.* Villalon HU, Alvarez PC, Barria EH, Caneleo
DH, Carrillo LM, Duran SG. Effect of early skin-to-skin contact on temperature regulation, heart
rate, and respiratory rate in healthy, full-term newborns [Contacto precoz piel a piel: efecto sobre
los parametros fisiologicos en las cuatro horas posteriores al parto en recien nacidos de termino
sanos]. Revista Chilena de Pediatria. 1992; 63(3):140–4.
Moore et al.
Page 63
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 References to studies excluded from this review
Abdel Razek 2009. [published data only]Abdel Razek A, Az El-Dein N. Effect of breast-feeding on
pain relief during infant immunization injections. International Journal of Nursing Practice. 2009;
15(2):99–104. [PubMed: 19335527]
Ali 1981. [published data only]Ali Z, Lowry M. Early maternal-child contact: effects on later behavior.
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology. 1981; 23:337–45. [PubMed: 7250542]
Anisfeld 1983. [published data only]Anisfeld E, Lipper E. Early contact, social support, and mother-
infant bonding. Pediatrics. 1983; 72:79–83. [PubMed: 6683399]
Castral 2008. [published data only]Castral TC, Warnock F, Leite AM, Haas VJ, Scochi CG. The
effects of skin-to-skin contact during acute pain in preterm newborns. European Journal of Pain.
2008; 12(4):464–71. [PubMed: 17869557]
Cattaneo 1998. [published data only]Cattaneo A, Davanzo R, Worku B, Surjono A, Echeverria M,
Bedri A, et al. Kangaroo mother care for low birthweight infants: a randomized controlled trial in
different settings. Acta Paediatrica. 1998; 87(9):976–85. [PubMed: 9764894]
Christensson 1998. [published data only]Christensson K, Bhat GJ, Amadi BC. Randomised study of
skin-to-skin versus incubator care for rewarming low-risk hypothermic neonates. Lancet. 1998;
352:1115. [PubMed: 9798589]
Darmstadt 2006. [published data only]Darmstadt GL, Kumar V, Yadav R, Singh V, Singh P, Mohanty
S, et al. Introduction of community-based skin-to-skin care in rural Uttar Pradesh, India. Journal
of Perinatology. 2006; 26(10):597–604. [PubMed: 16915302]
Durand 1997. [published data only]Durand R, Hodges S, LaRock S, Lund L, Schmid S, Swick D, et al.
The effect of skin-to-skin breastfeeding in the immediate recovery period on newborn
thermoregulation and blood glucose values. Neonatal Intensive Care. 1997; 3/4:23–9.
Erlandsson 2007. [published data only]Erlandsson K, Dsilna A, Fagerberg I, Christensson K. Skin-to-
skin care with the father after cesarean birth and its effect on newborn crying and prefeeding
behavior. Birth. 2007; 34(2):105–14. [PubMed: 17542814]
Feldman 2003. [published data only]Feldman R, Weller A, Sirota L, Eidelman AI. Testing a family
intervention hypothesis: the contribution of mother-infant skin-to-skin contact (kangaroo care) to
family interaction, proximity, and touch. Journal of Family Psychology. 2003; 17(1):94–107.
[PubMed: 12666466]
Ferber 2008. [published data only]Ferber SG, Makhoul IR. Neurobehavioural assessment of skin-to-
skin effects on reaction to pain in preterm infants: a randomized, controlled within-subject trial.
Acta Paediatrica. 2008; 97(2):171–6. [PubMed: 18177441]
Gardner 1979. [published data only]Gardner S. The mother as incubator-after delivery. Journal of
Obstetric, Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing. 1979; 8(3):174–6.
Gathwala 2008. [published data only]* Gathwala G, Singh B, Balhara B. KMC facilitates mother baby
attachment in low birth weight infants. Indian Journal of Pediatrics. 2008; 75(1):43–7. [PubMed:
18245934] Gathwala G, Singh B, Singh J. Effect of Kangaroo Mother Care on physical growth,
breastfeeding and its acceptability. Tropical Doctor. 2010; 40(4):199–202. [PubMed: 20667921]
Gomes-Pedro 1984. [published data only]Gomes-Pedro J, Bento de Almeida J, Silveira da Costa C,
Barbosa A. Influence of early mother-infant contact on dyadic behaviour during the first month
of life. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology. 1984; 26:657–64. [PubMed: 6510565]
Gray 2000. [published data only]Gray L, Watt L, Blass EM. Skin-to-skin contact is analgesic in
healthy newborns. Pediatrics. 2000; 105(1):e14. [PubMed: 10617751]
Gray 2002. [published data only]Gray L, Miller LW, Philipp BL, Blass EM. Breastfeeding is analgesic
in healthy newborns. Pediatrics. 2002; 109:590–3. [PubMed: 11927701]
Grossman 1981. [published data only]Grossman K, Thane K, Grossman KE. Maternal tactual contact
of the newborn after various postpartum conditions of mother-infant contact. Developmental
Psychobiology. 1981; 17:158–69.
Hill 1979. [published data only]Hill ST, Shronk LK. The effect of early parent-infant contact on
newborn body temperature. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing. 1979; 8(5):
287–90.
Moore et al.
Page 64
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Ibe 2004. [published data only]Ibe OE, Austin T, Sullivan K, Fabanwo O, Disu E, Costello AM. A
comparison of kangaroo mother care and conventional incubator care for thermal regulation of
infants <2000g in Nigeria using continuous ambulatory temperature monitoring. Annals of
Tropical Pediatrics. 2004; 24:245–51.
Johanson 1992. [published data only]Johanson RB, Malla DS, Rolfe P, Spencer A. The effect of
postdelivery care on neonatal body temperature. Early Human Development. 1990; 21:132–3.*
Johanson RB, Spencer SA, Rolfe P, Jones P, Malla DS. Effect of post-delivery care on neonatal
body temperature. Acta Paediatrica. 1992; 81:859–63. [PubMed: 1467605]
Johnson 1976. [published data only]Johnson NW. Breast-feeding at one hour of age. American Journal
of Maternal-Child Nursing. 1976; 1:12–6. [PubMed: 815736]
Kadam 2005. [published data only]Kadam S, Binoy S, Kanbur W, Mondkar JA, Fernandez A.
Feasibility of kangaroo mother care in Mumbai. Indian Journal of Pediatrics. 2005; 72(1):35–8.
[PubMed: 15684446]
Karlsson 1996. [published data only]Karlsson H. Skin to skin care: heat balance. Archives of Disease
in Childhood. 1996; 75:F130–F132. [PubMed: 8949698]
Klaus 1972. [published data only]Kennell JH, Jerauld R, Wolfe H, Chesler D, Kreger NC, McAlpine
W. Maternal behavior one year after early and extended post-partum contact. Developmental
Medicine and Child Neurology. 1974; 16:172–9. [PubMed: 4836546] Kennell, JH.; Trause, MA.;
Klaus, MH. Parent infant interaction. Vol. Vol. 33. CIBA Foundation Symposium; 1975.
Evidence for a sensitive period in the human mother; p. 87-101.* Klaus M, Jerauld R, Kreger N,
McAlpine W, Steffa M, Kennell J. Maternal attachment: importance of the first postpartum days.
New England Journal of Medicine. 1972; 286:460–3. [PubMed: 5009748] Ringler N, Kennell
JH, Klaus MH, Navojosky B. Mother to child speech at two years: the effects of increased
postnatal contact. Pediatric Research. 1974; 8:345.Ringler N, Trause MA, Klaus MH, Kennell
JH. The effects of extra postpartum contact and maternal speech patterns on children’s IQs,
speech and language comprehension at five. Child Development. 1978; 49:862–5.Ringler NM,
Kennell JH, Jarvella R, Navojosky BJ, Klaus MH. Mother-to-child speech at 2 years: effect of
early postnatal contact. Journal of Pediatrics. 1975; 86:141–4. [PubMed: 1110438]
Kontos 1978. [published data only]Kontos D. A study of the effects of extended mother-infant contact
on maternal behavior at one and three months. Birth and the Family Journal. 1978; 5(3):133–40.
Lindenberg 1990. [published data only]Lindenberg CS, Artola RC, Jimenez V. The effect of early
postpartum mother-infant contact and breastfeeding promotion on the incidence and continuation
of breastfeeding. International Journal of Nursing Studies. 1990; 27:179–86. [PubMed: 2379980]
Ludington-Hoe 2004. [published data only]Ludington-Hoe SM, Anderson GC, Swinth JY, Thompson
C, Hadeed AJ. Randomized controlled trial of kangaroo care: cardiorespiratory and thermal
effects on healthy preterm infants. Neonatal Network - Journal of Neonatal Nursing. 2004; 23(3):
39–48.
Ludington-Hoe 2006. [published data only]Ludington-Hoe SM, Johnson MW, Morgan K, Lewis T,
Gutman J, Wilson PD, et al. Neurophysiologic assessment of neonatal sleep organization:
preliminary results of a randomized, controlled trial of skin contact with preterm infants.
Pediatrics. 2006; 117(5):e909–23. [PubMed: 16651294]
Marin 2010. [published data only]Marin Gabriel MA, Llana Martin I, Lopez Escobar A, Fernandez
Villalba E, Romero Blanco I, Touza Pol P. Randomized controlled trial of early skin-to-skin
contact: effects on the mother and the newborn. Acta Paediatrica. 2010; Vol. 99(issue 11):1630–
4. [PubMed: 19912138]
Mikiel-Kostyra 2002. [published data only]Mikiel-Kostyra K, Boltruszko I, Mazur J. Skin-to-skin
contact after birth as a factor determining breastfeeding duration [Kontakt skora–do–skory po
porodzie jako czynnik warunkujacy czas trwania karmienia piersia]. Medycyna Wieku
Rozwojowego. 2001; 5(2):179–89. [PubMed: 11679683] * Mikiel-Kostyra K, Mazur J,
Boltruszko I. Effect of early skin-to-skin contact after delivery on duration of breastfeeding: a
prospective cohort study. Acta Paediatrica. 2002; 91(12):1301–6. [PubMed: 12578285]
Miles 2006. [published data only]Miles R, Cowan F, Glover V, Stevenson J, Modi N. A controlled
trial of skin-to-skin contact in extremely preterm infants. Early Human Development. 2006;
82(7):447–55. [PubMed: 16458458]
Moore et al.
Page 65
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Nagai 2010. [published data only]S, Nagai; Andrianarimanana, D.; Rabesandratana, N.; Yonemoto,
N.; Nakayama, T.; Mori, R. Earlier versus later continuous Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC) for
stable low-birth-weight infants: a randomized controlled trial. Acta Paediatrica. 2010; 99(6):827–
35. [PubMed: 20121708]
Neu 2010. [published data only]Neu M, Robinson J. Maternal holding of preterm infants during the
early weeks after birth and dyad interaction at six months. JOGNN - Journal of Obstetric,
Gynecologic & Neonatal Nursing. 2010; 39(4):401–14.
Ohgi 2002. [published data only]Ohgi S, Fukuda M, Moriuchi H, Kusumoto T, Akiyama T, Nugent
JK, et al. Comparison of kangaroo care and standard care: behavioral organization, development,
and temperament in healthy, low-birth-weight infants through 1 year. Journal of Perinatology.
2002; 22(5):374–9. [PubMed: 12082472]
Okan 2010. [published data only]Okan F, Ozdil A, Bulbul A, Yapici Z, Nuhoglu A. Analgesic effects
of skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding in procedural pain in healthy term neonates. Annals of
Tropical Paediatrics. 2010; 30(2):119–28. [PubMed: 20522298]
Ottaviano 1979. [published data only]Ottaviano CM, Campbell SBG, Taylor PM. The effects of extra
postpartum contact on infant-mother attachment at one year. Pediatric Research. 1979; 13:336.
Ramanathan 2001. [published data only]Ramanathan K, Paul VK, Deorari AK, Taneja U, George G.
Kangaroo mother care in very low birth weight infants. Indian Journal of Pediatrics. 2001;
68(11):1019–23. [PubMed: 11770234]
Roberts 2000. [published data only]Roberts KL, Paynter C, McEwan B. A comparison of kangaroo
mother care and conventional cuddling care. Neonatal Network - Journal of Neonatal Nursing.
2000; 19(4):31–5.
Rojas 2001. [published data only]Rojas MA, Kaplan M, Mayes L, Quevedo ME, Foster LB, Sherwonit
E, et al. Traditional holding (TH) and skin-to-skin care (SSC) for newborn infants <= 1500
grams. A randomized controlled trial [abstract]. Pediatric Research. 2001; 49(4):360A.
Salariya 1978. [published data only]Salariya EM, Easton PM, Cater JI. Duration of breastfeeding after
early initiation and frequent feeding. Lancet. 1978; 2:1141–3. [PubMed: 82695]
Sloan 2008. [published data only]Ahmed S, Mitra SN, Chowdhury AM, Camacho LL, Winikoff B,
Sloan NL. Community Kangaroo Mother Care: implementation and potential for neonatal
survival and health in very low-income settings. Journal of Perinatology. 2011; 31(5):361–7.
[PubMed: 21311502] Sloan, NL.; Ahmed, S.; Chowdhury, N.; Mitra, S.; Chowdhury, M.; Rob,
U. Community-based kangaroo mother care to prevent neonatal mortality [abstract]. Pediatric
Academic Societies Annual Meeting; San Francisco, CA, USA. 2006 April 29-May 2; 2006. *
Sloan NL, Ahmed S, Mitra SN, Choudhury N, Chowdhury M, Rob U, et al. Community-based
kangaroo mother care to prevent neonatal and infant mortality: a randomized, controlled cluster
trial. Pediatrics. 2008; 121(5):e1047–59. [PubMed: 18450847]
Suman 2008. [published data only]Suman Rao PN, Udani R, Nanavati R. Kangaroo mother care for
low birth weight infants: a randomized controlled trial. Indian Pediatrics. 2008; 45(1):17–23.
[PubMed: 18250500]
Taylor 1979. [published data only]Taylor PM, Campbell SBG, Taylor FH, Maloni J, Dickey D,
Rubenstein G. Short-term effects of extra mother-first born contact. Pediatric Research. 1979;
13:338.
Taylor 1985. [published data only]Taylor PM, Maloni JA, Taylor FH, Campbell SB. Extra early
mother-infant contact and duration of breastfeeding. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica Supplement.
1985; 316:15–22. [PubMed: 3861069] * Taylor PM, Taylor FH, Campbell SB, Maloni JA,
Cannon M. Extra early physical contact and aspects of the early mother-infant relationship. Acta
Paediatrica Scandinavica Supplement. 1985; 316:3–14. [PubMed: 3861070]
Taylor 1986. [published data only]Taylor PM, Maloni JA, Brown DR. Early sucking and prolonged
breastfeeding. American Journal of Diseases of Children. 1986; 140:151–4. [PubMed: 3946324]
Tessier 2009. [published data only]Tessier R, Charpak N, Giron M, Cristo M, de Calume ZF, Ruiz-
Pelaez JG. Kangaroo Mother Care, home environment and father involvement in the first year of
life: a randomized controlled study. Acta Paediatrica. 2009; 98(9):1444–50. [PubMed:
19500083]
Thukral 2010. [published data only]Thukral, A.; Sankar, J.; Agarwal, R.; Deorari, A.; Paul, V. Effect
of early skin to skin (STS) contact on breastfeeding behavior in term neonates: a randomized
Moore et al.
Page 66
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 trial. Pediatric Academic Societies 2010 Annual Meeting; Vancouver, Canada. 2010 May 1-4;
2010.
Velandia 2010. [published data only]Velandia M, Matthisen AS, Uvnas-Moberg K, Nissen E. Onset of
vocal interaction between parents and newborns in skin-to-skin contact immediately after
elective caesarean section. Birth. 2010; 37(3):192–201. [PubMed: 20887535]
Wimmer 1982. [published data only]Wimmer-Puchinger, B.; Nagel, M. The importance of attitudes
during pregnancy and early mother-child contact for breastfeeding behavior: an empirical study.
In: Prill, HJ.; Stauber, M., editors. Advances in Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynecology.
Springer-Verlag: 1982. p. 482-4.
Worku 2005. [published data only]Worku B, Kassie A. Kangaroo mother care: a randomized
controlled trial on effectiveness of early kangaroo mother care for the low birthweight infants in
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics. 2005; 51(2):93–7. [PubMed: 15840760]
References to ongoing studies
Keshavarz 2010. [published data only]Keshavarz, M. [accessed 6 December 2010] Comparison the
effect of skin to skin contact and music during skin to skin contact on maternal state anxiety in
cesarean section unit. IRCT Iranian Registry of Clinical Trials. 2010. www.irct.irwww.irct.ir
Additional references
Affonso 1989. [published data only]Affonso D, Wahlberg V, Persson B. Exploration of mother’s
reactions to the kangaroo method of prematurity care. Neonatal Network. 1989; 7(6):43–51.
[PubMed: 2733681]
Alberts 1994. Alberts JR. Learning as adaptation of the infant. Acta Paediatrica Supplement. 1994;
397:77–85.
American Academy of Pediatrics 2005. Gartner LM, Morton J, Lawrence RA, Naylor AJ, O’Hare D,
Schanler RJ, et al. Breastfeeding and the use of human milk. Pediatrics. 2005; 115(2):496–506.
[PubMed: 15687461]
Anderson 1989. Anderson GC. Risk in mother-infant separation postbirth. Image. 1989; 21:196–9.
Anderson 1995. Anderson GC, Chang H-P, Behnke M, Conlon M, Eyler FD. Self- regulatory
mothering (SR) postbirth: effect on, and correlation between, infant crying and salivary cortisol.
Pediatric Research. 1995; 37(4 Pt 2):12A.
Anderson 2004a. Anderson, GC.; Chiu, SH.; Morrison, B.; Burkhammer, M.; Ludington-Hoe, S. Skin-
to-skin care for breastfeeding difficulties postbirth. In: Field, T., editor. Touch and Massage
Therapy in Early Development. Johnson & Johnson Pediatric Institute; New Brunswick: 2004. p.
115-36.
Anderson 2004b. Anderson GC, Radjenovic D, Chiu SH, Conlon M, Lane AE. Development of an
observational instrument to measure mother-infant separation post birth. Journal of Nursing
Measurement. 2004; 12(3):215–34. [PubMed: 16138726]
Bernard-Bonnin 1989. Bernard-Bonnin AC, Stachtchenko S, Girard G, Rousseau E. Hospital practices
and breast-feeding duration: a meta-analysis of controlled trials. Birth. 1989; 16:64–6. [PubMed:
2547392]
Bramson 2010. Bramson L, Lee JW, Moore E, Montgomery S, Neish C, Bahjri K. Effect of early skin-
to-skin mother-infant contact during the first 3 hours following birth on exclusive breastfeeding
during the maternity hospital stay. Journal of Human Lactation. 2010; 26(2):130–7. [PubMed:
20110561]
Bystrova 2007a. Bystrova K, Matthiesen AS, Widstrom AM, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Welles-Nystrom
B, Vorontsov I, et al. The effect of Russian maternity home routines on breastfeeding and
neonatal weight loss with special reference to swaddling. Early Human Development. 2007;
83(1):29–39. [PubMed: 16716541]
Bystrova 2007b. Bystrova K, Widstrom AM, Matthiesen AS, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Welles-Nystrom
B, Vorontsov I, et al. Early lactation performance in primiparous and multiparous women in
relation to different maternity home practices. A randomised trial in St. Petersburg. International
Breastfeeding Journal. 2007; 2(1):9. [PubMed: 17488524]
Moore et al.
Page 67
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Bystrova 2007c. Bystrova K, Matthiesen AS, Vorontsov I, Widstrom AM, Ransjo-Arvidson AB,
Uvnas-Moberg K. Maternal axillar and breast temperature after giving birth: effects of delivery
ward practices and relation to infant temperature. Birth. 2007; 34(4):291–300. [PubMed:
18021144]
Bystrova 2009. Bystrova K, Ivanova V, Edhborg M, Matthiesen AS, Ransjo-Arvidson AB,
Mukhamedrakhimov R, et al. Early contact versus separation: effects on mother-infant
interaction one year later. Birth. 2009; 36(2):97–109. [PubMed: 19489802]
Chiu 2005. Chiu SH, Anderson GC, Burkhammer MD. Newborn temperature during skin-to-skin
breastfeeding in couples having breastfeeding difficulties. Birth. 2005; 32(2):115–21. [PubMed:
15918868]
Chiu 2008. Chiu SH, Anderson GC, Burkhammer MD. Can skin-to-skin contact help reduce racial
disparities in postpartum women having breastfeeding difficulties? Breastfeeding Medicine.
2008; 3(4):231–7. [PubMed: 19086826]
Chiu 2009. Chiu SH, Anderson GC. Effect of early skin-to-skin contact on mother-preterm infant
interaction through 18 months: randomized controlled trial. International Journal of Nursing
Studies. 2009; 46(9):1168–80. [PubMed: 19361802]
Christidis 2003. Christidis I, Zotter H, Rosegger H, Engele H, Kurz R, Kerbl R. Infrared thermography
in newborns: the first hour after birth. Gynakologisch Geburtschilfliche Rundschau. 2003; Vol.
43:31–5.
Clark 1985. Clark, R. The parent-child early relational assessment: instrument and manual.
Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin Medical School; Madison, Wisconsin: 1985.
Clark 1999. Clark R. The parent-child early relational assessment: a factorial validity study.
Educational and Psychological Measurement. 1999; 59(5):821–46.
Conde-Agudelo 2011. Conde-Agudelo A, Diaz-Rossello JL, Belizam JM. Kangaroo mother care to
reduce morbidity and mortality in low birthweight infants. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2011; (Issue 3) DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD002771.
Dageville 2008. Dageville C, Pignol J, De Smet S. Very early neonatal apparent life-threatening events
and sudden unexpected deaths: incidence and risk factors. Acta Paediatrica. 2008; Vol. 97:866–9.
[PubMed: 18482167]
De Carvalho 1983. De Carvalho M, Robertson S, Friedman A, Klaus M. Effect of frequent breast-
feeding on early milk production and infant weight gain. Pediatrics. 1983; 72:307–11. [PubMed:
6889034]
Del Sette 1998. Del Sette M, Angeli S, Leandri M, Ferriero G, Bruzzone GL, Finocchi C. Migraine
with aura and right-to-left shunt on transcranial Doppler: a case-control study. Cerebrovascular
Diseases. 1998; 8(6):327–30. [PubMed: 9774749]
Dennis 1999. Dennis C. Theoretical underpinnings of breast-feeding confidence: a self-efficacy
framework. Journal of Human Lactation. 1999; 15:195–201. [PubMed: 10578797]
Dewey 2003. Dewey KG, Nommsen-Rivers LA, Heinig MJ, Cohen RJ. Risk factors for suboptimal
infant breastfeeding behavior, delayed onset of lactation, and excess neonatal weight loss.
Pediatrics. 2003; 112(3 Pt 1):607–19. [PubMed: 12949292]
Dordevic 2008. Dordevic G, Jovanovic B, Dordevic M. An early contact with the baby - benefit for the
mother. Medicina Preglio. 2008; 61(11-12):576–9.
Egger 1997. Egger M, Davey Smith G, Schneider M, Minder C. Bias in meta-analysis detected by a
simple, graphical test. BMJ. 1997; 315(7109):629–34. [PubMed: 9310563]
Fischer 1998. Fischer CB, Sontheimer D, Scheffer F, Bauer J, Linderkamp O. Cardiorespiratory
stability of premature boys and girls during kangaroo care. Early Human Development. 1998;
52(2):145–53. [PubMed: 9783816]
Francis 1999. Francis D, Diorio J, Liu D, Meaney MJ. Nongenomic transmission across generations of
maternal behavior and stress responses in the rat. Science. 1999; 286:1155–8. [PubMed:
10550053]
Gomez 1998. Gomez P, Baiges Nogues MT, Batiste Fernandez MT, Marca Gutierrez MM, Nieto
Jurado A, Closa Monasterolo R. Kangaroo method in delivery room for full-term babies [Metodo
canguro en sala de partos en recien nacidos a termino]. Anales Espanoles De Pediatria. 1998;
48(6):631–3. [PubMed: 9662849]
Moore et al.
Page 68
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Grummer-Strawn 2008. Grummer-Strawn LM, Scanlon KS, Fein SB. Infant feeding and feeding
transitions during the first year of life. Pediatrics. 2008; Vol. 122:S36–S42. [PubMed: 18829829]
Hake-Brooks 2003. Hake-Brooks SJ, Anderson GC. Kangaroo care and breastfeeding of mother-
preterm infant dyads 0-18 months: a randomized, controlled trial. Neonatal Network. 2003;
27(3):151–9. [PubMed: 18557262]
Handlin 2009. Handlin L, Jonas W, Petersson M, Ejdeback M, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Nissen E, et al.
Effects of sucking and skin-to-skin contact on maternal ACTH and cortisol levels during the
second day postpartum-influence of epidural analgesia and oxytocin in the perinatal period.
Breastfeeding Medicine. 2009; Vol. 4(issue 4):207–20. [PubMed: 19731998]
Harbord 2006. Harbord RM, Egger M, Sterne JA. A modified test for small-study effects in meta-
analyses of controlled trials with binary endpoints. Statistics in Medicine. 2006; 25(20):3443–57.
[PubMed: 16345038]
Higgins 2011. Higgins, JPT.; Green, S., editors. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Interventions. Version 5.1.0. The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011. www.cochrane-
handbook.org[updated March 2011]
Hill 1994. Hill P, Humenick SS. The occurrence of breast engorgement. Journal of Human Lactation.
1994; 10:79–86. [PubMed: 7619260]
Hill 1996. Hill PD, Humenick SS. Development of the H&H Lactation Scale. Nursing Research. 1996;
45:136–40. [PubMed: 8637793]
Hill 2007. Hill PD, Johnson TS. Assessment of breastfeeding and infant growth. Journal of Midwifery
and Womens Health. 2007; 52(6):571–8.
Inch 1989. Inch, S.; Garforth, S. Establishing and maintaining breast-feeding. In: Chalmers, I.; Enkin,
M.; Keirse, M., editors. Effective Care in Pregnancy and Childbirth. Oxford University Press;
Oxford: 1989. p. 1359-74.
Jansson 1995. Jansson UM, Mustafa T, Khan MA, Lindblad BS, Widstrom AM. The effects of
medically-oriented labour ward routines on prefeeding behaviour and body temperature in
newborn infants. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics. 1995; 41:360–3. [PubMed: 8606445]
Labbok 1990. Labbok M, Krasovec K. Toward consistency in breastfeeding definitions. Studies in
Family Planning. 1990; 21:226–30. [PubMed: 2219227]
Lagercrantz 1986. Lagercrantz H, Slotkin TA. The “stress” of being born. Scientific American. 1986;
254(4):100–7. [PubMed: 3961465]
Lagercrantz 1996. Lagercrantz H. Stress, arousal and gene activation at birth. News in Physiological
Science. 1996; 11:214–8.
Liu 1997. Liu D, Diorio JC, Tannenbaum B, Caldji C, Francis D, Freedman A, et al. Maternal care,
hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor expression and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses to
stress. Science. 1997; 277:1659–62. [PubMed: 9287218]
Liu 2000. Liu D, Diorio J, Day JC, Francis DD, Meaney MJ. Maternal care, hippocampal
synaptogenesis and cognitive development in rats. Nature Neuroscience. 2000; 3:799–806.
Lucas 2005. Lucas A. Long-term programming effects of early nutrition -- implications for the preterm
infant. Journal of Perinatology. 2005; 25(Suppl 2):S2–S6. [PubMed: 15861165]
Ludington-Hoe 2002. Ludington-Hoe SM, Cong X, Hashemi F. Infant crying: nature, physiologic
consequences, and select interventions. Neonatal Network. 2002; Vol. 21(issue 2):29–36.
[PubMed: 11923998]
Matthews 1988. Matthews MK. Developing an instrument to assess infant breastfeeding behaviour in
the early neonatal period. Midwifery. 1988; 4(4):154–65. [PubMed: 3210979]
Matthews 1991. Matthews MK. Mothers’ satisfaction with their neonates’ breastfeeding behaviors.
Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing. 1991; 20(1):49–55.
McEwen 1998. McEwen BS. Stress, adaptation, and disease. Allostasis and allostatic load. Annals of
the New York Academy of Science. 1998; 840:33–44.
Meaney 2005. Meaney MJ, Szyf M. Maternal care as a model for experience-dependent chromatin
plasticity? Trends in Neurosciences. 2005; 28(9):456–63. [PubMed: 16054244]
Michelsson 1996. Michelsson K, Christensson K, Rothganger H, Winberg J. Crying in separated and
non-separated newborns: sound spectrographic analysis. Acta Paediatrica. 1996; 85:471–5.
[PubMed: 8740308]
Moore et al.
Page 69
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Moher 2001. Moher D, Schultz KF, Altman DA. The Consort statement: Revised recommendations
for improving the quality of reports of parallel group randomized trials. JAMA. 2001; 285:1987–
91. [PubMed: 11308435]
Moher 2010. Moher D, Hopewell S, Schultz K, Montori V, Gotzsche P, Devereaux PJ, et al.
CONSORT 2010 explanation and elaboration: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group
randomised trials. BMJ. 2010; 340:c869. [PubMed: 20332511]
Mori 2010. Mori R, Khanna R, Pledge D, Nakayama T. Meta-analysis of physiological effects of skin-
to-skin contact for newborns and mothers. Pediatrics International. 2010; Vol. 52:161–70.
[PubMed: 19519670]
O’Campo 1992. O’Campo P, Faden R, Gielen A, Wang M. Prenatal factors associated with breast-
feeding duration: recommendations for prenatal interventions. Birth. 1992; 19:195–201.
[PubMed: 1472267]
Odent 2001. Odent M. New reasons and new ways to study birth physiology. International Journal of
Gynecology & Obstetrics. 2001; 75(Suppl 1):S39–S45. [PubMed: 11742641]
Perez-Escamilla 1994. Perez-Escamilla R, Pollitt E, Lonnerdal B, Dewey KG. Infant feeding policies
in maternity wards and their effect on breast-feeding success: an analytic overview. American
Journal of Public Health. 1994; 84:89–97. [PubMed: 8279619]
Plotsky 2005. Plotsky PM, Thrivikraman KV, Nemeroff CB, Caldji C, Sharma S, Meaney MJ. Long-
term consequences of neonatal rearing on central corticotropin-releasing factor systems in adult
male rat offspring. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2005; 30:2192–204. [PubMed: 15920504]
Poletto 2006. Poletto R, Steibel JP, Siegford JM, Zanella AJ. Effects of early weaning and social
isolation on the expression of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptor and 11beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 and 2 mRNAs in the frontal cortex and hippocampus of piglets.
Brain Research. 2006; Vol. 1067(issue 1):36–42. [PubMed: 16271354]
Polit 2011. Polit DF, Gillespie BM, Griffin R. Deliberate ignorance: a systematic review of blinding in
nursing clinical trials. Nursing Research. 2011; 60(1):9–16. [PubMed: 21127453]
Porges 2007. Porges SW. The polyvagal perspective. Biological Psychology. 2007; 74(2):116–43.
[PubMed: 17049418]
Porter 1999. Porter RH, Winberg J. Unique salience of maternal breast odors for newborn infants.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews. 1999; 23:439–49. [PubMed: 9989430]
Raju 2006. Raju TN, Higgins RD, Stark AR, Leveno KJ. Optimizing care and outcome for late-
preterm (near-term) infants: a summary of the workshop sponsored by the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development. Pediatrics. 2006; Vol. 118:1207–14. [PubMed:
16951017]
RevMan 2011. The Nordic Cochrane Centre. The Cochrane Collaboration. Review Manager
(RevMan). 5.1. The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration; Copenhagen: 2011.
Righard 1990. Righard L, Alade MO. Effect of delivery room routines on success of first breast-feed.
Lancet. 1990; 336:1105–7. [PubMed: 1977988]
Riordan 1997. Riordan JM. Reliability and validity testing of three breastfeeding assessment tools.
Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing. 1997; 26:181–7.
Rogers 1997. Rogers IS, Emmett PM, Golding J. The incidence and duration of breast-feeding. Early
Human Development. 1997; 49:S45–S74. [PubMed: 9363417]
Shannon 2007. Shannon M, King TL, Kennedy HP. Allostasis: a theoretical framework for
understanding and evaluating perinatal health outcomes. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic and
Neonatal Nursing. 2007; 36(2):125–34.
Thomson 1984. Thomson ME, Kramer MS. Methodological standards for controlled clinical trials of
early contact and maternal-infant behavior. Pediatrics. 1984; 73:294–300. [PubMed: 6701052]
Thulier 2010. Thulier D. A call for clarity in infant breast and bottle-feeding definitions for research.
Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing. 2010; 39:627–634.
Uvnas-Moberg 1996. Uvnas-Moberg K, Eriksson M. Breastfeeding: physiological, endocrine and
behavioural adaptations caused by oxytocin and local neurogenic activity in the nipple and
mammary gland. Acta Paediatrica. 1996; Vol. 85:525–30. [PubMed: 8827091]
Uvnas-Moberg 1998. Uvnas-Moberg K. Oxytocin may mediate the benefits of positive social
interactions and emotions. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1998; 23:819–35. [PubMed: 9924739]
Moore et al.
Page 70
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Uvnas-Moberg 2005. Uvnas-Moberg K, Arn I, Magnusson D. The psychobiology of emotion: the role
of the oxytocinergic system. International Journal of Behavioral Medicine. 2005; Vol. 12(issue
2):59–65.
Varendi 1994. Varendi H, Porter RH, Winberg J. Does the newborn baby find the nipple by smell?
Lancet. 1994; 344:989–90. [PubMed: 7934434]
Varendi 1997. Varendi H, Porter RH, Winberg J. Natural odor preferences of newborn infants change
over time. Acta Paediatrica. 1997; 86:985–90. [PubMed: 9343280]
Varendi 1998. Varendi H, Christensson K, Porter RH, Winberg J. Soothing effect of amniotic fluid
smell in newborn infants. Early Human Development. 1998; 51:47–55. [PubMed: 9570031]
Widstrom 1987. Widstrom AM, Ransjo-Arvidson AB, Christensson K, Matthiesen AS, Winberg J,
Uvnas-Moberg K. Gastric suction in healthy newborn infants: effects on circulation and
developing feeding behavior. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica. 1987; 76:566–72. [PubMed:
3630673]
Widstrom 1990. Widstrom AM, Wahlberg V, Matthiesen AS, Eneroth P, Uvnas-Moberg K, Werner S,
et al. Short-term effects of early suckling and touch of the nipple on maternal behavior. Early
Human Development. 1990; 21:153–63. [PubMed: 2311552]
Widstrom 2011. Widstrom AM, Lilja G, Aaltomaa-Michalias P, Dahllof A, Lintula M, Nissen E.
Newborn behaviour to locate the breast when skin-to-skin: a possible method for enabling early
self-regulation. Acta Paediatrica. 2011; Vol. 100:79–85. [PubMed: 20712833]
Winberg 1995. Winberg J. Examining breast-feeding performance: forgotten influencing factors. Acta
Paediatrica. 1995; 84:465–7. [PubMed: 7633136]
Winberg 2005. Winberg J. Mother and newborn baby: mutual regulation of physiology and behavior--
a selective review. Developmental Psychobiology. 2005; 47(3):217–29. [PubMed: 16252290]
Ziabreva 2003. Ziabreva I, Poeggel G, Schnabel R, Braun K. Separation-induced receptor changes in
the hippocampus and amygdala of Octodon degus: influence of maternal vocalizations. Journal
of Neuroscience. 2003; Vol. 23(issue 12):5329–36. [PubMed: 12832558]
References to other published versions of this review
Anderson 2003. Anderson GC, Moore E, Hepworth J, Bergman N. Early skin-to-skin contact for
mothers and their healthy newborn infants. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2003;
(Issue 2) DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003519.
* Indicates the major publication for the study
Moore et al.
Page 71
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY
Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy newborn infants
Skin-to-skin contact between a mother and her baby at birth reduces crying, and helps the
mother to breastfeed successfully.
In many cultures, babies are generally cradled naked on their mother’s bare chest at birth.
Historically, this was necessary for the baby’s survival. In recent times, in some societies
such as in industrialized countries more babies are born in hospital, and as part of usual
hospital care babies are often separated and swaddled or dressed before being given to
their mothers. It has been suggested that hospital routines may significantly disrupt early
mother and baby interactions and have harmful effects. This review was done to see if
there was any impact of early skin-to-skin contact between the mother and her newborn
baby on infant health, behavior, and breastfeeding.
The review included 34 randomized studies involving 2177 mothers and their babies. It
showed that babies exposed to skin-to-skin contact interacted more with their mothers
and cried less than babies receiving usual hospital care. Mothers were more likely to
breastfeed in the first one to four months, and tended to breastfeed longer, if they had
early skin-to-skin contact with their babies. Babies were possibly more likely to have a
good early relationship with their mothers but this was difficult to measure. The overall
methodological quality of trials was mixed. There was variation in how the intervention
was implemented, including the time of skin-to-skin contact started after the birth and
how long it lasted, the outcomes looked at and how they were measured. No clear
negative outcomes were reported in association with skin-to-skin contact.
Moore et al.
Page 72
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Risk of bias graph: review authors’ judgements about each risk of bias item presented
as percentages across all included studies.
Moore et al.
Page 73
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Risk of bias summary: review authors’ judgements about each risk of bias item for
each included study.
Moore et al.
Page 74
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Funnel plot of comparison: 1 Skin-to-skin versus standard contact healthy infants,
outcome: 1.1 Breastfeeding 1 month to 4 months postbirth.
Moore et al.
Page 75
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 08.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
