                           
Moore, D. A., Russell, A. E., Arnell, S., & Ford, T. J. (2017). Educators'
experiences of managing students with ADHD: a qualitative study. Child:
Care, Health and Development, 43(4), 489-498.
https://doi.org/10.1111/cch.12448
Peer reviewed version
License (if available):
Other
Link to published version (if available):
10.1111/cch.12448
Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document
This is the accepted author manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via Wiley at https://doi.org/10.1111/cch.12448 . Please refer to any applicable terms of use of the publisher.
University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the published
version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/pure/about/ebr-terms
  
 
Educators’ experiences of managing students with ADHD: A qualitative study 
 
Darren A Moore*1, Abigail Emma Russell1, Sophie Arnell2, Tamsin J Ford1 
1 University of Exeter Medical School, South Cloisters, St Lukes, Exeter, Devon, EX1 2LU, UK 
2 University of Exeter College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Psychology, Washington Singer 
Building, Perry Road, Exeter EX4 4QG, UK 
 
*Corresponding author: Darren A Moore, University of Exeter Medical School, South Cloisters, St Lukes, 
Exeter, Devon, EX1 2LU, UK (e-mail: d.moore@exeter.ac.uk). 
 
Acknowledgements 
Preparation of this manuscript was supported in part by NIHR Collaboration for Leadership in Applied 
Health Research and Care South West Peninsula (PenCLAHRC). The views and opinions expressed therein 
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NIHR, NHS or Department of Health. 
We would like to thank Marianne Tay for her help with data collection and coding. 
 
Accepted version of 
Moore, D. A., Russell, A. E., Arnell, S., and Ford, T. J. (2017) Educators' experiences of 
managing students with ADHD: a qualitative study. Child: Care, Health and 
Development, 43: 489–498. doi: 10.1111/cch.12448. 
 
 
 
 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
2 
 
Abstract 
Background: The symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder are associated with 
difficulty coping with the social, behavioural and academic components of school. Compared to 
medication and other non-pharmacological treatment, there is less evidence relating to school-based 
interventions to support children with ADHD. There is additionally an absence of any research 
focused on the experiences and practices of educators in the UK around how they work with 
children who are inattentive, impulsive and hyperactive.  
Methods: Forty-two educational practitioners from primary, secondary and alternate provision 
schools in the UK participated in focus groups or individual interviews that explored (1) their 
experiences of managing students with ADHD in the classroom and (2) factors that helped and 
hindered them in this endeavour. Transcripts were analysed using thematic analysis. 
Results: Analysis identified six themes: Broad strategies; student-centred; inclusive strategies; 
labelling; medication; and relationships. Participants’ experiences of managing students with 
ADHD drew upon a wide range of strategies that typically involved responding to individual needs 
in an inclusive manner, so individuals with ADHD could access the classroom with their peers. 
Participants spoke about three factors that helped and hindered managing students with ADHD. 
Labelling of students with ADHD was reported, with the negative aspects of labelling, such as 
stigmatisation, affecting the classroom. Educators reported mixed experiences regarding the 
helpfulness of medication; where helpful it allowed the use of strategies in the classroom. Although 
students with ADHD were described as having rollercoaster relationships, positive relationships 
were considered key to the support of children with these difficulties.  
Conclusions: This study suggests that factors such as attitudes towards ADHD, relationships 
experienced by students with ADHD and other treatments being delivered need to be carefully 
considered before strategies are put in place in the classroom. This study supports the need for 
further work on the implementation of evidence-based school interventions for ADHD. 
  
 
 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
3 
 
 
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a developmental disorder characterised 
by developmentally inappropriate and pervasive levels of hyperactivity, inattention and impulsivity 
(APA 2013). The core symptoms of ADHD may affect a child’s functioning in an educational 
environment and a diagnosis of ADHD is associated with poor school outcomes including poorer 
reading ability (Rabiner et al. 2000), writing and mathematics (Rodriguez et al. 2007), lower school 
grades (Loe & Feldman, 2007) and exclusion from school (Parker et al., 2015). Childhood 
hyperactivity has been shown to predict adolescent behavioural and academic problems, and may 
reduce the number of qualifications obtained (McGee et al. 2002). The school system, therefore, 
plays an important role in addressing the academic impairment of children with ADHD (Daley & 
Birchwood 2010). Indeed, the UK’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 
clinical practice guidelines recommend that only teachers who have received training about ADHD 
and its management should provide behavioural interventions in the classroom to help children and 
young people with ADHD (NCCMH 2009). However, teacher training specific to ADHD 
behavioural interventions is often considered to be lacking (West et al. 2005). 
 
Effective intervention to support children with ADHD involves both medication and non-
pharmacological treatments. There is a relatively small evidence base relating to school-based 
treatments for ADHD compared to that for medication or non-pharmacological treatments like 
parent training. Reviews focused on interventions delivered in the school setting have reported 
beneficial effects of a variety of non-pharmacological interventions, including  ‘academic’, 
‘contingency management’ and ‘cognitive behavioural’ interventions (DuPaul et al. 2012), 
‘behaviour modification techniques’ (Miranda et al. 2006), ‘peer tutoring’, ‘self-regulation’ (Trout 
et al. 2007) and ‘self-monitoring’(Reid et al. 2005) for both academic and behavioural outcomes. 
However, a more recent review reported some beneficial effects of non-pharmacological 
interventions for ADHD used in school settings, but noted that it was unclear which aspects of 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
4 
 
intervention packages are most effective for which students and in what contexts (Richardson et al., 
2015). 
 
This previous literature has focused on quantitative evidence relating to school-based 
interventions. Qualitative research regarding the non-pharmacological treatment of ADHD is 
scarce. One 2016 systematic review synthesised views from young people with ADHD, their 
parents and educators about the experiences of and attitudes towards non-pharmacological 
interventions delivered in the school setting (Moore et al., 2016a). The findings of this review 
highlighted the importance and complexity of the school context, which is essential to explore in 
order to understand what works and for whom. The same review revealed a gap in the literature for 
qualitative research focused on the experience of teachers in the UK as the majority of qualitative 
studies previously conducted had examined the experience of teachers in the USA, who are working 
in a different educational system. A gap was also identified for the views of educators other than 
teachers. The culture of inclusivity and key role that mainstream teachers play in provision for 
special educational needs students (Kennedy, 2015), means it is important to consider how UK 
educators respond to ADHD in the classroom and what helps or hinders their management of these 
students. 
 
The current study therefore aims to use qualitative research methods to explore UK 
educators’ experiences of managing ADHD in school. By using the term “educators” we explicitly 
set out to recruit the full range of practitioners who are involved in teaching and learning for 
children with ADHD in the school setting, not just their teachers. There were two specific research 
questions: 
1. 
How do educators respond to ADHD in the classroom? 
2. 
What are the barriers and facilitators to these responses?   
Method 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
5 
 
Participants 
 
Forty-two school practitioners that self-identified as having worked with children or young 
people with ADHD participated. Participants worked in nine schools in the South West of the UK 
who responded to either a direct email from a researcher or through a newsletter (223 schools 
approached). If a school expressed interest in participating, a named contact, often the head teacher 
or special educational needs coordinator (SENCo), acted as gate-keeper and liaised with the 
researcher in identifying staff with relevant experience who were interested in participating. Table 1 
details participant characteristics. Educators worked in primary schools (ages 4-11), secondary 
schools (ages 11-18), or pupil referral units (PRU; alternative provision, for students excluded from 
mainstream education). Practitioners held a wide range of roles and experience.  
Table 1: Characteristics of participants 
Characteristic 
N 
Female 
32 
Primary 
19 
Secondary 
7 
PRU1 
16 
Worked with ages 0-4 
14 
Worked with ages 5-11 
33 
Worked with ages 11 and up 
25 
Worked with <10 children with ADHD diagnosis 
13 
Worked with ≥10 children with ADHD diagnosis 
12 
Teacher 
16 
Teaching assistant 
11 
Coordinator or team leader or head of year 
11 
Pastoral support 
3 
SENCo2 
6 
Head/deputy head teacher 
5 
Notes: n=42; numbers may not tally as some practitioners had multiple roles within the school and some had worked 
with a large range of age groups. 1. Pupil Referral Unit. 2 Special Educational Needs Coordinator. 
 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
6 
 
Data collection 
 
Participants took part in either a focus group (n=39) or individual interview (n=3). We used 
focus groups where there was more than one participant from a school, otherwise individual 
interviews were conducted in order to capture the range of attitudes, beliefs and experiences across 
as many possible individuals and schools. Focus groups had between two and 12 participants. 
Interviews and focus groups took place at the school where the practitioners worked, a nearby 
school or in one case the local University campus. The use of focus groups rather than individual 
interviews where numbers permitted was convenient for busy participants with little time, the use of 
focus groups in combination with individual interviews in qualitative research is well established 
(Morgan, 1996). Focus groups allow breadth of experience and views around a topic to be elicited 
as well as exploring similarities and differences in participant views. Interviews can explore 
individual’s understandings in greater depth, thus the two techniques together allow for a rich 
understanding of both individual experiences and beliefs and how these are understood and 
expressed in the wider social context of the school (Bauer et al., 2004; Michell, 1999). Interviews 
and focus groups were semi-structured allowing for consistency in topics covered as well as scope 
to probe further in response to participants’ views and adapt the topic guide in light of interesting 
findings from previous interviews. The University of Exeter Medical School research and ethics 
committee provided ethical approval for this study. Pseudonyms are used throughout. 
Procedure 
 
All focus groups and interviews were conducted by the second author (AR). In focus groups 
she was assisted by either the third author (SA) or another research student who took field notes 
(MT). Participants provided informed consent before taking part and were given the opportunity to 
choose a pseudonym to be used for the study analysis and write-up. Each interview or focus group 
was recorded using a Dictaphone and lasted between 40 minutes and one hour, the length was 
determined by the amount of time participants had available. Both interviews and focus groups 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
7 
 
followed the same topic guide (available on request from contact author) which covered 
experiences working with children with ADHD including how they managed these students in the 
classroom. At the end of each focus group or interview, practitioners were given an explicit 
opportunity to add to or raise any other issues they wished to discuss. Incentives were not provided 
with the exception of light refreshments during the session.  
Analysis 
 
Audio recordings were transcribed verbatim by the two research students and transcriptions 
were checked by AR prior to data analysis. Transcripts were then read and re-read by DM and AR. 
Data were analysed using thematic analysis as outlined by Braun and Clarke (2006). Thematic 
analysis is a flexible method for analysing qualitative data used to identify, analyse and organise 
repeating patterns within data. Analysis commences by coding features of the data according to 
meaning, then organising these codes into patterns of shared meaning, known as themes (Braun & 
Clarke, 2006). AR and one of the two research students independently coded each transcript. 
Coding each transcript twice increased the reliability of the analysis. This coding was amalgamated 
using NVivo version 10 with similar codes being merged. The coded data were grouped into 
tentative themes and subthemes by AR and DM. These were reviewed to ensure that relevant 
extracts fitted under each theme and whether themes appeared across the data set. This process 
continued in an iterative manner until a thematic map was drafted. Themes were clearly defined in 
order to identify and describe their core aspects. Although this process is described linearly, in 
actuality analysis was cyclical and reflexive (Braun & Clarke, 2006).  
Results 
 
Analysis identified six themes that captured participants’ views regarding their experience 
of managing children who have ADHD in the classroom and factors that helped and hindered this. 
Themes and how they relate to research questions are shown in Table 2. 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
8 
 
 
  
 
Table 2: Research questions, themes and key issues 
Research Question 
Theme 
Key issues 
How do educators 
respond to ADHD 
in the classroom? 
Broad 
strategies 
 
Practitioners report using many different strategies that do not exclusively target the core symptoms of ADHD. Strategies 
tend to be ad hoc rather than recognised interventions for ADHD: “They all have like personalised timetables to try and 
meet their needs, not just the ADHD ones” (Jane, SENCo, PRU). 
Student-
centred 
Strategies used are student-centred, making individual adaptations so that the child can access the classroom: “I draw up a 
pupil passport with a picture, what the child likes, so it’s a very pupil-centred process, and then what tends to happen is 
like Paul says we make lots of modification and adaptations to the classroom” (Rose, Team Leader for Learning Support, 
Secondary) 
Inclusive 
strategies 
The strategies used are inclusive rather than involving withdrawal from mainstream teaching, which was seen as 
something to be avoided: “My role is to try to keep the child in the lesson” (Hannah, Teaching Assistant, Secondary).  
What are the 
barriers and 
facilitators? 
Labelling 
Practitioners recognise the process of labelling occurring for children with ADHD. While the label may aid understanding 
and access to support, the negative aspects of labelling “can sometimes just compound them into their difficulties, rather 
than pull them out” (Ryan, Pastoral Leader, Primary) 
Medication 
Practitioners see positive impacts of medication that can then allow the use of strategies. “if he hadn’t had his medication 
he was all over the place” (Sally, Teaching Assistant, Primary). However, issues include adverse effects and medication (or 
lack of) used as an excuse for behaviour. 
Relationships 
Practitioners see the relationships children with ADHD hold as key to their success in school: “the relationship is key, really 
important” (Rebecca, Family Support Manager, PRU) A good relationship can unlock the potential of children with ADHD 
and therefore social skills and relationships are targeted in the classroom: “we got him back into school and a lot of that 
was about building relations between the child and the teachers” (Jemima, Teacher, PRU)  
  
 
Broad strategies  
When asked about their experience of managing ADHD behaviours in the classroom during 
interviews and focus groups, participants listed a wide range of strategies that they employed 
successfully with students with ADHD. It was clear that participants considered flexible use of a 
wide range of support to be helpful for students with ADHD as opposed to a one size fits all 
response. Many strategies practitioners mentioned were preventative, aiming to avoid behavioural 
issues:  
We issue them with an exit card … so they’ll be allowed to leave the lesson, come to somewhere 
safe like the student support centre, just a bit of calm down time and then go back (Laura, 
Teaching Assistant, Secondary). 
It was also of interest that the strategies practitioners reported using with students rarely 
target the core symptoms of ADHD (hyperactivity, inattention and impulsivity). Practitioners far 
more often aimed to encourage appropriate classroom behaviour, increase study skills and help 
these students to work with their peers. Many of the strategies that practitioners reported using are 
therefore focused on skills that might be under-developed in children with ADHD. Skills that 
practitioners specifically mentioned range from academic to emotional, social and self-regulation 
skills:  
Laura: we use the NFER Nelson Emotional Literacy assessments and from that I can take where 
one of their skills, emotion or literacy skills, it could be motivation, it could be social skills, that 
we need to work on. We use also use the Boxhall profile so we can see different developmental 
strands and we can start with that so we can work on where we feel their weaknesses are and 
try and build on their strengths … (Teaching Assistant, Secondary) 
It is clear that strategies mentioned were sometimes used for other children in the class, not just 
those with ADHD:  
The year eight [class], we try to do lots of interactive learning and again they love all that sort 
of stuff, all of them do (Janet, Teacher, Secondary). 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
11 
 
 
A strategy that appeared to be more targeted at improving difficulties related to ADHD in 
particular was using physical activity. Teachers described using “movement breaks” (Rose, Team 
Leader for Learning Support, Secondary) and “lots of little things where they can get up” (Jane, 
Teacher, Secondary). This is mirrored in other literature where giving motion and movement is seen 
to be beneficial with children who are hyperactive (Langberg et al. 2011).  
 
The one strategy that practitioners noted does not always work with students with ADHD 
was rewards. While some participants used “any opportunity to reward or praise him” (Louise, 
Subject Coordinator, PRU), others noted that rewards met resistance due to students’ previous 
experiences. Some participants suggest it is “to do with the way that rewards are being used at 
home” (Louise, Subject Coordinator, PRU) where either rewards are not forthcoming: “so why 
would he want to earn it [at school]” (Monica, Teacher, PRU) or that children “think of rewards as 
blackmail” (Steve, Teaching Assistant, PRU).  
Student-centred 
While the breadth of strategies and the perceived effectiveness of the majority of these 
strategies were striking, as was the focus of these strategies upon the individual student. One 
example, mentioned in the quote below is a pupil passport, which documents a student’s key 
strengths, needs and the strategies and key adjustments to teaching and learning required:  
Once I’ve had the information from the paediatrician, I would put them on the [SEN] code of 
practice and I would draw up a passport with those recommendations  
 (Rose, Team Leader for Learning Support, Secondary). 
 
The strategies that participants described aim to help children with ADHD access the 
classroom and academic work. The following quote indicates that these student-centred strategies 
need to be flexible:  
And really the key things are always are they learning? So I’d constantly be testing that, to 
make sure that they were learning. If they weren’t, then you’d have to change it and do 
whatever you can (Jemima, Teacher, PRU).  
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
12 
 
Indeed, practitioners mentioned that they used the personal interests of their students with ADHD as 
a means to engage them in classwork:  
He was really good at kind of extreme sports and stuff so I kinda did a whole literacy topic 
around that and it meant that he was centre of attention for a good reason … so he did really 
well in that because it's what he enjoyed (Amy, Teacher, PRU).  
This is a strategy recognised in other literature, where teachers reveal that they take advantage of 
personal interests (Furtick, 2010) and students with ADHD express a preference for relevant and 
purposeful content (Partridge, 2009). 
Inclusive strategies 
 
Given that the strategies reported by participants in the current study involved making 
individual adaptations so that the child can access the classroom, these strategies were inclusive 
rather than involving withdrawal from regular teaching.  Some participants in the current study 
mentioned that they aimed to do the opposite: “My role is to try to keep the child in the lesson” 
(Hannah, Teaching Assistant, Secondary).   
 
There was further evidence that participants typically took an inclusive approach to teaching 
students with ADHD, as they discussed the importance of providing academic work that the 
students could complete: “it’s about looking at something and feeling that you [student] can actually 
do it”. Part of the motivation appeared to be that if classwork “is too challenging, they [students] 
will completely disengage” (Tarquin, Teacher, PRU).  
 
The strategies used by educators working with students with ADHD are inclusive, but are 
used with a range of students, not just those with ADHD, often leading to an approach tailored to 
the individual. It is clear that practitioners are not using evidence-based programmes designed for 
students with ADHD. 
 
  
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
13 
 
Barriers and facilitators 
As well as speaking about the strategies they used with their students with ADHD 
difficulties, practitioners also raised some factors that can either help or hinder the success of these 
strategies. Participants’ narratives revealed that labelling was often a barrier, medication was often a 
facilitator and that relationships could affect the use of strategies positively or negatively. 
Labelling 
Practitioners discussed the process of labelling,  or the process by which a label like 
‘ADHD’ is applied to a person, as important to managing pupils with ADHD. This label may then 
lead to stigmatisation from others and changes in behaviour that befits the label (Bailey & 
Thompson, 2009). Labelling can be helpful, as practitioners often saw a diagnosis as validating 
problematic behaviour as a medical condition, which assists children and their parents to understand 
their difficulties and gives further access to support in school. Indeed one practitioner said “I think 
having that diagnosis can help them access other support” (Maisy, SENCo, Primary).However, 
participants noted that a diagnosis alone is “Not a wand that can be waved” (Maisy, SENCo, 
Primary) and more often spoke about how the negative aspects of labelling can affect the classroom. 
Practitioners gave examples of how the ADHD label can be used as an excuse by students in the 
classroom:  
Sam came in last year when he was what, 9 or 10, said ‘it’s alright I don’t have to do that I’ve 
got ADHD’ (Kate, Teaching Assistant, Primary).  
And this may be encouraged at home:  
You do find that with the families … it’s an excuse, then the family come in and ‘he's got ADHD 
so that it explains it all’ and it's kinda like no it don't really explain it all there's more to it than 
just a label (Monica, Teacher, PRU). 
Participants saw that the diagnosis removes blame from the child, “almost validates the behaviour 
and gives them a reason for it” (Paula, Teacher, PRU); placing the responsibility for behaviour 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
14 
 
elsewhere was not seen as entirely helpful. Participants raised concerns about the seeming 
permanency of the label: “Is it going to affect your life forever” (Jennifer, Headteacher, Primary). 
Practitioners did not think that categorising children as having ADHD is always helpful, 
recognising that there are individual differences amongst their students with ADHD and therefore 
seeing the problem when they “all get put in that box” (Jemima, Teacher, PRU). Participants also 
see the “danger of labelling something [ADHD symptoms] that you see in all children at some 
point” (Rose, Team Leader for Learning Support, Secondary). 
 
Stigma around ADHD has been seen as a barrier to intervention use in previous research 
(Gwernan-Jones et al., 2016). In the current study, some practitioners “don’t think it’s nice to have 
that [ADHD] label” (Bryony, SENCo, PRU) because “so many people are … stigmatised by these 
sorts of things” (Tarquin, Teacher, PRU). One participant pointed out that other learning difficulties 
like dyslexia are more “socially acceptable” (Janet, Teacher, Secondary) than ADHD. Another 
participant spoke of “the shame” (Bryony, SENCo, PRU) surrounding ADHD and how this can 
lead students to be reluctant to ask for or accept help. 
Medication 
 
While drugs were not mentioned as much as the strategies practitioners implemented in the 
classroom, participants saw positive impacts of medication that can then allow the more effective 
use of strategies in the classroom:  
When he had his medication it gave him that time for us to be able to talk to him for him to then 
make a better choice and I think that’s what it was about, it was just giving him that time to then 
make that choice (Maisy, SENCo, Primary).  
However, practitioners raised some issues regarding adverse effects:  
Soon as the medication was put on it might as well have been a zombie and it was painful as a 
teacher because it’s like you’ve taken the personality of that child out (Tammy, Teacher, 
Primary). 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
15 
 
The mixed views regarding the helpfulness of medication seen here, match the views of parents in 
Ghosh et al. (2016). 
Relationships 
 
Practitioners considered the relationships children with ADHD hold as key to their success 
in school and therefore social skills and relationships are targeted by practitioners in the classroom. 
Participants saw developing relationships with students with ADHD as an important part of the 
teaching role.. Practitioners believe that good relationships in school helps children with ADHD be 
successful and can increase their self-esteem:  
Just really going like ‘oh that’s fantastic’ and you could see them fill with pride and then they 
want to do more for you and they want to try (Janet, Teacher, Secondary).  
Practitioners spoke about needing to use empathy in order to “Try to understand it from their 
[students with ADHD] point of view” (Wilbur, Teacher, Primary).  
 
Practitioners’ views here imply that their relationships with students with ADHD are 
fundamental and a component of any successful strategy in the classroom: 
Building a relationship … we know it’s key to trust (Ryan, Pastoral Leader, Primary)  
It’s very important that they develop that relationship, because it helps them to feel … normal 
(Hannah, Teaching Assistant, Secondary).  
However, relationships with students with ADHD are often challenging:  
My relationship with him [student with ADHD] a few months ago was really really difficult 
(Louise, Subject Coordinator, PRU).  
Practitioners reported the need for understanding and acceptance of the disorder as well as the 
benefits of acting as an advocate:  
It’s not a very positive experience of school, so you have to build a relationship which restores 
some self-esteem in this setting … I’m an advocate for them so I will go to parents evenings and 
things and back them up if necessary (Bryony, SENCo, PRU).  
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
16 
 
This is important as poor relationships between teachers and students with ADHD have been shown 
to have a negative effect on intervention experience in literature (Ljusberg 2011).  
 
The relationships students with ADHD hold with their peers were described by practitioners 
as “rollercoaster relationships” (Ryan, Pastoral Leader, Primary). Practitioners reported using 
positive peer relationships, “trying to put children together that would be able to work together” 
(Tarquin, Teacher, PRU).  
 
The importance of social skills is recognised across a number of previous studies where such 
skills were actively incorporated into interventions and teaching strategies with perceived 
effectiveness (Moore et al. 2015). In the current study, practitioners mentioned developing social 
skills so their students with ADHD “learn to interact with all different people” (Hannah, Teaching 
Assistant, Secondary) and can manage their social interactions.  
Discussion 
 
The current study used qualitative data collection and analysis to explore educators’ 
responses to ADHD in the classroom. Findings suggest that the participants used a range of general, 
inclusive strategies to help children with ADHD cope in school, as opposed to ADHD-specific 
interventions and withdrawal from classrooms. The strategies described often placed the focus on 
the deficit skills and needs of individual children with ADHD, meaning there was rarely recognition 
of how the school context can influence the impairments associated with ADHD or evidence of a 
response at the class or school level. Practitioners did not mention using recognised intervention 
packages (for instance daily report cards (Moore et al. 2016b)) with students with ADHD. Instead 
strategies tended to be used in an ad hoc and flexible manner, which is consistent with reports 
amongst the existing qualitative literature (Moore et al. 2016a).Given that the goal of educators 
might be to support children with ADHD in accessing the curriculum and coping with school, rather 
than treating symptoms per se, these more generic strategies are important tools. However, the lack 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
17 
 
of use and indeed knowledge of evidence-based interventions for ADHD, aside from medication, 
raises an important implication. Higher levels of awareness about ADHD among educators might 
support the development of ADHD specific strategies and interventions, and tools such as MindEd 
(https://www.minded.org.uk), are a welcome resource to support teachers who are seeking such 
information.  
Participants provided several factors that help and hinder their ability to manage students 
with ADHD in school, and it was striking that these functioned as both barriers and facilitators. 
Labelling, medication and relationships were seen to support children with ADHD in some 
situations; however, stigmatisation, adverse effects of medication and the rollercoaster relationships 
with peers can further complicate what is already considered by practitioners to be “complex and 
challenging” (Bryony, SENCo, PRU). Participants’ description of labelling and stigma indicate that 
it is the reaction to ADHD rather than use of the label that may cause issues and hinder classroom 
management. There is therefore a continued need to tackle stigma and negative perceptions about 
ADHD (Bellanca & Pote, 2013). While participants in this study considered these factors in 
isolation, it should be noted that these barriers working together can compound the difficulties faced 
by students with ADHD. For instance, Singh et al. (2013) note the stigmatising link between 
ADHD diagnosis and drug treatment and Gwernan-Jones et al (2016) discuss the way in which 
stigma might operate as a barrier to better relationships for children with ADHD. This suggests that 
a focus on social skills alone from practitioners in the current study may not necessarily improve 
relationships. 
 
Although to our knowledge this is the first qualitative study of UK educators’ experiences 
managing students with ADHD, we found many similarities to the experience and attitudes reported 
in previous studies sampling participants from other countries and educational systems. Previous 
studies have noted that students with ADHD can be resistant to rewards (Wong, 2004). The view of 
participants that work needs to be suitably achievable but challenging is seen in other literature 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
18 
 
(Rafalovich, 2004). As for the current study, labelling is not necessarily seen as purely negative in 
other literature either. Rafalovich (2004) noted that teachers have varied opinions on the 
effectiveness of labelling, ranging from damaging to the child’s self-esteem to a necessary precursor 
for effective school-based treatment. . Houghton et al.’s (2006) also recognised the importance of 
the student-teacher relationship, which were seen to be at the heart of effective strategies for 
students with ADHD.  
 
There are some noticeable differences between the views reported by educators here, 
compared to other samples. The practitioners in the current study favoured inclusive strategies, in 
contrast, previous literature suggests that educators believe that withdrawing children with ADHD 
from their regular classroom to allow for specialised learning is beneficial (e.g. Hillman 2011; 
Nowacek & Mamlin, 2007). This may reflect policy movements encouraging inclusion for students 
with special educational needs in the UK (Kennedy, 2015). Participants reported promoting positive 
peer relationships, whereas teachers in Houghton et al.’s (2006) study expressed little sympathy for 
experiences of peer rejection faced by students with ADHD. Educators in the current study tended 
to speak positively about how they manage ADHD in the classroom and did not explicitly report 
that they lacked knowledge or guidance regarding working with students with ADHD as has been 
reported (see Ljusberg 2011). Educators noted that medication often enables their strategies, but 
primary school teachers in Moldavsky et al.’s (2014) study reported typically negative views about 
medication for ADHD. The majority of the previous research occurred in countries other than the 
UK and therefore in different educational systems, which may explain some variability in findings 
compared to the current study. 
Strengths of the methods included the inclusion of a variety of schools and practitioner 
roles. The broad nature of the semi-structured interview schedule meant that the themes reported 
above were not an artefact of the research question or the questions posed. Limitations of the study 
include the generalisability of findings; given the study was conducted in a relatively small 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
19 
 
geographical area, and that the sample cannot be inferred to be representative of all educational 
practitioners, indeed there were more primary and special educational practitioners than would be 
representative of all schools approached. The use of both focus groups and interviews allowed for 
richer data, as focus groups often contained descriptions of experience from multiple staff, while the 
individual interviews typically provided more detailed responses. One noticeable difference 
between the current findings and other papers with different populations appears to be the wide 
range of strategies used and the perceived success participants have in managing ADHD in the 
current study. This could be attributed to the volunteer sample, where practitioners with more 
positive views may have agreed to participate.  
This qualitative study has implications for intervention design. It is important that ADHD 
difficulties are remediated given the relatively high number of children that experience such 
impairments and the lasting educational deficits these children face (Daley & Birchwood 2010). 
Educators report using general strategies with their students with ADHD that are not often focused 
on the core symptoms of the disorder. We therefore recommend that the implementation of 
evidence-based school-based interventions for ADHD needs further research (Owens et al., 2014; 
Eiraldi et al., 2012). However, the strategies used by practitioners to target the skill deficits of 
individual students with ADHD are important to retain alongside interventions focused on ADHD 
symptoms. Therefore, we perhaps need to consider the development and testing of a range of more 
flexible intervention components that can be applied as required for the individual in question rather 
than intervention packages aimed at anyone with the disorder. Given the seeming importance of 
inclusive strategies and relationships, interventions used in the classroom that involve peers may be 
more acceptable and hold more perceived effectiveness for educators. This study suggests that 
factors such as the stigmatisation of ADHD, relationships held by students with ADHD and 
interaction with any medication need to be carefully considered when classroom strategies are put 
in place. 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
20 
 
 
 
Key Messages 
• There is limited qualitative research exploring the experiences of educators, particularly 
within the UK, regarding work with students with ADHD. 
• Educators report using a range of  inclusive strategies with their students with ADHD that 
are rarely focused on the improvement of the core symptoms of the disorder or changing the 
context of the classroom. 
• Educators do not report the use of evidence-based interventions and implementation studies 
need to explore a more flexible approach to align with current practice. 
• The educators interviewed recognised that the labelling experienced by children with 
ADHD, medication use and their relationships can all both help or hinder the success of 
classroom management. 
• School-based strategies are needed that take into account the relationships, other treatments 
and potential for stigmatisation of children with ADHD. 
 
 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
21 
 
References 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 
Arcia E, R Frank, A Sanchez-LaCay, and MC Fernandez. (2000). Teacher understanding of ADHD as 
reflected in attributions and classroom strategies. Journal of Attention Disorders 4, 91-101.  
Bailey, S. & Thomson, P. (2009). Routine (dis)order in an infant school. Ethnography and Education 4, 211-
227. 
Bauer, K.W., Yang, Y.W., & Austin, S.B. (2004). “How can we stay healthy when you’re throwing all of 
this in front of us?” Findings from focus groups and interviews in middle schools on environmental 
influences on nutrition and physical activity. Health Education & Behavior, 31, 34-46. 
Bellanca, F. F., & Pote, H. (2013). Children's attitudes towards ADHD, depression and learning disabilities. 
Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 13, 234-241. 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in psychology, 
3, 77-101. 
Daley, D., & Birchwood, J. (2010). ADHD and academic performance: why does ADHD impact on 
academic performance and what can be done to support ADHD children in the classroom?. Child: care, 
health and development, 36, 455-464. 
Edwards, K. (2008). The learning experiences and preferred educational strategies of children who have been 
identified as gifted with ADHD. Australasian Journal of Gifted Education, 17, 15-22. 
Einarsdottir, J. (2008). Teaching children with ADHD: Icelandic early childhood teachers' perspectives. 
Early Child Development and Care 178, 375-397. 
Eiraldi, R. B., Mautone, J. A., & Power, T. J. (2012). Strategies for implementing evidence-based 
psychosocial interventions for children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Child and 
adolescent psychiatric clinics of North America, 21, 145-159. 
Furtick, K. C. (2001). Successful Strategies Used with ADHD Students: Is an ADHD Classroom a 
Possibility? [PhD Thesis]. Capella University. 
Ghosh, M., Fisher, C., Preen, D. B., & Holman, C. A. J. (2016). “It has to be fixed”: a qualitative inquiry into 
perceived ADHD behaviour among affected individuals and parents in Western Australia. BMC health 
services research, 16, 141. 
Gwernan-Jones, R., Moore, D. A., Cooper, P., Russell, A. E., Richardson, M., Rogers, M., ... & Garside, R. 
(2016). A systematic review and synthesis of qualitative research: the influence of school context on 
symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties, 21, 83-
100. 
Hillman, M. K. (2011). An Examination of Teachers' Recommendations for Children with ADHD 
(Unpublished doctorate thesis). The Chicago School of Professional Psychology, Illinois. 
Hong, Y. (2008). Teachers' perceptions of young children with ADHD in Korea. Early Child Development 
and Care, 178, 399-414. 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
22 
 
Kennedy, E. K. (2015). The Revised SEND Code of Practice 0–25: effective practice in engaging children 
and young people in decision‐making about interventions for social, emotional and mental health needs. 
Support for Learning, 30, 364-380. 
Langberg, J. M., Vaughn, A. J., Williamson, P., Epstein, J. N., Girio-Herrera, E. & Becker, S. P. (2011). 
Refinement of an organizational skills intervention for adolescents with ADHD for implementation by 
school mental health providers. School Mental Health 3, 143-155. 
Ljusberg, A L. (2011). The Structured Classroom. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 15, 195-210. 
Loe, I. M., & Feldman, H. M. (2007). Academic and educational outcomes of children with ADHD. Journal 
of pediatric psychology, 32, 643-654. 
McGee, R., Prior, M., Williams, S., Smart, D., & Sanson, A. (2002). The long‐term significance of teacher‐
rated hyperactivity and reading ability in childhood: findings from two longitudinal studies. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 43, 1004-1017. 
Michell, L. (1999).  Combining focus groups and interviews: Telling how it is; telling how it feels.  In: 
Developing focus group research: Politics, theory and practice (eds. R. S. Barbour & J. Kitzinger), (pp. 
36-46). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Ltd. 
Moldavsky, M., Pass, S., & Sayal, K. (2014). Primary school teachers’ attitudes about children with attention 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the role of pharmacological treatment. Clinical child psychology and 
psychiatry, 19, 202-216. 
Moore, D., Whittaker, S., & Ford, T. (2016). Daily Report Cards as a school-based intervention for children 
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Support for Learning, 31, 71-83. 
Moore, D., Gwernan Jones, R., Richardson, M., Racey, D., Rogers, M., Stein, K., Ford, T., Thompson-Coon, 
J. & Garside, R.  (2016). The experiences of and attitudes toward non-pharmacological interventions for 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder used in school settings: A systematic review and synthesis of 
qualitative research. Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties, Online First, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13632752.2016.1139296 
Moore, D. A., Richardson, M., Gwernan-Jones, R., Thompson-Coon, J., Stein, K., Rogers, M., ... & Ford, T. 
J. (2015). Non-Pharmacological Interventions for ADHD in School Settings An Overarching Synthesis 
of Systematic Reviews. Journal of attention disorders, Online First, doi: 10.1177/1087054715573994. 
Morgan, D.L. (1996). Focus groups. Annual review of sociology, 129-152. 
NCCMH (2009) Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: Diagnosis and Management of ADHD in 
Children, Young People and Adults. Leicester and London: The British Psychological Society and the 
Royal College of Psychiatrists. [Full guideline] 
Nowacek, E. J., & Mamlin, N. (2007). General Education Teachers and Students with ADHD: What 
Modifications Are Made? Preventing School Failure 51, 28-35. 
Owens, J. S., Lyon, A. R., Brandt, N. E., Warner, C. M., Nadeem, E., Spiel, C., & Wagner, M. (2014). 
Implementation science in school mental health: Key constructs in a developing research agenda. 
School mental health, 6, 99-111. 
Ozdemir, S. (2006). The first step to success program: Implementation effectiveness with Turkish children 
with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Dissertation Abstracts International Section A: Humanities 
and Social Sciences, 67(6-A), 2115. 
 EDUCATORS’ MANAGEMENT OF ADHD 
 
23 
 
Parker, C., Whear, R., Ukoumunne, O. C., Bethel, A., Thompson-Coon, J., Stein, K., & Ford, T. (2015). 
School exclusion in children with psychiatric disorder or impairing psychopathology: a systematic 
review. Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties 20, 229-251.Partridge, L. (2009). Teaching Adolescent 
AD/HD Boys Through "Self-Sufficient Reward Control": A Sociological Investigation. Lewiston, New 
York: Edwin Mellen Press. 
Rabiner, D., Coie, J. D., & Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (2000). Early attention problems 
and children's reading achievement: A longitudinal investigation. Journal of the American Academy of 
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 859-867. 
Rafalovich, A. (2004). Framing ADHD Children: A Critical Examination of the History, Discourse, and 
Everyday Experience of Attention Deficit. Oxford: Lexington Books. 
Rodriguez, A., Järvelin, M. R., Obel, C., Taanila, A., Miettunen, J., Moilanen, I., ... & Linnet, K. M. (2007). 
Do inattention and hyperactivity symptoms equal scholastic impairment? Evidence from three European 
cohorts. BMC Public Health, 7, 327-335. 
Singh, I., Filipe, A. M., Bard, I., Bergey, M., & Baker, L. (2013). Globalization and cognitive enhancement: 
emerging social and ethical challenges for ADHD clinicians. Current psychiatry reports, 15, 1-9. 
West, J., Taylor, M., Houghton, S., & Hudyma, S. (2005). A comparison of teachers’ and parents’ 
knowledge and beliefs about attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). School Psychology 
International, 26, 192-208. 
 
