 SHORT REPORT
Paternity testing under the cloak of recreational genetics
Nathalie Moray1,2, Katherina E Pink3,4, Pascal Borry1,5 and Maarten HD Larmuseau*,5,6
Direct-to-consumer (DTC) internet companies are selling widely advertised and highly popular genetic ancestry tests to the broad
public. These tests are often classified as falling within the scope of so-called ‘recreational genetics’, but little is known about
the impact of using these services. In this study, a particular focus is whether minors (and under what conditions) should be
able to participate in the use of these DTC tests. Current ancestry tests are easily able to reveal whether participants are related
and can, therefore, also reveal misattributed paternity, with implications for the minors and adults involved in the testing. We
analysed the publicly available privacy policies and terms of services of 43 DTC genetic ancestry companies to assess whether
minors are able to participate in testing DTC genetic ancestry, and also whether and how companies ethically account for the
potential of paternity inference. Our results indicated that the majority of DTC genetic ancestry testing companies do not
specifically address whether minors are able to participate in testing. Furthermore, the majority of the policies and terms of
services fail to mention the vulnerability of minors and family members in receiving unexpected information, in particular, in
relation to (misattributed) paternity. Therefore, recreational genetics carries both the risk of unintentionally revealing
misidentified paternity, and also the risk that fathers will deliberately use these services to test their children’s paternity without
revealing their intentions to the mother or any other third party.
European Journal of Human Genetics (2017) 25, 768–770; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2017.31; published online 8 March 2017
INTRODUCTION
Genetic ancestry testing refers to the association of a person’s origin
(based on his or her DNA data) with the geographic location(s) of
presumed ancestors, which is inferred through comparison with
contemporary populations living in these locations.1 Due to the large
public interest, the direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic ancestry testing
industry is an economic growth sector.2,3 As of early 2016, there have
been more than three million tests sold.3 DTC companies widely
advertise a variety of genetic and genomic ancestry tests. First, multiple
unlinked diploid markers on autosomal DNA (atDNA), which are
inherited from both parents, have been used for assessing patterns of
genetic variation in worldwide human populations.4 Second, ‘lineage
analysis’ represents a generational narrative about one’s relatives
through maternal and paternal lines of descent.5 Mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) provides information about the female–female
transmitted lineage (males also inherit mtDNA from their mother
but do not transmit it to their offspring), whereas the Y chromosome
is informative about the male-to-male transmitted lineage.6
Although genetic ancestry testing is often categorised under
‘recreational genetics’, the increasing public interest in DTC tests has
been accompanied by growing concerns about the social, ethical and
scientific implications associated with ancestry testing.5,7,8 Research in
this field has covered issues such as genetic privacy and consent,9 the
use of DNA data for biomedical and clinical research3,7 and the
scientific validity of ancestry inferences.5 Ancestry assessment is often
wrongly perceived as the clear-cut connection between an individual’s
DNA and his/her racial or ethnic affiliation,10 opening up societal
challenges related to stigmatisation and ethnic group identification.2
Some authors have recently expressed their concerns regarding the
anonymity of donors and the biological parents of adoptive children in
the context of DTC genetic testing services.11–14 Given the increasing
number of DTC genetic testing companies and the potential impact of
test results on individuals, families and third parties, the American
Society of Human Genetics (ASHG) has recommended independent
consideration of the ethical implications of DTC genetic ancestry
testing.15
Considering the increasing attention being paid to the impact of
DTC genetic ancestry testing and to the implications of genetic testing
of minors in general,16 it is remarkable that the ability to involve
minors in these specific types of ‘recreational’ DTC tests has not yet
been addressed. Current available DTC genetic ancestry tests, which
make use of atDNA and Y-chromosomal markers have the intrinsic
potential to easily reveal whether participants are related.5,6 Therefore,
minors are particularly vulnerable as a result of the potential for
circumstances to reveal misattributed paternity, which could lead to
substantial social, psychological and educational consequences for
them.17 Furthermore, it will also be an emotionally distressing finding
for all other parties involved, including the mother, the social father,
the biological father and the close family network.18,19
Owing to these (negative) implications for minors, the research
question of this study is whether and how DTC genetic ancestry
testing companies account ethically for the potential use of their
services for minors for (misattributed) paternity questions and
paternity inferences. In addressing this question, we provide an
explorative, descriptive analysis of publicly available privacy policies
and terms of services for a well-defined sample of DTC genetic
ancestry testing companies. The following questions guided the
analysis: (i) are DTC genetic ancestry companies clear in their policies
1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 2AZ Maria Middelares, Gent, Belgium; 3Family and Population Studies, Centre of Sociological Research,
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 4Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of Anthropology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 5Leuven Institute for Genomics and Society (LIGAS),
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 6Forensic Biomedical Sciences, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
*Correspondence: Dr MHD Larmuseau, Forensic Biomedical Sciences, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU Leuven, Kapucijnenvoer 33, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
Tel: +32 16 33 66 63; Fax: +32 (0) 16 32 45 75; E-mail: maarten.larmuseau@kuleuven.be
Received 10 December 2016; revised 1 February 2017; accepted 7 February 2017; published online 8 March 2017
European Journal of Human Genetics (2017) 25, 768–770
& 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved 1018-4813/17
www.nature.com/ejhg
 about whether or not minors are able to participate in testing?; (ii) to
what extent do DTC genetic ancestry testing companies refer to the
ethical and social considerations of handling the data of minors for
paternity testing in general and paternity inference in particular?
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The companies that were included in this analysis were obtained from earlier
lists published by Royal et al.,5 Howard et al,20 and by the International Society
of Genetic Genealogy (ISOGG hereafter; www.isogg.com, 20 January 2016). We
only included companies with a working English website that are providing
genetic and genomic testing services for ancestry purposes. The final list
included 43 DTC companies.
The privacy policies, terms of services and the frequently asked questions
(FAQ) sections of the companies’ websites addressing the issue of genetic
testing in minors, were analysed in January/February 2016. In addition, all
information provided regarding the potential for paternity inferences and the
sensitive nature of this type of information was collected.
For clustering the companies’ policies and statements addressing the issues of
genetic testing of minors, an adaptation of the classification of Borry et al21 was
used: (i) companies that do not provide any information about testing of
minors; (ii) companies that accept testing of minors; (iii) companies pointing
out that their website is not aimed at minors but are not clear regarding their
acceptance of DNA samples from minors; (iv) companies suggesting that their
services are not meant for minors; and (v) companies with ambiguous or
contradictory information regarding the participation of minors.
RESULTS
The websites of 43 DTC companies were analysed (see Supplementary
Table S1). Their testing portfolios ranged from ancestry and paternity
testing to genetic testing services capable of testing genetic predisposi-
tion to diseases, addictions, allergies or athletic performance (N = 11);
predicting specific physical traits (N = 3); and providing evidence for
adultery of one’s partner based on collected items, for example,
underwear (N = 6). Only 12 of 43 DTC companies (27.9%) offered
genetic ancestry testing services exclusively. Paternity testing services
were offered by 23 (53.5%) out of 43 DTC companies (see
Supplementary Table S2).
The analysis showed that 20 (46.5%) out of 43 companies did not
provide any information about testing of minors for their genetic
ancestry tests (class 1); 18 companies (41.9%) accepted testing of
minors (class 2); two companies (4.7%) pointed out that their website
was not aimed at minors but were not clear concerning the acceptance
of DNA samples from minors (class 3); one company (2.3%) implied
that their services were not meant for minors (class 4); and two
companies (4.7%) were ambiguous or provided contradictory informa-
tion regarding their acceptance of the participation of minors (class 5).
As an illustration of the last class, the following two quotes were found
on the website of one company: ‘How old does a child need to be to
perform a DNA test? A newborn infant can be tested. Taking a sample
with a buccal swab is painless, and is not traumatic for the child
(Website FAQ).’ and ‘We do not intentionally gather information
about visitors who are under the age of 18. If you are under the age of
18 you should not use our site or service (Privacy policy, 8. A note
about children).’ These quotes show that the company concurrently
communicates that it accepts samples from minors (class 2) and that
the website or service should only be used by adults (class 4).
Within the 18 companies accepting the participation of minors, 11
explicitly referred to the need for the consent of one parent or legal
guardian, two companies mentioned that the customer must take local
laws into account and five companies did not mention any explicit
need for parental consent. However, there was no conformity among
the investigated websites in regard to either the content of the
information provided regarding the testing of minors or in which
section of the website this information could be found.
Overall, there were no companies in the sample that specifically
prohibited the use of the provided genetic ancestry testing services for
paternity testing. Only 10 (23.3%) out of 43 companies briefly referred
to the notion that unexpected or sensitive results may arise from testing,
although in vague and general terms. Only 3 out of these 10 companies
explicitly mention the possibility of finding out that your father is not
genetically your father when engaging in ancestry genetic testing.
DISCUSSION
The review of the publicly available privacy policies and terms of
services of 43 DTC genetic ancestry testing companies clearly showed
that information regarding the testing of minors is either absent or
difficult to locate on the companies’ websites. The same applies to
advising the consumer of the possible risk of identifying misattributed
paternity. In the first place, it is intriguing that only 18 out of 43 DTC
companies (41.9%) clearly state whether or not minors are able to
participate in genetic ancestry testing. The finding that almost half of
the companies in the sample do not provide information regarding
their stance on testing minors is in line with previous studies in the
context of DTC genetic testing for medical purposes,20,21 although the
ASHG has raised this issue in the context of consent for the genetic
testing of minors. Next, only three DTC genetic ancestry testing
companies refer to the fact that these tests have the potential to reveal
misattributed paternity and then go on to mention some ethical and
social considerations in handling the data of minors for paternity
testing. Therefore, the large majority of the companies pay no attention
at all to the possible implications of the test results for minors, where a
finding of non-paternity may apply to their parents, or for unknown
individuals who may come into the picture as a result of a focused
genetic ancestry database search to biologically related individuals.6 Of
course, our study is limited by the very nature of looking at written
company policies, which may not represent actual company practices
and do not cover additional information that may be given throughout
the process of providing the test kits. Nevertheless, consumers need to
be sufficiently informed before they buy genetic tests, especially when
the results of those tests carry the risk of negatively affecting their
personal relationships and the stability of their family.
As DTC genetic ancestry testing companies do not systematically
mention the potential they carry to reveal misattributed paternity, it
means that they are in fact paternity tests in disguise when a minor
and the attributed father (or a close family member of the father) are
both being tested. Therefore, ancestry testing carries the risk of
revealing misidentified paternity unexpectedly, but also the risk that
fathers may intentionally use the service to secretly test their paternity.
Unexpected findings of misidentified paternity are a well-recognised
issue in genetic testing.17 Anderson22 reported levels around 1–2% in
contemporary human populations of so-called extra-pair paternity
(EPP). Based on recent genetic genealogical studies, these rates seem to
be constant over the last centuries and across nations.23,24 Therefore,
the detection of an unexpected misattributed paternity is always a
potential outcome when related persons participate in genetic ancestry
testing together. Nevertheless, consumers of DTC genetic ancestry
tests have no reasonable access to appropriate support in cases where
unexpected results could have a strong psychological impact.17
Therefore, participants should always be warned of the potential for
the identification of misattributed paternity, especially when (highly
vulnerable) minors are involved.
As consumers do not need to be explicit about their reasons for
genetic ancestry testing, the implications of genetic testing of minors in
Genetic ancestry testing in minors
N Moray et al
769
European Journal of Human Genetics
 general, and the potential for paternity inference in particular, may be
underestimated. More specifically, attributed fathers may involve their
children in testing to confirm their paternity if they have doubts about
their biological relatedness. Along the same line, minors themselves
may have doubts about their parental ancestry and seek confirmation
through the use of DTC genetic ancestry testing services when another
member of the family has already done the test. As none of the 43
analysed DTC genetic ancestry testing companies asked for the
consent of both parents or specifically of the mother, those tests can
easily be used as paternity tests in disguise without raising suspi-
cions in the mother or third parties. This possibility of testing
paternity under the name of ‘recreational genetics’ might be proble-
matic in some countries where regulations regarding paternity
testing recommend the mother’s consent (eg, UK; http://www.bma.
org.uk/advice/employment/ethics/children-and-young-people/paternity-
testing—Accessed 26 November 2016) or require the consent of both
parents (eg, Switzerland; http://www.ch.ch/en/paternity-test/—Accessed
26 November 2016). France is even more strict: doubtful fathers
attempting to infer paternity through genetic testing without a court
order or without the explicit consent of the mother risk a sentence
of detention (http://www.avoiceformen.com/mens-rights/france-upholds-
the-ban-on-paternity-tests/—Accessed 26 November 2016).
Our analysis demonstrates the importance of developing an
industry standard concerning the testing of minors and (misattrib-
uted) paternity as an unexpected finding in the context of DTC genetic
ancestry testing. Regarding paternity testing, the following recommen-
dations from the UK Departments of Health (UK Departments of
Health 2008; BMA Ethics Department 2009) seem to be useful in the
context of DTC genetic ancestry testing. First, individuals giving
consent to a test should first and foremost be fully informed of its
purpose and accuracy, and the potential consequences of the test
result. Companies should include information, which will prompt
people to consider the best interests of the child involved and the
future implications for themselves and their families in commissioning
a test, as part of their advertising, marketing and kit literature. Second,
it is recommended that—if applicable—the consent of both parents of
the minor is required to avoid a lack of awareness in one of the
parents. In the case of a minor who already understands the test and
its consequences, their valid consent to being tested should form a part
of the process. Finally, together with Phillips,25 we voice the need for
more transparency in the DTC industry in general and call for a self-
regulatory effort on behalf of industry leaders in the ancestry testing
market in the development of concise and to the point minimum
standards, which can serve as a code of conduct for DTC genetic
ancestry testing companies.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
MHDL is a postdoctoral fellow of the FWO-Vlaanderen (Research Foundation-
Flanders), and was supported by the KU Leuven BOF—C1-grant C12/15/013.
We thank three anonymous reviewers, Anna Schaman, Stephanie Green and
Kelly Nivelle for suggestions on a previous version of the manuscript.
1 Jobling MA, Hollox E, Hurles ME, Kivisild T, Tyler-Smith C: Human Evolutionary
Genetics. London/New York: Garland Science Publishing, 2013.
2 Jobling MA, Rasteiro R, Wetton JH: In the blood: the myth and reality of genetic
markers of identity. Ethn Racial Stud 2016; 39: 142–161.
3 Kirkpatrick BE, Rashkin MD: Ancestry testing and the practice of genetic counseling.
J Genet Couns 26: 6–20.
4 Su P: Direct-to-consumer genetic testing: a comprehensive view. Yale J Biol Med 2013;
86: 359–365.
5 Royal CD, Novembre J, Fullerton SM et al: Inferring genetic ancestry: opportunities,
challenges, and implications. Am J Hum Genet 2010; 86: 661–673.
6 Calafell F, Larmuseau MHD: The Y chromosome as the most popular marker in genetic
genealogy benefits interdisciplinary research. Hum Genet 2016 (in press).
7 Via M, Ziv E, Burchard EG: Recent advances of genetic ancestry testing in biomedical
research and direct to consumer testing. Clin Genet 2009; 76: 225–235.
8 Larmuseau MHD, Bekaert B, Baumers M et al: Biohistorical materials and contempor-
ary privacy concerns—The forensic case of King Albert I. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2016;
24: 202–210.
9 Wallace SE, Gourna EG, Nikolova V, Sheehan NA: Family tree and ancestry inference: is
there a need for a ‘generational’ consent? BMC Medical Ethics 2015; 16: 87.
10 Bolnick DA, Fullwiley D, Duster T et al: The science and business of genetic ancestry
testing. Science 2007; 318: 399–400.
11 Borry P, Rusu O, Dondorp W, De Wert G, Knoppers BM, Howard HC: Anonymity 2.0:
direct-to-consumer genetic testing and donor conception. Fertil Steril 2014; 101:
630–632.
12 Borry P, Rusu O, Howard HC: Genetic testing: anonymity of sperm donors under threat.
Nature 2013; 496: 169.
13 Lehmann-Haupt R: Are sperm donors really anonymous anymore? Slate 2010.
14 Harper JC, Kennett D, Reisel D: The end of donor anonymity: how genetic testing is
likely to drive anonymous gamete donation out of business. Hum Reprod 2016; 31:
1135–1140.
15 Hudson K, Javitt G, Burke W, Byers P: ASHG statement* on direct-to-consumer genetic
testing in the United States. Am J Hum Genet 2007; 81: 635–637.
16 Botkin JR, Belmont JW, Berg JS et al: Points to consider: ethical, legal, and
psychosocial implications of genetic testing in children and adolescents. Am J Hum
Genet 2015; 97: 6–21.
17 Davis DS: The changing face of ‘misidentified paternity’. J Med Philos 2007; 32:
359–373.
18 Gray PB, Anderson KG: Fatherhood—Evolution and Human Paternal Behavior.
Cambridge (USA): Harvard University Press, 2010.
19 Juengst ET: Genetic testing and the moral dynamics of family life. Public Underst Sci
1999; 8: 193–205.
20 Howard HC, Knoppers BM, Borry P: Are the kids really all right? Direct-to-consumer
genetic testing in children: are company policies clashing with professional norms? Eur
J Hum Genet 2011; 19: 1122–1126.
21 Borry P, Howard HC, Senecal K, Avard D: Health-related direct-to-consumer genetic
testing: a review of companies’ policies with regard to genetic testing in minors. Fam
Cancer 2010; 9: 51–59.
22 Anderson KG: How well does paternity confidence match actual paternity? Evidence
from worldwide nonpaternity rates. Curr Anthropol 2006; 47: 513–520.
23 Larmuseau MHD, Matthijs K, Wenseleers T: Cuckolded fathers rare in human
populations. Trends Ecol Evol 2016; 31: 327–329.
24 Larmuseau MHD, Matthijs K, Wenseleers T: Long-term trends in human extra-pair
paternity: increased infidelity or adaptive strategy? A reply to Harris (2016). Trends Ecol
Evol 2016; 31: 663–665.
25 Phillips AD: Only a click away—DTC genetics for ancestry, health, love...and more: a
view of the business and regulatory landscape’. Appl Transl Genom 2016; 8: 16–22.
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on European Journal of Human Genetics website (http://www.nature.com/ejhg)
Genetic ancestry testing in minors
N Moray et al
770
European Journal of Human Genetics
