 E794 
CMAJ  |  JUNE 12, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 23 
© 2017 Joule Inc. or its licensors
A
s a result of increased availability, use and cost of pre-
scription drugs, maintaining the affordability of medicines 
has been a challenge worldwide. Among the 20 Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) coun-
tries with gross domestic product per capita of more than 
Can$45 000, average per capita expenditures on pharmaceuticals 
increased by about one-third in the past 10 years and more than 
doubled in the past 20 years.1 Despite cost pressures in all such 
countries, some have achieved greater control of pharmaceutical 
spending than others: in 2014, total pharmaceutical expenditures 
per capita were less than $600 in 6 of these OECD countries and 
more than $900 in 5 of them — an interquartile range (IQR) of more 
than 50%.1 It is unclear what factors drive such differences in per 
capita pharmaceutical expenditures: utilization levels, product 
choices, prices or a combination of such factors.
The purpose of this study was to quantify the levels and driv-
ers of international differences in spending per capita on pri-
mary care pharmaceuticals — those routinely prescribed by pri-
mary care providers — within a selection of high-income 
countries with universal health care systems. Although much 
attention has recently been paid to the rising cost of specialty 
pharmaceuticals, health care systems must also manage the 
cost of more commonly used primary care prescription medi-
cines. These pharmaceuticals are expected to account for the 
majority of global pharmaceutical expenditure for the foresee-
able future because of their widespread use.2 We analyze the 
drivers of international differences in expenditure on 6 large cat-
egories of primary care medicines using economic methods 
developed to compute multiple cost drivers in the pharmaceuti-
cal sector.
RESEARCH
Drivers of expenditure on primary care 
prescription drugs in 10 high-income countries 
with universal health coverage
Steven G. Morgan PhD, Christine Leopold PhD, Anita K. Wagner PharmD DrPH 
n Cite as: CMAJ 2017 June 12;189:E794-9. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.161481
See related article at www.cmaj.ca/lookup/doi/10.1503/cmaj.170440
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND: Managing expenditures 
on pharmaceuticals is important for 
health systems to sustain universal 
access to necessary medicines. We 
sought to estimate the size and sources 
of differences in expenditures on pri-
mary care medications among high-
income countries with universal health 
care systems.
METHODS: We compared data on the 
2015 volume and cost per day of pri-
mary care prescription drug therapies 
purchased in 10 high-income countries 
with various systems of universal health 
care coverage (7 from Europe, in addi-
tion to Australia, Canada and New Zea-
land). We measured total per capita 
expenditure on 6 categories of primary 
care prescription drugs: hypertension 
treatments, pain medications, lipid-
lowering medicines, noninsulin diabe-
tes treatments, gastrointestinal prep-
arations and antidepressants. We 
quantified the contributions of 5 drivers 
of the observed differences in per cap-
ita expenditures.
RESULTS: Across countries, the average 
annual per capita expenditure on the 
primary care medicines studied varied 
by more than 600%: from $23 in New 
Zealand to $171 in Switzerland. The vol-
ume of therapies purchased varied by 
41%: from 198 days per capita in Nor-
way to 279 days per capita in Germany. 
Most of the differences in average 
expenditures per capita were driven by 
a combination of differences in the aver-
age mix of drugs selected within thera-
peutic categories and differences in the 
prices paid for medicines prescribed.
INTERPRETATION: Significant interna-
tional differences in average expendi-
tures on primary care medications are 
driven primarily by factors that contrib-
ute to the average daily cost of therapy, 
rather than differences in the volume of 
therapy used. Average expenditures 
were lower among single-payer financ-
ing systems that appeared to promote 
lower prices and the selection of lower-
cost treatment options.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  JUNE 12, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 23 
E795
Methods
Study design and setting
This is a comparative economic analysis of market research data 
from calendar-year 2015 for 10 selected, high-income countries 
with a variety of systems of universal health care coverage: 
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, the United 
Kingdom, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland. 
Summary information about populations, economies and phar-
maceutical policies in the 10 countries is provided in Table 1.
We chose these countries because they are all high-income 
countries offering universal health coverage, and all were part of 
a large study involving countries that have participated in the 
Commonwealth Fund’s International Health Policy surveys.3 We 
did not include the United States in this analysis because it is an 
outlier in 2 important ways: first, it has not yet achieved universal 
health coverage; second, it has such exceptionally high pharma-
ceutical expenditures that its inclusion in this analysis would 
skew comparisons among the 10 more comparable countries 
studied here.4
Residents of all countries except Canada were eligible for univer-
sal health coverage that included universal coverage of outpatient 
prescription drugs. Residents in Canada were eligible for universal 
public health insurance for medical and hospital care (including 
inpatient prescription drugs) but may or may not have had access to 
either public or private coverage for prescriptions used in the com-
munity setting, depending on their age, occupation, income and 
province of residence.5 The systems of drug coverage in Australia, 
New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the UK can be described as uni-
versal public systems. In these countries, prescription medicines are 
financed predominantly by government, and either government or 
an arm’s-length public body manages the selection and the price-
setting of medicines to be covered by the universal system of public 
financing. Prescription drugs in France, Germany, the Netherlands 
Table 1: Summary of pharmaceutical coverage and general approach to drug price regulation in study countries
Country
Population, 
thousands
% of 
population ≥ 65 
yr
GDP per capita, 
Can$ PPP
Drug 
expenditure per 
capita, $*
Dominant 
source of 
prescription 
drug financing 
(%)
General approach to 
controlling brand-name 
drug prices
General approach to 
controlling generic drug 
prices
Australia
23 778
15
58 880
535
Public (71)
Cost-effectiveness 
considerations for national 
formulary
Statutory price disclosure 
and reductions
Canada
35 852
16.1
55 992
824
Public (39)
Mix of statutory regulation 
and voluntary price 
negotiations by some payers
Statutory reductions relative 
to brand-name drug price
France
66 415
18.4
49 450
679†
Social insurance 
(70†)
Statutory regulation based 
on internal and external 
reference pricing
Statutory reductions relative 
to brand-name drug price
Germany
81 198
21
58 586
815
Social insurance 
(88)
Mix of statutory regulation 
and voluntary price 
negotiations
Internal reference-based 
reimbursement pricing
Netherlands
16 901
17.8
61 195
494†
Social insurance 
(80†)
Mix of statutory regulation 
and voluntary price 
negotiations
Mix of statutory regulation 
and preferred provider 
contracts with insurers
New Zealand
4596
14.7
47 047
365‡
Public (74)
Negotiated supply contracts 
for national formulary
Competitive tendering of 
national supply contracts
Norway
5167
16.1
81 497
522
Public (57)
Mix of statutory regulation 
and voluntary price 
negotiations
Statutory reductions relative 
to brand-name drug price
Sweden
9747
19.6
58 221
407
Public (72)
Cost-effectiveness 
considerations for national 
formulary
Statutory reductions relative 
to brand-name drug price
Switzerland
8238
17.8
74 112
694
Social insurance 
(84)
Statutory regulation based 
on internal and external 
reference pricing
Statutory reductions relative 
to brand-name drug price
United 
Kingdom
64 875
17.7
50 601
598†
Public (66†)
Mix of statutory profit 
regulation and negotiated 
patient access schemes
Statutory price disclosure 
and reductions
Note: GDP = gross domestic product, PPP = purchasing power parity. 
*2015 or closest year.
†Select figures are for total pharmaceutical expenditures, including expenditures on nonprescription medicines.
‡Latest figure (2007) for New Zealand projected to 2015 based on average growth rates in other countries.
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Health Data 2016.1 
 RESEARCH
E796 
CMAJ  |  JUNE 12, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 23 
and Switzerland are financed through multiple-payer, social insur-
ance systems with various statutory policies governing minimum 
coverage and pricing for brand-name and generic drugs.
Data sources
This study draws on data sets maintained by QuintilesIMS. Esti-
mates of the dollar value and volume of sales of medicines in each 
country were obtained from the IMS MIDAS sales database.6 This 
sales database captures more than 95% of the value of the global 
pharmaceutical market, either at the point of sale to retail and 
hospital pharmacies or at the point of dispensing to consumers, 
exclusive of confidential rebates from manufacturers of brand-
name products. All national sales values were converted to a con-
stant currency (Canadian dollars) by applying a constant exchange 
rate (first quarter of 2016).
The MIDAS sales database tracks sales volumes in terms of 
standard units of a medicine and kilograms of the primary active 
ingredient. IMS converted these figures into standardized days of 
therapy using average daily doses for each medicine as computed 
from MIDAS Prescribing Insights, which draws on information col-
lected from a panel of office-based physicians in each country. 
Although variations are small, estimated average daily doses of 
medicines differ by country, reflecting differences in local prescrib-
ing behaviours.
Drug categories included in the analysis
We studied the use and cost of 6 therapeutic categories of pri-
mary care prescription drugs based on primary indication: hyper-
tension treatments; pain medicines, including nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs and opioids; lipid-lowering medicines; 
noninsulin diabetes treatments; gastrointestinal preparations 
(primarily drugs for ulcers and heartburn); and antidepressants. 
Pharmacologic classes included in each therapeutic category are 
provided in Appendix 1, available at www.cmaj.ca/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1503/cmaj.161481/-/DC1.
We selected these primary care categories of medicines because 
they are widely used, typically purchased at retail pharmacies (as 
opposed to hospitals) and usually sold in solid dosage forms (as 
opposed to liquids or injections, for example). Focusing on market 
research data for drug classes that satisfy these criteria improves 
the accuracy of how the use and cost of the medicines are mea-
sured and of the accuracy of the analytic methods described below.
We focused our analysis on pharmaceutical products from each 
therapeutic category classified as prescription-only medicines in 
most markets. We therefore excluded pharmaceuticals commonly 
sold over the counter (e.g., acetaminophen for pain). We also 
excluded herbal therapies (e.g., caraway for digestive problems).
A total of 1035 different products were included in the study, 
identified by active ingredient(s) and whether they were brand-
name or generic drugs. These products were assigned into hier-
archical, mutually exclusive groupings using the World Health 
Organization’s Anatomic Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classifica-
tion system. In total, the data set contained 614 different drugs 
(merging brand-name and generic versions of the same active 
ingredients together) that fell into 81 pharmacologic classes 
within the 6 broad therapeutic categories.
Drivers of variation in expenditure
For each therapeutic category, we quantified differences in pre-
scription drug expenditure between each country and the aver-
age of the remaining 9 countries combined. The comparison with 
averages in the other countries rather than with the 10-country 
average ensures that the data from each country are not in both 
the numerator and the denominator of comparisons.
We quantified sources of international differences in prescrip-
tion drug expenditures per capita per year using methods devel-
oped to compute multiple cost drivers in the pharmaceutical sec-
tor.7–9 We estimated the effects of 5 sources of difference in 
expenditure that fall into 3 broad categories: volume, choice 
effects and price effects (Figure 1).
Total diference in average spending
Diference in average per capita spending on 
medicines between reference country and 
comparator countries combined
Volume of therapy
Diference in average number of days of 
treatment purchased from each of the 6 
therapeutic categories
Broad mix of therapies
Diference in average mix of 81 broad 
pharmacologic classes selected from within 
therapeutic categories
Narrow mix of therapies
Diference in average mix of 614 drug types 
(defined by active ingredients, regardless of 
whether brand-name or generic drug) selected 
from within pharmacologic classes
Generic use
Diferences in average cost of each of the 614 
drug types (defined by active ingredients) 
resulting from diferences in generic competition
Prices
Diference in list prices per unit of brand-name 
branded and generic products sold
Total
Choice efects
Price efects
Volume efect
Figure 1: Framework for determining the drivers of differences in expenditure 
on the 6 therapeutic categories of primary care prescription drugs studied.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  JUNE 12, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 23 
E797
Volume relates to the average amounts of prescription drug ther-
apy received by a population. It depicts how much of the difference 
in expenditure per capita between a given country and the remaining 
comparator countries is the result of differences in the average num-
ber of days of therapy purchased per capita. The remaining cost driv-
ers estimate the sources of differences in costs per day of therapy.
Choice effects describe the differences in the average daily 
cost of treatment between a given country and the remaining 
comparator countries that stem from differences in the average 
mix of medicines selected from within therapeutic categories, 
holding the relative prices of treatment options constant. Other 
things being equal, prescribing higher-cost therapeutic options 
will result in higher overall spending.
Among choice effects, the “broad mix” cost driver reflects the cost 
impact of decisions concerning the pharmacologic classes (third 
level of the ATC coding system) selected from within each broad ther-
apeutic category. This includes such choices as whether to use plain 
β-blockers (ATC code C07A), angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors (C09A) or other drug types for hypertension treatment.
The “narrow mix” cost driver reflects the cost impact of the 
selection of specific active ingredients within a particular chemi-
cal or pharmacologic class. This includes such choices as 
whether to use enalapril or ramipril within the class of ACE inhib-
itors; it is, in effect, a choice among a “narrower” range of thera-
peutic options than is captured by the “broad mix” cost driver.
Price effects are factors that influence the average unit cost of 
treatments without altering the quantity or type of active ingredi-
ent used. These cost drivers include “generic use,” which captures 
the average difference in unit costs between a given country and 
the remaining comparator countries that stem from differences in 
the rate of generic use when multisource products are prescribed. 
Price effects also include simple differences between prices in a 
given country and those in the remaining comparator countries, as 
measured by a sales-weighted average of differences in the unit 
prices of brand-name or generic versions of a product.
All cost drivers are computed based on a series of Fisher ideal 
price and quantity indexes that have the desirable property of 
“adding up” in the sense that they explain the total difference in 
spending between jurisdictions without residuals. The methods 
are described in detail elsewhere.7–9
For ease of interpretation, we used logarithms to convert the 
multiplicative results of the analysis into additive percent changes 
for each component. The additive cost drivers reported here will 
add up exactly to the 3 respective main cost-driver subtotals, and 
those subtotals will add up to the total differences observed.
Statistical and sensitivity analyses
We used nonstochastic measures; standard tests of statistical 
significance therefore do not apply. In advance of computations, 
we decided that differences of less than 5% in absolute value 
would not be considered significant.
We tested the sensitivity of results to the measure of daily 
doses versus kilograms of ingredient or physical units of drug 
products. Results were qualitatively similar, so we present the 
analyses based on the most intuitive measure of quantity: 
estimated days of therapy purchased. 
Results
Table 2 lists the levels and drivers of differences in estimated 
2015 expenditure per capita on all 6 therapeutic categories of pri-
mary care prescription drugs in each country compared with the 
other 9 comparator countries combined. The levels of expendi-
ture per capita on these classes of medicines ranged from $23 in 
New Zealand to $171 in Switzerland (IQR $56–$104). The 
population- 
weighted average expenditures per capita on these 
primary care medicines were $77 in the 5 countries with univer-
sal public systems of prescription drug financing, $99 in the 4 
countries with universal social insurance for prescription medi-
cines, and $158 for Canada, where financing is a nonuniversal 
mix of private and public financing.
The primary care medicines included in this study were used 
commonly but with differing frequency across the 10 countries. 
Measured in terms of average number of days of therapy pur-
chased per capita, the total quantity of the 6 categories of primary 
care medicines purchased ranged from 198 days of therapy per 
capita in Norway to 279 days of therapy per capita in Germany 
(IQR 223–256). Medications indicated primarily for treating hyper-
tension accounted for the largest share of days of primary care 
therapy in each country, ranging from 39% in Australia to 57% in 
Germany. Differences in the volume of hypertension therapy pur-
chased also accounted for the majority of overall differences in pri-
mary care medication used across countries (details on each ther-
apeutic category are provided in Appendix 2, available at www.
cmaj.ca/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1503/cmaj.161481/-/DC1.).
Average costs per day of therapy varied more significantly 
than the total volume of days of therapy purchased. Differences in 
costs per day of therapy across the countries studied were driven 
by a combination of differences in the average mix of drugs 
selected within therapeutic categories (choice effects) and differ-
ences in the prices paid for medicines prescribed (price effects).
Relative to comparator countries, the mix of therapies 
selected from within drug classes contributed to higher costs in 
Canada, Australia, France and Switzerland. In contrast, patients 
in New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, the UK, Germany and the 
Netherlands were prescribed lower-cost options from within the 
6 therapeutic categories of primary care medicines. Holding 
other cost drivers constant, the choices of drugs prescribed to 
patients in New Zealand and the UK were enough to make the 
average costs per day of treatment in those countries about one-
third less expensive than in the other countries.
Prices also added to international differences in average 
expenditure per capita. The list prices of medicines used in Can-
ada were about 61% higher than the average list prices in the 
other countries; list prices in Switzerland were 57% higher than 
those in the comparator countries. When drugs were available in 
brand-name and generic versions, Canadians were more likely to 
receive generics than residents of the comparator countries com-
bined. This reduced Canadian spending on the primary care drug 
classes by 9% relative to what it would have been if generic utili-
zation patterns in Canada matched those of its comparators. In 
Switzerland, however, use of generics was lower than in its com-
parator countries, which resulted in an additional 12% increase 
 RESEARCH
E798 
CMAJ  |  JUNE 12, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 23 
in average costs per capita in that country compared with the 
other 9 countries combined.
Detailed results by therapeutic category are provided in 
Appendix 2. Differences in the per capita volume of therapy pur-
chased in the countries studied had a greater effect on variations 
in average expenditure per capita for pain medications and for 
antidepressants than they did in other therapeutic categories. In 
the antidepressants category, therapeutic choices also had a sig-
nificant effect on average costs per day of therapy in the coun-
tries studied, ranging from choices in the UK that cost 55% less 
than the average in comparator countries, to choices in Canada 
that cost 52% more than the average in comparator countries. In 
all 6 therapeutic categories studied, Switzerland and Canada had 
the highest list prices for the drugs used in their health care sys-
tems. They also had the highest average expenditure per capita 
on each of the 6 therapeutic categories of medicine studied.
Interpretation
Across 10 high-income countries with universal health care sys-
tems, the average expenditure per capita on 6 of the largest cate-
gories of primary care medicines varied by more than 600%. The 
volume of therapies purchased varied by only 41%, which meant 
that most of the differences in average expenditure per capita 
were driven by differences in the average mix of drugs selected 
within therapeutic categories and differences in the prices paid 
for medicines prescribed. In New Zealand, estimated costs per 
day of therapy were about one-third the level in comparator 
countries; in Switzerland, estimated costs per day were nearly 
double the level in comparator countries.
Averaged across the 6 classes of primary care medicines stud-
ied, the volume of therapy purchased in Canada was about the 
same as that in the comparator countries; however, Canadians 
spent an estimated $2.3 billion more than they would have in 2015 
if these primary care treatments had had the same average cost 
per day in Canada as in the 9 comparator countries combined. 
About $600 million of this difference in expenditure was due to 
Canadians being prescribed costlier drug treatments from within 
these therapeutic categories, particularly in the categories of lipid-
lowering treatments and antidepressants. A total of $1.7 billion of 
the difference was due to these primary care medicines having 
higher prices in Canada than in the comparator countries.
Our finding that international differences in expenditure were 
not primarily a function of differences in volumes of therapy used 
is comparable to a 2013 study of cross-national differences in 
pharmaceutical spending by Kanavos and colleagues,10 who con-
cluded that the effects of differences in volumes of medicines pur-
chased in the US versus comparator countries were smaller than 
the effects of differences in prices and uptake of new drugs.10 Our 
findings concerning the relative prices of drugs in the countries 
studied are also consistent with published price comparisons by 
Canada’s Patented Medicine Prices Review Board.4,11
Table 2: Effect of cost drivers on differences in estimated 2015 expenditure per capita on all 6 primary care therapeutic 
categories in each country compared with the other 9 comparator countries combined* 
Driver
Mixed 
financing, 
Canada
Universal public financing
Universal social insurance financing
Australia
New Zealand
Norway
Sweden
UK
France Germany Netherlands Switzerland
Volume
Domestic expenditure per capita, $
158
91
23
59
56
81
106
97
49
171
Comparator expenditure per capita, $
91
99
99
99
100
103
96
99
101
96
Difference in expenditure, %
74
–8
–77
–41
–44
–22
10
–2
–52
77
Domestic days of therapy per capita
260
222
228
198
243
267
236
279
238
202
Comparator days of therapy per capita
253
256
254
255
254
251
258
245
255
255
Difference in days of therapy, %
3
–13
–11
–22
–4
6
–9
14
–7
–21
Difference in cost per day of therapy, 
percentage point difference†
71
6
–66
–19
–40
–28
18
–16
–45
98
Choice effects
Broad mix of therapies, %
11
14
–10
–3
–16
–11
4
–12
–11
11
Narrow mix of therapies, %
8
11
–23
–8
–13
–23
11
–5
–10
18
Subtotal
19
24
–33
–12
–29
–34
15
–16
–22
29
Price effects
Generic use
–9
6
–7
13
1
1
5
–3
–2
12
Prices
61
–25
–27
–20
–13
5
–1
3
–21
57
Subtotal
52
–18
–33
–7
–11
6
3
1
–23
69
*The comparator for each country is the population-weighted sum of all 9 other countries studied. 
†The percentage point differences for the drivers of cost per day of therapy depict how much higher or lower per capita expenditures are because of differences between the specific 
country’s utilization or pricing patterns and those of the other comparator countries. Some totals and subtotals will not add up exactly because of rounding.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  JUNE 12, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 23 
E799
Limitations
As with any analysis of international differences in the use and 
cost of pharmaceuticals, our study has some limitations. The data 
we obtained did not include information about confidential dis-
counts on the price of brand-name drugs, which are now common 
in most of the countries studied.12 The relative prices of brand-
name products in countries with extensive experience in negotiat-
ing confidential discounts, such as New Zealand,13 may be lower 
than we have estimated. Similarly, the relative price of brand-
name products in countries without population-wide processes 
for negotiating rebates on pharmaceuticals, such as Canada,14 
may be higher than estimated.
We did not account for differences in morbidity of the popu-
lations in each country. Some of the differences in volume of 
therapies used and, potentially, the mix of drugs selected from 
within therapeutic categories may reflect differences in the 
average age and morbidity of the populations. Australia and 
New Zealand, for example, have slightly younger populations 
and may therefore not have as much demand for some of the 
medications included in this study. Although this is an unmea-
sured driver of potential differences in utilization — and is con-
sistent with lower volumes of medicines used in countries with 
younger populations — differences in population age and health 
status among the countries studied here are relatively small by 
comparison with our findings concerning the differences in aver-
age cost per day of therapy received across those countries. 
Other factors — including international differences in pricing 
and reimbursement policies, prescribing guidelines and pat-
terns, and patient expectations — are likely to play a substantial 
role in determining costs per day of therapy, even when differ-
ences in population age structure or health needs are taken into 
account.
Conclusion
Substantial international differences in average expenditures on 
primary care medications are driven primarily by factors that con-
tribute to the average daily cost of therapy, rather than differ-
ences in the volume of therapy used. Average expenditures are 
lower among single-payer financing systems, which appear to 
promote lower prices and selection of lower-cost treatment 
options within therapeutic categories.
References
 1. OECD health statistics 2016. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; 2016.
 2. Global medicines use in 2020 — outlook and implications. Parsippany (NJ): IMS 
Health; 2015.
 3. Osborn R, Moulds D, Squires D, et al. International survey of older adults finds 
shortcomings in access, coordination, and patient-centered care. New York: The 
Commonwealth Fund; 2014.
 4.  Patented Medicine Prices Review Board: annual report 2014. Ottawa: Patented 
Medicine Prices Review Board; 2015.
 5.  Barnes S, Anderson L. Low earnings, unfilled prescriptions: employer-provided 
health benefit coverage in Canada. Toronto: Wellesley Institute; 2015.
 6. IMS MIDAS — Global analysis made easy. London: IMS Health; 2012.
 7. Morgan SG. Sources of variation in provincial drug spending. CMAJ 2004;170:329-30.
 8. Morgan S. Drug spending in Canada: recent trends and causes. Med Care 2004; 
42:635-42.
 9. The drivers of prescription drug expenditures — a methodological report. Ottawa: 
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board; 2013.
10. Kanavos P, Ferrario A, Vandoros S, et al. Higher US branded drug prices and 
spending compared to other countries may stem partly from quick uptake of 
new drugs. Health Aff 2013;32:753-61.
11. Generic drugs in Canada, 2013. Ottawa: Patented Medicine Prices Review Board; 
2014.
12. Morgan SG, Vogler S, Wagner AK. Payers’ experiences with confidential pharmaceu-
tical price discounts: A survey of public and statutory health systems in North Amer-
ica, Europe, and Australasia. Health Policy 2017;121:354-62.
13. Morgan SG, Hanley G, McMahon M, et al. Influencing drug prices through 
 
formulary-based policies: lessons from New Zealand. Healthc Policy 2007;3:121-40.
14. Lexchin J. Drug pricing in Canada. In: Babar ZUD, editor. Pharmaceutical prices in 
the 21st century. Cham (Switzerland): Springer International Publishing; 2015:25-41.
Competing interests: None declared.
This article has been peer reviewed.
Affiliations: School of Population and Public Health (Morgan), University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC; Division of Health Policy and Insurance 
Research, Department of Population Medicine (Leopold, Wagner), Harvard 
Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston, Mass. 
Contributors: Steven Morgan was responsible for project conception, 
the acquisition of funding and data, and the analysis of data. Christine 
Leopold assisted with the study design and the interpretation of results. 
Anita Wagner assisted with the study design, the acquisition of data and 
the interpretation of results. Steven Morgan drafted the manuscript, 
and Christine Leopold and Anita Wagner revised it for important intel-
lectual content. All of the authors approved the final version to be pub-
lished and agreed to act as guarantors of the work.
Funding: This work was supported in part by a research grant from the 
Commonwealth Fund [grant no. 20160646], a national, private founda-
tion based in New York City. The views presented here are those of the 
authors and not necessarily those of the Commonwealth Fund, its direc-
tors, officers or staff. The funding agency had no role in study design, 
analysis or preparation of the paper.
Accepted: Feb. 17, 2017 
Correspondence to: Steven Morgan, steve.morgan@ubc.ca
