 Open Forum Infectious Diseases
A Qualitative Study of ID Fellows Regarding Antibiotic Stewardship  • OFID • 1
Open Forum Infectious Diseases®
A Qualitative Study of the Real-world Experiences 
of Infectious Diseases Fellows Regarding Antibiotic 
Stewardship
Jake R. Morgan,1,  Tamar F. Barlam,2,  and Mari-Lynn Drainoni1,2,3
1Department of Health Policy and Management, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts; 2Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; 3Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial Veterans Affairs Hospital, Bedford, Massachusetts 
Background. Antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections are a major threat to public health, yet improper use of antibiotics remains 
high. Infectious Diseases (ID) fellows play a major role in antibiotic stewardship efforts, but there is little research on how they view 
stewardship activities. We performed a qualitative study to explore ID fellows’ experiences and perspectives regarding their antibiotic 
stewardship training and their role as future antibiotic stewards.
Methods. We conducted 17 in-depth interviews with ID fellows across the country. The interviews were transcribed verbatim by 
the study team, and we used grounded theory to generate themes from these interviews
Results. Fellows focused on concrete tasks of stewardship such as performing antibiotic approvals, didactic and case-based 
education, and interactions with other physicians and pharmacists. There was little focus on the broader public health relevance of 
antibiotic stewardship. Pharmacists, not ID physician leaders, were identified as fellows’ primary resource for antibiotic teaching. 
Several fellows suggested that stewardship programs should be led by pharmacists.
Conclusions. ID fellowship training is not successfully conveying the public health importance of antibiotic stewardship or the 
role of ID physicians as leaders of antibiotic stewardship programs. Fellows are more focused on concrete tasks related to steward-
ship. ID training programs and societies should consider developing robust curricula involving fellows in the operation of the stew-
ardship program itself, not solely in antibiotic approvals, emphasizing aspects of the program such as complex problem solving that 
fellows find most compelling, and emphasizing the important role these programs serve in improving public health.
Keywords. Antibiotic stewardship; qualitative interview; fellowship education. 
 
The increased prevalence of antibiotic-resistant (ABR) bacter-
ial infections is a growing problem. ABR infections are more 
difficult to cure than infections caused by antibiotic-suscepti-
ble bacteria, result in increased morbidity and mortality, and 
impose burdensome costs upon the health care system [1–3]. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) esti-
mates that at least 2 million individuals were infected with anti-
biotic-resistant bacteria in 2013, with 23 000 deaths attributable 
to those infections [4].
Antibiotic use is the main driver of antibiotic-resistant bac-
teria. Despite wide dissemination and awareness of treatment 
guidelines, inappropriate prescribing of antibiotics remains 
common [5]. Antibiotics are prescribed unnecessarily in 
30%–50% of cases [6]. Programs devoted to improving anti-
biotic use are known as antibiotic stewardship programs (ASPs). 
ASPs have been shown to improve prescribing, an important 
public health goal [7].
The responsibility for leading ASPs and promoting proper 
antibiotic use in hospitals often rests with the Division of 
Infectious Diseases (ID). In academic medical centers, many 
of the responsibilities for antibiotic stewardship are tasked to 
ID fellows. The way in which the fellow views his/her antibiotic 
stewardship education and activities may impact how the fellow 
views stewardship overall and whether leading an ASP is a future 
career goal. Yet there are no published qualitative studies of ID 
fellows’ experiences of stewardship. To this end, we conducted 
a qualitative study with the objective of better understanding 
ID fellows’ perceptions of their role as antibiotic stewards in the 
face of the growing public health threat of ABR infections.
METHODS
Instrument Development
Review of the literature and prior work on the subject [8] 
informed the creation of a semistructured qualitative interview 
guide (see the semistructured qualitative interview guide in the 
Supplementary Data). The guide included questions aimed at 
M A J O R  A R T I C L E
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial reproduction and distribution of the work, in any 
medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed in any way, and that the work 
is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofy102
Received 7 February 2018; editorial decision 26 April 2018; accepted 1 May 2018.
Correspondence: J. R. Morgan, PhD, Boston Medical Center, 801 Massachusetts Ave, 
Boston, MA 02118 (jakem@bu.edu).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/9/ofy102/4992019 by guest on 03 June 2019
 2 • OFID • Morgan et al
understanding the knowledge and attitudes of fellows toward 
antibiotic stewardship and exploring how the fellowship pro-
moted stewardship education, training, and implementation. 
The interview guide was pilot-tested with a second-year ID fel-
low. Following pilot-testing, the guide was updated to include 
new questions generated from the pilot interview, the structure 
was re-organized for better flow, and several questions were 
rewritten to improve clarity. The Boston University Medical 
Center Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved the research.
Recruitment and Data Collection
Fellows were recruited nationally through e-mail. One of the 
study investigators (T.F.B.), the director of the ID fellowship at 
Boston Medical Center, sent information regarding the study to 
ID fellowship program directors across the country and asked 
them to forward the information to their respective fellows 
(Supplementary Figure 1), although we were not able to ascer-
tain what portion did this. Any fellows interested in participat-
ing in an interview were directed to e-mail the study interviewer 
(J.R.M.). The only criteria for inclusion were that the individual 
was a current ID fellow and that another fellow from the same 
state had not already been interviewed.
Fellows who agreed to participate scheduled a time at 
their convenience for an audio-recorded telephone interview. 
Interviews took place between December 2014 and June 2015. 
Fellows were given a description of the study before the inter-
view and assured that their participation would be kept con-
fidential. To further protect confidentiality, the IRB granted a 
waiver of written documentation of consent, and no identify-
ing information was solicited during the recording. Interviews 
lasted a mean of 37 minutes, with a range of 28 to 50 minutes. 
To obtain a national perspective, we used iterative sampling, 
soliciting an interview from a different fellow from a different 
state until reaching saturation, where no new information or 
themes emerged from the data [9, 10]. Saturation occurred after 
17 interviews. Each fellow was compensated with a $50 gift card 
for his or her time.
Data Analysis
The audio-recorded interviews were transcribed verbatim. 
After each interview was transcribed, the transcription was 
checked for accuracy by the interviewer. The transcripts were 
then imported into NVivo, version 11, for coding and analysis. 
The principles of grounded theory were used to analyze the data 
[10]. To generate themes from the data, 2 members of the study 
team (J.R.M., M.L.D.) independently reviewed the initial 2 tran-
scripts to identify emergent concepts related to antibiotic stew-
ardship. The transcripts were reviewed line by line to describe 
important quotations and passages as codes. Through this 
process of refining existing categories, the resulting consensus 
codes better reflected the data. This yielded a comprehensive 
codebook containing all codes and definitions that was used to 
code all subsequent transcripts.
RESULTS
We interviewed a total of 17 ID fellows from 17 states across 
the United States (Supplementary Figure 2). The characteristics 
of the final sample are described in Table 1. Most fellows were 
male, white, and in their second year of training. The results of 
the analysis are presented in 3 distinct thematic categories that 
further our understanding of how ID fellows view the steward-
ship role: (1) fellows’ views of antibiotic stewardship as a set of 
discrete, concrete tasks, (2) fellows’ views of different provider 
roles in stewardship, and (3) fellows’ suggestions as to what 
would improve the antibiotic stewardship training in their fel-
lowship program.
Fellows’ Views of Antibiotic Stewardship as a Set of Discrete, 
Concrete Tasks
When asked about the role that stewardship played in the larger 
context of the fellowship program and in their future career 
development, fellows spoke about the discrete components of 
the role and answered with a list of specific tasks associated 
with stewardship responsibilities such as carrying the antibiotic 
approval pagers. They also discussed their role in providing 
antibiotic recommendations and tactics to de-escalate antibiotic 
use during consultations. Fellows did not refer to stewardship in 
prevention or public health terms. The most common responses 
centered on the frustrations and burden of having to carry the 
antibiotic pager and respond to pages at all hours of the night. 
In contrast, fellows enjoyed antibiotic discussions in the context 
of formal patient consultations where antibiotic recommenda-
tions were a frequent component. Fellows noted that antibiotic 
discussions as part of formal consultation, unlike those related 
to the antibiotic pager, were collaborative with the consulting 
physician(s), and fellows were able to educate other providers 
as they worked together to provide the best clinical care. They 
particularly prefered consults they considered “highly cerebral” 
Table 1. Characteristics of Infectious Disease Fellows
Gender
No.
%
 Male
12
71
 Female
5
29
Race/ethnicity
 White
11
65
 Hispanic
2
12
 Asian
4
24
Region
 Northeast
4
24
 Midwest
4
24
 South
5
29
 West
4
24
Year in fellowship
 1
4
24
 2
11
65
 3
2
12
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/9/ofy102/4992019 by guest on 03 June 2019
 A Qualitative Study of ID Fellows Regarding Antibiotic Stewardship • OFID • 3
(Fellows 3, 4, 10) that involved complex problem-solving skills 
to those that were described as routine antibiotic management.
When describing the importance of stewardship, it was also 
viewed as very individual and patient-specific, rather than 
as part of a larger public health goal. For example, 1 fellow 
observed that often his role is simply to “provide reassurance…
in not treating something that they think may be an infection 
but actually isn’t” (Fellow 5). When speaking of their future 
careers in ID, fellows’ descriptions similarly had a narrow focus, 
such as needing to be “able to more accurately prescribe the best 
antibiotic (Fellow 4).” Although 1 fellow mentioned that add-
itional formal ASP education may be beneficial for the broader 
hospital community (Fellow 3), this was in the context of reduc-
ing the number of antibiotic pages and did not appear to be 
related to a concern for public health.
Fellows’ Views of Different Provider Roles in Stewardship
When describing stewardship activities, all fellows spoke a great 
deal about their interactions with other clinical staff. Largely 
absent from fellows’ discussions of other providers was any dis-
cussion of the importance of the ID physician ASP leader or 
other ID faculty member in stewardship directly and in men-
toring them as future stewards. In fact, 1 fellow commented 
that a strength of his program was that they didn’t “need to spe-
cifically have the attendings” because the fellows were able to 
handle the stewardship program, noting that attendings often 
did not have the “time or willingness to teach” (Fellow 8). ID 
physicians were most discussed when fellows needed approval 
of an attending to release a particular antibiotic (Fellows 2, 3, 9). 
These fellows described the stewardship leadership and men-
toring role as being primarily performed by pharmacists. When 
asked if he felt prepared for the stewardship responsibilities he 
faced during his first year of fellowship, 1 fellow responded:
Oh no, that’s why we had our trusty pharmacist. I owe her 
a lot of what I know now. She would tell me, “Yeah, you 
gotta call them and ask them this way”
…. I’ve been learn-
ing from her a lot, so without her it would be really, really, 
really tough. So yeah, we will always have the pharmacist. 
(Fellow 8)
There was widespread sentiment that the pharmacist was a 
knowledgeable source that could help fellows answer com-
plex questions around antibiotic choice, dosing, and duration. 
Fellows spoke about how programs that did not have a fellow 
carry an antibiotic pager for release of restricted antibiotics 
often used pharmacists in what the fellows described as the 
stewardship role. In fact, some fellows suggested that much of 
the stewardship role could be taken on by pharmacists instead 
of ID physicians (Fellows 4, 12, 17), whereas no one specifi-
cally mentioned the benefit of ID physician ASP leadership. 
For example, 1 fellow suggested that a program run by nurse 
practitioners or pharmacists would have advantages, and he 
portrayed ID attending involvement as potentially biased or 
disinterested:
It’s having other people that work with patients have a say, 
like pharmacists, nurses. I really like that model. And hav-
ing…an independent group…not biased in terms of mak-
ing antibiotic choices. I think more of that would be better 
than sort of the model where you just call the ID attend-
ing or the ID fellow and request an antibiotic, where we’re 
thinking you just want to get it approved and you think of 
it as a formality. (Fellow 17)
Although some fellows mentioned that their attendings were 
available to contact (usually for an approval; Fellows 7, 10, 11), 
there was little discussion of ID physicians as a positive source 
of antibiotic and stewardship information compared with 
pharmacists.
Fellows’ Suggestions as to What Would Improve the Antibiotic 
Stewardship Training in their Program
When asked for feedback about their stewardship experience 
in fellowship, several fellows expressed that although there 
was nothing explicit they would change in their program, they 
believed sharing their experiences could add to the discussion 
around the best way to conduct stewardship, and some cited the 
opportunity to share their experiences as the motivating fac-
tor in their decision to participate in the interview. For those 
with suggestions for change, 2 areas for improvement were 
identified: relieving the burden of carrying an antibiotic pager 
to approve restricted antibiotics and enhancing formal educa-
tional opportunities.
For those who had to carry an antibiotic approval pager, this 
pager was the primary source of burden in their daily routine 
and also the aspect they wanted to see changed. One fellow 
explained his main suggestion was to have a dedicated phar-
macy team to deal with the antibiotic restriction program rather 
than relegating that to fellows.
Fellows recognized the benefit of formal stewardship edu-
cation but felt that their programs often were not committed 
enough to the educational aspects of stewardship training. 
There was some recognition of the benefits of stewardship and 
a desire to be more involved with the ASP activities. This inter-
face with the hospital stewardship committee was suggested as 
beneficial not only to the fellow, but to the entire hospital com-
munity. Additionally, very few fellows knew how antibiotics 
were selected to be restricted. Often they knew of the committee 
that decided such things, but were unaware of the inner work-
ings (Fellows 3, 5).
DISCUSSION
This article responds to recent calls in the literature for qual-
itative research to better understand antibiotic stewardship 
[1]. The perspective of the ID fellow has not been previously 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/9/ofy102/4992019 by guest on 03 June 2019
 4 • OFID • Morgan et al
explored through qualitative interviews, and our study provides 
greater understanding of how they view and promote steward-
ship [11]. We found that ID fellows do not think of stewardship 
in terms of a broader public health benefit and do not clearly 
view stewardship activities as best led by ID physicians. Nor 
do they appear to look to the physician ASP directors or other 
ID faculty for antibiotic and stewardship teaching. Rather, they 
highly praise the ASP pharmacist as an invaluable resource, and 
several fellows believed that ASPs should be pharmacy-based 
programs. These results should be worrisome for ID physicians 
and their professional societies and for program directors.
The Infectious Diseases Society of America has sought to 
document and emphasize the importance of ID physician 
involvement as a way to improve patient outcomes [12]. The 
value of ID physician leadership for ASPs has been a particu-
lar focus. The Infectious Diseases Society of America and the 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology note the importance 
of both physician and pharmacist direction in the 2016 ASP 
implementation guideline [13]. Spellberg et al. recently pub-
lished guidance for making the business case for implement-
ing an ASP to hospital administrators [14], strongly advocating 
physician leadership. However, a survey by the CDC looking 
at implementation of the core elements of ASPs at hospitals 
demonstrated that the primary ASP leader was more likely to be 
a pharmacist (37%) than a physician (30%) [15]. Our findings 
suggest that the message about the physician’s role in antibiotic 
stewardship is not being properly communicated to ID fellows 
and that they are not being educated to be ASP leaders.
Our results also have implications beyond ID for the increas-
ing reliance on electronic forms of clinical management. We 
found that many trainees did not seem to understand the 
importance of their role in prescribing, instead seeing it as a 
mundane task that could be guided by electronic ordering sys-
tems or offloaded to a more efficient pharmacy model to take 
care of dosing, drug interactions, and other aspects of the pre-
scribing decision. Although computerized provider order entry 
(CPOE) has been shown to reduce errors caused by misread-
ing handwriting and providing useful on-demand information 
such as alerting providers to potential medication interactions, 
it can create a system of workarounds that values speed (get-
ting through the CPOE quickly) over thorough medical deci-
sion-making [16]. We see this in electronic health records as 
well, where copying and pasting notes saves time but creates 
potential risks for patients [17]. As other areas of clinical practice 
increasingly rely on electronic interventions (such as electronic 
pop-ups reminding providers of recommended tests or alert-
ing them to possible medication interactions), our findings in 
the context of stewardship offer important insights to the unin-
tended consequences of outsourcing clinical decision-making.
The lack of robust education about antibiotics and steward-
ship begins in medical school. In contrast to most pharmacy 
schools, which offer a semester-long course in infectious 
disease treatments [18], medical schools include only a few 
lectures about antibiotics within a broader course covering 
pharmacology. In a study by Abbo et al., medical students were 
surveyed about antibiotic prescribing and education. Ninety 
percent stated that they wanted more education on appropri-
ate use of antibiotics. Their mean antibiotic knowledge score 
was only 51% but varied significantly between the 3 schools 
surveyed, and only 15% had completed a clinical ID rotation 
[19]. In residency, young physicians receive limited antibiotic 
and stewardship education as well. In 1 report, although the 
residents knew that broad-spectrum antibiotics can cause 
adverse events, they did not connect those adverse events with 
increased patient morbidity or mortality and used those agents 
frequently [20]. We have shown that even in ID fellowship 
training, teaching about antibiotics and stewardship is not a 
priority. When asked about stewardship overall, fellows fre-
quently interpreted stewardship to mean antibiotic restriction 
programs and responding to requests for antibiotics. Fellows 
rarely discussed the societal importance of stewardship and the 
crisis of increasing prevalence of multidrug-resistant bacterial 
infections.
Based on our findings, we have 3 recommendations. First, 
fellowship programs may benefit from leveraging the aspects 
of the program that fellows found the most valuable—highly 
cerebral complex problem-solving and working with other phy-
sicians to provide the best possible clinical care and promote 
antibiotic stewardship. Ways to minimize the burden of the 
antibiotic approval pager and maximize the educational benefit 
should be sought, and future research should assess the burden 
of the fellowship workload overall; it is possible that the com-
plaints we heard regarding the antibiotic pager are symptomatic 
of feeling overwhelmed in general. Antibiotic approvals should 
be framed as educational tasks, and review of approvals with 
ASP directors as learning opportunities.
Next, fellows appear receptive to more formal education 
about antibiotics and stewardship; a robust curriculum should 
be instituted. Organizations such as the Society for Infectious 
Disease Pharmacists [21] and MAD-ID [22] have developed 
intensive curricula and certification by their organizations. 
Although physician societies are currently developing similar 
programs, they have not yet been implemented. Physicians have 
greater clinical training than pharmacists but do not receive the 
intensive instruction about each antibiotic’s mechanisms of 
action and resistance pharmacokinetics, spectrum, and dosing 
that pharmacists do. To best complement each other, physicians 
need to be confident in their antibiotic fund of knowledge. 
A curriculum can also teach trainees to understand the broader 
value of stewardship and demonstrate that stewardship isn’t just 
a series of concrete and sometimes tedious tasks but rather an 
effort to preserve the efficacy of antibiotics, reduce the emer-
gence of antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections, and provide an 
important public health benefit.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/9/ofy102/4992019 by guest on 03 June 2019
 A Qualitative Study of ID Fellows Regarding Antibiotic Stewardship • OFID • 5
Finally, programs should encourage fellow engagement by 
including fellows as team members of the antibiotic stew-
ardship team. Fellows often do not know how certain stew-
ardship decisions were made, such as restrictions of certain 
antibiotics. Inclusion of fellows in ASP activities and meet-
ings can help them understand the motivations for steward-
ship policies. Listening to and respecting their ideas could 
promote better stewardship education if fellows are invested 
in the success of their proposed changes. Some institutions 
have embraced new training strategies that enhance trainee 
engagement with educators to promote career aspirations and 
research dissemination [23]. This approach can be used for 
stewardship. ID physician ASP leaders can be role models for 
fellows considering their career options. We found that fellows 
often relied on the expertise of pharmacists and saw them as 
interchangeable (or more useful) than ID physicians. ID fac-
ulty should be ready to discuss antibiotic usage and defend 
their choices with evidence from the literature so fellows can 
learn to appreciate them as an important educational resource 
in this area. An emerging literature suggests that the success 
of ASPs is determined, in part, by managing interprofessional 
relationships, rather than focusing only on advice-giving [24], 
supporting the engagement of fellows in the hospital-wide 
antibiotic stewardship team.
This study has several limitations. First, as with any qualita-
tive study, the results are not meant to be generalizable; instead 
they represent an in-depth exploration of the attitudes and 
beliefs of the study sample. Second, because we interviewed fel-
lows, we only learned about the stewardship experience at an 
academic medical center. Stewardship programs at nonteaching 
institutions are likely different, and we were unable to explore 
those differences in our interviews. Third, although participants 
were assured of confidentiality and their responses appeared 
to be very candid, we cannot exclude the possibility of biased 
or socially desirable responses. Fourth, we do not know why 
these fellows chose to participate. If they specifically wanted to 
complain about antibiotic approvals, for example, it could have 
biased the sample. This was likely not the only reason every 
fellow had for participating, and through qualitative methods, 
we reached saturation of the themes and hopefully a good rep-
resentation of attitudes. Fifth, we depended on ID fellowship 
program directors to forward our interview request to fellows. 
We do not know how many program directors did this, and 
some fellows may have been unaware of the interview opportu-
nity. Finally, we did not collect information on which programs 
had a formal ASP educational component or track within the 
fellowship. Thus, we do not know if fellows advocating for more 
education were in programs that had instituted formal ASP 
training or those programs that had not. Future research would 
benefit from exploring the effectiveness of incorporating robust 
ASP educational components into ID fellowship. Despite those 
limitations, this in-depth analysis has raised important issues 
that would be high priority for ID physicians to address, and 
further research is warranted.
Our findings contribute to a more comprehensive under-
standing of the attitudes and beliefs of ID fellows regarding 
antibiotic stewardship. The insights from this study can inform 
future research and educational interventions to better train the 
stewards of tomorrow and reinforce the important role ID phy-
sicians play in implementing and leading ASPs.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary materials are available at Open Forum Infectious Diseases 
online. Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, 
the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of 
the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the corre-
sponding author.
Acknowledgments
Financial support. This project was supported in part by the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality (grant T32HS022242) and by a dis-
sertation support grant from the Jayne Koskinas Ted Giovanis Foundation 
for Health and Policy, a private foundation based in Highland, Maryland, 
dedicated to effecting change in the health care industry for the greater pub-
lic good. 
Disclosure. The opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the authors and are not 
necessarily those of the Jayne Koskinas Ted Giovanis Foundation for 
Health and Policy, its directors, officers, or staff. The funding source 
had no role in the design, conduct, collection, management, analysis, or 
interpretation of the data or in the preparation, review, or approval of 
the manuscript. 
Potential conflicts of interest. No author has any other conflicts of 
interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of 
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to 
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Teixeira Rodrigues A, Roque F, Falcão A, et al. Understanding physician antibiotic 
prescribing behaviour: a systematic review of qualitative studies. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents 2013; 41:203–12.
2. Arnold SR, Allen UD, Al-Zahrani M, et al. Antibiotic prescribing by pediatricians 
for respiratory tract infection in children. Clin Infect Dis 1999; 29:312–7.
3. Alanis AJ. Resistance to antibiotics: are we in the post-antibiotic era? Arch Med 
Res 2005; 36:697–705.
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Antibiotic resistance threats in the 
United States, 2013. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/threat-re-
port-2013/. Accessed 2 March 2018.
5. Marquet K, Liesenborgs A, Bergs J, et al. Incidence and outcome of inappropri-
ate in-hospital empiric antibiotics for severe infection: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Crit Care 2015; 19:63.
6. Hecker MT, Aron DC, Patel NP, et al. Unnecessary use of antimicrobials in hospi-
talized patients: current patterns of misuse with an emphasis on the antianaerobic 
spectrum of activity. Arch Intern Med 2003; 163:972–8.
7. Fishman N. Antimicrobial stewardship. Am J Med 2006; 119(Suppl 1):S53–61; 
discussion S2–S70.
8. Barlam TF, Morgan JR, Wetzler LM, et al. Antibiotics for respiratory tract infec-
tions: a comparison of prescribing in an outpatient setting. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2015; 36:153–9.
9. Drainoni ML, Dekker D, Lee-Hood E, et al. HIV medical care provider practices 
for reducing high-risk sexual behavior: results of a qualitative study. AIDS Patient 
Care STDS 2009; 23:347–56.
10. Patton MQ. Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE Publications, Inc.; 2001.
11. MacDougall C, Polk RE. Antimicrobial stewardship programs in health care sys-
tems. Clin Microbiol Rev 2005; 18:638–56.
12. McQuillen DP, Petrak RM, Wasserman RB, et al. The value of infectious diseases 
specialists: non-patient care activities. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 47:1051–63.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/9/ofy102/4992019 by guest on 03 June 2019
 6 • OFID • Morgan et al
13. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, et al. Implementing an antibiotic steward-
ship program: Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:e51–77.
14. Spellberg B, Bartlett JG, Gilbert DN. How to pitch an antibiotic stewardship pro-
gram to the hospital C-suite. Open Forum Infect Dis 2016; 3:ofw210.
15. Pollack LA, van Santen KL, Weiner LM, Dudeck MA, Edwards JR, Srinivasan A. 
Antibiotic stewardship programs in U.S. acute care hospitals: findings from the 
2014 National Healthcare Safety Network Annual Hospital Survey. Clin Infect Dis 
2016; 63:443–9.
16. Burgess JF Jr, Jones EA, Morgan JR. Capsule commentary on Tannenbaum et al., 
nudging physician prescription decisions by partitioning the order set: results of a 
vignette-based study. J Gen Intern Med 2015; 30:343.
17. Weis JM, Levy PC. Copy, paste, and cloned notes in electronic health records: 
prevalence, benefits, risks, and best practice recommendations. Chest 2014; 
145:632–8.
18. Northeastern University Bouvé College of Health Sciences School of Pharmacy. 
Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD) program schedule. Available at: https://bouve.
northeastern.edu/assets/uploads/2014/09/PharmD_19_20.pdf. 
Accessed 
30 
 
July 2017.
19. Abbo LM, Cosgrove SE, Pottinger PS, et al. Medical students’ perceptions and 
knowledge about antimicrobial stewardship: how are we educating our future pre-
scribers? Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:631–8.
20. Laake AM, Bernabe G, Peterson J, Liappis AP
. Internal medicine resident perspectives 
regarding broad-spectrum antibiotic usage. Open Forum Infect Dis 2017; 4:ofx060.
21. Society of infectious diseases pharmacists. Antimicrobial stewardship a certifi-
cate program for pharmacists. Available at: http://s3.proce.com/res/pdf/SIDP-
ASP_Announcement.pdf. Accessed 30 July 2017.
22. MAD-ID. Antimicrobial stewardship programs. Available at: http://mad-id.org/
antimicrobial-stewardship-programs/. Accessed 31 July 2017.
23. Chen HC, Wamsley MA, Azzam A, et al. The Health professions education path-
way: preparing students, residents, and fellows to become future educators. Teach 
Learn Med 2017; 29:216–27.
24. Broom J, Broom A, Plage S, et al. Barriers to uptake of antimicrobial advice in a 
UK hospital: a qualitative study. J Hosp Infect 2016; 93:418–22.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/9/ofy102/4992019 by guest on 03 June 2019
