 1 
 
Clinical effectiveness and acceptability of structured group psychoeducation versus 
optimised unstructured group support for remitted bipolar disorder: a multi-centre 
pragmatic randomised controlled trial.  
Richard Morriss, Fiona Lobban, Lisa Riste, Linda Davies, Fiona Holland, Rita Long, Georgia 
Lykomitrou, Sarah Peters, Christopher Roberts, Heather Robinson, Steven Jones. 
Department of Psychiatry and Applied Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
United Kingdom (Prof R Morriss MD, G Lykomitrou) 
Spectrum Centre, University of Lancaster, Lancaster, United Kingdom (Prof F Lobban PhD, 
R Long, Prof S Jones PhD, H Robinson) 
School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom 
(L Riste PhD, S Peters PhD) 
Institute of Population Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom (Prof 
L Davies MSc, F Holland MSc, Prof C Roberts PhD). 
 
Correspondence to: 
Professor Richard Morriss, Institute of Mental Health, University of Nottingham, Triumph 
Road, Nottingham, NG7 2TU, United Kingdom. e-mail: richard.morriss@nottingham.ac.uk 
 
 
 2 
 
Summary 
 
Background: Group psychoeducation (PEd) is a cheap NICE recommended treatment for 
bipolar disorder. Its clinical effectiveness and acceptability are unclear compared to 
unstructured group support (PS) matched for delivery and aim of treatment, and previous 
bipolar history. 
Methods: Randomised, parallel group, observer blinded superiority controlled trial recruiting 
at eight sites from secondary care or self-referral with two year follow up. Participants aged 
18 years or over with bipolar disorder, no episode in the preceding four weeks. 
Randomisation using minimisation for number of previous episodes (1-7, 8-19, 20+ bands) 
and site by clinical trials unit to either 21 two-hour weekly sessions of PEd or PS, allocation 
conveyed to trial co-ordinator and masking of assessors to outcome. Intention to treat primary 
outcome was time to the next bipolar episode with planned moderator analysis of number of 
previous bipolar episodes and qualitative interview of participant experience. Trial 
registration number ISRCTN62761948, ended. 
Findings: From September 2009 to June 2012, 153 and 151 participants were recruited to 
PEd and PS respectively with complete primary outcome data. Fewer drop outs from 
treatment occurred in PEd versus PS (median (IQR) 14 (15.5) versus 9 (15) sessions, 
p=0.026). Over 96 weeks, time to first bipolar episode did not differ between PEd and PS 
(number of bipolar episodes 89 (58%) versus 95 (65%), hazard ratio (HR) = 0.83 (95% CI 
0.62-1.11) p=0.217.  The treatment was moderated in favour of PEd for participants with 
fewer previous bipolar episodes (X2 = 6.80, p = 0.034, HR 0.28 (95% CI 0.12- 0.68) for 1-7 
previous episodes). Four participants (1 PEd, 3 PS) died in the follow-up period of the study.  
Interpretation: Structured group psychoeducation was no more clinically effective than 
similarly intensive unstructured group support but was more acceptable and improved 
outcome in participants with few previous episodes.  
 
296 words 
 
 
 3 
 
Introduction. 
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a common relapsing life-long mental health condition presenting in 
adolescence or early adulthood (1). Worldwide it is 18th in years lived with disability of all health 
conditions (2) and associated with a 20-fold increase in suicide and two-fold increase in mortality 
from ischaemic heart disease (3). The provision of information and emotional support is a National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) supported key recommendation and quality standard 
for all mental health service users (4). In the United Kingdom, such information and support is widely 
available to people with bipolar disorder through unstructured peer run groups by both the NHS or the 
third sector e.g. over 130 national support groups through Bipolar UK (5). However, across Europe 
including the United Kingdom, such information and support for people with bipolar disorder has also 
been provided through structured group psychoeducation in mental health services (6, 7).  
 
In 2003, researchers from Barcelona published two randomised controls (RCTs) of 21 session 
structured manualised group psychoeducation for people with bipolar disorder showing clinically 
important differences in time to all types of bipolar relapse at 12 and 24 months compared to 
attentional control support groups (8, 9). Their results influenced clinical practice because group 
psychoeducation had broad clinical effectiveness against relapse (10,11), as well as being helpful in 
improving knowledge, confidence and providing support to people with bipolar disorder (6,7).  Hence 
group psychoeducation is a key recommendation by NICE in its clinical guideline for bipolar disorder 
and a national development quality standard (1). It is a cheap, efficient and easy to deliver easy- to- 
set- up option for mental health services because 10-18 participants can be treated at a time and 
therapists require supervision but not the extensive training required for other psychological 
treatments recommended for bipolar disorder. However, recently doubt has been expressed as to 
whether group psychoeducation, or indeed other psychological treatments, are really effective against 
bipolar relapse (12, 13). A recent meta-analysis of the effectiveness of psychoeducation on bipolar 
relapse noted that the original Barcelona trials (8. 9) seemed to be outliers compared to other RCTs of 
individual or group psychoeducation versus either treatment as usual or attentional controls (14). The 
evidence was reported as weak or very weak with few pre-registered large multicentre blinded RCTs 
conducted independently of the developers of the intervention (1, 14, 15). Few studies controlled for 
the variation in outcome due to natural history of bipolar disorder e.g. people with 20 or more 
previous bipolar episodes relapse three times more frequently than those with only 1-7 previous 
bipolar episodes (16).  
 
The aims of our current randomised controlled trial were to independently examine:  
1. The clinical effectiveness of structured group psychoeducation (PEd) versus unstructured 
group support (PS) on time to the next bipolar episode, including the moderating effects of 
number previous bipolar episodes, plus secondary outcomes in groups matched for the 
duration, delivery and aim of treatment, and previous bipolar history.  
2. The experience, acceptability and subjective value of both treatments based on systematic 
qualitative enquiry and attendance at group sessions. 
 
Methods. 
Study design. 
This is a randomised, parallel group, interviewer blinded, superiority controlled trial with two year 
follow up of each participant. Recruitment occurred at eight sites by self-referral or secondary mental 
health care. The study was conducted in the community in two regions of England (the North West 
and East Midlands). At three sites recruitment occurred at two separate time periods so recruitment 
 4 
 
occurred in 11 waves (appendix, Figure A1). Ethics approval was obtained from a national ethics 
committee in Nottingham. The study protocol was published (17 and the statistical analysis plan is 
available on line at https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.3205738). 
Participants. 
The recruitment strategy was deliberately broad to ensure that the sample reflected a diversity of 
people with BD. Community mental health teams at NHS Trusts at each site were encouraged to 
invite potentially relevant participants. The study was also promoted at a primary care level, with 
local family doctors being asked to display posters about the trial, and through service user-run local 
BD groups, national BD publications and the general media, allowing people to self-refer. The target 
population was patients with bipolar 1 or 2 affective disorder at increased risk of further relapse 
(defined as having had an episode in the last 24 months), as preventing relapse is the key aim of the 
intervention. 
 
Participants were included if they: 
• 
had a SCID-DSM-IV verified diagnosis of primary bipolar 1 or bipolar 2 disorder (18, 19),  
• 
were at increased risk of relapse (at least one episode in the last 24 months), 
• 
were aged 18 years or more 
 
Participants were excluded if they had any of the following: 
• 
presence of a manic, hypomanic, mixed affective or major depressive episode currently or 
within the previous four weeks,  
• 
current suicide plans or high suicide intent, 
• 
inability or unwillingness to give written informed consent to the study, 
• 
inability to communicate in written and verbal English to a sufficient level to allow them to 
complete the measures and take part in the groups. 
 
Randomisation and masking. 
Consecutive eligible patients were individually randomised by a clinical trials unit to either 
intervention, using a stochastic minimisation software. Randomisation was stratified by clinical site 
and minimised within site by number of previous bipolar episodes within three categories (1-7, 8-19, 
20 or more previous bipolar episodes, determined by SCID-DSM-IV criteria for past mania, 
hypomania, mixed affective or major depression episodes). At each site, recruitment continued until 
there was a minimum of 20 and a maximum of 36 participants per wave (see appendix figure 1a). 
Research assistants at each site enrolled participants. To ensure blindness of assessment the research 
assistants sent participants details to the trial co-ordination team (trial administrator and trial co-
ordinator) at a separate site. Upon consent, the trial co-ordination team passed the participant 
information to the clinical trials unit for randomisation. The clinical trials unit reported the 
randomisation allocation to the trial co-ordination team which directly informed each participant and 
the lead health professional running the treatment group the participant was allocated to.  
 
Masking of randomisation allocation was achieved by blinding the research assistants who recruited 
the participants at baseline and conducted follow ups. This was achieved by the following processes 
1. Research assessors were based separately from the trial co-ordinator and trial administrator 
and all treatment groups.  
2. Treatment groups were run identically (over the same time period, frequency, duration of 
sessions, base, both groups received a manual and led by the same health professional), to 
mask the day on which each group was run at each site,  
 5 
 
3. All follow up data collected by self-complete questionnaire which could unblind the research 
assessor was returned in a sealed envelope to the research assistant carrying out the 
assessment and conveyed to the trial office for opening and subsequent data entry by another 
person. 
 
Unblindings were recorded and if they occurred, all subsequent follow up assessments were 
conducted by another research assistant who was masked to treatment allocation. At baseline, before 
attending either group, participants were asked whether they had a preference for PEd, PS or no 
preference; all participants indicated they were prepared to attend either group. 
 
Intervention procedures. 
In both the PEd and PS groups, participants were told when they consented to the study and at the first 
and subsequent sessions that the purpose of this intervention was to share experiences to help manage 
BD using: i) the information given by the group facilitators, ii) their own experience, and iii) the 
collective experience of the group. The groups differed only in the structure, nature of delivery within 
the sessions, choice of content and type of content. The PEd group followed a curriculum developed 
in Spain (8, 9) (appendix, Table A1) but contextualised to English current practice by the research 
team and a panel of service users recruited for the purpose. The PS group set their own agenda and 
chose the content of their own programme (appendix, Table A2). 
 
Both PEd and PS groups were run by three facilitators, comprising two health professionals (usually 
one experienced and one trainee facilitator) and a service user-facilitator with a diagnosis of BD. The 
facilitators were specially trained for the purpose and supervised by a psychiatrist (RM) or clinical 
psychologist (FL or SJ) experienced in delivering psychological treatment for bipolar disorder. 
However, none of the research team had devised PEd or PS nor had anything to gain from favouring 
either intervention allowing a completely independent trial. Service user facilitators were also offered 
additional peer support.  Both programmes comprised 21 sessions, delivered once per week for two 
hours, spread over a maximum of 26 weeks (8, 9). The group sessions comprised a closed group 
starting with a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 18 participants to capture a variety of service user 
experience about the topics of every session. The sessions were held at the same community based 
site away from hospital e.g. day centre for both PE and PS contemporaneously on different afternoons 
of the week.  A manual was produced for both PEd (20 adapted by authors) and PS on the aims and 
conduct of each group (available from authors). Participants in PEd were encouraged to share their 
staying well plan with their health professionals e.g. community psychiatric nurse, psychiatrist, 
general practitioner; and other people who were personally important to them. They were discouraged 
from sharing any information about the content of the group with other service users with bipolar 
disorder until their follow up was complete. In both trial arms participants received the trial group 
therapies in addition to their usual treatment. They were discouraged from attending any other course 
of group, family or individual psychological treatment for BD at the same time as attending the 
groups in the study. Otherwise treatment as usual was unconstrained and recorded by interview and 
from case notes. 
 
The PEd group was run as a collaborative workshop with a brief taught introduction of the topic for 
the session, and the rest of the work taking the form of active interaction using the collective 
experience of the participants (8, 9). Embedded in the PEd programme is the acquisition of specific 
skills by each individual, including life charting, recognition of early warning signs, problem solving 
and other forms of coping, sleep hygiene and care planning, as well as general skills of actively 
participating and working collaboratively in the groups. They were encouraged and supported to 
 6 
 
develop a plan that fitted their personalised goals for recovery and have two elements: (i) those 
actions they take every day to stay well, such as taking medication and keeping a regular early 
morning routine; and (ii) those actions they would take if they started to become unwell with mania or 
depression.  
 
In the PS group, participants collectively decided upon an agenda for discussion at each session. The 
three facilitators were present to facilitate discussion, encourage participation, prevent unhelpful 
group behaviour such as bullying or scapegoating, prevent factual misinformation, and if directly 
asked to, clear up factual uncertainty. Compared to group support delivered routinely by Bipolar UK, 
PS was optimised by being closed to new participants so that they got to know each other well and it 
was facilitated by both a peer service user and two health professionals allowing the delivery of expert 
information from health professionals if participants requested it. 
 
Treatment fidelity. 
Treatment fidelity was maintained by training and supervision, written record of the content and 
delivery of the sessions completed by therapists and supervisors, and qualitative interviews with 
participants. Audiotaping and videotaping of sessions were not employed because some participants 
reported that they would find such recording intrusive and unacceptable.  
  
Outcomes. 
The primary outcome measure was time to next bipolar episode (17, 19) recorded by research 
assistants at each site. This was based on the SCID-LIFE (19, 21), carried out every 16 weeks for 96 
weeks. We calculated time from randomisation to the first week of recurrence of an episode of mania, 
hypomania, a mixed episode, or major depression that lasted two consecutive weeks, satisfying DSM-
IV criteria. When a follow up interview was not conducted, a bipolar episode was recorded when 
there was: (i) a description of symptoms of a manic or depression type episode, in primary or 
secondary care mental health records, with symptoms of sufficient duration to meet episode criteria 
(17, 22) and (ii) there was a change of medication, care setting (inpatient or crisis team) or urgency of 
being reviewed because of these symptoms.  
 
Secondary outcome measures (17) were: 
• 
time to next mania-type episode (mania, hypomania or mixed affective episode) and time to 
next depressive episode (19, 22); 
• 
assessment of mean weekly symptoms of mania type symptoms and depression symptoms 
using the LIFE (19, 22); 
• 
assessment of function using the Social Adjustment Scale (SAS) (23) and SOFAS (24); 
• 
observer and self-rated measures of mood: 17 item Hamilton-GRID (HDRS) (25), Bech-
Raphaelson Mania Scale (MAS) (26), Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HAD) (27); 
• 
self-rated overall mental and physical health (SF-12 mental and physical component scores) 
(28) 
• 
the EQ-5D 3L (29) was used to assess health status; 
 
At each assessment, suicide, neglect and risk were recorded in addition to other assessments. We 
recorded the type and amount of medication rather than medication adherence as a secondary outcome 
in our protocol (17). A nested qualitative study was conducted to explore the experiences of group 
participants and reasons for drop out from group treatment. A maximum variance sample (number of 
treatment sessions attended, sex, age, number of previous bipolar episodes, geographical location of 
 7 
 
group) of participants received a single semi-structured digitally recorded interview on completion of 
group treatment at that site. 
 
The SF-12 was added to the measures outlined in the protocol to measure physical health with the 
approval of the study Trial Steering Committee. The economic analysis, medication adherence and 
theoretical psychological measures of process will be separately reported. 
 
Sample size. 
Based on the first two RCTs of group psychoeducation versus group support with at least 12 month 
follow up (8,9), a differential treatment effect of 0.22 was estimated (60% recurrence in the control 
group, 38% in the psycho-education group at 12-months follow-up). As the study involved a group 
administered intervention, we adjusted the sample size for the clustering effect assuming a mean 
group size of 18 at randomisation, with an intra-cluster correlation (ICC) for group therapy of 0.05.   
Based on these assumptions a study with 360 service users (10 groups per arm) has power greater than 
80% assuming 15% loss to follow-up. During the conduct of the RCT, the average group size was 
observed to be 14. With the agreement of the independent trial data monitoring committee, the 
numbers of groups per arm was increased and sample size was adjusted as a smaller group size 
reduces the effect of clustering.  Assuming a mean groups size of 14, a trial with 308 participants (11 
groups per arm) has 82% power. 
 
Statistical and qualitative data analysis. 
All analyses are intention to treat subject to the availability of data with a two sided type 1 error rate 
set at five per cent. Kaplan Meier curves and median time for first relapse are presented as summary 
statistics. A Cox model with robust standard errors to account for the therapy group effect was 
planned for the primary analysis. However, there was no clustering effect by therapy group for time to 
next bipolar episode, time to next mania episode or time to next depression episode so the standard 
Cox model results are presented. The proportional hazards assumption was checked by using log-log 
plots by arm alone and with additional covariates in the model. The treatment effect (PEd compared 
with PS) was adjusted for gender, number of previous bipolar episodes, and recruitment wave. We 
examined two pre-specified treatment moderators for the primary outcome: number of previous 
episodes (1-7, 8-19, >20 episodes minimised in the randomisation as part of the design) and 
participant treatment preference at baseline.  
 
For continuous longitudinal data, the main statistical analysis used to compare the two interventions 
was a linear random effects model (LME) incorporating time as a continuous variable. Random 
effects were included to account for between-patient variation in the intercept and the gradient of the 
patient-specific lines. In addition, the models that also included random effects for wave and arm 
(nested within wave), to take account of therapy group clustering effects, were fitted. Fixed covariates 
were included to model systematic differences due to treatment, assessment time point and participant 
characteristics. Time since randomisation was calculated in months and was centred by subtracting 
the overall (grand) mean of assessment times for each outcome measure. Models included the fixed 
effect covariates: baseline measure, treatment group, centred time from randomisation to each 
assessment at 16-week intervals, the interaction between the baseline score and centred time in 
months, gender and number of previous bipolar episodes. In order that that all subjects with outcome 
data could be included in the LME analyses missing baseline response values were imputed using 
simple (deterministic) imputation (30). We estimated a time-treatment interaction (i.e., difference in 
slopes) and a main effect. Where the time-treatment interaction was not significant the main effect 
was estimated without the interaction term which is the difference between treatments averaged across 
 8 
 
time.  More detail of the analysis can be found in the Statistical Analysis Plan on line. All analyses 
were carried out using STATA Release 13. 
 
Qualitative interviews were analysed using thematic analysis (31) taking an inductive and emergent 
approach based on participant’s experiences of the groups. Coding was performed by a 
multidisciplinary panel (health and clinical psychology, psychiatry, service user) and subsequent 
interviews sought evidence to refute emerging themes. Themes were continuously compared against 
the data using a constant comparative approach. Interviews were conducted until themes were 
saturated.  
  
Role of the funding source. 
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation 
or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had 
final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. 
 
Results. 
From September 2009 to June 2012, 304 participants were recruited, 153 to PEd and 151to PS. Figure 
1 shows the flow of participants through the trial. Data on all bipolar relapses, mania and depression 
relapses were completed using primary care and secondary care records. Four participants (one PEd 
and 3 PS) died in the follow-up period of the study. Three died from natural causes and one from open 
verdict. The independent trial steering and data monitoring and ethics committees deemed these 
deaths to be unrelated to the interventions or procedures in the trial. Ten unblindings were reported 
(three PEd, seven PS) where the participant divulged their group allocation to their RA with 
subsequent follow up by another blinded RA. Six raters made 292 inter-rater reliability assessments of 
17 subjects with a mean of 17.2 assessments of each subject and 2.35 assessments per time point. The 
ICC was 0.71 (95% CI 0.64 to 0.85) for depression scores and 0.57 (95% CI 0.40 to 0.83) for mania 
scores, indicating a high level of inter-rater agreement for depression symptoms but moderate for 
mania symptoms. Therapist and supervision records and qualitative interviews confirmed that PE 
sessions followed the manual and therapist led while PS followed topics decided by the participants 
and was peer led.   
 
Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics by treatment group. Over half the participants had 20 or 
more previous bipolar episodes and most were taking mood stabilising medication and either 
antipsychotic drugs or antidepressants. Participants scored below the clinical threshold for significant 
depression, mania or anxiety symptoms and showed mild to moderate impairment in social 
adjustment at baseline (appendix, Tables A3 and A4). There were no significant differences in the 
demographic or clinical characteristics that were measured, between participants who self-referred or 
were referred by secondary care, nor between participants from different sites. 
 
Table 2 shows attendance at treatment groups. The median attendance in PEd was 14 sessions (IQR 
15.5) versus 9 sessions (IQR 15) in the PS group. Overall, attendance at PEd groups was greater than 
in the PS groups (Mann-Whitney test z = 2.23, p = 0.026).  
 
Figure 2 shows the time to first bipolar episode (primary outcome measure). By 96 weeks, 89/153 
(58%)  PEd versus 98/151 (65%) PS participants had a first bipolar episode. The median time to first 
bipolar episode in PEd was 67 (95% CI 37 to 91) weeks after baseline versus 48 (95% CI 31 to 66) 
weeks in the PS groups. After adjustment for pre-specified covariates in a cox proportional hazards 
model there was no evidence from the primary analysis of an intervention effect (hazard ratio (HR) 
 9 
 
0.83; 95% CI 0.62-1.11; p=0.217). Planned moderator analysis  based on an interaction between 
treatment arm and number of previous bipolar episodes (1-7, 8-19 and 20+) indicated that, in those 
participants with 1-7 previous episodes, PEd may delay time to next bipolar episode compared to PS 
(appendix, Figure 2a) (2 = 6.80, p=0.034). The subgroup specific hazard ratios of PEd compared to 
PS were 0.28 (95% CI 0.12 to 0.68) for 1-7 previous episodes, 0.86 (95% CI 0.50 to1.49) for 8-19 and 
1.01 (95% CI 0.70 to 1.46) for 20 or more episodes. There was no evidence that participant treatment 
preference prior to randomisation had a moderating effect on time to first bipolar episode (2 = 1.95, 
p=0.38). 
 
Figure 3 suggests that the proportion of participants with a first mania-type episode was lower in PEd 
compared with PS (PEd: 39/153, 25%; PS: 53/151, 35%).  In both treatment arms insufficient 
numbers of the participants relapsed to report the median time to relapse with 95% confidence 
intervals. The 25th centile of the time to episode was greater in the PEd arm (90 weeks) than the PS 
arm (53 weeks) but the upper 95% confidence interval is undefined. After adjustment for pre-
specified covariates in a cox proportional hazards model there was some evidence that time to mania-
type episode was longer for PEd as compared to PS (HR 0.66, 95% CI 0.44-1.002, p = 0.049). The 
difference between the PEd and PS groups in relation to time to mania episode appeared at around 
session 15 when early warning signs of mania were being discussed in PEd, 
 
There was no evidence of differences in the time to first depressive episode (HR 0.96; 95% CI 0.70 to 
1.31; p = 0.784). The proportion with a depressive episode between participants in the PEd arm 
(80/153; 52%) compared to those people allocated to PS (82/151; 54%). Again insufficient 
participants relapse to report the median time to relapse with confidence interval. The 25th percentile 
time to first depressive episode was 22.0 weeks (95% CI 15 to 29) in the PEd participants and 19 
weeks after baseline (95% CI 15 to 28) in the PS group (Figure 4).  
 
There were no significant effects on symptoms, or self-rated mental or physical health outcomes 
(appendix, Tables A3 and A4). Participants in PEd improved faster in the SAS interpersonal domain 
than in PS (difference in gradient -0.017, 95% CI -0.030 to -0.004, p = 0.012). There was no evidence 
of a treatment by time interaction for the remaining SOFAS and SAS (overall, friction and 
dependency) function outcomes (appendix Table A5). Full economic and medication adherence 
results will be reported elsewhere but there were no clinically important differences in the use of 
medication between the groups. 
 
Qualitative data (appendix Tables A6 and A7) show the participants of both groups and the emerging 
themes. Two themes concerning the value of both groups emerged, “increased knowledge” in general 
about BD and specifically applied to them as an individual, and “people like me” tackling isolation 
and stigma, sharing similar experiences of having BD. Some participants related dropping out of 
treatment to the lack of structure of the PS groups. 
 
Discussion. 
The primary clinical results indicate that there was no significant difference on the primary clinical 
outcome of group psychoeducation (PEd) for BD versus group support (PS) on time to first bipolar 
episode after randomisation. Both groups provided general information about BD tailored to the 
participant, and provided emotional support beyond what can be provided in general written 
information recommended in NICE service user mental health guidelines (4). However there was 
evidence of some important benefits of PEd over PS and none for PS over PEd. There may be a 
 10 
 
substantial delay in time to the next bipolar episode in people with seven or fewer previous bipolar 
episodes, while time to mania was delayed and interpersonal function improved faster for all 
participants. Attendance at PEd groups was better than at PS groups and the lack of structure was seen 
as a reason for dropping out of PS.  
 
The strengths of the study are its large size, multicentre design, independence of the research team, 
pre-registration, allocation concealment, complete follow up on the primary outcome over two years, 
careful matching of therapists and duration of treatment, minimisation of patients across treatment 
arms for the natural history of the condition, few unblindings, training and supervision to ensure 
fidelity to treatment, and full reporting of clinical outcomes identified by NICE as being relevant to 
patients and clinicians (1, 16). Broad eligibility criteria and 22 groups at eight centres increased its 
generalisability.  
 
Limitations of the study are the low rate of completion of self-rated symptomatic and functional 
limiting the certainty of the conclusions that can be drawn on these outcomes, moderate reliability of 
the assessment of mania symptoms, no formal rating of blinding, and the lack of recording of 
treatment sessions to absolutely ensure fidelity to treatment. However, none of these limitations are 
likely to change the main finding of no evidence of clinical benefit on delay of the next bipolar 
episode. A limitation of the trial design is that there is no treatment-as-usual control group with 
minimal information giving, although arguably such practice is now regarded as poor and not 
supported by NICE (1, 4). Given that the PS group included some approaches that may be 
components of effective psychological treatments for bipolar disorder such as problem solving (1, 32), 
PS may have been more effective than treatment as usual.  
 
The results confirm a recent meta-analysis of RCTs on psychoeducation (14) that concluded the first 
RCTs of group psychoeducation versus group support (8,9) may be outliers in showing a much 
greater treatment effect versus control treatment than subsequent RCTs. Previous RCTs of group 
psychoeducation have been smaller single centre studies usually with shorter follow up, lack of 
blinding and complete reporting of all outcome measures, evaluated by the same investigators that 
developed the intervention, and without an optimised support group providing information and 
support tailored to the person with BD.  When all of these methodological weaknesses are controlled 
then there is less evidence of clinical superiority of structured group psychoeducation versus 
unstructured group support. Thus the benefits of group psychoeducation are in the provision of 
information about BD from health professional and other service user perspectives and emotional 
support that reduce social isolation and stigma.  
 
The large sample size and matching of participants by number of previous episodes allowed us to 
explore if there is an interaction between psychological treatment and number of previous bipolar 
episodes as some studies have previously shown (22, 33), but others have not (34). Number of 
previous bipolar episodes may be prone to recall bias and are not precise; however, a person with a 
few episodes can be distinguished readily from someone with 20 or more previous bipolar episodes. 
The current RCT demonstrated that in people with a few episodes (1-7), PEd may have been more 
effective than PS against time to next depression episode and time to next bipolar episode. The result 
requires replication in a sample confined to people early in the course of BD; RCTs of psychological 
interventions compared to treatment as usual confined to participants early in the course of their 
illness report clinical and cost effectiveness (35, 36). Previous RCTs of group psychoeducation versus 
group support may have shown a greater effect of group psychoeducation on time to the next bipolar 
episode than the current study because their sample recruited more participants in the early course of 
 11 
 
their illness (8, 33). PEd may be more effective if early warning sign interventions are delivered 
earlier in the course because half the participants had dropped out by week 14 when these effective 
techniques (37, 38) were discussed and differences in time to mania relapse between the two groups 
start to emerge.     
 
NICE guidelines for BD and other mental health conditions (1, 4) regard the provision of information 
and support as important outcomes in their own right but group psychoeducation is no more effective 
in terms of clinical outcome, except possibly on delay of mania episodes, than other less structured 
approaches. Group psychoeducation provides both general and tailored information and support from 
both health professional and service user perspectives at a relatively cheap price so it is an approach 
that may have merit in clinical practice, but not to the exclusion of other approaches that may deliver 
information and support of similar quality alongside other NICE recommended treatments for bipolar 
disorder such as medication (1). However, the optimised group support provided in this study is 
unavailable routinely in the United Kingdom in the precise form delivered in this RCT.   
 
Although meta-analysis of previous RCTs suggests that group psychoeducation may increase time to 
relapse compared to treatment as usual, these RCTs were of low or very low quality so there remains 
some doubt requiring further research.  Our results and the results of other recent psychological 
interventions (22, 33, 35, 36) suggest that the optimal provision of structured psychological 
interventions such as PEd early in the course of bipolar disorder may have important benefits on the 
course of illness, and merits further research.  
 
4,940 words. 
 
Funding.  
This study was funded as part of the PARADES Programme Grant for Applied Research (RP-PG-
0407-10389) by the National Institute for Health Research, Department of Health, England. It 
received further support from primary care trusts, mental health trusts, the Mental Health Research 
Network and Comprehensive Local Research Networks in the East Midlands and North West 
England. The views expressed by the authors do not necessarily reflect those of the National Institute 
for Health Research, the National Health Service nor the Department of Health in England. 
 
Conflict of Interest.   
None of the authors report any financial or personal conflict of interest.  
 
Acknowledgements.  
We would like to acknowledge the help and support of Bipolar UK, MIND and Mood Swings who all 
helped to publicise the study, Manchester Health and Social Care NHS Trust for hosting the 
PARADES programme, the University of Nottingham for providing sponsorship and clinical trials 
unit support for this trial, and the Spectrum Centre, University of Lancaster and University of 
Manchester for additional support. In particular we acknowledge the contributions of the following 
without whom the study would not have been possible: Ali Beck, Jelena Jovanoska, Natasha Lyon 
Karthik Thangavelu, Ayaz Quereshi, Kat Taylor, Ayesha Ahmed, Paul Hammersley, Brian Langshaw, 
Kathryn Reeveley, Kay Hampshire, Phil Byrne, Kiran Pindiprulu, Puru Pathy, Kirsten Nokling, 
Rachel Lambourne, Claire Hilton, Kirsty Stevenson, Rebecca Anderson,Dawn Knowles, Debbie 
Mayes, Lisa Brown, Dionysios Ntais, Elizabeth Camacho, Lizzie Tyler, Richard Pattison, Elly 
McGrath, Lorraine Getten, Emily Goodman-Smith, Lucy Bateman, Emma Weymouth, Lynda 
Fretwell, Sara Zarbakhsh, Mahesh Nachami, Sian Newman, Marcus Barker, Glyn Judge, Matthew 
 12 
 
Impey, Steve Kendall, Sue Lomas, Jane Fisher, Nancy Black. We would also like to thank the 
participants in the study.  
  
 
References. 
1. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. Bipolar disorder: The NICE guideline on the 
assessment and management of bipolar disorder in adults, children and young people in 
primary and secondary care. Updated edition. CG185. Leicester and London: British 
Psychological Society and Gaskell, 2014. 
2. Vos T, Flaxman AD, Naghavi M, et al. Years lived with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae 
of 289 diseases and injuries 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 
Study 2010. Lancet 2012; 380: 2163-2196. 
3. Osby U, Brandt L, Correia N, et al. Excess mortality in bipolar and unipolar disorder in 
Sweden. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58:844-50. 
4. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Service user experience in adult mental 
health: improving the experience of care for people using adult NHS mental health services. 
(Clinical Guideline 136). NICE: London, 2011. 
5. Bipolar UK. Support groups.  http://www.bipolaruk.org/find-a-support-group Accessed 
26/07/16. 
6. van Gent EM, Vida SL, Zwart FM. Group therapy in addition to lithium therapy in patients 
with bipolar disorders. Acta Psychiatr Belg. 1988;88: 405-18. 
7. Peet M, Harvey NS.  Lithium maintenance: 1. A standard education programme for patients. 
British Journal of Psychiatry 1991;158: 197–200. 
8. Colom F, Vieta E, Martinez-Aran A, et al. A randomized trial on the efficacy of group 
psychoeducation in the prophylaxis of recurrences in bipolar patients whose disease is in 
remission. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003; 60: 402-407. 
9. Colom F, Vieta E, Reinares M, et al. Psychoeducation efficacy in bipolar disorders: beyond 
compliance enhancement. J Clin Psychiatry 2003; 64: 1101-1105.  
10. Yatham LN, Kennedy SH, Parikh SV, et al Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety 
Treatments (CANMAT) and International Society for Bipolar Disorders (ISBD) collaborative 
update of CANMAT guidelines for the management of patients with bipolar disorder: update 
2013. Bipolar Disord. 2013;15: 1-44. 
11. Kanba S, Kato T, Terao T, et al. Guideline for treatment of bipolar disorder by the Japanese 
Society of Mood Disorders, 2012. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2013;67: 285-300. 
12. Jauhar S, McKenna PJ, Laws KR. NICE guidance on psychological treatments for bipolar 
disorder: searching for the evidence. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3:386-8. 
13. Goodwin GM, Haddad PM, Ferrier IN, et al. Evidence-based guidelines for treating bipolar 
disorder: Revised third edition recommendations from the British Association for 
Psychopharmacology. J Psychopharmacol. 2016 pii: 0269881116636545. 
14. Bond K, Anderson IM. Psychoeducation for relapse prevention in bipolar disorder: a 
systematic review of efficacy in randomized controlled trials. Bipolar Disord 2015; 17:349-62. 
15. Oud M, Mayo-Wilson E, Braidwood R,et al. Psychological interventions for adults with 
bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry. 2016;208:213-22 
16. Lobban F, Taylor L, Chandler C, et al. Enhanced relapse prevention for bipolar disorder by 
community mental health teams: cluster feasibility randomised trial. Br J Psychiatry. 
2010;196: 59-63. 
 13 
 
17. Morriss RK, Lobban F, Riste L, et al. Pragmatic randomised controlled trial of group 
psychoeducation versus group support in the maintenance of bipolar disorder. BMC Psychiatry 
2011; 11: 214. 
18. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th 
edn. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Association; 1994. 
19. First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Endicott J. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis 1 
Disorders, (SCID-I). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1997. 
20. Colom F, Vieta E. Psychoeducation Manual for Bipolar Disorder. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press; 2016. 
21. Paykel ES, Abbott R, Morriss R, et al. Sub-syndromal and syndromal symptoms in the 
longitudinal course of bipolar disorder. Br J Psychiatry 2006; 189: 118-123. 
22. Scott J, Paykel E, Morriss R, et al. Cognitive-behavioural therapy for severe and recurrent 
bipolar disorders: randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 2006; 188: 313-320. 
23. Morriss R, Scott J, Paykel E, et al. Social adjustment based on reported behaviour in bipolar 
affective disorder. Bipolar Disord 2007; 9:53-62. 
24. Goldman HH, Skodol AE, Lave TR. Revising Axis V for DSM-IV: a review of measures of 
social functioning. Am J Psychiatry 1992; 49: 1148-1156. 
25. Williams JBW, Kobak KA, Bech P, et al. The GRID-HAMD: standardization of the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2008; 23: 120-129. 
26. Licht R, Jensen J. Validation of the Bech-Rafaelsen Scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1997; 96: 
367-372. 
27. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 
1983; 67:361-70. 
28. Ware J Jr., Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey: construction of 
scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Med Care 1996; 34: 220–233 
29. Euroqol Group. EuroQol: a new facility for the measurement of health related quality of life. 
Health Policy 1990; 16: 199-208.  
30. White IR, Thompson SG.  Adjusting for partially missing baseline measurements in 
randomized trials. Stat Med 2005; 24: 993-1007.   
31. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006; 3: 77-101. 
32. Miklowitz DJ, Goodwin GM, Bauer MS, Geddes JR Common and specific elements of 
psychosocial treatments for bipolar disorder: a survey of clinicians participating in randomized 
trials. J Psychiatr Pract. 2008;14:77-85  
33. Colom F, Reinares M, Pacchiarotti I, et al. Has number of previous episodes any effect on 
response to group psychoeducation in bipolar patients? A 5-year follow-up post hoc analysis. 
Acta Neuropsychiatr. 2010;22:50-3 
34. Lam DH, Burbeck R, Wright K, Pilling S. Psychological therapies in bipolar disorder: the 
effect of illness history on relapse prevention - a systematic review. Bipolar Disord. 
2009;11:474-82.  
35. Kessing LV, Hansen HV, Hvenegaard A, Christensen EM, Dam H, Gluud C, Wetterslev J; 
Early Intervention Affective Disorders (EIA) Trial Group.Treatment in a specialised out-
patient mood disorder clinic v. standard out-patient treatment in the early course of bipolar 
disorder: randomised clinical trial. Br J Psychiatry. 2013;202: 212-9. 
36. Jones SH, Smith G, Mulligan LD,  et al. Recovery-focused cognitive-behavioural therapy for 
recent-onset bipolar disorder: randomised controlled pilot trial. Br J Psychiatry 2015; 206: 58-
66.  
 14 
 
37. Perry A, Tarrier N, Morriss R, et al. Randomised controlled trial of teaching bipolar disorder 
patients to identify early symptoms of relapse and obtain early treatment. BMJ 1999; 318: 149-
153. 
38. Morriss RK, Faizal MA, Jones AP et al. Interventions for helping people recognise early signs 
of recurrence in bipolar disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007; 1:CD004854. 
 
 
 
