 REVIEW ARTICLE
The putative role of environmental aluminium in the development
of chronic neuropathology in adults and children.
How strong is the evidence and what could be the mechanisms
involved?
Gerwyn Morris1 & Basant K. Puri2 & Richard E. Frye3
Received: 14 May 2017 /Accepted: 19 July 2017 /Published online: 27 July 2017
# The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract The conceptualisation of autistic spectrum disorder
and Alzheimer’s disease has undergone something of a para-
digm shift in recent years and rather than being viewed as
single illnesses with a unitary pathogenesis and pathophysiol-
ogy they are increasingly considered to be heterogeneous syn-
dromes with a complex multifactorial aetiopathogenesis, in-
volving a highly complex and diverse combination of genetic,
epigenetic and environmental factors. One such environmen-
tal factor implicated as a potential cause in both syndromes is
aluminium, as an element or as part of a salt, received, for
example, in oral form or as an adjuvant. Such administration
has the potential to induce pathology via several routes such as
provoking dysfunction and/or activation of glial cells which
play an indispensable role in the regulation of central nervous
system homeostasis and neurodevelopment. Other routes in-
clude the generation of oxidative stress, depletion of reduced
glutathione, direct and indirect reductions in mitochondrial
performance and integrity, and increasing the production of
proinflammatory cytokines in both the brain and peripherally.
The mechanisms whereby environmental aluminium could
contribute to the development of the highly specific pattern
of neuropathology seen in Alzheimer’s disease are described.
Also detailed are several mechanisms whereby significant
quantities of aluminium introduced via immunisation could
produce chronic neuropathology in genetically susceptible
children. Accordingly, it is recommended that the use of alu-
minium salts in immunisations should be discontinued and
that adults should take steps to minimise their exposure to
environmental aluminium.
Keywords Brain . Neuropathology . Aluminum . Alzheimer
disease . Autism spectrum disorder . Autoimmunity
Introduction
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) refers to an increasingly
common group of heterogeneous disorders identified by the
presence of impairments in social interactions and communi-
cation together with a restrictive range of repetitive and ste-
reotypical behaviours (Zhubi et al. 2014; Ladd-Acosta et al.
2014). Recent analyses have consistently shown that the prev-
alence of ASD is increasing. Estimates vary between one in 68
(CDC) and one in 46 (Pelly et al. 2015) to one in 38 (Kim et al.
2011) during similar time periods. There is some debate as to
the reasons for the precipitous increase in prevalence of ASD
over the past two decades, with some concluding that this is
essentially an artefact stemming from the development of
broader diagnostic categories and increased medical aware-
ness (Rutter 2005; King and Bearman 2009). However, anal-
yses conducted by other research teams have suggested that
other factors aside from diagnostic shift may contribute to this
increase in prevalence (Grether et al. 2009; Hertz-Picciotto
2009). Although early heritability estimates for ASD were
high (approximately 97%), multiple comprehensive genetic
studies have failed to reveal reproducible candidate genes,
and thus far no single gene can account for more than 1% of
ASD cases, although there is a great deal of evidence that
genetic abnormalities play a major role in the development
* Basant K. Puri
basant.puri@imperial.ac.uk
1
Tir Na Nog, Bryn Road seaside 87, Llanelli, Wales SA15 2LW, UK
2
Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, England W12 0HS, UK
3
College of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children’s Hospital
Research Institute, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
DOI 10.1007/s11011-017-0077-2
 of the disorders which is unsurprising given that this is the
case with most if not all illnesses (Siniscalco et al. 2013). It is
also worth noting that only a minority of children with an
ASD diagnosis have an identifiable genetic syndrome
(Siniscalco et al. 2013) and recent studies suggest that the
yield of genetic testing is low even when chromosomal mi-
croarray analysis is combined with whole exome sequencing,
particularly in non-dysmorphic ASD children (Tammimies
et al. 2015). Moreover, some genetic abnormalities which in-
crease the risk of developing ASD are also risk factors for
other neurodevelopmental or neuroimmune conditions, and
are polymorphisms rather than deleterious mutations, being
also present in unaffected individuals (Betancur 2011; Sahoo
et al. 2011). It would appear that these genes appear to confer
vulnerability to a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders
(Betancur 2011; Sahoo et al. 2011; Rapoport et al. 2012).
Furthermore, a recent heritability estimate stemming from
the largest twin study to date yielded a figure as low as 37%
(Hallmayer et al. 2011), although another recent study calcu-
lated an estimate of heritability between 40 and 60% (Klei
et al. 2012).
The concept of ASD as an illness of purely genetic origin
has given way to the view that, at the very least, the
aetiopathogenesis of ASD involves a highly complex interac-
tion between numerous genes and environmental risk factors
(Bushnell 2013; LaSalle 2013). Moreover, it is becoming
increasingly apparent that alterations in the epigenetic land-
scape and dysregulation of epigenetic mechanisms responsi-
ble for gene expression also play a major role in the
aetiopathogenesis of these disorders (Rangasamy et al. 2013;
Flashner et al. 2013; Siniscalco et al. 2013). In a landmark
post-mortem microarray study, Voineagu and fellow workers
identified 444 genes which were differentially expressed in
the cerebral cortex, and two genes which were differentially
expressed in the cerebellum, of children with ASD compared
with neurotypical age- and sex-matched controls. They report-
ed that the dysregulated patterns of expression of immune and
glial gene markers were not associated with any known ASD
risk genes, so that immune changes are likely to be either
secondary phenomena or the result of environmental factors
(Voineagu et al. 2011). In another study, Melnyk and others
examined 68 ASD subjects, 40 unaffected siblings and 54
age- and sex-matched controls, and reported oxidative dam-
age to DNA (indexed by the oxidised DNA adduct 8-oxo-
deoxyguanosine) and proteins in leukocytes combined with
global DNA hypomethylation that was specific to ASD chil-
dren (Melnyk et al. 2012). The phenomenon of global DNA
hypomethylation in the brain as a driver of altered gene ex-
pression in ASD children has also been reported (Ladd-Acosta
et al. 2014; Nardone et al. 2014). It is also of interest that the
latter team reported hypomethylation and consequent upregu-
lation of complement and tumour necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-α) genes, which are involved in the regulation of the
neurodevelopmental roles of microglia and synaptic scaling
respectively (Nardone et al. 2014).
Further evidence emphasising the importance of epigenetic
abnormalities in the pathogenesis of ASD was published by
Wong and fellow workers (2014). These authors reported differ-
ently methylated DNA regions within 50 monozygotic twin pairs
(i.e. 100 individuals) discordant for ASD that correlated with the
severity of autistic trait scores, emphasising the importance of
epigenetic rather than genetic factors in the pathophysiology
and pathogenesis of ASD (Wong et al. 2014). The role of epige-
netic dysregulation as an important factor in the pathogenesis of
ASD is further supported by evidence of dysregulated
microRNA (miRNA) expression in ASD children (Mundalil
Vasu et al. 2014; Mellios and Sur 2012). A recent post-mortem
study cited evidence of hypomethylated and upregulated miR-
142 in the frontal cortex (Brodmann area 10) in children with
ASD, which is of interest as this miRNA plays a major role in
regulating the neurodevelopmental activities of microglia and
maintaining them in a quiescent state (Mor et al. 2015;
Vaishnavi et al. 2013; Marrale et al. 2014).
When viewed as a whole, it appears that the aetiology of
ASD is multifactorial, involving a highly complex and diverse
combination of genetic, epigenetic, environmental and immu-
nological factors (Flashner et al. 2013; Herbert 2010; Roberts
et al. 2013). Overall, the conceptualisation of ASD has under-
gone a paradigm shift, and rather than being viewed as a single
illness with a unitary pathogenesis and pathophysiology, it is a
clinically heterogeneous syndrome with a complex multifac-
torial aetiopathogenesis (Zhubi et al. 2014; Voineagu et al.
2011; Betancur 2011; Tordjman et al. 2014; Ruggeri et al.
2014; Georgiades et al. 2013). Ultimately, the pathology in
any given child likely has its origins in a dynamic interplay
between a broad range of different environmental agents, pre-
disposing genetic factors and complex epigenetic mechanisms
as discussed above (Zhubi et al. 2014; Voineagu et al. 2011;
Betancur 2011; Tordjman et al. 2014; Ruggeri et al. 2014;
Georgiades et al. 2013).
The view of ASD as an illness or illnesses exclusively
affecting the brain is also changing. While many ASD chil-
dren display evidence of activated microglia and astrocytes,
which are characteristic of many neuroimmune and neurode-
generative diseases (Morgan et al. 2012; Suzuki et al. 2013;
Morgan et al. 2010; Morris and Berk 2015; Morris et al.
2015a), there is also copious evidence of abnormalities in
the peripheral immune system. Such evidence includes data
demonstrating excessive pro-inflammatory cytokine (PIC) ex-
pression, reduced anti-inflammatory cytokine expression,
modulated or increased T-cell responses, altered natural killer
T-cell responses, activated complement responses, major his-
tocompatibility complex (MHC) class I abnormalities and in-
creased autoantibodies in the periphery as well as in the brain
(reviewed in Noriega and Savelkoul 2014; Careaga and
Ashwood 2012; Estes and McAllister 2015; Gottfried et al.
1336
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 2015). The pattern of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in immune genes is similar to those seen in several
autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS) (Ramos
et al. 2012). There is also evidence of abnormally robust pat-
tern recognition receptor activity linked to the presence of
SNPs in encoding genes leading to exaggerated immune re-
sponses (Enstrom et al. 2010; Mead and Ashwood 2015). It is
also noteworthy that genes governing immune and inflamma-
tory responses are upregulated in some children with an ASD
diagnosis (Koufaris and Sismani 2015) and that the presence
of such abnormally expressed genes can predict the develop-
ment of ASD in male children with some 83% accuracy
(Pramparo et al. 2015). It is also of interest that polymor-
phisms in cytokine and HLA genes are associated with unusu-
al responses to vaccines (Castiblanco and Anaya 2015). The
evidence of immune abnormalities in many, but by no means
all, children afforded an ASD diagnosis has led to the proposal
of a neuroimmune subtype of ASD (McDougle et al. 2015).
Furthermore, several researchers have reported an association
between initial inflammatory insults and the subsequent de-
velopment of chronic immune disturbances in ASD children
(McDougle et al. 2015; Gottfried et al. 2015; Siniscalco et al.
2013). One possible explanation for this phenomenon is that
an unusually potent and/or prolonged immune response al-
lows for the development of macromolecular or tissue damage
leading to the formation of damage-associated molecular pat-
terns (DAMPs) (Lucas et al. 2015). The formation of such
DAMPs and the resultant chronic stimulation of pattern rec-
ognition receptors (PRRs), leading to the development of an
Bautotoxic loop^ of increasing inflammation and oxidative
stress, is considered to play a major role in the maintenance
and exacerbation of systemic inflammation, neuro-
inflammation and neurodegeneration in a range of autoim-
mune and neurodegenerative diseases such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), MS and Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
(Venegas and Heneka 2017; Land 2015). Frequent or
prolonged postnatal infections are an obvious source of in-
flammatory insults and such events appear to be associated
with a significantly increased risk of developing ASD
(Abdallah et al. 2012; Hadjkacem et al. 2016). However, other
environmental agents putatively associated with an increased
risk of developing the ASD phenotype, such as organophos-
phates, mercury and aluminium, also have the capacity to
provoke a prolonged and or exaggerated immune response
(Eisenkraft et al. 2013; Kern et al. 2016; Shaw and
Tomljenovic 2013). Aluminium salts in adjuvant form func-
tioning as DAMPs activate PRRs and exert profound stimu-
latory effects on innate immune responses (Powell et al. 2015)
and thus could be candidates for the generation of tissue dam-
age and DAMP formation in children with an underlying ten-
dency to produce an exaggerated immune response. There is
also evidence of increased aluminium levels in the hair and
urine of ASD children compared with unaffected controls
(Yasuda and Tsutsui 2013; Mohamed Fel et al. 2015;
Blaurock-Busch et al. 2012; Blaurock-Busch et al. 2011), al-
though this not an invariant finding (Fido and Al-Saad 2005;
Al-Ayadhi 2005). It should also be noted that aluminium ad-
juvants are becoming a recognised trigger of autoimmune pa-
thology in genetically susceptible individuals (Morris et al.
2015b).
Intriguingly, chronic or cumulative exposure to aluminium
reflected by increased levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and
serum may be one environmental factor in the pathogenesis
and pathophysiology of MS, Parkinson’s disease (PD) and
AD (Fulgenzi et al. 2014; Exley et al. 2006; Ahmed and
Santosh 2010; Yasui et al. 1992; Exley and Vickers 2014;
Basun et al. 1991). There is a wealth of research examining
the potential association between increased exposure to envi-
ronmental aluminium and the development of the last of these
illnesses. Indeed, a recent meta-analysis involving eight
cohort- and case-controlled studies conducted prior to 2015
involving 10,567 participants concluded that increased alu-
minium exposure increased the risk of developing AD by
some 71% (Wang et al. 2016). This seems a noteworthy find-
ing in the light of evidence indicating that AD is also an
aetiologically heterogeneous syndrome (Lam et al. 2013;
Morris and Berk 2015) as indeed is the case for PD (Klein
and Lohmann 2009; Korczyn and Hassin-Baer 2015) and MS
(Paz Soldan and Rodriguez 2002). Hence establishing an as-
sociation between AD and a single environmental factor in a
cross-sectional study when a multiplicity of such factors may
be involved in different patients is a difficult enterprise. Much
of the in vivo evidence examining the mechanisms underpin-
ning the pathological effects of aluminium exposure has been
obtained in the area of human and animal research into the
pathogenesis of AD. Such evidence includes the induction of
oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, microglial activa-
tion and functional dysregulation of microglia (Morris and
Berk 2016). This may be highly relevant as many children
with ASD also manifest oxidative stress (reviewed in
Depino 2013; Rossignol and Frye 2014; Frustaci et al.
2012), mitochondrial dysfunction (reviewed by Goh et al.
2014; Chen et al. 2015; Guevara-Campos et al. 2013) and
abnormal microglial activity as discussed above.
In this paper we aim to review the available evidence
purporting to establish an association between increased alu-
minium exposure and an increased risk of developing AD and
the evidence aimed at illuminating the potential pathophysio-
logical mechanisms by which aluminium could be an element
in the development of the illness in at least some people. The
objective of this part of the paper is to inform readers with an
interest in the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of ASD who
might not be aware of concerns regarding aluminium in the
pathogenesis of conditions other than ASD. We also aim to
highlight accumulating evidence suggesting that aluminium
adjuvants can precipitate serious autoimmune or auto-
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1337
 inflammatory pathology in genetically susceptible people
which is a growing area of concern. We will then move on
to consider evidence suggesting an association between the
increased use of aluminium salt adjuvants and an increased
incidence of ASD before moving on to touch briefly on the
safety or otherwise of vaccines in people with a predisposition
to autoimmunity and a range of polymorphisms in immune
genes. This would appear to be appropriate in the light of
changes in the conceptualisation of ASD as a syndrome with
a multiplicity of potential causes and increasing knowledge
regarding the effects of genetic variation in the immune sys-
tem and the response to vaccines. The remainder of the paper
will focus on mechanisms by which increased exposure to
aluminium could be an environmental trigger of ASD in at
least some children with a range of abnormalities in the per-
formance of their immune systems.
Section 1. Evidence highlighting the neurotoxic
properties of aluminium
Evidence of an association between chronic aluminium
exposure and the development of AD
The p-block metal aluminium, which is the third most fre-
quently occurring element in the Earth’s crust, occurs natural-
ly in the ore bauxite, various clays and alumino-silicate min-
erals, and has a preferred oxidation state of +3. Several authors
have reported a strong positive correlation between the level of
aluminium in drinking water and the incidence of AD throughout
the world including the United Kingdom, Canada, Norway and
France (Flaten 2001; Kawahara and Kato-Negishi 2011). The
most recently reported association was published by Rondeau
et al. (2009), who demonstrated that high daily consumption of
aluminium in drinking water was associated with a significantly
increased risk of developing mild cognitive impairment or AD in
a 15-year longitudinal French cohort study involving 1925 re-
cruits (Rondeau et al. 2009).
There is considerable in vitro and in vivo evidence demon-
strating that aluminium ions inhibit the dephosphorylation of
tau, potentiate the development of neurofibrillary tangles
(NFTs), cause the accumulation of amyloid beta protein and
accelerate the formation of amyloid plaques (Kawahara 2005;
Exley 2005). Despite such evidence, the enthusiasm for alu-
minium as a factor in the pathogenesis of AD waned largely
based on data suggesting that aluminium levels were no
higher in the brains of AD patients than in healthy controls,
and the failure to detect aluminium in NFTs and amyloid
plaques in post-mortem tissue at higher levels in AD than in
age- and sex-matched controls (Yumoto et al. 2009). In par-
ticular, no evidence of increased brain aluminium levels in AD
was found, using flameless atomic absorption spectrophotom-
etry, in the study of Jacobs et al. (1989). Furthermore, high
aluminium levels in the cores of amyloid or neuritic (senile)
plaques have not been reported in several studies variously
employing scanning proton microprobe analysis (Lovell
et al. 1993), energy-dispersive X-ray microprobe analysis
(Jacobs et al. 1989), electron microprobe analysis (Chafi
et al. 1991) or nuclear microscopy using particle-induced X-
ray emission, Rutherford backscattering spectrometry and
scanning transmission ion microscopy (Landsberg et al.
1992). In contrast, increased plaque core aluminium has been
reported in AD using an energy-dispersive X-ray microana-
lytical system (Edwardson et al. 1986) and a method based on
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry combined with
flow injection (Beauchemin and Kisilevsky 1998). Similarly,
the findings in relation to increased aluminium in NFTs are
inconsistent, with a positive finding using laser microprobe
mass analysis (Good et al. 1992), negative findings using
electron microprobe and ion microprobe analyses (Chafi
et al. 1991) and an intermediate finding (that is, slight in-
crease) again using laser microprobe mass analysis (Lovell
et al. 1993). A histochemical study of AD hippocampal
neurones reported evidence of aluminium in nucleoli and in
NFTs (Walton 2006).
Notwithstanding the above findings, some recent research
studies using more sensitive techniques have detected aluminium
in the brains of AD patients within plaques, NFTs and elsewhere
at significantly higher levels than in age- and sex-matched unaf-
fected controls (Yumoto et al. 2009; Bouras et al. 1997).
Furthermore, a number of studies reporting the effects of alumin-
ium exposure in animals have demonstrated the development of
AD and Alzheimer-like pathology in rodents (Al-Olayan et al.
2015; Abd-Elghaffar et al. 2005; Sumathi et al. 2015; Lu et al.
2014; Exley and Vickers 2014; Exley and Esiri 2006). Animal
studies have also revealed that aluminium administered orally or
via injection significantly decreased reduced glutathione levels
and the activities of catalase, superoxide dismutase, glutathione
peroxidase and glutathione reductase, and increased the levels of
nitric oxide (NO), PICs and lipid peroxidation (Sumathi et al.
2015; Al-Olayan et al. 2015). Moreover, histological examina-
tion has revealed apoptosis of hippocampal and cerebral cortical
neurones and the presence of NFTs, amyloid plaque deposition,
Schwann cell degeneration and nerve fibre demyelination (Abd-
Elghaffar et al. 2005).
Knowledge regarding the possible mechanisms by which
aluminium exposure could provoke some of the characteristic
features underpinning the pathophysiology of AD has also
evolved. In a recent paper, Zhao et al. (2014) reported on the
ability of physiologically realistic levels of aluminium to pro-
voke the aggregation of Aβ42 monomers into dimeric, oligo-
meric, and ultimately fibrillary structures. This team of au-
thors also cited decreased expression of triggering receptor
expressed in myeloid/microglial cells-2 (TREM2) in microg-
lia subsequent to the upregulation of miR-34a as the mecha-
nism underpinning impaired microglial-mediated clearance of
1338
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 Aβ42 peptides from the brain caused by prolonged exposure
to aluminium at nanomolar concentrations (Zhao et al. 2014).
Human in vivo studies have also reported specific aluminium-
related abnormalities in the brains of AD patients. The associa-
tion between prolonged exposure to environmental aluminium
and increased levels of phosphorylated tau subspecies in blood
lymphocytes has also been reported in a recent study involving
66 retired aluminium workers (Lu et al. 2014). Moreover, it has
been demonstrated that ferritin in plasma from AD patients, par-
ticularly those with mild AD, contains significantly higher con-
centrations of aluminium compared with plasma ferritin from
age- and sex-matched controls which, given the pivotal role of
this protein in the regulation of metal homeostasis, may be a
crucial finding; the finding of a higher level in mild AD com-
pared with severe AD may also point to a first phase in which
there is an aluminium overload of ferritin, followed by a phase in
which ferritin with reduced functional capacity releases alumin-
ium (De Sole et al. 2013). Interestingly, the capacity of alumin-
ium to disrupt the activity of ferritin and transferrin, with the
subsequent disruption of iron homeostasis, has been demonstrat-
ed in a series of studies implicating aluminium as a
potential causative agent in certain types of breast can-
cer cells as well as in primary invasive breast cancers
and ductal carcinoma in situ (Darbre et al. 2013; Darbre
et al. 2011; Mannello et al. 2013).
It should also be noted that, until recently, an explanation
which could explain the selective effects of AD on various re-
gions of the brain was lacking. However, in a study using elec-
trothermal atomic absorption spectroscopy of the aluminium
content of the arterial walls of eight arteries which supply the
brain, it was found that aluminium concentration is far higher in
the posterior cerebral artery (arteria cerebri posterior), which sup-
plies the hippocampus, in late-stage AD patients than in age- and
sex-matched controls (Bhattacharjee et al. 2013). This study is
particularly intriguing because, when taken as a whole, the data
indicate the presence of biochemical mechanisms in the endothe-
lial cells supplying the cerebral vasculature which enable the
binding of aluminium to selected areas such as the hippocampus,
known to play a major role in the pathogenesis of the illness
(Bhattacharjee et al. 2013).
There is little doubt that the weight of evidence implicating
aluminium in the causation of AD in at least some patients is
increasing. However, at the current time, despite an analysis
using Hill’s causality criteria concluding that aluminium
played a causative role in the development of AD (Walton
2014), there is currently no universal consensus on the subject,
and it seems reasonable to conclude that there is a correlative
link between aluminium and AD but that this association does
not currently amount to a causative relationship. There is,
however, an accumulating body of evidence suggesting that
that aluminium in adjuvant form may provoke systematic and
symptomatic autoimmune conditions in genetically suscepti-
ble individuals and we will now discuss this phenomenon.
The involvement of aluminium adjuvants
in the development of autoimmune syndrome induced
by adjuvants (ASIA)
Evidence demonstrating the development of chronic autoim-
mune or auto-inflammatory conditions following environmental
exposure to aluminium salts, and indeed other adjuvants, is in-
creasingly becoming a cause for concern (Zafrir et al. 2012;
Cerpa-Cruz et al. 2013; Jensen-Jarolim 2015; Willhite et al.
2014). Much of this evidence has been presented in the context
of the Bautoimmune (auto-inflammatory) syndrome induced by
adjuvants^ (ASIA), which encompasses a broad spectrum of
immune-mediated illnesses triggered by exposure to medical,
cosmetic or environmental adjuvants such as aluminium salts,
silicon compounds or indoor mould (Agmon-Levin et al.
2009). ASIA is characterised by specific and non-specific man-
ifestations of autoimmune disease such as chronic fatigue, myal-
gia, arthralgias, neurocognitive impairment, respiratory symp-
toms, gastrointestinal symptoms, dermatological signs and the
development of autoantibodies (Israeli 2012).
Medical conditions considered by some to be part of the syn-
drome include post-vaccination phenomena, Gulf War syn-
drome, macrophagic myofasciitis, antiphospholipid syndrome,
siliconosis and possibly chronic fatigue syndrome (myalgic en-
cephalomyelitis) and fibromyalgia syndrome (Cruz-Tapias et al.
2013; Vera-Lastra et al. 2013). It is interesting to note that data
from animal models suggest that adjuvants may play a role in the
development of syndromic autoimmune diseases such as SLE,
Sjögren’s syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis in some patients
(Cruz-Tapias et al. 2013; Bagavant et al. 2014).
Adjuvants were once thought to pose little or no independent
threat as drivers of pathology. Unfortunately, studies of animal
models and humans have demonstrated the ability of some of
them to induce autoimmunity and immune-mediated diseases
(Agmon-Levin et al. 2009; Elkayam et al. 2011). The mecha-
nisms underpinning adjuvant-induced immunotoxicity appear to
be somewhat varied, but clearly impinge on both innate and
humoral immune responses (Marrack et al. 2009; Kool et al.
2008a; Eisenbarth et al. 2008). It must be stated however that
adjuvant exposure per se does not appear to cause problems for
the vast majority of people and the development of ASIA seems
to depend on genetic predisposition or as yet undetermined en-
vironmental co-factors (Perricone et al. 2013; Esposito et al.
2014; Shoenfeld and Agmon-Levin 2011; Soriano et al. 2015).
Several authors have examined patients diagnosed with
autoimmune or other immune-mediated illnesses following
hepatitis B virus immunisation (Zafrir et al. 2012; Agmon-
Levin et al. 2009; Agmon-Levin et al. 2014). The largest such
study evaluated the medical records of 93 patients and report-
ed prevalence rates of different manifestations as follows: neu-
rological 67%; general symptoms 60%; musculoskeletal 60%;
gastrointestinal 51%; fatigue 42%, ophthalmological 32%;
muco-cutaneous 30%; sleep disturbance 19%; psychiatric
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1339
 16%; and local reactions 11% (Zafrir et al. 2012). Elevated
autoantibody titres were also documented in the sera in 80%
of the patients. Several vaccine adjuvants have also been im-
plicated in the development of autoimmune diseases which lie
outside ASIA, notably ASD which is a subject that we now
consider.
Aluminium adjuvants in the pathogenesis of ASD
From the perspective of aluminium adjuvants as a potential
contributory factor in the development of ASD (Shaw and
Tomljenovic 2013), a recent analysis applying Hill’s criteria
for establishing causality reported children living in countries
with the highest prevalence of ASD appear to have the
greatest exposure to vaccine based aluminium. Perhaps more
importantly, the increase in exposure to aluminium adjuvants
displayed a significant positive correlation with the increased
prevalence of ASD in the USA recorded over the last 20 years
(r = 0.92, p < 0.0001). Awider analysis revealed the presence
of significant positive correlation between the levels of alu-
minium in adjuvant form administered to preschool children
at around three to four months old and the existing ASD prev-
alence in seven major Western countries (r = 0.89 to 0.94,
p = 0.0018 to 0.0248) (Shaw and Tomljenovic 2013).
Taylor and colleagues, in a meta-analysis of 10 pre-selected
predominantly retrospective studies, reported no causal rela-
tionship between a range of mercury containing vaccines and
a range of neurodevelopmental conditions such as pervasive
developmental delay (PDD), attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), autistic disorder and ASD as diagnosed
by several different criteria (Taylor et al. 2014).
It is worth noting that the questions asked by the above two
groups are different, with the first focusing entirely on autism
using current diagnostic criteria while the second used a range
of different case definitions of autism and autism-like conditions
and also included children with PDD. Indeed, one large study
included in the analysis focused entirely on PDD (Smeeth et al.
2004), while another two focused on general
neurodevelopmental conditions (Andrews et al. 2004;
Verstraeten et al. 2003). It is also fair to say that the conclusions
of another study (DeStefano 2007) have been challenged and a
re-analysis of the data has revealed a significant association be-
tween a first measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) immunisation
before the age of 36 months in African-American males and a
diagnosis of ASD (Hooker 2014), although it should be noted
that this last study has since been retracted. It would appear that
the statisticians involved in the meta-analysis by Taylor et al.
(2014) viewed PDD, ADHD and ASD as essentially the same
condition, or, the interpretation of this and other data is based on
the concept of ASD as a discrete disease entity which is being
increasingly called into question (Zhubi et al. 2014; V
oineagu
2012; Betancur 2011; Tordjman et al. 2014; Ruggeri et al.
2014; Georgiades et al. 2013). However, in spite of these issues
those who believe that adjuvants cause Bautism^ have one ques-
tion which currently remains unanswered, namely that if alumin-
ium or other adjuvants per se provoke chronic central nervous
system and peripheral pathology, why is the prevalence of ASD
not far higher than it is now? Given the ubiquity of vaccination
one would expect that almost every child would be affected. This
fact alone means that adjuvants are highly unlikely to be the main
cause of ASD. However, research within the ASIA paradigm and
beyond does suggest that aluminium adjuvants, and indeed vac-
cination per se, can cause serious long-term pathology in people
with a certain genetic vulnerability, especially in the case of latent
or subclinical auto-immune diseases, and we now move on brief-
ly to detail such evidence.
Section 2. Pathological effects of vaccines in people
with a predisposition to autoimmunity
Langer-Gould and colleagues reviewed the medical records of
780 patients with newly diagnosed MS, clinically isolated syn-
drome (optic neuritis, transverse myelitis, and monofocal or mul-
tifocal clinically isolated syndrome) or acute disseminated en-
cephalomyelitis (ADEM) and concluded that vaccines may ac-
celerate or precipitate the transition between subclinical and overt
symptomatic autoimmune conditions within the first 30 days
post-immunisation, particularly in those aged under 50 years
(Langer-Gould et al. 2014). Several other authors have reported
an association between the quadrivalent human papilloma vac-
cine and the development of several autoimmune diseases in-
cluding Raynaud’s disease, Behçet’s syndrome, type 1 diabetes
mellitus and Hashimoto’s syndrome (Arnheim-Dahlstrom et al.
2013; Chao et al. 2012). However, once again it would appear
that affected patients displayed signs of subclinical autoimmunity
prior to vaccination which may have subsequently triggered ac-
tive disease (Chao et al. 2012; Arnheim-Dahlstrom et al. 2013).
Many research teams reviewing adverse event data have reached
similar conclusions (Pellegrino et al. 2015; Petrovsky 2015;
Guimaraes et al. 2015). Grimaldi-Bensouda and colleagues
found a positive association between a personal and family his-
tory of autoimmune diseases and the development of several
different autoimmune diseases post-vaccination (Grimaldi-
Bensouda et al. 2014). Interestingly, and perhaps reassuringly, a
prospective longitudinal case-controlled study examining initial-
ly unaffected patients with no evidence of overt or covert auto-
immune disease failed to demonstrate any association between
vaccination and the development of ADEM or other autoim-
mune conditions (Scheller et al. 2015). However, as previously
noted, there is considerable evidence that vaccines, or more likely
vaccine adjuvants, may precipitate specific autoimmune
sequelae in genetically or epigenetically vulnerable peo-
ple (Pellegrino et al. 2015; Petrovsky 2015; Guimaraes
et al. 2015). We will now discuss possible mechanisms
which may underpin this effect.
1340
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 Polymorphisms in human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
and Toll-like receptor (TLR) and immune response
to vaccination
There is a vast body of data demonstrating that immune and
inflammatory responses to vaccines such as MMR are heavily
influenced by polymorphisms in the HLA region and in genes
encoding effector proteins such as cytokines and PRRs which
have the capacity to recognise and become activated by con-
served pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) to pro-
duce immune response molecules such as PICs and interferons
(Haralambieva et al. 2013; Lucas and Maes 2013). Examples of
PRRs include membrane-bound receptors such as TLRs (e.g.
TLR-4) and cytosolic receptors such as retinoic acid-inducible
gene (RIG)-like receptors (Kumar et al. 2013). Readers interested
in examining the evidence purporting to demonstrate an associ-
ation between HLA polymorphisms and unusual response to the
MMR vaccine are referred to an excellent review by Castiblanco
and Anaya 2015. Extensive research has also revealed that im-
mune responses to vaccines per se in any given individual are
determined by polymorphisms and methylation patterns in the
HLA region, cytokine and TLR genes coupled with the compo-
sition of the microbiome, the presence of co-infections, and a
whole host of environmental variables (review Poland et al.
2013). These observations provide the basis for a mechanism
whereby adjuvants could provoke an abnormal response in peo-
ple with certain polymorphisms and/or methylation patterns in
the HLA region, cytokine and TLR genes leading to excessively
powerful and/or prolonged immune activity resulting in tissue
damage and the generation of DAMPs, such as S100b, with
the subsequent development of chronic immune and inflamma-
tory pathology (Lucas and Maes 2013; Lucas et al. 2015). This
will be the theme developed in the remainder of this paper. First,
however, it is appropriate to consider whether aluminium in en-
vironmental or adjuvant form does indeed possess the capacity to
generate the range of pathology seen in some children with an
ASD diagnosis, which we will now consider.
Section 3. Chronic aluminium exposure
and the development of chronic oxidative stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction and gliopathology
Aluminium exposure provoking PIC and chemokine
production
Aluminium salt-containing adjuvants induce the production of
the interleukins (ILs) IL-1β, IL-8 and IL-18 in TLR-stimulated
dendritic cells and macrophages (Kuroda et al. 2011; Li et al.
2008; Sharp et al. 2009). There are now considerable, albeit
in vitro, data demonstrating that such activation is dependent
upon nucleotide-binding oligomerisation domain-like receptor
pyrin domain-3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation (Kool et al.
2008a; Franchi and Nunez 2008). Aluminium salts can activate
the NLRP3 inflammasome via a number of different routes.
These include destabilisation of phagosomes, acidification of
lysosomes and increases in reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels
(Kool et al. 2012; Hornung et al. 2008; Sharp et al. 2009). In vivo,
aluminium hydroxide appears to induce dendritic cell and T-cell
activation at least partly via NLRP3 activation (Kool et al. 2008a;
Eisenbarth et al. 2008) although alternative routes such as
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) and in-
terferon response factor 3 (irf3) activation appear to be involved
(Kuroda et al. 2011; Marichal et al. 2011). Aluminium adjuvants
also provoke an immune response via the generation of DAMPs,
notably uric acid and host DNA (outside cell nuclei and mito-
chondria) (Kool et al. 2012; Kool et al. 2008b). There is a body
of evidence demonstrating that uric acid and DNA are released
in vivo following aluminium hydroxide injection (Marichal et al.
2011; Kool et al. 2008b). Uric acid is a DAMP synthesised
during purine nucleotide catabolism whose concentration in-
creases during cellular stress, such as at the site of injection
(Kool et al. 2008b). The functional relevance of uric acid levels
in increasing T-cell priming and the instigation of humoral im-
mune responses has been repeatedly demonstrated (Kool et al.
2008b; Munks et al. 2010). Both uric acid and aluminium hy-
droxide can independently activate the NLRP3 inflammasome,
inducing the secretion of IL-1β (Kool et al. 2008a; Franchi and
Nunez 2008). Uric acid crystals administered in the form of an
adjuvant can also induce complement responses and a T helper
type 2 (Th2) cell differentiation pattern (Kool et al. 2011; Shi
et al. 2003). Host DNA released into the intracellular space fol-
lowing cellular necrosis also acts as a DAMP. Testimony to the
highly immunogenic nature of double-stranded stranded DNA is
shown by data demonstrating that it can be used as a substitute
for aluminium hydroxide as a vaccine adjuvant (Marichal et al.
2011). Double-stranded cytosolic DNA is sensed by a number of
PRRs including TLR-9, leading to the production of PICs via the
activation of nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of acti-
vated B cells (NF-κB) or interferon-beta (IFN-β) via the activa-
tion of irf3 (Stetson and Medzhitov 2006; Thompson et al. 2011).
Aluminium exposure and the generation of oxidative
stress
Oxidative damage as evidenced by increased lipid peroxidation
and depleted anti-oxidant defences induced by prolonged alu-
minium exposure appears to be focused in the prefrontal cortex,
cerebellum, hippocampus and brainstem (Yuan et al. 2012;
Kumar et al. 2011). It is also noteworthy that several authors
have reported a linear relationship between increased cellular
levels of aluminium and concentrations of protein carbonyls
and S100 proteins (Mannello et al. 2013; Darbre et al. 2013;
Darbre et al. 2011). This is of particular interest as these mole-
cules may function as DAMPs and cause chronic stimulation of
PRRs and hence be a source of chronic immune activation as
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1341
 discussed above. Increased levels of lipid peroxidation in the
brain with the production of malondialdehyde (MDA), 4-hy-
droxy-2-trans-nonenal (HNE or 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNA))
and thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) following
oral administration of aluminium chloride is also a common
finding in small-animal studies (Newairy et al. 2009; Albendea
et al. 2007; Yuan et al. 2012; Lu et al. 2013).
Chronic aluminium exposure also exerts profound detri-
mental effects on cellular anti-oxidant defences leading to sig-
nificantly reduced cellular levels of glutathione transferase,
glutathione peroxidase, catalase, superoxide dismutase and
reduced glutathione (GSH) (Nampoothiri et al. 2015; El-
Demerdash 2004; Yousef 2004; Kumar et al. 2011; Newairy
et al. 2009). Aluminium ingestion also decreases GSH levels
in human blood samples (Khan et al. 2011). Interestingly,
aluminium decreases levels of this thiol by inhibiting the ac-
tivity of NADPH-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase in mi-
tochondria and malic enzyme and NADPH isocitrate dehydro-
genase in the cytosol (Murakami and Yoshino 2004). This is
of importance as depleted levels of these enzymes make cells
more sensitive to lipid peroxidation and oxidative mitochon-
drial DNA damage from singlet oxygen species in an environ-
ment of chronic oxidative stress (Kim and Park 2003; Lee
et al. 2002; Kochevar 2004). In this context the existence of
oxidative damage to mitochondrial proteins and DNA follow-
ing prolonged aluminium exposure was reported by Sharma
and colleagues (Sharma et al. 2013). Aluminium ingestion
also leads to increased oxidative stress, markers of lipid per-
oxidation and decreased GSH levels in the epithelial cells
lining the small intestine (Orihuela et al. 2005). This depletion
of GSH appears to be affected by reduced activity of GSH
synthase, GSH reductase and as yet undelineated changes to
the plasma membranes resulting in a reduced influx of GSH
from the lumen to the mucosa (Orihuela et al. 2005). This
aluminium-induced depletion of GSH impairs the activity of
calbindin-D9k resulting in decreased transcellular absorption
of calcium ions (Orihuela et al. 2005). Given the positive role
played by calcium ions in maintaining epithelial barrier integ-
rity (Ma et al. 2000; Schepens et al. 2009), depletion of GSH
could well underpin the increases in intestinal inflammation
and intestinal barrier permeability caused by prolonged con-
sumption of aluminium (Pineton de Chambrun et al. 2014).
Aluminium exposure and the development
of mitochondrial dysfunction
Oxidative stress and subsequent mitochondrial dysfunction con-
stitute the major vehicle underpinning aluminium-induced neu-
rotoxicity (for review see Kumar and Gill 2014). Exposure to
aluminium ions leads to a significant decrease in the activity of
cytochrome C oxidase, NADH and succinate dehydrogenase,
and a subsequent decrease in state 3 (ADP stimulated) and state
4 mitochondrial respiration, which are likely caused by
conformational changes in these enzymes as a direct result of
aluminium ion binding (Dua et al. 2010; Mohan et al. 2009;
Mustafa Rizvi et al. 2014; Kumar et al. 2008). Aluminium also
impairs mitochondrial biogenesis by decreasing levels of perox-
isome proliferator activated receptor gamma co-activator 1α
(PGC-1α) activity, either directly or indirectly as a result of in-
ducing elevated levels of oxidative stress (Sharma et al. 2013).
Aluminium ions also display the capacity to bind to the phos-
phate groups of ATP and ADP and inhibit the phosphorylation of
the latter molecule and the dephosphorylation of the former, and
this together with the capacity to inhibit a wide range of kinase
and phosphatase enzymes can grossly impair energy homeostasis
(Kawahara and Kato-Negishi 2011).
Aluminium can also impair mitochondrial function indirectly
via mechanisms such as the induction of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress (Mustafa Rizvi et al. 2014; Johnson et al. 2005).
Aluminium also induces mitochondrial dysfunction by provok-
ing release of calcium ions from intracellular stores, and it is
noteworthy that aluminium-induced oxidative damage and dis-
ruption of calcium ion homeostasis is similar in pattern to that
seen in AD (Johnson et al. 2005; Walton 2012). The functional
and physical relationship between the ER and mitochondria is
well documented in the context of apoptosis, but perhaps under-
discussed in the context of ER stress which is sub-lethal to the
cell (Vannuvel et al. 2013). In the latter environment, the unfold-
ed protein response in general, and protein kinase RNA-like ER
kinase activity in particular, leads to a state of chronic mitochon-
drial underperformance rather than cellular death. This is a com-
plex area and readers wishing to delve deeper into such mecha-
nisms are invited to consult the work of Rainbolt et al. 2014.
Calcium dyshomeostasis is equally detrimental to mito-
chondrial function and of vital importance in the maintenance
of neural function by matching mitochondrial energy produc-
tion to demand (Rueda et al. 2014; Llorente-Folch et al. 2013).
In particular, modest elevations of calcium ions in the cytosol
following increases in neural activity act as the Bgas pedal^ (or
Baccelerator^) to increase energy production and maintain
ATP homeostasis, hence impaired calcium homeostasis can
have profound adverse effects on neural function, even in
the absence of frank apoptosis (Gellerich et al. 2013) The
adverse effects of aluminium on calcium homeostasis is likely
one mechanism involved in aluminium-induced neuropathol-
ogy and we now turn to a consideration of other mechanisms
whereby aluminium exposure could result in the type of as-
trocytic and microglial dysfunction seen in many children
with a confirmed diagnosis of ASD.
The above effects of aluminium are summarised in Fig. 1.
Aluminium exposure and glial cell activation
or dysfunction
Chronic or prolonged exposure to aluminium can induce astro-
cyte apoptosis with one mechanism thought to involve DNA and
1342
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 chromatin damage, and hence mediated by p53 (Suarez-
Fernandez et al. 1999; Johnson et al. 2005). Another route may
involve inhibition of mitochondrial function and ATP produc-
tion, ultimately causing necrosis, which can have profound and
prolonged neuro-inflammatory consequences (Lemire and
Appanna 2011). Prolonged aluminium exposure can also induce
significant metabolic changes in astrocytes, which can
compromise function even in the absence of degenera-
tion. Such abnormalities include decreasing the activity
of γ-butyrobetainealdehyde dehydrogenase and γ-
butyrobetainealdehyde dioxygenase and reduced levels of
α-ketoglutarate (AKG), leading to low levels of L-carnitine
and subsequently impaired fatty acid beta-oxidation, mito-
chondrial dysfunction, reduced ATP production and in-
creased lipogenesis (Mailloux et al. 2011; Lemire et al.
2011; Han et al. 2013).
The increased lipogenesis subsequent to aluminium-
induced mitochondrial dysfunction via this route is enabled
by significant increases in lipogenic enzymes such as acetyl
CoA carboxylase (Mailloux et al. 2006). The increase in ac-
tivity of these enzymes is accompanied by decreases in the
activity of key enzymes within the electron transport chain
and the tricarboxylic acid (Kreb’s) cycle, such as succinate
dehydrogenase and AKG, leading to a significant decrease
in the levels of ATP produced by oxidative phosphorylation
(Mailloux et al. 2009; Mailloux et al. 2006; Mailloux et al.
2007). The loss of AKG activity in mitochondria and cytosol,
likely caused by sequestration of this molecule by antioxidant
defences, also results in significant negative consequences for
energy generation within the glial cells. Briefly, AKG acts to
stabilise hypoxia-inducible factor-1-alpha (HIF-1α) in the cy-
toplasm and prevents its translocation to the nucleus.
However, in a cellular environment of increased aluminium
cations and subsequently reduced AKG levels, HIF-1α trans-
locates to the nucleus provoking increases in the transcription
of hexokinase, pyruvate kinase, lactate dehydrogenase and
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, with the ultimate effect
of switching from energy production by oxidative phosphor-
ylation to the phylogenetically more ancient pathway of ener-
gy production via glycolysis (Mailloux and Appanna 2007;
Agrawal et al. 2007).
Aluminium also induces significant alterations to
glutamate/glutamine recycling within astrocytes leading to in-
creased glutamine to glutamate conversion coupled with in-
creased uptake of glutamate and increased intracellular levels
of glutamine (Zielke et al. 1993; Struys-Ponsar et al. 2000).
This has the effect of modulating glutamatergic and GABA-
ergic neurotransmission, but may also have significant bioen-
ergetic consequences given that increased levels of glutamate
within astrocytes act as a further stimulus for increased gly-
colysis (Albrecht et al. 2010; Bouzier-Sore and Pellerin 2013).
These observations are pertinent from the perspective of po-
tentially impaired neurodevelopment as astrocytes play an im-
portant role in the development of the brain by regulating
processes involved in synaptic transmission, neuronal migra-
tion, synaptogenesis and maybe even myelination (reviewed
by Molofsky et al. 2012). The weight of evidence also indi-
cates that the activity of these glial cells is of paramount im-
portance in the development and maintenance of neural net-
works and circuits (Clarke and Barres 2013). Furthermore,
there is now considerable evidence indicating that impaired
astrocyte function plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of
neurodevelopmental disorders (Molofsky et al. 2012; Sloan
and Barres 2013; Yang et al. 2013).
Aluminium can activate microglia leading to secretion of
TNF-α, IL-6 and cytokine-inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS or NOS-2) and the development of neuro-
inflammatory PICs and ROS (Bondy 2010; Zaky et al.
2013). This is also an important finding as there is now over-
whelming evidence demonstrating that microglia play an in-
dispensable role in the development of the brain by regulating
processes such as synaptic pruning, synaptic plasticity, synap-
togenesis, neuronal development and other vital processes in
neurogenesis (Kettenmann et al. 2013). Microglial dysfunc-
tion and/or priming provoked by immune challenges, inflam-
matory events or other changes in the brain which interfere
with processes such as synaptic pruning and neural prolifera-
tion is now thought to play a major causative role in the de-
velopment of ASD and other neurodevelopmental disorders
such a schizophrenia (Harry and Kraft 2012; Harry 2013;
Hoeijmakers et al. 2016; Edmonson et al. 2016). The stepwise
development of microglia is regulated by the activity of sev-
eral genes, and disruption in the expression of these genes can
occur as a result of prenatal immune activation or disturbances
in the microbiota (Matcovitch-Natan et al. 2016). Aluminium
can also provoke microglial activation and dysfunction via
Fig. 1 Summary of the effects of aluminium
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1343
 several other mechanisms, notably by impairing the function
of the multifunctional molecular complex of the adapter pro-
tein, DNAX activating protein of 12 kD (DAP12) with
TREM2, i.e. DAP12/TREM2, which is expressed on the sur-
face of glial cells (Bhattacharjee et al. 2014; Zhao et al. 2014;
Alexandrov et al. 2013).
The DAP12/TREM2 protein complex plays a major role in
the regulation of central nervous system homeostasis
(Paradowska-Gorycka and Jurkowska 2013; Thrash et al.
2009). TREM2 binds a range of liposaccharides, phospholipids
and polyanions with the subsequent activation of DAP12 and an
array of downstream kinases cumulating in cellular activation
(Poliani et al. 2015; Takahashi et al. 2007). Activation of the
DAP12/TREM2 axis has an important role in limiting PICs
and other neurotoxins following TLR activation by PAMPs
and DAMPs, and promotes the survival and proliferation of mi-
croglia and other cells of the myeloid lineage (Poliani et al. 2015;
Peng et al. 2013). However, in recent years the bulk of research
on the DAP12/TREM2 complex has focused on its role in en-
abling and regulating microglial phagocytosis (Neumann and
Takahashi 2007; Painter et al. 2015). TREM2 acts as a molecular
sensor of macromolecular debris and plays an indispensable role
in its immunogenically silent clearance, thereby resolving poten-
tially inflammatory reactions and acting as an impediment to the
development of neuro-inflammation (Painter et al. 2015;
Takahashi et al. 2005; Takahashi et al. 2007; Hsieh et al. 2009).
Microglial phagocytic processes play an essential role in
removing damaged or stressed neurons and synaptic struc-
tures, apoptotic cells and other cellular debris from the brain,
which have the potential of being immunogenic, and thus
militate against the development of neuro-inflammation.
Hence, this process plays an indispensable role in the mainte-
nance of neural homeostasis (Fu et al. 2014; Jones et al. 2014;
Zhao and Lukiw 2013). Unsurprisingly, several research
teams have reported that failure of these unceasing microglial
phagocytic processes have serious and potentially catastrophic
innate-immune, pro-inflammatory and neuropathogenic con-
sequences (Jones et al. 2014; Koenigsknecht-Talboo et al.
2008). Crucially, as previously noted, microglial apoptosis is
both regulated and enabled by TREM2 (Zhao and Lukiw
2013; Alexandrov et al. 2013; Jones et al. 2014; Wang et al.
2015). Impairment in the activity and/or expression of
TREM2 causes gross impairments of microglial phagocytic
activity leading to a broad spectrum of central nervous system
pathology including neuro-inflammation, synapatic loss, neu-
ronal loss and exaggerated production of PICs (Wang et al.
2015; Hickman and El Khoury 2014; Jiang et al. 2014).
TREM2 expression in turn is regulated by a number of
miRNAs, most notably miR-34a (Zhao et al. 2013; Zhao
and Lukiw 2013; Alexandrov et al. 2013). Microglial miR-
34a expression is upregulated by activation of the pro-
inflammatory transcription factor NF-κB (Zhang et al. 2011;
Hickman and El Khoury 2014; Bhattacharjee et al. 2014).
Aluminium in adjuvant or environmental form upregulates
NF-κB (Pogue et al. 2009; Bondy 2014), and thereby induces
a number of NF-κB-sensitive pro-inflammatory miRNAs, no-
tably miR-34a (Fu et al. 2014; Jones et al. 2014; Hickman and
El Khoury 2014; Zhang et al. 2013; Zhao and Lukiw 2013),
which in turn downregulates TREM2 expression in the mem-
branes of glial cells leading to a profound deficit in their
phagocytic capability (Hickman and El Khoury 2014; Zhao
et al. 2013; Bhattacharjee et al. 2014).
Upregulation of NF-κB induces the synthesis of other in-
flammatory miRNAs such as miR-9, miR-125b, miR-146a
and miR-155, which are recognised drivers of pathology in
several neurodegenerative diseases such as AD (Zhao et al.
2014; Lukiw 2012). While aluminium clearly could provoke
chronic pathology in people with a high or prolonged expo-
sure, it should be further emphasised that the likelihood that
adjuvant use could be the main cause of ASD in children, or
indeed harmful to the vast majority of children with normal
immune responses, appears to be vanishingly small. However,
the situation in children with an abnormal immune system and
a predisposition to autoimmunity may be different, and this
will be the final area of discussion in this paper.
The actions of aluminium on astrocytes and microglia are
summarised in Fig. 2.
Section 4. Consequences of aluminium exposure
in individuals with abnormal immune responses
Polymorphisms in immune effector genes
Abnormalities in the performance of PPRs are increasingly
associated with the development of neurodegenerative and
autoimmune conditions (Moraes et al. 2013; Cook et al.
Fig. 2 Effects of aluminium on astrocytes and microglia
1344
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 2004; Marshak-Rothstein 2006; Pradhan et al. 2012; Liu et al.
2014). In particular, functional polymorphisms in the genes
encoding proteins involved in effecting the immune response
following ligation of TLR-4, TLR-7 and TLR-9 increase the
susceptibility to and/or severity of a range of neurological,
auto-immune, inflammatory and infective illnesses, including
SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, sepsis and hepatitis
(Moraes et al. 2013; Dhaouadi et al. 2013; Fichna et al.
2016; Netea et al. 2012). Unsurprisingly, functional polymor-
phisms in cytokine genes such as those encoding for TNF-α,
IL-β, IL-6, IL-10 and IL-4 also increase the susceptibility to
develop a range of inflammatory, infective and autoimmune
conditions (Morris and Berk 2015).
The presence of these polymorphisms can also heavily in-
fluence the severity and ultimate trajectory of these diseases in
any given individual (Arfanakis et al. 2013; Tunçbilek 2014;
Haukim et al. 2002; Hollegaard and Bidwell 2006). There is
also accumulating evidence that functional polymorphisms in
genes encoding cytokines and/or their receptors increase the
risk of neuro-inflammatory and neurodegenerative pathology
such as stroke, AD, and MS (Ottoboni et al. 2013; Bagnoli
et al. 2007; Miranda-Hernandez and Baxter 2013; Cui et al.
2012). Functional polymorphisms can also lead to altered
structure and function of receptor and effector proteins in-
volved in a broad range of inflammasome responses, and once
again such mutations are also involved in the pathogenesis of
several autoimmune, neuro-immune and neurodegenerative
diseases (Pontillo et al. 2012; Tan et al. 2013; review by
Yang and Chiang 2015). In general, Bpathological^ polymor-
phisms within nuclear localisation leucine-rich-repeat protein-
1 (NLRP1) pathways lead to an exaggerated and/or prolonged
inflammatory response (Levandowski et al. 2013).
It is of interest that recent research has revealed a signifi-
cant association between the cumulative presence of immune
gene polymorphisms and increased risk of developing ASD
(Ramos et al. 2012). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in immune genes in many children also display a signature
pattern which is characteristic of autoimmune diseases such as
MS (Jung et al. 2011). Unsurprisingly, polymorphisms in the
HLA system, notably HLA-DR4 and HLA-A2, are associated
with a significantly increased likelihood of developing the
syndrome (Mostafa et al. 2013; Torres et al. 2012). It is also
noteworthy that the concomitant presence of abnormally
expressed genes governing the regulation and delivery of im-
mune and inflammatory responses can predict the develop-
ment of ASD with some 83% accuracy (Pramparo et al. 2015).
There is now copious evidence of dysregulated expression
of genes regulating the innate and adaptive immune response
in children with ASD (Michel et al. 2012; Gupta et al. 2014).
There is also some evidence of functional polymorphisms
coupled with exaggerated PRR responses in at least some
affected children (Bennabi et al. 2015; Enstrom et al. 2010).
There is also an accumulating body of research demonstrating
that immune responses following activation of TLRs are ab-
normal in many children who have received a diagnosis of
ASD (Mead and Ashwood 2015; Gesundheit et al. 2013;
Enstrom et al. 2010). Moreover, several research teams have
adduced evidence indicating that the immune response is ab-
normal in many children with ASD, and in particular that
genes governing the regulation and performance of immune
and inflammatory responses are upregulated allowing for an
excessive and/or prolonged response to an environmental in-
sult (Voineagu and Eapen 2013; Koufaris and Sismani 2015).
It is also noteworthy that several researchers have also report-
ed an association between initial inflammatory insults and the
subsequent development of chronic immune disturbances in
ASD children (Siniscalco 2015; Gottfried et al. 2015;
McDougle et al. 2015). This is particularly noteworthy, as
prolonged and/or excessive activation of immune and inflam-
matory pathways leading to oxidative and nitrosative stress
can have detrimental consequences for cellular and tissue in-
tegrity, which in turn could lead to the chronic activation of
immune and inflammatory pathways and ultimately of mi-
croglia and astrocytes in the brain as we will now discuss.
Prolonged or excessive immune responses
and the production of DAMPs
Oxidative stress activates NFκB and other transcription fac-
tors such as activated protein-1 (AP-1), leading to the synthe-
sis and secretion of PICs, various chemokine species by anti-
gen presentation cells, and activation and proliferation of T
and B lymphocytes (Morris et al. 2015a; Lucas et al. 2015).
Such activation and PIC production leads to the upregulation
of iNOS and NADPH oxidase, leading to the production of
superoxide, NO and peroxynitrite, and hence further increases
in ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) levels (Morris
and Maes 2014; Morris et al. 2015a). This bidirectional and
self-amplifying relationship between the development of
chronic systemic inflammation as evidenced by increased
PIC levels and chronic nitro-oxidative stress as evidenced by
increased levels of ROS and RNS is often labelled an
Bautotoxic loop^ (Reuter et al. 2010; Ortiz et al. 2013).
Excessive levels of ROS and RNS can also lead to the oxida-
tive and nitrosative modification of lipids, proteins and DNA,
leading to misfolded, and consequently immunogenic, pro-
teins, oxidative modification of DNA and lipid peroxidation
of cell membranes, together with the production of highly
reactive ketones and aldehydes (Lucas et al. 2015). The net
result of these processes is the indirect and direct formation of
DAMPs capable of activating pathogen-sensing receptors on
the cell surface, and in the cytoplasm of immune cells (Hwang
2013; Ortiz et al. 2013).
In summary, the presence of the immune abnormalities
discussed allows for an abnormally excessive or prolonged
inflammatory response following exposure to aluminium
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1345
 adjuvants, leading to the production of DAMPs and subse-
quent chronic immune activation in genetically susceptible
children. It is noteworthy that several authors have reported
the presence of DAMPs such as protein carbonyls, MDA and
high-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) protein in at least some
children afforded a diagnosis of ASD, and such DAMPs could
play a major role in initiating and maintaining a state of im-
mune activation and inflammation seen in many children with
an ASD diagnosis (Babinska et al. 2014; Emanuele et al.
2010; Frank et al. 2016; Napoli et al. 2013).
Chronic engagement of TLRs by DAMPs leads to the de-
velopment of a positive feedback loop, whereby increasing
tissue damage caused by elevated PICs, ROS and RNS per-
petuates and escalates pro-inflammatory responses, leading to
a state of chronic inflammation nitro-oxidative stress, mito-
chondrial dysfunction and glial cell activation (Drexler and
Foxwell 2010; Piccinini and Midwood 2010; Goh and
Midwood 2012; Morris and Berk 2015). Unsurprisingly,
chronic engagement of TLRs, nucleotide-binding
oligomerisation domain (NOD)-like receptors and RIG-like
receptors is implicated in the pathogenesis and pathophysiol-
ogy of SLE, rheumatoid arthritis and MS (review (Drexler and
Foxwell 2010; Piccinini and Midwood 2010; Goh and
Midwood 2012)). Pertinently, the presence of DAMPs can
also lead to the chronic activation of the inflammasome
(Anders and Schaefer 2014) which is also implicated in the
development of neuro-inflammation and abnormal central
nervous system signalling characteristic of neurodegenerative
and neurodevelopmental disorders (Tan et al. 2013; Singhal
et al. 2014). It is also of interest that a recent study has reported
the presence of activated inflammasome complexes in at least
some children afforded a diagnosis of ASD (Saresella et al.
2016) There is now overwhelming evidence that prolonged
and/or chronic activation of peripheral immune and inflam-
matory pathways provokes the development of chronic neuro-
inflammtion and/or microglial priming and a brief explanation
of this process will constitute the final subsection of this paper.
Systemic immune activation primed microglia
and chronic neuro-inflammation
There is ample evidence demonstrating that chronic immune
system activation and systemic inflammation can lead to the
development of chronic neuro-inflammation (Perry and
Holmes 2014; Cunningham 2013). Communication of inflam-
matory signals to the brain is mediated by PICs via a number of
routes, including innervation of the vagus nerve, carrier-enabled
transport across the blood-brain barrier (BBB), activation of en-
dothelial cells within the BBB and perivascular macrophages,
and finally via transport through circumventricular organs devoid
of a functional BBB (Morris and Maes 2012, 2014). The trans-
duced inflammatory signals may lead to the development of
chronic neuro-inflammation via the activation of microglia if of
sufficient intensity and/or duration or lead to the development of
Bprimed^ microglia (Perry and Holmes 2014; Su and Federoff
2014). Microglial priming involves the upregulation of a range of
surface receptors such as MHC class II, CD11b and CD11c
integrins, co-stimulatory molecule CD86 and TLR-4 (Su and
Federoff 2014).
Following the upregulation of these receptors, such mi-
croglia become exquisitely sensitive to subsequent inflamma-
tory stimuli, leading to an exaggerated production of neuro-
toxic molecules that may exacerbate the pre-existing patholo-
gy and may even accelerate the progression of existing neuro-
inflammatory or neurodegenerative diseases (Ferrari and
Tarelli 2011; Lunnon et al. 2011). Activated microglia exert
their neurotoxic effects by releasing PICs, such as TNF-α, IL-
1β, IL-6, and IFN-γ, and free radicals including superoxide,
NO and peroxynitrite, as well as inflammatory molecules such
as prostaglandin E2. Moreover, TNF-α, IL-1β and IFN-γ can
act as secondary sources of RNS and other inflammatory mol-
ecules by acting as potent inducers of iNOS and via their
capacity to upregulate cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) with the
resultant production of prostaglandin E2 (Morris et al.
2015b; Perry et al. 2010). The concept of microglial priming
could change the frame of reference from a consideration of a
single inoculation containing aluminium adjuvant to a cumu-
lative effect caused by a vaccination schedule in which suc-
cessive immune insults over a short period could provoke
chronic pathology either directly, by provoking microglial ac-
tivity, or more indirectly by provoking macromolecular dam-
age which could eventually reach a threshold capable of pro-
voking chronic pathology. It should be noted that there is an
accumulating body of evidence, albeit from animal studies,
that successive and frequent postnatal immune and inflamma-
tory insults play a pivotal role in the advent of microglial
priming and the genesis of neurodevelopmental disorders
(Ibi and Yamada 2015; Nagai 2013). There is also emerging
data implicating the development of microglial priming as a
major factor in the development of several if not all neurode-
generative diseases (Bhattacharya et al. 2016; Zhao et al.
2014; Shastri et al. 2013; Hoeijmakers et al. 2016).
Summary
Evidence of the neurotoxicity of aluminium cations (Al3+) in-
cludes: an association between chronic aluminium exposure
and the development of AD; the involvement of aluminium
adjuvants in the development of ASIA; and epidemiological
evidence pointing to an association between the use of alumin-
ium adjuvants and ASD. There is good evidence to suggest that
immunisation may accelerate or precipitate the transition be-
tween subclinical and overt symptomatic autoimmune condi-
tions within the first 30 days post-immunisation, particularly in
those younger than 50 years of age. The immune response to
1346
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 immunisation may be influenced by variations in HLA, TLR
and cytokine genes. Moreover, aluminium exposure is associ-
ated with the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines and with the development of chronic oxidative
stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and glial activation or dys-
function; these changes in turn are associated with ASD.
Conclusions and Future Directions
Aluminium has no known beneficial physiological action in
the human body and some genetic polymorphisms predispose
to a greater susceptibility to its adverse effects. Therefore, a
strong case can be made for avoiding unnecessary exposure to
environmental sources of aluminium salts, especially on the
part of children, pregnant mothers and women of child-
bearing age who may become pregnant. Such avoidance need
not lead to hardship or inconvenience; aluminium cookware
may be replaced by safer alternatives, while aluminium-
containing antiperspirants, potentially implicated in the rise
of cases of breast cancer particularly affecting the upper outer
quadrant of the mammary gland, may be replaced by non-
aluminium versions. The use of aluminium salts in medical
products is a more contentious issue. While antacids are avail-
able which do not contain aluminium salts, the avoidance of
immunisations which do not contain aluminium salts as adju-
vants has wider political and financial implications. It would
seem prudent to try to find an alternative to aluminium adju-
vants as soon as possible and phase out their use.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Victoria Storey for her
help in constructing the figures.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Abdallah MW, Hougaard DM, Norgaard-Pedersen B, Grove J, Bonefeld-
Jorgensen EC, Mortensen EL (2012) Infections during pregnancy
and after birth, and the risk of autism spectrum disorders: a register-
based study utilizing a Danish historic birth cohort. Turk psikiyatri
dergisi = Turkish J Psychiatry 23(4):229–235
Abd-Elghaffar S, El-Sokkary GH, Sharkawy AA (2005) Aluminum-
induced neurotoxicity and oxidative damage in rabbits: protective
effect of melatonin. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 26(5):609–616
Agmon-Levin N, Paz Z, Israeli E, Shoenfeld Y (2009) Vaccines and
autoimmunity. Nat Rev Rheumatol 5(11):648–652. doi:10.1038/
nrrheum.2009.196
Agmon-Levin N, Zafrir Y, Kivity S, Balofsky A, Amital H, Shoenfeld Y
(2014) Chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia following im-
munization with the hepatitis B vaccine: another angle of the 'auto-
immune (auto-inflammatory) syndrome induced by adjuvants'
(ASIA). Immunol Res 60(2–3):376–383. doi:10.1007/s12026-014-
8604-2
Agrawal A, Guttapalli A, Narayan S, Albert TJ, Shapiro IM, Risbud MV
(2007) Normoxic stabilization of HIF-1alpha drives glycolytic me-
tabolism and regulates aggrecan gene expression in nucleus
pulposus cells of the rat intervertebral disk. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 293(2):C621–C631. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00538.2006
Ahmed SS, Santosh W (2010) Metallomic profiling and linkage map
analysis of early Parkinson's disease: a new insight to aluminum
marker for the possible diagnosis. PLoS One 5(6):e11252. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0011252
Al-Ayadhi LY (2005) Heavy metals and trace elements in hair samples of
autistic children in central Saudi Arabia. Neurosci (Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia) 10(3):213–218
Albendea CD, Gomez-Trullen EM, Fuentes-Broto L, Miana-Mena FJ,
Millan-Plano S, Reyes-Gonzales MC, Martinez-Ballarin E, Garcia
JJ (2007) Melatonin reduces lipid and protein oxidative damage in
synaptosomes due to aluminium. J Trace Elements Med Biol: Organ
of the Society for Minerals and Trace Elements (GMS) 21(4):261–
268. doi:10.1016/j.jtemb.2007.04.002
Albrecht J, Sidoryk-Wegrzynowicz M, Zielinska M, Aschner M (2010)
Roles of glutamine in neurotransmission. Neuron Glia Biol 6(4):
263–276. doi:10.1017/s1740925x11000093
Alexandrov PN, Zhao Y, Jones BM, Bhattacharjee S, Lukiw WJ (2013)
Expression of the phagocytosis-essential protein TREM2 is down-
regulated by an aluminum-induced miRNA-34a in a murine
microglial cell line. J Inorg Biochem 128:267–269. doi:10.1016/j.
jinorgbio.2013.05.010
Al-Olayan EM, El-Khadragy MF, Abdel Moneim AE (2015) The protec-
tive properties of melatonin against aluminium-induced neuronal
injury. Int J Exp Pathol 96(3):196–202. doi:10.1111/iep.12122
Anders HJ, Schaefer L (2014) Beyond tissue injury-damage-associated
molecular patterns, toll-like receptors, and inflammasomes also
drive regeneration and fibrosis. J Am Soc Nephrol: JASN 25(7):
1387–1400. doi:10.1681/asn.2014010117
Andrews N, Miller E, Grant A, Stowe J, Osborne V, Taylor B (2004)
Thimerosal exposure in infants and developmental disorders: a ret-
rospective cohort study in the United kingdom does not support a
causal association. Pediatrics 114(3):584–591. doi:10.1542/peds.
2003-1177-L
Arfanakis K, Fleischman DA, Grisot G, Barth CM, Varentsova A, Morris
MC, Barnes LL, Bennett DA (2013) Systemic Inflammation in Non-
Demented Elderly Human Subjects: Brain Microstructure and
Cognition. PLoS One 8(8):e73107. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0073107
Arnheim-Dahlstrom L, Pasternak B, Svanstrom H, Sparen P, Hviid A
(2013) Autoimmune, neurological, and venous thromboembolic ad-
verse events after immunisation of adolescent girls with quadriva-
lent human papillomavirus vaccine in Denmark and Sweden: cohort
study. BMJ 347:f5906. doi:10.1136/bmj.f5906
van Assen S, Elkayam O, Agmon-Levin N, Cervera R, Doran MF,
Dougados M, Emery P, Geborek P, Ioannidis JP, Jayne DR,
Kallenberg CG, Muller-Ladner U, Shoenfeld Y, Stojanovich L,
Valesini G, Wulffraat NM, Bijl M (2011) Vaccination in adult pa-
tients with auto-immune inflammatory rheumatic diseases: a sys-
tematic literature review for the European League Against
Rheumatism evidence-based recommendations for vaccination in
adult patients with auto-immune inflammatory rheumatic diseases.
Autoimmun Rev 10(6):341–352. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2010.12.003
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1347
 Babinska K, Bucova M, Durmanova V, Lakatosova S, Janosikova D,
Bakos J, Hlavata A, Ostatnikova D (2014) Increased plasma levels
of the high mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1) are associated
with a higher score of gastrointestinal dysfunction in individuals
with autism. Physiol Res 63(Suppl 4):S613–S618
Bagavant H, Nandula SR, Kaplonek P, Rybakowska PD, Deshmukh US
(2014) Alum, an Aluminum Based Adjuvant, Induces Sjögren’s
Syndrome-like Disorder in Mice. Clin Exp Rheumatol 32(2):251–
255
Bagnoli S, Cellini E, Tedde A, Nacmias B, Piacentini S, Bessi V, Bracco
L, Sorbi S (2007) Association of IL10 promoter polymorphism in
Italian Alzheimer's disease. Neurosci Lett 418(3):262–265. doi:10.
1016/j.neulet.2007.03.030
Basun H, Forssell LG, Wetterberg L, Winblad B (1991) Metals and trace
elements in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid in normal aging and
Alzheimer's disease. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect 3(4):
231–258
Beauchemin D, Kisilevsky R (1998) A method based on ICP-MS for the
analysis of Alzheimer's amyloid plaques. Anal Chem 70(5):1026–
1029
Bennabi M, Delorme R, Oliveira J, Fortier C, Lajnef M, Boukouaci W,
Feugeas J-P, Marzais F, Gaman A, Charron D, Ghaleh B,
Krishnamoorthy R, Leboyer M, Tamouza R (2015) Dectin-1
Polymorphism: A Genetic Disease Specifier in Autism Spectrum
Disorders? PLoS One 10(9):e0137339. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0137339
Betancur C (2011) Etiological heterogeneity in autism spectrum disorders:
more than 100 genetic and genomic disorders and still counting. Brain
Res 1380:42–77. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2010.11.078
Bhattacharjee S, Zhao Y, Hill JM, Culicchia F, Kruck TPA, Percy ME,
Pogue AI, Walton JR, Lukiw WJ (2013) Selective accumulation of
aluminum in cerebral arteries in Alzheimer's disease (AD). J Inorg
Biochem 126:35–37. doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2013.05.007
Bhattacharjee S, Zhao Y, Lukiw WJ (2014) Deficits in the miRNA-34a-
regulated endogenous TREM2 phagocytosis sensor-receptor in
Alzheimer's disease (AD); an update. Front Aging Neurosci 6:116.
doi:10.3389/fnagi.2014.00116
Bhattacharya A, Derecki NC, Lovenberg TW, Drevets WC (2016) Role
of neuro-immunological factors in the pathophysiology of mood
disorders. Psychopharmacology 233(9):1623–1636. doi:10.1007/
s00213-016-4214-0
Blaurock-Busch E, Amin OR, Rabah T (2011) Heavy metals and trace
elements in hair and urine of a sample of arab children with autistic
spectrum disorder. Maedica 6(4):247–257
Blaurock-Busch E, Amin OR, Dessoki HH, Rabah T (2012) Toxic Metals
and Essential Elements in Hair and Severity of Symptoms among
Children with Autism. Maedica 7(1):38–48
Bondy SC (2010) The neurotoxicity of environmental aluminum is still
an issue. Neurotoxicology 31(5):575–581. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.
2010.05.009
Bondy SC (2014) Prolonged exposure to low levels of aluminum leads to
changes associated with brain aging and neurodegeneration.
Toxicology 315:1–7. doi:10.1016/j.tox.2013.10.008
Bouras C, Giannakopoulos P, Good PF, Hsu A, Hof PR, Perl DP (1997) A
Laser Microprobe Mass Analysis of Brain Aluminum and Iron in
Dementia pugilistica: Comparison with Alzheimer's Disease. Eur
Neurol 38(1):53–58
Bouzier-Sore A-K, Pellerin L (2013) Unraveling the complex metabolic
nature of astrocytes. Front Cell Neurosci 7. doi:10.3389/fncel.2013.
00179
Bushnell PJ (2013) Special issue: Environmental influences and emerg-
ing mechanisms in the etiology of autism. Neurotoxicol Teratol 36:
1–2. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2013.03.001
Careaga M, Ashwood P (2012) Autism spectrum disorders: from immu-
nity to behavior. Methods Mol Biol 934:219–240. doi:10.1007/978-
1-62703-071-7_12
Castiblanco J, Anaya J-M (2015) Genetics and Vaccines in the Era of
Personalized Medicine. Current Genomics 16(1):47–59. doi:10.
2174/1389202916666141223220551
Cerpa-Cruz S, Paredes-Casillas P, Landeros Navarro E, Bernard-Medina
AG, Martinez-Bonilla G, Gutierrez-Urena S (2013) Adverse events
following immunization with vaccines containing adjuvants.
Immunol Res 56(2–3):299–303. doi:10.1007/s12026-013-8400-4
Chafi AH, Hauw JJ, Rancurel G, Berry JP, Galle C (1991) Absence of
aluminium in Alzheimer's disease brain tissue: electron microprobe
and ion microprobe studies. Neurosci Lett 123(1):61–64
Chao C, Klein NP, Velicer CM, Sy LS, Slezak JM, Takhar H, Ackerson B,
Cheetham TC, Hansen J, Deosaransingh K, Emery M, Liaw KL,
Jacobsen SJ (2012) Surveillance of autoimmune conditions follow-
ing routine use of quadrivalent human papillomavirus vaccine. J
Intern Med 271(2):193–203. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011.02467.
x
Chen S, Li Z, He Y, Zhang F, Li H, Liao Y, Wei Z, Wan G, Xiang X, Hu
M, Xia K, Chen X, Tang J (2015) Elevated mitochondrial DNA
copy number in peripheral blood cells is associated with childhood
autism. BMC Psychi 15:50. doi:10.1186/s12888-015-0432-y
Clarke LE, Barres BA (2013) Emerging roles of astrocytes in neural
circuit development. Nat Rev Neurosci 14(5):311–321. doi:10.
1038/nrn3484
Cook DN, Pisetsky DS, Schwartz DA (2004) Toll-like receptors in the
pathogenesis of human disease. Nat Immunol 5(10):975–979
Cruz-Tapias P, Agmon-Levin N, Israeli E, Anaya JM, Shoenfeld Y
(2013) Autoimmune (auto-inflammatory) syndrome induced by ad-
juvants (ASIA)–animal models as a proof of concept. Current Med
Chem 20(32):4030–4036
Cui G, Wang H, Li R, Zhang L, Li Z, Wang Y, Hui R, Ding H, Wang DW
(2012) Polymorphism of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)
gene promoter, circulating TNF-alpha level, and cardiovascular risk
factor for ischemic stroke. J Neuroinflammation 9:235. doi:10.1186/
1742-2094-9-235
Cunningham C (2013) Microglia and neurodegeneration: the role of sys-
temic inflammation. Glia 61:71–90
Darbre PD, Pugazhendhi D, Mannello F (2011) Aluminium and human
breast diseases. J Inorg Biochem 105(11):1484–1488. doi:10.1016/
j.jinorgbio.2011.07.017
Darbre PD, Mannello F, Exley C (2013) Aluminium and breast cancer:
Sources of exposure, tissue measurements and mechanisms of tox-
icological actions on breast biology. J Inorg Biochem 128:257–261.
doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2013.07.005
De Sole P, Rossi C, Chiarpotto M, Ciasca G, Bocca B, Alimonti A,
Bizzarro A, Rossi C, Masullo C (2013) Possible relationship be-
tween Al/ferritin complex and Alzheimer's disease. Clin Biochem
46(1–2):89–93. doi:10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2012.10.023
Depino AM (2013) Peripheral and central inflammation in autism spec-
trum disorders. Mol Cell Neurosci 53:69–76. doi:10.1016/j.mcn.
2012.10.003
DeStefano F (2007) Vaccines and autism: evidence does not support a
causal association. Clin Pharmacol Ther 82(6):756–759. doi:10.
1038/sj.clpt.6100407
Dhaouadi T, Sfar I, Haouami Y, Abdelmoula L, Turki S, Hassine L (2013)
Polymorphisms of Toll-like receptor-4 and CD14 in systemic lupus
erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. Biomark Res 1:20
Drexler SK, Foxwell BM (2010) The role of toll-like receptors in chronic
inflammation. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 42(4):506–518. doi:10.1016/
j.biocel.2009.10.009
Dua R, Sunkaria A, Kumar V, Gill KD (2010) Impaired mitochondrial
energy metabolism and kinetic properties of cytochrome oxidase
following acute aluminium phosphide exposure in rat liver. Food
Chem Toxicol 48(1):53–60. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2009.09.014
Edmonson CA, Ziats MN, Rennert OM (2016) A Non-inflammatory
Role for Microglia in Autism Spectrum Disorders. Front Neurol 7:
9. doi:10.3389/fneur.2016.00009
1348
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 Edwardson JA, Klinowski J, Oakley AE, Perry RH, Candy JM (1986)
Aluminosilicates and the ageing brain: implications for the patho-
genesis of Alzheimer's disease. CIBA Found Symp 121:160–179
Eisenbarth SC, Colegio OR, O'Connor W, Sutterwala FS, Flavell RA
(2008) Crucial role for the Nalp3 inflammasome in the
immunostimulatory properties of aluminium adjuvants. Nature
453(7198):1122–1126. doi:10.1038/nature06939
Eisenkraft A, Falk A, Finkelstein A (2013) The role of glutamate and the
immune system in organophosphate-induced CNS damage.
Neurotox Res 24(2):265–279. doi:10.1007/s12640-013-9388-1
El-Demerdash FM (2004) Antioxidant effect of vitamin E and selenium
on lipid peroxidation, enzyme activities and biochemical parameters
in rats exposed to aluminium. J Trace Elem Med Biol 18(1):113–
121. doi:10.1016/j.jtemb.2004.04.001
Emanuele E, Boso M, Brondino N, Pietra S, Barale F, Ucelli di Nemi S,
Politi P (2010) Increased serum levels of high mobility group box 1
protein in patients with autistic disorder. Prog Neuro-
Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 34(4):681–683. doi:10.1016/j.
pnpbp.2010.03.020
Enstrom AM, Onore CE, Van de Water JA, Ashwood P (2010)
Differential monocyte responses to TLR ligands in children with
autism spectrum disorders. Brain Behav Immun 24(1):64–71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbi.2009.08.001
Esposito S, Prada E, Mastrolia MV, Tarantino G, Codeca C, Rigante D
(2014) Autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants
(ASIA): clues and pitfalls in the pediatric background. Immunol Res
60(2–3):366–375. doi:10.1007/s12026-014-8586-0
Estes ML, McAllister AK (2015) Immune mediators in the brain and
peripheral tissues in autism spectrum disorder. Nat Rev Neurosci
16(8):469–486. doi:10.1038/nrn3978
Exley C (2005) The aluminium-amyloid cascade hypothesis and
Alzheimer's disease. Subcell Biochem 38:225–234
Exley C, Esiri MM (2006) Severe cerebral congophilic angiopathy coin-
cident with increased brain aluminium in a resident of Camelford,
Cornwall, UK. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 77(7):877–879. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.2005.086553
Exley C, Vickers T (2014) Elevated brain aluminium and early onset
Alzheimer's disease in an individual occupationally exposed to alu-
minium: a case report. J Med Case Rep 8(1):41
Exley C, Mamutse G, Korchazhkina O, Pye E, Strekopytov S, Polwart A,
Hawkins C (2006) Elevated urinary excretion of aluminium and iron
in multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 12(5):533–540
Ferrari C, Tarelli R (2011) Parkinson's disease and systemic inflamma-
tion. Parkinsons Dis 2011:436813
Fichna M, Zurawek M, Fichna P, Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska D,
Ruchala M, Nowak J (2016) Polymorphisms of the Toll-Like
Receptor-3 Gene in Autoimmune Adrenal Failure and Type 1
Diabetes in Polish Patients. Arch Immunol Ther Exp 64(1):83–87.
doi:10.1007/s00005-015-0360-z
Fido A, Al-Saad S (2005) Toxic trace elements in the hair of children with
autism. Autism 9(3):290–298. doi:10.1177/1362361305053255
Flashner BM, Russo ME, Boileau JE, Leong DW, Gallicano GI (2013)
Epigenetic factors and autism spectrum disorders. NeuroMolecular
Med 15(2):339–350. doi:10.1007/s12017-013-8222-5
Flaten TP (2001) Aluminium as a risk factor in Alzheimer's disease, with
emphasis on drinking water. Brain Res Bull 55(2):187–196
Franchi L, Nunez G (2008) The Nlrp3 inflammasome is critical for alu-
minium hydroxide-mediated IL-1beta secretion but dispensable for
adjuvant activity. Eur J Immunol 38(8):2085–2089. doi:10.1002/eji.
200838549
Frank MG, Weber MD, Fonken LK, Hershman SA, Watkins LR, Maier
SF (2016) The redox state of the alarmin HMGB1 is a pivotal factor
in neuroinflammatory and microglial priming: A role for the NLRP3
inflammasome. Brain Behav Immun 55:215–224. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2015.10.009
Frustaci A, Neri M, Cesario A, Adams J, Domenici E, Dalla Bernardina B
(2012) Oxidative stress-related biomarkers in autism: systematic
review and meta-analyses. Free Radic Biol Med 52:2128–2141
Fu R, Shen Q, Xu P, Luo JJ, Tang Y (2014) Phagocytosis of microglia in
the central nervous system diseases. Mol Neurobiol 49(3):1422–
1434. doi:10.1007/s12035-013-8620-6
Fulgenzi A, Vietti D, Ferrero ME (2014) Aluminium Involvement in
Neurotoxicity. Biomed Res Int 2014:758323. doi:10.1155/2014/
758323
Gellerich FN, Gizatullina Z, Gainutdinov T, Muth K, Seppet E,
Orynbayeva Z, Vielhaber S (2013) The control of brain mitochon-
drial energization by cytosolic calcium: The mitochondrial gas ped-
al. IUBMB Life 65(3):180–190. doi:10.1002/iub.1131
Georgiades S, Szatmari P, Boyle M (2013) Importance of studying het-
erogeneity in autism. Neuropsychiatry 3(2):123–125. doi:10.2217/
npy.13.8
Gesundheit B, Rosenzweig JP, Naor D, Lerer B, Zachor DA, Prochazka
V, Melamed M, Kristt DA, Steinberg A, Shulman C, Hwang P,
Koren G, Walfisch A, Passweg JR, Snowden JA, Tamouza R,
Leboyer M, Farge-Bancel D, Ashwood P (2013) Immunological
and autoimmune considerations of Autism Spectrum Disorders. J
Autoimmun 44:1–7. doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2013.05.005
Goh FG, Midwood KS (2012) Intrinsic danger: activation of Toll-like
receptors in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 51(1):7–
23. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/ker257
Goh S, Dong Z, Zhang Y, DiMauro S, Peterson BS (2014) Mitochondrial
dysfunction as a neurobiological subtype of autism spectrum disor-
der: Evidence from brain imaging. JAMA Psychiatry 71(6):665–
671. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.179
Good PF, Perl DP, Bierer LM, Schmeidler J (1992) Selective accumula-
tion of aluminum and iron in the neurofibrillary tangles of
Alzheimer's disease: a laser microprobe (LAMMA) study. Ann
Neurol 31(3):286–292
Gottfried C, Bambini-Junior V, Francis F, Riesgo R, Savino W (2015)
The Impact of Neuroimmune Alterations in Autism Spectrum
Disorder. Front Psychiatry 6:121. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00121
Grether JK, Rosen NJ, Smith KS, Croen LA (2009) Investigation of shifts
in autism reporting in the California Department of Developmental
Services. J Autism Dev Disord 39(10):1412–1419. doi:10.1007/
s10803-009-0754-z
Grimaldi-Bensouda L, Guillemot D, Godeau B, Benichou J, Lebrun-
Frenay C, Papeix C, Labauge P, Berquin P, Penfornis A,
Benhamou PY, Nicolino M, Simon A, Viallard JF, Costedoat-
Chalumeau N, Courcoux MF, Pondarre C, Hilliquin P, Chatelus E,
Foltz V, Guillaume S, Rossignol M, Abenhaim L (2014)
Autoimmune disorders and quadrivalent human papillomavirus vac-
cination of young female subjects. J Intern Med 275(4):398–408.
doi:10.1111/joim.12155
Guevara-Campos J, Gonzalez-Guevara L, Puig-Alcaraz C, Cauli O
(2013) Autism spectrum disorders associated to a deficiency of the
enzymes of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Metab Brain Dis
28(4):605–612. doi:10.1007/s11011-013-9419-x
Guimaraes LE, Baker B, Perricone C, Shoenfeld Y (2015) Vaccines,
adjuvants and autoimmunity. Pharmacol Res 100:190–209. doi:10.
1016/j.phrs.2015.08.003
Gupta S, Ellis SE, Ashar FN, Moes A, Bader JS, Zhan J, West AB,
Arking DE (2014) Transcriptome analysis reveals dysregulation of
innate immune response genes and neuronal activity-dependent
genes in autism. Nat Commun 5. doi:10.1038/ncomms6748
Hadjkacem I, Ayadi H, Turki M, Yaich S, Khemekhem K, Walha A,
Cherif L, Moalla Y, Ghribi F (2016) Prenatal, perinatal and postnatal
factors associated with autism spectrum disorder. J Pediatr 92(6):
595–601. doi:10.1016/j.jped.2016.01.012
Hallmayer J, Cleveland S, Torres A et al (2011) GEnetic heritability and
shared environmental factors among twin pairs with autism. Arch
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1349
 Gen Psychiatry 68(11):1095–1102. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.
2011.76
Han S, Lemire J, Appanna VP, Auger C, Castonguay Z, Appanna VD
(2013) How aluminum, an intracellular ROS generator promotes
hepatic and neurological diseases: the metabolic tale. Cell Biol
Toxicol 29(2):75–84. doi:10.1007/s10565-013-9239-0
Haralambieva IH, Ovsyannikova IG, Pankratz VS, Kennedy RB,
Jacobson RM, Poland GA (2013) The genetic basis for interindivid-
ual immune response variation to measles vaccine: new understand-
ing and new vaccine approaches. Exp Rev Vacc 12(1):57–70. doi:
10.1586/erv.12.134
Harry GJ (2013) Microglia during development and aging. Pharmacol
Ther 139(3):313–326. doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2013.04.013
Harry GJ, Kraft AD (2012) Microglia in the developing brain: a potential
target with lifetime effects. Neurotoxicology 33(2):191–206. doi:10.
1016/j.neuro.2012.01.012
Haukim N, Bidwell JL, Smith AJP, Keen LJ, Gallagher G, Kimberly R,
Huizinga T, McDermott MF, Oksenberg J, McNicholl J, Pociot F,
Hardt C, Dalfonso S (2002) Cytokine gene polymorphism in human
disease: on-line databases, Supplement 2. Genes Immun 3(6):313–
330
Herbert MR (2010) Contributions of the environment and environmen-
tally vulnerable physiology to autism spectrum disorders. Curr Opin
Neurol 23(2):103–110. doi:10.1097/WCO.0b013e328336a01f
Hertz-Picciotto I (2009) Commentary: Diagnostic change and the in-
creased prevalence of autism. Int J Epidemiol 38(5):1239–1241.
doi:10.1093/ije/dyp258
Hickman SE, El Khoury J (2014) TREM2 and the neuroimmunology of
Alzheimer's disease. Biochem Pharmacol 88(4):495–498. doi:10.
1016/j.bcp.2013.11.021
Hoeijmakers L, Heinen Y, van Dam A-M, Lucassen PJ, Korosi A (2016)
Microglial Priming and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Possible Role for
(Early) Immune Challenges and Epigenetics? Front Hum Neurosci
10:398. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2016.00398
Hollegaard MV, Bidwell JL (2006) Cytokine gene polymorphism in hu-
man disease: on-line databases, Supplement 3. Genes Immun 7(4):
269–276
Hooker BS (2014) Measles-mumps-rubella vaccination timing and au-
tism among young african american boys: a reanalysis of CDC data.
Transl Neurodegener 3(1):1–6. doi:10.1186/2047-9158-3-16
Hornung V, Bauernfeind F, Halle A, Samstad EO, Kono H, Rock KL,
Fitzgerald KA, Latz E (2008) Silica crystals and aluminum salts
activate the NALP3 inflammasome through phagosomal destabili-
zation. Nat Immunol 9(8):847–856. doi:10.1038/ni.1631
Hsieh CL, Koike M, Spusta SC, Niemi EC, Yenari M, Nakamura MC,
Seaman WE (2009) A role for TREM2 ligands in the phagocytosis
of apoptotic neuronal cells by microglia. J Neurochem 109(4):1144–
1156. doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06042.x
Hwang O (2013) Role of oxidative stress in Parkinson's disease. Exp
Neurobiol 22:11–17
Ibi D, Yamada K (2015) Therapeutic Targets for Neurodevelopmental
Disorders Emerging from Animal Models with Perinatal Immune
Activation. Int J Mol Sci 16(12):28218–28229. doi:10.3390/
ijms161226092
Israeli E (2012) Gulf War syndrome as a part of the autoimmune
(autoinflammatory) syndrome induced by adjuvant (ASIA). Lupus
21(2):190–194. doi:10.1177/0961203311429552
Jacobs RW, Duong T, Jones RE, Trapp GA, Scheibel AB (1989) A reex-
amination of aluminum in Alzheimer's disease: analysis by energy
dispersive X-ray microprobe and flameless atomic absorption spec-
trophotometry. Can J Neurol Sci 16:498–503
Jensen-Jarolim E (2015) Aluminium in Allergies and Allergen immuno-
therapy. World Aller Org J 8(1):7. doi:10.1186/s40413-015-0060-5
Jiang T, Tan L, Zhu XC, Zhang QQ, Cao L, Tan MS, Gu LZ, Wang HF,
Ding ZZ, Zhang YD, Yu JT (2014) Upregulation of TREM2 ame-
liorates neuropathology and rescues spatial cognitive impairment in
a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
Neuropsychopharmacology 39(13):2949–2962. doi:10.1038/npp.
2014.164
Johnson VJ, Kim S-H, Sharma RP (2005) Aluminum-Maltolate Induces
Apoptosis and Necrosis in Neuro-2a Cells: Potential Role for p53
Signaling. Toxicol Sci 83(2):329–339. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfi028
Jones BM, Bhattacharjee S, Dua P, Hill JM, Zhao Y, Lukiw WJ (2014)
Regulating amyloidogenesis through the natural triggering receptor
expressed in myeloid/microglial cells 2 (TREM2). Front Cell
Neurosci 8:94. doi:10.3389/fncel.2014.00094
Jung JY, Kohane IS, Wall DP (2011) Identification of autoimmune gene
signatures in autism. Transl Psychiatry 1:e63. doi:10.1038/tp.2011.
62
Kawahara M (2005) Effects of aluminum on the nervous system and its
possible link with neurodegenerative diseases. J Alzheimer's Dis:
JAD 8(2):171–182 discussion 209-115
Kawahara M, Kato-Negishi M (2011) Link between Aluminum and the
Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease: The Integration of the
Aluminum and Amyloid Cascade Hypotheses. Int J Alzheimers
Dis 2011:276393. doi:10.4061/2011/276393
Kern JK, Geier DA, Sykes LK, Haley BE, Geier MR (2016) The rela-
tionship between mercury and autism: A comprehensive review and
discussion. J Trace Elem Med Biol 37:8–24. doi:10.1016/j.jtemb.
2016.06.002
Kettenmann H, Kirchhoff F, Verkhratsky A (2013) Microglia: new roles
for the synaptic stripper. Neuron 77(1):10–18. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.
2012.12.023
Khan H, Khan MF, Jan SU, Ullah N (2011) Effect of aluminium metal on
glutathione (GSH) level in plasma and cytosolic fraction of human
blood. Pak J Pharm Sci 24(1):13–18
Kim SY, Park JW (2003) Cellular defense against singlet oxygen-induced
oxidative damage by cytosolic NADP+−dependent isocitrate dehy-
drogenase. Free Radic Res 37(3):309–316
Kim YS, Leventhal BL, Koh YJ, Fombonne E, Laska E, Lim EC, Cheon
KA, Kim SJ, Kim YK, Lee H, Song DH, Grinker RR (2011)
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders in a total population sam-
ple. Am J Psychiatry 168(9):904–912. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.
10101532
King M, Bearman P (2009) Diagnostic change and the increased preva-
lence of autism. Int J Epidemiol 38(5):1224–1234. doi:10.1093/ije/
dyp261
Klei L, Sanders SJ, Murtha MT, Hus V, Lowe JK, Willsey AJ, Moreno-
De-Luca D, Yu TW, Fombonne E, Geschwind D, Grice DE,
Ledbetter DH, Lord C, Mane SM, Martin CL, Martin DM,
Morrow EM, Walsh CA, Melhem NM, Chaste P, Sutcliffe JS,
State MW, Cook EH Jr, Roeder K, Devlin B (2012) Common ge-
netic variants, acting additively, are a major source of risk for autism.
Molecular Autism 3(1):9. doi:10.1186/2040-2392-3-9
Klein C, Lohmann K (2009) Parkinson disease(s): Is BParkin disease^ a
distinct clinical entity? Neurology 72(2):106–107. doi:10.1212/01.
wnl.0000333666.65522.8d
Kochevar IE (2004) Singlet oxygen signaling: from intimate to global.
Sci STKE 2004 (221):pe7. doi:10.1126/stke.2212004pe7
Koenigsknecht-Talboo J, Meyer-Luehmann M, Parsadanian M, Garcia-
Alloza M, Finn MB, Hyman BT, Bacskai BJ, Holtzman DM (2008)
Rapid microglial response around amyloid pathology after systemic
anti-Abeta antibody administration in PDAPP mice. J Neurosci
28(52):14156–14164. doi:10.1523/jneurosci.4147-08.2008
Kool M, Petrilli V, De Smedt T, Rolaz A, Hammad H, van Nimwegen M
(2008a) Cutting edge: alum adjuvant stimulates inflammatory den-
dritic cells through activation of the NALP3 inflammasome. J
Immunol 181:3755–3759
Kool M, Soullie T, van Nimwegen M, Willart MA, Muskens F, Jung S,
Hoogsteden HC, Hammad H, Lambrecht BN (2008b) Alum adju-
vant boosts adaptive immunity by inducing uric acid and activating
1350
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 inflammatory dendritic cells. J Exp Med 205(4):869–882. doi:10.
1084/jem.20071087
Kool M, Willart MA, van Nimwegen M, Bergen I, Pouliot P, Virchow JC,
Rogers N, Osorio F, Reise Sousa C, Hammad H, Lambrecht BN
(2011) An unexpected role for uric acid as an inducer of T helper 2
cell immunity to inhaled antigens and inflammatory mediator of
allergic asthma. Immunity 34(4):527–540. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.
2011.03.015
Kool M, Fierens K, Lambrecht BN (2012) Alum adjuvant: some of the
tricks of the oldest adjuvant. J Med Microbiol 61(Pt 7):927–934.
doi:10.1099/jmm.0.038943-0
Korczyn AD, Hassin-Baer S (2015) Can the disease course in Parkinson’s
disease be slowed? BMC Med 13:295. doi:10.1186/s12916-015-
0534-x
Koufaris C, Sismani C (2015) Modulation of the genome and epigenome
of individuals susceptible to autism by environmental risk factors.
Int J Mol Sci 16(4):8699–8718. doi:10.3390/ijms16048699
Kumar V, Gill KD (2014) Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction
in aluminium neurotoxicity and its amelioration: A review.
Neurotoxicology 41:154–166. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2014.02.004
Kumar V, Bal A, Gill KD (2008) Impairment of mitochondrial energy
metabolism in different regions of rat brain following chronic expo-
sure to aluminium. Brain Res 1232:94–103. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.
2008.07.028
Kumar A, Prakash A, Dogra S (2011) Neuroprotective effect of carvedilol
against aluminium induced toxicity: possible behavioral and bio-
chemical alterations in rats. Pharmacol Rep 63(4):915–923
Kumar S, Ingle H, Prasad DV, Kumar H (2013) Recognition of bacterial
infection by innate immune sensors. Crit Rev Microbiol 39(3):229–
246. doi:10.3109/1040841x.2012.706249
Kuroda E, Ishii KJ, Uematsu S, Ohata K, Coban C, Akira S, Aritake K,
Urade Y, Morimoto Y (2011) Silica crystals and aluminum salts
regulate the production of prostaglandin in macrophages via
NALP3 inflammasome-independent mechanisms. Immunity 34(4):
514–526. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2011.03.019
Ladd-Acosta C, Hansen KD, Briem E, Fallin MD, Kaufmann WE,
Feinberg AP (2014) Common DNA methylation alterations in mul-
tiple brain regions in autism. Mol Psychiatry 19(8):862–871. doi:10.
1038/mp.2013.114
Lam B, Masellis M, Freedman M, Stuss DT, Black SE (2013) Clinical,
imaging, and pathological heterogeneity of the Alzheimer's disease
syndrome. Alzheimers Res Ther 5(1):1. doi:10.1186/alzrt155
Land WG (2015) The role of damage-associated molecular patterns in
human diseases: part i - promoting inflammation and immunity.
Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J 15(1):e9–e21
Landsberg JP, McDonald B, Watt F (1992) Absence of aluminium in
neuritic plaque cores in Alzheimer's disease. Nature 360:65–68
Langer-Gould A, Qian L, Tartof SY, Brara SM, Jacobsen SJ, Beaber BE,
Sy LS, Chao C, Hechter R, Tseng HF (2014) Vaccines and the risk
of multiple sclerosis and other central nervous system demyelinating
diseases. JAMA Neurol 71(12):1506–1513. doi:10.1001/
jamaneurol.2014.2633
LaSalle JM (2013) Epigenomic strategies at the interface of genetic and
environmental risk factors for autism. J Hum Genet 58(7):396–401.
doi:10.1038/jhg.2013.49
Lee SM, Koh HJ, Park DC, Song BJ, Huh TL, Park JW (2002) Cytosolic
NADP(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase status modulates ox-
idative damage to cells. Free Radic Biol Med 32(11):1185–1196
Lemire J, Appanna VD (2011) Aluminum toxicity and astrocyte dysfunc-
tion: a metabolic link to neurological disorders. J Inorg Biochem
105(11):1513–1517. doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2011.07.001
Lemire J, Mailloux R, Darwich R, Auger C, Appanna VD (2011) The
disruption of L-carnitine metabolism by aluminum toxicity and ox-
idative stress promotes dyslipidemia in human astrocytic and hepatic
cells. Toxicol Lett 203(3):219–226. doi:10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.03.
019
Levandowski CB, Mailloux CM, Ferrara TM, Gowan K, Ben S, Jin Y,
McFann KK, Holland PJ, Fain PR, Dinarello CA, Spritz RA (2013)
NLRP1 haplotypes associated with vitiligo and autoimmunity in-
crease interleukin-1beta processing via the NLRP1 inflammasome.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 110(8):2952–2956. doi:10.1073/pnas.
1222808110
Li H, Willingham SB, Ting JP, Re F (2008) Cutting edge: inflammasome
activation by alum and alum's adjuvant effect are mediated by
NLRP3. J Immunol 181(1):17–21
Liu Y, Yin H, Zhao M, Lu Q (2014) TLR2 and TLR4 in autoimmune
diseases: a comprehensive review. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 47(2):
136–147. doi:10.1007/s12016-013-8402-y
Llorente-Folch I, Rueda CB, Amigo I, del Arco A, Saheki T, Pardo B,
Satrustegui J (2013) Calcium-regulation of mitochondrial respira-
tion maintains ATP homeostasis and requires ARALAR/AGC1-
malate aspartate shuttle in intact cortical neurons. J Neurosci 33
(35):13957-13971, 13971a. doi:10.1523/jneurosci.0929-13.2013
Lovell MA, Ehmann WD, Markesbery WR (1993) Laser microprobe
analysis of brain aluminum in Alzheimer's disease. Ann Neurol
33(1):36–42
Lu H, Hu J, Li J, Pang W, Hu Y, Yang H, Li W, Huang C, Zhang M, Jiang
Y (2013) Optimal dose of zinc supplementation for preventing
aluminum-induced neurotoxicity in rats. Neural Regen Res 8(29):
2754–2762. doi:10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2013.29.007
Lu X, Liang R, Jia Z, Wang H, Pan B, Zhang Q, Niu Q (2014) Cognitive
disorders and tau-protein expression among retired aluminum
smelting workers. J Occup Environ Med 56(2):155–160. doi:10.
1097/jom.0000000000000100
Lucas K, Maes M (2013) Role of the Toll Like receptor (TLR) radical
cycle in chronic inflammation: possible treatments targeting the
TLR4 pathway. Mol Neurobiol 48:190–204
Lucas K, Morris G, Anderson G, Maes M (2015) The toll-like receptor
radical cycle pathway: a new drug target in immune-related chronic
fatigue. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 14(7):838–854
Lukiw WJ (2012) NF-kappaB-regulated, proinflammatory miRNAs in
Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Res Ther 4(6):47. doi:10.1186/
alzrt150
Lunnon K, Teeling J, Tutt A, Cragg M, Glennie M, Perry V (2011)
Systemic inflammation modulates Fc receptor expression on mi-
croglia during chronic neurodegeneration. J Immunol 186:7215–
7224
Ma TY, Tran D, Hoa N, Nguyen D, Merryfield M, Tarnawski A (2000)
Mechanism of extracellular calcium regulation of intestinal epithe-
lial tight junction permeability: role of cytoskeletal involvement.
Microsc Res Tech 51(2):156–168. doi:10.1002/1097-
0029(20001015)51:2<156::aid-jemt7>3.0.co;2-j
Mailloux RJ, Appanna VD (2007) Aluminum toxicity triggers the nuclear
translocation of HIF-1alpha and promotes anaerobiosis in hepato-
cytes. Toxicol in Vitro 21(1):16–24. doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2006.07.013
Mailloux RJ, Hamel R, Appanna VD (2006) Aluminum toxicity elicits a
dysfunctional TCA cycle and succinate accumulation in hepato-
cytes. J Biochem Mol Toxicol 20(4):198–208. doi:10.1002/jbt.
20137
Mailloux R, Lemire J, Appanna V (2007) Aluminum-induced mitochon-
drial dysfunction leads to lipid accumulation in human hepatocytes:
a link to obesity. Cell Physiol Biochem 20(5):627–638. doi:10.1159/
000107546
Mailloux RJ, Puiseux-Dao S, Appanna VD (2009) Alpha-ketoglutarate
abrogates the nuclear localization of HIF-1alpha in aluminum-
exposed hepatocytes. Biochimie 91(3):408–415. doi:10.1016/j.
biochi.2008.10.014
Mailloux RJ, Lemire J, Appanna VD (2011) Hepatic response to alumi-
num toxicity: dyslipidemia and liver diseases. Exp Cell Res 317(16):
2231–2238. doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.07.009
Mannello F, Ligi D, Canale M (2013) Aluminium, carbonyls and cyto-
kines in human nipple aspirate fluids: Possible relationship between
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1351
 inflammation, oxidative stress and breast cancer microenvironment.
J Inorg Biochem 128:250–256. doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2013.07.
003
Marichal T, Ohata K, Bedoret D, Mesnil C, Sabatel C, Kobiyama K,
Lekeux P, Coban C, Akira S, Ishii KJ, Bureau F, Desmet CJ
(2011) DNA released from dying host cells mediates aluminum
adjuvant activity. Nat Med 17(8):996–1002. doi:10.1038/nm.2403
Marrack P, McKee AS, Munks MW (2009) Towards an understanding of
the adjuvant action of aluminium. Nat Rev Immunol 9(4):287–293.
doi:10.1038/nri2510
Marrale M, Albanese NN, Cali F, Romano V (2014) Assessing the impact
of copy number variants on miRNA genes in autism by Monte Carlo
simulation. PLoS One 9(3):e90947. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0090947
Marshak-Rothstein A (2006) Toll-like receptors in systemic autoimmune
disease. Nat Rev Immunol 6(11):823–835
Matcovitch-Natan O, Winter DR, Giladi A, Vargas Aguilar S, Spinrad A,
Sarrazin S, Ben-Yehuda H, David E, Zelada González F, Perrin P,
Keren-Shaul H, Gury M, Lara-Astaiso D, Thaiss CA, Cohen M,
Bahar Halpern K, Baruch K, Deczkowska A, Lorenzo-Vivas E,
Itzkovitz S, Elinav E, Sieweke MH, Schwartz M, Amit I (2016)
Microglia development follows a stepwise program to regulate brain
homeostasis. Science 353(6301):aad8670. doi: 10.1126/science.
aad8670
McDougle CJ, Landino SM, Vahabzadeh A, O'Rourke J, Zurcher NR,
Finger BC, Palumbo ML, Helt J, Mullett JE, Hooker JM, Carlezon
WA Jr (2015) Toward an immune-mediated subtype of autism spec-
trum disorder. Brain Res 1617:72–92. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2014.
09.048
Mead J, Ashwood P (2015) Evidence supporting an altered immune
response in ASD. Immunol Lett 163(1):49–55. doi:10.1016/j.
imlet.2014.11.006
Mellios N, Sur M (2012) The Emerging Role of microRNAs in
Schizophrenia and Autism Spectrum Disorders. Front Psychiatry
3:39. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00039
Melnyk S, Fuchs G, Schulz E, Lopez M, Kahler S, Fussell J (2012)
Metabolic imbalance associated with methylation dysregulation
and oxidative damage in children with autism. J Autism Dev
Disord 42:367–377
Michel M, Schmidt MJ, Mirnics K (2012) Immune system gene dysreg-
ulation in autism and schizophrenia. Developl Neurobiol 72(10):
1277–1287. doi:10.1002/dneu.22044
Miranda-Hernandez S, Baxter A (2013) Role of toll-like receptors in
multiple sclerosis. Am J Clin Exp Immunol 2:75–93
Mohamed Fel B, Zaky EA, El-Sayed AB, Elhossieny RM, Zahra SS,
Salah Eldin W, Youssef WY, Khaled RA, Youssef AM (2015)
Assessment of Hair Aluminum, Lead, and Mercury in a Sample of
Autistic Egyptian Children: Environmental Risk Factors of Heavy
Metals in Autism. Behav Neurol 2015:545674. doi:10.1155/2015/
545674
Mohan N, Alleyne T, Adogwa A (2009) The effects of ingested alumin-
ium on brain cytochrome oxidase activity. West Indian Med J 58(5):
422–427
Molofsky AV, Krenick R, Ullian E, H-h T, Deneen B, Richardson WD,
Barres BA, Rowitch DH (2012) Astrocytes and disease: a
neurodevelopmental perspective. Genes Dev 26(9):891–907. doi:
10.1101/gad.188326.112
Mor M, Nardone S, Sams DS, Elliott E (2015) Hypomethylation of miR-
142 promoter and upregulation of microRNAs that target the oxy-
tocin receptor gene in the autism prefrontal cortex. Molecular
Autism 6:46. doi:10.1186/s13229-015-0040-1
Moraes CF, Benedet AL, Souza VC, Lins TC, Camargos EF, Naves JO,
Brito CJ, Cordova C, Pereira RW, Nobrega OT (2013) Cytokine
gene polymorphisms and Alzheimer's disease in Brazil.
Neuroimmunomodulation 20(5):239–246. doi:10.1159/000350368
Morgan J, Chana G, Pardo C, Achim C, Semendeferi K, Buckwalter J
(2010) Microglial activation and increased microglial density ob-
served in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in autism. Biol
Psychiatry 68:368–376
Morgan JT, Chana G, Abramson I, Semendeferi K, Courchesne E, Everall
IP (2012) Abnormal microglial-neuronal spatial organization in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in autism. Brain Res 1456:72–81. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.036
Morris G, Berk M (2015) The many roads to mitochondrial dysfunction
in neuroimmune and neuropsychiatric disorders. BMC Med 13(1):
68
Morris G, Berk M (2016) The Putative Use of Lithium in Alzheimer's
Disease. Curr Alzheimer Res 13(8):853–861
Morris G, Maes M (2012) A neuro-immune model of myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Metab Brain Dis 28:
523–540. doi:10.1007/s11011-012-9324-8
Morris G, Maes M (2014) Oxidative and nitrosative stress and immune-
inflammatory pathways in patients with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis
(ME)/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS). Curr Neuropharmacol 12:
168–185
Morris G, Berk M, Galecki P, Walder K, Maes M (2015a) The
Neuro-Immune Pathophysiology of Central and Peripheral
Fatigue in Systemic Immune-Inflammatory and Neuro-
Immune Diseases. Mol Neurobiol 53(2):1195–1219. doi:10.
1007/s12035-015-9090-9
Morris G, Berk M, Walder K, Maes M (2015b) Central pathways causing
fatigue in neuro-inflammatory and autoimmune illnesses. BMC
Med 13(1):28
Mostafa GA, Shehab AA, Al-Ayadhi LY (2013) The link between some
alleles on human leukocyte antigen system and autism in children. J
Neuroimmunol 255(1–2):70–74. doi:10.1016/j.jneuroim.2012.10.
002
Mundalil Vasu M, Anitha A, Thanseem I, Suzuki K, Yamada K,
Takahashi T, Wakuda T, Iwata K, Tsujii M, Sugiyama T, Mori N
(2014) Serum microRNA profiles in children with autism.
Molecular Autism 5:40. doi:10.1186/2040-2392-5-40
Munks MW, McKee AS, Macleod MK, Powell RL, Degen JL, Reisdorph
NA, Kappler JW, Marrack P (2010) Aluminum adjuvants elicit
fibrin-dependent extracellular traps in vivo. Blood 116(24):5191–
5199. doi:10.1182/blood-2010-03-275529
Murakami K, Yoshino M (2004) Aluminum decreases the glutathione
regeneration by the inhibition of NADP-isocitrate dehydrogenase
in mitochondria. J Cell Biochem 93(6):1267–1271. doi:10.1002/
jcb.20261
Mustafa Rizvi SH, Parveen A, Verma AK, Ahmad I, Arshad M, Mahdi
AA (2014) Aluminium induced endoplasmic reticulum stress medi-
ated cell death in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line is independent
of p53. PLoS One 9(5):e98409. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0098409
Nagai T (2013) Perinatal innate immune activation and neuropsycholog-
ical development. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi 33(4):
149–154
Nampoothiri M, John J, Kumar N, Mudgal J, Nampurath GK,
Chamallamudi MR (2015) Modulatory role of simvastatin against
aluminium chloride-induced behavioural and biochemical changes
in rats. Behav Neurol 2015:210169. doi:10.1155/2015/210169
Napoli E, Wong S, Giulivi C (2013) Evidence of reactive oxygen species-
mediated damage to mitochondrial DNA in children with typical
autism. Molecular Autism 4(1):1–8. doi:10.1186/2040-2392-4-2
Nardone S, Sharan Sams D, Reuveni E, Getselter D, Oron O, Karpuj M,
Elliott E (2014) DNA methylation analysis of the autistic brain re-
veals multiple dysregulated biological pathways. Transl Psychiatry
4:e433. doi:10.1038/tp.2014.70
Netea MG, Wijmenga C, O'Neill LAJ (2012) Genetic variation in Toll-
like receptors and disease susceptibility. Nat Immunol 13(6):535–
542
1352
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 Neumann H, Takahashi K (2007) Essential role of the microglial trigger-
ing receptor expressed on myeloid cells-2 (TREM2) for central ner-
vous tissue immune homeostasis. J Neuroimmunol 184(1–2):92–99.
doi:10.1016/j.jneuroim.2006.11.032
Newairy AS, Salama AF, Hussien HM, Yousef MI (2009) Propolis alle-
viates aluminium-induced lipid peroxidation and biochemical pa-
rameters in male rats. Food Chem Toxicol 47(6):1093–1098
Noriega DB, Savelkoul HF (2014) Immune dysregulation in autism spec-
trum disorder. Eur J Pediatr 173(1):33–43. doi:10.1007/s00431-
013-2183-4
Orihuela D, Meichtry V, Pizarro M (2005) Aluminium-induced impair-
ment of transcellular calcium absorption in the small intestine: cal-
cium uptake and glutathione influence. J Inorg Biochem 99(9):
1879–1886. doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2005.07.003
Ortiz G, Pacheco-Moises F, Bitzer-Quintero O, Ramirez-Anguiano A,
Flores-Alvarado L, Ramirez-Ramirez V (2013) Immunology and
oxidative stress in multiple sclerosis: clinical and basic approach.
Clin Dev Immunol 2013:708659
Ottoboni L, Frohlich IY, Lee M, Healy BC, Keenan BT, Xia Z, Chitnis T,
Guttmann CR, Khoury SJ, Weiner HL, Hafler DA, De Jager PL
(2013) Clinical relevance and functional consequences of the
TNFRSF1A multiple sclerosis locus. Neurology 81(22):1891–
1899. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000436612.66328.8a
Painter MM, Atagi Y, Liu CC, Rademakers R, Xu H, Fryer JD, Bu G
(2015) TREM2 in CNS homeostasis and neurodegenerative disease.
Mol Neurodegener 10:43. doi:10.1186/s13024-015-0040-9
Paradowska-Gorycka A, Jurkowska M (2013) Structure, expression pat-
tern and biological activity of molecular complex TREM-2/DAP12.
Hum Immunol 74(6):730–737. doi:10.1016/j.humimm.2013.02.
003
Paz Soldan MM, Rodriguez M (2002) Heterogeneity of Pathogenesis in
Multiple Sclerosis: Implications for Promotion of Remyelination.
Journal of Infectious Diseases 186 (Supplement 2):S248-S253.
doi:10.1086/344283
Pellegrino P, Clementi E, Radice S (2015) On vaccine's adjuvants and
autoimmunity: Current evidence and future perspectives.
Autoimmun Rev 14(10):880–888. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2015.05.
014
Pelly L, Vardy C, Fernandez B, Newhook LA, Chafe R (2015) Incidence
and cohort prevalence for autism spectrum disorders in the Avalon
Peninsula, Newfoundland and Labrador. CMAJ Open 3(3):E276–
E280. doi:10.9778/cmajo.20140056
Peng Q, Long CL, Malhotra S, Humphrey MB (2013) A physical inter-
action between the adaptor proteins DOK3 and DAP12 is required
to inhibit lipopolysaccharide signaling in macrophages. Sci Signal
6(289):ra72. doi:10.1126/scisignal.2003801
Perricone C, Colafrancesco S, Mazor RD, Soriano A, Agmon-Levin N,
Shoenfeld Y (2013) Autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced
by adjuvants (ASIA) 2013: Unveiling the pathogenic, clinical and
diagnostic aspects. J Autoimmun 47:1–16. doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2013.
10.004
Perry V, Holmes C (2014) Microglial priming in neurodegenerative dis-
ease. Nat Rev Neurol 10:217–224
Perry V, Nicoll J, Holmes C (2010) Microglia in neurodegenerative dis-
ease. Nat Rev Neurol 6:193–201
Petrovsky N (2015) Comparative Safety of Vaccine Adjuvants: A
Summary of Current Evidence and Future Needs. Drug Saf
38(11):1059–1074. doi:10.1007/s40264-015-0350-4
Piccinini AM, Midwood KS (2010) DAMPening inflammation by mod-
ulating TLR signalling. Mediat Inflamm 2010. doi:10.1155/2010/
672395
Pineton de Chambrun G, Body-Malapel M, Frey-Wagner I, Djouina M,
Deknuydt F, Atrott K, Esquerre N, Altare F, Neut C, Arrieta MC,
Kanneganti TD, Rogler G, Colombel JF, Cortot A, Desreumaux P,
Vignal C (2014) Aluminum enhances inflammation and decreases
mucosal healing in experimental colitis in mice. Mucosal Immunol
7(3):589–601. doi:10.1038/mi.2013.78
Pogue AI, Li YY, Cui JG, Zhao Y, Kruck TP, Percy ME, Tarr MA, Lukiw
WJ (2009) Characterization of an NF-kappaB-regulated, miRNA-
146a-mediated down-regulation of complement factor H (CFH) in
metal-sulfate-stressed human brain cells. J Inorg Biochem 103(11):
1591–1595. doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2009.05.012
Poland GA, Kennedy RB, McKinney BA, Ovsyannikova IG, Lambert
ND, Jacobson RM, Oberg AL (2013) Vaccinomics, adversomics,
and the immune response network theory: Individualized
vaccinology in the 21st century. Semin Immunol 25(2):89–103.
doi:10.1016/j.smim.2013.04.007
Poliani PL, Wang Y, Fontana E, Robinette ML, Yamanishi Y, Gilfillan S,
Colonna M (2015) TREM2 sustains microglial expansion during
aging and response to demyelination. J Clin Invest 125(5):2161–
2170. doi:10.1172/jci77983
Pontillo A, Girardelli M, Kamada AJ, Pancotto JA, Donadi EA, Crovella S,
Sandrin-Garcia P (2012) Polimorphisms in inflammasome genes are
involved in the predisposition to systemic lupus erythematosus.
Autoimmunity 45(4):271–278. doi:10.3109/08916934.2011.637532
Powell BS, Andrianov AK, Fusco PC (2015) Polyionic vaccine adju-
vants: another look at aluminum salts and polyelectrolytes. Clin
Exper Vacc Res 4(1):23–45. doi:10.7774/cevr.2015.4.1.23
Pradhan VD, Das S, Surve P, Ghosh K (2012) Toll-like receptors in
autoimmunity with special reference to systemic lupus erythemato-
sus. Indian J Human Gene 18(2):155–160. doi:10.4103/0971-6866.
100750
Pramparo T, Pierce K, Lombardo MV, Carter Barnes C, Marinero S,
Ahrens-Barbeau C, Murray SS, Lopez L, Xu R, Courchesne E
(2015) Prediction of autism by translation and immune/
inflammation coexpressed genes in toddlers from pediatric commu-
nity practices. JAMA Psychiatry 72(4):386–394. doi:10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2014.3008
Rainbolt TK, Saunders JM, Wiseman RL (2014) Stress-responsive regu-
lation of mitochondria through the ER unfolded protein response.
Trends Endocrinol Metab 25(10):528–537. doi:10.1016/j.tem.2014.
06.007
Ramos PS, Sajuthi S, Langefeld CD, Walker SJ (2012) Immune function
genes CD99L2, JARID2 and TPO show association with autism
spectrum disorder. Molecular Autism 3:4–4. doi:10.1186/2040-
2392-3-4
Rangasamy S, D'Mello SR, Narayanan V (2013) Epigenetics, autism
spectrum, and neurodevelopmental disorders. Neurotherapeutics
10(4):742–756. doi:10.1007/s13311-013-0227-0
Rapoport JL, Giedd JN, Gogtay N (2012) Neurodevelopmental model of
schizophrenia: update 2012. Mol Psychiatry 17(12):1228–1238.
doi:10.1038/mp.2012.23
Reuter S, Gupta S, Chaturvedi M, Aggarwal B (2010) Oxidative stress,
inflammation, and cancer: how are they linked? Free Radic Biol
Med 49:1603–1616
Roberts AL, Lyall K, Hart JE, Laden F, Just AC, Bobb JF, Koenen KC,
Ascherio A, Weisskopf MG (2013) Perinatal air pollutant exposures
and autism spectrum disorder in the children of Nurses' Health Study
II participants. Environ Health Perspect 121(8):978–984. doi:10.
1289/ehp.1206187
Rondeau V, Jacqmin-Gadda H, Commenges D, Helmer C, Dartigues J-F
(2009) Aluminum and silica in drinking water and the risk of
Alzheimer's disease or cognitive decline: findings from 15-year fol-
low-up of the PAQUID cohort. Am J Epidemiol 169(4):489–496.
doi:10.1093/aje/kwn348
Rossignol D, Frye R (2014) Evidence linking oxidative stress, mitochon-
drial dysfunction, and inflammation in the brain of individuals with
autism. Front Physiol 5:150
Rueda CB, Llorente-Folch I, Amigo I, Contreras L, Gonzalez-Sanchez P,
Martinez-Valero P, Juaristi I, Pardo B, del Arco A, Satrustegui J
(2014) Ca(2+) regulation of mitochondrial function in neurons.
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1353
 Biochim Biophys Acta 1837(10):1617–1624. doi:10.1016/j.bbabio.
2014.04.010
Ruggeri B, Sarkans U, Schumann G, Persico AM (2014) Biomarkers in
autism spectrum disorder: the old and the new. Psychopharmacology
231(6):1201–1216. doi:10.1007/s00213-013-3290-7
Rutter M (2005) Incidence of autism spectrum disorders: changes over
time and their meaning. Acta Paediatr 94(1):2–15
Sahoo T, Theisen A, Rosenfeld JA, Lamb AN, Ravnan JB, Schultz RA,
Torchia BS, Neill N, Casci I, Bejjani BA, Shaffer LG (2011) Copy
number variants of schizophrenia susceptibility loci are associated
with a spectrum of speech and developmental delays and behavior
problems. Gene Med 13(10):868–880. doi:10.1097/GIM.
0b013e3182217a06
Saresella M, Piancone F, Marventano I, Zoppis M, Hernis A, Zanette M,
Trabattoni D, Chiappedi M, Ghezzo A, Canevini MP, la Rosa F,
Esposito S, Clerici M (2016) Multiple inflammasome complexes
are activated in autistic spectrum disorders. Brain Behav Immun
57:125–133. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2016.03.009
Scheller NM, Svanstrom H, Pasternak B, Arnheim-Dahlstrom L,
Sundstrom K, Fink K, Hviid A (2015) Quadrivalent HPV vaccina-
tion and risk of multiple sclerosis and other demyelinating diseases
of the central nervous system. JAMA 313(1):54–61. doi:10.1001/
jama.2014.16946
Schepens MA, Schonewille AJ, Vink C, van Schothorst EM, Kramer E,
Hendriks T, Brummer RJ, Keijer J, van der Meer R, Bovee-
Oudenhoven IM (2009) Supplemental calcium attenuates the
colitis-related increase in diarrhea, intestinal permeability, and extra-
cellular matrix breakdown in HLA-B27 transgenic rats. J Nutr
139(8):1525–1533. doi:10.3945/jn.109.105205
Sharma DR, Sunkaria A, Wani WY, Sharma RK, Kandimalla RJL, Bal A,
Gill KD (2013) Aluminium induced oxidative stress results in de-
creased mitochondrial biogenesis via modulation of PGC-1α ex-
pression. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 273(2):365–380. doi:10.1016/j.
taap.2013.09.012
Sharp FA, Ruane D, Claass B, Creagh E, Harris J, Malyala P, Singh M,
O'Hagan DT, Petrilli V, Tschopp J, O'Neill LA, Lavelle EC (2009)
Uptake of particulate vaccine adjuvants by dendritic cells activates
the NALP3 inflammasome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(3):870–
875. doi:10.1073/pnas.0804897106
Shastri A, Bonifati DM, Kishore U (2013) Innate Immunity and
Neuroinflammation. Mediat Inflamm 2013:342931. doi:10.1155/
2013/342931
Shaw CA, Tomljenovic L (2013) Aluminum in the central nervous sys-
tem (CNS): toxicity in humans and animals, vaccine adjuvants, and
autoimmunity. Immunol Res 56(2–3):304–316. doi:10.1007/
s12026-013-8403-1
Shi Y, Evans JE, Rock KL (2003) Molecular identification of a danger
signal that alerts the immune system to dying cells. Nature
425(6957):516–521. doi:10.1038/nature01991
Shoenfeld Y, Agmon-Levin N (2011) 'ASIA' - autoimmune/inflammatory
syndrome induced by adjuvants. J Autoimmun 36(1):4–8. doi:10.
1016/j.jaut.2010.07.003
Singhal G, Jaehne EJ, Corrigan F, Toben C, Baune BT (2014)
Inflammasomes in neuroinflammation and changes in brain func-
tion: a focused review. Front Neurosci 8(315). doi:10.3389/fnins.
2014.00315
Siniscalco D (2015) Commentary: The Impact of Neuroimmune
Alterations in Autism Spectrum Disorder. Front Psychiatry 6:145.
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00145
Siniscalco D, Cirillo A, Bradstreet JJ, Antonucci N (2013)
Epigenetic Findings in Autism: New Perspectives for
Therapy. Int J Environ Res Public Health 10(9):4261–4273.
doi:10.3390/ijerph10094261
Sloan SA, Barres BA (2013) Glia as primary drivers of neuropathology in
TDP-43 proteinopathies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110(12):4439–
4440. doi:10.1073/pnas.1301608110
Smeeth L, Cook C, Fombonne E, Heavey L, Rodrigues LC, Smith PG,
Hall AJ (2004) MMR vaccination and pervasive developmental
disorders: a case-control study. Lancet 364(9438):963–969. doi:10.
1016/s0140-6736(04)17020-7
Soriano A, Nesher G, Shoenfeld Y (2015) Predicting post-vaccination
autoimmunity: who might be at risk? Pharmacol Res 92:18–22.
doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2014.08.002
Stetson DB, Medzhitov R (2006) Recognition of cytosolic DNA activates
an IRF3-dependent innate immune response. Immunity 24(1):93–
103. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2005.12.003
Struys-Ponsar C, Guillard O, van den Bosch de Aguilar P (2000) Effects
of aluminum exposure on glutamate metabolism: a possible expla-
nation for its toxicity. Exp Neurol 163(1):157–164. doi:10.1006/
exnr.2000.7355
Su X, Federoff H (2014) Immune responses in Parkinson's disease: inter-
play between central and peripheral immune systems. Biomed Res
Int 2014:275178
Suarez-Fernandez MB, Soldado AB, Sanz-Medel A, Vega JA, Novelli A,
Fernandez-Sanchez MT (1999) Aluminum-induced degeneration of
astrocytes occurs via apoptosis and results in neuronal death. Brain
Res 835(2):125–136
Sumathi T, Shobana C, Thangarajeswari M, Usha R (2015) Protective
effect of L-Theanine against aluminium induced neurotoxicity in
cerebral cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum of rat brain - histo-
pathological, and biochemical approach. Drug Chem Toxicol 38(1):
22–31. doi:10.3109/01480545.2014.900068
Suzuki K, Sugihara G, Ouchi Y, Nakamura K, Futatsubashi M,
Takebayashi K, Yoshihara Y, Omata K, Matsumoto K, Tsuchiya
KJ, Iwata Y, Tsujii M, Sugiyama T, Mori N (2013) Microglial acti-
vation in young adults with autism spectrum disorder. JAMA
Psychiatry 70(1):49–58. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.272
Takahashi K, Rochford CD, Neumann H (2005) Clearance of apoptotic
neurons without inflammation by microglial triggering receptor
expressed on myeloid cells-2. J Exp Med 201(4):647–657. doi:10.
1084/jem.20041611
Takahashi K, Prinz M, Stagi M, Chechneva O, Neumann H (2007)
TREM2-transduced myeloid precursors mediate nervous tissue de-
bris clearance and facilitate recovery in an animal model of multiple
sclerosis. PLoS Med 4(4):e124. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040124
Tammimies K, Marshall CR, Walker S, Kaur G, Thiruvahindrapuram B,
Lionel AC, Yuen RK, Uddin M, Roberts W, Weksberg R,
Woodbury-Smith M, Zwaigenbaum L, Anagnostou E, Wang Z,
Wei J, Howe JL, Gazzellone MJ, Lau L, Sung WW, Whitten K,
Vardy C, Crosbie V, Tsang B, D'Abate L, Tong WW, Luscombe S,
Doyle T, Carter MT, Szatmari P, Stuckless S, Merico D,
Stavropoulos DJ, Scherer SW, Fernandez BA (2015) Molecular
Diagnostic Yield of Chromosomal Microarray Analysis and
Whole-Exome Sequencing in Children With Autism Spectrum
Disorder. JAMA 314(9):895–903. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.10078
Tan MS, Yu JT, Jiang T, Zhu XC, Wang HF, Zhang W, Wang YL, Jiang
W, Tan L (2013) NLRP3 polymorphisms are associated with late-
onset Alzheimer's disease in Han Chinese. J Neuroimmunol 265(1–
2):91–95. doi:10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.10.002
Taylor LE, Swerdfeger AL, Eslick GD (2014) Vaccines are not associated
with autism: An evidence-based meta-analysis of case-control and
cohort studies. Vaccine 32(29):3623–3629. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.
2014.04.085
Thompson MR, Kaminski JJ, Kurt-Jones EA, Fitzgerald KA (2011)
Pattern Recognition Receptors and the Innate Immune Response
to Viral Infection. Viruses 3(6):920–940. doi:10.3390/v3060920
Thrash JC, Torbett BE, Carson MJ (2009) Developmental regulation of
TREM2 and DAP12 expression in the murine CNS: implications for
Nasu-Hakola disease. Neurochem Res 34(1):38–45. doi:10.1007/
s11064-008-9657-1
Tordjman S, Somogyi E, Coulon N, Kermarrec S, Cohen D, Bronsard G,
Bonnot O, Weismann-Arcache C, Botbol M, Lauth B, Ginchat V,
1354
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
 Roubertoux P, Barburoth M, Kovess V, Geoffray MM, Xavier J
(2014) Gene x Environment interactions in autism spectrum disor-
ders: role of epigenetic mechanisms. Front Psychiatry 5:53. doi:10.
3389/fpsyt.2014.00053
Torres AR, Westover JB, Rosenspire AJ (2012) HLA Immune Function
Genes in Autism. Autism Res Treat 2012:959073. doi:10.1155/
2012/959073
Tunçbilek S (2014) Relationship between cytokine gene polymorphisms
and chronic hepatitis B virus infection. World J Gastroenterol
20(20):6226–6235. doi:10.3748/wjg.v20.i20.6226
Vaishnavi V, Manikandan M, Tiwary BK, Munirajan AK (2013) Insights
on the functional impact of microRNAs present in autism-associated
copy number variants. PLoS One 8(2):e56781. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0056781
Vannuvel K, Renard P, Raes M, Arnould T (2013) Functional and mor-
phological impact of ER stress on mitochondria. J Cell Physiol
228(9):1802–1818. doi:10.1002/jcp.24360
Venegas C, Heneka MT (2017) Danger-associated molecular patterns in
Alzheimer’s disease. J Leukoc Biol 101(1):87–98. doi:10.1189/jlb.
3MR0416-204R
Vera-Lastra O, Medina G, Cruz-Dominguez M, Jara L, Shoenfeld Y
(2013) Autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants
(Shoenfeld's syndrome): clinical and immunological spectrum.
Expert Rev Clin Immunol 9:361–373
Verstraeten T, Davis RL, DeStefano F, Lieu TA, Rhodes PH, Black SB,
Shinefield H, Chen RT (2003) Safety of thimerosal-containing vac-
cines: a two-phased study of computerized health maintenance or-
ganization databases. Pediatrics 112(5):1039–1048
Voineagu I (2012) Gene expression studies in autism: moving from the
genome to the transcriptome and beyond. Neurobiol Dis 45(1):69–
75. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2011.07.017
Voineagu I, Eapen V (2013) Converging Pathways in Autism Spectrum
Disorders: Interplay Between Synaptic Dysfunction and Immune
Responses. Front Hum Neurosci 7:738. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.
00738
Voineagu I, Wang X, Johnston P, Lowe J, Tian Y, Horvath S (2011)
Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent molec-
ular pathology. Nature 474:380–384
Walton JR (2006) Aluminum in hippocampal neurons from humans with
Alzheimer's disease. Neurotoxicology 27(3):385–394
Walton JR (2012) Aluminum disruption of calcium homeostasis and sig-
nal transduction resembles change that occurs in aging and
Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis 29(2):255–273. doi:10.
3233/jad-2011-111712
Walton JR (2014) Chronic aluminum intake causes Alzheimer's disease:
applying Sir Austin Bradford Hill's causality criteria. J Alzheimers
Dis 40(4):765–838. doi:10.3233/jad-132204
Wang Y, Cella M, Mallinson K, Ulrich JD, Young KL, Robinette ML,
Gilfillan S, Krishnan GM, Sudhakar S, Zinselmeyer BH, Holtzman
DM, Cirrito JR, Colonna M (2015) TREM2 lipid sensing sustains
the microglial response in an Alzheimer's disease model. Cell
160(6):1061–1071. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.049
Wang Z, Wei X, Yang J, Suo J, Chen J, Liu X, Zhao X (2016) Chronic
exposure to aluminum and risk of Alzheimer's disease: A meta-anal-
ysis. Neurosci Lett 610:200–206. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2015.11.014
Willhite CC, Karyakina NA, Yokel RA, Yenugadhati N, Wisniewski TM,
Arnold IM, Momoli F, Krewski D (2014) Systematic review of
potential health risks posed by pharmaceutical, occupational and
consumer exposures to metallic and nanoscale aluminum, aluminum
oxides, aluminum hydroxide and its soluble salts. Crit Rev Toxicol
44(Suppl 4):1–80. doi:10.3109/10408444.2014.934439
Wong C, Meaburn E, Ronald A, Price T, Jeffries A, Schalkwyk L (2014)
Methylomic analysis of monozygotic twins discordant for autism
spectrum disorder and related behavioural traits. Mol Psychiatry
19:495–503
Yang CA, Chiang BL (2015) Inflammasomes and human autoimmunity:
A comprehensive review. J Autoimmun 61:1–8. doi:10.1016/j.jaut.
2015.05.001
Yang Y, Higashimori H, Morel L (2013) Developmental maturation of
astrocytes and pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders. J
Neurodev Disord 5(1):22. doi:10.1186/1866-1955-5-22
Yasuda H, Tsutsui T (2013) Assessment of infantile mineral imbalances
in autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Int J Environ Res Public
Health 10(11):6027–6043. doi:10.3390/ijerph10116027
Yasui M, Kihira T, Ota K (1992) Calcium, magnesium and aluminum
concentrations in Parkinson's disease. Neurotoxicology 13(3):593–
600
Yousef MI (2004) Aluminium-induced changes in hemato-biochemical
parameters, lipid peroxidation and enzyme activities of male rabbits:
protective role of ascorbic acid. Toxicology 199(1):47–57. doi:10.
1016/j.tox.2004.02.014
Yuan CY, Lee YJ, Hsu GS (2012) Aluminum overload increases oxida-
tive stress in four functional brain areas of neonatal rats. J Biomed
Sci 19:51. doi:10.1186/1423-0127-19-51
Yumoto S, Kakimi S, Ohsaki A, Ishikawa A (2009) Demonstration of
aluminum in amyloid fibers in the cores of senile plaques in the
brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Inorg Biochem
103(11):1579–1584. doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2009.07.023
Zafrir Y, Agmon-Levin N, Paz Z, Shilton T, Shoenfeld Y (2012)
Autoimmunity following hepatitis B vaccine as part of the spectrum
of 'Autoimmune (Auto-inflammatory) Syndrome induced by
Adjuvants' (ASIA): analysis of 93 cases. Lupus 21(2):146–152.
doi:10.1177/0961203311429318
Zaky A, Mohammad B, Moftah M, Kandeel K, Bassiouny A (2013)
Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 is a key modulator of
aluminum-induced neuroinflammation. BMC Neurosci 14(1):26
Zhang YW, Thompson R, Zhang H, Xu H (2011) APP processing in
Alzheimer's disease. Mol Brain 4:3. doi:10.1186/1756-6606-4-3
Zhang Y, Yamamoto T, Hisatome I, Li Y, Cheng W, Sun N, Cai B, Huang
T, Zhu Y, Li Z, Jing X, Zhou R, Cheng J (2013) Uric acid induces
oxidative stress and growth inhibition by activating adenosine
monophosphate-activated protein kinase and extracellular signal-
regulated kinase signal pathways in pancreatic β cells. Mol Cell
Endocrinol 375(1–2):89–96. doi:10.1016/j.mce.2013.04.027
Zhao Y, Lukiw WJ (2013) TREM2 signaling, miRNA-34a and the ex-
tinction of phagocytosis. Front Cell Neurosci 7:131. doi:10.3389/
fncel.2013.00131
Zhao Y, Bhattacharjee S, Jones BM, Dua P, Alexandrov PN, Hill JM,
Lukiw WJ (2013) Regulation of TREM2 expression by an NF-small
ka, CyrillicB-sensitive miRNA-34a. Neuroreport 24(6):318–323.
doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e32835fb6b0
Zhao Y, Bhattacharjee S, Jones BM, Hill J, Dua P, Lukiw WJ (2014)
Regulation of neurotropic signaling by the inducible, NF-kB-
sensitive miRNA-125b in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and in primary
human neuronal-glial (HNG) cells. Mol Neurobiol 50(1):97–106.
doi:10.1007/s12035-013-8595-3
Zhubi A, Cook EH, Guidotti A, Grayson DR (2014) Epigenetic mecha-
nisms in autism spectrum disorder. Int Rev Neurobiol 115:203–244.
doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-801311-3.00006-8
Zielke HR, Jackson MJ, Tildon JT, Max SR (1993) A glutamatergic
mechanism for aluminum toxicity in astrocytes. Mol Chem
Neuropathol 19(3):219–233
Metab Brain Dis (2017) 32:1335–1355
1355
