 Central neural control of thermoregulation and brown adipose 
tissue
Shaun F. Morrison
Department of Neurological Surgery, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239 
USA
Abstract
Central neural circuits orchestrate the homeostatic repertoire that maintains body temperature 
during environmental temperature challenges and alters body temperature during the inflammatory 
response. This review summarizes the experimental underpinnings of our current model of the 
CNS pathways controlling the principal thermoeffectors for body temperature regulation: 
cutaneous vasoconstriction controlling heat loss, and shivering and brown adipose tissue for 
thermogenesis. The activation of these effectors is regulated by parallel but distinct, effector-
specific, core efferent pathways within the CNS that share a common peripheral thermal sensory 
input. Via the lateral parabrachial nucleus, skin thermal afferent input reaches the hypothalamic 
preoptic area to inhibit warm-sensitive, inhibitory output neurons which control heat production by 
inhibiting thermogenesis-promoting neurons in the dorsomedial hypothalamus that project to 
thermogenesis-controlling premotor neurons in the rostral ventromedial medulla, including the 
raphe pallidus, that descend to provide the excitation of spinal circuits necessary to drive 
thermogenic thermal effectors. A distinct population of warm-sensitive preoptic neurons controls 
heat loss through an inhibitory input to raphe pallidus sympathetic premotor neurons controlling 
cutaneous vasoconstriction. The model proposed for central thermoregulatory control provides a 
useful platform for further understanding of the functional organization of central 
thermoregulation and elucidating the hypothalamic circuitry and neurotransmitters involved in 
body temperature regulation.
Keywords
Brown adipose tissue; shiver; cutaneous vasoconstriction; thermogenesis; fever; sympathetic nerve 
activity; preoptic hypothalamus; rostral raphe pallidus; dorsomedial hypothalamus
Correspondence to: Dr. Shaun Morrison, Neurological Surgery (Mail Code L-472), Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW 
Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR 97239, Phone: (503) 494-1560, FAX: (503) 494 2664, morrisos@ohsu.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Auton Neurosci. 2016 April ; 196: 14–24. doi:10.1016/j.autneu.2016.02.010.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Central neural circuits orchestrate a homeostatic repertoire to maintain body temperature 
during thermal challenges, both from the ambient and the internal (e.g., exercise) 
environment, and to alter body temperature during specific behavioral states (e.g., sickness, 
sleep, stress, etc.). Body temperature regulation is effected primarily through dedicated 
pathways in the brain which function to produce an optimal thermal environment for 
neurons and for the many tissues on which the brain depends for survival. The effector 
mechanisms for cold defense, recruited in order of increasing energy costs, include 
thermoregulatory behavior to reduce heat loss; cutaneous vasoconstriction (CVC) to 
conserve heat in the body core and limit heat loss to the environment; piloerection to 
supplement CVC in reducing heat loss; heat production (thermogenesis), a by-product of the 
inefficiency of mitochondrial ATP production and of ATP utilization, in skeletal muscle 
(shivering) and brown adipose tissue (BAT), the principal sources of metabolic heat 
production beyond those contributing to basal metabolic rate. Effector mechanisms for heat 
defense include thermoregulatory behavior to increase heat loss; cutaneous vasodilation, 
including an active vasodilation that appears to be specific to humans(Smith et al., 2016), 
that facilitates heat loss by conducting heat from the body core to the body surface; and 
evaporative cooling through sweating. The activation of these effectors is regulated by 
parallel but distinct, effector-specific, efferent pathways within the central nervous system 
that share common peripheral thermal sensory inputs. A wide variety of non-thermal 
physiological parameters, disease processes, neurochemicals and drugs can influence the 
central regulation of body temperature and their effects are hypothesized to result from an 
alteration of the activity within these core neural circuits for thermoregulation. For instance, 
since the high metabolic rate of BAT and shivering skeletal muscles during thermogenesis 
cannot be sustained without a dependable supply of metabolic fuels, particularly oxygen, 
lipolytic by-products and glucose, the CNS network driving cold-defensive and behavioral 
BAT activation or shivering is exquisitely sensitive to signals reflecting the short- and long-
term availability of the fuel molecules essential for BAT and skeletal muscle metabolism.
The core central thermoregulatory network (Fig. 1), involving thermal afferent pathways, 
hypothalamic sensorimotor integration and descending efferent pathways to spinal motor 
neurons, comprises the fundamental pathways through which cutaneous cold and warm 
sensation and/or reductions or elevations in brain temperature elicit changes in 
thermoregulatory effectors to counter or protect against deviations from a homeostatic 
temperature of the brain and other critical organs. Although the experimental basis for this 
model depends largely on studies in rodents (reviewed in (Morrison, 2011; Morrison et al., 
2011; Nakamura, 2011; Morrison et al., 2014a; Morrison et al., 2014b)) and often under 
anesthetized conditions, the fundamental neural circuits elucidated through this work are 
expected to be relevant to human thermoregulation since rodents have, with the exceptions 
of sweating and thermoregulatory behaviors, a repertoire of thermal effectors and thermal 
reflex responses that is similar to those in humans. This review will summarize the results of 
the principal studies leading to our current model (Fig. 1) of the core thermoregulatory 
neural circuits controlling CVC, and shivering and BAT thermogenesis.
Morrison
Page 2
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Afferents influencing thermoeffector activity
Cutaneous thermoreceptor afferent pathway
The central thermoregulatory system receives signals related to changes in the external 
environmental temperature through cutaneous thermoreceptors (primary sensory nerve 
endings distributed in the skin) and signals related to changes in the temperature of various 
tissues in the body core through local thermoreceptors, including intrinsically thermally-
sensitive neurons in the brain (Boulant et al., 1986; Tabarean et al., 2004; Boulant, 2006; 
Lundius et al., 2010). Relatively little is known about visceral thermoreceptors; but, species 
and body location differences notwithstanding, many of the cutaneous thermoreceptors are 
cool thermoreceptors (Darian-Smith et al., 1973) that drive cold-defensive CVC and 
thermogenesis. The membranes of thermal afferent neurons contain transient receptor 
potential (TRP) cation channels whose temperature-dependent conductances transduce skin 
temperature into primary thermoreceptor afferent neuronal activity. The TRPM8 channel, 
activated by menthol and cooling, is the primary candidate for the cutaneous cold receptor 
TRP channel. Some non-thermal, unmyelinated afferents expressing TRP channels 
(Andresen et al., 2012) also have access to central thermoregulatory circuits: endogenous 
ligand-stimulated TRPV1 channels inhibit BAT thermogenesis (Steiner et al., 2007) and 
TRPV1 agonist infusion reduces thermogenesis and lowers body temperature (Feketa et al., 
2013).
In addition to cutaneous thermoreception (reviewed in (Romanovsky, 2014)), 
thermoreceptive mechanisms exist in body core structures including the brain, spinal cord 
and abdomen. The afferent fibers from cold and warm receptors in the abdominal viscera are 
included among the splanchnic and vagus nerve afferent fibers and their responses to 
temperature changes are similar to those of cutaneous thermoreceptors (Riedel, 1976; Gupta 
et al., 1979). Temperature changes in the spinal cord can affect the activity of 
thermoregulatory neurons in more rostral areas of the brain (Guieu et al., 1970). TRP 
channels that are located in the central endings of primary somatosensory fibers in the spinal 
dorsal horn (Tominaga et al., 1998; Bautista et al., 2007) may sense spinal temperature and 
could underlie an integration of spinal thermal signals with cutaneous thermal signals at the 
spinal cord level. These could function to enhance thermoregulatory responses in extreme 
thermal environments when the feedforward thermoregulatory responses driven by changes 
in skin temperature prove inadequate to prevent changes in brain, spinal cord or body core 
temperatures.
Primary thermoreceptor dorsal root ganglion neurons synapse on thermoreceptive-specific, 
lamina I spinal (or trigeminal) dorsal horn cells that respond linearly to graded, innocuous 
cooling or warming stimuli, but are not activated further in the noxious temperature range 
(Craig, 2002). The TRP channels in the thermoreceptor central endings may also provide a 
substrate for spinal cord or trigeminal nucleus temperature to influence the level of thermal 
effector activity. In turn, spinal and trigeminal lamina I neurons collateralize and innervate 
the thalamus, providing the neural substrate for cutaneous thermosensory perception and 
localization (Craig et al., 1994; Craig, 2002), and the pontine lateral parabrachial nucleus 
Morrison
Page 3
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (LPB) (Hylden et al., 1989; Li et al., 2006) (Fig. 1), responsible for triggering involuntary 
(e.g., autonomic, shivering and respiratory) thermoregulatory responses.
Spinal lamina I cold thermal responsive neurons provide a glutamatergic excitation to 
neurons in the external lateral subdivision of the lateral parabrachial nucleus (LPBel), which, 
in turn, project principally to the median preoptic subnucleus (MnPO) of the preoptic area 
(POA) (Nakamura et al., 2008b). In parallel, glutamatergic excitation of POA-projecting 
neurons in the dorsal subnucleus of the LPB (LPBd) (Nakamura et al., 2010) is necessary for 
the skin warming-evoked inhibition of CVC and BAT thermogenesis (Nakamura et al., 
2010). The discharge rate of single, MnPO-projecting LPBel neurons recorded in vivo 
increased markedly in response to skin cooling in a manner paralleling the skin cooling-
evoked increases in BAT sympathetic nerve activity (SNA) (Nakamura et al., 2008b). In 
contrast, single, MnPO-projecting LPBd neurons were excited by skin warming in parallel 
with the simultaneous inhibition of BAT SNA (Nakamura et al., 2010). Activation of LPBd 
or LPBel neurons evokes decreases or increases, respectively, in CVC, and in BAT and 
shivering thermogenesis that mimic respective skin warming-evoked or skin cooling-evoked 
physiological responses. The critical role of LPB neurons in transmitting cutaneous, and 
possibly visceral, thermal sensory information to the hypothalamus to drive 
thermoregulatory responses is demonstrated by the elimination of BAT, shivering and CVC 
responses to alterations in skin temperature following experimental inactivation of local 
neurons or blockade of local glutamate receptors in the LPB (Kobayashi et al., 2003; 
Nakamura et al., 2008a; Nakamura et al., 2010). Thus, activations of LPBd and LPBel 
neurons by glutamatergic inputs from lamina I neurons, driven respectively by cutaneous 
warming and cooling signals, transmit the respective warm and cold cutaneous thermal 
afferent stimuli, via a spinoparabrachiopreoptic pathway, that initiate heat defense and cold 
defense responses in CVC SNA, cutaneous blood flow, BAT SNA, shivering EMGs, and 
BAT and shivering thermogenesis to defend body temperature during thermal challenges 
from the environment.
Non-thermal afferents influence thermal effectors
Viscerosensory afferents, with axons in the vagus nerve, synapsing on second-order neurons 
in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), and likely sensing metabolic rather than thermal 
parameters, can also influence BAT activity (Szekely, 2000) and shivering responses. For 
instance, the inhibition of BAT activity induced by upregulation of hepatic glucokinase 
(Tsukita et al., 2012) and the BAT activation following either intragastric delivery of the 
TRP agonist, capsiate (Ono et al., 2011) or the presence of lipids in the duodenum (Blouet et 
al., 2012) are mediated by vagal afferents. Arterial chemoreceptor afferents synapsing in the 
commissural NTS (commNTS) and signaling systemic hypoxia, elicit a marked inhibition of 
BAT SNA and BAT thermogenesis (Madden et al., 2005) to restrict oxygen consumption in 
the face of reduced oxygen availability. The NTS also receives inputs from brainstem and 
forebrain sites involved in metabolic regulation and these provide the additional potential for 
NTS neurons to integrate a variety of metabolic signals influencing BAT thermogenesis.
The NTS contains neurons whose activation reduces CVC and BAT SNAs and shivering 
EMGs (Johnson et al., 1998; Cao et al., 2010; Tupone et al., 2013). The bicuculline-evoked 
Morrison
Page 4
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 blockade of GABAA receptors in the intermediate NTS (iNTS) potently inhibits cooling-
evoked and febrile increases in BAT SNA (Cao et al., 2010) and the inhibition of BAT SNA 
following injection of an adenosine A1 receptor agonist into iNTS is dependent on the 
activity of iNTS neurons (Tupone et al., 2013). As byproducts of ATP metabolism, 
adenosine and adenosine 5′-monophosphate, whose central administration also produces 
hypothermia (Muzzi et al., 2013), can diffuse from cells and may function to reduce energy 
consumption, such as BAT and shivering thermogenesis, in situations (e.g., hypoxia or 
caloric restriction) of reduced energy substrate availability. CVC SNA has a modest degree 
of baroreceptor sensitivity (Macefield et al., 1999; Owens et al., 2002), indicating that the 
circuits controlling CVC SNA also receive an inhibitory outflow from the NTS.
Central neural pathways to thermoregulatory effectors
Thermoregulatory behavior
Thermoregulatory behaviors, the stereotypical somatic motor acts directed primarily toward 
minimizing or optimizing heat transfer from the body to the environment or toward 
generating heat in the cold are triggered primarily by cutaneous thermal receptors. However, 
although skin thermal receptors can initiate human thermoregulatory behavior, adult humans 
have established such a rich repertoire of experience, learned responses and options for 
altering their environment that a variety of non-thermal cues (hearing a weather report) play 
a significant role in initiating thermoregulatory behaviors. Thermoregulatory behaviors are 
included in the category of “motivated” behaviors, which have important relationships to the 
limbic and hypothalamic emotional and dopaminergic reward systems in the brain. The 
emotional distress of being too hot or too cold is commonly a significant factor in motivating 
human behavior to seek or produce an ambient temperature that is more “comfortable” and 
thereby obtain the ‘reward’ of being in a pleasant thermal environment. Due to the 
complexity of the neural circuitry required for initiating, organizing, performing and 
controlling even simple thermoregulatory motor acts, we have only a minimal understanding 
of the organization of the neural pathways underlying thermoregulatory behavior (Satinoff et 
al., 1970; Nagashima et al., 2000; Almeida et al., 2006; Romanovsky, 2007). Lesion studies 
suggest, for instance, that a wide range of thermoregulatory behaviors can occur in the 
absence of the neurons in the classic thermoregulatory sensorimotor integration area of the 
hypothalamic preoptic area (POA) (Satinoff et al., 1970; Almeida et al., 2006).
Cutaneous vasoconstriction regulates heat loss
In the cold, increasing the sympathetic nerve activity to cutaneous blood vessels reduces 
skin blood flow and the loss of metabolic heat to the environment, thus helping to maintain a 
normal core body temperature. Conversely, in a hot environment, inhibition of the 
sympathetic nerve activity to cutaneous blood vessels (i.e., cutaneous vasodilation) increases 
skin blood flow and brings metabolic heat to the body surface where it is available for 
transfer to the environment. Simultaneously, visceral vaso- and venodilation in the cold and 
constriction in the heat contribute to the respective increases and decreases in core blood 
flow. In both humans and rodents, heating-evoked cutaneous vasodilation is accompanied by 
a marked increase in visceral (i.e., splanchnic and renal) vasoconstriction (Escourrou et al., 
1982; Kregel et al., 1988; Minson et al., 1999). Sustained cutaneous vasoconstriction is an 
Morrison
Page 5
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 important factor in the defense of an elevated body temperature during fever. In humans, 
increased cutaneous vasoconstrictor sympathetic outflow mediates the reduction in 
cutaneous blood flow in a cold environment and during fever, while a sympathetic 
vasodilator outflow is principally responsible for the increase in cutaneous blood flow in 
hyperthermic environments (Wallin et al., 2007). Direct recordings of cutaneous 
vasoconstrictor postganglionic sympathetic nerve activity in several species, including 
humans, indicate a moderate level of cutaneous vasoconstrictor sympathetic activity at 
normothermic body temperatures.
CVC sympathetic preganglionic neurons (Fig. 1) are located in the intermediolateral cell 
column (IML) of the thoracolumbar spinal cord. These project primarily to paravertebral, 
cutaneous vasoconstrictor sympathetic ganglion cells that innervate the cutaneous blood 
vessels and anastomoses. Retrograde tracing studies indicate that premotor inputs to 
cutaneous vasoconstrictor spinal sympathetic networks including the preganglionic neurons, 
arise from neurons in the ventromedial medulla, including the rostral raphe pallidus (rRPa) 
and the parapyramidal (PaPy) region, some of which contain serotonin (5-HT) and others 
that express the vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGLUT3) (Smith et al., 1998; Nakamura 
et al., 2004; Toth et al., 2006). Additionally, premotor contributions arise from the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), some of which are C1 neurons, as well as from the A5 
noradrenergic cell group, lateral hypothalamic area and paraventricular hypothalamic area 
(Smith et al., 1998).
Functionally, activation of neurons in the rostral medullary raphe (or the RVLM) elicits CVC 
(Blessing et al., 2001; Tanaka et al., 2002) and inhibition of neurons in either the rRPa or the 
RVLM prevents the cooling-evoked increases cutaneous vasoconstriction (Ootsuka et al., 
2005b). An interaction of serotonin (via the 5-HT2A receptor) and glutamate 
neurotransmission in the IML is significant in determining the cutaneous vasoconstrictor 
outflow. Spinal application of a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist markedly reduces the CVC 
sympathetic response to rRPa stimulation and subsequent blockade of spinal glutamate 
receptors eliminates the residual cutaneous vasoconstrictor activation following rRPa 
stimulation (Ootsuka et al., 2005a). In summary, thermoregulatory alterations in cutaneous 
blood flow mediated by the CVC sympathetic outflow are determined by the activity of 
populations of CVC sympathetic premotor neurons located primarily in the rRPa (Fig. 1), 
PaPy and RVLM and involve release of glutamate and 5-HT within the CVC spinal 
sympathetic network.
Shivering thermogenesis
During the rapid, repeated skeletal muscle contractions of shivering, thermogenesis arises 
primarily from the inefficiency of energy utilization in cross-bridge cycling and calcium ion 
sequestration, and, to a lesser degree from mitochondrial membrane proton leak in the 
course of ATP production from fuel substrate oxidation. Heat generation through shivering 
has long been recognized as an essential mechanism in cold defense and in the elevated body 
temperature in fever in both experimental animals and in humans (Palmes et al., 1965; Saper 
et al., 1994). The muscle contractions of shivering result from rhythmic bursts of activity in 
the alpha-motoneurons innervating skeletal muscle fibers. The increased IA-afferent input in 
Morrison
Page 6
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 response to the simultaneous activation of gamma-motoneurons could play a role in 
determining alpha-motoneuron responsiveness and, in turn, in setting the shivering threshold 
and intensity (Schafer et al., 1973b; Schafer et al., 1973a) and frequency. The central neural 
network generating the cold-evoked bursts of alpha-motoneuron activity requires a 
supraspinal pathway that includes transmission of cutaneous cold afferent signals through 
the LPB (Nakamura et al., 2008a), hypothalamic integration and activation of descending 
outputs (Nakamura et al., 2011) to control the activity of somatic premotor neurons in the 
rostral ventromedial medulla (Tanaka et al., 2006; Brown et al., 2007; Nakamura et al., 
2011). Anatomical tracing has established synaptic connections between rostral 
ventromedial medullary neurons, including those in rRPa, and skeletal muscle (Kerman et 
al., 2003). Activation of rostral ventromedial medullary neurons increases muscle EMG 
activity and elicits shivering (Nason et al., 2004; Nakamura et al., 2011).
BAT Thermogenesis
In contrast to the ancillary nature of thermogenic shivering in skeletal muscles that are 
normally used to produce movement and posture, non-shivering or adaptive thermogenesis 
in BAT is the specific metabolic function of this tissue and is accomplished by the heat 
generating capacity of a significant proton leak across the extensive mitochondrial 
membranes of the brown adipocytes facilitated by the high expression of uncoupling 
protein-1 (UCP1) in BAT mitochondrial membranes (Cannon et al., 2004). The level of BAT 
SNA and norepinephrine release and β3-adrenergic receptor binding to brown adipocytes 
determine the level of thermogenesis in BAT by regulating both the activity of lipases 
providing the immediate fuel molecules for BAT mitochondria and the level of expression of 
BAT mitochondrial UCP1(Cannon et al., 2004). BAT is an important thermoregulatory 
effector in rodents and other small mammals (Golozoubova et al., 2006), but also contributes 
to cold defense in both infant and adult humans (Nedergaard et al., 2007; Cypess et al., 
2009; van Marken Lichtenbelt et al., 2009; Virtanen et al., 2009).
Similar to the medullospinal organization of the control of the CVC sympathetic outflow 
described above, the sympathetic outflow to BAT, which determines BAT thermogenesis, is 
driven by the activity of BAT sympathetic premotor neurons that provide an excitatory drive 
to BAT sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the thoracolumbar spinal cord, which, in turn, 
excite sympathetic ganglion cells innervating the BAT pads. A prominent location of BAT 
sympathetic premotor neurons is the rostral ventromedial medulla, centered in the rRPa and 
extending into nearby raphe magnus nucleus and over the pyramids to the PaPy area, 
initially suggested by transsynaptic retrograde tracing (Bamshad et al., 1999; Oldfield et al., 
2002; Cano et al., 2003; Yoshida et al., 2003) and subsequently more directly demonstrated 
(Nakamura et al., 2004; Stornetta et al., 2005).
Glutamate and 5-HT play critical roles in the descending excitation of BAT sympathetic 
preganglionic neurons by their antecedent premotor neurons in the rRPa. Spinally-projecting 
neurons in the rRPa region can contain phenotypic markers for (a) the vesicular glutamate 
transporter 3 (VGLUT3), potentially indicative of glutamatergic neurons (Nakamura et al., 
2004; Stornetta et al., 2005); (b) serotonin (5-HT) or tryptophan hydroxylase, a synthetic 
enzyme for 5-HT (Cano et al., 2003; Nakamura et al., 2004; Stornetta et al., 2005) and (c) 
Morrison
Page 7
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glutamic acid decarboxylase-67 (GAD-67), a marker for GABAergic neurons (Stornetta et 
al., 2005). The majority of VGLUT3-containing neurons in the rRPa express Fos in response 
to cold exposure or to the febrile stimulus of prostaglandin (PG)E2 (Nakamura et al., 2004) 
or to psychological stress (Lkhagvasuren et al., 2011), nanoinjection of glutamate or NMDA 
into the upper thoracic IML activates BAT SNA and BAT thermogenesis (Nakamura et al., 
2004; Madden et al., 2006), and blockade of glutamate receptors in the upper thoracic IML 
suppresses the increase in BAT thermogenesis evoked by bicuculline injection into rRPa 
(Nakamura et al., 2004). Putative serotonergic neurons in the rRPa increase their firing rate 
in response to cold (Martin-Cora et al., 2000; Nason et al., 2006) or PGE2 administration 
(Nason et al., 2006), serotonin injected into the IML can activate BAT SNA and BAT 
thermogenesis and potentiates the BAT SNA response to NMDA injections into the IML 
(Madden et al., 2006), and blockade of spinal serotonin receptors reverses the cold-evoked 
activation of BAT SNA (Madden et al., 2010).
BAT premotor neurons in the rRPa receive a potent glutamatergic excitation, as well as 
GABAergic inhibitory inputs, with the latter predominating under warm conditions to 
reduce BAT thermogenesis. Relief of this tonically-active, GABAergic inhibition as well as 
an increase in glutamate-mediated excitation, including that from the dorsomedial 
hypothalamus and dorsal hypothalamic area (DMH/DA) (Cao et al., 2006; Kataoka et al., 
2014), contributes to the cold-evoked and febrile increases in BAT premotor neuronal 
discharge that drives BAT SNA and BAT heat production. Injections of glutamate agonists 
into the rRPa or blockade of local GABAA receptors in rRPa evoke intense activations of 
BAT SNA (Morrison et al., 1999; Cao et al., 2003; Madden et al., 2003). Conversely, 
inhibition of neuronal activity or blockade of glutamate receptors in the rRPa reverses the 
increases in BAT SNA and BAT thermogenesis and heart rate elicited by a variety of 
thermogenic stimuli, including skin cooling and fever (Nakamura et al., 2002; Madden et al., 
2003; Morrison, 2003; Nakamura et al., 2007; Ootsuka et al., 2008), and produces dramatic 
falls in body temperature in awake rats (Zaretsky et al., 2003). Thus, the rRPa region of the 
ventromedial medulla contains the principal population of BAT sympathetic premotor 
neurons providing the final common medullospinal pathway for the sympathoexcitatory 
drive to the spinal network controlling BAT SNA and BAT thermogenesis (Fig. 1).
Evaporative cooling
Evaporative cooling, including sweating in humans, panting in dogs or thermoregulatory 
salivation in rodents, increases heat loss from wet body surfaces, and is a critical 
thermoregulatory strategy in humans, particularly when ambient temperature exceeds core 
temperature. Little is known about the pathway mediating the increased sympathetic 
cholinergic outflow to sweat glands in a warm environment, but it presumably includes the 
cutaneous warm thermoreceptor afferent pathway involving the dorsal horn and the LPBd 
warm-responsive neurons that project to the preoptic hypothalamus, as well as the warm-
sensitive preoptic neurons responsive to elevated core temperature. Hypothalamic circuitry 
would then elicit an increase in the discharge of the supraspinal sympathetic premotor 
neurons (Shafton et al., 2013) that control sweat gland-specific, spinal sympathetic 
preganglionic neurons (Shafton et al., 1992). Cortical influences may also play a role 
Morrison
Page 8
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Farrell et al., 2015), although there is also a significant drive for thermally-motivated 
behavior in heat defense.
Evaporation occurs both from hairless skin and from the upper respiratory tract. The 
significant loss of body water during sweating, which usually occurs in parallel with a large 
increase in cutaneous blood flow, has a significant effect on blood volume and plasma 
osmolarity and emphasizes the strong interaction between thermoregulatory and 
cardiovascular and osmotic control circuits during prolonged heat exposure, dehydration and 
exercise (Whyte et al., 2005), much of which occurs through integration of these signals in 
the hypothalamus (McKinley et al., 2015).
The hypothalamus in body temperature regulation
As the central integrator of many dimensions of the homeostatic space, the hypothalamus is 
composed of several interconnected populations of neurons which receive a variety of 
signals relating to behavioral and emotional state, as well as the condition of the body and 
the interstitial fluid, and has outputs influencing emotional, behavioral, somatic and 
autonomic responses. For body temperature regulation, the hypothalamus occupies a pivotal 
integrative position between the sensation of skin and core temperatures and the sympathetic 
and somatic premotor pathways controlling thermoeffector activation. Additionally, through 
their responses to immune signaling molecules, hypothalamic neurons are also the primary 
site for the organization and maintenance of the febrile response to inflammation and 
infection, which includes the stimulation of CVC, and shivering (“chills”) and BAT 
thermogenesis mediated by the action of PGE2 on its EP3 receptors. Thermoregulatory 
control is but one of the myriad of interrelated homeostatic functions embedded in the 
hypothalamic matrix, thus, the latter also provides a rich substrate for non-thermal 
influences, such as those related to osmolarity and body water status and to metabolic 
energy stores, on thermoeffector activity. Hypothalamic neurons recognized to play 
significant roles in thermoregulation are located in the POA, including the MnPO and the 
medial (MPA) subnuclei, in the DMH/DA, in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), and in the 
perifornical area of the lateral hypothalamus (PeF/LH).
Temperature sensation within the POA
The conceptual foundation of our current understanding of the role of the hypothalamus in 
normal body temperature regulation and in the elevated body temperature during fever is that 
the POA, including the MnPO and the MPA, contains a population of GABAergic neurons 
(Lundius et al., 2010) with intrinsic warm sensitivity (Boulant et al., 1974; Boulant et al., 
1986) whose discharge frequency increases with local hypothalamic temperature. The 
altered discharge of such warm-sensitive neurons in response to their local environmental 
(i.e., blood) temperature could provide the fundamental mechanism through which the 
central thermoregulatory network is apprised of deep body temperature. Nakayama and 
colleagues made the first single-cell recording from thermosensitive neurons in the POA in 
vivo and found neurons with spontaneous discharge at thermoneutral temperatures that 
increased their discharge during local hypothalamic warming (Nakayama et al., 1961; 
Nakayama et al., 1963). The POA contains warm-sensitive neurons whose tonic discharge is 
Morrison
Page 9
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reduced by skin cooling and whose thermosensitivity to preoptic temperature is increased 
when the skin is cooled (Boulant et al., 1974). Neurons sensitive to changes in bath 
temperature were found in subsequent recordings in the POA in hypothalamic slices and the 
majority of thermosensitive neurons were warm-sensitive neurons (Boulant et al., 1986).
Either skin cooling or direct cooling of the local environment of POA neurons evokes 
sympathetic thermogenesis in BAT as well as shivering thermogenesis (Hammel et al., 1960; 
Imai-Matsumura et al., 1984). Inhibition of neurons in the MPA, but not those in the MnPO, 
increases body core temperature, EMG activity (shivering), metabolism and heart rate 
(Osaka, 2004; Zaretsky et al., 2006; Yoshida et al., 2009). Transections immediately caudal 
to the POA elicit large increases in BAT temperature (Chen et al., 1998). Lesions in the MPA 
produce hyperthermia by increasing metabolism and by stimulating shivering thermogenesis 
and heat conservation through increased CVC (Szymusiak et al., 1982). In combination with 
the properties of warm-sensitive POA neurons, these findings support the hypothesis that 
warm-sensitive POA neurons integrate cutaneous and core thermal sensation, and provide a 
GABAergic inhibitory input that is tonically active at thermoneutral temperatures, to 
suppress the activity of BAT sympathoexcitatory and of shivering-promoting neurons in the 
DMH/DHA (Fig. 1), and/or that of CVC and BAT sympathetic premotor and of somatic 
shivering premotor neurons in the rostral raphe pallidus (rRPa) (Nakamura et al., 2002; 
Nakamura et al., 2009; Yoshida et al., 2009; Dimitrov et al., 2011). This mechanism would 
be consistent with the hypothesis that the firing rates of warm-sensitive, GABAergic MPA 
projection neurons are the principal neurophysiological substrate underlying the 
thermoregulatory “balance point” (Romanovsky, 2004), determined both by cutaneous 
thermosensory signals and the effect of local brain temperature, as well as a variety of non-
thermal inputs. The different body temperature thresholds for activation of CVC, shivering 
and BAT are consistent with different populations of POA warm-sensitive neurons (Fig. 1) 
providing an inhibitory regulation of the CVC premotor neurons in rRPa and the different 
BAT- and shivering-promoting neurons in the DMH/DA (Fig. 1).
Thermoregulatory sensorimotor integration in the POA
As described above, the POA, predominantly the MnPO, contains neurons that receive skin 
cooling-driven, glutamatergic inputs from cool-responsive neurons in LPBel. Glutamatergic 
stimulation of the MnPO with NMDA evokes physiological responses mimicking cold-
defensive responses, and inhibition of MnPO neurons completely blocks the activation of 
BAT and shivering thermogenesis evoked by skin cooling (Nakamura et al., 2008a; 
Nakamura et al., 2011). BAT and shivering thermogenesis evoked by skin cooling or by 
stimulation of MnPO neurons is blocked by antagonizing GABAA receptors in the MPA 
(Osaka, 2004; Nakamura et al., 2007; Nakamura et al., 2008a; Nakamura et al., 2011). Thus, 
skin cooling-evoked responses are postulated to require a local circuit in the POA in which 
cutaneous cool signals are received by GABAergic interneurons in MnPO that mediate an 
inhibition of the warm-sensitive, inhibitory projection neurons in the MPA, thereby reducing 
their tonic inhibition of neurons in caudal brain regions (e.g., DMH/DA, rRPa) whose 
increased activity leads to stimulation of the thermogenic effectors for cold defense (Fig. 1).
Morrison
Page 10
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 However, the MnPO also contains glutamatergic neurons that project to the DMH/DHA, that 
are synaptically connected to BAT, and that receive glutamatergic terminals containing 
tuberoinfundibular peptide of 39 residues (TIP39), which produces an increase in core 
temperature when injected into the MnPO (Dimitrov et al., 2011). MnPO neurons expressing 
the leptin receptor also project to DMH/DA (Zhang et al., 2011). Thus, glutamatergic inputs 
to DMH/DHA (Madden et al., 2004) from the MnPO could provide the excitation (Fig. 1) 
required to drive the BAT sympathoexcitatory neurons and the shivering-promoting neurons 
in DMH/DHA when their POA inhibitory input is reduced during skin cooling or fever. The 
strong activation of BAT and shivering thermogenesis following blockade of GABAA 
receptors in the MnPO (Nakamura et al., 2008a; Nakamura et al., 2011) could arise from a 
disinhibition of either (or both) the skin cooling-activated inhibitory interneurons in MnPO 
or a MnPO glutamatergic input to DMH/DHA, both of which would increase the activity of 
the thermogenesis-promoting neurons in the DMH/DA.
DMH/DA contains thermogenesis-promoting neurons
The observation that transection of the neuraxis immediately caudal to the POA increases 
BAT SNA and BAT thermogenesis (Chen et al., 1998) suggests that the POA projection 
neurons are inhibitory to BAT thermogenesis. In contrast, transections made in the midbrain, 
just caudal to the hypothalamus, do not increase basal levels of BAT thermogenesis in 
normothermic animals (Rothwell et al., 1983) and, in fact, reverse PGE2-evoked increases in 
BAT SNA and thermogenesis (Morrison et al., 2004; Rathner et al., 2006). These findings 
suggest that, although a long inhibitory pathway from the POA neurons to BAT sympathetic 
premotor neurons in rRPa (Nakamura et al., 2002; Tanaka et al., 2011) may contribute to the 
regulation of BAT thermogenesis and CVC, a source of excitatory drive to BAT 
thermogenesis must exist between the POA and the rostral midbrain.
The DMH contains neurons whose activity is necessary for both the cold-evoked and febrile 
activations of BAT SNA and BAT thermogenesis. Administration of endotoxin or cold 
exposure increases Fos expression in neurons in the DMH (Elmquist et al., 1996; Yoshida et 
al., 2002; Cano et al., 2003; Sarkar et al., 2007). Blockade of GABAA receptors in the DMH 
increases BAT SNA (Cao et al., 2004), suggesting a tonic GABAergic inhibitory input to 
BAT thermogenic neurons in the DMH (Fig. 1). This tonic GABAergic input to neurons 
within the DMH may originate in the POA since POA-derived GABAergic axon swellings 
make close appositions with DMH neurons, including those that project to the rRPa 
(Nakamura et al., 2005). In addition, inhibition of neurons in the DMH blocks febrile 
(Zaretskaia et al., 2003; Madden et al., 2004; Morrison et al., 2004; Nakamura et al., 2005; 
Nakamura et al., 2011) and cold-evoked (Nakamura et al., 2007; Nakamura et al., 2011) 
shivering and BAT thermogenesis. Blockade of ionotropic glutamate receptors within the 
DMH also blocks the increase in BAT SNA evoked by PGE2 within the POA (Madden et al., 
2004), indicating that a glutamatergic input, potentially from the MnPO, to neurons in the 
DMH is essential for these febrile responses.
Since neurons in the DMH do not project directly to the spinal cord, DMH neurons likely 
contribute to BAT and shivering thermogenesis by directly influencing the activity of the 
BAT sympathetic and shivering somatic premotor neurons in the rRPa (Kataoka et al., 2014). 
Morrison
Page 11
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The DMH contains neurons that project directly to the rRPa (Hermann et al., 1997; Samuels 
et al., 2002; Nakamura et al., 2005; Yoshida et al., 2009; Kataoka et al., 2014), some of 
which express Fos in response to thermogenic stimuli such as cold(Yoshida et al., 2009), 
endotoxin administration or stress (Sarkar et al., 2007; Kataoka et al., 2014) and some of 
which receive GABAergic putative synapses from neurons in the MPA (Nakamura et al., 
2005). Indeed, glutamate receptor activation within the rRPa is necessary for the increase in 
BAT SNA evoked by disinhibition of neurons within the DMH (Cao et al., 2006).
Hypothalamic regulation of shivering thermogenesis
Shivering thermogenesis is the last cold-defense mechanism to be activated as its thermal 
threshold is at a lower core (i.e., POA) temperature than that for either CVC or BAT 
thermogenesis. This likely reflects the existence of a distinct population of preoptic warm-
sensitive neurons that regulate shivering, but it is also in keeping with the high metabolic 
energy cost of shivering and the relative vulnerability of an animal during shivering as 
escape behavior would be more slowly mobilized. Although shivering is mediated by 
activation of somatic motoneurons rather than by the sympathetic nervous system that 
controls other thermoregulatory effectors, thermoregulatory and febrile shivering requires 
parallel changes in the activity of neurons in the same localized regions as does BAT 
thermogenesis (Nakamura et al., 2011). Briefly, cutaneous, and possibly visceral, cold 
afferent signals excite second-order cold sensory neurons in the spinal and trigeminal dorsal 
horns which project to thermally-responsive neurons in the LPBel (Nakamura et al., 2008b), 
as with the activation of other cold-defense effectors. Putative GABAergic interneurons in 
the MnPO are activated (Nakamura et al., 2008a; Nakamura et al., 2011) to reduce the 
activity of warm-sensitive, shivering-inhibiting MPA neurons (Zhang et al., 1995; Nakamura 
et al., 2011), thereby disinhibiting DMH neurons (Tanaka et al., 2001; Nakamura et al., 
2011) that project to shivering-promoting premotor neurons in the rRPa providing an 
excitatory drive (Tanaka et al., 2006; Nakamura et al., 2011) to somatic alpha-motoneurons, 
and possibly also gamma-motoneurons, in the spinal ventral horn.
Hypothalamic regulation of CVC
Neurons within several brain regions influence cutaneous heat loss through their effects on 
the activity of CVC sympathetic premotor neurons in rRPa. The hypothalamic 
thermoregulatory control of CVC, similar to that of other thermal effectors, is mediated 
significantly by GABAergic, MPA projection neurons, perhaps with warm-sensitivity 
(Tanaka et al., 2011, Tanaka, 2009 #307). Consistent with this model, L- glutamate 
injections into the POA, electrical stimulation of the POA and preoptic warming each elicit 
vasodilation in the rat paw and the rat tail (Zhang et al., 1995). Injection of PGE2 or GABA 
into the POA increases CVC SNA (Tanaka et al., 2005; Rathner et al., 2008; Tanaka et al., 
2009; Tanaka et al., 2013). Transection of the neuraxis immediately caudal to the POA 
increases CVC outflow (Rathner et al., 2008). The MnPO contains cold-activated neurons 
that project to the rRPa and inhibition of neuronal discharge in the MnPO inhibits cold-and 
PGE2-activated increases in CVC (Tanaka et al., 2011; Tanaka et al., 2013). Following the 
increase in CVC SNA after transection of the neuraxis immediately caudal to the POA, 
subsequent brain transections caudal to the DMH, but rostral to the rRPa, do not 
significantly reduce CVC outflow and injection of muscimol into DMH does not affect 
Morrison
Page 12
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 either spontaneous, thermally-sensitive, CVC neuronal discharge, or that evoked by injection 
of PGE2 into the POA (Rathner et al., 2008).
The absence of an effect of inhibition of DMH neurons on thermoregulatory control of CVC 
strongly supports the roles of direct pathways from the POA to the rRPa (Tanaka et al., 
2011) in mediating CVC thermoregulatory responses. Indeed, the data of Tanaka and 
colleagues support a circuit for control of CVC with connections between both MnPO and 
MPA, and rRPa that parallels that proposed above with potential connections between both 
MnPO and MPA, and DMH/DA for the control of thermogenesis. PGE2-mediated inhibition 
of CVC inhibitory POA projection neurons, potentially those in the MnPO, contributes to 
the activation of CVC sympathetic premotor neurons during fever (Tanaka et al., 2013). The 
demonstration that POA contains GABAergic neurons that express EP3 receptors for PGE2 
and project to the rRPa (Nakamura et al., 2002), and that these are distinct from those EP3-
expressing POA neurons that project to the DMH (Nakamura et al., 2009) provides a 
potential anatomical substrate for this marked difference between the hypothalamic 
regulation of CVC and that of thermogenic effectors. The finding that inhibition of neurons 
in MnPO reduces the PGE2-stimulated CVC sympathetic discharge is consistent with a 
contribution of an MnPO-rRPa CVC excitatory pathway in the febrile increase in heat 
retention. Overall, these results support a model in which the discharge of CVC sympathetic 
premotor neurons in rRPa is determined by a balance of the inhibitory influence of warm-
sensitive, inhibitory MPA-rRPa neurons and the excitatory input from cold-activated MnPO-
rRPa neurons (Fig. 1). Importantly, another significant source of the excitatory drive to CVC 
sympathetic premotor neurons in the rRPa would appear to arise from neurons in the 
brainstem (Rathner et al., 2008).
The data derived from transection experiments could also be consistent with a PGE2-evoked 
and cooling-driven increase in CVC neuronal discharge arising from inhibition of POA 
neurons that excite neurons, located between the POA and the rRPa, which are inhibitory to 
CVC sympathetic premotor neurons in the rRPa. Several observations suggest that a 
population of such neurons may exist in the rostral periaqueductal gray (PAG). Neurons in 
the rostral PAG receive input from neurons in the POA that are activated (increased Fos 
expression) by environmental warming, but not cooling (Yoshida et al., 2005), 
environmental warming also increases Fos expression in the rostral PAG (Yoshida et al., 
2002), and chemical excitation of neurons within the rostral PAG increases both tail 
temperature and blood flow (Zhang et al., 1997), presumably due to inhibition of CVC 
sympathetic outflow. The roles of direct and/or indirect pathways between CVC-regulating 
POA neurons and CVC sympathetic premotor neurons in the ventromedial and ventrolateral 
medulla remain to be elucidated.
Hypothalamic regulation of sweating
The thermal sensitivity of neurons in the POA provide the substrate for initiating and 
maintaining the sympathetic outflow to sweat glands, although little is known of the 
pathways connecting the POA neurons regulating sweating with the sympathetic 
preganglionic neurons for sweat glands (Shibasaki et al., 2010). The increased osmolarity 
during sustained sweating in a hot environment has central effects on thermoregulatory 
Morrison
Page 13
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 responses to heating, eliciting an increase the internal temperature threshold for cutaneous 
vasodilation (Shibasaki et al., 2009; Shibasaki et al., 2010)and evaporative heat loss (Baker 
et al., 1982) and a reduction in sweating (Takamata et al., 1995) and respiratory stimulation 
(Turlejska et al., 1986).
Perifornical lateral hypothalamus (PeF/LH) influences thermoregulatory effector output
The recent demonstration that neurons in the LH region can modulate the activity of 
thermogenic effectors, including BAT (Cerri et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2010; Tupone et al., 
2011) has sparked an interest in the role of LH and, in particular perifornical (PeF) area 
neurons in thermoregulation (Zhang et al., 2010; Takahashi et al., 2013). Orexinergic 
(hypocretin) neurons may provide the neurochemical and anatomical substrate responsible 
for the PeF/LH influence on BAT thermogenesis. Orexin-containing neurons within the LH 
are retrogradely infected following inoculation of BAT with the transsynaptic, retrograde 
tracer, pseudorabies virus (Tupone et al., 2011). Orexinergic neurons of the LH project 
directly to the rRPa and activation of orexin receptors within the rRPA potentiates cold-
evoked BAT thermogenesis (Tupone et al., 2011). Interestingly, a co-transmitter in 
orexinergic neurons may be more important than orexin, at least in mice, for mediating the 
effects of orexin neurons on thermoregulatory responses (Zhang et al., 2010; Takahashi et 
al., 2013). In addition, orexinergic inputs to other brain regions involved in 
thermoregulation, including the median and medial preoptic areas and the DMH (Peyron et 
al., 1998) or non-orexinergic neurons within this area could contribute to the thermogenic 
tone elicited from this region. These pathways could play important roles in setting the tone 
of BAT thermogenesis and energy expenditure, and thereby body temperature, across sleep-
wake cycles, during arousal or stress or in response to dietary influences.
The paraventricular hypothalamus (PVH) in thermoregulation
The PVH is a hypothalamic region that is not considered critical for thermoregulation since 
destruction of neurons in the PVH does not affect basal body temperature, the circadian 
rhythm of core body temperature (Lu et al., 2001), or cold-defense responses (Horn et al., 
1994). However, lesions of the PVH attenuate febrile responses evoked by bacterial 
endotoxins such as lipopolysacharride (LPS) (Horn et al., 1994), which led to the 
speculation that neurons in the PVH may contribute to the febrile response by stimulating 
thermogenesis in BAT (Lu et al., 2001). Supporting this speculation were the findings that 
neurons in the PVH are labeled following injection of a transynaptic retrograde tracer into 
BAT (Bamshad et al., 1999; Oldfield et al., 2002; Cano et al., 2003); PVH neurons are 
activated (express Fos) in response to bacterial endotoxins (Elmquist et al., 1996); and 
neurons in the dorsal PVH with direct projections to the sympathetic preganglionic cell 
column are activated during fever (Zhang et al., 2000). However, a direct assessment of the 
role of neurons in the PVH on sympathetically-mediated BAT thermogenesis demonstrated 
that BAT SNA and the resulting thermogenesis are potently inhibited by activation of 
neurons in the PVH (Madden et al., 2009). Thus, while some PVH neurons likely contribute 
to fever responses, possibly by increasing CVC or by stimulating adrenal cortical or 
medullary hormone secretion, other PVH neurons exert a marked inhibitory influence on 
thermogenic effectors, preventing their activation and thus their consumption of metabolic 
energy. Whether this influence of PVH neurons plays a role in thermoregulation, perhaps by 
Morrison
Page 14
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 limiting thermogenesis during conditions of reduced energy availability, remains to be 
determined.
An important, albeit indirect role of the PVH in heat defense responses is their contribution 
to the visceral vasoconstriction (Leite et al., 2012), likely with an angiotensinergic 
component (Kregel et al., 1994), that supports the marked increase in cutaneous blood flow 
resulting from the warm-evoked inhibition of CVC. As mentioned above, a significant 
osmotic challenge can arise from an uncompensated water loss during evaporative cooling in 
heat defense. The PVH could play a role in the interaction of osmotic and temperature 
regulation in which thermoregulatory responses are overridden (Kregel et al., 1988) to 
maintain vascular volume and cardiac output.
Conclusion
The principal thermoregulatory effectors are the cutaneous blood vessels for control of heat 
loss, the BAT and skeletal muscle for thermogenesis and sweating for evaporative heat loss. 
The activation of these effectors is regulated by parallel but distinct, effector-specific, core 
efferent pathways within the central nervous system (Fig. 1) that are strongly influenced by 
shared cutaneous thermal afferent signals. Cutaneous (and likely visceral) thermal sensory 
information is integrated, in an as yet unknown manner, at synapses in the spinal and 
trigeminal dorsal horns and subsequently within the LPB, where cool and warm afferent 
signals are processed within anatomically distinct regions with projections to the POA. 
Within the POA, different, effector-specific populations of temperature-sensitive neurons, 
principally warm-sensitive neurons, provide the substrate for thermal sensory inputs, 
arriving via the LPB projection neurons, to be integrated with local (i.e., core) temperature 
to influence the activation of thermoregulatory effectors. Neurons in the MnPO provide an 
excitatory input to thermogenesis-promoting neurons in the DMH and to CVC premotor 
neurons in the rRPa. Different thermal sensitivities among populations of temperature-
sensitive POA neurons may allow differential responsiveness of different effectors to 
changes in cutaneous vs. brain temperatures. It remains unknown whether and how these 
differing thermal sensitivities may be maintained under a variety of perturbing alterations in 
the external or internal thermal and neurochemical environments. The rostral ventromedial 
medulla, including the rRPa, contains the premotor neurons, including those containing 
serotonin, providing the essential excitation of thermoeffector spinal motor neurons.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grants R01NS040987, R01NS091066.
References
Almeida MC, Steiner AA, Branco LG, Romanovsky AA. Neural substrate of cold-seeking behavior in 
endotoxin shock. PLoS ONE. 2006; 1:e1. [PubMed: 17183631] 
Andresen MC, Hofmann ME, Fawley JA. The unsilent majority-TRPV1 drives “spontaneous” 
transmission of unmyelinated primary afferents within cardiorespiratory NTS. Am J Physiol Regul 
Integr Comp Physiol. 2012; 303:R1207–1216. [PubMed: 23076872] 
Baker MA, Doris PA. Control of evaporative heat loss during changes in plasma osmolality in the cat. J 
Physiol. 1982; 328:535–545. [PubMed: 7131325] 
Morrison
Page 15
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bamshad M, Song CK, Bartness TJ. CNS origins of the sympathetic nervous system outflow to brown 
adipose tissue. Am J Physiol. 1999; 276:R1569–1578. [PubMed: 10362733] 
Bautista DM, Siemens J, Glazer JM, Tsuruda PR, Basbaum AI, Stucky CL, Jordt SE, Julius D. The 
menthol receptor TRPM8 is the principal detector of environmental cold. Nature. 2007; 448:204–
208. [PubMed: 17538622] 
Blessing WW, Nalivaiko E. Raphe magnus/pallidus neurons regulate tail but not mesenteric arterial 
blood flow in rats. Neuroscience. 2001; 105:923–929. [PubMed: 11530230] 
Blouet C, Schwartz GJ. Duodenal lipid sensing activates vagal afferents to regulate non-shivering 
brown fat thermogenesis in rats. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e51898. [PubMed: 23251649] 
Boulant JA. Counterpoint: Heat-induced membrane depolarization of hypothalamic neurons: an 
unlikely mechanism of central thermosensitivity. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2006; 
290:R1481–1484. discussion R1484. [PubMed: 16708422] 
Boulant JA, Dean JB. Temperature receptors in the central nervous system. Annu Rev Physiol. 1986; 
48:639–654. [PubMed: 3010828] 
Boulant JA, Hardy JD. The effect of spinal and skin temperatures on the firing rate and 
thermosensitivity of preoptic neurones. J Physiol. 1974; 240:639–660. [PubMed: 4416218] 
Brown JW, Sirlin EA, Benoit AM, Hoffman JM, Darnall RA. Activation of 5-HT1A receptors in 
medullary raphe disrupts sleep and decreases shivering during cooling in the conscious piglet. Am 
J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007
Cannon B, Nedergaard J. Brown adipose tissue: function and physiological significance. Physiol Rev. 
2004; 84:277–359. [PubMed: 14715917] 
Cano G, Passerin AM, Schiltz JC, Card JP, Morrison SF, Sved AF. Anatomical substrates for the 
central control of sympathetic outflow to interscapular adipose tissue during cold exposure. J 
Comp Neurol. 2003; 460:303–326. [PubMed: 12692852] 
Cao WH, Fan W, Morrison SF. Medullary pathways mediating specific sympathetic responses to 
activation of dorsomedial hypothalamus. Neuroscience. 2004; 126:229–240. [PubMed: 15145088] 
Cao WH, Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Inhibition of brown adipose tissue thermogenesis by neurons in 
the ventrolateral medulla and in the nucleus tractus solitarius. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol. 2010; 299:R277–290. [PubMed: 20410479] 
Cao WH, Morrison SF. Disinhibition of rostral raphe pallidus neurons increases cardiac sympathetic 
nerve activity and heart rate. Brain Res. 2003; 980:1–10. [PubMed: 12865154] 
Cao WH, Morrison SF. Glutamate receptors in the raphe pallidus mediate brown adipose tissue 
thermogenesis evoked by activation of dorsomedial hypothalamic neurons. Neuropharmacology. 
2006; 51:426–437. [PubMed: 16733059] 
Cerri M, Morrison SF. Activation of lateral hypothalamic neurons stimulates brown adipose tissue 
thermogenesis. Neuroscience. 2005; 135:627–638. [PubMed: 16125857] 
Chen XM, Hosono T, Yoda T, Fukuda Y, Kanosue K. Efferent projection from the preoptic area for the 
control of non-shivering thermogenesis in rats. J Physiol. 1998; 512( Pt 3):883–892. [PubMed: 
9769429] 
Craig AD. How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body. Nat 
Rev Neurosci. 2002; 3:655–666. [PubMed: 12154366] 
Craig AD, Bushnell MC, Zhang ET, Blomqvist A. A thalamic nucleus specific for pain and 
temperature sensation. Nature. 1994; 372:770–773. [PubMed: 7695716] 
Cypess AM, Lehman S, Williams G, Tal I, Rodman D, Goldfine AB, Kuo FC, Palmer EL, Tseng YH, 
Doria A, Kolodny GM, Kahn CR. Identification and importance of brown adipose tissue in adult 
humans. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:1509–1517. [PubMed: 19357406] 
Darian-Smith I, Johnson KO, Dykes R. “Cold” fiber population innervating palmar and digital skin of 
the monkey: responses to cooling pulses. J Neurophysiol. 1973; 36:325–346. [PubMed: 4196271] 
Dimitrov EL, Kim YY, Usdin TB. Regulation of hypothalamic signaling by tuberoinfundibular peptide 
of 39 residues is critical for the response to cold: a novel peptidergic mechanism of 
thermoregulation. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:18166–18179. [PubMed: 22159128] 
Elmquist JK, Scammell TE, Jacobson CD, Saper CB. Distribution of Fos-like immunoreactivity in the 
rat brain following intravenous lipopolysaccharide administration. Journal of Comparative 
Neurology. 1996; 371:85–103. [PubMed: 8835720] 
Morrison
Page 16
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Escourrou P, Freund PR, Rowell LB, Johnson DG. Splanchnic vasoconstriction in heat-stressed men: 
role of renin-angiotensin system. J Appl Physiol. 1982; 52:1438–1443. [PubMed: 7050057] 
Farrell MJ, Trevaks D, Taylor NA, McAllen RM. Regional brain responses associated with 
thermogenic and psychogenic sweating events in humans. J Neurophysiol. 2015; 114:2578–2587. 
[PubMed: 26289468] 
Feketa VV, Balasubramanian A, Flores CM, Player MR, Marrelli SP. Shivering and tachycardic 
responses to external cooling in mice are substantially suppressed by TRPV1 activation but not by 
TRPM8 inhibition. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2013; 305:R1040–1050. [PubMed: 
24005250] 
Golozoubova V, Cannon B, Nedergaard J. UCP1 is essential for adaptive adrenergic nonshivering 
thermogenesis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006; 291:E350–357. [PubMed: 16595854] 
Guieu JD, Hardy JD. Effects of heating and cooling of the spinal cord on preoptic unit activity. J Appl 
Physiol. 1970; 29:675–683. [PubMed: 5474860] 
Gupta BN, Nier K, Hensel H. Cold-sensitive afferents from the abdomen. Pflugers Arch. 1979; 
380:203–204. [PubMed: 573447] 
Hammel HT, Hardy JD, Fusco MM. Thermoregulatory responses to hypothalamic cooling in 
unanesthetized dogs. Am J Physiol. 1960; 198:481–486. [PubMed: 14399311] 
Hermann DM, Luppi PH, Peyron C, Hinckel P, Jouvet M. Afferent projections to the rat nuclei raphe 
magnus, raphe pallidus and reticularis gigantocellularis pars alpha demonstrated by iontophoretic 
application of choleratoxin (subunit b). Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy. 1997; 13:1–21. 
[PubMed: 9271192] 
Horn T, Wilkinson MF, Landgraf R, Pittman QJ. Reduced febrile responses to pyrogens after lesions of 
the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus. American Journal of Physiology. 1994; 267:R323–328. 
[PubMed: 8048639] 
Hylden JL, Anton F, Nahin RL. Spinal lamina I projection neurons in the rat: collateral innervation of 
parabrachial area and thalamus. Neuroscience. 1989; 28:27–37. [PubMed: 2548118] 
Imai-Matsumura K, Matsumura K, Nakayama T. Involvement of ventromedial hypothalamus in brown 
adipose tissue thermogenesis induced by preoptic cooling in rats. Jpn J Physiol. 1984; 34:939–943. 
[PubMed: 6533384] 
Johnson CD, Gilbey MP. Effects of aortic nerve stimulation on discharges of sympathetic neurons 
innervating rat tail artery and vein. Am J Physiol. 1998; 275:R942–949. [PubMed: 9756521] 
Kataoka N, Hioki H, Kaneko T, Nakamura K. Psychological stress activates a dorsomedial 
hypothalamus-medullary raphe circuit driving brown adipose tissue thermogenesis and 
hyperthermia. Cell Metab. 2014; 20:346–358. [PubMed: 24981837] 
Kerman IA, Enquist LW, Watson SJ, Yates BJ. Brainstem substrates of sympatho-motor circuitry 
identified using trans-synaptic tracing with pseudorabies virus recombinants. J Neurosci. 2003; 
23:4657–4666. [PubMed: 12805305] 
Kobayashi A, Osaka T. Involvement of the parabrachial nucleus in thermogenesis induced by 
environmental cooling in the rat. Pflugers Arch. 2003; 446:760–765. [PubMed: 12838424] 
Kregel KC, Stauss H, Unger T. Modulation of autonomic nervous system adjustments to heat stress by 
central ANG II receptor antagonism. Am J Physiol. 1994; 266:R1985–1991. [PubMed: 8024055] 
Kregel KC, Wall PT, Gisolfi CV. Peripheral vascular responses to hyperthermia in the rat. J Appl 
Physiol. 1988; 64:2582–2588. [PubMed: 3403442] 
Leite LH, Zheng H, Coimbra CC, Patel KP. Contribution of the paraventricular nucleus in autonomic 
adjustments to heat stress. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2012; 237:570–577. [PubMed: 22619372] 
Li J, Xiong K, Pang Y, Dong Y, Kaneko T, Mizuno N. Medullary dorsal horn neurons providing axons 
to both the parabrachial nucleus and thalamus. J Comp Neurol. 2006; 498:539–551. [PubMed: 
16874804] 
Lkhagvasuren B, Nakamura Y, Oka T, Sudo N, Nakamura K. Social defeat stress induces hyperthermia 
through activation of thermoregulatory sympathetic premotor neurons in the medullary raphe 
region. Eur J Neurosci. 2011; 34:1442–1452. [PubMed: 21978215] 
Lu J, Zhang YH, Chou TC, Gaus SE, Elmquist JK, Shiromani P, Saper CB. Contrasting effects of 
ibotenate lesions of the paraventricular nucleus and subparaventricular zone on sleep-wake cycle 
and temperature regulation. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:4864–4874. [PubMed: 11425913] 
Morrison
Page 17
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lundius EG, Sanchez-Alavez M, Ghochani Y, Klaus J, Tabarean IV. Histamine influences body 
temperature by acting at H1 and H3 receptors on distinct populations of preoptic neurons. J 
Neurosci. 2010; 30:4369–4381. [PubMed: 20335473] 
Macefield VG, Wallin BG. Respiratory and cardiac modulation of single sympathetic vasoconstrictor 
and sudomotor neurones to human skin. J Physiol. 1999; 516( Pt 1):303–314. [PubMed: 
10066943] 
Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Excitatory amino acid receptor activation in the raphe pallidus area mediates 
prostaglandin-evoked thermogenesis. Neuroscience. 2003; 122:5–15. [PubMed: 14596844] 
Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Excitatory amino acid receptors in the dorsomedial hypothalamus mediate 
prostaglandin-evoked thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol. 2004; 286:R320–325. [PubMed: 14563660] 
Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Hypoxic activation of arterial chemoreceptors inhibits sympathetic outflow 
to brown adipose tissue (BAT) in rats. J Physiol. 2005
Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Serotonin potentiates sympathetic responses evoked by spinal NMDA. J 
Physiol. 2006; 577:525–537. [PubMed: 16973701] 
Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus inhibit 
sympathetic outflow to brown adipose tissue. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009; 
296:R831–843. [PubMed: 19129373] 
Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Endogenous activation of spinal 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptors 
contributes to the thermoregulatory activation of brown adipose tissue. Am J Physiol Regul Integr 
Comp Physiol. 2010; 298:R776–783. [PubMed: 20071609] 
Martin-Cora FJ, Fornal CA, Metzler CW, Jacobs BL. Single-unit responses of serotonergic medullary 
and pontine raphe neurons to environmental cooling in freely moving cats. Neuroscience. 2000; 
98:301–309. [PubMed: 10854761] 
McKinley MJ, Yao ST, Uschakov A, McAllen RM, Rundgren M, Martelli D. The median preoptic 
nucleus: front and centre for the regulation of body fluid, sodium, temperature, sleep and 
cardiovascular homeostasis. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2015; 214:8–32. [PubMed: 25753944] 
Minson CT, Wladkowski SL, Pawelczyk JA, Kenney WL. Age, splanchnic vasoconstriction, and heat 
stress during tilting. Am J Physiol. 1999; 276:R203–212. [PubMed: 9887196] 
Morrison SF. Raphe pallidus neurons mediate prostaglandin E2-evoked increases in brown adipose 
tissue thermogenesis. Neuroscience. 2003; 121:17–24. [PubMed: 12946696] 
Morrison SF. 2010 Carl Ludwig Distinguished Lectureship of the APS Neural Control and Autonomic 
Regulation Section: Central neural pathways for thermoregulatory cold defense. J Appl Physiol. 
2011; 110:1137–1149. [PubMed: 21270352] 
Morrison SF, Cao WH, Madden CJ. Dorsomedial hypothalamic and brainstem pathways controlling 
thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue. Journal of Thermal Biology. 2004; 29:333–337.
Morrison SF, Madden CJ. Central nervous system regulation of brown adipose tissue. Compr Physiol. 
2014a; 4:1677–1713. [PubMed: 25428857] 
Morrison SF, Madden CJ, Tupone D. Central neural regulation of brown adipose tissue thermogenesis 
and energy expenditure. Cell Metab. 2014b; 19:741–756. [PubMed: 24630813] 
Morrison SF, Nakamura K. Central neural pathways for thermoregulation. Front Biosci (Landmark 
Ed). 2011; 16:74–104. [PubMed: 21196160] 
Morrison SF, Sved AF, Passerin AM. GABA-mediated inhibition of raphe pallidus neurons regulates 
sympathetic outflow to brown adipose tissue. Am J Physiol. 1999; 276:R290–297. [PubMed: 
9950904] 
Muzzi M, Blasi F, Masi A, Coppi E, Traini C, Felici R, Pittelli M, Cavone L, Pugliese AM, Moroni F, 
Chiarugi A. Neurological basis of AMP-dependent thermoregulation and its relevance to central 
and peripheral hyperthermia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013; 33:183–190. [PubMed: 23093068] 
Nagashima K, Nakai S, Tanaka M, Kanosue K. Neuronal circuitries involved in thermoregulation. 
Auton Neurosci. 2000; 85:18–25. [PubMed: 11189023] 
Nakamura K. Central circuitries for body temperature regulation and fever. Am J Physiol Regul Integr 
Comp Physiol. 2011; 301:R1207–1228. [PubMed: 21900642] 
Nakamura K, Matsumura K, Hubschle T, Nakamura Y, Hioki H, Fujiyama F, Boldogkoi Z, Konig M, 
Thiel HJ, Gerstberger R, Kobayashi S, Kaneko T. Identification of sympathetic premotor neurons 
Morrison
Page 18
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in medullary raphe regions mediating fever and other thermoregulatory functions. J Neurosci. 
2004; 24:5370–5380. [PubMed: 15190110] 
Nakamura K, Matsumura K, Kaneko T, Kobayashi S, Katoh H, Negishi M. The rostral raphe pallidus 
nucleus mediates pyrogenic transmission from the preoptic area. J Neurosci. 2002; 22:4600–4610. 
[PubMed: 12040067] 
Nakamura K, Morrison SF. Central efferent pathways mediating skin cooling-evoked sympathetic 
thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007; 
292:R127–136. [PubMed: 16931649] 
Nakamura K, Morrison SF. Preoptic mechanism for cold-defensive responses to skin cooling. J 
Physiol. 2008a; 586:2611–2620. [PubMed: 18388139] 
Nakamura K, Morrison SF. A thermosensory pathway that controls body temperature. Nat Neurosci. 
2008b; 11:62–71. [PubMed: 18084288] 
Nakamura K, Morrison SF. A thermosensory pathway mediating heat-defense responses. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:8848–8853. [PubMed: 20421477] 
Nakamura K, Morrison SF. Central efferent pathways for cold-defensive and febrile shivering. J 
Physiol. 2011; 589:3641–3658. [PubMed: 21610139] 
Nakamura Y, Nakamura K, Matsumura K, Kobayashi S, Kaneko T, Morrison SF. Direct pyrogenic 
input from prostaglandin EP3 receptor-expressing preoptic neurons to the dorsomedial 
hypothalamus. Eur J Neurosci. 2005; 22:3137–3146. [PubMed: 16367780] 
Nakamura Y, Nakamura K, Morrison SF. Different populations of prostaglandin EP3 receptor-
expressing preoptic neurons project to two fever-mediating sympathoexcitatory brain regions. 
Neuroscience. 2009; 161:614–620. [PubMed: 19327390] 
Nakayama T, Eisenman JS, Hardy JD. Single unit activity of anterior hypothalamus during local 
heating. Science. 1961; 134:560–561. [PubMed: 13727681] 
Nakayama T, Hammel H, Hardy J, Eisenman J. Thermal stimulation of electrical activity of single 
units of the preoptic region. Am J Physiol. 1963; 204:1122–1126.
Nason MW Jr, Mason P. Modulation of sympathetic and somatomotor function by the ventromedial 
medulla. J Neurophysiol. 2004; 92:510–522. [PubMed: 14973310] 
Nason MW Jr, Mason P. Medullary raphe neurons facilitate brown adipose tissue activation. Journal of 
Neuroscience. 2006; 26:1190–1198. [PubMed: 16436606] 
Nedergaard J, Bengtsson T, Cannon B. Unexpected evidence for active brown adipose tissue in adult 
humans. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007; 293:E444–452. [PubMed: 17473055] 
Oldfield BJ, Giles ME, Watson A, Anderson C, Colvill LM, McKinley MJ. The neurochemical 
characterisation of hypothalamic pathways projecting polysynaptically to brown adipose tissue in 
the rat. Neuroscience. 2002; 110:515–526. [PubMed: 11906790] 
Ono K, Tsukamoto-Yasui M, Hara-Kimura Y, Inoue N, Nogusa Y, Okabe Y, Nagashima K, Kato F. 
Intragastric administration of capsiate, a transient receptor potential channel agonist, triggers 
thermogenic sympathetic responses. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011; 110:789–798. [PubMed: 
21071592] 
Ootsuka Y, Blessing WW. Inhibition of medullary raphe/parapyramidal neurons prevents cutaneous 
vasoconstriction elicited by alerting stimuli and by cold exposure in conscious rabbits. Brain Res. 
2005a; 1051:189–193. [PubMed: 15993863] 
Ootsuka Y, Blessing WW, Steiner AA, Romanovsky AA. Fever response to intravenous prostaglandin 
E2 is mediated by the brain but does not require afferent vagal signaling. Am J Physiol Regul 
Integr Comp Physiol. 2008; 294:R1294–1303. [PubMed: 18234746] 
Ootsuka Y, McAllen RM. Interactive drives from two brain stem premotor nuclei are essential to 
support rat tail sympathetic activity. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005b; 289:R1107–
1115. [PubMed: 15961539] 
Osaka T. Cold-induced thermogenesis mediated by GABA in the preoptic area of anesthetized rats. 
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2004; 287:R306–313. [PubMed: 15031132] 
Owens NC, Ootsuka Y, Kanosue K, McAllen RM. Thermoregulatory control of sympathetic fibres 
supplying the rat’s tail. J Physiol. 2002; 543:849–858. [PubMed: 12231643] 
Palmes ED, Park CR. The regulation of body temperature during fever. Arch Environ Health. 1965; 
11:749–759. [PubMed: 5846067] 
Morrison
Page 19
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Peyron C, Tighe DK, van den Pol AN, de Lecea L, Heller HC, Sutcliffe JG, Kilduff TS. Neurons 
containing hypocretin (orexin) project to multiple neuronal systems. J Neurosci. 1998; 18:9996–
10015. [PubMed: 9822755] 
Rathner JA, Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Central pathway for spontaneous and prostaglandin E2-evoked 
cutaneous vasoconstriction. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2008; 295:R343–354. 
[PubMed: 18463193] 
Rathner JA, Morrison SF. Rostral ventromedial periaqueductal gray: a source of inhibition of the 
sympathetic outflow to brown adipose tissue. Brain Res. 2006; 1077:99–107. [PubMed: 
16499889] 
Riedel W. Warm receptors in the dorsal abdominal wall of the rabbit. Pflugers Arch. 1976; 361:205–
206. [PubMed: 129763] 
Romanovsky A. Skin temperature: its role in thermoregulation. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2014; 210:498–
507. [PubMed: 24716231] 
Romanovsky AA. Do fever and anapyrexia exist? Analysis of set point-based definitions. Am J Physiol 
Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2004; 287:R992–995. [PubMed: 15191900] 
Romanovsky AA. Thermoregulation: some concepts have changed. Functional architecture of the 
thermoregulatory system. American Journal of Physiology - Regulatory Integrative & Comparative 
Physiology. 2007; 292:R37–46.
Rothwell NJ, Stock MJ, Thexton AJ. Decerebration activates thermogenesis in the rat. J Physiol 
(Lond). 1983; 342:15–22. [PubMed: 6631729] 
Samuels BC, Zaretsky DV, DiMicco JA. Tachycardia evoked by disinhibition of the dorsomedial 
hypothalamus in rats is mediated through medullary raphe. J Physiol. 2002; 538:941–946. 
[PubMed: 11826177] 
Saper CB, Breder CD. The neurologic basis of fever. N Engl J Med. 1994; 330:1880–1886. [PubMed: 
7832832] 
Sarkar S, Zaretskaia MV, Zaretsky DV, Moreno M, DiMicco JA. Stress- and lipopolysaccharide-
induced c-fos expression and nNOS in hypothalamic neurons projecting to medullary raphe in 
rats: a triple immunofluorescent labeling study. European Journal of Neuroscience. 2007; 
26:2228–2238. [PubMed: 17927775] 
Satinoff E, Rutstein J. Behavioral thermoregulation in rats with anterior hypothalamic lesions. J Comp 
Physiol Psychol. 1970; 71:77–82. [PubMed: 5452104] 
Schafer SS, Schafer S. The behavior of the proprioceptors of the muscle and the innervation of the 
fusimotor system during cold shivering. Exp Brain Res. 1973a; 17:364–380. [PubMed: 4269404] 
Schafer SS, Schafer S. The role of the primary afference in the generation of a cold shivering tremor. 
Exp Brain Res. 1973b; 17:381–393. [PubMed: 4269405] 
Shafton AD, McAllen RM. Location of cat brain stem neurons that drive sweating. Am J Physiol 
Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2013; 304:R804–809. [PubMed: 23467325] 
Shafton AD, Oldfield BJ, McAllen RM. CRF-like immunoreactivity selectively labels preganglionic 
sudomotor neurons in cat. Brain Res. 1992; 599:253–260. [PubMed: 1283970] 
Shibasaki M, Aoki K, Morimoto K, Johnson JM, Takamata A. Plasma hyperosmolality elevates the 
internal temperature threshold for active thermoregulatory vasodilation during heat stress in 
humans. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009; 297:R1706–1712. [PubMed: 
19812357] 
Shibasaki M, Crandall CG. Mechanisms and controllers of eccrine sweating in humans. Front Biosci 
(Schol Ed). 2010; 2:685–696. [PubMed: 20036977] 
Smith CJ, Johnson JM. Responses to hyperthermia. Optimizing heat dissipation by convection and 
evaporation: Neural control of skin blood flow and sweating in humans. Auton Neurosci. 
201610.1016/j.autneu.2016.1001.1002
Smith JE, Jansen AS, Gilbey MP, Loewy AD. CNS cell groups projecting to sympathetic outflow of 
tail artery: neural circuits involved in heat loss in the rat. Brain Res. 1998; 786:153–164. 
[PubMed: 9554992] 
Steiner AA, Turek VF, Almeida MC, Burmeister JJ, Oliveira DL, Roberts JL, Bannon AW, Norman 
MH, Louis JC, Treanor JJ, Gavva NR, Romanovsky AA. Nonthermal activation of transient 
Morrison
Page 20
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 receptor potential vanilloid-1 channels in abdominal viscera tonically inhibits autonomic cold-
defense effectors. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:7459–7468. [PubMed: 17626206] 
Stornetta RL, Rosin DL, Simmons JR, McQuiston TJ, Vujovic N, Weston MC, Guyenet PG. 
Coexpression of vesicular glutamate transporter-3 and gamma-aminobutyric acidergic markers in 
rat rostral medullary raphe and intermediolateral cell column. J Comp Neurol. 2005; 492:477–
494. [PubMed: 16228993] 
Szekely M. The vagus nerve in thermoregulation and energy metabolism. Auton Neurosci. 2000; 
85:26–38. [PubMed: 11189024] 
Szymusiak R, Satinoff E. Acute thermoregulatory effects of unilateral electrolytic lesions of the medial 
and lateral preoptic area in rats. Physiol Behav. 1982; 28:161–170. [PubMed: 7079312] 
Tabarean IV, Behrens MM, Bartfai T, Korn H. Prostaglandin E2-increased thermosensitivity of anterior 
hypothalamic neurons is associated with depressed inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 
101:2590–2595. [PubMed: 14983053] 
Takahashi Y, Zhang W, Sameshima K, Kuroki C, Matsumoto A, Sunanaga J, Kono Y, Sakurai T, 
Kanmura Y, Kuwaki T. Orexin neurons are indispensable for prostaglandin E2-induced fever and 
defence against environmental cooling in mice. J Physiol. 2013
Takamata A, Mack GW, Gillen CM, Jozsi AC, Nadel ER. Osmoregulatory modulation of thermal 
sweating in humans: reflex effects of drinking. Am J Physiol. 1995; 268:R414–422. [PubMed: 
7864236] 
Tanaka M, McAllen RM. A subsidiary fever center in the medullary raphe? Am J Physiol Regul Integr 
Comp Physiol. 2005; 289:R1592–1598. [PubMed: 15976309] 
Tanaka M, McKinley MJ, McAllen RM. Roles of two preoptic cell groups in tonic and febrile control 
of rat tail sympathetic fibers. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009; 296:R1248–1257. 
[PubMed: 19211726] 
Tanaka M, McKinley MJ, McAllen RM. Preoptic-raphe connections for thermoregulatory vasomotor 
control. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:5078–5088. [PubMed: 21451045] 
Tanaka M, McKinley MJ, McAllen RM. Role of an excitatory preoptic-raphe pathway in febrile 
vasoconstriction of the rat’s tail. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2013; 305:R1479–
1489. [PubMed: 24133101] 
Tanaka M, Nagashima K, McAllen RM, Kanosue K. Role of the medullary raphe in thermoregulatory 
vasomotor control in rats. J Physiol. 2002; 540:657–664. [PubMed: 11956351] 
Tanaka M, Owens NC, Nagashima K, Kanosue K, McAllen RM. Reflex activation of rat fusimotor 
neurons by body surface cooling, and its dependence on the medullary raphe. J Physiol. 2006; 
572:569–583. [PubMed: 16484305] 
Tanaka M, Tonouchi M, Hosono T, Nagashima K, Yanase-Fujiwara M, Kanosue K. Hypothalamic 
region facilitating shivering in rats. Jpn J Physiol. 2001; 51:625–629. [PubMed: 11734085] 
Tominaga M, Caterina MJ, Malmberg AB, Rosen TA, Gilbert H, Skinner K, Raumann BE, Basbaum 
AI, Julius D. The cloned capsaicin receptor integrates multiple pain-producing stimuli. Neuron. 
1998; 21:531–543. [PubMed: 9768840] 
Toth IE, Toth DE, Boldogkoi Z, Hornyak A, Palkovits M, Blessing WW. Serotonin-synthesizing 
neurons in the rostral medullary raphe/parapyramidal region transneuronally labelled after 
injection of pseudorabies virus into the rat tail. Neurochem Res. 2006; 31:277–286. [PubMed: 
16570210] 
Tsukita S, Yamada T, Uno K, Takahashi K, Kaneko K, Ishigaki Y, Imai J, Hasegawa Y, Sawada S, 
Ishihara H, Oka Y, Katagiri H. Hepatic glucokinase modulates obesity predisposition by 
regulating BAT thermogenesis via neural signals. Cell Metab. 2012; 16:825–832. [PubMed: 
23217261] 
Tupone D, Madden CJ, Cano G, Morrison SF. An orexinergic projection from perifornical 
hypothalamus to raphe pallidus increases rat brown adipose tissue thermogenesis. J Neurosci. 
2011; 31:15944–15955. [PubMed: 22049437] 
Tupone D, Madden CJ, Morrison SF. Central activation of the A1 adenosine receptor (A1AR) induces 
a hypothermic, torpor-like state in the rat. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:14512–14525. [PubMed: 
24005302] 
Morrison
Page 21
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Turlejska E, Baker MA. Elevated CSF osmolality inhibits thermoregulatory heat loss responses. Am J 
Physiol. 1986; 251:R749–754. [PubMed: 3766775] 
van Marken Lichtenbelt WD, Vanhommerig JW, Smulders NM, Drossaerts JM, Kemerink GJ, Bouvy 
ND, Schrauwen P, Teule GJ. Cold-activated brown adipose tissue in healthy men. N Engl J Med. 
2009; 360:1500–1508. [PubMed: 19357405] 
Virtanen KA, Lidell ME, Orava J, Heglind M, Westergren R, Niemi T, Taittonen M, Laine J, Savisto 
NJ, Enerback S, Nuutila P. Functional brown adipose tissue in healthy adults. N Engl J Med. 
2009; 360:1518–1525. [PubMed: 19357407] 
Wallin BG, Charkoudian N. Sympathetic neural control of integrated cardiovascular function: insights 
from measurement of human sympathetic nerve activity. Muscle Nerve. 2007; 36:595–614. 
[PubMed: 17623856] 
Whyte DG, Johnson AK. Lesions of the anteroventral third ventricle region (AV3V) disrupt 
cardiovascular responses to an elevation in core temperature. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol. 2005; 288:R1783–1790. [PubMed: 15650127] 
Yoshida K, Konishi M, Nagashima K, Saper CB, Kanosue K. Fos activation in hypothalamic neurons 
during cold or warm exposure: projections to periaqueductal gray matter. Neuroscience. 2005; 
133:1039–1046. [PubMed: 15927405] 
Yoshida K, Li X, Cano G, Lazarus M, Saper CB. Parallel preoptic pathways for thermoregulation. J 
Neurosci. 2009; 29:11954–11964. [PubMed: 19776281] 
Yoshida K, Maruyama M, Hosono T, Nagashima K, Fukuda Y, Gerstberger R, Kanosue K. Fos 
expression induced by warming the preoptic area in rats. Brain Res. 2002; 933:109–117. 
[PubMed: 11931855] 
Yoshida K, Nakamura K, Matsumura K, Kanosue K, Konig M, Thiel HJ, Boldogkoi Z, Toth I, Roth J, 
Gerstberger R, Hubschle T. Neurons of the rat preoptic area and the raphe pallidus nucleus 
innervating the brown adipose tissue express the prostaglandin E receptor subtype EP3. Eur J 
Neurosci. 2003; 18:1848–1860. [PubMed: 14622218] 
Zaretskaia MV, Zaretsky DV, DiMicco JA. Role of the dorsomedial hypothalamus in thermogenesis 
and tachycardia caused by microinjection of prostaglandin E2 into the preoptic area in 
anesthetized rats. Neuroscience Letters. 2003; 340:1–4. [PubMed: 12648744] 
Zaretsky DV, Hunt JL, Zaretskaia MV, DiMicco JA. Microinjection of prostaglandin E2 and muscimol 
into the preoptic area in conscious rats: comparison of effects on plasma adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone (ACTH), body temperature, locomotor activity, and cardiovascular function. Neurosci 
Lett. 2006; 397:291–296. [PubMed: 16406311] 
Zaretsky DV, Zaretskaia MV, DiMicco JA. Stimulation and blockade of GABAA receptors in the raphe 
pallidus: effects on body temperature, heart rate, and blood pressure in conscious rats. Am J 
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2003; 285:R110–116. [PubMed: 12609814] 
Zhang W, Sunanaga J, Takahashi Y, Mori T, Sakurai T, Kanmura Y, Kuwaki T. Orexin neurons are 
indispensable for stress-induced thermogenesis in mice. J Physiol. 2010; 588:4117–4129. 
[PubMed: 20807795] 
Zhang Y, Kerman IA, Laque A, Nguyen P, Faouzi M, Louis GW, Jones JC, Rhodes C, Munzberg H. 
Leptin-receptor-expressing neurons in the dorsomedial hypothalamus and median preoptic area 
regulate sympathetic brown adipose tissue circuits. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:1873–1884. [PubMed: 
21289197] 
Zhang YH, Hosono T, Yanase-Fujiwara M, Chen XM, Kanosue K. Effect of midbrain stimulations on 
thermoregulatory vasomotor responses in rats. J Physiol (Lond). 1997; 503:177–186. [PubMed: 
9288685] 
Zhang YH, Lu J, Elmquist JK, Saper CB. Lipopolysaccharide activates specific populations of 
hypothalamic and brainstem neurons that project to the spinal cord. J Neurosci. 2000; 20:6578–
6586. [PubMed: 10964963] 
Zhang YH, Yanase-Fujiwara M, Hosono T, Kanosue K. Warm and cold signals from the preoptic area: 
which contribute more to the control of shivering in rats? J Physiol. 1995; 485(Pt 1):195–202. 
[PubMed: 7658373] 
Morrison
Page 22
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Central neural circuits maintain a homeostatic body temperature during 
environmental temperature challenges and alter body temperature during the 
inflammatory response.
•
Activation of thermoeffectors is regulated by parallel but distinct, effector-
specific, core efferent pathways within the CNS that share a common peripheral 
thermal sensory input.
Morrison
Page 23
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Functional neuroanatomical model for the fundamental pathways providing the 
thermoregulatory control and pyrogenic activation of cutaneous vasoconstriction (CVC), 
brown adipose tissue (BAT) and shivering thermogenesis. Cool and warm cutaneous 
thermoreceptors transmit signals to respective primary sensory neurons in the dorsal root 
ganglia (DRG) which relay this information to second-order thermal sensory neurons in the 
dorsal horn (DH). Cool sensory DH neurons glutamatergically activate third-order sensory 
neurons in the external lateral subnucleus of the lateral parabrachial nucleus (LPB), while 
warm sensory DH neurons project to third-order sensory neurons in the dorsal subnucleus of 
the LPB. Thermosensory signals driving thermoregulatory responses are transmitted from 
the LPB to the preoptic area (POA) where GABAergic interneurons (red) in the median 
preoptic (MnPO) subnucleus are activated by glutamatergic inputs from cool-activated 
neurons in LPB and inhibit each of the distinct populations of warm-sensitive (W-S) neurons 
in the medial preoptic area (MPA) that control CVC, BAT and shivering. In contrast, 
glutamatergic interneurons (dark green) in the MnPO are postulated to be excited by 
glutamatergic inputs from warm-activated neurons in LPB and, in turn, excite W-S neurons 
in MPA. Prostaglandin (PG) E2 binds to EP3 receptors on each of the classes of W-S 
neurons in the POA to inhibit their activity. The MnPO also contains neurons (light green) 
Morrison
Page 24
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that provide an excitatory input to CVC premotor neurons in the rostral raphe pallidus 
(rRPa), and neurons (light green) that excite BAT- and shivering- promoting neurons in the 
dorsomedial hypothalamus and dorsal hypothalamic area (DMH/DA). Preoptic W-S neurons 
provide inhibitory control of CVC by inhibiting CVC sympathetic premotor neurons in the 
rostral ventromedial medulla, including the rRPa, that project to CVC sympathetic 
preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral nucleus (IML). Preoptic W-S neurons 
providing inhibitory thermoregulatory control of BAT and shivering thermogenesis inhibit 
BAT sympathoexcitatory neurons and shivering promoting neurons, respectively, in the 
DMH/DA, which, when disinhibited during skin and core cooling, provide respective 
excitatory drives to BAT sympathetic premotor neurons and to skeletal muscle shivering 
premotor neurons in the rRPa. These, in turn, project, respectively, to BAT sympathetic 
preganglionic neurons in the IML, and to alpha (α) and gamma (γ) motoneurons in the 
ventral horn (VH) of the spinal cord.
Morrison
Page 25
Auton Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
