 British Journal of Canadian Studies, vol. 30, no. 2 
https://doi.org/10.3828/bjcs.2017.9
Ian Mosby and Tracey Galloway
‘The abiding condition was hunger’: assessing the long-term 
biological and health effects of malnutrition and hunger in 
Canada’s residential schools 
‘La faim était un état permanent’: évaluation des effets 
biologiques et sanitaires à long terme de la malnutrition et  
de la faim dans les pensionnats autochtones du Canada
Recent studies of residential school survivors and their families focus on the 
impact of school experiences on the social determinants of health, especially 
mental health. Less studied is the connection between residential school 
survivorship and patterns of chronic disease risk among Indigenous peoples 
in Canada. Narrative accounts, supported by archival records on school food 
service, provide consistent evidence that children who attended Canada’s 
Indian residential schools experienced chronic undernutrition characterised 
by insufficient caloric intake, minimal protein and fat, and limited access to 
fresh produce, often over a period of five to ten years. When examined in 
the light of literature on the intergenerational effects of twentieth-century 
famines, this evidence suggests that high prevalence of metabolic risk factors 
among Indigenous peoples in Canada may be directly associated with the 
nutritional deprivations experienced by children in residential schools.
Keywords: residential schools, malnutrition, hunger, diabetes, 
obesity, cardiovascular disease
Des études récentes sur les survivants des pensionnats Indiens et de leurs 
familles se sont concentrées sur l’impact de l’expérience scolaire sur les 
déterminants sociaux de la santé, en particulier la santé mentale. Un aspect 
moins étudié est le rapport entre la survie à ces pensionnats Indiens et 
les caractéristiques associées aux risques de maladies chroniques chez les 
peuples autochtones du Canada. Les comptes-rendus descriptifs, étayés 
par les documents d’archives relatifs au service d’alimentation scolaire, 
fournissent des preuves constantes que les enfants qui fréquentaient les 
pensionnats Indiens du Canada souffraient de sous-nutrition chronique 
caractérisée par un apport calorique insuffisant, peu de protéines et de 
lipides et un accès limité aux produits frais, souvent sur une période de 
cinq à dix ans. Lorsqu’elles sont examinées à la lumière des textes sur les 
 148
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
effets intergénérationnels des famines du vingtième siècle, ces preuves 
suggèrent que la prévalence élevée de facteurs de risques métaboliques 
chez les peuples autochtones au Canada peut être directement associée 
aux privations nutritives subies par les enfants dans les pensionnats Indiens.
Mots clés: Pensionnats Indiens, malnutrition, faim, diabète, obésité, 
maladies cardiovasculaires
Canada’s residential schools
In recent years, there has been increasing medical consensus that Canada’s 
Indian residential school system – the federally funded and church-run 
boarding schools which operated between 1883 and 1996 – had a lifelong 
impact on the health of children. What was once referred to vaguely 
as ‘residential school syndrome’ (Brasfield 2001) has now been widely 
recognised as a complex of health outcomes that includes mental, physical, 
emotional, and cultural traumas experienced by former students as a 
result of their common experience of surviving what the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada (TRC), the six-year investigation 
into residential school experiences, has concluded was nothing short of an 
attempted cultural genocide (TRC 2015a).
Until recently, research on these health effects has focused mostly on 
survivors’ mental health (Bombay et al. 2014; Söchting et al. 2007; Wesley-
Esquimaux and Smolewski 2004). Less recognised are the long-term and 
intergenerational physical consequences of the residential school experience. 
Perhaps the least understood but potentially most profound of these physical 
legacies is the impact of chronic malnutrition. This article offers some 
tentative insights into the possible individual and intergenerational impacts 
of residential school diets, with the goal of contributing to the growing 
literature on the health impacts of residential schools. A second and equally 
important goal is to raise awareness among health care providers as well as 
public health and health decision makers that the health patterns observed 
among their patients may, in part, be the result of biological processes 
arising from residential schools that have previously gone unrecognised.
‘Hunger was never absent’
Well before the last residential school closed in 1996,1 survivors from every 
region of Canada told harrowing stories of hunger. One such account 
was written in the fall of 1965 by Russell Moses: an air force veteran and 
 149
CANADA’S RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS
member of the Delaware Band of the Six Nations of Grand River who 
had attended the Mohawk Institute in Brantford, Ontario between 1942 
and 1947. Moses was working for the Federal Indian Affairs Branch at the 
time and had been asked by his employer to reflect on his residential school 
experience. ‘The food at the institute’, he wrote, ‘was disgraceful’. For 
breakfast, children were given:
two slices of bread with either jam or honey as the dressing, oatmeal with 
worms … or corn meal porridge which was minimal in quantity and 
appalling in quality. The beverage consisted of skim milk and when one 
stops to consider that we were milking from twenty to thirty head of pure 
bred Holstein cattle, it seems odd that we did not ever receive whole milk 
and in my five years at the Institute we never received butter once. (Moses 
1965: 1)
Lunch consisted of ‘water as the beverage [and] if you were a senior boy 
or girl you received … one and a half slices of dry bread and the main 
course consisted of a “rotten soup” (local terminology) (i.e. scraps of beef, 
vegetables, some in a state of decay)’. For supper, ‘students were given 
two slices of bread and jam, fried potatoes, NO MEAT, a bun baked by 
the girls … and every other night a piece of cake or possibly an apple in 
the summer months’ (Moses 1965: 1). Moses went on to say, ‘The diet 
remained constant; hunger was never absent’. He even recalled hungry 
children ‘eating from the swill barrel, picking out soggy bits of food that 
was intended for the pigs’ (Moses 1965: 2).
Moses was not alone in his memories of hunger. In 1974 Secwepemc 
leader and president of the National Indian Brotherhood, George Manuel, 
wrote that hunger was one of the overriding memories of his time at the 
Kamloops Indian Residential School in the 1920s. ‘Every Indian student 
smelled of hunger’, he wrote, recounting how students had to steal raw 
potatoes from the kitchens to stave off their ever-present hunger pangs 
and how, at many points, they were reduced to eating dandelion roots, 
rosebuds, and leaves (Manuel and Posluns 1974: 65). And nearly forty years 
later Manuel’s son, Arthur, attempted an aborted hunger strike at the St 
Mary’s Residential School in Mission, British Columbia, upon realising 
that ‘the food they were serving us was worse than the food they serve in 
jail’. This was because, while spending a month in the Spy Hill Gaol in 
Calgary on a minor trespassing charge during his summer break in the early 
1960s, Manuel was shocked to find that – while meat and vegetables were 
‘almost unknown’ at the residential school – prisoners were being ‘served 
 150
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
meat and potatoes, pork chops, broiled chicken, and sometimes even steak’ 
(Manuel and Derrickson 2015: 13–15).
Other residential school survivors have recorded similar experiences across 
diverse geographies and time periods. In his 1988 memoir, Anishinaabe 
scholar Basil Johnston wrote that, during his time at Spanish Indian 
Residential School between 1939 and 1950, ‘the abiding condition was 
hunger’. According to Johnston, students were fed just enough ‘to blunt the 
sharp edge of hunger for three or four hours, never enough to dispel hunger 
completely until the next meal’ (Johnston 1988: 40). Secwepemc writer 
Bev Sellars similarly recalled her time as a student at the St Joseph’s Mission 
in Williams Lake, BC between 1962 and 1967: ‘We felt hungry all the time. 
I can remember my stomach aching and feeling empty’ (Sellars 2013: 57). 
The food, she recalls, was not just inadequate but was also often spoiled. In 
fact, years later, she discovered her regular bouts of what she called ‘yellow 
jaundice’ as a student were likely the result of food poisoning.
The TRC heard many similar accounts of hunger, malnutrition, and 
food-borne illness from survivors at schools across the country. In his 
statement to the TRC, for instance, Andrew Paul spoke of the unrelenting 
hunger he experienced during his time at Aklavik Roman Catholic 
Residential School: 
We cried to have something good to eat before we sleep. A lot of the times 
the food we had was rancid, full of maggots, stink. Sometimes we would 
sneak away from school to go visit our aunts or uncles just to have a piece of 
bannock. They stayed in tents not far from the school. And when it’s raining 
outside we could smell them frying doughnuts, homemade doughnuts, and 
those were the days when we ate good. (TRC 2015b: 71)
In his statement, Ray Silver told the TRC of being reduced to scavenging 
through garbage in order to get enough to eat at the Alberni Indian 
Residential School on Vancouver Island:
And us kids, we used to sneak from the school, we must have had to walk 
about a mile, sneak away from the school, sneak over the bridge, and go to 
that dump, and pick up apples, they were half rotten or something, and they 
threw out, they were no more good to sell, but us kids that were starving, 
we’d go there and pick that stuff up, fill up our shirts, and run back across 
the bridge, and go back to the school. (TRC 2015b: 72)
In statement after statement, survivors told the TRC how they struggled 
to overcome hunger in whatever way they could – whether it was stealing 
 151
CANADA’S RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS
food, eating spoiled food, or even catching wild animals like hares to 
supplement their meagre diet (TRC 2015b: 69–77).
These reports of widespread hunger and inadequate diets have largely 
been confirmed by leading historians of the residential school system 
(Haig-Brown 1988; Miller 1996; Milloy 1999; Kelm 1996). As historian 
J.R. Miller sums up the food service in residential schools, ‘the food 
was inadequate, frequently unappetizing, and all too often consumed in 
inhospitable and intimidating surroundings’ (Miller 1996: 290). In fact, 
malnutrition and inadequate diets were common enough in the early 
post-war years that, between 1948 and 1952, scientists and doctors working 
for the federal government were able to conduct a series of nutrition 
experiments on malnourished children at six residential schools across 
the country (Mosby 2013). At each of the six schools, existing levels of 
malnutrition were used as a baseline for investigations into the effectiveness 
of vitamins, fortified foods, and other nutritional interventions. For 
example, researchers selected the Shubenacadie Indian Residential School 
in Nova Scotia for a double-blind, randomised controlled trial of the effects 
of vitamin C supplementation; the school was considered an ideal location 
for the experiment because of widespread clinical ascorbic acid deficiencies 
observed among its students (Mosby 2013: 161–2).
Recent research published by Paul Hackett and colleagues reveals that 
the malnutrition observed at residential schools in the 1940s and 1950s 
was largely the product of the school environment, and that students 
were actually well-nourished prior to entering the schools (Hackett et al. 
2016). In fact, even during the 1940s, it was widely recognised that the 
malnutrition among residential school students was likely caused by the 
inadequate funding provided to the schools. The lead researcher on the 
nutrition experiments, Dr Lionel Pett, noted in 1948 that the per capita 
grant provided for food in most schools was often half of that required to 
maintain a balanced and nutritionally adequate diet (Mosby 2013: 159). 
And while the funding formula was revised in the late 1950s, the TRC 
concluded in its final report that 
The federal government knowingly chose not to provide schools with 
enough money to ensure that kitchens and dining rooms were properly 
equipped, that cooks were properly trained, and, most significantly, that food 
was purchased in sufficient quantity and quality for growing children. It was 
a decision that left thousands of Aboriginal children vulnerable to disease. 
(TRC Canada 2015a: 92) 
 152
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
Comparison studies
It is hard to estimate with any accuracy the average caloric intake or 
the overall nutritional status of children attending residential schools in 
Canada. In large part this is due to the limitations of the existing archival 
record. Records related to food service and other areas of residential school 
administration, after all, were routinely destroyed as a matter of official 
policy. A 2006 investigation by the Shingwauk Project at Algoma University 
found that ‘there was a general federal government policy to destroy many 
government files and that there was a very high level of records destruction 
activity that occurred between 1936 and 1956’ (Sadowski 2006: 3). For 
example, between 1936 and 1944 alone, it was estimated that at least 
200,000 Indian Affairs files were destroyed. Although a moratorium was 
placed on records destruction in 1973, a wide range of records related to 
residential schools prior to then has likely been destroyed. The files related 
to residential schools at particular risk of being destroyed include school 
returns and requisitions, monthly reports, diaries and returns, and reports 
of inspectors, among others. According to the TRC, student health records 
were also regularly destroyed as a matter of policy (TRC 2015c: 10–11).
When combined with the inconsistent and unpredictable record keeping 
practices of the churches responsible for running these schools, it is clear 
that any attempt to reconstruct the specific diet of students in a particular 
school at any given time is extraordinarily difficult.2 The general picture of 
students’ diets, however, is quite clear – especially when we take survivor 
testimony into account. Moses’ (1965) description, for instance, is consistent 
with the existing archival records documenting school food procurement 
and practices at the Mohawk Institute as well as the testimony from other 
former students (Graham 1997). While there was considerable variability in 
school food service, the widespread nature of narrative accounts of hunger 
across the entire country and at schools operated by all religious denomi-
nations suggests that this experience was common if not ubiquitous. As 
J.R. Miller argued in 1996: ‘“We were always hungry,” could serve as the 
slogan for any organization of former residential school students’ (Miller 
1996: 290).
Overall, then, the picture of residential school diets is one of sustained 
malnutrition characterised by insufficient caloric intake; minimal protein 
and fat; severely limited access to fresh fruit and vegetables; and frequent 
bouts of food-borne infection. A generous interpretation of Moses’ account 
describes a regime delivering a maximum of 1260 kcal per day. From 
 153
CANADA’S RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS
this account and others available, we estimate the average daily caloric 
intake at many residential schools like those described above to be in the 
range of 1000–1450 kcal per day; requirements for moderately active, 
healthy children aged 4 to 18 years range from 1400–3200 kcal (Institutes 
of Medicine 2002/2005). Over the course of a five-to-ten-year period, 
exposure to poor diet quality and caloric restriction of this magnitude has 
significant consequences on the biology and health of individuals.
For comparison, we draw on studies documenting impacts on growth and 
development in high-poverty environments where chronic under-nutrition 
is endemic and in so-called ‘natural experiments’ arising from famine 
events that occurred during the twentieth century. Much recent work on 
the long-term health effects of nutritional deprivation has been carried out 
by Ana Lydia Sawaya and colleagues on malnourished populations living in 
Sao Paulo, Brazil (Sawaya 2006; Martins and Sawaya 2006). Recent reviews 
of the literature on child malnutrition (de Onis and Branca 2016; Li et al. 
2016) also provide excellent resources for those seeking to understand the 
health implications of dietary restriction in childhood.
The lens through which we view the health impacts of malnutrition has 
widened appreciably in recent years with the publication of cohort studies 
examining the intergenerational impacts of devastating famines. The most 
widely known of these may be the Dutch Famine studies exploring chronic 
disease risk among the offspring of famine survivors (Lumey et al., 2007). 
The Dutch Famine or ‘Hunger Winter’ was the result of military blockades 
imposed by both Allied and Nazi forces during the German occupation of 
the Netherlands during the Second World War. From 1944 to 1945, it is 
estimated that residents of cities in the western region of the Netherlands 
subsisted on an average of 1000 kcal per day. Equally compelling are the 
Russian and Chinese famine cohorts. The Russian Empire and Soviet 
Union experienced a series of widespread famines, the worst of which 
occurred from 1932 to 1934 in what is now Kazakhstan, Ukraine, and the 
Volga Region of Russia (Sharygin 2010) and is estimated to have affected 
70 million people. The Chinese Famine of 1959 to 1961 was the result of 
a combination of crop failures and the mobilisation of rural populations to 
work in industrial centres as part of Mao’s Great Leap Forward (Chen and 
Zhou 2007; Gørgens et al. 2012). With an estimated thirty million deaths 
over the course of the famine, it was determined that daily energy intake 
fell to an average of about 1500 kcal per person (Ashton et al. 1984).
By drawing on archival sources and employing methods of observational 
epidemiology, famine studies document the lifelong and intergenerational 
 154
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
effects of famine exposure during the biologically sensitive period in 
utero. However, this body of literature also examines comparison groups 
of children born before and after famine events, thereby documenting 
the effects of severe caloric restriction on development throughout 
childhood. Follow-up studies of these cohorts have examined the 
biological consequences of childhood hunger throughout the life-course 
and in succeeding generations of children born to famine survivors. 
We believe this research provides a roadmap for examining the physical 
impacts of Canada’s residential school legacy.
Individual effects
The long-term health effects of malnutrition in childhood are well 
documented. The most evident of these impacts is stunted growth (low 
height for age). The effect of malnutrition on achieved stature is pronounced: 
child survivors of twentieth-century famines are height stunted by an 
average of 1–3 cm compared with their age-matched peers (Gørgens et al. 
2012; Sharygin 2010). Stunting is the most common growth impairment 
observed in developing countries (more common than low weight for 
height), with fully 74 per cent of the global burden of stunting confined to 
the world’s poorest countries in Africa and South-Central Asia (Dewey and 
Begum 2010). Even in developed nations, height stunting persists in areas of 
poverty where malnutrition is endemic; thus eradication of stunting is now 
a leading global health priority (de Onis and Branca 2016).
Stunting has profound health effects throughout the life-course. Children 
whose growth falters due to malnutrition have lower fat-free mass, impaired 
bone development, and a tendency to prioritise fat- over lean-mass 
deposition (Martins et al. 2011; Sawaya 2006). Stunted adolescents exhibit 
lower insulin levels and greater insulin sensitivity than non-stunted controls 
and are therefore at greater risk of developing Type II diabetes (Martins and 
Sawaya 2006). Studies document a strong association between stunting and 
high blood pressure among height-stunted adolescents and adults living in 
northeastern Brazil (Fernandes et al. 2003; Florêncio et al. 2004). Prolonged 
under-nutrition also alters thyroid function in an attempt to reduce energy 
expenditure, resulting in hypothyroidism and lower basal metabolic rates 
among height-stunted individuals (Sawaya et al. 2006).
Stunted women have greater risk of stillbirths, miscarriages, pre-term 
births, complications of labour and delivery, and decreased offspring birth 
 155
CANADA’S RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS
weight (Cai and Feng 2005; Dewey and Begum 2010; Victoria et al. 2008). 
Stunting is known to affect both cognitive development and educational 
attainment negatively (Victoria et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2016), and has been 
associated with delayed school entry, greater grade repetition and dropout 
rates, decreased graduation rates from primary and secondary school, and 
lower school performance (Daniels and Adair 2004; Jukes 2005). The 
effects of stunting on adult employment are well documented. Cohort 
studies demonstrate reduced work capacity among adults who experienced 
height stunting through childhood exposures (Martins et al. 2011) and 
lower income levels among height-stunted individuals (Chen and Zhou 
2007; Dewey and Begum 2010; Victoria et al. 2008).
Malnutrition produces a cascade of immune system effects leading 
to both acute and chronic changes in immune response and ultimately 
heightening risk of infectious disease, even in moderately malnourished 
children (Rytter et al. 2014). The impact of nutritional deprivation on 
immune function is one of a number of effects that has led Ptelletier and 
colleagues (1993) to describe malnutrition as a “potentiator” of childhood 
mortality. It is estimated that about half of all deaths among young children 
globally are ultimately caused by malnutrition, most commonly mild to 
moderate malnutrition (Martorell 1999; World Health Organization 2017). 
Furthermore, it has been cited as a leading contributor to disproportionately 
high tuberculosis mortality among residential school students compared 
with their non-Indigenous counterparts (Stoops 2006; TRC 2015c).
Recent research is also shedding light on the physiological connections 
between childhood malnutrition and risk of chronic disease in adulthood. 
Shorter stature, lower lean mass, lower resting metabolic rates, and greater 
insulin sensitivity predispose individuals to obesity and a range of chronic 
diseases, including Type II diabetes and cardiovascular disease (de Onis 
and Branca 2016; van Abeelen et al. 2012a; Sawaya 2006). In addition, 
malnutrition is itself a powerful stressor. Nutritional deprivation activates 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal stress response, causing a prolonged 
increase in cortisol secretion. An elevated cortisol level is exacerbated by the 
reduced rate of metabolic clearance of circulating cortisol due to lower basal 
metabolic rate (Martins et al. 2011; Sawaya 2006). Elevated cortisol further 
blunts insulin response, inhibits the function of insulin-like growth factor 
(IGF-1), and produces long-term changes in lipid metabolism (Martins et al. 
2011), thereby worsening growth impairment and further increasing risk of 
obesity and chronic disease. This cascade of effects leads almost inexorably 
to a complex of obesity, hypertension, and diabetes. The effects are not 
 156
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
reversed once adequate diets are re-established; rather, the individual’s 
physiology has been programmed, in a sense, by childhood deprivation to 
continue the cycle of worsening effects (Florêncio et al. 2004; Martins et 
al. 2011; Sawaya 2006).
This process matches descriptions of famine survivors emerging from 
observational studies of post-famine cohorts. Compared to controls, 
children exposed to twentieth-century famines are significantly more likely 
to be obese (van Abeelen et al. 2012b; Wang et al. 2010). Scholars report 
higher BMI and fasting plasma glucose, unfavourable lipid profiles, higher 
prevalence of diabetes and hypertension, and higher incidence of heart attack 
and stroke at ages 40 to 60 among famine survivors (Li et al. 2016; Huang et 
al. 2010; Wang et al. 2010). Women exposed as girls to the Dutch Famine 
are significantly more as likely to develop diabetes than their non-exposed 
peers (van Abeelen et al. 2012a). The odds of developing diabetes increase 
with the severity of famine exposure; women who reported only moderate 
caloric restriction as children were 1.3 times as likely to develop diabetes, 
while women who underwent severe caloric restriction were 1.5 times 
more likely to develop diabetes than their non-exposed peers.
Taken together, this research describes how sustained exposure to caloric 
restriction produces a biological complex of height stunting together with 
metabolic changes that lead to greater risk of obesity and chronic disease in 
people who experience malnutrition in childhood. 
Intergenerational effects
While observational studies are revealing the impact of malnutrition on the 
biology of those directly exposed to malnutrition, they are also revealing 
a complex of intergenerational effects on the children and grandchildren 
of famine survivors. Height-stunted women have been found to be more 
likely to give birth to low-birthweight babies (Dewey and Begum 2010). 
Maternal obesity and diabetes have also been associated with greater risk 
of inter-uterine growth failure, both low and high birthweight with their 
attendant risks, growth faltering, and the development of insulin resistance 
and diabetes, in offspring (Leddy et al. 2008). These effects appear to 
continue into the following generation: adult grandchildren of famine 
survivors have significantly higher BMI and prevalence of obesity than the 
general population (Li et al. 2016, Wang et al. 2010, Veenendaal et al. 2013). 
Among grandchildren, there is an interesting reversal of the first-generation 
 157
CANADA’S RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS
pattern, whereby these effects are significant among grandchildren whose 
fathers (not mothers) are the offspring of famine survivors (Veenendaal 
et al. 2013).
Although we are only beginning to understand these complex biological 
and epigenetic processes, it is clear that the negative health impacts of 
sustained malnutrition are multi-generational. A further part of the 
intergenerational impact, it seems, has to do with the psychological and 
cultural – and not just biological – impacts of residential schools on the 
dietary practices of survivors and their families. Many former students 
and their families trace contemporary unhealthy eating habits and a range 
of diet-related diseases to their residential school experience (Oster et al., 
2014). Not only did residential schools, themselves, attempt forcibly to 
strip students of their Indigenous dietary practices – leaving generations 
of children alienated from their own culinary traditions during their 
formative years – but they supplanted them with diets formed predomi-
nantly of unhealthy, nutritionally inadequate starch-heavy alternatives. 
Theodore Fontaine, former chief of the Sagkeeng Ojibway First Nation and 
survivor of the Fort Alexander Residential School in Manitoba, makes the 
connection between his inadequate residential school diet and later health 
issues explicit in his 2011 memoir:
For years after leaving school, I gorged almost every day on bacon, sausage, 
ham, bologna and eggs. I’d cut long slices into my toast and insert tracks of 
butter into them, and I routinely laid a piece of bread or bannock in the pan 
where I’d just fried bacon and let it soak up the grease, unaware of the health 
risks associated with eating this treat. I’d acquired a taste for a high-fat, low 
nutrient diet, which later contributed to my clogged arteries and need for 
open-heart surgery. (Fontaine 2010: 126–7) 
While more research still needs to be done examining the intergenerational 
effects of residential schools on the food cultures and dietary practices of 
Indigenous communities, it is nonetheless clear that the residential school 
experience often had a devastating effect on Indigenous diets and health 
even well after students left the schools.
Conclusion
Reynaldo Martorell (1999) once observed that malnutrition is often 
overlooked as a significant cause of childhood illness. There is strong evidence 
 158
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
that nutritional deprivation, with its concomitant effects on growth, body 
size, and metabolism, sets an individual on a path toward lifelong risk of 
obesity and chronic disease. Growing evidence of intergenerational effects 
associated with these processes should lead us to consider current health 
patterns among Indigenous peoples in Canada from an intergenerational 
perspective, following the suggestion of Hoke and McDade to consider 
the ways in which biology and poverty interact temporally to produce 
‘ever-widening disparities in contemporary society’ (2015: 195).
Residential school survivors from every part of the country have long 
testified that hunger and malnutrition defined their residential school 
experiences, yet there have been few studies of the long-term health effects 
of this hunger and malnutrition. In attempting to take the testimony of 
survivors seriously and to investigate the nature and extent of hunger and 
malnutrition in residential schools, the present research indicates that the 
high pattern of low birthweight, childhood and adult obesity, early-onset 
insulin resistance, and diabetes observed among Indigenous peoples in 
Canada may, in some part, be attributable to the prolonged caloric restriction 
experienced by those who attended residential schools. This knowledge 
introduces into both the health research and practice communities the 
very real possibility that much of our evidence base overlooks a significant 
driver of Indigenous health in Canada: malnutrition in childhood. That 
this malnutrition arises from state-sponsored intervention in the lives of 
Indigenous families whose intent, according to the Truth and Reconcil-
iation Commission, was nothing short of an attempted cultural genocide 
(TRC 2015a) is a fact that will hopefully mobilise collective action to 
address these health disparities. As in Russia, the Netherlands, and China, 
there is also an opportunity here to develop research that examines 
the intergenerational effects of malnutrition on health patterns among 
Indigenous peoples in Canada – one that not only remediates the harms 
arising from this legacy, but also promotes healing and reconciliation for 
survivors and their families.
In the meantime, primary health care providers need to be aware that 
these nutritional processes likely underlie high prevalence of metabolic 
and cardiovascular disease among Indigenous peoples, and that current 
therapies and approaches may be insufficient to address the biological 
changes associated with chronic disease in Indigenous patients. Behavioural 
and pharmacological interventions cannot reverse biology formed by 
intergenerational exposures. Comprehensive, culturally appropriate, 
and community-driven interventions are therefore necessary to support 
 159
CANADA’S RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS
improvements in health and nutrition for the survivors and intergenera-
tional survivors of residential schools. Results will, undoubtedly, be slow 
and incremental. The good news, however, is that these changes also have 
both individual and intergenerational effects, shifting the trajectories of 
growth and health in positive directions for current and future generations 
of Indigenous children. 
Notes
1 The Gordon Residential School, located in Punnichy, Saskatchewan (near Regina), 
was the last federally operated Indian Residential School to close its doors. It closed in 
November 1996.
2 The TRC, after all, found that even accounting for student deaths in specific residential 
schools is often impossible given the limitations in the archival record (TRC 2015c).
References
Ashton, Basil, Kenneth Hill, Alan Piazza, and Robin Zeitz, 1984, ‘Famine in China, 
1958–61’, Population and Development Review, 10.4, 613–45. 
Bombay, A., K. Matheson, and H. Anisman, 2014, ‘The Intergenerational Effects of 
Indian Residential Schools: Implications for the Concept of Historical Trauma’, 
Transcultural Psychiatry, 51.3, 320–38.
Brasfield, Charles, 2001, ‘Residential School Syndrome’, BC Medical Journal, 43.2, 78–81.
Cai, Yong, and Wang Feng, 2005, ‘Famine, Social Disruption, and Involuntary Fetal 
Loss: Evidence from Chinese Survey Data’, Demography, 42, 301–22. 
Chen, Yuyu, and Li-An Zhou, 2007, ‘The Long-term Health and Economic Consequences 
of the 1959–1961 Famine in China’, J Health Economics, 26, 659–81.
Daniels, Melissa C., and Linda S. Adair, 2004, ‘Growth in Young Filipino Children 
Predicts Schooling Trajectories through High School’, J Nutr., 134, 1439–46.
De Onis, Mercedes, and Francesco Branca, 2016, ‘Childhood Stunting: A Global 
Perspective’, Maternal & Child Nutrition, 12 (Suppl. 1), 12–26.
Dewey, Kathryn G., and Khadija Begum, 2010, ‘Why Stunting Matters’, Alive and Thrive 
Technical Brief, 2, 1–8.
Fernandes, M.T.B., R. Sesso, P. A. Martins, and A. L. Sawaya, 2003, ‘Increased Blood 
Pressure in Adolescents of Socioeconomic Status with Short Stature’, Pediatric 
Nephrology, 18, 435–39.
Florêncio, T.T., H. S. Ferreira, J. C. Cavalcante, and A. L. Sawaya, 2004, ‘Short Stature, 
Obesity and Arterial Hypertension in a Very Low Income Population in North-
eastern Brazil’, Nutr. Metab. Cardiovascular Disease, 14, 26–33.
Fontaine, T., 2010, Broken Circle: The Dark Legacy of Indian Residential Schools: A Memoir. 
(Victoria: Heritage House).
 160
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
Gørgens, Tue, Xin Meng, and Rhema Vaithianathan, 2012, ‘Stunting and Selection 
Effects of Famine: A Case Study of the Great Chinese Famine’, Journal of Development 
Economics, 97, 99–111.
Graham, Elizabeth, 1997, The Mush Hole: Life at Two Indian Residential Schools (Waterloo, 
ON: Heffle Publishing).
Hackett, F.J. Paul, Sylvia Abonyi, and Roland F. Dyck, 2016, ‘Anthropometric Indices 
of First Nations Children and Youth on First Entry to Manitoba/Saskatchewan 
Residential Schools—1919 to 1953’, International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75, 
307–34.
Haig-Brown, Celia, 1988, Resistance and Renewal: Surviving the Indian Residential School 
(Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press).
Hoke, Morgan K., and Thomas McDade, 2015, ‘Biosocial Inheritance: A Framework 
for the Study of the Intergenerational Transmission of Health Disparities’, Annals of 
Anthropological Practice, 38.2, 187–213.
Huang, Cheng, Zhu Li, Meng Wang, and Reynaldo Martorell, 2010, ‘Early Life 
Exposure to the 1959–1961 Chinese Famine has Long-term Health Consequences’, 
Journal of Nutrition, 140, 1874–78.
Huang, Cheng, Michael R. Phillips, Yali Zhang, Jingxuan Zhang, Qichang Shi, Zhiqiang 
Song, Zhijie Ding, Shuato Pang, and Reynaldo Martorell, 2013, ‘Malnutrition in 
Early Life and Adult Mental Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment’, Social 
Science and Medicine, 97, 325–30.
Institutes of Medicine, 2005, Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, 
Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids (Washington DC: National Academies 
Press). 
Johnston, Basil, 1988, Indian School Days (Toronto: Key Porter).
Jukes, Matthew, 2005, ‘The Long-term Impact of Preschool Health and Nutrition on 
Education,’ Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 26 (Suppl. 2), S193–S201.
Kelm, M.E., 1996, ‘“A Scandalous Procession”: Residential Schooling and the Shaping of 
Aboriginal Bodies’, Native Studies Review, 11.2, 51–81.
Leddy, Meaghan A., Michael L. Power, and Jay Schulkin, 2008, ‘The Impact of Maternal 
Obesity on Maternal and Fetal Health’, Reviews in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 1.4, 
170–78.
Li, Jie, Simin Liu, Songtao Li, Rennan Feng, Lixin Na, Xia Chu, Xiaoyan Wu, 
Yucun Niu, Zongxiang Sun, Tianshu Han, Haoyuan Deng, Xing Meng, Huan 
Xu, Zhe Zhang, Qiannuo Qu, Qiao Zhang, Ying Li, and Changhao Sun, 2016, 
‘Prenatal Exposure to Famine and the Development of Hyperglycemia and Type 2 
Diabetes in Adulthood across Consecutive Generations: A Population-based Cohort 
Study of Families in Suihua, China’, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 105.1, 
221–27.
Lumey L.H., Aryeh D. Stein, Henry S. Kahn, Karin M. van der Pal-de Bruin, 
G.J. Blauw, Patricia A. Zybert, and Ezra S. Susser, 2007, ‘Cohort Profile: The Dutch 
Hunger Winter Families Study’, International Journal of Epidemiology, 36, 1196–1204.
Manuel, Arthur, and Ronald M. Derrickson, 2015, Unsettling Canada: A National 
Wake-Up Call (Toronto: Between the Lines).
Manuel, George, and Michael Posluns, 1974, The Fourth World: An Indian Reality (New 
York: The Free Press).
 161
CANADA’S RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS
Martins, P.A., and Sawaya A.L., 2006, ‘Evidence for Impaired Insulin Production and 
Higher Sensitivity on Stunted Children Living in Slums’, British Journal of Nutrition 
95, 996–1001.
Martins, Vinicius J.B., Telma M.M. Toledo Florêncio, Luciane P. Grillo, Maria do 
Carmo P. Franco, Paula A. Martins, Ana Paula G. Clemente, Carla D. L. Santos, 
Maria de Fatima A. Viera, and Ana Lydia Sawaya, 2011, ‘Long-lasting Effects of 
Undernutrition’, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 8, 
1817–46.
Martorell, Reynaldo, 1999, ‘The Nature of Child Nutrition and its Long-term 
Implications’, Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 20.3, 288–92.
Miller, J.R., 1996, Shingwauk’s Vision: A History of Native Residential Schools (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press).
Milloy, John S., 1999, A National Crime: The Canadian Government and the Residential 
School System, 1879 to 1986 (Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press).
Moses, R., 1965, ‘Mohawk Institute, 1942–47’, LAC, RG10, File 1/25–20–1, Vol. 1.
Mosby, I., 2013, ‘Administering Colonial Science: Nutrition Research and Human 
Biomedical Experimentation in Aboriginal Communities and Residential Schools, 
1942–1952’, Histoire sociale/Social History, 46.1, 145–72.
Oster, R.T., A. Grier, R. Lightning, M.J. Mayan, and E.L. Toth, 2014, ‘Cultural 
Continuity, Traditional Indigenous Language, and Diabetes in Alberta First Nations: 
A Mixed Methods Study’, International Journal for Equity in Health, 13.1, 92.
Pelletier, David L., Edward A. Frongillo, and Jean-Pierre Habickt, 2003, ‘Epidemiologic 
Evidence for a Potentiating Effect of Malnutrition on Child Mortality’, American 
Journal of Public Health, 83.8, 1130–33.
Rytter, Maren Johanne Heilskov, Lilian Kolte, André Briend, Henrik Friis, and Vibeke 
Brix Christensen, 2014, ‘The Immune System in Children with Malnutrition: A 
Systematic Review’, Plos One, 9.8, e105017.
Sadowski, E.G., 2006, ‘Preliminary Report on the Investigation into Missing School 
Files for the Shingwauk Indian Residential School’, Algoma University College, 
Shingwauk Project Archives. 
Sawaya, Ana Lydia, 2006, ‘Malnutrition: Long-term Consequences and Nutritional 
Recovery Effects’, Estudos Avançados, 20.58, 147–58.
Sellars, B., 2013, They Called Me Number One: Secrets and Survival at an Indian Residential 
School (Vancouver, BC: Talonbooks). 
Sharygin E., 2010, ‘Stunting and Selection Effects of Famine: A Case Study in Russia’. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/rlms-hse/publications/1839 
(accessed 20 December 2016).
Söchting, Ingrid, Raymond Corrado, Irwin M. Cohen, Robert G. Ley, and Charles 
Brasfield, 2007, ‘Traumatic Pasts in Canadian Aboriginal People: Further Support for 
a Complex Trauma Conceptualization’, BC Medical Journal, 49.6, 320–26. 
Stoops, Melissa, 2006, ‘Health Conditions at Norway House Residential School 
1900–1946’, Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthropology, McMaster University. 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2015a, ‘Honouring the Truth, 
Reconciling for the Future: Summary of the Final Report of the Truth and Reconcil-
iation Commission of Canada’ (Ottawa: Truth and Reconciliation Commission of 
Canada).
 162
BRITISH JOURNAL OF CANADIAN STUDIES
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2015b, ‘The Survivors Speak: A 
Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’ (Ottawa: Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada).
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2015c, ‘Canada’s Residential Schools: 
Missing Children and Unmarked Burials: The Final Report of the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada’, Vol. 4 (Ottawa: Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission of Canada).
van Abeelen, Annet F.M., Sjoerd G. Elias, Patrick M.M. Bossuyt, Diederick E. Grobbee, 
Yvonne T. van der Schouw, Tessa J. Roseboom, and Cuno S.P.M. Uiterwaal, 2012a, 
‘Famine Exposure in the Young and the Risk of Type 2 Diabetes in Adulthood’, 
Diabetes, 61, 2255–60.
—, 2012b. ‘Postnatal Acute Famine and Risk of Overweight: The Dutch Hungerwinter 
Study’, International Journal of Paediatrics, 936509, 1–9.
Veenendaal, M.V.E., R.C. Painter, S.R. de Rooij, P.M.M. Bossuyt, J.A.M. van der Post, 
P.D. Gluckman, M.A. Hanson, and T.J. Roseboom, 2013, ‘Transgenerational Effects 
of Prenatal Exposure to the 1944–45 Dutch Famine’, BJOG An International Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 120, 548–54.
Victoria, Cesar G., Linda Adair, Caroline Fall, Pedro C. Hallal, Reynaldo Martorell, 
Linda Richter, Harshpal Singh Sachdev, and the Maternal and Child Undernutrition 
Study Group, 2008, ‘Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Consequences for Adult 
Health and Human Capital’, Lancet, 371.9609, 340–57.
Wang, Yonghong, Xiaolin Wang, Yuhan Kong, John H. Zhang, and Qing Zeng, 2010, 
‘The Great Chinese Famine leads to Shorter and Overweight Females in Chongqing 
Chinese Population after 50 years’, Obesity, 18, 588–92.
Wang, Chao, Yu An, Huanling Yu, Lingli Feng, Quanri Liu, Yanhui Lu, Hui Wang, and 
Rong Xiao, 2016, ‘Association between Exposure to the Chinese Famine in different 
stages of Early Life and Decline in Cognitive Functioning in Adulthood’, Frontiers in 
Behavioural Neuroscience, 10.146, 1–8.
Wesley-Esquimaux, C., and M. Smolewski, 2004, Historic Trauma and Aboriginal Healing 
(Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation).
World Health Organization, 2017, ‘Fact Sheet: Children – Reducing Mortality’. 
Available from: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs178/en/ (accessed 12 
January 2017).
