 ©2016 American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST). 
Published by the American Association of Critical-Care 
Nurses under license. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.4037/ajcc2016133
Burnout syndrome (BOS) occurs in all types of health care 
professionals and is especially common in individuals 
who care for critically ill patients. 
The development of 
BOS is related to an imbalance of personal characteristics 
of the employee and work-related issues or other organi-
zational factors. BOS is associated with many deleterious 
consequences, including increased rates of job turnover, 
reduced patient satisfaction, and decreased quality of 
care. BOS also directly affects the mental health and 
physical well-being of the many critical care physicians, 
nurses, and other health care professionals who practice 
worldwide. Until recently, BOS and other psycholog-
ical disorders in critical care health care professionals 
remained relatively unrecognized. 
To raise awareness 
of BOS, the Critical Care Societies Collaborative (CCSC) 
developed this call to action. 
The present article reviews 
the diagnostic criteria, prevalence, causative factors, 
and consequences of BOS. It also discusses potential 
interventions that may be used to prevent and treat BOS. 
Finally, we urge multiple stakeholders to help mitigate 
the development of BOS in critical care health care 
professionals and diminish the harmful consequences of 
BOS, both for critical care health care professionals and for 
patients. (American Journal of Critical Care. 2016;25:368-376)
AN OFFICIAL CRITICAL CARE 
SOCIETIES COLLABORATIVE 
STATEMENT: BURNOUT 
SYNDROME IN CRITICAL CARE
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS:
A CALL FOR ACTION
By Marc Moss, MD, Vicki S. Good, RN, MSN, CENP, CPPS, David Gozal, MD, MBA, 
Ruth Kleinpell, RN, PhD, FAAN, FCCP, and Curtis N. Sessler, MD, FCCP, FCCM
Critical Care Societies Collaborative
This official Critical Care Societies Collaborative 
statement is being published simultaneously in 
the July 1, 2016, issue of the American Journal of 
Critical Care and the July 2016 issues of American 
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 
CHEST, and Critical Care Medicine.
368         AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4          
www.ajcconline.org
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 P
sychological stress develops when individuals’ external demands exceed their adaptive 
abilities. Although stress may help an individual become more focused, chronic and 
excessive stress has deleterious effects such as feeling pressured and being overwhelmed. 
Extreme stress can result in insomnia, fatigue, irritability, anxiety, and depression. 
For many adults, the demands from their work environment are a major contributor 
to feeling stressed. Owing to increasing expectations, longer hours, and a relative lack of com-
munity support in the workplace, the amount of work-related stress has increased in the past 
few decades. As a result, burnout syndrome (BOS) has become a common worldwide phenome-
non, especially among members of high-stress professions: firefighters, police officers, teachers, 
and all types of health care professionals. Compared with all high school graduates, physicians 
were 36% more likely to have BOS develop.1 Among physicians, those at the front line of care 
(family medicine, emergency medicine, and general internal medicine) report the highest rates 
of BOS (ie, > 40%).
Working in an intensive care unit (ICU) can be 
especially stressful because of the high patient mor-
bidity and mortality, challenging daily work routines, 
and regular encounters with traumatic and ethical 
issues.2,3 This level of nearly continuous and excessive 
stress can rapidly accelerate when caregivers perceive 
that there is insufficient time or limited resources to 
properly care for patients. Until recently, the critical 
care community was relatively unaware of the harm-
ful effects of working in a stressful ICU environment, 
including the development of BOS and other psycho-
logical disorders.3-10 Unfortunately, critical care health 
care professionals have one of the highest rates of BOS 
(ie, > 50%),11 and development of this disorder may 
adversely affect the ability to care for patients properly.
The Critical Care Societies Collaborative (CCSC) 
comprises 4 major US professional and scientific soci-
eties: the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, 
the American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST), 
the American Thoracic Society, and the Society of 
Critical Care Medicine. The CCSC convened a work-
ing group to acknowledge the importance of BOS and 
other psychological disorders in critical care health 
care professionals and to publish a document in the 
societies’ 4 major journals that would focus attention 
on this issue. The primary objectives of the present 
commentary were to (1) summarize the available 
literature regarding the diagnostic criteria, preva-
lence, causative factors, and consequences of BOS 
and related conditions, (2) raise awareness of BOS 
within the critical care community, and (3) inform 
multiple stakeholders of their potential roles in reduc-
ing BOS and its deleterious consequences in health 
care professionals and their critically ill patients.
We searched the Cochrane Library and Medline 
by using PubMed for published research relevant to 
BOS. A variety of search terms were entered, includ-
ing (but not limited to) the following: “burnout 
syndrome,” “critical care,” “nursing,” “posttraumatic 
stress disorder,” “moral distress,” “resiliency,” and 
“mindfulness.” Search terms were grouped together 
and individually cross-matched.
Pertinent review articles, editorials, books, and 
references from identified articles were also reviewed. 
We preferentially selected publications from the 
past 10 years but also included commonly referenced 
or highly regarded older publications.
What Is BOS? 
First described in the 1970s, BOS is a work-related 
constellation of symptoms and signs that usually 
occurs in individuals with no history of psychological 
or psychiatric disorders.12 BOS is triggered by a 
About the Authors
Marc Moss is from the Division of Pulmonary Sciences 
and Critical Care Medicine, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado. Vicki S. Good is from 
Cox Health System, Springfield, Missouri. David Gozal 
is from the Sections of Pediatric Sleep Medicine and 
Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, Pritzker School of 
Medicine, Biological Sciences Division, 
The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. Ruth Kleinpell is from the 
Center for Clinical Research and Scholarship, Rush Uni-
versity Medical Center, and Rush University College of 
Nursing, Chicago, Illinois. Curtis N. Sessler is from the 
Division of Pulmonary Disease and Critical Care Medicine, 
Virginia Commonwealth University Health System, 
Medical College of Virginia Hospitals and Physicians, 
Richmond, Virginia.
This document was jointly developed by members of the 
Critical Care Societies Collaborative, which consists of the 
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, the Ameri-
can College of Chest Physicians (CHEST), the American 
Thoracic Society, and the Society of Critical Care Medicine.
Corresponding author: Curtis N. Sessler, MD, FCCP
, FCCM, 
Division of Pulmonary Disease and Critical Care Medicine, 
Virginia Commonwealth University Health System, Medical 
College of Virginia Hospitals and Physicians, Box 980050, 
Richmond, VA 23298 (e-mail: Curtis.sessler@vcuhealth.org).
www.ajcconline.org  
 
AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4         369
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 discrepancy between the expectations and ideals of 
the employee and the actual requirements of his or 
her position. Symptoms of BOS typically develop 
gradually and are usually absent when entering a 
new type of employment. In the initial stages of BOS, 
individuals feel emotional stress and increasing 
job-related disillusionment.13 They subsequently 
lose the ability to adapt to the work environment 
and display negative attitudes toward their job, 
their coworkers, and their patients. Eventually, the 
3 classic symptoms of BOS develop: exhaustion, 
depersonalization, and reduced personal accom-
plishment.14 Exhaustion is generalized fatigue that 
can be related to devoting excessive time and effort 
to a task or project that is not perceived to be 
beneficial. For example, a feeling of exhaustion, 
particularly emotional exhaustion, may be caused 
by continuing to care for a patient who has a very 
poor chance of recovery. Depersonalization is a dis-
tant or indifferent attitude toward work. It manifests 
as negative, callous, and cynical behaviors or interac-
tion with colleagues or patients in an impersonal 
manner. Depersonalization may be expressed as 
unprofessional comments directed toward cowork-
ers, blaming patients for their medical problems, 
or the inability to express empathy or grief when a 
patient dies. Reduced personal accomplishment is 
the tendency to negatively evaluate the worth of one’s 
work, feeling insufficient regarding the ability to 
perform one’s job, and a generalized poor profes-
sional self-esteem.
Individuals with BOS may also develop non-
specific symptoms such as feeling frustrated, angry, 
fearful, or anxious (Table 1). They may also express 
an inability to feel happiness, joy, pleasure, or con-
tentment. BOS can be associated with physical symp-
toms, including insomnia, muscle tension, headaches, 
and gastrointestinal problems. BOS is most commonly 
diagnosed by using the Maslach Burnout Inventory 
(MBI).14 The MBI is a 22-item, self-report question-
naire that asks respondents to indicate on a 7-point 
Likert scale the frequency with which they experience 
certain feelings related to their job. The MBI is scored 
according to the presence and severity of emotional 
exhaustion, depersonalization, and reduced sense of 
personal accomplishment. Individuals are diagnosed 
with BOS if they exceed a cutoff value on the MBI. 
However, accurate cutoff values for critical care health 
care providers have not been determined. As a result, 
the diagnostic criteria for BOS vary across studies, mak-
ing comparisons difficult from one study to another.
Other conditions may overlap with BOS, includ-
ing moral distress, perceived delivery of inappropriate 
care, and compassion fatigue (also called secondary 
traumatic stress).9,15-19 Moral distress occurs when an 
individual knows the ethical and appropriate action 
to take but feels constrained from enacting the spe-
cific action. Moral distress may be related to internal 
constraints such as self-doubt, anxiety about creating 
a conflict, and a lack of confidence. Moral distress 
may also be related to external constraints such as 
imbalances in perceived power (eg, between a nurse 
and a physician), inadequate communication strate-
gies, and pressure to reduce costs or avoid legal ram-
ifications. Clinicians consider care to be inappropriate 
when it is not aligned with their personal beliefs or 
professional knowledge. Examples of perceived inap-
propriate care include (1) differences in the amount 
of care given and the expected prognosis (either too 
much or too little care), (2) caring for patients who 
are persistently noncompliant, (3) holding the belief 
that other patients would benefit more from ICU care, 
(4) delivering inaccurate information to a patient or 
family, (5) not respecting the expressed wishes of a 
patient, and (6) delivering medical or nursing care 
believed to be of inadequate quality.9 Compassion 
fatigue is characterized by a gradual reduction in 
compassion over time that results from a cumulative 
and persistent desire to help suffering patients; it is 
sometimes referred to as “the cost of caring.” Moral 
distress, delivery of inappropriate care, and compas-
sion fatigue occur in critical care health care profes-
sionals. For example, the perception of inappropriate 
care occurs in 25% of critical care nurses and 32% 
of critical care physicians.
Prevalence of BOS in Critical Care Health 
Care Professionals 
Based upon multiple studies, approximately 25% 
to 33% of critical care nurses manifest symptoms of 
severe BOS, and up to 86% have at least 1 of the 3 
classic symptoms.6,10,20-23 Compared with other types 
of nurses, critical care nurses more commonly expe-
rience BOS.5,24 In critical care nurses, the most com-
mon symptom of BOS is emotional exhaustion 
(73%), followed by a lack of personal accomplish-
ment (60%) and depersonalization (48%).20 The 
prevalence of BOS in critical care nurses also varies 
across certain ICUs; nurses who reported the highest 
Psychological symptoms
Table 1
Symptoms associated with burnout syndrome
Frustration
Anger
Fear
Anxiety
Inability to feel happy
Being unprofessional
Feeling overwhelmed
Disillusionment
Hopelessness
Lack of empathy
Feeling insufficient at work
Exhaustion/fatigue
Insomnia
Muscle tension
Headache
Gastrointestinal problems
Physical symptoms
370         AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4          
www.ajcconline.org
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 prevalence of BOS among their colleagues were also 
more likely to have BOS themselves. Therefore, units 
with a negative working culture might harbor a “con-
tagion effect” among its employees.25 The relative 
shortage of critical care physicians and the demands 
for overnight ICU coverage have increased the aware-
ness and recognition of BOS among physicians.5 BOS 
is common in critical care physicians as well.7,26-30 
Up to 45% of critical care physicians reported 
symptoms of severe BOS.7,28 In pediatric critical 
care physicians, the prevalence of BOS is 71%, 
more than twice the rate in general pediatricians. 
Compared with other types of physicians, critical 
care physicians have the highest prevalence of BOS, 
followed closely by emergency medicine physicians.11 
There is a paucity of data on the prevalence of BOS 
in other critical care health care professionals, such 
as social workers, and respiratory, physical, occupa-
tional, or speech therapy health care professionals.31 
In one study, nursing assistants were more likely to 
have BOS compared with other types of critical care 
health care professionals.8
Risk Factors for BOS 
The ability to determine the temporal relationship 
between the majority of risk factors and the devel-
opment of BOS is hampered by the cross-sectional 
design of most previous studies. Risk factors associ-
ated with BOS can be divided into 4 categories: (1) 
personal characteristics, (2) organizational factors, 
(3) quality of working relationships, and (4) expo-
sure to end-of-life issues (see Figure).10 Personal 
characteristics associated with BOS include being 
self-critical, engaging in unhelpful coping strategies, 
sleep deprivation, and a work-life imbalance.32 
Other personal risk factors associated with BOS are 
idealism, perfectionism, and overcommitment; 
these qualities often occur in the best and most 
productive employees. Certain personality types, 
such as neurotic individuals, also reportedly have 
higher rates of BOS; extraverted, conscientious, and 
agreeable individuals, conversely, are less likely to 
demonstrate symptoms of BOS.33 Burnout was once 
thought to be a late-career phenomenon, but studies 
suggest that younger physicians have nearly twice the 
prevalence of BOS compared with older colleagues 
and that onset may occur as early as residency train-
ing.34 Similarly, younger age is an independent risk 
factor for BOS among ICU nurses.10 However, older 
health care professionals who have not developed 
BOS may be those who remained in the work force 
and are therefore overrepresented in cross-sectional 
studies. Having an inadequate support system out-
side of the work environment (eg, having no spouse, 
partner, or children) has also been associated with 
high rates of BOS.8,20,35
In general, organizational factors associated with 
BOS include (1) increasing workload, (2) lack of 
control over the work environment, (3) insufficient 
rewards, and (4) a general breakdown in the work 
community.12 Organizational factors that are associ-
ated with BOS seem to differ between critical care 
nurses and physicians. For critical care nurses, the 
inability to choose days off, rapid patient turnover, 
and the lack of participation in an ICU working 
group are all factors associated with BOS.5,10 For criti-
cal care physicians, the amount of work (defined as 
number of night shifts per month and time since the 
last nonworking week) was associated with the pres-
ence of BOS.7 For example, weekend coverage sched-
ules affect the risk of BOS. Compared with having 
weekend coverage by another physician, working a 
continuous 14-day period of direct patient care was 
associated with increased symptoms of BOS.36 Having 
to make ethical decisions was also associated with 
higher rates of BOS for physicians. In contrast to 
nurses, physicians may less frequently experience 
moral distress, most likely because physicians are 
responsible for making the patient care decisions. 
In both nurses and physicians, problems with the 
quality of working relationships were common risk 
factors for BOS, including conflicts and poor working 
relationships with colleagues.5,6 This issue is an import-
ant and potentially modifiable risk factor because 
measures to improve communication and reduce 
conflict among critical care health care professionals 
can enhance relationships. Another significant source 
of stress is the strained relationships between health 
care professionals and patients and their families.
Finally, factors related to end-of-life issues are 
commonly reported risk factors in nurses, including 
caring for a dying patient and participating in or 
witnessing decisions to forgo life-sustaining treat-
ments. As a result, higher unit-specific mortality 
Figure  Risk factors associated with burnout syndrome.
Intensive care unit 
environment
Moral distress
Perceived delivery of inappropriate care
Compassion fatigue
Decreased patient satisfaction 
and quality of care
Burnout 
syndrome
Personal 
characteristics
Organizational 
factors
Posttraumatic stress 
disorder and 
other psychological 
symptoms
Increased rates of 
job turnover
www.ajcconline.org  
 
AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4         371
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 rates have been associated with increased rates of 
BOS in critical care health care professionals.8 
Another often-minimized factor underlying the risk 
for BOS is the nearly inevitable consequence of 
extended shift work: sleep disruption. This condi-
tion may take the form of insufficient sleep quantity 
and/or quality, or even inadequate sleep recovery, 
the latter requiring periods of sleep after night shifts 
more extensive than would normally be the case 
when working normal daytime schedules.36-39 Other 
unit-based factors that are associated with increased 
rates of BOS include working in a university hospital 
setting and in a pediatric critical care unit.8
Consequences of BOS 
BOS in critical care health care professionals 
may result in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
alcohol abuse, and even suicidal ideation.26 Although 
alcohol and substance abuse were not specifically 
studied in critical care providers, physicians have 
higher rates of these problems compared with the 
general adult US population.11,29 PTSD is manifest 
by intrusion, avoidance, negative alterations in cog-
nitions and mood, and marked alterations in arousal 
and reactivity. PTSD can occur in response to one 
catastrophic event or after chronic or repetitive 
exposure to traumatic episodes. Between 22% and 
29% of critical care nurses have symptoms of PTSD, 
and up to 18% of critical care nurses meet the diag-
nostic criteria for PTSD.20,21,40 In addition, almost all 
of the nurses (98%) with PTSD will also have symp-
toms consistent with BOS.20 ICU work-related trig-
gers associated with PTSD include participation in 
end-of-life issues, feeling overextended, caring for 
combative patients or family members, visualizing 
open wounds or massive bleeding, and providing 
postmortem care.40-42
Many factors influence the decision of a health 
care professional to leave his or her current position. 
For example, working in a pediatric unit, a govern-
ment-owned hospital, or a hospital in a metropoli-
tan area is favorably associated with lower rates of 
nursing turnover.43 However, the presence of BOS 
affects a health care professional’s decision to leave 
the profession.44 Excessive turnover rates increase 
health care costs, decrease productivity, lower staff 
morale, and reduce the overall quality of care because 
experienced professionals who leave the ICU must 
be replaced.45-47 Turnover occurs frequently in ICU 
nurses, with reported annual rates ranging between 
13% and 20% (the 2013 US average annual turnover 
rate for all types of employees was 10.4%).45,48 In one 
survey, 41% of all nurses were not satisfied with their 
job, and 22% planned to leave their profession. 
When asked why they were considering leaving the 
nursing profession, 56% desired a less stressful 
position.49 Based on national survey data, the total 
cost of replacing 1 critical care nurse is estimated to 
be more than $65 000.50 Therefore, at a medium- 
sized hospital with 40 ICU beds employing 100 
ICU nurses with an annual turnover rate of 17%, 
the hospital’s cost related to ICU nursing turnover 
would be approximately $1 105 000 per year. In 
general, physicians with BOS are more likely to 
leave their practice and therefore potentially decrease 
access and continuity of care for patients. Recently, 
the total cost of burnout among Canadian physi-
cians was estimated to be more than $200 million.51 
In the United States, replacement costs have been 
estimated to be at least $250 000 for each primary 
care physician, an amount that may be even higher 
for critical care physicians.52
BOS also results in decreased effectiveness and 
poor work performance, which have a direct impact 
on patient care. BOS in nurses is associated with 
reduced quality of care, lower patient satisfaction, 
increased number of medical errors, higher rates of 
health care–associated infections, and higher 30-day 
mortality rates.53,54 A national study reported that 
9% of physicians had made a major medical error 
in the past 3 months.55 In studies of primarily physi-
cians, there were strong dose-response relationships 
between burnout scores and medical errors. These 
errors appear to occur in a bidirectional manner: 
errors lead to distress, and distress leads to errors.34,56 
After a medical error, physicians may experience 
significant job-related stress, including anxiety about 
future errors, loss of confidence, sleeping difficulties, 
reduced job satisfaction, and perceived harm to 
their reputation.57 Therefore, strategies that reduce 
medical errors may also decrease moral distress and 
BOS in health care providers. Additionally identify-
ing strategies that reduce BOS and turnover in criti-
cal care professionals would likely have important 
effects on quality of care and health care costs.
Interventions to Prevent or 
Treat BOS 
Currently, there are no large randomized con-
trolled trials that have examined strategies to prevent 
or treat BOS in critical care health care professionals. 
Potential strategies that may prevent and treat critical 
care–related BOS can be divided into 2 categories: 
(1) interventions focused on enhancing the ICU 
environment, and (2) interventions focused on 
helping individuals cope with their environment. 
It is unlikely that any single intervention will be 
effective in preventing and treating BOS in critical 
care health care professionals; rather, multidimen-
sional interventions that address the ICU environ-
mental culture and individual practitioner level are 
more likely to successfully prevent and treat BOS. 
The benefit of any potential BOS intervention needs 
372         AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4          
www.ajcconline.org
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 to be weighed against the costs associated with its 
implementation and maintenance.
Establishing and sustaining a healthy work envi-
ronment that fosters respect may be one key strategy 
to combat stress and BOS in the ICU working envi-
ronment.58,59 Based on a report from the American 
Association of Critical-Care Nurses, 6 standards are 
needed to establish and sustain a healthy work envi-
ronment: (1) skilled communication, (2) true collab-
oration, (3) effective decision-making, (4) appropriate 
staffing, (5) meaningful recognition, and (6) authen-
tic leadership.60 Additional commonly recognized 
tenets of a healthy ICU environment include “avoid-
ing or managing conflicts” and “improving end-of-life 
care.” Communication, collaboration, and effective 
decision-making during times when emotions are 
elevated are critical in engaging the team to decrease 
stress and BOS. A healthy work environment may 
be enhanced by utilizing team debriefings, structured 
communication, and collaborating with team mem-
bers on critical decisions.5,20,41,61
Critical care health care professionals should 
be taught how to recognize the risk factors for BOS 
and how to seek assistance when needed.20 Health 
care professionals should consider taking individual 
accountability for maintaining their own emotional 
and physical health, and for building resiliency. 
Resiliency is a multidimensional characteristic that 
allows an individual to thrive when faced with 
complexity and high rates of change.21,62 Building 
resilience requires a variety of interventions based 
on individual preferences. The foundation for 
resilience is adequate self-care, ensuring adequate 
rest, spiritual practices, exercise, meditation, and 
hobbies outside of the work environment.5,18,20,41,59 
Additional strategies such as setting limits, establish-
ing a work-life balance, and employing time man-
agement skills and stress reduction measures may 
also be beneficial in mitigating the risk of BOS.63 
Among critical care physicians and nurses, interdis-
ciplinary discussions that encourage ethical team 
deliberations may be useful in preventing BOS.64 
Other potentially beneficial strategies that have 
been effectively used to prevent BOS and PTSD in 
other settings include support groups, cognitive- 
behavioral therapy, and mindfulness-based stress 
reduction programs (Table 2).5,18,41,59,65 Promoting 
family care conferencing within 72 hours of ICU 
admission to enable discussion of prognosis and 
treatment goals is now advocated for critically ill 
patients, including those with severe sepsis and 
multiple organ system failure.66 These measures, as 
well as use of palliative care and ethics consultations, 
may mitigate moral distress in ICU clinicians, a 
potential mediator in the development of BOS. More 
research is needed to identify specific interventions 
that prevent and treat BOS and other psychological 
disorders in critical care health care professionals.
A Call for Action 
There are more than 10 
000 critical care physicians 
and 500 000 critical care nurses who practice in the 
United States.67 Much of the previous BOS-related 
literature has focused on the disorder’s negative 
consequences as they correspond to patient-centric 
outcome measures, including patient safety, satisfac-
tion, and quality of care. However, promoting well-
ness in health care providers is also essential.34,68 
Protecting the mental and physical health of health 
care professionals who are at risk for BOS should 
also be vitally important to the same group of 
stakeholders. This section provides advice for these 
stakeholder groups; suggestions are also included 
regarding ways to mitigate the development of BOS 
in critical care health care professionals and dimin-
ish the harmful consequences of BOS, both for criti-
cal care health care professionals and for patients.
Critical Care Health Care Professionals and 
Their Friends and Family
Critical care health care professionals have an 
important voice and should be involved in promoting 
their own wellness. Critical care health care profes-
sionals should be personally responsible for managing 
their own BOS symptoms and related consequences. 
They should be able to recognize the features of BOS 
Table 2
Potential interventions to prevent and treat  
burnout syndrome in the intensive care unit (ICU)
Environmental interventions
   Promoting healthy work environment
Communication training; appropriate staffing; meaningful recognition
   ICU self-scheduling/time off
   Limit the maximum number of days worked consecutively
   Support groups
   Cognitive-behavioral therapy
Team-based interventions
   Team debriefings
   Use of structured communication tools
   Team-building and interpersonal skills training
Practitioner-focused interventions
   Stress reduction training
   Relaxation techniques
   Time management
   Assertiveness training
   Meditation
   Work-life balance measures: hobbies, family, and social activities
   Self-care measures: ensuring adequate rest, exercise, healthy eating habits
Interventions to mitigate risk factors
   Palliative care consultations
   Ethics consultations
   Establishing goals of care for every ICU patient
   Family care conferencing within 72 h of ICU admission
www.ajcconline.org  
 
AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4         373
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 and to access currently available resources. Similarly, 
friends and family members of critical care health 
care professionals should also become aware of early 
symptoms and understand BOS and its consequences.
ICU Unit-Based Leaders
ICU nurse managers, medical directors, and other 
unit-based administrators need to be aware of the 
high prevalence of BOS and other psychological 
disorders in their employees. ICU nurse managers 
and medical directors can empower their colleagues 
to participate in the oversight of the unit, recognize 
exemplary efforts, and strive to create a healthy 
work environment. In addition, managers should 
develop innovative staffing models that promote 
effective time away from the critical care environment. 
Collectively, ICU teams should improve their ability 
to function as a group, respect each other, and reduce 
triggers of BOS. Similarly, ICU leaders should imple-
ment programs that identify and manage employees 
with BOS. Measures of BOS or potential other surro-
gate outcomes should be benchmarked and compared 
across ICUs and medical centers. Based on a 2011 
Joint Commission Sentinel Event Alert report, “The 
link between health care worker fatigue and adverse 
events is well documented, with a substantial num-
ber of studies indicating that the practice of extended 
work hours contributes to high levels of sleep depri-
vation and reduced productivity.”69 Consequently, 
nap opportunities strategically timed among high- 
intensity and potentially fatigued teams may provide 
unique reductions in BOS risk.70
Hospital Administrators
Owing to financial implications and effects on 
patient-centered outcomes, hospital administrators 
have prioritized reducing turnover rates.71 More infor-
mation is needed regarding the cost of BOS that occurs 
in all critical care health care professionals (nurses, 
physicians, and others members of the multidisci-
plinary team). Hospital administrators should con-
sider the reduction in turnover rates as an important 
quality metric of providing a successful work envi-
ronment; they should also monitor job satisfaction 
and rates of BOS in their employees. Hospitals should 
provide assistance programs for employees with (or 
at risk for) BOS and other psychological disorders 
such as PTSD. Finally, hospitals or clinical practices 
should consider limiting the number of consecutive 
days that a critical care health care professional 
works, while promoting healthy sleep habits and 
the importance of sleep recovery.
Funding Agencies
Despite the impact of BOS on health care pro-
fessionals and their patients, research in this area 
is grossly underfunded. Based on a 2015 NIH 
RePORTER search,72 only 2 grants are currently funded 
to study BOS in health care professionals, and nei-
ther is focused on the critical care setting. The ICU is 
a unique environment to study BOS because of the 
high prevalence of symptomatic health care profes-
sionals and the unique work-related triggers. Funding 
agencies such as the National Institutes of Health are 
encouraged to develop requests for applications that 
will enhance critical care health care professionals’ 
understanding of the following: the epidemiology 
of BOS, BOS criteria, and cutoff values that accurately 
diagnose this disorder; preventative and therapeutic 
interventions; and appropriate and measurable out-
come variables. In addition, research is needed to 
understand the relationship between moral distress, 
the delivery of inappropriate care, compassion 
fatigue, and BOS.
Professional Societies
One key function of professional societies is 
to educate and inform their members. These educa-
tional initiatives typically focus on disseminating 
new medical knowledge, updating health care poli-
cies, and teaching new practice strategies. Profes-
sional societies should educate members about BOS 
and other psychological disorders that impair the 
mental and physical health of their members, reduce 
the quality of care of their patients, and may deter 
trainees from entering their specific field. Similarly, 
accreditation and Maintenance of Certification groups 
should develop educational materials to raise 
awareness of BOS and its consequences.
Academic Institutions Training the Next Genera-
tion of Health Care Professionals
Academic institutions play an important role in 
career counseling. Students and postgraduate train-
ees should pursue positions and specialties in which 
they are most likely to be successful. However, the 
recruitment of students and postgraduate trainees 
into specialties perceived to have high levels of stress 
is declining.52 Career counselors could improve the 
preparation of trainees for their career choices and 
create more fulfilling and lasting careers. Therefore, 
academic institutions are encouraged to develop or 
expand their direct counseling or didactic education 
sessions so that students and postgraduate trainees 
are better prepared for the stresses inherent to their 
profession. In addition, academic institutions 
should educate students and postgraduate trainees 
on effective coping mechanisms to ensure more suc-
cessful careers. Furthermore, critical care fellowships 
should include in their curriculum education regard-
ing the recognition, prevention, and treatment of 
BOS and associated psychological disorders.
374         AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4          
www.ajcconline.org
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Patient Advocacy Groups
The focus of patient advocacy groups is on rais-
ing awareness, influencing policy, stimulating research, 
and improving the care of patients with specific 
disorders. Because of the negative effects of BOS on 
patient-centered outcomes, patient advocacy groups 
should be interested in improving the ability of health 
care professionals to effectively care for patients. 
These groups should develop educational programs 
for critically ill patients and their families to inform 
them about BOS in health care professionals. They 
may also develop patient and family educational 
programs to teach individuals how to effectively 
interact with critical care health care professionals 
and reduce the patient and family triggers associ-
ated with BOS. In addition, patient advocacy groups 
could help raise awareness about BOS and advocate 
for increased funding that may ultimately improve 
patient and family satisfaction, as well as the out-
comes of critically ill patients.
Policy Makers
Owing to the increasing budgetary pressures on 
health care, government officials and other policy 
makers have prioritized the discovery of novel meth-
ods to produce better health outcomes at lower costs. 
Because of the deleterious impact of BOS on the job 
satisfaction of critical care health care professionals, 
health care costs, and quality of care, international and 
national policy makers should work with a variety of 
stakeholders to shape the laws and regulations that 
will reduce BOS in critical care health care profession-
als, improve the quality of patient care, and decrease 
health care costs (eg, those associated with turnover).
Conclusions 
On behalf of the CCSC, this call to action hope-
fully enhances the critical care community’s interest 
in reducing the prevalence of BOS and other psycho-
logical disorders in health care professionals. Our 
colleagues are encouraged to be more vocal on this 
important issue and strive to create a healthy work 
environment in the ICU. The CCSC will continue to 
working diligently to increase awareness, educate our 
community, enhance research opportunities, imple-
ment strategies that enhance job satisfaction, and 
improve the mental health of critical care health care 
professionals. Collectively, healthy ICU work envi-
ronments need to be created that ultimately and, 
most importantly, improve patients’ quality of care.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
None reported.
eLetters
Now that you’ve read the article, create or contribute to an 
online discussion on this topic. Visit www.ajcconline.org 
and click “Submit a response” in either the full-text or PDF 
view of the article.
REFERENCES
1. Shanafelt 
TD, Boone S, 
T
an L, et al. Burnout and satisfaction with 
work-life balance among US physicians relative to the general 
US population. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172(18):1377-1385.
2. Donchin 
Y
, Seagull F
J. 
The hostile environment of the intensive 
care unit. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2002;8(4):316-320.
3. Mealer ML, Shelton A, Berg B, Rothbaum B, Moss M. 
Increased prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorder 
symptoms in critical care nurses. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2007;175(7):693-697
.
4. Azoulay E, Herridge M. Understanding ICU staff burnout: 
the show must go on. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011; 
184 
(10): 
1099-1100.
5. Chlan LL. Burnout syndrome among critical care professionals: 
a cause for alarm. Crit Care Alert. 2013;21:65-68.
6. Embriaco N, Papazian L, Kentish-Barnes N, Pochard F
, Azoulay 
E. Burnout syndrome among critical care healthcare workers. 
Curr Opin Crit Care. 2007;13(5):482-488.
7
. Embriaco N, Azoulay E, Barrau K, et al. High level of burnout 
in intensivists: prevalence and associated factors. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med. 2007;175(7):686-692.
8. Merlani P
, Verdon M, Businger A, et al. Burnout in ICU caregiv-
ers: a multicenter study of factors associated to centers. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;184(10):1140-1146.
9. Piers RD, Azoulay E, Ricou B, et al. Perceptions of appropriate-
ness of care among European and Israeli intensive care 
unit nurses and physicians. JAMA. 2011;306(24):2694-2703.
10. Poncet MC, 
Toullic P
, Papazian L, et al. Burnout syndrome in 
critical care nursing staff. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007; 
175(7):698-704.
11. Peckham C. Medscape physician lifestyle report 2015. http://
www.medscape.com/features/slideshow/lifestyle/2015/
public 
/overview#1. Accessed January 26, 2015.
12. Maslach C, Leiter MP
. The 
Truth About Burnout. San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers; 1997
.
13. Edelwich J, Brodsky A. Burn-out: Stages of Disillusionment 
in the Helping Professions. New 
York, NY: Human Sciences 
Press; 1980.
14. Maslach C, Jackson SE. MBI: Maslach Burnout Inventory; 
Manual Research Edition. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psycholo-
gists Press; 1986.
15. Corley MC, Minick P
. Moral distress or moral comfort. Bioethics 
Forum. 2002;18(1-2):7-14.
16. Jameton A, Jackson EM. Nuclear war and nursing ethics: 
what is the nurse’s responsibility? Mobius. 1984;4(1):75-88.
17
. Wiegand DL, Funk M. Consequences of clinical situations 
that cause critical care nurses to experience moral distress. 
Nurs Ethics. 2012;19(4):479-487
.
18. Hinderer KA, VonRueden KT
, Friedmann E, et al. Burnout, com-
passion fatigue, compassion satisfaction, and secondary 
traumatic stress in trauma nurses. J 
Trauma Nurs. 2014;21 
(4):160-169.
19. Dominguez-Gomez E, Rutledge DN. Prevalence of secondary 
traumatic stress among emergency nurses. J Emerg Nurs. 
2009;35(3):199-204.
20. Mealer M, Burnham EL, Goode CJ, Rothbaum B, Moss M. 
The 
prevalence and impact of post traumatic stress disorder and 
burnout syndrome in nurses. Depress Anxiety. 2009;26(12): 
1118-1126.
21. Mealer M, Jones J, Newman J, McFann KK, Rothbaum B, 
Moss M. 
The presence of resilience is associated with a 
healthier psychological profile in intensive care unit (ICU) 
nurses: results of a national survey. Int J Nurs Stud. 2012; 
49(3):292-299.
22. Patrick K, Lavery JF
. Burnout in nursing. Aust J Adv Nurs. 
2007;24(3):43-48.
23. Regan A, Howard RA, Oyebode JR. Emotional exhaustion 
and defense mechanisms in intensive therapy unit nurses. 
J Nerv Ment Dis. 2009;197(5):330-336.
24. Epp K. Burnout in critical care nurses: a literature review. 
Dynamics. 2012;23(4):25-31.
25. Bakker AB, Le Blanc PM, Schaufeli WB. Burnout contagion 
among intensive care nurses. J Adv Nurs. 2005;51(3): 
276-287
.
26. Dyrbye LN, 
Thomas MR, Massie FS, et al. Burnout and sui-
cidal ideation among US medical students. Ann Intern Med. 
2008;149(5):334-341.
27
. Dyrbye LN, Varkey P
, Boone SL, Satele DV, Sloan JA, 
Shanafelt 
TD. Physician satisfaction and burnout at different 
career stages. Mayo Clin Proc. 2013;88(12):1358-1367
.
28. Garcia 
TT
, Garcia PC, Molon ME, et al. Prevalence of burnout 
in pediatric intensivists: an observational comparison with 
www.ajcconline.org  
 
AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4         375
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 general pediatricians. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2014;15(8): 
e347-e353.
29. Shanafelt 
T
, Dyrbye L. Oncologist burnout: causes, conse-
quences, and responses. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(11):1235-1241.
30. Shanafelt 
TD, Oreskovich MR, Dyrbye LN, et al. Avoiding 
burnout: the personal health habits and wellness practices 
of US surgeons. Ann Surg. 2012;255(4):625-633.
31. Murji A, Gomez M, Knighton J, Fish JS. Emotional implications 
of working in a burn unit. J Burn Care Res. 2006; 
27(1):8-13.
32. Shanafelt 
TD. Enhancing meaning in work: a prescription for 
preventing physician burnout and promoting patient-centered 
care. JAMA. 2009;302(12):1338-1340.
33. Cañadas-De la Fuente GA, Vargas C, San Luis C, García I, 
Cañadas GR, De la Fuente EI. Risk factors and prevalence 
of burnout syndrome in the nursing profession. Int J Nurs 
Stud. 2015;52(1):240-249.
34. Shanafelt 
TD, Sloan JA, Habermann 
TM. 
The well-being of 
physicians. Am J Med. 2003;114(6):513-519.
35. Teixeira C, Ribeiro O, Fonseca AM, Carvalho AS. Burnout in 
intensive care units—a consideration of the possible preva-
lence and frequency of new risk factors: a descriptive correla-
tional multicentre study. BMC Anesthesiol. 2013; 
13(1): 
38.
36. Ali NA, Hammersley J, Hoffmann SP
, et al. Continuity of care 
in intensive care units: a cluster-randomized trial of intensivist 
staffing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011; 
184(7): 
803-808.
37
. Tucker P
, Bejerot E, Kecklund G, Aronsson G, Akerstedt 
T
. 
The impact of work time control on physicians’ sleep and 
well-being. Appl Ergon. 2015;47:109-116.
38. Howell MD. Intensivist time allocation: economic and ethical 
issues surrounding how intensivists use their time. Semin 
Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;33(4):401-412.
39. Eanes L. CE: the potential effects of sleep loss on a nurse’s 
health. Am J Nurs. 2015;115(4):34-40.
40. Mealer ML, Shelton AL, Martin GS, Burnham EL, Odom SE, 
Moss M. 
The prevalence of post traumatic stress disorder is 
increased among intensive care unit nurses. Proc Am 
Thoracic 
Soc. 2006;3:A833.
41. Mealer M, Jones J, Moss M. A qualitative study of resilience 
and posttraumatic stress disorder in United States ICU 
nurses. Intensive Care Med. 2012;38(9):1445-1451.
42. Mealer M, Jones J. Posttraumatic stress disorder in the nursing 
population: a concept analysis. Nurs Forum. 2013; 
48(4): 
279-288.
43. Staggs VS, Dunton N. Hospital and unit characteristics 
associated with nursing turnover include skill mix but not 
staffing level: an observational cross-sectional study. Int J 
Nurs Stud. 2012;49(9):1138-1145.
44. Shoorideh FA, Ashktorab 
T
, 
Yaghmaei F
, Alavi MH. Relation-
ship between ICU nurses’ moral distress with burnout and 
anticipated turnover. Nurs Ethics. 2015;22(1):64-76.
45. Ackerman AD. Retention of critical care staff. Crit Care Med. 
1993;21(9 Supp):S394-S395.
46. Jones CB. Revisiting nurse turnover costs: adjusting for 
inflation. J Nurs Adm. 2008;38(1):11-18.
47
. Waldman JD, Kelly F
, Arora S, Smith HL. 
The shocking cost 
of turnover in health care. Health Care Manage Rev. 2004; 
29(1):2-7
.
48. Mann EE, Jefferson KJ. Retaining staff: using turnover indices 
and surveys. J Nurs Adm. 1988;18(7-8):17-23.
49. Aiken LH, Clarke SP
, Sloane DM, et al. Nurses’ reports on 
hospital care in five countries. Health Aff (Millwood). 2001; 
20(3):43-53.
50. Kosel K, Olivio 
T
. The Business Case for Work Force Stability. 
Irvington, 
TX: VHA; 2002.
51. Dewa CS, Jacobs P
, 
Thanh NX, Loong D. An estimate of the cost 
of burnout on early retirement and reduction in clinical hours 
of practicing physicians in Canada. BMC Health Serv Res. 
2014;14:254.
52. Linzer M, Levine R, Meltzer D, Poplau S, Warde C, West CP
. 
10 bold steps to prevent burnout in general internal medicine. 
J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29(1):18-20.
53. Cimiotti JP
, Aiken LH, Sloane DM, Wu ES. Nurse staffing, 
burnout, and health care-associated infection. Am J Infect 
Control. 2012;40(6):486-490.
54. Poghosyan L, Clarke SP
, Finlayson M, Aiken LH. Nurse burn-
out and quality of care: cross-national investigation in six 
countries. Res Nurs Health. 2010;33(4):288-298.
55. Shanafelt 
TD, Balch CM, Bechamps G, et al. Burnout and 
medical errors among American surgeons. Ann Surg. 2010; 
251(6):995-1000.
56. Christensen JF
, Levinson W, Dunn PM. 
The heart of darkness: 
the impact of perceived mistakes on physicians. J Gen 
Intern Med. 1992;7:424-431.
57
. Waterman AD, Garbutt J, Hazel E, et al. 
The emotional 
impact of medical errors on practicing physicians in the 
United States and Canada. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 
2007;33(8):467-476.
58. Ulrich BT
, Lavandero R, Woods D, Early S. Critical care nurse 
work environments 2013: a status report. Crit Care Nurse. 
2014;34(4):64-79.
59. Von Rueden KT
, Hinderer KA, McQuillan KA, et al. Secondary 
traumatic stress in trauma nurses: prevalence and exposure, 
coping, and personal/environmental characteristics. J 
Trauma 
Nurs. 2010;17(4):191-200.
60. American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. AACN Standards 
for Establishing and Sustaining Healthy Work Environments: 
A Journey to Excellence. 2nd ed. Aliso Viejo, CA: American 
Association of Critical-Care Nurses; 2016.
61. Manojlovich M. Power and empowerment in nursing: looking 
backward to inform the future. Online J Issues Nurs. 2007; 
12(1):2.
62. Buell JM. 
The resilient leader: mind, body and soul. Healthc 
Exec. 2014;29(6):10-16, 18.
63. Reader 
TW, Cuthbertson BH, Decruyenaere J. Burnout in the 
ICU: potential consequences for staff and patient well-being. 
Intensive Care Med. 2008;34(1):4-6.
64. Teixeira C, Ribeiro O, Fonseca AM, Carvalho AS. Ethical deci-
sion making in intensive care units: a burnout risk factor? 
Results from a multicentre study conducted with physicians 
and nurses. J Med Ethics. 2014;40(2):97-103.
65. Mealer M, Conrad D, Evans J, et al. Feasibility and accept-
ability of a resilience training program for intensive care 
unit nurses. Am J Crit Care. 2014;23(6):e97-e105.
66. Dellinger RP
, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving sepsis 
campaign: international guidelines for management of 
severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med. 2013; 
41(2):580-637
.
67
. Critical care statistics. Society of Critical Care Medicine 
website. http://www.sccm.org/Communications/Pages 
/CriticalCareStats.aspx. Accessed February 17
, 2015.
68. Wallace JE, Lemaire JB, Ghali WA. Physician wellness: a 
missing quality indicator. Lancet. 2009;374(9702):1714-1721.
69. Health care worker fatigue and patient safety. Sentinel 
Event Alert. 2011;48:1-4.
70. Mednick SC, Nakayama K, Cantero JL, et al. 
The restorative 
effect of naps on perceptual deterioration. Nat Neurosci. 
2002; 
5(7):677-681.
71. Steinbrook R. Nursing in the crossfire. N Engl J Med. 2002; 
346(22):1757-1766.
72. US Department of Health & Human Services. NIH Research Port-
folio Online Reporting 
Tools (RePORT). http://projectreporter 
.nih.gov/reporter.cfm. Accessed February 17
, 2015.
To purchase electronic or print reprints, contact American 
Association of Critical-Care Nurses, 101 Columbia, Aliso 
Viejo, CA 92656. Phone, (800) 899-1712 or (949) 362-2050 
(ext 532); fax, (949) 362-2049; e-mail, reprints@aacn.org. 
376         AJCC AMERICAN JOURNAL OF CRITICAL CARE, July 2016, Volume 25, No. 4          
www.ajcconline.org
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Marc Moss, Vicki S. Good, David Gozal, Ruth Kleinpell and Curtis N. Sessler
Care Health Care Professionals: A Call for Action
An Official Critical Care Societies Collaborative Statement: Burnout Syndrome in Critical
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Published online 
©2016 American Association of Critical-Care Nurses
10.4037/ajcc2016133
 
368-376
 
25
 2016;
Am J Crit Care
 
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/cgi/external_ref?link_type=PERMISSIONDIRECT
Personal use only. For copyright permission information:
 
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/subscriptions/
Subscription Information
 
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/misc/ifora.xhtml
Information for authors
http://www.editorialmanager.com/ajcc 
Submit a manuscript
 
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/subscriptions/etoc.xhtml
Email alerts
. 
532. Fax: (949) 362-2049. Copyright ©2016 by AACN. All rights reserved
(AACN) published bimonthly by AACN, 101 Columbia, Aliso Viejo, CA 92656. Telephone: (800) 899-1712, (949) 362-2050, ext. 
The American Journal of Critical Care is an official peer-reviewed journal of the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses
 by AACN on June 3, 2019
http://ajcc.aacnjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
