 CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Maternal and Pediatric Nutrition
Keywords: choline, choline deficiency,
pig, neurodevelopment, gray matter,
white matter, prenatal nutrition
Copyright © 2018, Mudd et al. This is an Open Access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/,
which permits noncommercial re-use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use,
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com
Manuscript received January 4, 2018. Initial review
completed February 6, 2018. Revision accepted
March 6, 2018. Published online March 21, 2018.
Supported by the USDA National Institute of Food
and Agriculture, Hatch Project 1009051. Archer
Daniels Midland donated the soy protein isolate used
in the formation of the diets.
Author disclosures: ATM, CMG, and RND, no conflicts
of interest. The funders had no role in the study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Supplemental Figure 1 is available from the
“Supplementary data” link in the online posting of
the article and from the same link in the online table
of contents at https://academic.oup.com/cdn/.
Address correspondence to RND (e-mail:
rdilger2@illinois.edu).
Abbreviations used: AD, axial diffusivity; CD,
choline-deficient, CS, choline-sufficient; FA, fractional
anisotropy; FSL, FMRIB Software Library; MD, mean
diffusivity; RD, radial diffusivity; TBSS, tract-based
spatial statistics, VBM, voxel-based morphometry.
Maternal Dietary Choline Status Influences Brain
Gray and White Matter Development in Young
Pigs
Austin T Mudd,1,2 Caitlyn M Getty,1,3,4 and Ryan N Dilger1,2,3,5,6
1Piglet Nutrition and Cognition Laboratory; 2Neuroscience Program; 3Division of Nutrition Sciences; 4College
of Veterinary Medicine; 5Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology; and 6Department of Animal
Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
Abstract
Background: Choline is an essential nutrient that is pivotal to proper brain development. Research
in animal models suggests that perinatal choline deficiency influences neuron development in
the hippocampus and cortex, yet these observations require invasive techniques.
Objective: This study aimed to characterize the effects of perinatal choline deficiency on gray and
white matter development with the use of noninvasive neuroimaging techniques in young pigs.
Methods: During the last 64 d of the 114-d gestation period Yorkshire sows were provided with a
choline-sufficient (CS) or choline-deficient (CD) diet, analyzed to contain 1214 mg or 483 mg total
choline/kg diet, respectively. Upon farrowing, pigs (Sus scrofa domesticus) were allowed
colostrum consumption for ≤48 h, were further stratified into postnatal treatment groups, and
were provided either CS or CD milk replacers, analyzed to contain 1591 or 518 mg total
choline/kg diet, respectively, for 28 d. At 30 d of age, pigs were subjected to MRI procedures to
assess brain development. Gray and white matter development was assessed through
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) to assess the effects of
prenatal and postnatal dietary choline status.
Results: VBM analysis indicated that prenatally CS pigs exhibited increased (P < 0.01) gray matter
in the left and right cortex compared with prenatally CD pigs. Analysis of white matter indicated
that prenatally CS pigs exhibited increased (P < 0.01) white matter in the internal capsule,
putamen–globus pallidus, and right cortex compared with prenatally CD pigs. No postnatal
effects (P > 0.05) of choline status were noted for VBM analyses of gray and white matter. TBSS
also showed no significant effects (P > 0.05) of prenatal or postnatal choline status for diffusion
values along white matter tracts.
Conclusions: Observations from this study suggest that prenatal choline deficiency results in
altered cortical gray matter and reduced white matter in the internal capsule and putamen of
young pigs. With the use of noninvasive neuroimaging techniques, results from our study
indicate that prenatal choline deficiency greatly alters gray and white matter development in
pigs, thereby providing a translational assessment that may be used in clinical populations.
Curr Dev Nutr 2018;2:nzy015.
Introduction
Choline is an essential nutrient that has many physiologic functions. Despite being character-
ized as an essential micronutrient in 1998 (1), nearly 90% of adults do not meet the adequate
daily intake amounts of choline (2). It is recommended that pregnant women ingest 450 mg
choline/d, with these numbers increasing to 550 mg/d during lactation (3). However, recent
NHANES and independent reports suggest that women aged >20 y in the United States aver-
age ∼260 mg choline/d (4, 5). Although choline can be synthesized de novo, studies suggest that
single nucleotide polymorphisms in the phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PEMT)
1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
 2
Mudd et al.
gene contribute to a reduced ability to endogenously synthesize choline,
especially when dietary choline needs are not achieved (6). In addi-
tion, many vitamin and mineral supplements do not currently contain
choline (5) and prenatal vitamins do not contain adequate amounts of
choline, if any at all (7), further adding to the need for dietary choline
ingestion throughout gestation. Although inadequate choline intake has
been characterized in relatively high-income populations, such as in the
United States, it is also thought to be prevalent in lower-income coun-
tries (8), rendering insufficient choline consumption a possible global
concern.
Adequate choline ingestion throughout the perinatal period is crit-
ical because of the increased need to support fetal brain development
(9–11). One study suggests that women whose choline intake was in
the highest quartile during pregnancy had children who performed bet-
ter on cognitive tests at 7 y of age, highlighting the long-term impli-
cations of choline consumption during pregnancy (12). The cognitive
influences of choline may be due to its role in many physiologic as-
pects of brain development, including myelination, neurotransmitter
synthesis, cell membrane composition, and neuron morphology (9, 13).
Choline deficiency during the prenatal period, from embryonic days 12
to 17, in mice has previously been shown to alter hippocampal devel-
opment by increasing apoptosis and reducing neuronal progenitor cell
proliferation on embryonic day 17 (14). Rats born to choline-deficient
(CD) dams exhibited reduced cross-sectional areas in region-specific
neurons, thus suggesting regional specificity of choline effects on neu-
ron morphology (13). Furthermore, a recent study found that prena-
tal choline deficiency in mice, from embryonic days 11 to 17, resulted
in reduced numbers of upper-layer cortical neurons, altered epidermal
growth factor signaling, and decreased cortical neural progenitor cells
at embryonic day 17 as well as at 4 mo of age (15). Although many
of these studies provide mechanistic characterization of the influence
of choline on the developing brain, they also necessitate invasive tech-
niques that are not suitable for elucidating choline’
s influence in human
infants. Thus, there is a need to identify noninvasive methods of charac-
terizing the influence of choline on brain development, which may help
explain observations in rodent models.
Neuroimaging provides a sensitive and noninvasive means for char-
acterizing brain development in humans and animal models alike. Pre-
vious studies have used MRI techniques to evaluate the influence of
early-life nutrition on markers of myelination using diffusion tensor
imaging and changes in neurometabolites using magnetic resonance
spectroscopy in the biomedical piglet model (16). In fact, we previously
established that neuroimaging can sensitively quantify volumetric dif-
ferences in pigs whose mothers were provided CD diets throughout ges-
tation (17). Given the fact that other animal studies have observed dif-
ferences in neuron morphology and cortical development, this study is
a follow-up analysis from our initial neuroimaging assessment identi-
fying the effects of dietary choline deficiency on brain volumes and dif-
fusion measures (17). Herein, we aimed to assess gray and white matter
development in the context of prenatal and postnatal dietary choline de-
ficiency in pigs. We hypothesized that pigs from sows that were provided
a CD diet would exhibit region-specific decreases in gray and white mat-
ter of the brain at 4 wk of age. As such, we used voxel-based morphom-
etry (VBM) and tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) to quantify differ-
ences in brain gray and white matter development as a result of prenatal
and postnatal choline deficiency in pigs.
Methods
Animals and housing
For the prenatal dietary choline intervention, pregnant Yorkshire sows
(n = 12) were fed either a choline-sufficient (CS; n = 6) or CD (n = 6)
diet starting at day 50 of gestation, which is described in further detail
below. The standard gestation period for sows is 114 d; thus, the dietary
intervention was provided for the last 64 d of gestation. Throughout ges-
tation, sows were housed indoors in standard agricultural gestation and
farrowing crates as described previously (18). As stated previously, the
timing of choline deficiency was chosen to minimize chances of spon-
taneous fetal loss due to the dietary intervention, and sows were not
induced in this study due to unseasonably warm weather, resulting in
farrowing between 111 and 114 d of gestation (18).
The methods provided below were previously described (17, 18) and
are repeated in detail below to maintain continuity of methods descrip-
tions within a study. A total of 32 naturally farrowed domestic pigs (Sus
scrofa domesticus; n = 16/sex) from the 12 sows that were provided the
experimental gestation diets were obtained at 2 d of age. Each neona-
tal pig was placed in an artificial rearing system as previously described
(17). Individual caging units (1.03 m deep × 0.77 m wide × 0.81 m
high), designed for neonatal pigs, included ad libitum access to water,
supplemental heat, and a towel and rubber toy for enrichment. Light
in the rearing facility was kept on a 12-h light-dark cycle, with light
maintained from 0600 to 1800. Ambient local temperatures in the cages
were maintained between 24° and 36°C using heat lamps. Upon place-
ment into the artificial rearing system, neonatal pigs were administered
5 mL Clostridium perfringens antitoxin C+D per the manufacturer’
s rec-
ommendations (Colorado Serum Company). Neonatal pigs exhibiting
sickness behavior, defined as diarrhea for >48 h, were placed on an elec-
trolyte solution and administered a single dose of sulfamethoxazole and
trimethoprim oral suspension (50 and 8 mg/mL, respectively; Hi-Tech
Pharmacal) for 3 consecutive days.
Feeding methods were previously described (17, 18) and are re-
peated in detail below to maintain continuity of methods descriptions
within a study. After placement into the animal care facility, all neonatal
pigs were provided a custom soy-based milk replacer (Test Diets) for-
mulated to meet all nutrient requirements (19), apart from choline (fur-
ther details below), for the duration of the 28-d postnatal feeding study.
Milk replacer powder was reconstituted (200 g milk replacer powder/L
tap water) fresh ≥4 times/d, with feeding rates and intervals increased
on the basis of growth performance of postnatally CS pigs. Milk replacer
was supplied at a rate of 285 mL/kg body weight from 3 to 9 d of age,
300 mL/kg body weight from 10 to 13 d of age, 325 mL/kg body weight
from 14 to 15 d of age, and 350 mL/kg body weight from 16 to 29 d
of age (based on daily recorded pig body weights). Feedings occurred
every 3–4 h starting at 0800 and ending at 2300 daily. All animal care
and experimental procedures were in accordance with the National Re-
search Council Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and
approved by the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Dietary treatments
Dietary treatments were previously described (17, 18, 20) and are re-
peated in detail below to maintain continuity of methods descriptions
within a study. For the last 64 d of the 114-d gestation period, sows
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Choline deficiency alters brain development
3
(n = 12) were fed either CS (n = 6; 1214 mg analyzed total choline/kg
diet) or CD (n = 6; 483 mg analyzed total choline/kg diet) gestation di-
ets (19). Sows were administered the experimental gestation diet from
day 50 of the 114-d gestation period until 48 h postfarrowing. Sows were
provided restricted access to feed to maintain appropriate body condi-
tion per standard agricultural procedures; a detailed description of sow
diets was previously described (20).
At birth, neonatal pigs were allowed colostrum consumption for ≤48
h. At 2 d of age, pigs (n = 32) were further stratified into CS (n = 17;
1591 mg analyzed total choline/kg diet) or CD (n = 15; 518 mg ana-
lyzed total choline/kg diet) postnatal custom milk replacer treatments
and were fed these diets for the remainder of the 28-d feeding study (19).
This resulted in a 2 × 2 factorial arrangement with a total of 4 treat-
ment groups: CS/CS, prenatal and postnatal CS; CS/CD, prenatal CS
and postnatal CD; CD/CS, prenatal CD and postnatal CS; and CD/CD,
prenatal and postnatal CD. All daily choline requirements referenced
above were based on the most comprehensive evidence for the domestic
pig, which is based on a per-kilogram body weight basis (19). Analysis of
final choline content in gestation and milk replacer diets was performed
by using AOAC 994.14 methods by an external laboratory (Eurofins US)
(18).
Neuroimaging procedures
Neuroimaging procedures were previously described (17) and are re-
peated in detail below to maintain continuity of methods descriptions
within a study. At 30 d of age, pigs were subjected to MRI scanning
procedures. Before scanning, pigs were anesthetized via an intramus-
cular injection of Telazol (0.07 mg/kg body weight; Zoetis). Pigs were
immediately transferred to the MRI machine in which they were main-
tained on an average of 2% isoflurane:98% oxygen for the duration of
the 60-min scan. Pig heart rate and peripheral capillary oxygen satura-
tion were monitored throughout the duration of the scanning session
with the use of an MRI-compatible pulse oximeter. MRI procedures,
along with postimaging analyses of brain region volume and diffusion
tensor imaging, were previously described (21). Pigs were scanned with
the use of a Siemens MAGNETOM Trio 3T Imager with a Siemens 12-
channel head coil. Upon completion of MRI scans, pigs were allowed to
recover from anesthesia, vital signs were monitored every 15 min until
complete recovery, and pigs were subsequently transported back to the
rearing facilities.
VBM. Detailed descriptions of VBM procedures were previously de-
scribed (21–23) and are repeated in detail below to maintain conti-
nuity of methods. A T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid gra-
dient echo (MPRAGE) sequence was used to obtain anatomic images
of the pig brain, with a 0.7-mm isotropic voxel, resulting in a 0.343-
mm3 voxel size. The following sequence-specific parameters were used
to acquire T1-weighted MPRAGE data: repetition time = 1900 ms, echo
time = 2.49 ms, inversion time = 900 ms, 224 slices, field of view = 180
mm, and flip angle = 9°. Pig brain images were manually skull-stripped
by using a Wacom Cintiq digital display as previously described (17).
The “Segment” function of statistical parametric mapping 8 (SPM8;
Wellcome Department of Clinical Neurology) and pig-specific previous
probability tissue maps (24) were then used to segment the brains into
gray matter and white matter. VBM analysis was performed to assess
gray and white matter alterations with the use of SPM8 software. The
Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration using Exponentiated Lie Alge-
bra (DARTEL) toolbox was used with pig-specific specifications that in-
cluded changing the bounding box of −30.1 to 30.1, −35 to 44.8, −28
to 31.5 and a voxel size of 0.7-mm isotropic (i.e., 0.343 mm3). After the
nonlinear transformation of the data in the DARTEL procedure, flow
fields were created and converted to warp files. The warp files generated
were then applied to the pigs’gray and white matter. The modulated
data were smoothed with a 4-mm full-width half maximum, and were
subjected to VBM procedures using the SPM toolbox with the use of
methods previously described (21).
TBSS. Detailed descriptions of TBSS procedures were previously de-
scribed (22, 25) and are repeated in detail below to maintain continu-
ity of methods. Diffusion tensor imaging was used to assess white mat-
ter maturation and axonal tract integrity with the use of a b-value =
1000 s/mm2 across 30 directions and a 2-mm isotropic voxel (i.e.,
8 mm3). Diffusion-weighted echoplanar imaging images were assessed
in FMRIB Software Library (FSL) 5.0 for fractional anisotropy (FA),
mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD), and radial diffusivity
(RD) with the use of methods that were previously described (17). The
FSL 5.0 toolbox was used for TBSS assessment of FA data (26, 27). FA
images, previously generated from diffusion data, were manually skull-
stripped, and all FA data from individual pigs were aligned by using the
FSL nonlinear registration tool FMRIB’
s nonlinear image registration
tool (FNIRT). Upon alignment, the study-specific mean FA image was
created and a mean FA skeleton representing the center of all common
tracts was established. A threshold of 0.2 was determined to be sensitive
for mean FA tract delineation and to ensure that only white matter was
included in the analyzed FA skeleton. Once the study-specific mean FA
skeleton was created, each pig’
s aligned FA data were projected onto the
mean FA skeleton and the resulting voxel-wise cross-subject data were
used for statistical analyses (26, 27). For all TBSS analyses involving reg-
istration to an atlas, the Piglet Brain Atlas (http://pigmri.illinois.edu/)
was used in place of human brain templates (24).
The mean FA skeleton generated in the previous steps was used as
“predetermined” white matter tracts. Subsequently the TBSS non-FA
function was used to generate data on diffusion differences along the
white matter tracts for other diffusion tensor measures (i.e., MD, AD,
and RD). To analyze differences in these diffusion measures, nonlinear
warps and skeleton projection values generated in the TBSS FA analysis
were applied to each of the MD, AD, and RD images. Pig-specific alter-
ations to the non-FA script included registration to pig brain atlas space,
rather than MNI152 space, and registration with the use of a pig-specific
internal capsule mask rather than a lower cingulum mask.
Statistical analysis
VBM. VBM analyses were conducted separately to determine differ-
ences between prenatal choline status (i.e., CS compared with CD sow
diet) or differences between postnatal choline status (i.e., CS compared
with CD milk replacer). As such, 2-sample permutation t tests were
performed on a voxel-by-voxel basis for gray and white matter differ-
ences between CS and CD pigs. A family-wise error correction (Gaus-
sian Random Field Theory; P < 0.05) was applied to account for mul-
tiple comparisons, and an additional threshold criterion of ≥20-edge
connected voxels was used to determine significant clusters. All P val-
ues reported herein are P-corrected.
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
 4
Mudd et al.
TBSS. For TBSS analysis, data were analyzed separately to determine
differences between prenatal choline status (i.e., CS compared with CD
sow diet) or differences between postnatal choline status (i.e., CS com-
pared with CD milk replacer). A nonparametric permutation inference
function called “randomize” was used within the FSL toolbox and run as
a 2-sample t test with 500 permutations to compare the effects of early-
life choline deficiency. Multiple comparisons were also accounted for
within the randomize function. The resulting statistical analyses were
conducted for FA, AD, MD, and RD data.
Results
Neonatal pig growth
Sow choline status did not influence pig birth weight, with prenatally
CS pigs averaging 1.59 kg and prenatally CD pigs averaging 1.52 kg.
Moreover, there was no difference in body weight between the 4 dietary
treatment groups after the 28-d postnatal feeding study. These findings
were previously published and are provided to the reader for context of
overall pig body growth. A more detailed description of pig growth can
be found in Getty and Dilger (18).
VBM
A comparison of gray matter showed localized clusters in which prena-
tal CS pigs exhibited increased (P < 0.01) gray matter compared with
prenatal CD pigs (Table 1, Figure 1; CS > CD). These differences ap-
peared in 4 separate clusters that were located in the left and right cortex,
with the largest cluster located in the left cortex containing 312 voxels.
Notably, the Pig Brain Atlas does not differentiate between particular
regions of the cortex; however, upon visual inspection, these clusters
appear to be located in the frontal and prefrontal cortices. The converse
comparison in which prenatal CD pigs exhibited increased gray mat-
ter compared with prenatal CS pigs (i.e., CD > CS) yielded no signifi-
cant (P > 0.05) clusters. A comparison of white matter showed localized
clusters in which prenatal CS pigs exhibited increased (P < 0.001) white
matter compared with prenatal CD pigs (Table 1, Figure 2; CS > CD).
These differences appeared in 3 separate clusters that were located in the
putamen–globus pallidus, right cortex, and internal capsule, with the
largest cluster located in the putamen–globus pallidus containing 203
voxels. The converse comparison in which prenatal CD pigs exhibited
increased white matter compared with prenatal CS pigs (i.e., CD > CS)
yielded no significant (P > 0.05) clusters. Assessment of gray and white
matter differences between postnatal CS and postnatal CD pigs yielded
no significant differences (P > 0.05) for the 4 possible comparisons (i.e.,
gray matter CS > CD; gray matter CD > CS; white matter CS > CD;
white matter CD > CS). Notably, the regions identified above were de-
termined by inserting the local maxima X, Y, and Z coordinates listed in
Table 1 into the Pig Brain Atlas and cross-referencing the brain region
that was identified via the atlas.
TBSS
No differences due to prenatal choline status were observed for diffusion
values along predetermined white matter tracts. Assessment of white
matter tracts in which rates were higher in prenatally CD pigs than in
prenatally CS pigs (prenatal: CD > CS) indicated no significant results
for FA (P = 0.28), AD (P = 0.65), MD (P = 0.63), and RD (P = 0.41).
The converse assessment of areas along white matter tracts in which
prenatally CS pigs exhibited greater diffusion values than prenatally CD
pigs (prenatal: CS > CD) also indicated no significant differences for FA
(P = 0.17), AD (P = 0.23), MD (P = 0.27), and RD (P = 0.29). No differ-
ences due to postnatal choline status were observed for diffusion values
along predetermined white matter tracts. Assessment of white matter
tracts in which rates were higher in postnatally CD pigs than in postna-
tally CS pigs (postnatal: CD > CS) indicated no significant results for
FA (P = 0.36), AD (P = 0.45), MD (P = 0.74), and RD (P = 0.91). The
converse assessment of areas along white matter tracts in which post-
natally CS pigs exhibited greater diffusion values than postnatally CD
pigs (postnatal: CS > CD) also indicated no significant differences for
FA (P = 0.95), AD (P = 0.89), MD (P = 0.59), and RD (P = 0.52). Sup-
plemental Figure 1 shows the white matter skeleton that was used for
TABLE 1
Voxel-based morphometry assessment of gray and white matter differences between prenatally CS and CD pigs1
Cluster
Peak
Local maxima coordinates3
Tissue type, comparison, and anatomic region2
Voxels, n
P
P
Pseudo t
X
Y
Z
Gray
CS > CD
Left cortex
312
<0.001
<0.001
9.54
−14.0
16.8
13.3
Right cortex
22
0.003
0.002
7.87
9.1
23.8
4.2
Right cortex
21
0.004
0.007
7.36
7.0
25.9
−1.4
Left cortex
42
0.001
0.018
6.88
−17.5
−2.8
14.7
CD > CS
—
—
—
—
—
White
CS > CD
Putamen-GP
203
<0.001
0.001
8.59
−8.4
13.3
1.4
Right cortex
53
<0.001
0.014
7.05
12.6
−9.8
4.9
Internal capsule
31
0.001
0.027
6.73
4.9
16.1
0.0
CD > CS
—
—
—
—
—
1Voxel-based morphometry analysis of gray and white matter differences in the prenatal CS and CD pig brains at postnatal day 28. P values reported are family-wise
error-corrected (P < 0.05), and a minimum cluster size of 20 voxels was used to determine voxel clusters listed in the table. CD, choline deficient; CS, choline sufficient;
GP
, globus pallidus.
2Brain regions based on visual inspection of the cluster location and cross-referenced with the Piglet Brain Atlas (24).
3Local maxima coordinates: X increases from left (−) to right (+), Y increases from posterior (−) to anterior (+), and Z increases from inferior (−) to superior (+).
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Choline deficiency alters brain development
5
FIGURE 1
Voxel-based morphometric assessment in which prenatally CS pigs exhibited greater gray matter than did prenatally CD pigs.
The range of dark blue to light blue indicates the degree of statistical difference, ranging from pseudo t values of 6.80 to 9.55, respectively.
All clusters represented in the figure are significant at a P-corrected value of P < 0.01. Notably, there were no significant clusters in which
prenatally CD pigs exhibited greater gray matter than prenatally CS pigs. Within the figure, the changes from Y = 70 to Y = 89 indicate
movement from anterior to posterior, respectively, through the brain image slices. CD, choline-deficient; CS, choline-sufficient.
TBSS assessment. Notably, the diffusion tensor values assessed above
are commonly used to determine alterations in water movement within
tissue, and changes in these values are related to changes in brain mi-
crostructure (28–30).
Discussion
Choline is an essential nutrient that is important for many aspects of
brain structural and functional development (10). Research in rodent
models of perinatal choline deficiency reported mechanisms through
which altered choline status influences neurodevelopment; however,
these methods of evaluation necessitate invasive techniques. Thus, the
aim of this study was to use noninvasive neuroimaging techniques to
characterize alterations in gray and white matter development due to
perinatal choline deficiency. Herein, we report that prenatal dietary
choline deficiency exerts a greater influence on gray and white mat-
ter development than postnatal dietary choline deficiency. These find-
ings are novel because they use clinically translatable, noninvasive neu-
roimaging techniques in the well-established biomedical pig model to
show alterations in gray and white matter development as a result of
prenatal choline deficiency. Moreover, our results indicate that postna-
tal choline deficiency does not have as great of an effect on gray and
white matter development as deficiency during the prenatal period.
We previously reported that pigs exhibit smaller total brain volumes
when exposed to choline deficiency during the prenatal period (17).
Notably, our previous analysis assessed relative regional volumes with-
out identifying if gray or white matter had a greater influence on volu-
metric changes. Thus, to further characterize specific influences of di-
etary choline on gray or white matter development, we used VBM to
assess differences in gray and white matter on a voxel-wise basis. Our
results indicate that pigs exposed to prenatal choline deficiency exhib-
ited reduced gray matter in both cortices compared with prenatal CS
pigs. These findings corroborate our previous report of reduced total
brain volumes and smaller absolute volumes of the left and right cor-
tex (17). Notably, there were no gray matter clusters in which prenatal
CD pigs exhibited greater gray matter than prenatal CS pigs. Interest-
ingly, these findings corroborate research in rodent models that indi-
cates that choline deficiency alters neural development. Mice that were
born to CD dams exhibited increased hippocampal apoptosis and re-
duced neural progenitor cell proliferation (14). Furthermore, a sepa-
rate study in mice indicated decreased cortical neural progenitor cells
and fewer upper layer cortical neurons in offspring from CD dams (15).
Results from Wang et al. (15) suggest that the apparent disruption in
cortical development is the result of decreased epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor signaling in the CD mice. A separate study suggests that
prenatal choline deficiency in rats results in medial septal neurons with
smaller cross-sectional areas compared with control rats (13). Although
our findings were not in the same brain regions as those observed by
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
 6
Mudd et al.
FIGURE 2
Voxel-based morphometric assessment in which prenatally CS pigs exhibited greater white matter than did prenatally CD
pigs. The range of red to yellow indicates the degree of statistical difference, ranging from pseudo t values of 6.70 to 8.60, respectively.
All clusters represented in the figure are significant at a P-corrected value of P < 0.001. Notably, there were no significant clusters in which
prenatally CD pigs exhibited greater white matter than prenatally CS pigs. Within the figure, the changes from Y = 35 to Y = 73 indicate
movement from posterior to anterior, respectively, through brain image slices. CD, choline-deficient; CS, choline-sufficient.
McKeon-O’
Malley et al. (13), the observed decrease in gray matter
in prenatally CD pigs may be the result of smaller neuron sizes. Al-
though cellular analysis was not a primary outcome in this study, our
neuroimaging results provide a noninvasive characterization of altered
cortical development in pigs that were exposed to choline deficiency
throughout gestation, and corroborate our previous findings of reduced
absolute cortical volumes in prenatally CD pigs (17).
In pigs, cortical development reaches its maximal growth rate at
4 wk of age and is expected to continue for several weeks thereafter (31).
In this study, we report differences in cortical gray matter at 4 wk of age;
our previous analysis reported differences in absolute cortical volumes
but no differences in relative volumes of the cortex (17). We speculate
that our VBM results indicate the very early stages of altered cortical
development in which neural progenitor cells may be altered or even
reduced in number, thereby presenting as reduced gray matter in our
VBM findings. With the use of the findings by Wang et al. (15) as evi-
dence, we suggest that imaging the pigs at a later time point may result
in reduced cortical volumes in the prenatally CD pigs, because it would
be expected that cortical layers would not form properly, thus present-
ing as a reduction in cortical volume. Although histological analysis of
brain samples was not an outcome of our study, future work should seek
to characterize cortical development in the context of perinatal choline
deficiency. Work of this nature is warranted to verify similar influences
of dietary choline across animal models as well as providing substanti-
ation for observations made through noninvasive techniques.
The assessment of white matter differences indicates an effect of pre-
natal choline status, in which prenatally CS pigs exhibit localized clus-
ters of increased white matter compared with prenatally CD pigs. Al-
though all gray matter differences were identified in cortical regions,
the greatest differences in white matter appeared to be located in the
putamen–globus pallidus and internal capsule. Notably, the location of
all clusters was determined with the use of the Pig Brain Atlas, which
characterizes 19 different brain regions. Although informative, the Pig
Brain Atlas is not as granular as a human brain atlas; thus, a more spe-
cific atlas may help to better define the exact locations of these differ-
ences.
The internal capsule is one of the earliest myelinating brain regions
(32) and the presence of dietary choline is necessary for myelin com-
ponents such as phospholipids and sphingomyelin (11). Thus, this ob-
served reduction in white matter at 4 wk of age in prenatally CD pigs
may provide early indications of altered myelination. Our previous anal-
ysis did not observe diffusion differences in the internal capsule of these
pigs (17), which may suggest that myelination was still occurring and
was not altered enough to be detected through diffusion tensor imaging.
Notably, diffusion tensor imaging is commonly used to assess alterations
in water movement in tissue and is influenced by changes in myelination
and axon growth and development and increased fiber packing (28–30).
If white matter differences are evident at 4 wk of age, we speculate that
imaging at later time points would illuminate differences in diffusion
within the internal capsule.
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Choline deficiency alters brain development
7
Our results also indicate reduced white matter in the putamen–
globus pallidus region of prenatally CD pigs. Although there are not
many studies that suggest an influence of dietary choline on white mat-
ter in these regions, it is known that the putamen and the globus pal-
lidus, among other brain regions, contain a high density of choliner-
gic neurons (33). Moreover, reduced acetylcholine concentrations (34)
and impaired acetylcholine synthesis were observed in the striatum (i.e.,
brain region containing the caudate and putamen) of CD rats (35). A
separate study noted decreased phosphatidylcholine concentrations in
striatal cells that were stimulated in media containing low concentra-
tions of choline, thereby suggesting the choline-containing phospho-
lipids acted as a choline pool for acetylcholine synthesis (36). White
matter is, in part, composed of myelin, and among many other com-
ponents, myelin is composed of phospholipids and sphingomyelin (11).
Thus, the observed reduction in white matter in this region, which is
highly innervated with cholinergic neurons, may suggest a breakdown
of phospholipid products due to choline deficiency to ensure proper
acetylcholine synthesis. To further characterize this observation, future
work should seek to quantify acetylcholine concentrations in this brain
region in the context of a choline deficiency intervention and should as-
sess myelination to identify the extent of white matter composition in
this region.
Interestingly, our neuroimaging assessments indicated no signifi-
cant effects of postnatal choline deficiency on aspects of gray and white
matter development. These findings corroborate our previous findings,
which indicate that the greatest effect of postnatal choline deficiency was
on glycerophosphocholine-phosphocholine concentrations and not on
brain volumes (17). Whole-brain and cortical brain growth in the pig
are at the maximal rate of growth at ∼4 wk of age (31); thus, it is possi-
ble that postnatal dietary choline deficiency would not be evident until
later in life. Our findings may suggest that choline deficiency exerts its
greatest effects on brain development during the prenatal period. Re-
search suggests that children born to mothers with higher gestational
choline intake perform better on cognitive tasks later in life (12). Thus,
these findings of altered gray and white matter development may offer a
noninvasive characterization of alterations in brain structure that result
in later-life cognitive deficits.
In conclusion, we report herein that prenatal choline deficiency in-
fluences cortical gray matter development and subcortical white matter
development in young pigs. Although adequate choline intake is critical
throughout the perinatal period, the lack of postnatal effects on gray and
white matter development highlights the importance of choline during
gestation. Because most prenatal supplements do not contain adequate
choline and pregnant women often fall below the suggested daily intake
amounts, our findings highlight the need for continued efforts to ensure
proper choline concentrations are achieved in pregnant women.
Acknowledgments
We thank the University of Illinois Imported Swine Research Labora-
tory staff and Jennifer Rytych for their help in daily pig-rearing activi-
ties. We also thank the MRI technicians, Holly Tracy and Nancy Dodge,
at the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology Imaging
Center for their help in MRI data acquisition. The authors’responsibili-
ties were as follows—RND and CMG: designed the research; CMG: con-
ducted the animal study; ATM: processed MRI data; ATM and RND:
analyzed MRI data; and all authors: wrote the manuscript, and read
and approved the final manuscript.
References
1. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for folate, thiamin,
riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, biotin, and choline.
Washington (DC): National Academies Press; 1998.
2. Jensen HH, Batres-Marquez SP, Carriquiry A, Schalinske KL. Choline in
the diets of the US population: NHANES, 2003–2004. FASEB J
2007;21:lb219.
3. Zeisel SH, Da Costa KA. Choline: an essential nutrient for public health.
Nutr Rev 2009;67:615–23.
4. Chester DN, Goldman JD, Ahuja JK, Moshfegh AJ. Dietary intakes of
choline: What We Eat in America, NHANES 2007–2008 [Internet]. Food
Surveys Research Group Dietary Data Brief No. 9. 2011. Available from:
http://ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=19476, last accessed January
2018.
5. Wallace TC, Fulgoni VL. Assessment of total choline intakes in the United
States. J Am Coll Nutr 2016;35:108–12.
6. Da Costa KA, Kozyreva OG, Song J, Galanko JA, Fischer LM, Zeisel SH.
Common genetic polymorphisms affect the human requirement for the
nutrient choline. FASEB J 2006;20:1336–44.
7. Zeisel SH. Nutrition in pregnancy: the argument for including a source of
choline. Int J Womens Health 2013;5:193–9.
8. Gossell-Williams M, Fletcher H, McFarlane-Anderson N, Jacob A, Patel J,
Zeisel S. Dietary intake of choline and plasma choline concentrations in
pregnant women in Jamaica. West Indian Med J 2005;54:355–9.
9. Zeisel SH. Nutritional importance of choline for brain development. J Am
Coll Nutr 2004;23:621–6.
10. Zeisel S, Niculescu M. Perinatal choline influences brain structure and
function. Nutr Rev 2006;64:197–203.
11. Caudill MA. Pre- and postnatal health: evidence of increased choline needs.
J Am Diet Assoc 2010;110:1198–206.
12. Boeke CE, Gillman MW, Hughes MD, Rifas-Shiman SL, Villamor E, Oken
E. Choline intake during pregnancy and child cognition at age 7 years. Am J
Epidemiol 2013;177:1338–47.
13. McKeon-O’
Malley C, Siwek D, Lamoureux JA, Williams CL, Kowall NW.
Prenatal choline deficiency decreases the cross-sectional area of cholinergic
neurons in the medial septal nucleus. Brain Res 2003;977:278–83.
14. Craciunescu CN, Albright CD, Mar M, Song J, Zeisel SH. Choline
availability during embryonic development alters progenitor cell mitosis in
developing mouse hippocampus. J Nutr 2003;18:3614–8.
15. Wang Y, Surzenko N, Friday WB, Zeisel SH. Maternal dietary intake of
choline in mice regulates development of the cerebral cortex in the
offspring. FASEB J 2016;30:1566–78.
16. Mudd AT, Dilger RN. Early-life nutrition and neurodevelopment: use of
the piglet as a translational model. Adv Nutr 2017;8:92–104.
17. Mudd AT, Getty C, Sutton B, Dilger R. Perinatal choline deficiency delays
brain development and alters metabolite concentrations in the young pig.
Nutr Neurosci 2016;19:425–33.
18. Getty CM, Dilger RN. Moderate perinatal choline deficiency elicits altered
physiology and metabolomic profiles in the piglet. PLoS One 2015;10:1–16.
19. US National Research Council. Nutrient requirements of swine. 11th rev.
Washington (DC): The National Academies Press; 2012.
20. Mudd AT, Alexander LS, Johnson SK, Getty CM, Malysheva O V, Caudill
MA, Dilger RN. Perinatal dietary choline deficiency in sows influences
concentrations of choline metabolites, fatty acids, and amino acids in milk
throughout lactation. J Nutr 2016;146:2216–23.
21. Radlowski EC, Conrad MS, Lezmi S, Dilger RN, Sutton B, Larsen R,
Johnson RW. A neonatal piglet model for investigating brain and cognitive
development in small for gestational age human infants. PLoS One
2014;9:e91951.
22. Mudd A, Fil J, Knight L, Lam F, Liang Z-P, Dilger R. Early-life iron
deficiency reduces brain iron content and alters brain tissue composition
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
 8
Mudd et al.
despite iron repletion: a neuroimaging assessment. Nutrients
2018;10(2):135.
23. Mudd A, Alexander L, Berding K, Waworuntu R, Berg B, Donovan S,
Dilger R. Dietary prebiotics, milk fat globule membrane and lactoferrin
affects structural neurodevelopment in the young piglet. Front Pediatr
2016;4:1–10.
24. Conrad MS, Sutton BP, Dilger RN, Johnson R. An in vivo
three-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging-based averaged brain
collection of the neonatal piglet (Sus scrofa). PLoS One 2014;9:
107650.
25. Mudd AT, Waworuntu RV, Berg BM, Dilger RN. Dietary alpha-lipoic acid
alters piglet neurodevelopment. Front Pediatr 2016;4:1–9.
26. Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Woolrich MW, Beckmann CF, Behrens TEJ,
Johansen-Berg H, Bannister PR, De Luca M, Drobnjak I, Flitney DE et al.
Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and
implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 2004;23(Suppl 1):S208–19.
27. Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Johansen-Berg H, Rueckert D, Nichols TE, Mackay
CE, Watkins KE, Ciccarelli O, Cader MZ, Matthews PM et al. Tract-based
spatial statistics: voxelwise analysis of multi-subject diffusion data.
Neuroimage 2006;31:1487–505.
28. Le Bihan D, Mangin JF, Poupon C, Clark CA, Pappata S, Molko N,
Chabriat H. Diffusion tensor imaging: concepts and applications. J Magn
Reson Imaging 2001;13:534–46.
29. Drobyshevsky A, Song S, Gamkrelidze G, Wyrwicz AM, Derrick M, Meng
F, Li L, Ji X, Trommer B, Beardsley DJ et al. Developmental changes in
diffusion anisotropy coincide with immature oligodendrocyte progression
and maturation of compound action potential. J Neurosci 2005;25:5988–97.
30. Alexander AL, Lee JE, Lazar M, Field AS. Diffusion tensor imaging of the
brain. Neurotherapeutics 2007;4:316–29.
31. Conrad MS, Dilger RN, Johnson RW. Brain growth of the domestic pig
(Sus scrofa) from 2 to 24 weeks of age: a longitudinal MRI study. Dev
Neurosci 2012;34:291–8.
32. Deoni SCL, Mercure E, Blasi A, Gasston D, Thomson A, Johnson M,
Williams SCR, Murphy DGM. Mapping infant brain myelination with
magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci 2011;31:784–91.
33. Mesulam M-M, Mash D, Hersh L, Bothwell M, Geula C. Cholinergic
innervation of the human striatum, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus,
substantia nigra, and red nucleus. J Comp Neurol 1992;323:252–68.
34. Wecker L, Schnidt DE. Central cholinergic function: relationship to choline
administration. Life Sci 1979;25:375–84.
35. Wecker L. Influence of dietary choline availability and neuronal demand on
acetylcholine synthesis by rat brain. J Neurochem 1988;51:497–504.
36. Ulus IH, Wurtman RJ, Mauron C, Blusztajn JK. Choline increases
acetylcholine release and protects against the stimulation-induced decrease
in phosphatide levels within membranes of rat corpus striatum. Brain Res
1989;484:217–27.
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article-abstract/2/6/nzy015/4950391 by guest on 04 June 2019
