 REVIEW
Early-Life Nutrition and Neurodevelopment: Use of
the Piglet as a Translational Model1,2
Austin T Mudd3,4 and Ryan N Dilger3–6*
3Piglet Nutrition and Cognition Laboratory, 4Neuroscience Program, 5Division of Nutritional Sciences, and 6Department of Animal Sciences,
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL
ABSTRACT
Optimal nutrition early in life is critical to ensure proper structural and functional development of infant organ systems. Although pediatric
nutrition historically has emphasized research on the relation between nutrition, growth rates, and gastrointestinal maturation, efforts
increasingly have focused on how nutrition influences neurodevelopment. The provision of human milk is considered the gold standard in
pediatric nutrition; thus, there is interest in understanding how functional nutrients and bioactive components in milk may modulate
developmental processes. The piglet has emerged as an important translational model for studying neurodevelopmental outcomes influenced
by pediatric nutrition. Given the comparable nutritional requirements and strikingly similar brain developmental patterns between young pigs
and humans, the piglet is being used increasingly in developmental nutritional neuroscience studies. The piglet primarily has been used to
assess the effects of dietary fatty acids and their accretion in the brain throughout neurodevelopment. However, recent research indicates
that other dietary components, including choline, iron, cholesterol, gangliosides, and sialic acid, among other compounds, also affect
neurodevelopment in the pig model. Moreover, novel analytical techniques, including but not limited to MRI, behavioral assessments, and
molecular quantification, allow for a more holistic understanding of how nutrition affects neurodevelopmental patterns. By combining early-life
nutritional interventions with innovative analytical approaches, opportunities abound to quantify factors affecting neurodevelopmental trajectories
in the neonate. This review discusses research using the translational pig model with primary emphasis on early-life nutrition interventions assessing
neurodevelopment outcomes, while also discussing nutritionally-sensitive methods to characterize brain maturation. Adv Nutr 2017;8:92–104.
Keywords:
piglet, pediatric nutrition, neurodevelopment, magnetic resonance imaging, animal model, early-life nutrition
Introduction
Optimal nutrient provision early in life is essential for proper
development of the neonate (1). Pediatric nutrition research
commonly focuses on maturation of the gastrointestinal tract,
because this system is crucial to ensuring continued growth.
Although alterations in nutrition may lead to immediately evi
dent pathophysiologies of gastrointestinal development (2),
the developing brain also is highly sensitive to early-life nutri-
ent status (3). However, the sensitivities of the brain that lead
to altered structure and function may not be evident until
later in life (4). Thus, it is important to identify critical aspects
of early-life nutrition that modulate brain development dur-
ing periods in which brain regions are rapidly developing and
therefore susceptible to nutrition.
Throughout the perinatal period, the brain is rapidly de-
veloping, and its plasticity makes it highly susceptible to
alterations in nutrition (5). It is well known that maternal
dietary status greatly influences fetal brain development,
but this is not limited to just the prenatal period (6, 7). Hu-
man milk is generally regarded as the gold standard for
early-life nutrition, and known compositional differences
between infant formula and human milk exist (8). Accord-
ingly, research suggests that there are differences in brain de-
velopment and cognitive function between breastfed and
formula-fed infants (9–11). Throughout the first year of
life, most infants receive a combination of both human
milk and formula (12). Thus, there is interest in character-
izing the components of human milk that support optimal
brain development and can be incorporated into standard
infant diets.
Although epidemiologic data and randomized controlled
trials can be informative in assessing neurodevelopmental
outcomes in human populations, these studies are limited
in their mechanistic assessments of nutrition’s modulatory
effects on the developing brain. The piglet is a commonly
accepted animal model in the field of pediatric nutrition
1 The authors reported no funding received for this study.
2 Author disclosures: AT Mudd and RN Dilger, no conflicts of interest.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: rdilger2@illinois.edu.
92
ã2017 American Society for Nutrition. Adv Nutr 2017;8:92–104; doi:10.3945/an.116.013243.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 research because the gastrointestinal development and nutri-
ent requirements of the pig are similar to those of the human
infant (13). Because of the piglet’s utility in this line of re-
search, it also has gained popularity in the field of develop-
mental neuroscience, commonly being used to assess the
interactions of nutrition and neurodevelopment. It is through
these studies that researchers have been able to elucidate how
specific dietary compounds influence neurodevelopment.
This review will highlight studies of pediatric nutrition
that used the piglet model in which brain development out-
comes were of primary interest. It will also highlight tech-
nologies used to assess brain development and seeks to
offer novel insights into future areas of nutritional neurode-
velopment research in which the pig model will be of great
use. It should be noted that use of the pig in neuroscience is
not exclusively amendable to nutritional neuroscience;
rather, it has gained traction in other areas of brain-related
research. Although this review focuses solely on nutrition,
the reader is referred to other reviews that focus on topics
such as cognition and behavior (14, 15), early-life neuro-
developmental insults (16), brain disorders (17), and anes-
thetic effects on the developing brain (18) in the young pig.
Piglet Neurodevelopment
The piglet is an ideal model for neurodevelopmental re-
search because it exhibits perinatal brain development
much like human infants (19). Analysis of fatty acid frac-
tions from piglet brains ranging from 14 d preterm to
40 d postnatal indicates that the maturing piglet brain expe-
riences 2 peaks of myelination (20). The first peak of brain
growth occurs between ;100 and 110 d gestation (mean
gestation length is 114 d in the pig), depending on the spec-
ified brain region. This early myelinating event is character-
ized by an accumulation of DNA involved in the myelination
process, followed by cerebroside accumulation in developing
regions. It was noted that there is an apparent slowing of
brain growth in the immediate prenatal period, with devel-
opment ramping up again ;10 d after birth. The second
peak of myelination in the developing pig brain occurs
;30–40 d after birth, and is characterized by a simultaneous
appearance of myelinating DNA and cerebrosides in develop-
ing regions. Notably, cholesterol esters appear in brain regions
before myelinating events, presumably functioning as carriers
of fatty acids to be incorporated into the myelin sheath (20).
Purvis et al. (21) also noted that perinatal changes in fatty acid
accretion in the piglet brain parallel that of human brain de-
velopment. Particularly, fatty acids derived from 18:2n–6 and
18:3n–3 tend to increase during gestation, but concentrations
of these precursors remain low, and a rapid accumulation of
saturated fatty acids (i.e., 16:0 and 18:0) also suggests active
myelin synthesis (21).
Although rodents are commonly used animal models in
nutritional neuroscience research, the lissencephalic cortical
structure and predominantly postnatal brain development
are quite different from that of humans and pigs. In contrast,
the pig brain exhibits gyral patterning, vascularization, and
distribution of gray and white matter that is similar to
that of the human, and the pig brain is large enough for
live neuroimaging procedures (17, 22). MRI methods have
allowed for longitudinal characterization of volumetric
changes from 2 to 24 wk of age in the pig, further establish-
ing similarities between pig and human brain development
(23). When comparing data obtained from longitudinal
MRI assessment in pigs and humans, it is apparent that
both species follow a similar growth trajectory, with 1 mo
of human total brain volume growth being equivalent to
1 wk of piglet total brain volume growth (24). In general,
the pig brain is one-tenth the total volume of the human
brain throughout the lifespan, thus lending itself to easy col-
lection and characterization of specific brain subregions (23,
24). This is in contrast to rodent brains, which are much
smaller and often require pooling of tissue across the ro-
dents in order to analyze tissue components.
The use of the pig as a neurodevelopmental model is
unique in that it allows for assessment of learning and mem-
ory during critical periods of brain growth, which then may
be translated directly to humans. Because of the precocial
nature of the young pig, behavioral assessments can be per-
formed immediately after birth, whereas this is not possible
in human infants for several months. Because rodents’
brains develop predominantly during the postnatal period,
assessments of learning and memory are not possible imme-
diately after birth. Although behavioral analysis techniques
will be discussed briefly below, the reader is referred to a
more extensive review pertaining to piglet cognitive assess-
ment (14). By using nutritional interventions during the pe-
riods of rapid brain development, researchers are able to
define critical windows during which the brain is sensitive
to dietary interventions.
Nutritional Studies
Research focused on optimal piglet nutrition for agricul-
tural purposes has been a priority for many decades. Ac-
cordingly, nutritional effects on growth and development
of the piglet are well characterized. Studies directly assess-
ing the brain, however, have only recently gained popular-
ity, with many studies focusing only on crude measures,
such as brain weights or total fatty acid composition (20,
21, 25, 26). However, from these foundational studies, nu-
tritionists and neuroscientists alike have gained an appreci-
ation for the sensitivity of this model in the context of
nutritional neurodevelopment. The piglet is unique in
that it experiences perinatal brain development, thus mak-
ing it a premiere model for studies of perinatal nutrition.
This is unlike rodents, which develop postnatally and are
not as amendable to studies of maternal nutrition. More-
over, advancements in nutritional technologies have al-
lowed for development and characterization of novel
compounds that may serve to support or enhance brain de-
velopment when incorporated into pediatric products (27,
28). The following sections seek to highlight novel findings
in which the modulation of specific dietary compounds re-
sulted in alterations of brain development when using the
pig as a model.
The pig and nutritional neurodevelopment
93
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Fatty acids
Given the analysis techniques available and an intense inter-
est in fatty acids in pediatric nutrition in the early 1990s, the
piglet was identified as an optimal model for assessing brain
fatty acid accretion. Decades of research with the use of the
piglet have helped to establish DHA (22:6n–3) and arachi-
donic acid (20:4n–6) as 2 fatty acids that serve critical roles
in brain maturation (29–34). Research in this area has high-
lighted the need to understand ways in which altered ratios
and different sources of fatty acids might affect bioavailabil-
ity in the developing neonate (26, 31, 32, 34–39). Although
the majority of piglet neurodevelopmental research has fo-
cused on dietary fatty acid supplementation, extensive detail
pertaining to such studies is beyond the scope of this review.
For a more in-depth understanding of dietary fatty acids and
their impact on brain development, the reader is referred to
reviews by Innis (40–42).
Cholesterol
Cholesterol has many physiological functions in the body,
most notably as an integral compound in cell membranes
and key component of the myelin sheath (43). Although
most tissues can use dietary cholesterol, it is unclear whether
or not absorbed dietary cholesterol can cross the blood–
brain barrier or if cholesterol must be exclusively synthe-
sized de novo in the brain.
The piglet has proven to be a useful model for assessing
genetic factors leading to high or low serum cholesterol con-
centrations and the impact of dietary cholesterol on the de-
veloping brain. Piglets that were selected for high or low
circulating cholesterol concentrations were provided either a
diet supplemented with cholesterol or an unsupplemented
control diet, and brain cholesterol accretion and behavioral
outcomes were measured (44). In an open field behavioral as-
sessment, piglets that were selected for low serum cholesterol
and provided the control diet exhibited reduced explora-
tory behavior compared with all other groups. Analysis of
brain cholesterol content indicated that regardless of genetic
predisposition, piglets that were provided cholesterol-
supplemented diets had higher brain cholesterol concen-
trations. Therefore, these results tend to support the notion
that cholesterol is transported into the brain; however, this
is contradictory to the generally accepted idea of brain de
novo cholesterol synthesis (45). Given the reduced brain cho-
lesterol content and altered behavior in the unsupplemented
piglets, this study suggests that provision of dietary cholesterol
may have functional implications in the developing brain.
Supporting this work, Boleman et al. (46) showed that re-
gardless of genetic predisposition for serum cholesterol con-
centrations, piglets fed cholesterol-deficient diets early in life
exhibited decreased brain weight and diminished brain cho-
lesterol content, even after receiving a cholesterol-replete
diet later in life. Although contrary to the previously de-
scribed studies, piglet genetics also appear to have an influ-
ence on brain weight, with piglets of high serum cholesterol
status exhibiting higher brain weights (47). Open field be-
havioral assessment in this study indicated that there were
differences in exploratory behavior from genetics at 2 wk of
age. Low serum cholesterol piglets did not explore the arena,
and piglets selected for high serum cholesterol that were pro-
vided a cholesterol-supplemented diet explored more than
piglets selected for high serum cholesterol but provided an
unsupplemented diet. However, these genetically influenced
exploratory behaviors were not different between any groups
at 4 wk of age. Pond et al. (47) also observed increased vocal-
ization in low serum cholesterol piglets that were provided the
cholesterol-supplemented diet, which they ascribed to in-
creased emotionality, although it is unclear how increased
emotionality in piglets might manifest in structural and func-
tional differences later in life.
Studies involving supplementation of piglet milk replacer
with cholesterol or DHA indicate that both compounds influ-
ence amino acid metabolism in the developing brain (48).
Dietary addition of the 2 compounds appeared to have in-
teractive effects on glutamate, asparagine, serine, histi-
dine, alanine, tryptophan, tyrosine, and g-aminobutyric
acid in the developing piglet brain. Compared with values
in unsupplemented piglets, dietary cholesterol alone increased
brain serine, glycine, lysine, and g-animobutyric acid,
whereas glutamate, glutamine, threonine, b-alanine, methi-
onine, isoleucine, and leucine were all decreased. Similarly,
supplementation with DHA alone in the diet enhanced brain
concentrations of glycine, taurine, alanine, and g-aminobutryic
acid, but reduced concentrations of glutamate, glutamine,
threonine, methionine, and leucine compared with those in con-
trol piglets. Although the effects of altering concentrations of
these amino acids remains to be elucidated, it is important to
note that several of these amino acids are involved in neurotrans-
mitter synthesis and could have functional implications, thereby
warranting further research.
From the limited studies involving supplementation with
cholesterol in piglets, it appears that this nutrient differen-
tially affects the developing brain. Results from these studies
indicate that cholesterol may cross the blood-brain barrier
and could possibly have functional implications, although
more research is needed to better understand the mechanisms
in which dietary cholesterol influences brain development.
Milk bioactives
As the field of pediatric nutrition research advances, greater
emphasis has been placed on understanding the impact of
bioactive compounds such as sialic acid, lactoferrin, milk
fat globule membrane, prebiotics, and gangliosides present
in milk (49). To date, much of this research has focused
on the impact of these compounds in the developing gut, be-
cause they exert beneficial effects in disease prevention and
gut maturation. Recently, however, there has been interest
in understanding how these compounds might affect the
developing brain.
Sialic acid compounds. Sialic acid is a monosaccharide that
can be attached to glycoproteins and glycolipids in biological
tissues to elicit physiological effects during neurodevelopment
(50). Dietary supplementation with sialic acid in young pigs
94
Mudd and Dilger
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 has been shown to increase learning and memory, affect ex-
pression of learning-related and neural cell adhesion molecule
genes, and elevate concentrations of protein-bound cortical
sialic acid in a dose-dependent manner (51–53).
Lactoferrin is a sialylated, iron-binding, functional glyco-
protein commonly found in human milk (54). Provision of
bovine lactoferrin, as well as naturally present lactoferrin, in
porcine colostrum increases circulating cerebrospinal fluid
lactoferrin concentrations within hours of ingestion, possibly
affecting iron metabolism in the brain (55). Recent findings
from piglets suggests that supplementation with bovine lacto-
ferrin results in increased hippocampal mRNA and increased
protein concentrations of brain-derived neurotrophic factor,
phosphorylated cAMP response element–binding protein,
and polysialic acid, all of which also are upregulated after
learning events and during memory consolidation (56).
Moreover, provision of this functional protein enhanced
8-arm radial maze performance in supplemented piglets
compared with control piglets (56). Supplementation with lac-
toferrin also facilitates enteric nervous system development by
upregulating duodenal mRNA expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor and glial-cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (54). From its functional roles in both the central and
enteric nervous systems, it is possible that early-life ingestion
of lactoferrin might modulate development of the gut-brain
axis; however, specific studies are needed to elucidate these
modulatory effects.
Sialyllactose, a human milk oligosaccharide consisting of
sialic acid conjugated to lactose (57), was shown to influence
ganglioside-bound sialic acid concentrations in the corpus cal-
losum of piglets. Interestingly, supplementation with 39- or 69-
sialyllactose at 2 g/L increased the corpus callosum sialic acid
concentration by 15%, whereas supplementation with 39-sialyl-
lactose at 4 g/L only increased corpus callosum sialic acid con-
centrations by 10% compared with control pigs (58). This
differential response suggests an apparent sensitivity of the
developing brain to increased dietary intake of this compound.
Gangliosides and phospholipids. Human milk is a highly
concentrated source of phospholipids and gangliosides,
both of which are rapidly accreted in the developing brain
(59, 60). A study that supplemented a milk protein concen-
trate enriched in phospholipids, sphingolipids, gangliosides,
and phosphatidylserine in developing piglets resulted in
fewer errors in a spatial T-maze assessment, suggesting en-
hancement of cognitive development compared with that
of control piglets (61). MRI of the same pigs indicated
that supplementation with this compound increased the vol-
umes of the internal capsule, putamen, and thalamus rela-
tive to the control treatment. Furthermore, metabolomic
analysis indicated that supplementation with this milk fat
enriched protein concentrate at a rate of 2.5% (wt:wt) in-
creased hippocampal metabolites involved in the glutathi-
one cycle, acetylcholine, cytidine 59-diphosphocholine,
and lactate compared with in control piglets.
A separate study assessed the impact of deuterium-
labeled, milk-derived ganglioside GD3 supplementation on
the biosynthesis of frontal lobe gangliosides in piglets (62).
This study concluded that supplementation with GD3 in
milk at lower amounts (18.2 mg/mL) compared with higher
amounts (25 mg/mL) resulted in greater incorporation of
deuterium in steric acid bound to brain gangliosides GM1
and GD1a, as well as increased concentrations of GDB1,
within the frontal lobe. Reis et al. (62) also noted a greater
incorporation of deuterium in b-series gangliosides than
in a-series gangliosides, regardless of dietary treatment,
highlighting the potential importance of such molecules
early in development. Furthermore, the presence of specific
ganglioside moieties in human milk changes throughout
lactation, again suggesting differential impacts of ganglio-
sides at various stages of development. From the studies
by Lui et al. (61) and Reis et al. (62), it is increasingly evident
that supplementation with particular phospholipids and
gangliosides during specific developmental time periods
may play an important role in defining brain structure.
a-Lipoic acid. Although little research has focused on specific
antioxidants present in human milk, there is evidence to sug-
gest higher antioxidant capacity in human milk than in infant
formula (63, 64). a-Lipoic acid is considered to be a universal
antioxidant because of its multitude of physiological functions,
including transition metal chelation, free-radical quenching,
antioxidant regeneration, and regulation of gene and protein
expression (65). Recent work from our laboratory assessed di-
etary a-lipoic acid supplementation on piglet neurodevelop-
ment (66). Supplementation with this compound did not
result in any differences in piglet cognition; however, MRI
analysis indicated structural differences within the internal
capsule (66). Piglets that were provided a-lipoic acid at a
higher supplementation rate (240 mg a-lipoic acid/100 g
milk replacer powder) exhibited lower diffusion tensor imag-
ing (DTI) fractional anisotropy and axial diffusivity measures,
indicative of altered myelination or fiber coherence, within the
internal capsule compared with pigs fed either a control or
lower dietary supplementation rate (120 mg a-lipoic acid/
100 g milk replacer powder). Importantly, piglets that received
the lower dietary a-lipoic acid concentration were not differ-
ent from the control piglets, suggesting that this supplementa-
tion rate supported normal neurodevelopment. Analysis of
white matter tracts with the use of tract-based spatial statistics
confirmed the DTI outcomes by highlighting specific differ-
ences in white matter diffusion properties within the internal
capsule of piglets fed the higher concentration of a-lipoic acid
compared with control piglets. Thus, these data suggest a
threshold effect whereby a-lipoic acid supplementation sup-
ports neurodevelopment up to a certain dietary concentration,
without continued benefits once this limit is exceeded.
Novel dietary combinations. Single-nutrient interventions
are necessary for elucidating specific mechanisms by which
neurodevelopment outcomes are altered. However, it is
equally important to assess novel combinations of dietary
compounds, because this is more representative of how bio-
active components are presented to the infant in human
The pig and nutritional neurodevelopment
95
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 milk. Accordingly, a recent study in our laboratory studied
combined supplementation with milk fat globule mem-
brane, lactoferrin, and prebiotics on brain development in
the piglet model (67). No differences in cognition were ob-
served between control and supplemented piglets; however,
MRI analysis again highlighted the sensitivity of the internal
capsule to early-life dietary intervention. Piglets that re-
ceived the supplemented diet exhibited decreased mean
and radial diffusivity measures generated from DTI, which
suggested increased myelination or fiber coherence within
this specific brain region. Using voxel-based morphometry,
a method to sensitively characterize changes in gray and
white matter on a voxel-by-voxel basis, we observed differ-
ences in gray and white matter tissue concentrations within
motor and sensory regions of the brain. These observed dif-
ferences suggested advanced development in supplemented
compared with control piglets. Interestingly, the internal
capsule is an early-developing fiber tract that serves to con-
nect motor and sensory cortices to the rest of the body,
meaning the gray and white matter tissue observations
served to corroborate diffusion findings in this study (67).
From the studies described above, it is important to high-
light the novelty of the bioactive compounds being tested,
while also focusing on the sensitivity of the brain to their pres-
ence. It is increasingly apparent that higher amounts of one
compound may not always confer better neurodevelopment,
thereby suggesting the importance of defining optimal
amounts at which specific compounds should be incorpo-
rated into the diets used in future studies. As analysis
methods become more refined and optimal supplementation
amounts are empirically determined, researchers will be able
to better understand the mechanisms by which supplemented
compounds influence the trajectory of brain development.
Micronutrients
A deficiency of individual micronutrients, including folate,
iron, copper, and zinc, alters the neurodevelopmental trajec-
tory of infants (5). Accordingly, the piglet has proven to be a
sensitive model for characterizing developmental aberra-
tions caused by such nutrient deficiencies.
Iron. Piglets provided severely iron-deficient diets (10 mg
Fe/kg milk solids) for the first 4 wk of life exhibited decreased
learning in the spatial T-maze assessment, whereas mildly iron-
deficient (25 mg Fe/kg milk solids) piglets exhibited learning
similar to that of control piglets (100 mg Fe/kg milk solids)
(68). Further analyses indicated that both amounts of iron de-
ficiency resulted in more movement and longer latency to
choice, suggesting that there were alterations in the dopamin-
ergic pathways of these piglets. Quantification of brain iron
content indicated reduced iron in the hippocampus of iron-
deficient piglets, possibly contributing to observed cognitive
deficits in severely deficient piglets. Interestingly, the expression
of transferrin receptor mRNA was reduced in the prefrontal
cortex, but not the hippocampus, of pigs receiving iron-
deficient diets. MRI indicated no differences in whole-brain
or hippocampal volumes due to dietary iron status.
In a follow-up study, Leyshon et al. (69) used more sen-
sitive MRI measures to characterize the effect of early-life
iron deficiency on brain development. Results from this
study corroborated the lack of effect of iron deficiency on
brain volume observed by Rytych et al. (68); however, a
global reduction in white matter volumes was observed in
pigs receiving the iron-deficient diet (10 mg Fe/kg milk
solids). Voxel-based morphometric analysis revealed de-
creased white matter volumes in iron-deficient piglets,
whereas gray matter was increased or decreased on a re-
gional basis compared with that of control (100 mg Fe/kg
milk solids) piglets. DTI indicated decreased fractional an-
isotropy of the whole brain and corpus callosum in iron-
deficient piglets. Fractional anisotropy generally is used as
an indicator of myelination within the brain; thus, observed
decreases in iron-deficient piglets may suggest decreased
myelination. Further analysis with the use of histologic
staining indicated decreased corpus callosum width in
iron-deficient piglets, thereby suggesting that the micronu-
trient deficiency altered development of this region; this
outcome may have cognitive implications later in life. Hip-
pocampal development also appeared to be altered where
iron-deficient piglets exhibited decreased diffusion tensor–
measured radial and mean diffusivities, suggesting decreased
cellularity or myelination in this particular region. From this
study, magnetic resonance spectroscopy revealed altered hippo-
campal concentrations, with myo-inositol decreasing and
phosphocholine increasing in iron-deficient piglets, which
may indicate decreased astrocytic activity and altered myelina-
tion, respectively. Together, these sensitive MRI observations by
Leyshon et al. (69) serve to support the cognitive deficits pre-
viously quantified through behavioral assessments.
Iron deficiency not only alters cognitive function early in
life, but also appears to have lasting implications even when
an iron-replete diet is provided later in life. In one such lon-
gitudinal assessment, piglets were provided an iron-deficient
(21 mg Fe/kg milk solids) or control (88 mg Fe/kg milk
solids) milk replacer from birth until 4 wk of life, and
then all pigs were switched to an iron-replete diet (190–
240 mg Fe/kg diet) from 4 to 12 wk of age (70). With the
use of the spatial cognitive hole-board task to assess long-
term memory, it was observed that early-life iron-deficient
piglets exhibited impaired long-term memory compared
with control piglets, despite exhibiting no clinical signs of
iron deficiency at the time of behavioral testing. Hippocampal
analysis at 12 wk of age revealed that early-life iron-deficient
piglets had fewer iron-containing cells in the hippocampal
CA1 and dentate gyrus subregions than did control piglets.
This study reveals the lifelong implications of early-life nutri-
ent deficiencies in the developing brain, despite dietary rehabil-
itation to correct for known deficiencies.
Porcine milk is known to have low iron concentrations;
as such, it is common agricultural practice to supplement
piglets with an iron dextran injection to deliver ;250 mg
Fe early in life. As a follow-up study to their artificially
reared iron-deficient piglets, Antonides et al. (71) assessed
iron deficiency in piglets that were maternally reared and
96
Mudd and Dilger
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 then provided iron-replete feed from 4 to 16 wk of life. Sib-
ling pairs were divided into 2 groups, iron deficient (i.e., sa-
line injection on days 3 and 10 of life) or iron sufficient (i.e.,
iron dextran shot on days 3 and 10 of life), and allowed to
ingest maternal milk throughout the preweaning period.
Hematocrit and hemoglobin concentrations did not change
throughout the preweaning period and were lower in the
iron-deficient piglets than in the controls. Serum iron also
was lower than in control pigs, and increased throughout
the preweaning period. Despite the lower concentrations
of blood hematocrit, hemoglobin, and iron, the iron-
deficient piglets did not exhibit clinical signs of anemia,
and piglets at all levels recovered to normal during the post-
weaning period. Analysis of piglet spatial memory at 10 wk
of age indicated that early-life nonanemic iron deficiency
did not alter piglet performance in the spatial hole-board
task. Therefore, this study suggests that despite the low con-
centrations of iron in sow milk, it was not enough to induce
iron-deficiency anemia; thus, the maternally reared piglet
may not be an ideal model of iron deficiency. Together
with their previous findings, Antonides et al. (71) concluded
that early-life iron-deficiency anemia may be a sensitive in-
dicator of long-term cognitive and physiologic deficits.
Although characterization of iron deficiency and its im-
pact on neurodevelopment is of critical importance, it is
worth noting that excess iron might also cause adverse ef-
fects. It has been discussed recently that many infant formu-
las contain bioavailable iron concentrations that are 10–60
times greater than that of human milk (72). Because iron
metabolism is known to influence brain development, fu-
ture studies should use the piglet to identify possible adverse
effects of iron oversupplementation. Studies of this nature
could serve to identify an upper limit of iron ingestion,
whereby too much of this micronutrient negatively influ-
ences brain development in the young pig.
One-carbon metabolites. Choline is a critical micronu-
trient that plays a pivotal role in neurotransmitter synthesis,
myelin development, and cell membrane integrity (73). Our
work with the use of the piglet as a model for perinatal cho-
line deficiency indicates that exposure to prenatal choline
deficiency greatly alters brain development (74). We ob-
served smaller whole-brain volumes in piglets from sows
that were provided choline-deficient diets compared with
piglets from choline-sufficient sows. When expressing indi-
vidual regions as a proportion of total brain volume, prena-
tally choline-deficient piglets exhibited proportionally larger
midbrains, pons, right hippocampi, thalamus, and corpus
callosum. Interestingly, these structures are largely subcorti-
cal, which suggests a preferential development of these
regions when choline availability is limited. Using DTI
methods, we observed indications of delayed develop-
ment in the cerebellum of the prenatally choline-deficient
piglets. We also observed indications of altered hippo-
campal and thalamic development, which was dependent
on the timing of the induced choline deficiency (i.e., pre-
natal, postnatal, or both). We conclude that, as a methyl
donor, choline may play a role in metabolic imprinting, de-
pending on when it is provided. Therefore, the interactive na-
ture of our results suggests that brain regions are sensitive to
such imprinting when choline status is changed between the
pre- and postnatal period. Future work should seek to quantify
epigenetic changes in the brain from choline deficiency and its
effects on myelination and cognitive development in the piglet
model.
Betaine is a direct metabolite of choline oxidation and is
known to be important throughout perinatal development
(75). A study in which sows were supplemented with betaine
indicated that there was altered hippocampal development
in offspring compared with development in offspring from
unsupplemented sows (76). In this study, hippocampi were
collected at birth, and piglets from betaine-supplemented
sows exhibited increased glucocorticoid receptor mRNA,
but not glucocorticoid protein, compared with piglets from
control sows. Betaine also plays an important role in epi-
genetic modifications; as such, hypermethylation of the
glucocorticoid promoter region was observed in betaine-
supplemented offspring. In addition, betaine supplementa-
tion influenced specific micro-RNA expression, which may
have resulted in a lack of differences observed in the expres-
sion of glucocorticoid protein in piglets from betaine-
supplemented sows.
These studies highlight the importance of adequate mi-
cronutrient status throughout perinatal development. Pro-
vided the meaningful findings from prenatal choline and
betaine deficiency, it is clear that proper maternal nutrition
is equally as important as adequate postnatal nutrition for
ensuring optimal neurodevelopment. Interestingly, a human
study assessed child cognition at 7 y of age and related these
measures to maternal gestational choline intake. By longitu-
dinally assessing piglet brain development in the context of
micronutrient deficiencies, the maternal choline deficiency
model may help explain the mechanisms that underlie the
decreased childhood cognition observed in human studies
of low gestational choline (77) and corroborate previous
findings of altered structural brain development.
Nutrition for preterm infants
Infants born preterm exhibit altered neurodevelopmental
patterns compared with term infants, and it is well known
that these infants have specific nutritional needs (78). The
piglet is being used increasingly as a model for preterm in-
fancy to establish the utility of different feeding paradigms
(i.e., parenteral or enteral) and their impact on gut matura-
tion and neurodevelopment (79). An assessment of neurode-
velopment in preterm and term piglets indicated that there
were delays in arousal, physical activity, coordination, explo-
ration, and learning in preterm piglets relative to term piglets
(80). Results from this study indicated that the provision of
parenteral nutrition in addition to enteral nutrition for the
first 5 d did not affect later neurodevelopmental outcomes.
In a separate study, piglets delivered at 92% of complete
gestation (114 d in the pig) and provided parenteral nutri-
tion had smaller brain weights, reduced motor activity,
The pig and nutritional neurodevelopment
97
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 and indications of underdeveloped myelination at 10 d of
age compared with piglets that received enteral nutrition
(81). Late in gestation, the fetus begins to swallow amniotic
fluid. This is thought to help stimulate the gastrointestinal
tract (82). However, preterm infants often miss this critical
time period in utero and are regularly provided parenteral
feedings, thereby circumventing gut stimulation. A preterm
piglet model has shown that provision of an oral fluid sup-
plement, formulated to mimic the nutrient and electrolyte
composition of amniotic fluid, results in increased brain
weights compared with that of piglets that receive lactated
Ringer solution either intravenously or enterally (83). Fur-
thermore, Cao et al. (84) demonstrated that development
of physical activity in preterm piglets was dependent on
the route of supplement provision in the early postnatal pe-
riod. This study showed that enteral provision of bovine co-
lostrum or human milk resulted in increased motor activity
in preterm piglets compared with that of preterm piglets
that were provided infant formula. Although the direct
link between the gut and brain was not assessed in this study,
these authors concluded that early enteral feedings stimu-
lated physical activity, which may be due to increased neural
maturation. Thus, it is possible that early stimulation of the
enteric nervous system may influence central nervous sys-
tem development as well.
Malnutrition
Undernutrition is a common cause of neurodevelopmental
delays in infants worldwide (85–87). Protein malnutrition
in piglets from 3 to 10 wk of age resulted in decreased brain
weight, total protein concentrations, and total DNA content,
thus highlighting the vulnerability of the developing brain to
suboptimal nutrition (88). Piglets that were subjected to
protein malnutrition early in life but then provided nutri-
tionally adequate diets later in life exhibited brain weights
similar to those of control piglets at 18 wk of age. However,
protein and DNA content tended to be lower in the early-life
malnourished piglets, suggesting that early-life undernutri-
tion has life-long implications in the brain. Barnes et al.
(89) also noted behavioral and learning differences in adult
pigs that had been subjected to early-life malnutrition, even
after a period of nutritional rehabilitation.
Undernutrition also is commonly observed in utero, with
some infants being born small for gestational age. Piglets that
were born small for their gestational age took longer to learn a
spatial T-maze than did litter-matched siblings that were born
average for gestational age (90). Moreover, MRI analysis indi-
cated reduced gray matter volumes and smaller internal cap-
sules, along with regional alterations in gray and white matter
tissue concentrations, in small-for-gestational-age piglets.
This research suggests that nutritional status in utero may
set the foundation for later brain development when an oth-
erwise nutritionally adequate diet is provided.
Often, babies who are considered to have a very low birth
weight require parenteral nutrition to ensure optimal per-
formance (78). Amusquivar et al. (91) used the full-term
piglet to assess the impact of parenteral solutions compared
with enteral solutions on brain fatty acids. This study indi-
cated the resilience of the brain to differences in provision of
nutrients, with neither enteral nor parenteral provision, nor
the type of parenteral solution, affecting the fatty acid com-
position of the developing brain at 7 d of age. This suggests
that metabolism in the brain at this time point is sufficient to
ensure proper fatty acid accretion, regardless of the route of
nutrient provision.
Techniques Used to Assess Brain Development
The field of pediatric nutrition continues to identify and de-
velop novel compounds that may exert beneficial effects on
the developing neonate. As these technologies become avail-
able, there is a need to better understand the ways in which
they influence brain development. Previously, the most
common methods of assessing alterations in brain develop-
ment were largely focused on brain weight and global fatty
acid profiling. However, inconsistencies in how the brain
is extracted and overall fluid content of the brain can lead
to large variability in brain weights, thereby making it diffi-
cult to compare findings across studies. Many studies also
have assessed the fatty acid profiles of the whole cerebrum,
although it is now clear that this practice dilutes the impact
of dietary interventions on specific regions, because brain
regions develop at different rates (92, 93). Below, we seek
to highlight advancements in neurodevelopmental analytic
techniques (Table 1), all of which have proven to be sensi-
tive to early-life dietary intervention.
MRI. Currently, there is a large initiative in the United States
to characterize normal brain development from birth
through childhood (95, 96). In doing so, researchers are reg-
ularly using MRI in nonsedated children to elucidate brain
growth trajectories. Although this method is becoming in-
creasingly popular in pediatric studies, piglet researchers
have been developing similar translational methods in paral-
lel (Figure 1). MRI can sensitively assess changes in white
and gray matter, microstructural diffusion properties, blood
flow, and even neurometabolites. Neuroimaging of piglet
brains can occur in sedated piglets or in postmortem brains.
Although postmortem scanning allows for longer scanning
sessions and therefore higher resolution sequences, tissue
shrinkage and lack of blood flow negatively affect observed
outcomes, hence, the need for longer scans. Pig-specific
brain atlases have been developed to parcellate the brain
into individual brain regions (97, 98), which has allowed
for the characterization of regions that are sensitive to die-
tary intervention, as evidenced by recent work that consis-
tently shows the internal capsule to be altered by early-life
nutrition (61, 66, 67, 90).
Within neuroimaging, there are many different analytical
techniques, several of which we will briefly describe here.
Voxel-based morphometry is used to compare tissue vol-
umes between subjects’ gray matter and white matter on a
voxel-by-voxel basis. Comparisons of this nature can then
be used to show localized differences in individual brain
tissue types, which can indicate how dietary components
98
Mudd and Dilger
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 influence brain development. This method has proven sen-
sitive in showing alterations to iron deficiency (69) and
supplementation with milk fat globule membrane and lacto-
ferrin (67), and helps researchers understand how gray mat-
ter and white matter can be differentially sensitive to dietary
treatment.
Another volumetric assessment of brain regions uses the
piglet brain atlas and is able to define either absolute (i.e.,
cubic millimeters) or relative (i.e., percentage of total brain
volume) volumes for each of the regions defined by the atlas.
This method is powerful because it quantifies brain regions
that are maturing at a greater rate relative to other regions,
as hypothesized in recent nutrition studies involving peri-
natal choline deficiency (74) and supplementation with
milk fat globule membrane and lactoferrin (67). This
method is different from voxel-based morphometry, how-
ever, in that the observed volume differences do not differ-
entiate between white and gray matter, but rather quantify
the physical volume of discernable brain structures in the
live subject.
TABLE 1
Analytical techniques used in piglet developmental neuroscience
Technique
Definition
Dietary sensitivity (reference)
MRI
Voxel-based morphometry
Comparison of gray or white matter tissue volumes on a
voxel-by-voxel basis between treatment groups.
Reported as edge-connected voxel clusters, which may
span multiple brain regions.
Milk protein concentrate (enriched with phospholipids
and gangliosides) (61)
Milk fat globule membrane and lactoferrin (67)
Iron deficiency (69)
Small for gestational age (90)
Volumetric analysis
Defines absolute (cubic millimeter) or relative (percentage
total brain volume) volumes for distinct brain regions,
which are then compared between treatment groups.
Includes both gray and white matter in individual brain
regions.
Milk protein concentrate (enriched with phospholipids
and gangliosides) (61)
Milk fat globule membrane and lactoferrin (67)
Perinatal choline deficiency (74)
Small for gestational age (90)
Diffusion tensor imaging
Characterizes microscopic water movement within the
brain, which can help to infer structural changes, such as
myelination, fiber coherence, and changes in neuron
size. Reported as axial diffusivity (movement parallel to
magnetization gradient), radial diffusivity (movement
perpendicular to magnetization gradient), mean
diffusivity (overall water movement), and fractional
anisotropy (measure of rate and direction of water
movement) for distinct brain regions.
a-Lipoic acid (66)
Milk fat globule membrane and lactoferrin (67)
Iron deficiency (69)
Perinatal choline deficiency (74)
Small for gestational age (90)
Tract-based spatial statistics
Characterizes diffusion tensor measures along predefined
white matter tracts.
a-Lipoic acid (66)
Magnetic resonance
spectroscopy
Quantifies neurometabolites (parts per million) within a
specified voxel.
Iron deficiency (69)
Perinatal choline deficiency (74)
Behavioral techniques
Home cage
Used to assess daily bouts of activity and rest. May be useful
in characterizing repetitive behaviors.
Preterm piglet (80)
Open field
Assessment for anxiety-like behavior in which measures
exploration and vocalization are observed.
Cholesterol (47)
Spatial T-maze
Assessment of discrimination and spatial learning and
memory in which piglets use visual cues to learn the
location of a food reward.
Milk protein concentrate (enriched with phospholipids
and gangliosides) (61)
Iron deficiency (68)
Small for gestational age (90)
8-arm radial maze
Assessment of discrimination and spatial learning and
memory in which piglets use visual cues to learn the
location of a food reward.
Sialic acid (51)
Cognitive hole-board
Assessment of spatial learning and memory in which
habituation, reference memory, search strategies,
exploration, and anxiety-related behaviors can be assessed.
Iron deficiency (70)
Molecular assessments
Gene, mRNA, and protein
expression
Allows for characterizations in transcription and translation
from dietary treatment
Sialic acid (51, 52)
Lactoferrin (54, 56)
Iron deficiency (68)
Betaine (76)
Protein deficiency (88)
Fatty acid profiling
Used to quantify changes in fatty acid composition within
the brain.
Various fatty acid supplementations (29–39)
Histologic staining
Allows for visual characterization of structural changes in
distinct brain regions.
Lactoferrin (56)
Iron deficiency (69, 70)
Stable-isotope labeling
Characterizes accretion of labeled dietary compounds in
brain tissue.
Gangliosides and phospholipids (62)
DHA (94)
The pig and nutritional neurodevelopment
99
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Another commonly used method in neurodevelopmental
research is DTI. Very broadly, this method characterizes
water movement within the brain and can help to infer mi-
crostructural changes. These observed diffusion changes
might be due to several factors, including myelination, fiber
coherence, and changes in neuron size. This method pro-
vides measures of axial diffusivity, radial diffusivity, mean
diffusivity, and fractional anisotropy, each of which can be
used to infer specific differences within the tissue and are de-
scribed in detail in a review by Le Bihan et al. (100). DTI has
proven to be sensitive to detecting regional differences from
iron and choline deficiency, as well as dietary supplementa-
tion with compounds including a-lipoic acid, milk fat glob-
ule membrane, and lactoferrin (66, 67, 69, 74). With the use
of DTI data, researchers also are able to apply a method
known as tract-based spatial statistics, which allows for the
comparison of diffusion properties along white matter fiber
tracts (100, 101). Our laboratory previously used this
method to further corroborate evidence that supplementa-
tion with a-lipoic acid influences internal capsule develop-
ment (66).
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy measures also have
been applied to developmental nutritional neuroscience
studies, and have proven sensitive to dietary interventions
of iron deficiency (69) and perinatal choline deficiency
(74). The use of this technique allows for the quantification
of important metabolites, including N-acetylaspartate, cho-
line, inositol, g-aminobutyric acid, glutamate, glutamine,
and creatine, among others. Through the quantification of
these metabolites, researchers are better able to understand
FIGURE 1
Piglet MRI. The center shows a representative image acquired during MRI procedures, with the piglet brain shaded in red. At
the top, the piglet brain atlas is applied to each individual piglet’s MRI data and is used to assess the volumes and diffusion properties of
19 distinct regions. On the left, a representative example of voxel-based morphometry analysis in which differences in white matter
between 2 groups (visualized as a statistical heat map) are being displayed on a population-averaged brain image. On the right, a
representative example of tract-based spatial statistics. This image displays a population-averaged piglet brain with green marking areas of
white matter common to all piglets being compared. Red and yellow indicate areas in which one treatment group has higher fractional
anisotropy measures than does the other treatment group. At the bottom, a representative magnetic resonance spectrum that
characterizes neurometabolites within a specified voxel. Individual peaks represent the quantification of the following metabolites: Cr, Cho,
Ins, and NAA. Cho, choline; Cr, creatine; Ins, myo-inositol; NAA, N-acetylaspartate.
100
Mudd and Dilger
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 the mechanisms whereby early-life nutrition might influ-
ence brain metabolism.
The development of fiber tracts that connect different
parts of the brain is critical to neurodevelopment and may
be influenced by diet. Future work in this field should seek
to expand upon diffusion data by applying fiber tractogra-
phy methods (102). In doing so, researchers will better un-
derstand the mechanisms whereby specific nutrients direct
brain development, which may have functional implications
later in life. Myelination is a pivotal event that occurs
throughout neurodevelopment, and MRI methods have
been developed to specifically assess this process. Work by
Deoni et al. (103) uses the differences in water diffusion be-
tween myelin water and nonmyelin water, thus allowing for
a general understanding of the amount of myelin within a
region. This work has been performed in human infants
and has helped characterize the developmental trajectory
of different brain regions, highlighting the various time
points at which regions are most rapidly maturing (92, 93).
By applying this method to the piglet model, researchers
can assess the impact of specific nutrients on myelination.
Behavioral assessment paradigms. The use of behavioral
analysis techniques is one of the easiest and least invasive
methods to grossly assess brain development in infants and
pigs. Importantly, these measures are commonly used as bio-
markers of developmental milestones, all of which can inform
doctors of aberrations in this process. Piglet researchers also
use measures of cognitive assessment to uncover possible de-
velopmental alterations from diet. One common method of as-
sessment is to observe daily piglet behavior in the home cage,
as is done in the preterm piglet model (80). Methods such as
this seek to assess bouts of activity, which might be indicative
of neuromuscular development. This method of home cage
analysis could also prove useful in assessing social and repetitive
behaviors in the absence of a human observer; however, when
using these methods, researchers should have standardized and
objective criteria free of observer bias. Assessment of open field
behavior is commonly used to assess anxiety in rodent models,
and has also proven useful in piglets (47). Researchers found
that piglets bred to have lower serum cholesterol and provided
a high-cholesterol diet exhibited more vocalizations in an open
field test (47). The researchers ascribed this to increased emo-
tionality in the piglets, although some might argue that this is
anthropomorphizing of the piglet.
Although behavioral observations have their utility, cog-
nitive assessments such as the 8-arm radial maze, spatial
T-maze (104), and cognitive hole-board task (105) have
also proven sensitive to dietary intervention (51, 68, 70,
71). Each of these assessments may introduce possible bias
through human interaction, although consistent perfor-
mance between handlers helps to alleviate this potential con-
founder. A review by Gieling et al. (14) highlights many
classic and operant conditioning assessments that are known
to be effective in the piglet, yet many of these techniques
have not been used in the context of pediatric nutrition. Al-
though it is difficult to know which brain regions might be
affected by dietary treatment, researchers should carefully
choose a behavioral assessment that is sensitive to the spe-
cific brain region expected to be altered by the dietary inter-
vention. In addition, high variability in behavioral outcomes
necessitates greater replication per treatment, which is not
needed for more sensitive measures, such as neuroimaging
and molecular techniques. Moreover, if outcomes do not
yield cognitive differences, it may be due to the timing of
the intervention or an inappropriate test, or it truly may
be a lack of impact due to diet, which highlights the com-
plexity associated with the use of behavioral assessment as
a pivotal outcome in a nutrition study.
It is common to pair analytical methods such as electro-
encephalography and functional near-infrared spectrometry
with cognitive assessments in human infants. By using these
methods, researchers are better able to understand underlying
functional differences in the brain that manifest in cognitive
outcomes. Near-infrared spectroscopy and electroencepha-
lography methods currently are being used in piglet models
of hypoxic ischemia, and may prove useful in nutrition inter-
vention studies as well (106). By combining these functional
measures with cognitive performance outcomes, researchers
stand to gain a greater understanding of how diet affects brain
activity.
Molecular techniques. The noninvasive nature of MRI and
cognitive assessments are beneficial in allowing for immedi-
ately translatable methods between young pigs and humans.
However, the resolution with which researchers are able to
understand alterations in neurodevelopment are limited
when these methods are used. Thus, the ability to analyze
gene, mRNA, and protein expression along with cellular
structure in the piglet brain can serve to better elucidate die-
tary mechanisms that influence brain development; these
methods have proven sensitive to dietary interventions of
protein deficiency (88), betaine (76), sialic acid (51, 52), lacto-
ferrin (54, 56) and iron (68). Combined analyses of gene,
mRNA, and protein expression may help researchers to un-
derstand whether dietary compounds have a greater impact
on transcriptional or translational events, as Sun et al. (76) ob-
served with maternal betaine supplementation.
The use of histologic staining in the piglet brain also al-
lows for a better characterization of dietary interventions
in the context of brain development. By using this tech-
nique, Leyshon et al. (69) observed decreased corpus cal-
losum widths in iron-deficient piglets, thus allowing for
better interpretation of observed neuroimaging results. An-
tinodes et al. (70) also used histologic methods to stain for
iron-containing cells in the hippocampus, and observed
fewer of these cells in piglets that were provided iron-
deficient diets. The reduction of iron-containing cells in
the deficient piglets was consistent with observed reductions
in long-term memory, suggesting the importance of this
compound in memory formation.
Stable isotope–labeling of dietary compounds also has
proven useful in understanding the mechanisms of tissue ac-
cretion within the piglet brain. Deuterium-labeled gangliosides
The pig and nutritional neurodevelopment
101
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 provided in piglet milk replacer were shown to differentially ac-
cumulate in specific ganglioside moieties of the developing pig-
let brain (62). A study that used 13C-DHA bound to either
triglycerides or phosphatidylcholine showed greater gray mat-
ter accretion of the labeled fatty acid when provided in the
phospholipid form (94). Human studies of choline metabolism
have used these labeling techniques to better characterize the
physiologic mechanisms of choline metabolism (107). Given
the proven sensitivity of the developing piglet brain to perinatal
choline intervention, it would be of great interest to provide
gestating sows with labeled choline and trace how the defi-
ciency alters the neurodevelopmental trajectory in offspring.
Through the use of labeled compounds, researchers may better
understand how ingested compounds are altered in the body
and transferred across the blood-brain barrier.
Conclusions and Future Directions
Substantial advances in pediatric nutrition have been made
through sustained use of the piglet model. With the continued
application of the novel analytical technologies described
herein, the piglet is well poised to answer foundational ques-
tions pertaining to early-life nutrition and neurodevelopment.
As the field of developmental nutritional neuroscience ma-
tures, researchers should seek to include longitudinal study de-
signs to further characterize specific windows of sensitivity to
dietary intervention. Moreover, the use of novel nutritional
targets, both individually and combined, will permit optimiza-
tion of nutritional profiles for the developing brain. Further-
more, as our understanding of the gut-brain axis matures,
the piglet may prove beneficial in elucidating how nutrition
can modulate this connection. Continued research that uses
the piglet to better understand neurodevelopment will serve
to optimize early-life nutrition and consequently brain devel-
opment for future generations.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sharon Donovan for careful review and thought-
ful comments on this manuscript. Both authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
References
1. World Health Organization. Infant nutrition. Infant and young child
feeding: model chapter for textbooks for medical students and allied
health professionals. Geneva (Switzerland): World Health Organiza-
tion; 2009:1–99.
2. Jacobi SK, Odle J. Nutritional factors influencing intestinal health of
the neonate. Adv Nutr 2012;3:687–96.
3. Cusick SE, Georgieff M. Nutrient supplementation and neurodevelop-
ment. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2012;166:481–2.
4. Prado EL, Dewey KG. Nutrition and brain development in early life.
Nutr Rev 2014;72:267–84.
5. Georgieff MK. Nutrition and the developing brain: nutrient priorities
and measurement. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:614S–20S.
6. Morgane PJ, Austin-LaFrance R, Bronzino J, Tonkiss J, Díaz-Cintra S,
Cintra L, Kemper T, Galler JR. Prenatal malnutrition and develop-
ment of the brain. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 1993;17:91–128.
7. Dobbing J. Vulnerable periods in developing brain. Brain, behavior,
and iron in the infant diet. London: Springer-Verlag;1990:1–17.
8. Ballard O, Morrow AL. Human milk composition: nutrients and bio-
active factors. Pediatr Clin North Am 2013;60:49–74.
9. Ou X, Andres XA, Pivik XRT, Cleves XMA, Snow XJH, Ding Z, Badger
TM. Voxel-based morphometry and fMRI revealed differences in brain
gray matter in breastfed and milk formula – fed children. Am J Neuro-
radiol 2016;37:713–9.
10. Deoni SCL, Dean DC 3rd, Piryatinsky I, O’Muircheartaigh J, Waskiewicz
N, Lehman K, Han M, Dirks H. Breastfeeding and early white matter
development: a cross-sectional study. Neuroimage 2013;82:77–86.
11. Anderson JW, Johnstone BM, Remley DT. Breast-feeding and cogni-
tive development: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 1999;70:525–35.
12. Bhatia J, Greer F. Use of soy protein-based formulas in infant feeding.
Pediatrics 2008;121:1062–8.
13. Odle J, Lin X, Jacobi SK, Kim SW, Stahl CH. The suckling piglet as an
agrimedical model for the study of pediatric nutrition and metabo-
lism. Annu Rev Anim Biosci 2014;2:419–44.
14. Gieling ET, Schuurman T, Nordquist RE, van der Staay FJ. The pig as a
model animal for studying cognition and neurobehavioral disorders.
Curr Top Behav Neurosci 2011;7:359–83.
15. Held S, Mendl M, Laughlin K, Byrne RW. Cognition studies with pigs:
livestock cognition and its implication for production. J Anim Sci
2002;80:e10–7.
16. Conrad MS, Johnson R. The domestic piglet: an important model for
investigating the neurodevelopmental consequences of early life in-
sults. Annu Rev Anim Biosci 2015;3:245–64.
17. Lind NM, Moustgaard A, Jelsing J, Vajta G, Cumming P, Hansen AK.
The use of pigs in neuroscience: modeling brain disorders. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 2007;31:728–51.
18. Whitaker EE, Bissonnette B, Miller AD, Koppert TL, Tobias JD, Pierson
CR, Christofi FL. A novel, clinically relevant use of a piglet model to
study the effects of anesthetics on the developing brain. Clin Transl
Med 2016;5:2.
19. Dobbing J, Sands J. Comparative aspects of the brain growth spurt.
Early Hum Dev 1979;3:79–83.
20. Sweasey D, Patterson DSP, Glancy EM. Biphasic myelination and the
fatty acid composition of cerebrosides and cholesterol esters in the de-
veloping central nervous system of the domestic pig. J Neurochem
1976;27:375–80.
21. Purvis JM, Clandinin MT, Hacker RR. Fatty acid accretion during per-
inatal brain growth in the pig. A model for fatty acid accretion in hu-
man brain. Comp Biochem Physiol B 1982;72:195–9.
22. Sauleau P, Lapouble E, Val-Laillet D, Malbert C-H. The pig model in
brain imaging and neurosurgery. Animal 2009;3:1138–51.
23. Conrad MS, Dilger RN, Nickolls A, Johnson RW. Magnetic resonance
imaging of the neonatal piglet brain. Pediatr Res 2012;71:179–84.
24. Knickmeyer RC, Gouttard S. A structural MRI study of human brain
development from birth to 2 years. J Neurosci 2008;28:12176–82.
25. Hrboticky N, MacKinnon MJ, Innis SM. Effect of a vegetable oil for-
mula rich in linoleic acid on tissue fatty acid accretion in the brain,
liver, plasma, and erythrocytes of infant piglets. Am J Clin Nutr
1990;51:173–82.
26. Arbuckle LD, Rioux FM, Mackinnon MJ, Hrboticky N, Innis SM. Re-
sponse of (n-3) and (n-6) fatty acids in piglet brain, liver and plasma
to increasing, but low, fish oil supplementation of formula. J Nutr
1991;121:1536–47.
27. Lönnerdal B. Biological effects of novel bovine milk fractions. Nestle
Nutr Workshop Ser Pediatr Program 2011;67:41–54.
28. Lönnerdal B. Infant formula and infant nutrition: bioactive proteins
of human milk and implications for composition of infant formulas.
Am J Clin Nutr 2014;99:712S–7S.
29. Arbuckle LD, Innis SM. Docosahexaenoic acid is transferred through
maternal diet to milk and to tissues of natural milk-fed piglets. J Nutr
1993;123:1668–75.
30. Craig-Schmidt MC, Stieh KE, Lien EL. Retinal fatty acids of piglets fed
docosahexaenoic and arachidonic acids from microbial sources. Lipids
1996;31:53–9.
31. de la Presa-Owens S, Innis SM, Rioux FM. Addition of triglycerides
with arachidonic acid or docosahexaenoic acid to infant formula
has tissue- and lipid class-specific effects on fatty acids and hepatic
desaturase activities in formula-fed piglets. J Nutr 1998;128:1376–84.
102
Mudd and Dilger
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 32. de la Presa Owens S, Innis SM. Docosahexaenoic and arachidonic acid
prevent a decrease in dopaminergic and serotoninergic neurotrans-
mitters in frontal cortex caused by a linoleic and alpha-linolenic
acid deficient diet in formula-fed piglets. J Nutr 1999;129:2088–93.
33. de la Presa Owens S, Innis SM. Diverse, region-specific effects of ad-
dition of arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acids to formula with low
or adequate linoleic and alpha-linolenic acids on piglet brain mono-
aminergic neurotransmitters. Pediatr Res 2000;48:125–30.
34. Tyburczy C, Brenna ME, DeMari JA, Kothapalli KS, Blank BS, Valentine
H, McDonough SP, Banavara D, Diersen-Schade DA, Brenna JT. Eval-
uation of bioequivalency and toxicological effects of three sources
of arachidonic acid (ARA) in domestic piglets. Food Chem Toxicol
2011;49:2320–7.
35. Foote KD, Mackinnon J, Innis M. Brain synaptosomal, liver, plasma, and
red blood piglets fed exclusively on a vegetable-oil-containing formula
with and without fish-oil supplements. Am J Clin Nutr 1990;51:1001–6.
36. Alessandri JM, Goustard B, Guesnet P, Durand G. Docosahexaenoic
acid concentrations in retinal phospholipids of piglets fed an infant
formula enriched with long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids: effects
of egg phospholipids and fish oils with different ratios of eicosapen-
taenoic acid to docosahexaenoic acid. Am J Clin Nutr 1998;67:377–85.
37. Arbuckle LD, Rioux FM, MacKinnon MJ, Innis SM. Formula alpha-
linolenic (18:3(n - 3)) and linoleic (18:2(n - 6)) acid influence neonatal
piglet liver and brain saturated fatty acids, as well as docosahexaenoic
acid (22:6(n - 3)). Biochim Biophys Acta 1992;1125:262–7.
38. Arbuckle LD, MacKinnon MJ, Innis SM. Formula 18:2(n-6) and 18:3(n-3)
content and ratio influence long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in the
developing piglet liver and central nervous system. J Nutr 1994;124:289–98.
39. Huang M-C, Brenna JT, Chao AC, Tschanz C, Diersen-Schade DA,
Hung H. Differential tissue dose responses of (n-3) and (n-6) PUFA
in neonatal piglets fed docosahexaenoate and arachidonoate. J Nutr
2007;137:2049–55.
40. Innis SM. Dietary (n-3) fatty acids and brain development. J Nutr
2007;137:855–9.
41. Innis SM. The role of dietary n-6 and n-3 fatty acids in the developing
brain. Dev Neurosci 2000;22:474–80.
42. Innis SM. Dietary omega 3 fatty acids and the developing brain. Brain
Res 2008;1237:35–43.
43. Norton WT, Cammer W. Isolation and characterization of myelin. In:
Morell P, editor. Myelin. New York: Springer Science+Business Media;
1984:147–95.
44. Schoknecht PA, Ebner S, Pond WG, Zhang S, Mcwhinney V, Wong
WW, et al. Dietary cholesterol supplementation improves growth
and behavioral response of pigs selected for genetically high and
low serum cholesterol. J Nutr 1994;124:305–14.
45. Jurevics H, Morell P. Cholesterol for synthesis of myelin is made lo-
cally, not imported into brain. J Neurochem 1995;64:895–901.
46. Boleman SL, Graf TL, Mersmann HJ, Su DR, Krook LP, Savell JW,
Park YW, Pond WG. Pigs fed cholesterol neonatally have increased
cerebrum cholesterol as young adults. J Nutr 1998;128:2498–504.
47. Pond WG, Mersmann HJ, Su D, McGlone JJ, Wheeler MB, Smith EO.
Neonatal dietary cholesterol and alleles of cholesterol 7-alpha hydrox-
ylase affect piglet cerebrum weight, cholesterol concentration, and be-
havior. J Nutr 2008;138:282–6.
48. Li P, Kim SW, Li X, Datta S, Pond WG, Wu G. Dietary supplementa-
tion with cholesterol and docosahexaenoic acid affects concentrations
of amino acids in tissues of young pigs. Amino Acids 2009;37:709–16.
49. Donovan SM, Lönnerdal B. Introduction: emerging roles of bioactive
components in pediatric nutrition. J Pediatr 2016;173:S1–3.
50. Wang B, Miller JB, McNeil Y, McVeagh P. Sialic acid concentration of
brain gangliosides: Variation among eight mammalian species. Comp
Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 1998;119:435–9.
51. Wang B, Yu B, Karim M, Hu H, Sun Y, McGreevy P, Petocz P, Held S,
Brand-Miller J. Dietary sialic acid supplementation improves learning
and memory. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:561–9.
52. Wang B, Hu H, Yu B. Molecular characterization of pig ST8Sia IV–a crit-
ical gene for the formation of neural cell adhesion molecule and its re-
sponse to sialic acid supplement in piglets. Nutr Neurosci 2006;9:147–54.
53. Wang B, Downing JA, Petocz P, Brand-Miller J, Bryden WL. Metabolic
fate of intravenously administered N-acetylneuraminic acid-6–14C in
newborn piglets. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2007;16:110–5.
54. Yang C, Zhu X, Liu N, Chen Y, Gan H, Troy FA 2nd, Wang B.
Lactoferrin up-regulates intestinal gene expression of brain-
derived neurotrophic factors BDNF, UCHL1 and alkaline phosphatase
activity to alleviate early weaning diarrhea in postnatal piglets. J Nutr
Biochem 2014;25:834–42.
55. Harada E, Araki Y, Furumura E, Takeuchi T, Sitizyo K, Yajima T, Kuwata
T. Characteristic transfer of colostrum-derived biologically active sub-
stances into cerebrospinal fluid via blood in natural suckling neonatal
pigs. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2002;49:358–64.
56. Chen Y, Zheng Z, Zhu X, Shi Y, Tian D, Zhao F, Liu N, Hüppi PS, Troy
FA 2nd, Wang B. Lactoferrin promotes early neurodevelopment and
cognition in postnatal piglets by upregulating the BDNF signaling
pathway and polysialylation. Mol Neurobiol 2015;52:256–69.
57. Tarr AJ, Galley JD, Fisher SE, Chichlowski M, Berg BM, Bailey MT.
The prebiotics 39sialyllactose and 69sialyllactose diminish stressor-
induced anxiety-like behavior and colonic microbiota alterations: ev-
idence for effects on the gut-brain axis. Brain Behav Immun 2015;50:
166–77.
58. Jacobi SK, Yatsunenko T, Li D, Dasgupta S, Yu RK, Berg BM,
Chichlowski M, Odle J. Dietary isomers of sialyllactose increase gan-
glioside sialic acid concentrations in the corpus callosum and cerebel-
lum and modulate the colonic microbiota of formula-fed piglets. J
Nutr 2016;146:200–8.
59. Ryan JM, Rice GE, Mitchell MD. The role of gangliosides in brain de-
velopment and the potential benefits of perinatal supplementation.
Nutr Res 2013;33:877–87.
60. McJarrow P, Schnell N, Jumpsen J, Clandinin T. Influence of dietary
gangliosides on neonatal brain development. Nutr Rev 2009;67:451–63.
61. Liu H, Radlowski EC, Conrad MS, Li Y, Dilger RN, Johnson RW. Early
supplementation of phospholipids and gangliosides affects brain and
cognitive development in neonatal piglets. J Nutr 2014;144:1903–9.
62. Reis MM, Bermingham EN, Reis MG, Deb-Choudhury S, MacGibbon
A, Fong B, McJarrow P, Bibiloni R, Bassett SA, Roy NC. Effect of di-
etary complex lipids on the biosynthesis of piglet brain gangliosides. J
Agric Food Chem 2016;64:1245–55.
63. Aycicek A, Erel O, Kocyigit A, Selek S, Demirkol MR. Breast milk provides
better antioxidant power than does formula. Nutrition 2006;22:616–9.
64. Friel JK, Martin SM, Langdon M, Herzberg GR, Buettner GR. Milk
from mothers of both premature and full-term infants provides better
antioxidant protection than does infant formula. Pediatr Res 2002;51:
612–8.
65. Packer L, Witt E, Tritschler H. Alpha-lipoic acid as a biological anti-
oxidant. Free Radic Biol Med 1995;19:227–50.
66. Mudd AT, Waworuntu RV, Berg BM, Dilger RN. Dietary alpha-lipoic
acid alters piglet neurodevelopment. Front Pediatr 2016;4:44.
67. Mudd AT, Alexander L, Berding K, Waworuntu R, Berg BM, Donovan
SM, Dilger, RN. Dietary prebiotics, milk fat globule membrane and
lactoferrin affects structural neurodevelopment in the young piglet.
Front Pediatr 2016;4:4.
68. Rytych JL, Elmore MRP, Burton MD, Conrad MS, Donovan SM,
Dilger RN, Johnson RW. Early life iron deficiency impairs spatial cog-
nition in neonatal piglets. J Nutr 2012;142:2050–6.
69. Leyshon BJ, Radlowski EC, Mudd AT, Steelman AJ, Johnson RW. Post-
natal iron deficiency impairs brain development in piglets. J Nutr
2016;146:1420–7.
70. Antonides A, Schoonderwoerd AC, Scholz G, Berg BM, Nordquist RE,
van der Staay FJ. Pre-weaning dietary iron deficiency impairs spatial
learning and memory in the cognitive holeboard task in piglets. Front
Behav Neurosci 2015;9:291–16.
71. Antonides A, van Laarhoven S, van der Staay FJ, Nordquist RE. Non-
anemic iron deficiency from birth to weaning does not impair growth
or memory in piglets. Front Behav Neurosci 2016;10:112.
72. Lönnerdal B, Georgieff MK, Hernell O. Developmental physiology of
iron absorption, homeostasis, and metabolism in the healthy term in-
fant. J Pediatr 2015;167:S8–14.
The pig and nutritional neurodevelopment
103
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
 73. Zeisel SH. Nutritional importance of choline for brain development.
J Am Coll Nutr2004;23:621S–6S.
74. Mudd AT, Getty C, Sutton B, Dilger R. Perinatal choline deficiency
delays brain development and alters metabolite concentrations in
the young pig. Nutr Neurosci 2015 Jun 5 (Epub ahead of print;
DOI: 10.1179/1476830515Y.0000000031).
75. Caudill MA. Pre- and postnatal health: evidence of increased choline
needs. J Am Diet Assoc 2010;110:1198–206.
76. Sun Q, Li X, Pan S, Li R, Yang X, Zhao R. Maternal betaine supplemen-
tation during gestation modifies hippocampal expression of GR and its
regulatory miRNAs in neonatal piglets. J Vet Med Sci 2016;78:921–8.
77. Boeke CE, Gillman MW, Hughes MD, Rifas-Shiman SL, Villamor E,
Oken E. Choline intake during pregnancy and child cognition at
age 7 years. Am J Epidemiol 2013;177:1338–47.
78. Chan SHT, Johnson MJ, Leaf AA, Vollmer B. Nutrition and neurode-
velopmental outcomes in preterm infants: a systematic review. Acta
Paediatr 2016;105:587–99.
79. Sangild PT, Thymann T, Schmidt M, Stoll B, Burring DG, Buddington
RK. Invited review: the preterm pig as a model in pediatric gastroen-
terology. J Anim Sci 2013;91:4713–29.
80. Andersen AD, Sangild PT, Munch SL, van der Beek EM, Renes IB,
Ginneken Cv, Greisen GO, Thymann T. Delayed growth, motor func-
tion and learning in preterm pigs during early postnatal life. Am J
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2016;310:R481–92.
81. Choudhri AF, Sable HJ, Chizhikov VV, Buddington KK, Buddington
RK. Parenteral nutrition compromises neurodevelopment of preterm
pigs. J Nutr 2014;144:1920–7.
82. Ross MG, Nijland MJ. Development of ingestive behavior. Am J Phys-
iol 1998;274:R879–93.
83. Berding K, Makarem P
, Hance B, Axel AM, Nolan V, Buddington KK,
Buddington RK. Responses of preterm pigs to an oral fluid supplement
during parenteral nutrition. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2016;40:934–43.
84. Cao M, Andersen AD, Ginneken CV, Shen RL, Petersen SO, Thymann
T, Jing J, Sangild PT. Physical activity level is impaired and diet depen-
dent in preterm newborn pigs. Pediatr Res 2015;78:137–44.
85. Scrimshaw NS. Malnutrition, brain development, learning, and be-
havior. Nutr Res 1998;18:351–79.
86. Chase HP, Martin HP. Undernutrition and child development. N Engl
J Med 1970;282:933–9.
87. Ivanovic DM, Leiva BP, Perez HT, Inzunza NB, Almagià AF, Toro TD,
Urrutia MS, Cervilla JO, Bosch EO. Long-term effects of severe under-
nutrition during the first year of life on brain development and learn-
ing in Chilean high-school graduates. Nutrition 2000;16:1056–63.
88. Pond WG, Ellis KJ, Mersmann HJ, Heath JP, Krook LP, Burrin DG,
Dudley MA, Sheng HP. Severe protein deficiency and repletion alter
body and brain composition and organ weights in infant pigs. J
Nutr 1996;126:290–302.
89. Barnes RH, Moore AU, Pond WG. Behavioral abnormalities in young
adult pigs caused by malnutrition in early life. J Nutr 1970;100:149–55.
90. Radlowski EC, Conrad MS, Lezmi S, Dilger RN, Sutton B, Larsen R,
Johnson RW. A neonatal piglet model for investigating brain and cog-
nitive development in small for gestational age human infants. PLoS
One 2014;9:e91951.
91. Amusquivar E, Sánchez M, Hyde MJ, Laws J, Clarke L, Herrera E. In-
fluence of fatty acid profile of total parenteral nutrition emulsions on
the fatty acid composition of different tissues of piglets. Lipids 2008;
43:713–22.
92. Dean DC, O’Muircheartaigh J, Dirks H, Waskiewicz N, Lehman K,
Walker L, Piryatinsky I, Deoni SC. Estimating the age of healthy in-
fants from quantitative myelin water fraction maps. Hum Brain
Mapp 2015;36:1233–44.
93. Deoni SCL, Mercure E, Blasi A, Gasston D, Thomson A, Johnson M,
Williams SC, Murphy DG. Mapping infant brain myelination with
magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci 2011;31:784–91.
94. Liu L, Bartke N, Van Daele H, Lawrence P, Qin X, Park HG, Kothapalli
K, Windust A, Bindels J, Wang Z, et al. Higher efficacy of dietary DHA
provided as a phospholipid than as a triglyceride for brain DHA ac-
cretion in neonatal piglets. J Lipid Res 2014;55:531–9.
95. Evans AC. The NIH MRI study of normal brain development. Neuro-
image 2006;30:184–202.
96. Almli CR, Rivkin MJ, McKinstry RC. The NIH MRI study of normal
brain development (Objective-2): newborns, infants, toddlers, and
preschoolers. Neuroimage 2007;35:308–25.
97. Conrad MS, Sutton BP, Dilger RN, Johnson R. An in vivo three-
dimensional magnetic resonance imaging-based averaged brain
collection of the neonatal piglet (Sus scrofa). PLoS One 2014;9:
e107650.
98. Gan H, Zhang Q, Zhang H, Chen Y, Lin J, Kang T, Zhang J, Troy FA
2nd, Wang B. Development of new population-averaged standard
templates for spatial normalization and segmentation of MR
images for postnatal piglet brains. Magn Reson Imaging 2014;
32(10):1396–402.
99. Le Bihan D, Mangin JF, Poupon C, Clark CA, Pappata S, Molko N,
Chabriat H. Diffusion tensor imaging: concepts and applications. J
Magn Reson Imaging 2001;13:534–46.
100. Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Johansen-Berg H, Rueckert D, Nichols TE,
Mackay CE, Watkins KE, Ciccarelli O, Cader MZ, Matthews PM,
et al. Tract-based spatial statistics: voxelwise analysis of multi-subject
diffusion data. Neuroimage 2006;31:1487–505.
101. Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Woolrich MW, Beckmann CF, Behrens TE,
Johansen-Berg H, Bannister PR, De Luca M, Drobnjak I, Flitney
DE, et al. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis
and implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 2004;23 Suppl 1:S208–19.
102. Mukherjee P, Berman JI, Chung SW, Hess CP, Henry RG. Diffusion
tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: theoretic underpinnings.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008;29:632–41.
103. Deoni SCL, Rutt BK, Arun T, Pierpaoli C, Jones DK. Gleaning multi-
component T1 and T2 information from steady-state imaging data.
Magn Reson Med 2008;60:1372–87.
104. Elmore MRP, Dilger RN, Johnson RW. Place and direction learning in
a spatial T-maze task by neonatal piglets. Anim Cogn 2012;15:667–76.
105. van der Staay FJ, Gieling ET, Pinzón NE, Nordquist RE, Ohl F. The
appetitively motivated “cognitive” holeboard: a family of complex spa-
tial discrimination tasks for assessing learning and memory. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 2012;36:379–403.
106. Zhang D, Hou X, Liu Y, Zhou C, Luo Y, Ding H. The utility of
amplitude-integrated EEG and NIRS measurements as indices of hy-
poxic ischaemia in the newborn pig. Clin Neurophysiol 2012;123:
1668–75.
107. Davenport C, Yan J, Taesuwan S, Shields K, West AA, Jiang X, Perry
CA, Malysheva OV, Stabler SP, Allen RH, et al. Choline intakes exceed-
ing recommendations during human lactation improve breast milk
choline content by increasing PEMT pathway metabolites. J Nutr Bio-
chem 2015;26:903–11.
104
Mudd and Dilger
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/advances/article-abstract/8/1/92/4566584 by guest on 03 June 2019
