 Evolutionary routes and KRAS dosage define pancreatic cancer 
phenotypes
Sebastian Mueller1,2,*, Thomas Engleitner1,2,3,*, Roman Maresch1,2,3,*, Magdalena Zukowska1,2, 
Sebastian Lange1,2, Thorsten Kaltenbacher1,2,3, Björn Konukiewitz4, Rupert Öllinger1,2, 
Maximilian Zwiebel2, Alex Strong5, Hsi-Yu Yen3,6, Ruby Banerjee5, Sandra Louzada5, Beiyuan 
Fu5, Barbara Seidler1,2, Juliana Götzfried2, Kathleen Schuck2, Zonera Hassan2, Andreas 
Arbeiter2, Nina Schönhuber1,2, Sabine Klein1,2, Christian Veltkamp1,2, Mathias Friedrich5, Lena 
Rad2, Maxim Barenboim2,3, Christoph Ziegenhain7, Julia Hess8, Oliver M. Dovey5, Stefan Eser2, 
Swati Parekh7, Fernando Constantino-Casas9, Jorge de la Rosa5,10,11, Marta I. Sierra12, Mario 
Fraga12,13, Julia Mayerle14, Günter Klöppel4, Juan Cadiñanos5,10, Pentao Liu5, George 
Vassiliou5, Wilko Weichert3,4, Katja Steiger4,6, Wolfgang Enard7, Roland M. Schmid2,3, Fengtang 
Yang5, Kristian Unger8, Günter Schneider2,3, Ignacio Varela15, Allan Bradley5, Dieter Saur1,2,3,#, 
and Roland Rad1,2,3,#,§
1Center for Translational Cancer Research (TranslaTUM), Technische Universität München, 
Munich, Germany
2Department of Medicine II, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, 
Germany
3German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany
4Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
5The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton/Cambridge, UK
6Comparative Experimental Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
§Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R. R. (roland.rad@tum.de).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
#These authors jointly supervised this work.
Author Contributions
S.M., D.S., R.R. designed the study; S.M., T.E., R.M., D.S., R.R. interpreted and visualized data; T.E., S.La., M.Zw., M.B. conducted 
bioinformatic analyses. S.M., T.E., R.M., S.La., M.Zw., I.V. developed bioinformatic analyses strategies; S.M., R.M., M.Zu., T.K., 
A.S., B.S., J.G., K.Sc., Z.H., A.A., N.S., C.V. L.R. isolated mPDAC cell cultures; S.M., R.M., J.H., K.U. performed genomics with 
help from R.Ö.; R.Ö., C.Z. conducted RNA-Seq; R.B., S.Lo., B.F., S.K., K. St., F.Y. performed cytogenetics; B.K. performed 
microdissection; B.K., H-Y.Y., G.K., W.W., K.St. carried out pathological assessment; C.Z., S.P., W.E., K.U., I.V. contributed analytic 
tools; M.Fri., O.M.D., S.E., F.C-C., J.R., M.I.S., M.Fra., J.M., G.K., R.M.S., J.C., P.L., G.V., W.W., K.St., W.E., G.S., A.B., D.S., R.R. 
provided resources and critical input; D.S., R.R. supervised the study; S.M., R.R. wrote the manuscript; T.E., R.M. and D.S. edited the 
manuscript.
Author Information
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version 
of the paper.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2018 February 01; 554(7690): 62–68. doi:10.1038/nature25459.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 7Anthropology & Human Genomics, Department of Biology II, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität, 
Martinsried, Germany
8Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research Unit Radiation Cytogenetics, Neuherberg, Germany
9Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
10Instituto de Medicina Oncológicay Molecular de Asturias (IMOMA), Oviedo, Spain
11Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Medicina, Instituto Universitario 
de Oncología (IUOPA), Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain
12Institute of Oncology of Asturias (IUOPA), HUCA, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain
13Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology Research Center (CINN-CSIC), Universidad de Oviedo, El 
Entrego, Spain
14Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, Klinikum der LMU München-Grosshadern, Munich, 
Germany
15Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria (UC-CSIC), Santander, Spain
Abstract
The poor correlation of mutational landscapes with phenotypes limits our understanding of 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) pathogenesis and metastasis. Here we show a critical 
role of oncogenic dosage-variation in PDAC biology and phenotypic diversification. We found 
gene-dosage increase of mutant KRASMUT in human PDAC precursors, driving both early 
tumorigenesis and metastasis, thus rationalizing early PDAC dissemination. To overcome 
limitations posed to gene-dosage studies by PDAC´s stroma-richness we developed large cell 
culture resources of metastatic mouse PDAC. Integration of their genomes, transcriptomes and 
tumor phenotypes with functional studies and human data, revealed additional widespread effects 
of oncogenic dosage-variation on cell morphology/plasticity, histopathology and clinical outcome, 
with highest KrasMUT levels underlying aggressive undifferentiated phenotypes. We also identify 
alternative oncogenic gains (Myc, Yap1 or Nfkb2), which collaborate with heterozygous KrasMUT 
in driving tumorigenesis, yet with lower metastatic potential. Mechanistically, different oncogenic 
gains and dosages evolve along distinct evolutionary routes, licensed by defined allelic states 
and/or combinations of hallmark tumor-suppressor alterations (Cdkn2a, Trp53, Tgfβ-pathway). 
Thus, evolutionary constraints and contingencies direct oncogenic dosage gain and variation along 
defined routes to drive early progression and shape downstream PDAC biology. Our study 
uncovers universal principles in Ras-driven oncogenesis with potential relevance beyond 
pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related 
death and is expected to become the second within the next decade1. Whilst treatments 
constantly improved for many other cancer types, 5-year survival rates in PDAC stayed 
around 5%1. Genome sequencing revealed extensive genetic heterogeneity beyond a few 
frequently mutated drivers2–8 like KRAS, TP53, CDKN2A or TGFβ-pathway alterations. 
Disappointingly however, genomic changes could so far not be broadly linked to biologic, 
morphologic or clinical phenotypes. In addition, the molecular basis of cancer cell 
Mueller et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 dissemination is poorly understood, and genetic comparisons of primary/metastasis pairs 
could not identify recurrent alterations linked to metastasis3,8. Critical limitations to human 
PDACs (hPDAC) genomics are (i) the cancer genome complexity, posing challenges to their 
interpretation, (ii) the high (and variable) stromal content, which confounds particularly 
gene-dosage analyses and transcriptome interpretation, (iii) the limited availability of human 
cell culture-based resources to overcome this problem and (iv) the scarcity of paired 
primary/metastasis tissues, particularly of treatment-naive ones, e.g. for evolutionary studies. 
Here we characterized large murine PDAC cell line resources and combined the results with 
cross-species comparisons and functional studies to unravel molecular principles underlying 
PDAC evolution and phenotypic diversification.
Genetic landscapes of mouse PDAC
We initially characterized primary PDAC cell cultures from 38 mice expressing KrasG12D 
conditionally in the pancreas (PK mice)9,10 by multiplex FISH (M-FISH), whole-exome 
sequencing (WES) and array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). We developed a 
pipeline for WES data analysis allowing mouse/human comparisons using identical 
parameter settings. A WES study on microdissected human PDAC (reduced stromal 
“contamination”) served as the reference human data set6. Somatic mutation calling 
identified 318 synonymous and 606 non-synonymous mutations in 38 mPDACs (Extended 
Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1). Mutational patterns were similar, (Fig. 1a; 
Supplementary Table 2, Extended Data Fig. 1b-g) but mutational burdens were significantly 
higher in hPDAC than mPDAC, with 3.3 and 1.5 fold increased median SNV and indel 
numbers, respectively (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Tables 1, 3-5). Recurrently altered genes 
were infrequent in mice. A subset overlapped with recurrently mutated genes in human 
cancers and/or common insertion sites in pancreas-specific transposon screens11–13 
(Extended Data Fig. 1a).
Structural changes were also less common in mPDAC (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Tables 6-8). 
There was however substantial variation between cancers, with some mPDACs having only 
few focal alterations, but others showing extensive changes, including clustered intra-
chromosomal alterations, aneuploidy and inter-chromosomal translocations (Fig. 1c and 
Extended Data Fig. 1h-l). Notably, 34% (14/38) tumors had complex rearrangements, with 
ten or more alterations per affected chromosome. The majority (12/14) of such events affect 
chr4, invariably involving Cdkn2a. One cancer showed massively rearranged chr15 with 
high-level Myc amplification and another tumor had clustered chr1 rearrangements 
(Extended Data Fig. 2a-n). These findings reflect selection of complex rearrangements that 
affect cancer drivers.
The regularity of oscillating copy number states in most cancers suggested chromothripsis as 
the predominant process underlying these complex alterations. Whole-genome sequencing, 
followed by rearrangement analysis and computational simulations confirmed all hallmarks 
defining the one-off nature of chromothripsis14, including clustering of breakpoints, 
regularity of oscillating copy number states, identical CNA and LOH patterns, randomness 
of DNA segment order/joints and alternating head-tail sequences (Fig. 1d and detailed 
Mueller et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 analyses in Extended Data Fig. 2p-y. In addition, M-FISH confirmed chr4 content loss 
affecting only one haplotype (Fig. 1d).
Complex rearrangements were proposed to trigger accelerated evolution of human PDAC15. 
The mouse model allows experimental interrogation of this hypothesis due to the 
“synchronized” nature of tumor initiation (KrasG12D-mutation). We found that time-to-
tumor development was indeed shorter in animals with Cdkn2a loss through catastrophic 
events (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2o). A subset (16%) of complex rearrangements in 
hPDAC disrupts multiple known tumor suppressors through translocations15. 
Chromothripsis-associated chr4 translocations were also frequent in mice (Fig. 1c), although 
no recurrent translocation partners were found.
KrasMUT-iGD links early progression & metastasis
The most common amplification affected the Kras locus (Extended Data Fig. 3a,b), which is 
also frequent in hPDAC16,17. Combined analyses of M-FISH, aCGH and Kras mutant/wild-
type (wt) allele frequencies revealed four different KrasG12D gene dosage “states” (Fig. 2a, 
Extended Data Fig. 3c-h and Supplementary Table 9): focal gain (KrasG12D-FG, 7.9%), arm-
level gain (KrasG12D-AG, 23.7%), copy number neutral loss of wt Kras (KrasG12D-LOH, 
36.8%) or no change (KrasG12D-HET, 31.6%). Thus, two thirds of cancers had allelic 
imbalances causing increased KrasG12D gene dosage (hereafter designated KrasG12D-iGD), 
suggesting strong selective pressure for its acquisition. In addition, two KrasG12D-HET 
tumors displayed loss of KrasWT-mRNA, but high KrasG12D expression (blue dots in Fig. 
2b), suggesting additional non-genetic mechanisms. Of note, we observed similar 
KRASG12D-iGD rates/types in human PDAC cell lines (Supplementary Table 10). Gene 
dosage increase affects transcriptional output, as KrasG12D-iGD mPDAC had higher 
KrasG12D mRNA expression than KrasG12D-HET cancers (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 
3i).
Ras/Raf signaling amplification was observed at different stages of mammary, intestinal or 
lung tumorigenesis18–21. To identify the stage of KRASMUT-iGD-acquisition in PDAC, we 
microdissected low-grade human pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias (hPanIN) from 19 
patients and performed amplicon-based deep sequencing of KRAS exon-2 (Fig. 2c and 
Supplementary Table 11/12). hPanIN with exon-2-mutated KRAS (20/40 hPanINs featured 
KRASG12 mutations) displayed frequent KRASMUT-iGD: KRASMUT allele frequencies 
>50% occurred in 50%, 38% and 67% of KRAS exon-2-mutated hPanIN1a, hPanIN1b and 
hPanIN2, respectively. Given that healthy tissue “contamination” rates in microdissected 
PanINs ranged between 10-60%, KRASMUT-iGD is likely to be even more frequent. In cases 
with close to 100% mutant read frequency, KRAS interphase FISH excluded false-positive 
KRASG12D-iGD arising through chr12 monosomy (Extended Data Fig. 3l-n). Moreover, 
false-positive KRASMUT-iGD through cross-“contaminating” hPDAC is excluded due to 
either (i) the large distance of selected hPanINs to associated cancers, (ii) distinct KRAS 
mutations in hPanINs and associated cancers, or (iii) KRASMUT-iGD in IPMN-related 
hPanINs without invasive hPDAC. Altogether, these data suggest a critical role of 
KRASMUT-iGD in early PDAC progression.
Mueller et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Looking at organ dissemination, we found a dramatically increased metastatic potential of 
KrasG12D-iGD cancers (OR 16.7; 95% CI 2.8-98.0; Fig. 2d): primary mPDACs with 
KrasG12D-iGD were mostly metastasized (20/26), whereas KrasG12D-HET mPDACs were 
predominantly non-metastatic (2/12). Thus, KrasG12D-iGD drives both early progression and 
metastasis. This dual role explains (i) early PDAC dissemination in humans and mice22 and 
(ii) the high incidence of human PDAC metastasis at diagnosis23. We also mined published 
data8,24 and invariably found KRASMUT-iGD in human PDAC metastases. However, 
because KRASMUT-iGD is present in the primary (early acquisition), its contribution to 
metastasis could not be recognized by primary/metastasis comparisons8.
Alternative oncogenic gains in KrasMUT-HET tumors
Among the 12 cancers without KrasG12D-dosage gain, two cases had Myc amplifications 
and two had Yap1 gains (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4a-d). MYC and YAP1 are known 
human oncogenes, amplified in 12% (13/109) and 1% (1/109) of hPDAC, respectively (Fig. 
2f). In addition, chr19 gain occurred more frequently in KrasG12D-HET (3/12) than 
KrasG12D-iGD tumors (4/26), although this was not significant. A focal amplification on 
chr19 contained 20 genes (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Cross-species analyses revealed frequent 
gains of the syntenic region in hPDAC, with two genes in the minimal peak region: NFKB2 
and PSD, both amplified in 7% (8/109) of hPDAC (Extended Data Fig. 4f). NFKB2 (but not 
PSD) is expressed in human pancreas and hPDAC (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h), suggesting 
Nfkb2 to be the target proto-oncogene on murine chr19. NFKB2 mediates non-canonical 
Nfkb signaling. It has not yet been associated with hPDAC, but promotes cell cycle 
progression in vitro25, and knockout of its interaction partner RelB impairs PanIN formation 
in PK mice26. Thus, upon Kras mutation, further amplification of partial aspects of Kras 
downstream signaling (Myc, Yap1 or Nfkb2) seem sufficient to drive early PDAC 
progression, whereas strong metastatic potential is linked to amplification of the full 
KrasG12D signaling program.
Evolutionary licensing of oncogenic dosages
The most frequent deletion in mPDAC affected Cdkn2a and/or the adjacent non-coding 
Cdkn2a-regulatory region Ncruc: 23 Cdkn2aΔHOM, 4 NcrucΔHOM, 10 Cdkn2aΔHET, 1 
Cdkn2aWT (chr4 alteration types shown in Fig. 3a,b, Extended Data Fig. 5a-d and 
Supplementary Table 9). Notably, the majority of Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHOM cancers were 
KrasG12D-iGD (23/27) and had high KrasG12D expression. In contrast, Cdkn2aΔHET or 
Cdkn2aWT cancers were predominantly KrasG12D-HET (8/11) with low KrasG12D expression 
(Fig. 3c, Extended Data Fig. 3j and 5e,f). Accordingly, in microdissected human PDAC 
datasets6, KRASMUT variant allele frequencies were higher in CDKN2AΔHOM than in 
CDKN2AΔHET/WT tumors (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 5g). Thus, CDKN2AΔHOM-
deletion and KRASMUT-iGD are linked, with two possible scenarios: (i) KRASMUT-iGD 
occurs first, but induces senescence that prevents progression until CDKN2A is lost (as 
proposed in breast tumorigenesis18), or (ii) KRASMUT-iGD is only tolerated if preceded by 
CDKN2A deletion.
Mueller et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 To resolve the sequence, we determined copy-number changes and copy-number neutral 
allelic imbalance at Cdkn2a and Kras in Cdkn2aΔHOM;KrasG12D-iGD mPDACs (n=13) and 
associated metastases (n=25). We found identical Cdkn2a deletions in all 13 primary/
metastasis pairs, but discordant chr6 CNA/LOH phenotypes in 7/13 pairs (Fig. 3e). In 6/13 
pairs the sequence of Cdkn2a-loss/KrasG12D-iGD could not be reconstructed, either because 
the SNP density was too low (4 cases) or because chr6 profiles in primary/metastasis pairs 
were identical (2 cases). Thus, in all cases with reconstructable sequence, Cdkn2a deletion 
preceded KrasG12D-iGD acquisition. For example, mPDAC-53704 (Extended Data Fig. 6) 
had two liver metastases with identical Cdkn2a deletions, but distinct chr6 SNP patterns: one 
with KrasG12D-LOH at distal chr6 (through mitotic recombination) and another affecting the 
whole chromosome (likely through missegregation). This confirms clonal chr6 
diversification and convergent evolution following Cdkn2a loss, and explains the primary´s 
gradual chr6 SNP pattern (Extended Data Fig. 6). Fig. 3f shows another example: mPDAC 
5320 and its three metastases had identical Cdkn2a deletions, but distinct chr6 patterns: 
while liver metastasis-1 had KrasG12D-AG (combined interpretation of aCGH and SNP data), 
liver metastasis-3 and the lung-metastasis had distinct KrasG12D-LOH events, again showing 
convergent evolution of Kras-allelic imbalance and explaining the primary´s composite SNP 
pattern (Fig. 3f).
These results reveal several evolutionary principles in PDAC. First, KrasG12D-iGD is 
contingent on Cdkn2aΔHOM inactivation. Second, Myc, Yap1 or Nfkb2 amplifications can 
occur on a Cdkn2aΔHET context, suggesting context-dependent Cdkn2a haploinsufficiency. 
Of note, only one cancer was Cdkn2aWT. Third, evolution of multiple independent 
KrasG12D-gains in Cdkn2aΔHOM cancers demonstrates functional convergence towards 
KrasG12D-iGD acquisition upon homozygous Cdkn2a loss.
To provide in vivo evidence for functional convergence in Cdkn2aΔHOM contexts, we 
generated mice with pancreas-specific KrasG12D-expression and Cdkn2a-deletion (PKC). 
We found KrasG12D-iGD in 100% (16/16) of PKC tumors (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table 
9), confirming that KrasG12D-iGD acquisition is the preferred evolutionary route upon 
homozygous Cdkn2a loss.
Another hPDAC hallmark is TP53 inactivation27. The analysis of cancers from 
KrasG12D-Panc;Trp53ΔPanc (PKP) mice revealed ubiquitous KrasG12D-iGD (16/16) (Fig. 4 and 
Supplementary Table 9). Thus, Trp53-loss (like Cdkn2aΔHOM alteration) predisposes to 
KrasG12D-iGD acquisition (also reflected in hPDAC; Extended Data Fig. 5g). PK/PKC/PKP 
cross-comparisons revealed higher CNA numbers and a tendency to amplify KrasG12D 
through arm-level gain (trisomy) in PKP, whereas copy-number neutral LOH predominates 
in PKC (Fig. 4 and Extended Data Fig. 5h). Of note, PKP or PKC tumors did not have 
complex chr4 rearrangements, confirming that chromothripsis in PK cancers results from 
natural selection for Cdkn2a inactivation (Fig. 4).
To address the role of the TGFβ-pathway, we characterized KrasG12D-Panc;Tgfbr2ΔPanc 
(PKT) mice (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table 9). Strikingly, all PKT tumors (n=12) had 
Cdkn2a alterations: two cancers were Cdkn2aΔHOM/KrasG12D-iGD, ten were Cdkn2aΔHET 
and predominantly KrasG12D-HET (8/10). Overall, the prevalence of KrasG12D-iGD is 
Mueller et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 significantly lower in PKT (4/12) than PK mice (26/38) (P=0.04, Fisher’s exact test, OR 
0.23, 95% CI 0.06-0.92). KrasG12D-HET cancers had frequent alternative oncogenic gains 
(Nfkb2/chr19 trisomy in 4/8 PKT mice), similarly to KrasG12D-HET cancers in the PK 
cohort. Thus, contrary to Trp53ΔHOM or Cdkn2aΔHOM alterations, which license 
KrasG12D-iGD-acquisition, Tgfbr2 alterations facilitate the alternative route with Cdkn2a 
haploinsufficiency.
Altogether these data show that evolutionary contingencies and convergence shape early 
tumorigenesis: different tumor suppressor genes/pathways (Cdkn2a, Trp53, Tgfβ), their 
alteration types (ΔHOM/ΔHET) or their combinations (e.g. Cdkn2aΔHET/Tgfbr2ΔHET) direct 
evolution into different trajectories by licensing distinct types and extents of oncogenic 
dosage gains.
Integrating genomes, transcriptomes, phenotypes
Unbiased hierarchical clustering of RNA-Seq data from mPDAC cell cultures (PK cohort) 
revealed two clusters C1/C2, with 3 sub-clusters within C2 (Fig. 5a). Pathway analyses 
identified “epithelial cell differentiation” as the top C2 GO-term, whereas “mesenchymal 
cell differentiation” was defining C1 (Fig. 5a,b and Supplementary Table 13,14). Notably, all 
C1 cell lines show mesenchymal cell morphology, while C2 lines are invariably epithelial 
(Fig. 5a,c).
Previous studies classified human pancreatic cancer based on transcriptional profiles7,28,29. 
Unbiased hierarchical clustering with published classifiers shows large overlaps of subtypes 
proposed by Bailey7 and Moffitt29 to the initially proposed three Collisson28 subtypes: 
classical, exocrine-like, quasimesenchymal (QM). One exception is the lacking exocrine-like 
signature in the Moffitt classification, which was proposed to be an artefact of acinar cell 
“contamination” (details in Extended Data Fig. 7a-d). The Collisson classifier28 separates 
human PDAC cell lines into two subtypes (classical and QM; Extended Data Fig. 7e) and 
mouse PDAC cell lines into 3 subtypes: classical-equivalent, QM-equivalent (both in 
epithelial C2) and the mesenchymal M subtype (C1) (Extended Data Fig. 7f). The equivalent 
of the mouse M subtype with the strong EMT signature has not been described in human 
cell lines so far, reflecting underrepresentation of mesenchymal phenotypes in human cell 
line collections (see also Extended Data Fig. 7g,h). As described below, however, 
mesenchymal mPDACs in C1 represent undifferentiated pancreatic carcinomas with a 
pronounced EMT signature and human equivalent.
C1 shows strong gene set enrichment for Ras downstream signaling pathways (Fig. 5b and 
Supplementary Tables 13,14). This cannot be explained by the genetic Kras status alone: 
only C2a is KrasG12D-HET, whereas C2b, C2c and C1 are mostly KrasG12D-iGD. However, 
integration of KrasG12D expression revealed its gradual increase from C2a to C2b/c and 
further substantial elevation in C1 (Fig. 5d and Extended Data Fig. 3k). Thus, the 
mesenchymal phenotype is associated with KrasG12D expression above a certain threshold.
To study this association further, we induced clonal PDACs by CRISPR/Cas9 somatic 
mutagenesis30 in PK mice (Fig. 5e), screened for simultaneous presence of epithelial and 
Mueller et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mesenchymal cells, and separated/enriched either phenotype by differential trypsinization. 
Two such cancers were identified. In each case, indel patterns of epithelial/mesenchymal 
pairs were identical (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b), showing (i) common clonal origin of 
epithelial/mesenchymal cells and (ii) independence of epithelial/mesenchymal phenotypes 
form CRISPR/Cas9-induced TSG alterations. Notably however, mPDAC 021 had 
KrasG12D-iGD, elevated Kras expression and downstream pathway activation in 
mesenchymal, but not epithelial cells. In mPDAC 901 both clones were KrasG12D-HET, but 
mesenchymal cells had increased Kras expression, supporting a role of KrasG12D dosage-
variation in shaping cellular phenotypes (Fig. 5e, Extended Data Fig. 8c,d and 
Supplementary Table 15). Moreover, KRASG12D overexpression in hPDAC cell lines 
induced an EMT signature, with Vimentin upregulation and E-cadherin repression 
(Extended Data Fig. 8e-g and Supplementary Table 16).
PDAC histology revealed a striking association with transcriptome clusters (Fig. 5a,f). 
Histopathologic grade scores increased from C2a to C2b/c and C1, with C2a being well- or 
moderately differentiated (G1, G2) and C1 being almost exclusively undifferentiated. 
Undifferentiated cancers are typically advanced and therefore underrepresented (1-3%) in 
human surgical series or cell line collections, but autopsy series reported up to 16% hPDACs 
with at least focal undifferentiated components31,32. Dedifferentiation can occur during 
disease progression or is triggered by treatment. It is associated with poor prognosis32,33, 
which is also reflected in mice (Extended Data Fig. 9a). Our results link this aggressive 
PDAC subtype with highest KrasG12D expression levels and Ras-related transcriptional 
programs (Fig. 5b,d and Supplementary Table 13). We also screened human transcriptome 
data (ICGC PACA-AU cohort) for undifferentiated pancreatic carcinomas and performed 
unbiased hierarchical clustering of differentially regulated genes in undifferentiated cancers 
(Extended Data Fig. 9b). Of note, undifferentiated human pancreatic carcinomas are 
characterized by reduced expression of genes involved in “epithelial” (cluster-2) or 
“squamous differentiation” (cluster-1), and a strong upregulation of genes in cluster-3, 
containing gene sets enriched for EMT and Ras downstream signaling (Extended Data Fig. 
9b-d and Supplementary Table 17 and 18).
We exploited the mouse to address complex questions, including cell based resources 
(overcoming human PDAC´s stroma richness), primary/metastasis resources (phylogenetic 
tracking, evolution) and in vivo modelling (proof-of-concept functional studies). In addition, 
discoveries were facilitated by the relatively low complexity of mouse PDAC genomes 
(easier interpretability). Notably, a transposon-induced PDAC model13 showed that our 
findings are equally valid in contexts of excessive mutational loads (Extended Data Fig. 10 
and Supplementary Table 19).
Conclusions
Our study proposes a novel comprehensive conceptual framework for molecular PDAC 
evolution and phenotypic diversification. It describes evolutionary trajectories, identifies 
their genetic hallmarks and shows how oncogenic dosage-variation is differentially licensed 
along individual routes by the three major PDAC tumor suppressive pathways to control 
critical disease characteristics, including early progression, histopathology, metastasis, 
Mueller et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 cellular plasticity and clinical behavior (Fig. 5g). RAS gene mutations affect more than 30% 
of human cancers, often involving their allelic imbalance. We therefore presume that the 
principles identified here are significant far beyond PDAC.
Methods
Primary mPDAC cultures preparation
For 2D primary cell culturing, primary tumor or metastasis were cut into small pieces and 
digested 1-2h in 200Units/mL collagenase II (Worthington) in DMEM medium (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific Inc.) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Merck) and 1x Penicillin/
Streptomycin (P/S, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). After short term expansion, primary cells 
were frozen in 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (Roth) and 50% FCS. For all primary culture 
experiments, culturing medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS and 1x P/S) and 
cultures with less than 10 passages were used. Primary cultures were routinely tested for 
mycoplasma contamination by PCR and authenticated by re-genotyping of cell cultures and 
corresponding mice.
gDNA and RNA isolation
gDNA from murine primary cell culture pellets was isolated using the DNeasy Blood & 
Tissue Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA was isolated with 
the RNeasy kit (Qiagen) from 60-80% confluent primary cell lines cultured in a 10cm dish 
in culturing medium without P/S and immediately transferred into RLT buffer (Qiagen) 
containing ß-mercaptoethanol.
Histology and micro-metastases screening
For histologic characterization of mPDACs, 2µm thick specimens from formalin-fixed 
paraffin embedded (FFPE) material were routinely H&E stained and submitted to two 
veterinary pathologists experienced in comparative pancreatic cancer pathology. 
Histopathologic grading was performed with respect to the most recent consensus report of 
genetically engineered mouse models34. For histopathologic examination of micro-
metastases, three H&E-stained liver sections (separated by 200µm) were screened for 
metastatic lesions by a veterinary pathologist.
Animal experiments
Mice were maintained on C57Bl/6;129S6/SvEv mixed background and housed under 
specific-pathogen-free conditions. Female and male mice were randomly submitted to 
respective tumor cohorts. For the generation of double- or triple-mutants, pancreas-specific 
Cre lines10,35,36 were intercrossed with KrasG12D-Panc (PK mice)9,10 only, or in addition 
with Cdkn2aΔHOM-Panc (PKC mice)37, Trp53ΔHOM-Panc (PKP mice)38,39 or 
Tgfbr2ΔHET-Panc and Tgfbr2ΔHOM-Panc (PKT mice)40 mice. Kaplan-Meier survival curves 
were generated using Prism (GraphPad Software v5.01). In case the animal presented a 
palpable abdominal mass above 1.5cm, ascites, signs of sickness or a weight loss of more 
than 15% of the body weight, mice were euthanized in compliance with the European 
guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals. For necropsy of tumor-bearing mice, 
the abdominal cavity was macroscopically checked for pancreatic cancer and for metastases 
Mueller et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 at the main metastatic routes (liver, lung, lymph nodes). Animal studies were approved by 
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of Technische Universität 
München (Regierung von Oberbayern, Munich, Germany).
Amplicon-based deep sequencing at the Kras locus or of Kras mRNA
Fifty ng of high-quality genomic DNA or reversely transcribed mRNA (cDNA) were 
subjected to amplicon-based deep sequencing. Briefly, the KrasG12D-mutated locus was 
amplified using Q5® High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England Biolabs, 40 cycles) and 
primers with Nextera adapter overhangs (Supplementary Table 20). In a second Q5® PCR 
step (15 cycles), Nextera index primers (Illumina) were added. After each PCR step, solid 
phase reversible immobilization cleanup (0.8x) was performed using the Agencourt® 
AMPure® XP kit (Beckman Coulter GmbH). The pooled library was quantified by SYBR® 
Green qPCR (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and the Kapa Biosystems library quantification 
kit. In total, 8pM of denatured library (20% spiked PhiX DNA) was sequenced in 300bp 
paired end mode using a MiSeq system (Illumina). Raw reads were mapped to Kras 
reference sequence (Ensemble release GRCm38p4, Genome Reference Consortium). Variant 
allele frequencies on chr6 at position 145246771 were calculated.
Microdissection of hPanIN and KRASG12 status analysis
Nineteen patients (Supplementary Table 11) with or without a history of pancreatic cancer 
were included into hPanIN lesion analysis, according to approval by the Ethics Committee 
of the Faculty of Medicine of the Technische Universität München. Patients were classified 
using WHO recommendations and the TNM staging system. Serially cut 10µm thick 
specimens from FFPE material were air-dried overnight. Paraffin was removed through short 
incubation with xylene. Specimens were briefly stained with hematoxylin and kept wet for 
the micro-dissection procedure. Individually diagnosed samples were microdissected under 
the Axio Imager microscope (Zeiss) using 20 gauche cannula. Pre- and post-sampling 
microscopic pictures were taken to (i) document dissection performance and (ii) re-identify 
each specimen on the corresponding H&E-stained slide. gDNA was extracted as described 
above using MinElute spin columns (Qiagen) for higher sample concentration. Five µl of 
eluted hPanIN gDNA were submitted to amplicon-based deep sequencing of KRAS exon-2 
for detection of KRASG12 hotspot mutations. Briefly, 2 pairs of custom KRAS primers 
(Supplementary Table 20) were used for nested PCR amplification of the corresponding 
KRAS region. Illumina Nextera primer pairs were used to add sequencing adapters and 
indices. PCR steps, library quantification and sequencing were performed as described 
above. Raw reads were mapped to KRAS reference sequence (GRCh38.p10). Variant allele 
frequencies were calculated for KRASG12 hotspot mutations (positions 25398284 and 
25398285 on chr12).
Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
One µg of high-quality gDNA extracted from primary tumor cell line and corresponding tail 
were sheared on a Covaris M220 focused ultrasonicator (Covaris, Inc.) to an approximate 
fragment size of 500bp. Library was prepared from 500ng of fragmented gDNA using the 
NEBNext® Ultra™ II DNA Library Prep Kit (New England Biolabs, Inc.) in combination 
with the adapter/primer sequences and PCR conditions published before41. The final library 
Mueller et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 was quantified by qPCR using the Kapa Biosystems library quantification kit. Equimolar 
amounts of indexed libraries were denatured and diluted to a final concentration of 1.8pM 
and sequenced in 300bp paired end mode on a NextSeq 500 system (Illumina) to ~20x 
coverage. Sequencing raw data were converted to fastq format using the bcl2fastq software 
v2.18.0.12 (Illumina). Raw reads were trimmed with Trimmomatic v0.36 to preserve an 
average base Phred quality of 25, mapped using the BWA-MEM algorithm v0.7.12 with 
alternative contig handling and mapped to GRCm38.p5 reference genome.
Inference of chromothripsis
For estimation of copy number states, the Bioconductor HMMcopy package 1.16.0 was used 
followed by segmentation with the Bioconductor DNAcopy package 1.48.0. For LOH 
analysis variant positions in control and tumor were computed with samtools mpileup 
v1.3.1. Only positions in regions with mapping quality of 60 and an average phredscore of 
20 were considered for further analysis. Furthermore, positions harboring strand bias and 
variant allele frequencies less than 20% and above 85% in the control were excluded as they 
are likely homozygous in the germline. The minimal cutoff coverage for a given 
polymorphic position in the control was set to eight reads. Segmental duplications (UCSC 
Genome Browser) and regions with mouse line specific variation (Mouse Genomes Project, 
REL-1505) were excluded. For this set of somatic nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) the 
difference of frequencies between tumor and control samples were calculated. DELLY 
v0.7.6 was used for calling structural variations (SVs). SV-classes were defined according to 
DELLY callings: Deletion-type (3to5), duplication-type (5to3) and inversion-type (5to5 and 
3to3). The predicted rearrangements were merged and filtered based on variant frequency, 
mapping quality and the distance between two connected breakpoints. The existence of 
chromothripsis was tested by applying the six hallmark criteria proposed by Korbel et al.14. 
Clustering of SV breakpoints was tested using a χ2-goodness-of-fit test. Regularity of 
oscillating copy number states in the chromothriptic model was compared to a virtual 
chromosome generated by a Monte Carlo simulation, as described in42. For each distinct 
number of breakpoints, 100 simulation runs were completed and mean values as well as 
95% CI were calculated. Interspersed loss and retention of heterozygosity was analyzed by 
calculating the Jaccard index between heterozygously deleted segments and regions 
comprising LOH and SNP information. Randomness of observed DNA segment order was 
tested using a Monte Carlo simulation as described in14. The uniform distribution of SV-
types was tested using a χ2-goodness-of-fit test. The Wald-Wolfowitz runs test as 
implemented in R package randtests 1.0 was performed for testing right-sided against the 
null hypothesis of randomly distributed 5’-to-3’ breakpoint joints sequence.
FISH analyses
For the analysis of copy number status or large structural alterations of human and murine 
primary cell lines, multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) was performed as 
described before43. For KRAS gene detection in hPanIN specimens, the ZytoLight® SPEC 
KRAS/CEN12 Dual Color Probe kit was used according to manufacturer’s instructions 
(ZytoVision GmbH). In brief, 2µm FFPE specimens were deparaffinized, pre-incubated in 
CC 2 buffer (at 95°C for 24min), treated with pepsin solution (at 37°C for 8min) and 
denatured by a heat treatment step at 80°C for 8min on an automated Discovery XT system 
Mueller et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc.). KRAS/CEN12 dual color probe hybridization was 
performed by co-denaturing at 75°C for 10min and by incubating at 37°C overnight in a 
ThermoBrite system (Abbott Laboratories). Slides were washed, nuclei stained with 4',6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), covered in an antifade mounting medium and by a 
coverslip and stored for confocal laser scanning microscopy (LSM) analyses at 4°C in the 
dark. ZytoLight® SPEC KRAS/CEN12 Dual Color Probes and DAPI nuclear stain 
(excitation/emission: DAPI 405nm/415-490nm; ZyGreen, 503nm/510-540nm; ZyOrange, 
547nm/560-650nm) were detected by confocal LSM using a Leica TCS SP8; DMi8 CS 
microscope equipped with a 63x/1.4 oil immersion objective (Leica). Images (z-stacks, 
covering the whole nucleus) with a magnification factor of 3 and a frame size of 2048 x 
2048 pixels were collected. Generated images were processed using the Huygens Essential 
software (Scientific Volume Imaging) for deconvolution, than merged and maximum 
projections were converted with Leica LAS X software.
aCGH analysis
Agilent oligonucleotide aCGH (SurePrint G3 Mouse CGH 240K or custom 60K microarray) 
was performed according to manufactures instructions. Agilent Genomic Workbench 
software v7.0.4.0 was used for aCGH data preprocessing. Legacy centralization option was 
used for re-centralization of raw log ratios to the most common ploidy state. ADM-2 
algorithm was applied for aberration calling. Segments coordinates were reported for 
GRCm37 reference genome. Aberrations on chromosome 6 between positions 148719747 
and 149503634 were excluded in further downstream analysis as this region resulted likely 
from an artefact. Normalized and curated data was imported into R.
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) analysis
Coding exons were enriched via whole-exome pull down using Agilent SureSelect Mouse 
Exon Kit according to manufacturer's instructions and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq2000 
system. Prior to mapping, raw sequencing reads were trimmed using Trimmomatic v0.33. 
Leading and trailing bases with phred scores below 25 and reads shorter 50 nucleotides were 
removed. In addition the average base quality within a sliding window of 10 nucleotides 
should be above 25 to keep the read for further downstream analysis. Reads were aligned to 
the GRCm38.p3 reference genome using BWA-MEM 0.7.12 with default settings. PCR 
duplicates were marked with Picard tools v1.130 and realignment around indels was 
performed with GATK toolkit v 3.4.46. Mutect v 1.1.7 was used for calling somatic 
mutations with default settings. Potential somatic events were filtered for SNPs by excluding 
SNVs which were listed in in release 1505 of the Mouse Genome Project SNP database44. 
Somatic point mutations were included in the final list, if the read coverage for each position 
was ≥10 in both control and tumor, variant frequency was ≥10% and read count supporting 
the variant nucleotide is ≥3 in the tumor sample and =0 in the control. Further, SNVs 
marked as strand or PCR bias artifacts by “DKFZBiasFilter” (https://github.com/eilslabs/
DKFZBiasFilter, using default settings) or with a FOXOG-Score of 1 were excluded. 
Annotation of somatic events was conducted with SNPeff v4.1. SNVs causing variation in 
splice sites or upstream/downstream of genes were excluded from further analysis. Indels 
were detected with Pindel45. For each potential indel the read coverage was re-calculated 
using bedtools v2.17.0. Criteria for further downstream processing were: Variant frequency 
Mueller et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 ≥10% in tumor and =0% in control; and total coverage at the altered position in both control 
and tumor ≥20. LOH analysis was conducted as described in chapter Inference of 
Chromothripsis.
WES data analysis from hPDAC
Mapped BAM files from Witkiewicz et al.6 were downloaded from the Sequence Read 
Archive (accession number PRJNA278883) approved by the Ethics Committee of the 
Faculty of Medicine of the Technische Universität München. Further downstream analysis 
was performed as described above. SNPs were filtered by excluding variants with an 
alternate allele frequency ≥1% in the 1000 Genomes Project, as listed in dbSNP build 146. 
All available VCF files from the TCGA-PAAD cohort generated by Mutect2 were 
downloaded from the NIH Genomic Data Commons data. Downstream processing was 
performed as described above (PCR and strand bias marking by DKFZBiasFilter was not 
possible using VCF files). SNPs were filtered by excluding variants with an alternate allele 
frequency ≥1% in the 1000 Genomes Project, as listed in dbSNP build 142. MAF files from 
other human pancreatic cancer cohorts were downloaded and included in our analysis: All 
samples, for which whole-exome sequencing data was available, as provided by Bailey et al.
7; pancreatic cancer cell lines from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia46 and SNV data 
from pancreatic cancers as analyzed by Alexandrov et al.47. In these cohorts, SNPs were 
filtered by excluding variants with an alternate allele frequency ≥1% in the 1000 Genomes 
Project, as listed in dbSNP Build 146. Remaining SNVs were annotated and filtered with 
SNPeff as described above.
Analysis of mutational signatures
Mutation spectra for each cohort were compared to a list of 21 signatures previously 
described by Alexandrov et al.47; Signature 1B was excluded from further analyses because 
of presumed biological similarity to Signature 1A. The contribution of each individual 
signature to the mutation spectrum of each cohort was analyzed by using “deconstructSigs” 
v1.8.0.
qRT-PCR analysis
Reverse transcription was performed with random hexamers using 1µg of total RNA 
following instructions of the SuperScript II protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Real-
time qPCR was performed either with the TaqMan qPCR chemistry (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific Inc.) for mouse using Kras-specific primers and probes or with the SYBR® Green 
master mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) using primers for human target genes VIM, 
CDH1 and MMP1 (Supplementary Table 20). Gapdh or GAPDH in combination with PPIA 
were used as housekeeping genes for normalization (Supplementary Table 20). qPCR was 
conducted on a StepOnePlus system (Applied Biosystems). For analyses of mutant 
KrasG12D mRNA levels in mPDACs, first total (wild-type plus mutant) Kras mRNA levels 
were determined using qRT-PCR. Second, the identical cDNA was used for amplicon-based 
deep sequencing to detect the proportion of mutant to wild-type Kras mRNA. Third, the 
mutant to wild-type Kras mRNA ratio was multiplied with the total Kras mRNA level to 
calculate the mutant KrasG12D-specific mRNA level.
Mueller et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 RNA-Seq analysis
Bulk 3’-prime transcript end RNA-Seq (SCRB-Seq) libraries were prepared as described 
previously48. Briefly, RNA was reversely transcribed using oligo-dT primers decorated with 
sample barcodes, unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) and adapters (Integrated DNA 
Technologies). cDNA from all samples was pooled and un-incorporated primers digested 
using ExonucleaseI (New England Biolabs). Next, the cDNA pool was amplified with 
KAPA HiFi ReadyMix (KAPA Biosystems). To obtain sequencing libraries, 0.8ng of cDNA 
was tagmented and 3’ ends amplified with the Nextera XT Kit (Illumina) using a specific 
primer for the adapter on the 3’-end. The library was paired-end sequenced on a HiSeq1500 
with 16 cycles for read 1 to decode sample barcodes and UMIs and 51 cycles on read 2 into 
the cDNA fragment. For the preparation of the human pancreatic cancer cell line samples, 
the flow cell binding sites P5 and P7 were exchanged to allow sequencing of the cDNA in 
read1 and barcodes and UMIs in read2. Data was processed using the published Drop-seq 
pipeline (v1.0)49 to generate sample- and gene-wise UMI tables. Reference genome 
(GRCm38) was used for alignment. Transcript and gene definitions were used according to 
the ENSEMBL annotation release 75. Further analyses were performed with R version 
3.2.2. Initial hierachical clustering (method: Complete linkage, distance measure: Euclidian) 
of samples was performed for the top 10% variable genes. Bootstrapping was performed to 
access cluster stability with the pvclust package v2.0. The 4 most prominent clusters were 
selected and differential expression between these clusters was calculated with DEseq250. A 
gene was considered to be differentially regulated if the absolute log2-foldchange was above 
0.8 and the adjusted P-value was ≤0.05. Gene set enrichment testing was performed with 
DAVID 6.851 or the hypergeomtric test as implemented on the “Molecular Signature 
Database” (MSigDB) v6.0 homepage (http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/
annotate). For all MSigDB analyses, top100 enriched terms with a false discovery rate 
(FDR) of P≤10-4 were included. Published PDAC classifier genes28 and the hallmark EMT 
gene set (downloaded from MSigDB v5.252) were used for sample clusterings (method: 
Ward, distance measure: Euclidian).
hPDAC subtyping
Normalized RNAseq data was derived from Bailey et al.7. Samples that were histologically 
classified as “PDA-Adenosquamous carcinoma” and “Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma” 
were used for hierarchical clustering (method: Ward, distance measure: Euclidian) with 
classifier gene lists published elsewhere28,29.
Microarray data analysis
Affymetrix-based CCLE raw data set was downloaded from (Broad-Novartis Cancer Cell 
Line Encyclopedia, Version 2.17). Hematopoietic or lymphoid neoplasms were excluded 
since (1) the primary interest of our study were solid tumors and (2) the overall gene 
expression signature of these samples was shown to be very distinct from all other samples 
in the study46. Normalization of the data was performed with RMA. In general, if genes 
were represented by two or more probe sets, the probe set with the highest mean expression 
was used for all further microarray data analyses. Mapping between probeset and genes 
were conducted with the appropriate Bioconductor packages. Target genes for the TP63ΔN 
Mueller et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 network were downloaded from the “Pathway Interaction Database” (PID)53 and 
hierarchically clustered (method: Ward, distance measure: Euclidian). Gene set enrichment 
analysis was conducted with DAVID or MSigDB v6.0. All following microarray data sets 
are Illumina-based and were VST-transformed followed by quantile normalization as 
implemented in lumi54. Microarray data set of hPDAC cell lines (accession number 
GSE17891) was downloaded from Gene Omnibus Expression database. PDAC classifier 
genes and EMT hallmark gene set were used as described above. For the comparison of 
human wild-type pancreatic tissue and hPDAC cell lines, limma55 was used for detection of 
differential expression between groups. Differentially expressed genes were determined with 
an alpha level threshold of 5%. The PACA-AU ICGC data set was downloaded from the 
repository https://dcc.icgc.org/repositories. Samples that met the following criteria were 
selected for further analyses: (i) Bailey HistoSubtypes “PDA-Adenosquamous carcinoma” 
or “Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma” with available subtype information from Bailey et 
al.7 and (ii) ICGC WHO Grading “Undifferentiated carcinoma”. Only representative 
samples, as judged by cluster analysis, from this group were selected for downstream 
analysis. ANOVA was performed across six defined subgroups of pancreatic cancer: (i) 
undifferentiated pancreatic carcinoma, (ii) adenosquamous pancreatic carcinoma and (iii-vi) 
PDAC sub-stratified in pancreatic progenitor, immunogenic, squamous and ADEX subtypes. 
Genes with an adjusted P-value ≤0.05 were hierarchically clustered (method: Ward, distance 
measure: Manhattan) and the resulting cluster tree was computationally stratified into five 
sub-clusters. Genes within subclusters were used for gene enrichment analysis as described 
above. Seventeen PK-PB primary cultures established elsewhere13 were submitted to RNA 
extraction and subsequent gene expression profiling analysis on a MouseWG-6 v2.0 
Expression BeadChip (Illumina). The 5% of genes with the highest variability across all 
samples were used for hierarchical clustering using the ward method for aggregation of 
samples. Limma was used as described above. A gene was called differentially expressed if 
the adjusted P-value was ≤0.05 and the log2-fold was at least 0.8.
Quantitative transposon insertion site sequencing (QiSeq)
Aforementioned gDNA samples of the PK-PB pancreatic cancer cell cultures13 were 
sequenced for transposon integration sites and bioinformatics analyses were performed as 
described elsewhere56. Transposon integration sites that are supported by at least 20 reads 
and reside in intragenic regions were counted for the computation of the mutational burden. 
For the assessment of the Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHOM status caused by transposon insertional 
mutagenesis, only the top hit of each tumor was considered.
KrasG12D induction after lentiviral transduction of hPDAC cell lines
The pINDUCER2057 vector system comprising a puromycin resistance gene was used for 
doxycycline-inducible KRASG12D overexpression. Briefly, cDNA of oncogenic KRASG12D 
(CCDS 8702.1, 35G>A) and GFP were cloned into the pINDUCER20 lentiviral vector. 
Stbl3™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were chemically transformed and pDNA sequence 
was verified. For lentivirus production, HEK293FT cells were transfected using TransIT®-
LT1 (Mirus Bio LLC) with standard virus packaging plasmids and respective pINDUCER20 
vectors by following manufacturer’s recommendations. Virus-containing supernatant was 
pooled 48h and 72h post transfection, concentrated by polyethylene glycol 6000 
Mueller et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 precipitation58 and stored at -80°C after shock-freezing. 1x105 HUPT3 (COSMIC ID: 
COSS907285) and PANC0327 (COSMIC ID: COSS925346) hPDAC cells were transduced 
in presence of 1µg/mL polybrene and selected with puromycin antibiotic. Target gene 
expression was induced for stated time points by the addition of 100ng/µL doxycycline into 
P/S-free culturing medium. RNA isolation, qRT-PCR and SCRB-Seq were performed as 
described above. For differential gene expression analysis, raw sequencing data were 
mapped to the human reference genome (GRCh 38p10). Transcript and gene definitions 
were used according to the ENSEMBL annotation release 87. Group comparisons 
(KRASG12D vs GFP) were conducted with DESeq2.
Somatic CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing for tumor clone tracking in mice
Multiplexed gene editing of tumor suppressor genes using CRISPR/Cas9 in the pancreas of 
PK mice was performed as described elsewhere30. Primary cultures of induced mPDACs 
were isolated as described above and monitored for the simultaneous presence of epithelial 
and mesenchymal phenotypes. Enrichment of epithelial and mesenchymal cell morphologies 
was achieved by differential exposition times to trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). 
Short-term incubation (2-3 min) at room temperature induced detachment of mesenchymal 
cells, while epithelial colonies remained adherent. Both cell fractions were subsequently 
grown to 80% confluency in new flasks. This process was repeated for 3-6 times until 
homogenous epithelial and mesenchymal cell fractions were enriched. Clonal origin of both 
phenotypes was confirmed by targeted amplicon-based next generation sequencing of 
CRISPR/Cas9-edited loci as described earlier30,59. Analyses of the Kras allelic status and 
mRNA expression were carried out as described above.
Statistics and reproducibility
For each experiment, all statistics were performed as indicated in respective Figure legends 
and Extended Data Figure legends. Statistical testing across all classes was performed to 
account for multiple testing. Continuous variables were tested for normal distribution. Non-
parametric tests were used for non-normally distributed data. Complex statistical techniques 
are explained in detail in the Methods section. No animals were excluded from any of the 
cohorts. The veterinarian pathologists were blinded during histological grading of primary 
tumors and metastasis screening. The study was of explorative nature. Due to this study 
design prior knowledge of the expected effect-size was not available and no power 
calculations were conducted.
Code availability
Source code is available from the authors upon reasonable request.
Data Availability
Sequence data have been deposited at EBI European Nucleotide Archive (ENA; https://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ena) under accession number PRJEB23787. Microarray data have been 
deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) 
under accession number GSE107458. All data are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.
Mueller et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Mutational patterns, karyotype complexity and structural alterations in 
primary PDAC.
a, Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and indels in primary PDAC cultures derived from 38 
KrasG12D (PK) mice, as detected by whole-exome sequencing. Recurrently mutated genes 
that are frequently altered in human cancers and/or genomewide pancreas-specific 
transposon screens are indicated. b, Frequency of somatic base substitutions based on 
trinucleotide context in mouse (n=38 PK mice) and human PDAC (n=51 patients, data used 
Mueller et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 for analysis from 6). b-f, Mutation spectra defined by trinucleotide contexts around base 
substitutions as detected by whole-exome sequencing show similar patterns in PK mice 
(n=38) and in relevant human pancreatic cancer cohorts. Base substitutions were extracted 
from BAM, VCF or MAF files from: b, Witkiewicz et al.6, c, Bailey et al.7, d, TCGA-
PAAD, e, Barretina et al.46 and f, Alexandrov et al.47. Additional information regarding the 
analysis of each cohort is provided in Supplementary Table 2. g, Mutational signatures in 
mouse and human pancreatic cancer cohorts. Information on mutational signatures was used 
from Alexandrov et al.47, who identified 21 mutational signatures operative in human 
cancer. The „deconstructSigs“ tool was used to determine the composition of the given set of 
21 mutational signatures in each pancreatic cancer cohort. Extraction of mutational 
signatures strongly depends on SNV load per tumor. Due to the low mutational burden of 
mPDACs from PK mice (median of 18 SNVs per tumor as detected by WES), the analyses 
of mutational signatures could not be performed at the level of individual tumors. We have 
therefore investigated the contribution of each of the 21 mutational signatures to the SNV 
spectrum at the cohort-level (see Methods). Signature 1, reflecting age-associated C>T 
transversions at NCG trinucleotides, was the only signature consistently identifiable in all 
cohorts of human and mouse pancreatic cancer. In comparison to human cohorts, PK mice 
show C>G substitutions at GCC trinucleotides that cannot be attributed to one of 21 
mutational signatures. Note that mutations at the GCC motif are not a general phenomenon 
of PDAC from PK mice, since only 4 samples are predominantly contributing to this peak. 
h-i, Representative M-FISH karyotypes with no or few karyotypic changes are shown for a 
diploid (40 chromosomes) and tetraploid mouse PDAC (81 chromosomes). Tumor 9591 
shows gain of chr14. j, Representative karyotype of a complex diploid mPDAC genome with 
aneuploidy and translocations (46 chromosomes). Both copies of chr4 are involved in 
translocations: der(4)t(4;10) and der(4)t(4;16); likely affecting Cdkn2a. Further structural 
alterations and copy number changes are: +5, der(5)t(4;5)*2, +6, +7, +8, del(9), +14, 
del(14), der(16)t(5;16), +17. k, Representative example of a complex tetraploid mPDAC 
karyotype (77 chromosomes). Structural alterations are: der(1)t(1;11), dic(9;9), 
der(11)t(1;11), and der(14)t(14;19). Single chromosomal copy number changes are: +2, -3, 
-9, -10, -11, -13, -14, +15 and +19. Del, deletion; der, derivative chromosome; dic, dicentric 
chromosome; t, translocation; „-“, chromosome loss; „+“, chromosome gain. l, (Extension to 
Fig. 1c.) Circos plot shows CNAs assessed by aCGH as well as translocations and ploidy 
states detected by M-FISH in 38 primary PDACs derived from PK mice (n=38). CNAs for 
each mPDAC are displayed as log2 difference from tail control. Frequencies of 
translocations per chromosome are indicated in green in the inner circle of the graph. 
Connecting lines indicate individual translocations and involved chromosomes. On chr4, 
genomic alterations frequently involve Cdkn2a or Ncruc, a Non-coding regulatory region 
upstream of Cdkn2a (27/38 cancers with homozygous and 10/38 with heterozygous 
inactivation of Cdkn2a and/or Ncruc). Only one cancer remained Cdkn2aWT. The target of 
copy number changes on chr6 is KrasG12D, either through arm level gain or focal 
amplification. In addition, primary mPDAC of PK mice exhibited recurrent genetic 
amplifications affecting other known oncogenes, such as Myc or Yap1, or Nfkb2, a novel 
oncogenic PDAC driver identified in this study (see also Fig. 2e,f and Extended Data Figure 
4).
Mueller et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 2. Characterization of complex rearrangements in PDAC from PK mice 
and statistical inference of chromothripsis based on whole genome sequencing (WGS).
a-n, Copy number profiles of chromosomes with complex rearrangements (defined as n≥10 
CNAs per chromosome) from primary mPDAC cell cultures as detected by aCGH. A total of 
14 mPDACs had chromosomes with complex rearrangements. a-i, Nine primary mPDACs 
show copy number patterns characterized by heterozygous deletions and oscillation of copy 
number around few states, indicating chromothripsis as the underlying mechanism. g, 
mPDAC-S821 was subjected to whole genome sequencing for the inference of 
Mueller et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 chromothripsis using previously established criteria14 (see Fig. 1d and Extended Data 
Figure 2p-w). j-m, Four primary mPDACs showed complex rearrangements with multiple 
copy number states on chr4, likely acquired through progressive/sequential rearrangement 
cycles. n, Cancer 5671 carries a complex rearrangement on chr15 characterized by 
oscillating copy number states and 3 prominent focal amplifications, of which one contained 
the Myc oncogene. Myc amplification is most likely the result of double minute 
chromosome formation during chromothriptic rearrangement of chr15. o, Comparison of age 
at tumor diagnosis in Cdkn2aΔHOM-deleted cancers with (n=10) or without (n=15) complex 
clustered chromosomal rearrangements (n≥10 CNAs/chromosome). Complex clustered 
rearrangements are associated with significantly shortened time to tumor diagnosis, 
indicating accelerated tumor evolution through genetic crisis. Two-sided log-rank test. p, 
Criteria proposed by Korbel et al.14 were tested for the inference of chromothripsis. Circos 
plot displays SNP ratio (inner circle, red dashed line indicating heterozygosity), CNV (outer 
circle, blue area indicating deletion, red amplification) and structural variations (SVs, colors 
as in v) as detected by WGS. Chr4 shows a complex deletion pattern and massive 
rearrangements associated with loss of one copy of Cdkn2a. The second copy of Cdkn2a is 
focally deleted. In addition, a balanced translocation of a ~200Kb segment from trisomic 
chr6 to chr4 and a far smaller segment of chr4 into chr6 was detected. The Kras locus is not 
directly affected by this inter-chromosomal translocation. LOH, CNAs and rearrangements 
are not detected on other chromosomes. q, In a chromothriptic model, DNA breakpoints 
tend to cluster on a chromosome. Testing against an exponential distribution (parameter λ 
derived from mean of observed distance between adjacent breakpoints), revealed 
significantly shorter distances than expected in a progressive model (n=146 breakpoints). 
P<10-12; χ_-goodness-of-fit test. r, In a progressive model of acquisition of massive 
rearrangements, copy number states tend to be more complex than in the chromothriptic. 
Monte Carlo simulations were used to generate a progressive evolution model with 
sequential accumulation of observed rearrangements (n=100 simulations per number of 
SVs). mPDAC S821 showed fewer copy number states on chr4 than expected in the 
progressive model. Mean is indicated as a black point and lines represent the 95% CI. s, 
Chromothriptic tumors typically feature interspersed loss and retention of heterozygosity. 
Accordingly, there was a high overlap between deleted regions and LOH segments on chr4 
(Jaccard index (J) = 0.99). t, In a chromothriptic model, DNA shattering typically occurs on 
a single haplotype. M-FISH showed that significant loss of chromosomal content occurred 
on only one copy of chr4. u, To show random chromothriptic DNA shattering and re-joining, 
observed segments (n=73) were re-ordered by running Monte Carlo simulations (n=103) that 
generate a background probability distribution. S821 segment order lies within the 
chromothriptic null model. Two-sided P=0.78. v, All 4 SV-types are uniformly distributed in 
a chromothriptic tumor model. P=0.43; χ_-goodness-of-fit test. w, In a chromothriptic 
model, paired end connection types (as given by the SV-type) induce an alternating sequence 
of DNA segment ends when ordered according to the genomic position on the original 
chromosome. Tendency towards this alternating 3’-to-5’ pattern of rearranged DNA segment 
ends (n=146) was tested by using right-sided Wald-Wolfowitz runs test. P<10-12. x, 
Mutation clusters in relation to breakpoint junctions involved in chromothripsis are shown as 
rainfall plot for primary PDAC from PK mouse S821. Each dot represents a single somatic 
nucleotide variation (SNV) and is ordered on the x-axis according to its position in the 
Mueller et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mouse genome. The distance of each SNV to the previous SNV in the genome is shown on 
the y-axis. The coloring of individual SNV dots indicates the type of nucleotide substitution. 
y, Chr4 “zoom-in” from (x). Breakpoint junctions are shown according to their genomic 
position on chr4. No mutation clusters - neither in absence nor in combination with 
breakpoint junctions - were detected, consistent with chromothripsis involving end joining 
DNA repair mechanisms. This is in contrast to other complex rearrangement types, such as 
chromoanasynthesis, which arise through replication-based mechanisms with breakpoint-
associated high mutation rates (e.g. kataegis).
Mueller et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. Specificity, timing, mechanisms and impact of KrasG12D gene dosage 
alterations on gene expression in pancreatic tumorigenesis.
a, Overlay of copy number profiles of primary mPDAC cell cultures from PK mice (n=38) 
as determined by aCGH. Y-axis shows frequency of a genomic region to be amplified (up) or 
deleted (down) in the cohort, with Cdkn2a and Kras loci being most frequently affected by 
CNAs. b, Prevalence of LOH in primary mPDAC cell cultures from PK mice (n=38) based 
on whole exome sequencing (WES) data. A chromosome was considered to be affected by 
LOH if the SNP frequency was shifted to ≤0.1 or ≥0.9 in a segment with a size ≥200kb. 
Mueller et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 LOH on chr4 is frequently the consequence of heterozygous deletions involving the Cdkn2a 
locus. By contrast, LOH on chr6 is predominantly copy number neutral and linked to 
increase in KrasG12D gene dosage. Chr4 (home of Cdkn2a) and chr6 (home of Kras) show 
markedly increased rates of LOH as compared to all other chromosomes reflecting their 
functional importance during tumorigenesis. c-h, Genetic mechanisms of KrasG12D gene 
dosage alterations as identified by aCGH, M-FISH and whole exome sequencing (WES) in 
pancreatic cancers from PK mice. The observed types of increased KrasG12D gene dosage 
acquisition were: (i) focal gain (affecting ≤50% of the chromosome length), arising either 
through replication-based mechanisms (2 cases, one with high-level KrasG12D amplification 
[shown in c] and one with low level amplification) or translocation and subsequent 
amplification of the translocated chromosome (one case [shown in d]), (ii) arm-level gain 
(affecting ≥50% of the chromosome length) arising through mitotic errors (7 cases of whole-
chromosome gain [example shown in e], occasionally [2 cases] with concomitant intra-
chromosomal deletions or translocations not affecting Kras [example shown in f]) and (iii) 
copy-number neutral LOH (CN-LOH, KrasG12D homozygosity, acquired uniparental 
disomy), arising either through mitotic recombination (affecting parts of chr6 [shown in h]) 
or chromosomal missegregation (duplication of KrasG12D-mutant chr6 and loss of wild-type 
chr6 [shown in g]). c, mPDAC S134 shows a high-order focal amplification of KrasG12D. 
Sharp borders, small size of the amplification (600kb) and strong increase in copy number 
(4x) indicate that KrasG12D was amplified through multiple cycles of repeated template-
switching by a replication-based DNA repair mechanism. KrasG12D mutant allele frequency 
is 89.1%. d, Tumor 4706 carries a focal amplification of KrasG12D. M-FISH analysis 
revealed that the mutant KrasG12D allele (chr6) was likely first affected by a reciprocal 
translocation of chr4 and chr6, resulting in two rearranged chromosomes: Der(4)T(4;6) and 
Der(6)T(4;6). Subsequently, Der(4)T(4;6) was missegregated through mitotic error resulting 
in focal gain of the KrasG12D locus. KrasG12D mutant allele frequency is 72.2%. e, mPDAC 
R1035 shows ‘classical’ whole chromosome gain (trisomy) of chr6, which was likely 
generated through mitotic error/missegregation. The KrasG12D mutant allele frequency is 
69.8%. f, In tumor 8442 arm-level gain of KrasG12D was likely generated through mitotic 
missegregation of chr6. Intra-chromosomal deletion on one of three chromosomes (19.6Mb) 
does not affect Kras. KrasG12D mutant allele frequency is 66.4%. Asterisk, chr6 with 
reduced length resulting from intra-chromosomal deletion. g-h, mPDAC 16992 and B590 
display copy-number neutral LOH (CN-LOH) leading to increased KrasG12D gene dosage. 
KrasG12D mutant allele frequency is 99.2% and 96.3%, respectively. The SNP pattern of 
chr6 in mPDAC 16992 reveals that the whole chromosome is affected by CN-LOH 
indicating chromosome missegregation (duplication of the KrasG12D-mutant chr6 and loss of 
wild-type chr6) as the underlying mechanism. By contrast, in mPDAC B590 only a partial 
region of chr6 is affected by CN-LOH, therefore probably resulting from mitotic 
recombination. i, Allele-specific KrasG12D mRNA expression in KrasG12D-HET (n=12) vs. 
KrasG12D-iGD (n=26) primary PDAC cell cultures from PK mice as detected by combined 
analysis of amplicon-based RNA-Seq (proportion of mutant/wild-type Kras mRNA) and 3’-
prime pA RNA-Seq (amount of total Kras mRNA, but not the proportion of mutant/wild-
type Kras mRNA due to sequencing of 3’-prime transcript ends; see Methods section). This 
figure is related to Fig. 2b. ***P≤0.001, two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; bars, median. j, 
Mutant KrasG12D mRNA levels in Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHET/WT (n=11) vs. Ckdn2a/NcrucΔHOM 
Mueller et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (n=27) primary PDAC cell cultures from PK mice as detected by combined amplicon-based 
RNA-Seq and 3’-prime pA RNA-Seq. This figure is related to Extended Data Figure 5f. 
***P≤0.001, two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; bars, median. k, Mutant KrasG12D mRNA 
levels in transcriptional clusters of mPDAC from PK mice (C2a/b/c/C1, n=5/7/6/15) as 
detected by combined amplicon-based RNA-Seq and 3’-prime pA RNA-Seq. This figure is 
related to Fig. 5d. P=1.6*10-5, two-sided Pearson correlation; bars, median. l-n, Interphase 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for the analysis of copy-number and ploidy states 
at the KRAS locus on chr12 in human pancreatic intra-epithelial neoplasia (PanIN) with 
KRASG12 variant allele frequencies (VAFs) of ~100%. KRASG12 VAFs are indicated above 
each FISH profile as detected by amplicon-based deep sequencing. A VAF of ~100% can be 
caused either by loss of the wild-type KRAS-locus (hemizygosity of KRASG12-MUT: one 
KRASG12-MUT allele per cell) or by CN-LOH (acquired uniparental disomy; homozygosity 
of KRASG12-MUT: two KRASG12-MUT alleles per cell). All samples show a diploid genome 
as suggested by CEN12 (two red signals per nucleus). Neither loss of one KRAS allele nor 
monosomy of chr12 was observed providing evidence for CN-LOH and increased 
KRASG12-MUT gene dosage in hPanIN. Scale bars, 2.5µm; CEN12, centromere probe chr12.
Mueller et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 4. Enrichment for amplification of alternative oncogenic drivers in 
mPDACs of PK mice with KrasG12D-HET status.
a-b, Two primary mPDACs with strong focal Myc amplification on chr15 are shown, as 
detected by aCGH. Red dashed line indicates no copy number change. c-d, Focal copy 
number gains targeting the Yap1 locus on chr9 in primary mPDACs 4072 and 9203 as 
revealed by aCGH. e, Chr19 was also frequently subject to arm-level gain (see Fig. 1c and 
Extended Data Figure 1l). Primary mPDAC of PK mouse 4072 harbors a focal gain on chr19 
containing 20 genes: 9130011E15Rik, Gm6813, Hps6, Ldb1, Pprc1, Nolc1, Elovl3, Pitx3, 
Mueller et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Gbf1, Nfkb2, Psd, Fbxl15, Cuedc2, Tmem180, Actr1a, Sufu, Trim8, Arl3, Sfxn2, 
D19Wsu162e. f, Cross-species analyses revealed that the orthologous region on human 
chr10 is also subject to recurrent amplifications in human PDAC (8 out of 109 hPDACs have 
focal amplifications; data from Witkiewicz et al.6). Of the 20 mouse genes, sixteen could be 
assigned to orthologues in humans. Further analyses revealed that only two genes, NFKB2 
and PSD, are within the minimal overlapping region of recurrent amplification (data from6 
and oncoplot from cBioPortal60,61). g, NFKB2, but not PSD, shows medium protein 
expression in exocrine glandular cells of normal pancreatic tissue, as detected by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC, data from TheHumanProteinAtlas62). h, NFKB2 is highly 
expressed in 17% (2/12) of stained hPDAC biopsies as shown by IHC. In contrast, there was 
no PSD expression in any of the analyzed pancreatic cancers (0/12). Protein expression data 
was used from TheHumanProteinAtlas62.
Extended Data Figure 5. Characterization of Cdkn2a (chr4) alterations and correlation with 
KrasMUT gene dosage variation and mRNA expression in mouse and human PDAC.
a-d, Cdkn2a alteration on mouse chr4 can occur through arm-level, complex or focal loss as 
well as uniparental disomy (see Figure 3). In addition, chr4 is frequently involved in inter-
chromosomal translocations. Examples of representative karyotypes of primary pancreatic 
cancer cultures derived from PK mice with translocations involving chr4, likely affecting the 
Cdkn2a locus. In all 4 cases, chr4 translocations were found in all 10 metaphase spreads of 
Mueller et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 each cancer, indicating their early acquisition during tumor evolution. a, mPDAC 4706 with 
diploid karyotype: 42, XX, del(X), +2, der(2)t(2;4)is(2;4), der(4)t(4;6)*2, +der(4)t(2;4), 
der(6)t(4;6). b, mPDAC 4900 also features a diploid karyotype: 41, XX, der(X)is(X;4), 
der(4)is(4;8), del(4), +6, der(8)t(4;8). c, mPDAC 5123 underwent polyploidization, after 
translocation of chr4 with chr1 and an deletion on the other copy: 78, XXXX, -1, del(1)*2, 
-2, +4*2, der(4)t(1;4)*3, del(4)*3, -5, -7, -9, +15, -17, +18 d, mPDAC 8349 shows a diploid 
karyotype: 40,XX, der(4)t(3;4), der(4)t(4;13), +del(4), der(13)t(4;13). e, KrasG12D variant 
allele frequencies detected by amplicon-based deep sequencing of the Kras locus are higher 
in Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHOM mPDAC (n=27) as compared to Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHET/WT (n=11) 
pancreatic cancers. All cancers are from PK mice. Blue dots indicate tumors with complete 
Ncruc deletion. ***P≤0.001, two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; bars, median. f, Allele-specific 
expression of mutant KrasG12D mRNA is increased in primary tumors from PK mice with 
Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHOM (n=27) background in comparison to Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHET/WT (n=11) 
cancers. Primary mPDACs with homozygous loss of Ncruc are highlighted in blue. 
KrasG12D expression was analyzed by combining amplicon-based RNA-Seq and qRT-PCR 
(as described in the Methods section). **P=0.003, two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; bars, 
median. g, KRASMUT variant allele frequencies based on WES in a published dataset of 
microdissected human PDAC (Witkiewicz et al., reduced stromal content) was analyzed with 
respect to CDKN2A and TP53 status. KRASMUT allele frequency was higher in mutated/
homozygous deleted CDKN2A and/or TP53 (CDKN2AMUT/ΔHOM/TP53MUT/ΔHOM; 
hPDACs as compared to cancers with CDKN2AΔHET/WT/TP53ΔHET/WT status (from left: 
n=28, n=14, n=28, n=30). Two-sided rank-based ANOVA (P=5.8*10-6); post hoc testing 
with two-sided Tukey honest significant difference test, *adj. P≤0.05, ***adj. P≤0.001; bars, 
median. h, Fraction of the genome altered by copy number changes detected by aCGH in 
primary mPDACs of PK (n=38), PKC (n=16) and PKP (n=16) mice. PKP mice show a 
significantly increased CNA load as compared to PKC mice. Two-sided rank-based ANOVA 
(P=0.01); post hoc testing with two-sided Tukey honest significant difference test, **adj. 
P=0.009, adj. P-values for group wise comparisons are shown; bars, median. Del, deletion; 
der, derivative chromosome; is, insertion; t, translocation; „-“, chromosome loss; „+“, 
chromosome gain.
Mueller et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 6. Complete Cdkn2a barrier loss precedes KrasG12D-iGD in primary 
mPDAC of PK mouse 53704.
Copy number alterations at chr4 (Cdkn2a) and chr6 (Kras) in mPDAC 53704 and 
corresponding metastases, as detected by aCGH (top) and whole-exome sequencing based 
SNP pattern analysis (bottom). The primary cancer and both liver metastases display 
identical focal deletions of Cdkn2a and similar SNP patterns on chr4 revealing that all 
lesions share the same ancestor cell with complete Cdkn2a loss. By contrast, SNP analysis 
on chr6 revealed discordant patterns in the primary mPDAC and both metastases. Li2 shows 
partial LOH of a distal region on chr6 involving the Kras locus, while LOH in Li3 involves 
the whole chr6. This explains the step-wise LOH pattern observed on chr6 in the primary 
mPDAC. The graphic on the right shows the combined interpretation of CNV/LOH profiles, 
which suggests the following sequence of genetic events during tumor evolution: The initial 
KrasG12D mutation was followed by focal deletion of one copy of Cdkn2a. In a subsequent 
genetic event, the second copy of Cdkn2a was lost by chr4 missegregation and copy-number 
neutral LOH. Complete barrier loss allowed for convergent evolution of increased KrasG12D 
gene dosage through copy-number neutral LOH and gave rise to independent metastases in 
the liver. Note: A major obstacle for equivalent human studies is the limited availability of 
human matched primary/metastases samples, particularly of treatment naive ones. We 
performed cross-species analyses using data from a recent study, which analyzed human 
treatment-naive metastatic PDACs by whole-genome sequencing8 and provided CDKN2A 
and KRAS copy number data for matched primaries/metastases from 3 patients. In one 
patient the sequential order of CDKN2A deletion and KRAS amplification could be 
reconstructed: homozygous CDKN2A deletions were identical in all primaries and 
Mueller et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 metastases, whereas there were 5 different KRAS gains in the 6 metastases. This suggests 
convergent evolution of mutant KRAS gene dosage gain upon homozygous CDKN2A loss 
in this patient, in line with similar data in large series of mouse cancers and their metastases 
(see Figure 3e).
Extended Data Figure 7. Transcriptome-based subtyping of human primary pancreatic cancer 
and classification of human PDAC cell lines and primary PDAC cell cultures from PK mice.
a-c, Independent cross-comparison of transcriptional classification systems from Collisson 
et al.28, Moffitt et al.29 and Bailey et al.7. Collisson et al. performed PDAC microdissection 
Mueller et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and defined 3 transcriptional subtypes: classical, quasimesenchymal (QM) and exocrine-like. 
Moffitt et al. defined 2 subtypes (classical, basal-like) using (i) virtual separation of tumor 
and non-tumor gene expression patterns, (ii) transplantation studies and (iii) human PDAC 
cell lines; and proposed that the exocrine-like signature stems from exocrine pancreatic 
cells, rather than from the cancer cells. Bailey et al. used bulk tumors and defined 4 subtypes 
(pancreatic progenitor, immunogenic, squamous, aberrantly differentiated endocrine 
exocrine [ADEX]). RNA-Seq data from PDAC and adenosquamous pancreatic carcinoma 
from Bailey et al. was used for cross-comparison of classification systems. Other 
histological subentities of pancreatic cancer were excluded (e.g. IPMN, MCN, acinar cell 
carcinoma). The Bailey subtyping for this dataset was available. a, Unbiased hierarchical 
clustering of primary pancreatic cancer samples (n=71) from Bailey et al. using Collisson 
classifier genes. b, Subtyping of primary pancreatic cancer samples (n=71) from Bailey et al. 
using classifier genes defined by Moffitt et al. c, Consensus clustering based on analyses 
performed in a/b. There is considerable overlap between at least two subtypes, which are in 
large parts captured by the initially proposed Collisson classical and quasimesenchymal 
(QM) signatures (which are also detected in mouse and human PDAC cell lines; see 
Extended Data Figure 7e-h). The Bailey classification (based on bulk tissue analyses) 
suggests that Collisson classical cancers (microdissected cancer tissue) can be further sub-
stratified in some with and some without a strong immune cell infiltration. The Moffitt 
classification suggests that the Collisson exocrine-like signature (Bailey ADEX subtype) 
stems from “contaminating” healthy exocrine pancreatic cells, based on the evidence 
described above. Given that the Collisson exocrine-like signature was derived from 
microdissected PDAC, such “contamination” is only conceivable, if exocrine-like signature 
genes were dramatically higher expressed in pancreatic acinar cells as compared to PDAC 
cells. d, Volcano plot showing strongly upregulated expression of exocrine-like genes in 
human wild-type pancreas (13 to 241 fold; median: 183-fold upregulation). Note that 15 out 
of 19 exocrine-like signature genes (red dots) are among the top50 genes upregulated in 
human wild-type pancreas (n=3) as compared to hPDAC cell lines (n=30) (y axis is 
calculated on Benjamini-Hochberg adj. P-values derived from R package limma [see 
Methods section]). Although these data do not exclude the existence of exocrine-like 
PDACs, they support the possibility that “contamination” with few acinar cells can impose 
an exocrine-like signature on a cancer. This might explain why human or mouse PDAC cell 
lines don´t cluster into the exocrine-like subtype (see also Extended Data Figure 7e-f below). 
e, Hierarchical clustering of microarray-based expression profiles using Collisson identifier 
genes28 on human PDAC cell lines (n=19, GEO series GSE17891). As also described 
earlier by Collisson et al., only two subtypes can be detected in human cell line collections: 
classical and quasimesenchymal (QM). Of note, the most prominent change in the QM cell 
lines is downregulation (extinction) of the classical assigner genes, whereas expression of 
QM classifier genes is quite variable. We therefore also use here the terms classical and non-
classical. f, Projection of the Collisson classifiers on mouse PDAC cell culture 
transcriptomes (n=33) also identified classical and non-classical subtypes. The non-classical 
subtype contained a subset of mPDAC cell cultures from cluster C2a/b/c (epithelial 
morphology; equivalent of human QM) and all cluster C1 mPDACs (mesenchymal 
morphology; “M” cluster). g, Application of a human EMT hallmark gene set52 for 
hierarchical clustering of expression profiles from primary PDAC cultures (PK mice; n=33) 
Mueller et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 resulted in a separation of C1 (mesenchymal) and C2a/b/c (epithelial) cell lines. h, 
Projection of the EMT hallmark gene set on human PDAC cell line transcriptomes (n=19, 
GEO series GSE17891) did not result in a clear separation of samples, indicating 
underrepresentation of the mesenchymal M subtype (equivalent to murine C1/“M”) in 
available human cell line collections. As shown in Extended Data Figure 9b, however, the 
EMT signature is detectable in undifferentiated human pancreatic carcinoma, which is the 
human equivalent of the mesenchymal mouse PDACs in C1.
Mueller et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 8. Functional analyses to study the role of KrasG12D gene dosage increase 
in EMT. a-d, Multiplexed somatic CRISPR/Cas9 mutagenesis for phylogenetic tracking of 
epithelial/mesenchymal mPDAC clones in vivo.
a, Graphic demonstrates major steps of multiplexed gene editing by pooled delivery of 
CRISPR/Cas9 vectors, each targeting a different tumor suppressor gene in the pancreas of 
PK mice. Electroporation-based transfection enables low-frequency mosaic vector delivery 
(average of 120 cells per pancreas are transfected) to induce clonal tumors. Primary tumor 
cell cultures were screened for the simultaneous presence of epithelial and mesenchymal 
cells. Two such cancers were identified (mPDACs from mouse 021 and mouse 901) and 
subjected to differential trypsinization in order to enrich for each morphology. b, Amplicon-
based deep sequencing of all sgRNA-targeted loci revealed identical indel patterns in both 
epithelial/mesenchymal culture pairs. This shows (i) that epithelial and mesenchymal cells 
originate from the same clone and (ii) that the CRISPR-induced mutations are not 
contributing to the differential phenotype. c, KrasG12D variant allele frequencies in epithelial 
and mesenchymal cell cultures from mPDAC 021 and mPDAC 901, as detected by 
amplicon-based deep sequencing. Both cancers had increased KrasG12D expression in 
mesenchymal cells (see Fig. 5e). In mPDAC 021 this is due to selective amplification of the 
KrasG12D allele in mesenchymal cells. In mPDAC 901 genetic KrasG12D amplification was 
not observed, suggesting induction of increased Kras expression in mesenchymal cells by 
other mechanisms. d, Gene set enrichment analysis using “Molecular Signatures Database” 
(MSigDB) of differentially regulated genes in mesenchymal versus epithelial mPDACs 
based on RNA-Seq. Mesenchymal clones of mPDAC 021 and mPDAC 901 show an 
upregulation of genes involved in “MAPK signaling pathway” and “EMT” as compared to 
the corresponding epithelial clones, in line with increased KrasG12D gene dosage (a full list 
of enriched gene sets is provided for comparisons in Supplementary Table 15). FDR-
adjusted P-values are shown on y axis. Representative data from one experiment are shown. 
e-g, induction of EMT-like transcriptional programs by KRASG12D overexpression in human 
PDAC cell lines. e, Graphic of experimental workflow. Two human PDAC cell lines 
(HUPT3 and PANC0327) with homozygous CKDN2A loss (CDKN2AΔHOM) and 
heterozygous KRASMUT (KRASMUT-HET) status were transduced with lentivirus carrying 
doxycycline-inducible KRASG12D or GFP-control expression constructs. KRASG12D or 
GFP expression was induced by adding doxycycline for 1, 3 and 5 days. f, Gene set 
enrichment analysis using “Molecular Signatures Database” (MSigDB) of differentially 
regulated genes in KRASG12D- versus GFP-induced hPDAC cell lines HUPT3 and 
PANC0327 based on RNA-Seq. Upon doxycycline treatment, both hPDAC cell lines showed 
a consistent upregulation of genes involved in “KRAS signaling up” and “EMT” (a full list 
of enriched gene sets is provided for both cell lines in Supplementary Table 16). FDR-
adjusted P-values are shown on y axis. g, Expression of marker genes for epithelial (CDH1) 
or mesenchymal (VIM) cell differentiation and invasion/matrix disassembly (MMP1) was 
validated by qPCR (normalized to GAPDH and PPIA). In line with RNA-Seq data 
KRASG12D-induced cells show an increased expression of the mesenchymal marker gene 
VIM, increased expression of MMP1 and reduced levels of epithelial marker gene CDH1. 
*P≤0.05, **P≤0.005, ns=not significant, two-tailed t-test; bars=mean; error bars=SEM.
Mueller et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 9. Transcriptional profiles of human undifferentiated pancreatic 
carcinomas are enriched for signatures of oncogenic signaling intensification and EMT but not 
for activation of TP63ΔN transcriptional network.
a, Primary pancreatic tumors from PK mice with a mesenchymal phenotype (C1 cluster, 
n=15) are almost exclusively classified as undifferentiated/sarcomatoid by histopathological 
evaluation and tend to have a reduced age at diagnosis when compared to epithelial (C2a/b/c 
cluster, n=18) tumors (histopathological grade 1 to 3 [G1-G3]). This aggressive behavior of 
undifferentiated pancreatic carcinoma is also observed in human patients and is associated 
with worse clinical outcome33. P-value calculated by two-sided log-rank test. b, 
Mueller et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Comparison of publically available expression profiles of human undifferentiated pancreatic 
carcinoma (n=4), PDAC (WHO grade 1 to 3 [G1-G3], n=64) and adenosquamous pancreatic 
carcinoma (n=7). Human samples with the above histopathological characteristics for which 
expression-based subtype information from Bailey et al.7 was available were used and 
complemented with available undifferentiated pancreatic carcinomas from the ICGC PACA-
AU cohort (Supplementary Table 18). Other histological subentities of pancreatic cancer 
were excluded (e.g. IPMN, MCN, acinar cell carcinoma). ANOVA was performed to select 
genes which are differentially expressed in at least one of the six defined subgroups of 
pancreatic cancer: (i) undifferentiated, (ii) adenosquamous pancreatic carcinoma and (iii-vi) 
PDAC (G1-G3) sub-stratified in pancreatic progenitor, immunogenic, squamous and 
aberrantly differentiated endocrine exocrine (ADEX) Bailey subtypes. Differentially 
regulated genes were used for unbiased hierarchical clustering of these pancreatic cancer 
transcriptional profiles. Five sub-clusters of co-regulated gene expression could be identified 
according to the cluster tree on the y-axis (separated by white horizontal bars in the 
heatmap). Gene set enrichment analysis using “Molecular Signatures Database” (MSigDB) 
was performed for individual sub-clusters and terms related to predominating gene sets/
pathways are annotated for each cluster on the right (full list provided in Supplementary 
Table 17). Undifferentiated pancreatic carcinomas cluster together and are associated with 
(i) upregulation of genes in cluster 3 (containing MAPK signaling pathway and gene sets 
relevant during embryonic development or EMT) and (ii) downregulation of genes in 
clusters 2 and 5, which contain gene sets related to epithelial cell differentiation, embryonic 
development or metabolic signatures. This reflects the pathway enrichment signature in the 
equivalent undifferentiated (mesenchymal) mouse PDACs (cluster C1/"M" in PK mice; see 
Extended Data Figure 7g) and provides further support for the link between KRAS signaling 
intensification, EMT and the undifferentiated tumor phenotype. The immunogenic PDAC 
subtype showed high expression of cluster 4 genes, which was also strong (even elevated) in 
undifferentiated pancreatic carcinomas, suggesting an increased immune cell infiltration in 
undifferentiated carcinomas. Cluster 1 contained gene sets related to cell proliferation/cell 
cycle, squamous differentiation and TP63ΔN transcriptional targets, which were most highly 
overexpressed in pancreatic carcinomas with adenosquamous histology. Undifferentiated 
pancreatic carcinomas did not show activation of the TP63ΔN transcriptional targets. This 
suggests that activation of TP63ΔN transcriptional targets is not causally linked to KRAS 
signaling intensification and EMT (see also Extended Data Figure 9c-d, showing a lack of 
association of undifferentiated carcinomas withTP63ΔN transcriptional network activation). 
c, Unbiased hierarchical clustering of human pancreatic carcinomas with adenosquamous 
histology (n=7) as well as PDACs (WHO grade 1 to 3 [G1-G3], n=64) and undifferentiated 
pancreatic carcinomas (n=4) (sample set as in Extended Data Figure 9b) using a list of 
validated TP63ΔN transcriptional targets53. Pancreatic cancers with adenosquamous 
differentiation were significantly enriched in a cluster showing increased TP63ΔN 
transcriptional network activity (P≤0.001, two-sided Fisher’s exact test, OR 130, 95% CI 
11.6-1452). Undifferentiated pancreatic carcinomas did not contribute to this cluster. In line, 
pancreatic cancers from PK mice did not show differential regulation of the TP63ΔN 
network, reflecting the lack of adenosquamous tumors in this cohort (not shown). d, 
Unbiased hierarchical clustering across solid cancers (Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia, 
n=856) using the same gene list showed a strong enrichment of tumors with squamous 
Mueller et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 differentiation in the sub-cluster with highest TP63ΔN transcriptional network expression 
(P≤0.001, two-sided Fisher’s exact test, OR 28.1, 95% CI 16.4-48.1), in line with the 
observation of Hoadley et al.63 that TP63ΔN is a signature for squamous differentiation 
across cancers.
Extended Data Figure 10. KrasG12D-gene dosage is a critical determinant of PDAC biology in a 
mouse model with high mutational load.
The mutational burden in primary PDAC cultures of PK mice was significantly lower as 
compared to human PDAC studies (see Fig. 1b). To account for this potential confounding 
factor and to test if our discoveries in PK mice also apply in a setting of high mutational 
burden, we used a mouse model combining KrasG12D mutation and PiggyBac transposon-
based insertional mutagenesis (PK-PB mice13). PK-PB mice show accelerated 
tumorigenesis as compared to PK mice. PK-PB derived tumors had an extensive mutational 
burden (median of 494 transposon insertions per tumor). Primary cultures of PDAC from 
Mueller et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 PK-PB mice (n=17) were subjected to comprehensive genetic characterization using aCGH, 
microarray-based gene expression profiling, quantitative transposon insertion site 
sequencing (QiSeq) and amplicon-based deep sequencing of the Kras locus. a, 
Transcriptome profiles of primary PDAC cultures from PK-PB mice (n=17) were used for 
unbiased hierarchical clustering that resulted in 2 major clusters (C1 and C2), like in PK 
mice. KrasG12D gene dosage status (as determined by aCGH and amplicon-based deep 
sequencing of the Kras locus) and Cdkn2a status (as determined by aCGH and quantitative 
transposon insertion site sequencing [QiSeq]) are indicated below the cluster tree for each 
individual tumor. Similarly to PK mice, cluster C2a was characterized by KrasG12D-HET and 
Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHET/WT status, whereas mPDACs in clusters C2b/c and C1 had increased 
KrasG12D gene dosage (KrasG12D-iGD) and were Cdkn2a/NcrucΔHOM. The genetic 
KrasG12D-status was significantly associated with expression clusters (P=0.01, two-sided 
Fisher’s exact test) providing further evidence that expression clusters are associated with 
KrasG12D gene dosage. b, Prevalence of KrasG12D-iGD in cultures of primary mPDAC (from 
PK-PB mice) with homozygous (n=12) or heterozygous/wild-type (n=5) Cdkn2a/Ncruc 
status. *P=0.03, two-sided Fisher’s exact test, OR 20.0, 95% CI 1.4-287.8. c, Gene set 
enrichment analysis using DAVID of upregulated genes in cluster C1 (n=5) as compared to 
cluster C2 (n=12) of primary mPDAC cultures from PK-PB mice. As in PK mice, PK-PB 
tumors in C1 are characterized by upregulation of genes enriched in gene sets describing 
mesenchymal cell differentiation and revealed a strong enrichment for Ras downstream 
signaling pathways (full list in Supplementary Table 19). FDR-adjusted P-values are shown 
on y axis. Overall, these analyses show that the biological principles discovered in the PK 
model also apply to pancreatic cancers from PK-PB mice with high mutational load.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank the comparative experimental pathology team for valuable discussions and Aaron Selmeier, Laura Dajka, 
Olga Seelbach, Petra Meyer, Tatjana Schmidt, Julia Eichinger and Teresa Stauber for excellent technical assistance 
as well as Maximilian Reichert for vector constructs. The work was supported by the German Cancer Consortium 
Joint Funding Program, the Helmholtz Gemeinschaft (PCCC Consortium), the German Research Foundation 
(SFB1243; A13/A14) and the European Research Council (ERC CoG No. 648521). The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.
References
1. Rahib L, et al. Projecting cancer incidence and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, 
liver, and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:2913–2921. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0155 [PubMed: 24840647] 
2. Jones S, et al. Core signaling pathways in human pancreatic cancers revealed by global genomic 
analyses. Science. 2008; 321:1801–1806. DOI: 10.1126/science.1164368 [PubMed: 18772397] 
3. Campbell PJ, et al. The patterns and dynamics of genomic instability in metastatic pancreatic cancer. 
Nature. 2010; 467:1109–1113. DOI: 10.1038/nature09460 [PubMed: 20981101] 
4. Biankin AV, et al. Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes. 
Nature. 2012; 491:399–405. DOI: 10.1038/nature11547 [PubMed: 23103869] 
5. Waddell N, et al. Whole genomes redefine the mutational landscape of pancreatic cancer. Nature. 
2015; 518:495–501. DOI: 10.1038/nature14169 [PubMed: 25719666] 
Mueller et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 6. Witkiewicz AK, et al. Whole-exome sequencing of pancreatic cancer defines genetic diversity and 
therapeutic targets. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6744.doi: 10.1038/ncomms7744 [PubMed: 25855536] 
7. Bailey P, et al. Genomic analyses identify molecular subtypes of pancreatic cancer. Nature. 2016; 
531:47–52. DOI: 10.1038/nature16965 [PubMed: 26909576] 
8. Makohon-Moore AP, et al. Limited heterogeneity of known driver gene mutations among the 
metastases of individual patients with pancreatic cancer. Nat Genet. 2017; 49:358–366. DOI: 
10.1038/ng.3764 [PubMed: 28092682] 
9. Jackson EL, et al. Analysis of lung tumor initiation and progression using conditional expression of 
oncogenic K-ras. Genes Dev. 2001; 15:3243–3248. DOI: 10.1101/gad.943001 [PubMed: 11751630] 
10. Schonhuber N, et al. A next-generation dual-recombinase system for time- and host-specific 
targeting of pancreatic cancer. Nat Med. 2014; 20:1340–1347. DOI: 10.1038/nm.3646 [PubMed: 
25326799] 
11. Perez-Mancera PA, et al. The deubiquitinase USP9X suppresses pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. 
Nature. 2012; 486:266–270. DOI: 10.1038/nature11114 [PubMed: 22699621] 
12. Mann KM, et al. Sleeping Beauty mutagenesis reveals cooperating mutations and pathways in 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:5934–5941. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1202490109 [PubMed: 22421440] 
13. Rad R, et al. A conditional piggyBac transposition system for genetic screening in mice identifies 
oncogenic networks in pancreatic cancer. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:47–56. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3164 
[PubMed: 25485836] 
14. Korbel JO, Campbell PJ. Criteria for inference of chromothripsis in cancer genomes. Cell. 2013; 
152:1226–1236. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.023 [PubMed: 23498933] 
15. Notta F, et al. A renewed model of pancreatic cancer evolution based on genomic rearrangement 
patterns. Nature. 2016; 538:378–382. DOI: 10.1038/nature19823 [PubMed: 27732578] 
16. Yamada H, et al. Amplifications of both c-Ki-ras with a point mutation and c-myc in a primary 
pancreatic cancer and its metastatic tumors in lymph nodes. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1986; 77:370–375. 
[PubMed: 3009377] 
17. Heidenblad M, et al. Detailed genomic mapping and expression analyses of 12p amplifications in 
pancreatic carcinomas reveal a 3.5-Mb target region for amplification. Genes Chromosomes 
Cancer. 2002; 34:211–223. DOI: 10.1002/gcc.10063 [PubMed: 11979555] 
18. Sarkisian CJ, et al. Dose-dependent oncogene-induced senescence in vivo and its evasion during 
mammary tumorigenesis. Nat Cell Biol. 2007; 9:493–505. DOI: 10.1038/ncb1567 [PubMed: 
17450133] 
19. Junttila MR, et al. Selective activation of p53-mediated tumour suppression in high-grade tumours. 
Nature. 2010; 468:567–571. DOI: 10.1038/nature09526 [PubMed: 21107427] 
20. Feldser DM, et al. Stage-specific sensitivity to p53 restoration during lung cancer progression. 
Nature. 2010; 468:572–575. DOI: 10.1038/nature09535 [PubMed: 21107428] 
21. Rad R, et al. A genetic progression model of Braf(V600E)-induced intestinal tumorigenesis reveals 
targets for therapeutic intervention. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:15–29. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.05.014 
[PubMed: 23845441] 
22. Rhim AD, et al. EMT and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation. Cell. 2012; 148:349–
361. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.025 [PubMed: 22265420] 
23. Stathis A, Moore MJ. Advanced pancreatic carcinoma: current treatment and future challenges. Nat 
Rev Clin Oncol. 2010; 7:163–172. DOI: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2009.236 [PubMed: 20101258] 
24. Yachida S, et al. Distant metastasis occurs late during the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer. 
Nature. 2010; 467:1114–1117. DOI: 10.1038/nature09515 [PubMed: 20981102] 
25. Schneider G, et al. IKKalpha controls p52/RelB at the skp2 gene promoter to regulate G1- to S-
phase progression. EMBO J. 2006; 25:3801–3812. DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601259 [PubMed: 
16902410] 
26. Hamidi T, et al. Nuclear protein 1 promotes pancreatic cancer development and protects cells from 
stress by inhibiting apoptosis. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:2092–2103. DOI: 10.1172/JCI60144 
[PubMed: 22565310] 
Mueller et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 27. Redston MS, et al. p53 mutations in pancreatic carcinoma and evidence of common involvement of 
homocopolymer tracts in DNA microdeletions. Cancer Res. 1994; 54:3025–3033. [PubMed: 
8187092] 
28. Collisson EA, et al. Subtypes of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and their differing responses to 
therapy. Nat Med. 2011; 17:500–503. DOI: 10.1038/nm.2344 [PubMed: 21460848] 
29. Moffitt RA, et al. Virtual microdissection identifies distinct tumor- and stroma-specific subtypes of 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:1168–1178. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3398 
[PubMed: 26343385] 
30. Maresch R, et al. Multiplexed pancreatic genome engineering and cancer induction by transfection-
based CRISPR/Cas9 delivery in mice. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:10770.doi: 10.1038/ncomms10770 
[PubMed: 26916719] 
31. Morohoshi T, Held G, Kloppel G. Exocrine pancreatic tumours and their histological classification. 
A study based on 167 autopsy and 97 surgical cases. Histopathology. 1983; 7:645–661. [PubMed: 
6313514] 
32. Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, et al. DPC4 gene status of the primary carcinoma correlates with patterns 
of failure in patients with pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:1806–1813. DOI: 10.1200/
JCO.2008.17.7188 [PubMed: 19273710] 
33. Winter JM, et al. Absence of E-cadherin expression distinguishes noncohesive from cohesive 
pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:412–418. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-0487 
[PubMed: 18223216] 
34. Hruban RH, et al. Pathology of genetically engineered mouse models of pancreatic exocrine 
cancer: consensus report and recommendations. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:95–106. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-2168 [PubMed: 16397221] 
35. Hingorani SR, et al. Preinvasive and invasive ductal pancreatic cancer and its early detection in the 
mouse. Cancer Cell. 2003; 4:437–450. [PubMed: 14706336] 
36. Nakhai H, et al. Ptf1a is essential for the differentiation of GABAergic and glycinergic amacrine 
cells and horizontal cells in the mouse retina. Development. 2007; 134:1151–1160. DOI: 10.1242/
dev.02781 [PubMed: 17301087] 
37. Aguirre AJ, et al. Activated Kras and Ink4a/Arf deficiency cooperate to produce metastatic 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:3112–3126. DOI: 10.1101/gad.1158703 
[PubMed: 14681207] 
38. Jonkers J, et al. Synergistic tumor suppressor activity of BRCA2 and p53 in a conditional mouse 
model for breast cancer. Nat Genet. 2001; 29:418–425. DOI: 10.1038/ng747 [PubMed: 11694875] 
39. Lee CL, et al. Generation of primary tumors with Flp recombinase in FRT-flanked p53 mice. Dis 
Model Mech. 2012; 5:397–402. DOI: 10.1242/dmm.009084 [PubMed: 22228755] 
40. Chytil A, Magnuson MA, Wright CV, Moses HL. Conditional inactivation of the TGF-beta type II 
receptor using Cre:Lox. Genesis. 2002; 32:73–75. [PubMed: 11857781] 
41. Bronner IF, Quail MA, Turner DJ, Swerdlow H. Improved Protocols for Illumina Sequencing. Curr 
Protoc Hum Genet. 2014; 80 18 12 11-42. doi: 10.1002/0471142905.hg1802s80
42. Stephens PJ, et al. Massive genomic rearrangement acquired in a single catastrophic event during 
cancer development. Cell. 2011; 144:27–40. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.055 [PubMed: 
21215367] 
43. Jentsch I, Adler ID, Carter NP, Speicher MR. Karyotyping mouse chromosomes by multiplex-
FISH (M-FISH). Chromosome Res. 2001; 9:211–214. [PubMed: 11330395] 
44. Keane TM, et al. Mouse genomic variation and its effect on phenotypes and gene regulation. 
Nature. 2011; 477:289–294. DOI: 10.1038/nature10413 [PubMed: 21921910] 
45. Ye K, Schulz MH, Long Q, Apweiler R, Ning Z. Pindel: a pattern growth approach to detect break 
points of large deletions and medium sized insertions from paired-end short reads. Bioinformatics. 
2009; 25:2865–2871. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp394 [PubMed: 19561018] 
46. Barretina J, et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer 
drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603–607. DOI: 10.1038/nature11003 [PubMed: 22460905] 
47. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
421. DOI: 10.1038/nature12477 [PubMed: 23945592] 
Mueller et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 48. Parekh S, Ziegenhain C, Vieth B, Enard W, Hellmann I. The impact of amplification on differential 
expression analyses by RNA-seq. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:25533.doi: 10.1038/srep25533 [PubMed: 
27156886] 
49. Macosko EZ, et al. Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using 
Nanoliter Droplets. Cell. 2015; 161:1202–1214. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002 [PubMed: 
26000488] 
50. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq 
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014; 15:550.doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8 [PubMed: 
25516281] 
51. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists 
using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:44–57. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2008.211 
[PubMed: 19131956] 
52. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:15545–15550. DOI: 
10.1073/pnas.0506580102 [PubMed: 16199517] 
53. Schaefer CF, et al. PID: the Pathway Interaction Database. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:D674–679. 
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn653 [PubMed: 18832364] 
54. Du P, Kibbe WA, Lin SM. lumi: a pipeline for processing Illumina microarray. Bioinformatics. 
2008; 24:1547–1548. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn224 [PubMed: 18467348] 
55. Ritchie ME, et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and 
microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:e47.doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv007 [PubMed: 
25605792] 
56. Friedrich MJ, et al. Genome-wide transposon screening and quantitative insertion site sequencing 
for cancer gene discovery in mice. Nat Protoc. 2017; 12:289–309. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2016.164 
[PubMed: 28079877] 
57. Meerbrey KL, et al. The pINDUCER lentiviral toolkit for inducible RNA interference in vitro and 
in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:3665–3670. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1019736108 
[PubMed: 21307310] 
58. Kutner RH, Zhang XY, Reiser J. Production, concentration and titration of pseudotyped HIV-1-
based lentiviral vectors. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:495–505. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2009.22 [PubMed: 
19300443] 
59. Weber J, et al. CRISPR/Cas9 somatic multiplex-mutagenesis for high-throughput functional cancer 
genomics in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:13982–13987. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1512392112 [PubMed: 26508638] 
60. Cerami E, et al. The cBio cancer genomics portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional 
cancer genomics data. Cancer Discov. 2012; 2:401–404. DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0095 
[PubMed: 22588877] 
61. Gao J, et al. Integrative analysis of complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the 
cBioPortal. Sci Signal. 2013; 6:l1.doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004088
62. Uhlen M, et al. Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science. 2015; 
347:1260419.doi: 10.1126/science.1260419 [PubMed: 25613900] 
63. Hoadley KA, et al. Multiplatform analysis of 12 cancer types reveals molecular classification 
within and across tissues of origin. Cell. 2014; 158:929–944. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.049 
[PubMed: 25109877] 
Mueller et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Genetic landscape of mouse PDAC and comparison to the human disease.
a, Trinucleotide context-dependent SNV frequencies in mouse (n=38 PK mice) and human 
PDAC (n=51 patients from6) derived from WES. b, SNV, indel, CNA and translocation 
burdens by WES, aCGH and M-FISH in PK mice (n=38) and human PDAC (n=51 patients 
for SNV, indel, CNA [data from6] and n=24 cell lines for translocations). **P=0.002, 
***P≤0.001, two-sided Mann-Whitney test; bars, median. c, CNAs, ploidy and 
translocations in PK mice (n=38), detected by aCGH and M-FISH. Mixed ploidy, n≥3 
diploid/tetraploid cells in 10 karyotypes. d, Rearrangement graph showing chr4 
chromothripsis in mPDAC S821, based on WGS. Haplotype-specific chromosome content 
loss confirmed by M-FISH (n=10/10 karyotypes). e, Age at tumor diagnosis of mice having 
cancers with (n=14) or without (n=23) complex/clustered chromosomal rearrangements 
(n≥10 CNAs/chromosome). Two-sided log-rank test.
Mueller et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Mutant KRAS gene dosage increase occurs early in PDAC evolution and drives 
metastasis.
a, KrasG12D gene dosage “states” defined by aCGH, WES and M-FISH (n=38 PK mice). 
Exemplary CNV-plot for each “state” on the right, y-axis, copy number b, Allele-specific 
KrasG12D mRNA expression in KrasG12D-iGD (n=26 mice) and KrasG12D-HET mPDACs 
(n=12 mice) by combined amplicon-based RNA-Seq and qRT-PCR. *P=0.02, two-sided 
Mann-Whitney test; bars, median. c, Codon-12 variant allele frequency of microdissected 
KRASG12 mutant hPanIN (n=20) by amplicon-based deep sequencing. H&E stains show 
histopathologic stages of microdissected hPanINs. Scale bars, 50 µm. d, Macro-/micro-
metastasis prevalence in KrasG12D-HET (n=12) vs. KrasG12D-iGD (n=26) mPDACs. 
(***P=0.001, two-sided Fisher’s exact test). Liver metastasis, H&E. Scale bars, 150 µm 
(top) and 50 µm (bottom); square, zoom-in area. e, KrasG12D-HET mPDAC amplify 
alternative oncogenes (Myc, Nfkb2 or Yap1) to intensify partial aspects of Ras downstream 
signaling. Focal, focal amplification; Arm, arm-level amplification. f, Amplification of 
MYC, NFKB2 or YAP1 in KRASMUT human PDAC. Note, these amplified genes can not 
only collaborate with KRASMUT-Het but also with KRASMUT-iGD. Data from6.
Mueller et al.
Page 41
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Cdkn2a alteration “states” dictate distinct evolutionary PDAC trajectories.
a, Chr4 alteration types involving Cdkn2a by aCGH/M-FISH (n=38 PK mice). Complex 
rearrangements, n≥10 CNAs/chromosome. Examplary CNV plots on the right; y-axis, copy 
number. b, Translocations affecting chr4/Cdkn2a in mPDAC-R1035 by M-FISH (10/10 
karyotypes). c, Prevalence of KrasG12D-iGD in mPDAC with homozygously (ΔHOM, n=27) 
vs. wild-type/heterozygously (ΔHET/WT, n=11) deleted Cdkn2a/Ncruc. ***P=0.001, two-
sided Fisher’s exact test, OR 15.3, 95% CI 2.8-83.9. d, KRAS variant allele frequencies in 
human PDAC with wild-type/heterozygously (n=56) vs. homozygously deleted (n=38) 
CDKN2A. Data from6. ***P≤0.001, two-sided Mann-Whitney test; bars, median. e, 
Sequential order of Cdkn2a and KrasG12D alterations. Chr4 and chr6 CNA/LOH patterns 
(based on aCGH,WES) of primary mPDACs (n=13 PK mice) and associated metastases 
(n=25). For seven mPDACs and 16 associated metastases the order of genetic events (dots) 
could be reconstructed. Bifurcations, divergent evolution of clones; lines, lengths do not 
represent evolutionary distances; P, primary tumor; Li/Lu/LN, liver/lung/lymph node 
metastasis. f, Detailed chr4/chr6 CNV/LOH profiles for mPDAC5320 primary/metastases. 
Cdkn2a deletions are identical in all lesions (y-axis, copy number). SNP frequency analysis 
by WES shows distinct chr6 SNP patterns in metastases and a composite picture in the 
primary, showing convergent evolution of different KrasG12D-iGD-gains upon Cdkn2aΔHOM. 
Scheme, combined interpretation of WES/aCGH data.
Mueller et al.
Page 42
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Defined allelic states and/or combinations of hallmark PDAC tumor-suppressor 
alterations license oncogenic dosage variation.
Types and frequencies of KrasG12D gene dosage gains and Cdkn2a inactivations, defined by 
aCGH and amplicon-based KrasG12D sequencing in PDAC mouse models expressing 
pancreas-specific KrasG12D alone (PK) or in combination with engineered Cdkn2aΔHOM 
(PKC), Trp53ΔHOM (PKP) or Tgfbr2ΔHET/HOM (PKT) inactivation.
Mueller et al.
Page 43
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. Integrative analyses of PDAC genomics, transcriptomics, cellular phenotypes and 
histopathologies link molecular, morphologic and clinical disease characteristics.
a, Unbiased hierarchical clustering of primary mPDAC culture transcriptomes (PK mice). 
Cell morphology, histopathological grading, KrasG12D mRNA expression, genetic KrasG12D 
status and presence/absence of metastasis integrated below. b, Selected gene sets from gene-
set enrichment analysis of clusters C2 vs. C1. (full list in Supplementary Table 13,14). c, 
mPDAC cultures with mesenchymal/epithelial morphology from clusters C1/C2, 
respectively. 100x magnification; squares, zoom-in area. d, KrasG12D-allele-specific mRNA 
levels in mPDAC transcriptional clusters, combined amplicon-based RNA-Seq and qRT-
PCR (C2a/b/c/C1, n=5/7/6/15 mice). P=1.9*10-6, two-sided Pearson correlation; bars, 
median. e, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated multiplexed somatic inactivation of PDAC-relevant 
tumor suppressors by electroporation-based transfection to achieve low-frequency 
mosaicism and clonal tumor outgrowth. Differential trypsinization separates epithelial/
mesenchymal cells in mPDACs with mixed morphologies (100x magnification; squares, 
zoom-in area). CRISPR/Cas9-induced indel signatures are identical in epithelial/
mesenchymal pairs (Extended data Fig. 8), indicating common cell of origin. Total Kras 
mRNA levels in epithelial/mesenchymal pairs (qRT-PCR, normalized to Gapdh, n=2 
technical replicates). Bars, mean; error bars, SEM. f, mPDAC histophathological grading in 
transcriptional clusters (C2a/b/c/C1, n=4/7/6/15, single section per mPDAC). Representative 
sections (H&E) shown. *Benjamini-Hochberg-adj. P≤0.05, **P=0.005; two-sided Fisher’s 
exact test; scale bars, 150µm. g, Simplified model of PDAC evolution reconciling molecular, 
morphologic and clinical disease characteristics. KRASG12D-iGD gain or alternative 
oncogenic amplifications (Myc/Yap1/Nfkb2) are critical for early disease progression. 
Different oncogenic gains and dosages evolve along distinct evolutionary routes, licensed by 
defined allelic states (heterozygous/homozygous) and/or combinations of hallmark tumor-
suppressor alterations. For simplicity, only the prototype tumor suppressor gene CDKN2A is 
Mueller et al.
Page 44
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 shown. Not visualized: TP53ΔHOM loss, also promoting KRASMUT-iGD, or 
TGFBR2ΔHET/HOM inactivation, supporting evolution through CDKN2AHET/
KRASMUT-HET trajectories. Depicted alternative trajectories are typical, but not completely 
exclusive, e.g. MYC or NFKB2 amplifications, which drive KRASMUT-HET cancers, can 
also cooperate with KRASMUT-iGD. Major aspects of a cancer´s biology/phenotype are 
linked to differential evolution.
Mueller et al.
Page 45
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
