 H I V
Nonprogressing HIV-infected children share
fundamental immunological features of nonpathogenic
SIV infection
Maximilian Muenchhoff,1,2,3,4* Emily Adland,1* Owen Karimanzira,5 Carol Crowther,5
Matthew Pace,6,7,8 Anna Csala,1 Ellen Leitman,1 Angeline Moonsamy,1 Callum McGregor,1,2
Jacob Hurst,9 Andreas Groll,10 Masahiko Mori,1 Smruti Sinmyee,1 Christina Thobakgale,2
Gareth Tudor-Williams,11 Andrew J. Prendergast,12 Henrik Kloverpris,13,14 Julia Roider,1,2,13
Alasdair Leslie,13 Delane Shingadia,15 Thea Brits,16 Samantha Daniels,16 John Frater,6,7,8
Christian B. Willberg,7,8 Bruce D. Walker,2,17 Thumbi Ndung’u,2,13,17,18 Pieter Jooste,16
Penny L. Moore,5,19,20 Lynn Morris,5,19,20 Philip Goulder1,2,15†
Disease-free infection in HIV-infected adults is associated with human leukocyte antigen–mediated suppression
of viremia, whereas in the sooty mangabey and other healthy natural hosts of simian immunodeficiency virus
(SIV), viral replication continues unabated. To better understand factors preventing HIV disease, we investi-
gated pediatric infection, where AIDS typically develops more rapidly than in adults. Among 170 nonprogres-
sing antiretroviral therapy–naïve children aged >5 years maintaining normal-for-age CD4 T cell counts, immune
activation levels were low despite high viremia (median, 26,000 copies/ml). Potent, broadly neutralizing anti-
body responses in most of the subjects and strong virus-specific T cell activity were present but did not drive
pediatric nonprogression. However, reduced CCR5 expression and low HIV infection in long-lived central
memory CD4 T cells were observed in pediatric nonprogressors. These children therefore express two cardinal
immunological features of nonpathogenic SIV infection in sooty mangabeys—low immune activation despite
high viremia and low CCR5 expression on long-lived central memory CD4 T cells—suggesting closer similarities
with nonpathogenetic mechanisms evolved over thousands of years in natural SIV hosts than those operating
in HIV-infected adults.
INTRODUCTION
Without antiretroviral therapy (ART), HIV infection in >99% of cases
inevitably results in the development of AIDS. However, despite un-
detectable viral loads in a small subset of ART-naïve adults (elite con-
trollers) or in ART-treated individuals, systemic immune activation
levels remain higher than in uninfected individuals (1, 2). This gives
rise to an increased risk of non-AIDS mortality and morbidities nor-
mally linked with aging, including cardiovascular disease, malignancy,
and cognitive dysfunction (3, 4). Even in viremic individuals, it has
long been recognized that viral replication is not the major cause of
HIV disease but rather the high levels of immune activation that typ-
ically result from infection (5, 6).
The central role of immune activation rather than viral replication
in HIV pathogenesis has been highlighted by studies of the natural
hosts of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection, such as the
sooty mangabey and the African green monkey (7). In these and some
40 species of nonhuman primates naturally infected with SIV (8, 9),
high levels of viral replication are observed, typically with viral set points
of ~105 copies/ml, and yet these animals do not suffer from disease as a
consequence. In adult HIV infection, immune activation is linked to viral
load, whereas in the natural SIV hosts, immune activation remains low
despite persistent high viremia. Understanding the mechanisms by which
low systemic immune activation might arise in natural HIV infection
independent of viral replication therefore is of major importance not only
for vaccine development but also to address the growing burden of non-
AIDS HIV-associated disease in individuals receiving long-term ART.
In pediatric HIV infection, disease progression in the absence of
ART is typically more rapid than in adults, with the median time to
AIDS being 1 year, compared to 10 years in untreated adult infection
(10). It has long been recognized that progression in pediatric infection
is biphasic (11, 12), with 60% mortality by 2.5 years (12); thereafter, pro-
gression to disease is much slower. A subset of ART-naïve, HIV-infected
children who are clinically healthy and maintain normal-for-age CD4
1Department of Paediatrics, Peter Medawar Building for Pathogen Research, South Parks
Road, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3SY, U.K. 2HIV Pathogenesis Programme, Doris Duke
Medical Research Institute, University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN), Durban, South Africa. 3Max
von Pettenkofer-Institute, Department of Virology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany. 4German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Munich, Ger-
many. 5Centre for HIV and STIs, National Institute for Communicable Diseases of the Na-
tional Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, South Africa. 6Institute for Emerging
Infections, Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. 7Nuffield Department
of Medicine, Peter Medawar Building for Pathogen Research, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3SY, U.K. 8Oxford National Institute of Health Research, Bio-
medical Research Centre, Oxford, U.K. 9Institute of Cancer Research, Old Brompton Road, Lon-
don SW7 3RP, U.K. 10Department of Mathematics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Theresienstrasse 39, 80333 Munich, Germany. 11Department of Paediatrics, Imperial College
London, London, U.K. 12Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, U.K.
13KwaZulu-Natal Research Institute for Tuberculosis and HIV (K-RITH), University of Kwa-
Zulu-Natal (UKZN), 4001 Durban, South Africa. 14Department of Immunology and Micro-
biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. 15Department of Paediatric
Infectious Diseases, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, U.K. 16Paediatric De-
partment, Kimberley Hospital, Northern Cape, South Africa. 17Ragon Institute of Massachusetts
General Hospital, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02139–4307, USA. 18Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany. 19Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. 20Center for the AIDS
Programme of Research in South Africa (CAPRISA), 4001 Durban, South Africa.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: philip.goulder@paediatrics.ox.ac.uk
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
1
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 T cell counts throughout childhood exist (11, 13, 14). Previous reports
of pediatric nonprogressors (PNPs) have not been plentiful, but it is
clear that PNPs are much more common than their adult viremic
nonprogressor (AVNP) counterparts (15, 16). Although no consistent
CD4 and age criteria have been used to define PNPs (11, 14, 17), about
10% of ART-naïve, HIV-infected children reach middle childhood
(ages 6 to 8 years) without disease, maintaining normal-for-age abso-
lute CD4 T cell counts. Because, with very few exceptions, the PNP
subjects described in the current study were only identified incidental-
ly some years after birth, the precise percentage of these children be-
coming PNP is unknown, but a figure of 5 to 10% would be consistent
with our own longitudinal studies in Durban (13). PNPs have been
understudied because the pediatric HIV epidemic is so heavily con-
centrated outside North America and Europe. However, large nonpro-
gressor pediatric cohorts similar to those presented here have been
described from Uganda and Thailand (17, 18).
The mechanisms of nonprogression in children are not defined
but differ from those in elite controller adults. Although “protective”
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I alleles such as HLA-B*27 or
HLA-B*57 are expressed in >50% of “elite controller” adults (19), by
contrast, HLA class I variation does not influence progression rates
significantly in pediatric infection (20). Furthermore, the high CD4
T cell counts observed in elite controller adults are associated with
low viral loads beneath the level of detection, whereas in nonprogres-
sor children, as described previously (17, 18) and in the current study,
high CD4 T cell counts are typically associated with persistent high
viral loads. To identify potential mechanisms of HIV nonpathogenesis,
we first investigated whether nonprogression in pediatric infection is
dependent on strong virus-specific immune responses, as in adult HIV
elite controllers (21), or is independent of them, as in the natural hosts
of SIV infection (22). We then tested the hypothesis that, as in sooty
mangabeys (23), reduced infection of the long-lived central memory
(Tcm) and stem cell memory (Tscm) CD4 T cells may contribute to the
maintenance of high CD4 T cell counts despite persistent viremia in
these nonprogressor children.
RESULTS
Normal CD4 T cell counts, low immune activation, and high
viremia in PNPs
On the basis of normal absolute CD4 T cell counts in HIV-uninfected
children (24, 25), we here defined PNPs as ART-naïve, HIV-infected
children with CD4 T cell counts of >750 cells/mm3 at age ≥5 years,
who have not met the CD4 or clinical criteria for ART initiation. An
example of one such PNP followed from birth is shown in Fig. 1 (A to
C). Characteristically, although absolute CD4 T cell count and per-
centage (CD4%, that is, percentage of peripheral blood lymphocytes
expressing CD4) are close to the 50th centile for age-matched HIV-
uninfected children, the viral loads reach a quasi–set point of 104 to
105 copies per milliliter of plasma. Pooling all the available longitu-
dinal data from the 170 PNPs in the cohort of African children indi-
cates a decrease in viral load over the first 5 years of life, to a viral set
point of 20,000 to 30,000 copies/ml (Fig. 1, D and E). Viral loads of
<100 copies/ml among PNPs are exceptionally rare (10). Further-
more, also in contrast with ART-naïve nonprogressor adults, in
whom sustained high CD4 T cell counts are typically found in asso-
ciation with low viral loads (26), there is no association between ab-
solute CD4 T cell count and viral load in PNPs [Fig. 1F; r = 0.06, P =
not significant (ns)].
These data suggest a similarity between PNP and the natural hosts of
SIV infection, such as sooty mangabeys and African green monkeys, in
whom persistent high viral loads are also associated with lack of disease
progression and CD4 T cell preservation, and levels of immune activa-
tion are low (7). We observed levels of immune activation (CD38/HLA-
DR coexpression on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) that were strikingly low
especially on CD4+ T cells in the PNPs and a strong negative correlation
between levels of immune activation and absolute CD4 T cell count or
CD4% across ART-naïve, HIV-infected children (Fig. 1, G and H). No-
tably, CD4 T cell activation was more strongly associated than CD8 T cell
immune activation with CD4 T cell count among these infected children,
in contrast with the stronger associations between immune activation of
CD8 T cells and CD4 T cell count observed in adult infection (6). Fur-
thermore, levels of soluble CD14 (sCD14) that are characteristically
raised in pathogenic SIV or HIV infection, partly as a consequence
of microbial translocation and chronic stimulation of monocytes/
macrophages by lipopolysaccharide (27, 28), were similar in PNPs
and uninfected children and significantly lower compared to age-
matched progressor children (Fig. 1I). Pediatric “progressors” are
defined here as ART-naïve children aged >5 years who met the
prevailing CD4 T cell criterion for ART initiation, that is, an absolute
CD4 T cell count of <500 cells/mm3. Levels of intestinal fatty acid–
binding protein (iFABP), a biomarker of intestinal villous damage pre-
dictive of HIV-associated disease (29), were significantly lower in PNPs
compared to progressors and also to pediatric uninfected controls
(Fig. 1J). These data are consistent with a picture similar to that in
the natural hosts of SIV infection, in which low immune activation in
the face of persistent high viral loads is observed, associated with ev-
idence of low-level microbial translocation (27).
Low-level CD4 T cell differentiation and maintained function
in nonprogressing children
Nonpathogenesis despite high viremia, is independent of SIV-specific
cellular immunity in sooty mangabeys (22). To determine whether
virus-specific immune responses may play a role in nonprogressing pe-
diatric HIV infection, we first evaluated CD4 T cell differentiation and
function in PNPs. To compare CD4 T cell responses with age-matched
uninfected children as well as with progressor children, we initially
measured intracellular production by CD4+ T cells of T helper cell
1 (TH1) cytokines interferon-g (IFN-g), interleukin-2 (IL-2), and tumor
necrosis factor–a (TNF-a) in response to staphylococcal enterotoxin B
(SEB). IL-2 production in PNP did not differ from that in uninfected
controls but was significantly higher than that in progressors (Fig. 2, A
and B). IFN-g production was conversely significantly higher in pro-
gressors than in the other two groups. Similarly, in response to a pool
of overlapping Gag peptides, intracellular IFN-g production was lower
and IL-2 responses in CD4 T cells were significantly higher in PNPs
compared to progressors (P = 0.01; Fig. 2C). The same broad patterns
were observed in CD4 T cell responses to the pools of Pol and Nef HIV
proteins also tested (fig. S1, A and B).
These functional differences reflect the distinct patterns of CD4 T cell
differentiation among PNP and progressor children. The levels of
naïve CD4 T cells in PNPs are similar to those in age-matcheduninfected
children (median, 58%; 10th to 90th centiles, 42 to 74%; Fig. 2, D and E)
(24, 25). In pediatric HIV infection, analyzing PNPs and progressors
together, the percentage of naïve CD4 T cells is strongly associated with
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
2
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 high absolute CD4 T cell count, whereas an increasing percentage of
effector memory CD4 T cells is associated with decreasing absolute
CD4 T cell count (Fig. 2, D and E). Functionally, in response to SEB,
IL-2 is principally produced by naïve and central memory CD4 T cells,
whereas IFN-g and TNF-a are mainly produced by effector memory
CD4 T cells (Fig. 2, F and G). Expression of exhaustion markers such
asPD1and2B4isalsohigheronallCD4Tcellsubsetsinprogressors com-
pared to PNPs (Fig. 2, H and I, and fig. S1C). Together, these findings of
increased CD4 T cell differentiation, exhaustion, and dysfunction in the
pediatric progressors compared to PNPs are consistent with previous ob-
servations of the hierarchical exhaustion of the CD4 T cell response char-
acteristic of chronic viral infection and persistent high viremia (30). In
contrast, these features are largely absent in the PNPs, despite persistent
high viral loads.
Notably, the high proportion of naïve T cells observed here among
the PNPs (Fig. 2E) did not explain the low immune activation levels
described above (Fig. 1, G and H) in these children. Comparing cells
of the same differentiation phenotype by absolute CD4 T cell count,
in each case, immune activation levels were correlated with absolute
CD4 T cell count (Fig. 2, K and L).
CD4 T cell immune activation is the major driver of
progression in pediatric infection
Identification of multiple variables differentiating progressing versus
nonprogressing pediatric infection, including level of immune activa-
tion, markers of microbial translocation, T cell differentiation, CD4+
and CD8+ T cell subset function, absolute CD4 T cell count, and viral
load, prompts the question, what is the primary driver of progression in
pediatric infection? To help visualize the nature of the associations be-
tween these parameters, we constructed a correlation matrix using data
from a subset of 45 ART-naïve children in whom measurement of all
parameters had been undertaken at the same study visit (Fig. 3). Varia-
bles were grouped on the basis of principal components analysis using
the R package “corrgram” (31). A clear dichotomy emerges between
Fig. 1. Normal CD4 T cell counts for age and low immune activation de-
spite high viral loads in PNPs, in association with evidence of low levels
of microbial translocation. (A to C) Absolute CD4 T cell count, CD4% (per-
centage of peripheral blood lymphocytes expressing CD4), and viral load in
ART-naïve pediatric subject 517-C over the first 10 years of life. The 10th,
50th, and 90th centiles of absolute CD4 T cell counts and CD4% are
shown in (A) and (B) for uninfected children over the first 10 years of life
18, 19. (D) Longitudinal viral load data from 170 ART-naïve PNPs. Viral load
declines with age over the first 5 years (r = −0.34, P < 0.0001) but then pla-
teaus thereafter. (E) Current absolute CD4 T cell counts and viral loads in
170 PNPs. (F) Lack of correlation between CD4 T cell count and viral load in
170 PNPs. (G and H) Immune activation (CD38/HLA-DR expression) on CD4+
T cells (G) and CD8+ T cells (H) is inversely correlated with absolute CD4
T cell count in ART-naïve children aged >5 years (n = 163 HIV-infected
children and n = 21 HIV-uninfected children). (I) Levels of sCD14 are signif-
icantly lower in PNPs (absolute CD4 T cell count >750 cells/mm3; n = 14)
than in progressors (absolute CD4 T cell count <500 cells/mm3; n = 16) and
similar to HIV-uninfected children (n = 21). (J) Levels of iFABP are lower in
PNPs (n = 14) and HIV-uninfected children (n = 21) compared to progres-
sors (n = 19). Comparisons between groups were calculated by Mann-
Whitney tests (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01). P and r values for bivariate associations
were calculated by Spearman’s rank correlation tests.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
3
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 2. CD4 T cell dif-
ferentiation and func-
tion in nonprogressing
pediatric infection.
(A to C) IFN-g, IL-2, and
TNF-a intracellular cyto-
kine staining (ICS) re-
sponse to SEB and Gag
in PNPs. (A) Represen-
tative fluorescence-
activated cell sorting
(FACS) staining in a
progressor and a non-
progressor. (B) ICS re-
sponses to SEB in
nonprogressors (n =
14), progressors (n =
32), and uninfected
pediatric controls (n =
19), gating on bulk
CD4+ T cells. (C) ICS
responses to a Gag
peptide pool in non-
progressors (n = 26)
and progressors (n =
11), gating on bulk
CD4+ T cells. (D and
E) CD4 T cell differen-
tiation in pediatric
progressors and non-
progressors (n = 161).
(D) Representative
FACS staining in a pro-
gressor and a nonpro-
gressor. (E) Percentage
of CD4 T cells by abso-
lute CD4 T cell count
defined as naïve, cen-
tral memory, effector
memory, or terminally
differentiated effector
memory, by CCR7 and
CD45RA expression as
shown in (D). Correla-
tion between absolute
CD4 T cell count and
percent CD4 T cells in
each subset shown as
Spearman’s rank corre-
lation coefficient and P
value. Temra, effector
memory RA. (F and G) Functional differences between distinct CD4 T cell
subsets. (F) Representative FACS staining in response to SEB showing that
IFN-g–producing cells are predominantly effector memory, and IL-2–
producing cells are predominantly naïve and central memory in phenotype.
(G) Contribution of IL-2, IFN-g, and TNF-a to the total CD4 T cell SEB response.
The proportion of cells producing each cytokine to the total CD4 T cell SEB
response was determined (data from 11 nonprogressors). (H to J) PD-1 ex-
pression on CD4 T cell subsets in pediatric progressors, nonprogressors, and
uninfected controls (H). Increased PD-1 expression on CD4+ T cells in pediatric
progressors (n = 20) compared to nonprogressors (n = 32) and uninfected
pediatric controls (n = 22). (I) Increased PD-1 expression on CD4+ T cell sub-
sets inpediatric progressors (n= 20) compared to nonprogressors (n = 30). (J)
Representative FACS plots showing differential cytokine staining in relation
to PD-1 expression. (K and L) T cell activation by memory subsets. Immune
activation (CD38/HLA-DR expression) on CD4+ central memory T cells (Tcm)
(K) and other CD4+ and CD8+ T cell memory subsets (l) is inversely correlated
with absolute CD4 T cell count in ART-naïve children aged >5 years (n = 97).
Comparisons between groups were calculated by Mann-Whitney tests (*P <
0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001). P and r values for bivariate
associations were determined by Spearman’s rank correlation tests.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
4
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 factors associated with disease nonprogression (upper left quadrant)
and those associated with progression (lower right quadrant).
To better determine the major driver of these effects that are linked
by multicollinearity, we assessed the influence of each parameter using a
generalized linear model (GLM), applying the least absolute shrinkage
and selection operator (LASSO) principle on scaled covariates (32, 33).
All three of the LASSO fitting routines in R provide very similar results
(34, 35), with a consensus of 6 of the 17 covariates selected by all of the
methods as making an independent contribution to CD4 T cell count in
pediatric HIV infection (Table 1). Notably, viral load made no inde-
pendent contribution to pediatric progression according to these analy-
ses, consistent with the lack of relationship between absoluteCD4Tcell
count and viral load in the nonprogressor children described above
(Fig. 1F).
Finally, an unregularized GLM analysis (36) was then run on the
selected set of six covariates to determine statistical significance and
the b-coefficient estimates (Table 1). The covariates most strongly linked
to nonprogression were low immune activation of CD4 T cells, followed
by low percentage of proinflammatory effector memory CD4 T cells.
This analysis confirms the significance of all of these six influences on
nonprogressing pediatric infection, driven principally by low immune
activation on CD4 T cells.
Potent, broadly neutralizing antibodies in pediatric
compared with adult infection
Although high-titer, broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) are not a
feature of AIDS resistance in sooty mangabeys (37–39), persistent high
viremia in the context of healthy CD4 T cell activity might be expected
to provide the optimal setting for the generation of bnAb responses in
nonprogressing HIV-infected children (40–42). We initially compared
neutralization of a panel of 16 tier 2 and tier 3 clade A, B, and C viruses
by plasma from PNPs and progressors with plasma from a South
African cohort of adults (41) 5 years after infection {viral load median,
31,200 copies/ml [interquartile range (IQR), 3104 to 73,347 copies/ml];
absolute CD4 T cell count median, 449 cells/mm3 (IQR, 308 to
568 cells/mm3)}. Overall, 75% (64 of 85) of the pediatric subjects studied
were able to neutralize ≥50% of the panel of 16 viruses, compared to 19%
of the adults (P < 0.0001; Fig. 4A). The ability of nonprogressing children
(median: age, 6.6 years; absolute CD4 T cell count, 1050 cells/mm3; viral
load, 14,000 copies/ml) to neutralize this panel of viruses was somewhat
less than that of the progressing children (median: age, 8.2 years; absolute
CD4 T cell count, 225 cells/mm3; viral load, 71,803 copies/ml; Fig. 4B).
Although these differences between the pediatric groups approached sta-
tistical significance (P = 0.13; Fig. 4A), this was likely influenced by
the fact that progressors were older and had higher viral loads than
Fig. 3. Associations between immunological and clinical variables.
(A) Selected bivariate associations between immunological and clinical mea-
surements in HIV-infected, ART-naïve children aged >5 years (n = 163,
Spearman’s rank correlation tests). (B) Correlation matrix in a subset of n = 45
with available data for all regarded parameters from the same study visit.
Positive correlations are indicated in blue and inverse correlations are in-
dicated in red. Darker color shades indicate higher r values on the basis of
Spearman’s rank correlation tests. Clustering of variables is based on prin-
cipal components analysis using the R package corrgram and reveals two
well-differentiated groups of parameters, one associated with disease non-
progression (upper left quadrant) and the other associated with disease
progression (lower right quadrant).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
5
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the nonprogressors. As in previous studies (40–43), viral load in the
pediatric subjects was associated with neutralization breadth (r = 0.30,
P=0.006;Fig.4C).Inadditiontothegreaterbreadthofvirusneutralization
observed in the pediatric samples, the magnitude of these responses was
also higher (Fig. 4, D to F). For example, comparing nAb activity against
all16 viruses in the panel, the frequency of responses with neutralization
titers of more than 1:1000 was fivefold higher in the pediatric samples
than in the adult samples (P = 0.001, Fisher’s exact test; fig. S2).
CD8+ T cell breadth associates with lower viral load but not
nonprogression in children
We next investigated whether HIV-specific CD8+ T cell responses
might influence progression in pediatric infection. In sooty mangabeys,
SIV-specific CD8+ T cell breadth is unrelated to CD4 T cell count or
viral load (22), but in adult HIV infection, increasing breadth of the
virus-specific Gag-specific CD8+ T cell response is related to decreasing
viral load and increasing CD4 T cell count (44). For each subject, recog-
nition of a panel of 410 overlapping peptides spanning the HIV-1 C clade
proteome was determined in enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT)
assays, initially using pools of 12 peptides and then confirming recogni-
tion of individual peptides in a second assay. Exactly as previously de-
scribed in adults (44), there is a discordant protein-specific relationship
between the breadth of the CD8+ T cell response and viral load, with
increasing Gag breadth associated with decreasing viral set point, and
increasing Env breadth associated with increasing viral set point (Fig. 5,
A to C). However, in contrast to adults, the breadth and magnitude of the
HIV-specific CD8+ T cell response were associated with decreasing ab-
solute CD4 T cell count, an indicator of disease progression (Fig. 5D).
The main contributions in the pediatric cohort to decreasing CD4 T cell
count in association with increasing CD8+ T cell breadth were the Pol-
specific responses (r = −0.34, P = 0.0009; Fig. 5E). A GLM of data from
the pediatric subjects in whom immune activation had been measured
contemporaneously with the ELISPOT assays demonstrated that CD8+
HLA-DR/CD38 expression is significantly and independently correlated
with both viral load and CD8+ T cell breadth (Fig. 5F and table S1). These
data further support the conclusion that control of viral replication is less
important than avoidance of raised immune activation in the mainte-
nance of pediatric HIV nonprogression, because generation of a broad
HIV-specific CD8+T cellresponse may actually drive disease progression
through immune activation.
Decreased HIV infection in long-lived memory CD4 T cells
(Tcm and Tscm) in PNPs
To further investigate mechanisms to explain the maintenance of
normal-for-age CD4 T cell counts in nonprogressing children despite
persistent high viral loads, we next addressed the hypothesis that the
CD4 T cells predominantly infected with HIV are the short-lived effec-
tor memory subsets in these children, in contrast to progressive HIV
infection in which the long-lived central memory CD4 T cells are the
main T cell subset infected with HIV. Similar observations have been
made in the natural hosts of SIV—sooty mangabeys and African green
monkeys—compared with pathogenic SIV infection in the rhesus ma-
caque (23). We first determined expression of CCR5 on different CD4
T cell subsets and noted strikingly lower CCR5 expression on central
Table 1. Association of clinical and immunological parameters with
CD4 T cell count. Selected regression parameter estimates with the three
LASSO approaches implemented in the R packages grplasso, penalized, and
glmnet are shown in the first four columns. Standardized regression parameter
estimates for the selected set of covariates by an unregularized conventional
GLM using the R-function glm are shown in the last three columns.
LASSO
GLM
Variable
grplasso
Penalized
glmnet
Variable
b-Coefficient
P
CD4 CD38+DR+
−0.1701
−0.1754
−0.1718
CD4 CD38+DR+
−0.3123
<10−10
CD4 Tem
−0.0549
−0.0603
−0.0567
CD4 Tem
−0.1630
<10−10
Age at visit
−0.0632
−0.0674
−0.0646
Age at visit
−0.1582
<10−10
CD8 Tnaïve
0.1000
0.1008
0.1003
CD8 Tnaïve
0.1105
<10−10
sCD14
−0.0472
−0.0498
−0.0481
sCD14
−0.1098
<10−10
CD4 Tnaïve
0.1322
0.1274
0.1305
CD4 Tnaïve
0.0475
0.0147
iFABP
0
0
0
—
—
—
CD8 CD38+DR+
0
0
0
—
—
—
CD8 Tem
0
0
0
—
—
—
Sex
0
0
0
—
—
—
Viral load
0
0
0
—
—
—
CD4 PD1
0
0
0
—
—
—
CD8 PD1
0
0
0
—
—
—
Gag CD4 IFN-g
0
0
0
—
—
—
Gag CD4 IL-2
0
0
0
—
—
—
Gag CD8 IFN-g
0
0
0
—
—
—
Gag CD8 IL-2
0
0
0
—
—
—
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
6
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 4. Neutralization of a panel of 16 tier 2 and tier 3 subtype C, B,
and A viruses by pediatric and adult plasma samples. (A) Neutraliza-
tion breadth in PNPs (n = 66) and progressors (n = 19) compared with
adults (n = 21). (B) The frequency of bnAbs among PNPs (median: age,
6.6 years; absolute CD4 T cell count, 1050 cells/mm3; viral load, 14,000
copies/ml), pediatric progressors (median: age, 8.2 years; absolute CD4
T cell count, 225 cells/mm3; viral load, 71,803 copies/ml), and adults (5 years
after infection; median: absolute CD4 T cell count, 449 cells/mm3; viral load,
31,200 copies/ml). (C) Correlation between viral load and percent viruses
neutralized among pediatric subjects. P and r values were calculated by
Spearman’s rank correlation tests. (D to F) Geometric means of neutraliza-
tion titers for pediatric and adult samples against subtype C (n = 6), B (n = 6),
and A (n = 4) viruses. Comparisons between groups were calculated by Mann-
Whitney tests.
Fig. 5. HIV-specific CD8+ T cell responses in pediatric infection in rela-
tion to viral load and absolute CD4 count. (A to C) Breadth of IFN-g
ELISPOT responses correlates with viral load in a protein-specific fash-
ion. (A and B) Total breadth and Gag-specific breadth of IFN-g ELISPOT re-
sponse (n = 90). (C) Env-specific breadth of IFN-g ELISPOT response (n = 90).
(D and E) Total breadth and Pol-specific breadth of IFN-g ELISPOT response
in ART-naïve pediatric subjects are inversely correlated with absolute CD4
count (n = 90). (F) Total breadth of IFN-g ELISPOT response directly corre-
lates with CD8+ T cell activation in pediatric infection (n = 30, Spearman’s
rank correlation tests).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
7
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 memory (Tcm) CD4 T cells in the nonprogressor children both com-
pared to progressor children (P < 0.0001) and compared to CCR5
expression in nonprogressors on effector memory cells (Tem) (Fig. 6,
A and B). To compare HIV DNA levels in nonprogressor children with
those in control subjects in whom data were not confounded by the
effects of CD4 T cell depletion, we identified a group of progressing
HIV-infected adults, termed here “future progressors,” from whom
cryopreserved samples were available before progression, at a time
when absolute CD4 T cell counts (median, 1106 CD4 T cells/mm3;
IQR, 811 to 1284 cells/mm3; CD4%, 36%; IQR, 28 to 40%) were well
within the normal range for uninfected individuals. Viral loads in this
control group (median, 31,500; IQR, 16,750 to 119,500) were also
matched with the PNPs (Fig. 6C). Consistent with the CCR5 expression
data described above, in the PNPs, lower HIV DNA levels were ob-
served in the long-lived stem cell memory (Tscm) and central memory (Tcm)
CD4 T cell subsets compared to those in effector memory cells (Tem) (P <
0.0001 in each case; Fig. 6D). As previously shown in pathogenic SIV in-
fection in rhesus macaques (23) and also in studies of HIV-infected
adult progressors (15), in the future progressors, HIV infection of Tscm
and Tcm was higher than that of Tem, whereas the reverse was the case in
the nonprogressing children (Fig. 6, C and D). These data therefore are
consistentwiththe hypothesisthat,in nonprogressing children,reduced
HIV infection of the long-lived CD4 T cell subsets, Tscm and Tcm, in
association with relatively low expression of CCR5 on these cells,
enables absolute CD4 T cell counts to be maintained despite persistent
high viremia.
DISCUSSION
The mechanisms by which disease-free infection is achieved in HIV-
infected elite controllers and in the natural hosts of SIV infection, such
as the sooty mangabey and the African green monkey, are diametrically
opposed. Elite controllers suppress HIV replication to undetectable
levels via immune responses mediated principally by protective HLA
class I molecules such as HLA-B*27 and HLA-B*57. In contrast, non-
pathogenic SIV infection is independent of virus-specific immunity,
and viral replication continues unabated but without ill consequences.
These current studies of nonprogressing pediatric HIV infection dem-
onstrate that, although—in contrast to the sooty mangabeys—strong
virus-specific immune activity is present, it is not the major contributor
to the maintenance of normal CD4 T cell counts and absence of disease,
consistent with observations in the natural hosts of SIV (22, 37–39). The
normal-for-age CD4 T cell counts and low immune activation despite
persistent high viral loads seen in these nonprogressing children are also
characteristic of SIV infection in African nonhuman primates(7). In both
cases, CD4 T cell count is unrelated to viral load. A further feature of non-
progressing pediatric HIV infection in common with nonpathogenic SIV
Fig. 6. CCR5 expression and HIV infection are lower in central mem-
ory CD4+ T cells in PNPs than in progressors. (A) Representative FACS
data of CCR5 expression in pediatric progressors versus nonprogressors. (B)
CCR5 expression on CD4+ T cell subsets in ART-naïve children aged >5
years by absolute CD4 T cell count (n = 59). P and r values were calculated
by Spearman’s rank correlation tests. (C) Absolute CD4 T cell counts and
viral loads in PNPs and adult future progressors (FP). (D) HIV infection in
Tn, Tscm, Tcm, and Tem in PNPs and adult future progressors, determined by
quantitative PCR (qPCR) of HIV DNA in sorted CD4 T cell subsets. P values
were determined by Mann-Whitney tests.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
8
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 infection in the sooty mangabey natural hosts is decreased CCR5 ex-
pression on long-lived central memory CD4 T cells and the associated
low level of virus infection in these Tscm and Tcm subsets (23). Together,
these data suggest that the mechanisms that operate to achieve disease-
free pediatric HIV infection may have closer similarities to those that
have evolved over thousands of years (45) in African nonhuman pri-
mates as a consequence of SIV infection than to the well-described
HLA-mediated immunosuppression of HIV observed in adult elite
controllers.
However, clear differences are apparent between nonpathogenic SIV
infection and nonprogressing pediatric HIV infection, particularly in
relation to virus-specific immune responses observed. SIV-specific
CD4+ T cell responses in sooty mangabeys are relatively low in magni-
tude and breadth (22), whereas the same cytokine responses—IFN-g,
IL-2, and TNF-a—measured here, in response to HIV peptides in the
nonprogressing HIV-infected children, were of relatively high magni-
tude and breadth. Similarly, nAb responses in sooty mangabeys are de-
tectable but are relatively low level (37–39), whereas remarkably potent
and bnAb responses are observed in the PNPs, albeit somewhat lower
than those in the progressors. Nonetheless, in common with the sooty
mangabey, the virus-specific cellular and humoral responses detected in
the nonprogressing children appear not to be primarily responsible for
lack of immunodeficiency virus disease, as evidenced by the GLM and
the observation of equivalent or potentially broader nAb responses in
the progressor children compared to the nonprogressors.
The second of the two key immunological features of nonpathogenic
SIV infection shared by PNPs, in addition to low immune activation
despite highviral load, islow CCR5 expression on long-lived centralmem-
ory CD4 T cells. This finding would help explain how normal absolute
CD4 T cell counts can be maintained despite high viral loads, because
if most infected cells are Tem CD4 T cells that are in any case short-lived,
replenishment of the modest loss of long-lived Tscm and Tcm memory
could be achieved via a moderate increase in thymic output while main-
taining normal naïve CD4 T cell numbers. Low CCR5 expression has
also been proposed to play arole in the surprisingly low mother-to-child
transmission rates (<7%) observed in sooty mangabeys, given their high
viral loads (46), compared to HIV-infected humans (~40% in breast-fed
infants) (10).
Comparable studies of cellular subset localization of virus have been
undertaken in the rare group of HIV-infected adults—so-called AVNPs—
whoexpressasimilarphenotype to thePNPchildrenof normalCD4Tcell
counts despite persistent high viral loads (15). In a comparison of cel-
lular localization of HIV infection in AVNPs with putative progressor
adults who were matched for CD4 T cell count, viral load, and immune
activation levels but studied before progression to minimize possible
confounding effects of CD4 T cell decline, reduced HIV infection in Tscm
and Tcm was observed in the AVNPs in association with increased
numbers of these long-lived memory cells (15). The AVNPs showed
increased proliferation of CD4+ memory T cells compared to the putative
progressors, as did SIV-infected sooty mangabeys compared to either
uninfected sooty mangabeys or SIV-infected rhesus macaques with pro-
gressive disease (47), consistent with the rapid turnover of Tem being
maintained by modestly increased thymic output in nonpathogenic infec-
tion.InprogressiveHIVandSIVinfections,theviralreservoirisprincipally
localized in the central memory CD4+ T cells (23, 48), and preferential in-
fection of Tscm is a feature of progressive HIV infections (49).
Although the cellular distribution of HIV in PNPs is substantially
lower in long-lived central memory versus effector memory CD4 T cells
and therefore is similar to the cellular localization of virus observed in
SIV infected sooty mangabeys, the precise contribution of low CCR5
expression, independent of immune activation, remains to be fully eval-
uated in these nonprogressor children. In the measurements of CCR5
expression undertaken here, resting and activated cells were not dif-
ferentiated as immune activation markers were in a separate anti-
body panel. In part, therefore, CCR5 expression differences between
PNPs and progressors could theoretically have resulted from differ-
ences in immune activation. However, the current data can accurately
be used to compare different subsets within the same patient where
levels of activation will be consistent. These data show that, in PNPs,
there are substantially lower levels of CCR5 in central memory cells
compared to effector memory cells. However, in the progressors, levels
of CCR5 in central and effector memory cells are similar. These data
indicate that substantially lower levels of CCR5 in longer-lived sub-
sets only exist in PNPs and not in progressors, consistent with lower
levels of CCR5 in longer-lived subsets as a mechanism explaining the
PNP phenotype.
A further point to note with respect to the measurements of viral
DNAindifferentTcellsubsetspresentedbothhereandinthesootyman-
gabey and AVNP studies described above (15, 23) is the fact that total
viral DNA is being measured, as distinct from replication-competent
virus (50). Unfortunately, there is no assay currently available that accu-
rately quantifies replication-competent virus. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) approaches substantially overestimate, and viral outgrowth assays
substantially underestimate true levels of replication-competent virus
(51). However, it has been proposed that total HIV DNA measured here
is the most meaningful of all the assays available, because this measure
correlates with time to viral rebound after coming off ART (52). Addition-
ally, total HIV DNA has been recently shown to correlate with viral
outgrowth measures (53).
The contrast between nonpathogenic HIV infection achieved via
suppression of viral replication in adult elite controllers and that
achieved via mechanisms independent of HIV-specific immune re-
sponses in nonprogressing children deserves further comment. Previous
studies have shown that, although more than 50% of adult elite con-
trollers express one of the main protective HLA class I alleles, HLA-
B*27 or HLA-B*57 in Caucasians (19), or HLA-B*57/58:01/81:01 in
African populations (54), HLA class I differences do not significantly
influence disease progression in pediatric infection (20). Although
suppression of viremia as a result of strong CD8+ T cell responses
presented by these protective class I molecules can interrupt and ter-
minate the vicious cycle of immune activation and CD4 T cell decline
in adult infection, in pediatric infection, reduction in viremia via
increasing potency of the HIV-specific CD8+ T cell response coincides
with increased immune activation and therefore comes at the cost of
CD4 T cell decline (Fig. 5F). The fact that no elite controllers of HIV
infection have been described in ART-naïve pediatric infection is itself
evidence of the dangers of an immune strategy designed to suppress
viremia if at the same time this is associated with increased immune
activation. Consistent with this are the reports of a subset of ART-
naïve elite controller adults who succeed in suppressing viral replica-
tion to undetectable levels but have progressed to AIDS because of
increased immune activation (2).
The potency and high frequency of the bnAb responses in nonpro-
gressing children are an additional feature that is striking. As well de-
scribed previously, bnAbs typically do not neutralize contemporaneous
autologous virus (55) and therefore do not protect against disease
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
9
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 progression (56); bnAbs are characteristically seen in HIV-infected
individuals with high viral loads progressing to AIDS (41). Similarly,
the bnAbs observed in the PNPs do not appear to protect against pro-
gression, because levels are, if anything, higher in the progressors.
Nonetheless, bnAbs—defined by neutralization of ≥50% of a panel of
tier 2 and tier 3 clade A, B, and C viruses—were observed in 75% of
ART-naïve pediatric subjects studied, compared to only 19% of adults
infected with the same HIV subtype (clade C). This figure of about one
in five HIV-infected adults having bnAbs is highly consistent with other
studies (40, 41, 56). In part, this high frequency of bnAbs in the pediatric
subjects is driven by persistent high viremia, although the effect here
was not strong. However, high viral loads in typical adult infection lead
to progression, whereas in the PNPs, it does not. Thus, exposure to high
viral loads for a longer duration is more common in pediatric infection.
Previous studies have also shown early generation of bnAbs in HIV-
infected children in the first 2 years of life (42). Additional factors
contributing to this observation may therefore include the TH2 bias
of the immune response in early life, which potentiates humoral immu-
nity and therefore might be expected to favor bnAb development (57),
and the hypothetical possibility that a proportion of the mothers of
PNPs may share the same phenotype and therefore transmit a virus al-
ready molded by bnAbs in the mother. Passive immunization of bnAbs
in macaques has been shown to result in enhanced autologous neutra-
lizing responses in infants (58).
Nonetheless, irrespective of the apparent lack of a role of the potent
bnAb responses in maintaining disease nonprogression in these
infected children, access to pediatric cohorts such as those described
here represents a precious resource from which there is the potential
to isolate novel monoclonal bnAbs that have a key role in the combina-
tion bnAb treatment and cure strategies that are being developed
against HIV (59). It will also be important in future work to deter-
mine whether the bnAbs generated by HIV-infected children differ
in specificity from those generated in adult infection, as has been
suggested (42).
ThestudyofPNPsdescribedherehasfocusedprimarilyonHIV-specific
cellular immunity, limited to CD8+ T cell and TH1 CD4 T cell activity,
and the nAb response. Further work is necessary to investigate the
potential role of other CD4 T cell subsets, including TH2, TH17, and
regulatory CD4+ T cells, in contributing to nonprogression in these chil-
dren. The observation of potent bnAb responses among PNPs, al-
though not contributing to slow progression, prompts the question
of the mechanism by which these responses are generated and the hy-
pothesis that aspects of follicular helper CD4 T cell activity (60) specific
to early life may be key. If sufficient study subject numbers can be re-
cruited to make genetic studies feasible, then it would be important to
determine the genetic determinants of the immune strategy adopted by
PNPs and the impact of such an immune strategy on responses to vac-
cines and pathogens other than HIV. Previous studies have addressed
therole of HLAclassIvariationof replicative capacity of the transmitted
virus in pediatric nonprogression (20). Finally, the ability of the innate
immune system to sense HIV-1 and the resulting activation of innate
immune pathways clearly differ across distinct patient groups (61). Im-
mune activation is a strong independent predictor for the speed of
HIV-1 disease progression, and low levels of innate immune activation
might contribute to the PNP phenotype.
Further studies are therefore needed to determine the specific mech-
anisms underlying low immune activation and nonprogression in HIV-
infected children, as well as in the abovementioned AVNPs. AVNPs,
in contrast to their pediatric viremic nonprogressor counterparts de-
scribed here, appear to be extremely rare. Of the four studies pub-
lished to date, the largest cohort of AVNPs comprised only nine
subjects (15). Although their rarity has restricted the possible analyses,
there are also indications in AVNPs of mechanisms in common with
the natural SIV hosts, including localization of viral infection
predominantly in Tem CD4+ T cell subsets as described above (15), as
well as of high expression of certain regulatory genes such as SOCS1 and
EEF1D (16). Of note, even among the natural hosts of SIV infection,
notably the sooty mangabeys (23) and African green monkeys (62), dis-
tinct specific mechanisms have evolved to arrive at the similar disease-
free phenotype characterized by high SIV viral loads, low immune ac-
tivation, and preservation of long-lived memory CD4 T cells. Although
Darwinian selection has had sufficient time in the natural hosts of SIV
to eliminate the lesswell-adaptedanimals,HIVinhumansisaveryrecent
infection in the evolutionary time scale, and as a result, there is the oppor-
tunity here to study both the well-adapted nonprogressors and the ill-
adapted progressors. Further defining these mechanisms is relevant not
only to reaching abetter understanding of HIV pathogenesis and therefore
the development of new immunotherapeutic approaches to prevent HIV
disease but also to the HIV cure field, where blocking infection of long-
lived memory CD4 T cell subsets such as Tscm may be a prerequisite to
elimination of HIV infection (48).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The aim of this observational cohort study was to describe the clinical
and immunological phenotype of nonprogressing HIV-infected chil-
dren. More detailed information on conception of individual
experiments is provided in the specific sections below.
Study subjects
A total of 275 ART-naïve, HIV-1 C clade–infected children from south-
ern Africa were studied from clinics at Kimberley Hospital (Kimberley,
South Africa), Ithembalabantu Clinic (Durban, South Africa), and
Great Ormond Street Hospital (London, U.K.). PNPs (n = 170) were
definedasART-naïve children infectedviamother-to-childtransmission,
aged >5.0 years, whose absolute CD4 T cell count was >750 cells/mm3.
PNPs had a median age of 8.3 years (IQR, 6.6 to 10.5 years), a median
absolute CD4 T cell count of 885 cells/mm3 (IQR, 815 to 1019), and a
median viral load of 25,957 copies/ml (IQR, 5338 to 75,500). With very
few exceptions, these PNPs were not followed from birth and were iden-
tified incidentally some years later. Pediatric progressors were defined
as ART-naïve children infected via mother-to-child transmission,
aged >5.0 years, whose absolute CD4 T cell count was <500 cells/mm3.
For these progressors, the median age was 10.6 years (IQR, 8.35 to 13.0),
the median CD4 T cell count was 336 cells/mm3 (IQR, 197 to 432), and
the median viralloadwas57,500copies/ml(IQR, 19,000 to 159,424). The
median age of South African HIV-uninfected control children (n = 21)
was 13.1 years (IQR, 10.1 to 15.5).
For the corrgram (Fig. 3) and the LASSO model (Table 1), a sub-
set of n = 45 HIV-infected, ART-naïve children with available data
for all regarded parameters from the same study visit were included
in the analysis. This subset comprised ART-naïve, HIV-infected
children and included both progressors and nonprogressors: median
age, 11.5 years (IQR, 8.9 to 13.9 years); median absolute CD4 T cell count,
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
10
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 425 (IQR, 327 to 717 cells/mm3); and median viral load, 39,815 (IQR,
7950 to 158,500).
The adult subjects in whom neutralization assays were under-
taken were from the South African CAPRISA 002 cohort, as previ-
ously described (41). Five years after infection in these adults, median
viral loads were 31,200 copies/ml (IQR, 3104 to 73,347 copies/ml), and
median absolute CD4 T cell counts were 449 cells/mm3 (IQR, 308 to
568 cells/mm3).
The subjects termed future progressors (Fig. 5) were infected young
adults from Durban, South Africa (median: age, 24 years; absolute CD4
T cell count, 1106 cells/mm3; CD4%, 36%; viral load, 31,500) selected to
match the PNPs for CD4 T cell count and viral load in order that mea-
surements of HIV infection in distinct CD4 T cell subsets would not be
confounded by CD4 T cell decline. These adults were termed “future”
progressors because these individuals were young and therefore identi-
fied relatively early in infection and likely to be progressors; in 7 of 12 of
the future progressors, later samples with accompanying clinical data
were available, showing that in all7 cases, CD4 T cellcount haddeclined
subsequent to the initial time point by a median of 347 CD4 T cells/mm3
within a 6-month period (P = 0.05, paired t test), whereas viral loads
were not significantly altered (P = 0.38, Wilcoxon matched-pairs
signed-rank test).
Viral load measurement was undertaken using the Roche Amplicor
version 1.5 assay until 2010 (range, 400 to 750,000 copies/ml). There-
after, the COBAS AmpliPrep/COBAS TaqMan HIV-1 Test version 2.0
by Roche (CAP/CTM v2.0) (range, 20 to 10 million copies/ml) was used
except at the Ithembalabantu Clinic where the BioMérieux NucliSens
Version 2.0 Easy Q/Easy Mag (NucliSens v2.0) assay (range, 20 to
10 million copies/ml) was used from 2010.
Informed consent was obtained from all adult study participants,
and for underage children, informed consent was obtained from their
caregivers. Additionally, assent to participate in the study was given di-
rectly by children in the appropriate age groups. Studies were approved
by the University of the Free State Ethics Committee, Bloemfontein;
Biomedical Research Ethics Committee, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Durban; and Research Ethics Committee, University of Oxford.
Flow cytometry and ICS assays
Isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were used for
staining with fluorescent monoclonal antibodies against markers of im-
mune activation (HLA-DR and CD38), immune exhaustion (PD1 and
2B4), memory differentiation (CD45RA and CCR7), and CCR5 expres-
sion. Briefly, cells were rested in R10 medium for 1 hour at 37°C in 5%
CO2 and then washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and stained
in the dark for 20 min on a 96-well plate in a volume of 50-ml staining
solution with titrated concentrations of fluorochrome-conjugated mono-
clonal antibodies against cell surface markers and the Near-IR Dead Cell
Stain Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as a viability marker. The following
antibodies were used: CD3/BV605 (SK7, BD Biosciences), CD4/V450
(RPA-T4, BD Biosciences), CD8/V500 (RPA-T8, BD Biosciences), PD-1/
anaphase-promoting complex (APC) (MIH4, eBioscience), CCR7/
phycoerythrin (PE) (150503, R&D Systems), CD45RA/Alexa Fluor 700
(HI100, BioLegend), HLA-DR/fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) (L243,
BD Biosciences), CD38/PE-Cy7 (HIT2, BD Biosciences), and CCR5/
APC (2D7, BD Biosciences). Cells were then washed twice in PBS and
fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde to be acquired on a flow cytometer.
ICS assays to measure IFN-g, IL-2, and TNF-a production after stim-
ulation with SEB at 1 mg/ml or with pools of overlapping 18-mer HIV
peptides (Gag, Pol, or Nef) (44) of purified PBMC or of T cells in a
whole-blood assay, respectively, were performed as previously described
(63, 64). Briefly, whole blood was incubated within 2 hours of collection
with peptide pools (at 2 mg/ml for each peptide) in the presence of anti-
CD28 and anti-CD49 at 1 mg/ml (BD Biosciences). After 5 hours of in-
cubation at 37°C, brefeldin A (5 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) was added, and
the cells were incubated for a further 5 hours before 2 mM EDTA was
added for 15 min at room temperature, and FACS lysing solution (BD
Biosciences) was added for 10 min at room temperature. Cells were then
washed twice and cryopreserved at −80°C. Subsequently, cells were
thawed and stained with surface antibodies against CD3/Alexa Fluor
700 (UCHT1, BD Pharmingen), CD4/Qdot605 (S3.5, Life Technologies),
and CD8/Pacific Blue (RPA-T8, BD Biosciences).
After 20-min incubation at room temperature in the dark, cells were
washed twice and resuspended in Fix/Perm solution (BD Biosciences)
for 20 min at 4°C. Cells were then washed twice and resuspended in
the ICS antibody mix with fluorescence-conjugated antibodies against
IFN-g/PE-Cy7 (4S.B3, eBioscience), IL-2/PE (PN IM2718U, Beckman
Coulter), and TNF-a/Alexa Flour 647 (MAb11, BioLegend) for 30 min
at room temperature in the dark. Cells were again washed twice, and the
pellet was suspended in 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Flow cytometry
acquisition was performed on an LSR II (BD Biosciences) flow cytom-
eter within 12 hours of staining and analyzed using FlowJo version 8.8.6.
Soluble CD14 and iFABP assays
Plasma levels of sCD14 were quantified using a commercially available
Luminex kit (R&D Systems). Plasma samples were used at a 100-fold
dilution in duplicate following the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Plasma levels of iFABP were quantified using a commercially available
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (R&D Systems) at 1:10 in
duplicate. Results are expressed in picograms per microliter.
Corrgram
A correlation matrix (31) was used to visualize Spearman’s correlations
between selected variables comprising absolute CD4 T cell count, CD4%,
viral load, phenotypic frequencies of naïve (Tn) and effector memory
T cells (Tem), activated (CD38+HLADR+) and PD1high (PD1+) CD4+
and CD8+ T cells, plasma levels of sCD14, and functional CD4+ and
CD8+ T cell responses (IFN-g and IL-2 production) upon SEB stimu-
lation. A data set of n = 45 vertically HIV-infected, ART-naïve children
above 5 years of age for whom all measurements were available from the
same study visit was used for analysis. Variables are grouped on the
basis of principal components analysis using the R package corrgram.
Virus neutralization assays
The ability of plasma from infected children and adults to neutralize
HIV was measured against a panel of 16 tier 2 and tier 3 clade A, B,
and C viruses (listed in table S2) (41) as a reduction in luciferase gene
expression after a single round of infection of JC53bl-13 cells, also
known as TZM-bl cells (National Institutes of Health AIDS Research
and Reference Reagent Program), with Env-pseudotyped viruses (65).
Titer was calculated as the reciprocal plasma/serum dilution causing a
50% reduction of relative light units [median infective dose (ID50)].
Cell sorting and cell-associated virus quantification
CD4+ T cells were sorted on a MoFlo XDP (Beckman Coulter) into
T cellsubsetsTn(naïve),Tscm(stemcellmemory),Tcm(centralmemory),
and Tem(effectormemory) onthe basisof expression of CD27, CD45RO,
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
11
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 CCR7, and CD95, as previously described (15). DNA was extracted
(Qiagen) and used as input DNA for PCR. Cell copy number and total
HIV-1 DNA levels were quantified as previously described (52, 66).
Briefly, cell copy number was quantified in triplicate at two dilutions
using an albumin qPCR assay (52, 66). PCR amplification of the 5′ long
terminalrepeatregionofHIVwasperformedinasingleroundof40cycles.
8E5 cells containing one integrated copy of HIV-1 per cell were used in
duplicate as standards with cell and HIV copy numbers ranging in serial
10-fold dilutions from 1 × 105 to 1 DNA copy per reaction. Template
DNA samples were diluted to contain 106, 5 × 105, and 2.5 × 105 cells
per well for analysis in triplicate wells of a 96-well plate. Template copies
were calculated using ABI software.
IFN-g ELISPOT assays
Responses were determined to a set of 410 overlapping peptides, whose
sequence was based on the 2001 C-clade consensus, arranged in a
matrix system with 11 to 12 peptides in each pool. Responses to matrix
poolswere deconvolutedbysubsequenttestingwiththeindividual18-mer
peptides within each pool, and the identity of the individual 18-mers
recognized was thus confirmed, as previously described (54).
Statistical analysis
The influence of several predictor variables on the absolute number of
CD4 T cell counts was assessed by a GLM (32). In a GLM, the linear
predictor has the form hi = b0 + xilb1 + … + xipbp and is connected to the
(conditional) mean of the response variable, that is, mi := E[yi | xi] =
h(hi) or hi = g(mi), respectively, where g(⋅) and h(⋅) denote suitable link
and response functions, respectively; xi:= (xil, … xlp)T, i = 1, …, n, is the
vector of covariates, and b:= (b0, b1, … , bp)T represents the vector of
covariate effects. Additionally, given xi, the responses yi are assumed
to be (conditionally) independent observations from a simple exponen-
tial family. In the present situation, a Poisson regression model with log-
link function is chosen. Approaches to variable selection are used by
applying the so-called LASSO principle on scaled covariates (33). All
computations have been carried out in the statistical software R. For
GLMs, there exist three different LASSO fitting routines in R that allow
one to fit the underlying model: the glmnet (34), the penalized (35), and
the grplasso (36) packages. For all three methods, the optimal tuning
parameter l, which reflects the amount of penalization and hence
controls variable selection, is determined via 10-fold cross-validation
on the basis of the model’s deviance. A final unregularized conventional
GLM is fitted on the selected set of covariates using the R-function glm.
Another statistical analysis was undertaken using Prism GraphPad
software version 6.0. For exploration of bivariate associations, Spear-
man’s rank correlation test was used. For comparisons between groups,
P values were calculated using Mann-Whitney tests. All P values are
two-sided, and a P value of less than 0.05 was considered significant.
In scatterplots, median values and IQRs are indicated.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/358/358ra125/DC1
Fig. S1. Decreased CD4 T cell function and increased expression of exhaustion markers in pe-
diatric progressors.
Fig. S2. nAb potency in pediatric and adult subjects.
Table S1. CD8+ T cell activation is independently associated with total breadth of HIV-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses and viral load.
Table S2. List of pseudoviruses tested for neutralizing sera activity by HIV-1 subtype.
Source data
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. P. W. Hunt, J. N. Martin, E. Sinclair, B. Bredt, E. Hagos, H. Lampiris, S. G. Deeks, T cell acti-
vation is associated with lower CD4+ T cell gains in human immunodeficiency virus-
infected patients with sustained viral suppression during antiretroviral therapy. J. Infect.
Dis. 187, 1534–1543 (2003).
2. P. W. Hunt, J. Brenchley, E. Sinclair, J. M. McCune, M. Roland, K. Page-Shafer, P. Hsue,
B. Emu, M. Krone, H. Lampiris, D. Douek, J. N. Martin, S. G. Deeks, Relationship between T cell
activation and CD4+ T cell count in HIV-seropositive individuals with undetectable plasma HIV
RNA levels in the absence of therapy. J. Infect. Dis. 197, 126–133 (2008).
3. S. Subramanian, A. Tawakol, T. H. Burdo, S. Abbara, J. Wei, J. Vijayakumar, E. Corsini,
A. Abdelbaky, M. V. Zanni, U. Hoffmann, K. C. Williams, J. Lo, S. K. Grinspoon, Arterial
inflammation in patients with HIV. JAMA 308, 379–386 (2012).
4. M. M. Lederman, N. T. Funderburg, R. P. Sekaly, N. R. Klatt, P. W. Hunt, Residual immune
dysregulation syndrome in treated HIV infection. Adv. Immunol. 119, 51–83 (2013).
5. T. H. Finkel, G. Tudor-Williams, N. K. Banda, M. F. Cotton, T. Curiel, C. Monks, T. W. Baba,
R. M. Ruprecht, A. Kupfer, Apoptosis occurs predominantly in bystander cells and not in
productively infected cells of HIV- and SIV-infected lymph nodes. Nat. Med. 1, 129–134
(1995).
6. S. G. Deeks, C. M. R. Kitchen, L. Liu, H. Guo, R. Gascon, A. B. Narváez, P. Hunt, J. N. Martin,
J. O. Kahn, J. Levy, M. S. McGrath, F. M. Hecht, Immune activation set point during early
HIV infection predicts subsequent CD4+ T-cell changes independent of viral load. Blood
104, 942–947 (2004).
7. G. Silvestri, D. L. Sodora, R. A. Koup, M. Paiardini, S. P. O’Neil, H. M. McClure, S. I. Staprans,
M. B. Feinberg, Nonpathogenic SIV infection of sooty mangabeys is characterized by
limited bystander immunopathology despite chronic high-level viremia. Immunity 18,
441–452 (2003).
8. S. VandeWoude, C. Apetrei, Going wild: Lessons from naturally occurring T-lymphotropic
lentiviruses. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 19, 728–762 (2006).
9. A. Chahroudi, S. E. Bosinger, T. H. Vanderford, M. Paiardini, G. Silvestri, Natural SIV hosts:
Showing AIDS the door. Science 335, 1188–1193 (2012).
10. P. J. Goulder, S. R. Lewin, E. M. Leitman, Paediatric HIV infection: The potential for cure. Nat.
Rev. Immunol. 16, 259–271 (2016).
11. S. Blanche, M.-L. Newell, M.-J. Mayaux, D. T. Dunn, J. P. Teglas, C. Rouzioux, C. S. Peckham,
Morbidity and mortality in European children vertically infected by HIV-1: The French Pe-
diatric HIV Infection Study Group and European Collaborative Study. J. Acquir. Immune
Defic. Syndr. Hum. Retrovirol. 14, 442–450 (1997).
12. M.-L. Newell, H. Coovadia, M. Cortina-Borja, N. Rollins, P. Gaillard, F. Dabis; Ghent Interna-
tional AIDS Society (IAS) Working Group on HIV Infection in Women and Children, Mor-
tality of infected and uninfected infants born to HIV-infected mothers in Africa: A pooled
analysis. Lancet 364, 1236–1243 (2004).
13. W. Mphatswe, N. Blanckenberg, G. Tudor-Williams, A. Prendergast, C. Thobakgale,
N. Mkhwanazi, N. McCarthy, B. D. Walker, P. Kiepiela, P. Goulder, High frequency of rapid
immunological progression in African infants infected in the era of perinatal HIV prophylaxis.
AIDS 21, 1253–1261 (2007).
14. M. E. Paul, C. Mao, M. Charurat, L. Serchuck, M. Foca, K. Hayani, E. L. Handelsman, C. Diaz,
K. McIntosh, W. T. Shearer; Women and Infants Transmission Study, Predictors of immu-
nologic long-term nonprogression in HIV-infected children: Implications for initiating
therapy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 115, 848–855 (2005).
15. N. R. Klatt, S. E. Bosinger, M. Peck, L. E. Richert-Spuhler, A. Heigele, J. P. Gile, N. Patel, J. Taaffe,
B. Julg, D. Camerini, C. Torti, J. N. Martin, S. G. Deeks, E. Sinclair, F. M. Hecht, M. M. Lederman,
M. Paiardini, F. Kirchhoff, J. M. Brenchley, P. W. Hunt, G. Silvestri, Limited HIV infection of
central memory and stem cell memory CD4+ T cells is associated with lack of progression in
viremic individuals. PLOS Pathog. 10, e1004345 (2014).
16. M. Rotger, J. Dalmau, A. Rauch, P. McLaren, S. E. Bosinger, R. Martinez, N. G. Sandler, A. Roque,
J. Liebner, M. Battegay, E. Bernasconi, P. Descombes, I. Erkizia, J. Fellay, B. Hirschel, J. M. Miró,
E. Palou, M. Hoffmann, M. Massanella, J. Blanco, M. Woods, H. F. Günthard, P. de Bakker,
D. C. Douek, G. Silvestri, J. Martinez-Picado, A. Telenti, Comparative transcriptomics of
extreme phenotypes of human HIV-1 infection and SIV infection in sooty mangabey
and rhesus macaque. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 2391–2400 (2011).
17. J. Ananworanich, T. Apornpong, P. Kosalaraksa, T. Jaimulwong, R. Hansudewechakul,
C. Pancharoen, T. Bunupuradah, M. Chandara, T. Puthanakit, C. Ngampiyasakul, J. Wongsawat,
S. Kanjanavanit, W. Luesomboon, P. Klangsinsirikul, N. Ngo-Giang-Huong, S. J. Kerr, S. Ubolyam,
T. Mengthaisong, R. S. Gelman, K. Pattanapanyasat, V. Saphonn, K. Ruxrungtham, W. T. Shearer;
PREDICT Study Group, Characteristics of lymphocyte subsets in HIV-infected, long-term non-
progressor, and healthy Asian children through 12 years of age. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 126,
1294–1301.e10 (2010).
18. I. Ssewanyana, M. Elrefaei, G. Dorsey, T. Ruel, N. G. Jones, A. Gasasira, M. Kamya, J. Nakiwala,
J. Achan, E. Charlebois, D. Havlir, H. Cao, Profile of T cell immune responses in HIV-infected
children from Uganda. J. Infect. Dis. 196, 1667–1670 (2007).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 19. F. Pereyra, M. M. Addo, D. E. Kaufmann, Y. Liu, T. Miura, A. Rathod, B. Baker, A. Trocha,
R. Rosenberg, E. Mackey, P. Ueda, Z. Lu, D. Cohen, T. Wrin, C. J. Petropoulos, E. S. Rosenberg,
B. D. Walker, Genetic and immunologic heterogeneity among persons who control HIV in-
fection in the absence of therapy. J. Infect. Dis. 197, 563–571 (2008).
20. E. Adland, P. Paioni, C. Thobakgale, L. Laker, L. Mori, M. Muenchhoff, A. Csala, M. Clapson,
J. Flynn, V. Novelli, J. Hurst, V. Naidoo, R. Shapiro, K.-H. G. Huang, J. Frater, A. Prendergast,
J. G. Prado, T. Ndung’u, B. D. Walker, M. Carrington, P. Jooste, P. J. R. Goulder, Discordant
impact of HLA on viral replicative capacity and disease progression in pediatric and adult
HIV infection. PLOS Pathog. 11, e1004954 (2015).
21. P. J. R. Goulder, B. D. Walker, HIV and HLA class I: An evolving relationship. Immunity 37,
426–440 (2012).
22. R. Dunham, P. Pagliardini, S. Gordon, B. Sumpter, J. Engram, A. Moanna, M. Paiardini,
J. N. Mandl, B. Lawson, S. Garg, H. M. McClure, Y.-X. Xu, C. Ibegbu, K. Easley, N. Katz,
I. Pandrea, C. Apetrei, D. L. Sodora, S. I. Staprans, M. B. Feinberg, G. Silvestri, The AIDS
resistance of naturally SIV-infected sooty mangabeys is independent of cellular immunity
to the virus. Blood 108, 209–217 (2006).
23. M. Paiardini, B. Cervasi, E. Reyes-Aviles, L. Micci, A. M. Ortiz, A. Chahroudi, C. Vinton,
S. N. Gordon, S. E. Bosinger, N. Francella, P. L. Hallberg, E. Cramer, T. Schlub, M. L. Chan,
N. E. Riddick, R. G. Collman, C. Apetrei, I. Pandrea, J. Else, J. Munch, F. Kirchhoff, M. P. Davenport,
J. M. Brenchley, G. Silvestri, Low levels of SIV infection in sooty mangabey central mem-
ory CD4+ T cells are associated with limited CCR5 expression. Nat. Med. 17, 830–836
(2011).
24. W. T. Shearer, H. M. Rosenblatt, R. S. Gelman, R. Oyomopito, S. Plaeger, E. R. Stiehm, D. W. Wara,
S. D. Douglas, K. Luzuriaga, E. J. McFarland, R. Yogev, M. H. Rathore, W. Levy, B. L. Graham,
S. A. Spector; Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group, Lymphocyte subsets in healthy children
from birth through 18 years of age: The Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group P1009 study.
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 112, 973–980 (2003).
25. E. S. Lugada, J. Mermin, F. Kaharuza, E. Ulvestad, W. Were, N. Langeland, B. Asjo, S. Malamba,
R. Downing, Population-based hematologic and immunologic reference values for a healthy
Ugandan population. Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol. 11, 29–34 (2004).
26. J. W. Mellors, A. Munoz, J. V. Giorgi, J. B. Margolick, C. J. Tassoni, P. Gupta, L. A. Kingsley,
J. A. Todd, A. J. Saah, R. Detels, J. P. Phair, C. R. Rinaldo Jr., Plasma viral load and CD4+
lymphocytes as prognostic markers of HIV-1 infection. Ann. Intern. Med. 126, 946–954
(1997).
27. J. M. Brenchley, D. A. Price, T. W. Schacker, T. E. Asher, G. Silvestri, S. Rao, Z. Kazzaz, E. Bornstein,
O. Lambotte, D. Altmann, B. R. Blazar, B. Rodriguez, L. Teixeira-Johnson, A. Landay,
J. N. Martin, F. M. Hecht, L. J. Picker, M. M. Lederman, S. G. Deeks, D. C. Douek, Microbial
translocation is a cause of systemic immune activation in chronic HIV infection. Nat. Med.
12, 1365–1371 (2006).
28. N. G. Sandler, H. Wand, A. Roque, M. Law, M. C. Nason, D. E. Nixon, C. Pedersen,
K. Ruxrungtham, S. R. Lewin, S. Emery, J. D. Neaton, J. M. Brenchley, S. G. Deeks, I. Sereti,
D. C. Douek; INSIGHT SMART Study Group, Plasma levels of soluble CD14 independently
predict mortality in HIV infection. J. Infect. Dis. 203, 780–790 (2011).
29. P. W. Hunt, E. Sinclair, B. Rodriguez, C. Shive, B. Clagett, N. Funderburg, J. Robinson, Y. Huang,
L. Epling, J. N. Martin, S. G. Deeks, C. L. Meinert, M. L. Van Natta, D. A. Jabs, M. M. Lederman,
Gut epithelial barrier dysfunction and innate immune activation predict mortality in treated
HIV infection. J. Infect. Dis. 210, 1228–1238 (2014).
30. E. J. Wherry, M. Kurachi, Molecular and cellular insights into T cell exhaustion. Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 15, 486–499 (2015).
31. M. Friendly, Corrgrams: Exploratory displays for correlation matrices. Am. Stat. 56, 316–324
(2002).
32. P. McCullagh, J. A. Nelder, Generalized Linear Models (Chapman & Hall, ed. 2, 1989).
33. R. Tibshirani, Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J. R. Stat. Soc. B Methodol.
58, 267–288 (1996).
34. J. Friedman, T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, Regularization paths for generalized linear models via
coordinate descent. J. Stat. Softw. 33, 1–22 (2010).
35. J. J. Goeman, L1 penalized estimation in the Cox proportional hazards model. Biom. J. 52,
70–84 (2010).
36. L. Meier, S. van de Geer, P. Bühlmann, The group lasso for logistic regression. J. R. Stat. Soc.
B Methodol. 70, 53–71 (2008).
37. B. Li, K. Stefano-Cole, D. M. Kuhrt, S. N. Gordon, J. G. Else, J. Mulenga, S. Allen, D. L. Sodora,
G. Silvestri, C. A. Derdeyn, Nonpathogenic simian immunodeficiency virus infection of
sooty mangabeys is not associated with high levels of autologous neutralizing antibodies.
J. Virol. 84, 6248–6253 (2010).
38. W. Fischer, C. Apetrei, M. L. Santiago, Y. Li, R. Gautam, I. Pandrea, G. M. Shaw, B. H. Hahn,
N. L. Letvin, G. J. Nabel, B. T. Korber, Distinct evolutionary pressures underlie diversity in
simian immunodeficiency virus and human immunodeficiency virus lineages. J. Virol. 86,
13217–13231 (2012).
39. K. M. Kilgore, M. K. Murphy, S. L. Burton, K. S. Wetzel, S. A. Smith, P. Xiao, S. Reddy, N. Francella,
D. L. Sodora, G. Silvestri, K. S. Cole, F. Villinger, J. E. Robinson, B. Pulendran, E. Hunter,
R. G. Collman, R. R. Amara, C. A. Derdeyn, Characterization and implementation of a
diverse simian immunodeficiency virus SIVsm envelope panel in the assessment of
neutralizing antibody breadth elicited in rhesus macaques by multimodal vaccines
expressing the SIVmac239 envelope. J. Virol. 89, 8130–8151 (2015).
40. D. N. Sather, J. Armann, L. K. Ching, A. Mavrantoni, G. Sellhorn, Z. Caldwell, X. Yu, B. Wood,
S. Self, S. Kalams, L. Stamatatos, Factors associated with the development of cross-reactive
neutralizing antibodies during human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J. Virol. 83,
757–769 (2009).
41. E. S. Gray, M. C. Madiga, T. Hermanus, P. L. Moore, C. K. Wibmer, N. L. Tumba, L. Werner,
K. Mlisana, S. Sibeko, C. Williamson, S. S. Abdool Karim, L. Morris; CAPRISA002 Study Team, The
neutralization breadth of HIV-1 develops incrementally over four years and is associated
with CD4+ T cell decline and high viral load during acute infection. J. Virol. 85, 4828–4840
(2011).
42. L. Goo, V. Chohan, R. Nduati, J. Overbaugh, Early development of broadly neutralizing
antibodies in HIV-1–infected infants. Nat. Med. 20, 655–658 (2014).
43. C. A. Derdeyn, P. L. Moore, L. Morris, Development of broadly neutralizing antibodies from
autologous neutralizing antibody responses in HIV infection. Curr. Opin. HIV AIDS 9, 210–216
(2014).
44. P. Kiepiela, K. Ngumbela, C. Thobakgale, D. Ramduth, I. Honeyborne, E. Moodley, S. Reddy,
C. de Pierres, Z. Mncube, N. Mkhwanazi, K. Bishop, M. van der Stok, K. Nair, N. Khan,
H. Crawford, R. Payne, A. Leslie, J. Prado, A. Prendergast, J. Frater, N. McCarthy, C. Brander,
G. H. Learn, D. Nickle, C. Rousseau, H. Coovadia, J. I. Mullins, D. Heckerman, B. D. Walker,
P. Goulder, CD8+ T-cell responses to different HIV proteins have discordant associa-
tions with viral load. Nat. Med. 13, 46–53 (2007).
45. D. Ma, A. Jasinska, J. Kristoff, J. P. Grobler, T. Turner, Y. Jung, C. Schmitt, K. Raehtz, F. Feyertag,
N. Martinez Sosa, V. Wijewardana, D. S. Burke, D. L. Robertson, R. Tracy, I. Pandrea, N. Freimer,
C. Apetrei; International Vervet Research Consortium, SIVagm infection in wild African green
monkeys from South Africa: Epidemiology, natural history, and evolutionary considerations.
PLOS Pathog. 9, e1003011 (2013).
46. A. Chahroudi, E. Cartwright, S. T. Lee, M. Mavigner, D. G. Carnathan, B. Lawson, P. M. Carnathan,
T. Hashempoor, M. K. Murphy, T. Meeker, S. Ehnert, C. Souder, J. G. Else, J. Cohen, R. G. Collman,
T. H. Vanderford, S. R. Permar, C. A. Derdeyn, F. Villinger, G. Silvestri, Target cell availability,
rather than breast milk factors, dictates mother-to-infant transmission of SIV in sooty manga-
beys and rhesus macaques. PLOS Pathog. 10, e1003958 (2014).
47. C. S. McGary, B. Cervasi, A. Chahroudi, L. Micci, J. Taaffe, T. Meeker, G. Silvestri,
M. P. Davenport, M. Paiardini, Increased stability and limited proliferation of CD4+ cen-
tral memory T cells differentiate nonprogressive simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)
infection of sooty mangabeys from progressive SIV infection of rhesus macaques. J. Virol.
88, 4533–4542 (2014).
48. N. Chomont, M. El-Far, P. Ancuta, L. Trautmann, F. A. Procopio, B. Yassine-Diab, G. Boucher,
M.-R. Boulassel, G. Ghattas, J. M. Brenchley, T. W. Schacker, B. J. Hill, D. C. Douek, J.-P. Routy,
E. K. Haddad, R.-P. Sékaly, HIV reservoir size and persistence are driven by T cell survival
and homeostatic proliferation. Nat. Med. 15, 893–900 (2009).
49. M. J. Buzon, H. Sun, C. Li, A. Shaw, K. Seiss, Z. Ouyang, E. Martin-Gayo, J. Leng, T. J. Henrich,
J. Z. Li, F. Pereyra, R. Zurakowski, B. D. Walker, E. S. Rosenberg, X. G. Yu, M. Lichterfeld,
HIV-1 persistence in CD4+ T cells with stem cell–like properties. Nat. Med. 20, 139–142
(2014).
50. S. Eriksson, E. H. Graf, V. Dahl, M. C. Strain, S. A. Yukl, E. S. Lysenko, R. J. Bosch, J. Lai, S. Chioma,
F. Emad, M. Abdel-Mohsen, R. Hoh, F. Hecht, P. Hunt, M. Somsouk, J. Wong, R. Johnston,
R. F. Siliciano, D. D. Richman, U. O’Doherty, S. Palmer, S. G. Deeks, J. D. Siliciano, Comparative
analysis of measures of viral reservoirs in HIV-1 eradication studies. PLOS Pathog. 9, e1003174
(2013).
51. Y.-C. Ho, L. Shan, N. N. Hosmane, J. Wang, S. B. Laskey, D. I. S. Rosenbloom, J. Lai, J. N. Blankson,
J. D. Siliciano, R. F. Siliciano, Replication-competent noninduced proviruses in the latent reser-
voir increase barrier to HIV-1 cure. Cell 155, 540–551 (2013).
52. J. P. Williams, J. Hurst, W. Stöhr, N. Robinson, H. Brown, M. Fisher, S. Kinloch, D. Cooper,
M. Schechter, G. Tambussi, S. Fidler, M. Carrington, A. Babiker, J. Weber, K. K. Koelsch,
A. D. Kelleher, R. E. Phillips, J. Frater; SPARTAC Trial Investigators, HIV-1 DNA predicts disease
progression and post-treatment virological control. eLife 3, e03821 (2014).
53. M. Kiselinova, W. De Spiegelaere, M. J. Buzon, E. Malatinkova, M. Lichterfeld, L. Vandekerckhove,
Integrated and total HIV-1 DNA predict ex vivo viral outgrowth. PLOS Pathog. 12, e1005472
(2016).
54. P. Kiepiela, A. J. Leslie, I. Honeyborne, D. Ramduth, C. Thobakgale, S. Chetty, P. Rathnavalu,
C. Moore, K. J. Pfafferott, L. Hilton, P. Zimbwa, S. Moore, T. Allen, C. Brander, M. M. Addo,
M. Altfeld, I. James, S. Mallal, M. Bunce, L. D. Barber, J. Szinger, C. Day, P. Klenerman,
J. Mullins, B. Korber, H. M. Coovadia, B. D. Walker, P. J. R. Goulder, Dominant influence of
HLA-B in mediating the potential co-evolution of HIV and HLA. Nature 432, 769–775
(2004).
55. X. Wei, J. M. Decker, S. Wang, H. Hui, J. C. Kappes, X. Wu, J. F. Salazar-Gonzalez, M. G. Salazar,
J. M. Kilby, M. S. Saag, N. L. Komarova, M. A. Nowak, B. H. Hahn, P. D. Kwong, G. M. Shaw,
Antibody neutralization and escape by HIV-1. Nature 422, 307–312 (2003).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 56. Z. Euler, M. J. van Gils, E. M. Bunnik, P. Phung, B. Schweighardt, T. Wrin, H. Schuitemaker,
Cross-reactive neutralizing humoral immunity does not protect from HIV type 1 disease
progression. J. Infect. Dis. 201, 1045–1053 (2010).
57. A. J. Prendergast, P. Klenerman, P. J. R. Goulder, The impact of differential antiviral immu-
nity in children and adults. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 636–648 (2012).
58. C. T. Ng, J. P. Jaworski, P. Jayaraman, W. F. Sutton, P. Delio, L. Kuller, D. Anderson, G. Landucci,
B. A. Richardson, D. R. Burton, D. N. Forthal, N. L. Haigwood, Passive neutralizing antibody
controls SHIV viremia and enhances B cell responses in infant macaques. Nat. Med. 16, 1117–1119
(2010).
59. A. J. Hessell, J. P. Jaworski, E. Epson, K. Matsuda, S. Pandey, C. Kahl, J. Reed, W. F. Sutton,
K. B. Hammond, T. A. Cheever, P. T. Barnette, A. W. Legasse, S. Planer, J. J. Stanton, A. Pegu, X. Chen,
K. Wang, D. Siess, D. Burke, B. S. Park, M. K. Axthelm, A. Lewis, V. M. Hirsch, B. S. Graham,
J. R. Mascola, J. B. Sacha, N. L. Haigwood, Early short-term treatment with neutralizing
human monoclonal antibodies halts SHIV infection in infant macaques. Nat. Med. 22, 362–368
(2016).
60. S. Crotty, Follicular helper CD4 T cells (TFH). Annu. Rev. Immunol. 29, 621–663 (2011).
61. A. Meier, J. J. Chang, E. S. Chan, R. B. Pollard, H. K. Sidhu, S. Kulkarni, T. F. Wen, R. J. Lindsay,
L. Orellana, D. Mildvan, S. Bazner, H. Streeck, G. Alter, J. D. Lifson, M. Carrington, R. J. Bosch,
G. K. Robbins, M. Altfeld, Sex differences in the Toll-like receptor-mediated response of
plasmacytoid dendritic cells to HIV-1. Nat. Med. 15, 955–959 (2009).
62. C. M. Beaumier, L. D. Harris, S. Goldstein, N. R. Klatt, S. Whitted, J. McGinty, C. Apetrei,
I. Pandrea, V. M. Hirsch, J. M. Brenchley, CD4 downregulation by memory CD4+ T cells in vivo
renders African green monkeys resistant to progressive SIVagm infection. Nat. Med. 15,
879–885 (2009).
63. C. J. Pitcher, C. Quittner, D. M. Peterson, M. Connors, R. A. Koup, V. C. Maino, L. J. Picker,
HIV-1-specific CD4+ T cells are detectable in most individuals with active HIV-1 infection,
but decline with prolonged viral suppression. Nat. Med. 5, 518–525 (1999).
64. W. A. Hanekom, J. Hughes, M. Mavinkurve, M. Mendillo, M. Watkins, H. Gamieldien,
S. J. Gelderbloem, M. Sidibana, N. Mansoor, V. Davids, R. A. Murray, A. Hawkridge,
P. A. J. Haslett, S. Ress, G. D. Hussey, G. Kaplan, Novel application of a whole blood intracellular
cytokine detection assay to quantitate specific T-cell frequency in field studies. J. Immunol.
Methods 291, 185–195 (2004).
65. D. C. Montefiori, Evaluating neutralizing antibodies against HIV, SIV, and SHIV in luciferase
reporter gene assays. Curr. Protoc. Immunol. Chapter 12, Unit 12.11 (2005).
66. J. M. Brenchley, B. J. Hill, D. R. Ambrozak, D. A. Price, F. J. Guenaga, J. P. Casazza, J. Kuruppu,
J. Yazdani, S. A. Migueles, M. Connors, M. Roederer, D. C. Douek, R. A. Koup, T-cell subsets
that harbor human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in vivo: Implications for HIV patho-
genesis. J. Virol. 78, 1160–1168 (2004).
Acknowledgments: We thank Z. Ditse and M. Madzivhandila for technical support with the
nAb measurements. Funding: This work was funded by the Wellcome Trust (WT104748MA
to P.G.) and the NIH (RO1 AI46995 to P.G.). L.M. and P.L.M. acknowledge funding from the
South African Medical Research Council Strategic Health Innovation Partnerships (SHIP)
program. P.L.M. was supported by the South African Research Chairs Initiative (SARChI)
of the South African Department of Science and Technology (SA DST) and the National
Research Foundation of South Africa (grant no. 98341). A.J.P. was funded by the Wellcome
Trust (093768/Z/10/Z). Author contributions: M. Muenchhoff and E.A. designed the study,
conducted experimental work within the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper. C.C.
conducted experimental work within the study and analyzed the data. O.K., M.P., A.C., E.L., A.M.,
C.M., C.T., H.K., J.R., T.B., S.D., J.F., and C.B.W. conducted experimental work within the study. J.H.,
A.G., M. Mori, and S.S. analyzed the data. G.T.-W., A.J.P., D.S., T.N., and P.J. designed the study, re-
cruited the subjects, and analyzed the data. A.L. conducted/supervised experimental work within
the study. B.D.W. designed the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper. P.L.M. and L.M.
conducted/supervised experimental work within the study, analyzed data, and wrote the paper. P.G.
designed the study, conducted/supervised experimental work within the study, analyzed data, and
wrote the paper. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Submitted 10 May 2016
Accepted 22 August 2016
Published 28 September 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aag1048
Citation: M. Muenchhoff, E. Adland, O. Karimanzira, C. Crowther, M. Pace, A. Csala, E. Leitman,
A. Moonsamy, C. McGregor, J. Hurst, A. Groll, M. Mori, S. Sinmyee, C. Thobakgale, G. Tudor-Williams,
A. J. Prendergast, H. Kloverpris, J. Roider, A. Leslie, D. Shingadia, T. Brits, S. Daniels, J. Frater,
C. B. Willberg, B. D. Walker, T. Ndung’u, P. Jooste, P. L. Moore, L. Morris, P. Goulder, Nonprogressing
HIV-infected children share fundamental immunological features of nonpathogenic SIV infection. Sci.
Transl. Med. 8, 358ra125 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
28 September 2016
Vol 8 Issue 358 358ra125
14
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 nonpathogenic SIV infection
Nonprogressing HIV-infected children share fundamental immunological features of
Jooste, Penny L. Moore, Lynn Morris and Philip Goulder
Shingadia, Thea Brits, Samantha Daniels, John Frater, Christian B. Willberg, Bruce D. Walker, Thumbi Ndung'u, Pieter 
Thobakgale, Gareth Tudor-Williams, Andrew J. Prendergast, Henrik Kloverpris, Julia Roider, Alasdair Leslie, Delane
Angeline Moonsamy, Callum McGregor, Jacob Hurst, Andreas Groll, Masahiko Mori, Smruti Sinmyee, Christina 
Maximilian Muenchhoff, Emily Adland, Owen Karimanzira, Carol Crowther, Matthew Pace, Anna Csala, Ellen Leitman,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aag1048
, 358ra125358ra125.
8
Sci Transl Med 
treatments.
mechanisms described in these patients shed light on HIV pathogenesis, which may help develop future
expression on central memory CD4 T cells, similar to sooty mangabeys infected with SIV. The immune 
antiviral treatment. These children have low immune activation, including less chemokine receptor CCR5
describe a cohort of pediatric HIV patients who have normal CD4 T cell counts, despite high viremia and lack of 
et al.
the presence of virus, a phenomenon also seen in natural hosts of the closely related SIV. Muenchhoff 
Although most people that get infected with HIV develop AIDS, rare individuals maintain immune function in
HIV progression at a standstill
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/358/358ra125
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/09/26/8.358.358ra125.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/486/eaav0537.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/439/eaao4521.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/419/eaan8848.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/405/eaam5441.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/358/358fs16.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/358/358ra125#BIBL
This article cites 65 articles, 11 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
