 Article
The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Exp. Med. 2017 Vol. 214 No. 9 2591–2610
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20161134
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
2591
IntroductIon
T
ype 2 diabetes (T2D) mellitus is characterized by hypergly-
cemia, insulin resistance, defective insulin secretion, loss of β 
cell function and mass, and accumulation of amyloid in the 
islets of Langerhans (Stumvoll et al., 2005). The cause of T2D 
is not completely understood but is suspected to be related 
to a combination of lifestyle and genetic factors. The disease 
is due to insufficient insulin production from β cells in the 
setting of insulin resistance. However, not all people with in-
sulin resistance develop diabetes (Polonsky, 2000) because an 
impairment of insulin secretion from pancreatic β cell dys-
function is required (Kahn, 2003). Dysfunction and loss of β 
cells has been associated with glucolipotoxicity (Poitout and 
Robertson, 2002; El-Assaad et al., 2003), islet cholesterol ac-
cumulation (Brunham et al., 2010), and islet inflammation 
(Donath and Shoelson, 2011). However, compelling evidence 
suggests that accumulation of amyloid aggregates in the islets 
of Langerhans might significantly contribute to β cell dys-
function and disease (Hull et al., 2004; Haataja et al., 2008; 
Jurgens et al., 2011; Mukherjee et al., 2015).
Islet amyloid deposits, composed predominantly of a 
misfolded and aggregated form of the islet amyloid poly-
peptide (IAPP), are observed in >90% of patients with T2D 
(Westermark, 1972; Clark et al., 1988; Betsholtz et al., 1989; 
Johnson et al., 1989). Autopsy studies in humans suggest 
that islet amyloid is associated with the loss of β cells mass 
(Clark et al., 1988). Mutations in the IAPP gene have been 
linked with an increased risk for T2D (Novials et al., 2001). 
Longitudinal studies in animals that spontaneously develop 
T2D (nonhuman primates and domestic cats) showed that 
detection of IAPP aggregates precedes β cell dysfunction and 
clinical signs of the disease (Howard, 1986; de Koning et al., 
1993; Ma et al., 1998). 
Transgenic mice overexpressing human 
IAPP (hIAPP) develop islet amyloidosis and, associated to 
IAPP misfolding and oligomerization, the animals exhibit β 
cell loss, impaired insulin production, and fasting hypergly-
cemia (Janson et al., 1996). Overall, these results suggest an 
important role for IAPP misfolding and aggregation in islet 
pathology responsible for T2D. This finding does not contra-
dict the widely accepted fact that insulin resistance is very 
important for T2D pathogenesis. Indeed, it is very likely that 
insulin resistance has a key role in IAPP aggregation because 
insulin resistance leads to an increase in IAPP production, 
Although a large proportion of patients with type 2 diabetes (t2d) accumulate misfolded aggregates composed of the islet 
amyloid polypeptide (IAPP), its role in the disease is unknown. Here, we show that pancreatic IAPP aggregates can promote the 
misfolding and aggregation of endogenous IAPP in islet cultures obtained from transgenic mouse or healthy human pancreas. 
Islet homogenates immunodepleted with anti-IAPP–specific antibodies were not able to induce IAPP aggregation. Importantly, 
intraperitoneal inoculation of pancreatic homogenates containing IAPP aggregates into transgenic mice expressing human 
IAPP dramatically accelerates IAPP amyloid deposition, which was accompanied by clinical abnormalities typical of t2d, includ-
ing hyperglycemia, impaired glucose tolerance, and a substantial reduction on β cell number and mass. Finally, induction of 
IAPP deposition and diabetic abnormalities were also induced in vivo by administration of IAPP aggregates prepared in vitro 
using pure, synthetic IAPP. our findings suggest that some of the pathologic and clinical alterations of t2d might be trans-
missible through a similar mechanism by which prions propagate in prion diseases.
Induction of IAPP amyloid deposition and associated 
diabetic abnormalities by a prion-like mechanism
Abhisek Mukherjee,1* Diego Morales-Scheihing,1,2* Natalia Salvadores,1,3* Ines Moreno-Gonzalez,1 
Cesar Gonzalez,1 Kathleen Taylor-Presse,1 Nicolas Mendez,1 Mohammad Shahnawaz,1 A. Osama Gaber,4 
Omaima M. Sabek,4 Daniel W
. Fraga,4 and Claudio Soto1,2
1Mitchell Center for Alzheimer’s Disease, Department of Neurology, John P. and Kathrine G. McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Medical School at 
Houston, Houston, TX
2Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de los Andes, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile
3Center for Integrative Biology, Universidad Mayor, Santiago, Chile
4Department of Surgery, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX
© 2017 Mukherjee et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
*A. Mukherjee, D. Morales-Scheihing, and N. Salvadores contributed equally to this 
paper.
Correspondence to Claudio Soto: Claudio.Soto@uth.tmc.edu
Abbreviations used: FTIR, Fourier-transformed infrared; hIAPP, human IAPP; IAPP, 
islet amyloid polypeptide; Mcc, microcin; PMD, protein misfolding disease; rpm, rev-
olutions per minute; STZ, streptozotocin; T2D, type 2 diabetes; Tg, transgenic; ThS, 
thioflavin S; ThT, thioflavin T.
on June 2, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20161134
Published Online: 1 August, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2592
since IAPP and insulin are cosecreted and subjected to the 
same regulatory mechanisms (Höppener et al., 2000). Thus, 
in prediabetic stages, obesity and insulin resistance may in-
crease IAPP production, and it is very well established that an 
increase in protein concentration is one of the main factors 
leading to protein aggregation.
Accumulation of misfolded protein aggregates is not 
only present in T2D but also is the main feature of a group 
of diseases known as protein misfolding disorders (PMDs), 
including various neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzhei-
mer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
and prion disorders, as well as several systemic amyloido-
sis disease (Luheshi et al., 2008; Soto and Estrada, 2008). In 
PMDs, misfolding, aggregation, and accumulation of different 
proteins in distinct tissues leads to cellular damage, organ dys-
function, and disease. Among PMDs, prion diseases have the 
intriguing feature that the pathology can be transmitted by 
infection with the misfolded protein (Prusiner, 1998). Indeed, 
infectious prions are solely composed of preformed aggre-
gates of misfolded prion protein, which transmit disease by 
seeding the aggregation of the endogenous prion protein, re-
sulting in the accumulation of large quantities of these toxic 
aggregates in the brain (Prusiner, 1998; Soto et al., 2006). It is 
thought that the ability of misfolded prion protein to serve as 
a nucleus for the misfolding and aggregation of the host prion 
protein is the key property responsible for prion replication 
and infectivity (Soto et al., 2006; Soto, 2012). Interestingly, 
the formation of misfolded aggregates in T2D, as well as in all 
other PMDs, follows a seeding/nucleation mechanism, sim-
ilar to the process of prion replication, in which preformed 
polymers seed the aggregation of the monomeric endoge-
nous protein (Soto et al., 2006; Soto, 2012). The similarities 
between the molecular mechanism of prion propagation and 
the process of protein misfolding and aggregation in PMDs, 
suggest that misfolded aggregates have an inherent ability to 
be transmissible (Soto et al., 2006; Soto, 2012). Indeed, a se-
ries of recent, exciting studies have shown that the pathologic 
hallmarks of various PMDs, including Alzheimer’s, Parkin-
son’s, Huntington’s diseases, and some forms of systemic am-
yloidosis, can be induced under experimental conditions by 
administration of tissue homogenates carrying the respective 
misfolded proteins (Xing et al., 2001; Lundmark et al., 2002; 
Meyer-Luehmann et al., 2006; Clavaguera et al., 2009; Ren 
et al., 2009; Eisele et al., 2010; Grad et al., 2011; Luk et al., 
2012; Morales et al., 2012; Mougenot et al., 2012; Stöhr et al., 
2012; Iba et al., 2013).
We hypothesized that islet IAPP aggregation and asso-
ciated diabetic pathology could be induced by seeding with 
preformed IAPP aggregates through a prion-like mechanism. 
To test that hypothesis, we performed ex vivo studies using 
isolated islets cultures and in vivo experiments in a transgenic 
(Tg) mouse model overexpressing hIAPP
. The results indicate 
that IAPP aggregation can be promoted by administration 
of pancreatic tissue homogenates containing preformed IAPP 
aggregates. The pathologic induction did not occur when the 
aggregates were removed with antibodies specific to IAPP
. 
Interestingly, associated to IAPP accumulation, animals devel-
oped some of the typical clinical abnormalities of T2D, includ-
ing hyperglycemia, impaired glucose tolerance, and loss of β 
cells. Finally, islet pathology and associated clinical alterations 
were induced by administration of in vitro, prepared IAPP 
aggregates made from pure, synthetic hIAPP
. Our findings 
suggest that misfolded IAPP can self-propagate in a manner 
reminiscent of infectious prions and that IAPP accumulation 
may have an important role in islet dysfunction in T2D.
results
Pancreatic IAPP aggregates induce endogenous IAPP 
deposition in cultures from tg mice and human islets
T
o begin evaluating whether islet amyloid pathology might 
be transmissible, we performed studies in islets isolated from 
Tg mice that overexpress hIAPP (Tg-hIAPP). It has been 
shown that mouse IAPP is not amyloidogenic and does not 
accumulate as aggregates in the pancreas (Westermark et al., 
1990; Janson et al., 1999; Ritzel and Butler, 2003). Male ho-
mozygous mice for hIAPP develop T2D-like clinical and 
pathologic alterations, including hyperglycemia, reduced in-
sulin secretion, IAPP amyloid deposits, and β cell loss (Jan-
son et al., 1996). IAPP aggregation starts as small, intracellular 
aggregates and later becomes accumulated as massive, ex-
tracellular deposits over time. 12-mo-old Tg mice displayed 
extensive islet pathology and overt signs of T2D, including 
massive amyloid deposits, impaired insulin production (Fig. 1) 
and severe hyperglycemia (>360 mg/dl fasting blood glu-
cose). Age-matched, non-Tg mice of the same background, 
which did not have any detectable IAPP aggregates (Fig. 1), 
were used as controls.
Isolated islets from 3-wk-old Tg-hIAPP
, which do not 
exhibit IAPP aggregates at that age (Janson et al., 1996), were 
cultured in the presence of 1% or 0.1% islets extracts from 
old Tg or WT mice for 7 d under standard conditions, in-
cluding a glucose concentration of 11 mM in the medium to 
reduce glucotoxicity and spontaneous aggregation of the pro-
tein (Zraika et al., 2007). Those doses were chosen in analogy 
with the prion field, in which it is very common to observe 
that 1% and 0.1% tissue homogenate containing prion pro-
tein aggregates is able to induce pathological changes both 
in cell culture experiments and in in vivo animal models. 
As shown in Fig. 2 A, treatment with 1% islet homogenate 
from diabetic mice leads to punctated accumulation of thio-
flavin S (ThS)–positive amyloid aggregates in cultured islets. 
In contrast, islets untreated or treated with nondiabetic, WT 
islet homogenates did not show any significant accumulation 
of amyloid. T
o rule out that the staining was coming from 
the aggregates present in the inoculum, cultured islets from 
WT animals, which do not express hIAPP
, were incubated 
with the same amount of old 
Tg islet homogenate. 
The results 
showed only a small amount of staining that was not sub-
stantially higher than untreated islets (Fig. 2 A, bottom). The 
amyloid load was quantitatively analyzed by measuring the 
 2593
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
percentage of ThS-positive area to total islet area delimited by 
DAPI staining (Fig. 2 B). These results suggest that material 
containing aggregated IAPP seeds can induce the aggregation 
and deposition of new IAPP amyloid in cultured islets and 
that the formation of new amyloid deposits depends on the 
expression of endogenous hIAPP in the islets.
The previous experiment was performed using isolated 
islets from 
Tg mice that overexpress hIAPP and thus are genet-
ically predisposed to accumulate IAPP aggregates. T
o analyze 
the relevance of these results in a more-natural situation in 
humans, we performed an ex vivo experiment using islets iso-
lated postmortem from human subjects nonaffected by T2D. 
In those islets, hIAPP is expressed at physiological levels from 
the endogenous promoter. Islets from nondiabetic human sub-
jects exposed to islet homogenate from diabetic Tg-hIAPP 
mouse harboring extensive hIAPP aggregates developed 
substantial accumulations of ThS-positive amyloid deposits 
(Fig. 2 C). The load of IAPP aggregates in islets treated with 
old 
Tg-hIAPP islet homogenate was significantly greater than 
that of the control groups, including untreated human islets 
and those exposed to the same concentration of WT islet ex-
tracts lacking IAPP aggregates (Fig. 2 D). These data clearly 
show that exposure to islet extracts containing IAPP seeds 
induces IAPP aggregation in healthy human islets in culture. 
T
o show that IAPP aggregates are the active principle in seed-
ing IAPP deposition, we included a group treated with islet 
extracts that was specifically immunodepleted of IAPP
. hIAPP 
was depleted from the islet homogenate of diabetic 
Tg-hIAPP 
mice, using a cocktail of sequence-specific and conformational 
antibodies. 
The efficiency of immunodepletion was confirmed 
by 
Western blot using anti-IAPP–specific antibodies (Fig. 2 D, 
inset). 
The results showed that the IAPP immunodepleted ma-
terial was unable to induce aggregation in islets isolated from 
healthy human subjects (Fig. 2, C and D).
transmission of IAPP aggregates in vivo
T
o study the ability of IAPP aggregates to induce IAPP mis-
folding and other pathologic alterations typical of T2D in 
vivo, we performed experiments using 
Tg-hIAPP mice. All in 
vivo experiments, including controls and inocula, were per-
formed with male Tg mice. Groups of 3-wk-old, Tg-hIAPP
, 
homozygous male mice were inoculated with a single i.p. in-
jection of 100 µl of 10% pancreas homogenate. 
The inoculum 
was obtained from 12-mo-old 
Tg mice bearing extensive islet 
pathology and overt signs of T2D, including massive amyloid 
deposits (Fig. 1) and high levels of glucose in blood (>360 mg/dl 
 
in fasting condition). As controls, groups of male Tg mice 
were injected with pancreas homogenate from age-matched 
non-Tg mice that did not have any detectable IAPP aggre-
gates (Fig. 1). Groups of five animals in each condition were 
sacrificed at 5, 8, 10, and 20 wk of age, and pancreata were 
analyzed by histology. Tg-hIAPP mice inoculated with Tg 
pancreas homogenate containing IAPP aggregates (hereafter 
termed the Tg/Tg group) exhibited punctate staining with 
anti-IAPP antibody (Fig. 3 A) and ThS (Fig. 3 B), starting at 
∼8 wk of age. Amyloid staining increased over time, and by 
20 wk of age, it was extensive, exhibiting the typical mor-
phology of amyloid deposits (Fig. 3, A and B). Conversely, 
Tg-hIAPP mice inoculated with WT pancreas homogenate 
(hereafter referred to as the Tg/WT group) only began to 
show small IAPP aggregates at around 20 wk of age (Fig. 3, 
A and B), in a manner similar to untreated Tg mice. Staining 
with anti-IAPP antibody colocalized with ThS (Fig. 3 C), in-
dicating that those deposits are amyloid aggregates composed 
predominantly of IAPP
. T
o make sure that amyloid aggregates 
were located inside the islets of Langerhans, all sections were 
simultaneously stained with ThS (green) and anti-insulin 
 
antibody (red). Fig. 3 D shows one representative image 
of that costaining for an animal of the group treated with 
Tg-hIAPP pancreas homogenate and sacrificed at 20 wk old, 
depicting the ThS signal in association with β cells. Image 
analysis studies of the IAPP staining (Fig. 3 A) show that both 
the percentage of islets containing IAPP aggregates (Fig. 3 E) 
and the load of IAPP deposits (Fig. 3 F) in the Tg/Tg group 
of mice progressively increased with age. The stepwise in-
crease in amyloid deposition (both in size and number of 
Figure 1. characterization of the pancreas 
tissue used as inoculum in our studies. Pan-
creas from a 12-mo-old, male, Tg-hIAPP mouse 
exhibiting overt signs of diabetes (blood glu-
cose >360 mg/dl) as well as an age-matched 
WT mice used as control were extracted and 
analyzed histologically by immunohistochem-
istry using anti-IAPP and anti-insulin antibod-
ies and ThS staining. Images display staining of 
representative sections.
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2594
Figure 2. Islet homogenate from aged tg-hIAPP mice induces IAPP deposition in isolated islet cultures from either tg mice or healthy humans. 
(A) Isolated islets from 3-wk-old, female, Tg-hIAPP mice were cultured in presence of different concentrations of islet extracts (IE) from old Tg-hIAPP mice, 
with overt diabetic pathology and age-matched WT mice. Representative images of islets, after diverse treatments, characterized by DAPI staining (blue) 
and by presence of amyloid by ThS amyloid staining (green). (B) The amyloid load present in the islets was quantified by measuring ThS-positive area/total 
 2595
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
deposits) with time suggests that the IAPP deposits detected 
were not coming from the injected material, but rather, from 
new deposition of endogenous, misfolded IAPP aggregates. 
That conclusion was further supported by the results of an 
experiment in which the same old 
Tg pancreatic homogenate 
used previously was inoculated into WT, non-Tg mice of the 
same background. Those animals did not exhibit any detect-
able IAPP aggregates (Fig. S1 A). 
The extent of IAPP amyloid 
deposition in Tg/Tg mice was, at all time points, significantly 
higher than the staining observed in Tg-hIAPP animals in-
oculated with control pancreas homogenate (Fig. 3 F). Our 
findings clearly demonstrate that administration of material 
containing IAPP aggregates accelerates endogenous IAPP 
misfolding and aggregation. T
o rule out that the induction 
observed was due to other diabetic-associated alterations in 
the pancreas, we performed a control experiment in which 
we injected Tg-hIAPP mice with pancreas homogenate from 
a diabetic model not associated with IAPP aggregation. For 
that purpose, we used a streptozotocin (STZ) model of diabe-
tes, which is widely used in the field to produce destruction 
of β cells and hyperglycemia (Wilson and Leiter, 1990). 
Treat-
ment of Tg-hIAPP mice with that material did not produce 
any effect in terms of inducing IAPP aggregation, as com-
pared with control, untreated Tg mice (Fig. S2). These results 
strongly indicate that the effect observed was dependent on 
the presence of IAPP aggregates acting as seeds to induce the 
pathology by a prion-like mechanism and was not due to 
other changes associated with diabetic conditions.
Induction of IAPP aggregation in vivo leads 
to t2d-like abnormalities
T
o investigate whether induction of IAPP aggregation leads 
to some of the clinical alterations typically observed in pa-
tients with T2D, we measured fasting blood glucose at dif-
ferent times after inoculation in the same animals used for 
IAPP histological analysis shown above. Fasting blood glu-
cose level became significantly higher in animals injected 
with Tg-hIAPP pancreas homogenate containing IAPP ag-
gregates, as early as 8 wk compared with mice treated with 
WT pancreas extracts (Fig. 4 A). Glucose levels continued 
increasing in the Tg/Tg groups throughout the course of the 
experiment. In fact, by 20 wk of age >70% of the animals 
in this group developed hyperglycemia, defined as a blood 
glucose concentration >250 mg/dL (Fig. 4 B). In contrast, 
none of the Tg animals inoculated with normal pancreas ho-
mogenates showed elevated blood glucose up to 20 wk of age 
(Fig. 4, A and B). T
o test impairment of glucose metabolism, 
we performed a glucose tolerance test in animals at the age 
of 16 wk. Animals fasted for 16 h were injected with 1 g/kg 
 
body weight of glucose i.p., and blood glucose level was mon-
itored subsequently at different time intervals. 
Tg-hIAPP mice 
injected with pancreas homogenates containing IAPP aggre-
gates reached a higher level of blood glucose compared with 
control animals (Fig. 4 C). Moreover, those animals took lon-
ger to decrease glucose in blood, which did not return to basal 
levels even 120 min after glucose administration (Fig. 4 C). 
The differences were also evident by measuring the area 
under the curve in the graph (Fig. 4 C, inset). 
T
o evaluate islet 
dysfunction and β cells damage, we studied islet morphology 
by staining α-, β-, and δ cells using anti-glucagon, anti-insulin, 
and anti-somatostatin antibodies, respectively (Fig. 4 D). 
The results showed that Tg-hIAPP injected with pancre-
atic homogenate containing IAPP aggregates (the Tg/Tg 
group) exhibited an altered islet morphology characterized 
by the appearance of α- and δ-cells in the center of the islets, 
compared with the classical pattern in mice (observed in Tg/
WT), in which these cells are mostly confined to the periph-
ery of the islets (Brissova et al., 2005). The presence of α- and 
δ-cells inside the islet typically occurs because of the death 
of a massive numbers of β cells (Janson et al., 1996; Kharouta 
et al., 2009). The area of the islets occupied by β cells was 
significantly reduced in the Tg/Tg group, as compared with 
control mice. Indeed, the number of β cells/mm2 of pancreas 
in the Tg/Tg group was on average >60% lower in compar-
ison with Tg/WT mice (Fig. 4 E). Further analysis revealed 
that the mice in 
Tg/Tg group, which developed severe hyper-
glycemia, lost >75% of their β cells compared with WT mice 
of the same strain and similar age. It has been reported that 
in a Tg rodent (rat) model expressing hIAPP
, diabetes onset 
coincides with a ∼60% deficit in β cell mass (Butler et al., 
2004), which resembles the ∼70% loss of β cell mass observed 
in patients with T2D (Butler et al., 2003). Thus, our results 
strongly suggest that substantial loss of β cells is the likely 
cause of the diabetic phenotype in the animals treated with 
IAPP aggregate-containing materials. Our findings demon-
strate that induction of IAPP misfolding and aggregation by 
administration of preformed IAPP-aggregated seeds leads to 
the development of marked T2D-like pathology, including 
severe hyperglycemia, impaired glucose homeostasis, loss of 
β cells, and changes in islets morphology. These abnormali-
islet area. The values correspond to means ± SE of 5–20 islets analyzed per condition. Data were analyzed by one-way ANO 
VA, and differences were highly 
significant (P < 0.0001). Individual differences were evaluated by Tukey’s multiple comparison posttest (***, P < 0.001). (C) Human islets, isolated postmortem 
from nondiabetic individuals, were treated with 1% islet homogenate from old Tg-hIAPP mice, WT control islet homogenates, or old Tg-hIAPP immunode-
pleted using a cocktail of sequence and conformational antibodies. In addition, human islets were incubated with 100 nM synthetic IAPP aggregates using 
the conditions described in Fig. 5. After 10 d, islets were fixed and stained with DAPI (blue) and ThS (green). Representative pictures from each condition. 
 
(D) The amyloid present in islets was quantified by measuring the percentage of ThS-positive area/total islet area. On average, 27 islets were analyzed per 
condition, and data correspond to mean ± SE. (Inset) Amount of IAPP signal present in the extracts of islet homogenates before and after immunodepletion, 
as measured by Western blot. Data were analyzed by Kruskal–Wallis test, and treatment differences were highly significant (P < 0.0001). Individual differ-
ences were evaluated by Dunn’s multiple comparison test. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2596
Figure 3. Inoculation with old tg-hIAPP pancreas homogenate accelerates IAPP misfolding and aggregation. (See also Figs. S1 and S2.) Groups of 
male Tg-hIAPP mice were injected i.p. at 3 wk of age with 10% pancreas homogenate from either 12-mo-old, male, IAPP Tg mice bearing substantial islet 
amyloid aggregates (as shown in Fig. 1) or from age-matched, male, WT mice not expressing hIAPP. Groups of three to sixmice were sacrificed 2, 5, 7, and 
17 wk after inoculation, when they reached 5, 8, 10, and 20 wk of age, respectively. Appearance of IAPP aggregates was assessed by histologic studies using 
anti-IAPP antibody (A) or the amyloid-binding dye ThS (B). (A and B) Figures correspond to representative pictures of the five animals studied, except in 
the case of the animals treated with WT pancreas homogenate and sacrificed at 10 wk old; in which, 2 animals died of unrelated reasons. Arrows highlight 
 2597
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
ties were not observed during the time of our experiments 
in Tg-hIAPP untreated mice or mice injected with pancreas 
homogenate without IAPP aggregates.
ex vivo induction of IAPP accumulation by 
synthetic IAPP aggregates
The interpretation of the findings described above is that 
IAPP aggregates present in the inoculated material act in a 
prion-like manner to seed aggregation of endogenous IAPP
. 
However, because the material injected has many other com-
ponents, we cannot completely rule out that another mol-
ecule could be implicated in the pathologic induction. T
o 
study whether IAPP aggregates were the active principle in 
inducing pancreatic changes, transmission experiments were 
performed using pure protein aggregates prepared from syn-
thetic hIAPP in vitro. Amyloid formation was followed by a 
thioflavin 
T (ThT) binding assay (Fig. S3 A), which is a widely 
used procedure for monitoring amyloidosis and is based 
on the specific interaction of ThT with amyloid structures 
(Levine, 1993). Enriched β sheet content in IAPP aggregates 
was confirmed by Fourier-transformed infrared (FTIR) spec-
troscopy. Indeed, although soluble IAPP has FTIR spectra 
with a maximum absorption of ∼1,654 cm−1, consistent with 
a predominance of α-helix/random coil structure (Yang et 
al., 2015), aggregated IAPP exhibited a maximum absorption 
of ∼1,638 cm−1, indicating that β sheets are the predominant 
structure (Fig. S3 B). Fibrillar morphology was confirmed by 
transmission electron microscopy after negative staining (Fig. 
S3 C). As expected, preformed IAPP aggregates were able to 
seed IAPP aggregation in vitro (Fig. S3 D).
First, we tested the seeding potential of the synthetic 
aggregates in the ex vivo model using islet cultures. Islets iso-
lated from 3 wk-old Tg-hIAPP mice were treated with dif-
ferent concentrations of synthetic IAPP-aggregated seeds for 
10 d. As before, islet amyloid formation was analyzed by mea-
suring the ThS-positive area. Islets treated with 10, 50, and 
100 nM synthetic IAPP aggregates accumulated a progres-
sively higher level of amyloid compared with untreated islets 
(Fig. 5). The rationale for the doses selected was to mimic the 
putative quantities that islets might be exposed through blood 
irrigation. Serum IAPP levels in normal individuals range 
from 1 to 90 pM (Paulsson et al., 2014). In prediabetes or di-
abetic conditions, the serum IAPP levels may be substantially 
higher because insulin resistance promotes greater expression 
of insulin and IAPP
. Because the islets are continuously per-
fused by blood, it is likely that they may receive much larger 
quantities of blood-borne IAPP aggregates over a long time. 
In isolated islets, it is not possible to recapitulate multiple ex-
posures because the islets do not survive very long in culture. 
Therefore, we have used concentrations of IAPP aggregates 
in the nanomolar range in our ex vivo studies to mimic the 
possible physiologic conditions within the technical limita-
tions of the experiments.
Treating islets with 100 nM nonaggregated, mono-
meric IAPP did not produce any significant increase in 
IAPP amyloid accumulation, indicating that the effect was 
dependent on the aggregated conformation of the mate-
rial added (Fig. 5). To test the specificity of the effect, we 
also treated islets with aggregates coming from other dis-
ease-associated and functional amyloid proteins. For that 
purpose, we used aggregates of the Tau protein, implicated 
in Alzheimer's disease, as well as the bacterial amyloid pro-
tein microcin (Mcc). For the Tau protein, we used the K18 
fragment containing four microtubule binding repeats, 
which is considered the core of the Tau amyloid fibril and 
is often used as a model of Tau protein for aggregation 
experiments (Siddiqua and Margittai, 2010; Shammas et 
al., 2015). Mcc is a small–molecular-weight bacteriotoxin, 
with activity regulated in vivo by aggregation into amy-
loid fibrils at the stationary phase of the bacterial culture 
(Bieler et al., 2005; Shahnawaz et al., 2017). Tau and Mcc 
were induced to form amyloid aggregates by incubation 
in buffer, and amyloid fibril formation was characterized 
by ThT and transmission electron microscopy (Fig. S4). 
Treatment of islets with Tau and Mcc aggregates did not 
increase IAPP deposition in the islets cultures. These re-
sults indicated that, under our experimental conditions, 
other amyloidogenic proteins do not induce significant 
accumulation of IAPP compared with amyloid aggregates 
composed of IAPP
. As controls, we also treated islets from 
WT mice, which do not express hIAPP
, with 100 nM ag-
gregated IAPP; no significant accumulation of IAPP am-
yloid was observed in that experiment (Fig. 5), suggesting 
that IAPP accumulation in Tg islets was composed of new 
deposition of endogenous IAPP nucleated by the exog-
enously added synthetic aggregates. Similar results were 
obtained when human islets were treated with synthetic 
IAPP aggregates (Fig. 2, C and D).
small punctate deposits. (C) Slides were stained simultaneously with anti-IAPP antibody and ThS and colocalization of the staining analyzed. The picture 
corresponds to an animal of the Tg-hIAPP inoculated group sacrificed at 10 wk old. Arrows in the merged image point to the deposits in which colocaliza-
tion was observed. (D) Double-staining with ThS (green) and anti-insulin antibody (red). The picture corresponds to a representative image of one animal 
treated with Tg-hIAPP pancreas homogenate and sacrificed at 20 wk old. Image analysis of the immunohistochemical studies displayed in A (staining with 
an anti-IAPP antibody) was performed to estimate the percentage of islets containing amyloid deposits (E) and the load of IAPP aggregates (F), calculated 
as the percentage of the stained area compared with the total islet area. The values correspond to the mean ± SE of the results obtained for the three to six 
animals used per each group. (E and F) Black bars represent the animals inoculated with old Tg-hIAPP pancreas homogenate, and white bars correspond to 
the controls injected with WT pancreas. The data were statistically analyzed by two-way ANO 
VA using age and source of inoculation as the variables. In both 
cases, the overall results were statistically significant (P < 0.001). Individual differences between Tg/Tg and Tg/WT animals were studied by the Bonferroni 
posttest. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2598
Figure 4. Inoculation with old tg-hIAPP pancreas homogenate induces clinical abnormalities typical of t2d. (See also Figs. S1 and S2.) (A) Hy-
perglycemia was measured over time by the fasting blood glucose concentration. The values correspond to the mean ± SE of the results obtained from five 
to seven animals in each group. Black bars represent the Tg-hIAPP mice inoculated with old Tg-hIAPP pancreas homogenate, and white bars the controls 
injected with WT pancreas homogenate. For comparison, the blood glycemia of WT, untreated animals is shown (gray bars). The data were statistically an-
alyzed by two-way ANO 
VA using age and source of inoculation as the variables. The analysis shows that the increase in glucose concentration in the Tg/Tg 
group was highly significant (P < 0.001). Individual differences between groups on different days were analyzed by one-way ANO 
VA followed by the Tukey’s 
multiple comparison posttest. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. (B) Inoculation with diabetic pancreas homogenate produced severe hyperglycemia 
(>250 mg/dL) in a portion of the animals. The percentage of hyperglycemic animals increased progressively with time after inoculation of Tg pancreas ex-
tracts, whereas up to 20 wk of age, no animals of the Tg/WT group reached the threshold to be considered hyperglycemic. The differences were statistically 
significant (P = 0.02) as analyzed by the log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test. (C) To evaluate impairment in glucose tolerance, the i.p. glucose tolerance test was 
performed in 16-wk-old, Tg-hIAPP mice inoculated with pancreas extracts from old Tg-hIAPP (red line) as compared with Tg-hIAPP mice inoculated with 
 2599
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
In vivo induction of IAPP deposition and associated diabetic 
abnormalities by synthetic IAPP aggregates
Next, we investigated whether injection of pure, synthetic 
IAPP aggregates was able to induce IAPP deposition and 
associated diabetic abnormalities in vivo. These experiments 
were performed in a manner similar to the studies described 
in Fig. 3. Groups of 3-wk-old, Tg-hIAPP
, homozygous male 
mice were given a single i.p. injection of 100 µl of 50-µM 
synthetic IAPP aggregates. As controls, animals were injected 
with the same concentration of nonaggregated IAPP mono-
mers, and another group was treated with PBS. The results 
clearly showed that injection of synthetic IAPP aggregates 
induced a marked increase in the accumulation of IAPP- and 
ThS-positive deposits in the pancreatic islets of animals sacri-
ficed 13 wk after inoculation (16 wk old; Fig. 6 A). As before, 
amyloid staining was located inside the islets in association 
with β cells, as demonstrated by costaining between ThS and 
insulin (Fig. 6 B). Quantification of aggregates by image anal-
ysis of slides stained with anti-IAPP antibodies (Fig. 6 C) and 
ThS (Fig. 6 D) showed a twofold greater burden of IAPP de-
posits in mice inoculated with synthetic aggregates, as com-
pared with the PBS-treated controls and the animals injected 
with nonaggregated IAPP
. Injection of IAPP aggregates into 
WT mice did not show a significant amount of staining, indi-
cating that the aggregates observed in the experimental group 
were not composed solely of the inoculated material.
T
o investigate whether inoculation of pure, synthetic 
IAPP aggregates can accelerate clinical alterations typical of 
T2D, we measured fasting blood glucose concentrations and 
the integrity of islet morphology. Fasting glycemia was mea-
sured periodically in Tg-hIAPP mice treated with synthetic 
IAPP aggregates or PBS as well as in WT mice injected with 
the same preparation of synthetic aggregates (Fig. 7 A). Start-
ing at around 9 wk old, Tg mice inoculated with synthetic 
aggregates showed clearly higher blood glucose concentra-
tions than control animals had, and the concentrations kept 
increasing until animals were sacrificed for histologic analysis. 
Indeed, the percentage of severely hyperglycemic animals was 
clearly higher in the group of Tg-hIAPP treated with syn-
thetic aggregates, reaching 36% at 16 wk old, whereas none of 
the controls showed high glycemia at that time (Fig. 7 B). As 
before, abnormalities of islet morphology and β cells loss were 
studied by staining α-, β-, and δ-cells using anti-glucagon, 
anti-insulin, and anti-somatostatin antibodies, respectively 
(Fig. 7 C). In the group of mice treated with synthetic IAPP 
aggregates, we observed a substantial reduction in the area 
of islets occupied by β cells as compared with controls un-
treated or treated with the same concentration of nonaggre-
gated IAPP (Fig. 7 D). 
IAPP aggregates do not produce toxicity or IAPP 
accumulation in nonpancreatic tissues
Our previous results showed that administration of IAPP ag-
gregate-containing material resulted in significant accumu-
lation of IAPP in the recipient Tg-hIAPP mice, starting at 
∼8 wk (Fig. 3, A, B, E, and F). To test whether the inocula 
produced any other type of toxicity in the recipient mice, a 
group of 4-wk-old, male, Tg-hIAPP mice was inoculated 
with a single i.p. injection of 100 µl of 10% pancreas homog-
enate. The inoculum was obtained from old diabetic mice 
(fasting plasma glucose >360 mg/dl), following a similar ex-
perimental paradigm as presented in Fig. 3. Another group 
of 4-wk-old, male, Tg-hIAPP mice was also i.p inoculated 
with 100 µl of 50 µM synthetic IAPP aggregates, prepared 
in vitro. As a control, a group of age- and gender-matched 
Tg-hIAPP mice were i.p inoculated with buffer (PBS). To 
measure signs of general toxicity, body weights of recipient 
Tg-hIAPP mice were measured at 8 wk of age. No significant 
difference in body weight was observed in the groups treated 
with diabetic pancreas homogenate, containing IAPP aggre-
gates or synthetic IAPP aggregates, prepared in vitro, com-
pared with Tg-hIAPP mice injected with buffer (Fig. 8 A). 
To further assess signs of toxicity, we harvested major organs, 
including liver, kidney, spleen, heart, pancreas, and brain and 
analyzed the organ weight tobody weight ratio, a standard 
pharmacological procedure to test major organ toxicity. The 
results indicated that the administration of diabetic pancreas 
homogenate, containing IAPP aggregates or synthetic IAPP 
aggregates, prepared in vitro did not produce any signifi-
cant changes in the weight of major organs, compared with 
the controls treated with buffer (Fig. 8 B). The fact that the 
pancreas weight did not change either, despite the animals 
showing evidence of diabetes, is not surprising because only 
∼1% of pancreas weight corresponds to islets of Langerhans. 
To analyze whether the administration of the inocula lead 
to pathologic accumulation of IAPP in any other major tis-
sues, we analyzed sections of different tissues, stained with 
anti-IAPP antibody for a 250-µm range. We could not find 
accumulation of IAPP in any of the tissues tested, except 
for the pancreas (Fig. 8 C). Furthermore, we analyzed sec-
tions from tissues directly associated with glucose homeo-
stasis (liver and skeletal muscle), stained with hematoxylin 
and eosin, over a range of 250 µm. Our analysis revealed no 
gross morphological abnormalities in the groups treated with 
PBS (black line). The graph shows plasma glucose concentrations during the test after 16 h fasting. Area under the curve (AUC) was calculated using the 
trapezoidal rule (inset), and the values corresponds to means ± SE from five animals/group. The data were statistically analyzed by unpaired two-tailed t 
test (P = 0.0373). (D) The morphology of islets and the presence of different cell types was measured in different groups of mice at 20 wk old by staining 
with anti-insulin (green) to detect β cells, anti-glucagon, and anti-somatostatin antibodies (combined, red) to detect α- and δ-cells, respectively. The figure 
shows representative images of the islets from the Tg/Tg and Tg/WT mice. Image analysis of stained islets enabled us to calculate the number of β cells/mm2 
of pancreas area (E). Data correspond to the mean ± SE, and results were analyzed by unpaired two-tailed t test (*, P = 0.0234).
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2600
Figure 5. Induction of IAPP amyloid deposition in islets by incubation with synthetic IAPP aggregates. (See also Figs. S3 and S4.) (A) Isolated islets 
from 3-wk-old, female, Tg-hIAPP mice were cultured in presence of different concentrations of IAPP aggregates prepared in vitro from synthetic IAPP, as 
well as controls treated with other amyloidogenic proteins, including the Alzheimer's disease–associated protein Tau (the K18 fragment) and the bacterial 
amyloid Mcc. Representative images of islets after diverse treatments, characterized by DAPI staining (blue) and the presence of amyloid by ThS amyloid 
 2601
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
IAPP aggregate-containing material, compared with buffer- 
treated controls (Fig. 8 D).
dIscussIon
Although several environmental and genetic factors have 
been shown to contribute to the risk of T2D (e.g., obesity, 
inactivity, and aging), the origin of this disease is still not 
completely understood (Stumvoll et al., 2005). One of the 
hallmark abnormalities in T2D is the extensive dysfunction 
and loss of β cells (Kahn, 2003; Nyalakonda et al., 2010). The 
cause of β cell damage in T2D is currently unknown, but 
compelling evidence implicates the formation and accumula-
tion of IAPP misfolded aggregates in the pancreas (Hull et al., 
2004; Haataja et al., 2008; Jurgens et al., 2011; Mukherjee et 
al., 2015), in a manner similar to the way protein aggregates 
have been shown to be causative agents in a variety of chronic 
and progressive PMDs (Soto, 2003). Extensive work has been 
performed to understand the mechanisms of β cell loss in-
duced by the formation and accumulation of IAPP misfolded 
aggregates. We have recently summarized those mechanisms 
(Mukherjee et al., 2015), which include membrane disrup-
tion, mitochondrial damage, endoplasmic reticulum stress, 
impairment of the ubiquitin proteasome system and autoph-
agy, oxidative stress, and induction of inflammation. However, 
it is still unclear which of those various pathways are the most 
relevant during the disease.
A series of exciting recent studies suggested that the 
process of protein misfolding and aggregation implicated 
in various PMDs can be transmitted by administration of 
preformed, misfolded protein aggregates, in a way reminis-
cent of the transmission of prion diseases by infectious pri-
ons (Prusiner, 2012; Soto, 2012; Jucker and Walker, 2013). 
Our current study aimed to provide proof-of-concept for 
this phenomenon in diabetes, and for that reason, we used 
the models and methodologies traditionally used in the 
prion field to demonstrate the transmission process. These 
models include in vitro experiments with purified recom-
binant or synthetic proteins, cell culture experiments, and 
infectivity studies with Tg mice expressing the appropriate 
form of the protein. The findings obtained in our study not 
only extend the concept of prion-like transmission to the 
most prevalent disease of the PMD group but also show 
that transmission of protein misfolding leads to bona fide 
disease phenotypes. This is a subject of great importance, 
because, in most previous studies, the transmission of the 
pathologic misfolded aggregates did not induce the disease 
phenotype, raising a debate about whether seeding of pro-
tein misfolding is equivalent to disease transmission by in-
fectious proteinaceous agents (Guest et al., 2011; Schmidt 
et al., 2012; Fernández-Borges et al., 2013; Piccardo et al., 
2013; Walsh and Selkoe, 2016). Our ex vivo and in vivo 
results suggest that misfolded IAPP aggregates deposited in 
pancreatic tissue during the development of T2D can act as 
seeds to spread that process throughout the pancreatic islets 
or, under defined experimental conditions, even to other 
individuals. The results obtained in the experiments with 
immunodepletion, administration of pure, synthetic IAPP 
aggregates prepared in vitro, and aggregates of other dis-
ease-associated (Tau implicated in Alzheimer's disease) and 
nondisease–associated proteins (Mcc, a bacterial amyloid) 
clearly indicate that the active principle behind the patho-
logic transmission are the IAPP aggregates themselves. Our 
findings are in agreement with a recently published study by 
Oskarsson et al. (2015) in which Tg mice injected through 
the tail vein with in vitro–generated aggregates from syn-
thetic peptides containing the sequence of IAPP developed 
a higher percentage of IAPP aggregates in the pancreas than 
did untreated controls when subjected to a high-fat diet.
Our ex vivo studies in islets were performed as a 
proof-of-concept demonstration to show that exogenously 
added aggregates of IAPP can induce formation of endog-
enous IAPP aggregates in an isolated system without any 
confounding physiologic variables. 
We used this paradigm fol-
lowing the field of neurodegenerative disorders associated to 
protein misfolding, in which a widely established method for 
studying propagation of protein aggregates in vitro consists 
of exposing cell lines to specific protein aggregates. Interest-
ingly, isolated islets provide a superior platform for studying 
propagation of IAPP aggregates because islets retain the com-
position and organization of endocrine cells and the extracel-
lular matrix, which is absent in isolated, cellular monolayers. 
Isolated islets also provide the unique possibility to work with 
human tissue, not genetically manipulated in any manner. 
The 
ex vivo model of IAPP-aggregate propagation developed in 
this work will provide an important platform to study the role 
of the extracellular matrix and cellular signaling mechanisms 
involved in the process of IAPP-aggregate propagation. The 
physiologic relevance of the findings obtained using ex vivo 
islet studies is demonstrated in the in vivo studies by adminis-
tering IAPP aggregates, i.p., in living animals and monitoring 
the progressive accumulation of islet amyloid and associated 
diabetes pathology. We chose this route of administration in 
analogy to the prion field, in which most of the experiments 
to analyze prion infection by periphery are performed using 
this route of exposure. A similar experimental paradigm was 
recently used to test peripheral transmission potential of am-
yloid-β and Tau aggregates associated with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease (Eisele et al., 2010; Clavaguera et al., 2014). In a future 
extension of our work, we plan to study in detail different 
routes of transmission, including oral administration and 
staining (green). (B) The amyloid load present in the islets was quantified by measuring ThS-positive area/total islet area. The values correspond to means ± 
SE of 4–27 islets analyzed per condition. Data were analyzed by one-way ANO 
VA, and differences were highly significant (P < 0.0001). Individual differences 
among the different groups were studied by the Tukey’s multiple comparison test. *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001.
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2602
Figure 6. In vivo induction of IAPP deposition by synthetic IAPP aggregates. (See also Fig. S3.) (A) Groups of male, Tg-hIAPP mice were injected i.p. at 
3 wk old with 50 µM of in vitro, prepared, synthetic IAPP aggregates or the same concentration of nonaggregated protein. Animals were sacrificed at 16 wk 
old, and appearance of IAPP aggregates was assessed by histologic studies using anti-IAPP antibody or the amyloid-binding dye ThS. The figures included 
correspond to representative pictures of the animals studied. As controls, WT mice were injected with the same preparation of synthetic IAPP aggregates. 
(B) Double-staining of ThS (green) and insulin (red). The picture corresponds to a representative image from one animal of the group treated with 50 µM of 
IAPP aggregates. The accumulation of aggregates was quantified by the area of the islets occupied by anti-IAPP antibody reactive (C) and ThS-positive (D) 
deposits. (C and D) Bars correspond to mean ± SE, and data were analyzed by one-way ANO 
VA, and in both cases, the differences were highly significant 
 
(P < 0.001). Individual differences among the groups were studied by the Tukey’s multiple comparison posttest. *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001.
 2603
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
Figure 7. Inoculation with synthetic IAPP aggregates induces clinical abnormalities typical of t2d. (A) The fasting blood glucose concentration was 
measured over time in Tg-hIAPP or WT mice injected with synthetic IAPP aggregates or PBS. The values correspond to the means ± SE of the results obtained 
for 5–11 animals per group. Black bars represent the Tg-hIAPP mice inoculated with 50 µM of synthetic IAPP aggregates, and white bars are for the controls 
injected with PBS. Gray bars correspond to WT mice injected with the same preparation of IAPP aggregates. The data were statistically analyzed by two-way 
ANO 
VA using age and source of inoculation as the variables, and the results show a highly significant effect of the treatment (P < 0.001), but no significant 
effect on the interaction among the variables. (B) A proportion of Tg-hIAPP mice injected with IAPP aggregates developed severe hyperglycemia (>300 mg/
dL), whereas none of the Tg mice treated with PBS were hyperglycemic. (C) The morphology and cellular composition of islets were measured in various 
groups of mice at 16 wk of age by staining with anti-insulin (green) or combined anti-glucagon and anti-somatostatin antibodies (red). Representative 
images of the islets from Tg-hIAPP mice treated with synthetic IAPP aggregates, the same quantity of nonaggregated protein, or the controls treated with 
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2604
blood transfusion, two routes that have been shown to op-
erate in prion diseases.
Another important conclusion of our studies from the 
point of understanding 
T2D is the potential role of IAPP mis-
folding and aggregation in the etiopathogenesis of the dis-
ease. Our results showing that induction of IAPP misfolding 
is sufficient to produce the main symptoms of the disease 
in the absence of any other process (such as high-fat diet or 
disruption of insulin signaling) suggest that IAPP misfolding 
and aggregation have an important role in the pathogenesis 
of T2D. This finding is consistent with previous observations 
indicating that in patients with diabetes, β cell pathology is 
observed selectively in islets containing IAPP aggregates (Jur-
gens et al., 2011). However, the extent to which spreading 
of IAPP aggregation may contribute to diabetic alterations 
needs to be further studied in more detail. In our studies, 
we observed hyperglycemia and impaired glucose tolerance 
in the Tg-hIAPP mice treated with IAPP aggregates, which 
occurred concomitant to a significant loss of β cells (>60%). 
Similar reduction of β cells has been associated with hyper-
glycemia in other rodent models as well as in patients affected 
by diabetes (Butler et al., 2003, 2004). Therefore, our results 
suggest that the hyperglycemia observed was due to the loss 
of β cells, which results in insufficient insulin secretion. Fur-
ther experiments need to be performed to fully characterize 
the diabetic phenotype and the pathways implicated.
Finally, our data suggesting that some aspects of T2D 
pathology might be transmissible could open an entirely new 
area of research with profound implications for public health. 
Because IAPP aggregates are deposited in the periphery, the 
possibility that prion-like transmission events may occur is 
higher than in the neurodegenerative diseases, where the 
blood–brain barrier restricts exposure to peripherally ac-
quired protein seeds to the brain. However, because until 
now this concept has not been considered, no epidemiologic 
studies have been performed to specifically analyze that pos-
sibility. Nevertheless, there are several articles suggesting an 
infectious-like pandemic increase in 
T2D incidence, although 
that is mostly attributed to changes in lifestyle and increases 
in obesity rates (Matthews and Matthews, 2011). In addition, 
several anecdotic studies have revealed an increased risk for 
diabetes after blood transfusion (Chern et al., 2001), organ 
transplant (Kasiske et al., 2003; Carey et al., 2012), or even 
maternal inheritance (Karter et al., 1999), which may suggest 
a possible transmission. However, considering the experimen-
tal nature of the models and conditions used in this study, the 
results should not be extrapolated to conclude that T2D is 
a transmissible disease in humans without additional studies. 
Perhaps of greater importance than a putative interindividual 
transmission, the prion phenomenon may have a key role in 
spreading the pathology from cell to cell or from islet to islet 
during the progression of the disease.
MAterIAls And MetHods
IAPP tg mice
As a model of IAPP aggregation, we used Tg mice over-
expressing hIAPP at four- to fivefold levels of endogenous 
mouse IAPP (Janson et al., 1996). In homozygosis, male Tg 
mice spontaneously develop IAPP amyloid deposits, which 
are associated with selective β cell death, impaired insulin 
secretion and hyperglycemia (Janson et al., 1996). For all in 
vivo experiments, we used male mice because they all de-
velop spontaneously pathological and clinical alterations of 
T2D, whereas females develop the abnormalities late and only 
a proportion of them develop the alterations. Animals were 
distributed randomly among the different groups. A colony 
of these animals was established in our facility after receiv-
ing breeding pairs from P
.C. Butler (University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA). Of note, the plasma glucose 
values obtained for our untreated Tg-hIAPP animals were a 
bit lower than those reported by Janson et al. (1996). This 
may be because our animals have undergone much subse-
quent breeding after the colony was provided by P
.C. Butler. 
In Tg mice lines, it is not uncommon for the phenotype to 
gradually soften over time, most likely by a decrease in the 
number of copies of the transgene. Another possibility is that 
the food in our animal facility may have a different fat and/
or carbohydrate composition than the one used by Janson 
and colleagues. All animal experiments were performed fol-
lowing US National Institutes of Health guidelines and were 
approved by the Animal 
Welfare Committee of the University 
of T
exas Medical School, Houston.
Preparation of pancreas extracts
The pancreas of 12-mo-old, Tg-hIAPP mice, as well as age-
matched WT mice of the same background, were extracted 
and immediately homogenized in 10% wt/vol PBS in the 
presence of a cocktail of protease inhibitors. Samples were 
sonicated to fully disaggregate the tissue. Material was kept 
frozen at −80°C until use.
Mouse islet isolation, homogenization, and culture
Islets from Tg-hIAPP
, as well as controls, were isolated using 
a previously published procedure (Li et al., 2009). The pan-
creatic tissue was digested with collagenase IV for 15 min at 
37°C. The digested material was recovered by centrifugation, 
washed in HBSS, and filtered through a 70-µm cell strainer. 
Finally, islets were separated from the remaining exocrine tis-
sue by a Ficoll gradient, as previously described (Li et al., 
2009). T
o prepare islet extracts, isolated islets were weighed 
PBS. In addition, WT animals treated with the same preparation of synthetic IAPP aggregates are shown for comparison. Image analysis of stained islets 
was used to estimate the percentage of the islet area occupied by β cells (D) Data correspond to meand ± SE and were analyzed by one-way ANO 
VA, and 
differences were statistically significant (P = 0.0015). Individual differences were studied by the Tukey’s multiple comparison test. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. 
 2605
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
Figure 8. Inoculation with IAPP aggregates does not induce toxicity and IAPP accumulation in major nonpancreatic tissues. Groups of male, 
IAPP, Tg mice were injected i.p. at 4 wk of age with 10% pancreas homogenate from male, diabetic, IAPP Tg mice or 50 µM IAPP aggregates prepared from 
synthetic source. As a control, group of IAPP Tg mice were injected with PBS. (A) Body weight of injected animals was measured before sacrificing at 8 wk of 
age. Analysis by one-way ANO 
VA showed no significant (P = 0.12) changes in body weight because of injection of IAPP aggregates. (B) Represents the ratio 
of organ weight/body weight of animals injected with different inocula. The results shows that injection of IAPP aggregate-containing material, compared 
with PBS, does not induce significant changes in the weight of liver, kidney, spleen, heart, pancreas, and brain. Data for each organ was analyzed by one-way 
ANO 
VA, and no significant differences were observed in any of the tissues (P > 0.05). Bars in A and B correspond to mean ± SE. (C) Representative images 
of sections from different tissues stained with anti-IAPP antibody. The data show no IAPP accumulation in liver, kidney, skeletal muscle, and heart in any 
of the conditions tested. Sections from pancreas are shown as positive controls. (D) Representative images of sections from liver and skeletal muscle from 
different experimental groups, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, showing no gross morphological alterations.
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2606
and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in 
−80°C. The stock was homogenized in PBS, using a me-
chanical Eppendorf homogenizer, to prepare 1% homog-
enate. For islet culture from Tg-hIAPP mice, isolated islets 
were cultured in RPMI-1640 (11875-083; Thermo Fisher 
Scientific), supplemented with 10% FBS, glutamine, and anti-
biotics at 37°C in 5% CO2.
Human islet cultures
Human islets isolated postmortem from nondiabetic indi-
viduals were obtained from the National Disease Research 
Interchange. Protocols for sample collection were approved 
by the respective institutional review board of the National 
Disease Research Interchange. On arrival, islets were imme-
diately placed in CMRL 1066 (Cellgro; Corning) enriched 
medium, supplemented with 2 mM l-glutamine (Cellgro 
CN- 25-005-CI; Corning), 1 mM sodium pyruvate, (Cellgro 
CN-25-000-CI; Corning), 10 mM Hepes-free acid, (Cell-
gro CN- 25-060-CI; Corning), 10 U/ml heparin (Hospira 
RL-4311; Pfizer), and 10 mM nicotinamide, (CN N0636; 
Sigma-Aldrich) at 24°C with 5% CO2 for 7 d to stabilize 
the islets before starting the experiments. Studies were per-
formed in the presence of 11 mM glucose in the medium.
ex vivo experiments
Isolated islets were cultured in free-floating, 24-well ul-
tralow attachment plates (07-200-602; Corning) with an 
approximate confluence of 50 islets/well. The total volume 
of medium per well was around 400 µl. Culture medium 
was changed every 5 d. After stabilization in the respective 
medium supplemented with 11 mM of glucose, islets were 
treated with 1% (or 0.1%) islet extracts from old Tg-hIAPP 
or WT controls with respect to the total volume of medium.
Immunodepletion experiments
Immunodepletion of IAPP from 1% islet homogenate of 
overtly diabetic Tg-hIAPP mice was performed in three suc-
cessive rounds, using Dynabeads (Novex 11203D; Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) coupled with a cocktail of antibodies. 
For antibody coupling and immunodepletion, manufactur-
ers’ protocols were followed, except that 1 mg/ml BSA was 
used, instead of 0.1 mg/ml, for blocking unspecific interac-
tions, and EDTA was removed from the beads during the 
final washing step. For the first round of depletion, beads 
coupled with N-terminal (1–13)–specific (T4153; Peninsula 
Laboratories International) and C-terminal (25–37)–specific 
(T4157; Peninsula Laboratories International) anti–hIAPP 
antibodies, 20 µg of each, were used. For the next two rounds, 
beads coupled with 1.5 µg of each N- and C-terminal–spe-
cific, anti–hIAPP antibodies and 1 µg of anti-oligomeric A11 
antibody (AHB0052; Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used. 
After three rounds, the efficiency of depletion was tested 
by Western blot analysis using C-terminal (23–37)–specific 
anti–hIAPP antibody. Under those conditions, by measur-
ing the pixel density of IAPP bands in Western blots (using 
ImageJ software; National Institutes of Health), we estimated 
that >70% of IAPP reactive bands were removed by the im-
munodepletion procedure.
Production of synthetic IAPP and preparation of aggregates
hIAPP containing the appropriate posttranslational modifica-
tion (disulfide bridge and C-terminal amidation) was synthe-
sized using solid-phase N-tert-butyloxycarbonyl chemistry at 
the W
. Keck Facility at Yale University and was purified by 
reverse-phase HPLC. The final product was lyophilized and 
characterized by aa analysis and mass spectrometry. 
T
o prepare 
stock solutions free of IAPP-aggregated seeds, lyophilized, 
synthetic IAPP was dissolved in 2 mM HCl, and the resulting 
solution was sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 g to remove 
existing aggregates. For ex vivo studies and i.p administration, 
the stock was diluted in PBS to the desired concentration. 
For in vitro seeding the stock was diluted in 100 mM Tris-
HCl, pH 7.4 to reach the desired concentration. T
o produce 
IAPP aggregates, solutions of IAPP (0.2 mg/ml) in PBS were 
incubated overnight at 37°C with constant shaking at 500 
revolutions per min (rpm). For the in vitro seeding assay, the 
stock solution of IAPP in 100 mM Tris-HCL was incubated 
at 25°C. 
The degree of aggregation was characterized by 
ThT 
fluorescence emission and electron microscopy after negative 
staining, as previously described (Salvadores et al., 2014).
Production of tau and Mcc aggregates
Bacterial plasmid carrying the K18 fragment of human Tau 
containing four microtubule binding repeats (a gift from M. 
Margittai (University of Denver, Denver, CO) was overex-
pressed in Bl21 (D3) Escherichia coli bacteria and purified, as 
previously described (Meyer et al., 2014). K18 Tau aggregates 
were prepared by intermittent shaking (500 rpm) of 50 µM 
recombinant protein at 37°C in 100 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, con-
taining 100 mM NaCl and 25 µM heparin. Mcc was purified 
from the culture supernatants of E. coli 
VCS257 cells harbor-
ing pJEM15 plasmid, as described earlier (Bieler et al., 2005). 
Mcc aggregates were prepared by constant shaking (500 rpm) 
of 100 µM purified protein at 37°C in 50 mM Pipes pH 
6.5, containing 500 mM NaCl. The degree of aggregation 
was characterized by ThT fluorescence emission and electron 
microscopy after negative staining, as previously described 
(Bieler et al., 2005; Shahnawaz et al., 2017).
FtIr spectroscopy
FTIR experiments were conducted in an FT/IR-4100 spec-
trometer from Jasco Products. IAPP solution in PBS, after 
overnight aggregation, was centrifuged and resuspended 
to an estimated concentration of 5 mg/ml. 5 µl of aggre-
gated protein slurry was then placed on the top of a dia-
mond PRO450-S attenuated total reflectance unit from Jasco 
Products, adapted to the FT/IR-4100 system. Synthetic IAPP 
stock (5 mg/ml) was used as the soluble control. System pa-
rameters included 4.0 cm−1 resolution and an accumulation 
of 80 scans/sample. The data were processed using cosine 
 2607
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
apodization and Mertz phase correction. The data were also 
corrected for attenuated total reflectance and carbon diox-
ide vapor absorption. Data fitting and secondary-structure 
calculations were analyzed, after corresponding buffer sub-
traction, by the secondary structure estimation 4000 software 
from Jasco Products. Each sample was measured in triplicate 
to confirm the secondary structure.
Induction of diabetes by stZ administration
T
o induce diabetes in WT mice, animals were treated with 
STZ, as previously described (Wilson and Leiter, 1990). In 
brief, STZ (Sigma-Aldrich) was diluted in sodium citrate 
buffer (10 mM, pH 4.5) and injected i.p. at 110 mg/kg per 
day for a consecutive 2 d. 1 mo after treatment, pancreas from 
fasted animals with a blood glucose level >500 mg/dL was 
collected and used as inoculum for i.p. injections.
Measurement of blood glycemia
Fasting blood glucose was monitored at various times after 
inoculation as indicated in the text. Mice were fasted for 16 h 
overnight, and blood sugar was measured using a Contour 
blood glucose monitoring system (Bayer). Blood was col-
lected by venipuncture of the tail vein, and blood glucose was 
determined with a test strip inserted in the glucometer.
Glucose tolerance test
Mice were fasted for 16 h before the test. A glucose solution 
was injected i.p. (1 g/kg), and blood samples were taken by 
puncture of the tail vein at 0, 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min 
after injection of glucose. Blood glucose levels were measured 
using a Contour blood glucose monitoring system (Bayer).
Histological analysis
Pancreas samples were fixed in 10% formaldehyde solution, 
embedded in paraffin, and sliced in 8-µm-thick sections. Four 
serial sections from each animal were stained with hematoxy-
lin, 
ThS, or immunostained with various antibodies, including 
anti–hIAPP (27–37) polyclonal antibody (1:1000 dilution, 
Peninsula Laboratories International), anti-insulin antibody 
(1:1000; Abcam), anti-glucagon antibody (1:1000 dilution; 
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) or anti-somatostatin anti-
body (1:1000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), using 
previously described protocols (Castilla et al., 2005; More-
no-Gonzalez et al., 2013). Immunoreactions were developed 
using a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody, and samples 
visualized in a Leica Biosystems epifluorescent microscope or 
using a secondary antibody linked to horseradish peroxidase 
and developed with a 3,3′-diaminobenzidine kit. 
The immu-
nostained area was assessed in ≥25 islets from each animal. 
Images were submitted to image analysis using the image J 
software. To investigate the presence of IAPP accumulation 
and gross morphological abnormalities in nonpancreatic 
tissues, a section from the tissue was randomly chosen, and 
every tenth section was assessed (with a distance of 50 µm 
among them). Five sections per tissue were measured in each 
animal (n = 4–6/group).
statistical analysis
The data were statistically analyzed by Student’s t test, log-
rank (Mantel–Cox) test, one-way or two-way ANO 
VA, fol-
lowed by the Tukey’s multiple comparison posttest, or the 
Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by Dunn’s multiple compari-
son test. Statistical analysis was performed using the Prism 
software (version 5.0; GraphPad Software). The significance 
was set at 95% confidence.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows that WT mice inoculated with T2D Tg 
pancreas homogenate do not develop IAPP deposits or 
hyperglycemia. Fig. S2 shows that injection of pancreas ho-
mogenate from STZ-induced diabetic mice does not affect 
IAPP aggregation. Fig. S3 shows the preparation and char-
acterization of synthetic IAPP aggregates in vitro. Fig. S4 
shows the production and characterization of τ and Mcc 
fibrillar aggregates in vitro.
AcknowledGMents
We are very grateful to Dr. Peter C. Butler (University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA) for supplying the colony of Tg-hIAPP mice used in this study and for 
providing advice in various aspects of IAPP and diabetes research. We thank Dr. 
Charles Mays and Marcelo Chacon in our laboratory for critical review and editing of 
the manuscript and Mrs. Andrea Flores for helping with maintaining and breeding 
animals for these experiments. We also thank Dr. Martin Margittai (University of Den-
ver, Denver, CO) for providing the plasmid coding for Tau-4R. 
The Integrated Microscopy Core was provided with funding from the Dan L. 
Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, and the John S. Dunn Gulf Coast 
Consortium for Chemical Genomics for providing the electron microscopy micro-
graphs. This study was supported in part by the Jeane B. Kempner postdoctoral fel-
lowship awarded to A. Mukherjee.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: A. Mukherjee participated in the characterization of 
the diabetic phenotype, completed the analysis of the in vivo study of IAPP adminis-
tration of pancreatic aggregates, performed the characterization of IAPP toxicity and 
deposition in different organs, produced the final version of the figures, and pre-
pared the draft of the manuscript. D. Morales-Scheihing performed most of the ex-
periments with isolated islets and the in vivo experiments with synthetic IAPP 
aggregates. He also performed most of the histologic studies and participated in the 
preparation of the figures. N. Salvadores started the project and performed all initial 
in vivo experiments of transmission by administration of pancreatic homogenates 
and analyzed the results. I. Moreno-Gonzalez performed the in vivo experiment with 
STZ controls and collaborated with the histologic analysis. C. Gonzalez collaborated 
in the experiments with isolated islet cultures. K. Taylor-Presse collaborated with the 
experiments to analyze IAPP toxicity. N. Mendez purified and prepared aggregates of 
recombinant τ-4R and performed electron microscopy of IAPP aggregates. M. 
Shahnawaz purified and prepared aggregates of Mcc amyloid. A.O. Gaber, O.M. Sabek, 
and D.W. Fraga collaborated in the studies with human islet cultures. C. Soto is the 
principal investigator on the project and was responsible for coordinating research 
activity, analyzing the data, funding, writing the manuscript, and producing the final 
version of the article.
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2608
Submitted: 19 July 2016
Revised: 24 March 2017
Accepted: 19 June 2017
reFerences
Betsholtz, C., V
. Svensson, F
. Rorsman, U. Engström, G.T. Westermark, E. 
Wilander, K. Johnson, and P
. 
Westermark. 1989. Islet amyloid polypeptide 
(IAPP): cDNA cloning and identification of an amyloidogenic region 
associated with the species-specific occurrence of age-related diabetes 
mellitus. Exp. Cell Res. 183:484–493. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0014 
-4827(89)90407 
-2
Bieler, S., L. Estrada, R. Lagos, M. Baeza, J. Castilla, and C. Soto. 2005. Amyloid 
formation modulates the biological activity of a bacterial protein. J. Biol. 
Chem. 280:26880–26885. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M502031200
Brissova, M., M.J. Fowler, 
W
.E. Nicholson, A. Chu, B. Hirshberg, D.M. Harlan, 
and A.C. Powers. 2005. Assessment of human pancreatic islet architecture 
and composition by laser scanning confocal microscopy. J. Histochem. 
Cytochem. 53:1087–1097. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1369 
/jhc 
.5C6684 
.2005
Brunham, L.R., J.K. Kruit, M.R. Hayden, and C.B. Verchere. 2010. 
Cholesterol in β-cell dysfunction: The emerging connection between 
HDL cholesterol and type 2 diabetes. Curr. Diab. Rep. 10:55–60. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s11892 
-009 
-0090 
-x
Butler, A.E., J. Janson, S. Bonner-Weir, R. Ritzel, R.A. Rizza, and P
.C. Butler. 
2003. β-Cell deficit and increased β-cell apoptosis in humans with type 
2 diabetes. Diabetes. 52:102–110. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/diabetes 
.52 
.1 
.102
Butler, A.E., J. Jang, T. Gurlo, M.D. Carty, W
.C. Soeller, and P
.C. Butler. 2004. 
Diabetes due to a progressive defect in β-cell mass in rats transgenic 
for human islet amyloid polypeptide (HIP rat): A new model for type 
2 diabetes. Diabetes. 53:1509–1516. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/diabetes 
.53 
.6 
.1509
Carey, E.J., B.A. Aqel, T.J. Byrne, D.D. Douglas, J. Rakela, H.E. Vargas, A.A. 
Moss, D.C. Mulligan, K.S. Reddy, and H.A. Chakkera. 2012. Pretransplant 
fasting glucose predicts new-onset diabetes after liver transplantation. J. 
Transplant. 2012:614781. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1155 
/2012 
/614781
Castilla, J., P
. Saá, C. Hetz, and C. Soto. 2005. In vitro generation of infectious 
scrapie prions. Cell. 121:195–206. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2005 
.02 
.011
Chern, J.P
., K.H. Lin, M.Y
. Lu, D.T. Lin, K.S. Lin, J.D. Chen, and C.C. Fu. 2001. 
Abnormal glucose tolerance in transfusion-dependent β-thalassemic 
patients. Diabetes Care. 24:850–854. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/diacare 
.24 
.5 
.850
Clark, A., C.A. Wells, I.D. Buley, J.K. Cruickshank, R.I. Vanhegan, D.R. 
Matthews, G.J. Cooper, R.R. Holman, and R.C. 
Turner. 1988. Islet amy-
loid, increased A-cells, reduced B-cells and exocrine fibrosis: quantitative 
changes in the pancreas in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res. 9:151–159.
Clavaguera, F
., T. Bolmont, R.A. Crowther, D. Abramowski, S. Frank, A. 
Probst, G. Fraser, A.K. Stalder, M. Beibel, M. Staufenbiel, et al. 2009. 
Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain. Nat. 
Cell Biol. 11:909–913. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncb1901
Clavaguera, F
., J. Hench, I. Lavenir, G. Schweighauser, S. Frank, M. Goedert, 
and M. Tolnay. 2014. Peripheral administration of τ aggregates triggers 
intracerebral tauopathy in transgenic mice. Acta Neuropathol. 127:299–
301. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00401 
-013 
-1231 
-5
de Koning, E.J., N.L. Bodkin, B.C. Hansen, and A. Clark. 1993. Diabetes 
mellitus in Macaca mulatta monkeys is characterised by islet amyloidosis 
and reduction in β-cell population. Diabetologia. 36:378–384. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/BF00402271
Donath, M.Y
., and S.E. Shoelson. 2011. Type 2 diabetes as an inflammatory 
disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:98–107. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nri2925
Eisele, Y
.S., U. Obermüller, G. Heilbronner, F
. Baumann, S.A. Kaeser, H. 
Wolburg, L.C. Walker, M. Staufenbiel, M. Heikenwalder, and M. Jucker. 
2010. Peripherally applied Aβ-containing inoculates induce cerebral 
β-amyloidosis. Science. 330:980–982. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1194516
El-Assaad, W
., J. Buteau, M.L. Peyot, C. Nolan, R. Roduit, S. Hardy, E. 
Joly, G. Dbaibo, L. Rosenberg, and M. Prentki. 2003. Saturated fatty 
acids synergize with elevated glucose to cause pancreatic β-cell death. 
Endocrinology. 
144:4154–4163. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1210 
/en 
.2003 
-0410
Fernández-Borges, N., H. Eraña, S.R. Elezgarai, C. Harrathi, M. Gayosso, and 
J. Castilla. 2013. Infectivity versus seeding in neurodegenerative diseases 
sharing a prion-like mechanism. Int. J. Cell Biol. 2013:583498. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1155 
/2013 
/583498
Grad, L.I., W
.C. Guest, A. Yanai, E. Pokrishevsky, M.A. O’Neill, E. Gibbs, V
. 
Semenchenko, M. 
Y
ousefi, D.S. Wishart, S.S. Plotkin, and N.R. Cashman. 
2011. Intermolecular transmission of superoxide dismutase 1 misfolding 
in living cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108:16398–16403. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1102645108
Guest, W
.C., J.M. Silverman, E. Pokrishevsky, M.A. O’Neill, L.I. Grad, and 
N.R. Cashman. 2011. Generalization of the prion hypothesis to other 
neurodegenerative diseases: an imperfect fit. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A. 
74:1433–1459. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1080 
/15287394 
.2011 
.618967
Haataja, L., T. Gurlo, C.J. Huang, and P
.C. Butler. 2008. Islet amyloid in type 
2 diabetes, and the toxic oligomer hypothesis. Endocr. Rev. 29:303–316. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1210 
/er 
.2007 
-0037
Höppener, J.W
., B. Ahrén, and C.J. Lips. 2000. Islet amyloid and type 2 
diabetes mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med. 343:411–419. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJM200008103430607
Howard, C.F
. Jr. 1986. Longitudinal studies on the development of diabetes 
in individual Macaca nigra. Diabetologia. 29:301–306. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/BF00452067
Hull, R.L., G.T. Westermark, P
. Westermark, and S.E. Kahn. 2004. Islet 
amyloid: a critical entity in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 89:3629–3643. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1210 
/jc 
.2004 
-0405
Iba, M., J.L. Guo, J.D. McBride, B. Zhang, J.Q. Trojanowski, and V
.M. Lee. 
2013. Synthetic τ fibrils mediate transmission of neurofibrillary tangles 
in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s-like tauopathy. J. Neurosci. 
33:1024–1037. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.2642 
-12 
.2013
Janson, J., W
.C. Soeller, P
.C. Roche, R.T. Nelson, A.J. Torchia, D.K. Kreutter, 
and P
.C. Butler. 1996. Spontaneous diabetes mellitus in transgenic mice 
expressing human islet amyloid polypeptide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
93:7283–7288. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.93 
.14 
.7283
Janson, J., R.H. Ashley, D. Harrison, S. McIntyre, and P
.C. Butler. 1999. The 
mechanism of islet amyloid polypeptide toxicity is membrane disruption 
by intermediate-sized toxic amyloid particles. Diabetes. 48:491–498. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/diabetes 
.48 
.3 
.491
Johnson, K.H., T.D. O’Brien, C. Betsholtz, and P
. Westermark. 1989. Islet 
amyloid, islet-amyloid polypeptide, and diabetes mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med. 
321:513–518. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJM198908243210806
Jucker, M., and L.C. Walker. 2013. Self-propagation of pathogenic protein 
aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases. Nature. 501:45–51. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature12481
Jurgens, C.A., M.N. T
oukatly, C.L. Fligner, J. Udayasankar, S.L. Subramanian, 
S. Zraika, K. Aston-Mourney, D.B. Carr, P
. 
Westermark, G.T. 
Westermark, 
et al. 2011. β-cell loss and β-cell apoptosis in human type 2 diabetes are 
related to islet amyloid deposition. Am. J. Pathol. 178:2632–2640. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ajpath 
.2011 
.02 
.036
Kahn, S.E. 2003. The relative contributions of insulin resistance and β-cell 
dysfunction to the pathophysiology of T
ype 2 diabetes. Diabetologia. 
46:3–19. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00125 
-002 
-1009 
-0
 2609
JEM Vol. 214, No. 9
Karter, A.J., S.E. Rowell, L.M. Ackerson, B.D. Mitchell, A. Ferrara, J.V
. Selby, 
and B. Newman. 1999. Excess maternal transmission of type 2 diabetes: 
The Northern California Kaiser Permanente Diabetes Registry. Diabetes 
Care. 22:938–943. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/diacare 
.22 
.6 
.938
Kasiske, B.L., J.J. Snyder, D. Gilbertson, and A.J. Matas. 2003. Diabetes mellitus 
after kidney transplantation in the United States. Am. J. 
Transplant. 3:178–
185. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1034 
/j 
.1600 
-6143 
.2003 
.00010 
.x
Kharouta, M., K. Miller, A. Kim, P
. Wojcik, G. Kilimnik, A. Dey, D.F
. Steiner, 
and M. Hara. 2009. No mantle formation in rodent islets -- The 
prototype of islet revisited. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 85:252–257. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.diabres 
.2009 
.06 
.021
Levine, H. III. 1993. Thioflavine T interaction with synthetic Alzheimer’s 
disease β-amyloid peptides: Detection of amyloid aggregation in solution. 
Protein Sci. 2:404–410. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/pro 
.5560020312
Li, D.S., 
Y
.H. 
Yuan, H.J. Tu, Q.L. Liang, and L.J. Dai. 2009. A protocol for islet 
isolation from mouse pancreas. Nat. Protoc. 4:1649–1652. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nprot 
.2009 
.150
Luheshi, L.M., D.C. Crowther, and C.M. Dobson. 2008. Protein misfolding 
and disease: from the test tube to the organism. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
12:25–31. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cbpa 
.2008 
.02 
.011
Luk, K.C., 
V
. Kehm, J. Carroll, B. Zhang, P
. O’Brien, J.Q. 
Trojanowski, and 
V
.M. 
Lee. 2012. Pathological α-synuclein transmission initiates Parkinson-like 
neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice. Science. 338:949–953. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1227157
Lundmark, K., G.T. Westermark, S. Nyström, C.L. Murphy, A. Solomon, and 
P
. Westermark. 2002. Transmissibility of systemic amyloidosis by a prion-
like mechanism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 99:6979–6984. (published 
erratum appears in Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2003. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0630139100) 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.092205999
Ma, Z., G.T. 
Westermark, K.H. Johnson, 
T.D. O’Brien, and P
. 
Westermark. 1998. 
Quantitative immunohistochemical analysis of islet amyloid polypeptide 
(IAPP) in normal, impaired glucose tolerant, and diabetic cats. Amyloid. 
5:255–261. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3109 
/13506129809007298
Matthews, D.R., and P
.C. Matthews. 2011. Banting Memorial Lecture 2010^. 
Type 2 diabetes as an ‘infectious’ disease: Is this the Black Death of the 
21st century? Diabet. Med. 28:2–9. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1464 
-5491 
.2010 
.03167 
.x
Meyer, V
., P
.D. Dinkel, E. Rickman Hager, and M. Margittai. 2014. 
Amplification of Τ fibrils from minute quantities of seeds. Biochemistry. 
53:5804–5809. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1021 
/bi501050g
Meyer-Luehmann, M., J. Coomaraswamy, T. Bolmont, S. Kaeser, C. Schaefer, 
E. Kilger, A. Neuenschwander, D. Abramowski, P
. Frey, A.L. Jaton, et al. 
2006. Exogenous induction of cerebral β-amyloidogenesis is governed 
by agent and host. Science. 313:1781–1784. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1131864
Morales, R., C. Duran-Aniotz, J. Castilla, L.D. Estrada, and C. Soto. 2012. 
De novo induction of amyloid-β deposition in vivo. Mol. Psychiatry. 
17:1347–1353. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/mp 
.2011 
.120
Moreno-Gonzalez, I., L.D. Estrada, E. Sanchez-Mejias, and C. Soto. 2013. 
Smoking exacerbates amyloid pathology in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nat. Commun. 4:1495. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncomms2494
Mougenot, A.L., S. Nicot, A. Bencsik, E. Morignat, J. Verchère, L. Lakhdar, 
S. Legastelois, and T. Baron. 2012. Prion-like acceleration of a 
synucleinopathy in a transgenic mouse model. Neurobiol. Aging. 33:2225–
2228. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neurobiolaging 
.2011 
.06 
.022
Mukherjee, A., D. Morales-Scheihing, P
.C. Butler, and C. Soto. 2015. Type 2 
diabetes as a protein misfolding disease. Trends Mol. Med. 21:439–449. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molmed 
.2015 
.04 
.005
Novials, A., I. Rojas, R. Casamitjana, E.F
. Usac, and R. Gomis. 2001. A novel 
mutation in islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) gene promoter is associ-
ated with type II diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia. 44:1064–1065.
Nyalakonda, K., T. Sharma, and F
. Ismail-Beigi. 2010. Preservation of β-cell 
function in type 2 diabetes. Endocr. Pract. 16:1038–1055. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4158 
/EP10112 
.RA
Oskarsson, M.E., J.F
. Paulsson, S.W
. Schultz, M. Ingelsson, P
. Westermark, and 
G.T. Westermark. 2015. In vivo seeding and cross-seeding of localized 
amyloidosis: A molecular link between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer 
disease. Am. J. Pathol. 185:834–846. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ajpath 
.2014 
.11 
.016
Paulsson, J.F
., J. Ludvigsson, A. Carlsson, R. Casas, G. Forsander, S.A. Ivarsson, 
I. Kockum, Å. Lernmark, C. Marcus, B. Lindblad, and G.T. Westermark. 
2014. High plasma levels of islet amyloid polypeptide in young with 
new-onset of type 1 diabetes mellitus. PLoS One. 9:e93053. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0093053
Piccardo, P
., D. King, G. Telling, J.C. Manson, and R.M. Barron. 2013. 
Dissociation of prion protein amyloid seeding from transmission of a 
spongiform encephalopathy. J. Virol. 87:12349–12356. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.00673 
-13
Poitout, V
., and R.P
. Robertson. 2002. Minireview: secondary β-cell failure 
in type 2 diabetes--A convergence of glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity. 
Endocrinology. 
143:339–342. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1210 
/endo 
.143 
.2 
.8623
Polonsky, K.S. 2000. Dynamics of insulin secretion in obesity and diabetes. 
Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 24:S29–S31. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/sj 
.ijo 
.0801273
Prusiner, S.B. 1998. Prions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 95:13363–13383. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.95 
.23 
.13363
Prusiner, S.B. 2012. Cell biology: A unifying role for prions in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Science. 336:1511–1513. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1222951
Ren, P
.H., J.E. Lauckner, I. Kachirskaia, J.E. Heuser, R. Melki, and R.R. 
Kopito. 2009. Cytoplasmic penetration and persistent infection of 
mammalian cells by polyglutamine aggregates. Nat. Cell Biol. 11:219–
225. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncb1830
Ritzel, R.A., and P
.C. Butler. 2003. Replication increases β-cell vulnerability 
to human islet amyloid polypeptide-induced apoptosis. Diabetes. 
52:1701–1708. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/diabetes 
.52 
.7 
.1701
Salvadores, N., M. Shahnawaz, E. Scarpini, F
. Tagliavini, and C. Soto. 2014. 
Detection of misfolded Aβ oligomers for sensitive biochemical diagnosis 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Reports. 7:261–268. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2014 
.02 
.031
Schmidt, C., A. Karch, C. Korth, and I. Zerr. 2012. On the issue of 
transmissibility of Alzheimer disease: A critical review. Prion. 6:447–452. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4161 
/pri 
.22502
Shahnawaz, M., K.W
. Park, A. Mukherjee, R. Diaz-Espinoza, and C. Soto. 
2017. Prion-like characteristics of the bacterial protein Microcin E492. 
Sci. Rep. 7:45720. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/srep45720
Shammas, S.L., G.A. Garcia, S. Kumar, M. Kjaergaard, M.H. Horrocks, N. 
Shivji, E. Mandelkow, T.P
. Knowles, E. Mandelkow, and D. Klenerman. 
2015. A mechanistic model of τ amyloid aggregation based on direct 
observation of oligomers. Nat. Commun. 6:7025. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncomms8025
Siddiqua, A., and M. Margittai. 2010. Three- and four-repeat Τ coassemble 
into heterogeneous filaments: An implication for Alzheimer disease. J. 
Biol. Chem. 285:37920–37926. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M110 
.185728
Soto, C. 2003. Unfolding the role of protein misfolding in neurodegenerative 
diseases. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4:49–60. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nrn1007
Soto, C. 2012. Transmissible proteins: expanding the prion heresy. Cell. 
149:968–977. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2012 
.05 
.007
 Prion-like transmission of type 2 diabetes | Mukherjee et al.
2610
Soto, C., and L.D. Estrada. 2008. Protein misfolding and neurodegeneration. 
Arch. Neurol. 65:184–189. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1001 
/archneurol 
.2007 
.56
Soto, C., L. Estrada, and J. Castilla. 2006. Amyloids, prions and the inherent 
infectious nature of misfolded protein aggregates. Trends Biochem. Sci. 
31:150–155. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.tibs 
.2006 
.01 
.002
Stöhr, J., J.C. Watts, Z.L. Mensinger, A. Oehler, S.K. Grillo, S.J. DeArmond, 
S.B. Prusiner, and K. Giles. 2012. Purified and synthetic Alzheimer’s 
amyloid β (Aβ) prions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109:11025–11030. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1206555109
Stumvoll, M., B.J. Goldstein, and T.W
. van Haeften. 2005. T
ype 2 diabetes: 
Principles of pathogenesis and therapy. Lancet. 365:1333–1346. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0140 
-6736(05)61032 
-X
Walsh, D.M., and D.J. Selkoe. 2016. A critical appraisal of the pathogenic 
protein spread hypothesis of neurodegeneration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
17:251–260. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn 
.2016 
.13
Westermark, P
. 1972. Quantitative studies on amyloid in the islets of 
Langerhans. Ups. J. Med. Sci. 77:91–94. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1517 
/03009734000000014
Westermark, P
., U. Engström, K.H. Johnson, G.T. Westermark, and C. 
Betsholtz. 1990. Islet amyloid polypeptide: Pinpointing amino acid 
residues linked to amyloid fibril formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
87:5036–5040. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.87 
.13 
.5036
Wilson, G.L., and E.H. Leiter. 1990. Streptozotocin interactions with pan-
creatic β cells and the induction of insulin-dependent diabetes. Curr. 
Top. 
Microbiol. Immunol. 156:27–54.
Xing, Y
., A. Nakamura, T. Chiba, K. Kogishi, T. Matsushita, F
. Li, Z. Guo, 
M. Hosokawa, M. Mori, and K. Higuchi. 2001. Transmission of mouse 
senile amyloidosis. Lab. Invest. 81:493–499. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
labinvest 
.3780257
Yang, H., S. Yang, J. Kong, A. Dong, and S. Yu. 2015. Obtaining information 
about protein secondary structures in aqueous solution using Fourier 
transform IR spectroscopy. Nat. Protoc. 10:382–396. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nprot 
.2015 
.024
Zraika, S., R.L. Hull, J. Udayasankar, K.M. Utzschneider, J. 
T
ong, F
. Gerchman, 
and S.E. Kahn. 2007. Glucose- and time-dependence of islet amyloid 
formation in vitro. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 354:234–239. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.bbrc 
.2006 
.12 
.187
