 Suicide prevention is generally seen as a major priority for the
mental health sector. This has led to significant research interest
in the risk factors associated with suicide. Efforts have been made
to group the identified risk factors in such a way that clinicians
can categorise patients into low- and high-risk groups, with
significant treatment implications, such as the choice to admit
to hospital, voluntarily or not. A significant problem with such
an approach is the low incidence of completed suicide, albeit
the total global impact affects thousands of lives.
One way to address the problem of low base rates of suicide is
to study suicide risk factors in groups where the base rate is higher
than in the general population. This ‘enriched’ risk group not only
provides for data of greater power, allowing better identification of
the factors of interest, but is clinically relevant if the element
‘enriching’ the group is one that increases presentations to health
services. An obvious group, and the subject of a systematic review
in this issue of the BJPsych,1 is people who have already self-
harmed. Self-harm is more common than suicide, is of major
clinical interest being a common reason for admission to hospital
and, importantly, the risk of suicide is elevated between 50- and
100-fold in the year after self-harm. This implies that fewer
participants will be necessary to identify meaningful risk factors.
The idea that risk factors can be identified and then used to
predict the likelihood of suicide is appealing not only to clinicians,
but also to hospital managers, politicians, families and patients.
Even more appealing is the idea that these risk factors can be
grouped into composite risk tools or scales that can quantify the
risk of later suicide. These tools can be used by a very wide array
of mental health clinicians, carry the kudos of science and provide
reassurance to all groups that suicidality can be made understandable
and easily manageable. Such tools are currently commonly used in
clinical practice despite little evidence that they are effective.
The Chan et al review in this issue of the BJPsych has two aims;
the first is to identify risk factors in this enriched sample of
individuals who have attempted suicide.1 The second, and to
our knowledge unique, aim is a review and meta-analysis of risk
assessment scales in people who had self-harmed or were under
specialist mental healthcare.
Risk factors
The results on risk factors associated with suicide are predictable;
the four factors that emerged from the meta-analysis were
previous episodes of self-harm, suicide intent, physical health
problems and male gender. All these risk factors are common in
clinical populations so that the positive predictive value is low
and they are of little use clinically. This finding is reported in all
studies that have looked at risk factors.2 Large et al,3 for example,
carried out a meta-analysis of another group with a high base rate
of suicide: patients discharged from a psychiatric hospital. They
reported that previous episodes of self-harm, depressive symptoms,
male gender, suicidal ideas, unplanned discharge and recent social
difficulty were moderately or weakly associated with post-
discharge suicide. Again, all risk factors were common and they
concluded that no factor, or combination of factors, was strongly
associated with suicide. Perhaps it is finally time to acknowledge
that rare events such as suicide – no matter that they are tragic
for all involved or how much we wish to prevent them – are
impossible to predict with a degree of accuracy that is clinically
meaningful.4 This has significant clinical implications for our
assessments of patients following a self-harm attempt and,
importantly, implications for how we communicate the issues
associated with future completed suicide to medical colleagues,
families and the wider public.
Risk scales
Risk scales are widely used internationally, occasionally mandated
for use in some health settings and routinely considered the
essential component of risk assessment. This belies the evidence:
Chan and colleagues could only find seven studies evaluating their
efficacy.1 Of these, only two scales, the Beck Hopelessness Scale
(BHS) and the Suicide Intent Scale (SIS), had sufficient data
points to conduct a meta-analysis. Both the BHS and SIS lacked
sufficient specificity and sensitivity to be clinically useful. Without
being sufficiently sensitive the tool will miss those who go on to
die by suicide, providing false reassurance to staff and families.
By lacking specificity many patients who would not have gone
on to take their own life will be managed more aggressively,
including admission to hospital, carrying clinical risk and
implications as to the capacity of services to manage. Chan et al
271
The futility of risk prediction
in psychiatry{
Roger Mulder, Giles Newton-Howes and Jeremy W. Coid
Summary
Significant efforts have been made to identify risk factors
associated with suicide. However, the evidence suggests that
risk categorisation may be of limited value, or worse,
potentially harmful, confusing clinical thinking. We argue
instead for a shift in focus towards real engagement with the
individual patient, their specific problems and circumstances.
Declaration of interest
None.
Copyright and usage
B The Royal College of Psychiatrists 2016.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2016)
209, 271–272. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.116.184960
Editorial
Roger Mulder (pictured) is a professor in the Department of Psychological
Medicine, at the University of Otago, Christchurch. Giles Newton-Howes is a
senior lecturer in the Department of Psychological Medicine, at the University
of Otago, Wellington. Jeremy Coid is a professor in the Violence Prevention
Research Unit at the Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Queen Mary
University, London.
{See pp. 277–283, this issue.
 opine that risk scales are of dubious clinical utility at best
and should not be used alone in clinical practice to assess the
future risk of suicide.1 To our knowledge only one study has
prospectively examined the effect of risk assessment on patient
outcome.5 The participants were forensic out-patients and the
outcome was violent and criminal behaviour. They reported no
difference in outcome between a structured risk assessment
protocol and treatment as usual.
The risks of risk assessment
Chan et al’s review reinforces the limited usefulness of risk factors
and risk scales in clinical practice.1 This should be well known.
What is less discussed is the potential harms that risk categorisation
and risk scales can do to patients. The most obvious harm is that
patients labelled ‘high risk’ may receive needlessly more restrictive
treatment. This is counter to the principles of a recovery-focused
service embedded into many countries’ mental health strategies,
and is in conflict with international treaties such as the Convention
on the Rights of People with Disabilities that take a strongly
libertarian stance. It may increase the stigma felt by those in
mental distress and reduce the ability of services to engage in
providing evidence-based care that could be of benefit to these
very patients. Less obvious is that the majority of suicides occur
in ‘low-risk’ groups primarily because they contain many more
members than high-risk groups and the sensitivity of the
instruments used to assess risk are, we can now say, too poor to
overcome this size issue. This is a common problem in medicine
with very low incidence outcomes. According to the National
Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide in People with
Mental Illness, 86% of suicides are in low-risk groups.6 Focusing
healthcare resources on high-risk groups not only has the
potential to directly harm them but may result in the misallocation
of resources from some of the patients wrongly labelled low risk
who require more intensive input.
In clinical practice, as Chan et al point out, risk assessment
may provide false reassurance for clinicians and managers.1 Some
go further, positing that risk assessment is often an organisational
attempt to tame anxiety rather than to improve patient care.7
Patients may be detained not for treatment needs but because
not detaining them produces intolerable anxiety in the staff
involved in the assessment. The myth that certain risk factors
can predict suicide leads to the belief that suicide may be the result
of inadequate risk assessments in health services. The conflation of
risk prediction and risk assessment confuses clinical thinking and
is unhelpful. Our current preoccupation with risk prediction has
the potential to harm patients, clinicians and the organisations
in which they work. It has created a sense of unease among
clinicians and a culture of blame when things go wrong. What
can be done to change this?
First, we need to acknowledge the impossibility of predicting
individual risk accurately and educate the public that this fact,
although unfortunate, is true. Second, as Chan et al point out,
we need to move away from assessment models that prioritise
quantification of risks at the expense of understanding. Rather than
using risk scales we need to focus on the individual; determining the
specific factors that precipitate suicidal ideation and attempts in that
person and identifying the qualitative personal factors that could
increase the likelihood of later suicide. Although there is no
empirical evidence this approach is effective, we need to accept
this as the ‘art’ of psychiatry and accept it is difficult to quantify
and examine empirically. Risk assessments should be a consensual
process with the patient and clinicians striving towards a realistic
conceptualisation of the risk then mutually deciding how best
to manage it. This is a broad approach that forms part of a
needs-based model of care, overcoming the problems associated
with attempts at risk prediction. Third, detailed risk assessments
should be curtailed. Accumulating more and more risk information
of marginal utility is of little value and increasingly likely to harm
the patient and the therapeutic alliance. Risk assessment should not
form the basis of clinical decision-making. The aim of assessment
is to provide optimal care and planning according to patient needs
regardless of the perceived risk. Fourth, a major problem with risk
research is the emphasis on identifying statistical predictors and
not the causal factors for outcomes such as suicide. Research into
factors leading to violence among discharged psychiatric patients
has shown that delusions are a poor future predictor but strongly
associated when mediated by anger, suggesting causality. Similarly,
some risk factors may be poor predictors of future outcome when
combined into scales, but if different statistical models are used
that attempt to establish causal pathways, targets for preventive
intervention can be identified. This corresponds to clinical
experience and the approach recommended by Chen et al.1
Clinical intervention will only be effective with factors that have
some causal association with suicide. The search for ever better
statistical predictors will not achieve this.
In conclusion, although it is possible to validly and reliably
identify risk factors for completed suicide, the mathematics of risk
prediction, whether clinical or using risk assessment tools, mean that
risk categorisation can never assist in reducing suicide.8 Suicide is a
sufficiently rare event and our current tools sufficiently blunt that
‘high-risk’ groups will contain mainly false positives and the
majority of those who die by suicide will have been categorised
as low risk. We need to accept that risk conceptualisation and
prediction associated with completed suicide is a major public
health concern, not a major psychiatric concern. The logical
response to this for psychiatry is to abandon misguided attempts
at risk prediction and encourage real engagement with the
individual patient, their specific problems and circumstances.
Roger Mulder, MB ChB, PhD, FRANZCP, Department of Psychological Medicine,
University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand; Giles Newton-Howes, MRCPsych,
Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand;
Jeremy W. Coid, MB ChB, MD(Lond), FRCPsych, MPhilDipCriminol, Violence
Prevention Research Unit, Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Queen Mary
University, London, UK
Correspondence: Roger Mulder, University of Otago, Christchurch, PO Box 4345,
Christchurch 8140, New Zealand. Email: roger.mulder@otago.ac.nz
First received 10 May 2016, accepted 5 Jul 2016
References
1
Chan MKY, Bhatti H, Meader N, Stockton S, Evans J, O’Connor RC, et al.
Predicting suicide following self-harm: systematic review of risk factors and
risk scales Br J Psychiatry 2016; 209: 277–83.
2
Mulder R. Problems with suicide risk assessment. Aust NZ J Psychiatry 2011;
45: 605–7.
3
Large M, Sharma S, Cannon E, Ryan C, Nielssen O. Risk factors for
suicide within a year of discharge from psychiatric hospital: a systematic
meta-analysis. Aust NZ J Psychiatry 2011; 45: 619–28.
4
Szmukler G. Risk assessment for suicide and violence is of extremely limited
value in general psychiatric practice. Aust NZ J Psychiatry 2012; 46: 173–4.
5
Troquete NAC, van den Brink RHS, Beintema H, Mulder T, van Os TWDP,
Schoevers RA, et al. Risk assessment and shared care planning in out-patient
forensic psychiatry: cluster randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 2013;
202: 365–71.
6
Appleby L, Shaw I, Kapur N, Windfuhr K, Ashton A, Swinson N, et al.
Avoidable Deaths: Five Year Report by the National Confidential Inquiry
into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental Illness. University of
Manchester, 2006.
7
Undrill G. The risks of risk assessment. Adv Psychiatr Treat 2007; 13: 291–7.
8
Paton MB, Large MM, Ryan CJ. Debate: clinical risk categorisation is valuable
in the prevention of suicide and severe violence – no. Australas Psychiatry
2014; 22: 10–2.
272
Newton-Howes et al
