 REVIEW ARTICLE
Precision medicine in allergic disease—food allergy, drug
allergy, and anaphylaxis—PRACTALL document of the
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology and
the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology
A. Muraro1, R. F. Lemanske Jr.2, M. Castells3, M. J. Torres4, D. Khan5, H.-U. Simon6,
C. Bindslev-Jensen7, W. Burks8, L. K. Poulsen9, H. A. Sampson10, M. Worm11 & K. C. Nadeau12,13
1Food Allergy Referral Centre Veneto Region, Department of Women and Child Health, Padua General University Hospital, Padua, Italy;
2Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI; 3Drug Hypersensitivity and
Desensitization Center, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 4Allergy Unit, Regional University
Hospital of Malaga-IBIMA, UMA, Malaga, Spain; 5Division of Allergy & Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA; 6Institute of Pharmacology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; 7Department of
Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense Research Center for Anaphylaxis (ORCA), Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark;
8Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 9Allergy Clinic, Copenhagen University Hospital at Gentofte
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; 10Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; 11Klinik f€
ur Dermatologie, Charit�
e –
Universit€
atsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; 12Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine; 13Sean N. Parker Center for
Allergy and Asthma Research, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
To cite this article: Muraro A, Lemanske Jr. RF, Castells M, Torres MJ, Khan D, Simon H-U, Bindslev-Jensen C, Burks W, Poulsen LK, Sampson HA, Worm M,
Nadeau KC. Precision medicine in allergic disease—food allergy, drug allergy, and anaphylaxis—PRACTALL document of the European Academy of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology and the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Allergy 2017; 72: 1006–1021.
Keywords
allergy; anaphylaxis; endotype; phenotype;
precision medicine.
Correspondence
Antonella Muraro, Food Allergy Centre
Department of Women and Child Health,
Padua General University Hospital, Via Gius-
tiniani 3-35128 Padua, Italy.
Tel.: +39 049 8218086
Fax: +39 049 821 8091
E-mail: muraro@centroallergiealimentari.eu
Accepted for publication 22 January 2017
DOI:10.1111/all.13132
Edited by: Thomas Bieber
Abstract
This consensus document summarizes the current knowledge on the potential for
precision medicine in food allergy, drug allergy, and anaphylaxis under the aus-
pices of the PRACTALL collaboration platform. PRACTALL is a joint effort of
the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology and the American
Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, which aims to synchronize the
European and American approaches to allergy care. Precision medicine is an
emerging approach for disease treatment based on disease endotypes, which are
phenotypic subclasses associated with specific mechanisms underlying the disease.
Although significant progress has been made in defining endotypes for asthma,
definitions of endotypes for food and drug allergy or for anaphylaxis lag behind.
Progress has been made in discovery of biomarkers to guide a precision medicine
approach to treatment of food and drug allergy, but further validation and quan-
tification of these biomarkers are needed to allow their translation into practice
in the clinical management of allergic disease.
Abbreviations
AAAAI, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; AERD, aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease; AGEP, acute generalized
exanthematous pustulosis; BAT, basophil activation test; COX-1, cyclooxygenase-1; CRD, component-resolved diagnostics; CyTOF, time-of-
flight mass cytometry; DIHS, drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms;
EAACI, European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology; EoE, eosinophilic esophagitis; FA, food allergy; FPIES, food protein-induced
enterocolitis syndrome; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; HRF, histamine-releasing factor; IT, immunotherapy; LTC4, leukotriene C4; LTE4,
leukotriene E4; LTT, lymphocyte transformation tests; mAb, monoclonal antibody; NGS, next-generation sequencing; OIT, oral
immunotherapy; PAF, platelet-activating factor; PGD2, prostaglandin D2; PRACTALL, practical allergy; SCAR, severe cutaneous adverse
reactions; SJS, Stevens–Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis; TSLP, thymic stromal lymphopoietin.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1006
Allergy
 Observed variations in treatment response in patients with
similar clinical characteristics (termed phenotype) reinforce
the concept that for treatment, ‘one size does not fit all’, and
encourage the scientific community to determine pathophysi-
ological mechanisms. To this end, classifying disease pheno-
types
into
subclasses
termed
endotypes
(i.e.,
identifying
characteristics defined by specific mechanisms) takes into
consideration associated variations in genetic, pharmacologic,
physiologic, biologic, and/or immunologic pathways with
each phenotype. Treatment that is targeted to an individual
based on endotypic profile, rather than phenotypic profile,
has now been termed by consensus as precision or personal-
ized medicine (among other terms) (1, 2).
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
and AAAAI conducted a project focused on evaluating the
latest findings in precisely defining the endotype of the aller-
gic and/or asthmatic patient, and the potential for the spe-
cialty of allergy/immunology to utilize this precision medicine
approach. The PRACTALL approach was utilized to con-
duct these analyses, in which a panel of experts from these
two geographic regions reviewed the relevant literature and
harmonized the supporting evidence. PRACTALL examined
the potential benefits of applying precision medicine to air-
way and skin allergic diseases (3), and to food allergy (FA),
drug allergy, and anaphylaxis. Although several terms have
been used to define this approach, we employ the term ‘preci-
sion medicine’
here. Precision
medicine is an emerging
approach for disease prevention and treatment that takes
into account the individual variability in genes, environment,
and lifestyle of each person (1).
Precision medicine in food allergy
There is marked heterogeneity of clinical presentations for
FA, which poses a challenge to successful management and
treatment; therefore, precision medicine and its goals are
highly relevant to the field of FA to improve prevention
and therapy. Avoidance of allergenic foods and the use of
epinephrine in case of a severe reaction triggered by acci-
dental ingestion remain the standard of care, as there are
currently no approved treatments for FA (4–6). Recent
technological advances and big data analytics have now
made possible further insights into the molecular mecha-
nisms underlying FA giving us new opportunities to further
classify FA into phenotypes and endotypes with the end
goal of using precision medicine to safely and efficaciously
treat
individual
FA
endotypes.
Sensitive
and
specific
biomarkers for determination of FA endotypes, risk of
developing allergies, reaction severity, and prognosis with
treatment are essential components in the path toward pre-
cision medicine (7).
Phenotypes in food allergy
Clinical presentation of FA differs with respect to offending
allergens, age at presentation, timing of reaction, presence of
comorbid atopic diseases, resolution with time, and response
to immunotherapy. The following FA phenotypes can be
considered in possible approaches toward improving preci-
sion medicine in FA.
Age of onset and spontaneous resolution
Food allergies may present in infancy, toddlerhood, child-
hood, or in adulthood. Certain genetic mutations, genetic
variations, gene associations (as determined by GWAS),
copy number variations, and epigenetic changes in several
genes or gene loci such as SPINK5, FOXP3, HLA-DR, or
HLA-DQ are associated with early onset of food allergies
(8). Other biomarkers such as T regulatory cells and Th1
activity may predict resolution of disease (9). In a study by
Lack et al., children who had spontaneous resolution of pea-
nut allergy had high levels of IFN-c and TNF-a and low
levels of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 indicating a Th1-type skew-
ing. In contrast, children with peanut allergy showed a Th2-
type profile with low levels of IFN-c and TNF-a and high
levels of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 (10). A longitudinal study by
Ho et al. (11) demonstrated that peanut-specific IgE and
SPT wheal size are lower initially in infants with natural res-
olution of their peanut allergy. In addition, component-
resolved diagnostic (CRD) testing show trends for associa-
tion of IgE to Ara h 1 and Ara h 8 with persistence of pea-
nut allergy (12).
Allergen type and disease severity
More than 170 foods have been associated with food aller-
gies, the most common of which are milk, egg, wheat, fish,
shellfish, peanuts, soy, and tree nuts, although regional varia-
tions occur. Symptom severity can vary and precision medi-
cine can be used to assist with prediction of severity (13).
For example, using CRD, severe reactions during oral food
challenges have been shown to be associated with high sIgE
to Ara h 2 peanut allergies (14, 15). Absence of IgE to speci-
fic components such as Ara h 2 in peanut allergy or Cor a 14
or Cor a 9 in hazelnut allergy may predict absence of or less
severe clinical reactivity (16, 17). A study by Vadas et al.
found that serum platelet-activating factor (PAF) levels were
positively correlated, while serum PAF acetylhydrolase activ-
ity was inversely correlated with the severity of anaphylaxis.
The study found that 20% of patients with allergic reactions
(cutaneous only) had elevated PAF, compared with 100% of
those with severe anaphylactic signs with hypotension or seri-
ous respiratory involvement. Low levels of PAF acetylhydro-
lase have been reported in fatal anaphylaxis, and failure of
this enzyme to inactivate PAF may help identify individuals
at risk of severe or even fatal anaphylaxis (18). In addition,
Brough et al. (19) recently showed that patients with peanut
allergy had higher levels of IL-9 compared with children who
had peanut sensitization or those without atopic disease indi-
cating that IL-9 could potentially be a valuable biomarker
for diagnosis.
Comorbid atopic disease
The atopic march (20, 21) suggests an increased risk of ato-
pic dermatitis and FA in children who carry the filaggrin
mutation (22, 23), although this mutation alone is not suffi-
cient for the clinical presence of atopic disease.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1007
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
 Endotypes in food allergy
Increased understanding of the cells involved (e.g., epithelial
cells, ILC2s, T helper cells, mast cells, eosinophilic cells),
cytokines (e.g., IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-13, IL-25, IL-33), anti-
bodies (e.g., IgE, IgG), and other pro-inflammatory mole-
cules (e.g., histamine, tryptase) in allergic mechanisms has led
to the development of many drugs that are currently being
tested in clinical trials. A well-defined classification based on
molecular characteristics can assist with identification of
those that may be more likely to see positive outcomes from
therapy. Characterization of FA into the following prelimi-
nary endotypes can be considered to enable precision medi-
cine (24).
IgE-mediated endotype
IgE-mediated allergies are typically immediate onset with
reactions ranging from mild to severe to life-threatening ana-
phylactic reactions involving single or multiple organs. How-
ever, two variants of typical IgE endotypes have been
observed:
•
Alpha-gal allergy: These allergies result in a delayed aller-
gic reaction that occurs 3–8 h after the consumption of
red meat and diagnosed by IgE to a-gal (25). Reactions
may be mild to life-threatening anaphylactic reactions.
Open food challenge with red meat in individuals with
sIgE to a-gal resulted in increased tryptase levels and
increased expression of CD63 on basophils, indicating
their potential use as biomarkers (26).
•
Oral allergy syndrome (pollen-food syndrome): Those
who have developed allergies to pollen can have symp-
toms on eating uncooked fruits, raw vegetables, spices,
and nuts that have allergens very similar to the offend-
ing pollen allergen. Consumption of apples and hazel-
nuts, in those with birch-pollen allergy, often leads to
oral allergy syndrome. Symptoms are generally mild
and confined to the oral cavity, but more severe reac-
tions can occur in rare cases. A recent study showed
that specific IgG4/IgE ratios to either apple (Mal d 1)
or hazelnut (Cor a 1) were higher in those associ-
ated with allergy than those associated with tolerance
(27).
Non-IgE and mixed endotypes
•
Food protein-induced gastrointestinal endotype: Food pro-
tein-induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES) is an exam-
ple of this endotype. FPIES, diagnosed in infants and
toddlers (with spontaneous resolution within 1–5 years),
includes reactions with vomiting and diarrhea primarily
due to FA to cow’s milk or soy. However, FPIES also
occurs following ingestion of other foods such as cereal
grains, fish, and shellfish (28, 29). Gonzalez-Delgado
et al. (30) recently demonstrated that TNF-a and HLA-
DR were both increased in patients with FPIES to fish
compared with controls.
•
Eosinophilic endotype: This endotype is best exemplified
by eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE). High levels of thymic
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) have been shown to be
increased in patients with EoE and could be helpful for
the diagnosis of the disease (31). Anti-TSLP mono-
clonal antibodies for EoE are being tested in clinical
trials. Recently, it has been shown that desmoglein-1,
an intracellular adhesion molecule, is downregulated by
IL-13 leading to impaired barrier function. Tracking of
desmoglein-1 in individuals with EoE can aid in diag-
nosis and management, leading to improved precision
medicine (32). Recent studies have shown that children
with EoE have high or very high titers of IgG4 and
low, but detectable IgE (24). Moreover, an EoE-like
disease has been described that can be distinguished
from EoE by eotaxin-3, MUC4, and CDH26 expression
levels (33).
Biomarkers in food allergy
More specific and sensitive in vitro tests for determination of
reaction severity, prognosis with immunotherapy, and evalua-
tion of treatment efficacy are under investigation. Basophil
activation tests (BAT) and CRD are novel methods that have
shown promise (34). Genetic mutations and epigenetic modi-
fications have been associated with FA and may assist with
assessing risk of developing allergies as well as diagnosis and
prognosis with treatment.
Skin prick tests
Associations between SPT wheal size and severity of reaction
on food challenge have been observed in a few studies, but
these findings have not been consistent among studies (35,
36). An analysis of a subset of infants from the longitudinal
HealthNuts Study found peanut SPT and sIgE levels were
significantly associated with persistent peanut allergy. Thresh-
olds for SPT and sIgE were determined to be ≥8 mm and
≥2.1 kU/l, respectively, in children aged 4 years (37). Analy-
sis of over 5000 infants from the HealthNuts Study found
that SPTs and sIgEs had a 95% positive predictive value for
challenge-proven allergy to peanuts and eggs (38). Results
from the LEAP study indicates that increasing SPT wheal
sizes (0 mm, 1–4 mm, and >4 mm) are predictive of increased
risk of peanut allergy. Along with other markers, SPT wheal
size may enable determination of long-term efficacy of early
introduction of peanuts (39).
Allergen-specific IgE (sIgE)
Allergen-specific IgE is commonly used, in conjunction with
clinical history and SPTs, for diagnosis of FA, thus reduc-
ing
the
need
for
food
challenge.
Although
correlation
between sIgE and severity of reaction has been observed in
some studies, the clinical utility of sIgE for assessing risk
of severe reactions has not been established (35). In a
small clinical study, Vickery et al. (40) demonstrated that
high IgE to peanut at baseline was associated with less sus-
tained
unresponsiveness
in
oral
immunotherapy
(OIT);
other groups have not found similar predictive features of
IgE and instead are using other biomarkers for potential
prediction of outcome for precision medicine practices (41,
42).
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1008
Precision medicine in allergic disease
Muraro et al.
 CRD
Component-resolved diagnostics may be helpful in the man-
agement toward precision medicine care of allergy patients.
For example, sIgE to Ara h 2 and Ara h 8 was associated
with high and low risk of severe and persistent peanut aller-
gies, respectively (14). A study of children with wheat allergy
found that children with severe symptoms had significantly
higher IgE antibody levels to x-5 gliadin, gliadin, and high
and
low
molecular
weight
glutenin
(43).
CRD
before
immunotherapy for milk allergy may also help to identify
children with lower probability of a successful outcome, as
high IgE levels to a-lactalbumin, b-lactoglobulin, and casein
have been associated with lower maintenance dose reached
(44). Further refinement of CRD and high-resolution epitope
microarrays could allow for improved accuracy in the future.
BAT
In basophils obtained from peanut-allergic children who were
challenged with peanuts, increased levels of activation mark-
ers, such as CD63 or CD203c, were observed (45). Santos
et al. found that when basophils were sensitized with plasma
from peanut-allergic (but not from peanut-sensitized) chil-
dren were exposed to peanuts, dose-dependent activation
occurred. The ratio of the percentage of CD63+ basophils
after stimulation with peanut and after stimulation with anti-
IgE was found to be correlated with disease severity (46).
Mukai et al. (47) found that blood stored in heparin tubes at
4°C for 24 h can be used for BATs to measure upregulation
of basophil CD203c and induction of a CD63hi basophil pop-
ulations, which should help with ease and standardization of
protocols.
IgG4
Increases in IgG4 with immunotherapy are associated with
successful clinical outcomes. A study found that an increase
in the IgG4 concentration to milk components during treat-
ment indicated effective desensitization (44). In another
study, it appears that mast cells became activated on expo-
sure to peanuts and IgG4 depleted plasma from peanut-sensi-
tized children, suggesting a role for IgG4 in tolerance.
Further, addition of post-OIT sera containing specific IgG
antibodies inhibited IgE-mediated allergic reactions (46). The
ratio of IgG4 : IgE has found promise in several studies of
immunotherapy. An early introduction of peanuts to infants
decreased the incidence of peanut allergy and was associated
with higher peanut-specific IgG4 : IgE ratio (48). Monitoring
these ratios may therefore have some value in precision medi-
cine applications to the natural history of FA.
Genetic markers
Genetic predispositions in the following loci have been found
to be associated with FA and atopy: Filaggrin, FOXP3,
STAT6, SPINK 5, IL-10, and IL-13 (49). A GWAS of
patient-reported FA in a large cohort of children from the
Chicago Allergy Study identified peanut allergy-specific loci
in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DR and DQ regions
at 6p21.32, tagged by rs7192 and rs9275596. Both signifi-
cantly affected DNAm in the HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1
genes and increased population attributable risk by 19- 21%
(50).
Epigenetic markers
Studies of peanut-allergic individuals undergoing OIT have
found increases in FOXP3 T regulatory cells and decreases in
FOXP3 methylation in patients who attained desensitization
(41). Epigenetic modification of FOXP3 and other gene loci
have been shown to alter Treg function (41, 51) and could be
associated with FA and response to therapy (52). A genome-
wide DNA methylation study by Martino et al. (53) used
blood mononuclear cells obtained from individuals undergo-
ing oral food challenge and found a DNAm signature of 96
CpG sites that predicted oral food challenge outcomes with
increased predictability compared with SPTs and sIgE. An
epigenome-wide association study of cow’s milk allergy in a
subset of children from the Chicago Food Allergy Study and
from the Boston Birth Cohort indicates that specific gene loci
are associated with cow’s milk allergy (54). Another study
found that tolerance in children with IgE-mediated cow’s
milk allergy was characterized by a distinct Th1 (IL-10 and
INF-c) and Th2 (IL-4 and IL-5) cytokine gene DNA methy-
lation pattern (52).
Mediators
Elevated serum tryptase and histamine have been found in
some, but not the majority of cases of FA anaphylactic reac-
tions and cannot be considered a reliable marker of FA-
related anaphylaxis (55–57). Urinary metabolites of histamine
are
more
stable
than
plasma
histamine
and
are
being
explored as a diagnostic tool for FA reactions (56, 58). In
one study by Sato et al. (59), threshold of histamine release
(defined as the minimum concentration of food antigen to
induce a 10% net histamine release) was proposed to predict
egg white, milk, and wheat FA.
Summary
Food allergy classification systems that take into account the
heterogeneity of FAs are a crucial first step to enable preci-
sion
medicine.
With
greater
understanding
of
the
key
immune cells and molecules involved in FA, we are making
progress in developing a composite set of biomarkers that
could serve to predict, manage, and monitor prevention and
treatment strategies in FA. Changes in immune cells (e.g.,
basophils from peripheral blood and T cells), cytokine pro-
files, effector molecules (e.g., histamine, tryptase), and DNA
methylation of key loci are being evaluated to determine their
roles in allergy and desensitization with immunotherapy. The
key genetic and environmental risks of developing FA are
being identified and biomarkers to determine treatment prog-
nosis and efficacy can assist to further refine the options for
immunotherapy.
Precision medicine in drug allergy
Several facets of precision medicine apply directly to the field
of drug allergy. At a pharmacogenetics level, patients can be
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1009
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
 identified to be at high risk of developing severe drug hyper-
sensitivities. From a diagnostics perspective, patients who are
inappropriately labeled as being allergic to certain medica-
tions can be proven to be tolerant of these medications pri-
marily via drug skin testing and drug challenge, thus sparing
the expense and side-effects of alternative therapies. Finally,
from a therapeutic perspective, patients who are hypersensi-
tive to specific medications may actually have conferred bene-
fits from treatment with these medications via desensitization
procedures. The use of molecular and pharmacogenetics tools
can assist in the delivery of precision medicine for drug aller-
gies.
Phenotypes in drug allergy
Hypersensitivity reactions to drugs may vary extensively in
presentation. While clinical characteristics of many drug
allergic reactions have been well defined, no agreed-upon sys-
tem to organize these reactions into phenotypes has been
developed. Nevertheless, utilizing clinical characteristics and
timing of reactions to drugs, the following phenotypes can be
considered.
Immediate-onset drug allergy
Immediate-onset drug allergic reactions manifest within 1–
6 h of exposure to a drug, and present with cutaneous
(e.g., flushing, pruritus, urticaria, angioedema), respiratory,
and/or gastrointestinal symptoms, and anaphylaxis. Imme-
diate drug allergic reactions may be due to several mecha-
nisms including but not limited to IgE-mediated reactions,
direct mast cell/basophil activation, and cyclooxygenase-1
(COX-1)
inhibition.
Two
distinct
presentations
of
IgE-
mediated drug allergy reactions have emerged: (1) reactions
that occur after multiple doses of the drug; and (2) reac-
tions that occur with exposure to the first dose. IgE-
mediated reactions to penicillin or carboplatin present after
several exposures, whereas allergy to the monoclonal anti-
body
(mAb)
cetuximab
manifests
on
the
first
dose
in
patients with pre-existing IgE antibodies to the carbohy-
drate determinant, galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose, present on
the humanized antibody. Taxane reactions can occur at
first exposure in atopic cancer patients, and sensitization is
thought to occur through prior environmental exposure
(60). Direct mast cell/basophil activation can present clini-
cally identical symptoms to those of IgE-mediated reac-
tions,
via
IgE-independent
mechanisms.
Complement
activation and generation of anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a,
which activate mast cells through complement receptors,
can occur in contrast media reactions, and in reactions to
over-sulfated chondroitin sulfate contaminated heparin (61).
Recently,
the
human
G
protein-coupled
receptor
MRGPRX2 has been identified as a mast cell receptor cap-
able of causing histamine release in response to drugs con-
taining THIQ motifs such as quinolones (ciprofloxacin and
levofloxacin), neuromuscular blocking agents, and icatibant
(62). Finally, patients with various forms of NSAID hyper-
sensitivity can have immediate reactions induced by media-
tors generated by COX-1 inhibition (63).
Delayed-onset drug allergy
In delayed-onset drug allergy, reaction usually occurs days to
weeks after allergen exposure. These reactions have heteroge-
neous clinical manifestations, but may be subdivided into
those with isolated, single-organ involvement or systemic,
multi-organ involvement.
Cutaneous reactions are the most common manifestation
of drug allergy. Numerous clinical phenotypes exist, with the
most common being maculopapular exanthems, fixed drug
eruption, urticaria, angioedema, and acneiform reactions
(64). Delayed drug reactions may also affect a single-organ
system including the hepatic, pulmonary, renal, and hemato-
logic systems (65). Numerous mechanisms exist for these sin-
gle-organ delayed drug reactions, ranging from T cell-specific
delayed hypersensitivity responses to idiosyncratic reactions
or those due to toxic metabolites, some of them determined
by genetic specificity.
The most severe drug reactions are referred to as severe
cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR) and include three major
syndromes: drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic
symptoms (DRESS or DIHS for drug-induced hypersensitiv-
ity syndrome), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
(AGEP), and Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epider-
mal necrolysis (TEN). SCAR commonly have multi-organ
involvement including but not limited to mucosal, hepatic,
hematologic, and renal systems. The risk of SJS/TEN is
higher in persons expressing certain HLA haplotypes, and
patients with HIV, cancer, or systemic lupus erythematosus;
mortality rates for SJS/TEN can be up to 90% and may be
predicted by a validated measure of disease severity, the
SCORETEN (66). Persistent sequelae occur in 50–90% of
survivors, involving scarring of the conjunctiva and eyelids,
and dermatologic, dental, urogenital, and pulmonary compli-
cations
as
well
as
psychological
impact
(67).
The
immunopathogenesis of SCAR is not completely understood,
but may involve T cell-mediated drug hypersensitivity and
heterologous immunity (e.g., molecular mimicry between
prior virus and current drug exposure) in predisposed hosts
(68).
Endotypes in drug allergy
Multiple endotypes exist for drug allergic reactions, including
IgE-mediated reactions, T cell-mediated reactions, pharmaco-
logic interactions, and genetic predispositions. Well-defined
endotypes are discussed below.
IgE-mediated endotype
IgE-mediated reactions depend on sensitization to the culprit
drug or a cross-reactive substance, with resultant production
of drug and epitope-specific IgE. The phenotype is an imme-
diate reaction and may be diagnosed via skin testing most
commonly, or in some cases, through in vitro specific IgE or
BATs (69).
Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) endotype
Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease patients are charac-
terized phenotypically by the classic triad of asthma, nasal
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1010
Precision medicine in allergic disease
Muraro et al.
 polyposis, and immediate respiratory reactions to aspirin and
NSAIDs. This syndrome is characterized by eosinophilic tis-
sue infiltration and excessive production of cysteinyl leuko-
trienes. Recently, platelet-adherent granulocytes in peripheral
blood and nasal polyp tissue of AERD patients have been
shown to contribute to the over production of cysteinyl leu-
kotrienes (70).
HLA-associated drug-hypersensitivity reactions
Associations between HLA haplotypes and specific drug
reactions have been recognized for several years. Recently,
several specific HLA alleles have been associated with specific
drug reactions, and screening for certain alleles has been rec-
ommended prior to specific drug therapy (71). One of the
earliest examples of the specificity of pharmacogenetics in
drug allergy was a report in 2004 on the strong association
of the HLA-B*15:02 allele and carbamazepine-induced SJS
(72). The HLA-B*15:02 allele was present in 100% (44/44) of
Han Chinese patients with carbamazepine-induced SJS com-
pared
with
only
3%
(3/101)
of
carbamazepine-tolerant
patients yielding an odds ratio of 2504 with a p-value of
3.13 9 10�27! While the HLA-B*15:02 allele is predictive in
other Asian populations, it is uncommon in those of Euro-
pean descent. Although the HLA-A*31:01 allele was initially
reported to be associated with carbamazepine-induced hyper-
sensitivity reactions in subjects of Northern European des-
cent, this association was not consistently seen in subsequent
studies (68).
The
best
example
of
utilizing
a
pharmacogenomics
approach to reduce drug allergy relates to the association of
HLA-B*57:01 and the development of the abacavir hypersen-
sitivity syndrome, which was discovered in 2002 (73, 74).
Abacavir is a nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor that
has been associated with a multi-organ hypersensitivity reac-
tion in 2–7% of patients. Abacavir hypersensitivity presents
with a phenotypic reaction of a delayed drug reaction with
symptoms of fever, rash, malaise, and gastrointestinal and
respiratory symptoms. Susceptible patients may be identified
by carriage of the HLA-B*57:01 allele and by positive patch
testing before exposure to the drug. The altered peptide
repertoire model has been proposed to explain this reaction
in which abacavir sits in the HLA-B*57:01 pocket resulting
in a conformational change allowing self-peptides to bind
resulting in activation of abacavir-specific T cells (75).
Biomarkers in drug allergy
SPT and sIgE
The most widely used in vivo biomarker for IgE/mast cell/ba-
sophil drug-hypersensitivity reactions is immediate skin test-
ing. For most antibiotics, skin testing lacks well-defined
predictive values. Positive skin tests with nonirritant concen-
trations are suggestive of drug-specific IgE; however, negative
skin tests are less helpful due to unclear negative predictive
values (76). In contrast, penicillin skin testing has well-
defined negative predictive values with some reports having
negative predictive values over 97%, indicating that patients
with a history of penicillin allergy and negative skin test have
a 3% risk of reaction when challenged with penicillin (77).
Anaphylaxis or severe adverse outcomes after negative skin
tests are rare (78). Over 85% of patients with carboplatin
hypersensitivity reactions have a positive skin test, indicating
a strong correlation between skin testing and clinical symp-
toms in the population of cancer patients with chemotherapy
allergy (79, 80).
Because most drug allergens are not captured by skin test-
ing, it is important to develop new and more specific reagents
to address drug allergy and hypersensitivity, which is thought
to affect close to 10% of the general population and is affect-
ing new target populations exposed to chemotherapy and
mAbs
(81).
Specific
IgE
to
platins
have
recently
been
reported, revealing the high cross-reactivity between oxali-
platin and both cisplatin and carboplatin. This provides a
rationale for the observation of oxaliplatin IgE-sensitized
patients presenting with high rates of cisplatin and carbo-
platin sensitization without prior exposure (69).
BAT and basophil histamine release assay
Basophil activation test has been used in vitro to provide evi-
dence of IgE sensitization. Cell activation has been demon-
strated by the expression of CD63 and CD203 markers in
the presence of the implicated drug (82). BAT has been used
for multiple drugs, including antibiotics and general anesthet-
ics, as well as to identify chemotherapy drug reactions, and
may be a useful tool to identify sensitized patients before
reactions occur (83). A review of electronic records found
that positive serum basophil histamine release assay is a use-
ful marker for cyclosporine responsiveness in patients with
chronic spontaneous urticaria (84).
Mediators
Tryptase, the more abundant of the mast cell proteases, is
released during mast cell activation and its blood levels corre-
late with the extent of hypersensitivity drug reactions, with
patients presenting higher levels during drug anaphylaxis
(85).
Cells
T
cell-mediated
drug
reactions
have
been
investigated
through
patch
testing,
lymphocyte
transformation
tests
(LTT) and, more recently, with markers of inflammation
such as granzyme B and granulysin. These later biomarkers
have also been identified in severe hypersensitivity reactions
such as SJS. A recent report indicates that granulysin expres-
sion in CD3+CD4+ T cells, in association with granzyme B
and IFN- c expression, may provide a high sensitivity and
specificity for patients with SJS (86).
Patch testing
Patch testing is a useful biomarker of maculopapular rashes,
flexural exanthems, fixed drug eruptions, and AGEP. Drug
patch testing has been found frequently to be positive in
patients with recent histories of DRESS and SJS, due to car-
bamazepine. Standardization is still lacking and the predic-
tive value is different according to the implicated drug. In
TEN, only up to 23% of the cases are positive (87).
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1011
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
 HLA markers
International guidelines and the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration have recommended prospective screening for HLA-
B*57:01 prior to initiation of abacavir (88). A double-blind
prospective randomized study assigned patients to undergo
HLA-B*57:01 screening and excluded HLA-B*57:01 positive
patients
from
abacavir
(89).
HLA
screening
eliminated
immunologically confirmed (i.e., patch test positive) patients
with a negative predictive value of 100%. In addition, inter-
national guidelines and the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion have also recommended prospective screening for HLA-
B*15:02 prior to initiation of carbamazepine in high risk
populations (those of Han Chinese descent and patients in
Vietnam, Cambodia, the Reunion Islands, Thailand, India
(specifically Hindus), Malaysia, and Hong Kong) (90, 91).
Future research using prospective pharmacogenomics screen-
ing should help reduce severe, potentially fatal reactions to
other drugs.
Summary
In summary, drug allergy is increasing in the 21st century
and we are faced with numerous challenges when treating
patients with reported drug allergy. These challenges include
the lack of standardized drug allergens, the paucity of diag-
nostic methods with reliable positive and negative predictive
values, and the limited treatment options. Specifically, skin
testing and other in vitro tests including specific IgE, BATs,
and lymphocyte activation tests need to be developed for the
majority
of
drugs
including
not
only
antibiotics,
but
chemotherapy drugs, new monoclonal antibodies, and tar-
geted therapies. Measurable mediators of acute and delayed
reactions will need to be developed including new mast cell/
basophil mediators and soluble chemokines, cytokines, and
other molecular targets of inflammation. We anticipate geno-
typing of patients not only at the time of the reactions but
also when exposed to new medications that could carry a
potential risk. Desensitization protocols that can provide
increased quality of life and increased life expectancy such as
in cancer patients will need to be tailored to each patient
reaction phenotype/endotype and genotype. We envision
that, with these advances of precision medicine, patients with
drug allergy will be diagnosed and classified according to the
expression of their reactions into different endotypes/pheno-
types. In the future, appropriate tools will be used for the
management of their symptoms, and treatments will be aimed
at reversing the inflammatory reactions. Whether acute reac-
tions will continue to necessitate epinephrine and other mast
cell mediator-targeted therapies, and whether delayed reac-
tions such as SJS/TEN will target cytokines, chemokines,
and activation pathway molecules for therapeutic interven-
tion will be defined in the next few years.
Precision medicine in anaphylaxis
There is an unmet need for precision medicine in predicting,
preventing, and managing anaphylaxis, a life-threatening sys-
temic allergic reaction. In contrast to the disease entities food
and drug allergy, anaphylaxis is a syndrome that can be
caused by a number of conditions.
Phenotypes in anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis can be classified based on the eliciting factor,
such
as
foods
(e.g.,
peanuts,
tree
nuts,
and
shellfish),
hymenoptera venom (e.g., bees and wasps), natural latex
rubber, and medications (e.g., codeine, morphine, contrast
media, fluoroquinolone antibiotics, and muscle relaxants),
but also physical phenomena such as cold exposure. Each
of these forms may be modulated by cofactors, such as
exercise, medication, or alcohol intake, and comorbidities
such as mastocytosis may also alter the clinical presenta-
tion (92).
Endotypes in anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is primarily IgE-mediated, but anaphylaxis can
also be caused by alternate pathways involving mast cells/ba-
sophils, or complement. The mechanisms behind these alter-
nate pathways are not well understood and have mainly been
studied in animal models. The following endotypes can be
considered part of precision medicine approaches in the field
of anaphylaxis:
IgE-mediated endotype
This is the best characterized anaphylaxis endotype. In IgE-
mediated endotypes, mast cells and basophils, upon cross-
linking of sIgE bound to FceRI, release preformed mediators
such as histamine, tryptase, chymase, carboxypeptidase A,
and tumor necrosis factor (93). Amplification and prolonga-
tion of allergic response occurs in the late phase with the syn-
thesis
of
lipid-derived
mediators
such
as
PAF,
prostaglandins, and leukotrienes (94). Currently, there are no
tests that have been well established for reliably determining
severity to reaction to allergens, but sIgEs, SPTs, BAT, and
CRD have shown promise. Observed increases in levels of
mediators such as tryptase and PAF are also being further
evaluated as diagnostic and prognostic markers (95).
Non-IgE-mediated endotype
Substances such as radiopaque contrast media, antibiotics
(e.g., penicillin, cephalosporin), opiates, latex, and others
cause hypersensitivity by direct release of mast cell and baso-
phil inflammatory mediators. Such reactions occur without
prior sensitization to the allergen and occur in the absence of
IgE. Anaphylactoid reactions are derived from the activation
of complement or other mechanisms, such as via the bradyki-
nin cascade or by direct activation of mast cells and/or baso-
phils. Two classes of anaphylactoids can be considered:
•
Complement-activated endotype: Anaphylatoxins such as
C3a and C5a, small peptides derived from C3 and C5,
respectively, have been associated with anaphylaxis. In a
study of wasp-sting anaphylaxis, C3a was found to corre-
late with severity of reaction (96). PEGylated liposomes
can also activate the complement system resulting in
acute anaphylactic reactions (97).
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1012
Precision medicine in allergic disease
Muraro et al.
 •
Complement- and antibody-independent endotype: Anaphy-
lactic reactions also occur in the absence of complement
or antibody production. Over-sulfated heparin has been
shown to induce hypotension and anaphylaxis via the
bradykinin type 2 receptors by increased production of
bradykinin (98). The mechanisms underlying anaphylactic
reactions to vancomycin appear to involve phospholipase
C and phospholipase A2 pathways (99). Fluoroquinolone
antibiotics with a tetrahydroisoquinoline motif activate
mast cells directly by binding to MRGPRX2, a G pro-
tein-coupled receptor (100).
Biomarkers in anaphylaxis
Skin Prick Tests and sIgE
Along with clinical history, SPTs and sIgEs are valuable for
diagnosing FA, but correlations with reaction severity or pre-
diction of anaphylaxis have met with mixed results (35). A
study found that neither SPT or sIgE were useful for predict-
ing severity and combining SPT and sIgE improved speci-
ficity but did not help to achieve clinically useful sensitivity
(101). In contradiction, a study of peanut-allergic children
found that the mean peanut SPT wheal size and specific IgE
level were associated with the severity of reactions on chal-
lenge (36).
CRD
Positive test results to both bee and vespid venom are fre-
quently observed during diagnosis of hymenoptera venom
allergy making it difficult to identify the causative insect to
determine proper immunotherapy. In an analysis of studies
of diagnostic methods, CRD showed lower rates of double
sensitization to both bee and vespid venom, but inconsistent
results were common (102). In peanut-sensitized individuals,
sIgE to rAra h 2 was more often found in patients with pea-
nut allergy and anaphylaxis and the ratio of rAra h 2 sIgE to
peanut sIgE was found to predict those who will develop
anaphylaxis (103).
BAT
The utility of BAT in identifying those with food, drug, and
venom allergy has been established by many studies and, in
some studies, has been correlated with severity of disease with
those undergoing oral food challenge (104). The ability of
BAT in identifying those with severe bee and wasp allergy have
been demonstrated by studies (105, 106). In a case report, a
positive BAT result was obtained 1 month after severe ana-
phylaxis caused by allergy to patent blue V (107). In a study of
peanut-allergic children, BAT significantly correlated with
severity of reaction. The study also found that a very low or
negative BAT excludes peanut allergy. BAT was found to have
a higher diagnostic specificity with comparable sensitivity than
IgE for major peanut allergen components (108).
Mediators
The anaphylaxis markers generally measured in clinical labo-
ratories
are
total
tryptase
and
histamine,
but
others
biomarkers are being explored. Tryptase elevation is usually
more pronounced in drug-, anesthetic-, and insect sting-
induced anaphylaxis than in food-induced anaphylaxis (18,
109). In a mouse model of allergy and asthma, histamine-
releasing factor (HRF) was found to increase inflammation
via binding to HRF-reactive IgE on mast cells. The use of
peptide inhibitors to block HRF/IgE interaction inhibited
HRF/IgE mast cell activation and cutaneous anaphylaxis
and airway inflammation (110). In a study of 169 patients
with hymenoptera venom anaphylaxis, basal PAF acetylhy-
drolase level was associated with clinical severity of anaphy-
laxis (111). In a small study, elevated chymase was associated
with anaphylaxis-related death (112). Similarly, in a post-
mortem study, tryptase and carboxypeptidase were found to
Table 1 Some Gene associations with food allergies, drug aller-
gies, and/or anaphylaxis
Gene/Gene locus
Association
HLA
•
Peanut allergy was associated with
HLA-DQB1*02 and DQB1*06:03P (130)
•
HLA-B*57:01 is associated with increased
risk of abacavir hypersensitivity (131)
•
HLA-B*15:02 is associated with increased
risk of carbamazepine hypersensitivity (71)
•
HLA-B*58:01 is associated with increased
risk of allopurinol hypersensitivity (132).
Filaggrin
•
Filaggrin loss-of-function genetic variants
were associated with food allergy (23)
STAT6
•
STAT6 gene polymerism was associated
with risk of nut allergy (126)
IL-10
•
Persistent form of cow’s milk allergy was
associated with IL10-1082G/A
polymorphism (133).
•
In a Taiwanese population, single
nucleotide polymorphisms at -1082A/G
and -592A/C of IL-10 were associated with
food allergy (134).
IL-13
•
Single nucleotide polymorphism of C-1055T
in the IL-13 gene is associated with
increased risk of food sensitization (135)
SPINK5
•
SPINK5 polymorphism is associated with
food allergy in children with atopic
dermatitis (136)
FOXP3
•
Severe food allergy as a variant of IPEX
syndrome is caused by a deletion in a
noncoding region of the FOXP3 gene (137)
•
Oral immunotherapy for peanut allergy
leads to desensitization and
hypomethylation of FOXP3 (41)
GRIA1
•
Polymorphisms in GRIA1 gene are a risk
factor for asparaginase hypersensitivity
(125)
N567D STAT3
•
Anaphylaxis and high IgE was observed in
a patient carrying the N567D STAT3
mutation (127)
This list is not an exhaustive list and represents highlights of those
genes involved in food allergy, anaphylaxis, and drug allergy.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1013
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
 be about eightfold and over twofold greater in those who
died due to drug-related anaphylaxis than in nonanaphylactic
deaths,
respectively
(113).
Increased
basophil
histamine
release was observed in a case study of exercise-induced ana-
phylactic shock after exposure to a sensitizing food allergen
(114).
The generation of leukotrienes and prostaglandins occurs
after inflammatory or allergic mast cell and basophil activa-
tion. The major arachidonic acid-derived mediators produced
by mast cells leukotriene C4 (LTC4) and prostaglandin D2
(PGD2) are rapidly metabolized to leukotriene E4 (LTE4)
and 9-a,11-b PGF2, respectively. These degradation products
are relatively stable and can be measured in urine (115).
Recently, the detection of 9-a,11-b PGF2 in serum after an
anaphylactic episode has been reported and be able to diag-
nose acute anaphylaxis with better sensitivity and specificity
than tryptase or histamine (116). Several cytokines, chemoki-
nes, and growth factors have been described to be increased
during an anaphylactic episode. However, their sensitivity
and specificity for the diagnosis of anaphylaxis are limited
due to their production by many cells and their increase in
other clinical conditions, such as general inflammation (117).
IgE-mediated food allergy phenotypes
Early
onset
Late
onset
Multi
sensitized
Mono
sensitized
Atopic
comorbidities
Refractory to
therapy
Mono
genetic
Spontaneous
resolution
Figure 1 Possible phenotypes of food allergy.
Eosinophil
ILC2
Epithelium
Mast Cell
Th9
Th2
IL-4
IL-13
CRTH2/
PGD2
IL-33
IL-4
IL-13
CRTH2/
PGD2
CRTH2/
PGD2
IL-5
IL-4
IL-4
IL-13
IL-13
Approved treatment 
targets
Under investigation 
treatment targets
Potential treatment 
targets
IL-5
TSLP
Barrier 
creams
IL-25
IL-9
IL-9
IL-9
Treg
IL-10
IL-2
Figure 2 Possible endotypes of food allergy.
Gender
Age
Race/ethnicity
Obesity
Environmental Exposure
Early vs. late onset
Atopic status
Refractory to therapy
Type 2 immune response
Biomarkers
-Blood
-Sputum
-Saliva
Diagnosis
Characterizephenotype
CharacterizeEndotype
Primary and Secondary Prevention
Tailored Therapy
Prognostic Biomarker
Non-type 2 immune response
Figure 3 Approach to determining biomarker applications to atopic conditions.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1014
Precision medicine in allergic disease
Muraro et al.
 Genetic markers
Patients at risk of anaphylaxis include patients with clonal
(mastocytosis) and nonclonal (mast cell activation syndrome)
mast cell disorders (118, 119). In mastocytosis, patients with
mutation in the KIT gene experience anaphylaxis in 1 of 3
cases. The most common mutation, D816V, can now be
established in a blood sample in addition to the bone marrow
and the skin, but the allele burden does not correlate with
the risk of anaphylaxis (120–122). CRD can also assist in
depicting severity in patients with KIT mutation, or with ele-
vated serum tryptase without KIT mutation, in venom
allergy (123). Patients with hymenoptera-induced anaphylaxis
Knowledge Network
Exposome
Transcriptome
Metabolome
Signs and Symptoms
Microbiome
Epigenome
Genome
Information Commons
Accurate
Diagnosis
Targeted
Treatment
Improved
Outcome
Disease Classification
(Endotypes)
A
Td
Id
Epidemiological data
Clinical Knowledge
&
Electronic Health Records
Biomedical Resear
ch 
&
Discovery
B
i
o
m
e
d
i
c
a
l 
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
B
i
o
m
e
d
i
c
a
l 
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
  
  
  
  
  
 
B
i
o
m
e
d
i
c
a
l 
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
Figure 4 The future of precision medicine in food allergy, drug
allergy, and anaphylaxis. By centralizing collection and analysis of
vast amounts of data from biomedical research (i.e., ‘omics’ profil-
ing, biomarkers, sequencing), clinical data from electronic health
records, and clinical research, we can understand and differentiate
the distinct endotypes of disease among individuals having a simi-
lar phenotype and assist with the ability to personalize treatment
and prevention to improve health outcome (138).
Molecular
fingerprinting 
BIG
DA
T
A
10101010101010
010101010101010101
01010101010101010101
01010101010101010101
01010101010101010101
01010101010101010101
010101010101001001
01010101010010
0101010101
0101010101
Big data analytics
& 
Reference databases
Mobile information 
communication 
technologies & 
precision medicine
Shifting Towards Precision Medicine
Figure 5 High-throughput specific and sensitive molecular fingerprinting techniques, big data analytics, and reference databases enable
actionable clinical decision support for precision medicine.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1015
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
 presenting with hypotension are at increased risk of an
underlying clonal mast cell disorder (systemic mastocytosis)
(119, 124). Statistically significant association between SNPs
in the GRIA1 gene and the occurrence of asparaginase
allergy (125) and STAT6 3’UTR polymorphism and severity
in nut allergic patients (126) have been observed in separate
studies. In a case study, an infant with a N567D STAT3
mutation
and
autosomal-dominant
hyper-IgE
syndrome
(AD-HIES) presented with anaphylaxis (127).
Summary
Precision medicine in diagnosing and evaluating risk of ana-
phylaxis is important as reactions are immediate and life-
threatening. Novel diagnostic and prognostic methods are
being evaluated, some of which have shown great promise,
in
particular
PAF
acetyl
hydrolase
activity,
BAT,
and
CRD. The role of complement and other mediators in ana-
phylaxis is poorly understood. There is still much to be
done to identify genetic and epigenetic markers for deter-
mining risk of anaphylaxis to specific allergens. Other chal-
lenges
include
the
role
of
cofactors,
such
as
exercise,
alcohol intake, and concomitant infection in increasing the
severity of response.
The future of precision medicine in food allergy, drug
allergy, and anaphylaxis
Present treatments for allergy immunotherapy provide an
early approach toward precision medicine with allergens
and dosing tailored to the patient. Identification of individ-
ual
patients’
allergen
profiles
is
an
ongoing
area
of
research. We are gaining ground in our understanding of
the
underlying
genetics
that
increase
risk
of
allergies.
Table 1 provides a list of some of the genes that have been
associated with food and drug allergy and anaphylaxis. We
are expanding our knowledge of the causative protein com-
ponents that are responsible for FA, and CRD is being
explored as a diagnostic tool for FA (128). Further, CRD
may provide prognostic value and may enable physicians to
predict severity of reactions to allergens based on knowl-
edge of the antibodies specific to food-derived proteins. A
possible approach to biomarker and phenotype studies is
depicted in Figs 1–4. In recent years, there also have been
technological advances in biology and bioinformatics, which
enable a more detailed profile of an individual’s genetic,
epigenetic, cellular, and/or molecular characteristics (129).
For example, recent advances in technologies such as next-
generation
sequencing
(NGS)
and
time-of-flight
mass
cytometry
(CyTOF),
combined
with
functional
testing
in vitro, have greatly assisted with our understanding of the
underlying mechanisms involved in atopy. Ongoing studies
will determine the modifications in the immune profile of
individuals before and after successful allergen immunother-
apy, greatly advancing our understanding of immune regu-
lation. Employing innovative and state-of-the-art tools will
improve our definition of endotypes that connect specific
immune
cell
signatures,
genetic and epigenetic
markers,
plasma markers, tissue markers, ‘omics’ profiling (Fig. 4),
and cell functional studies.
Our understanding of the role of immune regulators, such
as T cell, B cells, antibodies, cytokines, complement, and
others has vastly increased. In addition to immune biomark-
ers, future progress in defining endotypes in food and drug
allergy will likely take into account allergen and cross-react-
ing allergen profiles, age of onset of disease symptoms, tim-
ing of onset of symptoms after exposure to allergens, history
of other comorbid atopic diseases, and treatment outcome.
By centralizing collection and analysis of vast amounts of
data
from
biomedical
research
(i.e.,
‘omics’
profiling,
biomarkers, sequencing), clinical data from electronic health
records, and clinical research (Figs 5 and 6), we will be able
to understand and discern different endotypes of disease
among individuals with the same phenotype and assist with
the
ability
to
personalize
treatment
and
prevention
to
improve health outcomes.
  SYMPTOM-BASED
MEDICINE
EVIDENCE-BASED
MEDICINE
ALGORITHM-BASED
PRECISION MEDICINE
 
Figure 6 A paradigm shift toward precision medicine: From symptom-based medicine to evidence-based medicine to algorithm-based medi-
cine.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1016
Precision medicine in allergic disease
Muraro et al.
 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. Vanitha Sampath and Dr. Ste-
phen J. Galli for their reading and edits to this manuscript.
Author contributions
All authors assisted with writing and editing this manuscript.
Funding
None.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Collins FS, Varmus H. A new initiative on
precision medicine. N Engl J Med
2015;372:793–795.
2. Galli SJ. Toward precision medicine and
health: opportunities and challenges in
allergic diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2016;137:1289–1300.
3. Muraro A, Lemanske RF Jr, Hellings PW,
Akdis CA, Bieber T, Casale TB et al. Preci-
sion medicine in patients with allergic dis-
eases: airway diseases and atopic
dermatitis-PRACTALL document of the
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology and the American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;137:
1347–1358.
4. Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, Jones
SM, Sampson HA, Wood RA et al. Guide-
lines for the diagnosis and management of
food allergy in the United States: summary
of the NIAID-sponsored expert panel
report. Nutr Res 2011;31:61–75.
5. Muraro A, Werfel T, Hoffmann-Sommer-
gruber K, Roberts G, Beyer K, Bindslev-
Jensen C et al. EAACI food allergy and
anaphylaxis guidelines: diagnosis and man-
agement of food allergy. Allergy
2014;69:1008–1025.
6. Muraro A, Agache I, Clark A, Sheikh A,
Roberts G, Akdis CA et al. EAACI food
allergy and anaphylaxis guidelines: manag-
ing patients with food allergy in the com-
munity. Allergy 2014;69:1046–1057.
7. Sicherer SH, Leung DY. Advances in aller-
gic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersen-
sitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and
insects in 2014. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2015;135:357–367.
8. Li J, Maggadottir SM, Hakonarson H. Are
genetic tests informative in predicting food
allergy? Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
2016;16:257–264.
9. Rachid R, Umetsu DT. Immunological
mechanisms for desensitization and toler-
ance in food allergy. Semin Immunopathol
2012;34:689–702.
10. Turcanu V, Maleki SJ, Lack G. Characteri-
zation of lymphocyte responses to peanuts
in normal children, peanut-allergic children,
and allergic children who acquired
tolerance to peanuts. J Clin Invest
2003;111:1065–1072.
11. Ho MH, Wong WH, Heine RG, Hosking
CS, Hill DJ, Allen KJ. Early clinical pre-
dictors of remission of peanut allergy in
children. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2008;121:731–736.
12. Agabriel C, Ghazouani O, Birnbaum J,
Liabeuf V, Porri F, Gouitaa M et al. Ara h
2 and Ara h 6 sensitization predicts peanut
allergy in Mediterranean pediatric patients.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2014;25:662–667.
13. Turner PJ, Baumert JL, Beyer K, Boyle
RJ, Chan CH, Clark AT et al. Can we
identify patients at risk of life-threatening
allergic reactions to food? Allergy
2016;71:1241–1255.
14. Caubet JC, Sampson HA. Beyond skin test-
ing: state of the art and new horizons in
food allergy diagnostic testing. Immunol
Allergy Clin North Am 2012;32:97–109.
15. Eller E, Bindslev-Jensen C. Clinical value
of component-resolved diagnostics in pea-
nut-allergic patients. Allergy 2013;68:190–
194.
16. Eller E, Mortz CG, Bindslev-Jensen C. Cor
a 14 is the superior serological marker for
hazelnut allergy in children, independent of
concomitant peanut allergy. Allergy
2016;71:556–562.
17. Hansen KS, Ballmer-Weber BK, Sastre J,
Lidholm J, Andersson K, Oberhofer H
et al. Component-resolved in vitro diagno-
sis of hazelnut allergy in Europe. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:1134–1141.
18. Vadas P, Gold M, Perelman B, Liss GM,
Lack G, Blyth T et al. Platelet-activating
factor, PAF acetylhydrolase, and severe
anaphylaxis. N Engl J Med 2008;358:
28–35.
19. Brough HA, Cousins DJ, Munteanu A,
Wong YF, Sudra A, Makinson K et al. IL-
9 is a key component of memory TH cell
peanut-specific responses from children
with peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2014;134:1329–1338.
20. Alduraywish SA, Standl M, Lodge CJ,
Abramson MJ, Allen KJ, Erbas B et al. Is
there a march from early food sensitization
to later childhood allergic airway disease?
Results from two prospective birth cohort
studies. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
2017;28:30–37.
21. Shaker M. New insights into the allergic
march. Curr Opin Pediatr 2014;26:516–520.
22. Brough HA, Simpson A, Makinson K,
Hankinson J, Brown S, Douiri A et al. Pea-
nut allergy: effect of environmental peanut
exposure in children with filaggrin loss-of-
function mutations. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2014;134:867–875.
23. van Ginkel CD, Flokstra-de Blok BM,
Kollen BJ, Kukler J, Koppelman GH,
Dubois AE. Loss-of-function variants of
the filaggrin gene are associated with clini-
cal reactivity to foods. Allergy 2015;70:461–
464.
24. Platts-Mills TA, Schuyler AJ, Erwin EA,
Commins SP, Woodfolk JA. IgE in the
diagnosis and treatment of allergic disease.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;137:1662–
1670.
25. Apostolovic D, Tran TA, Sanchez-Vidaurre
S, Cirkovic Velickovic T, Starkhammar M,
Hamsten C et al. Red meat allergic patients
have a selective IgE response to the alpha-
Gal glycan. Allergy 2015;70:1497–1500.
26. Commins SP, James HR, Stevens W,
Pochan SL, Land MH, King C et al.
Delayed clinical and ex vivo response to
mammalian meat in patients with IgE to
galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2014;134:108–115.
27. Geroldinger-Simic M, Zelniker T, Aberer
W, Ebner C, Egger C, Greiderer A et al.
Birch pollen-related food allergy: clinical
aspects and the role of allergen-specific IgE
and IgG4 antibodies. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2011;127:616–622.
28. Miceli Sopo S, Monaco S, Badina L, Barni
S, Longo G, Novembre E et al. Food pro-
tein-induced enterocolitis syndrome caused
by fish and/or shellfish in Italy. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol 2015;26:731–736.
29. Nowak-Wegrzyn A, Muraro A. Food pro-
tein-induced enterocolitis syndrome. Curr
Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;9:371–377.
30. Gonzalez-Delgado P, Caparros E, Moreno
MV, Clemente F, Flores E, Velasquez L
et al. Clinical and immunological character-
istics of a pediatric population with food
protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1017
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
 (FPIES) to fish. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
2016;27:269–275.
31. Cianferoni A, Spergel JM. From genetics
to treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
2015;15:417–425.
32. Sherrill JD, Kc K, Wu D, Djukic Z, Cald-
well JM, Stucke EM et al. Desmoglein-1
regulates esophageal epithelial barrier func-
tion and immune responses in eosinophilic
esophagitis. Mucosal Immunol 2014;7:718–
729.
33. Straumann A, Blanchard C, Radonjic-Hoe-
sli S, Bussmann C, Hruz P, Safroneeva E
et al. A new eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE)-
like disease without tissue eosinophilia
found in EoE families. Allergy 2016;71:
889–900.
34. Matricardi PM, Kleine-Tebbe J, Hoffmann
HJ, Valenta R, Hilger C, Hofmaier S et al.
EAACI molecular allergology user’s guide.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2016;27(Suppl
23):1–250.
35. Harleman L, Sie A. History, blood tests or
skin prick testing? Is it possible to predict
the severity of allergic reactions in children
with IgE-mediated food allergy? Arch Dis
Child 2015;100:594–598.
36. Wainstein BK, Studdert J, Ziegler M, Zieg-
ler JB. Prediction of anaphylaxis during
peanut food challenge: usefulness of the
peanut skin prick test (SPT) and specific
IgE level. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
2010;21:603–611.
37. Peters RL, Allen KJ, Dharmage SC,
Koplin JJ, Dang T, Tilbrook KP et al.
Natural history of peanut allergy and pre-
dictors of resolution in the first 4 years of
life: a population-based assessment. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1257–1266.
38. Peters RL, Allen KJ, Dharmage SC, Tang
ML, Koplin JJ, Ponsonby AL et al. Skin
prick test responses and allergen-specific
IgE levels as predictors of peanut, egg, and
sesame allergy in infants. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2013;132:874–880.
39. Du Toit G, Roberts G, Sayre PH, Plaut M,
Bahnson HT, Mitchell H et al. Identifying
infants at high risk of peanut allergy: the
Learning Early About Peanut Allergy
(LEAP) screening study. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2013;131:135–143.
40. Vickery BP, Scurlock AM, Kulis M, Steele
PH, Kamilaris J, Berglund JP et al. Sus-
tained unresponsiveness to peanut in sub-
jects who have completed peanut oral
immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2014;133:468–475.
41. Syed A, Garcia MA, Lyu SC, Bucayu R,
Kohli A, Ishida S et al. Peanut oral
immunotherapy results in increased anti-
gen-induced regulatory T-cell function and
hypomethylation of forkhead box protein 3
(FOXP3). J Allergy Clin Immunol
2014;133:500–510.
42. Ryan JF, Hovde R, Glanville J, Lyu SC, Ji
X, Gupta S et al. Successful immunother-
apy induces previously unidentified aller-
gen-specific CD4 + T-cell subsets. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2016;113:E1286–E1295.
43. Nilsson N, Sjolander S, Baar A, Berthold
M, Pahr S, Vrtala S et al. Wheat allergy in
children evaluated with challenge and IgE
antibodies to wheat components. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol 2015;26:119–125.
44. Kuitunen M, Englund H, Remes S, Mover-
are R, Pelkonen A, Borres MP et al. High
IgE levels to alpha-lactalbumin, beta-lacto-
globulin and casein predict less successful
cow’s milk oral immunotherapy. Allergy
2015;70:955–962.
45. Chan SM, Dumitru C, Turcanu V. Molecu-
lar diagnosis of peanut allergy. Expert Rev
Mol Diagn 2012;12:879–891.
46. Santos AF, James LK, Bahnson HT,
Shamji MH, Couto-Francisco NC, Islam S
et al. IgG4 inhibits peanut-induced baso-
phil and mast cell activation in peanut-tol-
erant children sensitized to peanut major
allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2015;135:1249–1256.
47. Mukai K, Gaudenzio N, Gupta S, Vivanco
N, Bendall SC, Maecker HT et al. Assess-
ing basophil activation by using flow
cytometry and mass cytometry in blood
stored 24 hours before analysis. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2016;139:889–899.
48. Du Toit G, Roberts G, Sayre PH, Bahnson
HT, Radulovic S, Santos AF et al. Ran-
domized trial of peanut consumption in
infants at risk for peanut allergy. N Engl J
Med 2015;372:803–813.
49. Hong X, Tsai HJ, Wang X. Genetics of
food allergy. Curr Opin Pediatr
2009;21:770–776.
50. Hong X, Hao K, Ladd-Acosta C, Hansen
KD, Tsai HJ, Liu X et al. Genome-wide
association study identifies peanut allergy-
specific loci and evidence of epigenetic
mediation in US children. Nat Commun
2015;6:6304.
51. Begin P, Schulze J, Baron U, Olek S, Bauer
RN, Passerini L et al. Human in vitro
induced T regulatory cells and memory T
cells share common demethylation of speci-
fic FOXP3 promoter region. Clin Transl
Allergy 2015;5:35.
52. Berni Canani R, Paparo L, Nocerino R,
Cosenza L, Pezzella V, Di Costanzo M
et al. Differences in DNA methylation pro-
file of Th1 and Th2 cytokine genes are
associated with tolerance acquisition in
children with IgE-mediated cow’s milk
allergy. Clin Epigenetics 2015;7:38.
53. Martino D, Dang T, Sexton-Oates A, Pre-
scott S, Tang ML, Dharmage S et al.
Blood DNA methylation biomarkers pre-
dict clinical reactivity in food-sensitized
infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2015;135:1319–1328.
54. Hong X, Ladd-Acosta C, Hao K, Sher-
wood B, Ji H, Keet CA et al. Epigenome-
wide association study links site-specific
DNA methylation changes with cow’s milk
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2016;138:908–911.
55. Sala-Cunill A, Cardona V, Labrador-Hor-
rillo M, Luengo O, Esteso O, Garriga T
et al. Usefulness and limitations of sequen-
tial serum tryptase for the diagnosis of ana-
phylaxis in 102 patients. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2013;160:192–199.
56. Lin RY, Schwartz LB, Curry A, Pesola
GR, Knight RJ, Lee HS et al. Histamine
and tryptase levels in patients with acute
allergic reactions: an emergency depart-
ment-based study. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2000;106:65–71.
57. Sahiner UM, Yavuz ST, Buyuktiryaki B,
Cavkaytar O, Yilmaz EA, Tuncer A et al.
Serum basal tryptase may be a good mar-
ker for predicting the risk of anaphylaxis in
children with food allergy. Allergy
2014;69:265–268.
58. Kolmert J, Forngren B, Lindberg J, Ohd J,
Aberg KM, Nilsson G et al. A quantitative
LC/MS method targeting urinary 1-methyl-
4-imidazoleacetic acid for safety monitoring
of the global histamine turnover in clinical
studies. Anal Bioanal Chem 2014;406:1751–
1762.
59. Sato S, Tachimoto H, Shukuya A, Ogata
M, Komata T, Imai T et al. Utility of the
peripheral blood basophil histamine release
test in the diagnosis of hen’s egg, cow’s
milk, and wheat allergy in children. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 2011;155(Suppl
1):96–103.
60. Picard M, Castells MC. Re-visiting Hyper-
sensitivity Reactions to Taxanes: a Compre-
hensive Review. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
2015;49:177–191.
61. Kishimoto TK, Viswanathan K, Ganguly
T, Elankumaran S, Smith S, Pelzer K et al.
Contaminated heparin associated with
adverse clinical events and activation of the
contact system. N Engl J Med
2008;358:2457–2467.
62. McNeil BD, Pundir P, Meeker S, Han L,
Undem BJ, Kulka M et al. Identification of
a mast-cell-specific receptor crucial for
pseudo-allergic drug reactions. Nature
2015;519:237–241.
63. Ayuso P, Blanca-Lopez N, Dona I, Tor-
res MJ, Gueant-Rodriguez RM, Canto G
et al. Advanced phenotyping in
hypersensitivity drug reactions to
NSAIDs. Clin Exp Allergy 2013;43:1097–
1109.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1018
Precision medicine in allergic disease
Muraro et al.
 64. Khan DA. Cutaneous drug reactions. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1225.
65. Khan DA, Solensky R. Drug allergy. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:
S126–S137.
66. Bastuji-Garin S, Fouchard N, Bertocchi M,
Roujeau JC, Revuz J, Wolkenstein P.
SCORTEN: a severity-of-illness score for
toxic epidermal necrolysis. J Invest Derma-
tol 2000;115:149–153.
67. Nirken MH, High WA, Roujeau J. Ste-
vens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epider-
mal necrolysis: Pathogenesis, clinical
manifestations, and diagnosis. UpToDate.
2015. Available from: http://www.uptoda
te.com/contents/stevens-johnson-syndrome-
and-toxic-epidermal-necrolysis-pathogene
sis-clinical-manifestations-and-diagnosis
68. White KD, Chung WH, Hung SI, Mallal S,
Phillips EJ. Evolving models of the
immunopathogenesis of T cell-mediated
drug allergy: the role of host, pathogens,
and drug response. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2015;136:219–234.
69. Caiado J, Venemalm L, Pereira-Santos
MC, Costa L, Barbosa MP, Castells M.
Carboplatin-, oxaliplatin-, and cisplatin-
specific IgE: cross-reactivity and value in
the diagnosis of carboplatin and oxaliplatin
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
2013;1:494–500.
70. Laidlaw TM, Boyce JA. Platelets in
patients with aspirin-exacerbated respira-
tory disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2015;135:1407–1414.
71. Pirmohamed M, Ostrov DA, Park BK.
New genetic findings lead the way to a bet-
ter understanding of fundamental mecha-
nisms of drug hypersensitivity. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2015;136:236–244.
72. Chung WH, Hung SI, Hong HS, Hsih MS,
Yang LC, Ho HC et al. Medical genetics: a
marker for Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Nature 2004;428:486.
73. Mallal S, Nolan D, Witt C, Masel G, Mar-
tin AM, Moore C et al. Association
between presence of HLA-B*5701, HLA-
DR7, and HLA-DQ3 and hypersensitivity
to HIV-1 reverse-transcriptase inhibitor
abacavir. Lancet 2002;359:727–732.
74. Hetherington S, Hughes AR, Mosteller M,
Shortino D, Baker KL, Spreen W et al.
Genetic variations in HLA-B region and
hypersensitivity reactions to abacavir. Lan-
cet 2002;359:1121–1122.
75. Illing PT, Vivian JP, Dudek NL, Kostenko
L, Chen Z, Bharadwaj M et al. Immune
self-reactivity triggered by drug-modified
HLA-peptide repertoire. Nature
2012;486:554–558.
76. Empedrad R, Darter AL, Earl HS, Gru-
challa RS. Nonirritating intradermal skin
test concentrations for commonly
prescribed antibiotics. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2003;112:629–630.
77. Fox S, Park MA. Penicillin skin testing in
the evaluation and management of peni-
cillin allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
2011;106:1–7.
78. Romano A, Viola M, Gueant-Rodriguez
RM, Gaeta F, Pettinato R, Gueant JL.
Imipenem in patients with immediate
hypersensitivity to penicillins. N Engl J
Med 2006;354:2835–2837.
79. Sloane D, Govindarajulu U, Harrow-Mor-
telliti J, Barry W, Hsu FI, Hong D et al.
Safety, costs, and efficacy of rapid drug
desensitizations to chemotherapy and mon-
oclonal antibodies. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract 2016;4:497–504.
80. Patil SU, Long AA, Ling M, Wilson MT,
Hesterberg P, Wong JT et al. A protocol
for risk stratification of patients with carbo-
platin-induced hypersensitivity reactions. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:443–447.
81. Galvao VR, Castells MC. Hypersensitivity
to biological agents-updated diagnosis,
management, and treatment. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 2015;3:175–185.
82. Fernandez TD, Torres MJ, Blanca-Lopez
N, Rodriguez-Bada JL, Gomez E, Canto G
et al. Negativization rates of IgE radioim-
munoassay and basophil activation test in
immediate reactions to penicillins. Allergy
2009;64:242–248.
83. Gonzalez-de-Olano D, Morgado JM,
Juarez-Guerrero R, Sanchez-Munoz L,
Letellez-Fernandez J, Malon-Gimenez D
et al. Positive basophil activation test fol-
lowing anaphylaxis to pertuzumab and suc-
cessful treatment with rapid desensitization.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2016;4:338–
340.
84. Iqbal K, Bhargava K, Skov PS, Falken-
crone S, Grattan CE. A positive serum
basophil histamine release assay is a marker
for ciclosporin-responsiveness in patients
with chronic spontaneous urticaria. Clin
Transl Allergy 2012;2:19.
85. Fernandez J, Blanca M, Moreno F, Garcia
J, Segurado E, del Cano A et al. Role of
tryptase, eosinophil cationic protein and
histamine in immediate allergic reactions to
drugs. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
1995;107:160–162.
86. Porebski G, Pecaric-Petkovic T, Groux-
Keller M, Bosak M, Kawabata TT, Pichler
WJ. In vitro drug causality assessment in
Stevens-Johnson syndrome - alternatives
for lymphocyte transformation test. Clin
Exp Allergy 2013;43:1027–1037.
87. Barbaud A. Skin testing and patch testing
in non-IgE-mediated drug allergy. Curr
Allergy Asthma Rep 2014;14:442.
88. Martin MA, Klein TE, Dong BJ, Pirmo-
hamed M, Haas DW, Kroetz DL. Clinical
pharmacogenetics implementation consor-
tium guidelines for HLA-B genotype and
abacavir dosing. Clin Pharmacol Ther
2012;91:734–738.
89. Mallal S, Phillips E, Carosi G, Molina JM,
Workman C, Tomazic J et al. HLA-B*5701
screening for hypersensitivity to abacavir.
N Engl J Med 2008;358:568–579.
90. Tangamornsuksan W, Chaiyakunapruk N,
Somkrua R, Lohitnavy M, Tassaneeyakul
W. Relationship between the HLA-B*1502
allele and carbamazepine-induced Stevens-
Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Dermatol 2013;149:
1025–1032.
91. Leckband SG, Kelsoe JR, Dunnenberger
HM, George AL Jr, Tran E, Berger R
et al. Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implemen-
tation Consortium guidelines for HLA-B
genotype and carbamazepine dosing. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2013;94:324–328.
92. Simons FE. 9. Anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2008;121:S402–S407.
93. Sanz ML, Gamboa PM, Garcia-Figueroa
BE, Ferrer M. In vitro diagnosis of ana-
phylaxis. Chem Immunol Allergy
2010;95:125–140.
94. Valenta R, Hochwallner H, Linhart B,
Pahr S. Food allergies: the basics. Gastroen-
terology 2015;148:1120–1131.
95. Sala-Cunill A, Cardona V. Biomarkers of
anaphylaxis, beyond tryptase. Curr Opin
Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;15:329–336.
96. van der Linden PW, Hack CE, Kerckhaert
JA, Struyvenberg A, van der Zwan JC. Pre-
liminary report: complement activation in
wasp-sting anaphylaxis. Lancet
1990;336:904–906.
97. Szebeni J, Muggia F, Gabizon A, Baren-
holz Y. Activation of complement by thera-
peutic liposomes and other lipid excipient-
based therapeutic products: prediction and
prevention. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2011;63:1020–1030.
98. Adam A, Montpas N, Keire D, Deso-
rmeaux A, Brown NJ, Marceau F et al.
Bradykinin forming capacity of oversul-
fated chondroitin sulfate contaminated hep-
arin in vitro. Biomaterials 2010;31:5741–
5748.
99. Veien M, Szlam F, Holden JT, Yamaguchi
K, Denson DD, Levy JH. Mechanisms of
nonimmunological histamine and tryptase
release from human cutaneous mast cells.
Anesthesiology 2000;92:1074–1081.
100. Finkelman FD, Khodoun MV, Strait R.
Human IgE-independent systemic anaphy-
laxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2016;137:1674–1680.
101. Ta V, Weldon B, Yu G, Humblet O,
Neale-May S, Nadeau K. Use of specific
IgE and skin prick test to determine clinical
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1019
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
 reaction severity. Br J Med Med Res
2011;1:410–429.
102. Sturm GJ, Jin C, Kranzelbinder B, Hem-
mer W, Sturm EM, Griesbacher A et al.
Inconsistent results of diagnostic tools ham-
per the differentiation between bee and ves-
pid venom allergy. PLoS One 2011;6:
e20842.
103. Suratannon N, Ngamphaiboon J, Wong-
piyabovorn J, Puripokai P, Chatchatee P.
Component-resolved diagnostics for the
evaluation of peanut allergy in a low-preva-
lence area. Pediatr Allergy Immunol
2013;24:665–670.
104. Song Y, Wang J, Leung N, Wang LX,
Lisann L, Sicherer SH et al. Correlations
between basophil activation, allergen-speci-
fic IgE with outcome and severity of oral
food challenges. Ann Allergy Asthma Immu-
nol 2015;114:319–326.
105. Korosec P, Silar M, Erzen R, Celesnik N,
Bajrovic N, Zidarn M et al. Clinical routine
utility of basophil activation testing for
diagnosis of hymenoptera-allergic patients
with emphasis on individuals with negative
venom-specific IgE antibodies. Int Arch
Allergy Immunol 2013;161:363–368.
106. Eberlein-Konig B, Varga R, Mempel M,
Darsow U, Behrendt H, Ring J. Compar-
ison of basophil activation tests using
CD63 or CD203c expression in patients
with insect venom allergy. Allergy
2006;61:1084–1085.
107. Boita M, Mietta S, Bommarito L, Rolla G.
Basophil activation test in the diagnosis of
patent blue V anaphylaxis. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2015;115:78–79.
108. Homsak M, Silar M, Berce V, Tomazin M,
Skerbinjek-Kavalar M, Celesnik N et al.
The relevance of basophil allergen sensitiv-
ity testing to distinguish between severe and
mild peanut-allergic children. Int Arch
Allergy Immunol 2013;162:310–317.
109. Vitte J. Human mast cell tryptase in biol-
ogy and medicine. Mol Immunol
2015;63:18–24.
110. Kashiwakura JC, Ando T, Matsumoto K,
Kimura M, Kitaura J, Matho MH et al.
Histamine-releasing factor has a proinflam-
matory role in mouse models of asthma
and allergy. J Clin Invest 2012;122:
218–228.
111. Pravettoni V, Piantanida M, Primavesi L,
Forti S, Pastorello EA. Basal platelet-acti-
vating factor acetylhydrolase: prognostic
marker of severe Hymenoptera venom ana-
phylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2014;133:1218–1220.
112. Nishio H, Takai S, Miyazaki M, Horiuchi
H, Osawa M, Uemura K et al. Usefulness
of serum mast cell-specific chymase levels
for postmortem diagnosis of anaphylaxis.
Int J Legal Med 2005;119:331–334.
113. Guo XJ, Wang YY, Zhang HY, Jin QQ,
Gao CR. Mast cell tryptase and car-
boxypeptidase A expression in body fluid
and gastrointestinal tract associated with
drug-related fatal anaphylaxis. World J
Gastroenterol 2015;21:13288–13293.
114. Barg W, Wolanczyk-Medrala A, Obojski
A, Wytrychowski K, Panaszek B, Medrala
W. Food-dependent exercise-induced ana-
phylaxis: possible impact of increased baso-
phil histamine releasability in hyperosmolar
conditions. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol
2008;18:312–315.
115. Ono E, Taniguchi M, Mita H, Fukutomi
Y, Higashi N, Miyazaki E et al. Increased
production of cysteinyl leukotrienes and
prostaglandin D2 during human anaphy-
laxis. Clin Exp Allergy 2009;39:72–80.
116. Nassiri M, Eckermann O, Babina M, Eden-
harter G, Worm M. Serum levels of 9alpha,
11beta-PGF2 and cysteinyl leukotrienes are
useful biomarkers of anaphylaxis. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2016;137:312–314.
117. Brown SG, Stone SF, Fatovich DM, Bur-
rows SA, Holdgate A, Celenza A et al.
Anaphylaxis: clinical patterns, mediator
release, and severity. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2013;132:1141–1149.
118. Brockow K, Jofer C, Behrendt H, Ring J.
Anaphylaxis in patients with mastocytosis:
a study on history, clinical features and risk
factors in 120 patients. Allergy
2008;63:226–232.
119. Matito A, Alvarez-Twose I, Morgado JM,
Sanchez-Munoz L, Orfao A, Escribano L.
Anaphylaxis as a clinical manifestation of
clonal mast cell disorders. Curr Allergy
Asthma Rep 2014;14:450.
120. Brockow K. Epidemiology, prognosis, and
risk factors in mastocytosis. Immunol
Allergy Clin North Am 2014;34:283–295.
121. Broesby-Olsen S, Kristensen T, Vestergaard
H, Brixen K, Moller MB, Bindslev-Jensen
C. KIT D816V mutation burden does not
correlate to clinical manifestations of indo-
lent systemic mastocytosis. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2013;132:723–728.
122. Broesby-Olsen S, Oropeza AR, Bindslev-
Jensen C, Vestergaard H, Moller MB,
Siebenhaar F et al. Recognizing mastocyto-
sis in patients with anaphylaxis: value of
KIT D816V mutation analysis of peripheral
blood. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2015;135:262–264.
123. Michel J, Brockow K, Darsow U, Ring J,
Schmidt-Weber CB, Grunwald T et al.
Added sensitivity of component-resolved
diagnosis in hymenoptera venom-allergic
patients with elevated serum tryptase
and/or mastocytosis. Allergy 2016;71:
651–660.
124. Bonadonna P, Bonifacio M, Lombardo C,
Zanotti R. Hymenoptera allergy and mast
cell activation syndromes. Curr Allergy
Asthma Rep 2016;16:5.
125. Rajic V, Debeljak M, Goricar K, Jazbec J.
Polymorphisms in GRIA1 gene are a risk
factor for asparaginase hypersensitivity dur-
ing the treatment of childhood acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma
2015;56:3103–3108.
126. Amoli MM, Hand S, Hajeer AH, Jones
KP, Rolf S, Sting C et al. Polymorphism in
the STAT6 gene encodes risk for nut
allergy. Genes Immun 2002;3:220–224.
127. Merli P, Novara F, Montagna D, Benzo S,
Tanzi M, Turin I et al. Hyper IgE syn-
drome: anaphylaxis in a patient carrying
the N567D STAT3 mutation. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol 2014;25:503–505.
128. Incorvaia C, Rapetti A, Aliani M, Castag-
neto C, Corso N, Landi M et al. Food
allergy as defined by component resolved
diagnosis. Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug
Discov 2014;8:59–73.
129. Heath JR, Ribas A, Mischel PS. Single-cell
analysis tools for drug discovery and devel-
opment. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2016;15:204–
216.
130. Madore AM, Vaillancourt VT, Asai Y,
Alizadehfar R, Ben-Shoshan M, Michel DL
et al. HLA-DQB1*02 and DQB1*06:03P
are associated with peanut allergy. Eur J
Hum Genet 2013;21:1181–1184.
131. Martin MA, Kroetz DL. Abacavir pharma-
cogenetics–from initial reports to standard
of care. Pharmacotherapy 2013;33:765–775.
132. Wu R, Cheng YJ, Zhu LL, Yu L, Zhao
XK, Jia M et al. Impact of HLA-B*58:01
allele and allopurinol-induced cutaneous
adverse drug reactions: evidence from 21
pharmacogenetic studies. Oncotarget
2016;49:81870–81879.
133. Jacob CM, Pastorino AC, Okay TS, Castro
AP, Gushken AK, Watanabe LA et al.
Interleukin 10 (IL10) and transforming
growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) gene poly-
morphisms in persistent IgE-mediated cow’s
milk allergy. Clinics (Sao Paulo)
2013;68:1004–1009.
134. Chen TK, Lee JH, Yu HH, Yang YH,
Wang LC, Lin YT et al. Association
between human IL-10 gene polymorphisms
and serum IL-10 level in patients with food
allergy. J Formos Med Assoc 2012;111:686–
692.
135. Liu X, Beaty TH, Deindl P, Huang SK,
Lau S, Sommerfeld C et al. Associations
between specific serum IgE response and 6
variants within the genes IL4, IL13, and
IL4RA in German children: the German
Multicenter Atopy Study. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2004;113:489–495.
136. Kusunoki T, Okafuji I, Yoshioka T, Saito
M, Nishikomori R, Heike T et al. SPINK5
polymorphism is associated with disease
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1020
Precision medicine in allergic disease
Muraro et al.
 severity and food allergy in children with
atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2005;115:636–638.
137. Torgerson TR, Linane A, Moes N, Anover
S, Mateo V, Rieux-Laucat F et al. Severe
food allergy as a variant of IPEX syndrome
caused by a deletion in a noncoding region
of the FOXP3 gene. Gastroenterology
2007;132:1705–1717.
138. Desmond-Helmann S, Sawyers CL, Cox
DR, Fraser-Liggett C, Galli SJ, Goldstein
DB et al. Toward precision medicine: building
a knowledge network for biomedical research
and a new taxonomy of disease. Committee
on a Framework for Developing a New Tax-
onomy of Disease. National Research Coun-
cil of the National Academies. Washington,
DC: The National Academies Press; 2011.
Allergy 72 (2017) 1006–1021 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1021
Muraro et al.
Precision medicine in allergic disease
