 New evidence pyramid
M Hassan Murad, Noor Asi, Mouaz Alsawas, Fares Alahdab
Abstract
A pyramid has expressed the idea of hierarchy of
medical evidence for so long, that not all evidence is the
same. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses have been
placed at the top of this pyramid for several good
reasons. However, there are several counterarguments to
this placement. We suggest another way of looking at
the evidence-based medicine pyramid and explain how
systematic reviews and meta-analyses are tools for con-
suming evidence—that is, appraising, synthesising and
applying evidence.
The first and earliest principle of evidence-based medi-
cine indicated that a hierarchy of evidence exists. Not
all evidence is the same. This principle became well
known in the early 1990s as practising physicians learnt
basic clinical epidemiology skills and started to appraise
and apply evidence to their practice. Since evidence was
described as a hierarchy, a compelling rationale for a
pyramid was made. Evidence-based healthcare practi-
tioners became familiar with this pyramid when reading
the literature, applying evidence or teaching students.
Various versions of the evidence pyramid have been
described, but all of them focused on showing weaker
study designs in the bottom (basic science and case
series), followed by case–control and cohort studies in
the middle, then randomised controlled trials (RCTs), and
at the very top, systematic reviews and meta-analysis.
This description is intuitive and likely correct in many
instances. The placement of systematic reviews at the top
had undergone several alterations in interpretations, but
was still thought of as an item in a hierarchy.1 Most ver-
sions of the pyramid clearly represented a hierarchy of
internal validity (risk of bias). Some versions incorpo-
rated external validity (applicability) in the pyramid by
either placing N-1 trials above RCTs (because their results
are most applicable to individual patients2) or by separat-
ing internal and external validity.3
Another version (the 6S pyramid) was also developed
to describe the sources of evidence that can be used by
evidence-based
medicine
(EBM)
practitioners
for
answering foreground questions, showing a hierarchy
ranging from studies, synopses, synthesis, synopses of
synthesis, summaries and systems.4 This hierarchy may
imply some sort of increasing validity and applicability
although its main purpose is to emphasise that the lower
sources of evidence in the hierarchy are least preferred
in practice because they require more expertise and time
to identify, appraise and apply.
▸ http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ebmed-
2016-110447
▸ http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ebmed-
2016-110498
10.1136/ebmed-2016-110401
Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Correspondence to:
Dr M Hassan Murad,
Evidence-based Practice
Center, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA;
murad.mohammad@mayo.edu
Evid Based Med August 2016 | volume 21 | number 4 |
125
Perspective
 The traditional pyramid was deemed too simplistic at
times, thus the importance of leaving room for argument
and counterargument for the methodological merit of
different designs has been emphasised.5 Other barriers
challenged the placement of systematic reviews and
meta-analyses at the top of the pyramid. For instance,
heterogeneity (clinical, methodological or statistical) is
an inherent limitation of meta-analyses that can be mini-
mised or explained but never eliminated.6 The methodo-
logical intricacies and dilemmas of systematic reviews
could potentially result in uncertainty and error.7 One
evaluation of 163 meta-analyses demonstrated that the
estimation of treatment outcomes differed substantially
depending
on
the
analytical
strategy
being
used.7
Therefore, we suggest, in this perspective, two visual
modifications to the pyramid to illustrate two contempor-
ary methodological principles (figure 1). We provide the
rationale and an example for each modification.
Rationale for modification 1
In the early 2000s, the Grading of Recommendations
Assessment,
Development
and
Evaluation
(GRADE)
Working Group developed a framework in which the cer-
tainty in evidence was based on numerous factors and
not solely on study design which challenges the pyramid
concept.8 Study design alone appears to be insufficient
on its own as a surrogate for risk of bias. Certain meth-
odological limitations of a study, imprecision, inconsist-
ency and indirectness, were factors independent from
study design and can affect the quality of evidence
derived
from
any
study
design.
For
example,
a
meta-analysis of RCTs evaluating intensive glycaemic
control in non-critically ill hospitalised patients showed
a non-significant reduction in mortality (relative risk of
0.95 (95% CI 0.72 to 1.25)9). Allocation concealment and
blinding were not adequate in most trials. The quality of
this evidence is rated down due to the methodological
imitations of the trials and imprecision (wide CI that
includes substantial benefit and harm). Hence, despite
the fact of having five RCTs, such evidence should not be
rated high in any pyramid. The quality of evidence can
also be rated up. For example, we are quite certain about
the benefits of hip replacement in a patient with disab-
ling hip osteoarthritis. Although not tested in RCTs, the
Figure 1
The proposed new evidence-based medicine pyramid. (A) The traditional pyramid. (B)
Revising the pyramid: (1) lines separating the study designs become wavy (Grading of
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation), (2) systematic reviews are
‘chopped off’ the pyramid. (C) The revised pyramid: systematic reviews are a lens through which
evidence is viewed (applied).
126
Evid Based Med August 2016 | volume 21 | number 4 |
Perspective
 quality of this evidence is rated up despite the study
design (non-randomised observational studies).10
Therefore, the first modification to the pyramid is to
change the straight lines separating study designs in the
pyramid to wavy lines (going up and down to reflect the
GRADE approach of rating up and down based on the
various domains of the quality of evidence).
Rationale for modification 2
Another challenge to the notion of having systematic
reviews on the top of the evidence pyramid relates to
the framework presented in the Journal of the American
Medical Association User’s Guide on systematic reviews
and meta-analysis. The Guide presented a two-step
approach in which the credibility of the process of a sys-
tematic review is evaluated first (comprehensive litera-
ture search, rigorous study selection process, etc). If the
systematic review was deemed sufficiently credible, then
a second step takes place in which we evaluate the cer-
tainty in evidence based on the GRADE approach.11 In
other words, a meta-analysis of well-conducted RCTs at
low risk of bias cannot be equated with a meta-analysis
of observational studies at higher risk of bias. For
example, a meta-analysis of 112 surgical case series
showed that in patients with thoracic aortic transection,
the mortality rate was significantly lower in patients
who underwent endovascular repair, followed by open
repair and non-operative management (9%, 19% and
46%, respectively, p<0.01). Clearly, this meta-analysis
should not be on top of the pyramid similar to a
meta-analysis of RCTs. After all, the evidence remains
consistent of non-randomised studies and likely subject
to numerous confounders.
Therefore, the second modification to the pyramid is
to remove systematic reviews from the top of the
pyramid and use them as a lens through which other
types of studies should be seen (ie, appraised and
applied). The systematic review (the process of selecting
the studies) and meta-analysis (the statistical aggrega-
tion that produces a single effect size) are tools to
consume and apply the evidence by stakeholders.
Implications and limitations
Changing how systematic reviews and meta-analyses are
perceived by stakeholders (patients, clinicians and stake-
holders) has important implications. For example, the
American Heart Association considers evidence derived
from meta-analyses to have a level ‘A’ (ie, warrants the
most
confidence).
Re-evaluation
of
evidence
using
GRADE shows that level ‘A’ evidence could have been
high, moderate, low or of very low quality.12 The quality
of evidence drives the strength of recommendation,
which is one of the last translational steps of research,
most proximal to patient care.
One of the limitations of all ‘pyramids’ and depic-
tions of evidence hierarchy relates to the underpinning
of such schemas. The construct of internal validity may
have varying definitions, or be understood differently
among evidence consumers. A limitation of considering
systematic
review
and
meta-analyses
as
tools
to
consume evidence may undermine their role in new dis-
covery (eg, identifying a new side effect that was not
demonstrated in individual studies13).
This pyramid can be also used as a teaching tool.
EBM teachers can compare it to the existing pyramids to
explain how certainty in the evidence (also called
quality of evidence) is evaluated. It can be used to teach
how evidence-based practitioners
can appraise and
apply systematic reviews in practice, and to demonstrate
the evolution in EBM thinking and the modern under-
standing of certainty in evidence.
Contributors MHM conceived the idea and drafted the
manuscript. FA helped draft the manuscript and designed
the new pyramid. MA and NA helped draft the manuscript.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned;
externally peer reviewed.
References
1. Paul M, Leibovici L. Systematic review or meta-analysis? Their
place in the evidence hierarchy. Clin Microbiol Infect
2014;20:97–100.
2. Agoritsas T, Vandvik P, Neumann I, et al. Finding current best
evidence. In: Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade MO, et al. eds. Users’
guides to the medical literature: a manual for evidence-based
clinical practice. 3rd edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill,
2015:29–50.
3. Tomlin G, Borgetto B. Research Pyramid: a new evidence-based
practice model for occupational therapy. Am J Occup Ther
2011;65:189–96.
4. Resources for Evidence-Based Practice: The 6S Pyramid.
Secondary Resources for Evidence-Based Practice: The 6S
Pyramid Feb 18, 2016 4:58 PM. http://hsl.mcmaster.libguides.
com/ebm
5. Vandenbroucke JP. Observational research and evidence-based
medicine: what should we teach young physicians? J Clin
Epidemiol 1998;51:467–72.
6. Berlin JA, Golub RM. Meta-analysis as evidence: building a
better pyramid. JAMA 2014;312:603–5.
7. Dechartres A, Altman DG, Trinquart L, et al. Association
between analytic strategy and estimates of treatment outcomes
in meta-analyses. JAMA 2014;312:623–30.
8. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging
consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of
recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924–6.
9. Murad MH, Coburn JA, Coto-Yglesias F, et al. Glycemic control
in non-critically ill hospitalized patients: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:49–58.
10. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Sultan S, et al. GRADE guidelines: 9. Rating
up the quality of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:1311–16.
11. Murad MH, Montori VM, Ioannidis JP, et al. How to read a
systematic review and meta-analysis and apply the results to
patient care: users’ guides to the medical literature. JAMA
2014;312:171–9.
12. Murad MH, Altayar O, Bennett M, et al. Using GRADE for evaluating
the quality of evidence in hyperbaric oxygen therapy clarifies
evidence limitations. J Clin Epidemiol 2014;67:65–72.
13. Nissen SE, Wolski K. Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of
myocardial infarction and death from cardiovascular causes.
N Engl J Med 2007;356:2457–71.
Evid Based Med August 2016 | volume 21 | number 4 |
127
Perspective
