 Offspring of parents who were separated and not
speaking to one another have reduced resistance
to the common cold as adults
Michael L. M. Murphya,1, Sheldon Cohena, Denise Janicki-Devertsb, and William J. Doylec,2
aDepartment of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; bSchool of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261;
and cDepartment of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Edited by Susan T. Fiske, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, and approved March 27, 2017 (received for review January 15, 2017)
Exposure to parental separation or divorce during childhood has
been associated with an increased risk for physical morbidity
during adulthood. Here we tested the hypothesis that this associ-
ation is primarily attributable to separated parents who do not
communicate with each other. We also examined whether early
exposure to separated parents in conflict is associated with greater
viral-induced inflammatory response in adulthood and in turn with
increased susceptibility to viral-induced upper respiratory disease.
After assessment of their parents’ relationship during their child-
hood, 201 healthy volunteers, age 18–55 y, were quarantined, ex-
perimentally exposed to a virus that causes a common cold, and
monitored for 5 d for the development of a respiratory illness.
Monitoring included daily assessments of viral-specific infection,
objective markers of illness, and local production of proinflamma-
tory cytokines. Adults whose parents lived apart and never spoke
during their childhood were more than three times as likely to
develop a cold when exposed to the upper respiratory virus than
adults from intact families. Conversely, individuals whose parents
were separated but communicated with each other showed no
increase in risk compared with those from intact families. These
differences persisted in analyses adjusted for potentially confounding
variables (demographics, current socioeconomic status, body mass in-
dex, season, baseline immunity to the challenge virus, affectivity, and
childhood socioeconomic status). Mediation analyses were consistent
with the hypothesis that greater susceptibility to respiratory infec-
tious illness among the offspring of noncommunicating parents was
attributable to a greater local proinflammatory response to infection.
parental divorce | childhood adversity | adult health | cold susceptibility |
inflammation
T
he past half century has witnessed sweeping cultural changes
in the acceptability of parental separation and divorce (1).
Consequently, the number of youth whose parents do not live
together has increased markedly, with more than one million
children in the United States alone being exposed to parental
separation each year (2). These observed changes to the tradi-
tional family environment evoked questions and concerns among
clinicians, social scientists, and public policy makers about the
impact parental separation may have on a child’s adjustment and
well-being. To understand this issue better, numerous studies
have documented negative psychosocial outcomes among chil-
dren whose parents separated, including psychological distress,
internalizing and externalizing behaviors, educational deficits, per-
sistent family conflict, household economic disadvantage, and ex-
posure to other adverse childhood experiences (for reviews, see refs.
3 and 4). Moreover, studies also revealed that the consequences of
parental separation during early life extend into the adult years. For
example, adults who experienced the dissolution of their parents’
relationship during childhood are more likely to report lower psy-
chological well-being, higher rates of psychiatric morbidities, and
poorer adult relationships (for reviews, see refs. 5 and 6).
Less is known about how childhood parental separation im-
pacts physical health across the life span, although available data
suggest adverse consequences. Youth who experience parental
separation report more somatic complaints (7), are at increased
risk for developing asthma (8), and are more likely to be hos-
pitalized for infectious illnesses (9). Additionally, adults whose
parents separated during childhood self-report more medical
complaints and poorer perceived health (10) and are more likely
to endorse having previously experienced both myocardial in-
farction (11) and stroke (12). Furthermore, a study using data
from a large cancer registry found increased risk for some types
of cancer among adults who experienced childhood parental
separation (13). Finally, mortality studies document increased
risk for premature death, especially from cardiovascular disease,
among adults who experienced childhood parental separation
(14–16). Taken together, these findings support the notion that
childhood parental separation may have a lasting impact on life-
span physical health. However, this work is largely reliant on
survey data in which health status is determined via self-report.
This reliance on self-reporting makes it difficult to disentangle
the extent to which childhood parental separation is associated
with objectively determined health outcomes versus the sub-
jective perception of health. Moreover, although data from the
cancer registry and mortality records are consistent with an as-
sociation between childhood parental separation and objectively
determined risk for disease in adulthood, the underlying patho-
physiological processes remain unclear.
One possibility is that childhood parental separation may in-
crease adult risk for morbidity and mortality in part through
stress-related perturbation of immunologic processes. Psychological
Significance
Adults whose parents separated during childhood are at in-
creased risk for poorer health, although the underlying mech-
anisms remain unclear. Furthermore, increasing evidence
suggests that aspects of the family environment following
parental separation better predict a child’s adjustment than the
separation itself. Using a viral challenge study, we found that
adults whose parents separated but remained on speaking
terms during childhood were no more likely to develop a cold
when exposed to a cold-causing virus than adults from intact
childhood families. However, adults whose parents separated
and did not speak to each other during childhood were more
than three times as likely to develop a cold following viral
exposure. This increased risk was attributed to heightened in-
flammation in response to infection.
Author contributions: S.C. and W.J.D. designed research; S.C. and W.J.D. performed re-
search; M.L.M.M., S.C., and D.J.-D. analyzed data; and M.L.M.M., S.C., D.J.-D., and W.J.D.
wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: michaelmurphy@cmu.edu.
2Deceased October 21, 2016.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1700610114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1700610114
PNAS
|
June 20, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 25
|
6515–6520
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 stress is associated with dysregulation of immunomodulating systems
such as the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and the sympa-
thetic–adrenal–medullary system, which are responsible for co-
ordinating the body’s response to threat (17). In turn, dysregulation
of these systems via psychological stress can engender a proin-
flammatory phenotype and increase the risk for a broad range of
diseases (18). Relatedly, childhood adversity potentiates heightened
levels of inflammatory molecules during adulthood (19). Addition-
ally, the illnesses (e.g., asthma, cancer, and cardiovascular disease)
disproportionally reported by individuals who experience childhood
parental separation are all shaped by ongoing inflammatory activity
(20). Taken together, these lines of evidence provide theoretical
scaffolding for an immunologic link between childhood parental
separation and poorer health outcomes during adulthood.
Research directly connecting parental separation during
childhood to deleterious immune outcomes is sparse, although
there are some data consistent with this possibility. For example,
one study found heightened concentrations of inflammatory
molecules among young children whose parents had recently
separated (21). Additionally, when comparing responses to a
threatening laboratory speech task by young adults whose par-
ents had separated during childhood and individuals from intact
families, another study found lower output of the antiinflammatory
regulatory hormone cortisol among individuals whose parents had
separated (22). Furthermore, in a large longitudinal study that
followed participants from birth, researchers documented elevated
levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein among indi-
viduals in their mid-40s who had experienced parental separation
during childhood compared with those who had not (23). However,
these studies did not directly evaluate whether parental separation
during childhood actually increases disease susceptibility through
inflammatory mediators.
Another outstanding issue in the literature is that, although
research generally shows a negative association between child-
hood parental separation and adult health and well-being, the
effect sizes tend to be modest, and there is substantial variability
in individual outcomes (5, 6, 24). Indeed, increasing evidence
highlights that family environment and the quality of parents’
relationship with each other following separation may be more
important predictors of childhood adjustment than parental
separation per se (4). In particular, having parents who can
communicate and cooperate in jointly attending to a child’s care
following separation may protect against adverse psychosocial
outcomes in the years following the separation (25–28). Furthermore,
compared with individuals who report poorer childhood family en-
vironments, individuals who report more family cohesion and less
parental conflict following childhood parental separation endorse
fewer health complaints and show decreased risk of morbidity and
mortality during adulthood (29, 30). These findings indicate that
not all forms of childhood parental separation are equally detri-
mental and suggest that separations marked by conflict and lack of
effective communication related to parenting may be particularly
impactful to a child’s adjustment and subsequent adult health.
In the current project we sought to address these issues using
data obtained from 201 healthy adult men and women who
participated in a viral challenge study. In this study, participants
who were selected for “good health” by medical history, physical
examination, and biological profiles answered questions re-
garding their parents’ relationship during childhood. They then
were quarantined in a hotel for 6 d. On the first day they were
administered nasal drops containing rhinovirus 39 (RV39), a
virus that causes the common cold, and then were monitored for
5 d for the development of viral infection and objective physical
markers of having a cold. Monitoring included daily collection of
nasal secretions for viral isolation and assessing local proin-
flammatory cytokine production. Assessments of objective cold
markers included daily measurements of the individual’s total
mucus weight and nasal mucociliary clearance function, a marker
of nasal congestion. The primary outcome was the development
of the common cold. The criteria used to determine cold sta-
tus were based on methods validated and used extensively in
previous viral challenge studies over the past two decades (e.g.,
refs. 31–33). Specifically, individuals were considered to have a cold
if they were infected with the challenge virus and showed increased
expression of at least one of two objective markers of illness.
We evaluated whether the status of the parental relationship
during the individual’s childhood was associated with the indi-
vidual’s differential risk for developing a cold after exposure to
the challenge virus. Individuals were sorted into one of three
groups capturing childhood parental-relationship status: those
who reported that their parents remained together throughout
their childhood (the reference category; n = 109), those who
reported that their parents separated but stayed on speaking
terms during childhood (n = 41), and those who reported that
their parents separated and were not on speaking terms during
childhood (parents lived apart and never spoke, hereafter
“PLANS”; n = 51). We additionally tested whether any observed
associations could be accounted for by individual differences in
various potentially confounding variables including a set of de-
mographic and study-related covariates referred to as the “standard
covariates,” i.e., age, sex, race, education attainment, body mass
index (BMI), season of the year during which the trial was
conducted, and baseline immunity to RV39 (31); personality
characteristics that could bias recall (positive and negative af-
fectivity); and childhood socioeconomic status (SES) indicators
(childhood parental education and homeownership). We pre-
dicted that individuals reporting PLANS would show the highest
risk for developing a cold after exposure to the challenge virus.
We also assessed two physiologic pathways through which
childhood parental separation might increase susceptibility to
developing a cold following exposure to a challenge virus. It is possible
that parental separation heightens cold risk by increasing individuals’
likelihood of becoming infected after exposure to the challenge virus.
Alternatively, childhood parental separation may increase the ex-
pression of illness markers in response to infection. To evaluate these
possibilities, we examined if childhood parental separation predicted
infection in the full sample or markers of illness among individuals
who became infected. Finally, the severity of illness markers expressed
in response to infection are driven by local proinflammatory cytokine
production (34). As such, we also assessed whether the production of
nasal proinflammatory cytokines mediated an observed association
between parental separation and illness.
Results
Descriptive Information. Participants in this study were an average
of 29.76 y old (SD = 10.85). The sample contained 118 (59%)
men and 83 (41%) women; 138 (69%) of the participants iden-
tified as white; and 63 (31%) of the participants self-identified as
nonwhite; 83% of nonwhite individuals identified as black.
Ninety-two participants (46%) reported that their parents had
separated or divorced during their childhood. Of these, 51 (25%)
participants reported PLANS. One hundred forty-nine partici-
pants (74%) met criteria for developing an infection with RV39,
and 60 (30%) participants met the criteria for a cold (i.e., in-
fection and sufficiently severe objectively assessed markers of
illness). For full descriptive information on all of the variables in
this study, see Materials and Methods or Tables S1 and S2.
Does the Status of the Parental Relationship During Childhood Predict
Colds During Adulthood?
Standard covariate-adjusted model. We first used logistic regression
to predict cold risk following exposure to the challenge virus as
a function of the two childhood parental-relationship status
dummy variables indicating having parents who were separated
but on speaking terms or PLANS. Participants who reported that
their parents were not separated during childhood served as the
reference category. We also adjusted the model for the seven
standard covariates. Evidence supported an association between
childhood parental-relationship status and cold risk [χ2 with
two degrees of freedom, hereafter “χ2(2)” = 10.489, P = 0.005]
(Fig. 1). Specifically, individuals whose parents separated but
remained on speaking terms during childhood were no more
6516
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1700610114
Murphy et al.
 likely to develop a cold than individuals whose parents remained
together during childhood [odds ratio (OR) = 0.839, P = 0.716, 95%
CI = (0.326, 2.162)]. However, compared with individuals whose
parents were together during childhood, those who reported PLANS
were more than three times as likely to develop a cold [OR =
3.265, P = 0.004, 95% CI = (1.462, 7.290)].
Alternative explanations. We next examined whether the association
between childhood parental-relationship status and cold risk
remained after controlling for the standard covariates as well as
individual differences in two personality characteristics associ-
ated with recall biases, positive and negative affectivity. In-
cluding positive and negative affectivity in the model did not
attenuate the association between childhood parental-relationship
status and cold risk [χ2(2) = 9.664, P = 0.008]. As in the previous
analyses, those whose parents separated but remained on speaking
terms were not at increased risk for developing a cold [OR =
0.938, P = 0.898, 95% CI = (0.356, 2.474)], whereas individuals
who reported PLANS remained more than three times as likely to
develop a cold [OR = 3.260, P = 0.004, 95% CI = (1.445, 7.357)].
Next, in a separate model, we tested whether the association
between childhood parental-relationship status and cold risk
could be attributed to individual differences in childhood SES. In
this model, we adjusted for the standard covariates as well as the
two indicators of childhood SES, parental education and
homeownership. The association between childhood parental-
relationship status and cold risk remained evident in this model
[χ2(2) = 8.987, P = 0.011]. Once again, individuals whose parents
were separated but remained on speaking terms did not show in-
creased cold risk [OR = 0.772, P = 0.617, 95% CI = (0.280, 2.128)].
However, the association between reporting PLANS and cold risk
persisted [OR = 3.091, P = 0.011, 95% CI = (1.295, 7.377)].
Was the Association Between PLANS and Colds Explained by Infection
Status or Markers of Illness? Participants were considered to have
a cold if they were both infected with the challenge virus and
expressed sufficiently severe objective markers of illness.
Infection status. We used logistic regression to test whether the two
childhood parental-relationship dummy variables predicted becoming
infected after exposure to the challenge virus. Adjusting for the
standard covariates, we did not find evidence for an association
[χ2(2) = 2.121, P = 0.346].
Markers of illness. We next used logistic regression to test whether
childhood parental-relationship status was associated with markers
of illness among individuals infected with the challenge virus (as
evidenced by meeting the criteria for having a cold once infected).
After adjusting for the standard covariates, childhood parental-
relationship status was associated with illness markers among infected
individuals [χ2(2) = 6.918, P = 0.031]. Compared with individuals
whose parents remained together throughout childhood, those
whose parents separated but remained on speaking terms did not
show differential markers of illness [OR = 0.865, P = 0.785, 95%
CI = (0.306, 2.449)]. Conversely, individuals who reported PLANS
were more likely to show sufficient markers of illness to meet cri-
teria for a cold [OR = 2.957, P = 0.017, 95% CI = (1.210, 7.230)].
Was Increased Illness Among Individuals Reporting PLANS Mediated
by Local Proinflammatory Cytokine Levels? Because individuals
whose parents separated but remained on speaking terms did not
differ in clinical illness risk from those whose parents remained
together, we collapsed these two groups for the mediation
analyses. We evaluated whether the association between PLANS
and increased illness was mediated by local levels of the proin-
flammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. Because of strong
correlations among the three cytokines, we constructed a single com-
posite nasal inflammation variable by calculating and then summing
z-scores for TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 (e.g., ref. 35). Adjusting for the
standard covariates, we found that reporting PLANS predicted higher
composite nasal inflammation [regression coefficient (b) = 0.943, P =
0.023, 95% CI = (0.130, 1.755)]. We then used bootstrapping tech-
niques (36, 37) to assess the indirect effect of the composite in-
flammation variable on the association between reporting PLANS and
the criteria for a cold. Adjusting for the standard covariates, we found
evidence that an increase in the composite inflammation variable
mediated the association between PLANS and greater risk for
clinical illness [b = 0.401, 95% CI = (0.001, 1.079)].
Finally, as an alternative test of mediation of the association
between PLANS and clinical illness, we fit a structural equation
model in which the three cytokines were loaded onto a single latent
factor for inflammation. In this model, the observed variable
PLANS predicted the latent factor for inflammation, which in turn
predicted whether the individual met the criteria for a cold. After
adjusting for the standard covariates, the model fit the data well [χ2
(18) = 24.676, P = 0.134; standardized root mean square residual
(SRMR) = 0.024; confirmatory fit index (CFI) = 0.978; root mean
square error of approximation (RMSEA) = 0.043; 90% CI for
RMSEA = (0.000, 0.082); P(RMSEA ≤ 0.05) = 0.568]. For the
individual regression paths, there was a positive association between
PLANS and the latent factor for inflammation [b = 2.404, P =
0.051, 95% CI = (−0.009, 4.817)] as well as between the latent
factor for inflammation and colds [b = 0.033, P < 0.001, 95% CI =
(0.019, 0.047)]. There also was evidence for a direct association
between PLANS and colds [b = 0.160, P = 0.016, 95% CI = (0.031,
0.289)]. A graphical depiction of this model is shown in Fig. S1.
Discussion
In this study, we found that individuals whose parents separated
during childhood but remained on speaking terms were no more
likely than those whose parents remained together to develop a
cold during adulthood in response to exposure to a challenge
virus. However, individuals who reported PLANS were more
than three times as likely to develop a cold during adulthood
after exposure to the challenge virus as individuals from intact
families. Moreover, this finding persisted even after analyses were
adjusted for a variety of potentially confounding variables.
Our finding that PLANS but not parental separation with
continued communication between parents predicted increased
cold risk converges with literature showing that adverse family
processes related to parental separation are more potent pre-
dictors of negative outcomes than parental separation alone.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Together
Separated
PLANS
Predicted Probability of Developing a Cold
Childhood ParentalRelationship Status
Fig. 1.
Predicted probability of developing a cold as a function of whether
participants reported that, during their childhoods, their parents were not
separated or divorced (Together; n = 109), were separated or divorced but
were still on speaking terms (Separated; n = 41), or were separated or di-
vorced and not on speaking terms (PLANS; n = 51), adjusted for the seven
standard covariates. Error bars represent 95% CIs for the mean predicted
probabilities of developing a cold.
Murphy et al.
PNAS
|
June 20, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 25
|
6517
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 Indeed, on a conceptual level, it is likely that PLANS reflects a
number of deleterious childhood family dynamics occurring be-
fore and after parental separation. For example, having parents
who are separated and not on speaking terms with each other
suggests high levels of acrimony in the childhood family environ-
ment. Although conflict and rancor in the family environment are
associated with negative outcomes among youth regardless of
whether their parents are separated (28), such conflict is also an
important pathway through which parental divorce may negatively
impact individuals both during childhood and in their adult years
(38). Additionally, parents who are not on speaking terms might
be more prone to recruit the child to serve as an intermediary or
attempt to get the child to take sides against the other parent.
These behaviors in turn are associated with increased distress and
poorer adjustment among youth (39, 40). Furthermore, coopera-
tive communication between parents regarding childcare is asso-
ciated with better psychosocial and behavioral outcomes among
youth and may protect individuals against at least some of the
negative consequences of parental separation (25, 28, 41). How-
ever, if a child’s parents are not speaking to each other, there is no
possibility for such collaboration in attending to the child’s needs.
Thus individuals whose parents are separated and not on speaking
terms during childhood may be exposed to ongoing family pro-
cesses that interfere with effective parenting, that convey threat,
and that increase stress. Importantly, this type of environment can
stymie a child’s ability to adjust to parental separation (24, 42) and
can increase the risk for future morbidity (43, 44).
We also evaluated two physiological processes through which
PLANS may have increased cold risk. To meet the criteria for
having developed a cold after exposure to a challenge virus, in-
dividuals must both become infected with the virus and exhibit
excessive objective markers of illness related to the infection.
Expression of these illness markers is driven largely by local
proinflammatory activity (34). Although we did not find evidence
that PLANS predicted infection, it did predict clinical illness
among infected individuals. Furthermore, the association be-
tween PLANS and clinical illness was mediated by local proin-
flammatory cytokine expression as evinced by a model evaluating
the indirect effect of the composite inflammation variable and by
a structural equation model in which the three individual cyto-
kines were loaded onto a latent factor for inflammation. These
findings corroborate and extend previous studies documenting
poorer regulation of inflammation and increased levels of inflam-
matory molecules among adults who experienced childhood
adversity related to parental separation (e.g., refs. 22, 23).
Mechanistically, these findings are also consistent with more
general models of stress-induced reductions in immune cells’
sensitivity to the inhibitory effects of glucocorticoids (e.g., ref. 45).
Glucocorticoids play a pivotal role in regulating the immune sys-
tem’s inflammatory response to viral infection. However, stressful
experiences marked by long-term threat can result in local im-
mune cells becoming desensitized to regulation by glucocorticoids.
This resistance to glucocorticoids is in turn associated with in-
creased production of proinflammatory cytokines in response to
infection and greater risk for developing a cold following a viral
challenge (33). Additionally, it is possible that experiences such as
PLANS may modulate the regulation of autonomic nervous system
processes, resulting in exaggerated sympathetic versus para-
sympathetic effects on the system, which in turn are associated with
increased inflammation and morbidity (46).
This study has several strengths. Most notably, the unique
viral-challenge paradigm provides a sensitive assessment of im-
munocompetence by measuring host resistance to a challenge
with a common viral pathogen. Furthermore, the prospective
nature of the study enabled us to rule out the possibility that the
cold itself influenced participants’ reports of their parents’ re-
lationship during childhood. Additionally, the 11 covariates were
chosen to eliminate the possibility that the associations we found
were attributable to their impact on both parental-relationship
status and cold susceptibility. Nonetheless, there are some po-
tential limitations to consider. First, the viral-challenge paradigm
would be extremely difficult to implement in a longitudinal
prospective study, and hence data regarding childhood parental
separation and PLANS were obtained retrospectively. Although
we statistically controlled for individual differences that could
bias recall, it is always possible that some other unmeasured
characteristic could account for our findings. Second, although
the strict recruitment criteria for this sample allow us to rule out
a number of potential third-variable explanations (e.g., medical
and psychiatric illnesses, prescription medication use), they also
restrict our ability to examine other potentially deleterious life
outcomes that might correlate with PLANS in a more hetero-
geneous sample. Furthermore, the age range of our sample was
somewhat restricted. Thus future studies will be needed to ex-
amine if our findings replicate in other populations, especially those
that are older and less healthy. Third, to determine cold status, we
relied on both evidence of infection and objective markers of illness.
Although there is substantial evidence for the validity of this ap-
proach (e.g., refs. 31–33), these illness markers do not cover the
range of indicators used in the self-reported symptom measures. As
such, it is possible that the objective markers are not tapping all
manifestations that physicians and patients may view as colds (for
further information regarding subjective symptoms, please see SI
Text and Table S3). Fourth, when examining residual versus fitted
value and quantile– quantile (Q–Q) plots, there was some evidence
that the portion of our mediation model predicting the composite
inflammation variable may not have met the underlying assump-
tions of normality of errors and homoscedasticity of residuals. Al-
though deviations from normality are less of a concern because of
the use of nonparametric bootstrapping, heteroscedasticity of the
residuals could bias the SEs and thus affect inferences. Indeed,
when applying a power transformation to the composite inflam-
mation variable or when analyzing the original data using hetero-
skedasticity-consistent-3 robust SEs, the mediation findings were
attenuated. Thus the mediation findings may be less robust and
should be replicated. Finally, our assessment of mediation by
cytokines was correlational, precluding a causal interpretation.
Notwithstanding these limitations, this study provides theo-
retical insights regarding the association between childhood pa-
rental separation and adult health. Using a prospective viral
challenge paradigm, we found that individuals who reported that
their parents had separated or divorced during childhood but
remained on speaking terms were no more likely to develop a
cold after exposure to a challenge virus than individuals from
intact families. However, individuals whose parents were sepa-
rated and not on speaking terms during childhood were more
than three times as likely to develop a cold following exposure to
the challenge virus, highlighting poorer immunocompetence
among these individuals. Furthermore, this association appeared
to be attributable to increased expression of illness markers
among infected individuals and was mediated by heightened
levels of local proinflammatory cytokines. Given the wide prev-
alence of parental separation and divorce and limited in-
tervention resources, these findings have important implications
for better understanding who is at increased risk for deleterious
health consequences following parental separation.
Materials and Methods
Participants. Participants for this project were from a study of how socio-
environmental factors influence host resistance to an infectious illness.
Through the auspices of the NIH, these data (and data from four other viral-
challenge studies conducted by our group) are available online (www.
commoncoldproject.com). For this project, 212 healthy volunteers, age 18–
55 y, were recruited between 2007 and 2011 from the greater Pittsburgh
area. Individuals were excluded from participation if they were not deemed
to be in “good general health” as determined through a medical history,
physician-conducted physical examination, and clinical profiles via urinalysis,
complete blood cell count (CBC), and analysis of blood chemistry. Specifi-
cally, volunteers were excluded if they had a history of psychiatric illness,
major nasal or ontological surgery, asthma, or cardiovascular disease; had
abnormal urinalysis, CBC, or blood enzymes; were pregnant or currently
lactating; were seropositive for HIV; were taking regular medications other
than oral contraceptives (women only); or if they reported experiencing
6518
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1700610114
Murphy et al.
 cold/flu symptoms within 30 d of quarantine. To maximize infection rates,
volunteers were also excluded from the study if a blood sample taken 4 wk
before the physical examination revealed antibody titers ≥4:1 for RV39. Each
participant received $1,000 as an honorarium for taking part in the study.
The Institutional Review Boards at Carnegie Mellon University and the
University of Pittsburgh approved this study, and all participants provided
informed written consent. Only individuals with complete data regarding
childhood parental-relationship status were included in the current analyses,
providing a final sample size of 201.
Procedures. Upon being enrolled into the study, participants filled out
questionnaires regarding demographic (including age, sex, race, and edu-
cation attainment) and psychosocial (including trait positive and negative
affectivity) factors. Approximately 8 wk after this assessment, participants
provided a sample of blood that was used to quantify prechallenge (baseline)
antibody titers to RV39. At this session, they also answered questions re-
garding their childhood SES and parental relationships. Two to three days
later, participants were quarantined in a hotel for 6 d. On the afternoon of
the first day, participants were administered nasal drops containing RV39. On
all 6 d of quarantine participants were monitored for the development of
viral infection and objective markers of illness. This monitoring included
taking daily collections of nasal secretions for viral isolation via culture and
for assessing proinflammatory cytokine production and daily measurements
of individuals’ total mucus weight and nasal mucociliary clearance function.
Four weeks later, participants provided a final blood sample that was used
to test again for antibodies to RV39. Individuals also participated in two
laboratory stress-reactivity sessions that were unrelated to the current re-
search question. Relevant to the current project, during these sessions in-
dividuals’ height and weight were measured via a balance scale and
stadiometer, and these values were used to calculate their BMI. The BMI was
highly stable between the two reactivity sessions (r = 0.991, P < 0.001).
Therefore we averaged the two measurements for use in analyses.
Measures.
Parental relationships during childhood. Childhood parental separation or di-
vorce status was ascertained by asking participants if their parents had
separated or divorced during the participant’s childhood or adolescence.
Participants who responded affirmatively were asked how old they were
when their parents separated, and individuals indicating they were ≤18 y old
were considered to have experienced childhood parental divorce or sepa-
ration. Additionally, participants were asked “how often did your parents
argue” in reference to when they were age 5, 10, and 15 y separately. Re-
sponses included “all of the time,” “most of the time,” “some of the time,”
“never,” and “not sure.” Participants could also respond with “my parents
lived apart and never spoke” (PLANS). We then calculated a binary variable
indicating whether the parents of each participant had ever lived apart and
not spoken during the individual’s childhood. For this variable, we assigned
participants a value of 1 if they indicated PLANS at age 5, 10, or 15 y. We
assigned a value of 0 to all other responses, including “not sure.” Across the
three ages, 42 responses (7.0%) were “not sure.” We then constructed two
dummy codes indicating parental separation/divorce either with communication
or PLANS. All participants who reported PLANS also reported contact with each
parent for at least one of the three ages queried. Individuals whose parents
remained together throughout childhood served as the reference category.
Objective disease outcomes. The primary outcome for this project was the
development of a common cold. An individual’s cold status was determined
based on both evidence of viral infection and sufficiently severe objective
markers of clinical illness (31). Viral infection occurs when a virus is able to
invade a host and replicate. Viruses such as RV39 that replicate in the upper
respiratory system can be detected in nasal secretions. Therefore samples of
participants’ nasal secretions were collected each day during quarantine via
a saline wash of the nasal passages. These samples were centrifuged at
2,060 × g for 15 min to remove mucus, and debris and a 1.35-mL aliquot of
the resulting lavage fluid was mixed with 0.45 mL of viral collection broth.
They then were stored in a freezer at −70 °C until they were cultured for
RV39 following standard protocols (47). Additionally, the immune system
responds to viral infection by producing antibodies to the virus. An increase
in these virus-specific antibodies can be used as a marker of infection. Thus, virus-
specific antibody titers were assessed in serum via blood draws 2 or 3 d before
and 28 d after exposure to RV39 (47). Individuals were considered to be infected
if the virus could be detected in culture in any of the five postchallenge days or if
a fourfold or greater rise in virus specific antibody titers was observed between
the prechallenge and 28-d postchallenge exposure assessments (31).
Two objective markers of upper respiratory illness were also assessed: nasal
mucus production and mucociliary clearance function. To determine daily
mucus production, used facial tissues were collected in sealed plastic bags
each day. Daily mucus weight was subsequently obtained by weighing the
bags containing the soiled tissues and subtracting the predetermined weight
of the tissues when clean and the bags. Mucociliary clearance function is an
indicator of how effectively cilia located in the nasal passageways clear mucus
through the nose toward the throat. Mucociliary clearance function was
measured by administering a sweetened-dyed solution into the anterior
portion of the nose and timing how long it took for the participant to be able
to taste the solution (48). Baseline-adjusted daily scores were generated for
both mucus weight and clearance function. To generate these scores, values
obtained the day before the administration of the viral challenge were
subtracted from each of the five daily postchallenge scores (31). Finally, the
variable for total mucus weight was generated by summing the average
adjusted daily weights across each of the five postchallenge quarantine days
(mean = 9.98, SD = 17.32). Likewise, the variable for average mucociliary
clearance function was computed by taking the mean of the adjusted daily
clearance function scores over the five postchallenge quarantine days
(mean = 3.78, SD = 3.93).
Participants met criteria for having a cold if they were (i) infected with the
challenge virus and (ii) showed increased expression of illness markers as evi-
denced by either a total baseline-adjusted mucus weight of at least 10 g or an
average baseline-adjusted nasal mucociliary clearance time of at least 7 min (31).
Nasal inflammatory markers. The inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α
were quantified in nasal secretions using commercially available ELISAs
(Endogen). These assays were performed in duplicate following the manu-
facturer’s instructions. The minimum detection thresholds for the assays
ranged from 0.02 to 0.04 pg/mL, and the inter- and intra-assay variabilities
were less than 10%. The nasal cytokine responses to viral exposure were
calculated as the log-transformed area under the curve (AUC) for the five
postexposure days adjusted for the baseline day. Participants’ levels of IL-1β
(mean = 31.09, SD = 41.82), IL-6 (mean = 58.83, SD = 80.00), and TNF-α
(mean = 5.95, SD = 9.72) in nasal secretions were highly intercorrelated [r(IL-1β,
IL-6) = 0.65, P < 0.001; r(IL-1β, TNF-α) = 0.59, P < 0.001; r(IL-6, TNF-α) = 0.53,
P < 0.001]. As such, we computed a composite measure of nasal in-
flammation for use in data analyses by z-scoring participant values on each of
the cytokines and then summing them (for an example of another study that
has used this approach, see ref. 35). Three individuals were missing cytokine
data. Therefore analyses involving the cytokine data had a sample size of 198.
Standard covariates. We included the following seven covariates in all adjusted
analyses: self-reported age, sex, race (coded as white or not-white because of
the small number of nonblack racial groups represented), educational at-
tainment (in years; mean = 14.10, SD = 1.91), objectively assessed BMI (cal-
culated as kilograms per square meter; mean = 27.35, SD = 6.36), season of
the year (via two dummy codes to represent winter, n = 55; spring, n = 67;
and summer, n = 79; spring was the reference category), and baseline im-
munity to RV39 (coded as ≥4:1, n = 41; or <4:1, n = 160). These covariates
were chosen a priori mirroring previous analyses by our group using data
from viral challenge studies (e.g., ref. 31).
Psychological covariates. Negative affectivity has been linked to recall of
negative experiences, whereas positive affect has been linked to recall of
positive experiences (49). To control for the potential confounding of trait
affectivity in our analyses, we evaluated neuroticism and trait positive and
negative affect.
Neuroticism was assessed using the International Personality Item Pool
(IPIP) Big-Five Factor Markers (50). For this measure, participants indicated
how accurately each of 10 statements indicating emotional stability
(e.g., “I seldom feel blue”) described them in general on a scale from 0 (very
inaccurate) to 4 very accurate). Item responses were reverse scored and summed
so that higher values indicated higher neuroticism (mean = 15.31, SD = 7.72).
Internal consistency for this scale was satisfactory (Cronbach’s α = 0.82).
Trait positive and negative affect were assessed using the Positive and
Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form (51). In this measure, participants
rated the extent to which 10 positive and 10 negative mood-related adjec-
tives described how they generally felt on a scale from 0 (very slightly or not
at all) to 4 (extremely). The two sets of 10 items were each summed to give
total scores for positive (mean = 34.96, SD = 6.91) and negative affect
(mean = 16.53, SD = 5.66). Internal consistency for both domains was satis-
factory (Cronbach’s α = 0.86 for both domains). Trait negative affect and
neuroticism were strongly correlated (r = 0.691, P < 0.001). Therefore we
z-scored and summed the trait negative affect and neuroticism variables to
create a composite measure of negative affectivity for use in analyses.
Childhood SES. We assessed two indicators of each participant’s childhood SES
during the first 18 y of life: parental education and homeownership. To
obtain parental education, participants were asked to recall which of nine
levels of education (for details, see Table S1) each parent had achieved by
Murphy et al.
PNAS
|
June 20, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 25
|
6519
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 the time the participant was 5, 10, and 15 y old, and the maximum value
from either parent was used. Because of small cell sizes for some of the nine
categories, we collapsed parental education into four categories for analysis
(high school or less, n = 70; some college, n = 40; college degree, n = 46;
graduate/professional degree, n = 45). Parental homeownership was assessed
by asking participants to indicate for each year of the first 18 y of their lives
whether their parents owned their own home. This variable was expressed
as the percentage of years that participants endorsed their parents owning a
home (mean = 68.98, SD = 37.92).
Data Analyses. The data analyses reported here were all preplanned for this
project. Analyses were conducted using the software package SPSS (52). For lo-
gistic regressions we report Wald tests of the childhood parental-relationship
status dummy variables (with individuals whose parents remained together
during childhood serving as the reference category) distributed as χ2 with two
degrees of freedom and the OR. For linear regressions we report the un-
standardized regression coefficients (b). For these tests, we present the two-
tailed P values as well as the 95% CIs for the ORs and regression coefficients.
To test simple mediation of the association between PLANS and clinical
illness by the composite inflammation variable, we used the PROCESS macro
for SPSS (37) to obtain an estimate of the indirect effect along with a cor-
responding bootstrapped 95% CI. Following recommendations described by
Biesanz, et al. (36), this CI was constructed using the percentile bootstrap
based on 50,000 resamples. We also fit a structural equation model using the
Lavaan package for R (53, 54) as an alternative evaluation of whether nasal
inflammation mediated the association between PLANS and clinical illness.
In this model, we used the observed variable PLANS to predict a latent factor
for nasal inflammation based on the three cytokine variables, which in turn
predicted the observed variable for colds. We allowed the nasal cytokine
error terms to covary with each other and adjusted the model for the
standard covariates. The model was evaluated using the maximum likeli-
hood estimator and probit link function. We present the χ2 test for model
fit, as well as the fit indices SRMR, CFI, and RMSEA. For RMSEA, we provide
the 90% CI as well as the P value for testing the hypothesis of close fit
(RMSEA ≤ 0.05). We also report unstandardized regression coefficients (b)
and corresponding two-tailed P values and 95% CIs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Preparation of this paper was supported by National
Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Grant AT006694. The
conduct of the study was supported by National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases Grant AI066367 and National Institutes of Health Grants
UL1 RR024153 and UL1TR000005. Supplemental support was provided by
the Pennsylvania Department of Health Commonwealth Enhancement
Grant 08-01-2.
1. Bumpass LL (1990) What’s happening to the family? Interactions between demo-
graphic and institutional change. Demography 27:483–498.
2. Schor EL; American Academy of Pediatrics Task Force on the Family (2003) Report of
the task force on the family. Pediatrics 111:1541–1571.
3. Amato PR (2000) The consequences of divorce for adults and children. J Marriage Fam
62:1269–1287.
4. Lansford JE (2009) Parental divorce and children’s adjustment. Perspect Psychol Sci 4:140–152.
5. Amato PR, Keith B (1991) Parental divorce and adult well-being: A meta-analysis.
J Marriage Fam 53:43–58.
6. Amato PR (2001) Children of divorce in the 1990s: An update of the Amato and Keith
(1991) meta-analysis. J Fam Psychol 15:355–370.
7. Aro H (1988) Parental discord, divorce and adolescent development. Eur Arch
Psychiatry Neurol Sci 237:106–111.
8. Harknett K (2009) Why are children with married parents healthier? The case of pe-
diatric asthma. Popul Res Policy Rev 28:347–365.
9. Nielsen NM, Hansen AV, Simonsen J, Hviid A (2012) Stressful life events in childhood
and risk of infectious disease hospitalization. Eur J Pediatr 171:173–179.
10. Maier EH, Lachman ME (2000) Consequences of early parental loss and separation for
health and well-being in midlife. Int J Behav Dev 24:183–189.
11. Monnat SM, Chandler RF (2015) Long-term physical health consequences of adverse
childhood experiences. Sociol Q 56:723–752.
12. Fuller-Thomson E, Dalton AD (2015) Gender differences in the association between
parental divorce during childhood and stroke in adulthood: Findings from a
population-based survey. Int J Stroke 10:868–875.
13. Hemminki K, Chen B (2006) Lifestyle and cancer: Effect of parental divorce. Eur J
Cancer Prev 15:524–530.
14. Lundberg O (1993) The impact of childhood living conditions on illness and mortality
in adulthood. Soc Sci Med 36:1047–1052.
15. Schwartz JE, et al. (1995) Sociodemographic and psychosocial factors in childhood as
predictors of adult mortality. Am J Public Health 85:1237–1245.
16. Larson K, Halfon N (2013) Parental divorce and adult longevity. Int J Public Health 58:
89–97.
17. McEwen BS (2008) Central effects of stress hormones in health and disease: Un-
derstanding the protective and damaging effects of stress and stress mediators. Eur J
Pharmacol 583:174–185.
18. Cohen S, Janicki-Deverts D, Miller GE (2007) Psychological stress and disease. JAMA
298:1685–1687.
19. Baumeister D, Akhtar R, Ciufolini S, Pariante CM, Mondelli V (2016) Childhood trauma
and adulthood inflammation: A meta-analysis of peripheral C-reactive protein, in-
terleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor-α. Mol Psychiatry 21:642–649.
20. Nathan C, Ding A (2010) Nonresolving inflammation. Cell 140:871–882.
21. Herberth G, et al.; LISAplus study group (2008) Relation between stressful life events,
neuropeptides and cytokines: Results from the LISA birth cohort study. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 19:722–729.
22. Kraft AJ, Luecken LJ (2009) Childhood parental divorce and cortisol in young adulthood:
Evidence for mediation by family income. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:1363–1369.
23. Lacey RE, Kumari M, McMunn A (2013) Parental separation in childhood and
adult inflammation: The importance of material and psychosocial pathways.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 38:2476–2484.
24. Kelly JB, Emery RE (2003) Children’s adjustment following divorce: Risk and resilience
perspectives. Fam Relat 52:352–362.
25. Goldberg JS, Carlson MJ (2015) Patterns and predictors of coparenting after un-
married parents part. J Fam Psychol 29:416–426.
26. Seltzer JA (1994) Consequences of marital dissolution for children. Annu Rev Sociol
20:235–266.
27. Margolin G, Gordis EB, John RS (2001) Coparenting: A link between marital conflict
and parenting in two-parent families. J Fam Psychol 15:3–21.
28. Teubert D, Pinquart M (2010) The association between coparenting and child ad-
justment: A meta-analysis. Parent Sci Pract 10:286–307.
29. Troxel WM, Matthews KA (2004) What are the costs of marital conflict and dissolution
to children’s physical health? Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev 7:29–57.
30. Luecken LJ, Fabricius WV (2003) Physical health vulnerability in adult children from
divorced and intact families. J Psychosom Res 55:221–228.
31. Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP, Rabin BS, Gwaltney JM, Jr (1997) Social ties and sus-
ceptibility to the common cold. JAMA 277:1940–1944.
32. Cohen S, et al. (1998) Types of stressors that increase susceptibility to the common
cold in healthy adults. Health Psychol 17:214–223.
33. Cohen S, et al. (2012) Chronic stress, glucocorticoid receptor resistance, inflammation,
and disease risk. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:5995–5999.
34. Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP (1999) Psychological stress, cytokine production, and
severity of upper respiratory illness. Psychosom Med 61:175–180.
35. Brody GH, Yu T, Miller GE, Chen E (2015) Discrimination, racial identity, and cytokine
levels among African-American adolescents. J Adolesc Health 56:496–501.
36. Biesanz JC, Falk CF, Savalei V (2010) Assessing mediational models: Testing and in-
terval estimation for indirect effects. Multivariate Behav Res 45:661–701.
37. Hayes AF (2013) Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process
Analysis: A Regression-Based Approach (The Guilford Press, New York).
38. Fabricius WV, Luecken LJ (2007) Postdivorce living arrangements, parent conflict, and
long-term physical health correlates for children of divorce. J Fam Psychol 21:195–205.
39. Buchanan CM, Maccoby EE, Dornbusch SM (1991) Caught between parents: Adoles-
cents’ experience in divorced homes. Child Dev 62:1008–1029.
40. Buehler C, et al. (1998) Interparental conflict styles and youth problem behaviors: A
two-sample replication study. J Marriage Fam 60:119–132.
41. Amato PR, Kane JB, James S (2011) Reconsidering the “good divorce”. Fam Relat 60:
511–524.
42. Amato PR (2010) Research on divorce: Continuing trends and new developments.
J Marriage Fam 72:650–666.
43. Repetti RL, Taylor SE, Seeman TE (2002) Risky families: Family social environments and
the mental and physical health of offspring. Psychol Bull 128:330–366.
44. Roustit C, et al. (2011) Family social environment in childhood and self-rated health in
young adulthood. BMC Public Health 11:949.
45. Cole SW (2008) Social regulation of leukocyte homeostasis: The role of glucocorticoid
sensitivity. Brain Behav Immun 22:1049–1055.
46. Thayer JF, Sternberg E (2006) Beyond heart rate variability: Vagal regulation of al-
lostatic systems. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1088:361–372.
47. Gwaltney JM, Colonno RJ, Hamparian VV, Turner RB (1988) Rhinovirus. Diagnostic
Procedures for Viral, Rickettsial, and Chlamydial Infections, eds Schmidt NJ,
Emmons RW (Americna Public Health Association, Washington, DC), pp 579–614.
48. Doyle WJ, McBride TP, Swarts JD, Hayden FG, Gwaltney JM (1988) The response of the
nasal airway, middle ear, and eustachian tube to experimental rhinovirus infection.
Am J Rhinol 2:149–154.
49. Rusting CL (1999) Interactive effects of personality and mood on emotion-congruent
memory and judgment. J Pers Soc Psychol 77:1073–1086.
50. Goldberg LR, et al. (2006) The international personality item pool and the future of
public-domain personality measures. J Res Pers 40:84–96.
51. Watson D, Clark L (1994) The PANAS-X: Manual for the Positive and Negative Affect
Schedule - Expanded Form (The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA).
52. Corporation IBM (2016) IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh, Version 24.0.1 (IBM Cor-
poration, Armonk, NY).
53. Rosseel Y (2012) Lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. J Stat Softw
48:1–36.
54. R Core Team (2016) R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing
(R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna), 3.3.1.
55. Gwaltney JM, Jr, Moskalski PB, Hendley JO (1980) Interruption of experimental rhi-
novirus transmission. J Infect Dis 142:811–815.
6520
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1700610114
Murphy et al.
