 Solubilized Amnion Membrane Hyaluronic Acid
Hydrogel Accelerates Full-Thickness Wound Healing
SEAN V. MURPHY
,a ALEKSANDER SKARDAL,a,b LUJIE SONG,c KHIRY SUTTON,a REBECCA HAUG,a
DAVID L. MACK,d JOHN JACKSON,a SHAY SOKER,a,b ANTHONY ATALAa
Key Words. Skin • Wound healing • Solubilized amnion membrane • Biomaterial • Hydrogel
ABSTRACT
The early and effective treatment of wounds is vital to ensure proper wound closure and healing
with appropriate functional and cosmetic outcomes. The use of human amnion membranes for
wound care has been shown to be safe and effective. However, the difficulty in handling and plac-
ing thin sheets of membrane, and the high costs associated with the use of living cellularized tissue
has limited the clinical application of amniotic membrane wound healing products. Here, we
describe a novel amnion membrane-derived product, processed to result in a cell-free solution,
while maintaining high concentrations of cell-derived cytokines and growth factors. The solubilized
amnion membrane (SAM) combined with the carrier hyaluronic acid (HA) hydrogel (HA-SAM) is
easy to produce, store, and apply to wounds. We demonstrated the efficacy of HA-SAM as a
wound treatment using a full-thickness murine wound model. HA-SAM significantly accelerated
wound closure through re-epithelialization and prevented wound contraction. HA-SAM-treated
wounds had thicker regenerated skin, increased total number of blood vessels, and greater num-
bers of proliferating keratinocytes within the epidermis. Overall, this study confirms the efficacy of
the amnion membrane as a wound treatment/dressing, and overcomes many of the limitations
associated with using fresh, cryopreserved, or dehydrated tissue by providing a hydrogel delivery
system for SAM. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:2020–2032
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
The early and effective treatment of wounds is vital to ensure proper wound closure and heal-
ing with appropriate functional and cosmetic outcomes. This study confirms the efficacy of the
amnion membrane as a wound treatment/dressing, and overcomes many of the limitations
associated with using fresh, cryopreserved, or dehydrated tissue.
INTRODUCTION
Chronic and acute full-thickness wounds affect
over seven million patients in the U.S. Full-
thickness skin injuries are a major source of mor-
tality and morbidity, and include an estimated
500,000 civilian burns treated in the U.S. each
year [1, 2]. Chronic, large, or nonhealing wounds
are especially costly because they often require
multiple treatments; for example, a single diabetic
foot ulcer can cost approximately $50,000 to treat
[3]. Due to the continuing need for better prod-
ucts that help in healing and preventing infection,
the global wound care market is expected to
reach USD 20.4 Billion by 2021 [4].
The early treatment and the proper coverage
of wounds are vital steps in increasing the surviv-
ability of patients with extensive wounds. Patients
respond best when rapid treatments are available
that result in closure and protection of the
wounds as fast as possible. The gold standard
wound treatment, still used in the clinic, is an
autologous split-thickness skin graft. However, the
adequate coverage of wounds is often a challenge
particularly when there is limited availability of
healthy donor skin to harvest. Allografts are
another option, but due to their allogeneic nature,
require immunosuppressive drugs to prevent
rejection of the graft [5]. These limitations have
led to the development of noncellular polymer
scaffolds, such as Integra and Biobrane. While
these materials have been shown to improve
wound healing [6, 7], they are expensive and do
not provide optimal cosmetic outcomes. Thus,
there is a need for a wound healing and tissue
engineering product with high clinical efficiency,
which does not require a cellular component, but
retains the bioactivity of a biological treatment.
Amnion membranes have been successfully
used for wound and reconstructive purposes since
the early 20th century [8]. There have been many
studies demonstrating the safety and efficacy of
aWake Forest Institute for
Regenerative Medicine,
Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem,
North Carolina, USA;
bVirginia Tech-Wake Forest
School of Biomedical
Engineering and Sciences,
Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem,
North Carolina, USA;
cDepartment of Urology,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People’s
Hospital, Shanghai, People’s
Republic of China;
dDepartment of
Rehabilitation Medicine,
Institute for Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine,
University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA
Correspondence: Sean Murphy,
Ph.D., Wake Forest Institute for
Regenerative Medicine, Wake
Forest School of Medicine,
Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina
27157, USA. Telephone: 336-
713-7277; e-mail: semurphy@
wakehealth.edu; or Anthony
Atala, M.D., Wake Forest
Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, Wake Forest School
of Medicine, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem,
North Carolina 27157, USA.
Telephone: 336-716-5701;
e-mail: aatala@wakehealth.edu
Received March 9, 2017;
accepted for publication July 14,
2017; first published September
23, 2017.
O
c AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2017/$30.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.17-0053
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCom-
mercial-NoDerivs License, which
permits use and distribution in
any medium, provided the origi-
nal work is properly cited, the use
is non-commercial and no modifi-
cations or adaptations are made.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:2020–2032 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
 human amnion for wound treatment and the use of amnion for
skin burn management has been reported in over 200 clinical tri-
als. The amnion has also found relatively widespread application
as a wound covering, with treatment for diabetic neurovascular
ulcers, venous stasis ulcers, and various types of postsurgical and
posttraumatic wound dehiscence [9–13]. Some examples include
the use of amnion as a wound covering for burn wounds treated
with split thickness skin grafts [14], for children with partial-
thickness facial burns [15], and various other clinical trials showing
similar successes with various preparation and application meth-
odologies [16–19]. These studies demonstrate that the use of
amnion as a wound covering contributes to accelerated wound
closure, reduced inflammation and scarring, reduced pain, and
fewer infections.
For many clinical examples, a sheet of amnion is generally
placed over the wound and held in place with sutures, glue, or
additional bandaging. However, while the use of amnion in these
clinical settings appears to be advantageous, it is a somewhat diffi-
cult material to incorporate into routine clinical use. Limitations
included difficulty to handle the thin sheets without folding or
tearing, and the requirement for sutures or adhesives to hold the
membrane in place over the wound. Additionally, the processing,
transportation and storage of the living cellularized tissue has lim-
ited clinical applications due to cost.To partially address these lim-
itations, some groups have developed methods for cleaning,
preparing, and dehydrating human amnion. In this form, the
material is stable at room temperature, with a shelf life of up to 5
years. However, while multiple studies have shown that the dehy-
dration of the amnion does not affect its efficacy as a wound
treatment [20–24], there are still significant limitations in the
delivery and application of this intact amnion to large or irregular
shaped wounds. This includes in the majority of treatment cases
where an amnion sheet does not conform to an irregular wound
size or topology.
Recently, various hydrogel biomaterials have been explored
for many applications in regenerative medicine, including as deliv-
ery vehicles for drugs, proteins, and living cells.Through a detailed
hydrogel characterization study, our group identified a commer-
cially available hyaluronic acid (HA)-based hydrogel with a range
of properties that make it ideal for many regenerative medicine
applications [25]. HA is a nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan [26, 27],
which has been manipulated into various forms [28, 29], including
a modular system consisting of thiolated HA, thiolated gelatin,
and a polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA) cross-linker (com-
mercially available as HyStem by ESI-BIO) [30, 31]. We have
recently demonstrated that this modified HA-hydrogel functioned
as an ideal carrier for the bioprinting of amniotic fluid stem cells
directly into full-thickness excisional wounds [32]. These studies
demonstrated that the HA hydrogel with encapsulated stem cells
improved wound healing, even though the presence of cells
within the wound was only transient. Our studies demonstrated
the potential of HA hydrogel to function as a delivery vehicle that
supported the release of stem cell-derived paracrine factors,
thereby increasing their therapeutic effectiveness in wound
healing.
In this reported study, we have developed a novel amnion
membrane-derived product, processed to result in a cell-free
solution, while maintaining high concentrations of cell-derived
cytokines and growth factors. The solubilized amnion mem-
brane (SAM) combined with the carrier HA hydrogel, results in
an effective product that is easy to produce, store, and
apply to wounds to accelerate wound closure and re-
epithelialization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of Solubilized Amnion Membrane
Donated human placenta was collected and stored at 48C for a
maximum of 24 hours. The amnion membrane (avascular/inner)
was manually dissected from the chorion membrane (vascular/
outer). Any blood clots present were removed. The membrane
was washed with 500–1,000 ml of sterile saline. Using sterile scis-
sors and forceps, the amnion was cut into approximately 5 3
5 cm pieces. The amnion pieces were then transferred into a ster-
ile 500 ml container and washed five times with 100 ml sterile
saline. Pieces were then washed with 500 ml sterile water. The
amnion pieces were transferred into 50 ml tubes. During transfer,
the pieces were dragged along the edge of the 500 ml container
in order to remove as much water as possible from each piece.
Each 50 ml tube was filled to a maximum of 25 ml. The 50-ml
tubes containing the amnion pieces were then kept at 2808C for
12–24 hours. The lids of the 50 ml tubes were removed and
replaced with sterile filter caps. The tubes were placed in a pre-
cooled glass lyophilizer container and were lyophilized for 48–72
hours. A SPEX SamplePrep 8970 freezer/mill (Metuchen, NJ,
https://www.spexsampleprep.com/) was filled with liquid nitro-
gen. The lyophilized amnion pieces were placed into the freezer/
mill chamber. Membrane pieces were milled for 3 cycles of 5
minutes of cool, 5 minutes of mill. Following the grinding, 220 mg
of amnion and 22 mg of pepsin (Cat# P7000, Sigma, Darmstadt,
Germany, http://www.sigmaaldrich.com) was added into a 15 ml
tube. The tube was then gamma irradiated for 1 hour at 1 mega
rad. Following gamma radiation, all subsequent steps were per-
formed in sterile conditions. Ten milliliters of sterilized 0.01 N HCl
was added to the tube. The materials within the tube were then
mixed, allowing digestion for 48 hours at 378C.The digest was cen-
trifuged at 4,500 rpm for 10 minutes. The supernatant was
removed and placed in another 15 ml tube. The solution was neu-
tralized with NaOH to a pH of 7. The amnion solution is referred
to as Solubilized Amnion Membrane (SAM) from herein. SAM was
stored in aliquots at 2808C until further use. An overview of this
process is show in in Figure 1A.
Preparation of HA-SAM Hydrogel
Figure 1B provides a diagram demonstrating the chemistry by
which the HA hydrogel is formed using thiol-ene photopolyme-
rization chemistry. HyStem-HP hydrogel (ESI-BIO, Alameda, CA,
http://www.esibio.com/) components were dissolved in sterile
water. Briefly, heprasil (thiolated HA with conjugated heparin
groups) or glycosil (thiolated HA) and Gelin-S (thiolated gela-
tin) were dissolved in water containing 0.05% (wt/vol) 2-
hydroxy-40-(2-hydroxyethoxy)22-methylpropiophenone
pho-
toinitiator (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) to make 1% (wt/vol) solu-
tions. Extralink, a PEGDA cross-linker, was dissolved in water
containing the photoinitiator to make a 2% (wt/vol) solution.
Heprasil, Gelin-S, and extralink were then mixed in a 2:2:1 ratio
by volume, and SAM solution was incorporated into the HA
hydrogel solution at a 1:1 ratio prior UV cross-linking. For
cross-linking, HA-SAM hydrogels were irradiated with UV light
(365 nm, 18 W/cm2) at a distance of 3 cm to initiate a thiol–
ene stepwise cross-linking reaction.
Murphy, Skardal, Song et al.
2021
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Hydrogel Swelling Assay
For the hydrogel swelling assay a 500 ml aliquot of HA-SAM or HA
alone (water used in place of SAM volume) was gelled in the bot-
tom of replicate glass vials and the vials weighed. Then, 3 ml of
Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) was added on top of each gel,
and the vials were placed into a standard tissue culture incubator
at 378C with 5% CO2. In this case, the hydrogel swelling occurred
uniaxially toward the upper direction of the vials. The PBS was
changed every hour for 4 hours, after which the vials were
weighed after carefully removing the surface PBS. The mass of the
both the initially formed and swollen hydrogels was calculated by
subtracting the mass of the vial from the total mass. The swelling
ratio was defined as a ratio of the mass of the swollen hydrogel
divided by the mass of the initially formed hydrogel.
Protein Release Assay
HA-SAM hydrogels were prepared as described above. The gels
had a total volume of 500 ml and were prepared in 9 wells of a 24-
well plate. Five hundred microliters of PBS were added to the top
of each hydrogel, and this volume was collected and replaced
after 24 hours and daily for 15 days. The collected liquid was
stored at 2208C until the Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, DC Protein Assay
Kit II, 500-0112, Hercules, California, http://www.bio-rad.com/)
was performed. The resulting data from above were converted
into cumulative protein released and plotted versus time. To
model the kinetics of the protein release, three release models
were applied to the data to achieve a best fitting model as previ-
ously described [32] Initially, a simple first-order release kinetic
model was applied to the cumulative protein release data set.
First-order release rates are described by the following equation:
log Qt5K � t
where Qt is the cumulative amount of material released at time t,
K is the first order release constant, and t is the time in days dur-
ing the release study. Next, the Hixson–Crowell release kinetic
model was applied to the data set. Hixson–Crowell release kinetics
are described by
ffiffiffiffiffi
Qt
3
p
5KHC � t
where, again, Qt is the cumulative amount of material released at
time t, KHC is the Hixson–Crowell release constant, and t is the
time in days during the release study. In this model, the application
of the cube root describes release that is impacted by changes to
the surface area or volume of the container (the hydrogel) by deg-
radation or dissolution. Last, the Higuchi release model was
applied to the data. Higuchi release kinetics are described by
Qt5KH �
ffiffi
t
p
where, once more, Qt is the cumulative amount of drug released
at time t, KH is the Higuchi release constant, and t is the time in
days. In this kinetic model, the cumulative release is plotted
against the square root of time, effectively providing a model that
describes diffusion of the released protein being governed by the
need to travel through the hydrogel polymer matrix.
Human Dermal Fibroblast and Keratinocyte Culture
Human dermal fibroblasts were obtained from human foreskin
(ScienCell, Carlsbad, CA, www.sciencellonline.com) and cultured in
Figure 1.
Formulation of Solubilized Amnion Membrane Hydrogel. (A): Process of generating solubilized amnion membrane from human
placental tissue. Amnion membrane is manually dissected from the chorion membrane and washed with sterile saline to remove blood. The
membrane is cut into small pieces, washed in saline and sterile water, and lyophilized/freezer milled. This amnion is then digested in pepsin/
HCl and the supernatant is collected. (B): A diagram demonstrating the reaction by which the HA-based Extracel hydrogel is formed by thiol-
ene photopolymerization chemistry. Thiolated HA and gelatin are cross-linked with PEGDA in the presence of the photoinitiator 4-(2-hydrox-
yethoxy)phenyl-(2-hydroxy-2-propyl)ketone using irradiation with UV light. Abbreviations: HA, hyaluronic acid; PEGDA, polyethylene glycol
diacrylate.
2022
Amnion Membrane Hydrogel for Wound Healing
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 High Glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, http://www.thermofisher.com) supple-
mented with 5% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomy-
cin (P/S) solution. Human epidermal keratinocytes were also
purchased from ScienCell and cultured in keratinocyte serum-free
media (Gibco-BRL) supplemented with prequalified human
recombinant Epidermal Growth Factor 1-53 (EGF 1-53), Bovine
Pituitary Extract, and 1% P/S solution. When sufficient cell num-
bers were reached in culture, fibroblasts (passage 8–12) and kera-
tinocytes (passage 6–10) were trypsinized for 5 minutes, counted
and used for experiments.
Cell Viability Assay
To assess the effects of hydrogel formation and exposure on cell
viability, LIVE/DEAD assays were performed on HA, HA-SAM, and
collagen encapsulated human keratinocytes and dermal fibro-
blasts. Cell viability was assessed with the LIVE/DEAD Viability/
Cytotoxicity Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, http://
www.thermofisher.com). Human keratinocytes and dermal fibro-
blasts were expanded on two-dimensional tissue culture plates
prior to gel encapsulation. The cells were treated with trypsin and
counted before centrifugation, after which the supernatant was
removed and discarded. The cells were resuspended in the hydro-
gels at a density of 1 3 106 cells per milliliter of gel. The hydrogel
plus cells was irradiated with UV light (365 nm, 18 W/cm2) at a
distance of 3 cm for 15–20 seconds for a 500 ml final volume of
the hydrogel. Control groups included cells resuspended in a HA
hydrogel not containing SAM and a collagen hydrogel. Type I rat
tail collagen (3.66 mg/ml, BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA, www.
bdbiosciences.com) was prepared as per the manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, the collagen solution was mixed with 10X
PBS, water, and 1N NaOH resulting in a 1.25 mg/ml collagen solu-
tion at pH 7.0. The collagen gel solutions were transferred to an
incubator at 378C to allow hydrophobic cross-linking to occur.
Each hydrogel was formed in one well of a two-well chamber
slide, imaged using confocal microscopy, and percentage of live to
total cells was quantified using ImageJ.
Metabolism/Proliferation Assay
For metabolism/proliferation assays, keratinocytes and dermal
fibroblasts were prepared as above, and 50,000 cells were seeded
in 50 ml hydrogel per well in 96-well plates containing the previ-
ously prepared hydrogel substrates (n5 3 per timepoint). Control
groups included cells resuspended in a HA hydrogel not containing
SAM, and a collagen hydrogel as described above.The plates were
then transferred to an incubator (378C, 5% CO2), and metabolism
was determined using 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxy-
methoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium
(MTS)
assay
(Promega, Madison, WI, http://www.promega.com) on days 1, 4,
and 7 of culture. Aliquots (100 ll) were removed and absorbance
readings determined at 490 nm on the plate reader. Absorbance
levels are approximately proportional to the number of live cells.
It should be noted that media was not changed during the time
course of the MTS assay.
Growth Factor and Cytokine Content Analysis
SAM was prepared as described above and analyzed for growth
factor and cytokine content using a Quantibody Human Growth
Factor Array (Ray-Biotech, Norcross, GA, http://www.raybiotech.
com), an array-based multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) system for simultaneous quantitative measurement
of multiple cytokines, growth factors, proteases, soluble receptors,
and other proteins. Analysis was performed by RayBiotech’s auto-
mated slide processing system.
In Vivo Wound Healing Study
An in vivo wound healing study was performed to evaluate the
efficacy of the HA-SAM hydrogel. This study was reviewed and
approved by the Wake Forest University Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee. While under anesthesia, a single full-
thickness skin wound (2.0 3 2.0 cm) was surgically created on the
mid-dorsal region of nu/nu mice as previously described [33].
Each wounded mouse received one of three treatment options;
(a) Untreated other than standard bandaging, (b) HA-gel only, or
(c) HA-SAM gel. For all treatments, triple antibiotic (bacitracin
zinc, neomycin sulfate, polymyxin-B sulfate; Medique Products,
Fort Myers, FL, http://www.mediqueproducts.com) was applied
directly to a Tegaderm bandage (3M, St. Paul, MN, http://www.
3m.com), which covered the wound after gelation. Finally, a
custom-made bandage was sutured in place in order prevent the
Tegaderm from being removed. Wound size was documented by
taking photographs immediately after surgery and again at 4, 7,
10, and 14 days (n5 6), Animals were euthanized at 14 days, and
the regenerated skin was harvested for histological analysis.
Wound Closure, Contraction, and Re-Epithelialization
Wound closure, contraction, and re-epithelialization percentages
were calculated using photographs and histological examination
of the wounds, taken at the time of surgery, and again at 4, 7, 10,
and 14 days. Using ImageJ software, the original wound area was
defined as A, the clearly re-epithelialized (but thinner) skin area
was defined as B, and the remaining unclosed wound was defined
as C. Percentage of wound remaining was defined as C/A 3
100%, percentage of contraction of the wound was defined as (A–
B)/A 3 100%, and percentage of re-epithelialization was defined
as (B–C)/B 3 100%. Wound aspect ratio was also determined to
describe observed changes in the shape and direction of wound
contraction between groups. Measurements of wound length
(head to tail direction) and wound width was measured using
Image J, and the length:width ratio determined. Symmetrical con-
traction result in aspect ratios close to 1, while asymmetrical con-
traction results in aspect ratios greater than 1.
Histology
Harvested skin tissues were first rolled around a syringe needle to
facilitate handling prior to being fixed overnight in 4% paraformal-
dehyde. Samples were then washed in PBS three times for 30
minutes per wash, after which the samples were transferred to
30% sucrose for an overnight incubation at 48C. The rolled tissues
were then sliced in half and flash frozen in Tissue-Tek OCT Com-
pound (Sakur; Finetek, Torrance, CA, http://www.sakura.com)
blocks in liquid nitrogen or processed for paraffin embedding. A
cryotome (Leica, Heerbrugg, Switzerland, http://www.leica.com)
was used to generate 6-lm frozen sections made up of the entire
cross-sections of the regenerating wounds. These slides were
stored at 2208C until histological procedures were performed.
Sections were stained with H&E for histology, and slides were
imaged under light microscopy. Quantification of vascularization
was performed by determining the blood vessel density and aver-
age vessel size (diameter) H&E-stained wound cross-sections. To
do this, ImageJ software was used to perform measurements on
histological images. For blood vessel density, first the cross-
Murphy, Skardal, Song et al.
2023
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 sectional area of tissue in the image was determined. Within that
area the number of vessels was counted. Blood vessel density val-
ues were calculated by dividing the area by the number of vessels,
after which the average blood vessel density per group was deter-
mined. For average vessel size, vessels were selected at random
from histological images taken of each animal. To calculate each
individual vessel diameter, the diameter of at least 100 blood ves-
sels was measured using ImageJ and the area approximated using
area 5 pr2. Areas of each treatment were expressed relative to
the average vessel size in healthy, uninjured skin from the same
animal. Blood vessel size distribution was also evaluated by group-
ing vessels into small (<500 mm), medium (500–1,000 mm), or
large (>1,000 mm) diameter.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining with smooth muscle actin
(SMA) was used to visualize smooth muscle cells in mature blood
vessels in the regenerating skin, and with von Willebrand factor
(vWF) to visualize endothelial cells in newly formed capillaries and
lining the mature blood vessels. For IHC, all incubations were car-
ried out at room temperature unless otherwise stated. Slides
were warmed at 608C for 1 hour to increase bonding to the slides.
Antigen retrieval was performed on all slides and achieved with
incubation in proteinase K (Dako, Carpinteria, CA, http://www.
dako.com) for 5 minutes. Sections were permeabilized with 0.05%
Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 minutes. Nonspecific antibody binding
was minimized by incubating sections for 10 minutes in Protein
Block Solution (Abcam, Cambridge, U.K., http://www.abcam.com).
Sections were incubated for 90 minutes in a humidified chamber
with the primary anti-SMA (catalog no. A5228, Sigma) and anti-
vWF antibodies (catalog no. AB7356; Millipore, Billerica, MA,
http://www.millipore.com) at 1:200 dilution in antibody diluent.
Following primary incubation, slides were washed three times in
PBS for 5 minutes. Sections were then incubated for 60 minutes
with Fluorescein Horse Anti-Mouse IgG (FL-2001) secondary anti-
bodies at a 1:25 Dilution and DyLight 594-conjugated AffiniPure
donkey anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibodies in a 1:200 dilution in
Mouse on Mouse (M.O.M.) Immunodetection reagent (BMK-
2202, Vector Laboratories). The sections were washed in PBS,
counterstained with 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), and
coverslipped with Prolong Gold Antifade (invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
http://www.invitrogen.com). For Keratin 10 and Ki67 IHC, tissues
were treated as described above, but with primary antibodies
anti-Keratin 10 antibody (catalog no. PRB-159P, Covance) and anti
Ki67 (catalog no. M7249, Dako) and secondary antibodies Invitro-
gen 488 anti-rabbit IgG and Invitrogen 594 Anti-rat IgG respec-
tively. Native skin samples were harvested as positive controls and
were used for comparison. Negative controls were set up at the
same time as the primary antibody incubations and included incu-
bation with PBS in place of the primary antibody. No immunoreac-
tivity was observed in these negative control sections. Ki67
positive cells were counted in representative slides for each ani-
mal and expressed as a number per field of view for all groups.
Statistical Analysis
Data were expressed for each experimental group as mean 6 SD
and statistical significance determined using statistical analysis
software (GraphPad Prism, Graphpad Software Inc.). Data were
analyzed using the repeated measures Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) with the Bonferroni post hoc test. Student’s t tests were
performed to compare the means of a normally distributed
interval dependent variable for two independent groups. Confi-
dence intervals of 95% were assumed to be significant.
RESULTS
Evaluation of Hydrogel Swelling
HA and HA-SAM hydrogels were prepared as described in Figure 1.
As previously described [25], the HA-only hydrogels were cross-
linked with a 18 w/cm2 365 nm UV lamp at a distance of 3 cm
cross-linked in approximately 18–20 seconds. The addition of SAM
to the hydrogel had no effect on these cross-linking properties of
the biomechanical properties of the hydrogel (data not shown).
We next evaluated the swelling properties of the HA-only hydrogel
and the HA-SAM. To measure swelling or contraction, each hydro-
gel was prepared as described above and supplemented with PBS.
The hydrogels were weighed upon gelation and every hour for 4
hours until at an equilibrium point 24 hours afterward. The swel-
ling ratio was defined as a ratio of the mass of swollen hydrogel to
the mass at equilibrium. The inclusion of SAM increased the swel-
ling ratio from approximately 1.05 to 1.17 over the first 4-hour
time-point, which remained stable until the equilibrium 24-hour
time-point (Supporting Information Fig. S1A). This difference may
be contributed to the significant mass of SAM protein impairing
the same degree of cross-linking density in the SAM-free hydro-
gels, resulting in a looser polymer network, which subsequently is
capable of expanding further. However, this difference is quite
minor compared with that of different hydrogel formulations with
similar applications, where the swelling ratio can range from 20.5
to 2.5 [25], so the significance of this finding is not clear.
Protein Release Kinetics
Cumulative protein release curves were generated from the quanti-
fication of protein released daily from HA-SAM hydrogels (Support-
ing Information Fig. S1B) over a 14-day time-course. As previously
described for release of stem cell-derived proteins [33], the major-
ity of the total SAM protein release occurred within the first week,
after which cumulative release plateaued, but maintained a minor
daily increase. Hydrogel release mechanisms were assessed using
with a set of three kinetic mathematical models. Quantification of
modeling was important to verify that the general mechanism of
release of growth factors from our material was in line with the
actual designed hydrogel system components. The models were
compared using the R2 values generated regression lines fitting the
data. The three kinetic mathematical models are shown in (Sup-
porting Information Fig. S1C–1E). R2 values indicated that the Higu-
chi diffusion-mediated release model was the most accurate for
protein release (R2 of.81365).This is expected, as secreted proteins
such as growth factors would be required to diffuse through the
polymer network to reach the fluid outside of the hydrogel.
Cell Encapsulation, Viability, and Proliferation
To confirm the biocompatibility of UV-induced cross-linking with
HA-SAM, we performed LIVE:DEAD staining of encapsulated kera-
tinocytes and dermal fibroblasts immediately after gel encapsula-
tion and cross-linking. As with all in vitro assays, we performed
these studies in triplicate, with three independently derived HA-
SAM preparations. We did not measure any significant difference
in viability of keratinocytes maintained in HA hydrogel only
(97.38% 6 0.26% viable), HA-SAM (95.2% 6 2.74% viable), and
collagen hydrogel (98.49% 6 0.12% viable; Fig. 2A). Similarly, no
2024
Amnion Membrane Hydrogel for Wound Healing
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 differences in viability were observed for dermal fibroblasts main-
tained in HA hydrogel only (97.72% 6 0.72% viable), HA-SAM
(97.44% 6 0.26% viable), and collagen hydrogel (98.44% 6 0.13%
viable; Fig. 2B). An MTS cell metabolism assay was performed as a
measure of cell proliferation within each of the hydrogel condi-
tions following a period of culture in vitro. Keratinocytes main-
tained under the three conditions did not show any significant
differences between groups at day 1 or day 4 (Fig. 2C). However,
by day 7, keratinocytes maintained in HA-SAM, showed signifi-
cantly greater absorbance (0.626 0.12) than cells maintained in
either HA hydrogel only (0.28 6 0.02) or collagen hydrogel
(0.15 6 0.01; p < .0001). Interestingly, there was also significantly
greater absorbance in HA hydrogel compared with collagen hydro-
gel only (p < .001). No differences were observed at any time-
point for fibroblasts maintained under each of the three condi-
tions, with all groups showing a steady increase in absorbance
over time (Fig. 2D).
Growth Factor and Cytokine Analysis
SAM was prepared as described above and analyzed for growth
factor and cytokine content using a Quantibody Human Growth
Factor Array. Proteomics analysis of SAM demonstrated a large
range of growth factors and cytokines able to be captured by this
assay (Supporting Information Table S1). Of note, SAM contained
high concentrations of bone morphogenetic protein 5 (BMP5;
6088.6 pg/ml), bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7; 3645.4 pg/
ml), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R; 31219.8 pg/ml),
fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4; 17213.3 pg/ml), hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF; 26791.1 pg/ml), Insulin-like growth factor
binding protein (IGFBP1-6; 5871.4–70255.2 pg/ml), Placental
Growth Factor-1 (PlGF; 2522.1 pg/ml), transforming growth factor
beta 1 (TGFb1; 5090.8 pg/ml), vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF; 9681.0 pg/ml), and vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 (VEGF R2; 2799.6 pg/ml).
Wound Treatment and Gross Morphology
Both HA-SAM and HA hydrogel only were easy to apply to wounds
and resulted in immediate wound coverage. Exposure of the
hydrogel to UV light during application resulted in only minimal
material flow, which allowed it to conform to the wound shape
and depth, but without material loss from the wound area. The
rapid cross-linking of the hydrogel provided an ideal delivery
Figure 2.
Cell Viability and Proliferation with HA-SAM hydrogel. Demonstration of post-encapsulation viability of primary keratinocytes (A)
and fibroblasts (B) following encapsulation in HA only, HA-SAM hydrogels (cross-linked with UV light) or collagen hydrogels (hydrophobic
cross-linking). Cells remained highly viable (95%–99%) following gel encapsulation. (C): Keratinocytes maintained in HA-SAM, showed signifi-
cantly greater absorbance at day 7 than cells maintained in either HA hydrogel only or collagen hydrogel. (D): No differences were observed
at any time-point for fibroblasts maintained under each of the three conditions, with all groups showing a steady increase in absorbance
over time. (**, p < .001; ***, p < .0001). Abbreviations: HA, hyaluronic acid; SAM, solubilized amnion membrane.
Murphy, Skardal, Song et al.
2025
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 system for the full thickness wounds, which followed the natural
curve of the mouse dorsum. The applied hydrogels were soft, but
robust enough to maintain wound coverage during the bandaging
process. The hydrogel was still present four days after application
for both the HA-SAM and HA only-treated wounds. By day 7, this
appeared as more of a thin transparent film or membrane. It was
not clear whether this represented remaining hydrogel, endoge-
nous cellular coverage, or a combination of both (Fig. 3).
Untreated wounds remained open during both of these time
points. By day 10, the presence of hydrogel within the wound
areas was no longer observed and instead replaced by the forma-
tion of primarily epithelium in the HA-SAM-treated wounds, and a
combination of epithelium, dried scab tissue, and open wound
area in the HA only and untreated wounds.
Wound Closure
Wound closure was calculated and expressed as the percentage
of wound remaining using photographs taken at the time of sur-
gery and again at 4, 7, 10, and 14 days (Fig. 4A). All groups started
at day 0 with 100% wound remaining. At all time-points HA-SAM-
treated wounds showed significantly less wound remaining com-
pared with both HA only-treated wounds and untreated wounds
(p < .05). Specifically at day 4, HA-SAM-treated wounds had
60.84% 6 5.08%
wound
remaining,
while
HA
only-treated
wounds
showed
80.85% 6 3.20%
and
untreated
wounds
81.12% 6 12.96% (p < .01). The trend toward accelerated wound
closure in HA-SAM-treated wounds was maintained at day 7 (HA-
SAM:
34.37% 6 7.23%,
HA:
48.25% 6 4.92%,
Untreated:
47.27% 6 10.27%, p < .05), and at day 10 (HA-SAM: 5.27% 6
2.11%, HA: 20.47% 6 4.2%, Untreated: 15.34% 6 5.13%, p < .01).
By day 14, the differences between groups had narrowed, due to
all wounds trending toward complete wound closure. However,
HA-SAM-treated wounds still showed significantly less wound
remaining compared with the other groups, primarily due to mul-
tiple wounds within the group showing complete closure, while
open wound areas still remained in all of the HA-treated and
untreated wounds (HA-SAM: 0.13% 6 0.15%, HA: 3.31% 6
1.11%, Untreated: 3.69% 6 2.54%, p < .05). There were no signif-
icant
differences
between
HA
only-treated
wounds
and
untreated wounds at any of the time-points.
Re-Epithelialization
The percentage of wound re-epithelialization was calculated and
expressed as the percentage of epithelial covering of the total
wounded area at each time-point (Fig. 4B). All groups started at day
0 with 0% wound re-epithelialization. HA-SAM-treated wounds
showed significantly more re-epithelialization at each time-point
compared with both HA only-treated wounds and untreated
wounds (p< .05). Specifically at day 4, HA-SAM-treated wounds
had 18.45% 6 3.68% wound re-epithelialization, while HA only
wounds showed 7.14% 6 4.40% and untreated wounds showed no
signs of re-epithelialization for any wounds the group (p< .001).
There were also significant differences at day 7 (HA-SAM: 32.72% 6
10.62%, HA: 16.62% 6 8.15%, Untreated: 3.38% 6 4.14%, p< .05),
and at day 10 (HA-SAM: 82.15% 6 7.23%, HA: 37.79% 6 9.91%,
Untreated: 29.63% 6 3.36%, p< .0001). All three groups showed
significant differences to each other at day 14, with HA-SAM-
treated wounds trending toward 100% wound re-epithelialization
at this final time-point (HA-SAM: 99.34% 6 0.72%, HA: 84.86% 6
3.34%, Untreated: 65.69% 6 18.07%, p< .001). Interestingly, there
also seemed like HA hydrogel itself may have a role in promoting
re-epithelialization, showing a slight improvement over untreated
wounds at day 4 and day 14 (p< .05). However, no clear trend over
the entire time course of the experiment was observed.
Wound Contraction
Wound contraction was calculated and expressed in two ways.
First, expressed as a percentage of the total regenerated/
wounded area over the original total wound area (Fig. 4C) and
second, the wound aspect ratio of the wound length:width (Fig.
Figure 3.
Time-course images from in vivo wound healing study. A 2 3 2 cm full-thickness wound was created on the back of nude mice
and received one of three treatment options; (A): Untreated other than standard bandaging; (B): HA-gel only or; (C): HA-SAM hydrogel. Gross
morphology demonstrates accelerated wound closure time, increased epithelialization, and reduced contraction in HA-SAM groups. Abbrevia-
tions: HA, hyaluronic acid; SAM, solubilized amnion membrane.
2026
Amnion Membrane Hydrogel for Wound Healing
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 4D). These two measurements of wound contraction represent
two common characteristics of wound contraction, the shrinking
of total wound area and the distortion of wound shape. All groups
started at day 0 with 0% wound contraction. Over all time-points,
there appeared to be a clear trend of untreated wounds showing
greater contraction compared with HA-SAM-treated wounds and
HA only-treated wounds. At day 4, HA only-treated wounds
showed a slight, but significant decrease in wound contraction
compared with HA-SAM-treated wounds and untreated wounds
(HA-SAM: 21.19% 6 5.79%, HA: 13.45% 6 1.75%, Untreated:
26.52% 6 3.35%, p < .05). However, this trend was not observed
at subsequent time-points, with both HA-SAM and HA only-
treated wounds both showing significant differences to untreated
wounds (p< .05), but not each other. This difference was main-
tained at day 7 (HA-SAM: 48.61% 6 7.27%, HA: 44.90% 6 5.96%,
Untreated: 54.48% 61.93%, p < .05), day 10 (HA-SAM: 70.75% 6
1.613%,
HA:
66.68% 6 6.56%,
Untreated:
80.04% 6 1.18%,
p < .01), and day 14 (HA-SAM: 77.90% 6 4.23%, HA: 78.58% 6
2.93%, Untreated: 88.20% 6 3.43%, p < .01).
The wound aspect ratio ranged from 1, representing a wound
with even length:width, to 4, representing a wound with a length
4 times as long as it’s width. There were no significant differences
between day 0 and day 4 of analysis, suggesting that while
wounds did contract, it occurred with equal effect along each of
the measured dimensions. However, beginning at day 7 and con-
tinuing until the final time-point, untreated wounds showed a sig-
nificant increase in the wound aspect ratio compared with the
HA-SAM and HA only-treated wounds, both of which remained
close to 1. Specifically, the wound aspect ratio was calculated at
day
7
(HA-SAM:
1.19 6 0.12,
HA:
1.16 6 0.12,
Untreated:
1.76 6 0.29, p < .001), at day 10 (HA-SAM: 1.27 6 0.19, HA:
1.14 6 0.13, Untreated: 2.17 6 0.59, p< .01), and day 14 (HA-
SAM: 1.35 6 0.38, HA: 1.43 6 0.49, Untreated: 3.53 6 1.22,
p < .01).
Gross Histology and Tissue Thickness
Evaluation of the overall wound area was performed by compiling
a series of >50 individual images into a single image using
ImageJ’s image stitching capabilities. This visual allowed us to
appreciate the total wound area, size, thickness, epidermis and
dermis formation (data not shown), as well as for higher resolu-
tion and quantitative analysis. Untreated wounds (Fig. 5A)
appeared to have a thinner regenerated wound area compared
Figure 4.
Quantitative Analysis of Wound Healing. (A): Percentage (%) wound remaining was calculated by dividing the area of the remain-
ing wound by the original wound size (C/A 3 100). HA-SAM groups had significant acceleration of wound closure times resulting in wound
closure 3–4 days before other groups. (B): Wound re-epithelialization was calculated by measuring newly re-epithelized skin, taking into con-
sideration remaining wound area and contraction ([B-C]/B 3 100). HA-SAM groups had significantly greater wound re-epithelialization at all
time-points compared with other groups. (C): Contraction was measured based on original wound size and the area of re-epithelized skin ([A-
B]/A 3 100). HA only and HA-SAM groups had significantly less contraction compared with untreated animals. (D): Wound aspect ratio was
determined to describe observed changes in the shape and direction of wound contraction between groups (length:width). HA only and HA-
SAM groups displayed symmetrical contraction, with aspect ratios close to 1, while other groups showed asymmetrical contraction with
aspect ratios closer to 4.
Murphy, Skardal, Song et al.
2027
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 with HA-SAM (Fig. 5B) or HA only-treated wounds (Fig. 5C). This
was quantified using total skin thickness measurements on high
magnification images, showing an increased thickness of HA-SAM-
treated skin (1259 6 315.3 lm, p< .01) and HA-gel only
(1142 6 326.1 lm, p < .05) compared with untreated wounds
(804.2 6 104.9 lm). Presence of rete pegs or hair follicles was not
observed in the central wound area, although some were
observed toward the wound edge, likely due to migration and
regeneration of endogenous cells.
Blood Vessel Density, Size, and Size Distribution
Quantification of blood vessel density was performed by counting
the number of blood vessels in representative high-resolution
microscopy images, expressed relative to the cross-sectional area
of tissue in the image. Representative images are shown in Figure
6A–6C. HA-SAM-treated wounds showed a significantly greater
number of blood vessels per measured area (4.03 6 0.62) com-
pared with HA only-treated (2.64 6 0.42, p < .01) and untreated
wounds (2.03 6 0.57, p< .001; Fig. 6D).To determine the average
blood vessel size, ImageJ was used to measure the vessel diame-
ter of at least 100 vessels per sample, and the area approximated
using area 5 pr2. To control for any inaccuracies in assuming circu-
lar blood vessel presentation in histological sections, data were
expressed relative to vessel size measured in healthy, uninjured
skin from the same animal. Interestingly, HA-SAM-treated wounds
showed an overall smaller average vessel area (0.59 6 0.23) com-
pared to HA only-treated (0.96 6 0.19, p< .05) and untreated
wounds (1.06 6 0.21, p < .01; Fig. 6E). To understand why we
were observing an increase in vessel number, but a decrease in
average vessel size, we analyzed our data to visualize vessel size
distribution by grouping vessels into either small (<500 mm),
medium (500–1,000 mm) or large (>1,000 mm) diameter. The
need to control for potential bias due to histological artifacts was
not required for this assay, which involved comparison between
vessel groupings and not specific size values. This data demon-
strated that HA-SAM-treated wounds had similar density of large
or medium sized blood vessels, but significantly greater density of
small blood vessels (299.3 6 19.57) compared with HA only-
treated
(180.6 6 16.64,
p < .01)
and
untreated
wounds
(159.28 6 14.53, p< .0001). Overall average blood vessel size was
significantly smaller in HA-SAM-treated animal compared with
HA-gel only and untreated groups, which appeared to be due to a
larger number of small vessels and equal numbers of large and
medium vessels in the regenerated wound tissue.
IHC staining was performed for a-smooth muscle actin
(aSMA) to visualize smooth muscle cells in mature blood vessels
in the regenerating skin together with vWF to visualize endothelial
cells in newly formed capillaries and lining the mature blood ves-
sels. Compared with untreated (Fig. 6G) and HA only-treated
wounds (Fig. 6H), HA-SAM-treated wounds (Fig. 6I) appeared to
show significantly more vWF positive blood vessels and these
blood vessels appeared smaller in size than vessels within skin
from other groups, matching our quantitative evaluation. Slightly
more aSMA positive blood vessels were also observed in HA-
SAM-treated wounds, but these large aSMA positive blood vessels
were too sparse to provide the power sufficient for comparison.
IHC staining for keratin 10 was performed to distinguish the epi-
dermis from the dermis together with Ki-67 to visualize proliferat-
ing cells within the tissues (Fig. 7A–7C). In HA-SAM and HA-only-
treated wounds, proliferating cells were identified in the basal
layer of the epidermis of the regenerating wounds. In untreated
groups proliferating cells were mostly identified within the dermis,
while these were rare in HA only and HA-SAM groups. We
observed significantly more proliferating cells in HA-SAM-treated
animals (27.386 2.41 per field of view) compared with HA-only-
treated (10.956 1.86 per field of view, p< .0001) and untreated
groups (12.6 6 3.30 per field of view, p< .0001; Fig. 7D).
DISCUSSION
Chronic, large, or nonhealing wounds are a major source of
patient mortality and morbidity, as well as representing a signifi-
cant financial burden on our health care system. The early closure
and protection of wounds is vital to increase patient survivability
and recovery. However, the current wound coverings available
have significant limitations, including the requirement for second-
ary biopsy sites for harvesting of autologous split-thickness grafts,
immune rejection of allogeneic grafts, and excessive costs for bio-
logical skin substitutes. To overcome these limitations, we devel-
oped a biological wound-healing product, derived from a
solubilized human amnion membrane incorporated into a HA
hydrogel. This product has not been decellularized, thus while not
containing live cells, our manufacturing process preserves the cel-
lular and extracellular components of the amnion. It has been
demonstrated that the amnion contains cell populations with
potentially therapeutic properties [34, 35], and that the lyophiliza-
tion of these cells and tissues does not alter their wound treat-
ment efficacy. Extensive studies have confirmed the effectiveness
of amnion prepared by lyophilization produces a wound dressing
that is safe and effective for promoting wound healing and pre-
venting wound infection [8, 24, 36–38].
Hydrogels and other gel-like wound dressings have recently
found clinical application for burn and wound dressings, as they
Figure 5.
Histological Analysis of Wound Healing. High magnification H&E stained sections showing epidermis formation and dermis compo-
sition of untreated (A), HA only (B), or HA-SAM-treated (C) skin. (D): Total skin thickness measurements showed an increased thickness of HA
only and HA-SAM-treated skin compared with untreated wounds. (*, p < .01; **, p < .001). Abbreviations: HA, hyaluronic acid; SAM, solubi-
lized amnion membrane.
2028
Amnion Membrane Hydrogel for Wound Healing
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 show superior wound coverage to traditional dry dressings, and
are effective in retaining and creating a moist environment within
the wound to facilitate wound healing. Current hydrogel dressings
are applied either as an amorphous gel or as a pre-formed sheet
or film. Some examples such as Nu-gel (sodium alginate, Johnson
& Johnson, Ascot, U.K.), Purilon (sodium carboxymethylcellulose/
calcium alginate, Coloplast), and Hyalosafe and Hyalomatrix (HA
derivative, Anika Therapeutics s.r.l., Abano Terme, Italy). HA pos-
sesses many properties that make it a desirable material for
wound healing applications. It is a glycoaminoglycan component
of the extracellular matrix naturally occurring within the skin,
cartilage and connective tissues. A recent clinical study has dem-
onstrated that HA-based dressings are effective for managing
acute wounds particularly in terms of its safety and efficacy [39].
Additionally, we have recently demonstrated that the commer-
cially available HyStem HA hydrogel, modified to have nearly
instantaneous in situ photocross-linking through thiol–ene chem-
istry, provides an ideal carrier for the delivery of stem cells or cell-
derived paracrine factors directly into full thickness excisional
wounds [32].
In this study, we aimed to improve the known therapeutic
potential of the amnion for wound healing by incorporating
Figure 6.
Blood Vessel Formation in Healing Wounds. H&E stained sections of wound area demonstrating blood vessels within the newly
regenerated untreated (arrows) (A), HA only (B), or HA-SAM-treated (C) skin. (D): Blood vessel density within areas of regenerated skin. There
were significantly more blood vessels in HA-SAM-treated animal compared to HA only and untreated groups. Counts were performed on six
representative fields of view. (E): Blood vessel area was calculated and represented as relative to blood vessel size within healthy skin of the
same mouse. Average blood vessel size was significantly smaller in HA-SAM-treated animal compared to HA only and untreated groups. (F):
HA-SAM-treated wounds had similar density of large or medium sized blood vessels, but significantly greater density of small blood vessels
compared to HA only-treated and untreated wounds. Immuno-fluorescent staining for aSMA and vWF to stain for blood vessels in the regen-
erating skin of untreated (G), HA only (H), and HA-SAM (I) animals. HA-SAM samples had significantly more blood vessels than other groups.
These blood vessels also appeared smaller in size than vessels within skin from other groups. Scale bars 5 50 mm (A–C) Scale bars 5 25 mm
(G–I). (*, p < .05; **, p < .01; ***, p < .01). Abbreviations: aSMA, a-smooth muscle actin; DAPI, 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; HA, hyal-
uronic acid; SAM, solubilized amnion membrane; vWF, von Willebrand factor.
Murphy, Skardal, Song et al.
2029
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 solubilized amnion membrane into a UV-cross-linked HA-based
hydrogel. We hypothesized that HA-SAM would be easy to apply
to full-thickness wounds, where it would conform to nonuniform
wound shape, and that it would significantly improve wound heal-
ing through the promotion of re-epithelialization and prevention
of wound contraction. We found that the HA hydrogel incorpo-
rated SAM within the hydrogel structure, releasing bound proteins
via Higuchi diffusion-mediated release. To evaluate the efficacy of
HA-SAM as a wound treatment, we used a full-thickness murine
wound model, and compared HA-SAM treatment to HA-only and
untreated wounds. Morphological analysis demonstrated that
HA-SAM significantly accelerated wound closure through re-
epithelialization and prevented wound contraction. Histologically,
HA-SAM-treated wounds had thicker regenerated skin, increased
total number of blood vessels, specifically small and newly formed
vessels. Our in vitro observations that HA-SAM was beneficial to
keratinocyte proliferation were supported by our in vivo IHC analy-
sis, where we observed greater numbers of proliferating keratino-
cytes within HA-SAM-treated wounds. Our findings that HA-SAM
support the proliferation of keratinocytes in vitro and in vivo, as
well as induced the formation of neovascularization, may be
explained by the growth factor composition of SAM. While our
observations are likely a result of multiple factors, beyond what
was evaluated here, the presence of growth factors known to
promote keratinocyte proliferation (bFGF, NGF, HB-EGF) [40] and
migration (HGF, IGF1, EGF, FGF-7) [41] would explain some aspects
of our presented data. Similarly, growth factors present in SAM
known to promote neovascularization (FGF-family, EGF-R, EG-
VEGF,VEGF) [42, 43] are likely to have contributed to the observed
increase in new blood vessel formation. Overall, this study con-
firms the efficacy of the amnion membrane as a wound treat-
ment/dressing, and overcomes many of the limitations associated
with using fresh, cryopreserved, or dehydrated tissue by providing
a hydrogel delivery system for SAM.
The murine nude model of wound injury and regeneration is
commonly used for basic research studies and evaluation of
potential new therapies. However, there are significant limitations
to this model that are well recognized. First, unlike humans, where
large acute wounds are unlikely to heal without intervention, the
mouse has remarkable endogenous regeneration potential. How-
ever, the 14-day wound healing window observed in this study still
provides us the opportunity to compare the influence of wound
treatments on the rates of epithelialization, wound closure and
contraction. While we found significant improvement in these
parameters in our mouse model, we anticipate that these
improvements would have even greater impact in wounds that
are slow to heal. Second, due to the rapid wound closure in the
relatively healthy mouse model used in this study, evaluation of
Figure 7.
Cell Proliferation in Healing Wounds. Immuno-fluorescent staining for proliferating cells in the epidermis of untreated (A), HA only
(B), and HA-SAM (C) animals. Antibodies for keratin 10 were used to highlight the epidermis and Ki-67 to stain proliferating cells. More prolif-
erating cells were identified in the basal layer of the epidermis of HA-SAM-treated animals compared to HA-gel only-treated and untreated
groups (arrows). In untreated groups proliferating cells were also identified within the dermis, while this was rare in HA only and HA-SAM
groups. Significantly more proliferating cells were observed in HA-SAM-treated animals compared to HA-only-treated and untreated groups.
Scale bars 5 25 mm. (***, p < .0001). Abbreviations: DAPI, 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; HA, hyaluronic acid; SAM, solubilized amnion
membrane.
2030
Amnion Membrane Hydrogel for Wound Healing
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 long-term scarring is difficult to perform. The fact that we
observed
accelerated
wound
closure,
driven
primarily
by
increased epithelialization and reduced contraction, suggests that
HA-SAM can be applied to full thickness wounds to promote the
formation of healthy regenerated skin. Finally, the use of an
immunodeficient nude mouse model, precludes any evaluation of
immune-rejection of the human tissue, or conversely, the
reported anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects of
the amnion membrane. Future studies using large animal models,
with or without slow or difficult to heal wounds will be needed to
address these questions.
It is also worth discussing the role of the HA hydrogel carrier
in the support of wound healing. As discussed previously, there
are multiple studies now describing the benefits of HA-based
wound dressings for reducing inflammation and promoting
wound healing [44–46]. In our study, while the impact of HA treat-
ment was overshadowed by the positive effects of HA-SAM, there
were some noticeable improvement in HA-only treated wounds.
Specifically, we observed improvements in keratinocyte prolifera-
tion in HA hydrogels compared with collagen, and in our mouse
model, we observed decreased contraction and increased epithe-
lialization, although this did not have a major impact on wound
closure times. Similarly, we observed that HA-treated wounds had
thicker regenerated tissue, and slightly greater levels of new blood
vessel formation compared with untreated wounds. From these
findings, we are able to conclude that HA hydrogel treatment
alone also contributes to improved wound healing, although the
main improvement occurred when HA hydrogel contained SAM. A
major benefit of using a hydrogel such as HA is the potential to
selectively modify the hydrogel properties to best match specific
applications.We previously developed a modular HA-based hydro-
gel with different cross-linking approaches that allows for the
modification of hydrogel pore size, stiffness and protein/growth
factor binding and release characteristics [25, 32]. In our upcom-
ing studies, we plan on evaluating the role of hydrogel stiffness on
wound healing, and the potential to match protein/growth factor
release to specific wound types. For example, we hypothesize that
a fast releasing hydrogel would be best suited for acute burns or
wounds, while a long lasting and slow releasing hydrogel would
be more useful for the treatment of slow or difficult to heal
wound such as diabetic ulcers.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this study demonstrated that HA-SAM maintains
the safety and efficacy of amniotic membrane for wound heal-
ing, combined with a UV cross-linked HA-hydrogel delivery sys-
tem for easy application and conformation to full-thickness
wounds. Our approach overcomes many of the limitations of liv-
ing, cellular wound treatments, while still providing biological
support for endogenous wound healing mechanisms. Further
studies will test the efficacy of HA-SAM in large and/or diseased
wound healing animal models, as well as explore the use of
multiple administrations, inclusion of biopsy-derived cells or
stem cells, and potential delivery using three-dimensional bio-
printing technology.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.V.M. and A.S.: conception and design, collection and/or assem-
bly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing,
final approval of manuscript; L.S., K.S., and R.H.: collection and/or
assembly of data, final approval of manuscript; D.L.M.: conception
and design, collection and/or assembly of data; J.J.: conception
and design, final approval of manuscript; S.S. and A.A.: conception
and design, financial support, final approval of manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
S.V.M,
A.S.,
and
A.A.
have
filed
patent
applications:
US20140342015, US20140348940, and EP2897625. All other
authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Brigham PA, McLoughlin E. Burn inci-
dence and medical care use in the United
States: Estimates, trends, and data sources.
J Burn Care Rehabil 1996;17:95–107.
2
Miller SF, Bessey P, Lentz CW et al.
National burn repository 2007 report: a syn-
opsis of the 2007 call for data. J Burn Care Res
2008;29:862–870; discussion 871.
3
Beckrich K, Aronovitch SA. Hospital-
acquired pressure ulcers: A comparison of
costs in medical vs. surgical patients. Nurs
Econ 1999;17:263–271.
4
MarketsandMarkets.com. Wound Care
Market by Product - MD2611. May 2017.
http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-
Reports/wound-care-market-371.html
5
Morrow T. Wound healing promoted
with living-skin substitutes. Manag Care 2004;
13:62–63.
6
Lesher AP, Curry RH, Evans J et al. Effec-
tiveness of Biobrane for treatment of partial-
thickness burns in children. J Pediatr Surg
2011;46:1759–1763.
7
Rahmanian-Schwarz A, Beiderwieden A,
Willkomm L-M et al. A clinical evaluation of
BiobraneV
R and SuprathelV
R in acute burns and
reconstructive surgery. Burns 2011;37:1343–
1348.
8
John
T.
Human amniotic
membrane
transplantation: Past, present, and future.
Ophthalmol Clin North Am 2003;16:43–65, vi.
9
Pigeon J. Treatment of second-degree
burns with amniotic membranes. Can Med
Assoc J 1960;83:844.
10
Cornwell KG, Landsman A, James KS.
Extracellular matrix biomaterials for soft tissue
repair. Clin Podiatr Med Surg 2009;26:507–
523.
11
Bose B. Burn wound dressing with
human amniotic membrane. Ann R Coll Surg
Engl 1979;61:444–447.
12
Quinby WC, Jr., Hoover HC, Scheflan M
et al. Clinical trials of amniotic membranes in
burn wound care. Plast Reconstr Surg 1982;
70:711–717.
13
Sawhney C. Amniotic membrane as a
biological dressing in the management of
burns. Burns 1989;15:339–342.
14
Mohammadi AA, Jafari SMS, Kiasat M
et al. Effect of fresh human amniotic mem-
brane dressing on graft take in patients with
chronic burn wounds compared with conven-
tional methods. Burns 2013;39:349–353.
15
Branski LK, Herndon DN, Celis MM
et al. Amnion in the treatment of pediatric
partial-thickness facial burns. Burns 2008;34:
393–399.
16
Hermans MH. Preservation methods of
allografts and their (lack of) influence on clini-
cal results in partial thickness burns. Burns
2011;37:873–881.
17
Fairbairn N, Randolph M, Redmond R.
The clinical applications of human amnion in
plastic surgery. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg
2014;67:662–675.
18
Lo K, Kohanim S, Trief D et al. Role of
amniotic membrane transplantation in acute
chemical injury. Int Ophthalmol Clin 2013;53:
33–41.
19
John T. Human amniotic membrane
transplantation. Ophthalmol Clin 2003;16:43–
65.
20
Fetterolf DE, Snyder RJ. Scientific and
clinical support for the use of dehydrated
amniotic membrane in wound management.
Wounds 2012;24:299–307.
21
Zelen CM, Serena TE, Denoziere G et al.
A
prospective
randomised
comparative
Murphy, Skardal, Song et al.
2031
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 parallel study of amniotic membrane wound
graft in the management of diabetic foot
ulcers. Int Wound J 2013;10:502–507.
22
Zelen C. An evaluation of dehydrated
human amniotic membrane allografts in patients
with DFUs. J Wound Care 2013;22:347–351.
23
Zelen CM, Serena TE, Fetterolf DE.
Dehydrated
human
amnion/chorion
mem-
brane allografts in patients with chronic dia-
betic foot ulcers: A long-term follow-up study.
Wound Med 2014;4:1–4.
24
Bujang-Safawi E, Halim A, Khoo T et al.
Dried irradiated human amniotic membrane
as a biological dressing for facial burns—A 7-
year case series. Burns 2010;36:876–882.
25
Murphy SV, Skardal A, Atala A. Evalua-
tion of hydrogels for bio-printing applications.
J Biomed Mater Res Part A 2013;101:272–284.
26
Fraser JR, Laurent TC, Laurent UB. Hya-
luronan: Its nature, distribution, functions and
turnover. J Intern Med 1997;242:27–33.
27
Toole BP. Hyaluronan in morphogene-
sis. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2001;12:79–87.
28
Burdick JA, Prestwich GD. Hyaluronic
acid hydrogels for biomedical applications.
Adv Mater 2011;23:H41–56.
29
Allison DD, Grande-Allen KJ. Review.
Hyaluronan: A powerful tissue engineering
tool. Tissue Eng 2006;12:2131–2140.
30
Prestwich GD, Kuo JW. Chemically-
modified HA for therapy and regenerative
medicine. Curr Pharm Biotechnol 2008;9:242–
245.
31
Prestwich GD, Shu XZ, Liu Y, Inventors.
Modified macromolecules and methods of
making
and
using
thereof.
PCT/US2004/
040726.
2005.
http://www.marketsandmar-
kets.com/Market-Reports/wound-care-market-
371.html
32
Skardal A, Murphy SV, Crowell K et al. A
tunable hydrogel system for long-term release
of cell-secreted cytokines and bioprinted in
situ wound cell delivery. J Biomed Mater Res
B Appl Biomater 2017;105:1986–2000.
33
Skardal A, Mack D, Kapetanovic E et al.
Bioprinted amniotic fluid-derived stem cells
accelerate healing of large skin wounds. STEM
CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2012;1:792–802.
34
Murphy SV, Kidyoor A, Reid T et al. Iso-
lation, cryopreservation and culture of human
amnion epithelial cells for clinical applications.
J Vis Exp 2014.
35
Murphy S, Lim R, Dickinson H et al.
Human
amnion
epithelial
cells
prevent
bleomycin-induced lung injury and preserve
lung function. Cell Transplant 2011;20:909–
923.
36
Forbes J, Fetterolf D. Dehydrated amni-
otic membrane allografts for the treatment of
chronic wounds: A case series. J Wound Care
2012;21:290–292.
37
Sheikh ES, Sheikh ES, Fetterolf DE. Use
of dehydrated human amniotic membrane
allografts to promote healing in patients with
refractory non healing wounds. Int Wound J
2014;11:711–717.
38
Shah AP. Using amniotic membrane
allografts in the treatment of neuropathic foot
ulcers. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc 2014;104:
198–202.
39
Voinchet V, Vasseur P, Kern J. Efficacy
and safety of hyaluronic acid in the manage-
ment of acute wounds. Am J Clin Dermatol
2006;7:353–357.
40
Mitev V, Miteva L. Signal transduction
in keratinocyte proliferation and differentia-
tion. Biomedical Rev 1997;8:73–85.
41
Seeger MA, Paller AS. The roles of
growth factors in keratinocyte migration. Adv
Wound Care 2015;4:213–224.
42
Brouillet S, Hoffmann P, Feige J-J et al.
EG-VEGF: A key endocrine factor in placental
development. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2012;
23:501–508.
43
Cross MJ, Claesson-Welsh L. FGF and
VEGF
function
in
angiogenesis:
Signalling
pathways, biological responses and therapeu-
tic inhibition. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2001;22:
201–207.
44
King S, Hickerson W, Proctor KG. Benefi-
cial actions of exogenous hyaluronic acid on
wound healing. Surgery 1991;109:76–84.
45
Weigel P, Frost S, McGary C et al. The
role of hyaluronic acid in inflammation and
wound healing. Int J Tissue React 1987;10:
355–365.
46
Doillon CJ, Silver FH. Collagen-based
wound dressing: Effects of hyaluronic acid and
firponectin on wound healing. Biomaterials
1986;7:3–8.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
2032
Amnion Membrane Hydrogel for Wound Healing
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
