 590   
Murray E, et al. Emerg Med J 2018;35:590–594. doi:10.1136/emermed-2017-207216
Original article
Are medical students in prehospital care at risk of 
moral injury?
Esther Murray,1 Charlotte Krahé,2 Danë Goodsman1
To cite: Murray E, Krahé C, 
Goodsman D. Emerg Med J 
2018;35:590–594.
1Centre for Medical Education, 
Barts and The London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen 
Mary University of London, 
London, UK
2Department of Psychology, 
Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, 
King’s College London, London, 
UK
Correspondence to
Dr Esther Murray, Centre for 
Medical Education, Barts and 
The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary 
University of London, London E1 
2AD, UK;  
e. 
murray@ 
qmul. 
ac. 
uk
Received 27 September 2017
Revised 4 June 2018
Accepted 8 June 2018
Published Online First 
26 June 2018
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2018. Re-use 
permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights 
and permissions. Published 
by BMJ.
AbsTrACT
background The term ’moral injury’ may be useful 
in conceptualising the negative psychological effects 
of delivering emergency and prehospital medicine 
as it provides a non-pathological framework for 
understanding these effects. This is in contrast to 
concepts such as burnout and post-traumatic stress 
disorder which suggest practitioners have reached a 
crisis point. We conducted an exploratory, pilot study to 
determine whether the concept of moral injury resonated 
with medical students working in emergency medicine 
and what might mitigate that injury for them.
Methods Structured interviews and focus groups were 
carried out with medical students involved in the delivery 
of prehospital and emergency medicine. The study was 
carried out at Barts and the London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry in May and June 2017. The data were 
analysed using theoretically driven thematic analysis.
results Concepts of moral injury such as witnessing 
events which contravene one’s moral code, especially 
those involving children, or acts of violence, resonated 
with the experiences of medical students in this study. 
Participants stated that having more medical knowledge 
and a clear sense of a job to do on scene helped reduce 
their distress at the time. While social support was a 
protective factor, not all students found the process 
of debrief easy to access or undergo, those with more 
established relationships with colleagues fared better in 
this regard.
Conclusions The term moral injury is useful in 
exploring the experience of medical students in 
emergency medicine. More effort should be made to 
ensure that students effectively access debrief and 
other support opportunities. It is hoped that future 
work will be undertaken with different professional 
groups and explore the potential psychological and 
neuropsychological impact of witnessing trauma.
The term ‘moral injury’ emerged from work with 
military veterans to describe the psychological 
sequelae of ‘bearing witness to the aftermath of 
violence and human carnage’1 2 and can occur as 
a result of witnessing human suffering or failing 
to prevent outcomes which transgress deeply held 
beliefs. For some time there has been a wider 
concern about the moral aspects of work in health-
care, as evidenced by the body of work which 
builds on Jameton’s writings about moral distress 
in nursing.3 4 While work on moral distress focuses 
on decisions made in a healthcare setting, moral 
injury also recognises the impact on practitioners 
of the nature of the traumatic event. Moral injury 
helps conceptualise the ways in which a person’s 
sense of themselves and the world is disrupted by ‘a 
betrayal of what’s right’.1 The symptoms of moral 
injury include feelings of guilt and shame due to 
an inability to have righted the wrongs committed 
and can result in social isolation and emotional 
numbing. Social support can be useful in the 
management of psychological distress but where 
shame is an element of the distress, social contact 
is avoided.1 A dose-response relationship has been 
shown for both post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) and moral injury1 5 so that practitioners 
providing life-saving pre-hospital care are increas-
ingly at risk over the course of their careers; rising 
numbers of violent crimes, terror attacks and mass 
casualty events increase this risk.
There is a growing awareness of threats to prac-
titioner mental health in prehospital care and 
emergency medicine.6 7 Not all those who are 
psychologically affected by their work, even in 
lasting ways, will reach the threshold for diagnosis 
of PTSD8 and this diagnosis is often resisted by 
staff until they become acutely unwell. Concep-
tualising individual staff as disordered, insuffi-
ciently resilient or otherwise compromised by the 
performance of their work is counterproductive, 
resulting in loss of experience and expertise from 
the workforce and in staff masking symptoms. It is 
important to explore the concept of moral injury 
as it may capture the experience of practitioners 
who do not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD9 
Key messages
What is already known on this subject
 
► There is an increasing awareness of the 
negative psychological impact of providing 
prehospital care and emergency medicine on 
practitioners.
 
► Not all healthcare professionals who suffer 
psychological harm at work will meet the 
criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder.
 
► The term ‘moral injury’ is useful for 
conceptualising psychological sequelae 
resulting from witnessing events which 
transgress deeply held beliefs.
What this study adds
 
► This qualitative pilot study suggests that moral 
injury is a term applicable to the experience of 
student prehospital practitioners.
 
► Students involved in emergency medicine may 
need to be more strongly encouraged to talk 
about their experiences.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2017-207216 on 26 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 591
Murray E, et al. Emerg Med J 2018;35:590–594. doi:10.1136/emermed-2017-207216
Original article
but who are troubled by the nature of the events they have seen 
and it may provide a useful framework for the discussion of 
this psychological disturbance after witnessing/being present at 
traumatic events.
This research is the first to explore moral injury as a type of 
secondary trauma in a healthy, working population in the UK. 
Much has been written recently about burnout in the health-
care professions (see eg Lemaire and Wallace10). Maslach’s 
pioneering work from the 1980s11 illustrates that burnout in 
helping professions produces emotional exhaustion and cynicism 
with regard to patients, similarly compassion fatigue will result 
in disaffection from the job at hand and a tendency to make 
more mistakes.12 In addition, neural responses to witnessing 
pain are attenuated in physicians versus non-physicians13 14 and 
more experienced physicians rate pain in others as less intense 
than less experienced physicians15 possibly indicating a blunting 
of empathic responses with increasing experience and exposure 
to trauma which would impact on patient care and team func-
tioning. Work in the field of PTSD and secondary trauma recog-
nises the potentially extreme psychological states which can be 
the result, not just of exposure to danger and risk to the self, but 
also of witnessing trauma in the other.16
While secondary traumatic stress5 7 can and does affect 
providers at all levels, there is evidence to suggest that medical 
students may suffer more frequently, and this may be because 
students, in contrast with experienced staff, have fewer resources 
and less experience to deal with witnessing suffering.17 Thus the 
current research explores the experience of medical students 
involved in prehospital care.
The objectives of this pilot study were to explore the questions:
 
►
Does the way in which medical students talk about their 
experiences in prehospital care resonate with the concept 
of moral injury?
 
►
If social support can be protective, to what degree do 
students feel they have access to this support and want to 
use it?
 
►
 In this research, we sought to explore a new way of concep-
tualising the psychological harms which may result from 
the practice of prehospital and emergency medicine. The 
concept of moral injury offers practitioners the opportunity 
to think about the impacts of their work in ways which do 
not threaten their ability to continue to do it.
sTudy design, MeThOdOlOgy And dATA AnAlysis
The current pilot study is the first of a series across professional 
groups, exploring the lived experience of providing prehospital 
care, through the theoretical lens of moral injury. The focus 
group/interview schedule (box 1) was adapted for healthcare 
populations from previous research on moral injury in military 
populations.18
The study was peer reviewed in the first authors’ institute 
and ethical approval was granted by Queen Mary University of 
London ethics committee. Interviews were conducted by EM, a 
senior lecturer and chartered and registered health psychologist 
with extensive experience in student support, qualitative data 
collection and analysis. Participants were aware of EM through 
her attendance at teaching symposia. The goals of the research 
were explained in a recruitment email sent to students on the 
prehospital care programme and the intercalated degree in 
prehospital medicine via gatekeepers such as course administra-
tors and society secretaries. EM’s interest in the area of research 
was also explained in the preamble to the interviews and focus 
groups.
Participants were selected via a form of critical case sampling 
suitable for this exploratory study.19 Data were gathered via two 
focus groups of two participants each and one interview. Data 
collection is ongoing. Other students who had agreed to take 
part dropped out before the planned focus group took place. 
The interview and focus groups were held in teaching rooms 
on campus, audio recorded and lasted between 24 and 68 
min. 
No non-participants were present. No repeat interviews were 
carried out. Field notes were made after the interviews. Partic-
ipants were offered the opportunity to amend transcripts but 
declined nor did they take up the opportunity to review the find-
ings. Questions were designed to be minimally distressing for 
students while exploring moral injurious experiences (see box 1 
Q4, Q7, Q10) and symptoms resulting from moral injury (Q6, 
Q9). Questions 11 and 12 explore potential protective factors as 
well as closing the interview in a ‘safe’ and positive way.
A theoretical thematic analysis20 21 was carried out to explore 
students’ perceptions of the psychosocial effects of their involve-
ment in trauma medicine. All findings reported here are viewed 
through the theoretical lens of moral injury, which may preclude 
other readings of the texts. Data were analysed by the first 
author, by hand. No claims are made that data saturation has 
been reached since data collection is ongoing. Pseudonyms are 
used.
resulTs
Five students took part in the pilot study; they described complex 
and vivid experiences in prehospital and emergency settings and 
were clearly working hard to make sense of themselves and others 
in this experience. Their desire to do well for their team on scene 
was strong and meant that their relationship with debrief was 
box 1 interview/focus group schedule
1. What made you sign up for Prehospital Medicine/
Prehospital Care programme?
2. I suspect that we will have different definitions of the word 
‘trauma’ since you have a medical background and I do not. 
What comes to mind when I say ‘trauma’ to you?
3. And can you describe what it’s like to see these events 
when you’re out with the cars/ambulances/helicopter?
4. Do you find that some types of incidents worse than others? 
a.  What do you think makes them worse?
5. Who do you talk to about what you’ve seen on shift?
6. Do you ever find you’re remembering particular incidents 
some time later?
7. If you’ve experienced an event which bothered you for a 
while after it was over, would you be able to tell us what it 
is about it that bothers you?
8. Does it ever seem as if you would rather not keep talking 
over an event with others, just work on it in your own head?
9. Do you think some people (in general, not specific people 
you know) feel these events more deeply than others/are 
more bothered by them?
10. Do you ever feel as if there are not enough resources 
(financial/kit/staff) to treat the cases you attend?
11. Can you remember any really excellent experiences when 
you’ve been out with the teams? Things which impressed 
you or impacted you?
12. What do you think being involved in Emergency Medicine 
brings to you as a person?
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2017-207216 on 26 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 592
Murray E, et al. Emerg Med J 2018;35:590–594. doi:10.1136/emermed-2017-207216
Original article
complicated. Students explained that they were often surprised 
and challenged by what made a scene memorable.
The data reported in this paper is gathered into three themes: 
‘What is seen on scene’, ‘Material versus Human Resources’ and 
‘The Complexity of Debrief’.
What is seen on scene
Some of the concepts of moral injury, such as the impact of 
witnessing events which contravene a person’s moral code, reso-
nate with the students’ experiences. When asked what made 
some scenes worse than others, students revealed that it was the 
‘mechanism behind what had happened’ (Sarah):
‘it’s always the ones with the violent connotations which are the 
hardest to process afterwards… when it’s a violent attack there’s 
an air about it of ‘God, someone else has done this and it’s up to us 
to reverse it.’ Nick
Students described themselves as more aware of the scene as a 
whole and its implications because they had less clinical work to 
do than the doctors there:
‘I’m just thinking about what’s happened and what’s going to hap-
pen next, what’s going to be the effect.’ Caitlin
Students observed that sometimes others were there with a 
‘medical, practical head on’ (Sarah) using algorithms and experi-
ence to help them manage the scene. These experienced doctors 
were able to notice details which students sometimes found 
themselves too distressed to attend to, for example in this case 
of a deceased patient:
‘he (the doctor) was like, okay, let’s look for injury patterns because 
that’s quite useful. I just remember thinking, oh my God … Obvi-
ously I was feeling a lot more than he was but that’s just by virtue 
of him having—that’s his job and that’s his life.’ Maria
One student speculated that developing medical expertise was 
a psychologically protective factor; they talked about the differ-
ence it made to be ‘looking at scenes with their medical eyes’ 
(Sarah) and said, for example,
‘I’m not just seeing (the scenes) as ‘this is horrific’ I’m seeing them 
as ‘this is your injury pattern’ and it changes for me the way the 
scenes feel.’ Sarah
These observations from students suggest that while witnessing 
events can indeed be distressing, becoming more experienced 
allows them to use clinical knowledge to make sense of what is 
happening and thus better manage their feelings.
Material versus human resources
When asked if they had ever found there was a lack of resources 
to support patients at a scene, students generally had incidents 
they could refer to such as the lack of availability of ambulances 
or supplies when shifts are changing:
‘It’s around times like that when you can go to an incredibly, in-
credibly unwell person and they will be deteriorating in front of 
you and you know that actually I’m probably not going to get a 
truck for another half an hour. What do I do?’ Nick
‘the paramedic had used up all his morphine… I felt so bad for this 
kid… he was in lots of pain and just basically lying on the floor and 
we couldn’t do anything. I felt bad.’ David
What they also noted, though, was the seemingly infinite 
resource of compassion:
‘he (the medic) cares so much and it comes across. Considering the 
amount that he’s seen and his experience, it’s still,—it’s so fresh and 
genuine which is lovely to see.’ David
Some students were concerned that they could not live up to 
the high standards set them by their colleagues.
‘They (the paramedics) are always compassionate and caring, which 
I think is incredible really. Sometimes I think, actually, I don’t know 
if I would be able to be that…understanding.’ Nick
The way students describe themselves on scene and the note 
they take of their seniors’ behaviour suggests that they develop 
an image of an ideal practitioner which they feel they might 
struggle to become.
The complexity of debrief
Social support is considered to be protective for all forms of 
work-related distress. Within their discussions about debriefing 
in response to the question ‘Who do you talk to?’ students 
described a multilayered process encompassing formal Death 
and Disability meetings, informal debriefs on shift, informal 
debrief with fellow PCP and PHM students, debrief with para-
medic colleagues and with family. Some students wanted to talk 
to family members:
‘I phone my mum…after every traumatic shift’ Caitlin
But some believed that this was inappropriate and unhelpful 
since it required managing the emotional upset of others when it 
was comfort and understanding they needed:
‘Just sit down and understand and go, yeah, that’s crap… talk me 
through it. Get everything out.’ Nick
All the participants described debrief as ‘important’ in allowing 
them to make sense of what had happened on scene. It was seen 
as something that should take place in a timely manner and 
with appropriate seriousness. Although friends on the course 
were a great source of support, debrief with a clinician was the 
optimum:
‘we (paramedic and student) went and sat down…we just properly 
spoke it through. I feel very at ease with that one now. I think it 
needs to be spoken about on the day or the day after…otherwise 
I just feel like I have this niggly feeling that it’s going to come out’ 
Caitlin
‘They know exactly what happened and you can say, well why did 
we decide to do this…then suddenly there is some kind of scientific 
underpinning, understanding that helps you process what’s hap-
pened ’ Nick
That said, debriefing conversations were not always easy to 
come by. All the students noted that the doctors were very busy, 
and one described herself as feeling ‘on the periphery’ (Sarah) of 
some of the informal support systems. Those who had good rela-
tionships, especially longer term relationships, with colleagues 
explained that these were essential in facilitating debrief:
‘I think our relationship is quite nice in that he can tell when I am 
still processing things quite a while afterwards.’ Nick
One student felt very strongly that debriefing was hard work:
‘You’ve got to make the effort, I find I have to make the effort. If 
I’m going to talk about it, I need to talk about it properly.’ Sarah
The same student later added:
‘for me that was quite a big step to say that like, hey, actually I need 
to talk about this.’  Sarah
Of the five students in the study, each had an idea about what 
could address the issue of debrief being challenging. Three of 
the five students felt they should be ‘obliged to have the opportu-
nity’ (Sarah) to talk, whereby they would be expected to attend 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2017-207216 on 26 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 593
Murray E, et al. Emerg Med J 2018;35:590–594. doi:10.1136/emermed-2017-207216
Original article
regular meetings so that if they were distressed there would be a 
designated space to talk:
‘it needs to be a system where people don’t feel any apprehension 
in approaching it at all.’ Maria.
Maria suggested that a standardised system would not work, 
but that there should be a culture of openness:
‘If you’re in the environment with the sort of people who do that 
every day, then you’ll feel… it will be very natural to be able to 
talk…’ Maria
Sarah pointed out that ‘it’s only in hindsight that I figured I was 
upset’ and ‘I can’t put my finger on what I would have wanted’ 
which highlights the need for regular debrief to be a standard 
part of practice. Maria had the sense that ‘their (HEMS) support 
network for each other’s quite good up there’ but that because 
students were moving from service to service, they missed the 
opportunity to debrief in a more stable team.
disCussiOn
From these interviews, it would seem that the concept of moral 
injury resonates with the students’ experience; they are trou-
bled by scenes which they have witnessed, both in terms of how 
the event has come about and its consequences for the lives of 
patients and families. They have a sense that while there are 
challenges to having sufficient material resources to deliver 
appropriate care, the human resources are well covered; that 
said, some students worry that they cannot live up to the stan-
dards they believe are required for them. They are aware of the 
importance and utility of talking about their experiences, even if 
they sometimes find it hard to do so.
It has been suggested that the amount and quality of social 
support available at the time of the morally injurious event can 
reduce its impact but the nature of moral emotions such as shame 
or guilt may lead people to avoid social contact.1 The inability 
to effectively reconcile events with beliefs and the potential for 
unresolved feelings of guilt and shame about perceived failures 
can lead to the intrusive thoughts and feelings which are symp-
toms of moral injury.22 What these data also suggest is that the 
systems which should be protective for practitioners are not as 
accessible as might be imagined. The perception of colleagues 
as more robust than oneself or as too senior as to be accessible 
means that some opportunities for exploring the impact of 
practicing this type of medicine may be missed. Compassionate 
responses from more senior colleagues meant that the residents 
in Abedeni et al’s23 study felt better able to recover from their 
feelings of burnout. Perhaps due to the nature of prehospital 
medicine, not all students in this study felt able to access these 
interactions easily with senior colleagues.
Despite evidence that there is a dose-response relationship for 
traumatic exposure (see eg, Mullett-Hume et al24) in this study 
participants’ perceptions of themselves as becoming more expe-
rienced and knowledgeable about trauma medicine and feeling 
more competent on scene seemed to relieve some of their feel-
ings of distress. Research in the field of social cognitive neurosci-
ence has demonstrated that neural responses to witnessing pain 
are dampened in physicians compared with non-physicians.13 14 
However, it is unclear whether or not this downregulation is 
problematic or in fact constitutes an adaptive strategy to miti-
gate ‘empathic distress’ and promote helping behaviours when 
exposed to acute suffering and how this relates to physicians’ 
psychological distress and levels of coping in the longer term. 
Developing experimental paradigms for future research relevant 
to this group of healthcare practitioners and combining them 
with self-report questionnaires and behavioural tasks can help 
to establish whether emergency medicine teams show damp-
ened neural responses to traumatic situations, how responses 
may change over time and how these relate to levels of distress, 
coping and the ability to effectively and compassionately carry 
out their job. In addition, the impact of potential moderators 
such as years of experience or features of the situation can be 
examined.
This study has limitations, the number of participants is small, 
it is exploratory, ongoing work and the accounts presented here 
are by no means exhaustive. The students who took part are 
involved in prehospital care and a taught course in prehospital 
medicine and are thus different from students in other disciplines 
and professionals who have completed their training. Naturally 
those students who want to talk are those who would volunteer 
to take part in interviews and focus groups. It would be useful 
to explore the experience of the more recalcitrant students, and 
it may be that a non-face to face data collection method would 
be more suitable for this. The authors of this paper would like 
to undertake further qualitative and quantitative research across 
professional groupings in order to explore the lived experience 
of providers of emergency medicine and the potential effects 
on the brain and to develop interventions which could mitigate 
these effects.
Contributors EM conceived of and designed the study, collected the data, 
analysed it and wrote the first draft of the short report. EM has redrafted the 
article in collaboration with CK and DG and approved the final manuscript. CK 
collaborated in the conception of the study as it relates to cognitive neuroscience. 
CK wrote those parts of the short report relating to cognitive neuroscience and 
has redrafted the work for important intellectual content and approved the final 
manuscript. DG provided expert guidance in the conception of the study with 
regard to the field of emergency medicine. DG has contributed to drafts of the 
report from this perspective and approved the final manuscript. All three coauthors 
to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to 
the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and 
resolved.
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors. 
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Not required.
ethics approval Queen Mary Ethics of Research Committee.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
data sharing statement Redacted interview and focus group transcripts are 
available on request from the corresponding author.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/.
RefeRences
 1 Litz BT, Stein N, Delaney E, et al. Moral injury and moral repair in war veterans: a 
preliminary model and intervention strategy. Clin Psychol Rev 2009;29:695–706.
 2 Shay J. Moral injury. PsychoanalPsychol 2014;31:182–91.
 3 Jameton A. Nursing practice: the ethical issues, 1984.
 4 Fourie C. Who is experiencing what kind of moral distress? distinctions for moving 
from a narrow to a broad definition of moral distress. AMA J Ethics 2017;19:578–84.
 5 Sendler DJ, Krukowska A, Makara-Studzinska M. How the exposure to trauma has 
hindered physicians’ capacity to heal: prevalence of PTSD among healthcare workers. 
EurJPsychiat 2016;30:321–34.
 6 Roden-Foreman JW, Bennett MM, Rainey EE, et al. Secondary traumatic stress in 
emergency medicine clinicians. Cogn Behav Ther 2017;46:1–11.
 7 Sheck A. Special report: lurking inside every headline, PTSD for emergency physicians. 
Emergency Medicine News 2013;35:18–19.
 8 American Psychological Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM–5). 5th ed, 2013.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2017-207216 on 26 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 594
Murray E, et al. Emerg Med J 2018;35:590–594. doi:10.1136/emermed-2017-207216
Original article
 9 Zoellner LA, Bedard-Gilligan MA, Jun JJ, et al. The evolving construct of Posttraumatic 
Stress Disorder (PTSD): DSM-5 Criteria Changes and Legal Implications. Psychol Inj 
Law 2013;6:277–89.
 
10 Lemaire JB, Wallace JE. Burnout among doctors: a system level problem requiring a 
system level response. BMJ 2017;358:j3360.
 
11 Maslach C, Jackson SE. The measurement of experienced burnout. JOrganBehav 
1981;2:99–113.
 
12 Hooper C, Craig J, Janvin DR, et al. Compassion satisfaction, burnout and compassion 
fatigue among emergency medicine nurses compared with Nurses in other selected 
inpatient specialties. J Emerg Nurse 2010;36:420–7.
 
13 Decety J, Yang C-Y. & Cheng Y, Physicians down-regulate their pain empathy response: 
An event-related brain potential study. NeuroImage;201050:1676–82.
 
14 Cheng Y, Lin CP, Liu HL, et al. Expertise modulates the perception of pain in others. 
Curr Biol 2007;17:1708–13.
 
15 Gleichgerrcht E, Decety J. The relationship between different facets of empathy, pain 
perception and compassion fatigue among physicians. Front Behav Neurosci 2014;8.
 
16 American psychological association clinical practice guideline for the treatment of 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) in Adults. https://www. 
apa. 
org/ 
ptsd- 
guideline/ 
ptsd. 
pdf (accessed Sep 2017).
 
17 Crumpei I, Dafinoiu I. Secondary traumatic stress in medical students Procedia. 
SocBehavSci 2012;46:1465–9.
 
18 Currier JM, Holland JM, Drescher K, et al. Initial psychometric evaluation of 
the Moral Injury Questionnaire--Military version. Clin Psychol Psychother 
2015;22:54–63.
 
19 Patton MQ. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. 2nd edn. Newbury 
Park, California: Sage, 1990.
 
20 Clarke V, Braun V. Teaching thematic analysis: overcoming challenges and developing 
strategies for effective learning. Psychologist 2013;26:120–3.
 
21 Clarke V, Braun V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. QualResPsychol 2006;3:2.
 
22 Nieuwsma JA, Walsmer RD, Farnsworth JK. Possibilities within acceptance 
and commitment therapy for approaching moral injury. CurrPsychiatryRev 
2015;11:193–206.
 
23 Abedeni NC, Stack SW, Goodman JL, et al. “It’s not just time off”: a framework for 
understanding factors promoting recovery from burnout among internal medicine 
residents. J Grad Med Educ 2018.
 
24 Mullett-Hume E, Anshel D, Guevara V, et al. Cumulative trauma and posttraumatic 
stress disorder among children exposed to the 9/11 World Trade Center attack. Am J 
Orthopsychiatry 2008;78:103–8.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2017-207216 on 26 June 2018. Downloaded from 
