 P H A R M A C O L OG Y
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Subtle modifications to oxytocin produce ligands that
retain potency and improved selectivity across species
Markus Muttenthaler,1,2* Åsa Andersson,1 Irina Vetter,1,3 Rohit Menon,4 Marta Busnelli,5,6
Lotten Ragnarsson,1 Christian Bergmayr,7 Sarah Arrowsmith,8 Jennifer R. Deuis,1
Han Sheng Chiu,1 Nathan J. Palpant,1 Margaret O’Brien,9 Terry J. Smith,9 Susan Wray,8
Inga D. Neumann,4 Christian W. Gruber,7,10 Richard J. Lewis,1 Paul F. Alewood1*
Oxytocin and vasopressin mediate various physiological functions that are important for osmoregulation, reproduc-
tion,cardiovascularfunction,social behavior,memory, and learning throughfourG protein–coupled receptors that are
also implicated in high-profile disorders. Targeting these receptors is challenging because of the difficulty in obtaining
ligands that retain selectivity across rodents and humans for translational studies. We identified a selective and more
stable oxytocin receptor (OTR) agonist by subtly modifying the pharmacophore framework of human oxytocin and
vasopressin. [Se-Se]-oxytocin-OH displayed similar potency to oxytocin but improved selectivity for OTR, an effect that
was retained in mice. Centrally infused [Se-Se]-oxytocin-OH potently reversed social fear in mice, confirming that this
action was mediated by OTR and not by V1a or V1b vasopressin receptors. In addition, [Se-Se]-oxytocin-OH produced a
more regular contraction pattern than did oxytocin in a preclinical labor induction and augmentation model using
myometrial strips from cesarean sections. [Se-Se]-oxytocin-OH had no activity in human cardiomyocytes, indicating
a potentially improved safety profile and therapeutic window compared to those of clinically used oxytocin. In con-
clusion, [Se-Se]-oxytocin-OH is a novel probe for validating OTR as a therapeutic target in various biological systems
and is a promising newlead fortherapeutic development. Ourmedicinal chemistryapproachmay also be applicable to
other peptidergic signaling systems with similar selectivity issues.
INTRODUCTION
Oxytocin and vasopressin [also known as arginine vasopressin (AVP)]
are closely related neurohypophysial neuropeptides that are mainly
synthesized in the magnocellular and parvocellular neurons of the
hypothalamus, transported in association with neurophysins to the
posterior pituitary, and released into the systemic circulation after en-
zymatic cleavage in response to relevant physiological stimuli (1, 2). In
the periphery, oxytocin is involved in uterine smooth muscle contrac-
tion during parturition, milk ejection during lactation, ejaculation, and
pain (3–5), whereas centrally released oxytocin functions as a neuro-
transmitter or neuromodulator that promotes multiple behaviors (6–8)
such as maternal care (9, 10), partnership bonding (8, 11, 12), social
interactions (12), and stress and anxiety responses (13–15), as largely
determined in rodents. Intranasal administration of oxytocin elicits
broad behavioral effects in humans, and its therapeutic potential for
psychopathologies characterized by social or emotional dysfunctions is
under clinical investigation (14, 16–21). Vasopressin increases and de-
creases fluid balance and blood pressure in the periphery (22–24). Cen-
trally, vasopressin is implicated in learning and memory (25–27), in
various social behaviors including pair bonding and aggression in ro-
dents (6, 8, 28, 29), and in stress- and anxiety-related behaviors (28–30).
The ubiquitous involvement of the oxytocin and vasopressin signal-
ing system in diverse physiological functions reflects its ancient origin
dating back at least 600 million years (8, 31). The oxytocin receptor
(OTR) and vasopressin receptor are members of the G protein–coupled
receptor (GPCR) family (5, 32) and are attractive targets in the treat-
ment of various high-profile disorders including cancer, pain, autism,
schizophrenia, anxiety, and reproductive and cardiovascular disorders
(5, 8, 16, 33).
In humans and rodents, oxytocin and vasopressin act through the
oxytocin receptor (OTR) and the three AVP receptors (AVPRs; vaso-
pressor V1aR, pituitary V1bR, and antidiuretic V2R). Oxytocin and
vasopressin are structurally similar nonapeptides that differ only by
two amino acids at positions 3 and 8 (Fig. 1A). Two cysteine residues
in positions 1 and 6 form the cyclic part of the molecules followed by a
three-residue amidated C-terminal tail. Their chemical similarity and
the high sequence homology of the extracellular binding domains of
OTR and AVPRs (~80%) lead to substantial cross-talk, with oxytocin
able to activate the AVPRs and vasopressin the OTR (34, 35). Specific
receptor functionality is thus not controlled by ligand selectivity but by
cell-specific variations in receptor abundance, controlled release, receptor
oligomerization, rapid clearance, and specific enzymatic degradation
(36). High OTR and AVPR homology and overlapping distribution
constitute a major hurdle in the development of selective receptor ago-
nists, antagonists, and therapeutic candidates (37, 38). The identification
of novel drug leads is further complicated by substantial species differ-
ences, such that rodent and human selectivity typically do not overlap,
thereby restricting clinical translation (37–39). For example, clinically
used oxytocin and vasopressin analogs including desmopressin (40, 41),
carbetocin (42), and atosiban (37, 43, 44) are receptor subtype–selective
in rats but not in humans. This difference is mainly due to rapid bio-
degradation, renal clearance, and a limited administration window during
which they can be used clinically without side effects (40, 44, 45). Despite
1Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queens-
land 4072, Australia. 2Faculty of Chemistry, Institute of Biological Chemistry, University
of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. 3School of Pharmacy, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland 4104, Australia. 4Department of Behavioral and Molecular
Neurobiology, Regensburg Center of Neuroscience, University of Regensburg,
93053 Regensburg, Germany. 5CNR–Institute of Neuroscience, 20129 Milan, Italy.
6Department of Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan,
20129 Milan, Italy. 7Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. 8Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Harris-
Wellbeing Preterm Birth Centre, Institute of Translational Medicine, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, UK. 9National Centre for Biomedical Engineering Science,
NationalUniversityofIreland,GalwayH91CF50,Ireland. 10SchoolofBiomedicalSciences,
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.
*Corresponding author. Email: markus.muttenthaler@univie.ac.at, m.muttenthaler@uq.edu.au
(M.M.); p.alewood@uq.edu.au (P.F.A.)
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
1 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 these limitations, oxytocin remains the ligand of choice in the clinic to in-
duce and progress labor (46). The lack of a complete set of selective recep-
tor agonists and antagonists further limits our ability to characterize the
physiological responses for each subtype receptor and their relevance in
disease. We therefore commenced a program to overcome these limita-
tions and to produce more selective ligands for this fundamental signaling
system (31, 47–51). Here, we demonstratedthat small modificationsto the
structural framework of the pharmacophore of the endogenous and phar-
macologically unselective neuropeptides could be used to tune selectivity
and generate analogs with an improved selectivity profile that was con-
served across mouse and human, thereby facilitating translational studies.
RESULTS
Rationale for subtle modifications
Traditional medicinal chemistry strategies that modify single or mul-
tiple functional groups of oxytocin and vasopressin commonly yield
selectivity improvements that are not retained across species (37, 38).
On the basis of structural data for oxytocin (4, 48, 52–54) and earlier
studies (37, 50, 55–57), we knew that oxytocin and vasopressin bind-
ing and receptor activation are sensitive to even minor modifications.
For example, ring reduction by one sulfur atom or disulfide bond re-
placement by a dicarba bridge (−CH2−CH2−) causes complete loss of
activity (56). N-terminal deamination of oxytocin analogs often leads
Fig. 1. Overview of the pharmacophore framework modifications to oxytocin and vasopressin. (A) NMR structure of oxytocin (OT), with framework residues marked in red
that were the focus of this study. The table provides an overview of all synthesized peptides with details on their modifications. U, selenocysteine; d, deamino (N terminus); D,
deletion of residue; bold, modification; P, position; term, terminus; AVP, arginine vasopressin. (B) Synthesis of selenocysteine building blocks for Boc-SPPS to enable sulfur to
seleniumreplacements. (C and D)Functionalscreen ofoxytocin analogs 1to 10 (C) andvasopressin analogs11 to 16 (D)at the human OT receptor (hOTR), hV1aR, andhV1bRusing
the fluorescent imaging plate reader (FLIPR) Ca2+ signaling assay and at the hV2R by measuring cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) accumulation. Taller bars in graphs
indicate loss of function at that particular receptor. The last row of beige bars illustrates how modifications affected potency compared to oxytocin at the hOTR and vasopressin at
the hV2R (black). (E) Functional screen of oxytocin analogs 1 to 7, vasopressin, and dAVP at the hOTR, hV1aR, and hV1bR as assessed by measuring second-messenger inositol
1-phosphate (IP1) accumulation and at the hV2R as assessed by measuring second-messenger cAMP accumulation. CNS (central nervous system) and PNS (peripheral nervous
system) indicate where these receptors can be found in humans. Exact EC50 values are shown in tables S2 and S3.
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
2 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 to improved OTR activation, which has led to the generation of the
slightly more stable and hydrophobic oxytocin superagonist deamino-
oxytocin (dOT) and the clinically used ligands carbetocin, desmopressin,
and atosiban (37, 55, 57). Furthermore, changing Gly9 to Val9 in ox-
ytocin and vasopressin switches these agonists to antagonists. In ad-
dition, [Gly9,Val]-oxytocin not only acts as an antagonist at the human
V1aR (hV1aR) but also no longer binds to the hV1bR and the hV2R at
concentrations up to 10 mM (50). For vasopressin, replacement of Gly9
by a carboxylic acid markedly decreases its vasopressor (V1aR) and
antidiuretic (V2R) activity in rats (58). We also included replacement
of the disulfide bond with a diselenide bond, which has been described
as a structurally isosteric disulfide bond mimic that can increase po-
tency and selectivity due to the slightly more hydrophobic character of
the diselenide bond (56, 59). Moreover, the lower redox potential of
the diselenide bond correlates to higher stability in a reducing environ-
ment and can therefore be exploited to improve peptide half-life
(56, 59–61). We therefore introduced subtle modifications to the
pharmacophore framework of oxytocin and vasopressin (Fig. 1A and
table S1) to identify those that yield selectivity gains that are retained
across species.
Peptide synthesis
Two building blocks [Boc-L-Sec(Meb)-OH and dSec(Meb)-OH] were
synthesized to generate the desired sulfur or selenium modifications
(Fig. 1, A and B, and table S1). To acquire Boc-L-Sec(Meb)-OH in
sufficient quantities, we optimized various protocols (62–64) to obtain
28.7 g of pure Boc-L-Sec(Meb)-OH in only three steps (62% overallyield
in a 4-day procedure; Fig. 1B). We also devised a new synthetic strategy
for dSec(Meb)-OH, yielding the building block in a two-step synthesis
with an overall yield of 12% (Fig. 1B). With these building blocks in
hand, all of the oxytocin and vasopressin analogs 1 to 16 (Fig. 1A and
table S1) were synthesized by Boc-SPPS (tert-butyloxycarbonyl solid-phase
peptide synthesis), folded in 0.1 M NH4HCO3, and purified by reversed-
phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) (59, 65).
Functional response of novel oxytocin and
vasopressin ligands
A fluorescent imaging plate reader (FLIPR) Ca2+ mobilization assay
(for OTR, V1aR, and V1bR) and a second-messenger cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) assay (for V2R) showed that oxytocin acti-
vated all four human receptors. Half-maximal effective concentration
(EC50) at the hV1aR and hV1bR was 10- to 300-fold higher than that
at the hOTR (EC50: hOTR ≈ hV2R < hV1bR < hV1aR) (Fig. 1C and
table S2). Deletion of the N-terminal amino group (dOT) increased
the ability of the ligand to activate all of the AVPRs, suggesting an im-
proved fit of dOT in the hydrophobic transmembrane binding pocket
(47) across all four receptors. Replacement of the disulfide bond with
the isosteric yet slightly more hydrophobic diselenide bond ([Se-Se]-
OT and d[Se-Se]-OT) was well tolerated and did not lead to marked
changes in potency. In particular, d[Se-Se]-OT showed the least change
in potency and selectivity compared to oxytocin. Exchange of the
C-terminal amide to acid in oxytocin (OT-OH) resulted in weaker
potency at all receptors, and truncations of the C terminus of oxytocin
(compounds 8, 9, and 10) reduced the potency at all receptors with
complete loss of activity at the hV2R (up to 10 mM). Compounds 6,
7, 9, and 10 all showed substantial drops in interaction with AVPRs
while retaining good potency at the hOTR, thereby indicating that
the C terminus of oxytocin is a good target for improving selectivity
for the hOTR against the three AVPRs.
In particular, the combination of diselenide replacement and
C-terminal amide to acid change yielded [Se-Se]-OT-OH (compound
6) with an improved selectivity profile for OTR compared to oxytocin
(Fig. 1C and table S2). [Se-Se]-OT-OH displayed low nanomolar
potency (7.3 nM) and partial agonism (Emax = 52%) at the hOTR,
no activation of the hV1aR (>10 mM), a 600-fold higher EC50 at the
hV1bR, and a 15-fold higher EC50 at the hV2R (109 nM). N-terminal
deamination of [Se-Se]-OT-OH yielded d[Se-Se]-OT-OH, which did
not have improved potency at the OTR but at all three AVPRs, thus
having a less interesting selectivity profile than [Se-Se]-OT-OH (Fig. 1C
and table S2). d[Se-Se]-OT-OH was also a partial agonist at the hOTR
(Emax = 59%) and a full agonist at the AVPRs.
Subtle modifications to vasopressin also modulated potency and
selectivity without, however, yielding a clear lead compound (Fig. 1D
and table S2). Vasopressin activated all four receptors, including the
hOTR (EC50: hV2R > hV1bR > hV1aR > hOTR). Deamination of the
N terminus [deamino-AVP (dAVP)] did not affect receptor activa-
tion, and the resulting ligand had potencies similar to that of vaso-
pressin. The disulfide-to-diselenide exchange ([Se-Se]-AVP and
d[Se-Se]-AVP) was well tolerated and did not substantially change the
potency or selectivity profile. Deletion of Gly9 in dAVP and dAVP-OH
resulted in substantial drops in potency at all four receptors.
Oxytocin analogs 1 to 7, vasopressin, and dAVP were further tested
using the homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF) inositol
1-phosphate (IP1) assay (Fig. 1E and table S3) to allow comparison
with the downstream intracellular Ca2+ changes measured using the
FLIPR assay. The HTRF-IP1 assay correlated well with the FLIPR assay
(table S4), and the potency and selectivity trends, particularly with
the lead compound [Se-Se]-OT-OH, were confirmed. [Se-Se]-OT-
OH had an EC50 that was only 2.6-fold less potent than that of oxy-
tocin and no activity at the hV1aR and hV1bR at concentrations up to
10 mM (table S3).
The Ca2+ concentration–response curves of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at the
hOTR, hV1aR, and hV1bR (representative curves in Fig. 2A; raw FLIPR
data in fig. S1, A and B) highlight its partial agonism at the hOTR, its
receptor selectivity, and its weak antagonism at the hV1aR [17% in-
hibition; half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50), 132 nM]
(Fig. 2A; fig. S1, C and D; and table S2). The representative cAMP
concentration–response curves of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at the hV2R showed
that [Se-Se]-OT-OH was a full agonist at this receptor but not as potent
as oxytocin and vasopressin (Fig. 2B). The IP1 concentration–response
curves of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at the hOTR, hV1aR, and hV1bR showed
that the same selectivity, potency, and partial agonism trends were also
observed using second-messenger IP1 measurements (Fig. 2C).
Binding analysis at the hOTR, hV1aR, hV1bR, and hV2R
Binding data for the oxytocin analogs 1 to 7, vasopressin, and dAVP
were obtained in radioligand displacement assays at all four human re-
ceptors (table S5). The experimental inhibition constants (Ki) correlated
well with the functional data (tables S2 and S3). [Se-Se]-OT-OH dis-
placed the 125I-V1a antagonist ([125I]phenylacetyl-D-Tyr(Me)-Phe-
Gln-Asn-Arg-Pro-Arg-Tyr-NH2) at the hV1aR with a Ki of 57 nM,
thereby confirming the weak antagonistic effects observed in the FLIPR
assay (Fig. 2D and table S5).
Schild regression analysis for binding mode
To confirm competitive binding of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at the hOTR, we
performed a series of Schild regression experiments with oxytocin
and [Se-Se]-OT-OH against the hOTR/Gq antagonist atosiban using
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
3 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the HTRF-IP1 assay. Increasing concentrations of atosiban shifted
the concentration-response curves of oxytocin (fig. S2A) and [Se-Se]-
OT-OH (fig. S2B) to the right, resulting in a linear Schild plot that is
representative of competitive binding at the hOTR.
Binding and functional analysis of [Se-Se]-OT-OH and
d[Se-Se]-OT-OH at murine OTR, V1aR, V1bR, and V2R
[Se-Se]-OT-OH retained its functional selectivity for OTR in mice and
was inactive at murine V1aR (mV1aR) and mV1bR concentrations up
to 10 mM (Fig. 3A, fig. S3A, and table S3). [Se-Se]-OT-OH activated
mOTR with a potency similar to that of oxytocin (table S3) (66).
[Se-Se]-OT-OH activated mV2R with an EC50 that was ~300-fold
larger than that of vasopressin (67). d[Se-Se]-OT-OH also retained
its selectivity profile in mice and was again less selective than [Se-Se]-
OT-OH because it activated all four murine receptor subtypes (fig. S3B
and table S3). Both compounds were partial agonists at the mOTR and
full agonists at the mV2R. The binding data of both compounds (table
S5) correlated well with the functional data (table S3), including low-
affinity binding of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at the mV1bR fitting with the ab-
sence of activation at the mV1bR and binding to the mV1aR confirming
mV1aR antagonism. [Se-Se]-OT-OH displayed biphasic binding to
mV1aR and mV2R (fig. S4A and table S5), and d[Se-Se]-OT-OH
displayed biphasic binding to mV2R (fig. S4B and table S5).
Human serum stability assay
[Se-Se]-OT-OH had a ~2-fold longer half-life of 25 hours compared to
oxytocin, which had a half-life of 12 hours (Fig. 3B).
Human myometrial cell and strip contractility assays as
proxies for induction and augmentation of labor
To determine whether the partial agonism of [Se-Se]-OT-OH and
d[Se-Se]-OT-OH in the pharmacological studies would affect their
physiological activity compared to the full agonist oxytocin, we tested
the ability of compounds 1, 6, and 7 to induce contraction by activating
the hOTR in myometrial cells immortalized with the human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT-HM) (68) in a collagen gel contractility
assay (69, 70). Both [Se-Se]-OT-OH and d[Se-Se]-OT-OH induced
a contractile response comparable to oxytocin (fig. S5). [Se-Se]-OT-OH
and d[Se-Se]-OT-OH increased contractility by 7.4 and 9% respectively,
compared to 9% for oxytocin. We then confirmed these findings in
contractility studies that used strips of human myometrium from cesar-
ean sections. [Se-Se]-OT-OH and oxytocin increased contraction ampli-
tude in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 3, C and D, and fig. S6)
and had similar potencies (fig. S6). The contraction profile induced
by [Se-Se]-OT-OH was, however, more phasic and frequent compared
to a more tonic-like activity induced by oxytocin at the concentrations
used (Fig. 3, C and D).
Behavioral efficacy in a mouse model of social fear
[Se-Se]-OT-OH was tested in the social fear conditioning (SFC) para-
digm (71), which specifically generates social fear (as measured by
reduced social investigation 24 hours after fear conditioning) in mice
without any confounding behavioral alterations. [Se-Se]-OT-OH re-
duced social fear and facilitated social fear extinction 10 min after its
intracerebroventricular infusion compared with vehicle-treated social
fear–conditioned mice (Fig. 4A). This effect was similar to that of syn-
thetic oxytocin and [Thr4,Gly7]-OT, a highly selective mOTR agonist
(66) that also potently reduced social fear (Fig. 4A). All unconditioned
control mice treated with either vehicle, [Se-Se]-OT-OH, oxytocin, or
[Thr4,Gly7]-OT showed similar extents of social preference behav-
ior as reflected by active exploration of conspecifics. Independently of
subsequent treatment, all social fear–conditioned and unconditioned
Fig. 2. Pharmacological characterization of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at all four human
oxytocin and vasopressin receptors. (A) Representative Ca2+ concentration–
response curves of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at the hOTR, hV1aR, and hV1bR. (B) Representative
cAMP concentration–response curves of oxytocin, vasopressin, and [Se-Se]-OT-OH at
the hV2R. (C) Representative IP1 concentration–response curves of [Se-Se]-OT-OH at
the hOTR, hV1aR, and hV1bR. (D) Representative radioligand concentration-
displacement curves for [Se-Se]-OT-OH at the hOTR, hV1aR, hV1bR, and hV2R. All
curves were normalized to percentage of response or displacement of the control lig-
and (oxytocin for OTR and vasopressin for AVPRs). Data in (A) to (D) are means ± SEM of
results obtained from at least n = 3 separate experiments, each performed in triplicate.
Fig. 3. Comparison of selectivity, stability, and ability to augment myometrial
strip contractions between [Se-Se]-OT-OH and oxytocin. (A) Functional selectivity
profile of [Se-Se]-OT-OH and OT over all four human (h) and murine (m) oxytocin
and vasopressin receptors. OTR, V1aR, and V1bR activity was measured by IP1
accumulation. V2R activity was measured by cAMP accumulation. (B) Metabolic
stability of [Se-Se]-OT-OH (t1/2 = 25 hours) compared to oxytocin (t1/2 = 12 hours)
in human serum. Data in (A) and (B) are means ± SEM of results obtained from at
least n = 3 separate experiments, each performed in triplicate. (C and D) Repre-
sentative contraction pattern for human myometrial strips exposed to increasing
doses of oxytocin (C) or [Se-Se]-OT-OH (D). n = 5 women for [Se-Se]-OT-OH, and n = 8
women for oxytocin.
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
4 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 groups showed similar investigation of a nonsocial stimulus (small emp-
ty cage), indicating similar amounts of nonsocial anxiety. During
the social fear recall (Fig. 4B), all groups of mice, irrespective of their
treatment, showed high social investigation, which indicated reduced
social fear and successful social fear extinction.
Maximal Ca2+ concentrations in human cardiomyocytes as a
proxy for assessing cardiovascular safety
V1aR is highly abundant in the vascular smooth muscle and heart
(cardiomyocytes), and V1aR activation has been linked to cardiovascular
risks (72–76). As a proxy to assess cardiovascular risks, we measured
maximal intracellular Ca2+ concentrations in human cardiomyocytes
treated with the various ligands (Fig. 5). Vasopressin and oxytocin
concentration-dependently caused an increase in maximal intracellular
Ca2+ in human cardiomyocytes with EC50 values of 121 and 174 nM,
respectively, which aligned well with our pharmacological results of
hV1aR activation by oxytocin (tables S2 and S3). Consistent with its
improved selectivity (OTR activation without V1aR activation), [Se-Se]-
OT-OH did not affect the maximal intracellular Ca2+ concentration
(up to 10 mM) in cardiomyocytes (Fig. 5).
DISCUSSION
Agonists and antagonists with good selectivity for the four oxytocin and
vasopressin receptor subtypes are in short supply (37, 38, 77). Physio-
logical function and dysfunction of the receptors are therefore studied
by time- and cost-intensive knockout models, which have linked the
subtypes to various disorders including autism, schizophrenia, epilepsy,
stress, aggression, depression, anxiety, and pain (5, 8, 16, 33). Therapeutic
development targeting these disorders has so far failed because of the
challenge of developing subtype-selective ligands that retain their se-
lectivity across species, thereby limiting translational studies with
clinically relevant animal models (37, 38, 78).
Subtle pharmacophore framework modifications—A new
strategy to retain selectivity across murine and
human receptors
This structure-activity relationship study demonstrated that subtle
modifications to the pharmacophore framework of the endogenous
ligands oxytocin and vasopressin could tune potency and selectivity
and yield ligands ([Se-Se]-OT-OH and d[Se-Se]-OT-OH) with an im-
proved selectivity profile that was conserved across mouse and human
(Fig. 3A and table S3). In particular, the replacement of the disulfide
bond with the diselenide bond in combination with the C-terminal
amide to acid change in oxytocin yielded [Se-Se]-OT-OH, the com-
pound with the most pronounced selectivity gain for the OTR (Fig.
3A). Although an amide-to-acid modification can generally be
considered a subtle modification, it seems that either the free lone
pair of the nitrogen atom is involved in receptor recognition and ac-
tivation or the negative charge of the acid contributes to activity loss
at the AVPRs. Substitution of the disulfide bond by the diselenide bond
slightly increases the bond length (+0.3 Å), torsion angle (D +11°),
and hydrophobicity (59, 60). In particular, the change in torsion
angle could play a part in the selectivity differences observed by push-
ing the ligand into a left-handed conformer, as observed in the crystal
structure of dOT (54). Both modifications (diselenide bond and C-
terminal acid) had to be present to improve selectivity.
The increased selectivity of [Se-Se]-OT-OH makes it an excellent
probe to delineate OTR function in the central nervous system (CNS)
in behavioral animal models (where V2R is not present) and a prom-
ising lead molecule for the clinic, which we further explored in this
study. We recommend that an effective concentration of 50 nM or
a 10-fold higher concentration than oxytocin (in comparative stu-
dies with oxytocin) is used to ensure OTR-mediated action while
retaining OTR preference. The weak antagonism (17% inhibition of
vasopressin at the hV1aR) does not affect the investigation of OTR
function but needs to be taken into account either when binding
studies are carried out ([Se-Se]-OT-OH binds to the hV1aR with a
Ki of 56.8 nM) or when [Se-Se]-OT-OH is administered in the pres-
ence of V1aR ligands. [Se-Se]-OT-OH is a partial agonist for OTR;
however, this did not affect biological function as suggested by our
myometrial contractility study, which showed that OTR activation
resulted in a full response similar to that induced by oxytocin (Fig.
3, C and D, and fig. S5). Partial agonists can be beneficial in treating
chronic disorders such as pain and autism because they often do not
trigger the development of adverse effects such as overstimulation, de-
sensitization, adaptation, tolerance, and dependence as seen with full
agonists.
Fig. 4. Social fear conditioning (SFC) mouse study. (A and B) Unconditioned (SFC−) and conditioned (SFC+) mice were intracerebroventricularly infused with either vehicle
(2 ml of Ringer’s solution; n = 9 SFC− mice; n = 10 SFC+ mice) or [Se-Se]-OT-OH (250 mM/2 ml; 500 pmol; n = 7 SFC− mice; n = 7 SFC+ mice). Oxytocin (250 mM/2 ml;
500 pmol; n = 10 mice) and [Thr4,Gly7]-OT (250 mM/2 ml; 500 pmol; n = 4 mice) were only infused into SFC+ mice 10 min before extinction training. Percentage of
mice that investigated three nonsocial stimuli (empty cage) and six social stimuli (cage with a conspecific) during social fear extinction (day 2; A) and six social
stimuli during social fear extinction recall (day 3; B) is shown. Data are means ± SEM and were analyzed using two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for repeated
measures. (A) #P < 0.05 SFC+/vehicle compared to SFC+/[Se-Se]-OT-OH; *P < 0.05 SFC+/vehicle compared to SFC+/OT, SFC+/[Thr4,Gly7]-OT, and SFC−/vehicle; (B) $P < 0.05
SFC+/vehicle compared to SFC+/OT and SFC−/vehicle.
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
5 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 General conclusions and guidelines for future oxytocin and
vasopressin ligand design
N-terminal deamination of oxytocin ligands improves binding and
potency at all four receptors, renders oxytocin slightly more hydro-
phobic, and improves its stability against proteases (55). Although
N-terminal deamination of vasopressin did not affect potency and
selectivity, we still recommend deamination because it offers enhanced
proteolytic stability. Considering the advancements in the area of di-
sulfide mimetics, we recommend the replacement of the disulfide
bond by a nonreducible and therefore metabolically more stable thio-
or selenoether bond (4, 56). Modification of the C terminus of oxyto-
cin and vasopressin could yield novel antagonists, considering this
study and the replacement of Gly9 in oxytocin and vasopressin by Val,
which results in an agonist-to-antagonist switch at the hV1aR for both
ligands (50). The FLIPR is a valuable instrument for primary screening
of compounds that target oxytocin and vasopressin receptors because
it rapidly provides agonist and antagonist information with high-
throughput capabilities. Follow-up characterization of selected leads
by ligand binding, second-messenger quantification, and arrestin re-
cruitment can then be used to better understand ligand kinetics and
secondary messenger signaling pathways. The structure-activity rela-
tionship study presented here assessed affinity and functional data
(FLIPR and IP1) of the most commonly used control compounds ox-
ytocin, vasopressin, dOT, and dAVP over all four receptor subtypes
in a single study and could be a reference for future oxytocin and
vasopressin ligand development.
Comparison of the FLIPR and IP1 assays
Only three discrepancies with more than 50-fold difference were de-
tected between the FLIPR and the IP1 assays (oxytocin and dOT at the
hV1bR and d[Se-Se]-OT at the hV1aR; table S4), suggesting signaling
bias for these ligands at these receptors. The characteristic Ca2+ tran-
sients elicited by activation of Gaq-coupled GPCRs such as OTR,
V1aR, and V1bR originate from the production of IP3 downstream
of phospholipase C activation, which induces the release of Ca2+ from
intracellular stores through IP3 receptors, termination of receptor sig-
naling, and subsequent uptake of increased intracellular Ca2+ into
stores and the extracellular compartment through Ca2+ adenosine tri-
phosphatases (79). In addition, Ca2+ signals can be magnified or in-
hibited through intracellular feedback mechanisms such as Ca2+-induced
Ca2+ release, activation of downstream effectors that modulate intra-
cellular Ca2+ amounts, or modification of Ca2+ signals through alter-
nate G proteins such as Gai, which is involved in OTR and vasopressin
receptor signaling (5, 80). Thus, whereas IP3 production is a requisite
step for initiation of a Ca2+ signal, other factors contribute to the mag-
nitude and kinetics of the observed Ca2+ transients elicited by activation
of GPCRs. In contrast, the IP1 assay indirectly quantifies the production
of IP3 through accumulation of its breakdown product IP1. It is
plausible that the observed differences arise because of mechanistic
differences that contribute to increases in intracellular Ca2+ and accu-
mulation of IP1. The cellular consequences of such differences remain
unclear to date, although Ca2+ signaling is a physiologically relevant
consequence of GPCR activation. The difference in signaling produced
by these ligands indicates a potential signaling bias, a phenomenon that
has been previously studied for this receptor class (43, 80–82).
[Se-Se]-OT-OH modulating central actions: Reversal of
social fear
Oxytocin is linked to multiple CNS disorders such as autism, bipolar
disorders, schizophrenia, pain, anxiety, and depression (5, 8, 16, 33).
Studies showing that intranasal oxytocin administration can modulate
social behavior in humans have resulted in increased interest and clin-
ical trials exploring the therapeutic potential of intranasal oxytocin for
these disorders. The exact target pharmacology and underlying
mechanisms of action are, however, still under debate because oxyto-
cin can also signal through V1aR and V1bR (tables S2 to S5). Hence,
receptor subtype–specific probes are critical because of the partly
opposing behavioral effects of oxytocin and vasopressin, especially
in the context of anxiety and stress regulation (14). [Se-Se]-OT-OH
allows for a clear and simple distinction between the involvement
of OTR compared to V1aR and V1bR in the CNS without the use of
time- and cost-intensive knockout models or coapplication of species-
selective V1a and V1bR antagonists. This is particularly valuable
for therapeutic target validation and future drug development. Here,
we chose to behaviorally test our novel probe in the SFC mouse
model, which has clinical implication to treat social anxiety disorders
(15, 71, 83), and to compare it to the commonly used mOTR-selective
agonist [Thr4,Gly7]-OT, which does not retain its selectivity profile
for human receptors. The use of [Se-Se]-OT-OH confirmed that this
action is mediated through OTR and not through V1aR or V1bR,
and [Se-Se]-OT-OH displayed similar effects to [Thr4,Gly7]-OT (Fig.
4, A and B).
[Se-Se]-OT-OH modulating peripheral action: Labor
induction and augmentation
Selectivity against V1aR to reduce cardiovascular side effects is of par-
ticular importance for peripheral applications because V1aR is the pri-
mary receptor subtype in the vascular smooth muscle and heart
(72–76). Clinically, oxytocin is administered intravenously to induce
labor, augment weak contractions in labor, and treat postpartum hem-
orrhage and intranasally to elicit lactation. Because of its activation
of AVPRs, oxytocin administration has only a limited therapeutic
window of use, and adverse effects reported in the mother include
anaphylactic reaction, postpartum hemorrhage, cardiac arrhythmia,
fatal afibrinogenemia, pelvic hematoma, subarachnoid hemorrhage,
Fig. 5. Effects of vasopressin, oxytocin, and [Se-Se]-OT-OH on maximal intra-
cellular Ca2+ in humancardiomyocytes. FLIPR assays showing the effect of vasopres-
sin, oxytocin, and[Se-Se]-OT-OH on the maximalintracellular Ca2+ concentrations. Data
are means ± SEM, n = 4 wells per data point.
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
6 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 hypertensive episodes, rupture of the uterus, convulsions, coma, and
death due to water intoxication. In the neonate, adverse effects reported
include bradycardia, cardiac arrhythmia, jaundice, retinal hemorrhage,
permanent CNS or brain damage, seizures, and death (46, 84, 85).
Hence, the lack of AVPR activation in OTR agonists is needed to
diminish side effects.
[Se-Se]-OT-OH may be such a candidate because it only minimally
raised intracellular Ca2+ concentrations in human cardiomyocytes,
in contrast to oxytocin, which displayed nanomolar activity (Fig. 5).
V1aR is highly abundant in human cardiomyocytes where it mediates
many of its cardiovascular side effects. Furthermore, [Se-Se]-OT-OH
and oxytocin were equipotent in augmenting contractility in human
myometrial preparations, although [Se-Se]-OT-OH displayed a more
regular contraction pattern (Fig. 3D). By contrast, oxytocin reduced
contraction frequency in a concentration-dependent fashion but in-
creased the contraction duration, resulting in much greater total con-
tractile activity (Fig. 3C), which can lead to uterine hyperstimulation
and rupture, which are life-threatening events for mother and fetus
(86, 87). [Se-Se]-OT-OH’s inactivity at V1aR, a receptor that is also
abundant in the myometrium during pregnancy and is involved in
contraction (88, 89), in combination with its partial agonism at the
OTR, resulted in an improved contractility profile, suggesting that it
would be a more controlled and safer alternative to oxytocin to induce
and augment human labor. Thus, [Se-Se]-OT-OH not only reduced
AVPR-related side effects but also offered additional advantages to
aid labor induction and progression through a more regular increase
of contraction strength without the risk of uterine hyperstimulation
or rupture.
Human serum stability of [Se-Se]-OT-OH
Enzymatic stability is a key characteristic for many peptide drug can-
didates, and hence, it was important to characterize the stability of
[Se-Se]-OT-OH compared to oxytocin. Diselenide bonds exhibit a
lower redox potential than disulfide bonds, rendering such mimetics
more difficult to reduce, a feature that can be exploited in improving
the half-life of peptide drug candidates (4, 56, 59–61). On the other
hand, peptides with C-terminal amides are more stable than peptides
with C-terminal acids. The improved stability of [Se-Se]-OT-OH in
human serum (Fig. 3B) suggests that the impact of the more redox-
stable diselenide bond outweighs the disadvantage of the C-terminal
acid modification. However, the experimentally determined in vitro
human serum half-life (which was in hours) of oxytocin and [Se-Se]-
OT-OH does not reflect physiologically relevant in vivo half-life (which
is in minutes) because it does not take renal clearance into account.
Nonetheless, it can assess even small stability improvements, which
could be important for treating CNS disorders through delivery methods
[such as treatment of autism in children or treatment of migraines in
adults (21)] that are not affected by renal clearance.
In conclusion, we showed that subtle modifications to the pharma-
cophore framework of oxytocin can lead to enhanced selectivity pro-
files that are conserved across species (mouse and human), thereby
overcoming a substantial hurdle in ligand development. This proof-of-
concept study provides a framework that could be applied to similar
complex peptidergic signaling systems. The lead ligand derived from
this study, [Se-Se]-OT-OH, is a valuable probe that can effectively
delineate the physiological responses of OTR and is particularly suited
for use in animal behavior studies looking at the central roles of OTR.
Its functional selectivity and close structural similarity to oxytocin are
important features that will help to clarify the contributions of the
oxytocin signaling system in health and disease. The improved selec-
tivity, stability, and safety profile of [Se-Se]-OT-OH could lead to su-
perior alternatives to oxytocin in the clinic for peripheral indications
such as labor induction and progression and postpartum hemorrhage,
as well as for central indications such as autism, migraine, schizo-
phrenia, anxiety, and stress, where clinical trials have shown that in-
tranasally administered oxytocin is safe and therapeutically effective
(20, 21, 90–93). [Se-Se]-OT-OH has the potential to advance our
understanding of the OTR as a therapeutic target in different animal
models and represents a promising lead molecule for various high-
profile OTR-related indications.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Selenocysteine building block synthesis
An optimized protocol with yield-improving modifications was devel-
oped on the basis of Chocat et al. (62), Tanaka et al. (63), and Oikawa et al.
(64), enabling the synthesis of the Boc-L-Sec(Meb)-OH at a scale
of 20 g with an overall yield of 62%. A new two-step strategy was de-
vised for the synthesis of dSec(Meb)-OH with an overall yield of 12%
(Fig. 1B).
Peptide synthesis
Peptides 1 to 16 were assembled manually by Boc-SPPS using the
HBTU (2-(1H-benzotriazol-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetramethyluronium hex-
afluorophosphate)–mediated in situ neutralization protocol (59, 65).
The analogs were cleaved with hydrogen fluoride (94), purified by
RP-HPLC, folded over 24 hours in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 buffer at pH
8.2 (1 mg/10 ml; ~100 mM), and purified by RP-HPLC to >95% pu-
rity. Peptide concentrations were determined on the basis of peak
area detected at 214 nm by analytical RP-HPLC against oxytocin
and vasopressin as standards with known peptide content established
by amino acid analysis. Using the Beer-Lambert law, the peptide con-
centrations were calculated on the basis of absorptions of standards
and samples using calculated extinction coefficients (95–97).
Transfection and membrane preparation for FLIPR,
HTRF-IP1, and radioligand displacement assays for the
human receptors
hOTR, hV1aR, hV1bR, and hV2R complementary DNAs (cDNAs)
were obtained from OriGene Technologies. [Tyrosyl-2,6-3H]-oxytocin
(3H-OT) (46.3 Ci/mmol), [phenylalanyl-3,4,5-3H(N)]-AVP (3H-AVP)
(2200 Ci/mmol), 125I-linear vasopressin hV1aR antagonist (2200 Ci/
mmol), FlashBlue GPCR Scintillating Beads, TopSeal-A 96-well
sealing film, and 384-well white OptiPlates were from PerkinElmer Life
Sciences. The HTRF-IP1 assay kit was from Cisbio International.
COS-1 cells grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)
and 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in 150-mm plates were transiently
transfected with plasmid DNA (14.5 mg) encoding the hOTR, hV1aR,
hV1bR, or hV2R using Lipofectamine 2000 (29 ml; Invitrogen). The cells
were harvested 48 hours after transfection and homogenized using an
Ultra-Turrax homogenizer (22,000 rpm) in assay buffer [50 mM tris-
HCl, 10 mM MgCl2 (5 mM MgCl2 for oxytocin), and 0.1% bovine
serum albumin (BSA) (pH 7.4)] with cOmplete protease inhibitor
cocktail (Roche Diagnostics). The homogenate was centrifuged at 484g
(2000 rpm) for 10 min, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged
at 23,665g (14,000 rpm) for 30 min. The pellet was resuspended in ap-
propriate buffer without protease inhibitor containing 10% glycerol and
stored at −80°C until assayed.
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
7 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 FLIPR assay for the hOTR, hV1aR, and hV1bR
COS-1 cells transfected with the hOTR, hV1aR, or hV1bR were plated
24 hours before the experiment at a density of 35,000 to 50,000 cells
per well on black-walled 96-well imaging plates (Corning). Cells were
loaded for 30 min at 37°C with Fluo-4-AM [4-(6-acetoxymethoxy-2,7-
difluoro-3-oxo-9-xanthenyl)-4′-methyl-2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)dianiline-
N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid tetrakis(acetoxymethyl) ester] (4.8 mM) in
physiological salt solution (PSS; 140 mM NaCl, 11.5 mM glucose,
5.9 mM KCl, 1.4 mM MgCl2, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 5 mM NaHCO3,
1.8 mM CaCl2, and 10 mM Hepes) containing 0.3% fatty acid–free
BSA. To allow for complete dye de-esterification, cells were washed with
PSS for 5 to 10 min before transferring them to a FLIPRTETRA (Molec-
ular Devices) fluorescent plate reader. Ca2+ responses were measured
using a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) camera with excitation
at 470 to 495 nM and emission at 515 to 575 nM. The baseline fluo-
rescence was set to a minimum of 1000 arbitrary fluorescence units by
adjusting camera gain and excitation intensity. Compounds were added
as 3× concentrated stock solutions in PSS, with 10 baseline fluorescence
readings before compound addition followed by fluorescence reading
every second for 180 s.
Raw fluorescence data were converted to DF/F values by subtract-
ing baseline fluorescence readings from subsequent time points and
dividing the difference by baseline fluorescence values, as previously de-
scribed (98). For the concentration-response curves, maximum DF/F
values after the addition of compounds were plotted against agonist con-
centration and normalized to the response elicited by the native ligand
(oxytocin for the hOTR and vasopressin for the hV1aR and hV1bR).
A four-parameter Hill equation with a Hill coefficient of 1 was fitted
to the data using GraphPad Prism (version 4.00).
cAMP assay for hV2R
The cDNA plasmid clones for hV2R were a gift from R. Schülein
(FMP, Berlin). The hV2R sequence was inserted into pKaede-MN1
(MBL Life Science) using Eco RI and Hind III restriction sites to yield
the wild-type receptor. The conditions for the propagation of human
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells and the creation of stably trans-
fected cell lines were similar to those described previously (48, 99).
Briefly, cells were transfected with CaPO4 transfection, and 1.8 × 106 of
HEK293 cells per 10-cm dish were prepared. Twenty microliters of DNA,
with a concentration of 1 mg/ml, was mixed with 480 ml of H2O + CaCl2
(430 ml of H2O + 50 ml of CaCl2) and added to 500 ml of Hepes-buffered
saline solution. After 6 min, the solution was added to the DMEM high-
glucose medium (PAA Laboratories), supplemented with L-glutamine
and gentamicin, and the cells were incubated for 4 hours at 37°C. After a
glycerol shock, DMEM was added again and the cells were put back at
37°C. In the following days, selection through the antibiotic Geneticin
[geneticin G418-BC liquid (50 mg/ml; Biochrom)] took place.
Cells were grown in six-well plates. The adenine nucleotide pool was
metabolically labeled by incubating confluent monolayers with 3H-
adenine (1 mCi per well) ([2,8-3H]-adenine; 27.2 Ci/mmol, PerkinElmer
Life Sciences) for 16 hours as described previously (100). After pre-
incubation, fresh medium that contained 100 mM RO201724 (a cell-
permeable, selective inhibitor of cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase;
Calbiochem) was added. After 4 hours, cAMP formation was stimulated
by the hV2R agonist vasopressin (50 pM to 1 mM), oxytocin (60 pM
to 1 mM), synthetic oxytocin analogs (700 pM to 10 mM), or forskolin
(30 mM; a cell-permeable diterpenoid that has antihypertensive, positive
inotropic, and adenylyl cyclase–activating properties; Sigma-Aldrich)
for 20 min at 37°C. Assays were performed in at least three separate
experiments in triplicate. The formation of 3H-cAMP was determined
according to Bergmayr et al. (100). Potency (EC50) and efficacy (Emax)
were calculated by fitting the data to a three-parameter logistic equation
(Hill equation) using a Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. EC50 values
were presented as means ± SEM.
HTRF-IP1 assay for the human receptors
COS-1 cells were transiently transfected with plasmid DNA encoding
the hOTR, hV1aR, or hV1bR using a Lipofectamine 2000/DNA ratio
of 2 in DMEM. Assays measuring IP1 accumulation were performed
48 hours after transfection according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Briefly, cells were incubated with increasing concentrations of oxyto-
cin and vasopressin analogs (10 pM to 10 mM) in stimulation buffer
containing LiCl for 1 hour in 37°C and 5% CO2 in white 384-well
OptiPlates. Cells were lysed by the addition of the HTRF reagents,
the europium cryptate–labeled anti-IP1 antibody, and the d2-labeled
IP1 analog and diluted in lysis buffer. The assays were incubated for
1 hour at room temperature. The emission signals at 590 and 665 nm
were measured after excitation at 340 nm using the EnVision multi-
label plate reader (PerkinElmer Life Sciences). Signal was presented as
the HTRF ratio: F = [(F665nm/F590nm) × 104]. For concentration-response
curves, the HTRF ratio values after the addition of compounds were
plotted against the ligand concentration and normalized to the response
elicited without ligand (negative control). Sigmoidal curves for the cal-
culation of the EC50 values were fitted to individual data points by non-
linear regression with a Hill coefficient of 1, using the software package
Prism (GraphPad Software).
Radioligand displacement assay for the human receptors
Competitive binding assays were performed using FlashBlue GPCR
Scintillating Beads (PerkinElmer Life Sciences) as previously described
(56). Reactions containing increasing concentrations of competing
oxytocin and vasopressin analogs (10 pM to 10 mM); FlashBlue GPCR
Scintillating Beads (100 mg for the hOTR and hV1aR; 200 mg for the
hV1bR and hV2R); hOTR, hV1aR, hV1bR, and hV2R membrane
preparations (5 mg of protein); and radioligand [3H-OT (2 nM) for
the hOTR, 125I-V1a antagonist ([125I]phenylacetyl-d-Tyr(Me)-Phe-Gln-
Asn-Arg-Pro-Arg-Tyr-NH2) (0.5 nM) for the hV1aR, and 3H-AVP (3 nM)
for the hV1bR and hV2R] in assay buffer [50 mM tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2
(5 mM MgCl2 for oxytocin), and 0.1% BSA (pH 7.4)] were established in
96-well white polystyrene plates with clear flat bottoms in a total reaction
volume of 80 ml. Radioligand binding was detected using a Wallac 1450
MicroBeta scintillation counter (PerkinElmer Life Sciences). Sigmoidal
curves for the calculation of the IC50 values were fitted to individual
data points by nonlinear regression with a Hill coefficient of −1, using
the software package Prism (GraphPad Software).
Radioligand displacement assay for the murine receptors
Competitive binding assays were performed using 3H-OT and 3H-
AVP (PerkinElmer Life Sciences) and increasing concentrations of the
indicated peptides at 30°C on membranes prepared from HEK293 cells
transfected with the mOTR, mV1aR, mV1bR, or mV2R as described
previously (66). Compound affinities (Ki) were determined by means
of competition experiments in which the unlabeled compound con-
centrations varied from 10 pM to 10 mM to displace 4 nM 3H-OT for
the mOTR and 3H-AVP for the mV1aR, mV1bR, and mV2R. Ligand
binding data and Ki were analyzed by means of nonlinear regression
and binding-competitive fitting using Prism version 5 (GraphPad
Software).
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
8 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 HTRF-IP1 assay and cAMP determination for the
murine receptors
IP1 and cAMP accumulation were determined in HEK293 cells tran-
siently transfected with DNA plasmids encoding the mOTR, mV1aR,
mV1bR, or mV2R using HTRF assays (IP1 and cAMP assays, Cisbio
International) as previously described (66). Sigmoidal curves for the calcu-
lation of the EC50 values were fitted by nonlinear regression log(agonist)
versus response fitting, using Prism version 5 (GraphPad Software).
Stability assays
Peptides were added to human serum, and aliquots were taken and ana-
lyzed by RP-HPLC and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry at 1-,
2-, 3-, 4-, 12-, 24-, and 48-hour time points as previously described (56).
SFC mouse model
SFC was performed as previously described (71). Sample sizes (>4 mice)
were determined on the basis of previous studies (71, 83, 101). All ex-
perimental procedures were performed in accordance with the Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the Government of
Oberpfalz and the guidelines of the National Institutes of Health. All
male CD1 mice (8 to 10 weeks of age at the start of experiments; Charles
River Laboratories) were group-housed under standard laboratory
conditions (12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle, lights on at 06:00, 22°C,
60% humidity, and food and water ad libitum) in polycarbonate cages
(16 cm × 22 cm × 14 cm). All experimental procedures were performed
between 08:00 and 15:00. Surgeries were performed under isoflurane
anesthesia, and extreme care was taken to minimize animal suffering.
Analysis of the SFC paradigm was performed using GraphPad Prism
version 6.0 (GraphPad Software).
On day 1 of the SFC paradigm, mice were transferred from their
home cage into the conditioning chamber; after a 30-s adaptation
period, an empty cage was placed in the conditioning chamber as a
nonsocial stimulus that mice were allowed to investigate for 3 min
before it was replaced by an identical cage containing an unfamiliar
male conspecific (which represented the social stimulus). SFC−
mice were allowed to investigate the social stimulus for 3 min with-
out receiving any foot shocks, whereas SFC+ mice were given a 1-s
electric foot shock (0.7 mA) each time they investigated (sniffed)
the social stimulus. Mice were returned to their home cage when no
further social contact was made for 2 min. All mice investigated the
nonsocial (empty cage) stimulus to a similar extent and received a
similar number of foot shocks (table S6). On day 2, which consisted of
social fear extinction training, mice were exposed to three nonsocial
stimuli (empty cages) in their home cage to assess nonsocial investi-
gation as a parameter of nonsocial fear and general anxiety-related
behavior. Mice were then exposed to six unfamiliar social stimuli
(six different male mice) to assess social investigation as a parameter
of social fear. Mice received single acute intracerebroventricular in-
fusions (35 to 45 s) of either vehicle (2 ml of sterile Ringer’s solution),
oxytocin (2 ml of 250 mM; 500 pmol), [Se-Se]-OT-OH (2 ml of 250 mM;
500 pmol), or [Thr4,Gly7]-OT (2 ml of 250 mM; 500 pmol) 10 min before
social fear extinction. On day 3, which assessed social fear extinction
recall, mice were exposed in their home cage to six different unfamiliar
social stimuli to investigate whether repeated exposure to social
stimuli during extinction leads to a complete reversal of social fear.
Human myometrial cell contractility assay
Human uterine myometrial smooth muscle cells (hTERT-HM) were
cultured, collagen gels were prepared, and the assays were performed
as described previously (48, 70). Briefly, cells were cultured in DMEM/
F-12/10% FBS (Invitrogen). Collagen gels were prepared from rat tail
type 1 collagen (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final concentration of 1.5 mg/ml
and seeded in 24-well culture dishes, with 150,000 hTERT-HM cells
per well. Cells in collagen gels were allowed to equilibrate overnight in
serum-free DMEM. The ligands of interest (1 mM concentration) were
added to the serum-free medium, and the gels were released from the
sides of the wells. FBS [10% (v/v)] was used as a positive control for
contraction, and unstimulated cells were used as the negative control in
all experiments. Gel images were captured over time using a FluorChem
8900 imager, and the area (in square centimeters) of the gels was
measured using AlphaEaseFC software (Alpha Innotech Corporation).
A decrease in gel area correlated with an increase in contractility.
Tissue bath myometrial contractility assays
Biopsies of myometrium were obtained from women undergoing
term (39 to 40 weeks) prelabor elective cesarean section delivery at
Liverpool Women’s Hospital, Liverpool, UK. All women gave written
informed consent to participate, and the study was approved by the
North West (Liverpool East) Research Ethics Committee (reference
#10/H1002/49) and by the Research and Development director at
Liverpool Women’s Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK.
A full-thickness biopsy (~2 cm3) was cut from the upper lip of the
lower uterine incision site and placed into Hanks’ balanced salt so-
lution at 4°C (102). In the laboratory, strips of myometrium (1 mm ×
2 mm × 5 mm) were dissected and placed between a force transducer
and a fixed hook using aluminum clips. Strips were continually super-
fused with PSS [154 mM NaCl, 5.6 mM KCl, 1.2 mM MgSO4, 7.8 mM
glucose, 10.9 mM Hepes, and 2.0 mM CaCl2 (pH 7.4)] maintained at
36°C. After stable spontaneous contractions developed, the strips were
exposed to rising concentrations of oxytocin or [Se-Se]-OT-OH. Data
were analyzed by measuring the amplitude of contraction using Origin
Pro 9.0 software (OriginLab Corporation) as described previously
(48, 103, 104). The effect of [Se-Se]-OT-OH or oxytocin was com-
pared to the activity preceding the application of the first dose, and
the data represent the change in activity compared to spontaneous
control activity (100%). Concentration-response curves were fitted
using nonlinear regression to calculate EC50 values.
Human cardiomyocyte assay
Wild-type WTC11 human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs)
were used in this study. Undifferentiated cells were maintained in
mTeSR1 medium (STEMCELL Technologies). Standard cardiomyocyte-
directed differentiation using a monolayer platform was performed
with a modified protocol based on previous reports (105–109). The
differentiation setup was initiated by plating undifferentiated hiPSCs
as single cells. The cultures were treated with 1 mM CHIR-99021 (Cayman
Chemical) for 24 hours before reaching confluence. Cells were in-
duced to differentiate (designated day 0) by replacing the culturing
medium with RPMI 1640 medium (catalog number 11875-119, Thermo
Fisher Scientific) containing 3 mM CHIR-99021, BSA (500 mg/ml), and
ascorbic acid (213 mg/ml). On day 3, the medium was changed to RPMI
1640 medium with BSA and ascorbic acid containing 1 mM XAV-939
(Tocris Bioscience). On day 5, the medium was changed to RPMI
1640 containing ascorbic acid and BSA. On day 7, the medium was
replaced with RPMI 1640 containing B-27 supplement with insulin
(catalog number 17504-044, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were
harvested using trypsin, replated into a black-walled 384-well imaging
plate coated with CellBIND (Sigma-Aldrich) at a density of 4 × 104 cells
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
9 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 per well and cultured for 8 days before the experiments. Functional
activity was assessed using a high-throughput FLIPRTETRA (Molec-
ular Devices) FLIPR assay. The growth medium was removed and re-
placed with Calcium 4 (no-wash) dye (Molecular Devices) diluted in
PSS [140 mM NaCl, 11.5 mM glucose, 5.9 mM KCl, 1.4 mM MgCl2,
1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 5 mM NaHCO3, 1.8 mM CaCl2, and 10 mM Hepes
(pH 7.4)] according to the manufacturer’s instructions and incubated
at 37°C for 30 min. Changes in intracellular Ca2+ amounts were mea-
sured using a cooled CCD camera (excitation, 470 to 495 nm; emission,
515 to 575 nm) with reads taken every 0.4 s for 240 s after the addition
of compounds. The maximum intracellular Ca2+ amount was deter-
mined using ScreenWorks (version 2.2.0.14, Molecular Devices).
Statistical analysis
All statistical comparisons were made using GraphPad Prism software,
and values were expressed as means ± SEM. Student’s t test and one-
way analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used to determine statistical
significance for the human myometrial cell contractility and organ bath
assays. Two-way ANOVA was used to analyze the SFC data. P values
<0.05 were considered significant.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencesignaling.org/cgi/content/full/10/508/eaan3398/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Representative raw FLIPR data.
Fig. S2. Schild plot analysis.
Fig. S3. Functional study of [Se-Se]-OT-OH and d[Se-Se]-OT-OH at the mOTR, mV1aR, mV1bR,
and mV2R.
Fig. S4. Binding study of [Se-Se]-OT-OH and d[Se-Se]-OT-OH at the mOTR, mV1aR, mV1bR, and
mV2R.
Fig. S5. Human myometrial cell contractility assay.
Fig. S6. Human myometrial strip contractility assay.
Table S1. Overview of the synthesized peptides including details on their modifications.
Table S2. Functional potencies for oxytocin and vasopressin analogs at the hOTR, hV1aR,
hV1bR, and hV2R.
Table S3. Functional potencies for oxytocin and vasopressin analogs at the human and murine
OTR, V1aR, V1bR, and V2R.
Table S4. Comparison of functional data from the FLIPR and HTRF-IP1 assays.
Table S5. Radioligand displacement data for oxytocin and vasopressin analogs at the human
and murine OTR, V1aR, V1bR, and V2R.
Table S6. Overview of the number of electric foot shocks per mouse.
Reference (110)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. H. Gainer, Cell-specific gene expression in oxytocin and vasopressin magnocellular
neurons. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 449, 15–27 (1998).
2. R. Landgraf, I. D. Neumann, Vasopressin and oxytocin release within the brain: A
dynamic concept of multiple and variable modes of neuropeptide communication.
Front. Neuroendocrinol. 25, 150–176 (2004).
3. K. Nishimori, L. J. Young, Q. Guo, Z. Wang, T. R. Insel, M. M. Matzuk, Oxytocin is
required for nursing but is not essential for parturition or reproductive behavior.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 11699–11704 (1996).
4. A. D. de Araujo, M. Mobli, J. Castro, A. M. Harrington, I. Vetter, Z. Dekan, M. Muttenthaler,
J. Wan, R. J. Lewis, G. F. King, S. M. Brierley, P. F. Alewood, Selenoether oxytocin
analogues have analgesic properties in a mouse model of chronic abdominal pain.
Nat. Commun. 5, 3165 (2014).
5. G. Gimpl, F. Fahrenholz, The oxytocin receptor system: Structure, function, and
regulation. Physiol. Rev. 81, 629–683 (2001).
6. A. H. Veenema, I. D. Neumann, Central vasopressin and oxytocin release: Regulation of
complex social behaviours. Prog. Brain Res. 170, 261–276 (2008).
7. I. D. Neumann, Brain oxytocin: A key regulator of emotional and social behaviours in
both females and males. J. Neuroendocrinol. 20, 858–865 (2008).
8. Z. R. Donaldson, L. J. Young, Oxytocin, vasopressin, and the neurogenetics of sociality.
Science 322, 900–904 (2008).
9. I. D. Neumann, The advantage of social living: Brain neuropeptides mediate the beneficial
consequences of sex and motherhood. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 30, 483–496 (2009).
10. C. A. Pedersen, A. J. Prange Jr., Induction of maternal behavior in virgin rats after
intracerebroventricular administration of oxytocin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
76, 6661–6665 (1979).
11. C. S. Carter, A. J. Grippo, H. Pournajafi-Nazarloo, M. G. Ruscio, S. W. Porges, Oxytocin,
vasopressin and sociality. Prog. Brain Res. 170, 331–336 (2008).
12. M. Lukas, I. Toth, S. O. Reber, D. A. Slattery, A. H. Veenema, I. D. Neumann, The
neuropeptide oxytocin facilitates pro-social behavior and prevents social avoidance in
rats and mice. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 2159–2168 (2011).
13. D. Viviani, A. Charlet, E. van den Burg, C. Robinet, N. Hurni, M. Abatis, F. Magara, R. Stoop,
Oxytocin selectively gates fear responses through distinct outputs from the central
amygdala. Science 333, 104–107 (2011).
14. I. D. Neumann, R. Landgraf, Balance of brain oxytocin and vasopressin: Implications for
anxiety, depression, and social behaviors. Trends Neurosci. 35, 649–659 (2012).
15. I. D. Neumann, D. A. Slattery, Oxytocin in general anxiety and social fear: A translational
approach. Biol. Psychiatry 79, 213–221 (2016).
16. A. Meyer-Lindenberg, G. Domes, P. Kirsch, M. Heinrichs, Oxytocin and vasopressin in the
human brain: Social neuropeptides for translational medicine. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
12, 524–538 (2011).
17. P. J. Zak, A. A. Stanton, S. Ahmadi, Oxytocin increases generosity in humans. PLOS ONE 2,
e1128 (2007).
18. M. Kosfeld, M. Heinrichs, P. J. Zak, U. Fischbacher, E. Fehr, Oxytocin increases trust in
humans. Nature 435, 673–676 (2005).
19. J. G. Veening, B. Olivier, Intranasal administration of oxytocin: Behavioral and clinical
effects, a review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 1445–1465 (2013).
20. D. Feifel, K. Macdonald, A. Nguyen, P. Cobb, H. Warlan, B. Galangue, A. Minassian,
O. Becker, J. Cooper, W. Perry, M. Lefebvre, J. Gonzales, A. Hadley, Adjunctive intranasal
oxytocin reduces symptoms in schizophrenia patients. Biol. Psychiatry 68, 678–680
(2010).
21. C. J. Yatawara, S. L. Einfeld, I. B. Hickie, T. A. Davenport, A. J. Guastella,
The effect of oxytocin nasal spray on social interaction deficits observed in
young children with autism: A randomized clinical crossover trial. Mol. Psychiatry
21, 1225–1231 (2016).
22. C. L. Holmes, D. W. Landry, J. T. Granton, Science review: Vasopressin and the
cardiovascular system part 1—Receptor physiology. Crit. Care 7, 427–434 (2003).
23. C. L. Holmes, D. W. Landry, J. T. Granton, Science review: Vasopressin and the
cardiovascular system part 2—Clinical physiology. Crit. Care 8, 15–23 (2004).
24. G. I. Hatton, Emerging concepts of structure-function dynamics in adult brain: The
hypothalamo-neurohypophysial system. Prog. Neurobiol. 34, 437–504 (1990).
25. R. Dantzer, G. F. Koob, R.-M. Bluthé, M. Le Moal, Septal vasopressin modulates social
memory in male rats. Brain Res. 457, 143–147 (1988).
26. I. F. Bielsky, S.-B. Hu, K. L. Szegda, H. Westphal, L. J. Young, Profound impairment in social
recognition and reduction in anxiety-like behavior in vasopressin V1a receptor knockout
mice. Neuropsychopharmacology 29, 483–493 (2004).
27. M. Engelmann, Vasopressin in the septum: Not important versus causally involved in
learning and memory—Two faces of the same coin? Prog. Brain Res. 170, 389–395
(2008).
28. S. R. Wersinger, E. I. Ginns, A. M. O’Carroll, S. J. Lolait, W. S. Young III,
Vasopressin V1b receptor knockout reduces aggressive behavior in male mice.
Mol. Psychiatry 7, 975–984 (2002).
29. C. F. Ferris, R. H. Melloni Jr., G. Koppel, K. W. Perry, R. W. Fuller, Y. Delville, Vasopressin/
serotonin interactions in the anterior hypothalamus control aggressive behavior in
golden hamsters. J. Neurosci. 17, 4331–4340 (1997).
30. R. Landgraf, The involvement of the vasopressin system in stress-related disorders.
CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets 5, 167–179 (2006).
31. C. W. Gruber, M. Muttenthaler, Discovery of defense- and neuropeptides in social ants
by genome-mining. PLOS ONE 7, e32559 (2012).
32. C. Barberis, B. Mouillac, T. Durroux, Structural bases of vasopressin/oxytocin receptor
function. J. Endocrinol. 156, 223–229 (1998).
33. C. W. Gruber, M. Muttenthaler, M. Freissmuth, Ligand-based peptide design and
combinatorial peptide libraries to target G protein-coupled receptors. Curr. Pharm. Des.
16, 3071–3088 (2010).
34. B. Chini, B. Mouillac, M.-N. Balestre, S. Trumpp-Kallmeyer, J. Hoflack, M. Hibert,
M. Andriolo, S. Pupier, S. Jard, C. Barberis, Two aromatic residues regulate the response
of the human oxytocin receptor to the partial agonist arginine vasopressin. FEBS Lett.
397, 201–206 (1996).
35. T. Kimura, Y. Makino, F. Saji, M. Takemura, T. Inoue, T. Kikuchi, Y. Kubota, C. Azuma,
T. Nobunaga, Y. Tokugawa, O. Tanizawa, Molecular characterization of a cloned human
oxytocin receptor. Eur. J. Endocrinol. 131, 385–390 (1994).
36. B. F. Mitchell, X. Fang, S. Wong, Oxytocin: A paracrine hormone in the regulation of
parturition? Rev. Reprod. 3, 113–122 (1998).
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
10 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 37. M. Manning, S. Stoev, B. Chini, T. Durroux, B. Mouillac, G. Guillon, Peptide and non-
peptide agonists and antagonists for the vasopressin and oxytocin V1a, V1b, V2 and OT
receptors: Research tools and potential therapeutic agents. Prog. Brain Res. 170,
473–512 (2008).
38. B. Chini, M. Manning, G. Guillon, Affinity and efficacy of selective agonists and
antagonists for vasopressin and oxytocin receptors: An “easy guide” to receptor
pharmacology. Prog. Brain Res. 170, 513–517 (2008).
39. M. Saito, A. Tahara, T. Sugimoto, 1-Desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP)
as an agonist on V1b vasopressin receptor. Biochem. Pharmacol. 53, 1711–1717
(1997).
40. C. Barberis, D. Morin, T. Durroux, B. Mouillac, G. Guillon, R. Seyer, M. Hibert, E. Tribollet,
M. Manning, Molecular pharmacology of AVP and OT receptors and therapeutic
potential. Drug News Perspect. 12, 279–292 (1999).
41. G. Guillon, S. Derick, A. Pena, L. L. Cheng, S. Stoev, R. Seyer, J. L. Morgat, C. Barberis,
C. Serradeil-Le Gal, J. Wagnon, M. Manning, The discovery of novel vasopressin V1b
receptor ligands for pharmacological, functional and structural investigations.
J. Neuroendocrinol. 16, 356–361 (2004).
42. G. Sweeney, A. M. Holbrook, M. Levine, M. Yip, K. Alfredsson, S. Cappi, M. Ohlin, P. Schulz,
W. Wassenaar, Pharmacokinetics of carbetocin, a long-acting oxytocin analogue, in
nonpregnant women. Curr. Ther. Res. Clin. Exp. 47, 528–540 (1990).
43. A. Reversi, V. Rimoldi, T. Marrocco, P. Cassoni, G. Bussolati, M. Parenti, B. Chini, The
oxytocin receptor antagonist atosiban inhibits cell growth via a “biased agonist”
mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 16311–16318 (2005).
44. M. Manning, S. Stoev, L. L. Cheng, N. C. Wo, W. Y. Chan, Design of oxytocin antagonists,
which are more selective than atosiban. J. Pept. Sci. 7, 449–465 (2001).
45. S. Arrowsmith, S. Wray, Oxytocin: Its mechanism of action and receptor signalling in the
myometrium. J. Neuroendocrinol. 26, 356–369 (2014).
46. D. A. Wing, L. Sheibani, Pharmacotherapy options for labor induction. Expert Opin.
Pharmacother. 16, 1657–1668 (2015).
47. J. Koehbach, T. Stockner, C. Bergmayr, M. Muttenthaler, C. W. Gruber, Insights into the
molecular evolution of oxytocin receptor ligand binding. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 41,
197–204 (2013).
48. J. Koehbach, M. O’Brien, M. Muttenthaler, M. Miazzo, M. Akcan, A. G. Elliott, N. L. Daly,
P. J. Harvey, S. Arrowsmith, S. Gunasekera, T. J. Smith, S. Wray, U. Göransson,
P. E. Dawson, D. J. Craik, M. Freissmuth, C. W. Gruber, Oxytocic plant cyclotides as
templates for peptide G protein-coupled receptor ligand design. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 110, 21183–21188 (2013).
49. C. W. Gruber, J. Koehbach, M. Muttenthaler, Exploring bioactive peptides from natural
sources for oxytocin and vasopressin drug discovery. Future Med. Chem. 4, 1791–1798
(2012).
50. S. Dutertre, D. Croker, N. L. Daly, Å. Andersson, M. Muttenthaler, N. G. Lumsden,
D. J. Craik, P. F. Alewood, G. Guillon, R. J. Lewis, Conopressin-T from Conus tulipa
reveals an antagonist switch in vasopressin-like peptides. J. Biol. Chem.
283, 7100–7108 (2008).
51. M. Busnelli, G. Kleinau, M. Muttenthaler, S. Stoev, M. Manning, L. Bibic, L. A. Howell,
P. J. McCormick, S. Di Lascio, D. Braida, M. Sala, G. E. Rovati, T. Bellini, B. Chini, Design and
characterization of superpotent bivalent ligands targeting oxytocin receptor dimers via
a channel-like structure. J. Med. Chem. 59, 7152–7166 (2016).
52. J. P. Rose, C.-K. Wu, C.-D. Hsiao, E. Breslow, B.-C. Wang, Crystal structure of the
neurophysin-oxytocin complex. Nat. Struct. Biol. 3, 163–169 (1996).
53. V. J. Hruby, Implications of the x-ray structure of deamino-oxytocin to agonist/
antagonist-receptor interactions. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 8, 336–339 (1987).
54. S. P. Wood, I. J. Tickle, A. M. Treharne, J. E. Pitts, Y. Mascarenhas, J. Y. Li, J. Husain,
S. Cooper, T. L. Blundell, V. J. Hruby, A. Buku, A. J. Fischman, H. R. Wyssbrod, Crystal
structure analysis of deamino-oxytocin: Conformational flexibility and receptor binding.
Science 232, 633–636 (1986).
55. V. Du Vigneaud, G. Winestock, V. V. Murti, D. B. Hope, R. D. Kimbrough Jr., Synthesis
of 1-b-mercantopropionic acid oxytocin (desamino-oxytocin), a highly potent analogue
of oxytocin. J. Biol. Chem. 235, PC64–PC66 (1960).
56. M. Muttenthaler, A. Andersson, A. D. de Araujo, Z. Dekan, R. J. Lewis, P. F. Alewood,
Modulating oxytocin activity and plasma stability by disulfide bond engineering.
J. Med. Chem. 53, 8585–8596 (2010).
57. K. Jošt, M. Lebl, F. Brtnik, CRC Handbook of Neurohypophyseal Hormone Analogs (CRC
Press, 1987), vols. 1 and 2.
58. M. Manning, A. Olma, W. Klis, A. Kolodziejczyk, E. Nawrocka, A. Misicka, J. Seto,
W. H. Sawyer, Carboxy terminus of vasopressin required for activity but not binding.
Nature 308, 652–653 (1984).
59. M. Muttenthaler, S. T. Nevin, A. A. Grishin, S. T. Ngo, P. T. Choy, N. L. Daly, S.-H. Hu,
C. J. Armishaw, C.-I. A. Wang, R. J. Lewis, J. L. Martin, P. G. Noakes, D. J. Craik, D. J. Adams,
P. F. Alewood, Solving the a-conotoxin folding problem: Efficient selenium-directed
on-resin generation of more potent and stable nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
antagonists. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 3514–3522 (2010).
60. M. Muttenthaler, P. F. Alewood, Selenopeptide chemistry. J. Pept. Sci. 14, 1223–1239
(2008).
61. M. Muttenthaler, P. F. Alewood, in Oxidative Folding of Peptides and Proteins, J. Buchner,
L. Moroder, Eds. (The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2008) pp. 396–418.
62. P. Chocat, N. Esaki, H. Tanaka, K. Soda, Synthesis of L-selenodjenkolate and its
degradation with methionine g-lyase. Anal. Biochem. 148, 485–489 (1985).
63. H. Tanaka, K. Soda, Selenocysteine. Methods Enzymol. 143, 240–243 (1987).
64. T. Oikawa, N. Esaki, H. Tanaka, K. Soda, Metalloselenonein, the selenium analogue of
metallothionein: Synthesis and characterization of its complex with copper ions.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 3057–3059 (1991).
65. M. Schnölzer, P. Alewood, A. Jones, D. Alewood, S. B. H. Kent, In situ neutralization in
Boc-chemistry solid phase peptide synthesis. Rapid, high yield assembly of difficult
sequences. Int. J. Pept. Protein Res. 40, 180–193 (1992).
66. M. Busnelli, E. Bulgheroni, M. Manning, G. Kleinau, B. Chini, Selective and potent
agonists and antagonists for investigating the role of mouse oxytocin receptors.
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 346, 318–327 (2013).
67. A. L. Del Tredici, K. E. Vanover, A. E. Knapp, S. M. Bertozzi, N. R. Nash, E. S. Burstein,
J. Lameh, E. A. Currier, R. E. Davis, M. R. Brann, N. Mohell, R. Olsson, F. Piu, Identification
of novel selective V2 receptor non-peptide agonists. Biochem. Pharmacol. 76,
1134–1141 (2008).
68. J. Condon, S. Yin, B. Mayhew, R. A. Word, W. E. Wright, J. W. Shay, W. E. Rainey,
Telomerase immortalization of human myometrial cells. Biol. Reprod. 67, 506–514
(2002).
69. J. Fitzgibbon, J. J. Morrison, T. J. Smith, M. O’Brien, Modulation of human uterine smooth
muscle cell collagen contractility by thrombin, Y-27632, TNF alpha and indomethacin.
Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 7, 2 (2009).
70. A. F. Attah, M. O’Brien, J. Koehbach, M. A. Sonibare, J. O. Moody, T. J. Smith, C. W. Gruber,
Uterine contractility of plants used to facilitate childbirth in Nigerian ethnomedicine.
J. Ethnopharmacol. 143, 377–382 (2012).
71. I. Toth, I. D. Neumann, D. A. Slattery, Social fear conditioning: A novel and specific
animal model to study social anxiety disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 37,
1433–1443 (2012).
72. C. Hicks, L. Ramos, T. Reekie, G. H. Misagh, R. Narlawar, M. Kassiou, I. S. McGregor, Body
temperature and cardiac changes induced by peripherally administered oxytocin,
vasopressin and the non-peptide oxytocin receptor agonist WAY 267,464: A
biotelemetry study in rats. Br. J. Pharmacol. 171, 2868–2887 (2014).
73. S. R. Goldsmith, M. Gheorghiade, Vasopressin antagonism in heart failure. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.
46, 1785–1791 (2005).
74. M. O. Maybauer, D. M. Maybauer, P. Enkhbaatar, D. L. Traber, Physiology of the
vasopressin receptors. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Anaesthesiol. 22, 253–263 (2008).
75. T. A. Schweiger, M. M. Zdanowicz, Vasopressin-receptor antagonists in heart failure.
Am. J. Health Syst. Pharm. 65, 807–817 (2008).
76. X. Li, T. O. Chan, V. Myers, I. Chowdhury, X.-Q. Zhang, J. Song, J. Zhang, J. Andrel,
H. Funakoshi, J. Robbins, W. J. Koch, T. Hyslop, J. Y. Cheung, A. M. Feldman, Controlled
and cardiac-restricted overexpression of the arginine vasopressin V1A receptor
causes reversible left ventricular dysfunction through Gaq-mediated cell signaling.
Circulation 124, 572–581 (2011).
77. B. Chini, M. Manning, Agonist selectivity in the oxytocin/vasopressin receptor family:
New insights and challenges. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 35, 737–741 (2007).
78. M. Manning, A. Misicka, A. Olma, K. Bankowski, S. Stoev, B. Chini, T. Durroux, B. Mouillac,
M. Corbani, G. Guillon, Oxytocin and vasopressin agonists and antagonists as research
tools and potential therapeutics. J. Neuroendocrinol. 24, 609–628 (2012).
79. D. Di Scala-Guenot, D. Mouginot, M. T. Strosser, Increase of intracellular calcium induced
by oxytocin in hypothalamic cultured astrocytes. Glia 11, 269–276 (1994).
80. M. Busnelli, A. Saulière, M. Manning, M. Bouvier, C. Galés, B. Chini, Functional selective
oxytocin-derived agonists discriminate between individual G protein family subtypes.
J. Biol. Chem. 287, 3617–3629 (2012).
81. J. D. Urban, W. P. Clarke, M. von Zastrow, D. E. Nichols, B. Kobilka, H. Weinstein,
J. A. Javitch, B. L. Roth, A. Christopoulos, P. M. Sexton, K. J. Miller, M. Spedding,
R. B. Mailman, Functional selectivity and classical concepts of quantitative
pharmacology. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 320, 1–13 (2007).
82. R. Rahmeh, M. Damian, M. Cottet, H. Orcel, C. Mendre, T. Durroux, K. S. Sharma,
G. Durand, B. Pucci, E. Trinquet, J. M. Zwier, X. Deupi, P. Bron, J.-L. Banères,
B. Mouillac, S. Granier, Structural insights into biased G protein-coupled receptor
signaling revealed by fluorescence spectroscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109,
6733–6738 (2012).
83. I. Zoicas, D. A. Slattery, I. D. Neumann, Brain oxytocin in social fear conditioning
and its extinction: Involvement of the lateral septum. Neuropsychopharmacology
39, 3027–3035 (2014).
84. RxList, The Internet Drug Index for Prescription Drugs and Medications; www.rxlist.com/.
85. R. A. Dyer, A. J. Butwick, B. Carvalho, Oxytocin for labour and caesarean delivery:
Implications for the anaesthesiologist. Curr. Opin. Anaesthesiol. 24, 255–261 (2011).
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
11 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 86. J. Lipshitz, C. W. Klose, Use of tocolytic drugs to reverse oxytocin-induced uterine
hypertonus and fetal distress. Obstet. Gynecol. 66, 16S–18S (1985).
87. A. G. Cahill, B. M. Waterman, D. M. Stamilio, A. O. Odibo, J. E. Allsworth, B. Evanoff,
G. A. Macones, Higher maximum doses of oxytocin are associated with an unacceptably
high risk for uterine rupture in patients attempting vaginal birth after cesarean
delivery. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 199, e32.e1–e32.e5 (2008).
88. M. Maggi, P. Del Carlo, G. Fantoni, S. Giannini, C. Torrisi, D. Casparis, G. Massi, M. Serio,
Human myometrium during pregnancy contains and responds to VI vasopressin
receptors as well as oxytocin receptors. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 70, 1142–1154
(1990).
89. T. Bossmar, M. Åkerlund, G. Fantoni, J. Szamatowicz, P. Melin, M. Maggi,
Receptors for and myometrial responses to oxytocin and vasopressin in
preterm and term human pregnancy: Effects of the oxytocin antagonist atosiban.
Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 171, 1634–1642 (1994).
90. E. MacDonald, M. R. Dadds, J. L. Brennan, K. Williams, F. Levy, A. J. Cauchi, A review
of safety, side-effects and subjective reactions to intranasal oxytocin in human research.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 36, 1114–1126 (2011).
91. A. J. Guastella, S. L. Einfeld, K. M. Gray, N. J. Rinehart, B. J. Tonge, T. J. Lambert, I. B. Hickie,
Intranasal oxytocin improves emotion recognition for youth with autism spectrum
disorders. Biol. Psychiatry 67, 692–694 (2010).
92. C. A. Pedersen, C. M. Gibson, S. W. Rau, K. Salimi, K. L. Smedley, R. L. Casey, J. Leserman,
L. F. Jarskog, D. L. Penn, Intranasal oxytocin reduces psychotic symptoms and improves
Theory of Mind and social perception in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 132, 50–53
(2011).
93. C. Cacciotti-Saija, R. Langdon, P. B. Ward, I. B. Hickie, E. M. Scott, S. L. Naismith, L. Moore,
G. A. Alvares, M. A. Redoblado Hodge, A. J. Guastella, A double-blind randomized
controlled trial of oxytocin nasal spray and social cognition training for young people
with early psychosis. Schizophr. Bull. 41, 483–493 (2015).
94. M. Muttenthaler, F. Albericio, P. E. Dawson, Methods, setup and safe handling for
anhydrous hydrogen fluoride cleavage in Boc solid-phase peptide synthesis. Nat. Protoc.
10, 1067–1083 (2015).
95. A. C. Conibear, N. L. Daly, D. J. Craik, Quantification of small cyclic disulfide-rich peptides.
Biopolymers 98, 518–524 (2012).
96. M. A. Buck, T. A. Olah, C. J. Weitzmann, B. S. Cooperman, Protein estimation by the product
of integrated peak area and flow rate. Anal. Biochem. 182, 295–299 (1989).
97. F. Moffatt, P. Senkans, D. Ricketts, Approaches towards the quantitative analysis of
peptides and proteins by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography in
the absence of a pure reference sample. J. Chromatogr. A 891, 235–242 (2000).
98. I. Vetter, R. J. Lewis, Characterization of endogenous calcium responses in neuronal cell
lines. Biochem. Pharmacol. 79, 908–920 (2010).
99. C. Hicks, W. Jorgensen, C. Brown, J. Fardell, J. Koehbach, C. W. Gruber, M. Kassiou,
G. E. Hunt, I. S. McGregor, The nonpeptide oxytocin receptor agonist WAY 267,464:
Receptor-binding profile, prosocial effects and distribution of c-Fos expression in
adolescent rats. J. Neuroendocrinol. 24, 1012–1029 (2012).
100. C. Bergmayr, P. Thurner, S. Keuerleber, O. Kudlacek, C. Nanoff, M. Freissmuth,
C. W. Gruber, Recruitment of a cytoplasmic chaperone relay by the A2A adenosine
receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 28831–28844 (2013).
101. I. Toth, I. D. Neumann, D. A. Slattery, Central administration of oxytocin receptor ligands
affects cued fear extinction in rats and mice in a timepoint-dependent manner.
Psychopharmacology 223, 149–158 (2012).
102. M. J. M. Luckas, S. Wray, A comparison of the contractile properties of human
myometrium obtained from the upper and lower uterine segments. BJOG
107, 1309–1311 (2000).
103. S. Arrowsmith, S. Quenby, A. Weeks, T. Burdyga, S. Wray, Poor spontaneous and
oxytocin-stimulated contractility in human myometrium from postdates pregnancies.
PLOS ONE 7, e36787 (2012).
104. M. J. M. Luckas, M. J. Taggart, S. Wray, Intracellular calcium stores and agonist-induced
contractions in isolated human myometrium. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 181, 468–476
(1999).
105. N. J. Palpant, P. Hofsteen, L. Pabon, H. Reinecke, C. E. Murry, Cardiac development in
zebrafish and human embryonic stem cells is inhibited by exposure to tobacco
cigarettes and e-cigarettes. PLOS ONE 10, e0126259 (2015).
106. N. J. Palpant, L. Pabon, J. S. Rabinowitz, B. K. Hadland, C. L. Stoick-Cooper, S. L. Paige,
I. D. Bernstein, R. T. Moon, C. E. Murry, Transmembrane protein 88: A Wnt regulatory
protein that specifies cardiomyocyte development. Development 140, 3799–3808 (2013).
107. N. J. Palpant, L. Pabon, M. Roberts, B. Hadland, D. Jones, C. Jones, R. T. Moon,
W. L. Ruzzo, I. Bernstein, Y. Zheng, C. E. Murry, Inhibition of b-catenin signaling
respecifies anterior-like endothelium into beating human cardiomyocytes.
Development 142, 3198–3209 (2015).
108. X. Lian, J. Zhang, S. M. Azarin, K. Zhu, L. B. Hazeltine, X. Bao, C. Hsiao, T. J. Kamp,
S. P. Palecek, Directed cardiomyocyte differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells
by modulating Wnt/b-catenin signaling under fully defined conditions. Nat. Protoc. 8,
162–175 (2013).
109. P. W. Burridge, E. Matsa, P. Shukla, Z. C. Lin, J. M. Churko, A. D. Ebert, F. Lan, S. Diecke,
B. Huber, N. M. Mordwinkin, J. R. Plews, O. J. Abilez, B. Cui, J. D. Gold, J. C. Wu,
Chemically defined generation of human cardiomyocytes. Nat. Methods 11, 855–860
(2014).
110. A. Oksche, G. Leder, S. Valet, M. Platzer, K. Hasse, S. Geist, G. Krause, A. Rosenthal,
W. Rosenthal, Variant amino acids in the extracellular loops of murine and human
vasopressin V2 receptors account for differences in cell surface expression and ligand
affinity. Mol. Endocrinol. 16, 799–813 (2002).
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge A. Jones for his help with mass spectrometry,
A. Mulligan for his contribution to some of the synthetic work, L. Rash for conducting
the qualitative control and concentration determination of tested analogs, and
M. Freissmuth and B. Chini for their continuous support. Funding: This work was supported
by National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Project (1063803) and
Program grants (1072113 and 1063803). I.V. was supported by an Australian Research
Council (ARC) Future Fellowship grant (FT130101215) and R.J.L. was supported by
an NHMRC Fellowship. M.B. is an Umberto Veronesi Foundation Postdoctoral Fellow
(FUV 2017). M.M. received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under Marie Curie Actions grant agreement no. 254897 and
2013-BP-B-00109, from the Secretary of Universities and Research of the Economy and
Knowledge Department of the Government of Catalonia, from the ARC (DE150100784),
and from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
Research and Innovation Programme grant agreement no. 714366. C.W.G. is an ARC Future
Fellow (FT140100730), and his research was supported by the Vienna Science and
Technology Fund (WWTF) through project grant LS13-017. S.W. and S.A. were supported
by a Harris-Wellbeing Preterm Birth Research Centre grant administered by Wellbeing
of Women, UK. I.D.N. was supported by the DFG (Ne 465/27-1), German Ministry
of Education and Research (BMBF; OptiMD; 01EE1401A), and European Union Seventh
Framework (FemNAT CD; Health-F2-2013-602407). Author contributions: M.M. designed
and performed the synthesis of the peptide analogs and developed the selenocysteine
chemistry. A.A., I.V., M.B., L.R., C.B., R.J.L., and C.W.G. performed the pharmacological
analysis of the analogs. J.R.D., H.S.C., and N.J.P. performed the cardiomyocyte experiments.
S.A., S.W., M.O., and T.J.S. performed the uterine strip contraction studies. R.M. and
I.D.N. performed the behavioral in vivo experiments. M.M. and P.F.A. directed the project
and wrote the paper. All authors contributed to the discussion, preparation of figures,
and interpretation of the results. Competing interests: M.M. and P.F.A. are named on
a U.S. patent (2013/0130,985) for oxytocin peptide analogs. The other authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: The hiPSC line
(WTC11 hiPSCs) used to generate the cardiomyocytes in this study requires a material
transfer agreement from Bruce Conklin’s laboratory at University of California, San
Francisco (Gladstone Institute).
Submitted 30 March 2017
Accepted 7 November 2017
Published 5 December 2017
10.1126/scisignal.aan3398
Citation: M. Muttenthaler, Å. Andersson, I. Vetter, R. Menon, M. Busnelli, L. Ragnarsson, C. Bergmayr,
S. Arrowsmith, J. R. Deuis, H. S. Chiu, N. J. Palpant, M. O’Brien, T. J. Smith, S. Wray, I. D. Neumann,
C. W. Gruber, R. J. Lewis, P. F. Alewood, Subtle modifications to oxytocin produce ligands that
retain potency and improved selectivity across species. Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017).
S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H RE S O U R C E
Muttenthaler et al., Sci. Signal. 10, eaan3398 (2017)
5 December 2017
12 of 12
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 across species
Subtle modifications to oxytocin produce ligands that retain potency and improved selectivity
D. Neumann, Christian W. Gruber, Richard J. Lewis and Paul F. Alewood
Inga
Sarah Arrowsmith, Jennifer R. Deuis, Han Sheng Chiu, Nathan J. Palpant, Margaret O'Brien, Terry J. Smith, Susan Wray, 
Markus Muttenthaler, Åsa Andersson, Irina Vetter, Rohit Menon, Marta Busnelli, Lotten Ragnarsson, Christian Bergmayr,
DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.aan3398
 (508), eaan3398.
10
Sci. Signal. 
are solely mediated by the oxytocin receptor.
that
cross-talk between oxytocin, vasopressin, and their receptors, this compound will also be helpful in identifying effects 
mice and induced contractile activity in human myometrial strips without affecting cultured cardiomyocytes. Given the
compound that was more selective for the oxytocin receptor than for the vasopressin receptors. It reduced social fear in 
. generated ligands based on oxytocin with subtle modifications, yielding a lead
et al
oxytocin receptor. Muttenthaler 
However, oxytocin triggers adverse cardiovascular side effects because it activates the vasopressin receptor and the 
Oxytocin is clinically used to induce labor, and there is interest in using this peptide to treat social disorders.
A more selective oxytocin receptor agonist
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/10/508/eaan3398
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/12/01/10.508.eaan3398.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/351/6271/375.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/271/271ra8.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/348/6232/333.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/357/6358/1406.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/8/368/ec60.abstract
REFERENCES
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/10/508/eaan3398#BIBL
This article cites 107 articles, 25 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Signaling 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 1937-9145) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Signaling 
 on June 2, 2019
http://stke.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
