 © Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.
Transl Pediatr 2017;6(3):137-143
tp.amegroups.com
Introduction
The goals of resistance training (RT) should focus on the 
specific goals of the participant in the exercise program. 
Table 1 provides a close look at terms associated with RT 
techniques. RT design can focus on improving muscle 
strength, increasing power or muscle bulk, enhancing 
endurance or a combination of any of the above (1-4). 
In addition, studies have found that positive associations 
were noted between muscular fitness and bone health and 
self-esteem (1). These programs should be specifically 
designed by taking into account the various demands of 
the sport considered. For example, an athlete who runs 
track and an athlete who plays baseball may have similar 
goals in improving muscle strength but should have specific 
programs tailored towards the aerobic demands of each 
respective sport. As such, designing such programs for 
conditioning and sport-specific training should be done 
by appropriately trained professionals, taking the athlete’s 
goals into consideration (2). Doing so will allow for fitness 
promotion to support motor skill acquisition, to enhance 
performance, to improve markers of well-being and to 
reduce the risk of sustaining sports-related injuries (1). 
 
Granacher et al. looked at three major benefits from 
implementing muscular fitness enhancing exercise. First, 
regular training stimulates athletic development and career. 
Second, RT enhances tolerance of the demands of long-
term training, while, finally, inducing long-term health 
promoting effects that track into adulthood (1).
In addition to RT, one needs to take health-related 
fitness goals into account. These goals may revolve around 
aerobic and flexibility exercises, as well as stretching—
Review Article
Resistance training for children and adolescents
Allison M. Myers, Nicholas W. Beam, Joseph D. Fakhoury
Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Contributions: (I) Conception and design: All authors; (II) Administrative support: All authors; (III) Provision of study materials or patients: All 
authors; (IV) Collection and assembly of data: All authors; (V) Data analysis and interpretation: All authors; (VI) Manuscript writing: All authors; (VII) 
Final approval of manuscript: All authors.
Correspondence to: Joseph D. Fakhoury, MD. Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, MI, USA. 
 
Email: Joseph.Fakhoury@med.wmich.edu.
Abstract: As more children and adolescents are becoming involved in exercise and school or community 
based athletics, attention is turned towards proper training and conditioning to optimize performance, 
stimulate athletic development and ensure safety while tolerating long-term competition. Resistance 
training (RT) refers to the methodology of ensuring such optimal performance and safety. This is a common 
component of sports and physical fitness in schools and organized athletic programs around the country. RT 
is a physical conditioning program that involves various training techniques (e.g., machine based, free weight, 
plyometric, complex and functional training) and progressively increasing resistive loads to achieve desired 
muscle endurance, strength, power or a combination of the above. Proper RT programs have a plethora 
of associated benefits including increased strength, lower rates of sports-related injury, increased bone 
strength index (BSI), decreased risk of fracture and improved self-esteem and interest in fitness. There are 
risks involved with improper or poor training programs. Proper training programs involve knowledgeable 
trainers, effective supervision and tailored weight training.
Keywords: Resistance training (RT); eccentric contraction; concentric contraction; plyometrics; weight training; 
adolescent strength training
Submitted Feb 22, 2017. Accepted for publication Mar 21, 2017.
doi: 10.21037/tp.2017.04.01
View this article at: http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp.2017.04.01
 138
Myers et al. Resistance training
© Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.
Transl Pediatr 2017;6(3):137-143
tp.amegroups.com
another key component of RT. RT is considered safe if 
the training is designed appropriately for the emotional 
and developmental stage of the participant, rather than 
simply considering chronological age (1,2). This will 
help minimize any associated injuries to growth plates, 
cartilage and overall skeletal structure. The term RT may 
be used interchangeably with strength training, weight 
training and weight lifting, but this interchangeable use 
is often inappropriate. Competitive weight lifting is not 
recommended for children or adolescents (4). As such, the 
American Academy of Pediatrics has recommended that 
preadolescents and adolescents should avoid power lifting, 
body building and maximal lifts until they reach physical 
and skeletal maturity. The many positive effects of RT 
have been examined and will be discussed here. This article 
discusses the benefits, safety and risks associated with RT in 
children and adolescents, as well as analyzing current proper 
recommendations and techniques for proper resistance 
fitness. There is, however, a noted difference between 
specific characteristics of youth athlete physiology and 
level of expertise versus proficiency in motor performance 
in non-athletic youth. This review will focus on general 
principles applying to children and adolescents, primarily 
focusing on observed benefits, risks and general basic 
understanding of RT.
Benefits of RT
RT in youth is believed to capitalize on the synergistic 
effects of physiological adaptations demanded by RT 
along with the natural proliferation and adaptations due to 
maturation in the young athlete. During pre-pubescence, 
youth experience is heightened by neural proliferation and 
central nervous system (CNS) maturation (5). Increased 
load and stress on the body provides an added stimulus to 
the already natural proliferation taking place, resulting in 
a synergistic increase in neural proliferation compared to 
youth who do not partake in RT. Studies also show youth 
and adolescents that undertake initial RT of different 
forms show increased gains in strength compared to adults 
undergoing initial RT (5,6). This disparity between youth 
and adults also supports the suggestion that increased 
neural adaptation during normal physiological maturation is 
synergistic with the physical demands of RT.
Table 1 Definition of terms
Term
Definition
Strength training
The use of resistance methods to increase one’s ability to exert or resist force. May include free 
weights, body weight, machines or other resistance devices to attain this goal
Core strengthening
Focusing a program to the muscles that stabilize the trunk. Emphasizes on abdominal, lower back, 
gluteal muscles
Set
Group of repetitions separated by scheduled periods of rest
Reps
Abbreviation for repetitions
Strength
Maximal force a muscle generates at a specific velocity of movement
Power
Rate at which a muscle or group of muscles perform a given task
Hypertrophy
Increase in cross-sectional area or size of a muscle, primarily resulting from muscle fibers
Concentric contraction
Muscle shortening during contraction
Eccentric contraction
Muscle lengthening during contraction
Isometric contraction
Muscle length is unchanged during contraction (e.g., wall sits)
Isokinetic contraction
Speed of muscle contraction is fixed through motion
Isotonic contraction
Involves both concentric and eccentric components; Muscle tension remains constant during the 
movement
Progressive resistive exercises
Exercise regimen in which the athlete progressively increases amount of weight lifted and/or repetition 
number
Plyometric exercise
Repeated eccentric and concentric muscle contractions
 139
Translational Pediatrics, Vol 6, No 3 July 2017
© Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.
Transl Pediatr 2017;6(3):137-143
tp.amegroups.com
There are many ways to measure the effects of RT. 
The largest benefit of RT to many athletes is an observed 
increase in power generated by the stretch shortening 
cycle (SSC). SSC activity is a naturally incorporated 
movement used to increase power output during particular 
movements. SSC is described as a muscle undergoing an 
eccentric contraction immediately prior to undergoing a 
concentric contraction. The SSC is seen commonly in an 
individual attempting a jump from a standing position. 
Instead of remaining static prior to the jump, the individual 
will appear to uncoil before recoiling and then jumping. 
RT designed to enhance the SSC is the main target for 
plyometric training to increase the contractile force of 
muscles, stiffness of the tendons and efficacy of neurons to 
function synergistically to produce greater force and speed 
during competition (6,7). The increased force provided 
by stronger SSC activity allows for increased speed during 
initial acceleration or directional change, arm speed during 
throwing or swinging or force during vertical leap (5,7).
It has been widely demonstrated that the increased 
strength experienced in adolescent athletes gained from 
RT is attributed to the nervous system as opposed to 
hypertrophy (5,7,8). This is evidenced by increased strength 
without a statistically significant increase in muscle cross 
sectional area demonstrating hypertrophy (8).
The main mechanism of increased neuronal function 
due to RT is increased motor unit activation leading to 
greater muscle output, increasing demonstrated strength. 
This was measured using the interpolated twitch technique 
that measures maximum voluntary contraction compared to 
complete activation by electrostimulation. The interpolated 
twitch technique demonstrated increased motor activation 
in children who underwent a 20-week RT regimen 
focusing on the elbow and knee extensors (8). Studies that 
demonstrated an increase in agonist motor activation also 
measured a decrease in antagonistic muscle activation 
during exertion. The decrease in antagonistic muscle 
activation allows for greater overall muscle output (8). This 
has been specifically measured in adults but has not yet 
been proven in adolescents but is theorized to yield similar 
findings.
Two other neural adaptations related to increased 
strength are rate of force development (RFD) and 
electromechanical delay (EMD). RFD is the rate at which 
a particular amount of force can be developed and exerted 
by a particular muscle group. An 8-week study of involving 
high velocity RT resulted in significant increases in RFD 
for participants. Similar findings were not supported in a 
study conducted with lower intensity RT suggesting that 
only high velocity RT can develop an increased RFD. 
Decreased EMD, the time it takes from neuronal signaling 
to contraction, has been shown to decrease with RT largely 
due to increased tendon stiffness, allowing a faster transfer 
of force from muscle contraction to bone movement via the 
tendon. An increase in tendon stiffness causing a decrease 
in EMD has been demonstrated; however, the expected 
association to increased RFD was not supported in the 
study. A decreased EMD does lessen the reaction time in 
competition for athletes adding to the benefits of RT (8).
In the past, it was thought RT was detrimental to 
youth athletes and was specifically avoided out of concern 
for damage caused by the high forces exerted upon the 
adolescent skeleton resulting in concern for increased 
physeal injuries and the potential for stunted growth (6,9). 
Multiple studies have since discredited this theory by 
demonstrating there is no adverse effects of RT in youth 
athletes, when designed properly, and is often completed 
injury free (5-7,10). Instead, athletes who incorporate RT 
into their training regimen have demonstrated decreased 
rates of fracture, musculotendinous and muscle injuries 
associated with sport specific practice and competition (8). 
 
RT has been shown to decrease injury rates by increasing 
bone strength index (BSI) and mineral content, 
strengthening tendons and improving the strength of 
accessory muscles to prevent injury during practice and 
competition.
RT is beneficial to the immature skeleton in several 
ways. The increased loading on the skeleton causes 
changes in the bone mineral content. Increased bone 
content is positively correlated with an increase in bone 
strength. Increases in bone content are also correlated with 
increased time of RT. Soccer players who had 4 or more 
hours of RT per week showed significantly greater gains in 
bone content compared to soccer players who had only 2 h 
of RT per week. Those soccer players who had 2 h of RT 
per week showed increases in bone content greater than 
the control group of soccer players who had no RT (8). 
RT is also correlated with increased BSI calculated from 
the cross sectional moment of inertia multiplied by cortical 
bone mineral density. Increased BSI has been observed 
in sport specific bones critical to athletic performance. 
Gymnasts have been found to have increased BSI in the 
radius. Track and field athletes have been found to have 
increased BSI in the distal and proximal tibia; and water 
polo players have been found to have increased BSI in the 
distal radius. Studies show an increased BSI is correlated 
 140
Myers et al. Resistance training
© Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.
Transl Pediatr 2017;6(3):137-143
tp.amegroups.com
with a decreased risk of fracture (8).
Athletes’ tendons undergo changes in composition and 
thickness due to RT. During athletic development the 
muscle undergoes adaptation faster than the tendon does 
leading to an imbalance in maximum stress that puts the 
athlete at increased risk for tendinous injury. This change 
in tendon composition allows for a higher amount of stress 
that can be tolerated without injury. T
endon composition 
changes at a faster rate due to RT compared to increases 
in tendon cross sectional area (8). Nine-year-old in a 
 
10-week RT regimen demonstrated increased tendon 
stiffness with no significant change in cross sectional area. 
T
endons of adolescents are capable of increases in cross 
sectional area over longer periods of time as evidenced 
by gymnasts, cyclists and ball sport athletes having larger 
cross sectional areas of Achilles tendons compared to non-
sport controls of similar age. The exact mechanism of how 
RT leads to changes in cross sectional area and tendon 
composition requires further studying at this time (1,8).
Musculature in children is enhanced by RT in several 
ways. Physiological cross sectional area does increase with 
longer term RT; but because most of the studies completed 
on RT in youth are limited, this specific finding is not widely 
demonstrated. RT does reliably increase fascicle length and 
pennation angles that are associated with increased strength 
independent of the maturation process (8). The most 
beneficial way RT reduces the risk of injury is through the use 
of free weights and the utilization of balance aids during RT. 
Free weights allow for multi planar movements that mimic 
more the demands of competitive play and exertion more 
so than static machines do. The multi planar movements 
combined with balance training actively strengthen stabilizer 
muscles needed to prevent injuries during high levels of 
exertion (1).
RT causes many physiological and metabolic changes 
in the adolescent. Studies regarding the metabolic changes 
associated with RT in adolescents are not well established, 
but a general trend of mildly decreased adiposity and 
increased muscle strength as well as increased muscle mass 
in longer studies has been observed. Studies have shown 
that while RT does not demonstrate a significant change 
in body composition for overweight and obese adolescents, 
large increases in physical strength and self-esteem after a 
6-month training regimen have been documented (11). This 
suggests a positive correlation between exercise efficacy and 
self-esteem that is supported by multiple studies. However, 
it was noted that these values returned to baseline 6 months 
after the end of the training regimen suggesting the need to 
continue physical activity to maintain gains in both fitness 
and self-esteem. It is also hypothesized that introducing 
overweight, obese and sedentary adolescents to RT can also 
be used to help acclimate youth to physical exercise in a less 
strenuous and intimidating way that eventually builds to 
more vigorous and regular cardiovascular exercise (12).
Risks of RT
A major risk that is mentioned any time childhood RT is 
discussed is the risk of epiphyseal plate injury. This is a 
unique risk in this population as adult populations lack open 
physeal plates. In particular, separation of the epiphyseal 
plate is the biggest fracture mentioned in the literature. This 
would be classified as a Salter-Harris type 1 fracture, often 
viewed as a less traumatic epiphyseal plate injury usually 
without long-term risk of growth abnormalities. However 
any fracture of this region has the potential for deformity. 
Injuries of this region of the bone can lead to early physeal 
closure and limb length anomalies as the non-injured arm 
continues to grow, and therefore are of significant concern 
for medical practitioners. Literature review demonstrates 
that this concern grew from studies and case reports 
published in the 1970s and 1980s (13). These were based 
on data from the National Electronic Injury Surveillance 
System (NEISS) that showed increasing trends of epiphyseal 
injuries in youth lifters. Several retrospective studies from 
this time demonstrate damage to the growth cartilage in 
youth (14-17). However, as this data was further evaluated, 
it was found most of these injuries were related to improper 
form and lifting program design leading to injury (18). 
 
One particularly clear example is a young lifter who was 
lifting in a makeshift gym at home. While pressing a 30 kg 
load overhead, he lost control of the weight resulting in 
bilateral separations of the radial epiphysis (19). Current 
expert opinion in the field supports the belief that RT prior 
to epiphyseal closure is not inherently harmful (13). The 
prospective studies that have provided effective supervision 
and guidance have demonstrated no increased incidence of 
physeal injury in children weightlifting (20-24).
Soft tissue injuries are some of the most frequently 
reported injuries in the literature with regards to pediatric 
RT. In particular, trunk injuries are one of the more 
commonly reported weightlifting injuries in children and 
adolescents (25). This is thought to be due to an individual 
emphasis on building superficial “mirror muscles” and 
therefore neglecting core and trunk strength training. 
Due to this imbalance in lifting, this could be viewed 
 141
Translational Pediatrics, Vol 6, No 3 July 2017
© Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.
Transl Pediatr 2017;6(3):137-143
tp.amegroups.com
as an injury due to an improper RT program. There 
are certainly many case reports of injuries from RT, but 
only a few reported studies of lifting that demonstrated 
significant injuries. One study had a participant who 
required a week of rest due to shoulder pain (21). Another 
had a shoulder strain that required them to miss a 
single training session (26). It is important to highlight 
that the most commonly injured sites from RT are the 
back and trunk. One study reports trunk injuries being 
approximately 36% of the injuries reported for men and 
27% for women (25). Other studies of young athletes note 
high rates lumbar spine pain. One study noted that 29 of 
43 adolescents with weight lifting injuries had injury of 
their lower back. Most of these were minor, but 4 were 
severe enough to require surgery (27). That being said, 
these are rare injuries requiring time away from training, 
and studies have demonstrated quite low injury rates 
when lifting programs are well designed. Two separate 
prospective studies demonstrated injury rates of 0.053 and 
0.055 per 100 participant hours (26,28). There are even 
studies showing that high stress lifting, such as 1 rep max 
training, do not demonstrate significant injury risk. One 
study looked at 96 children doing one rep max training 
with weight machines and found there was no increased 
risk of injury (29). Another study evaluated similar training 
using free weights and found similar results (30).
In discussion of injuries from RT itself, it is critical to put 
this into the context of the sports these young individuals 
are participating in. With effective supervision and training, 
as well as a properly designed lifting program, the rates of 
injury are quite low. In fact, one study found the rate to be 
around 0.035 injuries per 100 participant hours in RT (31). 
 
A separate study of adolescent power-lifters showed an 
injury rate of 0.29 per 100 participant hours, and these 
are individuals who would be lifting larger loads and more 
complicated lifts such as bench press, deadlift, and back 
squats (32). This is in comparison to heavier contact sports 
such as rugby, which have been shown to have injury rates 
near 0.800 per 100 participant hours, much higher than 
those demonstrated in RT (31).
In fully examining the risks of RT it is quite apparent 
that, though some risk of injury does exist, this is 
comparable to that of sports these children are already 
participating in. Children do have unique injury risks, such 
as physeal plate injury. However, this risk is not dramatically 
elevated by lifting. Furthermore, all injury risk can be 
minimized with effective training program development, 
supervision, and effective lifting form education.
Plyometric training
Plyometric exercise is unique in its combination of power 
and strength. It involves both eccentric loading of a muscle 
or muscle group followed immediately by concentric 
contraction. This combination utilizes the SSC or reflex 
in which the concentric action releases stored energy 
for subsequent muscular actions. The stored energy is 
preloaded during the eccentric phase and is used to produce 
more force than can be provided by concentric muscle 
action alone (9). Plyometric training has been demonstrated 
to improve endurance in vertical jumping, leg strength and 
acceleration (9). Most activities include hopping, skipping, 
jumping, focused on lower extremities. Plyometrics may 
also involve throwing to condition upper extremities. As 
with any exercise or training program, a plyometric training 
program must follow careful design and recommended 
intensities to avoid injury. It is also recommended to 
incorporate plyometrics at a maximum of 2–3 times per 
week to prevent muscular injury.
Requirements for good training
In evaluating RT in pediatric populations, it can be 
concluded that there is significant benefit in numerous areas 
to effective RT. The benefit does not come at a significant 
injury cost; and, given the possible reduction in injury in 
athletics due to increased overall strength, there is support 
for the efficacy of RT in these populations. However, 
all of these are dependent upon proper execution of RT 
programs. In the proper design of training programs there 
are three critical aspects—education regarding proper 
lifting form, adequate supervision, and effectively scaled 
lifting. 
One of the most important aspects of good training 
is education on proper techniques of lifting. There are 
numerous lifts that can be incorporated into a training 
program, and as previously discussed, these are not 
programs that are more likely to cause injury. It is important 
that instructors of weight training are comfortable teaching 
proper lifts in various training programs. When introducing 
new athletes to lifting, it is important to initially introduce 
simple lifts (33). This allows these individuals to gain 
comfort on simple motions prior to progressing to more 
difficult lifts. When to progress to more difficult lifts is 
dependent upon the individual supervising the lifting.
Effective supervision is the second important aspect of a 
training program. The individual supervising is responsible 
 142
Myers et al. Resistance training
© Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.
Transl Pediatr 2017;6(3):137-143
tp.amegroups.com
for reinforcing proper form and addressing any mistakes 
being made in training by the athletes. With that in mind, 
trainers should be confident overseeing the lifts being 
performed and identifying areas for improvement in the 
lifters they are supervising. The supervising individual will 
also determine when trainees are able to progress to more 
difficult or heavier loads. Especially in newer lifters, it is 
important for the supervising adult to determine when 
the athlete appears comfortable enough to progress in the 
lifting program both in complexity of activities and weight 
used for lifting.
Lastly, designing a program that is effective without 
overly taxing the youth lifter is critical to gaining the 
benefits of RT without increasing injury risk. It is important 
to exercise all large muscle groups as part of the lifting 
program. In addition, starting a lifting session with complex 
motions requiring multiple muscle groups is favorable as 
these lifts can be performed before muscles are fatiguing, 
causing imbalance in the activity. Progression to more 
isolated lifts may then occur. Beyond these core aspects, 
there is no specifically favored lifting program in this age 
group. Lifts involving weight machines, free weights, 
barbell lifts, and bodyweight lifts have all shown efficacy 
in this population (33). It is upon the judgement and 
expertise of the individual designing the program to ensure 
identification of goals for both the lifting program and its 
participants. This information will then encourage and 
allow for proper research to identify and design the most 
effective training program to ensure safety.
Acknowledgements
None.
Footnote
Conflict of Interest: The authors have no conflicts of interest 
to declare. 
References
1. 
Granacher U, Lesinski M, Büsch D, et al. Effects of 
Resistance Training in Youth Athletes on Muscular Fitness 
and Athletic Performance: A Conceptual Model for Long-
T
erm Athlete Development. Front Physiol 2016;7:164.
2. 
Miller MG, Cheatham CC, Patel ND. Resistance training 
for adolescents. Pediatr Clin North Am 2010;57:671-82.
3. 
Behm DG, Faigenbaum AD, Falk B, et al. Canadian 
Society for Exercise Physiology position paper: resistance 
training in children and adolescents. Appl Physiol Nutr 
Metab 2008;33:547-61.
4. 
American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Sports 
Medicine and Fitness, McCambridge TM, Stricker PR. 
Strength training by children and adolescents. Pediatrics 
2008;121:835-40.
5. 
Negra Y, Chaabene H, Hammami M, et al. Effects 
of High-Velocity Resistance Training on Athletic 
Performance in Prepuberal Male Soccer Athletes. J 
Strength Cond Res 2016;30:3290-7.
6. 
Lloyd RS, Radnor JM, De Ste Croix MB, et al. Changes 
in Sprint and Jump Performances After Traditional, 
Plyometric, and Combined Resistance Training in Male 
Youth Pre- and Post-Peak Height Velocity. J Strength 
Cond Res 2016;30:1239-47.
7. 
Bedoya AA, Miltenberger MR, Lopez RM. Plyometric 
Training Effects on Athletic Performance in Youth Soccer 
Athletes: A Systematic Review. J Strength Cond Res 
2015;29:2351-60.
8. 
Legerlotz K, Marzilger R, Bohm S, et al. Physiological 
Adaptations following Resistance Training in Youth 
Athletes-A Narrative Review. Pediatr Exerc Sci 
2016;28:501-20.
9. 
Miller MG; Michael TJ. Strength Training and 
Conditioning. In: Patel DR, Greydanus DE, Baker RJ. 
editors. Pediatric Practice: Sports Medicine. New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 2009. 
10. Lesinski M, Prieske O, Granacher U. Effects and dose-
response relationships of resistance training on physical 
performance in youth athletes: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:781-95.
11. Schranz N, T
omkinson G, Parletta N, et al. Can 
resistance training change the strength, body composition 
and self-concept of overweight and obese adolescent 
males? A randomised controlled trial. Br J Sports Med 
2014;48:1482-8.
12. Bea JW, Blew RM, Howe C, et al. Resistance Training 
Effects on Metabolic Function Among Youth: A Systematic 
Review. Pediatr Exerc Sci 2017. [Epub ahead of print].
13. Milone MT, Bernstein J, Freedman KB, et al. There is 
no need to avoid resistance training (weight lifting) until 
physeal closure. Phys Sportsmed 2013;41:101-5.
14. Benton JW. Epiphyseal fracture in sports. Phys Sportsmed 
1982;10:63-71.
15. Ryan JR, Salciccioli GG. Fractures of the distal radial 
epiphysis in adolescent weight lifters. Am J Sports Med 
1976;4:26-7.
 143
Translational Pediatrics, Vol 6, No 3 July 2017
© Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.
Transl Pediatr 2017;6(3):137-143
tp.amegroups.com
16. Gumbs VL, Segal D, Halligan JB, et al. Bilateral distal 
radius and ulnar fractures in adolescent weight lifters. Am 
J Sports Med 1982;10:375-9.
17. Weiss AP
, Sponseller PD. T
eam physician #5. Salter-Harris 
type I fracture of the distal radius due to weightlifting. 
Orthop Rev 1989;18:233-5.
18. Faigenbaum AD, Kraemer WJ, Blimkie CJ, et al. Youth 
resistance training: updated position statement paper 
from the national strength and conditioning association. J 
Strength Cond Res 2009;23:S60-79.
19. Jenkins NH, Mintowt-Czyz WJ. Bilateral fracture-
separations of the distal radial epiphyses during weight-
lifting. Br J Sports Med 1986;20:72-3.
20. Faigenbaum AD, Westcott WL, Loud RL, et al. The 
effects of different resistance training protocols on 
muscular strength and endurance development in children. 
Pediatrics 1999;104:e5.
21. Rians CB, Weltman A, Cahill BR, et al. Strength training 
for prepubescent males: is it safe? Am J Sports Med 
1987;15:483-9.
22. Ramsay JA, Blimkie CJ, Smith K, et al. Strength training 
effects in prepubescent boys. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
1990;22:605-14.
23. Faigenbaum A, Zaichkowsky L, Westcott W, et al. The 
Official Journal of the North American Society for Pediatric 
Exercise Medicine and the European Group of Pediatric 
Work Physiology. Pediatr Exerc Sci 1993;5:339-46.
24. Falk B, Mor G. The effects of resistance and martial 
arts training in 6- to 8-year old boys. Pediatr Exerc Sci 
1996;8:48-56.
25. Quatman CE, Myer GD, Khoury J, et al. Sex differences 
in "weightlifting" injuries presenting to United States 
emergency rooms. J Strength Cond Res 2009;23:2061-7.
26. Lillegard WA, Brown EW, Wilson DJ, et al. Efficacy of 
strength training in prepubescent to early postpubescent 
males and females: effects of gender and maturity. Pediatr 
Rehabil 1997;1:147-57.
27. Brady TA, Cahill BR, Bodnar LM. Weight training-related 
injuries in the high school athlete. Am J Sports Med 
1982;10:1-5.
28. Sadres E, Eliakim A, Constantini N, et al. The Effect 
of Long-T
erm Resistance Training on Anthropometric 
Measures, Muscle Strength, and Self Concept in Pre-
Pubertal Boys. Pediatr Exerc Sci 2001;13:357-72.
29. Faigenbaum AD, Milliken LA, Westcott WL. Maximal 
strength testing in healthy children. J Strength Cond Res 
2003;17:162-6.
30. Hetzler R, DeRenne C, Buxton B, et al. Effects of 12 Weeks 
of Strength Training on Anaerobic Power in Prepubescent 
Male Athletes. J Strength Cond Res 1997;11:174-81.
31. Hamill B. Relative safety of weightlifting and weight 
training. J Strength Cond Res 1994;8:53-7.
32. Brown EW, Kimball RG. Medical history associated with 
adolescent powerlifting. Pediatrics 1983;72:636-44.
33. Faigenbaum AD, Myer GD. Pediatric resistance training: 
benefits, concerns, and program design considerations. 
Curr Sports Med Rep 2010;9:161-8.
Cite this article as: Myers AM, Beam NW, Fakhoury JD. 
Resistance training for children and adolescents. Transl Pediatr 
2017;6(3):137-143. doi: 10.21037/tp.2017.04.01
