 Oncotarget
5426
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Chemotherapy can induce weight normalization of morbidly 
obese mice despite undiminished ingestion of high fat diet
Cheryl E. Myers1, Dominique B. Hoelzinger1, Tiffany N. Truong1, Lindsey A. Chew1, 
Arpita Myles2, Leena Chaudhuri2, Jan B. Egan3, Jun Liu1, Sandra J. Gendler1,2,4, 
Peter A. Cohen2,4
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA
2Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA
3Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA
4Department of Hematology and Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA
Correspondence to: Cheryl E. Myers, email: myers.cheryl@mayo.edu
Peter A. Cohen, email: cohen.peter@mayo.edu
Keywords: obesity, chemotherapy, proton leak, preadipocyte, lipogenesis
Received: July 27, 2016    Accepted: December 05, 2016    Published: January 10, 2017
ABSTRACT
Morbidly obese patients who accomplish substantial weight loss often 
display a long-term decline in their resting metabolism, causing even relatively 
restrained caloric intake to trigger a relapse to the obese state. Paradoxically, we 
observed that morbidly obese mice receiving chemotherapy for cancer experienced 
spontaneous weight reduction despite unabated ingestion of their high fat diet 
(HFD). This response to chemotherapy could also be achieved in morbidly obese 
mice without cancer. Optimally dosed methotrexate (MTX) or cyclophosphamide 
(CY) enabled the mice to completely and safely normalize their body weight 
despite continued consumption of obesogenic quantities of HFD. Weight reduction 
was not attributable to decreased HFD intake, enhanced energy expenditure or 
malabsorption. MTX or CY dosing significantly depleted both adipose tissue and 
preadipocyte progenitors. Remarkably, however, despite continued high fat 
feeding, a compensatory increase in hepatocyte lipid storage was not observed, 
but rather the opposite. Gene microarray liver analyses demonstrated that HFD 
mice receiving MTX or CY experienced significantly inhibited lipogenesis and lipid 
storage, whereas Enho (energy homeostasis) gene expression was significantly 
upregulated. Further metabolic studies employing a human hepatocellular line 
revealed that MTX treatment preserved robust oxidative phosphorylation, but 
also promoted mitochondrial uncoupling with a surge in proton leak. This is the 
first report that certain optimally dosed chemotherapeutic agents can induce 
weight loss in morbidly obese mice without reduced dietary intake, apparently by 
depleting stores of adipocytes and their progenitors, curtailment of lipogenesis, 
and inconspicuous disposal of incoming dietary lipid via a steady state partial 
uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
INTRODUCTION
Obesity affects more than one-third of the adult 
population in the United States, and is identified as 
a major global health and economic concern by the 
World Health Organization [1, 2]. Excessive body fat 
is considered a negative independent risk factor for a 
number of life-altering diseases including metabolic 
syndrome, cardiovascular disease, type-2 diabetes, 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and cancer [3, 4]. 
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/ 
Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 3), pp: 5426-5438
                  Research Paper
 Oncotarget
5427
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
An additional dilemma is that when morbidly obese 
patients achieve impressive weight loss through dietary 
restraint and intensive exercise, they often display a 
poorly understood long-term reduction in their resting 
metabolic rate which causes even relatively moderate 
caloric intake to provoke recurrent obesity [5].
Apart from these concerns, there is a tendency 
for obese patients with malignancies to be undertreated 
with chemotherapy, due to apprehension about their 
ability to tolerate its comorbidities [6–9]. Recent 
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 
guidelines suggest that chemotherapy dosing for obese 
patients should be calculated using actual body weight 
rather than ideal weight or capped dosing, unless there 
are other complications [6]. These recommendations 
are based on meta-analyses of obese cancer patients, 
identifying studies published in English between 
1996 and 2010. Most patients had breast, ovarian, 
colon or lung cancers treated with standard-of-care 
chemotherapy. Such analysis revealed no increased 
chemotherapy-related toxicities compared to non 
obese patients when dosing was based on actual body 
weight, and therapeutic outcomes to chemotherapy were 
comparable in the two cohorts. It was acknowledged, 
however, that such findings might not extrapolate 
to clinical trials including novel therapeutics [6]. 
Additional studies in mice suggest that persistent 
high fat diet (HFD) and untreated insulin resistance 
can modestly accelerate tumor progression [10–12], 
but these studies were performed in the absence of 
chemotherapy.
Our own effort to observe whether chemotherapy’s 
anti-tumor efficacy varied for normal versus obese mice 
evidenced no significant differences, consistent with 
the ASCO analysis. Surprisingly, however, the weekly 
weighing of mice to adjust their chemotherapy doses 
revealed that chemotherapy-treated obese mice had 
an unsuspected and remarkable tendency for weight 
reduction despite their continued avid ingestion of 
HFD. This paraphenomenon was also observed in non-
tumor-bearing obese mice, with two chemotherapeutic 
agents, cyclophosphamide and methotrexate, proving 
to be particularly well tolerated during weeks of 
treatment, facilitating complete weight normalization 
despite unabated HFD intake. Explanations such as 
malabsorption, decreased caloric intake, increased 
energy expenditure, or ketotic excretion of calories 
were effectively ruled out as explanations for weight 
normalization. Instead, a pronounced loss of lipid stores 
associated with a log-fold cytoreduction of adipocyte 
progenitors was evident. Remarkably, despite continued 
high fat feeding, a compensatory increase in hepatocyte 
lipid storage was not observed during chemotherapy, 
but rather a stable background increase in uncoupled 
oxidative phosphorylation which could inconspicuously 
dissipate calories through a steady-state proton leak.
RESULTS
Whereas chemotherapy’s antitumor impact 
is unaffected by diet-induced obesity (DIO), 
chemotherapy itself can induce a trend towards 
weight normalization in obese mice
Six-week old C57BL/6 male mice were randomly 
assigned to either a 60% lard HFD or a 10% low fat 
diet (LFD), remaining on the same diet at all stages of 
treatment. Eight weeks later, mice were individually 
housed to precisely monitor food intake. At 10 weeks on 
diet, 5x105 MC38 colorectal tumor cells were injected 
subcutaneously. Two weeks after implantation, MC38 
tumors averaged 6mm in diameter, at which time 
cyclophosphamide 100 mg/kg (CY100) was given to the 
chemotherapy cohorts for 5 weekly treatments (Figure 1A, 
arrows). Dosing was recalculated weekly and was based 
on the concurrent actual body weight.
HFD-fed 
mice 
were 
morbidly 
obese 
and 
weighed significantly more than LFD-fed mice prior to 
chemotherapy (average 52±5.8g, 30±2.1g respectively) 
(Figure 1A, black lines). Tumor-challenged obese HFD 
mice not receiving chemotherapy averaged a slightly 
faster tumor progression than LFD mice but this was not 
significantly different (Figure 1A). In contrast, CY100 
treatment of mice, whether on HFD or LFD, resulted in 
kinetically indistinguishable complete and durable tumor 
regressions by the end of three weekly chemotherapy 
cycles (Figure 1A). Therefore, obesity did not detectably 
modulate the anti-tumor impacts of CY100.
Nonetheless, during chemotherapy, we observed 
strikingly different weight trends in the two dietary 
cohorts. Prior to chemotherapy, HFD-fed obese mice 
consumed approximately 10% fewer kcal than non-obese 
LFD-fed mice (normalized to body weight, Figure 1B). 
HFD-fed obese mice treated with CY100 also displayed 
a transient drop in food consumption during the first 
cycle of chemotherapy, but their HFD intake quickly 
rebounded during continued cycles of CY100 (Figure 1B). 
Notwithstanding their robust ingestion of the HFD, obese 
mice receiving CY100 showed a significant loss of total 
body weight during the remainder of the treatment period 
(weeks 13-16). Interestingly, after chemotherapy ceased, 
HFD mice continued to display the same caloric intake per 
body weight but began gradually to regain body weight, 
once again trending towards morbid obesity (Figure 1A).
Weight normalization observed in non-
tumor bearing HFD-fed mice treated with 
chemotherapy does not reflect decreased 
caloric intake, increased energy expenditure, or 
malabsorption
We sought to determine whether chemotherapy 
would have similar metabolic impacts in non tumor-
 Oncotarget
5428
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
challenged, morbidly obese mice, following the schematic 
in Figure 2A. C57BL/6 mice were weighed before they 
were segregated into HFD or LFD cohorts. After eight 
weeks on the respective diets, mice were individually 
housed and randomly assigned to chemotherapy treatment 
groups with graded dosing based on whole body 
weight. Maximum tolerated dose levels of individual 
chemotherapy agents were established in the non-tumor-
bearing setting (irinotecan, paclitaxel, cyclophosphamide 
(CY), 
methotrexate 
(MTX), 
5-fluorouracil 
and 
gemcitabine) [13].
Mice treated with individual chemotherapy agents 
presented three different response patterns (Figure 2B): 
(1) low-end dosing which resulted in insignificant impacts 
compared to mice not receiving chemotherapy; (2) high-
end “toxic” dosing which resulted in persistently decreased 
food intake, weight loss and inanition whether HFD or 
LFD; (3) in the cases of MTX and CY, intermediate dosing 
which, except during the first week of treatment, caused 
no significant alteration in either continued HFD or LFD 
food intake, yet paradoxically did cause normalizing 
weight loss in the obese HFD cohort. The most favorable 
intermediate doses of weekly MTX (12.5-50 mg/kg) or 
CY (100-200 mg/kg) proved reliably well tolerated despite 
their weight reducing impacts (Figure 2C). Dose-response 
experiments revealed that complete weight normalization 
could be achieved in non tumor-challenged HFD mice 
with five weekly doses of MTX50 or CY200 (Figure 2C). 
Consistent with this phenomenon’s dose dependence, 
slightly lower doses of CY or MTX (e.g., CY100) 
produced partial weight normalization during that same 
time period, whether in tumor-challenged or non tumor-
challenged HFD mice (Figure 1A and not shown).
We examined the mechanisms by which optimal 
weekly dosing of MTX or CY accomplished complete 
weight normalization of HFD obese mice. Preceding 
chemotherapy treatment, mice fed on HFD nearly doubled 
in body weight after 10 weeks compared to only a 17% gain 
in the LFD cohort (Figure 2C). Mice fed on LFD or HFD not 
receiving chemotherapy continued to gain weight throughout 
the study (Figure 2C). To assess the mechanisms contributing 
to weight loss in HFD-fed, chemotherapy-treated mice we 
measured caloric intake and energy expenditure. Mice fed 
on either HFD or LFD showed small variability in calories 
consumed per body weight throughout chemotherapy 
treatment (Figure 2D). Interestingly, as already observed 
for tumor-bearing mice (Figure 1B), mice fed on the LFD 
had a 16% higher caloric intake corrected for body weight 
Figure 1: MC38 tumor growth and chemotherapy response in HFD mice vs LFD mice. A. Growth rates of MC38 colorectal 
tumors implanted in syngeneic B6 mice after 10 weeks on a continuing LFD or HFD diet were measured weekly, with or without 
cyclophosphamide 100 mg/kg (CY100) beginning at week 12 (LFD - ○, LFD CY100 - □, HFD - D, HFD CY100 - — tumor volumes 
reflected on right red axis). Weekly body weights (LFD - ●, LFD CY100 - ■, HFD - ▲, HFD CY100 - ▼ reflected on black left axis) were 
used to adjust CY100 dosing to current actual body weight, with CY100 given i.p. weekly for 5 cycles (each CY dose depicted as an arrow 
“↑”). Each treatment condition consisted of 3 to 5 mice with 2 biological replicates. For HFD vs LFD mice not receiving CY there were no 
significant differences in tumor progression requiring euthanasia (median day of euthanasia, HFD day 30.3 ±4.0 vs LFD day 31.4 ± 6.9, 
p=0.3 by t-test). Cure rates for LFD vs HFD mice receiving chemotherapy were identical (both 100% cured, Fisher’s exact-test p=1.0), with 
superimposable rejection kinetics. However, HFD mice receiving CY displayed progressive loss of weight at weeks 13 through 17, which 
reversed when CY was discontinued. Error bars are omitted in (A) to make the individual treatment events easier to discern. B. Kilocalories 
consumed per body weight. No significant differences were seen among groups except for HFD vs HFD+CY after the first week of CY 
(week 13, HFD 2.2 ± 0.01 kcal/gm vs HFD+CY 1.7 ± 0.2 kcal/gm, p<0.02 by t-test). After 16 weeks only the groups receiving CY survived 
and continued to be monitored. As in (A) each treatment condition consisted of 3 to 5 mice, with 2 biological replicates.
 Oncotarget
5429
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Figure 2: Intermediate chemotherapy dosing fully normalizes body weight of non tumor-bearing obese mice. A. Schematic 
for non tumor-challenged LFD and HFD mice treated with chemotherapy in Figure 2B. B. Graph summarizes maximum tolerated doses (mg/kg) 
of various classes of chemotherapy agents for targeted weight loss continued on HFD in the absence of tumor challenges. Shaded areas; black = 
early fatalities, dark gray = weight loss with late fatalities, gray pattern = well tolerated drug with target weight loss, and white = well tolerated 
drug without target weight loss. Boxed areas denote chemotherapy agents with the greatest non-toxic therapeutic window of targeted weight 
loss. Results display 3 mice/treatment condition with 3 biological replicates for CY and MTX. C. Weekly total body weight measurements 
showing HFD and LFD treated mice (no tumor) treated with effective doses of MTX or CY. (NB, the greater weight loss of HFD mice receiving 
CY in Figure 2C compared to Figure 1A is attributable to the higher dose of CY.) Chemotherapy agents were given weekly i.p. for 5 rounds 
beginning on week 10 (arrows). There were no significant differences in body weights comparing HFD MTX50 and HFD CY200 to LFD 
without chemotherapy at week 15 (p=0.9 and p=0.6, respectively, by t-test). Significant differences were found at week 15 comparing HFD 
to LFD (p<0.0002), HFD to HFD MTX50 (p<0.0006), HFD to HFD CY200 (p<0.00007), LFD to LFD MTX50 (p<0.002) and LFD to LFD 
CY200 (p<0.02). Each treatment group consisted of 6 mice, each time point showing mean ± SD, data representative of 5 biological replicates. 
D. Normalization of kcal consumed after transitory underfeeding following first chemotherapy dose. Averaged kcal consumed per body weight 
normalized to calories consumed at start of weekly chemotherapy treatments. There were no significant differences in percent change in kcal 
consumed/body weight comparing HFD to LFD by t-test. Significant difference was observed during TX2 comparing HFD MTX50 and HFD 
CY20 to HFD (p<0.02 and p<0.003, respectively) and a significant increase was seen during Post TX comparing HFD MTX50 and HFD CY20 
to HFD (p<0.03 and p<0.02, respectively). Each treatment group consisted of 6 mice, each time point showing mean ± SD, data representative of 
2 biological replicates. E. Energy was not lost due to malabsorption during chemotherapy. Indirect bomb calorimetry was performed to measure 
kcals lost in fecal waste before chemotherapy (open bars) and after chemotherapy was completed (filled bars). No significant differences were 
observed within HFD groups or LFD groups whether or not they received chemotherapy. Each treatment group consisted of 3 mice, each time 
point showing mean ± SD, data representative of 2 biological replicates.
 Oncotarget
5430
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
compared to mice fed on HFD. HFD-fed mice treated with 
MTX50 or CY200 experienced transitory underfeeding 
following the first chemotherapy dose, but caloric intake 
quickly rebounded to surpass that being consumed by non-
treated HFD-fed mice (Figure 2D).
Mice were housed in metabolic cages (CLAMS) for 
72h to test possible differences in energy expenditure. The 
results showed that HFD-fed mice had significantly higher 
lean body mass energy expenditure compared to LFD-fed 
mice (caloric value x VO2); however, there was no significant 
difference in lean body mass energy expenditure between the 
chemotherapy treated and non-treated groups within either 
the HFD or LFD-fed groups (Supplementary Table 1) [14]. 
We also observed a modest decrease in activity events in 
diet-induced obesity (DIO) and even a greater decrease in 
activity during chemotherapy treatment (Supplementary 
Figure 1). Therefore, the weight loss observed in obese mice 
receiving intermediate doses of MTX or CY could not be 
attributed to either decreased dietary intake or increased 
metabolic activity.
To examine whether there was a difference in energy 
excretion, fecal matters from singly housed mice kept in 
bedding-free cages were collected every 24h during a 3 day 
collection period. Collected sample weight from all mice, 
regardless of diet or chemotherapy treatment, averaged 1.7 
± 0.06 g. Bomb calorimetry revealed that there were no 
significant differences between pre- and post-chemotherapy 
regarding calories lost fecally in each group, nor were there 
significant differences between HFD and LFD respective 
treatment groups (Figure 2E). Therefore, weight loss was not 
due to chemotherapy-induced malabsorption or persistent 
loss of appetite. In addition, there was no evidence for 
ketotic urinary excretion of calories (data not shown).
Intermediate doses of MTX or CY modulate fat 
loss in epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT)
Metabolically active adipose tissue was examined 
to quantify dietary- and chemotherapy-related alterations 
in fat storage. The eWAT from HFD mice was determined 
to be significantly bulkier than in LFD-fed mice (2.2g and 
1.0g, respectively, p<0.004). When mice were treated with 
5-weekly doses of MTX 12.5-50 mg/kg (MTX12.5-MTX50) 
or CY 100-200 mg/kg (CY100-CY200), eWAT displayed 
significant reductions: for example, HFD mice receiving 
MTX50 lost 44% and CY200 lost 48% of eWAT weight 
compared to non-treated HFD mice, reducing eWAT to levels 
indistinguishable from LFD mice not receiving chemotherapy 
(Figure 3A). Predictably, the loss of eWAT in LFD mice 
receiving chemotherapy was also significant (Figure 3B).
Figure 3: Chemotherapy leads to fat loss in diet induced obese mice. A. Weight of epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT) from 
LFD, HFD, CY200 and MTX50 treated mice 1 week after last chemotherapy treatment. Each treatment group consisted of 6 mice, showing 
mean ± SD, data representative of 2 biological replicates. Comparisons by Student’s t-test: ns - not significant, * p<0.02, ** p<0.004, *** 
p<0.002, **** p<0.0007 B. Representative illustration of abdominal cavities measured in (A), showing that large visceral fat deposits 
(arrows) were reduced post chemotherapy in HFD mice. C. Relative percent frequency of eWAT-associated adipocyte stem-like cells (ASC) 
in HFD mice treated with MTX12.5 or CY100. Each treatment group consisted of 3 mice, showing mean ± SD, data representative of 2 
biological replicates. Statistics as in (A). D. Representative confocal imagery of sorted ASC cultured in adipogenic medium displaying 
lipid droplets. DAPI (blue)- DNA nuclear stain, FABP4 (green)- lipid transport protein in adipocytes, LipidTOX (red)- neutral lipid stain.
 Oncotarget
5431
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
We 
hypothesized 
that 
chemotherapy-induced 
reductions in eWAT resulted in part from chemotherapy-
mediated reductions in adipocyte progenitors [15]. Adipocyte 
stem-like cells (ASC), conventionally defined as CD31-, 
CD34+, CD45- and CD140a+ [16], were quantified in resected 
eWAT from HFD mice, revealing that ASC were significantly 
reduced (a log-fold in absolute number) by treatment with 
MTX or CY (Figure 3C, Supplementary Figure 2 and 
not shown). To verify that these cells were indeed fat-
storing precursor cells, they were cultured in adipogenic 
differentiation medium. Differentiated ASC were then stained 
with adipocyte fatty acid binding protein 4 (Fabp4), a lipid 
transport molecule, and neutral lipid LipidTOX and imaged 
by confocal microscopy to confirm that cells displayed lipid 
storage potential (Figure 3D). This confirmed that normal 
ASC are sensitive to chemotherapy agents MTX and CY.
Intermediate doses of MTX or CY reduce lipid 
content of fatty liver in non tumor-challenged 
obese mice
We examined the consequences of MTX or CY 
to hepatic metabolism at the same time that these agents 
reduced adipocyte availability for lipid storage. Without 
chemotherapy, harvested livers from HFD mice were on 
average 60% heavier than LFD livers (p<0.005). Livers from 
HFD mice treated with MTX50 or CY200 displayed 44% 
or 31% (p<0.02) average decrease in weight compared to 
HFD non-treated mice (Figure 4A), effectively normalizing 
liver weights to those of LFD-fed mice regardless of 
whether LFD mice also received chemotherapy. Inspection 
of hematoxylin and eosin-stained liver cross-sections from 
MTX50 and CY200 treated mice on either diet displayed a 
parallel reduction in lipid accumulation (Figure 4B).
Intracellular liver triglycerides (TG) were extracted 
and normalized to liver weight for quantitative comparisons 
(Figure 4C). Mice fed on HFD without chemotherapy 
contained significantly elevated levels of TG compared to 
control LFD mice (108.1 mM and 47.3 mM, respectively). 
Chemotherapy treated HFD-fed mice stored significantly 
less TG compared to non-treated HFD-fed mice (MTX50, 
44.9 mM and CY200, 40.1 mM, p<0.008 and p<0.006 
respectively). Chemotherapy-induced TG reductions were 
also seen in the LFD-fed groups (MTX50, 10.3 mM, 
p<0.03 vs CY200, 21.0 mM). These data indicated that 
optimized doses of MTX or CY facilitated the catabolism 
and/or clearance of liver TG in HFD-fed mice to the levels 
observed in LFD-fed mice not receiving chemotherapy.
Figure 4: Triglyceride (TG) storage in whole livers is reduced with chemotherapy treatment. A. Liver weight reduction post 
chemotherapy treatment. Each treatment group consisted of 6 mice, showing mean ± SD, data representative of 2 biological replicates. As 
analyzed by t-test, * p<0.03, ** p<0.02, *** p<0.008, **** p<0.006. B. Representative H&E staining of formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded 
livers displaying reduced lipid content in hepatocytes after chemotherapy treatment (↑ - lipid globules in hepatocytes). C. Colorimetric 
measure of TG levels is significantly lower in flash frozen livers with chemotherapy treatment. Each treatment group consisted of 6 mice, 
showing mean ± SD, data representative of 2 biological replicates. Significance as in (A).
 Oncotarget
5432
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Differential gene expression of hepatic 
lipogenesis relating diet and intermediate doses 
of MTX or CY in non tumor-challenged mice
To further elucidate mechanisms involved in 
metabolic changes in fatty liver, expression microarray 
analysis comparing total liver RNA from 4-5 individual 
male C57BL/6 mice was studied in LFD, LFD MTX50, 
HFD and HFD MTX50 conditions using Agilent mouse 
whole genome microarray 4x44K chip set with ~39485 
probes. Microarray data were analyzed using GeneSpring 
13.0 as described in experimental procedures. Annotated 
genes (2135) that were found to be differentially expressed 
when comparing LFD, HFD and methotrexate 50 mg/kg 
treatment were selected for GeneSpring gene ontology 
(GO) analysis. There were 113 transcripts differentially 
regulated in the metabolic process and 55 genes that made 
the p≤ 0.015 cut-off (Figure 5A). Of those transcripts, 13 
lipid metabolism-related genes were significantly altered 
(p≤ 0.015) in response to HFD and/or methotrexate 
treatment (Figure 5B).
Key 
lipogenic 
enzymes 
were 
significantly 
downregulated in livers after chemotherapy treatment, 
consistent with suppression of de novo fat synthesis 
(Figure 5C and 5D). Fatty acid synthase (Fasn), catalyst 
of the last step in the FA biosynthetic pathway, was 2.7-
fold reduced in MTX50-treated obese mice compared to 
long-term HFD-fed control mice (Figure 5D). Stearoyl-
Figure 5: Gene expression analysis of total liver from LFD and HFD diet with and without MTX50 treatment. A. Heat 
map of differentially regulated genes (> 2-fold) involved in lipid metabolism. **11 lipogenic genes, ► 1 energy homeostasis gene, ● 1 
lipid accumulation gene (Blue = lower expression, Red = higher expression). B. Lipid metabolism pathway genes > 2-fold change. C. Lipid 
metabolism pathway genes fold-change difference between HFD vs LFD, HFD MTX50 vs HFD and LFD MTX vs LFD [25–36]. D. Schematic 
representation of remodeling of lipid metabolism pathways after MTX50 treatment. Highlighted blue genes are downregulated in HFD and LFD 
treated with MTX50. MUFA - monounsaturated fatty acids, SFA - saturated fatty acids, TG - triacylglycerol, PUFA - polyunsaturated fatty acids, 
DAG - diacylglycerol, MAG - monoacylglycerol, VLCFA - very long chain fatty acids, TCA - tricarboxylic acid cycle, ND - no difference.
 Oncotarget
5433
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
CoA desaturase (Scd1), catalyst of the biosynthesis of 
monounsaturated FA, showed a 2.6-fold decrease in 
livers of HFD-fed mice compared to LFD-fed mice. 
Furthermore, Scd1 was 14.5-fold reduced in HFD 
MTX50-treated mice compared to HFD-fed control. 
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase β (Acacb), which catalyzes the 
carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to the malonyl-CoA pool, 
was 2.4-fold reduced in chemotherapy-treated mice 
compared to controls. Elongation of very long chain fatty 
acids protein (Elovl), a family of microsomal enzymes, 
displayed differential hepatic expression in three of seven 
isoforms. Elovl3, Elov5 and Elov6 were respectively 
downregulated 3.5-fold, 2.4- fold and 3.0-fold in HFD 
MTX50-treated mice compared to HFD-fed control mice. 
Glycerol-3-phospate acyltransferase 1-mitochondrial 
(Gpam), an enzyme on the outer mitochondrial membrane 
that promotes triglyceride synthesis, was slightly reduced 
in HFD-fed mice compared to LFD-fed mice; however, 
when treated with methotrexate, obese mice displayed 
a 2.1-fold reduction in gene expression compared to 
HFD-fed controls. Monoacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 
(Mogat1), an enzyme converting monoacylglycerol to 
diacylglycerol, was significantly upregulated (5-fold) in 
obese mice compared to non-obese controls, but when 
HFD-fed mice were treated with MTX there was a 3.7-
fold decreased expression.
These analyses suggested that MTX affects 
hepatocytes not only by effectively blocking the 
generation of lipids, but also by impairing the retention 
of lipids. Fat storage-inducing transmembrane protein 
1 (Fitm1), a strong promoter of intracellular lipid 
accumulation [17], was upregulated 2.1-fold in HFD-fed 
mice compared to LFD, but when treated with MTX50 
there was a 3.0-fold and 4.4-fold downregulation 
in HFD MTX50 and LFD MTX50, respectively. 
Furthermore, energy homeostasis (Enho) gene, known 
to be down regulated in obesity, hepatosteatosis 
and insulin resistance [18], was the only gene in the 
metabolic category showing decreased expression 
with HFD feeding but an increase in gene expression 
with methotrexate treatment. Obese mice treated with 
MTX experienced a 5.5-fold increase in hepatic Enho 
expression, surpassing levels seen in LFD control mice. 
LFD MTX50 mice also displayed significantly increased 
Enho expression (3.7-fold increase) compared to LFD 
control.
The particular trends observed for Enho, Gpam 
and Mogat1 in the microarray expression analysis were 
validated by qRT-PCR (Supplementary Figure 3). Similar 
metabolic modulations were also observed in HFD-fed 
and LFD-fed mice treated with CY200 instead of MTX50, 
although at a reduced intensity compared to MTX50 (data 
not shown).
With further inspection of the microarray data, it 
was observed that liver expression of Srebp1 and Mlxipl/
ChREBP, key master regulators of lipogenesis, was not 
significantly affected by prior in vivo treatment with 
MTX50 or CY200, suggesting that these agents’ inhibition 
of lipogenesis was most likely non-canonical. In addition, 
hepatic expression of cholesterol metabolism-associated 
enzymes was not significantly modulated by prior in vivo 
treatment with MTX50 or CY200, effectively decoupling 
cholesterol metabolism from FA/TG synthesis pathways.
Methotrexate promotes both ATP production 
and proton leak in hepatic mitochondria
To 
further 
investigate 
our 
findings 
of 
chemotherapy-induced 
alterations 
in 
hepatic 
metabolism, oxygen consumption rates (OCR), an 
indicator of mitochondrial respiration, and extracellular 
acidification rates (ECAR), a measure of glycolytic 
energy metabolism, were measured in HepG2 cells 
treated with or without a nontoxic dose of 10 μM MTX. 
(CY was not tested in vitro as its bioactivity requires the 
generation of active metabolites.) MTX-exposed HepG2 
cells showed a significant (MTX-6hrs p<0.03) sustained 
2-fold increase in OCR (Figure 6A). Furthermore 
when ECAR was examined, HepG2 cells showed a 
steady-state rate of glycolysis which was unaffected 
by MTX treatment (Figure 6B). The OCR/ECAR ratio 
was determined to measure the relative contribution 
of mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis to energy 
management, and it was significantly increased by 
MTX (Figure 6C). Coupling efficiency, impacted by the 
mitochondrial respiration rate that drives ATP synthase 
and the protons that leak across the mitochondria inner 
membrane (MIM), remained constant during MTX 
exposure (Figure 6D), due to a sustained significant 
increase of both ATP production (Figure 6E) and proton 
leak across the MIM (Figure 6F) during MTX treatment. 
Such enhanced uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation 
(i.e., proton leak) in the face of maintained robust 
mitochondrial ATP production provides a plausible 
mechanism to account for chemotherapy-driven weight 
normalization despite continued ingestion of excessive 
dietary lipid.
DISCUSSION
We observed that the growth rate of colon cancer MC38 
in male C57BL/6 mice was not significantly impacted by 
HFD-induced morbid obesity, nor was the tumor’s response 
to chemotherapy, consistent with ASCO guidelines. However, 
we also observed that chemotherapy agents, especially 
optimized dosing of MTX or CY
, led to a reduction of 
adiposity and accompanying weight loss in HFD-fed tumor-
bearing mice. Moreover, even non-tumor-bearing obese mice 
with sustained HFD intake normalized their body weight 
to that of LFD-fed mice during MTX or CY treatments. 
Finally, cessation of chemotherapy was temporally linked to 
recommencement of weight gain and recurrent obesity.
 Oncotarget
5434
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Weight loss is a familiar event in cancer patients. 
Cachexia, a wasting syndrome in which loss of both 
appetite and body weight occurs involuntarily, can be 
cancer-induced in the absence of treatment [19], but further 
aggravated or mimicked by chemotherapeutic agents such 
as doxorubicin or cisplatin [20–22]. Chemotherapy varies 
tremendously in its direct metabolic impacts depending 
upon the agent(s) administered, agent dosing and dosing 
interval [20–22]. However, apart from chemotherapy’s 
direct effects upon energy metabolism, it is unsurprising 
that chemotherapy can have antiproliferative impacts 
upon adipocyte progenitors (ASC) similar to its impact 
upon bone marrow myeloid progenitors, although this has 
mostly been modeled with the 3T3-L1 cell line rather than 
studied in normal ASC [15, 21, 22].
The present report is the first to distinguish a form of 
chemotherapy-induced weight loss which targets morbidly 
obese mice, does not require the presence of tumor, and 
is not associated with such cachexia events as decreased 
appetite, inanition or foreshortened survival. This form of 
weight reduction could be rendered entirely normalizing 
for morbidly obese mice over a well-tolerated five week 
treatment period, during which time no change in diet 
or quantity of diet was required. This conglomeration of 
features was not observed for most of the chemotherapy 
agents we tested over a range of doses, and in the case 
of the alkylating agent CY or the antimetabolite MTX 
only particular dose ranges were both effective and safe 
(Figure 2B). We confirmed that these effective dose ranges 
had significant antiproliferative effects upon normal ASC 
in vivo, causing a log-fold reduction in ASC absolute 
numbers (Supplementary Figure 2B). Remarkably, 
however, despite the reduced availability of adipocytes 
for lipid storage, no compensatory increase in hepatocyte 
lipid storage was observed during MTX or CY treatment, 
but rather a significant drop in TG storage and lipogenesis.
During the period that HFD mice received five 
optimized weekly doses of MTX or CY they continued 
to follow a weight normalization trend which did not 
reverse until the chemotherapy was terminated, even in 
non tumor-challenged mice. Therefore, there was no 
evidence that resistance to chemotherapy developed 
when normal body cellular constituents were the targets 
of chemotherapy. Consistent with such lack of resistance, 
our liver gene arrays for HFD mice demonstrated no 
significant MTX-attributable downregulation of Slc19a1 
Figure 6: Cellular bioenergetics of human hepatocellular HepG2 cells treated with methotrexate 10 μM. Addition of 
MTX was timed to be 6 or 12hrs prior to the assays performed at the end of a 24hr total culture period. A. Steady and increased levels 
of OXPHOS (basal respiration used to meet a cell’s ATP demands) in MTX treated cells, B. steady glycolysis (ECAR) rate after MTX 
treatment, C. steady-state OCR/ECAR coefficient ratio continuing during MTX treatment, D. consistent coupling efficiency (percentage 
of basal respiration used to drive ATP synthesis divided by proton leak) in OXPHOS metabolism following MTX treatment, E. increased 
ATP generation (calculated from: OCR basal respiration minus proton leak) in MTX treated cells, F. increasing proton leakage (non-ATP 
linked OCR) across mitochondria inner membrane in MTX treated cells are shown. Each treatment group shows mean of 6 wells ± SD, 
data representative of 2 biological replicates. *p<0.03, **p<0.05, OCR - oxygen consumption rate, ECAR - extracellular acidification rate, 
OXPHOS - oxidation phosphorylation, ATP - adenosine triphosphate.
 Oncotarget
5435
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
(a main MTX membrane transporter), nor upregulated 
expression of dihydrofolate reductase (Dhfr), a main target 
of MTX [23].
A key question in the present studies is what 
becomes of the excessive dietary lard continuously 
consumed by obese mice receiving MTX or CY, yet 
accompanied by normalizing weight loss. Common 
explanations such as malabsorption, increased activity, 
decreased feeding or diet-induced urinary ketosis were 
effectively ruled out. Incoming dietary fat storage was 
thwarted by reduced or unavailable adipocyte storage, 
due to chemotherapy’s depletion of ASC. Despite this 
additional pressure on the liver to process the continuing 
glut of incoming dietary TG, CY or MTX treatment was 
paradoxically also associated with depletion of hepatic 
lipid stores. In depth analysis of MTX additionally 
demonstrated this agent’s inhibition of hepatic lipogenesis 
and overall enhancement of mitochondrial respiration, but 
perhaps most importantly, also revealed a persistence of 
mitochondrial uncoupling in the face of enhanced overall 
oxygen consumption, generating a significantly enhanced 
steady state proton leak. This leak is probably the best 
candidate mechanism to explain the catabolic dissipation 
of ingested lipid in a manner which promotes weight loss 
rather than worsening obesity.
The favorable metabolic effects of MTX or CY 
chemotherapy upon HFD-fed obese mice is in stunning 
contrast to the plight of markedly obese patients who 
achieve impressive weight loss through dietary restraint 
and intensive exercise, but who subsequently display a 
poorly understood long-term reduction in their resting 
metabolism which causes even relatively moderate 
caloric intake to provoke recurrent obesity [5]. Our 
findings suggest that MTX, CY and possibly other 
chemotherapy agents may offer a strategy to address 
life-threatening morbid obesity in the non-cancer setting. 
Chronic administration of several chemotherapy agents, 
including both MTX and CY, is already used clinically to 
treat non-cancerous diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, 
psoriasis and lupus erythematosus. We calculate that 
the dose of MTX which best counters obesity in mice 
(12.5-50 mg/kg) is at least a log-fold higher than the 
dose range given to patients with non-cancerous disease, 
perhaps explaining why the phenomenon of weight 
normalization is not apparent as a trend in such patients. 
Finally, fuller understanding of the mechanisms leading 
to chemotherapy-modulated normalizing weight loss may 
identify additional non-chemotherapeutic agents which 
safely accomplish the same goals.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and animal care
Animal work was performed in accordance of Mayo 
Clinic Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. 
C57BL/6 male mice were purchased from Jackson 
Laboratories. Starting at 6 weeks of age mice were started 
on either the control,10% kcal fat energy diet (LFD) or 
60% kcal fat energy diet (HFD) (Research Labs, Inc. cat# 
D12450Bi and D12492i respectively, New Brunswick, 
NJ) for 10 weeks ad libitum prior to treatment or CLAMS 
(Comprehensive Lab Animal Monitoring System) study. 
At week 8 on diet mice were housed individually to 
measure food intake. Mice and food were weighed weekly.
Cell culture
HepG2 (freshly purchased from ATCC HB-8065, 
Manassas, VA) and MC38 colon carcinoma (NCI/NIH) 
cells were cultured in complete growth medium: DMEM 
(Gibco, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with 10% fetal 
bovine serum (Gibco), 1000 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin 
and 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco) at 37˚C/5% CO2. Cells 
were fed every 2-3 days. MC38 cells (5x105) were injected 
subcutaneously into right flank after 10 weeks on diet. If 
maximal tumor burden was reached, 2000 mm3, mice were 
euthanized.
Drugs and treatment
Mice were randomized by body weight and then 
given weight-based chemotherapy (mg/kg) intraperitoneal 
(i.p.) x5 weekly injections (except gemcitabine which was 
given i.p. twice weekly) and tissue harvest was performed 
1 week post final treatment. Maximum tolerated doses 
(MTD) were determined for each of the following 
chemotherapy compounds: cyclophosphamide (Sigma, 
St. Louis, MO), 5-fluorouracil (Teva Parenteral Medicines, 
North Wales, PA ), gemcitabine (Hospira, Inc., Lake 
Forest, IL), irinotecan (Pfizer, New York, NY), paclitaxel 
(Hospira, Inc) and methotrexate (APP Pharmaceuticals, 
Schaumburg, IL) [13].
Adipocyte stem-like cell (ASC) differentiation
Stromal vascular fraction from epididymal white 
adipose tissue was isolated using collagenase type VIII 
(Sigma) digestion. Isolated cells were stained (0.25-0.5 
µg/ml per 106 cell in 100 µl volume) with CD31-PE (BD 
Biosciences cat# 560238, San Jose, CA), CD34-FITC (BD 
Biosciences cat# 553373), CD45-APC-Cy7 (Biolegend 
cat# 103116, San Diego, CA) and CD140a-BV421 (BD 
Pharmingen cat# 562774) and cell sorted with FACS Aria 
and analyzed with FACS Diva for CD31-, CD34+, CD45- 
and CD140a+ preadipocytes [16]. Cells were then plated 
and cultured according to the adipogenic differentiation of 
mouse mesenchymal stem cells protocol (R&D Systems, 
Minneapolis, MN). After differentiation, adipocytes 
were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 
primary antibody Fabp4 (R&D Systems cat# AF1443, 
Minneapolis, MN), secondary antibody α-goat Alexa 
Fluor-488 (ABCAM cat# ab150129, Cambridge, MA), 
 Oncotarget
5436
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
HCS LipidTOX Red neutral lipid stain (Life Technologies, 
Carlsbad, CA) and Vectashield with DAPI (Vector 
Laboratories cat# H-1200, Burlingame, CA). Confocal 
microscopy was performed using Axiovert 200M (Zeiss) 
with 63x/1.4 oil objective and images analyzed with Zeiss 
LSM510 software.
Calorimetry
Minimum of one gram fecal samples were 
collected for 72h prior to first methotrexate 50 mg/kg or 
cyclophosphamide 200 mg/kg chemotherapy treatment 
and for 72h after last treatment. Samples were stored at 
-80˚C until bomb calorimetry was performed by Covance 
Laboratories (Madison, WI).
Liver triglyceride measurement
Triglycerides (TG) were extracted from flash frozen 
liver samples and were measured using the Triglyceride 
Quantification Kit protocol (Biovision cat# K622-100, 
Milpitas, CA).
Histology
Liver sections were fixed in 10% formalin and 
paraffin embedded (FFPE). 4 micron thick liver samples 
were stained with hematoxylin and counterstained with 
eosin (H&E). Microscopy performed using Leica DMRB 
(20x objective) with Olympus DP71 camera and images 
analyzed with cellSens Entry 1.12 software.
RNA extraction and microarray processing
RNA was isolated using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen 
cat#74104, Hilden, Germany) according to manufacturer’s 
instructions. RNA quantity and integrity were verified with 
the Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific) and Bioanalyzer using 
the Nano chip (Agilent). Using the Quick Amp Labeling 
kit, one color (Agilent), 200 ng RNA per sample was 
labeled. Dye incorporation and amplified RNA amounts 
were verified with Nanodrop. Then, 1.65 μg of each 
sample was hybridized to a 4X44K mouse whole genome 
slide (Agilent), washed, and feature extracted according to 
manufacturer’s (Agilent) instructions.
Microarray data analysis
Gene expression imaging, quality control, fold 
change, GO (gene ontology), and clustering analysis 
was performed with GeneSpring GX 13.0 (Agilent 
Technologies, Inc.). Differentially regulated gene lists, 
2-fold change or greater, were selected between LFD 
and HFD and between methotrexate treated and non-
treated mice. Metabolic process list was generated using 
GO analysis with p-value≤0.05. Hierarchical clustering 
analysis was performed using gene lists that were 
differentially regulated with a p-value ≤0.015 rather than 
0.02 for greater stringency [24]. Every treatment cohort 
consisted of 4-5 biological replicates. The data have been 
deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus and 
are accessible through GEO Series accession number 
GSE87729.
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc=GSE87729)
Comprehensive lab animal monitoring system 
(CLAMS)
Mice fed on LFD or HFD for 10 weeks prior to 
placement into a 12 chamber Oxymax/CLAMS (Columbus 
Instruments, Columbus, OH) with free access to food 
and water. Mice were allowed to acclimate in individual 
metabolic cages at 22˚C for 16h before measurements 
were taken. 72h metabolic profiles were generated in 
successive 26min cycles. Oxygen consumption, CO2 
production, respiratory exchange ratio (RER), food intake 
and spontaneous locomotor activity were measured.
Measurement of mitochondrial function and 
oxidative stress of HepG2 cells
Human hepatocellular HepG2 cells were untreated 
or treated with MTX 10 μM for either 6h or 12h prior 
to extracellular flux analysis. HepG2 cells were washed 
with PBS and cells were seeded at 40000 cells/well in 
XF96-well cell culture microplate (Seahorse Bioscience, 
North Billerica, MA). Seahorse Bioscience XF96e 
Extracellular Flux Analyzer was used to monitor the 
oxygen consumption rate (OCR, XF Cell Mito Stress 
Test Kit) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR, XF 
Glycolysis Stress Test Kit) in intact HepG2 cells.
Statistics
Within individual experiments, each treatment 
condition (e.g. HFD vs LFD with or without 
chemotherapy) was tested in individual groups of mice to 
determine means ±SD for various parameters at particular 
time points, such as weight or kcal consumed. Such groups 
were compared via unpaired Student’s t-test, with p≤ 0.05 
considered significant. In Seahorse experiments, 6 wells 
were concurrently performed and similarly analyzed for 
each condition by Student’s t-test. Therapeutic impact of 
diet and chemotherapy upon tumor growth was analyzed 
in a binary fashion (permanent tumor eradication, yes 
or no) by Fisher’s exact-test. Statistical analyses of 
microarrays are described above.
Abbreviations
ASC, adipocyte stem-like cells; ASCO, American 
Society of Clinical Oncology; CLAMS, comprehensive 
lab monitoring system; CY, cyclophosphamide; DIO, diet-
 Oncotarget
5437
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
induced obesity; Enho, energy homeostasis (gene); eWAT, 
epididymal white adipose tissue; GO, gene ontology; 
HFD, high fat diet; LFD, low fat diet; MTX, methotrexate; 
TG, triglycerides
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Andrew A. Butler for useful 
discussions.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by funds from the Mayo 
Foundation.
REFERENCES
1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK and Flegal KM. Prevalence 
of obesity in the United States, 2009-2010. NCHS Data 
Brief. 2012; 1-8.
2. Obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic. 
Report of a WHO consultation. World Health Organ Tech 
Rep Ser. 2000; 894:i-xii, 1-253.
3. Fabbrini E, Sullivan S and Klein S. Obesity and 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: biochemical, metabolic, 
and clinical implications. Hepatology. 2010; 51:679-689.
4. Pi-Sunyer X. The medical risks of obesity. Postgrad Med. 
2009; 121:21-33.
5. Fothergill E, Guo J, Howard L, Kerns JC, Knuth ND, 
Brychta R, Chen KY, Skarulis MC, Walter M, Walter PJ 
and Hall KD. Persistent metabolic adaptation 6 years after 
“The Biggest Loser” competition. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2016; 24:1612-1619.
6. Griggs JJ, Mangu PB, Anderson H, Balaban EP, Dignam 
JJ, Hryniuk WM, Morrison VA, Pini TM, Runowicz CD, 
Rosner GL, Shayne M, Sparreboom A, Sucheston LE and 
Lyman GH. Appropriate chemotherapy dosing for obese 
adult patients with cancer: American Society of Clinical 
Oncology clinical practice guideline. Journal of clinical 
oncology. 2012; 30:1553-1561.
7. Horowitz NS and Wright AA. Impact of obesity on 
chemotherapy management and outcomes in women 
with gynecologic malignancies. Gynecol Oncol. 2015; 
138:201-206.
8. Lyman GH and Sparreboom A. Chemotherapy dosing in 
overweight and obese patients with cancer. Nat Rev Clin 
Oncol. 2013; 10:451-459.
9. Donelli MG, Zucchetti M, Munzone E, D’Incalci M and 
Crosignani A. Pharmacokinetics of anticancer agents in 
patients with impaired liver function. European Journal of 
Cancer. 1998; 34:33-46.
10. Algire C, Amrein L, Zakikhani M, Panasci L and Pollak M. 
Metformin blocks the stimulative effect of a high-energy 
diet on colon carcinoma growth in vivo and is associated 
with reduced expression of fatty acid synthase. Endocrine-
Related Cancer. 2010; 17:351-360.
11. Hvid H, Blouin MJ, Birman E, Damgaard J, Poulsen F, Fels 
JJ, Fledelius C, Hansen BF and Pollak M. Treatment with 
insulin analog X10 and IGF-1 increases growth of colon 
cancer allografts. PloS One. 2013; 8:e79710.
12. Nimri L, Saadi J, Peri I, Yehuda-Shnaidman E and Schwartz 
B. Mechanisms linking obesity to altered metabolism in mice 
colon carcinogenesis. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:38195-38209. 
 
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5561.
13. Manrique SZ, Dominguez AL, Mirza N, Spencer CD, 
Bradley JM, Finke JH, Lee JJ, Pease LR, Gendler SJ and 
Cohen PA. Definitive activation of endogenous antitumor 
immunity by repetitive cycles of cyclophosphamide with 
interspersed Toll-like receptor agonists. Oncotarget. 2016; 
7:42919-42942. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10190.
14. The EE ANCOVA analysis done for this work was provided 
by the NIDDK Mouse Metabolic Phenotyping Centers 
(MMPC, www.mmpc.org) using their Energy Expenditure 
Analysis page (http://www.mmpc.org/shared/regression.
aspx) and supported by grant DK076169.
15. Marques C, Teixeira D, Cunha A, Meireles M, Pestana D, 
Keating E, Calhau C, Monteiro R and Faria A. Methotrexate 
enhances 3T3-L1 adipocytes hypertrophy. Cell Biol 
Toxicol. 2013; 29:293-302.
16. Cawthorn WP, Scheller EL and MacDougald OA. Adipose 
tissue stem cells meet preadipocyte commitment: going 
back to the future. J Lipid Res. 2012; 53:227-246.
17. Mormeneo E, Jimenez-Mallebrera C, Palomer X, De Nigris 
V, Vazquez-Carrera M, Orozco A, Nascimento A, Colomer 
J, Lerin C and Gomez-Foix AM. PGC-1alpha induces 
mitochondrial and myokine transcriptional programs and 
lipid droplet and glycogen accumulation in cultured human 
skeletal muscle cells. PloS One. 2012; 7:e29985.
18. Kumar KG, Trevaskis JL, Lam DD, Sutton GM, Koza RA, 
Chouljenko VN, Kousoulas KG, Rogers PM, Kesterson RA, 
Thearle M, Ferrante AW, Jr., Mynatt RL, Burris TP, Dong 
JZ, Halem HA, Culler MD, et al. Identification of adropin 
as a secreted factor linking dietary macronutrient intake 
with energy homeostasis and lipid metabolism. Cell Metab. 
2008; 8:468-481.
19. Perez MM, Newcomer AD, Moertel CG, Go VL and 
Dimagno EP. Assessment of weight loss, food intake, fat 
metabolism, malabsorption, and treatment of pancreatic 
insufficiency in pancreatic cancer. Cancer. 1983; 
52:346-352.
20. Arunachalam S, Tirupathi Pichiah PB and Achiraman S. 
Doxorubicin treatment inhibits PPARgamma and may induce 
 Oncotarget
5438
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
lipotoxicity by mimicking a type 2 diabetes-like condition in 
rodent models. FEBS letters. 2013; 587:105-110.
21. Biondo LA, Lima Junior EA, Souza CO, Cruz MM, Cunha 
RD, Alonso-Vale MI, Oyama LM, Nascimento CM, Pimentel 
GD, Dos Santos RV, Lira FS and Rosa Neto JC. Impact of 
Doxorubicin Treatment on the Physiological Functions of 
White Adipose Tissue. PloS One. 2016; 11:e0151548.
22. Garcia JM, Scherer T, Chen JA, Guillory B, Nassif A, 
Papusha V, Smiechowska J, Asnicar M, Buettner C and 
Smith RG. Inhibition of cisplatin-induced lipid catabolism 
and weight loss by ghrelin in male mice. Endocrinology. 
2013; 154:3118-3129.
23. Matherly LH, Taub JW, Ravindranath Y, Proefke SA, Wong 
SC, Gimotty P, Buck S, Wright JE and Rosowsky A. Elevated 
dihydrofolate reductase and impaired methotrexate transport 
as elements in methotrexate resistance in childhood acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 1995; 85:500-509.
24. Khaitan D, Dinger ME, Mazar J, Crawford J, Smith MA, 
Mattick JS and Perera RJ. The melanoma-upregulated 
long noncoding RNA SPRY4-IT1 modulates apoptosis and 
invasion. Cancer Research. 2011; 71:3852-3862.
25. Zadravec D, Brolinson A, Fisher RM, Carneheim C, 
Csikasz RI, Bertrand-Michel J, Boren J, Guillou H, Rudling 
M and Jacobsson A. Ablation of the very-long-chain fatty 
acid elongase ELOVL3 in mice leads to constrained lipid 
storage and resistance to diet-induced obesity. FASEB J. 
2010; 24:4366-4377.
26. Kadereit B, Kumar P, Wang WJ, Miranda D, Snapp 
EL, Severina N, Torregroza I, Evans T and Silver DL. 
Evolutionarily conserved gene family important for fat 
storage. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America. 2008; 105:94-99.
27. Hall AM, Kou K, Chen Z, Pietka TA, Kumar M, Korenblat 
KM, Lee K, Ahn K, Fabbrini E, Klein S, Goodwin B 
and Finck BN. Evidence for regulated monoacylglycerol 
acyltransferase expression and activity in human liver. J 
Lipid Res. 2012; 53:990-999.
28. Ganesh Kumar K, Zhang J, Gao S, Rossi J, McGuinness OP, 
Halem HH, Culler MD, Mynatt RL and Butler AA. Adropin 
deficiency is associated with increased adiposity and insulin 
resistance. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012; 20:1394-1402.
29. Biddinger SB, Almind K, Miyazaki M, Kokkotou E, Ntambi 
JM and Kahn CR. Effects of diet and genetic background 
on sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c, stearoyl-
CoA desaturase 1, and the development of the metabolic 
syndrome. Diabetes. 2005; 54:1314-1323.
30. Linden D, William-Olsson L, Ahnmark A, Ekroos 
K, Hallberg C, Sjogren HP, Becker B, Svensson L, 
Clapham JC, Oscarsson J and Schreyer S. Liver-directed 
overexpression of mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate 
acyltransferase results in hepatic steatosis, increased 
triacylglycerol secretion and reduced fatty acid oxidation. 
FASEB J. 2006; 20:434-443.
31. Stoffel W, Hammels I, Jenke B, Binczek E, Schmidt-
Soltau I, Brodesser S, Odenthal M and Thevis M. Obesity 
resistance and deregulation of lipogenesis in Delta6-fatty 
acid desaturase (FADS2) deficiency. EMBO Rep. 2014; 
15:110-120.
32. Tripathy S, Lytle KA, Stevens RD, Bain JR, Newgard 
CB, Greenberg AS, Huang LS and Jump DB. Fatty 
acid elongase-5 (Elovl5) regulates hepatic triglyceride 
catabolism in obese C57BL/6J mice. J Lipid Res. 2014; 
55:1448-1464.
33. Matsuzaka T, Atsumi A, Matsumori R, Nie T, Shinozaki 
H, Suzuki-Kemuriyama N, Kuba M, Nakagawa Y, Ishii K, 
Shimada M, Kobayashi K, Yatoh S, Takahashi A, Takekoshi 
K, Sone H, Yahagi N, et al. Elovl6 promotes nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis. Hepatology. 2012; 56:2199-2208.
34. Smith S, Witkowski A and Joshi AK. Structural and 
functional organization of the animal fatty acid synthase. 
Prog Lipid Res. 2003; 42:289-317.
35. Wakil SJ and Abu-Elheiga LA. Fatty acid metabolism: 
target for metabolic syndrome. J Lipid Res. 2009; 
50:S138-143.
36. Zhang S, Yang Y and Shi Y. Characterization of human 
SCD2, an oligomeric desaturase with improved stability and 
enzyme activity by cross-linking in intact cells. Biochemical 
J. 2005; 388:135-142.
