 June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
1
Original research
published: 06 June 2016
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2016.00074
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Kenneth Curley, 
Iatrikos Research and 
Development Solutions, 
LLC, USA
Reviewed by: 
Linda Noble, 
University of California 
San Francisco, USA 
 
Eric Peter Thelin, 
Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
*Correspondence:
Gregory D. Myer 
greg.myer@cchmc.org
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted 
to Neurotrauma, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Neurology
Received: 25 February 2016
Accepted: 29 April 2016
Published: 06 June 2016
Citation: 
Myer GD, Yuan W, Barber Foss KD, 
Smith D, Altaye M, Reches A, 
Leach J, Kiefer AW, Khoury JC, 
Weiss M, Thomas S, Dicesare C, 
Adams J, Gubanich PJ, Geva A, 
Clark JF, Meehan WP III, Mihalik JP 
and Krueger D (2016) The Effects of 
External Jugular Compression 
Applied during Head Impact 
Exposure on Longitudinal Changes in 
Brain Neuroanatomical and 
Neurophysiological Biomarkers: 
A Preliminary Investigation. 
Front. Neurol. 7:74. 
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2016.00074
The effects of external Jugular 
compression applied during head 
impact exposure on longitudinal 
changes in Brain neuroanatomical 
and neurophysiological Biomarkers: 
a Preliminary investigation
Gregory D. Myer1,2,3,4,5,6*, Weihong Yuan7, Kim D. Barber Foss1,2,8, David Smith1,9,  
Mekibib Altaye10, Amit Reches11, James Leach12, Adam W. Kiefer1,2,3,13, Jane C. Khoury10, 
Michal Weiss11, Staci Thomas1,2, Chris Dicesare1,2, Janet Adams12, Paul J. Gubanich1,3, 
Amir Geva11,14, Joseph F. Clark15, William P. Meehan III5,16,17, Jason P. Mihalik18 and  
Darcy Krueger19
1 
Division of Sports Medicine, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 2 
The Human Performance 
Laboratory, Division of Sports Medicine, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 3 
Department of 
Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 4 
Department of Orthopaedics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 5 
The Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention, Waltham, MA, USA, 6 
Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 7 
Pediatric Neuroimaging Research Consortium, 
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 8 
Department of Athletic Training, Division of Health 
Sciences, Mount St. Joseph University, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 9 
Department of Neurosurgery, NorthShore University Health 
Systems, Evanston, IL, USA, 10 
Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA, 11 
ElMindA, Ltd., Herzliya, Israel, 12 
Division of Radiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA, 13 
Department of Psychology, Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA, 14 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, 
Israel, 15 
Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 16 
Division of Sports 
Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 17 
Department of Pediatrics and Orthopedics, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA, 18 
Department of Exercise and Sport Science, Matthew Gfeller Sport-Related Traumatic Brain 
Injury Research Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA, 19 
Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Objectives: Utilize a prospective in vivo clinical trial to evaluate the potential for mild 
neck compression applied during head impact exposure to reduce anatomical and 
physiological biomarkers of brain injury.
Methods: This project utilized a prospective randomized controlled trial to evaluate 
effects of mild jugular vein (neck) compression (collar) relative to controls (no collar) 
during a competitive hockey season (males; 16.3 ± 1.2 years). The collar was designed 
to mildly compress the jugular vein bilaterally with the goal to increase intracranial 
blood volume to reduce risk of brain slosh injury during head impact exposure. Helmet 
sensors were used to collect daily impact data in excess of 20 g (games and prac-
tices) and the primary outcome measures, which included changes in white matter 
(WM) microstructure, were assessed by diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Specifically, 
four DTI measures: fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity, and 
radial diffusivity (RD) were used in the study. These metrics were analyzed using the 
tract-based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) approach – a voxel-based analysis. In addition, 
 2
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
electroencephalography-derived event-related potentials were used to assess changes 
in brain network activation (BNA) between study groups.
results: For athletes not wearing the collar, DTI measures corresponding to a disruption 
of WM microstructure, including MD and RD, increased significantly from pre-season to 
mid-season (p < 0.05). Athletes wearing the collar did not show a significant change 
in either MD or RD despite similar accumulated linear accelerations from head impacts 
(p > 0.05). In addition to these anatomical findings, electrophysiological network anal-
ysis of the degree of congruence in the network electrophysiological activation pattern 
demonstrated concomitant changes in brain network dynamics in the non-collar group 
only (p < 0.05). Similar to the DTI findings, the increased change in BNA score in the 
non-collar relative to the collar group was statistically significant (p < 0.01). Changes 
in DTI outcomes were also directly correlated with altered brain network dynamics 
(r = 0.76; p < 0.05) as measured by BNA.
conclusion: Group differences in the longitudinal changes in both neuroanatomical 
and electrophysiological measures, as well as the correlation between the measures, 
provide initial evidence indicating that mild jugular vein compression may have reduced 
alterations in the WM response to head impacts during a competitive hockey season. 
The data indicate sport-related alterations in WM microstructure were ameliorated by 
application of jugular compression during head impact exposure. These results may 
lead to a novel line of research inquiry to evaluate the effects of protecting the brain from 
sports-related head impacts via optimized intracranial fluid dynamics.
Keywords: head injury, pediatric traumatic brain injury, traumatic brain injury, eeg
inTrODUcTiOn
The World Health Organization projected that traumatic brain 
injury (TBI) will rank as the third leading cause of global disease 
and injury by 2020 (1). The annual cost is over $60 billion in the 
United States alone (2) for the diagnosis, treatment, and man-
agement of TBI. These monetary costs, combined with the poor 
long-term prognosis and heightened awareness of the potential 
long-term sequelae of multiple concussions and subconcussive 
blows, indicate that innovative prevention strategies are needed 
to reduce the significant morbidity associated with concussion 
and mild TBI that result from sports-related head impacts (3).
The most common historical solutions to this growing epi-
demic have been in the innovation and improvement of helmet 
design, rule changes, and restricted participation in high-risk 
sports (4, 5). These advancements, however, have not reduced 
concussion incidence or reported symptoms (4–6). Moreover, 
this focus on helmets does little to address the concussion epi-
demic in non-helmeted sports (2). In fact, helmets, and other 
touted protective gear (5, 7), do not address the underlying 
mechanism of concussion injury – the dynamic forces that cause 
movement of the brain inside the cranium, commonly referred 
to as slosh (8, 9). Thus, neither rule changes or invoking fear of 
TBI to reduce participation in certain sports has diminished the 
incidence of concussions and neither is an acceptable long-term 
solution (10).
The biomechanical forces imparted to the brain during sports-
related collisions can result in a wide range of trauma, from 
asymptomatic impacts and cerebral concussion to diffuse axonal 
injuries. In hockey and other collision sports, the majority of 
impacts fall between 20 and 25 g of linear acceleration, although 
hits from 50 to 75 g are common (11–14). When exposed to 
impact, the brain risks slosh-induced injury as tissues of differing 
density accelerate/decelerate at diverse rates, which induces shear 
forces. Neuropathological findings suggest that even subconcus-
sive impacts to the head can lead to persistent cognitive impair-
ments in various neuro-cognitive domains, including attention, 
memory, and executive function (15).
Given the common range of impact levels in humans and 
their associated sequela (16), it was contemplated how a ram can 
survive a 500 g collision directly to the head (17), and similarly 
how woodpeckers’ brains tolerate repeated 1200 g impacts? (18) 
Observations suggest that both may have evolved the ability to 
modulate their intracranial pressure/volume via jugular vein 
impedance (19). Researchers have suggested that a similar pro-
tective mechanism to reduce brain slosh may exist in humans 
(9, 19, 20). Contraction of the omohyoid neck muscles can gently 
indent and constrain the jugular veins slowing the outflow of 
blood from the brain (21). Compression of the jugular vein in 
humans can also result in increased volume of the venous capaci-
tance vessels of the cranium (22). Based on these physiological 
models, filling the compensatory reserve volume (23) within the 
 FigUre 1 | The Q-collar designed to facilitate the actions of the compressive effect of the omohyoids to reduce blood outflow of the brain (a) and 
produce a tighter fit of the brain within the cranium (B).
3
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
cranium is hypothesized to create a cradling effect that increases 
brain stiffness (24), reduces slosh of the brain inside the skull, and 
reduces risk of brain injury. In preclinical models for TBI, we have 
demonstrated significant reductions in axonal amyloid precursor 
proteins, degenerative neurons, reactive astrocytes, and microglial 
activation in collared vs. no-collar rodents (8, 19). Drawing from 
these predicate studies, a collar has been developed for humans 
to gently facilitate the actions of the omohyoid muscular complex 
in modulating intracranial blood volume to produce a tighter fit 
of the brain within the cranium (Figures 1A,B).
The current study presents a novel, in vivo clinical trial 
evaluating the Q-Collar during sport (i.e., hockey) to test its 
effect in ameliorating both neuroanatomical and neurophysi-
ological biomarkers. Specifically, anatomical white matter (WM) 
integrity was evaluated using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 
and physiological changes in functional connectivity reflecting 
the spatiotemporal dynamics of brain network responses were 
assessed using electroencephalography (EEG) event-related 
potentials (ERPs). We hypothesized that the collar device would 
significantly reduce the change in WM integrity and brain net-
work neurophysiology relative to non-collar controls.
MaTerials anD MeThODs
study Participants
The Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center Institutional 
Review Board approved the data collection procedures and con-
sent forms. IRB approval number is IRB # 2014-5009 (Clinical 
Trials.gov #: NCT02271451). Nineteen healthy male varsity 
level high school hockey players were recruited from Southwest 
Ohio, 17 of them were enrolled. Parents, guardians and athletes 
provided informed consent and assent prior to participation in 
the study. Normal, healthy volunteers who were able to provide 
written consent and were on the varsity hockey team roster were 
included in the study. Exclusion criteria for study participation 
included history of neurological deficits, previous cerebral 
infarction, severe head trauma, known increased intracerebral 
pressure, metabolic acidosis or alkalosis, glaucoma (narrow angle 
or normal tension), hydrocephalus, recent (within 6 months) 
penetrating brain trauma, known carotid hypersensitivity, central 
vein thrombosis, known airway obstruction, or seizure disorder. 
Of the 17 subjects enrolled, two participants had contraindica-
tions for MRI imaging, one with upper and lower dental braces 
and one with an existing metal implant from a prior surgery. In 
addition, evaluation of the athlete with the indwelling metal plate 
did not provide usable EEG data and, thus, was excluded from 
the study. One athlete chose to withdraw due to irritation upon 
wearing the collar at the first practice. This left 15 subjects for 
final analysis (aged 16.3 ± 1.2 years): 15 with EEG outcomes and 
14 DTI. The 15 athletes were randomly assigned to one of two 
groups: (1) device wearing during the first half of the season or (2) 
non-device wearing during the first half of the season.
study Design
This investigation was planned using a 2 × 2 cross-over study 
design; however, after the first phase of the study, more than 
half of the subjects who were scheduled to switch from the 
no collar to collar condition were not compliant, leaving only 
three subjects to comply with the collar use in the second half 
of the season (Figure 2). Given the non-compliance, the small 
number of subjects who complied with the protocol following 
cross-over, and the limited wash-out period, an intention to 
treat (ITT) analysis that included data from the mid- to post-
season period was deemed not to be valid. Thus, we conducted 
analyses that were determined the most appropriate for this 
preliminary project, and only compared and presented the 
results of longitudinal assessments of data collected at baseline 
and mid-season (first period of hockey season, approximately 
2 months) between the collar and no-collar groups in the cur-
rent manuscript.
incidental Findings
On pre-season imaging, one athlete demonstrated an area of 
volume loss and encephalomalacia involving the left mesial 
temporal lobe and hippocampus with hemorrhagic staining; 
likely representing a remote insult. Clinical MRI was performed, 
 FigUre 2 | study subject allocation following randomization. Subjects 
randomly assigned to the collar (n = 7) or no-collar group (n = 8) for the first 
half of the season were crossed-over at the mid-season time point. The 
number of subjects who completed each test (EEG and MRI) at each time 
point is indicated in the blue and yellow boxes. In the second half of the 
season, five subjects did not comply with wearing the collar, which created a 
second “No-Collar” group in the latter part of the season, as indicated in the 
red box.
4
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
including MR angiography that demonstrated no other baseline 
abnormality or definite etiology. The athlete was cleared by his 
neurologist for full participation in the study, and no changes 
were noted on subsequent mid-season imaging. One athlete 
demonstrated internal echoes within the left internal jugular 
vein (IJV) on pre-season sonography (without compressibility). 
Follow-up clinical CT and Doppler ultrasound were performed 
showing the IJVs to be normal without filling defects or thrombi. 
Subsequent Doppler ultrasound was performed and still showed 
increased internal echoes but with normal and complete com-
pressibility. No further work-up was needed and the athlete was 
cleared for full participation in the study.
instrumentation and Procedures
Testing sessions were completed at three different time points: 
(1) pre-season (2) mid-season, and (3) post-season. Each testing 
session consisted of two visits: (1) laboratory testing with EEG 
and (2) MRI brain imaging that took place within ~1–2 days 
from the paired laboratory testing visit. The laboratory testing 
visit was completed at the Human Performance Laboratory 
in the Division of Sports Medicine at Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC). MRI testing was completed 
at the Imaging Research Center at CCHMC and consisted of a 
pre-imaging screening questionnaire to ensure each subject 
had no contraindications for MRI such as cochlear implants, 
implanted medical devices, etc. Imaging sequences included 3D 
T1 anatomic, DTI, and susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI), 
MR scans were acquired on a 3T Phillips scanner (Phillips 
Achieva, Phillips Medical Systems, Amsterdam, Netherlands) 
using a 32-channel head coil. In the present study, only DTI and 
SWI outcome measures were included in the report. Pre-season 
(baseline) testing took place prior to the start of competitive 
play. Mid-season testing was completed halfway through the 
season, while post-season testing took place after competitive 
play (including post-season play) was complete. The average 
time between testing was 63.8 ± 9.8 (range = 47–76) days for the 
pre- to mid-season phase and 77.2 ± 6.2 (range = 70–92) days for 
the mid- to post-season phase, which also included post-season 
tournament play. The average number of days between the last 
mid-season competition exposure and mid-season test sessions 
was 2.9 ± 1.8 (range = 1–6) days. Study visits were scheduled in 
coordination with subject, laboratory, and MR scanner availabil-
ity. During the pre- to mid-season phase, there were 17 practices 
and 15 regular season games. During the second phase, including 
post-season tournaments, there were 26 practices and 21 regular 
or tournament games.
Mri Data acquisition
The DTI data were acquired with a spin echo planar sequence 
with the following specifications: TR/TE = 9000/83 ms; 
FOV = 256 mm × 256 mm, matrix = 128 × 128, in-plane resolu-
tion = 2 mm × 2 mm; slice thickness = 2 mm; 72 slices. Diffusion 
weighed images were acquired along 61 non-collinear directions 
with 7 no diffusion weighed images (b0 = 1000 s/mm2). All 
anatomical imaging (3D T1-weighted and SWI sequences) was 
evaluated by the same board certified neuroradiologist (JLL) 
blinded to treatment group assignment, at each imaging time 
point. Abnormal findings were reported to the study investiga-
tors, subject, and parents as per study protocol.
Mri Data Processing and analysis
Diffusion tensor imaging data were processed with the Functional 
MRI of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library (FSL) software 
package (www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl). In FSL, skull stripping was 
performed using the brain extraction tool (BET) function. Eddy 
current and head motion artifact were corrected in FSL by align-
ing diffusion weighted images to the first b0 image with an affine 
transformation with 12 degrees of freedom. The following four 
commonly used DTI measures were calculated using standard 
methods: fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), 
axial diffusivity (AD), and radial diffusivity (RD) (25). The tract-
based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) approach was used in the image 
analysis in the present study (26). This is a method developed to 
ameliorate the registration error at the boundary of narrow WM 
fiber bundles, a common source of error in voxel-based style 
analysis. Studies have shown that TBSS can effectively reduce 
the granularity and improve accuracy during the normalization. 
We followed standard TBSS analysis steps summarized briefly as 
follows: (1) after DTI scalar maps were generated, FA maps from 
all subjects were first aligned via a non-linear transformation to 
determine a target image that was closest to the mean of the FA 
maps in the study; (2) the target image was aligned to Montreal 
Neurological Institute (MNI) space using affine registration; 
(3) individual FA map was registered into the MNI space based 
on the combined transformation; (4) all the aligned FA maps 
were averaged to generate a mean FA and then thresholded at 
 5
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
FA > 0.2 to create a mean FA skeleton, which represented the 
WM tracts most common to all the subjects; (5) FA maps from 
individual subjects were projected onto the skeleton with the FA 
values determined via a special algorithm for local maximum 
FA; and (6) the MD, AD, and RD maps were projected to the 
skeleton using the TBSS_non_FA function in FSL based on the 
same overall transformation as calculated in the processing of 
FA maps. The group statistical analysis was conducted only in 
the WM skeleton with the individual projected DTI maps as 
input and the skeleton as mask, thus restricting the analysis to 
determine the major WM tracts that are common to all subjects. 
In association with the current study, we explored the potential 
physiological effects of exercise and time on DTI measures in 
the absence of head impact exposure. To evaluate the stability 
of DTI measures, we captured a sub-sample of matched athletes 
from the same school competing in track and field. The track 
athletes were assessed using identical MR sequences to the cur-
rent sample of hockey periods over a similar time period (data 
not shown). The results indicated no significant changes in DTI 
measures, for the specific DTI outcome measured, between 
baseline and follow-up.
eeg Data acquisition and analysis
Each study subject performed an auditory oddball paradigm 
including a series of tones (N = 400) containing 80% standard 
tones (2000 Hz) and 10% target tones (1000 Hz). The remaining 
10% of sounds were environmental sounds (i.e., a telephone ring, 
dog bark, etc.; the novel sound). During this task, sounds were 
presented at a fixed rate of 1 every 1.5 s. The subject’s task was to 
respond to the target sound by pressing a button. The Oddball 
task took approximately 12 min to complete. For all tasks, EEG 
channels were sampled at 250 Hz.
Post-processing of the EEG data consisted of a brain network 
activation (BNA) (27–31) analysis for the data measured via a 
standard high-density 64- or 128-electrode wet EEG cap fitted 
to the participant’s head. As part of the BNA preprocessing, all 
data were interpolated to a 64-electrode framework. For the 
Oddball task data, epoched segments (200 ms pre-stimulus 
to 1200 ms post-stimulus), using the 200 ms pre-stimulus 
interval, were averaged separately for the “frequent/standard,” 
“target,” and “novel” sounds. The EEG signals were recorded 
and cleaned by standard procedures, band pass filtered into 
overlapping physiological frequency bands [delta (0.5–4 Hz), 
theta (3–8 Hz), alpha (7–13 Hz), and beta (12–30 Hz)], cut 
into epochs demarking pre- and post-stimulus onset times, and 
averaged to align with ERPs. The data were reduced into a set 
of discrete points that denote local extrema for each band, and 
the resulting latencies and amplitudes were input into the BNA 
algorithm (28–30).
Detailed descriptions of the BNA analysis method are pub-
lished elsewhere (27–29, 31). Briefly, the BNA analysis involves 
two independent processes: (1) a group-level pattern recognition 
process used to generate the characteristic group’s network and 
(2) a single-subject level similarity evaluation process in which a 
single subject is compared to the reference brain network model 
(RBNM). The degree of similarity with the RBNM is measured 
by the BNA score (27–29, 31). The coordinated activity in time, 
location, and frequency depicted in the RBNM implies that the 
spatiotemporal functional dependencies of regional neuronal 
activities in different frequency bands represent functional links 
common to and characteristic of a specific population (e.g., 
healthy controls, concussed patients). The RBNM serves as an 
integral part of the BNA algorithm, namely as a consistent elec-
trophysiological template to assess the degree of congruence in 
terms of the network activation pattern between the single subject 
and the group’s pattern. The result is a BNA Score – a measure of 
similarity of Δt of a single subject compared to the Δt of all pairs 
of events in the RBNM, reflecting the time lagged dynamics of the 
co-occurrence between events. The BNA Score ranges between 
0 (no similarity to the RBNM) and 100% (identical to RBNM). 
Thus, the higher the BNA Score the greater the similarity to the 
RBNM. Here, we report the absolute change in BNA Score (or 
BNA Change Score) between two visits (i.e., mid-season minus 
baseline).
neck Ultrasound evaluation  
and collar Fitting
The neck collar was designed to mildly compress the jugular 
vein bilaterally to increase intracranial blood volume in order 
to reduce risk of brain slosh injury during head impact expo-
sure. The neck collar device is made of the following: outer 
collar – Urethane Thermoplastic elastomers (durometer 80 
Shore A), an inner collar – Urethane Thermoplastic elastomers 
(durometer 50 Shore A), and an insert – Rigid Urethane, glass 
filled (Figures 1A,B). The individual collar size was determined 
from the measured user neck circumference, and validated in 
use by both measuring the spacing of the collar tips (1.25″–2.5″) 
and visual evidence of ultrasound IJV dilation. At the initial fit-
ting of the collar, a registered vascular technologist (JA) utilized 
ultrasound to ensure that the proper collar and IJV responses 
(e.g., visual evidence of IJV dilation superior to collar) occurred 
as prescribed (Figure 3). All ultrasonography procedures 
and measurements were performed by a single sonographer 
and the images and video clips were acquired on a SonoSite 
M-MSK unit (SonoSite Inc-US, Bothell, WA, USA), using the 
HFL 50, 15–6 MHz linear transducer. During testing, the study 
participants sat upright, facing forward. Ultrasound coupling 
gel was applied to the lateral neck, and the right side common 
carotid artery and IJV were identified in the transverse plane, 
verifying normal anatomy. A collar was then placed in proper 
position around the subject’s neck. To further evaluate respon-
siveness to the collar, a 15 s video clip was obtained, recording 
the collar in proper position, the collar opened away from the 
neck, and the collar returned to its proper position. The IJV 
metrics were measured at their largest transverse dimensions 
upon initial placement of the collar, and then at the smallest 
transverse dimension when the collar was opened, and again 
after replacing the collar back on the neck. The collar imparts 
a gentle and continuous pressure to the area just above the 
omohyoid muscles. As there would be no way to know when 
an impact would occur, this continuous impedance serves to 
provide the proposed physiological response during the entire 
 FigUre 3 | Pictorial representation of internal jugular vein (iJV) response via dilation to the application of the collar device.
6
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
session (practice or game) in which the athlete may be exposed 
to head impacts (both intended and unintended). Ultrasound 
evaluations were taken to ensure that this rapid response to 
jugular compression occurred in the study participants. The 
Queckenstedt literature indicates that jugular compression fills 
the intracranial compensatory reserve in 0.5 s (20).
head impact surveillance
An athletic trainer affiliated with the high school attended every 
practice and game and provided head impact surveillance. Head 
accelerations were recorded using GForceTracker accelerometers 
(GForceTracker, Markham, ON, Canada) secured inside the 
back of each hockey helmet. With the exception of goalies (who 
wore specialized headgear), all subjects were provided with 
standardized headgear (Bauer RE-AKT, Exeter, NH, USA) and 
mouth guards (Nike, Beaverton, OR, USA). Accelerometers were 
placed in the same location and orientation inside each helmet. 
Goalies had accelerometers placed on an exterior portion of the 
helmet in the same location as teammates. During each practice 
and game, the athletic trainer activated the accelerometers and 
monitored the real-time transmission of impact data displayed on 
a laptop via telemetry. The start and end times of each exposure 
were recorded, and only accelerations recorded within that time 
window were aggregated from each participant’s accelerometer 
data. At the conclusion of each practice session or game, the 
accelerometers were turned off and all data were downloaded to 
the study database. The accelerometers were removed from the 
helmets and recharged twice weekly. The accelerometers were 
programed to record data only when experiencing accelerations 
above a 10 g threshold and acceleration data were collected at 
3000 Hz. Prior to the initial exposure (i.e., first practice), each 
accelerometer was calibrated according to device specifications 
and relative to the eventual placement of the sensor in each 
helmet.
safety and Tolerance of collar
Throughout the season, the school’s athletic trainer monitored 
the compliance of wearing the collar at each practice and game. 
For the pre- to mid-season period, there was a reported 98.3% 
compliance rate of collar use in the intervention group. After 
the cross-over from the mid-season, four of the seven players 
assigned to the collar condition in the second half of the season 
did not want to change equipment or reported enough irritation, 
e.g., perception of pressure on the neck, to cause them not to wear 
it for all exposures. One player reported feeling slightly nauseated 
after wearing the collar. Another player felt the collar made head 
turning difficult, yet he continued the season with the collar on. 
There was no evidence of acquired intracranial hemorrhage or 
gross brain injury on the mid-season and post-season imaging 
in any participant. No detrimental effect was found in collar 
wearing on EEG measures. At the end of the season, participants 
completed a questionnaire regarding the tolerance and accept-
ance of the collar while playing hockey and the responses were 
qualitatively assessed relative to acceptance and tolerance of 
collar wear.
statistical analysis
The data indexing the number of total impacts was subjected to 
a Box–Cox natural log (Ln) transformation to alleviate extreme 
positive skewness observed in the data (32), while the total expe-
rienced g-forces were subjected to a simple Ln transformation 
due to moderate positive skewness. Separate independent t-tests 
were then conducted to compare the collar and non-collar groups 
for total number of impacts with various g-force cut-off (>20, 
>50, >100 g), total g-forces experienced (>20 g), and g-force per 
impact (>20 g).
In this analysis, the DTI measures (FA, RD, AD, and MD) 
at a given voxel were modeled as a function of sequence (order 
of treatment assignment), period (mid-season or post), and 
 TaBle 1 | (a) Average (±SD) # of hits at impact level; (B) average (± SD) of 
total g-forces experienced above impact level; (c) average g-force of hits above 
impact level.
group
Mean
sD
a
20 g
Collar
166.00
52.85
No collar
117.50
35.73
50 g
Collar
23.57
11.18
No collar
16.63
7.71
100 g
Collar
3.57
3.95
No collar
4.13
3.00
B 
20 g
Collar
6311.52
1812.67
No collar
4453.62
1621.84
50 g
Collar
1657.93
981.13
No collar
1364.18
707.95
100 g
Collar
414.78
463.93
No collar
565.94
413.86
c
20 g/Collision
Collar
38.34
4.32
No collar
37.40
3.30
7
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
treatment (collar or no collar). Initially, group differences at a 
given time point (mid-season or baseline) were assessed using an 
independent two-sample t-test. This was followed by a within-
group longitudinal change analysis between the two time points. 
For each subject within both the collar wearing group and the 
non-collar wearing group, a difference map between the two time 
points was calculated and the statistical significance and a paired 
t-test was used to assess the longitudinal change for each group. 
Finally, we used an independent two-sample t-test to assess 
whether the interaction between group and time was significant 
by comparing the longitudinal change between the two groups. 
The threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) approach was 
adopted and the multiple comparisons were accounted for via 
family-wise error correction at p < 0.05 level. Correlation between 
the change in DTI measures and reaction time and memory com-
posite scores as well as linear acceleration (g-force) and number 
of hits was examined using Pearson correlation at each voxel level. 
The TFCE approach and multiple comparison correction were 
again used in the correlation analysis as described relative to the 
group comparisons. The correlation between RD and the BNA 
Change score was examined using a Pearson correlation. The 
difference between BNA measures in the non-collar and collar 
groups was assessed using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Finally, a 
repeated measure ANOVA with Bonferroni correction was used 
to evaluate the ultrasound measures of Jugular vein dilation in 
response to collar wear.
resUlTs
Jugular Vein Dilation in response to collar 
Wearing
The dilating action of the collar on IJV surface area was meas-
ured twice by ultrasound. There was a significant response 
in the IJV measured superior to the collar [F(2.26) = 55.37, 
p < 0.001]. Follow-up comparisons revealed that there was a sig-
nificant increase in IJV dilation after both trials of collar wearing 
(M ± SD = 4.71 ± 0.33 mm) in the first trial and (4.61 ± 0.37 mm) 
in the second trial when compared to the test without collar 
(1.70 ± 0.23 mm; p < 0.001).
head impact surveillance
Descriptive results of head impact exposures for each of the 
study groups are presented in Table 1A–C. The collar group 
experienced significantly more collisions, on average (linear 
acceleration threshold >50 g; p = 0.024) and trended toward 
increased average number of collisions (linear acceleration 
threshold >20 g; p = 0.052) and larger total accrued g-forces 
(p = 0.054) relative to the no-collar group during the first half 
season investigation period. There were no significant group 
differences with linear accelerations exceeding 100 g (p = 0.415) 
with no significant group differences in the average linear accel-
eration per collision above 20 g (p = 0.639) during the first half 
season investigation period. Figure 4 presents the location of 
accelerometer measured linear accelerations exceeding 20, 50, 
and 100 g thresholds, accumulated over the pre to mid-season 
phase of the investigation.
longitudinal DTi changes and the effect 
of collar Wearing
No significant group difference was found in any DTI measures 
at baseline between the seven participants initially assigned to 
the collar group and the seven participants initially assigned to 
the non-collar group. Longitudinally, no significant change was 
found in any DTI measures between pre- and mid-season in the 
collar group. In the non-collar group, significant increases in 
MD and RD from pre- to mid-season were found in extended 
WM areas (p < 0.05, FWE corrected), including (mostly bilat-
eral) the corpus callosum (involving both the body and the 
genu), anterior, superior, and posterior corona radiata, anterior 
and posterior internal capsule, external capsule, superior 
longitudinal fasciculus, superior, middle, and inferior frontal 
gyrus WM, superior marginal gyrus WM, and superior parietal 
lobe gyrus WM (Figure 5: MD; Figure 6: RD). No significant 
longitudinal change was found in FA or AD in the non-collar 
group (p > 0.05).
In order to account for potential confounding effects from 
factors other than the collar, we used the collar group as a con-
trol. Specifically we tested whether the longitudinal DTI change 
between pre- and mid-season observed in the non-collar group 
persisted after the pre- and mid-season change in the collar 
group was taken into consideration. As shown in Figure 6, the 
increase in MD (Figure 7A) and RD (Figure 7B) from pre- to 
mid-season in the non-collar group was significantly higher 
than that of the collar group in the body of corpus callosum. 
Descriptive statistics of MD and RD values in the two study 
groups within the region with significant between-group dif-
ference of pre- vs. mid-season change (i.e., “hot areas”) are pre-
sented in Table 2. The group differences of FA and AD change 
were also tested but no  
statistically significant result was found 
in these comparisons.
 FigUre 4 | colored dots represent location of accelerometer measured the linear accelerations above 20 g (green), 50 g (yellow), and 100 g (red) 
sustained by either the collar or no-collar groups during the pre- to mid-season time period.
8
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
eeg Outcomes
Figure 8 represents the group mean for absolute value of change in 
the BNA synchronization score between baseline and mid-season 
visits in the non-collar group vs. the collar group (BNA change 
score) within each event pair of the RBNM. Heat map imaging 
highlights increased change as the color moves away from green. 
The BNA change score in the collar group remained relatively 
stable in comparison to the non-collar group (Figure 7). Similar 
to the DTI findings, the increased change in BNA score in the 
non-collar relative to the collar group was statistically significant 
(p = 0.006). Interestingly, the BNA change score in the non-collar 
group significantly correlated with the pre- to mid-season longi-
tudinal RD changes (r = 0.76; p = 0.04).
DiscUssiOn
This study examined the potential of the jugular vein impedance 
to modify the intracranial fluid dynamics and mitigate alterations 
to brain structure and function following head impact exposure. 
The collar device developed for evaluation is a novel, yet simple, 
approach for the internal prevention of brain movement when 
the head is exposed to concussive blows. The intervention under 
investigation was found to prevent alterations to WM integrity 
and brain network neurophysiology following head impact expo-
sure. Importantly, the athletes tolerated that physiological change 
during competition and did so without subsequent anatomical or 
neurophysiological impairments.
Previous neuroimaging and outcome studies have reported 
significant changes in imaging biomarkers and the correlation of 
these biomarkers with cognitive outcomes after only one season 
of participation in contact sports with repetitive sub-concussion 
head impact (33). Consistent with the previous findings, but 
within only a half season, we identified significantly larger 
increase in MD and RD in the non-collar group than the collar 
group in the corpus callosum. The FA, MD, AD, and RD measures 
are standard DTI measures that have been used extensively in 
studying WM integrity in various neurological disorders/dis-
eases (34). The direction of change in these measures are often 
interpreted and related to different injury mechanisms. Most 
commonly, decreased FA driven by the increase of MD and RD is 
often related to compromised myelin sheath or axonal membrane 
damage, while an increased FA accompanied by increased AD 
and decreased RD is often interpreted as the result of increased 
compression on WM tracts. In the current study, we found 
increased MD and RD from pre- to mid-season in the corpus 
callosum, which is suggestive of the initial sign of axonal and/or 
myelin degradation in the non-collared group. It should be noted 
that corpus callosum is the largest WM structure with extensive 
myelinated axons supporting interhemispheric information 
transferring. Altered WM integrity in the corpus callosum has 
been frequently reported in the TBI literature (35–37) and appears 
related to deficits in memory, attention, motor, and executive 
function, further resulting in worse clinical outcomes, greater 
severity in post-concussive symptoms, and other neuropsycho-
logical outcomes (35, 38–46).
Previous studies of jugular vein compression indicated no 
alterations in O2 uptake or glucose metabolism to any portion 
of the brain before or after jugular vein impedance (47). In a 
MR venography study, there was a significant increase in brain 
volume in the dural sinuses with the compression collar in place 
(22) and this volume increase normalizes as expected acutely 
following collar removal (22). It is theorized that these changes, 
although minimal, would translate to diminished brain motion 
within the cranial vault and, hence, less traumatic effects of sheer 
 FigUre 5 | increase in MD from pre- to mid-season in non-collar group. The red regions represent areas with statistically significant longitudinal changes at 
p < 0.05 level (FWE corrected). The red regions are thickened to improve visual display.
9
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
and rotational forces during competition (9, 48). It should be 
noted that these previous studies were conducted in the supine 
position and may not directly translate to sport. In the current 
study, athletes exhibited a physiologic response, in the upright 
position, to collar compression as hypothesized, and evidenced 
by IJV dilation assessed via ultrasound examination. While the 
mechanism(s) through which IJV distention translates directly 
to competition, or the extent of intracranial pressure and volume 
changes during competition are uncertain, the benefits of both 
anatomical and neurophysiological protection afforded by the 
collar in the current study are salient.
The collar device used in the present study did not negatively 
affect brain structures grossly or global cerebral function, as 
evidenced by MR imaging and EEG measures. The current results 
indicate, despite being subjected to similar head impacts, a change 
in WM integrity occurred only in the non-collar group. While it 
may be premature to reach a conclusion for the ultimate nature 
and significance of the finding, the alterations seen in the present 
study are congruent with prior studies to be a WM biomarker 
and possible injury (34, 49). Accordingly, the existence of these 
alterations in the non-collar group appears to reflect potential 
brain injury or long-term outcomes compared to the collar group.
In recent years, ERPs have been utilized as neurophysiological 
correlates of mild TBI (50) and as an objective index for chronic 
cognitive dysfunction associated with concussion (51, 52). In 
addition to anatomic changes demonstrated by DTI, we found 
larger electrophysiological changes between pre-season and mid-
season in the non-collar group compared to the collar group (as 
evidenced by the BNA Change score – the absolute value of the 
change in the BNA synchronization score between pre-season 
and mid-season; Figure 7). It is possible, and even likely, that 
BNA is sensitive to the magnitude of brain injury and collar-based 
 FigUre 6 | increase in rD from pre- to mid-season in non-collar group. The red regions represent areas with statistically significant longitudinal changes at 
p < 0.05 level (FWE corrected). The red regions are thickened to improve visual display.
10
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
protection observed in the present study. Importantly, the BNA 
system has previously revealed differences between concussed 
athletes and healthy controls performing a cognitive task at 
1 week post injury (31). Existing findings indicate that a net-
work deficiency is involved in concussion (53, 54) and, thus, 
the consequences of mild TBI on the structure and function of 
large-scale brain networks is now becoming an extensive area of 
investigation.
The combination of EEG and DTI (40, 55–58) makes it 
possible to examine the relationship between functional and 
structural connectivity. The majority of previous studies that 
focused on structure–function associations utilizing EEG in task 
context have quantified the quality of signal transfer between the 
hemispheres using the interhemispheric transfer time (IHTT) 
or interhemispheric signal propagation (58). At rest, EEG–DTI 
studies indicated a relationship between interhemispheric 
coherence in the alpha band and DTI measures, thus allowing 
assessment of the efficiency of trans-regional communication 
(58). Structural alterations to WM tracts in concussion may, 
therefore, be related to reduced EEG phase synchrony between 
brain regions (59). The correlation between the BNA Change 
score and the difference in RD seen in our study may be associ-
ated with a temporal synchronization between brain regions that 
might have become impaired as a result of structural damage 
in their associated networks. Furthermore, this relationship 
between change in corpus callosum integrity and changes in 
network dynamics is congruent with other’s finding in young 
patients with moderate-to-severe TBI (60). Future research is 
warranted to determine if the BNA changes noted in no-collar 
group are associated with functional or quality of life measure-
ments to help show if protection from change identified in the 
collar group is beneficial or not.
 TaBle 2 | Descriptive statistics of MD and rD values in the two study groups within the region with significant between-group difference of pre- vs. 
mid-season change as shown in Figure 7.
Minimum
Median
Maximum
average
sTD
Collar baseline
MD
0.000732
0.000817
0.000894
0.000809
0.000056
Collar mid-season
MD
0.000675
0.00076
0.000897
0.000763
0.000072
No collar baseline
MD
0.000587
0.000785
0.000845
0.000760
0.000089
No collar mid-season
MD
0.00077
0.000839
0.000927
0.000843
0.000062
Collar baseline
RD
0.000466
0.000536
0.000586
0.000525
0.000044
Collar mid-season
RD
0.000392
0.000433
0.00058
0.000447
0.000062
No collar baseline
RD
0.000329
0.000417
0.000507
0.000426
0.000062
No collar mid-season
RD
0.000451
0.000525
0.000554
0.000511
0.000037
Note that the DTI values represent post hoc data extracted from the brain regions with significant statistical significance in the test of within-group pre- vs. mid-season change (or in 
the test of between-group difference of pre- vs. mid-season change). These were not the data used in the statistical analysis that led to the findings as shown in Figures 5–7.
FigUre 7 | increase in MD (a) and rD (B) from pre- to mid-season in non-collar group after accounting for longitudinal changes in collar group. The 
red regions represent areas where the increase of DTI measure in the non-collar group was significantly larger than that in the collar group, p < 0.05 level (FWE 
corrected). The red regions are thickened to improve visual display.
11
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
In the current investigation, functional and anatomical 
changes were identified in the participants without clini-
cal concussive-type symptoms. There is emerging evidence 
that subconcussive blows may also result in brain injury. 
A study utilizing DTI pre-and post-season on high school 
athletes (football and hockey) found changes in WM in the 
asymptomatic athletes with subconcussive blows (61). These 
WM changes were three times greater than those seen in non-
athletic controls (61), and similar changes have been shown 
in soccer and ice hockey athletes (62). These WM changes 
could remain after 6 months of rest from all activity (63). The 
full understanding of the effect of the subconcussive impacts 
remains an open question for medical professionals. Many con-
tend that sub-concussions will lead to long-term detrimental 
effects functionally (15). Therefore, it is even more imperative 
that prevention strategies move toward promising technologies 
designed to protect the individual via an internal mechanism, 
as vetted in this study.
It should be stressed that accelerometers mounted in the 
helmets allow us to quantify head impact kinematics – including 
both linear acceleration and angular velocity – and commonly 
serve as a proxy for assessing the inertial behavior of the brain 
within the skull during an impact or collision (64). While head 
impacts have not been associated with short-term clinical 
measures of neurologic function (65), the current study results 
indicate that DTI and EEG provide sensitive measures to neu-
roanatomical and electrophysiological events following collision 
sport. Interestingly, despite the similarities in accumulated head 
impacts, the collar group experienced no statistically significant 
changes in each of the four DTI measures. This further highlights 
that the collar-induced jugular impedance may have attenu-
ated the effects of head impact and may actually mitigate the 
 FigUre 8 | representation of the group mean for absolute value of the change in the Bna synchronization score between baseline and mid-season 
visits in the non-collar group vs. the collar group (Bna change score). Heat map imaging highlight increased change as the color moves away from green 
(0 = no change) to red (1 = high change).
12
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
concomitant neurological changes that are known to occur after 
subconcussive and concussive events (61).
The authors do acknowledge that the changes reported in the 
current study could be potentially explained by other factors, 
such as physiologic responses to other stresses in addition to 
trauma, developmental changes of the immature brain, genetics 
and/or other susceptibilities. The utilization of controlled longi-
tudinal study design mitigates, but does not eliminate, the risk 
of these potential confounding variables. It is also acknowledged 
that physical activity and concussive events outside of hockey 
participation were not monitored although the exposure to col-
lision forces during games and practices were closely monitored. 
In association with the current study, we explored the potential 
physiological effects of exercise on DTI measures in a sub-sample 
of matched athletes from the same school competing in track 
and field. The track athletes were assessed using identical MR 
sequences to current sample of hockey periods over a similar 
time period (Data not shown). The exploratory results indicated 
no significant changes in DTI measures in the track athletes as 
well as no group differences (collar vs. track) between the DTI 
outcome measures.
While the existing evidence and current study results indicate 
the collar approach as both safe and likely effective at mitigating 
the effects of concussive impacts, future research is warranted 
to determine the long-term effects of playing sport with mildly 
increased cerebral blood volume. Future research is also war-
ranted to evaluate the effects of potential counter regulatory 
responses (decreased IJ distention over time or evidence of 
accommodation) in response to collar wear. This study was 
limited by the small sample size. Although we have carefully 
corrected for the multiple comparisons statistically to minimize 
the potential type I error, a larger scale study is warranted to 
corroborate the current findings. In addition, despite the 98.3% 
compliance rate in the first half of the season, the limited 
compliance of collar wearing in the second half of the season (in 
those athletes who were in the non-collar group in the first half 
of the season) requires further investigation. In particular, future 
efforts to better understand compliance, including the use of ITT 
statistical analyses would enhance related knowledge associated 
with the actual efficacy of the collar to ameliorate changes in 
WM microstructure following head impacts associated with 
competitive hockey.
cOnclUsiOn
The current prospective, longitudinal analysis demonstrates 
statistically significant differential effects in brain structure and 
function from head impact. These data indicate that a mild jugular 
vein compression device may ameliorate the detrimental effects 
of collisions and resultant alterations in WM microstructure that 
are associated with brain injury in sport. The novel approach of 
this investigation and the early evidence, indicating a potential 
protection from WM alterations in response to head impacts, 
may help drive future efforts to prevent sports-related TBI.
aUThOr cOnTriBUTiOns
GM contributed to study design, manuscript development, data 
analysis, and final review. WY contributed to study design, manu-
script development, data analysis, and final review. KF contrib-
uted to study design, manuscript development, and final review. 
DS contributed to study design, manuscript development, and 
final review. MA contributed to study design, manuscript devel-
opment, data analysis, and final review. AR contributed to study 
design, manuscript development, and final review. JL contributed 
to study design, manuscript development, and final review. AK 
contributed to study design, manuscript development, and final 
 13
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
review. JK contributed to study design, manuscript development, 
data analysis, and final review. MW contributed to study design, 
manuscript development, and final review. ST contributed to 
study design, manuscript development, and final review. CD 
contributed to study design, manuscript development, and final 
review. JA contributed to study design, manuscript development, 
and final review. PG contributed to study design, manuscript 
development, and final review. AG contributed to study design, 
manuscript development, and final review. JC contributed to 
study design, manuscript development, and final review. WM 
contributed to study design, manuscript development, and final 
review. JM contributed to study design, manuscript development, 
and final review. DK contributed to study design, manuscript 
 
development, and final review.
acKnOWleDgMenTs
The authors would like to thank Adam Tramonte and Jason Kamp, 
John Sullivan, Michael Gordon, and Ken Rushford for their sup-
port and assistance to conduct this study. Thanks to the hockey 
parents and players. We appreciate their patience with the testing 
scheduling, follow-ups, and equipment additions. The authors 
would like to thank Lacey Haas, Brynne Williams, and Matt 
Lanier in the Imaging Research Center. Their support made this 
study possible. The authors would like to acknowledge the support 
of ElMindA for providing the EEG equipment and supportive 
analyses. Funding for this study was provided by The Heidt Family 
Foundation and Q30 Innovations, LLC. Q30 Sports Innovations 
has financial interests in the development of the Q-Collar.
reFerences
1. Finfer SR, Cohen J. Severe traumatic brain injury. Resuscitation (2001) 
48:77–90. doi:10.1016/S0300-9572(00)00321-X 
2. Thurman DJ, Alverson C, Dunn KA, Guerrero J, Sniezek JE. Traumatic brain 
injury in the United States: a public health perspective. J Head Trauma Rehabil 
(1999) 14:602–15. doi:10.1097/00001199-199912000-00009 
3. Meehan WP III, d’Hemecourt P, Collins CL, Comstock RD. Assessment and 
management of sport-related concussions in United States high schools. Am 
J Sports Med (2011) 39:2304–10. doi:10.1177/0363546511423503 
4. Brooks MA, McGuine TA, McCrea M. Association of helmet brand and mouth 
guard type with incidence of sport related concussion in high school football 
players. Presented at the American Academy of Pediatrics Annual Meeting 
Session H3019 Council on Sports Medicine & Fitness Program, Orlando, FL 
(2013).
5. Benson B, McIntosh A, Maddocks D, Herring S, Raftery M, Dvorak J. What 
are the most effective risk-reduction strategies in sport concussion? Br J Sports 
Med (2013) 47:321–6. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092216 
6. Giza CC, Kutcher JS, Ashwal S, Barth J, Getchius TSD, Gioia GA, et al. 
Summary of evidence-based guideline update: evaluation and management 
of concussion in sports. Report of the guideline development subcommittee 
of the american academy of neurology. Neurology (2013) 80(24):2250–7. 
doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828d57dd 
7. Mihalik JP, McCaffrey MA, Rivera EM, Pardini JE, Guskiewicz KM, 
Collins MW, et al. Effectiveness of mouthguards in reducing neurocognitive 
deficits following sports-related cerebral concussion. Dent Traumatol (2007) 
23:14–20. doi:10.1111/j.1600-9657.2006.00488.x 
8. Turner RC, Naser ZJ, Bailes JE, Smith DW, Fisher JA, Rosen CL. 
Effect of slosh mitigation on histologic markers of traumatic brain 
injury: 
laboratory 
investigation. 
J Neurosurg 
(2012) 
117:1110–8. 
doi:10.3171/2012.8.JNS12358 
9. Smith DW, Myer GD, Currie DW, Comstock RD, Clark JF, Bailes JE. 
Altitude modulates concussion incidence implications for optimizing brain 
compliance to prevent brain injury in athletes. Orthop J Sports Med (2013) 
1:2325967113511588. doi:10.1177/2325967113511588 
10. Wallerson R. Youth participation weakens in basketball, football, baseball, 
soccer. Wall St J Online (2014). 
11. Mihalik JP, Bell DR, Marshall SW, Guskiewicz KM. Measurement of head 
impacts in collegiate football players: an investigation of positional and 
event-type differences. Neurosurgery (2007) 61:1229–35. doi:10.1227/01.
neu.0000306101.83882.c8 
12. Wilcox BJ, Machan JT, Beckwith JG, Greenwald RM, Burmeister E, 
Crisco JJ. Head-impact mechanisms in men’s and women’s collegiate ice 
hockey. J Athl Train (2014) 49:514–20. doi:10.4085/1062-6050-49.3.19 
13. Reed N, Taha T, Keightley M, Duggan C, McAuliffe J, Cubos J, et al. 
Measurement of head impacts in youth ice hockey players. Int J Sports Med 
(2010) 31:826. doi:10.1055/s-0030-1263103 
14. Mihalik JP, Blackburn JT, Greenwald RM, Cantu RC, Marshall SW, 
Guskiewicz KM. Collision type and player anticipation affect head impact 
severity among youth ice hockey players. Pediatrics (2010) 125:e1394–401. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2009-2849 
15. Bailes JE, Petraglia AL, Omalu BI, Nauman E, Talavage T. Role of subconcus-
sion in repetitive mild traumatic brain injury. J Neurosurg (2013) 119:1235–45. 
doi:10.3171/2013.7.JNS121822 
16. Guskiewicz KM, Mihalik JP, Shankar V, Marshall SW, Crowell DH, 
Oliaro SM, et al. Measurement of head impacts in collegiate football 
players: relationship between head impact biomechanics and acute clinical 
outcome after concussion. Neurosurgery (2007) 61:1244–53. doi:10.1227/01.
neu.0000306103.68635.1a 
17. Courtney M, Courtney A. Sheep collisions: the good, the bad and the TBI. 
(2007). arXiv 0711.3804
18. Gibson L. Woodpecker pecking: how woodpeckers avoid brain injury. J Zool 
(2006) 270:462–5. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2006.00166.x 
19. Smith DW, Bailes JE, Fisher JA, Robles J, Turner RC, Mills JD. Internal jugular 
vein compression mitigates traumatic axonal injury in a rat model by reducing 
the intracranial slosh effect. Neurosurgery (2012) 70:740–6. doi:10.1227/
NEU.0b013e318235b991 
20. Gilland O, Chin F, Anderson WB, Nelson JR. A cinemyelographic study 
of cerebrospinal fluid dynamics. AJR Am J Roentgenol (1969) 106:369–75. 
doi:10.2214/ajr.106.2.369 
21. Bouyssou M, Tricoire J. Experimental detection of a cervical arousal mech-
anism of yawning, enhancing intracerebral (CSF) fluid pressure. J Dent Res 
(1985) 64:721. 
22. Leach JL, Smith DW, Myer GD. Mild neck compression alters intracranial 
venous sinus volume: implications for a novel neuroprotective effect in 
concussion. American Society of Neuroradiology Annual Meeting, San Diego, 
CA (2013).
23. Mongan P, Sulpicio S, Sloan TB, Gravlee GP. A Practical Approach to 
Neuroanesthesia. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health (2013).
24. Hatt A, Cheng S, Tan K, Sinkus R, Bilston L. MR elastography can be used to 
measure brain stiffness changes as a result of altered cranial venous drainage 
during jugular compression. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2015) 36(10):1971–7. 
doi:10.3174/ajnr.A4361 
25. Basser PJ, Pierpaoli C. A simplified method to measure the diffusion tensor 
from seven MR images. Magn Reson Med (1998) 39:928–34. doi:10.1002/
mrm.1910390610 
26. Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Johansen-Berg H, Rueckert D, Nichols TE, Mackay CE, 
et al. Tract-based spatial statistics: voxelwise analysis of multi-subject 
diffusion data. Neuroimage (2006) 31:1487–505. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage. 
2006.02.024 
27. Shahaf G, Reches A, Pinchuk N, Fisher T, Bashat GB, Kanter A, et al. 
Introducing a novel approach of network oriented analysis of ERPs, demon-
strated on adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Clin Neurophysiol 
(2012) 123:1568–80. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2011.12.010 
28. Reches A, Kerem D, Gal N, Laufer I, Shani-Hershkovitch R, Dickman D, 
et al. A novel electroencephalography-based tool for objective assessment 
of network dynamics activated by nociceptive stimuli. Eur J Pain (2016) 
20(2):250–62. doi: 10.1002/ejp.716
29. Reches A, Laufer I, Ziv K, Cukierman G, McEvoy K, Ettinger M, et al. Network 
dynamics predict improvement in working memory performance following 
donepezil administration in healthy young adults. Neuroimage (2014) 
88:228–41. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.11.020 
 14
Myer et al.
Device Protection Against Brain Injury
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 74
30. Reches A, Nir R, Shram M, Dickman D, Laufer I, Shani-Hershkovich R, et al. 
A novel electroencephalography-based tool for objective assessment of net-
work dynamics activated by nociceptive stimuli. Eur J Pain (2015) 20:250–62. 
31. Kontos AP, Reches A, Elbin RJ, Dickman D, Laufer I, Geva AB, et al. 
Preliminary evidence of reduced brain network activation in patients with 
post-traumatic migraine following concussion. Brain Imaging Behav (2015) 
1–10. doi:10.1007/s11682-015-9412-6 
32. Box GE, Cox DR. An analysis of transformations. J R Stat Soc Series B Methodol 
(1964):211–52. 
33. Davenport EM, Whitlow CT, Urban JE, Espeland MA, Jung Y, Rosenbaum DA, 
et al. Abnormal white matter integrity related to head impact exposure in a 
season of high school varsity football. J Neurotrauma (2014) 31:1617–24. 
doi:10.1089/neu.2013.3233 
34. Hulkower M, Poliak D, Rosenbaum S, Zimmerman M, Lipton M. A decade 
of DTI in traumatic brain injury: 10 years and 100 articles later. AJNR Am 
J Neuroradiol (2013) 34:2064–74. doi:10.3174/ajnr.A3395 
35. Newcombe VF, Correia MM, Ledig C, Abate MG, Outtrim JG, Chatfield D, 
et al. Dynamic changes in white matter abnormalities correlate with late 
improvement and deterioration following TBI: a diffusion tensor imag-
ing study. Neurorehabil Neural Repair (2016) 30(1):49–62. doi:10.1177/ 
1545968315584004
36. Rutgers D, Fillard P, Paradot G, Tadie M, Lasjaunias P, Ducreux D. Diffusion 
tensor imaging characteristics of the corpus callosum in mild, moderate, and 
severe traumatic brain injury. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2008) 29:1730–5. 
doi:10.3174/ajnr.A1213 
37. Blumbergs PC, Scott G, Vis JM, Wainwright H, Simpson DA, 
Mclean AJ. Topography of axonal injury as defined by amyloid precursor 
protein and the sector scoring method in mild and severe closed head injury. 
J Neurotrauma (1995) 12:565–72. doi:10.1089/neu.1995.12.565 
38. Treble A, Hasan KM, Iftikhar A, Stuebing KK, Kramer LA, Cox CS Jr, et al. 
Working memory and corpus callosum microstructural integrity after 
pediatric traumatic brain injury: a diffusion tensor tractography study. 
J Neurotrauma (2013) 30:1609–19. doi:10.1089/neu.2013.2934 
39. Palacios EM, Fernandez-Espejo D, Junque C, Sanchez-Carrion R, Roig T, 
Tormos JM, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging differences relate to memory 
deficits in diffuse traumatic brain injury. BMC Neurol (2011) 11:24. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2377-11-24 
40. Kraus MF, Susmaras T, Caughlin BP, Walker CJ, Sweeney JA, Little DM. White 
matter integrity and cognition in chronic traumatic brain injury: a diffusion 
tensor imaging study. Brain (2007) 130:2508–19. doi:10.1093/brain/awm216 
41. Caeyenberghs K, Leemans A, Geurts M, Vander Linden C, Smits-Engelsman 
BC, Sunaert S, et al. Correlations between white matter integrity and 
motor function in traumatic brain injury patients. J Neurol Rehabil (2011) 
25:492–502. doi:10.1177/1545968310394870 
42. Bazarian JJ, Zhong J, Blyth B, Zhu T, Kavcic V, Peterson D. Diffusion tensor 
imaging detects clinically important axonal damage after mild traumatic 
brain injury: a pilot study. J Neurotrauma (2007) 24:1447–59. doi:10.1089/
neu.2007.0241 
43. Perlbarg V, Puybasset L, Tollard E, Lehericy S, Benali H, Galanaud D. Relation 
between brain lesion location and clinical outcome in patients with severe 
traumatic brain injury: a diffusion tensor imaging study using voxel-based 
approaches. Hum Brain Mapp (2009) 30:3924–33. doi:10.1002/hbm.20817 
44. Sidaros A, Engberg AW, Sidaros K, Liptrot MG, Herning M, Petersen P, 
et al. Diffusion tensor imaging during recovery from severe traumatic brain 
injury and relation to clinical outcome: a longitudinal study. Brain (2008) 
131:559–72. doi:10.1093/brain/awm294 
45. Wilde E, McCauley S, Hunter J, Bigler E, Chu Z, Wang Z, et al. Diffusion tensor 
imaging of acute mild traumatic brain injury in adolescents. Neurology (2008) 
70:948–55. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000305961.68029.54 
46. Kumar R, Husain M, Gupta RK, Hasan KM, Haris M, Agarwal AK, et al. 
Serial changes in the white matter diffusion tensor imaging metrics in mod-
erate traumatic brain injury and correlation with neuro-cognitive function. 
J Neurotrauma (2009) 26:481–95. doi:10.1089/neu.2008.0461 
47. Fisher JA, Duffin J, Mikulis D, Sobczyk O. The Effect of Jugular Vein Compression 
on Cerebral Hemodynamics in Healthy Subjects. Unpublished Report (2013)
48. Barth JT, Freeman JR, Broshek DK, Varney RN. Acceleration-deceleration 
sport-related concussion: the gravity of it all. J Athl Train (2001) 
36(3):253–6. 
49. Alexander AL, Lee JE, Lazar M, Field AS. Diffusion tensor imaging of the 
brain. Neurotherapeutics (2007) 4:316–29. doi:10.1016/j.nurt.2007.05.011 
50. Gosselin N, Bottari C, Chen J-K, Petrides M, Tinawi S, de Guise É, et al. 
Electrophysiology and functional MRI in post-acute mild traumatic brain 
injury. J Neurotrauma (2011) 28:329–41. doi:10.1089/neu.2010.1493 
51. Gosselin 
N, 
Thériault 
M, 
Leclerc 
S, 
Montplaisir 
J, 
Lassonde 
M. 
Neurophysiological 
anomalies in symptomatic and asymptomatic concussed athletes. Neurosurgery 
(2006) 58:1151–61. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000215953.44097.FA 
52. Lavoie ME, Dupuis F, Johnston KM, Leclerc S, Lassonde M. Visual p300 effects 
beyond symptoms in concussed college athletes. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
(2004) 26:55–73. doi:10.1076/jcen.26.1.55.23936 
53. Cao C, Slobounov S. Alteration of cortical functional connectivity as a result 
of traumatic brain injury revealed by graph theory, ICA, and sLORETA 
analyses of EEG signals. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng (2010) 18:11–9. 
doi:10.1109/TNSRE.2009.2027704 
54. Slobounov SM, Zhang K, Pennell D, Ray W, Johnson B, Sebastianelli W. 
Functional abnormalities in normally appearing athletes following mild trau-
matic brain injury: a functional MRI study. Exp Brain Res (2010) 202:341–54. 
doi:10.1007/s00221-009-2141-6 
55. Arfanakis K, Haughton VM, Carew JD, Rogers BP, Dempsey RJ, Meyerand ME. 
Diffusion tensor MR imaging in diffuse axonal injury. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
(2002) 23:794–802. 
56. Ptak T, Sheridan RL, Rhea JT, Gervasini AA, Yun JH, Curran MA, et al. 
Cerebral fractional anisotropy score in trauma patients: a new indicator of 
white matter injury after trauma. AJR Am J Roentgenol (2003) 181:1401–7. 
doi:10.2214/ajr.181.5.1811401 
57. Huisman TA, Schwamm LH, Schaefer PW, Koroshetz WJ, Shetty-Alva N, 
Ozsunar Y, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging as potential biomarker of white 
matter injury in diffuse axonal injury. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2004) 25:370–6. 
58. Sui J, Huster R, Yu Q, Segall JM, Calhoun VD. Function – structure associ-
ations of the brain: evidence from multimodal connectivity and covariance 
studies. Neuroimage (2014) 102:11–23. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.044 
59. Sponheim SR, McGuire KA, Kang SS, Davenport ND, Aviyente S, Bernat EM, 
et al. Evidence of disrupted functional connectivity in the brain after 
combat-related blast injury. Neuroimage (2011) 54:S21–9. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2010.09.007 
60. Dennis EL, Ellis MU, Marion SD, Jin Y, Moran L, Olsen A, et al. Callosal func-
tion in pediatric traumatic brain injury linked to disrupted white matter integ-
rity. J Neurosci (2015) 35:10202–11. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1595-15.2015 
61. Bazarian JJ, Zhu T, Blyth B, Borrino A, Zhong J. Subject-specific changes in 
brain white matter on diffusion tensor imaging after sports-related concus-
sion. Magn Reson Imaging (2012) 30:171–80. doi:10.1016/j.mri.2011.10.001 
62. Carman AJ, Ferguson R, Cantu R, Comstock RD, Dacks PA, DeKosky ST, et al. 
Expert consensus document: mind the gaps [mdash] advancing research into 
short-term and long-term neuropsychological outcomes of youth sports-related 
concussions. Nat Rev Neurol (2015) 11(4):230–44. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2015.30 
63. Bazarian JJ, Zhu T, Zhong J, Janigro D, Rozen E, Roberts A, et al. Persistent, 
long-term cerebral white matter changes after sports-related repetitive head 
impacts. PLoS One (2014) 9:e94734. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0094734 
64. Rowson S, Duma SM, Beckwith JG, Chu JJ, Greenwald RM, Crisco JJ, et al. 
Rotational head kinematics in football impacts: an injury risk function for 
concussion. Ann Biomed Eng (2012) 40:1–13. doi:10.1007/s10439-011-0392-4 
65. Munce TA, Dorman JC, Thompson PA, Valentine VD, Bergeron MF. Head 
impact exposure and neurologic function of youth football players. Medicine 
and science in sports and exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2015) 47(8):1567–76. 
doi:10.1249/MSS.00000000000005910 
Conflict of Interest Statement: DS is the pioneer of the Q-Collar approach and 
has financial interest in the results of the current research. AR, MW, and AG have 
financial conflicts of interest with ElMindA technology.
The remaining coauthors declare that the research was conducted in the absence 
of any commercial or financial relationships that could beconstrued as a potential 
conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Myer, Yuan, Barber Foss, Smith, Altaye, Reches, Leach, Kiefer, 
Khoury, Weiss, Thomas, Dicesare, Adams, Gubanich, Geva, Clark, Meehan, Mihalik 
and Krueger. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in 
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited 
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted 
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not 
comply with these terms.
