 WORLD REPORT 
ON DISABILITY
 WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
World report on disability 2011.
1.Disabled persons - statistics and numerical data. 2.Disabled persons - rehabilitation. 3.Delivery of health care. 
4.Disabled children. 5.Education, Special. 6.Employment, Supported. 7.Health policy.  I.World Health Organization.
ISBN 978 92 4 156418 2 
(NLM classification: HV 1553)
ISBN 978 92 4 068521 5 (PDF)
ISBN 978 92 4 068636 6 (ePUB)
ISBN 978 92 4 068637 3 (Daisy)
© World Health Organization 2011
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO web site (www.who.int) or can be 
purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; 
fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – 
whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO web site (http://
www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of 
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border 
lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or 
recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and 
omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this 
publication.  However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied.  
The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader.  In no event shall the World Health 
Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.
Printed in  Malta
 iii
iii
Contents
Foreword 
ix
Preface  
xi
Acknowledgements 
xiii
List of contributors 
xv
Introduction  
xxi
Understanding disability 
1
What is disability? 
3
Environment 
4
The diversity of disability 
7
Prevention 
8
Disability and human rights 
9
Disability and development 
10
Disability – a global picture 
19
Measuring disability 
21
Prevalence of disability – difficulties in functioning 
24
Country-reported disability prevalence 
25
Global estimates of disability prevalence 
25
Health conditions 
32
Trends in health conditions associated with disability 
32
Demographics 
34
Older persons 
34
Children 
36
The environment 
37
Health conditions are affected by environmental factors 
37
Disability and poverty 
39
Developed countries 
39
Developing countries 
39
Needs for services and assistance 
40
 iv
Costs of disability 
42
Direct costs of disability 
43
Indirect costs 
44
Conclusion and recommendations 
44
Adopt the ICF 
45
Improve national disability statistics 
45
Improve the comparability of data 
46
Develop appropriate tools and fill the research gaps 
46
General health care  
55
Understanding the health of people with disabilities 
57
Primary health conditions 
57
Risk of developing secondary conditions 
58
Risk of developing co-morbid conditions 
59
Greater vulnerability to age-related conditions 
59
Increased rates of health risk behaviours 
59
Greater risk of being exposed to violence 
59
Higher risk of unintentional injury 
60
Higher risk of premature death 
60
Needs and unmet needs 
60
Addressing barriers to health care 
62
Reforming policy and legislation 
65
Addressing barriers to financing and affordability 
66
Addressing barriers to service delivery 
70
Addressing human resource barriers 
77
Filling gaps in data and research 
80
Conclusion and recommendations 
81
Policy and legislation 
82
Financing and affordability  
82
Service delivery  
82
Human resources  
83
Data and research 
83
Rehabilitation  
93
Understanding rehabilitation 
95
Rehabilitation measures and outcomes 
95
Rehabilitation medicine 
97
Therapy 
100
Assistive technologies 
101
Rehabilitation settings 
101
Needs and unmet needs 
102
Addressing barriers to rehabilitation 
103
Reforming policies, laws, and delivery systems 
104
National rehabilitation plans and improved collaboration 
105
Developing funding mechanisms for rehabilitation 
106
 v
Increasing human resources for rehabilitation 
108
Expanding education and training 
110
Training existing health-care personnel in rehabilitation 
111
Building training capacity 
112
Curricula content 
112
Recruiting and retaining rehabilitation personnel 
112
Expanding and decentralizing service delivery 
114
Coordinated multidisciplinary rehabilitation 
114
Community-delivered services 
114
Increasing the use and affordability of technology 
117
Assistive devices 
117
Telerehabilitation 
118
Expanding research and evidence-based practice 
119
Information and good practice guidelines 
120
Research, data, and information 
121
Conclusion and recommendations 
121
Policies and regulatory mechanisms 
122
Financing 
122
Human resources 
122
Service delivery 
122
Technology 
123
Research and evidence-based practice 
123
Assistance and support  
135
Understanding assistance and support 
138
When are assistance and support required? 
139
Needs and unmet needs 
139
Social and demographic factors affecting demand and supply 
140
Consequences for caregivers of unmet need for formal support services 
141
Provision of assistance and support  
142
Barriers to assistance and support  
144
Lack of funding 
144
Lack of adequate human resources 
144
Inappropriate policies and institutional frameworks 
145
Inadequate and unresponsive services 
145
Poor service coordination 
145
Awareness, attitudes, and abuse 
147
Addressing the barriers to assistance and support 
147
Achieving successful deinstitutionalization 
147
Creating a framework for commissioning effective support services 
149
Funding services 
149
Assessing individual needs 
150
Regulating providers 
151
Supporting public-private-voluntary services 
151
 vi
Coordinating flexible service provision 
152
Building capacity of caregivers and service users 
155
Developing community-based rehabilitation and  
community home-based care 
156
Including assistance and support in disability policies and action plans 
156
Conclusion and recommendations 
157
Support people to live and participate in the community 
157
Foster development of the support services infrastructure 
157
Ensure maximum consumer choice and control 
158
Support families as assistance and support providers 
158
Step up training and capacity building 
158
Improve the quality of services 
159
Enabling environments  
167 
Understanding access to physical and information environments 
170
Addressing the barriers in buildings and roads 
172
Developing effective policies 
173
Improving standards 
173
Enforcing laws and regulations 
175
The lead agency 
175
Monitoring 
175
Education and campaigning 
176
Adopting universal design 
177
Addressing the barriers in public transportation 
178
Improving policies 
179
Providing special transport services and accessible taxis 
179
Universal design and removing physical barriers  
180
Assuring continuity in the travel chain 
182
Improving education and training 
183
Barriers to information and communication 
183
Inaccessibility 
184
Lack of regulation 
185
Cost 
185
Pace of technological change 
186
Addressing the barriers to information and technology 
186
Legislation and legal action 
186
Standards 
188
Policy and programmes 
189
Procurement 
190
Universal design 
191
Action by industry 
191
Role of nongovernmental organizations 
192
 vii
Conclusion and recommendations 
193
Across domains of the environment 
193
Public accommodations – building and roads 
194
Transportation 
194
Accessible information and communication 
195
Education  
203
Educational participation and children with disability 
206
Understanding education and disability 
209
Approaches to educating children with disabilities 
210
Outcomes 
211
Barriers to education for children with disabilities 
212
System-wide problems 
212
School problems 
215
Addressing barriers to education 
216
System-wide interventions 
217
School interventions 
220
The role of communities, families, disabled people,  
and children with disabilities 
223
Conclusion and recommendations 
225
Formulate clear policies and improve data and information 
226
Adopt strategies to promote inclusion 
226
Provide specialist services, where necessary 
227
Support participation 
227
Work and employment  
233
Understanding labour markets 
236
Participation in the labour market 
236
Employment rates 
237
Types of employment 
238
Wages 
239
Barriers to entering the labour market 
239
Lack of access 
239
Misconceptions about disability 
240
Discrimination 
240
Overprotection in labour laws 
240
Addressing the barriers to work and employment 
240
Laws and regulations 
240
Tailored interventions 
241
Vocational rehabilitation and training 
245
Self-employment and microfinance 
247
Social protection 
248
Working to change attitudes 
249
 viii
Conclusion and recommendations 
250
Governments 
251
Employers 
251
Other organizations: NGOs including disabled people’s organizations,  
microfinance institutions, and trade unions 
252
The way forward: recommendations  
259
Disability: a global concern 
261
What do we know about people with disabilities? 
261
What are the disabling barriers? 
262
How are the lives of people with disabilities affected? 
263
Recommendations 
263
Recommendation 1: Enable access to all mainstream policies,  
systems and services 
264
Recommendation 2: Invest in specific programmes and  
services for people with disabilities 
265
Recommendation 3: Adopt a national disability strategy and  
plan of action 
265
Recommendation 4: Involve people with disabilities 
265
Recommendation 5: Improve human resource capacity 
266
Recommendation 6: Provide adequate funding and  
improve affordability 
266
Recommendation 7: Increase public awareness and  
understanding of disability 
267
Recommendation 8: Improve disability data collection 
267
Recommendation 9: Strengthen and support research on disability 
267
Conclusion 
268
Translating recommendations into action 
268
Technical appendix A  
271
Technical appendix B  
281
Technical appendix C 
287
Technical appendix D 
295
Technical appendix E 
299
Glossary 
301
Index 
311
 ix
Foreword
Disability need not be an obstacle to success. I have had motor neurone disease for practically all 
my adult life. Yet it has not prevented me from having a prominent career in astrophysics and a 
happy family life.
Reading the World report on disability, I find much of relevance to my own experience. I have 
benefitted from access to first class medical care. I rely on a team of personal assistants who make 
it possible for me to live and work in comfort and dignity. My house and my workplace have been 
made accessible for me. Computer experts have supported me with an assisted communication 
system and a speech synthesizer which allow me to compose lectures and papers, and to commu-
nicate with different audiences.
But I realize that I am very lucky, in many ways. My success in theoretical physics has ensured 
that I am supported to live a worthwhile life. It is very clear that the majority of people with dis-
abilities in the world have an extremely difficult time with everyday survival, let alone productive 
employment and personal fulfilment.
I welcome this first World report on disability. This report makes a major contribution to our 
understanding of disability and its impact on individuals and society. It highlights the different 
barriers that people with disabilities face – attitudinal, physical, and financial. Addressing these 
barriers is within our reach.
In fact we have a moral duty to remove the barriers to participation, and to invest sufficient fund-
ing and expertise to unlock the vast potential of people with disabilities. Governments throughout 
the world can no longer overlook the hundreds of millions of people with disabilities who are denied 
access to health, rehabilitation, support, education and employment, and never get the chance to shine.
The report makes recommendations for action at the local, national and international levels. 
It will thus be an invaluable tool for policy-makers, researchers, practitioners, advocates and vol-
unteers involved in disability. It is my hope that, beginning with the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, and now with the publication of the World report on disability, this century 
will mark a turning point for inclusion of people with disabilities in the lives of their societies.
Professor Stephen W Hawking
  xi
Preface
More than one billion people in the world live with some form of disability, of whom nearly 200 
million experience considerable difficulties in functioning. In the years ahead, disability will be an 
even greater concern because its prevalence is on the rise. This is due to ageing populations and the 
higher risk of disability in older people as well as the global increase in chronic health conditions 
such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer and mental health disorders.
Across the world, people with disabilities have poorer health outcomes, lower education 
achievements, less economic participation and higher rates of poverty than people without 
disabilities. This is partly because people with disabilities experience barriers in accessing 
services that many of us have long taken for granted, including health, education, employment, 
and transport as well as information. These difficulties are exacerbated in less advantaged 
communities.
To achieve the long-lasting, vastly better development prospects that lie at the heart of the 2015 
Millennium Development Goals and beyond, we must empower people living with disabilities and 
remove the barriers which prevent them participating in their communities; getting a quality edu-
cation, finding decent work, and having their voices heard.
As a result, the World Health Organization and the World Bank Group have jointly produced 
this World Report on Disability to provide the evidence for innovative policies and programmes 
that can improve the lives of people with disabilities, and facilitate implementation of the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which came into force in May 2008. 
This landmark international treaty reinforced our understanding of disability as a human rights 
and development priority.
The World Report on Disability suggests steps for all stakeholders – including governments, 
civil society organizations and disabled people’s organizations – to create enabling environments, 
develop rehabilitation and support services, ensure adequate social protection, create inclusive 
policies and programmes, and enforce new and existing standards and legislation, to the benefit 
of people with disabilities and the wider community. People with disabilities should be central to 
these endeavors.
Our driving vision is of an inclusive world in which we are all able to live a life of health, com-
fort, and dignity. We invite you to use the evidence in this report to help this vision become a reality.
Dr Margaret Chan 
Director-General
World Health Organization
Mr Robert B Zoellick
President
World Bank Group
  xiii
Acknowledgements
The World Health Organization and the World Bank would like to thank 
the more than 370 editors, contributors, regional consultation partici-
pants, and peer reviewers to this Report from 74 countries around the 
world. Acknowledgement is also due to the report advisors and editors, 
WHO regional advisors, and World Bank and WHO staff for offering 
their support and guidance. Without their dedication, support, and 
expertise this Report would not have been possible.
The Report also benefited from the efforts of many other people, in par-
ticular, Tony Kahane and Bruce Ross-Larson who edited the text of the main 
report, and Angela Burton who developed the alternative text and assisted 
with the references. Natalie Jessup, Alana Officer, Sashka Posarac and Tom 
Shakespeare who prepared the final text for the summary and Bruce Ross-
Larson who edited the summary report.
Thanks are also due to the following: Jerome Bickenbach, Noriko 
Saito Fort, Szilvia Geyh, Katherine Marcello, Karen Peffley, Catherine 
Sykes, and Bliss Temple for technical support on the development of the 
Report; Somnath Chatterji, Nirmala Naidoo, Brandon Vick, and Emese 
Verdes for analysis and interpretation of the World Health Survey; Colin 
Mathers and Rene Levalee for the analysis of the Global Burden of Disease 
study; and to Nenad Kostanjsek and Rosalba Lembo for the compilation 
and presentation of the country-reported disability data. The Report ben-
efited from the work of Chris Black, Jean-Marc Glinz, Steven Lauwers, 
Jazz Shaban, Laura Sminkey, and Jelica Vesic for media and communica-
tion; James Rainbird for proofreading and Liza Furnival for indexing; 
Sophie Guetaneh Aguettant and Susan Hobbs for graphic design; Omar 
Vulpinari, Alizée Freudenthal and Gustavo Millon at Fabrica for crea-
tive direction, art direction and photographs of cover design and images 
for chapter title pages; Pascale Broisin and Frédérique Robin-Wahlin for 
coordinating the printing; Tushita Bosonet for her assistance with the 
cover; Maryanne Diamond, Lex Grandia, Penny Hartin for feedback on 
the accessibility of the Report; Melanie Lauckner for the production of 
the Report in alternative formats; and Rachel Mcleod-Mackenzie for her 
administrative support and for coordinating the production process.
 xiv
World report on disability
For assistance in recruiting narrative contributors, thanks go to the 
Belize Council for the Visually Impaired, Shanta Everington, Fiona Hale, 
Sally Hartley, Julian Hughes, Tarik Jasarevic, Natalie Jessup, Sofija Korac, 
Ingrid Lewis, Hamad Lubwama, Rosamond Madden, Margie Peden, Diane 
Richler, Denise Roza, Noriko Saito Fort, and Moosa Salie.
The World Health Organization and the World Bank also wish to thank 
the following for their generous financial support for the development, trans-
lation, and publication of the Report: the Governments of Australia, Finland, 
Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland; CBM International; the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency; and the multidonor trust fund, the Global Partnership 
on Disability and Development.
 xv
Contributors
Editorial guidance
Editorial Committee
Sally Hartley, Venus Ilagan, Rosamond Madden, Alana Officer, Aleksandra 
Posarac, Katherine Seelman, Tom Shakespeare, Sándor Sipos, Mark 
Swanson, Maya Thomas, Zhuoying Qiu.
Executive Editors
Alana Officer (WHO), Aleksandra Posarac (World Bank).
Technical Editors
Tony Kahane, Bruce Ross-Larson.
Advisory Committee
Chair of Advisory Committee: Ala Din Abdul Sahib Alwan.
Advisory Committee: Amadaou Bagayoko, Arup Banerji, Philip Craven, 
Mariam Doumiba, Ariel Fiszbein, Sepp Heim, Etienne Krug, Brenda 
Myers, Kicki Nordström, Qian Tang, Mired bin Raad, José Manuel Salazar-
Xirinachs, Sha Zukang, Kit Sinclair, Urbano Stenta, Gerold Stucki, Tang 
Xiaoquan, Edwin Trevathan, Johannes Trimmel.
Contributors to individual chapters
Introduction
Contributors: Alana Officer, Tom Shakespeare.
Chapter 1: Understanding disability
Contributors: Jerome Bickenbach, Theresia Degener, John Melvin, Gerard 
Quinn, Aleksandra Posarac, Marianne Schulze, Tom Shakespeare, Nicholas 
Watson.
Boxes: Jerome Bickenbach (1.1), Alana Officer (1.2), Aleksandra Posarac, 
Tom Shakespeare (1.3), Marianne Schulze (1.4), Natalie Jessup, Chapal 
Khasnabis (1.5).
 xvi
Chapter 2: Disability – a global picture
Contributors: Gary Albrecht, Kidist Bartolomeos, Somnath Chatterji, 
Maryanne Diamond, Eric Emerson, Glen Fujiura, Oye Gureje, Soewarta 
Kosen, Nenad Kostanjsek, Mitchell Loeb, Jennifer Madans, Rosamond 
Madden, Maria Martinho, Colin Mathers, Sophie Mitra, Daniel Mont, 
Alana Officer, Trevor Parmenter, Margie Peden, Aleksandra Posarac, 
Michael Powers, Patricia Soliz, Tami Toroyan, Bedirhan Üstün, Brandon 
Vick, Xingyang Wen.
Boxes: Gerry Brady, Gillian Roche (2.1), Mitchell Loeb, Jennifer Madans 
(2.2), Thomas Calvot, Jean Pierre Delomier (2.3), Matilde Leonardi, Jose 
Luis Ayuso-Mateos (2.4), Xingyang Wen, Rosamond Madden (2.5).
Chapter 3: General health care
Contributors: Fabricio Balcazar, Karl Blanchet, Alarcos Cieza, Eva Esteban, 
Michele Foster, Lisa Iezzoni, Jennifer Jelsma, Natalie Jessup, Robert Kohn, 
Nicholas Lennox, Sue Lukersmith, Michael Marge, Suzanne McDermott, 
Silvia Neubert, Alana Officer, Mark Swanson, Miriam Taylor, Bliss Temple, 
Margaret Turk, Brandon Vick.
Boxes: Sue Lukersmith (3.1), Liz Sayce (3.2), Jodi Morris, Taghi Yasamy, 
Natalie Drew (3.3), Paola Ayora, Nora Groce, Lawrence Kaplan (3.4), Sunil 
Deepak, Bliss Temple (3.5), Tom Shakespeare (3.6).
Chapter 4: Rehabilitation
Contributors: Paul Ackerman, Shaya Asindua, Maurice Blouin, Debra 
Cameron, Kylie Clode, Lynn Cockburn, Antonio Eduardo DiNanno, 
Timothy Elliott, Harry Finkenflugel, Neeru Gupta, Sally Hartley, Pamela 
Henry, Kate Hopman, Natalie Jessup, Alan Jette, Michel Landry, Chris Lavy, 
Sue Lukersmith, Mary Matteliano, John Melvin, Vibhuti Nandoskar, Alana 
Officer, Rhoda Okin, Penny Parnes, Wesley Pryor, Geoffrey Reed, Jorge 
Santiago Rosetto, Grisel Roulet, Marcia Scherer, William Spaulding, John 
Stone, Catherine Sykes, Bliss Temple, Travis Threats, Maluta Tshivhase, 
Daniel Wong, Lucy Wong, Karen Yoshida.
Boxes: Alana Officer (4.1), Janet Njelesani (4.2), Frances Heywood (4.3), 
Donata Vivanti (4.4), Heinz Trebbin (4.5), Julia D’Andrea Greve (4.6), Alana 
Officer (4.7).
Chapter 5: Assistance and support
Contributors: Michael Bach, Diana Chiriacescu, Alexandre Cote, Vladimir 
Cuk, Patrick Devlieger, Karen Fisher, Tamar Heller, Martin Knapp, Sarah 
Parker, Gerard Quinn, Aleksandra Posarac, Marguerite Schneider, Tom 
Shakespeare, Patricia Noonan Walsh.
Boxes: Tina Minkowitz, Maths Jesperson (5.1), Robert Nkwangu (5.2), 
Disability Rights International (5.3).
World report on disability
 xvii
Chapter 6: Enabling environments
Contributors: Judy Brewer, Alexandra Enders, Larry Goldberg, Linda 
Hartman, Jordana Maisel, Charlotte McClain-Nhlapo, Marco Nicoli, Karen 
Peffley, Katherine Seelman, Tom Shakespeare, Edward Steinfeld, Jim Tobias, 
Diahua Yu.
Boxes: Edward Steinfeld (6.1), Tom Shakespeare (6.2), Asiah Abdul Rahim, 
Samantha Whybrow (6.3), Binoy Acharya, Geeta Sharma, Deepa Sonpal (6.4), 
Edward Steinfeld (6.5), Katherine Seelman (6.6), Hiroshi Kawamura (6.7).
Chapter 7: Education
Contributors: Peter Evans, Giampiero Griffo, Seamus Hegarty, Glenda 
Hernandez, Susan Hirshberg, Natalie Jessup, Elizabeth Kozleski, Margaret 
McLaughlin, Susie Miles, Daniel Mont, Diane Richler, Thomas Sabella.
Boxes: Susan Hirshberg (7.1), Margaret McLaughlin (7.2), Kylie Bates, Rob 
Regent (7.3), Hazel Bines, Bliss Temple, R.A. Villa (7.4), Ingrid Lewis (7.5).
Chapter 8: Work and employment
Contributors: Susanne Bruyère, Sophie Mitra, Sara VanLooy, Tom 
Shakespeare, Ilene Zeitzer.
Boxes: Susanne Bruyère (8.1), Anne Hawker, Alana Officer, Catherine Sykes 
(8.2), Peter Coleridge (8.3), Cherry Thompson-Senior (8.4), Susan Scott 
Parker (8.5).
Chapter 9: The way forward: recommendations
Contributors: Sally Hartley, Natalie Jessup, Rosamond Madden, Alana 
Officer, Sashka Posarac, Tom Shakespeare.
Boxes: Kirsten Pratt (9.1)
Technical appendices
Contributors: Somnath Chatterji, Marleen De Smedt, Haishan Fu, Nenad 
Kostanjsek, Rosalba Lembo, Mitchell Loeb, Jennifer Madans, Rosamond 
Madden, Colin Mathers, Andres Montes, Nirmala Naidoo, Alana Officer, 
Emese Verdes, Brandon Vick. 
Narrative contributors
The report includes narratives with personal accounts of the experiences of 
people with disabilities. Many people provided a narrative but not all could 
be included in the report. The narratives included come from Australia, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Cambodia, Canada, China, Egypt, Haiti, 
India, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, the Netherlands, Palestinian Self-Rule Areas, 
Panama, the Russian Federation, the Philippines, Uganda, the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and Zambia. Only the 
first name of each narrative contributor has been provided for reasons of 
confidentiality. 
Contributors
 xviii
Peer reviewers
Kathy Al Ju’beh, Dele Amosun, Yerker Anderson, Francesc Aragal, Julie 
Babindard, Elizabeth Badley, Ken Black, Johannes Borg, Vesna Bosnjak, Ron 
Brouillette, Mahesh Chandrasekar, Mukesh Chawla, Diana Chiriacescu, 
Ching Choi, Peter Coleridge, Ajit Dalal, Victoria de Menil, Marleen De 
Smedt, Shelley Deegan, Sunil Deepak, Maryanne Diamond, Steve Edwards, 
Arne Eide, James Elder-Woodward, Eric Emerson, Alexandra Enders, John 
Eriksen, Haishan Fu, Marcus Fuhrer, Michelle Funk, Ann Goerdt, Larry 
Goldberg, Lex Grandia, Pascal Granier, Wilfredo Guzman, Manal Hamzeh, 
Sumi Helal, Xiang Hiuyun, Judith Hollenweger, Mosharraf Hossain, Venus 
Ilagan, Deborah Iyute, Karen Jacobs, Olivier Jadin, Khandaker Jarulul 
Alam, Jennifer Jelsma, Steen Jensen, Nawaf Kabbara, Lissa Kauppinen, 
Hiroshi Kawamura, Peter Kercher, Chapal Khasnabis, Ivo Kocur, Johannes 
Koettl, Kalle Könköllä, Gloria Krahn, Arvo Kuddo, Gaetan Lafortune, 
Michel Landry, Stig Larsen, Connie Lauren-Bowie, Silvia Lavagnoli, Axel 
Leblois, Matilde Leonardi, Clayton Lewis, Anna Lindström, Gwynnyth 
Lleweyllyn, Mitchell Loeb, Michael Lokshin, Clare MacDonald, Jennifer 
Madans, Richard Madden, Thandi Magagula, Dipendra Manocha, Charlotte 
McClain-Nhlapo, John Melvin, Cem Mete, Susie Miles, Janice Miller, 
Marilyn Moffat, Federico Montero, Andres Montes, Asenath Mpatwa, 
Ashish Mukerjee, Barbara Murray, David Newhouse, Penny Norgrove, 
Helena Nygren Krug, Japheth Ogamba Makana, Thomas Ongolo, Tanya 
Packer, Trevor Parmenter, Donatella Pascolini, Charlotte Pearson, Karen 
Peffley, Debra Perry, Poul Erik Petersen, Immaculada Placencia-Porrero, 
Adolf Ratzka, Suzanne Reier, Diane Richler, Wachara Riewpaiboon, Tom 
Rikert, Alan Roulstone, Amanda Rozani, Moosa Salie, Mohammad Sattar 
Dulal, Duranee Savapan, Shekhar Saxena, Walton Schlick, Marguerite 
Schneider, Marianne Schultz, Kinnon Scott, Tom Seekins, Samantha Shann, 
Owen Smith, Beryl Steeden, Catherine Sykes, Jim Tobias, Stefan Trömel, 
Chris Underhill, Wim Van Brakel, Derek Wade, Nicholas Watson, Ruth 
Watson, Mark Wheatley, Taghi Yasamy, Nevio Zagaria, Ilene Zeitzer, Ruth 
Zemke, Dahong Zhuo.
Additional contributors
Regional consultants
WHO African Region/Eastern Mediterranean Region
Alice Nganwa Baingana, Betty Babirye Kwagala, Moussa Charafeddine, 
Kudakwashe Dube, Sally Hartley, Syed Jaffar Hussain, Deborah Oyuu 
Iyute, Donatilla Kanimba, Razi Khan, Olive Chifefe Kobusingye, Phitalis 
Were Masakhwe, Niang Masse, Quincy Mwya, Charlotte McClain-Nhlapo, 
Catherine Naughton, William Rowland, Ali Hala Ibrahim Sakr, Moosa 
Salie, Alaa I. Sebeh, Alaa Shukrallah, Sándor Sipos, Joe Ubiedo.
World report on disability
 xix
WHO Region of the Americas
Georgina Armstrong, Haydee Beckles, Aaron Bruma, Jean-Claude Jalbert, 
Sandy Layton, Leanne Madsen, Paulette McGinnis, Tim Surbey, Corey 
Willet, Valerie Wolbert, Gary L. Albrecht, Ricardo Restrepo Arbelaez, Martha 
Aristizabal, Susanne Bruyere, Nixon Contreras, Roberto Del Águila, Susan 
Hirshberg, Federico Montero, Claudia Sánchez, Katherine Seelman, Sándor 
Sipos, Edward Steinfeld, Beatriz Vallejo, Armando Vásquez, Ruth Warick, 
Lisbeth Barrantes, José Luís Di Fabio, Juan Manuel Guzmán, John Stone.
WHO South-East Asia Region/Western Pacific Region
Tumenbayar Batdulam, Amy Bolinas, Kylie Clode, David Corner, Dahong 
Zhuo, Michael Davies, Bulantrisna Djelantik, Mohammad Abdus Sattar 
Dulal, Betty Dy-Mancao, Fumio Eto, Anne Hawker, Susan Hirshberg, 
Xiaolin Huang, Venus Ilagan, Yoko Isobe, Emmanuel Jimenez, Kenji Kuno, 
Leonard Li, Rosmond Madden, Charlotte McClain-Nhlapo, Anuradha 
Mohit, Akiie Ninomiya, Hisashi Ogawa, Philip O’Keefe, Grant Preston, 
Wachara Riewpaiboon, Noriko Saito, Chamaiparn Santikarn, Mary Scott, 
Sándor Sipos, Catherine Sykes, Maya Thomas, Mohammad Jashim Uddin, 
Zhuoying Qiu, Filipinas Ganchoon, Geetika Mathur, Miriam Taylor, John 
Andrew Sanchez.
The WHO Regional Office for European Region
Viveca Arrhenius, Jerome Bickenbach, Christine Boldt, Matthias 
Braubach, Fabrizio Cassia, Diana Chiriacescu, Marleen De Smedt, Patrick 
Devlieger, Fabrizio Fea, Federica Francescone, Manuela Gallitto, Denise 
Giacomini,Donato Greco, Giampiero Griffo, Gunnar Grimby, Ahiya Kamara, 
Etienne Krug, Fiammetta Landoni, Maria G. Lecce, Anna Lindström, 
Marcelino Lopez, Isabella Menichini, Cem Mete, Daniel Mont, Elisa Patera, 
FrancescaRacioppi, Adolf Ratzka, Maria Pia Rizzo, Alan Roulstone, Tom 
Shakespeare, Sándor Sipos, Urbano Stenta, Raffaele Tangorra, Damjan Tatic, 
Donata Vivanti, Mark Wheatley.
None of the experts involved in the development of this Report declared 
any conflict of interest.
Contributors
  xxi
Introduction
Many people with disabilities do not have equal access to health care, edu-
cation, and employment opportunities, do not receive the disability-related 
services that they require, and experience exclusion from everyday life 
activities. Following the entry into force of the United Nations Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), disability is increasingly 
understood as a human rights issue. Disability is also an important develop-
ment issue with an increasing body of evidence showing that persons with 
disabilities experience worse socioeconomic outcomes and poverty than 
persons without disabilities.
Despite the magnitude of the issue, both awareness of and scientific 
information on disability issues are lacking. There is no agreement on defi-
nitions and little internationally comparable information on the incidence, 
distribution and trends of disability. There are few documents providing a 
compilation and analysis of the ways countries have developed policies and 
responses to address the needs of people with disabilities.
In response to this situation, the World Health Assembly (resolution 
58.23 on “Disability, including prevention, management and rehabilitation”) 
requested the World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General to 
produce a World report on disability based on the best available scientific 
evidence. The World report on disability has been produced in partnership 
with the World Bank, as previous experience has shown the benefit of col-
laboration between agencies for increasing awareness, political will and 
action across sectors.
The World report on disability is directed at policy-makers, practition-
ers, researchers, academics, development agencies, and civil society.
Aims
The overall aims of the Report are:
 
■
To provide governments and civil society with a comprehensive descrip-
tion of the importance of disability and an analysis of the responses pro-
vided, based on the best available scientific information.
 
■
Based on this analysis, to make recommendations for action at national 
and international levels.
 xxii
Scope of the Report
The Report focuses on measures to improve accessibility and equality of 
opportunity; promoting participation and inclusion; and increasing respect 
for the autonomy and dignity of persons with disabilities. Chapter 1 defines 
terms such as disability, discusses prevention and its ethical considerations, 
introduces the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health (ICF) and the CRPD, and discusses disability and human rights, and 
disability and development. Chapter 2 reviews the data on disability prev-
alence and the situation of people with disabilities worldwide. Chapter 3 
explores access to mainstream health services for people with disabilities. 
Chapter 4 discusses rehabilitation, including therapies and assistive devices. 
Chapter 5 investigates support and assistance services. Chapter 6 explores 
inclusive environments, both in terms of physical access to buildings, trans-
port, and so on, but also access to the virtual environments of informa-
tion and communication technology. Chapter 7 discusses education, and 
Chapter 8 reviews employment for people with disabilities. Each chapter 
includes recommendations, which are also drawn together to provide broad 
policy and practice considerations in Chapter 9.
Process
The development of this Report has been led by an Advisory Committee and 
an Editorial Board, and has taken over three years. WHO and the World 
Bank acted as secretariat throughout this process. Based on outlines pre-
pared by the Editorial Board, each chapter was written by a small number 
of authors, working with a wider group of experts from around the world. 
Wherever possible, people with disabilities were involved as authors and 
experts. Nearly 380 contributors from various sectors and all the regions of 
the world wrote text for the report.
The drafts of each chapter were reviewed following input from regional 
consultations organized by WHO Regional Offices, which involved local 
academics, policy-makers, practitioners, and people with disabilities. During 
these consultations, experts had the opportunity to propose overall recom-
mendations (see Chapter 9). The complete chapters were revised by editors 
on the basis of human rights standards and best available evidence, subjected 
to external peer review, which included representatives of disabled people’s 
organizations. The text was finally reviewed by the World Bank and WHO.
It is anticipated that the recommendations in this Report will remain 
valid until 2021. At that time, the Department of Violence and Injury 
Prevention and Disability at WHO headquarters in Geneva will initiate a 
review of the document.
World report on disability
 xxiii
Moving forward
This World report on disability charts the steps that are required to improve 
participation and inclusion of people with disabilities. The aspiration of 
WHO, the World Bank, and all the authors and editors of this World report 
on disability is that it contributes to concrete actions at all levels and across 
all sectors, and thus helps to promote social and economic development 
and the achievement of the human rights of persons with disabilities 
across the world.
Introduction
  Chapter 1
Understanding disability
 “I am a black woman with a disability. Some people make a bad face and don’t 
include me. People don’t treat me well when they see my face but when I talk to them 
sometimes it is better. Before anyone makes a decision about someone with a disability 
they should talk to them.”
Haydeé 
“Can you imagine that you’re getting up in the morning with such severe pain which 
disables you from even moving out from your bed? Can you imagine yourself having a 
pain which even requires you to get an assistance to do the very simple day to day activi-
ties? Can you imagine yourself being fired from your job because you are unable to per-
form simple job requirements? And finally can you imagine your little child is crying for 
hug and you are unable to hug him due to the pain in your bones and joints?”
Nael 
“My life revolves around my two beautiful children. They see me as ‘Mummy’, not a 
person in a wheelchair and do not judge me or our life. This is now changing as my efforts 
to be part of their life is limited by the physical access of schools, parks and shops; the 
attitudes of other parents; and the reality of needing 8 hours support a day with my per-
sonal care…I cannot get into the houses of my children’s friends and must wait outside for 
them to finish playing. I cannot get to all the classrooms at school so I have not met many 
other parents. I can’t get close to the playground in the middle of the park or help out at 
the sporting events my children want to be part of. Other parents see me as different, and 
I have had one parent not want my son to play with her son because I could not help with 
supervision in her inaccessible house.”
Samantha 
“Near the start of the bus route I climb on. I am one of the first passengers. People 
continue to embark on the bus. They look for a seat, gaze at my hearing aids, turn their 
glance quickly and continue walking by. Only when people with disabilities will really be 
part of the society; will be educated in every kindergarten and any school with personal 
assistance; live in the community and not in different institutions; work in all places and 
in any position with accessible means; and will have full accessibility to the public sphere, 
people may feel comfortable to sit next to us on the bus.”
Ahiya 
 1
Understanding disability
3
Disability is part of the human condition. Almost everyone will be temporarily 
or permanently impaired at some point in life, and those who survive to old age 
will experience increasing difficulties in functioning. Most extended families 
have a disabled member, and many non-disabled people take responsibility 
for supporting and caring for their relatives and friends with disabilities (1–3). 
Every epoch has faced the moral and political issue of how best to include 
and support people with disabilities. This issue will become more acute as the 
demographics of societies change and more people live to an old age (4).
Responses to disability have changed since the 1970s, prompted largely 
by the self-organization of people with disabilities (5, 6), and by the growing 
tendency to see disability as a human rights issue (7). Historically, people 
with disabilities have largely been provided for through solutions that segre-
gate them, such as residential institutions and special schools (8). Policy has 
now shifted towards community and educational inclusion, and medically-
focused solutions have given way to more interactive approaches recognizing 
that people are disabled by environmental factors as well as by their bodies. 
National and international initiatives – such as the United Nations Standard 
Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities of Persons with Disabilities (9) – 
have incorporated the human rights of people with disabilities, culminating 
in 2006 with the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD).
This World report on disability provides evidence to facilitate imple-
mentation of the CRPD. It documents the circumstances of persons with 
disabilities across the world and explores measures to promote their social 
participation, ranging from health and rehabilitation to education and 
employment. This first chapter provides a general orientation about dis-
ability, introducing key concepts – such as the human rights approach to 
disability, the intersection between disability and development, and the 
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) – 
and explores the barriers that disadvantage persons with disabilities.
What is disability?
Disability is complex, dynamic, multidimensional, and contested. Over 
recent decades, the disabled people’s movement (6, 10) – together with 
 4
World report on disability
numerous researchers from the social and 
health sciences (11, 12) – have identified the 
role of social and physical barriers in disabil-
ity. The transition from an individual, medical 
perspective to a structural, social perspective 
has been described as the shift from a “medical 
model” to a “social model” in which people are 
viewed as being disabled by society rather than 
by their bodies (13).
The medical model and the social model are 
often presented as dichotomous, but disability 
should be viewed neither as purely medical nor 
as purely social: persons with disabilities can 
often experience problems arising from their 
health condition (14). A balanced approach is 
needed, giving appropriate weight to the differ-
ent aspects of disability (15, 16).
The ICF, adopted as the conceptual frame-
work for this World report on disability, under-
stands functioning and disability as a dynamic 
interaction between health conditions and 
contextual factors, both personal and envi-
ronmental (see Box 1.1) (17). Promoted as 
a “bio-psycho-social model”, it represents a 
workable compromise between medical and 
social models. Disability is the umbrella term 
for impairments, activity limitations and par-
ticipation restrictions, referring to the negative 
aspects of the interaction between an indi-
vidual (with a health condition) and that indi-
vidual’s contextual factors (environmental and 
personal factors) (19).
The Preamble to the CRPD acknowledges 
that disability is “an evolving concept”, but also 
stresses that “disability results from the inter-
action between persons with impairments and 
attitudinal and environmental barriers that 
hinder their full and effective participation in 
society on an equal basis with others”. Defining 
disability as an interaction means that “disabil-
ity” is not an attribute of the person. Progress 
on improving social participation can be made 
by addressing the barriers which hinder per-
sons with disabilities in their day to day lives.
Environment
A person’s environment has a huge impact 
on the experience and extent of disability. 
Inaccessible environments create disability by 
creating barriers to participation and inclusion. 
Examples of the possible negative impact of the 
environment include:
 
■
a Deaf individual without a sign language 
interpreter
 
■
a wheelchair user in a building without an 
accessible bathroom or elevator
 
■
a blind person using a computer without 
screen-reading software.
Health is also affected by environmental 
factors, such as safe water and sanitation, nutri-
tion, poverty, working conditions, climate, or 
access to health care. As the World Health 
Organization (WHO) Commission on Social 
Determinants of Health has argued, inequality 
is a major cause of poor health, and hence of 
disability (20).
The environment may be changed to improve 
health conditions, prevent impairments, and 
improve outcomes for persons with disabilities. 
Such changes can be brought about by legisla-
tion, policy changes, capacity building, or tech-
nological developments leading to, for instance:
 
■
accessible design of the built environment 
and transport;
 
■
signage to benefit people with sensory 
impairments;
 
■
more accessible health, rehabilitation, edu-
cation, and support services;
 
■
more opportunities for work and employ-
ment for persons with disabilities.
Environmental factors include a wider set 
of issues than simply physical and information 
access. Policies and service delivery systems, 
including the rules underlying service provi-
sion, can also be obstacles (21). Analysis of 
public health service financing in Australia, for 
 5
Chapter 1 
Understanding disability
Box 1.1. New emphasis on environmental factors
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) (17) advanced the understanding and 
measurement of disability. It was developed through a long process involving academics, clinicians, and – impor-
tantly – persons with disabilities (18). The ICF emphasizes environmental factors in creating disability, which is 
the main difference between this new classification and the previous International Classification of Impairments, 
Disabilities, and Handicaps (ICIDH). In the ICF, problems with human functioning are categorized in three inter-
connected areas:
 
■
impairments are problems in body function or alterations in body structure – for example, paralysis or blindness;
 
■
activity limitations are difficulties in executing activities – for example, walking or eating;
 
■
participation restrictions are problems with involvement in any area of life – for example, facing discrimina-
tion in employment or transportation.
Disability refers to difficulties encountered in any or all three areas of functioning. The ICF can also be used to 
understand and measure the positive aspects of functioning such as body functions, activities, participation and 
environmental facilitation. The ICF adopts neutral language and does not distinguish between the type and cause 
of disability – for instance, between “physical” and “mental” health. “Health conditions” are diseases, injuries, 
and disorders, while “impairments” are specific decrements in body functions and structures, often identified as 
symptoms or signs of health conditions.
Disability arises from the interaction of health conditions with contextual factors – environmental and personal 
factors as shown in the figure below.
Representation of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
Health condition
(disorder or disease)
Body functions 
and structures
Participation
Activities
Environmental
factors
Personal
factors
The ICF contains a classification of environmental factors describing the world in which people with different 
levels of functioning must live and act. These factors can be either facilitators or barriers. Environmental factors 
include: products and technology; the natural and built environment; support and relationships; attitudes; and 
services, systems, and policies.
The ICF also recognizes personal factors, such as motivation and self-esteem, which can influence how much 
a person participates in society. However, these factors are not yet conceptualized or classified. It further distin-
guishes between a person’s capacities to perform actions and the actual performance of those actions in real 
life, a subtle difference that helps illuminate the effect of environment and how performance might be improved 
by modifying the environment.
The ICF is universal because it covers all human functioning and treats disability as a continuum rather than 
categorizing people with disabilities as a separate group: disability is a matter of more or less, not yes or no. 
However, policy-making and service delivery might require thresholds to be set for impairment severity, activity 
limitations, or participation restriction.
It is useful for a range of purposes – research, surveillance, and reporting – related to describing and measuring health 
and disability, including: assessing individual functioning, goal setting, treatment, and monitoring; measuring outcomes 
and evaluating services; determining eligibility for welfare benefits; and developing health and disability surveys.
 6
World report on disability
instance, found that reimbursement of health 
providers did not account for the additional 
time often required to provide services to per-
sons with disabilities; hospitals that treated 
patients with a disability were thus disadvan-
taged by a funding system that reimbursed 
them a fixed amount per patient (22).
Analysis of access to health care services 
in Europe found organizational barriers – such 
as waiting lists, lack of a booking system for 
appointments, and complex referral systems – 
that are more complicated for persons with dis-
abilities who may find it difficult to arrive early, 
or wait all day, or who cannot navigate complex 
systems (23, 24). While discrimination is not 
intended, the system indirectly excludes per-
sons with disabilities by not taking their needs 
into account.
Institutions and organizations also need to 
change – in addition to individuals and envi-
ronments – to avoid excluding people with dis-
abilities. The 2005 Disability Discrimination 
Act in the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland directed public sector 
organizations to promote equality for persons 
with disability: by instituting a corporate dis-
ability equality strategy, for example, and by 
assessing the potential impact of proposed poli-
cies and activities on disabled people (25).
Knowledge and attitudes are important 
environmental factors, affecting all areas of 
service provision and social life. Raising aware-
ness and challenging negative attitudes are 
often first steps towards creating more accessi-
ble environments for persons with disabilities. 
Negative imagery and language, stereotypes, 
and stigma – with deep historic roots – persist 
for people with disabilities around the world 
(26–28). Disability is generally equated with 
incapacity. A review of health-related stigma 
found that the impact was remarkably similar 
in different countries and across health con-
ditions (29). A study in 10 countries found 
that the general public lacks an understand-
ing of the abilities of people with intellectual 
impairments (30). Mental health conditions are 
particularly stigmatized, with commonalities 
in different settings (31). People with mental 
health conditions face discrimination even in 
health care settings (24, 32).
Negative attitudes towards disability can 
result in negative treatment of people with dis-
abilities, for example:
 
■
children bullying other children with dis-
abilities in schools
 
■
bus drivers failing to support access needs 
of passengers with disabilities
 
■
employers discriminating against people 
with disabilities
 
■
strangers mocking people with disabilities.
Negative attitudes and behaviours have an 
adverse effect on children and adults with dis-
abilities, leading to negative consequences such 
as low self-esteem and reduced participation 
(32). People who feel harassed because of their 
disability sometimes avoid going to places, 
changing their routines, or even moving from 
their homes (33).
Stigma and discrimination can be com-
bated, for example, through direct personal 
contact and through social marketing (see 
Box 1.2) (37–40). World Psychiatric Association 
campaigns against stigmatizing schizophrenia 
over 10 years in 18 countries have demon-
strated the importance of long-term interven-
tions, broad multisectoral involvement, and of 
including those who have the condition (41). 
Evidence from Norway showed that knowledge 
about psychosis among the general population 
improved after a year of information cam-
paigns, and that the duration of untreated psy-
chosis fell from 114 weeks in 1997 to 20 weeks 
in 1999 due to greater recognition and early 
intervention with patients (42).
Community-based rehabilitation (CBR) pro-
grammes can challenge negative attitudes in 
rural communities, leading to greater visibility 
and participation by people with disabilities. A 
three-year project in a disadvantaged commu-
nity near Allahabad, India, resulted in children 
with disabilities attending school for the first 
time, more people with disabilities participat-
ing in community forums, and more people 
 7
Chapter 1 
Understanding disability
bringing their children with disabilities for 
vaccination and rehabilitation (43).
The diversity of disability
The disability experience resulting from the 
interaction of health conditions, personal fac-
tors, and environmental factors varies greatly. 
Persons with disabilities are diverse and heter-
ogeneous, while stereotypical views of disabil-
ity emphasize wheelchair users and a few other 
“classic” groups such as blind people and deaf 
people (44). Disability encompasses the child 
born with a congenital condition such as cer-
ebral palsy or the young soldier who loses his 
leg to a land-mine, or the middle-aged woman 
Box 1.2. Eliminating leprosy, improving lives
The diagnosis and treatment of leprosy is easy and effective. The best way of preventing disabilities associated 
with it, as well as preventing further transmission, lies in early diagnosis and treatment. Since 1983 the disease 
has been curable with multidrug therapy, and since 1985 this therapy has been made available by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) free of charge around the world. WHO estimates that early detection and treatment 
with multidrug therapy have prevented about 4 million people from being disabled (34).
To eliminate the disease, access to information, diagnosis, and treatment with multidrug therapy are crucial (34). 
The greatest barriers to eliminating the disease are ignorance and stigma. Information campaigns about leprosy 
in endemic areas are of supreme importance so that people affected by leprosy and their families – historically 
ostracized from their communities – come forward and receive treatment. Reducing stigma also improves the 
quality of life of people affected by leprosy and their families by improving people’s mobility, interpersonal 
relationships, employment, leisure, and social activities (35).
In India, home to two thirds of the world’s people affected by leprosy, the BBC World Service Trust – in partnership 
with two Indian broadcasters Doordarshan TV and All-India Radio – launched a 16-month campaign on leprosy in 
1999 (36). The campaign stressed that leprosy is curable, that drugs to cure it are available free throughout India, and 
that people affected by leprosy should not be excluded from society. The central messages of the campaign were:
 
■
leprosy is not hereditary
 
■
leprosy is not caused by bad deeds in a previous life
 
■
leprosy is not spread by touch.
The campaign used 50 television and 213 radio programmes in 20 languages, and 85 000 information posters. 
More than 1700 live drama shows, 2746 mobile video screenings, and 3670 public events or competitions were 
performed in remote areas. Independent market surveys conducted before, during, and after the campaign found:
 
■
Reach of media campaign. The radio and TV spots were seen by 59% of respondents, or 275 million people.
 
■
Transmissibility and curability. The proportion of people who believed leprosy was transmitted by touch 
fell from 52% to 27%. The proportion believing that people with leprosy who take multidrug therapy are still 
infectious fell from 25% to 12%. Those who knew that leprosy was curable rose from 84% to 91%.
 
■
Symptoms. Awareness that loss of sensation could be a possible symptom of leprosy rose from 65% to 80%. 
Awareness of pale reddish patches as a possible symptom remained unchanged at 86%. Awareness of non-
itchy patches as a possible symptom rose from 37% to 55%.
 
■
Therapies. The awareness rate in control villages (not covered in the campaign) that multidrug therapy was 
a cure for leprosy was only 56%, but in villages that had been shown live drama it was 82%. In rural areas 
awareness that the treatment was free was 89% among those exposed to the poster campaign, against 20% 
in those not exposed.
 
■
Stigma. The proportion of people saying they would be willing to sit next to a person affected by leprosy was 
10% higher in villages where drama shows had been used than in those without. Similarly, the proportion of 
those claiming they would be willing to eat food served by somebody affected by leprosy was 50% in villages 
covered by the campaign, against 32% in those not covered.
Sources (34–36).
 8
World report on disability 
with severe arthritis, or the older person with 
dementia, among many others. Health condi-
tions can be visible or invisible; temporary or 
long term; static, episodic, or degenerating; 
painful or inconsequential. Note that many 
people with disabilities do not consider them-
selves to be unhealthy (45). For example, 40% 
of people with severe or profound disability 
who responded to the 2007–2008 Australian 
National Health Survey rated their health as 
good, very good, or excellent (46).
Generalizations 
about 
“disability” 
or 
“people with disabilities” can mislead. Persons 
with disabilities have diverse personal factors 
with differences in gender, age, socioeconomic 
status, sexuality, ethnicity, or cultural herit-
age. Each has his or her personal preferences 
and responses to disability (47). Also while 
disability correlates with disadvantage, not 
all people with disabilities are equally disad-
vantaged. Women with disabilities experi-
ence the combined disadvantages associated 
with gender as well as disability, and may be 
less likely to marry than non-disabled women 
(48, 49). People who experience mental health 
conditions or intellectual impairments appear 
to be more disadvantaged in many settings 
than those who experience physical or sensory 
impairments (50). People with more severe 
impairments often experience greater disad-
vantage, as shown by evidence ranging from 
rural Guatemala (51) to employment data from 
Europe (52). Conversely, wealth and status can 
help overcome activity limitations and partici-
pation restrictions (52).
Prevention
Prevention of health conditions associated with 
disability is a development issue. Attention to 
environmental factors – including nutrition, 
preventable diseases, safe water and sanitation, 
safety on roads and in workplaces – can greatly 
reduce the incidence of health conditions lead-
ing to disability (53).
A public health approach distinguishes:
 
■
Primary prevention – actions to avoid 
or remove the cause of a health problem 
in an individual or a population before it 
arises. It includes health promotion and 
specific protection (for example, HIV 
education) (54).
 
■
Secondary prevention – actions to detect a 
health problem at an early stage in an indi-
vidual or a population, facilitating cure, or 
reducing or preventing spread, or reduc-
ing or preventing its long-term effects (for 
example, supporting women with intel-
lectual disability to access breast cancer 
screening) (55).
 
■
Tertiary prevention – actions to reduce the 
impact of an already established disease by 
restoring function and reducing disease-
related complications (for example, reha-
bilitation for children with musculoskeletal 
impairment) (56).
Article 25 of the CRPD specifies Access to 
Health as an explicit right for people with disabili-
ties, but primary prevention of health conditions 
does not come within its scope. Accordingly, this 
Report considers primary prevention only in so 
far as people with disabilities require equal access 
to health promotion and screening opportuni-
ties. Primary prevention issues are extensively 
covered in other WHO and World Bank publica-
tions, and both organizations consider primary 
prevention as crucial to improved overall health 
of countries’ populations.
Viewing disability as a human rights issue 
is not incompatible with prevention of health 
conditions as long as prevention respects the 
rights and dignity of people with disabili-
ties, for example, in the use of language and 
imagery (57, 58). Preventing disability should 
be regarded as a multidimensional strategy 
that includes prevention of disabling barriers 
as well as prevention and treatment of underly-
ing health conditions (59).
 9
Chapter 1 
Understanding disability
Disability and human rights
Disability is a human rights issue (7) because:
 
■
People with disabilities experience ine-
qualities – for example, when they are 
denied equal access to health care, employ-
ment, education, or political participation 
because of their disability.
 
■
People with disabilities are subject to viola-
tions of dignity – for example, when they 
are subjected to violence, abuse, prejudice, 
or disrespect because of their disability.
 
■
Some people with disability are denied 
autonomy – for example, when they are sub-
jected to involuntary sterilization, or when 
they are confined in institutions against their 
will, or when they are regarded as legally 
incompetent because of their disability.
A range of international documents have 
highlighted that disability is a human rights 
issue, including the World Programme of 
Action Concerning Disabled People (1982), the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989), 
and the Standard Rules on the Equalisation 
of Opportunities for People with Disabilities 
(1993). More than 40 nations adopted disabil-
ity discrimination legislation during the 1990s 
(60). The CRPD – the most recent, and the most 
extensive recognition of the human rights of 
persons with disabilities – outlines the civil, 
cultural, political, social, and economic rights 
of persons with disabilities (61). Its purpose is to 
“promote, protect, and ensure the full and equal 
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamen-
tal freedoms by people with disabilities and to 
promote respect for their inherent dignity”.
The CRPD applies human rights to disabil-
ity, thus making general human rights specific 
to persons with disabilities (62), and clarifying 
existing international law regarding disability. 
Even if a state does not ratify the CRPD, it helps 
interpret other human rights conventions to 
which the state is party.
Article 3 of the CRPD outlines the follow-
ing general principles:
1. respect for inherent dignity, individual 
autonomy including the freedom to make 
one’s own choices, and independence of 
persons;
2. non-discrimination;
3. full and effective participation and inclu-
sion in society;
4. respect for difference and acceptance of 
persons with disabilities as part of human 
diversity and humanity;
5. equality of opportunity;
6. accessibility;
7. equality between men and women;
8. respect for the evolving capacities of chil-
dren with disabilities and respect for the 
right of children with disabilities to pre-
serve their identities.
States ratifying the CRPD have a range of gen-
eral obligations. Among other things, they 
undertake to:
 
■
adopt legislation and other appropriate 
administrative measures where needed;
 
■
modify or repeal laws, customs, or 
practices that discriminate directly or 
indirectly;
 
■
include disability in all relevant policies 
and programmes;
 
■
refrain from any act or practice inconsist-
ent with the CRPD;
 
■
take all appropriate measures to eliminate 
discrimination against persons with dis-
abilities by any person, organization, or 
private enterprise.
States must consult with people with dis-
abilities and their representative organiza-
tions when developing laws, policies, and 
programmes to implement the CRPD. The 
Convention also requires public and private 
bodies to make “reasonable accommodation” 
to the situation of people with disabilities. And 
it is accompanied by an Optional Protocol that, 
if ratified, provides for a complaints procedure 
and an inquiry procedure, which can be lodged 
with the committee monitoring the treaty.
 10
World report on disability
The CRPD advances legal disability reform, 
directly involving people with disabilities and 
using a human rights framework. Its core mes-
sage is that people with disabilities should 
not be considered “objects” to be managed, 
but “subjects” deserving of equal respect and 
enjoyment of human rights.
Disability and development
Disability is a development issue, because of 
its bidirectional link to poverty: disability may 
increase the risk of poverty, and poverty may 
increase the risk of disability (63). A growing 
body of empirical evidence from across the 
world indicates that people with disabilities and 
their families are more likely to experience eco-
nomic and social disadvantage than those with-
out disability.
The onset of disability may lead to the 
worsening of social and economic well-being 
and poverty through a multitude of channels 
including the adverse impact on education, 
employment, earnings, and increased expendi-
tures related to disability (64).
 
■
Children with disabilities are less likely to 
attend school, thus experiencing limited 
opportunities for human capital formation 
and facing reduced employment opportu-
nities and decreased productivity in adult-
hood (65–67).
 
■
People with disabilities are more likely to 
be unemployed and generally earn less even 
when employed (67–72). Both employment 
and income outcomes appear to worsen with 
the severity of the disability (52, 73). It is 
harder for people with disabilities to benefit 
from development and escape from poverty 
(74) due to discrimination in employment, 
limited access to transport, and lack of 
access to resources to promote self-employ-
ment and livelihood activities (71).
 
■
People with disabilities may have extra 
costs resulting from disability – such 
as costs associated with medical care or 
assistive devices, or the need for personal 
support and assistance – and thus often 
require more resources to achieve the same 
outcomes as non-disabled people. This is 
what Amartya Sen has called “conversion 
handicap” (75). Because of higher costs, 
people with disabilities and their house-
holds are likely to be poorer than non-dis-
abled people with similar incomes (75–77).
 
■
Households with a disabled member are 
more likely to experience material hardship 
– including food insecurity, poor housing, 
lack of access to safe water and sanitation, 
and inadequate access to health care (29, 
72, 78–81).
Poverty may increase the risk of disability. 
A study of 56 developing countries found that 
the poor experienced worse health than the 
better off (82). Poverty may lead to the onset 
of a health conditions associated with disability 
including through: low birth weight, malnutri-
tion (83, 84), lack of clean water or adequate 
sanitation, unsafe work and living conditions, 
and injuries (20, 85–87). Poverty may increase 
the likelihood that a person with an existing 
health condition becomes disabled, for exam-
ple, by an inaccessible environment or lack of 
access to appropriate health and rehabilitation 
services (88) (see Box 1.3).
Amartya Sen’s capabilities approach (91, 
92) offers a helpful theoretical underpinning to 
understanding development, which can be of 
particular value for the disability human rights 
field (93) and is compatible with both the ICF 
(94) and the social model of disability (76). It 
moves beyond traditional economic measures 
such as GDP, or concepts of utility, to empha-
size human rights and “development as free-
dom” (91), promoting the understanding that 
the poverty of people with disabilities – and 
other disadvantaged peoples – comprises social 
exclusion and disempowerment, not just lack 
of material resources. It emphasizes the diver-
sity of aspirations and choices that different 
people with disabilities might hold in different 
cultures (95). It also resolves the paradox that 
many people with disabilities express that they 
 11
Chapter 1 
Understanding disability
have a good quality of life (96), perhaps because 
they have succeeded in adapting to their situ-
ation. As Sen has argued, this does not mean 
that it is not necessary to address what can be 
objectively assessed as their unmet needs.
The capabilities approach also helps in 
understanding the obligations that states owe 
to individuals to ensure that they flourish, 
exercise agency, and reach their potential as 
human beings (97). The CRPD specifies these 
obligations to persons with disabilities, empha-
sizing development and measures to promote 
the participation and well-being of people with 
disabilities worldwide. It stresses the need to 
address disability in all programming rather 
than as a stand-alone thematic issue. Moreover, 
its Article 32 is the only international human 
rights treaty article promoting measures for 
international cooperation that include, and are 
accessible to, persons with disabilities.
Box 1.3. Safety net interventions for people with disabilities
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) states that people with disabilities 
have an equal right to social protection. Safety nets are a type of social protection intervention that target 
vulnerability and poverty.
Many countries provide safety nets to poor people with disabilities and their households, either through specific 
disability-targeted programmes or more commonly through general social assistance programmes.
While systematic evidence is lacking, anecdotal evidence suggests that persons with disabilities may face barriers 
to accessing safety nets when, for example, information is inadequate or inaccessible, the welfare offices are physi-
cally inaccessible, or the programmes’ design features do not take into account specific needs of disabled people. 
Thus, special measures may be needed to ensure that safety nets are inclusive of disabled people. For example:
 
■
information about programmes should be accessible and reach the intended recipients. This may require 
targeted outreach;
 
■
proxies designated by persons with disabilities should be allowed to conduct many of the transactions in 
accessing programmes;
 
■
the welfare offices, as well as the transport system, need to be accessible;
 
■
programmes’ eligibility criteria may need to specifically include disability;
 
■
means testing mechanisms may need to take into account the extra costs of disability;
 
■
cash transfers might provide higher payments to beneficiaries with disabilities to help with extra costs of 
living with a disability;
 
■
conditional cash transfers may need to be adjusted to specific circumstances of children with disabilities;
 
■
workfare can introduce quotas and be sensitive to disability;
 
■
labour activation measures should be sensitive to disability.
Some countries, such as Albania, Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Romania, and the Russian Federation also have specific 
programmes targeted at people with disabilities. The design of these programmes varies. In some cases they 
cover all disabled people, in other cases they are means tested, or targeted at children with disabilities. 
Administration of disability benefits requires assessment of disability. Many formal assessment processes still 
use predominantly medical criteria, though there has been a move towards adopting a more comprehensive 
assessment approach focusing on functioning and using the International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health framework. More research is needed to better understand what works with regards to disability 
assessment and to identify good practice.
Evidence on the impact of safety nets on people with disabilities is limited. While they may improve health and 
economic status, it is less clear whether access to education also improves. For safety nets to be effective in 
protecting disabled people, many other public programmes need to be in place, such as health, rehabilitation, 
education and training and environmental access. More research is needed to better understand what works in 
providing safety nets to people with disabilities and their households.
Source (89, 90).
 12
World report on disability
Despite the widely acknowledged inter-
connection between disability and poverty, 
efforts to promote development and poverty 
reduction have not always adequately included 
disability (76, 98–100). Disability is not 
explicitly mentioned in the eight Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs), or the 21 targets, 
or the 60 indicators for achieving the goals 
(see Box 1.4).
People with disabilities can benefit from 
development projects; examples in this Report 
show that the situation for people with dis-
abilities in low-income countries can be 
improved. But disability needs to be a higher 
priority, successful initiatives need to be scaled 
up, and a more coherent response is needed. 
In addition, people with disabilities need to 
be included in development efforts, both as 
beneficiaries and in the design, implementa-
tion, and monitoring of interventions (104). 
Despite the role of CBR (see Box 1.5), and 
many other promising initiatives by national 
governments or national and international 
NGOs, systematic removal of barriers and 
social development has not occurred, and dis-
ability still is often considered in the medical 
component of development (104).
Responses to disability have undergone a 
radical change in recent decades: the role of 
environmental barriers and discrimination in 
contributing to poverty and exclusion is now 
well understood, and the CRPD outlines the 
measures needed to remove barriers and pro-
mote participation. Disability is a development 
issue, and it will be hard to improve the lives 
of the most disadvantaged people in the world 
Box 1.4. The Millennium Development Goals and disability
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) – agreed on by the international community in 2000 and endorsed 
by 189 countries – are a unified set of development objectives addressing the needs of the world’s poorest and 
most marginalized people, and are supposed to be achieved by 2015. The goals are:
1. eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
2. achieve universal primary education
3. promote gender equality and empower women
4. reduce child mortality
5. improve maternal health
6. combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
7. ensure environmental sustainability
8. develop a global partnership for development.
The MDGs are a compact between developing and developed nations. They recognize the efforts that must be 
taken by developing countries themselves, as well as the contribution that developed countries need to make 
through trade, development assistance, debt relief, access to essential medicines, and technology transfer.
While some of the background documents explicitly mention people with disabilities, they are not referred to in 
the MDGs, or in the material generated as part of the process to achieve them.
The 2010 MDG report is the first to mention disabilities, noting the limited opportunities facing children with 
disabilities, and the link between disability and marginalization in education. The Ministerial Declaration of July 
2010 recognizes disability as a cross-cutting issue essential for the attainment of the MDGs, emphasizing the need 
to ensure that women and girls with disabilities are not subject to multiple or aggravated forms of discrimination, 
or excluded from participation in the implementation of the MDGs (101). The United Nations General Assembly 
has highlighted the invisibility of persons with disabilities in official statistics (102).
The General Assembly concluded its High Level Meeting on the MDGs in September 2010 by adopting the 
resolution “Keeping the promise: united to achieve the Millennium Development Goals,” which recognizes that 
“policies and actions must also focus on persons with disabilities, so that they benefit from progress towards 
achieving the MDGs” (103).
 13
Chapter 1 
Understanding disability
without addressing the specific needs of per-
sons with disabilities.
This World report on disability provides a 
guide to improving the health and well-being 
of persons with disabilities. It seeks to provide 
clear concepts and the best available evidence, 
to highlight gaps in knowledge and stress the 
need for further research and policy. Stories of 
success are recounted, as are those of failure 
and neglect. The ultimate goal of the Report 
and of the CRPD is to enable all people with 
disabilities to enjoy the choices and life oppor-
tunities currently available to only a minority by 
minimizing the adverse impacts of impairment 
and eliminating discrimination and prejudice.
People’s capabilities depend on external 
conditions that can be modified by govern-
ment action. In line with the CRPD, this 
Report shows how the capabilities of people 
with disabilities can be expanded; their well-
being, agency, and freedom improved; and 
their human rights realized.
Box 1.5. Community-based rehabilitation
Since the 1970s community-based rehabilitation (CBR) has been an important strategy to respond to the needs 
of people with disabilities, particularly in developing countries. CBR was initially promoted to deliver rehabilita-
tion services in countries with limited resources. Field manuals such as Training in the community for people with 
disabilities (105) provided family members and community workers with practical information about how to 
implement basic rehabilitation interventions.
More than 90 countries around the world continue to develop and strengthen their CBR programmes. Through an 
ongoing evolutionary process CBR is shifting from a medical-focused, often single-sector approach, to a strategy 
for rehabilitation, equalization of opportunities, poverty reduction, and social inclusion of people with disabilities 
(106). Increasingly, CBR is implemented through the combined efforts of people with disabilities, their families, 
organizations, and communities, and the relevant government and nongovernmental services (106).
In Chamarajnagar, one of the poorest districts of Karnataka, India, many community members did not have access 
to basic sanitation facilities, putting their health at risk. The Indian government offered grants to families living 
in these areas to construct toilets. The total cost to construct one toilet was estimated to be US$ 150. Funding the 
remaining amount was difficult for most people, particularly people with disabilities. A local nongovernmental 
organization – Mobility India – assisted people with disabilities and their families to construct accessible toilets. 
Using existing community-based networks and self-help groups, Mobility India organized street plays and wall 
paintings to raise awareness about hygiene and the importance of proper sanitation.
As people became interested and motivated, Mobility India – with financial support from MIBLOU, Switzerland, 
and local contributions – facilitated access to basic sanitation. The group members selected poor households with 
disabled family members who had the greatest need for a toilet, and they coordinated the construction work in 
partnership with families and ensured proper use of funds. As a result of the pilot project, 50 accessible toilets 
were constructed in one year. Many people with disabilities no longer need to crawl or be carried long distances 
for their toileting needs. They have become independent and, importantly, been able to reclaim their dignity. 
Their risk of developing health conditions associated with poor sanitation has also been significantly reduced.
Evidence for the effectiveness of CBR varies, but research and evaluation are increasingly being conducted 
(107–110), and information sharing is increasing through regional networks such as the CBR Africa Network, the 
CBR Asia-Pacific Network, and the CBR American and Caribbean Network.
The recent publication of the CBR guidelines (111) joins the development and human rights aspects of disability. 
The guidelines:
 
■
promote the need for inclusive development for people with disabilities in the mainstream health, education, 
social, and employment sectors;
 
■
emphasize the need to promote the empowerment of people with disabilities and their family members;
 
■
through the provision of practical suggestions, position CBR as a tool that countries can use to implement the 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
 14
World report on disability
References
1. 
Zola IK. Toward the necessary universalizing of a disability policy. The Milbank Quarterly, 1989,67:Suppl 2 Pt 2401-428. 
doi:10.2307/3350151 PMID:2534158
2. 
Ferguson PM. Mapping the family: disability studies and the exploration of parental response to disability. In: Albrecht G, 
Seelman KD, Bury M, eds. Handbook of Disability Studies. Thousand Oaks, Sage, 2001:373–395.
3. 
Mishra AK, Gupta R. Disability index: a measure of deprivation among the disabled. Economic and Political Weekly, 
2006,41:4026-4029.
4. 
Lee R. The demographic transition: three centuries of fundamental change. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
2003,17:167-190. doi:10.1257/089533003772034943
5. 
Campbell J, Oliver M. Disability politics: understanding our past, changing our future. London, Routledge, 1996.
6. 
Charlton J. Nothing about us without us: disability, oppression and empowerment. Berkeley, University of California Press, 
1998
7. 
Quinn G, Degener T. A survey of international, comparative and regional disability law reform. In: Breslin ML, Yee S, eds. 
Disability rights law and policy - international and national perspectives. Ardsley, Transnational, 2002a.
8. 
Parmenter TR. The present, past and future of the study of intellectual disability: challenges in developing countries. 
Salud Pública de México, 2008,50:Suppl 2s124-s131. PMID:18470339
9. 
Standard rules on the equalization of opportunities of persons with disabilities, New York, United Nations, 2003.
10. Driedger D. The last civil rights movement. London, Hurst, 1989.
11. Barnes C. Disabled people in Britain and discrimination. London, Hurst, 1991.
12. McConachie H et al. Participation of disabled children: how should it be characterised and measured? Disability and 
Rehabilitation, 2006,28:1157-1164. doi:10.1080/09638280500534507 PMID:16966237
13. Oliver M. The politics of disablement. Basingstoke, Macmillan and St Martin’s Press, 1990.
14. Thomas C. Female forms: experiencing and understanding disability. Buckingham, Open University Press, 1999.
15. Shakespeare T. Disability rights and wrongs. London, Routledge, 2006.
16. Forsyth R et al. Participation of young severely disabled children is influenced by their intrinsic impairments and environ-
ment. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 2007,49:345-349. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.2007.00345.x PMID:17489807
17. The International Classification of Functioning. Disability and Health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.
18. Bickenbach JE, Chatterji S, Badley EM, Ustün TB. Models of disablement, universalism and the international classi-
fication of impairments, disabilities and handicaps. Social science & medicine (1982), 1999,48:1173-1187. doi:10.1016/
S0277-9536(98)00441-9 PMID:10220018
19. Leonardi M et al. MHADIE ConsortiumThe definition of disability: what is in a name? Lancet, 2006,368:1219-1221. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69498-1 PMID:17027711
20. Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Closing the gap in a generation: Health equity through action on the social 
determinants of health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
21. Miller P, Parker S, Gillinson S. Disablism: how to tackle the last prejudice. London, Demos, 2004.
22. Smith RD. Promoting the health of people with physical disabilities: a discussion of the financing and organization of 
public health services in Australia. Health Promotion International, 2000,15:79-86. doi:10.1093/heapro/15.1.79
23. Scheer JM, Kroll T, Neri MT, Beatty P. Access barriers for persons with disabilities: the consumers perspective. Journal of 
Disability Policy Studies, 2003,13:221-230. doi:10.1177/104420730301300404
24. Quality in and equality of access to healthcare services. Brussels, European Commission, Directorate General for Employment, 
Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities, 2008.
25. Improving the life chances of disabled people: final report. London, Prime Minister’s Strategy Unit, 2005.
26. Ingstad B, Whyte SR, eds. Disability and culture. Berkley, University of California Press, 1995.
27. Yazbeck M, McVilly K, Parmenter TR. Attitudes towards people with intellectual disabilities: an Australian perspective. 
Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 2004,15:97-111. doi:10.1177/10442073040150020401
28. People with disabilities in India: from commitments to outcomes. Washington, World Bank, 2009.
29. Van Brakel WH. Measuring health-related stigma–a literature review. Psychology, Health & Medicine, 2006,11:307-334. 
doi:10.1080/13548500600595160 PMID:17130068
30. Siperstein GN, Norins J, Corbin S, Shriver T. Multinational study of attitudes towards individuals with intellectual disabilities. 
Washington, Special Olympics Inc, 2003.
31. Lauber C, Rössler W. Stigma towards people with mental illness in developing countries in Asia. International Review of 
Psychiatry (Abingdon, England), 2007,19:157-178. PMID:17464793
32. Thornicroft G, Rose D, Kassam A. Discrimination in health care against people with mental illness. International Review of 
Psychiatry (Abingdon, England), 2007,19:113-122. PMID:17464789
 15
Chapter 1 
Understanding disability
33. Hate crime against disabled people in Scotland: a survey report, Edinburgh, Capability Scotland and Disability Rights 
Commission, 2004.
34. Fact sheet: leprosy. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs101/en/
index.html, accessed 29 January 2009).
35. Wong ML. Guest editorial: designing programmes to address stigma in leprosy: issues and challenges. Asia and Pacific 
Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 2004,15:3-12.
36. India: leprosy awareness. London, BBC World Service Trust, n.d. (http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/trust/news/
story/2003/09/010509_leprosy.shtml accessed 1 February 2011).
37. Cross H. Interventions to address the stigma associated with leprosy: a perspective on the issues. Psychology, Health & 
Medicine, 2006,11:367-373. doi:10.1080/13548500600595384 PMID:17130073
38. Sartorius N, Schulze H. Reducing the stigma of mental illness: a report from a global programme of the World Psychiatric 
Association. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
39. Sartorius N. Lessons from a 10-year global programme against stigma and discrimination because of an illness. Psychology, 
Health & Medicine, 2006,11:383-388. doi:10.1080/13548500600595418 PMID:17130075
40. Thornicroft G, Brohan E, Kassam A, Lewis-Holmes E. Reducing stigma and discrimination: Candidate interventions. 
International Journal of Mental Health Systems, 2008,2:3- doi:10.1186/1752-4458-2-3 PMID:18405393
41. International programme to fight stigma and discrimination because of schizophrenia. Geneva, World Psychiatric Association., 
n.d. (www.openthedoors.com, accessed 14 October 2010).
42. Joa I et al. The key to reducing duration of untreated first psychosis: information campaigns. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2007, 
doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm09510.1093/schbul/sbm095
43. Dalal AK. Social interventions to moderate discriminatory attitudes: the case of the physically challenged in India. 
Psychology, Health & Medicine, 2006,11:374-382. doi:10.1080/13548500600595392 PMID:17130074
44. Park A et al. British social attitudes survey 23rd report. London, Sage, 2007.
45. Watson N. Well, I know this is going to sound very strange to you, but I don’t see myself as a disabled person: identity and 
disability. Disability & Society, 2002,17:509-527. doi:10.1080/09687590220148496
46. National Health Survey 2007–8: summary of results. Canberra, Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2009.
47. Learning lessons: defining, representing and measuring disability. London, Disability Rights Commission, 2007.
48. Nagata KK. Gender and disability in the Arab region: the challenges in the new millennium. Asia Pacific Disability 
Rehabilitation Journal, 2003,14:10-17.
49. Rao I. Equity to women with disabilities in India. Bangalore, CBR Network, 2004 (http://v1.dpi.org/lang-en/resources/
details.php?page=90, accessed 6 August 2010).
50. Roulstone A, Barnes C, eds. Working futures? Disabled people, policy and social inclusion. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
51. Grech S. Living with disability in rural Guatemala: exploring connections and impacts on poverty. International Journal of 
Disability, Community and Rehabilitation, 2008, 7(2) (http://www.ijdcr.ca/VOL07_02_CAN/articles/grech.shtml, accessed 
4 August 2010).
52. Grammenos S. Illness, disability and social inclusion. Dublin, European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and 
Working Conditions, 2003 (http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/pubdocs/2003/35/en/1/ef0335en.pdf, accessed 6 August 
2010).
53. Caulfield LE et al. Stunting, wasting and micronutrient deficiency disorders. In: Jamison DT et al., eds. Disease control 
priorities in developing countries. Washington, Oxford University Press and World Bank, 2006:551–567.
54. Maart S, Jelsma J. The sexual behaviour of physically disabled adolescents. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2010,32:438-443. 
doi:10.3109/09638280902846368 PMID:20113191
55. McIlfatrick S, Taggart L, Truesdale-Kennedy M. Supporting women with intellectual disabilities to access breast cancer 
screening: a healthcare professional perspective. European Journal of Cancer Care, 2011,20:412-20. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2354.2010.01221.x PMID:20825462
56. Atijosan O et al. The orthopaedic needs of children in Rwanda: results from a national survey and orthopaedic service 
implications. Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics, 2009,29:948-951. PMID:19934715
57. Wang CC. Portraying stigmatized conditions: disabling images in public health. Journal of Health Communication, 
1998,3:149-159. doi:10.1080/108107398127436 PMID:10977251
58. Lollar DJ, Crews JE. Redefining the role of public health in disability. Annual Review of Public Health, 2003,24:195-208. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.24.100901.140844 PMID:12668756
59. Coleridge P, Simonnot C, Steverlynck D. Study of disability in EC Development Cooperation. Brussels, European Commission, 
2010.
60. Quinn G et al. The current use and future potential of United Nations human rights instruments in the context of disabil-
ity. New York and Geneva, United Nations, 2002b (http://www.icrpd.net/ratification/documents/en/Extras/Quinn%20
Degener%20study%20for%20OHCHR.pdf, accessed 21 Sept 2010).
 16
World report on disability
61. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Geneva, United Nations, 2006 (http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/
disabilities-convention.htm, accessed 16 May 2009).
62. Megret F. The disabilities convention: human rights of persons with disabilities or disability rights? Human Rights Quarterly, 
2008,30:494-516.
63. Sen A. The idea of justice. Cambridge, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2009.
64. Jenkins SP, Rigg JA. Disability and disadvantage: selection, onset and duration effects. London, London School of Economics, 
Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion, 2003 (CASEpaper 74).
65. Filmer D. Disability, poverty and schooling in developing countries: results from 14 household surveys. The World Bank 
Economic Review, 2008,22:141-163. doi:10.1093/wber/lhm021
66. Mete C, ed. Economic implications of chronic illness and disability in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. Washington, 
World Bank, 2008.
67. Burchardt T. The education and employment of disabled young people: frustrated ambition. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
68. Sickness, disability and work: breaking the barriers. A synthesis of findings across OECD countries. Paris, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010.
69. Houtenville AJ, Stapleton DC, Weathers RR 2nd, Burkhauser RV, eds. Counting working-age people with disabilities. What 
current data tell us and options for improvement. Kalamazoo, WE Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2009.
70. Contreras DG, Ruiz-Tagle JV, Garcez P, Azocar I. Socio-economic impact of disability in Latin America: Chile and Uruguay. 
Santiago, Universidad de Chile, Departemento de Economia, 2006.
71. Coleridge P. Disabled people and ‘employment’ in the majority world: policies and realities. In: Roulstone A, Barnes C, eds. 
Working futures? Disabled people, policy and social inclusion. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
72. Mitra S, Posarac A, Vick B. Disability and poverty in developing countries: a snapshot from the world health survey. 
Washington, Human Development Network Social Protection, forthcoming
73. Emmett T. Disability, poverty, gender and race. In: Watermeyer B et al., eds. Disability and social change: a South African 
agenda. Cape Town, HSRC Press, 2006.
74. Thomas P. Disability, poverty and the Millennium Development Goals. London, Disability Knowledge and Research, 2005 
(www.disabilitykar.net/docs/policy_final.doc, accessed 20 July 2010).
75. Zaidi A, Burchardt T. Comparing incomes when needs differ: equivalization for the extra costs of disability in the UK. 
Review of Income and Wealth, 2005,51:89-114. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4991.2005.00146.x
76. Braithwaite J, Mont D. Disability and poverty: a survey of World Bank poverty assessments and implications. ALTER – 
European Journal of Disability Research / Revue Européenne de Recherche sur le Handicap, 2009,3:219-232. doi:10.1016/j.
alter.2008.10.002
77. Cullinan J, Gannon B, Lyons S. Estimating the extra cost of living for people with disabilities. Health Economics, 2010, 
doi:10.1002/hec.1619 PMID:20535832
78. Beresford B, Rhodes D. Housing and disabled children. York, Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 2008.
79. Loeb M, Eide H. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Malawi: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2004 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCMalawi.pdf).
80. Eide A, van Rooy G, Loeb M. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Namibia: a representative national 
survey. Oslo, SINTEF, 2003 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCNamibia.pdf, accessed 15 February 2011).
81. Eide A, Loeb M. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zambia: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2006 (http://www.sintef.no/upload/Helse/Levek%C3%A5r%20og%20tjenester/ZambiaLCweb.pdf, accessed 15 
February 2011).
82. Gwatkin DR et al. Socioeconomic differences in health, nutrition, and population within developing countries. Washington, 
World Bank, 2007 (Working Paper 30544).
83. Maternal and child undernutrition [special series]. Lancet, January2008,
84. Monitoring child disability in developing countries: results from the multiple indicator cluster surveys. United Nations 
Children’s Fund, Division of Policy and Practice, 2008.
85. Emerson E et al. Socio-economic position, household composition, health status and indicators of the well-being of 
mothers of children with and without intellectual disabilities. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2006,50:862-
873. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00900.x PMID:17100947
86. Emerson E, Hatton C. The socio-economic circumstances of children at risk of disability in Britain. Disability & Society, 
2007,22:563-580. doi:10.1080/09687590701560154
87. Rauh VA, Landrigan PJ, Claudio L. Housing and health: intersection of poverty and environmental exposures. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 2008,1136:276-288. doi:10.1196/annals.1425.032 PMID:18579887
88. Peters DH et al. Poverty and access to health care in developing countries. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
2008,1136:161-171. doi:10.1196/annals.1425.011 PMID:17954679
 17
Chapter 1 
Understanding disability
89. Grosh M, del Ninno C, Tesliuc E, Ouerghi A. For protection and promotion: the design and implementation of effective safety 
nets. Washington, World Bank, 2008.
90. Marriott A, Gooding K. Social assistance and disability in developing countries. Haywards Heath, Sightsavers International, 
2007.
91. Sen A. Development as freedom. New York, Knopf, 1999.
92. Sen A. Inequality reexamined. New York and Cambridge, Russell Sage and Harvard University Press, 1992.
93. Dubois JL, Trani JF. Extending the capability paradigm to address the complexity of disability. Alter, 2009,3:192-218.
94. Mitra S. The capability approach and disability. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 2006,16:236-247. doi:10.1177/10442073
060160040501
95. Clark DA. The capability approach. In: Clark DA, ed. The Elgar companion to development studies. Cheltenham, Edward 
Elgar, 2006.
96. Albrecht GL, Devlieger PJ. The disability paradox: high quality of life against all odds. Social Science & Medicine (1982), 
1999,48:977-988. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(98)00411-0 PMID:10390038
97. Stein MA, Stein PJS. Beyond disability civil rights. The Hastings Law Journal, 2007,58:1203-1240.
98. Fritz D et al. Making poverty reduction inclusive: experiences from Cambodia, Tanzania and Vietnam. Journal of 
International Development, 2009,21:673-684. doi:10.1002/jid.1595
99. Mwendwa TN, Murangira A, Lang R. Mainstreaming the rights of persons with disabilities in national development frame-
works. Journal of International Development, 2009,21:662-672. doi:10.1002/jid.1594
100. Riddell RC. Poverty, disability and aid: international development cooperation. In Barron T, Ncube JM, eds. Poverty and 
Disability. London, Leonard Cheshire Disability, 2010.
101. Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to gender equality and empowerment of 
women. New York, United Nations, Economic and Social Council, 2010 (E/2010/L.8, OP 9).
102. Realizing the MDGs for persons with disabilities. New York, United Nations, General Assembly, 2010 (A/RES/64/131).
103. Draft outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development 
Goals. New York, United Nations, General Assembly, 2010 (A/RES/64/299, OP 28).
104. Kett M, Lang R, Trani JF. Disability, development and the dawning of a new Convention: a cause for optimism? Journal of 
International Development, 2009,21:649-661. doi:10.1002/jid.1596
105. Training in the community for people with disabilities. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1989.
106. CBR. a strategy for rehabilitation, equalization of opportunities, poverty reduction and social inclusion of people with dis-
abilities: joint position paper. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
107. Mitchell R. The research base of community-based rehabilitation. Disability and Rehabilitation, 1999,21:459-468. 
doi:10.1080/096382899297251 PMID:10579666
108. Mannan H, Turnbull A. A review of community based rehabilitation evaluations: Quality of life as an outcome measure for 
future evaluations. Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 2007,64:1231-1241.
109. Kuipers P, Wirz S, Hartley S. Systematic synthesis of community-based rehabilitation (CBR) project evaluation reports for 
evidence-based policy: a proof-of-concept study. BMC International Health and Human Rights, 2008,8:3- doi:10.1186/1472-
698X-8-3 PMID:18325121
110. Finkenflügel H, Wolffers I, Huijsman R. The evidence base for community-based rehabilitation: a literature review. 
International Journal of Rehabilitation Research. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Rehabilitationsforschung. Revue Internationale 
de Recherches de Réadaptation, 2005,28:187-201. PMID:16046912
111. World Health Organization, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, International Labour 
Organization, International Disability and Development Consortium. Community-based rehabilitation: CBR guidelines. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
  Chapter 2
Disability – a global picture
 “I lost my leg by landmine when I was 5 years old, at that time I went to the rice field 
with my mother to get firewood. Unfortunately I stepped on a mine. After the accident 
I was very sad when I saw the other children playing or swimming in the river because I 
have no leg. I used to stand with my crutch made of wood and I wish I could play freely like 
the other children too. And when I walked to school some children they called me kombot, 
meaning disabled person, and [the discrimination] make me feel shy and cry and disap-
pointed. So I want all people to have equal rights and not discriminate against each other.”
Song
“At the age of 9, I became deaf as a result of a bout with meningitis. In 2002, I went for 
Voluntary Counseling and Testing (VCT). The results showed that I was HIV+. I become 
devastated and lost hope to live because I thought that being HIV+ was the end of world 
for me. Later, I met a disabled person who spiritually encouraged me to accept my status. 
Now I have confidence to be able to speak out on HIV/AIDS openly. I have been inter-
viewed widely by print and electronic media and I have been invited to speak in public 
meetings. I am creating awareness on the importance of VCT and encouraging people to 
know their status. My work is limited by lack of money. Deaf people living in rural areas 
have no information on HIV/AIDS. I would like to break the barriers by going to visit 
them right where they live.”
Susan
“What makes me to feel not included in this school is because my parents are poor, 
they can’t provide me with enough books. This makes my life difficult in the school. They 
also can’t buy me everything which I am supposed to have, like clothes. Being in school 
without books and pens also makes me feel not included, because teachers used to send 
me out because I don’t have books to write in.”
Jackline
 2
Disability – a global picture
Robust evidence helps to make well informed decisions about disability 
policies and programmes. Understanding the numbers of people with dis-
abilities and their circumstances can improve efforts to remove disabling 
barriers and provide services to allow people with disabilities to participate. 
Collecting appropriate statistical and research data at national and interna-
tional levels will help parties to the United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) formulate and implement policies to 
achieve internationally agreed development goals (1).
This chapter offers a picture of disability that succeeding chapters build 
on. It presents estimates of the prevalence of disability; factors affecting 
trends in disability (demographic, health, environmental); the socioeco-
nomic circumstances of people with disabilities, need and unmet needs, and 
the costs of disability. It proposes steps for improving data at national and 
international levels.
The evidence here is based on national (such as the census, population 
surveys and administrative data registries) and international data sets and a 
large number of recent studies. Each source has its purposes, strengths, and 
weaknesses. The data here are, to varying degrees, in accord with the defini-
tion of disability outlined in Chapter 1. Additional data and methodological 
explanations are in the Technical appendices (A, B, C, and D).
Measuring disability
Disability, a complex multidimensional experience (see Chapter 1), poses 
several challenges for measurement. Approaches to measuring disability 
vary across countries and influence the results. Operational measures of 
disability vary according to the purpose and application of the data, the 
conception of disability, the aspects of disability examined – impairments, 
activity limitations, participation restrictions, related health conditions, 
environmental factors – the definitions, question design, reporting sources, 
data collection methods, and expectations of functioning.
Impairment data are not an adequate proxy for disability informa-
tion. Broad “groupings” of different “types of disability” have become part 
of the language of disability, with some surveys seeking to determine the 
prevalence of different “types of disability” based directly or indirectly on 
21
 22
World report on disability
assessments and classifications. Often, “types of 
disability” are defined using only one aspect of 
disability, such as impairments – sensory, phys-
ical, mental, intellectual – and at other times 
they conflate health conditions with disability. 
People with chronic health conditions, com-
munication difficulties, and other impairments 
may not be included in these estimates, despite 
encountering difficulties in everyday life.
There is an implicit assumption that each 
“type of disability” has specific health, educa-
tional, rehabilitation, social, and support needs. 
However, diverse responses may be required – for 
example, two individuals with the same impair-
ment may have very different experiences and 
needs. While countries may need information 
on impairments – for instance, to help design 
specific services or to detect or prevent discrimi-
nation – the usefulness of such data is limited, 
because the resulting prevalence rates are not 
indicative of the entire extent of disability.
Data on all aspects of disability and con-
textual factors are important for constructing a 
complete picture of disability and functioning. 
Without information on how particular health 
conditions in interaction with environmental 
barriers and facilitators affect people in their 
everyday lives, it is hard to determine the scope 
of disability. People with the same impair-
ment can experience very different types and 
degrees of restriction, depending on the con-
text. Environmental barriers to participation 
can differ considerably between countries and 
communities. For example, many children 
drop out of school in Brazil because of a lack 
of reading glasses, widely available in most 
high-income countries (2). Stigma attached to 
impairments as diverse as missing limbs and 
anxiety, can result in similar limits on a per-
son’s participation in work. This was shown in a 
recent comparison between two surveys in the 
United States of America that focused on the 
work limitations of individuals and on actual 
work performance (3).
Disability can be conceptualized on a con-
tinuum from minor difficulties in functioning 
to major impacts on a person’s life. Countries are 
increasingly switching to a continuum approach 
to measurement, where estimates of prevalence 
of disability – and functioning – are derived from 
assessing levels of disability in multiple domains 
(4–8). Estimates vary according to where the 
thresholds on the continuum of disability are 
set, and the way environmental influences are 
taken into account. Disaggregating these data 
further by sex, age, income, or occupation is 
important for uncovering patterns, trends, and 
other information about “subgroups” of people 
experiencing disability.
The data collection method also influences 
results. Censuses and surveys take varying 
approaches to measuring disability, and the use 
of these approaches to data collection in the same 
country often report different rates of disability 
(see Box 2.1). Censuses cover entire populations, 
occur at long intervals, and by their nature can 
incorporate only a few disability-relevant ques-
tions. While considerable socioeconomic data, 
such as employment rates and marital status, 
are available from censuses, they can provide 
only limited information about participation. 
On the other hand, censuses tend to be carried 
out regularly and so can also give information 
on trends over a certain period. Surveys have 
the possibility of providing richer information 
through more comprehensive questions includ-
ing on institutionalized populations. In devel-
oped countries, for example, survey questions 
identify people with disabilities for impair-
ments in body function and structure, but also 
increasingly for activities, participation, and 
environmental factors. Some surveys also pro-
vide information on the origins of impairments, 
the degree of assistance provided, service acces-
sibility, and unmet needs.
Countries reporting a low disability preva-
lence rate – predominantly developing countries 
– tend to collect disability data through censuses 
or use measures focused exclusively on a narrow 
choice of impairments (10–12). Countries 
reporting higher disability prevalence tend to 
collect their data through surveys and apply a 
measurement approach that records activity 
limitations and participation restrictions in 
 23
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
addition to impairments. If institutionalized 
populations are included in a survey, prevalence 
rates will also be higher (13). These factors influ-
ence comparability at the national and interna-
tional levels and the relevance of the data to a 
wider set of users. While progress is being made 
– as with activity limitation studies in Lesotho, 
Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia, and Zimbabwe 
– accurate data on disability are mostly lacking 
for developing countries.
The question design and reporting source 
can affect estimates. The underlying purpose of 
a survey – whether a health or general survey, 
for instance – will affect how people respond 
(14). Several studies have found differences in 
“prevalence” between self-reported and meas-
ured aspects of disability (15–18). Disability is 
interpreted in relation to what is considered 
normal functioning, which can vary based on 
the context, age group, or even income group 
Box 2.1. The Irish census and the disability survey of 2006
In April 2006 the Central Statistics Office in Ireland carried out a population census that included two questions on 
disability relating the presence of a long-term health condition and the impact of that condition on functioning. 
It found that 393 785 people in Ireland were disabled, a rate of 9.3%. Later in 2006 the Central Statistics Office’s 
National Disability Survey (NDS) followed up with a sample of those who had reported a disability in the census, 
plus a group of people in private households who had not reported a disability. The NDS used a broader defini-
tion of disability than the census, with more domains, including pain and breathing, and a measure of severity. 
Completed questionnaires were received from 14 518 people who had reported a disability in the census and 
from 1551 who had not done so.
There was a high degree of consistency between the responses to the census and the NDS:
 
■
of those in private households who reported a disability in the census, 88% also reported a disability in the NDS;
 
■
of those in non-private households who reported a disability in the census, 97% also reported a disability in the NDS;
 
■
of those in private households who did not report a disability in the census, 11.5% were found to have a dis-
ability in the NDS.
Extrapolating the NDS findings to the whole population produced an overall national disability rate of 18.5%. The 
differences in the disability rates obtained in the census and the NDS may result from the following:
 
■
The NDS used face-to-face interviews, while the census forms were self-completed.
 
■
The census was a large survey designed for a range of purposes. The NDS focused solely on disability defined 
as difficulties in functioning in any of the following domains: seeing, hearing, speech, mobility and dexterity, 
remembering and concentrating, intellectual and learning, emotional, psychological, and mental health, and 
pain and breathing.
 
■
The inclusion of a pain domain in the NDS resulted in a significantly higher disability rate, with 46% of those 
not reporting disabilities in the census reporting pain in the NDS.
 
■
Those who only reported a disability in the NDS had a lower level of difficulty and were more likely to have 
only a single disability, rather than disabilities in several domains.
 
■
More children reported a disability in the NDS than in the census, perhaps because of the more detailed 
questions in the NDS.
This example shows that prevalence estimates can be affected by the number and type of questions, the level-
of-difficulty scale, the range of explicit disabilities, and the survey methodology. The differences between the 
two measures are mainly due to the domains included and the threshold of the definition of disability. If the 
domain coverage is narrow (for example, pain is excluded) many people experiencing difficulties in functioning 
may be excluded. Where resources permit, specific surveys on disability, with comprehensive domain coverage, 
should be carried out in addition to a census. They provide more comprehensive data, across age groups, for 
policy and programmes.
Note: The actual questions used in the two surveys are available in the published reports.
Sources (5, 9).
 24
World report on disability
(2). For example, older persons may not self-
identify as having a disability, despite having 
significant difficulties in functioning, because 
they consider their level of functioning appro-
priate for their age.
Where children are involved, there are fur-
ther complexities. Parents or caregivers – the 
natural proxy responders in surveys – may not 
accurately represent the experience of the child 
(19). Questions in surveys developed for adults 
but used for children may also skew results. 
Imprecise or off-putting wording in the ques-
tions – such as using the word “disabled” when 
asking about difficulty with an activity (20, 21) 
– can also result in under-reporting (2).
Comparisons across populations must take 
these factors into account. Ideally, comparisons 
should adjust the data for differences in certain 
methodological effects – such as interviews and 
examination surveys – where such adjustments 
are soundly based.
A primary goal of collecting population 
data on people with disabilities is to iden-
tify strategies to improve their well-being. 
Comprehensive and systematic documentation 
of all aspects of functioning of the popula-
tion can support the design and monitoring of 
interventions. For instance, such data would 
enable policy-makers to assess the poten-
tial benefit of assistance programmes to help 
people with mobility limitations get to work or 
to assess interventions to reduce depression (2). 
Data on prevalence and need should be popu-
lation-based and relevant to policy, but at the 
same time not dependent on policy. If data are 
dependent on policy, estimated prevalence rates 
can suddenly change if, for example, the benefit 
system changed and people switched from an 
unemployment benefit to a disability benefit. 
With population data and administrative and 
service data based on the same basic concepts 
and frameworks, a strong integrated national 
information database can be developed.
International standards on data and stand-
ardized question sets can improve harmoniza-
tion across the various approaches. There have 
been attempts in recent years to standardize 
disability surveys (see Technical appendix B) 
(22, 23). But the definitions and methodolo-
gies used vary so greatly between countries that 
international comparisons still remain difficult. 
This also makes it hard for signatories of the 
CRPD to monitor their progress in implement-
ing the Convention against a common set of 
indicators.
Data gathered need to be relevant at the 
national level and comparable at the global 
level – both of which can be achieved by basing 
design on international standards, like the 
International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health (ICF).
International frameworks and resources 
are important in these efforts.
 
■
Policy frameworks and agreed principles 
are set out in the CRPD.
 
■
Information-related standards are pro-
vided by the ICF (24, 25).
 
■
Attempts to harmonize and standard-
ize question sets for assessment of health 
status and disability at population level 
are in progress (see Technical appendix B 
for information on European Statistical 
System, United Nations Washington Group 
on Disability Statistics, United Nations 
Economic and Social Commission for 
Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP), WHO 
Regional Office for the Americas/Pan 
American Health Organization/Budapest 
Initiative).
 
■
A training manual on disability statistics, 
prepared by WHO and UNESCAP, pro-
vides useful guidance on how countries 
can enhance their national statistics (26).
Prevalence of disability – 
difficulties in functioning
In examining the prevalence of disability in 
the world today, this Report presents country-
reported estimates of disability prevalence, as 
well as prevalence estimates based on two large 
data sources: the WHO World Health Survey of 
2002–2004, from 59 countries, and the WHO 
 25
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
Global Burden of Disease study, 2004 update. 
These sources can be used to examine the preva-
lence of disability, but they are not directly com-
parable because they use different approaches to 
estimating and measuring disability.
Country-reported 
disability prevalence
More countries have been collecting preva-
lence data on disability through censuses and 
surveys, with many having moved from an 
“impairment” approach to a “difficulties in 
functioning” approach. Estimated prevalence 
rates vary widely across and within countries 
(2, 11, 27). Box 2.1 shows variations between 
two sources of disability data in Ireland. 
Technical appendix A gives an idea of the varia-
tion across countries in conceptual framework, 
method, and prevalence – from under 1% of the 
population to over 30% – and illustrates the dif-
ficulties surrounding the comparison of exist-
ing national data sets. As discussed previously, 
most developing countries report disability 
prevalence rates below those reported in many 
developed countries, because they collect data 
on a narrow set of impairments, which yield 
lower disability prevalence estimates.
A growing number of countries are using 
the ICF framework and related question sets 
in their national surveys and censuses (5–8, 
28–30). Experience in Zambia that makes use 
of the Washington Group’s six questions for 
census is outlined in Box 2.2. These efforts by 
countries – together with global and regional 
initiatives (see technical appendices A and B for 
details) – will eventually lead to more stand-
ardized and thus more comparable estimates of 
country disability prevalence.
Global estimates of 
disability prevalence
The two sources of statistical information to esti-
mate global disability prevalence in this Report, 
the World Health Survey and the Global Burden 
of Disease, both have limitations with regard to 
disability. So the prevalence estimates presented 
here should be taken not as definitive but as 
reflecting current knowledge and available data.
Estimates based on the WHO 
World Health Survey
The World Health Survey, a face-to-face house-
hold survey in 2002–2004, is the largest multi-
national health and disability survey ever using 
a single set of questions and consistent methods 
to collect comparable health data across coun-
tries. The conceptual framework and func-
tioning domains for the World Health Survey 
came from the ICF (24, 32). The questionnaire 
covered the health of individuals in various 
domains, health system responsiveness, house-
hold expenditures, and living conditions (33). 
A total of 70 countries were surveyed, of which 
59 countries, representing 64% of the world 
population, had weighted data sets that were 
used for estimating the prevalence of disability 
of the world’s adult population aged 18 years 
and older (33). The countries in the survey were 
chosen based on several considerations:
 
■
the need to fill data gaps in geographical 
regions where data were most lacking, such 
as sub-Saharan Africa;
 
■
a spread of countries that would include 
high-income, middle-income, and low-
income countries with a focus on low-
income and middle-income countries;
 
■
inclusion of countries with large adult 
populations.
The samples were drawn from each coun-
try’s sampling frame at the time of the World 
Health Survey, using a stratified, multistage 
cluster. The survey used a consistent conceptual 
framework to identify measurement domains.
The choice of domains to include in the 
World Health Survey was informed by analy-
sis of WHO’s MultiCountry Survey Study 
(MCSS). To arrive at the most parsimonious set 
of domains that would explain most of the vari-
ance in the valuation of health and functioning, 
the domains of affect, cognition, interpersonal 
relationships, mobility, pain, sleep and energy, 
 26
World report on disability
self-care, and vision were included. Although 
hearing impairment is the most common of 
sensory impairments and markedly increases 
with age, reporting biases in general popula-
tion surveys, low-endorsement rates in the 
general population, and the domain of hear-
ing not contributing significantly to explaining 
the variance led to this domain being dropped 
from the World Health Survey (15, 34).
Possible self-reported responses to the ques-
tions on difficulties in functioning included: no 
difficulty, mild difficulty, moderate difficulty, 
severe difficulty, and extreme difficulty. These 
were scored, and a composite disability score cal-
culated, ranging from 0 to 100, where 0 represented 
“no disability” and 100 was “complete disability”. 
This process produced a continuous score range. 
To divide the population into “disabled” and 
“not disabled” groups it was necessary to create a 
threshold value (cut-off point). A threshold of 40 
on the scale 0–100 was set to include within esti-
mates of disability, those experiencing significant 
Box 2.2. Using the Washington Group questions to understand disability in Zambia
The Washington Group on Disability Statistics was set up by the United Nations Statistical Commission in 2001 
as an international, consultative group of experts to facilitate the measurement of disability and the comparison 
of data on disability across countries. The Washington Group applies an ICF-based approach to disability and 
follows the principles and practices of national statistical agencies as defined by the United Nations Statistical 
Commission. Its questions cover six functional domains or basic actions: seeing, hearing, mobility, cognition, 
self-care, and communication. The questions asking about difficulties in performing certain activities because 
of a health problem are as follows.
1. Do you have difficulty seeing, even if wearing glasses?
2. Do you have difficulty hearing, even if using a hearing aid?
3. Do you have difficulty walking or climbing steps?
4. Do you have difficulty remembering or concentrating?
5. Do you have difficulty with self-care, such as washing all over or dressing?
6. Using your usual (customary) language, do you have difficulty communicating (for example, understanding 
or being understood by others)?
Each question has four types of response, designed to capture the full spectrum of functioning, from mild to 
severe: no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty and unable to do it at all.
This set of Washington Group questions was included in a 2006 survey of living conditions in Zambia. They had 
screened people with conditions, which had lasted or were expected to last for six months or more. The prevalence 
of difficulty in each of the six domains could be calculated from the responses (see table below). 
Prevalence of disability by domain and degree of difficulty, Zambia 2006
Core domains
Degree of difficulty
At least some difficulty (%)
At least a lot of difficulty (%)
Unable to do it at all (%)
Seeing
4.7
2.6
0.5
Hearing
3.7
2.3
0.5
Mobility
5.1
3.8
0.8
Cognition
2.0
1.5
0.3
Self-care
2.0
1.3
0.4
Communication
2.1
1.4
0.5
  
Note: n = 28 010; 179 missing.
Source (31).
continues ...
 27
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
difficulties in their everyday lives. A threshold of 
50 was set to estimate the prevalence of persons 
experiencing very significant difficulties. A full 
account of the survey method and the process of 
setting the threshold is in Technical appendix C.
Across all 59 countries the average preva-
lence rate in the adult population aged 18 years 
and over derived from the World Health Survey 
was 15.6% (some 650 million people of the esti-
mated 4.2 billion adults aged 18 and older in 
2004 (35)) (see Table 2.1) ranging from 11.8% 
in higher income countries to 18.0% in lower 
income countries. This figure refers to adults who 
experienced significant functioning difficulties 
in their everyday lives (see Technical appendix 
C). The average prevalence rate for adults with 
very significant difficulties was estimated at 
2.2% or about 92 million people in 2004.
If the prevalence figures are extrapolated 
to cover adults 15 years and older, around 720 
million people have difficulties in functioning 
with around 100 million experiencing very sig-
nificant difficulties.
These estimates do not directly indicate the 
need for specific services. Estimating the size 
of the target group for services requires more 
specific information about the aims of services 
and the domain and extent of disability.
Across all countries, vulnerable groups 
such as women, those in the poorest wealth 
quintile, and older people had higher preva-
lences of disability. For all these groups the 
rate was higher in developing countries. The 
prevalence of disability in lower income coun-
tries among people aged 60 years and above, for 
instance, was 43.4%, compared with 29.5% in 
higher income countries.
Several limitations or uncertainties sur-
rounding the World Health Survey data, 
described further in Technical appendix C, 
need to be noted. These include the valid debate 
regarding how best to set the threshold for 
disability, and the still unexplained variations 
across countries in self-reported difficulties 
in functioning, and the influence of cultural 
differences in expectations about functional 
... continued
Within each degree of difficulty, problems encountered with mobility were the most prevalent, followed by 
seeing and hearing difficulties. The results in the table were not mutually exclusive, and many individuals had a 
disability that covered more than one domain.
Measures that reflect the multidimensionality of disability, constructed from the results of the Washington Group 
questions, are in the table below.
Measures reflecting multidimensionality of disability, Zambia 2006
Number
Percent
At least one domain is scored “some difficulty” (or higher)
4053
14.5
At least one domain is scored “a lot of difficulty” (or higher). This measure excludes those 
with the mildest degrees of difficulty.
2368
8.5
At least one domain is scored “cannot do it at all”. This measure focuses on the most 
severe levels of difficulty.
673
2.4
More than one domain is scored “some difficulty” (or higher). This measure focuses on 
difficulties with multiple actions.
1718
6.1
  
Note: n = 28 010.
Source (31).
As in the first table, higher prevalence rates are associated with definitions of disability that include milder or 
lesser degrees of difficulty. The relatively low overall prevalence rates for disability reported in many low-income 
countries (such as the figure of 2.7% in Zambia in 2000) may correspond more closely to rates of severe disability 
in these countries.
 28
World report on disability
requirements and other environmental fac-
tors, which the statistical methods could not 
adjust for.
Estimates based on the WHO 
Global Burden of Disease study
The second set of estimates of the global dis-
ability prevalence is derived from the Global 
Burden of Disease study, 2004 update. The first 
Global Burden of Disease study was commis-
sioned in 1990 by the World Bank to assess the 
relative burden of premature mortality and 
disability from different diseases, injuries, and 
risk factors (38, 39).
In response to criticisms of disability-
adjusted life-years (DALYs) in the original 
Global Burden of Disease study (10, 40–42), the 
concept has been further developed – for exam-
ple, the use of population-based health state 
valuations in preference to expert opinion and 
better methods for cross-national comparabil-
ity of survey data on health states (43, 44). The 
disability weights – years lived with disability 
(YLD) – used in the DALYs attempt to quantify 
the functional status of individuals in terms of 
their capacities and ignore environmental fac-
tors. The YLD uses a set of core health domains 
including mobility, dexterity, affect, pain, cog-
nition, vision, and hearing.
Table 2.1. Disability prevalence rates for thresholds 40 and 50 derived from multidomain functioning 
levels in 59 countries, by country income level, sex, age, place of residence, and wealth
Population 
subgroup
Threshold of 40
Threshold of 50
Higher 
income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
Lower 
income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
All countries 
(standard 
error)
Higher income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
Lower income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
All countries 
(standard 
error)
Sex
Male
9.1 (0.32)
13.8 (0.22)
12.0 (0.18)
1.0 (0.09)
1.7 (0.07)
1.4 (0.06)
Female
14.4 (0.32)
22.1 (0.24)
19.2 (0.19)
1.8 (0.10)
3.3 (0.10)
2.7 (0.07)
 
Age group
18–49
6.4 (0.27)
10.4 (0.20)
8.9 (0.16)
0.5 (0.06)
0.8 (0.04)
0.7 (0.03)
50–59
15.9 (0.63)
23.4 (0.48)
20.6 (0.38)
1.7 (0.23)
2.7 (0.19)
2.4 (0.14)
60 and over
29.5 (0.66)
43.4 (0.47)
38.1 (0.38)
4.4 (0.25)
9.1 (0.27)
7.4 (0.19)
 
Place of 
residence
Urban
11.3 (0.29)
16.5 (0.25)
14.6 (0.19)
1.2 (0.08)
2.2 (0.09)
2.0 (0.07)
Rural
12.3 (0.34)
18.6 (0.24)
16.4 (0.19)
1.7 (0.13)
2.6 (0.08)
2.3 (0.07)
 
Wealth quintile
Q1(poorest)
17.6 (0.58)
22.4 (0.36)
20.7 (0.31)
2.4 (0.22)
3.6 (0.13)
3.2 (0.11)
Q2
13.2 (0.46)
19.7 (0.31)
17.4 (0.25)
1.8 (0.19)
2.5 (0.11)
2.3 (0.10)
Q3
11.6 (0.44)
18.3 (0.30)
15.9 (0.25)
1.1 (0.14)
2.1 (0.11)
1.8 (0.09)
Q4
8.8 (0.36)
16.2 (0.27)
13.6 (0.22)
0.8 (0.08)
2.3 (0.11)
1.7 (0.08)
Q5(richest)
6.5 (0.35)
13.3 (0.25)
11.0 (0.20)
0.5 (0.07)
1.6 (0.09)
1.2 (0.07)
 
Total
11.8 (0.24)
18.0 (0.19)
15.6 (0.15)
2.0 (0.13)
2.3 (0.09)
2.2 (0.07)
  
Note: Prevalence rates are standardized for age and sex. Countries are divided between low-income and high-income 
according to their 2004 gross national income (GNI) per capita (36). The dividing point is a GNI of US$ 3255.
Source (37).
 29
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
In recent years the WHO has reassessed the 
Global Burden of Disease for 2000–2004, drawing 
on available data sources to produce estimates 
of incidence, prevalence, severity, duration, and 
mortality for more than 130 health conditions for 
17 subregions of the world (45, 46). The Global 
Burden of Disease study starts with the preva-
lence of diseases and injuries and distributions of 
limitations in functioning – where available – in 
different regions of the world, and then estimates 
the severity of related disability (46).
The analysis of the Global Burden of Disease 
2004 data for this Report estimates that 15.3% 
of the world population (some 978 million 
people of the estimated 6.4 billion in 2004 (35)) 
had “moderate or severe disability”, while 2.9% 
or about 185 million experienced “severe dis-
ability” (see Table 2.2). Among those aged 0–14 
years, the figures were 5.1% and 0.7%, or 93 
million and 13 million children, respectively. 
Among those 15 years and older, the figures 
were 19.4% and 3.8%, or 892 million and 175 
million, respectively.
The Global Burden of Disease study has 
given considerable attention to the internal con-
sistency and comparability of estimates across 
populations for specific diseases and causes of 
injury, severity, and distributions of limitations 
in functioning. But it is not appropriate to infer 
the overall picture of disability from health con-
ditions and impairments alone. There is sub-
stantial uncertainty about the Global Burden 
of Disease estimates – particularly for regions 
of the world and for conditions where the data 
are scarce or of poor quality – and about assess-
ments of the average severity of related dis-
ability, whether based on published studies or 
expert opinion (see Technical appendix D).
About the prevalence estimates
National survey and census data cannot be com-
pared directly with the World Health Survey or 
Global Burden of Disease estimates, because 
there is no consistent approach across countries 
to disability definitions and survey questions.
In 2004, the latest year for which data are 
available from surveys and burden of disease 
estimates, the World Health Survey and Global 
Burden of Disease results based on very differ-
ent measurement approaches and assumptions, 
give global prevalence estimates among the 
adult population of 15.6% and 19.4% respec-
tively. The World Health Survey gives the preva-
lence of adults with very significant difficulties 
in functioning at 2.2%, while the Global Burden 
of Disease data indicate that 3.8% of the adult 
population is estimated to have “severe disabil-
ity” – the equivalent of disability inferred for 
conditions such as quadriplegia, severe depres-
sion, or blindness.
Based on 2010 population estimates – 6.9 
billion with 5.04 billion 15 years and over and 
1.86 billion under 15 years – and 2004 disability 
prevalence estimates (World Health Survey and 
Global Burden of Disease) there were around 
785 (15.6%) to 975 (19.4%) million persons 15 
years and older living with disability. Of these, 
around 110 (2.2%) to 190 (3.8%) million expe-
rienced significant difficulties in functioning. 
Including children, over a billion people (or 
about 15% of the world’s population) were esti-
mated to be living with disability.
This is higher than WHO estimates from 
the 1970s, which suggested a global prevalence 
of around 10% (47). The World Health Survey 
estimate includes respondents who reported 
significant difficulties in everyday function-
ing. Against this, the Global Burden of Disease 
estimates result from setting a cut-off based on 
average disability weights that corresponds to 
the disability weights for typical health states 
associated with such conditions as low vision, 
arthritis, and angina. From these two sources, 
only the Global Burden of Disease provides data 
on prevalence of disability in children – see the 
section below on factors affecting disability 
prevalence for a broader discussion on child-
hood disability.
The overall prevalence rates from both 
the World Health Survey and Global Burden of 
Disease analyses are determined by the thresh-
olds chosen for disability. Different choices of 
thresholds result in different overall prevalence 
rates, even if fairly similar approaches are used 
 30
World report on disability 
Table 2.2. Estimated prevalence of moderate and severe disability, by region, sex, and age, Global 
Burden of Disease estimates for 2004
Sex/age group
Percent
World
High-
income 
countries
Low-income and middle-income countries, WHO region
African
Americas
South-
East 
Asia
European
Eastern 
Mediterranean
Western 
Pacific
Severe disability
Males
    0–14 years
0.7
0.4
1.2
0.7
0.7
0.9
0.9
0.5
    15–59 years
2.6
2.2
3.3
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.4
    ≥ 60 years
9.8
7.9
15.7
9.2
11.9
7.3
11.8
9.8
Females
    0–14 years
0.7
0.4
1.2
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
    15–59 years
2.8
2.5
3.3
2.6
3.1
2.7
3.0
2.4
    ≥ 60 years
10.5
9.0
17.9
9.2
13.2
7.2
13.0
10.3
All people
    0–14 years
0.7
0.4
1.2
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.5
    15–59 years
2.7
2.3
3.3
2.6
2.9
2.7
3.0
2.4
    ≥ 60 years
10.2
8.5
16.9
9.2
12.6
7.2
12.4
10.0
    ≥ 15 years
3.8
3.8
4.5
3.4
4.0
3.6
3.9
3.4
All ages
2.9
3.2
3.1
2.6
2.9
3.0
2.8
2.7
 
Moderate and 
severe disability
Males
    0–14 years
5.2
2.9
6.4
4.6
5.3
4.4
5.3
5.4
    15–59 years
14.2
12.3
16.4
14.3
14.8
14.9
13.7
14.0
    ≥ 60 years
45.9
36.1
52.1
45.1
57.5
41.9
53.1
46.4
Females
    0–14 years
5.0
2.8
6.5
4.3
5.2
4.0
5.2
5.2
    15–59 years
15.7
12.6
21.6
14.9
18.0
13.7
17.3
13.3
    ≥ 60 years
46.3
37.4
54.3
43.6
60.1
41.1
54.4
47.0
All people
    0–14 years
5.1
2.8
6.4
4.5
5.2
4.2
5.2
5.3
    15–59 years
14.9
12.4
19.1
14.6
16.3
14.3
15.5
13.7
    ≥ 60 years
46.1
36.8
53.3
44.3
58.8
41.4
53.7
46.7
    ≥ 15 years
19.4
18.3
22.0
18.3
21.1
19.5
19.1
18.1
All ages
15.3
15.4
15.3
14.1
16.0
16.4
14.0
15.0
  
Note: High-income countries are those with a 2004 gross national income (GNI) per capita of US$ 10 066 or more in 2004, 
as estimated by the World Bank. Low-income and middle-income countries are grouped according to WHO region and are 
those with a 2004 GNI per capita of less than US$ 10 066 in 2004, as estimated by the World Bank. Severe disability com-
prises classes VI and VII, moderate and severe disability, classes III and above.
Source (36).
 31
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
in setting the threshold. This methodological 
point needs to be borne in mind when consid-
ering these new estimates of global prevalence.
The World Health Survey and Global Burden 
of Disease results appear reasonably similar in 
Fig. 2.1, which shows average prevalence for 
countries by income band. But the sex ratio 
for disability differs greatly between the World 
Health Survey and the Global Burden of Disease 
(see Table 2.1 and Table 2.2). At the global 
level, the Global Burden of Disease estimates of 
moderate and severe disability prevalence are 
11% higher for females than males, reflecting 
somewhat higher age-specific prevalences in 
females, but also the greater number of older 
women in the population than older men. But 
the World Health Survey estimates give a female 
prevalence of disability nearly 60% higher than 
that for males. It is likely that the differences 
between females and males in the World Health 
Survey study result to some extent from differ-
ences in the use of response categories.
The average prevalences from country sur-
veys and censuses, calculated from population-
weighted average prevalences in Technical 
appendix A, are much lower in low-income and 
middle-income countries than in high-income 
countries, and much lower than prevalences 
derived from the World Health Survey or Global 
Burden of Disease (see Fig. 2.1). This probably 
reflects the fact that most developing countries 
tend to focus on impairment questions in their 
surveys, while some developed country surveys 
are more concerned with broader areas of par-
ticipation and the need for services. The World 
Health Survey results show variation across 
countries within each income band, possibly 
reflecting cross-country and within-country 
differences in the interpretation of categories 
by people with the same levels of difficulty in 
functioning. The variation across countries in 
the Global Burden of Disease results is smaller, 
but this is due to some extent to the extrapo-
lation of country estimates from regional 
analyses.
While the prevalence data in this Report 
draw on the best available global data sets, they 
are not definitive estimates. There is an urgent 
need for more robust, comparable, and com-
plete data collection. Generally, a better knowl-
edge base is required on the prevalence, nature, 
and extent of disability—both at a national level 
where policies are designed and implemented, 
but also in a globally comparable manner, with 
changes monitored over time. In the quest for 
more reliable and comprehensive national and 
international data on disability, the ICF pro-
vides a common platform for measurement and 
data collection. The ICF is neither a measure-
ment tool nor a survey instrument, but a clas-
sification that can provide a standard for health 
and disability statistics and help in the difficult 
Fig. 2.1. Global disability prevalence estimates 
from different sources
0
5
10
15
20
25
Prevalence (%)
30
WHS
Surveys
GBD
WHS
Surveys
GBD
WHS
Surveys
GBD
WHS
Surveys
GBD
High-income 
countries
Middle-income 
countries
Low-income 
countries
World
Note: This figure compares the population-weighted 
average prevalence of disability for high-income, middle-
income, and low-income countries from multiple sources. 
The solid grey bars show the average prevalence based 
on available data, the range lines indicate the 10th and 
90th percentiles for available country prevalence within 
each income group. The data used for this figure are 
not age standardized and cannot be directly compared 
with Table 2.1 and Table 2.3. WHS = World Health Survey; 
GBD = the Global Burden of Disease, 2004 update; 
Surveys = Technical appendix A.
Sources (37, 46).
 32
World report on disability
task of harmonizing approaches towards esti-
mating disability prevalence.
Disability prevalence is the result of a com-
plex and dynamic relationship between health 
conditions and contextual factors, both per-
sonal and environmental.
Health conditions
The relationship between health conditions and 
disabilities is complicated. Whether a health 
condition, interacting with contextual factors, 
will result in disability is determined by inter-
related factors.
Often the interaction of several condi-
tions rather than a single one contributes to 
the relationship between health conditions 
and disability. Co-morbidity, associated with 
more severe disability than single conditions, 
has implications for disability. Also the pres-
ence of multiple health problems can make the 
management of health care and rehabilitation 
services more difficult (48–50). Chronic health 
problems often occur together. For example, 
one chronic physical health condition, such 
as arthritis, significantly increases the likeli-
hood of another physical health condition and 
mental health conditions (51, 52). So the aspect 
of disability that may be reported as primarily 
associated with one health condition may often 
be related to several coexisting conditions.
It is not possible to produce definitive global 
statistics on the relationship between disability 
and health conditions. Studies that try to cor-
relate health conditions and disability without 
taking into account environmental effects are 
likely to be deficient.
The evidence suggests that the two main 
approaches to dealing with disability and asso-
ciated health conditions yield different results. 
These approaches:
 
■
Estimate disability and then look at associ-
ated health conditions – as in population 
surveys such as those mentioned under 
the section on noncommunicable diseases, 
which can contribute to developing an 
empirical base.
 
■
Estimate the prevalence of health condi-
tions and then apportion disability – as 
in the synthetic estimates derived from 
the Global Burden of Disease study (see 
Technical appendix D) (46).
Trends in health conditions 
associated with disability
A growing body of statistical evidence presents 
a complex picture of shifting risk factors for 
different age and socioeconomic groups, with 
a pronounced increase in the prevalence of 
chronic conditions in the general population. 
Discussed here are trends in three broad cat-
egories of health conditions – infectious dis-
eases, chronic conditions, and injuries.
Infectious diseases
Infectious diseases, may create, or be defined 
in terms of impairments. They are estimated to 
account for 9% of the years lived with disability 
in low-income and middle-income countries 
(46). Prominent among them are lymphatic 
filariasis, tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, and other 
sexually transmitted diseases. Less prominent 
are diseases with neurological consequences, 
such as encephalitis (53, 54), meningitis (55, 
56), and childhood cluster diseases – such as 
measles, mumps, and poliomyelitis (57).
Some of the trends in significant infectious 
diseases associated with disability:
 
■
At the end of 2008 an estimated 33.4 mil-
lion people worldwide – about 0.5% of the 
world population – were living with HIV. 
Between 2000 and 2008 the number of 
people living with HIV rose by 20%, but the 
annual global incidence of HIV infection 
is estimated to have declined by 17%. Sub-
Saharan Africa remains the region most 
affected (58).
 
■
Malaria is endemic in 109 countries, 
compared with 140 in the 1950s. In 7 
of 45 African countries or territories 
with smaller populations, malaria cases 
 33
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
and deaths fell by at least 50% between 
2000 and 2006. In 22 countries in other 
regions, malaria cases also fell by at least 
50% (59).
 
■
Polio cases fell more than 99% in 18 years, 
from an estimated 350 000 cases in 1988, to 
1604 in 2009 (60). In 2010 only four coun-
tries – Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and 
Pakistan – remain polio-endemic, down 
from more than 125 in 1988 (60, 61).
 
■
The elimination of leprosy, to less than 1 per 
10 000 population, was attained at the global 
level by 2000. At the beginning of 2003 the 
number of leprosy patients in the world was 
around 530 000, as reported by 106 coun-
tries. The number of countries with preva-
lence rates above 1 per 10 000 population fell 
from 122 in 1985 to 12 in 2002. Brazil, India, 
Madagascar, Mozambique, and Nepal are 
the most endemic countries (62).
 
■
Trachoma, once endemic in many coun-
tries, is now largely confined to the poorest 
population groups in 40 developing coun-
tries, affecting about 84 million people, 8 
million of them visually impaired (63). 
The prevalence of trachoma-related visual 
impairment has fallen considerably over 
the past two decades due to disease control 
and socioeconomic development (64).
Noncommunicable chronic diseases
The increase in diabetes, cardiovascular dis-
eases (heart disease and stroke), mental disor-
ders, cancer, and respiratory illnesses, observed 
in all parts of the world, will have a profound 
effect on disability (65–73). They are estimated 
to account for 66.5% of all years lived with 
disability in low-income and middle-income 
countries (46).
National surveys present a more detailed 
picture of the types of health conditions asso-
ciated with disabilities:
 
■
In a 1998 population survey in Australia 
of people (of all ages) with disabilities, the 
most common disability-related health 
conditions reported were: arthritis, back 
problems, hearing disorders, hypertension, 
heart disease, asthma, and vision disorders, 
followed by noise-induced hearing loss, 
speech problems, diabetes, stroke, depres-
sion, and dementia (74). The pattern varied 
with age and the extent of disability (74).
 
■
In Canada, for adults aged 15 years and 
over with disabilities, a 2006 study found 
that the most common health conditions 
related to disability were arthritis, back 
problems, and hearing disorders. Other 
conditions included heart disease, soft 
tissue disorders such as bursitis and fibro-
myalgia, affective disorders, asthma, vision 
disorders, and diabetes. Among children 
aged 0–14 years, many of the most common 
health conditions were related to difficul-
ties in learning. They included learning dis-
abilities, specifically autism and attention 
deficit (with and without hyperactivity), as 
well as high levels of asthma and hearing 
problems. Other health conditions found 
in young people included speech problems, 
dyslexia, cerebral palsy, vision disorders, 
and congenital abnormalities (75).
 
■
A 2001 OECD study in the United States of 
the top 10 conditions associated with dis-
ability found rheumatism to be the leading 
cause among elderly people, accounting for 
30% of adults aged 65 years or older who 
reported limitations in their “activities of 
daily living”. Heart problems were second, 
accounting for 23%. The other main disa-
bling conditions were hypertension, back 
or neck problems, diabetes, vision disor-
ders, lung and breathing problems, frac-
tures, stroke, and hearing problems (76).
It is projected that there will continue to be 
large increases in non-communicable disease-
related YLDs in rapidly developing regions (65, 
77, 78). Several factors help explain the upward 
trend: population ageing, reduction in infec-
tious conditions, lower fertility, and changing 
lifestyles related to tobacco, alcohol, diet, and 
physical activity (39, 65, 79, 80).
 34
World report on disability
Injuries
Road traffic injury, occupational injury, vio-
lence, and humanitarian crises have long been 
recognized as contributors to disability (see 
Box 2.3). However, data on the magnitude 
of their contribution are very limited. Injury 
surveillance tends to focus exclusively on near-
term outcomes such as mortality or the acute-
care consequences of injury (83). For example, 
between 1.2 million and 1.4 million people die 
every year as a result of road traffic crashes. A 
further 20 to 50 million more are injured (84–
86). The number of people disabled as a result of 
these crashes is not well documented.
A recent systematic review of the risk of 
disability among motor vehicle drivers sur-
viving crashes showed substantial variability 
in derived estimates. Prevalence estimates of 
post-crash disability varied from 2% to 87%, 
largely a result of the methodological diffi-
culties in measuring the non-fatal outcomes 
following injuries (87). In Belgium a study 
using the country’s Official Disability Rating 
Scale (a tool insurance companies use to assess 
disability rates among specific patients) found 
that 11% of workers injured in a road traffic 
crash on their way to or from work sustained 
a permanent disability (88). In Sweden 10% of 
all car occupants with an Abbreviated Injury 
Scale of 1 (the lowest injury score) sustained a 
permanent impairment (89).
Road traffic injuries are estimated to account 
for 1.7% of all years lived with disability – vio-
lence and conflict, for an additional 1.4% (46).
Demographics
Older persons
Global ageing has a major influence on disabil-
ity trends. The relationship here is straightfor-
ward: there is higher risk of disability at older 
Box 2.3. Assistance for people with disabilities in conflict situations
Armed conflict generates injuries and trauma that can result in disabilities. For those incurring such injuries, the 
situation is often exacerbated by delays in obtaining emergency health care and longer-term rehabilitation. In 
2009 in Gaza an assessment found such problems as (81):
 
■
complications and long-term disability from traumatic injuries, from lack of appropriate follow-up;
 
■
complications and premature mortality in individuals with chronic diseases, as a result of suspended treatment 
and delayed access to health care;
 
■
permanent hearing loss caused by explosions, stemming from the lack of early screening and appropriate treatment;
 
■
long-term mental health problems from the continuing insecurity and the lack of protection.
As many as half of the 5000 men, women, and children injured over the first three weeks of the conflict could have 
permanent impairments, aggravated by the inability of rehabilitation workers to provide early intervention (82).
In situations of conflict, those with disabilities are entitled to assistance and protection. Humanitarian organiza-
tions do not always respond to the needs of people with disabilities promptly, and gaining access to persons with 
disabilities who are scattered among affected communities can be difficult. A variety of measures can reduce the 
vulnerability of persons with disabilities including:
 
■
effective planning to meet disability needs by humanitarian organizations before crises;
 
■
assessments of the specific needs of people with disabilities;
 
■
provisions of appropriate services;
 
■
referral and follow-up services where necessary.
These measures may be carried out directly or through mainstreaming. The needs of families and carers must 
also be taken into account, both among the displaced population and in the host communities. In emergencies 
linked to conflicts, the measures need to be flexible and capable of following the target population, adjusting 
quickly as the situation evolves.
 35
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
ages, and national populations are ageing at 
unprecedented rates.
Higher disability rates among older people 
reflect an accumulation of health risks across a 
lifespan of disease, injury, and chronic illness 
(74). The disability prevalence among people 
45 years and older in low-income countries 
is higher than in high-income countries, and 
higher among women than among men.
Older people are disproportionately repre-
sented in disability populations (see Fig. 2.2). 
They make up 10.7% of the general population 
of Australia and 35.2% of Australians with dis-
abilities (29). In Sri Lanka, 6.6% of the general 
population are 65 years or older represent-
ing 22.5% of people with disabilities. Rates of 
disability are much higher among those aged 
80 to 89 years, the fastest-growing age cohort 
worldwide, increasing at 3.9% a year (90) and 
projected to account for 20% of the global 
population 60 years or older by 2050 (91). See 
Fig. 2.3 for the contribution of ageing to the 
disability prevalence in selected countries.
The ageing population in many countries 
is associated with higher rates of survival to 
an older age and reduced fertility (99). Despite 
differences between developing and developed 
nations, median ages are projected to increase 
markedly in all countries (99). This is an histor-
ically important demographic transition, well 
under way in high-income nations, and pro-
jected to become more marked across the globe 
throughout the 21st century (see Table 2.3) (90, 
99, 100).
Studies report contradictory trends in the 
prevalence of disability among older age groups 
in some countries, but the growing proportions 
of older people in national populations and the 
increased numbers of the “oldest old” most at 
risk of disability are well documented (76, 101). 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) has concluded that 
it would be unwise for policy-makers to expect 
Fig. 2.2. Age-specific disability prevalence, derived from multidomain functioning levels in 59 
countries, by country income level and sex
45–54
55–64
65–74
75+
45–54
55–64
65–74
75+
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Prevalence (%)
Prevalence (%)
Low-income countries
High-income countries
Total
Female
Male
Age group (years)
Age group (years)
Source (37).
Fig. 2.3. Distribution of ages within disability 
populations
Percentage of disability population
< 65 years                      ≥ 65 years
Australia
 2003
Canada
 2006
Germany
 2007
Ireland
 2006
New Zealand
 2006
South Africa
 2001
Sri Lanka
 2001
USA
 2007
35.2
64.8
39.8
60.2
54.3
45.7
36.1
63.9
33.4
66.6
18.6
81.4
22.5
77.5
35.6
64.4
Sources (5, 92–98).
 36
World report on disability
that reductions in severe disability among older 
people will offset increased demands for long-
term care (76).
Children
Estimates of the prevalence of children with dis-
abilities vary substantially depending on the def-
inition and measure of disability. As presented 
above, the Global Burden of Disease estimates 
the number of children aged 0–14 years expe-
riencing “moderate or severe disability” at 93 
million (5.1%), with 13 million (0.7%) children 
experiencing severe difficulties (46). In 2005 the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) esti-
mated the number of children with disabilities 
under age 18 at 150 million (102). A recent review 
of the literature in low- and middle-income 
countries reports child disability prevalence 
from 0.4% to 12.7% depending on the study and 
assessment tool (103). A review in low-income 
countries pointed to the problems in identifying 
and characterizing disability as a result of the 
lack of cultural and language-specific tools for 
assessment (104). This may account in part for 
the variation in prevalence figures and suggests 
that children with disabilities are not being 
identified or receiving needed services.
The functioning of a child should be seen 
not in isolation but in the context of the family 
and the social environment. Children under 
age 5 in developing countries are exposed to 
multiple risks, including poverty, malnutrition, 
poor health, and unstimulating home environ-
ments, which can impair cognitive, motor, and 
social-emotional development (105). Children 
screening positive for increased risk of dis-
ability are less likely to have been breastfed or 
to have received a vitamin A supplement. As 
the severity of stunting and being underweight 
increases, so does the proportion of children 
screening positive for risk of disability (106). 
An estimated 200 million children under age 
5 fail to reach their potential in cognitive and 
social-emotional development (105).
In its Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys 
(MICS), for ages 2–9, UNICEF used 10 ques-
tions to screen children for risk of disability 
(106). These studies were found to lead to a large 
number of false positives – an overestimate of 
the prevalence of disability (107). Clinical and 
diagnostic evaluation of children who screen 
positive is required to obtain more definitive 
data on the prevalence of child disability. The 
MICS were administered in 19 languages to 
more than 200 000 children in 20 participating 
countries. Between 14% and 35% of children 
screened positive for risk of disability in most 
countries. Some authors argue that the screen-
ing was less able to identify children at risk of 
disabilities related to mental health conditions 
(108, 109). Also data from selected countries 
indicated that children in ethnic minority 
groups were more likely than other children 
to screen positive for disability. There was also 
evidence of regional variation within countries. 
Children who screened positive for increased 
risk of disability were also more likely than 
others:
 
■
to come from poorer households;
Table 2.3. Global ageing trends: median age by country income
Country income level
Median Age (years)
1950
1975
2005
2050
High-income countries
29.0
31.1
38.6
45.7
Middle-income countries
21.8
19.6
26.6
39.4
Low-income countries
19.5
17.6
19.0
27.9
World
23.9
22.4
28.0
38.1
  
Note: Middle estimate.
Source (91).
 37
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
 
■
to face discrimination and restricted access 
to social services, including early-child-
hood education;
 
■
to be underweight and have stunted growth;
 
■
to be subject to severe physical punishment 
from their parents (106).
The environment
The effects of environmental factors on disabil-
ity are complex.
Health conditions are affected 
by environmental factors
For some environmental factors such as low 
birth weight and a lack of essential dietary 
nutrients, such as iodine or folic acid, the impact 
on the incidence and prevalence of health con-
ditions associated with disability is well estab-
lished in the epidemiological literature (106, 
110, 111). But the picture differs greatly because 
exposure to poor sanitation, malnutrition, and 
a lack of access to health care (say, for immuni-
zation) are all highly variable around the world, 
often associated with other social phenomena 
such as poverty, which also represents a risk for 
disability (see Table 2.4) (80).
People’s environments have a huge effect on 
the prevalence and extent of disability. Major 
environmental changes, such as those caused 
by natural disasters or conflict situations, will 
also affect the prevalence of disability not only 
by changing impairments but also by creating 
barriers in the physical environment. By con-
trast, campaigns to change negative attitudes 
towards persons with disabilities and large-
scale changes to improve accessibility in the 
transport system or to public infrastructure 
will reduce barriers to activities and participa-
tion for many persons with disabilities. Other 
environmental changes include assistance pro-
vided by another person or an adapted or spe-
cially designed tool, device, or vehicle, or any 
form of environmental modification to a room, 
home, or workplace.
Measuring these interactions can provide 
useful information on whether to target the 
individual (providing an assistive device), the 
society 
(implementing 
anti-discrimination 
laws), or both (see Box 2.4) (118).
Table 2.4. Selected risk trends in selected countries
Country
Access to adequate 
sanitation (%)
Households consum-
ing iodine (%)a
Infants with low birth 
weight (%)a
One-year-olds with 
DTP immunization 
(%)b
1990
2006
1992–
1996
1998–2005
1990–1994
1998–2005
1997–1999
2005
Argentina
81
91
90
90c
7
8
86
90
Bangladesh
26
36
44
70
50
36
69
96
China
48
65
51
93
9
4
85
95
Egypt
50
66
0
78
10
12
94
98
Ghana
6
10
10
28
7
16
72
88
Iran
83
–
82
94
9
7c
100
97
Mexico
56
81
87
91
8
8
87
99
Thailand
78
96
50
63
13
9
97
99
  
a. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified in the column heading. 
b. DTP = Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis.
c. Data refer to years or periods other than those specified in the column heading, differ from the standard definition, or 
refer to only part of a country.
Sources (112–115).
 38
World report on disability
Box 2.4. Measuring the effect of environment on disability
The ICF model of disability provides a tool for measuring the effect of changes in the environment on the preva-
lence and severity of disability. It uses capacity and performance to assess the influence of the environment on 
disability. These constructs are as follows:
 
■
Capacity indicates what a person can do in a standardized environment, often a clinical setting, without the 
barriers or facilitators of the person’s usual environment;
 
■
Performance indicates what a person does in the current or usual environment, with all barriers and 
facilitators in place.
Using these notions provides one way of identifying the effect of the environment and judging how a person’s 
performance might be improved by modifying the environment.
Data were collected from a range of settings (research, primary care, rehabilitation) in the Czech Republic, 
Germany, Italy, Slovenia, and Spain on 1200 individuals with bipolar disorder, depression, low back pain, migraine, 
multiple sclerosis, other musculoskeletal conditions (including chronic widespread pain, rheumatoid arthritis and 
osteoarthritis), osteoporosis, Parkinson disease, stroke, or traumatic brain injury (116). Participants were rated 
on a five-point scale by interviewers using the ICF checklist recording levels of problems across all dimensions 
(117). Activity and participation items were scored using both the capacity and the performance constructs. Data 
were reported using a 0–100 score, with higher scores representing greater difficulties, and a composite score 
was created (see accompanying figure).
Mean and 95% confidence interval of the overall scores of capacity and performance in selected 
health conditions.
Osteoporosis
Traumatic 
brain 
injury
Multiple 
sclerosis
Bipolar 
disorder
Low back 
pain
Migraine
Other 
musculo-
skeletal
Parkinson’s 
disease
Depression
Stroke
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean score and 95% confdence interval
Capacity 
Performance
Note: Score 0 = no problems; score 100 = maximum problems. The data in Box Fig. 1 should be taken not as necessarily 
representative of these conditions at large, but as an indication that a consistent conceptual framework can be applied 
in clinical settings to a wide range of health conditions.
Source (116).
Capacity scores were worst in people with stroke, depression, and Parkinson disease, while individuals with 
osteoporosis had the fewest limitations. Performance scores tended to be better than capacity scores, except 
for individuals with bipolar disorder or traumatic brain injury. This suggests that most individuals had supportive 
environments that promoted their functioning at or above the level of their intrinsic ability – something that 
applied particularly for multiple sclerosis and Parkinson disease. For people with conditions such as bipolar disorder 
and traumatic brain injury, the environmental factors hindered optimal performance. The data suggest that it is 
possible in clinical settings to disentangle aspects of disability that are particular to the individual (the capacity 
score) from the effects of a person’s physical environment (the difference between capacity and performance).
 39
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
Disability and poverty
Empirical evidence on the relation between 
disability and poverty in its various dimen-
sions (income and non-income) differs greatly 
between developed and developing countries 
with most of the evidence from developed 
countries. But longitudinal data sets to estab-
lish the causal relation between disability and 
poverty are seldom available, even in developed 
countries.
Developed countries
Persons with disabilities experience worse edu-
cational and labour market outcomes and are 
more likely to be poor than persons without dis-
abilities (119–129). A 2009 OECD study cover-
ing 21 upper-middle and high-income countries 
shows higher poverty rates among working-age 
people with disabilities than among working-age 
people without disability in all but three coun-
tries (Norway, Slovakia, and Sweden) (130). The 
relative poverty risk (poverty rate of working-age 
disabled relative to that of working-age non-disa-
bled people) was shown to be the highest – more 
than two times higher – in Australia, Ireland, 
and the Republic of Korea, and the lowest – only 
slightly higher than for nondisabled people – in 
Iceland, Mexico, and the Netherlands. Working-
age people with disabilities were found to be twice 
as likely to be unemployed. When employed, they 
are more likely to work part-time. And unless 
they were highly educated and have a job, they 
had low incomes.
Most studies provide a snapshot of the 
labour market outcomes and poverty situation 
of working-age persons with disabilities. Few 
studies provide information about people’s 
socioeconomic status before the onset of dis-
ability and what has happened after it. A study 
using the British Household Panel Survey 
between 1991 and 1998 found that having less 
education, or not being in paid work, was a 
“selection” factor for disability (131). The study 
also found that employment rates fell with the 
onset of disability, and continue to fall with the 
duration of disability – indicating that people 
left the workforce early if they became disa-
bled. Average income fell sharply with onset, 
but recovered subsequently, though not to pre-
disability levels (131).
Some studies have attempted to estimate 
poverty rates among households with disability 
taking into account the extra cost of living with 
disabilities. A United Kingdom study found 
that in the late 1990s, the poverty rate among 
households with disabled people, depending 
on the assumptions used, was 20% to 44% 
higher after equalizing for disability (using 60% 
median income threshold) (124).
Developing countries
Quantitative research on the socioeconomic 
status of persons with disabilities in develop-
ing countries, while small, has recently grown. 
As with developed countries, descriptive data 
suggest that persons with disabilities are at a 
disadvantage in educational attainment and 
labour market outcomes. The evidence is less 
conclusive for poverty status measured by asset 
ownership, living conditions, and income and 
consumption expenditures.
The majority of studies find that persons 
with disability have lower employment rates 
and lower educational attainment than per-
sons without disability (31, 132–143). In Chile 
and Uruguay the situation is better for younger 
persons with disabilities than older cohorts, 
as younger cohorts may have better access to 
education, through the allocation of additional 
resources (133). Most of the cross-section data 
for education suggests that children with dis-
abilities tend to have lower school attendance 
rates (30, 31, 133–136, 139, 142–146).
An analysis of the World Health Survey data 
for 15 developing countries suggests that house-
holds with disabled members spend relatively 
more on health care than households without 
disabled members (for 51 World Health Survey 
countries, see Chapter 3 of this Report) (132). 
 40
World report on disability
A study on Sierra Leone found that households 
with persons with severe or very severe disabili-
ties spent on average 1.3 times more on health 
care than did non-disabled respondents (147). 
While many studies find that households with 
disabled members generally have fewer assets 
(31, 132, 134, 139, 143, 146, 147) and worse living 
conditions compared with households without 
a disabled member (134, 139, 146) some stud-
ies found no significant difference in assets (30, 
140) or living conditions (30, 31).
Data for income and household consump-
tion expenditures are less conclusive. For 
example households with disabilities in Malawi 
and Namibia have lower incomes (139, 146) 
while households in Sierra Leone, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe do not (30, 31, 147). In South Africa 
research suggests that, as a result of the pro-
vision of disability grants, households with a 
disabled member in the Eastern Cape Province 
had higher income than households without a 
disabled member (136).
Evidence on poverty as measured by 
per capita consumption expenditures is also 
mixed. An analysis of 14 household surveys in 
13 developing countries found that adults with 
disabilities as a group were poorer than average 
households (144). However, a study of 15 devel-
oping countries, using World Health Survey 
data, found that households with disabilities 
experienced higher poverty as measured by 
nonhealth per capita consumption expendi-
tures in only 5 of the countries (132).
Data in developing countries on whether 
having a disability increases the probability 
of being poor are mixed. In Uruguay disabil-
ity has no significant effect on the probability 
of being poor except in households headed by 
severely disabled persons. By contrast, in Chile 
disability is found to increase the probability 
of being poor by 3–4 percent (133). In a cross-
country study of 13 developing countries dis-
ability is associated with a higher probability of 
being poor in most countries – when poverty is 
measured by belonging to the two lowest quin-
tiles in household expenditures or asset owner-
ship. But this association disappears in most of 
the countries when controls for schooling are 
introduced (144).
One study attempted to account for the 
extra cost of disability in poverty estimates in 
two developing countries: Viet Nam and Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. Before the adjustments, the 
overall poverty rate in Viet Nam was 13.5% and 
the poverty rate among households with dis-
ability was 16.4%. The extra cost of disability 
was estimated at 9.0% resulting in an increase 
in the poverty rate among households with dis-
ability to 20.1% and in the overall poverty rate 
to 15.7%. In Bosnia and Herzegovina the overall 
poverty rate was estimated at 19.5% and among 
households with disability at 21.2%. The extra 
cost of disability was estimated at 14%, result-
ing in an increase in the poverty rate among 
households with disability to 30.8% and in the 
overall poverty rate to 22.4% (148).
Very few studies have looked at the preva-
lence of disability among the poor, or across 
the distribution of a particular welfare indica-
tor (income, consumption, assets), or across 
education status. A study of 20 countries found 
that children in the poorest three quintiles of 
households in most countries are at greater risk 
of disability than the others (106). Disability 
across expenditure and asset quintiles in 15 
developing countries, using several disability 
measures suggests higher prevalence in lower 
quintiles, but the difference is statistically sig-
nificant in only a few countries (132).
Needs for services 
and assistance
People with disabilities may require a range of 
services – from relatively minor and inexpen-
sive interventions to complex and costly ones. 
Data on the needs – both met and unmet – are 
important for policy and programmes. Unmet 
needs for support may relate to everyday activi-
ties – such as personal care, access to aids and 
equipment, participation in education, employ-
ment, and social activities, and modifications 
to the home or workplace.
 41
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
In developed countries, national estimates of 
need are largely related to specific daily activities, 
rather than to types of service (92, 149–152). In 
Germany, for instance, it is estimated that 2.9% of 
the total population aged 8 years and older has a 
need for support services. In Sweden this figure has 
been estimated at 8.1%, solely in the 15–75 years age 
group (153). See also Box 2.5 for data on Australia.
Several developing countries have con-
ducted national studies or representative sur-
veys on unmet needs for broad categories of 
services for people with disabilities (159–161). 
Estimates of unmet needs have been included 
as a subcomponent in some national stud-
ies on people with disabilities in low-income 
and middle-income countries. The estimate 
of unmet needs is often based on data from 
a single survey and related to broad service 
programmes such as health, welfare, aids and 
equipment, education, and employment. The 
ICF conceptual framework has been used in the 
definitions of disability in most of the studies.
 
■
In Africa national studies on living condi-
tions of people with disabilities were con-
ducted between 2001 and 2006 in Malawi, 
Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe (159). 
Across the four countries the only sector 
that met more than 50% of reported needs 
for people with disabilities was health care. 
The studies revealed large gaps in service 
provision for people with disabilities, with 
unmet needs particularly high for welfare, 
assistive devices, education, vocational 
training, and counselling services (see 
Table 2.5). 
 
■
In 2006 a national study on disability in 
Morocco estimated the expressed need 
for improved access to a range of services 
(160). People with disabilities in the study 
expressed a strong need for better access to 
health care services (55.3%), medications 
(21.3%), and technical devices (17.5%), and 
financial help for basic needs (52.5%).
 
■
A 2006 study on unmet needs in Tonga 
found that 41% of people with disabilities 
reported a need for medical advice for their 
disability – more than twice the proportion 
of people who received such advice (161). 
Some 20% of people with disabilities needed 
physiotherapy, but only 6% received it.
 
■
A 2007 national study on rehabilitation 
needs in China found that about 40% of 
people with disabilities who needed ser-
vices and assistance received no help. The 
unmet need for rehabilitation services was 
particularly high for aids and equipment, 
rehabilitation therapy and financial sup-
port for poor people (162).
Box 2.5. Combining sources to better understand need and unmet need – an example from 
Australia
Four special national studies on unmet needs for specific disability support services were conducted in Australia 
over a recent decade (154–157). These studies relied on a combination of different data sources, especially the 
national population disability surveys and administrative data collections on disability services (158).
The use of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) was critical to the success of 
these studies; first to underpin national data standards, so as to give the maximum comparability of different 
sets of disability data; and second to create a framework that related data on support needs (the “demand” data 
from population surveys) to data on the needs for specific types of service (the “supply” data, also known as 
“registration data”, from disability services).
An analysis of these demand and supply data combined provided an estimate of unmet needs for services. 
Furthermore, because the concepts were stable over time it was possible to update the estimates of unmet needs. 
For example, the estimate of unmet needs for accommodation and respite services was 26 700 people in 2003 and 
23 800 people in 2005, after adjusting for population growth and increases in service supply during the period 
2003–2005 (157). The users of accommodation and respite services increased from 53 722 people in 2003–2004 
to 57 738 in 2004–2005, an increase of 7.5%.
 42
World report on disability 
Costs of disability
The economic and social costs of disability 
are significant, but difficult to quantify. They 
include direct and indirect costs, some borne 
by people with disabilities and their families 
and friends and employers, and some by soci-
ety. Many of these costs arise because of inac-
cessible environments and could be reduced in 
a more inclusive setting. Knowing the cost of 
disability is important not only for making a 
case for investment, but also for the design of 
public programmes.
Comprehensive estimates of the cost of 
disability are scarce and fragmented, even in 
developed countries. Many reasons account for 
this situation, including:
 
■
Definitions of disability often vary, across 
disciplines, different data collection instru-
ments, and different public programmes for 
disability, making it difficult to compare 
data from various sources, let alone com-
pile national estimates.
 
■
There are limited data on the cost compo-
nents of disability. For instance, reliable 
estimates of lost productivity require data 
on labour market participation and pro-
ductivity of persons with disabilities across 
gender, age, and education levels.
 
■
There are no commonly agreed methods 
for cost estimation.
Progress in the technical aspects of disabil-
ity cost estimates and better data are required 
to achieve reliable national estimates of the 
cost of disability – for example, the cost of 
productivity losses because of disability, the 
cost of lost taxes because of non-employment 
or reduced employment of disabled people, the 
cost of health care, social protection, and labour 
market programmes, and the cost of reasonable 
accommodation. The situation is better for data 
Table 2.5. Met and unmet need for services reported by people with a disability, selected 
developing countries
Service
Namibia
Zimbabwe
Malawi
Zambia
Neededa 
(%)
Receivedb 
(%)
Neededa 
(%)
Receivedb 
(%)
Neededa 
(%)
Receivedb 
(%)
Neededa 
(%)
Receivedb 
(%)
Health services
90.5
72.9
93.7
92.0
83.4
61.0
76.7
79.3
Welfare services
79.5
23.3
76.0
23.6
69.0
5.0
62.6
8.4
Counselling for 
parent or family
67.4
41.7
49.2
45.4
50.5
19.5
47.3
21.9
Assistive device 
services
67.0
17.3
56.6
36.6
65.1
17.9
57.3
18.4
Medical 
rehabilitation
64.6
26.3
68.2
54.8
59.6
23.8
63.2
37.5
Counselling for 
disabled person
64.6
15.2
52.1
40.8
52.7
10.7
51.2
14.3
Educational 
services
58.1
27.4
43.4
51.2
43.9
20.3
47.0
17.8
Vocational 
training
47.3
5.2
41.1
22.7
45.0
5.6
35.1
8.4
Traditional healer
33.1
46.8
48.9
90.1
57.7
59.7
32.3
62.9
  
a. Percentage of total number of people with disabilities who expressed a need for the service.
b. Percentage of total number of people with disabilities who expressed a need for service who received the service.
Sources (30, 31, 139, 146).
 43
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
on public spending on disability benefits in 
cash, both contributory (social insurance ben-
efits) and non-contributory (social assistance 
benefits), particularly in developed countries 
(130). But even for these programmes, consoli-
dated data at the national level are scarce.
Direct costs of disability
Direct costs fall into two categories: additional 
costs that people with disabilities and their 
families incur to achieve a reasonable standard 
of living, and disability benefits, in cash and in 
kind, paid for by governments and delivered 
through various public programmes.
Extra costs of living with disability
People with disabilities and their families often 
incur additional costs to achieve a standard of 
living equivalent to that of non-disabled people 
(120, 124, 148, 163). This additional spending 
may go towards health care services, assistive 
devices, costlier transportation options, heat-
ing, laundry services, special diets, or personal 
assistance. Researchers have attempted to cal-
culate these costs by asking disabled people to 
estimate them by pricing the goods and ser-
vices that disabled people report they need, by 
comparing actual spending patterns of people 
with and without disabilities, and by using 
econometric techniques (120, 124, 164).
Several recent studies have attempted to esti-
mate the extra cost of disability. In the United 
Kingdom estimates range from 11% to 69% of 
income (124). In Australia the estimated costs – 
depending on the degree of severity of the disabil-
ity – are between 29% and 37% of income (120). In 
Ireland the estimated cost varied from 20% to 37% 
of average weekly income, depending on the dura-
tion and severity of disability (164). In Viet Nam, 
the estimated extra costs were 9%, and in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina 14% (148). While all studies con-
clude that there are extra costs related to disability, 
there is no technical agreement on how to meas-
ure and estimate them (163).
Public spending on disability 
programmes
Nearly all countries have some type of public pro-
grammes targeted at persons with disabilities, 
but in poorer countries these are often restricted 
to those with the most significant difficulties in 
functioning (165). They include health and reha-
bilitation services, labour market programmes, 
vocational education and training, disability 
social insurance (contributory) benefits, social 
assistance (non-contributory) disability benefits 
in cash, provision of assistive devices, subsidized 
access to transport, subsidized utilities, various 
support services including personal assistants 
and sign language interpreters, together with 
administrative overheads.
The cost of all programmes is significant, 
but no estimates of the total cost are available. 
For OECD countries an average of 1.2% of GDP 
is spent on contributory and non-contributory 
disability benefits, covering 6% of the work-
ing age population in 2007 (130). The benefits 
include full and partial disability benefits, as 
well as early retirement schemes specific to 
disability or reduced work capacity. The figure 
reaches 2% of GDP when sickness benefits are 
included, or almost 2.5 times the spending 
on unemployment benefits. The expenditure 
is particularly high in the Netherlands and 
Norway (about 5% of GDP). The cost of disabil-
ity is around 10% of public social expenditure 
across OECD (up to 25% in some countries). At 
6% of the working age population in 2007, the 
disability benefit recipiency rate was similar to 
the unemployment rate. In some countries it 
was close to 10%. Both the number of recipi-
ents and public spending have risen during 
the last two decades, creating significant fiscal 
concerns about affordability and sustainability 
of the programmes and motivating some coun-
tries, including the Netherlands and Sweden, 
to take steps to reduce the disability benefit 
dependency and to foster labour market inclu-
sion of disabled people (166).
 44
World report on disability 
Indirect costs
Indirect economic and non-economic costs as 
a result of disability can be wide-ranging and 
substantial. The major components of eco-
nomic cost are the loss of productivity from 
insufficient investment in educating disabled 
children, and exits from work or reduced work 
related to the onset of disability, and the loss of 
taxes related to the loss of productivity. Non-
economic costs include social isolation and 
stress and are difficult to quantify.
An important indirect cost of disability is 
related to lost labour productivity of persons 
with disability and associated loss of taxes. 
Losses increase when family members leave 
employment or reduce the number of hours 
worked to care for family members with dis-
abilities. The lost productivity can result from 
insufficient accumulation of human capital 
(underinvestment in human capital), from a 
lack of employment, or from underemployment.
Estimating disability-related loss in pro-
ductivity and associated taxes is complex and 
requires statistical information, which is seldom 
available. For example, it is hard to predict the 
productivity that a person who has dropped 
out of the labour market because of disabil-
ity would have if they were working. Hence, 
estimates of the loss of productivity are rare. 
One such estimate, for Canada using data from 
the 1998 National Population Health Survey, 
reports disability by type of impairment, age, 
and sex as well as the number of days in bed or 
with reduced activity. It suggests that the loss 
of work through short-term and long-term dis-
ability was 6.7% of GDP (167).
Conclusion and 
recommendations
Using multiple surveys from more than 100 
countries, this chapter has shown that disabil-
ity is a universal experience with economic and 
social costs to individuals, families, communi-
ties and nations.
There are around 785 (15.6% according to 
the World Health Survey) to 975 (19.4% accord-
ing to the Global Burden of Disease) million 
persons 15 years and older living with disabil-
ity, based on 2010 population estimates (6.9 bil-
lion with 1.86 billion under 15 years). Of these 
the World Health Survey estimates that 110 
million people (2.2%) have very significant dif-
ficulties in functioning while the Global Burden 
of Disease estimates 190 million (3.8%) have 
“severe disability” – the equivalent of disability 
inferred for conditions such as quadriplegia, 
severe depression, or blindness. Including chil-
dren, over a billion people (or about 15% of the 
world’s population) were estimated to be living 
with disability.
Disability varies according to a complex 
mix of factors, including age, sex, stage of life, 
exposure to environmental risks, socioeco-
nomic status, culture and available resources 
– all of which vary markedly across locations. 
Increasing rates of disability in many places 
are associated with increases in chronic health 
condition – diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, 
mental disorders, cancer, and respiratory ill-
nesses – and injuries. Global ageing also has 
a major influence on disability trends because 
there is higher risk of disability at older ages. 
The environment has a huge effect on the 
prevalence and extent of disability, and on the 
disadvantage faced by persons with disabilities. 
Persons with disabilities and households with 
disabilities experience worse social and eco-
nomic outcomes compared with persons with-
out disabilities. In all settings, disabled people 
and their families often incur additional costs 
to achieve a standard of living equivalent to 
that of nondisabled people.
Because disability is measured on a spec-
trum and varies with the environment, preva-
lence rates are related to thresholds and context. 
Countries requiring estimates of the number of 
people needing income support, daily assistance 
with activities, or other services will construct 
their own estimates relevant to local policy.
Although the prevalence data in this 
Report draw on the best available global data 
 45
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
sets, they are not definitive. Considerable and 
commendable efforts are being made in many 
countries and by major international agencies 
to improve disability data. Nevertheless, data 
quality requires further collaborative effort 
and there is an urgent need for more robust, 
comparable, and complete data collection 
especially in developing countries. Improving 
disability data may be a long-term enterprise, 
but it will provide essential underpinning for 
enhanced functioning of individuals, com-
munities and nations. In the quest for more 
reliable and comprehensive national and inter-
national data on disability, the ICF provides a 
common platform for measurement and data 
collection. Improving the quality of informa-
tion in this way, both nationally and interna-
tionally, is essential for monitoring progress 
in the implementation of the CRPD and in the 
achievement of internationally agreed devel-
opment goals.
The following recommendations can con-
tribute to enhancing the availability and qual-
ity of data on disability.
Adopt the ICF
Using the ICF, as a universal framework for 
disability data collection related to policy goals 
of participation, inclusion, and health will help 
create better data design and also ensure that 
different sources of data relate well to each 
other. The ICF is neither a measurement tool 
nor a survey instrument – it is a classification 
that can provide a standard for health and dis-
ability statistics and help in the difficult task of 
harmonizing approaches across sources of dis-
ability data. To achieve this, countries can:
 
■
Base definitions and national data stand-
ards on the ICF.
 
■
Ensure that data collection cover the broad 
array of ICF domains – impairments, 
activity limitations and participation 
restrictions, related health condition, envi-
ronmental factors – even if a minimal set of 
data items is to be selected.
Improve national disability statistics
At the national level, information about 
people with disabilities is derived from cen-
suses, population surveys and administrative 
data registries. Decisions on how and when 
to collect data depend on the resources avail-
able. Steps that can be taken to improve dis-
ability data, prevalence, need and unmet need, 
and socioeconomic status are outlined below. 
Disaggregating data by sex, age, and income 
or occupation will provide information about 
subgroups of persons with disabilities, such as 
children and older persons.
 
■
Employ a “difficulties in functioning 
approach” instead of an “impairment 
approach” to determine prevalence of disa-
bility to better capture the extent of disability.
 
■
As a first step national population census 
data can be collected in line with recom-
mendations from the United Nations 
Washington Group on Disability and the 
United Nations statistical commission. 
Census data can provide an estimate of 
prevalence, information on socioeconomic 
situation, and geographical data and be 
used to identify populations at risk. It can 
also be used to screen respondents to imple-
ment more detailed follow up surveys.
 
■
A cost-effective and efficient approach to 
gain comprehensive data on persons with 
disabilities is to add disability questions – 
or a disability module – to existing sample 
surveys such as a national household 
survey, national health survey, a general 
social survey or labour force survey.
 
■
Dedicated disability surveys can be car-
ried out to gain extensive information on 
disability and functioning – such as preva-
lence, health conditions associated with 
disability, use of and need for services, and 
other environmental factors, including on 
persons living in institutions and children.
 
■
Data on persons with disabilities or those at 
particular risk of disability, including dis-
placed persons, can also be collected through 
specific surveys in humanitarian crises.
 46
World report on disability
 
■
Administrative data collections can pro-
vide information on users, types and 
quantity of services and cost of services. 
In mainstream administrative data collec-
tions, standard disability identifiers can be 
included to monitor access to services by 
people with disabilities.
 
■
Statistical linkage of various data sets can 
allow countries to bring together an array 
of information on a person from different 
time points, while at the same time protect-
ing that individual’s confidentiality. These 
linkage studies can often be conducted 
quickly and at relatively low cost.
 
■
Where resources exist, collect longitudinal 
data that include questions on disability. 
Longitudinal data – the study of cohorts of 
people and their environments over time 
– allow researchers and policy-makers to 
understand better the dynamics of dis-
ability. Such analyses would provide better 
indications of what happens to individuals 
and their households after disability onset, 
how their situation is impacted by public 
policies aimed at improving the social and 
economic status of disabled people, of the 
causal relationship between poverty and 
disability, and how and when to instigate 
prevention programmes, modify interven-
tions, and make environmental changes.
Improve the comparability of data
Data gathered at the national level need to be 
comparable at the international level.
 
■
Standardize metadata on national disabil-
ity prevalence, for example, by defining the 
measures of disability, purpose a measure-
ment, indicate which aspects of disability 
are included, and define the cut-off on the 
continuum. This will facilitate the compila-
tion of country-reported disability preva-
lence in international data repositories 
such as WHO’s Global Health Observatory.
 
■
Refine methods of generating prevalence 
rates using a continuous metric that meas-
ures multidomain functioning levels. This 
would include more work on the various 
approaches for setting thresholds, includ-
ing sensitivity analyses of the different 
thresholds and the implications for ser-
vices and policies.
 
■
Comparable definitions of disability, based 
on the ICF, and uniform methods for col-
lecting data on people with disabilities need 
to be developed, tested across cultures, and 
applied consistently in surveys, censuses 
and administrative data.
 
■
Extended measures of disability should be 
developed and tested that can be incorpo-
rated into population surveys, or used as 
supplements to surveys, or as the core of a 
disability survey as initiated by the United 
Nations Washington Group on Disability 
Statistics and the Budapest Initiative.
 
■
Develop appropriate instruments for meas-
uring childhood disability.
 
■
Improve collaboration and coordina-
tion 
between 
various 
initiatives 
to 
measure disability prevalence at global, 
regional and national levels (including the 
Budapest Initiative, European Statistical 
Commission, UNESCAP, United Nations 
Statistical 
Commission, 
Washington 
Group, WHO, United States and Canada).
Develop appropriate tools 
and fill the research gaps
 
■
To improve validity of estimates – further 
research is needed on different types of 
investigation, such as self-report and pro-
fessional assessment.
 
■
To gain a clearer understanding of people 
in their environments and their interac-
tions – better measures of the environment 
and its impacts on the different aspects of 
disability need to be developed. These will 
facilitate the identification of cost-effective 
environmental interventions.
 
■
To understand the lived experiences of 
people with disabilities, more qualitative 
research is required. Measures of the lived 
experience of disability need to be coupled 
 47
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
with measurements of the well-being and 
quality of life of people with disabilities.
 
■
To better understand the interrelationships 
and develop a true epidemiology of disabil-
ity – studies are needed that bring health 
condition (including co-morbidity) aspects 
of disability into a single data set describing 
disability, and that explore the interactions 
between health conditions and disability 
and environmental factors.
 
■
To better understand the costs of disability 
– technical agreement is required on defini-
tions and methods of calculating the extra 
costs of living with a disability. Data are 
needed on labour market participation and 
lost productivity due to disability as well 
as estimates of the cost of public spending 
on disability programmes, including cost–
benefit and cost–effectiveness analyses.
Data and information to inform national poli-
cies on disability should be sought in a wide 
range of places – including data collected by 
statistical agencies, administrative data col-
lected by government agencies, reports by gov-
ernment bodies, international organizations, 
nongovernmental organizations, and disabled 
people’s organizations – in addition to the usual 
academic journals. It is vital that such informa-
tion – including on good practices – be shared 
among a wider network of countries. This will 
help disseminate experiences from develop-
ing countries, which are often innovative and 
cost-effective.
References
1. 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. New York, United Nations, 2006 (http://www.un.org/disabilities/docu-
ments/convention/convoptprot-e.pdf, accessed 8 June 2009).
2. 
Mont D. Measuring disability prevalence. Washington, World Bank, 2007 (SP Discussion Paper No. 0706) (http://sitere-
sources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/Resources/Data/MontPrevalence.pdf, accessed 9 December 2009).
3. 
Burkhauser RV et al. Self-reported work-limitation data: what they can and cannot tell us. Demography, 2002,39:541-555. 
doi:10.1353/dem.2002.0025 PMID:12205757
4. 
Disability and social participation in Europe. Brussels, Eurostat, 2001.
5. 
National Disability Survey 2006: first results. Dublin, Stationery Office, 2008 (http://www.cso.ie/releasespublications/
nationaldisabilitysurvey06first.htm, accessed 15 November 2009).
6. 
First national study on disability. Santiago, National Fund for Disability in Chile, 2005 (http://www.ine.cl/canales/chile_
estadistico/encuestas_discapacidad/pdf/estudionacionaldeladiscapacidad(ingles).pdf, accessed 2 February 2010).
7. 
Encuesta nacional de evaluación del desempeño, 2003 [National performance evaluation survey, 2003]. In: Programa 
nacional de salud 2007–2012 [National health programme, 2007–2012]. Mexico City, Secretaria de Salud, 2007.
8. 
Lerma RV. Generating disability data in Mexico [Estadística sobre personas con discapacidad en Centroamérica]. Managua, 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2004 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
9. 
Census 2006, Volume 11: disability, carers and voluntary activities. Dublin, Stationery Office, 2007 (http://www.cso.ie/
census/census2006_volume_11.htm, accessed 15 November 2009).
10. Mont D. Measuring health and disability. [comment]Lancet, 2007,369:1658-1663. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60752-1 
PMID:17499607
11. Barbotte E, Guillemin F, Chau N. Lorhandicap GroupPrevalence of impairments, disabilities, handicaps and quality of 
life in the general population: a review of recent literature. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2001,79:1047-1055. 
PMID:11731812
12. Me A, Mbogoni M. Review of practices in less developed countries on the collection of disability data. In: Barnatt SN, 
Altman BM, eds. International views on disability measures: moving toward comparative measurement. Oxford, Elesevier, 
2006:63–87.
13. She P, Stapleton DC. A review of disability data for the institutional population: research brief. Ithaca, Rehabilitation Research 
and Training Center on Disability Demographics and Statistics, Cornell University, 2006.
14. Cambois E, Robine JM, Mormiche P. Une forte baisse de l’incapacité en France dans les années 1990? Discussion autour 
des questions de l’enquête santé. Population, 2007,62:363-386. doi:10.2307/20451015
15. Ikeda N, Murray CJL, Salomon JA. Tracking population health based on self-reported impairments: Trends in the preva-
lence of hearing loss in US adults, 1976–2006. American Journal of Epidemiology, 2009,170:80-87. doi:10.1093/aje/kwp097 
PMID:19451176
 48
World report on disability
16. Andresen EM et al. Reliability and validity of disability questions for US Census 2000. American Journal of Public Health, 
2000,90:1297-1299. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.8.1297 PMID:10937013
17. Doyle J, Wong LL. Mismatch between aspects of hearing impairment and hearing disability/handicap in adult/elderly 
Cantonese speakers: some hypotheses concerning cultural and linguistic influences. Journal of the American Academy of 
Audiology, 1996,7:442-446. PMID:8972445
18. Lane SD et al. Sociocultural aspects of blindness in an Egyptian delta hamlet: visual impairment vs. visual disability. 
Medical Anthropology, 1993,15:245-260. doi:10.1080/01459740.1993.9966093 PMID:8114621
19. Chamie M. Can childhood disability be ascertained simply in surveys? Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 1994,5:273-275. 
PMID:7518696
20. Schneider M. The difference a word makes: responding to questions on ‘disability’ and ‘difficulty’ in South Africa. Disability 
and Rehabilitation, 2009,31:42-50. doi:10.1080/09638280802280338 PMID:19194809
21. Schneider M et al. Measuring disability in censuses: the case of South Africa. European Journal of Disability Research, 
2009,3:245-265.
22. Altman B. The Washington Group: origin and purpose. In: Barnatt SN, Altman BM, eds. International views on disability 
measures: moving toward comparative measurement. Oxford, Elesevier, 2006:9–16.
23. Report of the meeting of the group of experts on measurement of health status, of 14–16 November 2005. New York, United 
Nations Economic and Social Council, 2006.
24. International Classification of Functioning. Disability and Health (ICF). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.
25. International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health, Children and Youth Version (ICF-CY). Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2007.
26. Training manual on disability statistics. Geneva, World Health Organization and Bangkok, United Nations Economic and 
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2008.
27. United Nations demographic yearbook, special issue: population ageing and the situation of elderly persons. New York, 
United Nations, 1993.
28. Classifying and measuring functioning. Washington, United States National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, 2001.
29. Testing a disability question for the census. Canberra, Family and Community Statistics Section, Australian Bureau of 
Statistics, 2003.
30. Eide AH, van Rooy G, Loeb ME. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Namibia: a representative, national 
study. Oslo, SINTEF, 2003 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCNamibia.pdf, accessed 9 November 2009).
31. Eide AH, Loeb ME, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zambia: a national representative study. 
Oslo, SINTEF, 2006 (http://www.sintef.no/upload/Helse/Levekår%20og%20tjenester/ZambiaLCweb.pdf, accessed 7 
December 2009).
32. Üstün TB et al. WHO multi-country survey study on health and responsiveness 2000–2001. In: Murray CJL, Evans DB, 
eds. Health systems performance assessment: debates, methods and empiricism. Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2003:761–796.
33. Üstün TB et al. The World Health Surveys. In: Murray CJL, Evans DB, eds. Health systems performance assessment: debates, 
methods and empiricism. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003.
34. Mathers C, Smith A, Concha M. Global burden of hearing loss in the year 2000. Global Burden of Disease, 2000 (http://www.
who.int/healthinfo/statistics/bod_hearingloss.pdf).
35. 2004 demographic yearbook- fifty-sixth issue department of Economic and Social Affairs, New York, United Nations, 2007 
(http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/products/dyb/dybsets/2004%20DYB.pdf, accessed??).
36. Data and statistics: country groups. Washington, World Bank, 2004 (http://go.worldbank.org/D7SN0B8YU0, accessed 4 
January 2010).
37. World Health Survey. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002–2004 (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/en/, 
accessed 9 December 2009)
38. World Bank. World Development Report 1993: investing in health. New York, Oxford University Press, 1993.
39. Murray CJL, Lopez AD, eds. The Global Burden of Disease: a comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from dis-
eases, injuries and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020, 1st ed. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1996.
40. Arnesen T, Nord E. The value of DALY life: problems with ethics and validity of disability adjusted life years. BMJ (Clinical 
research ed.), 1999,319:1423-1425. PMID:10574867
41. Fox-Rushby JA. Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYS) for decision-making? An overview of the literature. London, Office of 
Health Economics, 2002.
42. Reidpath DD et al. Measuring health in a vacuum: examining the disability weight of the DALY. Health Policy and Planning, 
2003,18:351-356. doi:10.1093/heapol/czg043 PMID:14654511
43. Murray CJL et al. Summary measures of population health: concepts, ethics, measurement and applications. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2002.
 49
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
44. Salomon J et al. Quantifying individual levels of health: definitions, concepts and measurement issues. In: Murray CJL, 
Evans D, eds. Health systems performance assessment: debate, methods and empiricism. Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2003:301–318.
45. Mathers CD, Lopez AD, Murray CJL. The burden of disease and mortality by condition: data, methods and results for 2001. 
In: Lopez AD et al., eds. Global burden of disease and risk factors, 1st ed. Washington, Oxford University Press and World 
Bank, 2006:45–240.
46. The global burden of disease: 2004 update. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
47. Disability prevention and rehabilitation: report of the WHO expert committee on disability prevention and rehabilitation. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 1981 (Technical Report Series 668) (http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_668.
pdf, accessed 9 December 2009).
48. Merikangas KR et al. The impact of comorbidity of mental and physical conditions on role disability in the US adult 
household population. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2007,64:1180-1188. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.64.10.1180 PMID:17909130
49. Moussavi S et al. Depression, chronic diseases, and decrements in health: results from the World Health Surveys. Lancet, 
2007,370:851-858. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61415-9 PMID:17826170
50. Sousa RM et al. Contribution of chronic diseases to disability in elderly people in countries with low and middle 
incomes: a 10/66 Dementia Research Group population-based survey. Lancet, 2009,374:1821-1830. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(09)61829-8 PMID:19944863
51. Croft P, Dunn KM, Von Korff M. Chronic pain syndromes: you can’t have one without another. Pain, 2007,131:237-238. 
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2007.07.013 PMID:17728065
52. Gureje O et al. The relation between multiple pains and mental disorders: results from the World Mental Health Surveys. 
Pain, 2008,135:82-91. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2007.05.005 PMID:17570586
53. Kaiser R. The clinical and epidemiological profile of tick-borne encephalitis in southern Germany 1994–98: a prospective 
study of 656 patients. Brain, 1999,122:2067-2078. doi:10.1093/brain/122.11.2067 PMID:10545392
54. Lewis P, Glaser CA. Encephalitis. Pediatrics in Review / American Academy of Pediatrics, 2005,26:353-363.
55. Hodgson A et al. Survival and sequelae of meningococcal meningitis in Ghana. International Journal of Epidemiology, 
2001,30:1440-1446. doi:10.1093/ije/30.6.1440 PMID:11821360
56. van de Beek D et al. Community-acquired bacterial meningitis in adults. The New England Journal of Medicine, 2006,354:44-
53. doi:10.1056/NEJMra052116 PMID:16394301
57. Galazka AM, Robertson SE, Kraigher A. Mumps and mumps vaccine: a global review. Bulletin of the World Health 
Organization, 1999,77:3-14. PMID:10063655
58. AIDS epidemic update, December 2009. Geneva, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and World Health 
Organization, 2009.
59. World malaria report 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
60. Poliomyelitis: fact sheet. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008d (http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs114/
en/index.html, accessed 25 November 2009).
61. Polio this week: wild polio virus list. Geneva, The Global Polio Eradication Initiative, 2010 (http://www.polioeradication.org/
casecount.asp, accessed 6 September 2010)
62. Daumerie D. Leprosy in the global epidemiology of infectious diseases. In: Murray C, Lopez A, Mathers C, eds. The 
global epidemiology of infectious diseases [Global burden of disease and injury series, Volume IV]. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2004.
63. Priority eye diseases: fact sheet. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (http://www.who.int/blindness/causes/priority/
en/print.html, accessed 14 December 2009).
64. Thylefors B et al. Trachoma-related visual loss. In: Murray C, Lopez A, Mathers C, eds. The global epidemiology of infectious 
diseases [Global burden of disease and injury series, Volume IV]. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
65. Preventing chronic diseases: a vital investment. WHO global report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005.
66. Engelgau MM et al. The evolving diabetes burden in the United States. Annals of Internal Medicine, 2004,140:945-950. 
PMID:15172919
67. Jemal A et al. Trends in the leading causes of death in the United States, 1970–2002. JAMA: the Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 2005,294:1255-1259. doi:10.1001/jama.294.10.1255 PMID:16160134
68. Mannino DM et al. Surveillance for asthma–United States, 1980–1999. MMWR. Surveillance summaries: Morbidity and mor-
tality weekly report. Surveillance summaries / CDC, 2002,51:1-13. PMID:12420904
69. Green A, Christian Hirsch N, Pramming SK. The changing world demography of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes/Metabolism 
Research and Reviews, 2003,19:3-7. doi:10.1002/dmrr.340 PMID:12592640
70. Perenboom RJM et al. Life expectancy without chronic morbidity: trends in gender and socioeconomic disparities. Public 
health reports (Washington, DC: 1974), 2005,120:46-54. PMID:15736331
 50
World report on disability 
71. Sans S, Kesteloot H, Kromhout D. The burden of cardiovascular diseases mortality in Europe. European Heart Journal, 
1997,18:1231-1248.
72. Wang L et al. Preventing chronic diseases in China. Lancet, 2005,366:1821-1824. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67344-8 
PMID:16298221
73. Mental health atlas. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005.
74. Disability and its relationship to health conditions and other factors. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 
2004 (http://www.aihw.gov.au/publications/dis/drhcf/drhcf.pdf, accessed 9 December 2009).
75. Custom tabulation of PALS 2006 data. Ottawa, Statistics Canada, 2006.
76. Lafortune G, Balestat G. Trends in severe disability among elderly people: assessing the evidence in 12 OECD countries 
and the future implications [OECD Health Working Papers No. 26]. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, 2007 (http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/13/8/38343783.pdf, accessed 9 December 2009).
77. Ezzati M et al. Comparative quantification of health risks: global and regional burden of diseases attributable to selected major 
risk factors. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
78. Adeyi O, Smith O, Robles S. Public policy and the challenge of chronic noncommunicable diseases. Washington, International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, World Bank, 2007.
79. Lopez AD et al. Global burden of disease and risk factors, New York, Oxford University Press, 2006 (http://www.dcp2.org/
pubs/GBD).
80. Mathers CD, Loncar D. Projections of global mortality and burden of disease from 2002 to 2030. PLoS Medicine, 2006,3:e442- 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0030442 PMID:17132052
81. Gaza Strip Health Cluster Bulletin No. 2. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (http://www.who.int/hac/crises/inter-
national/wbgs/sitreps/gaza_health_cluster_4feb2009/en/index.html, accessed 15 November 2009).
82. Call for all agencies in Gaza to ensure rights for people with disabilities. Bensheim, CBM, 2009 (http://www.cbm-nz.org.nz/
NEWS/Archives/Call+for+all+agencies+in+Gaza+to+ensure+rights+for+people+with+disabilities.html, accessed 15 
November 2009).
83. Injury: a leading cause of the global burden of disease, 2000. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002.
84. Global status report on road safety: time for action. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (http://www.who.int/vio-
lence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2009, accessed 5 January 2010).
85. World report on road traffic injury prevention. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004 (http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publi-
cations/2004/9241562609.pdf, accessed 5 January 2010).
86. World health statistics. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
87. Ameratunga SN et al. Risk of disability due to car crashes: a review of the literature and methodological issues. Injury, 
2004,35:1116-1127. doi:10.1016/j.injury.2003.12.016 PMID:15488502
88. Levêque A, Coppieters Y, Lagasse R. Disabilities secondary to traffic accidents: what information is available in Belgium? 
Injury Control and Safety Promotion, 2002,9:113-120. doi:10.1076/icsp.9.2.113.8698 PMID:12461838
89. Malm S et al. Risk of permanent medical impairment (RPMI) in road traffic accidents. Annals of advances in automotive 
medicine / Annual Scientific Conference ... Association for the Advancement of Automotive Medicine. . Scientific Conference, 
2008,52:93-100. PMID:19026226
90. Robine JM, Michel JP. Looking forward to a general theory on population aging. The journals of gerontology. Series A, 
Biological sciences and medical sciences, 2004,59:M590-597. PMID:15215269
91. World population prospects: the 2006 revision. New York, United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division, 2007.
92. Disability, ageing and carers: summary of findings, 2003 (No. 4430.0). Canberra, Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2004 (http://
tinyurl.com/ydr4pbh, accessed 9 December 2009).
93. Participation and activity limitation survey 2006: tables. Ottawa, Social and Aboriginal Statistics Division, Statistics Canada, 
2007 (http://tinyurl.com/yftgvb5, accessed 9 December 2009).
94. Statistics on severely handicapped persons. Bonn, Federal Statistical Office, 2009 (http://www.gbe-bund.de/gbe10/abrech-
nung.prc_abr_test_logon?p_uid=gast&p_aid=4711&p_knoten=VR&p_sprache=E&p_suchstring=disability, accessed 
15 December 2009).
95. 2006 disability survey. Wellington, Statistics New Zealand, 2007 (http://www.stats.govt.nz/browse_for_stats/health/dis-
abilities/disabilitysurvey2006_hotp06.aspx, accessed 18 November 2009).
96. Prevalence of disability in South Africa census 2001. Pretoria, Statistics South Africa, 2005.
97. 2001 Census of population and housing. Colombo, Sri Lanka Department of Census and Statistics, 2001 (http://www.sta-
tistics.gov.lk/PopHouSat/index.asp, accessed 12 November 2009).
98. 2007 American community survey, 1-year estimates (S1801 disability characteristics). Washington, United States Census 
Bureau, 2007 (http://tinyurl.com/ydvqugn, accessed 18 November 2009).
 51
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
99. Lee R. The demographic transition: three centuries of fundamental change. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
2003,17:167-190. doi:10.1257/089533003772034943
100. Why population aging matters: a global perspective. Bethesda, National Institute on Aging, US National Institutes of Health, 
2007.
101. Manton KG, Gu XL. Changes in the prevalence of chronic disability in the United States black and nonblack popula-
tion above age 65 from 1982 to 1999. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
2001,98:6354-6359. doi:10.1073/pnas.111152298 PMID:11344275
102. The state of the world’s children 2006: excluded and invisible. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2005. 
103. Maulik PK, Darmstadt GL. Childhood disability in low- and middle-income countries: overview of screening, prevention, 
services, legislation, and epidemiology. Pediatrics, 2007,120:Suppl 1S1-S55. doi:10.1542/peds.2007-0043B PMID:17603094
104. Hartley S, Newton CRJC. Children with developmental disabilities in the majority of the world. In: Shevell M, ed. 
Neurodevelopmental disabilities: clinical and scientific foundations. London, Mac Keith Press, 2009.
105. Grantham-McGregor S et al. International Child Development Steering GroupDevelopmental potential in the first 5 years 
for children in developing countries. Lancet, 2007,369:60-70. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60032-4 PMID:17208643
106. United Nations Children’s Fund, University of Wisconsin. Monitoring child disability in developing countries: results from the 
multiple indicator cluster surveys. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2008.
107. Workshop on Millennium Development Goals Monitoring. Geneva, United Nations Statistics Division, 8–11 November 2010 
(http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/Host.aspx?Content=Capacity/Geneva.htm).
108. Robson C, Evans P. Educating children with disabilities in developing countries: the role of data sets. Huddersfield, 
University of Huddersfield, 2005 (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/Resources/280658-1172610312075/
EducatingChildRobson.pdf, accessed 23 October 2009).
109. Robertson J, Hatton C, Emerson E. The identification of children with or at significant risk of intellectual disabilities in low and 
middle income countries: a review. Lancaster, Centre for Disability Research, Lancaster University, 2009.
110. Hack M, Klein NK, Taylor HG. Long-term developmental outcomes of low birth weight infants. The Future of children/Center 
for the Future of Children, the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, 1995,5:176-196. doi:10.2307/1602514 PMID:7543353
111. Wang J et al. A ten year review of the iodine deficiency disorders program of the People’s Republic of China. Journal of 
Public Health Policy, 1997,18:219-241. doi:10.2307/3343436 PMID:9238845
112. The state of the world’s children 1998. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 1998.
113. Progress on drinking water and sanitation: special focus on sanitation. New York, United Nation’s Children’s Fund and 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
114. The state of the world’s children 2001. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2001.
115. The state of the world’s children 2007: child survival. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2007.
116. Leonardi M et al. MHADIE background document on disability prevalence across different diseases and EU countries. Milan, 
Measuring Health and Disability in Europe, 2009 (http://www.mhadie.it/publications.aspx, accessed 21 January 2010).
117. ICF checklist: version 2.1a, clinician form: for international classification of functioning, disability and health. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2003 (http://www.who.int/classifications/icf/training/icfchecklist.pdf).
118. Schneidert M et al. The role of environment in the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). 
Disability and Rehabilitation, 2003,25:588-595. doi:10.1080/0963828031000137090 PMID:12959332
119. Buddelmeyer H, Verick S. Understanding the drivers of poverty dynamics in Australian households. The Economic Record, 
2008,84:310-321. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4932.2008.00493.x
120. Saunders P. The costs of disability and incidence of poverty. Sydney, Social Policy Research Centre, University of New South 
Wales, 2006.
121. Gannon B, Nolan B. Disability and labour market participation in Ireland The Economic and Social Review, 2004,35:135-155.
122. Parodi G, Sciulli D. Disability in Italian households: income, poverty and labour market participation. Applied Economics, 
2008,40:2615-2630. doi:10.1080/00036840600970211
123. Kuklys W. Amartya Sen’s capability approach: theoretical insights and empirical applications. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University, 2004.
124. Zaidi A, Burchardt T. Comparing incomes when needs differ: equivalization for the extra costs of disability in the UK. 
Review of Income and Wealth, 2005,51:89-114. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4991.2005.00146.x
125. Meyer BD, Mok WKC. Disability, earnings, income and consumption. Working paper No. 06.10. Chicago, The Harris School 
of Public Policy Studies, The University of Chicago, 2008.
126. Mitra S, Findley PA, Sambamoorthi U. Health care expenditures of living with a disability: total expenditures, out-of-pocket 
expenses, and burden, 1996 to 2004. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2009,90:1532-1540. doi:10.1016/j.
apmr.2009.02.020 PMID:19735781
127. She P, Livermore GA. Material hardship, poverty and disability among working-age adults. Social Science Quarterly, 
2007,88:970-989. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6237.2007.00513.x
 52
World report on disability
128. She P, Livermore GA. Long term poverty and disability among working-Age Adults. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 
2009,19:244-256.
129. Houtenville AJ et al., eds. Counting working-age people with disabilities: what current data tell us and options for improve-
ment. Kalamazoo, WE Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2009.
130. Sickness, Disability and Work: Keeping on Track in the Economic Downturn. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, 2009 (Background Paper).
131. Jenkins SP, Rigg JA. Disability and disadvantage: selection, onset and duration effects. London, Centre for Analysis of Social 
Exclusion, London School of Economics, 2003 (CASEpaper 74).
132. Mitra S, Posarac A, Vick B. Disability and poverty in developing countries: a snapshot from the world health survey. 
Washington, Human Development Network Social Protection, forthcoming
133. Contreras DG et al. Socio-economic impact of disability in Latin America: Chile and Uruguay. Santiago, Universidad de Chile, 
Departemento de Economia, 2006.
134. Eide AH, Kamaleri Y. Living conditions among people with disabilities in Mozambique: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 
2009 
(http://www.sintef.no/upload/Helse/Levekår%20og%20tjenester/LC%20Report%20Mozambique%20
-%202nd%20revision.pdf, accessed 11 April 2011).
135. Mete C, ed. Economic implications of chronic illness and disease in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Washington, 
World Bank, 2008.
136. Loeb M et al. Poverty and disability in Eastern and Western Cape provinces, South Africa. Disability & Society, 2008,23:311-
321. doi:10.1080/09687590802038803
137. Mitra S. The recent decline in the employment of persons with disabilities in South Africa, 1998–2006. The South African 
Journal of Economics, 2008,76:480-492. doi:10.1111/j.1813-6982.2008.00196.x
138. Mitra S, Sambamoorthi U. Disability and the rural labor market in India: evidence for males in Tamil Nadu. World 
Development, 2008,36:934-952. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2007.04.022
139. Loeb ME, Eide AH, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Malawi: a national representative study. 
Oslo, SINTEF, 2004 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCMalawi.pdf, accessed 9 November 2009).
140. Trani J, Loeb M. Poverty and disability: a vicious circle? Evidence from Afghanistan and Zambia. Journal of International 
Development, 2010,n/a- doi:10.1002/jid.1709
141. Zambrano S. Trabajo y Discapacidad en el Perú: laboral, políticas públicas e inclusión social. Lima, Fondo Editorial del 
Congreso del Perú, 2006.
142. Rischewski D et al. Poverty and musculoskeletal impairment in Rwanda. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene, 2008,102:608-617. doi:10.1016/j.trstmh.2008.02.023 PMID:18430444
143. People with disabilities in India: from commitments to outcomes. Washington, World Bank, 2009.
144. Filmer D. Disability, poverty and schooling in developing countries: results from 14 household surveys. The World Bank 
Economic Review, 2008,22:141-163. doi:10.1093/wber/lhm021
145. Trani J, VanLeit B. Increasing inclusion of persons with disabilities: reflections from disability research using the ICF in 
Afghanistan and Cambodia. London, Leonard Cheshire International, 2010.
146. Eide AH et al. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zimbabwe: a representative regional survey. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2003 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCZimbabwe.pdf, accessed 9 November 2009).
147. Trani J et al. Disability in and around urban areas of Sierra Leone. London, Leonard Cheshire International, 2010
148. Braithwaite J, Mont D. Disability and poverty: a survey of World Bank poverty assessments and implications. ALTER – 
European Journal of Disability Research / Revue Européenne de Recherche sur le Handicap, 2009, 3(3):219–232.
149. Disability supports in Canada, 2001: participation and activity limitation survey. Ottawa, Statistics Canada, 2003 (http://
www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/89-580-XIE/help.htm, accessed 30 August 2007).
150. Supports and services for adults and children aged 5–14 with disabilities in Canada: an analysis of data on needs and gaps. 
Ottawa, Canadian Council on Social Development, 2004 (http://www.socialunion.ca/pwd/title.html, accessed 30 August 
2007).
151. Living with disability in New Zealand: a descriptive analysis of results from the 2001 Household Disability Survey and the 
2001 Disability Survey of Residential Facilities. Wellington, New Zealand Ministry of Health, 2004 (http://www.moh.govt.
nz/moh.nsf/238fd5fb4fd051844c256669006aed57/8fd2a69286cd6715cc256f33007aade4?OpenDocument, accessed 30 
August 2007).
152. Kennedy J. Unmet and under met need for activities of daily living and instrumental activities of daily living assistance 
among adults with disabilities: estimates from the 1994 and 1995 disability follow-back surveys. Journal of Medical Care, 
2001,39:1305-1312. doi:10.1097/00005650-200112000-00006
153. Ratzka AD. Independent living and attendant care in Sweden: a consumer perspective. New York, World Rehabilitation Fund, 
1986 (Monograph No. 34) (http://www.independentliving.org/docs1/ar1986spr.pdf, accessed 27 December 2007).
 53
Chapter 2 
Disability – a global picture
154. Madden R et al. The demand for disability support services in Australia: a study to inform the Commonwealth/State Disability 
Agreement evaluation. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 1996.
155. Demand for disability support services in Australia: size, cost and growth. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and 
Welfare, 1997.
156. Unmet need for disability services: effectiveness of funding and remaining shortfall. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health 
and Welfare, 2002.
157. Current and future demand for specialist disability services. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2007.
158. Disability support services 2004–05: national data on services provided under the Commonwealth State/Territory Disability 
Agreement. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2006.
159. Southern African Federation of the Disabled, Norwegian Federation of Disabled People, SINTEF. Living conditions among 
people with activity limitation in Southern Africa: representative surveys on living conditions among people with activity limi-
tations in Malawi, Namibia, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Mozambique, Oslo, SINTEF, 2007.
160. Childhood and disabled persons, Kingdom of Morocco. The national survey on disability: results synthesis, 2006. Rabat, 
Secretariat of Family, Morocco, 2006.
161. Tonga national disability identification survey. Nuku’Alofa, Tonga Disability Action Committee, 2006.
162. Qiu ZY. Rehabilitation need of people with disability in China: analysis and strategies [in Chinese]. Beijing, Huaxia Press, 2007.
163. Tibble M. Review of the existing research on the extra costs of disability. London, Department for Work and Pensions, 2005 
(Working Paper No. 21).
164. Cullinan J, Gannon B, Lyons S. Estimating the extra cost of living for people with disabilities. Health Economics, 2010,n/a-
www.interscience.wiley.com doi:10.1002/hec.1619 PMID:20535832
165. Marriott A, Gooding K. Social assistance and disability in developing countries. Haywards Heath, Sightsavers International, 
2007.
166. Sickness, disability and work: breaking the barriers. A synthesis of findings across OECD countries. Paris, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010.
167. The economic burden of illness in Canada, 1998. Ottawa, Health Canada, 2002.
  Chapter 3
General health care
 “My doctor is great. He is my friend and not just my doctor. He used to be my father’s 
doctor too. When I want to see the doctor he always has time for me. He always talks to 
me about this, about that, before he says, “What is wrong?” I used to be on 60 mg of blood 
pressure medicine for my high blood pressure. But then my doctor told me that I had to 
get more life to help my pressure. He did not want me to twiddle my thumbs and watch 
soap operas seven days a week. He wanted me to move around and be active. It was a 
good idea. So I went and got some volunteer work. Now I have friends and I always talk to 
people. And I only need 20 mg of medicine!”
Jean-Claude 
“You can not have a baby”, those were the words of the first gynecologist I visited 
few months after I got married. I was so confused. Why wouldn’t I be able to have a 
baby? I am physically disabled, but I have no medical reason not to. I faced a lot of chal-
lenges either because of bad attitude of nurses or doctors questioning my eligibility to be 
a mother or the inaccessible medical facilities, whether it is the entrances, bathrooms, 
examinations beds etc. I am now a mother of a 5 year old boy which is one of the best 
things that ever happened to me, but I keep thinking why did it end up to be a luxury 
thing while it is a right? Why was I only able to do it when I had the money to go to a 
better medical care system?”
Rania 
“Even though during my appointments to the medical centre, doctors haven’t dis-
cussed health promotion with me and they don’t even have a scale to measure my body 
weight, I still try to engage in activities that would enhance my health and wellbeing. It’s 
not easy as most fitness facilities and equipment are not accessible. I’m yet to find dietary 
advice for people with spinal cord injury or identify a dentist near my place of residence 
with accessible facility and equipment.”
Robert 
 3
General health care
57
Health can be defined as “a state of physical, mental, and social well-being and 
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity” (1). Good health is a prereq-
uisite for participation in a wide range of activities including education and 
employment. Article 25 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) reinforces the right of persons with disabili-
ties to attain the highest standard of health care, without discrimination (2).
A wide range of factors determine health status, including individual 
factors, living and working conditions, general socioeconomic, cultural 
and environmental conditions, and access to health care services (3, 4). This 
Report shows that many people with disabilities experience worse socioeco-
nomic outcomes than people without disabilities: they experience higher 
rates of poverty, lower employment rates, and have less education. They also 
have unequal access to health care services and therefore have unmet health 
care needs compared with the general population (5–8).
This chapter focuses on how health systems can address the health ine-
qualities experienced by people with disabilities. It provides a broad over-
view of their health status, explores the main barriers to using health care, 
and suggests ways to overcome them.
Understanding the health of 
people with disabilities
This section provides a general overview of the health status of people with 
disabilities by looking at the different types of health conditions they may 
experience and several factors that may contribute to the health disparities 
for this population (see Box 3.1). Increasing evidence suggests that, as a 
group, people with disabilities experience poorer levels of health than the 
general population (18). They are often described as having a narrower or 
thinner margin of health (9, 17).
Primary health conditions
Disability is associated with a diverse range of primary health conditions: 
some may result in poor health and high health care needs; others do not 
 58
World report on disability
keep people with disabilities from achieving 
good health (19). For example:
 
■
A child born blind may not specifically 
require ongoing health care for a primary 
health condition and associated impair-
ment (20).
 
■
An adolescent with a traumatic spinal cord 
injury may have considerable health care 
needs during the acute phase of the primary 
condition but thereafter may require only 
services to maintain health – for example, 
to prevent secondary conditions (20).
 
■
Adults with chronic conditions such as 
multiple sclerosis, cystic fibrosis, severe 
arthritis, or schizophrenia may have com-
plex and continuing health care needs 
related to their primary health condition 
or associated impairments (20).
Risk of developing 
secondary conditions
Depression is a common secondary condition in 
people with disabilities (21–23). Pain has been 
Box 3.1. Terminology
Primary health condition
A primary health condition is the possible starting point for impairment, an activity limitation, or participation 
restriction (9). Examples of primary health conditions include depression, arthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, ischaemic heart disease, cerebral palsy, bipolar disorder, glaucoma, cerebrovascular disease, and Down 
syndrome. A primary health condition can lead to a wide range of impairments, including mobility, sensory, 
mental, and communication impairments.
Secondary conditions
A secondary condition is an additional condition that presupposes the existence of a primary condition. It is 
distinguished from other health conditions by the lapse in time from the acquisition of the primary condition to 
the occurrence of the secondary condition (10). Examples include pressure ulcers, urinary tract infections, and 
depression. Secondary conditions can reduce functioning, lower the quality of life, increase health care costs, 
and lead to premature mortality (11). Many such conditions are preventable and can be anticipated from primary 
health conditions (12, 13).
Co-morbid conditions
A co-morbid condition is an additional condition independent of and unrelated to the primary condition (14). 
The detection and treatment of co-morbid conditions are often not well managed for people with disabilities 
and can later have an adverse affect on their health (12): for example, people with intellectual impairments and 
mental health problems commonly experience “diagnostic overshadowing” (15). Examples of co-morbid condi-
tions include cancer or hypertension for a person with an intellectual impairment.
General health care needs
People with disabilities require health services for general health care needs like the rest of the population. General 
health needs include health promotion, preventive care (immunization, general health screening), treatment of 
acute and chronic illness, and appropriate referral for more specialized needs where required. These needs should 
all be meet through primary health care in addition to secondary and tertiary as relevant. Access to primary health 
care is particularly important for those who experience a thinner or narrower margin of health to achieve their 
highest attainable standard of health and functioning (16).
Specialist health care needs
Some people with disabilities may have a greater need for specialist health care than the general population. 
Specialist health care needs may be associated with primary, secondary, and co-morbid health conditions. Some 
people with disabilities may have multiple health conditions, and some health conditions may involve multiple 
body functions and structures. Assessment and treatment in these instances can be quite complex and therefore 
may necessitate the knowledge and skills of specialists (17).
 59
Chapter 3 
General health care
reported in children and adults with cerebral 
palsy (24, 25), children with spina bifida (26), 
and adults with post-polio paralysis (27), neu-
romuscular disease (28), and traumatic brain 
injury (29). Osteoporosis is common in people 
with a spinal cord injury (30), spina bifida (31), 
or cerebral palsy (32, 33).
Risk of developing co-
morbid conditions
People with disabilities develop the same health 
problems that affect the general population, 
such as influenza and pneumonia. Some may 
be more susceptible to developing chronic con-
ditions because of the influence of behavioural 
risk factors such as increased physical inactiv-
ity (18). They also may experience earlier onset 
of these conditions (17). One study indicated 
that adults with developmental disabilities 
had a similar or greater rate of chronic health 
conditions such as high blood pressure, car-
diovascular disease, and diabetes than people 
without disabilities (34). The prevalence of dia-
betes in people with schizophrenia is around 
15%, compared with the general population 
rate of 2–3% (21).
Greater vulnerability to 
age-related conditions
The ageing process for some groups of people 
with disabilities begins earlier than usual. 
Some people with developmental disabilities 
show signs of premature ageing in their 40s 
and 50s (35) and they may experience age-
related health conditions more frequently. For 
example, people with Down syndrome have 
a higher incidence of Alzheimer disease than 
the general population, while people with 
intellectual impairments (unrelated to Down 
syndrome) have higher rates of dementia (35). 
The ageing process and associated changes 
(presbycusis, deconditioning, loss of strength 
and balance, osteoporosis) may have a greater 
impact on people with disabilities. For exam-
ple, those with existing mobility impairments 
may increasingly experience functional loss as 
they age (9).
Increased rates of health 
risk behaviours
The health behaviours practiced by some adults 
with disabilities can differ in degree from those 
of the general population (12). In Australia, 
people with disabilities aged between 15–64 
were more likely to be overweight or obese than 
other people (48% compared with 39%) and to 
smoke daily (3). Data cited from the 2001 and 
2003 Behavioural Risk Factor Surveillance 
System in the United States of America reported 
similar findings. People with disabilities have 
higher rates of smoking (30.5% compared with 
21.7%), are more likely to be physically inactive 
(22.4% compared with 11.9%), and are more 
likely to be obese (31.2% compared with 19.6%) 
(18). A Canadian study using a national sample 
showed that people with hearing impairments 
were more likely than the general popula-
tion to report low levels of physical activity 
(36). A study in Rwanda reported that adults 
with lower limb amputations engaged in poor 
health-related behaviours such as smoking, 
alcohol consumption, recreational drug use, 
and a lack of exercise (37).
Greater risk of being 
exposed to violence
Violence is linked to health outcomes both 
immediate and long term, including injuries, 
physical and mental health problems, sub-
stance abuse, and death (38). People with disa-
bilities are at greater risk of violence than those 
without disabilities. In the United States vio-
lence against people with disabilities has been 
reported to be 4–10 times greater than that 
against people without disabilities (39). The 
prevalence of sexual abuse against people with 
disabilities has been shown to be higher (40, 
41), especially for institutionalized men and 
women with intellectual disabilities (42–44), 
intimate partners (40, 45), and adolescents (46).
 60
World report on disability 
Higher risk of unintentional injury
People with disabilities are at higher risk of 
nonfatal unintentional injury from road traf-
fic crashes, burns, falls, and accidents related 
to assistive devices (47–51). One study found 
that children with developmental disabilities – 
including autism, attention deficit disorder, and 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder – were 
two to three times more at risk of an injury than 
those without (50). Other studies conclude that 
children with disabilities have a significantly 
higher risk of falls (52), burn-related injuries 
(53), and injuries from crashes involving motor 
vehicles or bicycles (54).
Higher risk of premature death
Mortality rates for people with disabilities vary 
depending on the health condition. People with 
schizophrenia and depression have an increased 
risk of premature death (2.6 and 1.7 times greater, 
respectively) (21). An investigation in the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
regarding health inequalities among people 
with learning impairments and people with 
mental health disorders found that they had a 
lower life expectancy (see Box 3.2) (15).
In some instances mortality rates for people 
with disabilities have fallen in developed coun-
tries. For example, adults with cerebral palsy 
have lifespans close to those of people with no 
disability (55). Over the past few decades people 
with a spinal cord injury in the United Kingdom 
and the United States have improved survival 
rates during the first one to two years following 
injury (56, 57), but beyond this period there is no 
evidence of improvement (57). The data are lim-
ited on mortality rates for people with disabilities 
in low-income countries. A study in Bangladesh 
suggests that people with cerebral palsy may have 
higher rates of premature death (58).
Needs and unmet needs
Disabled respondents from 51 countries report-
ed seeking more inpatient and outpatient care 
than people without disabilities in the WHO 
2002–2004 World Health Survey (see Table 3.1). 
Women seek care more often than men, and so 
do respondents with disabilities in high-income 
countries compared with respondents in low-
income countries across gender and age groups. 
The proportion of respondents seeking care in 
high-income countries increases with age; the 
results varied for low-income countries.
Disabled respondents reported not receiv-
ing care more than people without disabilities, 
across both sex and age grouping. Respondents 
with disabilities in low-income countries show 
higher rates of not receiving care (6.1–6.6) 
than respondents in high-income countries 
(3.3–4.6). Age-standardized analysis across all 
countries suggests that older respondents with 
disabilities have less unmet care needs than 
younger (≤ 59) respondents.
Need and unmet needs exist across the 
spectrum of health services – promotion, pre-
vention, and treatment.
Health promotion and prevention
Misconceptions about the health of people with 
disabilities have led to assumptions that people 
with disabilities do not require access to health 
promotion and disease prevention (60).
Evidence shows that health promotion inter-
ventions such as physical activities are beneficial 
for people with disabilities (61–65). But health 
promotion activities seldom target people with 
disabilities, and many experience multiple barri-
ers to participation. For example, limited access 
to health promotion has been documented for 
people with multiple sclerosis (66), stroke (67), 
poliomyelitis (67), intellectual impairment (15), 
and mental health problems (15).
While some research indicates minimal 
differences in immunization rates (68–70), 
people with disabilities are generally less 
likely to receive screening and preventive ser-
vices. Several studies found that women with 
disabilities receive less screening for breast 
and cervical cancer compared with women 
without disabilities (15, 68, 69, 71–75), and 
men with disabilities are less likely to receive 
 61
Chapter 3 
General health care
screening for prostate cancer (68, 76). A United 
Kingdom investigation found that people with 
intellectual impairment and diabetes are less 
likely than others with just diabetes to have 
their weight checked, and people with schizo-
phrenia and a high risk of coronary heart 
disease are less likely to receive cholesterol 
screening (15).
Sexual and reproductive health services
Sexual and reproductive health services include 
family planning, maternal health care, prevent-
ing and managing gender-based violence, and 
preventing and treating sexually transmitted 
infections including HIV/AIDS. While little 
information is available, it is widely thought 
that people with disabilities have significant 
unmet needs (77). Adolescents and adults with 
disabilities are more likely to be excluded from 
sex education programmes (78, 79). A national 
study in the United States showed that women 
with functional limitations were less likely to 
be asked about contraceptive use during visits 
to general practitioners (71).
Dental care
The oral health of many people with disabilities 
is poor, and access to dental care limited (80–
86). An Australian study investigating dental 
treatment of children with disabilities found 
that the simple treatment needs of 41% of the 
sample were not met (81). A study of the use of 
oral health care services by children in Lagos, 
Nigeria, found that children with disabilities 
and children from lower socioeconomic status 
did not adequately use dental facilities (84).
Box 3.2. Health inequalities experienced by people with disabilities
The Disability Rights Commission in the United Kingdom formally investigated premature deaths among 
people with learning disabilities or mental health problems and local reports of unequal access to health care 
between 2004 and 2006.
People with long-term mental health problems – such as severe depression, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia 
– and learning disabilities, such as autism:
 
■
Had more chronic health conditions than the general population. They were more likely to be obese and 
have heart disease, high blood pressure, respiratory disease, diabetes, strokes, or breast cancer. People with 
schizophrenia were nearly twice as likely to have bowel cancer. Although the recording of people with learning 
disability in primary care settings was poor, higher rates of respiratory disease and obesity in this population 
were indicated.
 
■
Developed chronic health conditions at a younger age than other people. For example, 31% of people with schizo-
phrenia were diagnosed with heart disease under the age of 55, compared with 18% of others with heart disease.
 
■
Died sooner following diagnosis. Five years following a diagnosis of heart disease (adjusting for age), 22% of 
people with schizophrenia and 15% of people with bipolar disorder had died, compared with 8% of people without 
serious mental health problems. The pattern was similar for stroke and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder.
Social deprivation was a major contributor to these health inequalities, and people with mental health problems 
and learning disabilities were at a high risk of poverty. The lack of health promotion, service access, and equal 
treatment were also cited as significant barriers. Disabled people identified fear and mistrust, limited access to 
general practice lists, difficulty negotiating appointment systems, inaccessible information, poor communication, 
and diagnostic overshadowing. Service providers identified issues such as fear, ignorance, and inadequate training.
Responses to the study were positive. Prominent health care professionals endorsed the findings. The British 
Medical Association established training for medical students, and nongovernmental organizations ran cam-
paigns on health inequalities. The British government introduced incentives to encourage people with learning 
disabilities to undergo health checks and strengthened guidance for mental health-care workers. The Health 
Care Commission in association with RADAR – a disability NGO – undertook further work to explore disabling 
factors in health care and to produce guidelines on good practice and criteria for future health care inspections.
Source (15).
 62
World report on disability
Mental health services
Many people with mental health conditions 
do not receive mental health care despite the 
fact that effective interventions exist, includ-
ing medication. A large multicountry survey 
supported by WHO showed that between 35% 
and 50% of people with serious mental disor-
ders in developed countries, and between 76% 
and 85% in developing countries, received no 
treatment in the year before the study (87). A 
meta-analysis of 37 epidemiological studies 
across 32 developed and developing countries 
uncovered a median treatment gap between 
32% and 78% for a range of mental health 
conditions including schizophrenia, mood 
disorders, anxiety disorders, and alcohol abuse 
or dependence (88).
Addressing barriers 
to health care
People with disabilities encounter a range of 
barriers when they attempt to access health 
care services (7, 89, 90). Analysis of the World 
Health Survey data showed a significant differ-
ence between men and women with disabilities 
and people without disabilities in terms of the 
attitudinal, physical, and system level barriers 
faced in accessing care (see Table 3.2).
Table 3.1. Individual’s seeking health care and not receiving needed care. 
Percent
Low-income countries
High-income countries
All countries
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Male
Sought inpatient care
 
13.7
22.7*
21.7
42.4*
16.5
28.5*
Sought outpatient care
49.3
58.4*
55.0
61.8*
51.1
59.5*
Needed, but did not get care
4.6
6.6*
2.8
3.3
4.1
5.8*
 
Female
Sought inpatient care
16.8
21.9*
30.1
46.7*
20.9
29.0*
Sought outpatient care
49.6
59.3*
67.0
68.5
55.8
61.7*
Needed, but did not get care
4.8
6.1
1.8
4.6*
3.7
5.8*
 
18–49
Sought inpatient care
13.5
23.2*
23.1
46.6*
16.1
28.1*
Sought outpatient care
48.8
58.5*
56.7
63.4*
50.9
59.3*
Needed, but did not get care
4.3
6.2*
2.3
4.1
3.8
6.0*
 
50–59
Sought inpatient care
13.9
20.7*
22.1
42.9*
16.6
27.1*
Sought outpatient care
52.1
67.4*
61.4
74.9*
55.1
69.2*
Needed, but did not get care
4.2
6.7*
2.2
4.6
3.6
6.4*
60 and over
Sought inpatient care
18.6
20.6
31.4
42.3*
23.7
29.9*
Sought outpatient care
49.9
56.7
67.9
67.6
57.3
60.8
Needed, but did not get care
5.6
6.3
2.2
3.8
4.2
5.3
  
Note: Estimates are weighted using WHS post-stratified weights, when available (probability weights otherwise) and 
age-standardized.
* t-test suggests significant difference from “Not disabled” at 5%.
Source (59).
 63
Chapter 3 
General health care
Research in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu 
states of India found that cost (70.5%), lack of 
services in the area (52.3%), and transporta-
tion (20.5%) were the top three barriers to 
using health facilities (91). These findings are 
supported by studies in Southern Africa that 
identified cost, distance, and lack of transport 
as reasons for not using services, along with 
services no longer being helpful or the individ-
ual not being satisfied by the services (92–95).
Governments can improve health out-
comes for people with disabilities by improving 
Table 3.2. Reasons for lack of care
Percent
Low-income 
countries
High-income 
countries
All countries
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Male
Could not afford the visit
 
40.2
58.8*
11.6
29.8*
33.5
53.0*
No transport
18.4
16.6
6.9
28.3*
15.2
18.1
Could not afford transport
20.1
30.6
2.1
16.9*
15.5
27.8*
Health-care provider’s equipment 
inadequate
8.5
18.7*
5.0
27.8*
7.7
22.4*
Health-care provider’s skills inadequate
5.8
14.6*
9.9
13.5
6.7
15.7*
Were previously treated badly
4.6
17.6*
7.2
39.6*
5.1
23.7*
Could not take time off
9.5
11.9
6.2
7.9
8.8
11.8
Did not know where to go
5.1
12.4
1.5
23.1*
4.3
15.1*
The person did not think he/she/his/her 
child was sick enough
42.6
32.2
44.1
18.0*
43.7
28.4*
Tried but was denied care
5.2
14.3*
18.7
44.3*
8.5
23.4*
Other
12.8
18.6
12.5
20.5
12.4
18.1
 
Female
Could not afford the visit
35.6
61.3*
25.8
25.0
32.2
51.5*
No transport
14.0
18.1
7.9
20.4*
13.8
17.4
Could not afford transport
15.3
29.4*
4.4
15.2*
13.3
24.6*
Health-care provider’s equipment 
inadequate
10.2
17.0
8.4
25.7*
9.8
17.0*
Health-care provider’s skills inadequate
5.3
13.6*
8.9
20.6*
6.3
15.7*
Were previously treated badly
3.7
8.5*
9.3
20.1*
5.3
10.2*
Could not take time off
6.1
8.3
8.3
17.8
6.6
10.6
Did not know where to go
7.7
13.2
9.3
16.2
9.0
12.2
The person did not think he/she/his/her 
child was sick enough
30.7
28.2
21.3
22.6
29.3
29.3
Tried but was denied care
3.8
9.0*
19.6
54.6*
7.3
21.7*
Other
30.2
17.0*
23.0
24.0
28.5
16.4*
Could not afford the visit
 
18–49
Could not afford the visit
38.7
65.4*
14.1
27.7*
33.6
58.7*
No transport
12.7
13.7
6.6
25.1
11.3
16.0
Could not afford transport
15.0
29.5*
4.6
11.2*
12.8
25.8*
continues ...
 64
World report on disability
Percent
Low-income 
countries
High-income 
countries
All countries
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Health-care provider’s equipment 
inadequate
9.7
17.4*
9.2
29.3
9.5
20.3*
Health-care provider’s skills inadequate
6.2
15.4*
10.9
18.4
7.4
16.3*
Were previously treated badly
5.1
15.1*
6.8
17.9*
5.5
15.5*
Could not take time off
9.0
13.4
8.8
23.9
8.8
15.8
Did not know where to go
7.0
11.9
2.0
9.0*
5.9
11.8*
The person did not think he/she/his/her 
child was sick enough
40.2
30.6*
26.8
26.9
37.0
29.4
Tried but was denied care
5.3
12.9*
27.5
49.5*
10.5
21.4*
Other
16.0
13.5
17.5
14.4
16.2
13.3
 
50–59
Could not afford the visit
49.6
67.4*
17.9
26.7
42.8
58.0
No transport
19.8
16.0
2.9
2.3
16.3
13.0
Could not afford transport
23.1
33.0
0.7
4.0
18.5
26.3
Health-care provider’s equipment 
inadequate
8.6
14.5
4.2
29.1
7.7
15.1
Health-care provider’s skills inadequate
6.5
13.3
10.0
40.9*
7.2
17.6
Were previously treated badly
6.7
12.4
7.2
31.1
6.8
14.0
Could not take time off
8.8
9.7
14.9
10.8
10.2
9.7
Did not know where to go
11.6
18.5
6.5
4.5
10.5
15.6
The person did not think he/she/his/her 
child was sick enough
35.4
14.5*
38.2
5.3*
36.0
13.0*
Tried but was denied care
6.4
17.9
18.0
55.3*
9.0
24.5*
Other
18.6
12.8
34.8
44.5
22.1
19.9
 
60 and over
Could not afford the visit
36.8
47.7
14.4
21.1
30.6
38.7
No transport
25.1
24.3
9.5
30.3*
20.6
22.0
Could not afford transport
23.6
27.5
1.9
28.5*
18.0
24.7
Health-care provider’s equipment or are 
inadequate
9.1
17.1
3.2
20.6
7.7
16.5
Health-care provider’s skills inadequate
4.1
11.8
6.6
18.5
4.8
14.8
Were previously treated badly
1.7
6.7*
8.7
36.7*
3.7
14.1
Could not take time off
5.4
4.1
2.7
1.2
5.1
3.2
Did not know where to go
4.5
13.8
9.0
37.6*
6.1
16.5
The person did not think he/she/his/her 
child was sick enough
31.8
32.7
56.2
21.6*
38.9
31.2
Tried but was denied care
2.6
7.8
4.5
62.1*
3.2
25.8*
Other
27.7
25.2
12.2
35.5*
23.7
22.6
  
Note: Results are significant in every case according to Pearson’s Chi-Square test, corrected for survey design. Estimates are 
weighted using WHS post-stratified weights, when available (probability weights otherwise) and age-standardized.
* t-test suggests significant difference from “Not disabled” at 5%.
Source (59).
... continued
 65
Chapter 3 
General health care
access to quality, affordable health care services, 
which make the best use of available resources. 
Usually several factors interact to inhibit access 
to health care (96), so reforms in all the inter-
acting components of the health care system 
are required:
 
■
reforming policy and legislation
 
■
addressing barriers to financing and 
affordability
 
■
addressing barriers to service delivery
 
■
addressing human resource barriers
 
■
filling gaps in data and research (97).
Reforming policy and legislation
International, regional, and national policy 
and legislation can help meet the health care 
needs of people with disabilities where political 
will, funding, and technical support accom-
pany implementation. Policy formulated at the 
international level can affect national health 
care policies (98). International agreements 
such as the CRPD (2) and the Millennium 
Development Goals can provide countries 
with rationale and support to improve avail-
ability of health care for people with disabili-
ties. The CRPD indicates the following areas 
for action:
 
■
Accessibility – stop discrimination against 
people with disabilities when access-
ing health care, health services, food or 
fluid, health insurance, and life insurance. 
This includes making the environment 
accessible.
 
■
Affordability – ensure that people with 
disabilities get the same variety, quality, 
and standard of free and affordable health 
care as other people.
 
■
Availability – put early intervention and 
treatment services as close as possible to 
where people live in their communities.
 
■
Quality – ensure that health workers give 
the same quality care to people with dis-
abilities as to others.
Formal acknowledgement, within national 
health care policies, that some groups of persons 
with disabilities experience health inequali-
ties is needed to remove health disparities (11). 
Countries such as Australia, Canada, the United 
Kingdom and the United States have published 
national agendas or position papers that specifi-
cally address the health problems of people with 
intellectual impairment (14). In the United States 
Healthy People 2010 – a framework for prevent-
ing health conditions in the entire population – 
makes reference to people with disabilities (60).
In addition to the health sector, many 
other sectors can enact “disability-friendly” 
policies to prevent access barriers and enable 
those with disabilities to promote their health 
and actively participate in community life (99). 
Legislation and policies within the education, 
transport, housing, labour, and social welfare 
sectors can all influence the health of people 
with disabilities (see Chapters 5–8 for further 
information).
People with disabilities are most intimately 
familiar with and most affected by barriers to 
health care access, and eliminating these barriers 
requires input from these people (89). Research 
has shown the benefits of involving users in the 
design and operation of health care systems (100). 
People with diverse disabilities can contribute, 
including people with intellectual impairment 
(101), people with mental health conditions 
(102–104), children with disabilities (105), and 
families and caregivers (106, 107).
Commitment to collaboration is neces-
sary, and input is required from health-care 
providers familiar with the structural, institu-
tional, and professional challenges of providing 
access to quality care. The time, technical, and 
resource challenges of involving users must be 
acknowledged (100, 106), but the benefits are 
also significant. People with disabilities are fre-
quent users of the health care system, and tend 
to use a wide range of services across the con-
tinuum of care, so their experiences can also 
help measure overall performance of the health 
system (17, 89).
 66
World report on disability 
Addressing barriers to 
financing and affordability
A review of the 2002–2004 World Health Survey 
reveals that affordability was the primary reason 
why people with disabilities, across gender and 
age groups, did not receive needed health care in 
low-income countries. For 51 countries 32–33% 
of nondisabled men and women cannot afford 
health care, compared with 51–53% of people 
with disabilities (see Table 3.2). Transport costs 
also rank high as a barrier to health care access 
in low-income and high-income countries, and 
across gender and age groups.
Health services are funded through a vari-
ety of sources including government budgets, 
social insurance, private health insurance, 
external donor funding, and private sources 
including 
nongovernmental 
arrangements 
and out-of-pocket expenses. The World Health 
Survey showed that the rate at which people with 
disabilities pay with current income, savings, 
or insurance is roughly the same as for people 
without disabilities, but paying with personal 
means varies between groups: paying with 
insurance is more common in high-income 
countries, while selling items and relying on 
friends and family is more common in low-
income countries, and people with disabilities 
are more likely to sell items, borrow money, or 
rely on a family member (see Table 3.3).
Public health systems theoretically provide 
universal coverage, but this is rare (108, 109): no 
country has ensured that everybody has imme-
diate access to all health care services (110). 
In the poorest countries only the most basic 
services may be available (110). Restrictions 
in public health sector expenditure are result-
ing in an inadequate supply of services and a 
Table 3.3. Overview of health expenditures, proportion of disabled and not disabled respondents
Percent
Low-income countries
High-income countries
All countries
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Men
Paid with current income
 
84.6
81.4*
73.3
70.1
80.9
79.1
Paid with savings
10.6
9.8
11.5
12.9
10.8
11.1
Paid with insurance
1.8
1.8
11.3
13.3
5.1
5.2
Paid by selling items
13.6
17.6*
3.3
5.3
9.9
13.6*
Family paid
15.8
23.8*
7.7
13.5*
12.9
21.3*
Paid by borrowing
13.7
25.2*
5.9
14.7*
11.0
21.6*
Paid by other means
5.3
5.1
2.6
6.5*
4.3
5.5
 
Women
Paid with current income
82.9
82.8
71.5
74.9
78.5
80.3
Paid with savings
9.1
10.8
11.4
11.6
10.1
10.8
Paid with insurance
2.0
1.8
11.1
16.0*
5.7
6.2
Paid by selling items
12.0
14.2*
2.4
4.7*
8.3
10.7*
Family paid
16.7
26.6*
9.3
15.1*
13.7
22.7*
Paid by borrowing
14.0
23.5*
6.4
12.7*
11.2
19.5*
Paid by other means
6.7
5.8
2.6
3.6
4.9
5.3
  
Note: Estimates are weighted using WHS post-stratified weights, when available (probability weights otherwise) and 
age-standardized.
* t-test suggests significant difference from “Not disabled” at 5%.
Source (59).
 67
Chapter 3 
General health care
significant increase in the proportion of out-
of-pocket expenditure by households (109, 
111). In many low-income countries less than 
1% of health budgets are spent on mental health 
care, with countries relying on out-of-pocket 
payments as the primary financing mecha-
nism (112). Some middle-income countries are 
moving towards private sector provision for 
treatments such as mental health services (113).
People with disabilities experience lower 
rates of employment, are more likely to be eco-
nomically disadvantaged, and are therefore 
less likely to afford private health insurance 
(114). Employed people with disabilities may be 
excluded from private health insurance because 
of pre-existing conditions or be “underinsured” 
(114) because they have been denied coverage for 
a long period (11), or are excluded from claiming 
for treatment related to a pre-existing condition, 
or must pay higher premiums and out-of-pocket 
expenses. This has been a problem in the United 
States for example, but the new Affordable Care 
Act enacted in March 2010 will prohibit the 
denial of insurance to those with pre-existing 
conditions starting in 2014 (115).
Analysis from the 2002–2004 World Health 
Survey across 51 countries showed that men and 
women with disabilities, in high-income and 
low-income countries, had more difficulties 
than adults without disabilities in obtaining, 
from private health care organizations or the 
government, payment exemptions or the right 
to special rates for health care. Furthermore 
people with disabilities experienced more dif-
ficulties in finding out which benefits they were 
entitled to from health insurance and obtain-
ing reimbursements from health insurance. 
This finding was most evident in the age group 
18–49 with some variability in the older age 
groups across income settings (see Table 3.4).
Social health insurance systems are gener-
ally characterized by mandatory payroll contri-
butions from individuals and employers (109). 
These employer-based systems may be inacces-
sible for many adults with disabilities because 
they have lower employment rates than people 
without disabilities. Even employed people 
with disabilities may not be able to afford 
insurance premiums associated with employer-
based health insurance plans (114), while disa-
bled people working in the informal sector or 
for small businesses are unlikely to be offered 
insurance (114).
The World Health Survey found that disa-
bled respondents in 31 low-income and low 
middle-income countries spend 15% of total 
household expenditure on out-of-pocket health 
care costs compared with 11% for nondisabled 
respondents. People with disabilities were also 
found to be more vulnerable to catastrophic 
health expenditure (see Table 3.5) across gender 
and age groups, and for both low-income and 
high-income countries as defined by the World 
Bank. For all countries, 28–29% of all people 
with disabilities suffer catastrophic expendi-
tures compared with 17–18% of nondisabled 
people, but low-income countries show signifi-
cantly higher rates than high-income countries 
across sex and age groups.
Financing options
Health system financing options determine 
whether health services – a mix of promo-
tion, prevention, treatment, and rehabilita-
tion – are available and whether people are 
protected from financial risks associated with 
using them (110, 116). Contributions such as 
social insurance and copayment for health 
services must be affordable and fair, and take 
into account the individual’s ability to pay. 
Full access will be achieved only when gov-
ernments cover the cost of the available health 
services for disabled people who cannot afford 
to pay (110).
A range of health financing options can 
increase the availability of health care services 
to the general population, and improve access 
for individuals with disabilities. The World 
Health Report 2010 outlines an action agenda 
for paying for health that does not deter people 
from using services including (110):
 
■
raise sufficient resources for health by 
increasing the efficiency of revenue collec-
tion, reprioritizing government spending, 
 68
World report on disability 
Table 3.4. Difficulties in access to health care financing 
Percent
Low-income countries
High-income countries
All countries
Not  
disabled
Disabled
Not  
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Male
Difficulties in:
   obtaining exemptions or special rates 
 
17.7
24.1*
7.5
14.1*
15.0
22.0*
   completing insurance applications 
3.6
6.6
4.7
12.4*
4.3
10.1*
   finding out insurance benefits/entitlements 
4.0
9.0*
8.6
17.2*
6.4
13.2*
   getting reimbursed from health insurance
3.3
7.4*
3.5
11.8*
3.4
8.6*
 
Female
Difficulties in:
   obtaining exemptions or special rates 
15.7
23.5*
5.9
16.5*
12.3
21.1*
   completing insurance applications 
3.3
5.2
5.1
9.3*
4.5
7.0*
   finding out insurance benefits/entitlements 
3.3
6.0*
8.4
15.9*
6.2
10.7*
   getting reimbursed from health insurance
3.2
5.4*
3.2
5.8*
3.1
5.6*
 
18–49
Difficulties in:
   obtaining exemptions or special rates 
15.7
22.5*
6.3
15.8*
13.7
21.6*
   completing insurance applications 
4.2
6.7*
4.2
10.7*
4.1
8.3*
   finding out insurance benefits/entitlements 
4.6
8.0*
9.9
17.7*
7.3
12.1*
   getting reimbursed from health insurance
4.2
7.1*
4.1
10.6*
4.1
8.0*
 
50–59
Difficulties in:
   obtaining exemptions or special rates 
17.5
24.2*
7.9
18.5*
14.9
23.1*
   completing insurance applications 
3.8
5.8
5.9
14.6*
5.0
10.4*
   finding out insurance benefits/entitlements 
5.0
7.9
9.1
19.9*
7.4
13.8*
   getting reimbursed from health insurance
4.4
7.1
5.0
8.0
4.7
7.4
 
≥ 60
Difficulties in:
   obtaining exemptions or special rates 
18.6
25.5
6.9
14.0*
13.6
20.1*
   completing insurance applications 
2.1
4.4
6.0
7.8
4.7
6.7
   finding out insurance benefits/entitlements 
1.6
6.1*
5.8
11.7*
4.2
9.6*
   getting reimbursed from health insurance
1.3
4.7
1.5
4.8*
1.5
4.7*
  
Note: Estimates are weighted using WHS post-stratified weights, when available (probability weights otherwise) and 
age-standardized.
* t-test suggests significant difference from “Not disabled” at 5%.
Source (59).
 69
Chapter 3 
General health care
using innovative financing, and providing 
development assistance;
 
■
remove financial risks and barriers to access;
 
■
promote efficiency and eliminate waste.
While improving access to affordable, 
quality health care pertains to everyone, the 
evidence presented above suggests that people 
with disabilities have more health care needs 
and more unmet needs. This section therefore 
focuses specifically on financing strategies that 
may improve access to health services for per-
sons with disabilities.
Provide affordable health insurance
Having insurance (public, private, or mixed) 
can increase disabled people’s access to, and 
use of, health care services. Having insurance 
improves a variety of outcomes including an 
increase in the likelihood of receiving primary 
care, a decrease in unmet needs (including for 
speciality care), and a reduction in delays or in 
foregoing care (117–119). Insurance for a wide 
range of basic medical services can improve 
clinical outcomes (120), and can reduce the 
financial problems and the burden of out-of-
pocket payments for families (118). Subsidizing 
health insurance can also extend coverage to 
persons with disabilities. In Taiwan, China 
the health insurance scheme pays for part of 
the insurance premium for people with intel-
lectual disabilities according to their level of 
disability (121). In Colombia subsidized health 
insurance increased coverage for the poorest 
quintile of the population (122), which may 
benefit people with disabilities because they 
are disproportionately represented in the 
bottom quintile.
Target people with disabilities who 
have the greatest health care needs
Some governments have targeted funding to 
primary care doctors and organizations to 
support health care of people with the great-
est need. Care Plus – a primary health care 
initiative in New Zealand – provides an addi-
tional approximately 10% capitation funding 
to primary health organizations to include 
services such as comprehensive assessments, 
individual care plan development, patient edu-
cation, and regular follow-ups, as well as better-
coordinated and lower cost services (123, 124). 
Medicare, a United States government social 
insurance scheme, provides additional pay-
ment to primary care physicians for physician-
patient-family-nurse conferences to facilitate 
communication, support lifestyle changes, 
and improve treatment compliance (125). The 
programme improved functioning of elderly 
people with heart conditions and has the poten-
tial to lower total health care expenditures 
(125). Many governments also extend financial 
assistance to disabled people’s organizations 
and nongovernmental organizations for health 
Table 3.5. Overview of catastrophic health expenditures, proportion of disabled and not disabled 
respondents
Percent
Low-income countries
High-income countries
All countries
Not disabled
Disabled
Not disabled
Disabled
Not disabled
Disabled
Male
20.2
31.2
14.5
18.5
18.4
27.8
Female
20.0
32.6
12.7
18.7
17.4
28.7
18–49
19.9
33.4
13.2
16.1
17.9
29.2
50–59
18.2
32.6
13.0
24.7
16.4
30.1
60 and over
21.2
29.5
14.2
21.5
18.3
26.3
  
Note: All results are significant according to Pearson’s Chi-Square test, corrected for survey design. Estimates are weighted 
using WHS post-stratified weights, when available (probability weights otherwise) and age-standardized.
Source (59).
 70
World report on disability 
programmes targeting people with disabilities 
(91, 126, 127).
Link income support to use of health care
Reviews of health financing mechanisms for the 
poor in Latin America indicate that conditional 
cash transfers can increase the use of preven-
tative health services and encourage informed 
and active health care consumers, where effec-
tive primary health care and a mechanism to 
disburse payments are in place (111, 128–131). 
Conditional cash transfers, targeted at those 
groups of people with disabilities who typi-
cally receive fewer preventative services, may 
increase access to these services (114).
Provide general income support
Unconditional cash transfers for people with 
disabilities recognize the additional barriers 
they face in accessing health care and reha-
bilitation, transport, education, and working, 
among other things. Many countries provide 
income support through these transfers to poor 
households, including poor households with a 
disabled member, and directly to individuals 
with disabilities. Some, such as Bangladesh, 
Brazil, India, and South Africa, have uncon-
ditional cash transfer programmes targeted at 
poor people and households with a disabled 
member. The programmes aim at increasing 
the disposable income of poor households, 
which they spend according to their priori-
ties – for example by buying food, enrolling 
children in education, or paying for health 
care. No best practice formula is available to 
guide policy, but cash transfers can exist along 
with other social policies and social protection 
programmes.
Reduce or remove out-of-pocket 
payments to improve access
Reduction or elimination of out-of-pocket pay-
ments for fees – whether formal or informal – can 
increase poor people’s use of health care services, 
and reduce financial hardship and catastrophic 
health expenditure (110, 111). This is particularly 
important for people with disabilities who spend 
more on health than people without disabilities 
(see Table 3.3). Removing fees does not guarantee 
access, however, as even “free” health services may 
not get used. People with mental health conditions, 
for example, might not access services because of 
barriers such as stigma, or people with mobility 
impairments may face physical barriers to health 
care access (72, 113).
Provide incentives for health 
providers to promote access
Some people with disabilities require prolonged 
care and accommodations requiring additional 
resources to ensure effective coordination 
(114). In the United States tax credits to small 
practices help make up for the cost of patient 
accommodations (132). In Wales new disability 
access criteria for primary care doctors create 
incentives for general medical practices to make 
services more accessible to disabled people (15).
Addressing barriers to 
service delivery
Ensuring the availability of services and disa-
bled peoples’ awareness of the services, includ-
ing those in rural and remote communities, is 
essential to improving access (see Box 3.3). 
Where services do exist people with disabili-
ties may encounter a range of physical, com-
munication, information, and coordination 
barriers when they attempt to access health 
care services.
Physical barriers may be related to the archi-
tectural design of health facilities, or to medical 
equipment, or transportation (11, 69, 72, 96).
Barriers to facilities include inaccessible 
parking areas, uneven access to buildings, poor 
signage, narrow doorways, internal steps, and 
inadequate bathroom facilities. A study of 41 
Brazilian cities examining the architectural bar-
riers in basic health care units found that about 
60% did not allow adequate access for people 
with functional difficulties (137). Similarly, a 
survey carried out in Essen, Germany found 
that 80% of orthopaedic surgeries and 90% 
of neurological surgeries did not meet access 
 71
Chapter 3 
General health care
standards, which limited wheelchair users 
from accessing their doctor of choice (138).
Medical equipment is often not acces-
sible for people with disabilities, particularly 
those with mobility impairments. In the World 
Health Survey men with disabilities report 
health service provider’s equipment (including 
medication) to be inadequate across income 
settings (22.4% compared with 7.7% for men 
without disabilities); women with disabilities in 
high-income countries report similar difficul-
ties (see Table 3.2). For example, many women 
with mobility impairments are unable to access 
breast and cervical cancer screening because 
examination tables are not height-adjustable 
and mammography equipment only accom-
modates women who are able to stand (11, 132).
People with disabilities frequently cite 
transport as a barrier to accessing health care, 
particularly when they are located at a distance 
Box 3.3. Access to mental health services
The 2001 World Health Report called for adequate access to effective and humane treatment for people with mental 
health conditions (133). Access to appropriate care is problematic for many people with mental health conditions, 
and certain groups – such as rural populations – typically have less access to services than other groups (134).
In ensuring access to mental health services, one of the most important factors to consider is the extent to which 
services are community-based (135). But in most countries, care is still predominantly provided in institutions. In 
low-income and middle-income countries there is less than one outpatient contact or visit (0.7) per day spent in 
inpatient care (136). The move from institutional to community care is slow and uneven. A recent study of mental 
health systems in 42 low-income and middle-income countries (136) showed that resources for mental health are 
overwhelmingly concentrated in urban settings. A considerable number of people with mental health conditions 
are being hospitalized in mental hospitals in large cities. Controlling for population density, there were nearly 
three times as many psychiatric beds in the largest city of a country, than in the rest of the country (see figure 
below). In low-income countries, the imbalance was even greater with more than six times as many beds based 
in the largest city. A similar pattern was found for human resources: across the participating countries, the ratio 
per population of psychiatrists and nurses working in the largest city was more than twice that of psychiatrists 
and nurses working in the entire country.
Ratio of psychiatric beds located in or near the largest city to beds in the entire country 
 
Ratio of beds per 100 000 population
0
2
4
6
8
LICs (n=10)
6.4
LMICs (n=23)
2.9
UMICs (n=5)
1.3
Total (n=38)
2.9
Note: Low-income countries (LICs), lower middle-income countries (LMICs), and upper middle-income countries (UMICs)
To increase access to services for people with mental health conditions, community care systems need to be 
strengthened. This will include greater integration into primary health care, as well as discouraging hospitaliza-
tion, especially in large mental hospitals, and strengthening outpatient mental health care through follow-up 
care and mobile teams (161). Wherever delivered, mental health services need to respect the human rights of 
people with mental health conditions, in line with the CRPD (162).
 72
World report on disability 
from health care facilities (see Table 3.2) (91–95). 
Transport for people with disabilities is often 
limited, unaffordable, or inaccessible (139). The 
majority of disabled participants in a United 
States study said that transportation problems 
were a major barrier to accessing health care 
(89). A study in the Republic of Korea suggested 
that transportation barriers were a likely factor 
in keeping people with severe physical and com-
munication impairments from participating in 
population screenings for chronic diseases (140).
Communication 
difficulties 
between 
people with disabilities and service providers 
are regularly cited as an area of concern (79, 
141, 142). Difficulties can arise when people 
with disabilities attempt to make appointments 
with service providers, provide a medical his-
tory and description of their symptoms, or try 
to understand explanations about diagnosis and 
management of health conditions. Inaccurate 
case histories may be provided to health-care 
practitioners when information is supplied by 
caregivers, family members, or others (143).
Service providers may feel uncomfortable 
communicating with people with disabilities. 
For example, many health-care providers have 
not been trained to interact with people with 
serious mental illness, and feel uncomfortable 
or ineffective in communicating with them 
(144). An investigation into Deaf women’s 
access to health care in the United States found 
that health-care workers often turn their heads 
down when talking, preventing deaf women 
from lip-reading (141).
Failure to communicate in appropriate for-
mats can lead to problems with compliance and 
attendance (145). A survey commissioned by the 
Zimbabwe Parents of Handicapped Children’s 
Association found that people with disabilities 
were excluded from general HIV/AIDS ser-
vices because counselling and testing were not 
offered in sign language for people with hearing 
impairments, and education and communica-
tion materials were not offered in Braille for 
people with visual impairments (146).
Some people with disabilities may have 
multiple or complex health needs, including 
rehabilitation, which require input from differ-
ent service providers. These needs may extend 
across services in different sectors such as the 
education and social sectors. People with dis-
abilities who require multiple services often 
receive fragmented or duplicative services 
(147). They may also encounter transitional 
difficulties when care is transferred from one 
service provider to another (148), such as when 
transitioning from child to adult services (149–
151), and from adult services to elderly services 
(152, 153).
Lack of communication between service 
providers can hamper coordinated service 
delivery (154). Primary health-care profession-
als’ referrals to specialists often lack sufficient 
information, for example. Conversely primary 
health-care professionals frequently receive 
inadequate consultation reports from special-
ists, and discharge summaries following hos-
pital admission may never reach the primary 
care doctor (155).
Primary care consultations can take longer 
for people with disabilities than for people 
without disabilities (156). Adults with intel-
lectual impairment often require extra time for 
examinations, screening, clinical procedures, 
and health promotion (99). Health-care prac-
titioners are often not reimbursed for the addi-
tional consultation time they spend with people 
with disabilities (132, 156), and the disparities 
between actual cost and reimbursement can be 
a disincentive for service providers to provide 
comprehensive health care (156). Short consul-
tations may leave little time for service provid-
ers to understand and address the sometimes 
complex health care needs of people with dis-
abilities (154, 157).
Perceptions of health status may influ-
ence health behaviours, including attendance 
at health care services, and how health needs 
are communicated. A study on people with epi-
lepsy in rural Ghana, for example, found that 
spiritual beliefs surrounding epilepsy influ-
enced health and seeking of treatment (158). A 
study in rural areas of the Gambia reported that 
only 16% of 380 people with epilepsy knew that 
 73
Chapter 3 
General health care
preventive treatment was possible; of the 48% of 
people with epilepsy who had never used treat-
ment, 70% did not know that clinics offered 
treatment for seizures (158). People with intel-
lectual impairment in minority ethnic commu-
nities have also been found to be less likely to 
use health care services (14, 159). An Australian 
study on women with mental health conditions 
and physical, sensory, and intellectual impair-
ment found that self-perceptions regarding 
sexuality, painful past experiences associated 
with reproductive screening, and memories of 
themselves before disability were all barriers 
to seeking health care (72). In another exam-
ple, people who experience disability as they 
age may “normalize” their symptoms as “just 
part of ageing” rather than seeking appropriate 
treatment (160).
Include people with disabilities in 
general health care services
All groups in society should have access to 
comprehensive, inclusive health care (122, 163). 
An international survey of health research pri-
orities indicated that addressing the specific 
impairments of people with disabilities is sec-
ondary to integrating their health needs into 
primary health care systems (164). Primary 
care services are generally the most accessi-
ble, affordable, and acceptable for communi-
ties (161). For example, a systematic review of 
studies from six developing countries in Africa, 
Asia, and Latin America confirmed that local, 
affordable primary health care programmes 
were more effective than other programmes 
for people with mental health conditions (165).
Providers may have to cater to the range of 
needs stemming from hearing, vision, speech, 
mobility, and cognitive impairments to include 
people with disabilities in primary health care 
services. Table 3.6 lists examples of accommo-
dations. While evidence on the efficacy of such 
accommodations is limited, they represent 
practical approaches, widely recommended 
throughout the literature and within the dis-
ability community.
Within low-income and lower middle-
income settings, community-based rehabili-
tation (CBR) programmes can promote and 
facilitate access to health care services for people 
with disabilities and their families. As outlined 
in the health component of the CBR guidelines 
(166), programmes can assist people with dis-
abilities to overcome access barriers, train 
primary health care workers in disability aware-
ness, and initiate referrals to health services.
Target interventions to complement 
inclusive health care 
Targeted interventions can help reduce ineq-
uities in health and meet the specific needs of 
individuals with disabilities (4, 17). Groups 
that are difficult to reach through broad-based 
programmes – people with intellectual impair-
ment, mental health conditions, or Deaf people, 
for example – may warrant targeted interven-
tions. Targeted interventions may also be useful 
for people with disabilities with a higher risk 
of secondary conditions or co-morbidities, or 
where there are specific health needs requiring 
ongoing care (see Box 3.4).
Health promotion efforts targeted at people 
with disabilities can have a substantial impact 
on improving lifestyle behaviours, increasing 
the quality of life, and reducing medical costs 
(18, 168). Several small health promotion pro-
grammes for weight loss and fitness developed 
specifically for people with intellectual impair-
ment have demonstrated some success (169). 
An intervention in the United States for adults 
with Down syndrome included a 12-week fit-
ness and health education programme, which 
led to significantly improved fitness, strength, 
and endurance, and slight but significant reduc-
tions in body weight (65).
Improve access to specialist 
health services
Primary care teams require support from spe-
cialized services, organizations, and institu-
tions (170) to provide comprehensive health care 
to people with disabilities. A survey of general 
 74
World report on disability 
Table 3.6. Examples of reasonable accommodations
Accommodations
Suggested approaches
Structural modifications to 
facilities
Ensuring an accessible path of travel from the street or transit to the clinic; allocating 
adequate parking bays for people with disabilities; configuring the layout of examination 
rooms and other clinic spaces to provide access for mobility equipment or support people; 
installing ramps and grab rails; widening doorways; clearing hallways of equipment 
obstructing the path of travel; installing lifts; high contrast, large print and Braille signage; 
providing modified toilets and hand washing facilities; providing seating for those who 
cannot stand or sit on the floor to wait.
 
Using equipment with 
universal design features
Height-adjustable examination tables or availability of a lower cot or bed for examination; 
seated or platform scales; wheelchair accessible diagnostic equipment: for example, 
mammography equipment.
 
Communicating information 
in appropriate formats
Presenting health information in alternative formats such as large print, Braille, audio 
and picture format; speaking clearly and directly to the individual; providing information 
slowly to ensure comprehension; demonstrating activities rather than just describing 
them; sign language interpreting services; providing readers, scribes, or interpreters to 
assist with forms.
 
Making adjustments to 
appointment systems
Provisions for making appointments via e-mail or fax; sending text or phone appoint-
ments reminders; scheduling additional time for appointments; offering first or last 
appointments; clustering appointments for general health and disability needs.
 
Using alternative models of 
service delivery
Telemedicine; mobile clinic services, and house calls; involving family members and car-
egivers in medical consultations when appropriate and desired by the patient; assistance 
with transportation to health services.
  
Box 3.4. Preventing HIV/AIDS among young people with disabilities in Africa
In 1999 the international network Rehabilitation International began an HIV/AIDS project in Mozambique and the 
United Republic of Tanzania to promote the African Decade of Persons with Disabilities, and to provide HIV/AIDS 
leadership and human rights training. The nongovernmental organizations Miracles in Mozambique, the Disabled 
Organization for Legal Affairs, and Social Economic Development in the United Republic of Tanzania were local 
partners in the project, with support by the Swedish International Development Agency.
A baseline survey carried out with 175 disabled people aged 12–30 revealed that knowledge about HIV/AIDS was low, 
there was a lack of health information available in accessible formats and health facilities were also often inaccessible.
The project developed educational materials on HIV/AIDS issues and rights for youths and young adults with 
disabilities, as well as for outreach workers and peer educators working with this group. The materials included 
manuals in accessible formats such as Braille and a DVD with sign language. Project materials were widely dis-
seminated to HIV/AIDS and disability organizations. Four training workshops, delivered in Kiswahili and Portuguese 
to 287 participants, were later expanded to include people with disabilities in rural areas of Mozambique. Some 
participants trained to serve locally as HIV/AIDS educators. At the same time, a wide-ranging campaign used mass 
media, the Internet, and seminars involving representatives of governments and nongovernmental organizations 
to educate the public.
At the conclusion of the project, it was recommended that disability issues should be mainstreamed within HIV/
AIDS educational programmes. The participatory and inclusive approach proved effective in training young 
people with disabilities as well as peer educators and outreach workers.
Source (167).
 75
Chapter 3 
General health care
practitioners in the Netherlands found that 
while they agreed that people with intellectual 
impairment should receive services in primary 
care settings, they rated access to specialist 
support as “important to very important” for 
health issues such as behavioural and psychiat-
ric problems and epilepsy (171). Comprehensive 
health reviews in primary care settings have 
also been recommended for people with intel-
lectual impairment with specialist multidisci-
plinary backup where required (169).
Good practices in mental health highlight 
the importance of specialists (161). In Uganda 
mental health specialists travel to primary care 
clinics to provide supervision and support; in 
Brazil visiting mental health specialists see 
patients together with primary care practition-
ers; and in Australia general practitioners are 
able to contact psychogeriatric nurses, psychol-
ogists, or psychiatrists as required (161).
Dedicated 
community-based 
services 
meet specialist health needs in some coun-
tries. In the United Kingdom, learning dis-
ability teams are widely available for people 
with intellectual impairment. These teams 
provide specialist treatment where general 
services are unable to meet needs, support 
primary care services to identify and meet 
health needs, facilitate access to general ser-
vices, and provide education and advice to 
individuals, families, and other profession-
als (172). Outreach teams in Brazil and India 
follow-up on patients with spinal cord injuries 
to address issues such as skin care, bowel and 
bladder management, joint and muscle prob-
lems, and pain management (173).
Provide people-centred health services
Many disabled people seek more collaborative 
relationships with primary care providers in 
managing primary, secondary, and co-morbid 
conditions (7). A comprehensive health assess-
ment programme in Australia designed to 
enhance interactions between adults with intel-
lectual impairment and caregivers showed that 
the assessment increased general practitioners’ 
attention to the health needs of adults with 
intellectual impairment, and improved health 
promotion and disease prevention (174).
People-centred approaches should:
 
■
Educate and support people with disabilities 
to manage their health. Self-management 
approaches have been effective in improv-
ing health outcomes and quality of life for 
a range of chronic conditions, and in some 
instances have lowered costs for the health 
care system (125, 175, 176). With appropri-
ate training and support, and opportunities 
for collaborative decision-making, people 
with disabilities can actively improve their 
health (see Box 3.5). People with disabili-
ties with more knowledge can communi-
cate better, negotiate the health system 
more effectively, and are generally more 
satisfied with their care (179, 180). 
 
■
Provide time-limited, self-management 
courses, involving peer support to enable 
persons with disabilities to better manage 
their health (176). In Nicaragua, where 
the health system is overburdened with 
increasing patients with chronic disease, 
“chronic clubs” have been established in 
health centres to teach people with dia-
betes about risk factors, disease man-
agement, signs of complications, and 
healthy lifestyles (181). In Rwanda a study 
regarding the health promotion needs of 
individuals with lower limb amputation 
recommended workshops to enable people 
with disabilities to share experiences and 
motivate each other to improve health 
behaviours (37).
 
■
Involve family members and caregivers in 
service delivery where appropriate. Family 
members and caregivers may have limited 
knowledge and skills. They may not under-
stand the importance of a healthy lifestyle, 
or they may not be able to identify changes 
in a person with a disability that would be 
indicative of a health problem (182). Family 
members and caregivers can support the 
health-seeking behaviours of people with 
 76
World report on disability 
disabilities by identifying health needs, 
helping obtain health care, including 
scheduling appointments, accompanying 
individuals to their appointments, and 
communicating information and helping 
to promote and maintain healthy activities 
(14). One study in the United States sug-
gested that spouses, partners and paid car-
egivers were more likely than other types 
of caregivers to ensure the participation 
of people with disabilities in preventive 
health care services (183).
Coordinate services
Care coordination promotes a collaborative, 
interdisciplinary team approach to health care 
service delivery, linking people with disabili-
ties to appropriate services and resources, and 
ensuring a more efficient and equitable dis-
tribution of resources (147, 154, 184). While 
perhaps increasing service delivery costs in 
the short-term, coordination has the poten-
tial to improve quality, efficiency, and cost–
effectiveness of health care service delivery 
in the longer term (184–188). Targeting those 
who can benefit will help improve outcomes 
and reduce unnecessary coordination costs 
(189). Studies have confirmed that integrated 
and coordinated approaches across service 
organizations – including those involved in 
housing and education – can reduce the use 
of hospitals and nursing homes for people 
with disabilities and improve their general 
health and participation in the community 
(190, 191).
Effective and efficient ways to coordinate 
the seamless transition of health care services 
for people with disabilities are still under 
development. But some general strategies 
thought to be effective include the following 
elements (148, 152, 192):
 
■
Identify a care coordinator. A range of 
health personnel can assume the role of 
care coordinator. Primary care structures 
are probably the most efficient for coor-
dinating care throughout the health care 
system (155, 185), and many people with 
disabilities see general practitioners as 
having the overall responsibility for their 
health care and being “gatekeepers” for the 
wide range of community-based services 
(193). Sometimes, dedicated care coordi-
nation services and health facilitators can 
assist people to access primary health care 
services (120), as in the United Kingdom 
where clinical nurse specialists coordinate 
health care for people with intellectual 
impairment (169).
Box 3.5. People with spinal cord injuries on the medical care team
In 2005 a multicountry initiative was launched to investigate how people with disabilities could play a greater 
role in the management of their own care. The “New Paradigm of Medical Care for Persons with Disabilities” was 
a joint initiative between the World Health Organization (WHO), the Associazione Italiana Amici di Raoul Follereau 
(AIFO), and Disabled Peoples’ International (DPI). It followed an earlier WHO recommendation that health care 
services organized according to the traditional model of acute care were inappropriate for long-term health care 
because they did not give people with disabilities a sufficient role in managing their own care (177).
The “New Paradigm” project in Piedecuesta, Colombia, encouraged people with spinal cord injuries to meet 
regularly as a group to discuss their health care needs. Health care and social workers provided information on 
health and led interactive training sessions in practical self-care skills. Topics covered included pressure sores, 
urinary problems, catheter management, and issues related to sexuality.
Participants reported improved relationships with health care workers, and a better quality of life after the project 
started. The group decided to form an association after two years of regular meetings. Members of the association 
share their experiences with new people admitted to the local hospital in Piedecuesta with spinal cord injuries, 
making the members part of the local health care team (178).
 77
Chapter 3 
General health care
 
■
Develop an individual care plan. A cus-
tomized care plan is important to bridge 
current and past care and for arrang-
ing future needs. A plan should be flex-
ible enough to accommodate changes in 
people’s needs and circumstances (194). 
Enhanced Primary Care in Australia 
encourages general practitioners to carry 
out comprehensive health assessments, 
multidisciplinary care plans, and case 
conferences with older people, people 
with chronic illness, and people with 
intellectual impairment (169).
 
■
Provide appropriate referral and effective 
information transfer to other services. 
Timely referral can facilitate access and 
decrease stress, frustration, and the devel-
opment of secondary conditions (154, 195, 
196). Good communication between ser-
vice providers is critical (197). Electronic 
records or client passbooks – which 
include information on a person’s abili-
ties, challenges, and methods of learning 
or communicating – can support transi-
tion between child and adult services and 
between multiple health care practitioners 
(154). Inventories of relevant services and 
community resources also may be useful.
Use information and 
communication technologies
Information and communication technologies 
can increase the capacity of health care services, 
improve the delivery of services and enable 
people to better manage their own health (198). 
Evidence on the efficacy of some technologies 
is limited, or shows limited effect, while other 
technologies promise benefits for the health 
care system and for improvement in individual 
health outcomes (199).
 
■
Electronic medical records – shared 
electronic medical records can overcome 
common problems in care continuity (200).
 
■
Telemedicine services – people receiving 
psychiatric telemedicine services, such as 
psychiatric evaluations and medication 
management, have reported high satisfac-
tion with their care (201), and video con-
ferencing also has successfully delivered 
self-management programmes (202).
 
■
Consumer health informatics – internet-
based, 
self-management 
programmes 
have helped people with chronic disease 
(175, 203). A study compared internet-
based hearing screening with conventional 
screening to demonstrate that the former 
could be accomplished successfully (204), 
and internet portals can offer “e-coaching” 
to prepare individuals for visits to primary 
care physicians and to discuss chronic con-
ditions (180).
Addressing human resource barriers
Common barriers include health-service pro-
viders’ attitudes, knowledge and skills, and 
ensuring that heath practices do not conflict 
with the rights of persons with disabilities.
People with disabilities may be reluctant 
to seek health care because of stigmatization 
and discrimination (205). People with dis-
abilities may have experienced institutionali-
zation or other involuntary treatment, abuse, 
neglect and persistent devaluation. Negative 
experiences in the health system, including 
instances of insensitivity or disrespect, may 
result in distrust of health providers, failure 
to seek care, and reliance upon self diagnosis 
and treatment (89, 206). Therefore, respectful, 
knowledgeable and supportive responses to 
people with disabilities from health-care pro-
viders are vital.
However, attitudes and misconceptions 
among health-care providers remain barri-
ers to health care for people with disabilities 
(90, 207). Some health-care providers may feel 
uncomfortable about treating people with dis-
abilities (157), and clinical decision-making 
may be influenced by negative attitudes and 
assumptions. The common misconception that 
people with disabilities are not sexually active 
often leads health professionals to fail to offer 
 78
World report on disability 
sexual and reproductive health services, for 
example (11, 79, 89, 208).
Health-care workers often lack adequate 
knowledge and skills on primary and second-
ary and co-morbid conditions associated with 
disability and how to effectively manage the 
health care needs of people with disabilities (89, 
154, 209). Service providers may be unsure how 
to address health needs directly related to a dis-
ability and how to distinguish between health 
problems related and unrelated to a disability, 
and may not understand the need for compre-
hensive health care services (96).
Undergraduate training programmes for 
health-care workers rarely address the health 
needs of people with disabilities, for example 
(11, 145), and general practitioners frequently 
indicate that a lack of training influences their 
ability to provide health care for people with 
disabilities (143).
Limited knowledge and understanding of 
disability among health-care providers often 
prevents timely and effective coordination of 
health care services (96, 154), sometimes lead-
ing to inadequate examinations and uncom-
fortable and unsafe experiences for people 
with disabilities (210). Variations in treatment 
can be wide where health-care providers are 
unsupported by research and clinical guide-
lines related to people with disabilities. One 
study found that the main reason people with 
spinal cord injury were not prescribed medica-
tion for osteoporosis was because general prac-
titioners lacked evidence-based guidelines (30).
The presence of a particular health condi-
tion is not sufficient to determine capacity (211). 
The assumption that people with certain condi-
tions lack capacity is unacceptable, according 
to Article 12 of the CRPD. Denying people 
with disabilities the right to exercise their legal 
capacity may prevent them from taking an 
active role in their own health care. The way 
forward is supported decision-making, rather 
than guardianship or other forms of substitute 
decision-making (see Box 3.6).
Education and training for health care 
workers about disability is an important pri-
ority to increase awareness about the health 
care needs of people with disabilities and 
improve access to services (89, 127, 142, 143, 
209, 217). Health-care workers should be 
taught the causes, consequences, and treat-
ment of disabling conditions, and of the incor-
rect assumptions about disabilities that result 
from stigmatized views about people with dis-
abilities (145, 150, 154).
Box 3.6. Sexual and reproductive rights of persons with disabilities
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) specifies that persons with dis-
abilities enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with others (Article 12), have the right to marry and found a 
family and retain their fertility (Article 23), and have access to sexual and reproductive health care (Article 25). 
The prejudice that people with disabilities are asexual or else that they should have their sexuality and fertility 
controlled is widespread (77). There is evidence that people with disabilities are sexually active (212), so access 
to sex education is important to promote sexual health and positive experiences of sex and relationships for all 
people with disabilities.
Despite legal prohibitions, there are many cases of involuntary sterilization being used to restrict the fertility of 
some people with a disability, particularly those with an intellectual disability, almost always women (213–216). 
Sterilization may also be used as a technique for menstrual management.
Involuntary sterilization of persons with disabilities is contrary to international human rights standards. Persons 
with disabilities should have access to voluntary sterilization on an equal basis with others. Furthermore, sterili-
zation is almost never the only option for menstrual management or fertility control (214). Nor does it offer any 
protection against sexual abuse or sexually transmitted diseases. Legal frameworks and reporting and enforcement 
mechanisms need to be put in place to ensure that, whenever sterilization is requested, the rights of persons with 
disabilities are always respected above other competing interests.
 79
Chapter 3 
General health care
A survey of general practitioners in France 
recommends the introduction of disability 
courses into medical school curriculums, rel-
evant continuing education, and provision of 
adequate resources (157). In one innovative 
approach to education and training, people 
with disabilities educate students and health 
care providers on a wide range of disability 
issues, including discriminatory attitudes 
and practices, communication skills, physical 
accessibility, the need for preventive care, and 
the consequences of poor care coordination 
(145, 154). Training delivered by people with 
physical, sensory, and mental health impair-
ments may improve knowledge of issues expe-
rienced by people with disabilities (142).
Integrate disability education 
into undergraduate training 
Educators are increasingly teaching students 
about communicating with patients, including 
people with disabilities (144), and many stud-
ies have reported successful outcomes across a 
range of health professionals:
 
■
A study of Australian fourth-year under-
graduate medical students indicated a 
significant change in attitudes towards 
people with developmental disabilities fol-
lowing a three-hour communication skills 
workshop (218).
 
■
In a United States study, third-year medical 
students reported that they felt less “awk-
ward” and “sorry for” people with disabili-
ties after attending a 90-minute education 
session (219).
 
■
A study found that medical students 
educated by individuals with disabilities 
helped students to learn how disability 
affects treatment plans, and helped stu-
dents reflect on, and recognize, attitudes 
about disability (220).
 
■
A study of fourth-year medical students 
used panel presentations led by individu-
als with disabilities. Students reported that 
they valued hearing about the personal 
experiences of people with disabilities, and 
about what worked and what did not in the 
medical setting and in patient-provider 
relationships (221).
 
■
Introductory courses for students enrolled 
in the first occupational therapy and 
post-diploma management courses in the 
Russian Federation, developed and taught 
by the All-Russian Society of the Disabled, 
successfully developed positive attitudes in 
the students (222).
 
■
A study to determine whether a change 
in curriculum affected nursing student’s 
attitudes towards people with disabilities 
showed that their attitudes were more posi-
tive at the completion of their senior year 
(223).
Provide health-care workers 
with continuing education
Many health-care workers acknowledge a need 
for continuing education about disability (143). 
In one study service providers described spe-
cific educational needs, including information 
about how to access disability resources, coor-
dinate care, make reasonable accommodations 
for people with disabilities, address sexuality 
and reproductive health needs, and complete 
forms for disability status (209). Evidence from 
the United Kingdom found that while practice 
nurses in primary health care generally had 
positive attitudes towards working with people 
with intellectual impairment, they regarded 
training in this area as a priority (224).
The Rehabilitation Council of India imple-
mented a national programme (1999–2004) to 
educate medical officers working in primary 
health care centres about disability issues. 
Objectives included disseminating knowledge 
about prevention, health promotion, early iden-
tification, treatment, and rehabilitation; raising 
awareness about services for people with dis-
abilities; and sensitizing officers about general 
disability issues such as legislation and human 
rights. On conclusion of the programme 18 657 
medical officers from a baseline figure of 25 506 
had received training (225).
 80
World report on disability
Support health care workers 
with adequate resources
Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines can 
support health professionals in providing appro-
priate health care to people with disabilities. For 
example, the Clinical guidelines and integrated 
care pathways for the oral health care of people 
with learning disabilities (226) helps health pro-
fessionals to improve the oral health of people 
with learning impairments. The manual Table 
manners and beyond describes and provides 
pictures of alternative examination positions 
to assist clinicians in gynaecological examina-
tions for women with disabilities (132). Resource 
directories can also assist health workers to refer 
patients to specialists, and link people with dis-
abilities to community-based services includ-
ing exercise programmes, self-help groups, and 
home-care agencies. Disseminated to a wide 
audience including health care workers, the 
Directory of disability services in Malawi details 
all disability-focused organizations, groups, and 
services in Malawi (227).
Filling gaps in data and research
Evidence leads to better decisions and better 
health outcomes (228, 229). Reliable informa-
tion is essential for increasing public aware-
ness of health issues, informing planning and 
policy, and allocating resources to reduce 
disparities (230). Therefore, data and research 
are critical for providing information to help 
understand the factors that determine health 
status, to develop policy, to guide implemen-
tation, and to monitor health care services for 
people with disabilities – and in doing these 
things to strengthen health care systems (231). 
A lack of data and research evidence can create 
a significant barrier for policy-makers and 
decision-makers, which in turn can influence 
the ability of people with disabilities to access 
mainstream health services.
The availability of data related to people 
with disabilities varies greatly between coun-
tries (232). Few sources of national data are 
available, and information to determine 
the extent of health disparities experienced 
by people with disabilities is limited (233). 
Surveillance systems do not often disaggregate 
data based on disability, and people with dis-
abilities are also often excluded from trials that 
seek scientific evidence for the outcomes of a 
health intervention (234, 235). Often, eligibility 
criteria prevent the participation of people with 
disabilities (11) as their primary conditions may 
be seen as “confounders” to research questions. 
Certain barriers – transport, for example – may 
also sometimes limit opportunities for people 
with disabilities to participate in research (236).
A recent exercise on research priorities 
determined that the identification of barriers 
in mainstream health care, and strategies for 
overcoming barriers, were the highest priorities 
(164). Other priorities included prevention of 
secondary conditions and early detection and 
referral of health problems through primary 
health care. Some of the relevant areas for health 
research and data collection are outlined below.
Health services research
Data needed to strengthen health care systems 
include:
 
■
number of people with disabilities
 
■
health status of people with disabilities (11)
 
■
social and environmental factors influenc-
ing the health of people with disabilities
 
■
responsiveness of health care systems to 
people with disabilities
 
■
use of health care services by people with 
disabilities
 
■
need, both met and unmet, for care (237).
People with disabilities should be included in 
all general health care surveillance (233), and data 
on people with disabilities should be disaggre-
gated. A good example at the state level is the 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Behavioural Risk Factor Surveillance System 
(BRFSS), which includes two general disability iden-
tifier questions to ensure provision of state-specific 
disability data (233). Research should also focus on 
 81
Chapter 3 
General health care
the quality and structure of health care systems, 
examining, for example, reasonable accommoda-
tions needed for people with disabilities.
Research related to health conditions 
associated with disability
Preventing secondary conditions related to 
existing disabilities is an important priority. 
Preliminary results from a systematic review 
of health promotion interventions for people 
with disabilities indicates that research in this 
area is a growing field and that there is evidence 
of effective interventions (238). But stronger 
research designs require precise dosing for 
intervention, and research and multicentre 
trials will increase recruitment and the ability 
to generalize findings (237).
Ensuring the relevance and applicability 
of general clinical research to people with dis-
abilities, given evidence of high co-morbidity 
rates, is also important. For example, the 
increased risk of people with schizophrenia for 
diabetes and cardiovascular disease requires 
monitoring and management (239), but genetic 
research to understand metabolic mechanisms 
is also recommended (240).
Relevant strategies for inclusive health 
research as well as improving comparability, 
quality, and disability research capacity include:
 
■
Organizations funding research could 
routinely require researchers to include 
people with disabilities in their popula-
tion samples. Despite challenges, rand-
omized controlled trials with people with 
intellectual impairment are possible (172). 
Researchers should be required to justify 
restricted eligibility criteria on scientific 
grounds (11). People with intellectual 
disabilities, people who face communica-
tion barriers, and others with low levels 
of literacy may need support completing 
survey instruments or participating in 
interviews (17, 235).
 
■
People with disabilities can actively par-
ticipate in research, as researchers them-
selves, as participants in consultations or 
advisory groups, or playing a central role in 
commissioning and monitoring research 
(99, 235, 241). In the United Kingdom the 
Quality Research in Dementia Network 
involves 180 patients and caregivers pri-
oritizing research, allocating funds to 
medical research, monitoring projects, 
and assessing outcomes (242). Patient and 
public involvement can improve the qual-
ity and impact of research, but barriers to 
access must be removed so people with dis-
abilities can attend health consultations or 
research meetings (235).
 
■
The International Classification of Funct-
ioning, Disability and Health (ICF) – which 
uses accepted and understood terminol-
ogy, language, and concepts – can ensure 
consistency across studies and settings, 
thus removing these as barriers to progress 
in disability and health research and public 
policy (9).
 
■
A range of research methods are needed 
including clinical trials, observational and 
epidemiological studies, health services 
research, surveys, and social and behav-
ioural studies. Well designed, qualitative 
research can be used to investigate the full 
range of barriers and document good prac-
tices (243).
 
■
Capacity building, research tools, and 
research training on disability are needed. 
Good instruments are particularly impor-
tant for disability outcome research given 
evidence that people with disabilities 
often perceive health status and quality of 
life differently than people without dis-
abilities (243).
Conclusion and 
recommendations
People with disabilities experience health dis-
parities and greater unmet needs in comparison 
to the general population. All countries need 
to work towards removing barriers and making 
existing health care systems more inclusive and 
accessible to people with disabilities.
 82
World report on disability
This chapter has identified several strate-
gies to ensure that persons with disabilities 
can achieve their highest attainable standard 
of health including: financial measures to 
improve coverage and affordability; measures 
to improve service delivery, including training 
of health-care personnel; measures to empower 
people with disabilities to improve their own 
health; and measures to improve research 
and data to monitor, evaluate, and strengthen 
health systems. A range of strategies are needed 
to close the gap in access to health care between 
people with and without disabilities. Given the 
limited evidence available on the efficacy of 
some of these strategies across different con-
texts and groups, costs and health outcomes 
must be carefully evaluated.
In realizing the recommendations sum-
marized below, a broad range of stakeholders 
have roles to play. Governments should develop, 
implement, and monitor policies, regulatory 
mechanisms, and standards for health care pro-
vision to ensure that they include people with 
disabilities. Service providers should provide the 
highest quality of health services. Service users, 
disabled people’s organizations, and professional 
organizations should increase awareness, partic-
ipate in policy development, and monitor imple-
mentation of policies and services. Through 
international cooperation, good and promising 
practices can be shared and technical assistance 
provided to countries to strengthen existing poli-
cies, system, and services.
Policy and legislation
 
■
Assess existing policies, systems, and ser-
vices, including an analysis of the needs, 
experiences, and views of people with 
disabilities, identify gaps and priorities 
to reduce health inequalities and plan 
improvements for access and inclusion.
 
■
Make required changes in policies, systems, 
and services to comply with the CRPD.
 
■
Establish health care standards related to 
care of persons with disabilities and frame-
works and enforcement mechanisms to 
ensure standards are met.
 
■
Involve people with disabilities in audits 
and related development and implementa-
tion of policies and services.
Financing and affordability 
 
■
Ensure that people with disabilities benefit 
equally from public health care programmes.
 
■
In countries where private health insur-
ance dominates health care financing, 
ensure that people with disabilities are not 
denied insurance and consider measures to 
make the premiums affordable for people 
with disabilities.
 
■
Use financial incentives to encourage 
health-care providers to make services 
accessible and provide comprehensive 
assessments, evidence-based treatment, 
and follow-ups.
 
■
In low-income and middle-income coun-
tries, where effective primary care and 
mechanisms of disbursement exist, consider 
targeted conditional cash transfer schemes 
linked to the use of health care to improve 
affordability and the use of services.
 
■
Consider options for reducing or removing 
out-of-pocket payments for people with 
disabilities who do not have other means 
of financing health care services.
 
■
Consider providing support to meet the 
indirect costs associated with accessing 
health care, such as transport.
Service delivery 
 
■
Empower people with disabilities to maxi-
mize their health by providing informa-
tion, training, and peer support. Where 
appropriate, include family members.
 
■
Provide a broad range of reasonable 
accommodations.
 83
Chapter 3 
General health care
 
■
Support primary health-care workers with 
specialists, who may be located elsewhere.
 
■
Explore the options for use of communi-
cation and information technologies for 
improving services, health care capacity, 
and information access to persons with 
disabilities.
 
■
Identify groups who require alternative ser-
vice delivery models, for example, targeted 
services, care coordination to improve 
access to health care.
 
■
In high-income countries incorporate dis-
ability access and quality standards into 
contracts with public, private, and volun-
tary service providers.
 
■
Promote community-based rehabilitation, 
specifically in less-resourced settings, 
to facilitate access for disabled people to 
existing services.
Human resources 
 
■
Integrate disability education into under-
graduate and continuing education for all 
health care professionals.
 
■
Involve people with disabilities as providers 
of education and training wherever possible.
 
■
Provide evidence-based guidelines for 
assessment and treatment emphasizing 
patient-centred care.
 
■
Train community workers so that they 
can play a role in screening and preventive 
health care services.
Data and research
 
■
In health and disability related research use 
the ICF, to provide a consistent framework.
 
■
Conduct more research on the needs, bar-
riers to general health care, and health out-
comes for people with specific disabilities.
 
■
Establish monitoring and evaluation sys-
tems to assess interventions and long-term 
health outcomes for people with disabilities.
 
■
Include people with disabilities in research 
on general health care services.
 
■
Include people with disabilities in health 
care surveillance by using disability iden-
tifiers - see Chapter 2 for more information.
References
1. 
Constitution of the World Health Organization. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1948 (http://apps.who.int/gb/bd/
PDF/bd47/EN/constitution-en.pdf, accessed 7 May 2009).
2. 
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Geneva, United Nations, 2006 (http://www2.ohchr.
org/english/law/disabilities-convention.htm, accessed 16 May 2009).
3. 
Australia’s health 2010. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2010.
4. 
Closing the gap in a generation: Health equity through action on the social determinants of health. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2008.
5. 
Beatty PW et al. Access to health care services among people with chronic or disabling conditions: patterns and predictors. 
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2003,84:1417-1425. doi:10.1016/S0003-9993(03)00268-5 PMID:14586907
6. 
VanLeit B et al. Secondary prevention of disabilities in the Cambodian Provinces of Siem Reap and Takeo: perceptions of and use 
of the health system to address health conditions associated with disability in children. Brussels, Handicap International, 2007.
7. 
Bowers B et al. Improving primary care for persons with disabilities: the nature of expertise. Disability & Society, 
2003,18:443-455. doi:10.1080/0968759032000080995
8. 
Gulley SP, Altman BM. Disability in two health care systems: access, quality, satisfaction, and physician contacts among 
working-age Canadians and Americans with disabilities. Disability and Health Journal, 2008,1:196-208. doi:10.1016/j.
dhjo.2008.07.006 PMID:21122730
9. 
Field MJ, Jette AM, eds. The future of disability in America. Washington, The National Academies Press, 2007.
10. Field MJ, Jette AM. Martin, L eds. Workshop on disability in America: a new look. Washington, Board of Health Sciences 
Policy, 2005.
11. Nosek MA, Simmons DK. People with disabilities as a health disparities population: the case of sexual and reproductive 
health disparities. Californian Journal of Health Promotion, 2007,5:68-81.
12. Drum CE et al. Health of people with disabilities: determinants and disparities. In: Drum C, Krahn G, Bersani H, eds. 
Disability and Public Health, Washington, American Public Health Association, 2009a:125–144.
 84
World report on disability 
13. Marge M. Secondary conditions revisited: examining the expansion of the original concept and definition. Disability and 
Health Journal, 2008,1:67-70. doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2008.02.002 PMID:21122713
14. Krahn GL, Hammond L, Turner A. A cascade of disparities: health and health care access for people with intellectual disabilities. 
Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 2006,12:70-82. doi:10.1002/mrdd.20098 PMID:16435327
15. Equality treatment: closing the gap: a formal investigation into the physical health inequalities experiences by people with 
learning disabilities and/or mental health problems. London, Disability Rights Commission, 2006.
16. Drum CE et al. Recognizing and responding to the health disparities of people with disabilities. Californian Journal of 
Health Promotion, 2005,3:29-42.
17. Dejong G et al. The organization and financing of health services for persons with disabilities. The Milbank Quarterly, 
2002,80:261-301. doi:10.1111/1468-0009.t01-1-00004 PMID:12101873
18. Rimmer JH, Rowland JL. Health promotion for people with disabilities: implications for empowering the person and 
promoting disability-friendly environments. Journal of Lifestyle Medicine, 2008,2:409-420. doi:10.1177/1559827608317397
19. Emerson E et al. Intellectual and physical disability, social mobility, social inclusion and health. Lancaster, Centre for Disability 
Research, Lancaster University, 2009.
20. Iezzoni LI. Quality of care for Medicare beneficiaries with disabilities under the age of 65 years. Expert Review of 
Pharmaeconomics & Outcomes Research, 2006,a6:261-273. doi:10.1586/14737167.6.3.261 PMID:20528520
21. Prince M et al. No health without mental health. Lancet, 2007,370:859-877. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61238-0 
PMID:17804063
22. Khlat M et al. Lorhandicap GroupSocial disparities in musculoskeletal disorders and associated mental malaise: 
findings from a population-based survey in France. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, 2010,38:495-501. 
doi:10.1177/1403494810371246 PMID:20529964
23. Ohayon MM, Schatzberg AF. Chronic pain and major depressive disorder in the general population. Journal of Psychiatric 
Research, 2010,44:454-461. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.10.013 PMID:20149391
24. Hadden KL, von Baeyer CL. Global and specific behavioral measures of pain in children with cerebral palsy. The Clinical 
Journal of Pain, 2005,21:140-146. doi:10.1097/00002508-200503000-00005 PMID:15722807
25. Engel JM, Kartin D, Jensen MP. Pain treatment in persons with cerebral palsy: frequency and helpfulness. American 
Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation/Association of Academic Physiatrists, 2002,81:291-296. doi:10.1097/00002060-
200204000-00009 PMID:11953547
26. Oddson BE, Clancy CA, McGrath PJ. The role of pain in reduced quality of life and depressive symptomology in children 
with spina bifida. The Clinical Journal of Pain, 2006,22:784-789. doi:10.1097/01.ajp.0000210929.43192.5d PMID:17057560
27. Klein MG et al. The relation between lower extremity strength and shoulder overuse symptoms: a model based on 
polio survivors. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2000,81:789-795. doi:10.1016/S0003-9993(00)90113-8 
PMID:10857526
28. Guy-Coichard C et al. Pain in hereditary neuromuscular disorders and myasthenia gravis: a national survey of 
frequency, characteristics, and impact. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 2008,35:40-50. doi:10.1016/j.jpainsym-
man.2007.02.041 PMID:17981001
29. Hoffman JM et al. Understanding pain after traumatic brain injury: impact on community participation. American 
Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation/Association of Academic Physiatrists, 2007,a86:962-969. doi:10.1097/
PHM.0b013e31815b5ee5 PMID:18090437
30. Morse LR et al. VA-based survey of osteoporosis management in spinal cord injury. PM&R: the Journal of Injury, Function 
and Rehabilitation, 2009,1:240-244. PMID:19627901
31. Dosa NP et al. Incidence, prevalence, and characteristics of fractures in children, adolescents, and adults with spina bifida. 
The journal of spinal cord medicine, 2007,30:Suppl 1S5-S9. PMID:17874679
32. Henderson RC et al. Bisphosphonates to treat osteopenia in children with quadriplegic cerebral palsy: a randomized, 
placebo-controlled clinical trial. The Journal of Pediatrics, 2002,141:644-651. doi:10.1067/mpd.2002.128207 PMID:12410192
33. Turk MA et al. The health of women with cerebral palsy. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of North America, 
2001,12:153-168. PMID:11853034
34. Havercamp SM, Scandlin D, Roth M. Health disparities among adults with developmental disabilities, adults with 
other disabilities, and adults not reporting disability in North Carolina. Public Health Reports (Washington, DC: 1974), 
2004,119:418-426. doi:10.1016/j.phr.2004.05.006 PMID:15219799
35. Disability and ageing: Australian population patterns and implications. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 
2000.
36. Woodcock K, Pole JD. Health profile of deaf Canadians: analysis of the Canada Community Health Survey. Canadian Family 
Physician Médecin de Famille Canadien, 2007,53:2140-2141. PMID:18077753
37. Amosun SL, Mutimura E, Frantz JM. Health promotion needs of physically disabled individuals with lower limb amputa-
tion in Rwanda. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2005,27:837-847. doi:10.1080/09638280400018676 PMID:16096236
 85
Chapter 3 
General health care
38. World report on violence and health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002a.
39. Marge DK, ed. A call to action: preventing and intervening in violence against children and adults with disabilities: a report to 
the nation. Syracuse, State University of New York Upstate Medical University Duplicating and Printing Services, 2003.
40. Hague G, Thaira RK, Magowan P. Disabled women and domestic violence: making the links. Bristol, Women’s Aid Federation 
of England, 2007.
41. McCarthy M. Sexuality and women with learning disabilities. London, Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 1999.
42. Peckham NG. The vulnerability and sexual abuse of people with learning disabilities. British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
2007,35:131-137. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3156.2006.00428.x
43. Reichard AA et al. Violence, abuse, and neglect among people with traumatic brain injuries. The Journal of Head Trauma 
Rehabilitation, 2007,22:390-402. doi:10.1097/01.HTR.0000300234.36361.b1 PMID:18025971
44. Yoshida KK et al. Women living with disabilities and their experiences and issues related to the context and complexi-
ties of leaving abusive situations. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2009,31:1843-1852. doi:10.1080/09638280902826808 
PMID:19479561
45. Barrett KA et al. Intimate partner violence, health status, and health care access among women with disabilities. Women’s 
Health Issues: official publication of the Jacobs Institute of Women’s Health, 2009,19:94-100. doi:10.1016/j.whi.2008.10.005 
PMID:19272559
46. Yousafzai AK et al. HIV/AIDS information and services: the situation experienced by adolescents with disabilities in 
Rwanda and Uganda. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2005,27:1357-1363. doi:10.1080/09638280500164297 PMID:16372430
47. Secondary injuries among individuals with disabilities. Research summary brief. Columbus, Centre for Injury Research and 
Policy, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, 2009.
48. Sinclair SA, Xiang H. Injuries among US children with different types of disabilities. American Journal of Public Health, 
2008,98:1510-1516. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2006.097097 PMID:18048794
49. World report on child injury and prevention. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
50. Lee LC et al. Increased risk of injury in children with developmental disabilities. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 
2008,29:247-255. doi:10.1016/j.ridd.2007.05.002 PMID:17582739
51. Xiang H, Chany A-M, Smith GA. Wheelchair related injuries treated in US emergency departments. Injury Prevention: 
Journal of the International Society for Child and Adolescent Injury Prevention, 2006,a12:8-11. doi:10.1136/ip.2005.010033 
PMID:16461412
52. Petridou E et al. Injuries among disabled children: a study from Greece. Injury Prevention: Journal of the International 
Society for Child and Adolescent Injury Prevention, 2003,9:226-230. doi:10.1136/ip.9.3.226 PMID:12966010
53. Chen G et al. Incidence and pattern of burn injuries among children with disabilities. The Journal of Trauma, 2007,62:682-
686. doi:10.1097/01.ta.0000203760.47151.28 PMID:17414347
54. Xiang H et al. Risk of vehicle-pedestrian and vehicle-bicyclist collisions among children with disabilities. Accident; Analysis 
and Prevention, 2006,b38:1064-1070. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2006.04.010 PMID:16797463
55. Turk MA. Health, mortality, and wellness issues in adults with cerebral palsy. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 
2009,51:Suppl 424-29. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.2009.03429.x PMID:19740207
56. Frankel HL et al. Long-term survival in spinal cord injury: a fifty year investigation. Spinal Cord, 1998,36:266-274. 
doi:10.1038/sj.sc.3100638 PMID:9589527
57. Strauss DJ et al. Trends in life expectancy after spinal cord injury. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
2006,87:1079-1085. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2006.04.022 PMID:16876553
58. Khan NZ et al. Mortality of urban and rural young children with cerebral palsy in Bangladesh. Developmental Medicine and 
Child Neurology, 1998,40:749-753. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.1998.tb12343.x PMID:9881804
59. World Health Survey. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002–2004 (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/en/, 
accessed 10 September 2010).
60. Healthy people 2010: understanding and improving health, 2nd ed. Washington, Department of Health and Community 
Services, 2000.
61. Allen J et al. Strength training can be enjoyable and beneficial for adults with cerebral palsy. Disability and Rehabilitation, 
2004,26:1121-1127. doi:10.1080/09638280410001712378 PMID:15371024
62. Durstine JL et al. Physical activity for the chronically ill and disabled. [Erratum appears in Sports Medicine 2001, 31:627]
Sports Medicine (Auckland, N.Z.), 2000,30:207-219. doi:10.2165/00007256-200030030-00005 PMID:10999424
63. Fragala-Pinkham MA, Haley SM, Goodgold S. Evaluation of a community-based group fitness program for children with 
disabilities. Pediatric Physical Therapy: the official publication of the Section on Pediatrics of the American Physical Therapy 
Association, 2006,18:159-167. doi:10.1097/01.pep.0000223093.28098.12 PMID:16735864
64. Mead GE et al. Exercise for depression. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2009,3CD004366-
65. Rimmer JH et al. Improvements in physical fitness in adults with Down syndrome. American Journal of Mental Retardation: 
AJMR, 2004,109:165-174. doi:10.1352/0895-8017(2004)109<165:IIPFIA>2.0.CO;2 PMID:15000673
 86
World report on disability  
66. Becker H, Stuifbergen A. What makes it so hard? Barriers to health promotion experienced by people with multiple 
sclerosis and polio. Family & Community Health, 2004,27:75-85. PMID:14724504
67. Rimmer JH, Wang E, Smith D. Barriers associated with exercise and community access for individuals with stroke. Journal 
of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 2008,45:315-322. doi:10.1682/JRRD.2007.02.0042 PMID:18566948
68. Hoffman JM et al. Association of mobility limitations with health care satisfaction and use of preventive care: a survey of 
Medicare beneficiaries. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2007,88:583-588. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2007.02.005 
PMID:17466726
69. Iezzoni LI et al. Mobility impairments and use of screening and preventive services. American Journal of Public Health, 
2000,90:955-961. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.6.955 PMID:10846515
70. Groce NE, Ayora P, Kaplan LC. Immunization rates among disabled children in Ecuador: unanticipated findings. The Journal 
of Pediatrics, 2007,151:218-220. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.04.061 PMID:17643783
71. Chevarley FM et al. Health, preventive health care, and health care access among women with disabilities in the 1994–
1995 National Health Interview Survey, Supplement on Disability. Women’s Health Issues: official publication of the Jacobs 
Institute of Women’s Health, 2006,16:297-312. doi:10.1016/j.whi.2006.10.002 PMID:17188213
72. Johnson K et al. Screened out: women with disabilities and preventive health. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research, 
2006,8:150-160. doi:10.1080/15017410600802201
73. Sullivan SG, Slack-Smith LM, Hussain R. Understanding the use of breast cancer screening services by women with intel-
lectual disabilities. Sozial- und Präventivmedizin, 2004,49:398-405. doi:10.1007/s00038-004-3121-z PMID:15669440
74. Mele N, Archer J, Pusch BD. Access to breast cancer screening services for women with disabilities. Journal of Obstetric, 
Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing: JOGNN/NAACOG, 2005,34:453-464. doi:10.1177/0884217505276158 PMID:16020413
75. Reichard A, Stolzle H, Fox MH. Health disparities among adults with physical disabilities or cognitive limitations com-
pared to individuals with no disabilities in the United States. Disability and Health Journal, 2011,4:59-67. doi:10.1016/j.
dhjo.2010.05.003 PMID:21419369
76. Ramirez A et al. Disability and preventive cancer screening: results from the 2001 California Health Interview Survey. 
American Journal of Public Health, 2005,95:2057-2064. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2005.066118 PMID:16195509
77. Promoting sexual and reproductive health for persons with disabilities. Geneva, World Health Organization and United 
Nations Population Fund, 2009.
78. Rohleder P et al. HIV/AIDS and disability in Southern Africa: a review of relevant literature. Disability and Rehabilitation, 
2009,31:51-59. doi:10.1080/09638280802280585 PMID:19194810
79. The forgotten: HIV and disability in Tanzania. Dar es Salaam, Tanzanian Commission for AIDS, 2009 (http://www.gtz.de/de/
dokumente/gtz2009-en-hiv-and-disability-tanzania.pdf, accessed 5 April 2010).
80. Bhansali S et al. A study of the prosthodontic and oral health needs of an ageing psychiatric population. Gerodontology, 
2008,25:113-117. doi:10.1111/j.1741-2358.2007.00209.x PMID:18282147
81. Desai M, Messer LB, Calache H. A study of the dental treatment needs of children with disabilities in Melbourne, Australia. 
Australian Dental Journal, 2001,46:41-50. doi:10.1111/j.1834-7819.2001.tb00273.x PMID:11355240
82. Jensen PM et al. Factors associated with oral health-related quality of life in community-dwelling elderly persons with dis-
abilities. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 2008,56:711-717. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01631.x PMID:18284537
83. del Valle LML et al. Puerto Rican athletes with special health care needs: an evaluation of oral health status. ASDC Journal 
of Dentistry for Children, 2007,74:130-132.
84. Oredugba FA. Use of oral health care services and oral findings in children with special needs in Lagos, Nigeria. Special 
Care in Dentistry: official publication of the American Association of Hospital Dentists, the Academy of Dentistry for the 
Handicapped, and the American Society for Geriatric Dentistry, 2006,26:59-65. doi:10.1111/j.1754-4505.2006.tb01511.x 
PMID:16681240
85. Pezzementi ML, Fisher MA. Oral health status of people with intellectual disabilities in the southeastern United States. 
The Journal of the American Dental Association (1939), 2005,136:903-912. PMID:16060471
86. De Camargo MA, Antunes JL. Untreated dental caries in children with cerebral palsy in the Brazilian context. International 
journal of paediatric dentistry / the British Paedodontic Society [and] the International Association of Dentistry for Children, 
2008,18:131-138. doi:10.1111/j.1365-263X.2007.00829.x PMID:18237296
87. Demyttenaere K et al. WHO World Mental Health Survey ConsortiumPrevalence, severity, and unmet need for treatment 
of mental disorders in the World Health Organization World Mental Health Surveys. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 2004,291:2581-2590. doi:10.1001/jama.291.21.2581 PMID:15173149
88. Kohn R et al. The treatment gap in mental health care. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2004,82:858-866. 
PMID:15640922
89. Drainoni M-L et al. Cross-disability experiences of barriers to health-care access: consumer perspectives. Journal of 
Disability Policy Studies, 2006,17:101-115. doi:10.1177/10442073060170020101
 87
Chapter 3 
General health care
90. McColl MA et al. Physician experiences providing primary care to people with disabilities. Healthcare Policy = Politiques 
de Sante, 2008,4:e129-e147. PMID:19377334
91. People with disabilities in India: from commitments to outcomes. Washington, World Bank, 2009 (http://www-wds.world-
bank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2009/09/02/000334955_20090902041543/Rendered/PDF/5020
90WP0Peopl1Box0342042B01PUBLIC1.pdf, accessed, 10 September 2010).
92. Loeb ME, Eide AH, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Malawi: a national representative study. 
Oslo, SINFEF, 2004.
93. Eide AH, van Rooy G, Loeb ME. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Namibia: a representative national 
survey. Oslo, SINTEF, 2003.
94. Eide AH et al. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zimbabwe: a representative regional survey. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2003.
95. Eide AH, Loeb ME, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zambia: a national representative study. 
Oslo, SINTEF, 2006.
96. Scheer J et al. Access barriers for persons with disabilities. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 2003,13:221-230. 
doi:10.1177/104420730301300404
97. de Savigny D, Adam T, eds. Systems thinking for health systems strengthening. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 
(http://www.who.int/alliance-hpsr/resources/9789241563895/en/index.html, accessed 25 March 2010).
98. Kickbusch I. The development of international health policies–accountability intact? Social Science & Medicine (1982), 
2000,51:979-989. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(00)00076-9 PMID:10972440
99. Marks BA, Heller T. Bridging the equity gap: health promotion for adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities. 
The Nursing Clinics of North America, 2003,38:205-228. doi:10.1016/S0029-6465(02)00049-X PMID:12914305
100. Nilsen ES et al. Methods of consumer involvement in developing healthcare policy and research, clinical practice guidelines 
and patient information material. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 2006,3:CD004563- PMID:16856050
101. Walmsley J. Inclusive learning disability research: the (nondisabled) researcher’s role. British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
2004,32:65-71. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3156.2004.00281.x
102. Truman C, Raine P. Experience and meaning of user involvement: some explorations from a community mental health 
project. Health & Social Care in the Community, 2002,10:136-143. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2524.2002.00351.x PMID:12121249
103. Hayward R, Cutler P. What contribution can ordinary people make to national mental health policies? Community Mental 
Health Journal, 2007,43:517-526. doi:10.1007/s10597-007-9086-7 PMID:17514505
104. Tomes N. The patient as a policy factor: a historical case study of the consumer/survivor movement in mental health. 
Health Affairs (Project Hope), 2006,25:720-729. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.25.3.720 PMID:16684736
105. Sloper P, Lightfoot J. Involving disabled and chronically ill children and young people in health service development. 
Child: Care, Health and Development, 2003,29:15-20. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2214.2003.00315.x PMID:12534563
106. . Bedfordshire Community Health ServicesNothing about us without us: involving families in early support. Community 
Practitioner: the journal of the Community Practitioners’ & Health Visitors’ Association, 2009,82:26-29. PMID:19552112
107. Roulstone A, Hudson V. Carer participation in England, Wales and Northern Ireland: a challenge for interprofessional 
working. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 2007,21:303-317. doi:10.1080/13561820701327822 PMID:17487708
108. Ali M, Miyoshi C, Ushijima H. Emergency medical services in Islamabad, Pakistan: a public-private partnership. Public 
Health, 2006,120:50-57. doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2005.03.009 PMID:16198384
109. Gottret P, Schieber G. Health financing revisited: a practitioners guide. Washington, World Bank, 2006.
110. The World Health Report 2010 – Health systems financing: the path to universal coverage. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
111. Lagarde M, Palmer N. The impact of health financing strategies on access to health service in low and middle income 
countries (protocol). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2006,3CD006092-
112. Saxena S, Sharan P, Saraceno B. Budget and financing of mental health services: baseline information on 89 countries from 
WHO’s project atlas. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 2003,6:135-143. PMID:14646006
113. Dixon A et al. Financing mental health services in low- and middle-income countries. Health Policy and Planning, 
2006,21:171-182. doi:10.1093/heapol/czl004 PMID:16533860
114. White PH. Access to health care: health insurance considerations for young adults with special health care needs/dis-
abilities. Pediatrics, 2002,110:1328-1335. PMID:12456953
115. Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP). Washington, United States Department of Health and Human Services, 2010 
(http://www.healthcare.gov/law/provisions/preexisting/index.html, accessed 6 December 2010).
116. Kruk ME, Freedman LP. Assessing health system performance in developing countries: a review of the literature. Health 
Policy (Amsterdam, Netherlands), 2008,85:263-276. PMID:17931736
117. Salti N, Chaaban J, Raad F. Health equity in Lebanon: a microeconomic analysis. International Journal for Equity in Health, 
2010,9:11- doi:10.1186/1475-9276-9-11 PMID:20398278
 88
World report on disability
118. Jeffrey AE, Newacheck PW. Role of insurance for children with special health care needs: a synthesis of the evidence. 
Pediatrics, 2006,118:e1027-e1038. doi:10.1542/peds.2005-2527 PMID:16966391
119. Newacheck PW et al. The future of health insurance for children with special health care needs. Pediatrics, 2009,123:e940-
e947. doi:10.1542/peds.2008-2921 PMID:19403486
120. Ayanian JZ et al. Unmet health needs of uninsured adults in the United States. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 2000,284:2061-2069. doi:10.1001/jama.284.16.2061 PMID:11042754
121. Lin JD et al. Primary health care for people with an intellectual disability: a mission impossible? Journal of Medical Science, 
2005,25:109-118.
122. Gwatkin DR, Bhuiya A, Victora CG. Making health systems more equitable. Lancet, 2004,364:1273-1280. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(04)17145-6 PMID:15464189
123. McAvoy BR, Coster GD. General practice and the New Zealand health reforms – lessons for Australia? Australia and New 
Zealand Health Policy, 2005,2:1-11. doi:10.1186/1743-8462-2-26 PMID:15679895
124. Primary health care: care plus. Wellington, New Zealand Ministry of Health, 2007 (http://www.moh.govt.nz/moh.nsf/
indexmh/phcs-projects-careplusservice, accessed 6 December 2010).
125. Meng H et al. Impact of a health promotion nurse intervention on disability and health care costs among elderly adults 
with heart conditions. The Journal of Rural Health: official journal of the American Rural Health Association and the National 
Rural Health Care Association, 2007,23:322-331. doi:10.1111/j.1748-0361.2007.00110.x PMID:17868239
126. Al Ahmadi A. Cash transfers and persons with disabilities in practice: The case of Yemen. Disability Monitor Initiative-
Middle East Journal, 2009, 1:27–29. (http://www.disabilitymonitor-me.org/, accessed 14 April 2011).
127. South-North Centre for Dialogue and Development. Global survey on government action on the implementation of the 
standard rules of the equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities. Amman, Office of the UN Special Rapporteur 
on Disabilities. 2006.
128. Lagarde M, Haines A, Palmer N. The impact of conditional cash transfers on health outcomes and use of health services 
in low and middle income countries. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 2009,4CD008137- PMID:19821444
129. Barber SL, Gertler PJ. Empowering women to obtain high quality care: evidence from an evaluation of Mexico’s condi-
tional cash transfer programme. Health Policy and Planning, 2009,24:18-25. doi:10.1093/heapol/czn039 PMID:19022854
130. Morris SS et al. Monetary incentives in primary health care and effects on use and coverage of preventive health care 
interventions in rural Honduras: cluster randomised trial. Lancet, 2004,364:2030-2037. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17515-6 
PMID:15582060
131. Fiszbein A, Schady N. Conditional cash transfers: reducing present and future poverty. Washington, World Bank, 2009.
132. Kaplan C. Special issues in contraception: caring for women with disabilities. Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 
2006,51:450-456. doi:10.1016/j.jmwh.2006.07.009 PMID:17081935
133. The World Health Report 2001 – Mental health: New understanding, new hope. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.
134. Saxena S et al. Resources for mental health: scarcity, inequity, and inefficiency. Lancet, 2007,370:878-889. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)61239-2 PMID:17804062
135. Dollars, DALYs and decisions. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.
136. Mental health systems in selected low- and middle-income countries: a WHO-AIMS cross national analysis. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2009.
137. Siqueira FC et al. [Architectonic barriers for elderly and physically disabled people: an epidemiological study of the physi-
cal structure of health service units in seven Brazilian states] Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, 2009,14:39-44. PMID:19142307
138. Trösken T, Geraedts M. [Accessibility of doctors’ surgeries in Essen, Germany] Gesundheitswesen (Bundesverband der Arzte 
des Offentlichen Gesundheitsdienstes (Germany)), 2005,67:613-619. PMID:16217715
139. Huber M et al. Quality in and equality of access to healthcare services. Brussels, European Commission, 2008.
140. Park JH et al. Disparities between persons with and without disabilities in their participation rates in mass screening. 
European Journal of Public Health, 2009,19:85-90. doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckn108 PMID:19158103
141. Ubido J, Huntington J, Warburton D. Inequalities in access to healthcare faced by women who are deaf. Health & Social 
Care in the Community, 2002,10:247-253. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2524.2002.00365.x PMID:12193168
142. Smith DL. Disparities in patient-physician communication for persons with a disability from the 2006 Medical Expenditure 
Panel Survey (MEPS). Disability and Health Journal, 2009,2:206-215. doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2009.06.002 PMID:21122761
143. Phillips A, Morrison J, Davis RW. General practitioners’ educational needs in intellectual disability health. Journal of 
Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2004,48:142-149. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2004.00503.x PMID:14723656
144. Iezzoni LI, Ramanan RA, Lee S. Teaching medical students about communicating with patients with major mental illness. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, 2006,b21:1112-1115. doi:10.1111/j.1525-1497.2006.00521.x PMID:16970561
145. Shakespeare T, Iezzoni LI, Groce NE. Disability and the training of health professionals. Lancet, 2009,374:1815-1816. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62050-X PMID:19957403
146. Banda I. Disability, poverty and HIV/AIDS. Newsletter of Disabled Persons, 2006, South Africa.
 89
Chapter 3 
General health care
147. Antonelli RC, McAllister JW, Popp J. Making care coordination a critical component of the pediatric health system: a multidis-
ciplinary framework. New York, The Commonwealth Fund, 2009.
148. David TJ. Transition from the paediatric clinic to the adult service. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 2001,94:373-374. 
PMID:11461978
149. Honey A et al. Approaching adulthood with a chronic health condition: professionals’ and young people’s perspectives. 
In: Bennett D et al., eds. Challenges in adolescent health: an Australian perspective. Hauppauge, Nova Science Publishers, 
2009:177–188.
150. Shaw KL, Southwood TR, McDonagh JE. British Paediatric Rheumatology GroupUser perspectives of transitional care for 
adolescents with juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford, England), 2004,43:770-778. doi:10.1093/rheumatol-
ogy/keh175 PMID:15039498
151. Stewart D. Transition to adult services for young people with disabilities: current evidence to guide future research. 
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 2009,51:Suppl 4169-173. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.2009.03419.x PMID:19740226
152. Binks JA et al. What do we really know about the transition to adult-centered health care? A focus on cerebral palsy and spina 
bifida. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2007,88:1064-1073. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2007.04.018 PMID:17678671
153. Davis M, Sondheimer DL. State child mental health efforts to support youth in transition to adulthood. The Journal of 
Behavioral Health Services & Research, 2005,32:27-42. doi:10.1007/BF02287326 PMID:15632796
154. Kroll T, Neri MT. Experiences with care co-ordination among people with cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, or spinal cord 
injury. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2003,25:1106-1114. doi:10.1080/0963828031000152002 PMID:12944150
155. Bodenheimer T. Coordinating care–a perilous journey through the health care system. The New England Journal of 
Medicine, 2008,358:1064-1071. doi:10.1056/NEJMhpr0706165 PMID:18322289
156. Smith RD. Promoting the health of people with physical disabilities: a discussion of the financing and organization of 
public health services in Australia. Health Promotion International, 2000,15:79-86. doi:10.1093/heapro/15.1.79
157. Aulagnier M et al. General practitioners’ attitudes towards patients with disabilities: the need for training and support. 
Disability and Rehabilitation, 2005,27:1343-1352. doi:10.1080/09638280500164107 PMID:16321918
158. Coleman R, Loppy L, Walraven G. The treatment gap and primary health care for people with epilepsy in rural Gambia. 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2002,80:378-383. PMID:12077613
159. Summers SJ, Jones J. Cross-cultural working in community learning disabilities services: clinical issues, dilemmas and tensions. 
Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2004,48:687-694. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2004.00601.x PMID:15357689
160. Ory MG, DeFriese GH. Self-care in later life: research, program and policy issues. New York, Springer Publishing Company, 1998.
161. Integrating mental health into primary care: a global perspective. Singapore, World Health Organization and World 
Organization of Family Doctors, 2008.
162. Mental health and development: targeting people with mental health conditions as a vulnerable group. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2010.
163. Krahn GL, Ritacco B. Public health as a change agent for disability. In: Drum C, Krahn G, Bersani H, eds. Disability and public 
health. Washington, American Public Health Association, 2009:183–204.
164. Tomlinson M et al. Research priorities for health of people with disabilities: an expert opinion exercise. Lancet, 
2009,374:1857-1862. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61910-3 PMID:19944866
165. Patel V et al. Treatment and prevention of mental disorders in low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet, 
2007,370:991-1005. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61240-9 PMID:17804058
166. World Health Organization, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, International Labour 
Organization, International Disability and Development Consortium. Community-based rehabilitation: CBR guidelines. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
167. Final technical report: Raising the voice of the African Decade of Disabled Persons: Phase II: Training emerging leaders in 
the disability community, promoting disability rights and developing HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention programs for 
adolescents and young adults with disabilities in Africa. New York, Rehabilitation International, 2007.
168. Drum CE et al. Guidelines and criteria for the implementation of community-based health promotion programs for indi-
viduals with disabilities. American Journal of Health Promotion: AJHP, 2009,b24:93-101, ii. doi:10.4278/ajhp.090303-CIT-94 
PMID:19928482
169. Durvasula S, Beange H. Health inequalities in people with intellectual disability: strategies for improvement. Health 
Promotion Journal of Australia, 2001,11:27-31.
170. The World Health Report 2008: Primary health care, now more than ever. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (http://
www.who.int/whr/2008/en/index.html, accessed 11 April 2010).
171. van Loon J, Knibbe J, Van Hove G. From institutional to community support: consequences for medical care. Journal of 
Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 2005,18:175-180. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2005.00246.x
172. Balogh R et al. Organising health care services for persons with an intellectual disability. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews (Online), 2008,4CD007492- PMID:18843752
 90
World report on disability
173. Strengthening care for the injured: Success stories and lessons learned from around the world. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2010.
174. Lennox N et al. Effects of a comprehensive health assessment programme for Australian adults with intellectual disability: 
a cluster randomized trial. International Journal of Epidemiology, 2007,36:139-146. doi:10.1093/ije/dyl254 PMID:17218326
175. Lorig KR et al. Internet-based chronic disease self-management: a randomized trial. Medical Care, 2006,44:964-971. 
doi:10.1097/01.mlr.0000233678.80203.c1 PMID:17063127
176. Wagner EH et al. Finding common ground: patient-centeredness and evidence-based chronic illness care. Journal of 
Alternative and Complementary Medicine (New York, NY), 2005,11:Suppl 1S7-S15. PMID:16332190
177. Innovative care for chronic conditions: building blocks for actions: global report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002.
178. New paradigm of medical care for persons with disability: a multi-country action research joint initiative of WHO/DAR & AIFO/
Italy. Piedecuesta, ASODISPIE, 2007 (http://www.aifo.it/english/proj/aifo-who/romemeeting_dec07/Colombia_piede-
cuesta-descriptive.pdf, accessed 6 January 2011).
179. Allen M et al. Improving patient-clinician communication about chronic conditions: description of an internet-based 
nurse E-coach intervention. Nursing Research, 2008,57:107-112. doi:10.1097/01.NNR.0000313478.47379.98 PMID:18347482
180. Leveille SG et al. Health coaching via an internet portal for primary care patients with chronic conditions: a randomized 
controlled trial. Medical Care, 2009,47:41-47. doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e3181844dd0 PMID:19106729
181. Beran D et al. Diabetes care in Nicaragua: results of the RAPIA study. Diabetes Voice, 2007,52:38-40.
182. Lindsey M. Comprehensive health care services for people with learning disabilities. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 
2002,8:138-147. doi:10.1192/apt.8.2.138
183. Jamoom EW et al. The effect of caregiving on preventive care for people with disabilities. Disability and Health Journal, 
2008,1:51-57. doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2007.11.005 PMID:21122711
184. Kendall E, Clapton J. Time for a shift in Australian rehabilitation? Disability and Rehabilitation, 2006,28:1097-1101. 
doi:10.1080/09638280500531784 PMID:16950740
185. Schillinger D et al. Effects of primary care coordination on public hospital patients. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 
2000,15:329-336. doi:10.1046/j.1525-1497.2000.07010.x PMID:10840268
186. Boling PA. Care transitions and home health care. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 2009,25:135-148, viii. doi:10.1016/j.
cger.2008.11.005 PMID:19217498
187. Zwarenstein M, Reeves S, Perrier L. Effectiveness of pre-licensure interprofessional education and post-licensure col-
laborative interventions. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 2005,19:Suppl 1148-165. doi:10.1080/13561820500082800 
PMID:16096152
188. Nielsen PR et al. Costs and quality of life for prehabilitation and early rehabilitation after surgery of the lumbar spine. BMC 
Health Services Research, 2008,8:209- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-209 PMID:18842157
189. Battersby MW. SA HealthPlus TeamHealth reform through coordinated care: SA HealthPlus. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 
2005,330:662-665. doi:10.1136/bmj.330.7492.662 PMID:15775001
190. Engle PL et al. International Child Development Steering GroupStrategies to avoid the loss of developmental potential 
in more than 200 million children in the developing world. Lancet, 2007,369:229-242. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60112-3 
PMID:17240290
191. Elliott J, Hatton C, Emerson E. The health of people with intellectual disabilities in the UK: evidence and implications for 
the NHS. Journal of Integrated Care, 2003,11:9-17.
192. Stewart D et al. A critical appraisal of literature reviews about the transition to adulthood for youth with disabilities. 
Physical & Occupational Therapy in Pediatrics, 2006,26:5-24. PMID:17135067
193. Gething L, Fethney J. The need for disability awareness training among rurally based Australian general medical practi-
tioners. Disability and Rehabilitation, 1997,19:249-259. doi:10.3109/09638289709166535 PMID:9195143
194. Haggerty JL et al. Continuity of care: a multidisciplinary review. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 2003,327:1219-1221. doi:10.1136/
bmj.327.7425.1219 PMID:14630762
195. Elrod CS, DeJong G. Determinants of utilization of physical rehabilitation services for persons with chronic and disa-
bling conditions: an exploratory study. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2008,89:114-120. doi:10.1016/j.
apmr.2007.08.122 PMID:18164340
196. Darrah J, Magil-Evans J, Adkins R. How well are we doing? Families of adolescents or young adults with cerebral palsy 
share their perceptions of service delivery. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2002,24:542-549. doi:10.1080/09638280210121359 
PMID:12171644
197. Stille CJ, Antonelli RC. Coordination of care for children with special health care needs. Current Opinion in Pediatrics, 
2004,16:700-705. doi:10.1097/01.mop.0000144442.68016.92 PMID:15548935
198. Bordé A et al. Information and communication technologies for development: health. New York, Global Alliance for ICT and 
Development, 2010.
 91
Chapter 3 
General health care
199. Gagnon MP et al. Interventions for promoting information and communication technologies adoption in healthcare pro-
fessionals. [review]Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 2009,1CD006093- PMID:19160265
200. Crosson JC et al. Implementing an electronic medical record in a family medicine practice: communication, decision 
making, and conflict. Annals of Family Medicine, 2005,3:307-311. doi:10.1370/afm.326 PMID:16046562
201. Rowe N et al. Ten-year experience of a private nonprofit telepsychiatry service. Telemedicine and e-Health: the official 
journal of the American Telemedicine Association, 2008,14:1078-1086. doi:10.1089/tmj.2008.0037 PMID:19119830
202. Taylor DM et al. Exploring the feasibility of videoconference delivery of a self-management program to rural participants 
with stroke. Telemedicine and e-Health: the official journal of the American Telemedicine Association, 2009,15:646-654. 
doi:10.1089/tmj.2008.0165 PMID:19694589
203. Murray E et al. Interactive health and communication applications for people with chronic disease. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, 2005,4CD004274-
204. Seren E. Web-based hearing screening test. Telemedicine and e-Health: the official journal of the American Telemedicine 
Association, 2009,15:678-681. doi:10.1089/tmj.2009.0013 PMID:19694590
205. Maulik PK, Darmstadt GL. Childhood disability in low- and middle-income countries: overview of screening, prevention, 
services, legislation, and epidemiology. Pediatrics, 2007,120:Suppl 1S1-S55. doi:10.1542/peds.2007-0043B PMID:17603094
206. Loon J, Knibbe J, Van Hove G. From institutional to community support: consequences for medical care. Journal of Applied 
Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 2005,18:175-180. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2005.00246.x
207. Hewitt-Taylor J. Children with complex, continuing health needs and access to facilities. Nursing Standard (Royal College 
of Nursing (Great Britain): 1987), 2009,23:35-41. PMID:19413072
208. Liu SY, Clark MA. Breast and cervical cancer screening practices among disabled women aged 40–75: does quality of the 
experience matter? Journal of Women’s Health (2002), 2008,17:1321-1329. doi:10.1089/jwh.2007.0591 PMID:18788985
209. Morrison EH, George V, Mosqueda L. Primary care for adults with physical disabilities: perceptions from consumer and 
provider focus groups. Family Medicine, 2008,40:645-651. PMID:18830840
210. Sabharwal S, Sebastian JL, Lanouette M. An educational intervention to teach medical students about examining disa-
bled patients. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 2000,284:1080-1081. doi:10.1001/jama.284.9.1080-a 
PMID:10974684
211. Wong JG, Scully P. A practical guide to capacity assessment and patient consent in Hong Kong. Hong Kong Medical Journal 
= Xianggang yi xue za zhi/Hong Kong Academy of Medicine, 2003,9:284-289. PMID:12904617
212. Maart S, Jelsma J. The sexual behaviour of physically disabled adolescents. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2010,32:438-443. 
doi:10.3109/09638280902846368 PMID:20113191
213. Dyer O. Gynaecologist is struck off for sterilising women without their consent. British Medical Journal, 
2002,325:1260- doi:10.1136/bmj.325.7375.1260
214. Grover SR. Menstrual and contraceptive management in women with an intellectual disability. The Medical Journal of 
Australia, 2002,176:108-110. PMID:11936305
215. Servais L. Sexual health care in persons with intellectual disabilities. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities 
Research Reviews, 2006,12:48-56. doi:10.1002/mrdd.20093 PMID:16435330
216. Stansfield AJ, Holland AJ, Clare ICH. The sterilisation of people with intellectual disabilities in England and Wales during the 
period 1988 to 1999. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2007,51:569-579. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00920.x 
PMID:17598870
217. Nieuwenhuijsen C et al. Unmet needs and health care utilization in young adults with cerebral palsy. Disability and 
Rehabilitation, 2008,30:1254-1262. doi:10.1080/09638280701622929 PMID:18821192
218. Tracy J, Iacono T. People with developmental disabilities teaching medical students–does it make a difference? Journal of 
Intellectual & Developmental Disability, 2008,33:345-348. doi:10.1080/13668250802478633 PMID:19039695
219. Graham CL et al. Teaching medical students about disability in family medicine. Family Medicine, 2009,41:542-544. 
PMID:19724936
220. Duggan A et al. What can I learn from this interaction? A qualitative analysis of medical student self-reflection and 
learning in a standardized patient exercise about disability. Journal of Health Communication, 2009,14:797-811. 
doi:10.1080/10810730903295526 PMID:20029712
221. Saketkoo L et al. Effects of a disability awareness and skills training workshop on senior medical students as assessed 
with self ratings and performance on a standardized patient case. Teaching and Learning in Medicine, 2004,16:345-354. 
doi:10.1207/s15328015tlm1604_7 PMID:15582871
222. Packer TL et al. Attitudes to disability of Russian occupational therapy and nursing students. International Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Rehabilitationsforschung. Revue Internationale de Recherches de 
Réadaptation, 2000,23:39-47. PMID:10826124
223. Thompson TL, Emrich K, Moore G. The effect of curriculum on the attitudes of nursing students toward disability. 
Rehabilitation Nursing: the official journal of the Association of Rehabilitation Nurses, 2003,28:27-30. PMID:12567819
 92
World report on disability 
224. Melville CA et al. Enhancing primary health care services for adults with intellectual disabilities. Journal of Intellectual 
Disability Research: JIDR, 2005,49:190-198. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2005.00640.x PMID:15713194
225. National programme on orientation of medical officers working in primary health centres to disability management. New 
Dehli, Rehabilitation Council of India, 2009 (http://www.rehabcouncil.nic.in/projects/phc.htm, accessed 30 September 
2010).
226. Clinical guidelines and integrated care pathways for the oral health care of people with learning disabilities. London, British 
Society for Disability and Oral Health and The Royal College of Surgeons of England, 2001.
227. Kerac M. The Malawi directory of disability organizations. In: Hartley S, ed. CBR as part of community development: a 
poverty eradication strategy. London, University College London, Centre for International Child Health, 2006.
228. Pappaioanou M et al. Strengthening capacity in developing countries for evidence-based public health: the data for 
decision-making project. Social Science & Medicine (1982), 2003,57:1925-1937. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(03)00058-3 
PMID:14499516
229. Oxman AD et al. SUPPORT Tools for evidence-informed health policymaking (STP) 1: What is evidence-informed policymak-
ing? Health Research Policy and Systems/BioMed Central, 2009,7:Suppl 1S1- doi:10.1186/1478-4505-7-S1-S1 PMID:20018099
230. Armour BS, Thierry JM, Wolf LA. State-level differences in breast and cervical cancer screening by disability status: 
United States, 2008. Women’s Health Issues: official publication of the Jacobs Institute of Women’s Health, 2009,19:406-414. 
doi:10.1016/j.whi.2009.08.006 PMID:19879454
231. Jamison DT et al., eds. Priorities in health. Washington, World Bank, 2006.
232. Tercero F et al. The epidemiology of moderate and severe injuries in a Nicaraguan community: a household-based survey. 
Public Health, 2006,120:106-114. doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2005.07.005 PMID:16260010
233. Adams E et al. Fundamentals of disability epidemiology. In: Drum CE, Krahn GL, Bersani H, eds. Disability and public health. 
Washington, American Public Health Association, 2009:105–124.
234. Baquet CR et al. Recruitment and participation in clinical trials: socio-demographic, rural/urban, and health care access 
predictors. Cancer Detection and Prevention, 2006,30:24-33. doi:10.1016/j.cdp.2005.12.001 PMID:16495020
235. Mactavish JB, Lutfiyya ZM, Mahon MJ. “I can speak for myself”: involving individuals with intellectual disabilities as 
research participants. Mental Retardation, 2000,38:216-227. doi:10.1352/0047-6765(2000)038<0216:ICSFMI>2.0.CO;2 
PMID:10900929
236. Rimmer JH et al. Exercise intervention research on persons with disabilities: what we know and where we need to go. 
American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation/Association of Academic Physiatrists, 2010,89:249-263. doi:10.1097/
PHM.0b013e3181c9fa9d PMID:20068432
237. Lollar DJ. Public health and disability: emerging opportunities. Public Health Reports (Washington, DC: 1974), 2002,117:131-
136. doi:10.1016/S0033-3549(04)50119-X PMID:12356997
238. Seekins T, Kimpton T. Evidence-based health promotion interventions for people with disabilities: results of a systematic 
review of literature. Portland, Rehabilitation Research and Training Center, 2008 (http://www.ohsu.edu/oidd/rrtc/archive/
SOS2008/briefs/promotion_seekins_review.cfm, accessed 30 September 2010)
239. Heald A. Physical health in schizophrenia: a challenge for antipsychotic therapy. European Psychiatry: the journal of the 
Association of European Psychiatrists, 2010,25:Suppl 2S6-S11. doi:10.1016/S0924-9338(10)71700-4 PMID:20620888
240. Gilbert T. Involving people with learning disabilities in research: issues and possibilities. Health & Social Care in the 
Community, 2004,12:298-308. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2004.00499.x PMID:15272885
241. Lin PI, Shuldiner AR. Rethinking the genetic basis for comorbidity of schizophrenia and type 2 diabetes. Schizophrenia 
Research, 2010,123:234-243. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.08.022 PMID:20832248
242. Alzheimer’s Society [web site]. (http://alzheimers.org.uk, accessed 30 September 2010).
243. Jette AM, Keysor JJ. Uses of evidence in disability outcomes and effectiveness research. The Milbank Quarterly, 2002,80:325-
345. doi:10.1111/1468-0009.t01-1-00006 PMID:12101875
 Chapter 4
Rehabilitation
 “Being an amputee myself with functional lower limb prosthetics, I can say that the 
device enable me to function normally. My prosthetics brought back my confidence and 
self esteem to participate in mainstream activities of the society, thus changing my outlook 
in life to positive to more positive. Definitely, my prosthetics had an impact on my present 
status or the quality of life I am enjoying now because I basically perform all the task that 
is assigned to me which at the end the day results to quality output and good pay.”
Johnny 
“Coming from a country where there is not much awareness and resources for dealing 
with post-spinal cord injured victims, my return home was indeed an enormous chal-
lenge. Living in a house that was inaccessible, members of my family have had to perse-
vere with daily lifting me up and down the house. Physiotherapy had become a crucial 
necessity and as a result of the continuous costs incurred, my mother took up the task to 
administer physiotherapy as well as stand in as my caretaker. During my rehabilitation 
process, getting admitted for treatment during times of illness or to use physiotherapy 
facilities was close to impossible as a result of the overwhelming numbers on the waiting 
list. My rehabilitation period despite challenging was a humbling moment of my life and 
a continuous process that I face until today. I have learned disability is not inability and a 
strong mentality and great attitude have been very important!”
Casey 
“Families find themselves in difficulty after a member of the family has a stroke. I 
consider myself a stroke survivor but my family are stroke victims. I have been fortunate 
and have been able to return to work, but I have had to battle all the way. We do not get 
the help we need, services are so variable and there is not enough speech and language 
therapy and physiotherapy. After my stroke I had to learn to do everything again, includ-
ing swallowing and to learn to talk. The first thing that came back to me with my speech 
was swearing, my first sentence had four expletives in it, but I am told that was normal.”
Linda 
“If you don’t have a proper wheelchair, that is when you really feel that you are disa-
bled. But if you have a proper wheelchair, which meets your needs and suits you, you can 
forget about your disability.”
Faustina 
 4
Rehabilitation
95
Rehabilitation has long lacked a unifying conceptual framework (1). 
Historically, the term has described a range of responses to disability, from 
interventions to improve body function to more comprehensive measures 
designed to promote inclusion (see Box 4.1). The International Classification 
of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) provides a framework that can 
be used for all aspects of rehabilitation (11–14).
For some people with disabilities, rehabilitation is essential to 
being able to participate in education, the labour market, and civic life. 
Rehabilitation is always voluntary, and some individuals may require 
support with decision-making about rehabilitation choices. In all cases 
rehabilitation should help to empower a person with a disability and his 
or her family.
Article 26, Habilitation and Rehabilitation, of the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) calls for:
“… appropriate measures, including through peer support, to enable 
persons with disabilities to attain and maintain their maximum 
independence, full physical, mental, social and vocational ability, 
and full inclusion and participation in all aspects of life”.
The Article further calls on countries to organize, strengthen, and 
extend comprehensive rehabilitation services and programmes, which 
should begin as early as possible, based on multidisciplinary assessment 
of individual needs and strengths, and including the provision of assistive 
devices and technologies.
This chapter examines some typical rehabilitation measures, the need 
and unmet need for rehabilitation, barriers to accessing rehabilitation, and 
ways in which these barriers can be addressed.
Understanding rehabilitation
Rehabilitation measures and outcomes
Rehabilitation measures target body functions and structures, activities and 
participation, environmental factors, and personal factors. They contribute 
 96
World report on disability
Box 4.1. What is rehabilitation?
This Report defines rehabilitation as “a set of measures that assist individuals who experience, or are likely 
to experience, disability to achieve and maintain optimal functioning in interaction with their environments”. 
A distinction is sometimes made between habilitation, which aims to help those who acquire disabilities con-
genitally or early in life to develop maximal functioning; and rehabilitation, where those who have experienced 
a loss in function are assisted to regain maximal functioning (2). In this chapter the term “rehabilitation” covers 
both types of intervention. Although the concept of rehabilitation is broad, not everything to do with disability 
can be included in the term. Rehabilitation targets improvements in individual functioning – say, by improving 
a person’s ability to eat and drink independently. Rehabilitation also includes making changes to the individual’s 
environment – for example, by installing a toilet handrail. But barrier removal initiatives at societal level, such as 
fitting a ramp to a public building, are not considered rehabilitation in this Report.
Rehabilitation reduces the impact of a broad range of health conditions. Typically rehabilitation occurs for a 
specific period of time, but can involve single or multiple interventions delivered by an individual or a team of 
rehabilitation workers, and can be needed from the acute or initial phase immediately following recognition of 
a health condition through to post-acute and maintenance phases.
Rehabilitation involves identification of a person’s problems and needs, relating the problems to relevant factors 
of the person and the environment, defining rehabilitation goals, planning and implementing the measures, and 
assessing the effects (see figure below). Educating people with disabilities is essential for developing knowledge 
and skills for self-help, care, management, and decision-making. People with disabilities and their families experi-
ence better health and functioning when they are partners in rehabilitation (3–9). 
The rehabilitation process
Identify problems
and needs
Assess efects
Relate problems 
to modifable and 
limiting factors
Defne target problems 
and target mediators, 
select appropriate measures
Plan, implement, and 
coordinate interventions
Source: A modified version of the Rehabilitation Cycle from (10).
Rehabilitation – provided along a continuum of care ranging from hospital care to rehabilitation in the com-
munity (12) – can improve health outcomes, reduce costs by shortening hospital stays (15–17), reduce disability, 
and improve quality of life (18–21). Rehabilitation need not be expensive.
Rehabilitation is cross-sectoral and may be carried out by health professionals in conjunction with specialists in 
education, employment, social welfare, and other fields. In resource-poor contexts it may involve non-specialist work-
ers – for example, community-based rehabilitation workers in addition to family, friends, and community groups.
Rehabilitation that begins early produces better functional outcomes for almost all health conditions associated 
with disability (18–30). The effectiveness of early intervention is particularly marked for children with, or at risk of, 
developmental delays (27, 28, 31, 32), and has been proven to increase educational and developmental gains (4, 27).
 97
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
to a person achieving and maintaining optimal 
functioning in interaction with their environ-
ment, using the following broad outcomes:
 
■
prevention of the loss of function
 
■
slowing the rate of loss of function
 
■
improvement or restoration of function
 
■
compensation for lost function
 
■
maintenance of current function.
Rehabilitation outcomes are the ben-
efits and changes in the functioning of 
an individual over time that are attribut-
able to a single measure or set of measures 
(33). Traditionally, rehabilitation outcome 
measures have focused on the individual’s 
impairment level. More recently, outcomes 
measurement has been extended to include 
individual activity and participation out-
comes (34, 35). Measurements of activity and 
participation outcomes assess the individual’s 
performance across a range of areas – includ-
ing communication, mobility, self-care, edu-
cation, work and employment, and quality of 
life. Activity and participation outcomes may 
also be measured for programmes. Examples 
include the number of people who remain in 
or return to their home or community, inde-
pendent living rates, return-to-work rates, 
and hours spent in leisure and recreational 
pursuits. Rehabilitation outcomes may also be 
measured through changes in resource use – 
for example, reducing the hours needed each 
week for support and assistance services (36).
The following examples illustrate different 
rehabilitation measures:
 
■
A middle-aged woman with advanced 
diabetes. Rehabilitation might include 
assistance to regain strength following 
her hospitalization for diabetic coma, the 
provision of a prosthesis and gait training 
after a limb amputation, and the provision 
of screen-reader software to enable her to 
continue her job as an accountant after sus-
taining loss of vision.
 
■
A young man with schizophrenia. The man 
may have trouble with routine daily tasks, 
such as working, living independently, and 
maintaining relationships. Rehabilitation 
might mean drug treatment, education of 
patients and families, and psychological 
support via outpatient care, community-
based rehabilitation, or participation in a 
support group.
 
■
A child who is deafblind. Parents, teachers, 
physical and occupational therapists, and 
other orientation and mobility specialists 
need to work together to plan accessible and 
stimulating spaces to encourage develop-
ment. Caregivers will need to work with the 
child to develop appropriate touch and sign 
communication methods. Individualized 
education with careful assessment will help 
learning and reduce the child’s isolation.
Limitations and restrictions for a child 
with cerebral palsy, and possible rehabilitation 
measures, outcomes, and barriers are described 
in Table 4.1.
Rehabilitation teams and specific disci-
plines may work across categories. Rehabilita-
tion measures in this chapter are broadly 
divided into three categories:
 
■
rehabilitation medicine
 
■
therapy
 
■
assistive technologies.
Rehabilitation medicine
Rehabilitation medicine is concerned with 
improving functioning through the diagnosis 
and treatment of health conditions, reduc-
ing impairments, and preventing or treating 
complications (12, 37). Doctors with specific 
expertise in medical rehabilitation are referred 
to as physiatrists, rehabilitation doctors, or 
physical and rehabilitation specialists (37). 
Medical specialists such as psychiatrists, pae-
diatricians, geriatricians, ophthalmologists, 
neurosurgeons, and orthopaedic surgeons can 
be involved in rehabilitation medicine, as can a 
broad range of therapists. In many parts of the 
world where specialists in rehabilitation medi-
cine are not available, services may be provided 
by doctors and therapists (see Box 4.2).
 98
World report on disability
Table 4.1. Child with cerebral palsy and rehabilitation
Difficulties faced 
by the child
Rehabilitation measures
Possible outcomes
Potential barriers
People involved in the 
measures
Unable to care for 
self
→ Therapy 
– Training for the child on different ways to 
complete the task. 
– Assessment and provision of equipment, 
training parents to lift, carry, move, feed and 
otherwise care for the child with cerebral palsy. 
– Teaching parents and family members to use 
and maintain equipment. 
– Provision of information and support for 
parents and family. 
– Counselling the family. 
→ Assistive technology 
– Provision of equipment for maintaining pos-
tures and self-care, playing and interaction, such 
as sitting or standing (when age-appropriate)
– Parents better able to care for 
their child and be proactive. 
– Reduced likelihood of 
compromised development, 
deformities, and contractures. 
– Reduced likelihood of 
respiratory infections. 
– Access to support groups or 
peer support. 
– Coping with stress and other 
psychological demands. 
– Better posture, respiration, 
feeding, speech, and physical 
activity performance.
– Timeliness of interventions. 
– Availability of family and 
support. 
– Financial capacity to pay 
for services and equipment. 
– Availability of well trained 
staff. 
– Attitudes and understand-
ing of others involved in the 
rehabilitation measure. 
– Physical access to home 
environment, community, 
equipment, assistive devices 
and services.
– The child, parents, siblings, 
and extended family. 
– Depending on the setting 
and resources available: 
physiotherapists, occupational 
therapists, speech and 
language therapists, orthotists 
and technicians, doctors, 
psychologists, social workers, 
community-based rehabilita-
tion workers, schoolteachers, 
teaching assistants.
 
Difficulty walking
→ Rehabilitation medicine 
– Botulinum toxin injections. 
– Surgical treatment of contractures and 
deformities (therapy interventions usually 
complement these medical interventions). 
→ Therapy 
– Therapy, exercises and targeted play activities 
to train effective movements. 
→ Assistive technology 
– Orthotics, wheelchair or other equipment.
– Decreased muscle tone, better 
biomechanics of walking. 
– Decrease in self-reported 
limitations. 
– Increased participation in 
education and social life.
– Access to post-acute 
rehabilitation.
– Doctor, parents, therapist, 
orthotist.
 
Communication 
difficulties
→ Therapy 
– Audiology. 
– Activities for language development. 
– Conversation skills. 
– Training conversation partners. 
→ Assistive technology 
– Training to use and maintain aids and 
equipment, which may include hearing aids and 
augmentative and alternative communication 
devices.
– Better communication skills. 
– Participation in social, 
educational and occupational 
life opportunities. 
– Improved relationships with 
family, friends, and the wider 
community. 
– Reduced risk of distress, 
educational failure, and 
antisocial behaviour.
– Availability of speech 
language therapists. 
– Social and economic status 
of the family. 
– Costs of purchasing and 
maintaining devices.
– Parents, speech and 
language pathologist/thera-
pist, communication disorders 
assistant, community-based 
rehabilitation worker, teachers, 
and assistants.
  
Note: The table shows some potential rehabilitation measures for a child with cerebral palsy, possible outcomes, potential barriers, and the various people involved in care.
 99
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
Box 4.2. Clubfoot treatment in Uganda
Clubfoot, a congenital deformity involving one or both feet, is commonly neglected in low and middle-income 
countries. If left untreated, clubfoot can result in physical deformity, pain in the feet, and impaired mobility, all 
of which can limit community participation, including access to education.
In Uganda the incidence of clubfoot is 1.2 per 1000 live births. The condition is usually not diagnosed, or if 
diagnosed it is neglected because conventional invasive surgery treatment is not possible with the resources 
available (38).
The Ponseti clubfoot treatment involving manipulation, casting, Achilles tenotomy, and fitting of foot braces has 
proven to result in a high rate of painless, functional feet (Ponseti, 1996). The benefits of this approach for devel-
oping countries are low cost, high effectiveness, and the possibility to train service providers other than medical 
doctors to perform the treatment. The results of a clubfoot project in Malawi, where the treatment was conducted 
by trained orthopaedic clinical officers, showed that initial good correction was achieved in 98% of cases (39).
The Ugandan Sustainable Clubfoot Care Project – a collaborative partnership between the Ugandan Ministry 
of Health, CBM International, and Ugandan and Canadian universities – is funded by the Canadian International 
Development Agency. Its purpose is to make sustainable, universal, effective, and safe treatment of clubfoot in 
Uganda using the Ponseti method. It built on the existing health care and education sectors and has incorporated 
research to inform the project’s activities and evaluate outcomes.
The project has resulted in many positive achievements in two years including:
 
■
The Ugandan Ministry of Health has approved the Ponseti method as the preferred treatment for clubfoot in 
all its hospitals.
 
■
36% of the country’s public hospitals have built the capacity to do the Ponseti procedure and are using the method.
 
■
798 health-care professionals received training to identify and treat clubfoot.
 
■
Teaching modules on clubfoot and the Ponseti method are being used in two medical and three paramedical 
schools.
 
■
1152 students in various health disciplines received training in the Ponseti method.
 
■
872 children with clubfoot received treatment, an estimated 31% of infants born with clubfoot during the 
sample period – very high, given that only 41% of all births occur in a health care centre.
 
■
Public awareness campaigns were implemented – including radio messages and distribution of posters and 
pamphlets to village health teams – to inform the general public that clubfoot is correctable.
The project shows that clubfoot detection and treatment can quickly be incorporated into settings with few 
resources. The approach requires:
 
■
Screening infants at birth for foot deformity to detect the impairment.
 
■
Building the capacity of health-care professionals across the continuum of care, from community midwives 
screening for deformity, to NGO technicians making braces, and orthopaedic officers performing tenotomies.
 
■
Decentralizing clubfoot care services, including screening in the community, for example through community-
based rehabilitation workers, and treatment in local clinics, to address treatment adherence barriers.
 
■
Incorporating Ponseti method training into the education curricula of medical, nursing, paramedical, and 
infant health-care students.
 
■
Establishing mechanisms to address treatment adherence barriers including travel distance and costs.
 100
World report on disability
Rehabilitation medicine has shown posi-
tive outcomes, for example, in improving joint 
and limb function, pain management, wound 
healing, and psychosocial well-being (40–47).
Therapy
Therapy is concerned with restoring and com-
pensating for the loss of functioning, and pre-
venting or slowing deterioration in functioning 
in every area of a person’s life. Therapists and 
rehabilitation workers include occupational 
therapists, orthotists, physiotherapists, pros-
thetists, psychologists, rehabilitation and tech-
nical assistants, social workers, and speech and 
language therapists.
Therapy measures include:
 
■
training, exercises, and compensatory 
strategies
 
■
education
 
■
support and counselling
 
■
modifications to the environment
 
■
provision of resources and assistive 
technology.
Convincing evidence shows that some 
therapy measures improve rehabilitation out-
comes (see Box 4.3). For example, exercise 
therapy in a broad range of health conditions 
– including cystic fibrosis, frailness in elderly 
people, Parkinson disease, stroke, osteoar-
thritis in the knee and hip, heart disease, and 
low back pain – has contributed to increased 
strength, endurance, and flexibility of joints. 
It can improve balance, posture, and range of 
motion or functional mobility, and reduce the 
risk of falls (49–51). Therapy interventions have 
also been found to be suitable for the long-term 
care of older persons to reduce disability (18). 
Some studies show that training in activities of 
daily living have positive outcomes for people 
with stroke (52).
Box 4.3. Money well spent: The effectiveness and value of housing adaptations
Public spending on housing adaptations for people with difficulties in functioning in the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland amounted to more than £220 million in 1995, and both the number of demands and 
unit costs are growing. A 2000 research study examined the effectiveness of adaptations in England and Wales, 
using interviews with recipients of major adaptations, postal questionnaires returned by recipients of minor 
adaptations, administrative records, and the views of visiting professionals. The main measure of “effectiveness” 
was the degree to which the problems experienced by the respondent before adaptation were overcome by the 
adaptation, without causing new problems. The study found that:
 
■
Minor adaptations (rails, ramps, over-bath showers, and door entry systems, for example) – most costing less 
than £500 – produced a range of lasting, positive consequences for virtually all recipients: 62% of respondents 
suggested they felt safer from the risk of accident, and 77% perceived a positive effect on their health.
 
■
Major adaptations (bathroom conversions, extensions, lifts, for example) in most cases had transformed 
people’s lives. Before adaptations, people used words like “prisoner”, “degraded”, and “afraid’ to describe 
their situations; following adaptations, they spoke of themselves as “independent”, “useful”, and “confident”.
 
■
Where major adaptations failed, it was typically because of weaknesses in the original specification. Adaptations 
for children sometimes failed to allow for the child’s growth, for example. In other cases, policies intended 
to save money resulted in major waste. Examples included extensions that were too small or too cold to use, 
and cheap but ineffective substitutes for proper bathing facilities.
 
■
The evidence from recipients suggests that successful adaptations keep people out of hospitals, reduce strain 
on carers, and promote social inclusion.
 
■
Benefits were most pronounced where careful consultation with users took place, where the needs of the 
whole family had been considered, and where the integrity of the home had been respected.
Adaptations appear to be a highly effective use of public resources, justifying investment in health and rehabilita-
tion resources. Further research is needed in diverse contexts and settings.
Source (48).
 101
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
Distance training was used in Bangladesh 
for mothers of children with cerebral palsy in 
an 18-month therapy programme: it promoted 
the development of physical and cognitive 
skills and improved motor skills in the chil-
dren (53). Counselling, information, and train-
ing on adaptive methods, aids, and equipment 
have been effective for individuals with spinal 
cord injury and younger people with disabili-
ties (54–56). Many rehabilitation measures help 
people with disabilities to return or continue to 
work, including adjusting the content or sched-
ule of work, and making changes to equipment 
and the work environment (57, 58).
Assistive technologies
An assistive technology device can be defined 
as “any item, piece of equipment, or product, 
whether it is acquired commercially, modified, 
or customized, that is used to increase, main-
tain, or improve the functional capabilities of 
individuals with disabilities” (59).
Common examples of assistive devices are:
 
■
crutches, prostheses, orthoses, wheel-
chairs, and tricycles for people with mobil-
ity impairments;
 
■
hearing aids and cochlear implants for 
those with hearing impairments;
 
■
white canes, magnifiers, ocular devices, 
talking books, and software for screen 
magnification and reading for people with 
visual impairments;
 
■
communication boards and speech synthe-
sizers for people with speech impairments;
 
■
devices such as day calendars with 
symbol pictures for people with cognitive 
impairment.
Assistive technologies, when appropriate to 
the user and the user’s environment, have been 
shown to be powerful tools to increase inde-
pendence and improve participation. A study of 
people with limited mobility in Uganda found 
that assistive technologies for mobility created 
greater possibilities for community participa-
tion, especially in education and employment 
(60). For people in the United Kingdom with 
disabilities resulting from brain injuries, tech-
nologies such as personal digital assistants, and 
simpler technologies such as wall charts, were 
closely associated with independence (61). In a 
study of Nigerians with hearing impairments, 
provision of a hearing aid was associated with 
improved function, participation and user sat-
isfaction (62).
Assistive devices have also been reported to 
reduce disability and may substitute or supple-
ment support services – possibly reducing care 
costs (63). In the United States of America, data 
over 15 years from the National Long-Term Care 
Survey found that increasing use of technology 
was associated with decreasing reported disabil-
ity among people aged 65 years and older (64). 
Another study from the United States showed 
that users of assistive technologies such as 
mobility aids and equipment for personal care 
reported less need for support services (65).
In some countries, assistive devices are 
an integral part of health care and are pro-
vided through the national health care system. 
Elsewhere, assistive technology is provided by 
governments through rehabilitation services, 
vocational rehabilitation, or special education 
agencies (66), insurance companies, and chari-
table and nongovernmental organizations.
Rehabilitation settings
The availability of rehabilitation services in dif-
ferent settings varies within and across nations 
and regions (67–70). Medical rehabilitation 
and therapy are typically provided in acute 
care hospitals for conditions with acute onset. 
Follow-up medical rehabilitation, therapy, and 
assistive devices could be provided in a wide 
range of settings, including specialized rehabil-
itation wards or hospitals; rehabilitation cen-
tres; institutions such as residential mental and 
nursing homes, respite care centres, hospices, 
prisons, residential educational institutions, 
and military residential settings; or single or 
multiprofessional practices (office or clinic). 
Longer-term rehabilitation may be provided 
 102
World report on disability
within community settings and facilities such 
as primary health care centres, schools, work-
places, or home-care therapy services (67–70).
Needs and unmet needs
Global data on the need for rehabilitation ser-
vices, the type and quality of measures provided, 
and estimates of unmet need do not exist. Data 
on rehabilitation services are often incomplete 
and fragmented. When data are available, com-
parability is hampered by differences in defini-
tions, classifications of measures and personnel, 
populations under study, measurement meth-
ods, indicators, and data sources – for example, 
individuals with disabilities, service providers, 
or programme managers may experience needs 
and demands differently (71, 72).
Unmet rehabilitation needs can delay dis-
charge, limit activities, restrict participation, 
cause deterioration in health, increase depend-
ency on others for assistance, and decrease 
quality of life (37, 73–77). These negative out-
comes can have broad social and financial 
implications for individuals, families, and 
communities (78–80).
Despite acknowledged limitations such as 
the quality of data and cultural variations in 
perception of disabilities, the need for rehabili-
tation services can be estimated in several ways. 
These include data on the prevalence of disabil-
ity; disability-specific surveys; and population 
and administrative data.
Prevalence data on health conditions 
associated with disability can provide infor-
mation to assess rehabilitation needs (81). As 
Chapter 2 indicated, disability rates correlate 
with the increase in noncommunicable condi-
tions and global ageing. The need for rehabili-
tation services is projected to increase (82, 83) 
due to these demographic and epidemiological 
factors. Strong evidence suggests that impair-
ments related to ageing and many health condi-
tions can be reduced and functioning improved 
with rehabilitation (84–86).
Higher rates of disability indicate a greater 
potential need for rehabilitation. Epidemiologi- 
cal evidence together with an examination of 
the number, type, and severity of impairments, 
and the activity limitations and participation 
restrictions that may benefit from various reha-
bilitation measures, can help measure the need 
for services and may be useful for setting appro-
priate priorities for rehabilitation (87).
 
■
The number of people needing hearing aids 
worldwide is based on 2005 World Health 
Organization estimates that about 278 
million people have moderate to profound 
hearing impairments (88). In developed 
countries, industry experts estimate that 
about 20% of people with hearing impair-
ments need hearing aids (89), suggesting 56 
million potential hearing-aid users world-
wide. Hearing aid producers and distribu-
tors estimate that hearing aid production 
currently meets less than 10% of global 
need (88), and less than 3% of the hearing 
aid needs in developing countries are met 
annually (90).
 
■
The International Society for Prosthetics 
and Orthotics and the World Health 
Organization have estimated that people 
needing prostheses or orthotics and related 
services represent 0.5% of the population 
in developing countries; and 30 million 
people in Africa, Asia, and Latin America 
(91) require an estimated 180 000 rehabili-
tation professionals. In 2005 there were 24 
prosthetic and orthotic schools in devel-
oping countries, graduating 400 trainees 
annually. Worldwide existing training 
facilities for prosthetic and orthotic pro-
fessionals and other providers of essential 
rehabilitation services are deeply inad-
equate in relation to the need (92).
 
■
A national survey of musculoskeletal 
impairment in Rwanda concluded that 
2.6% of children are impaired and that 
about 80 000 need physical therapy, 50 000 
need orthopaedic surgery, and 10 000 need 
assistive devices (93).
Most of the available data on national 
supply and unmet need are derived from 
 103
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
disability-specific surveys on specific popula-
tions such as:
 
■
National studies on living conditions 
of people with disabilities conducted in 
Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Zambia, 
and Zimbabwe (94–98) revealed large gaps 
in the provision of medical rehabilitation 
and assistive devices (see Table 2.5 in 
Chapter 2). Gender inequalities in access 
to assistive devices were evident in Malawi 
(men 25.3% and women 14.1%) and Zambia 
(men 15.7% and women 11.9%) (99).
 
■
A survey of physical rehabilitation medicine 
in Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, 
Slovakia, and Slovenia found a general lack 
of access to rehabilitation in primary, sec-
ondary, tertiary, and community health 
care settings, as well as regional and socio-
economic inequalities in access (100).
 
■
In a study of people identified as disabled 
from three districts in Beijing, China, 75% 
of those interviewed expressed a need for 
a range of rehabilitation services, of which 
only 27% had received such services (101). 
A national Chinese study of the need for 
rehabilitation in 2007 found that unmet 
need was particularly high for assistive 
devices and therapy (102).
 
■
United States surveys report considerable 
unmet needs – often caused by funding 
problems – for assistive technologies (103).
Unmet need for rehabilitation services can also 
be estimated from administrative and population 
survey data. The supply of rehabilitation services 
can be estimated from administrative data on the 
provision of services, and measures such as wait-
ing times for rehabilitation services can proxy the 
extent to which demand for services is being met.
A recent global survey (2006–2008) of 
vision services in 195 countries found that 
waiting times in urban areas averaged less than 
one month, while waiting times in rural areas 
ranged from six months to a year (104). Proxy 
measures may not always be reliable. In the case 
of waiting times, for instance, lack of awareness 
of services and beliefs about disability influence 
treatment-seeking, while restrictions on who is 
legitimately waiting for services can complicate 
data interpretation (105–107).
Indicators on the number of people 
demanding but not receiving services, or 
receiving inadequate or inappropriate ser-
vices, can provide useful planning informa-
tion (108). Data on rehabilitation often are 
not disaggregated from other health care 
services, however, and rehabilitation meas-
ures are not included in existing classification 
systems, which could provide a framework 
for describing and measuring rehabilitation. 
Administrative data on supply are often frag-
mented because rehabilitation can take place 
in a variety of settings and be performed by 
different personnel.
Comparing multiple data sources can 
provide more robust interpretations, if a 
common framework like the ICF is used. 
As an example, the Arthritis Community 
Research and Evaluation Unit in Toronto 
merged administrative data sources to pro-
file rehabilitation demand and supply across 
all regions of the province of Ontario (109). 
The researchers triangulated population 
data with the number of health-care workers 
per region to estimate the number of work-
ers per person: they found that the higher 
concentration of workers in the southern 
region did not coincide with the highest 
areas of demand, causing unmet demand for 
rehabilitation.
Addressing barriers 
to rehabilitation
The barriers to rehabilitation service provi-
sion can be overcome through a series of 
actions, including:
 
■
reforming policies, laws, and delivery sys-
tems, including development or revision of 
national rehabilitation plans;
 
■
developing 
funding 
mechanisms 
to 
address barriers related to financing of 
rehabilitation;
 104
World report on disability
 
■
increasing human resources for rehabilita-
tion, including training and retention of 
rehabilitation personnel;
 
■
expanding and decentralizing service 
delivery;
 
■
increasing the use and affordability of tech-
nology and assistive devices;
 
■
expanding research programmes, includ-
ing improving information and access to 
good practice guidelines.
Reforming policies, laws, 
and delivery systems
A 2005 global survey (110) of the implementa-
tion of the nonbinding, United Nations Standard 
Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for 
Persons with Disabilities found that:
 
■
in 48 of 114 (42%) countries that responded 
to the survey, rehabilitation policies were 
not adopted;
 
■
in 57 (50%) countries legislation on reha-
bilitation for people with disabilities was 
not passed;
 
■
in 46 (40%) countries rehabilitation pro-
grammes were not established.
Many countries have good legislation 
and related policies on rehabilitation, but the 
implementation of these policies, and the 
development and delivery of regional and local 
rehabilitation services, have lagged. Systemic 
barriers include:
 
■
Lack of strategic planning. A study of 
rehabilitation medicine related to physical 
impairments – excluding assistive technol-
ogy, sensory impairments, and specialized 
disciplines – in five central and eastern 
European countries suggested that the 
lack of strategic planning for services had 
resulted in an uneven distribution of ser-
vice capacity and infrastructure (100).
 
■
Lack of resources and health infrastruc-
ture. Limited resources and health infra-
structure in developing countries, and in 
rural and remote communities in developed 
countries, can reduce access to rehabili-
tation and quality of services (111). In a 
survey on the reasons for not using needed 
health facilities in two Indian states, 52.3% 
of respondents indicated that no health-
care facility in the area was available (112). 
Other countries lack rehabilitation services 
that have proven effective at reducing long-
term costs, such as early intervention for 
children under the age of 5 (5, 113–115). A 
study of users of community-based reha-
bilitation (CBR) in Ghana, Guyana, and 
Nepal showed limited impact on physical 
well-being because CBR workers had dif-
ficulties providing physical rehabilita-
tion, assistive devices, and referral services 
(116). In Haiti, before the 2010 earthquake, 
an estimated three quarters of amputees 
received prosthetic management due to the 
lack of availability of services (117).
 
■
Lack of agency responsible to administer, 
coordinate, and monitor services. In some 
countries all rehabilitation is integrated in 
health care and financed under the national 
health system (118, 119). In other countries 
responsibilities are divided between differ-
ent ministries, and rehabilitation services are 
often poorly integrated into the overall system 
and not well coordinated (120). A report of 
29 African countries found that many lack 
coordination and collaboration among the 
different sectors and ministries involved in 
disability and rehabilitation, and 4 of the 29 
countries did not have a lead ministry (119).
 
■
Inadequate health information systems 
and communication strategies can con-
tribute to low rates of participation in 
rehabilitation. 
Aboriginal 
Australians 
have high rates of cardiovascular disease 
but low rates of participation in cardiac 
rehabilitation, for example. Barriers to 
rehabilitation include poor communica-
tion across the health care sector and 
between providers (notably between pri-
mary and secondary care), inconsistent 
and insufficient data collection processes, 
multiple clinical information systems, 
 105
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
and incompatible technologies (121). Poor 
communication results in ineffective 
coordination of responsibilities among 
providers (75).
 
■
Complex referral systems can limit 
access. Where access to rehabilitation ser-
vices is controlled by doctors (77), medical 
rules or attitudes of primary physicians 
can obstruct individuals with disabilities 
from obtaining services (122). People are 
sometimes not referred, or inappropriately 
referred, or unnecessary medical consulta-
tions may increase their costs (123–126). 
This is particularly relevant to people with 
complex needs requiring multiple rehabili-
tation measures.
 
■
Absence of engagement with people with 
disabilities. The study of 114 countries 
mentioned above did not consult with disa-
bled people’s organizations in 51 countries, 
and did not consult with families of persons 
with disabilities about design, implementa-
tion, and evaluation of rehabilitation pro-
grammes in 57 of the study countries (110).
Countries that lack policies and legislation 
on rehabilitation should consider introducing 
them, especially countries that are signatories to 
the CRPD, as they are required to align national 
law with Articles 25 and 26 of the Convention. 
Rehabilitation can be incorporated into general 
legislation on health, and into relevant employ-
ment, education, and social services legislation, 
as well as into specific legislation for persons 
with disabilities.
Policy responses should emphasize early 
intervention and use of rehabilitation to enable 
people with a broad range of health conditions 
to improve or maintain their level of function-
ing, with a specific focus on ensuring participa-
tion and inclusion, such as continuing to work 
(127). Services should be provided as close as 
possible to communities where people live, 
including in rural areas (128).
Development, implementation, and moni-
toring of policy and laws should include users 
(see Box 4.4) (132). Rehabilitation professionals 
must be aware of the policies and programmes 
given the role of rehabilitation in keeping 
people with disabilities participating in society 
(133, 134).
National rehabilitation plans 
and improved collaboration
Creating or amending national plans on reha-
bilitation, and establishing infrastructure and 
capacity to implement the plan are critical 
to improving access to rehabilitation. Plans 
should be based on analysis of the current 
situation, consider the main aspects of reha-
bilitation provision – leadership, financing, 
information, service delivery, products and 
technologies, and the rehabilitation workforce 
(135) – and define priorities based on local need. 
Even if it is not immediately possible to provide 
rehabilitation services for all who need them, 
a plan involving smaller, annual investments 
may progressively strengthen and expand the 
rehabilitation system.
Successful implementation of the plan 
depends on establishing or strengthening 
mechanisms for intersectoral collaboration. 
An interministerial committee or agency for 
rehabilitation can coordinate across organi-
zations. For example, a Disability Action 
Council with representatives from the govern-
ment, NGOs, and training programmes was 
established in Cambodia in 1997, to support 
coordination and cooperation across reha-
bilitation providers, decrease duplication and 
improve distribution of services and referral 
systems, and promote joint ventures in train-
ing (136). The Council has been very success-
ful in developing physical rehabilitation and 
supporting professional training (physical 
therapy, prosthetics, orthotics, wheelchairs, 
and CBR) (137). Further benefits include (136):
 
■
joint negotiation for equipment and supplies;
 
■
sharing knowledge and expertise;
 
■
continuing education through sharing 
specialist educators, establishing clinical 
education sites, reviewing and revising 
curricula, and disseminating information;
 106
World report on disability
 
■
support for the transition from expatriate 
professional services to local management.
Developing funding 
mechanisms for rehabilitation
The cost of rehabilitation can be a barrier for 
people with disabilities in high-income as well 
as low-income countries. Even where funding 
from governments, insurers, or NGOs is avail-
able, it may not cover enough of the costs to 
make rehabilitation affordable (117). People 
with disabilities have lower incomes and are 
often unemployed, so are less likely to be covered 
by employer-sponsored health plans or private 
voluntary health insurance (see Chapter 8). 
If they have limited finances and inadequate 
public health coverage, access to rehabilitation 
may also be limited, compromising activity and 
participation in society (138).
Lack of financial resources for assis-
tive technologies is a significant barrier 
for many (101). People with disabilities 
and their families purchase more than half 
of all assistive devices directly (139). In a 
Box 4.4. Reform of mental health law in Italy – closing psychiatric institutions is not enough
In 1978 Italy introduced Law No. 180 gradually phasing out psychiatric hospitals and introducing a community-
based system of psychiatric care. Social psychiatrist Franco Basaglia was a leading figure behind the new law that 
rejected the assumption that people with mental illness were a danger to society. Basaglia had become appalled 
by the inhuman conditions he witnessed as the director of a psychiatric hospital in northern Italy. He viewed 
social factors as the main determinants in mental illness, and became a champion of community mental health 
services and beds in general hospitals instead of psychiatric hospitals (129).
Thirty years later, Italy is the only country where traditional mental hospitals are prohibited by law. The law 
comprised framework legislation, with individual regions tasked with implementing detailed norms, methods, 
and timetables for action. As a result of the law, no new patients were admitted to psychiatric hospitals, and a 
process of deinstitutionalization of psychiatric inpatients was actively promoted. The inpatient population dropped 
by 53% between 1978 and 1987, and the final dismantling of psychiatric hospitals was completed by 2000 (130).
Treatment for acute problems is delivered in general hospital psychiatric units, each with a maximum of 15 beds. 
A network of community mental health and rehabilitation centres support mentally ill people, based on a holistic 
perspective. The organization of services uses a departmental model to coordinate a range of treatments, phases, 
and professionals. Campaigns against stigma, for social inclusion of people with mental health problems, and 
empowerment of patients and families have been promoted and supported centrally and regionally.
As a consequence of these policies, Italy has fewer psychiatric beds than other countries – 1.72 per 10 000 people 
in 2001. While Italy has a comparable number of psychiatrists per head of population to the United Kingdom, it 
has one third the psychiatric nurses and psychologists, and one tenth of the social workers. Italy also has lower 
rates of compulsory admissions (2.5 per 10 000 people in 2001, compared with 5.5 per 10 000 in England) (131), 
and lower use of psychotropic drugs than other European countries. “Revolving door” readmissions are evident 
only in regions with poor resources.
Yet Italian mental health care is far from perfect (130). In place of public sector mental hospitals, the government 
operates small, protected communities or apartments for long-term patients, and private facilities provide long-
term care in some regions. But support for mental health varies significantly by region, and the burden of care still 
falls on families in some areas. Community mental health and rehabilitation services have in some areas failed to 
innovate, and optimal treatments are not always available. Italy is preparing a new national strategy to reinforce 
the community care system, face emerging priorities, and standardize regional mental health care performance.
Italy’s experience shows that closing psychiatric institutions must be accompanied by alternative structures. 
Reform laws should provide minimum standards, not just guidelines. Political commitment is necessary, as well 
as investment in buildings, staff, and training. Research and evaluation is vital, together with central mechanisms 
for verification, control, and comparison of services.
 107
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
national survey in India, two thirds of the 
assistive technology users reported having 
paid for their devices themselves (112). In 
Haiti, poor access to prosthetic services was 
attributed partially to users being unable to 
pay (117).
Spending on rehabilitation services is dif-
ficult to determine because it generally is not 
disaggregated from other health care expendi-
ture. Limited information is available on 
expenditure for the full range of rehabilitation 
measures (68, 74, 138). Governments in 41 of 
114 countries did not provide funding for assis-
tive devices in 2005 (110). Even in the 79 coun-
tries where insurance schemes fully or partially 
covered assistive devices, 16 did not cover poor 
people with disabilities, and 28 did not cover 
all geographical locations (110). In some cases 
existing programmes did not cover mainte-
nance and repairs for assistive devices, which 
can leave individuals with defective equipment 
and limit its use (76, 112, 140). One third of the 
114 countries providing data to the 2005 global 
study did not allocate specific budgets for 
rehabilitation services (110). OECD countries 
appear to be investing more in rehabilitation 
than in the past, but the spending is still low 
(120). For example, unweighted averages for all 
OECD countries between 2006 and 2008 indi-
cate that public spending on rehabilitation as 
part of labour market programmes was 0.02% 
of GDP with no increase over time (127).
Health care funding often provides selec-
tive coverage for rehabilitation services – for 
example, by restricting the number or type 
of assistive devices, the number of therapy 
visits over a specific time, or the maximum 
cost (77) – in order to control cost. While cost 
controls are needed, they should be balanced 
with the need to provide services to those who 
can benefit. In the United States, government 
and private insurance plans limit coverage of 
assistive technologies and may not replace 
ageing devices until they are broken, some-
times requiring a substantial waiting period 
(77). A study of assistive device use by people 
with rheumatic disease in Germany and the 
Netherlands found significant differences 
between the two countries, thought to result 
from differences in country-related health care 
systems with respect to prescription and reim-
bursement rules (141).
Policy actions require a budget matching the 
scope and priorities of the plan. The budget for 
rehabilitation services should be part of the regu-
lar budgets of relevant ministries – notably health 
– and should consider ongoing needs. Ideally, the 
budget line for rehabilitation services would be 
separated to identify and monitor spending.
Many countries – particularly low-income 
and middle-income countries – struggle to 
finance rehabilitation, but rehabilitation is a 
good investment because it builds human capital 
(36, 142). Financing strategies can improve the 
provision, access, and coverage of rehabilitation 
services, particularly in low-income and mid-
dle-income countries. Any new strategy should 
be carefully evaluated for its applicability and 
cost–effectiveness before being implemented. 
Financing strategies may include the following:
 
■
Reallocate or redistribute resources. 
Public rehabilitation services should be 
reviewed and evaluated, with resources 
reallocated effectively. Possible modifica-
tions include:
 
–
changing from hospital or clinic-based 
rehabilitation to community-based 
interventions (74, 83);
 
–
reorganizing and integrating services 
to make them more efficient (26, 74, 
143);
 
–
relocating equipment to where it is 
most needed (144).
 
■
Cooperate 
internationally. 
Developed 
countries, through their development aid, 
could provide long-term technical and 
financial assistance to developing coun-
tries to strengthen rehabilitation services, 
including rehabilitation personnel devel-
opment. Aid agencies from Australia, 
Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, 
Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom, 
and the United States have supported such 
activities (145–147).
 108
World report on disability 
 
■
Include rehabilitation services in foreign 
aid for humanitarian crises. Conflict and 
natural disaster cause injuries and disabili-
ties and make people with existing disabili-
ties even more vulnerable – for example, 
after an earthquake there are increased 
difficulties in moving around due to the 
rubble from collapsed buildings and the 
loss of mobility devices. Foreign aid should 
also include trauma care and rehabilitation 
services (135, 142, 148).
 
■
Combine public and private financing. 
Clear demarcation of responsibilities and 
good coordination among sectors is needed 
for this strategy to be effective. Some ser-
vices could be publicly funded but privately 
provided – as in Australia, Cambodia, 
Canada, and India.
 
■
Target poor people with disabilities. The 
essential elements of rehabilitation need to 
be identified, publicly funded, and made 
available for free to people with low incomes, 
as in South Africa (149) and India (8).
 
■
Evaluate coverage of health insurance, 
including criteria for equitable access. 
A study in the United States on access to 
physical therapy found that health care 
funding sources provided different cover-
age for physical therapy services depending 
on whether people had cerebral palsy, mul-
tiple sclerosis, or spinal cord injury (74).
Increasing human resources 
for rehabilitation
Global information about the rehabilita-
tion workforce is inadequate. In many coun-
tries national planning and review of human 
resources for health do not refer to rehabilitation 
(135). Many lack the technical capacity to accu-
rately monitor their rehabilitation workforce, 
so data are often unreliable and out-of-date. 
Furthermore, the terms to describe the work-
ers vary, proven analytical tools are absent, and 
skills and experience for assessing crucial policy 
issues are lacking (150, 151).
Many countries, developing and developed, 
report inadequate, unstable, or nonexistent 
supplies, (83, 152, 153) and unequal geographic 
distribution of, rehabilitation professionals (82, 
140). Developed countries such as Australia, 
Canada, and the United States report shortages 
of rehabilitation personnel in rural and remote 
areas (154–156).
The low quality and productivity of the 
rehabilitation workforce in low-income coun-
tries are disconcerting. The training for rehabili-
tation and other health personnel in developing 
countries, can be more complex than in devel-
oped countries. Training needs to consider the 
absence of other practitioners for consultation 
and advice and the lack of medical services, 
surgical treatment, and follow-up care through 
primary health care facilities. Rehabilitation 
personnel working in low-resource settings 
require extensive knowledge on pathology, and 
good diagnostic, problem-solving, clinical deci-
sion-making, and communication skills (136).
Physiotherapy services are the ones most 
often available, often in small hospitals (144). A 
recent comprehensive survey of rehabilitation in 
Ghana identified no rehabilitation doctor or occu-
pational therapist in the country, and only a few 
prosthetists, orthotists, and physical therapists, 
resulting in very limited access to therapy and 
assistive technologies (68). Services such as speech 
pathology are nearly absent in many countries 
(144). In India people with speech impairments 
were much less likely to receive assistive devices 
than people with visual impairments (112). 
An extensive survey of rehabilitation doctors 
in sub-Saharan Africa identified only six, all in 
South Africa, for more than 780 million people, 
while Europe has more than 10 000 and the United 
States more than 7000 (142). Discrepancies are 
also large for other rehabilitation professions: 
0.04–0.6 psychologists per 100 000 population 
in low-income and lower middle-income coun-
tries, compared with 1.8 in upper middle-income 
countries and 14 in high-income countries; and 
0.04 social workers per 100 000 population in 
low-income countries compared with 15.7 in 
high-income countries (157). Data from official 
 109
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
statistical sources showing the large disparities in 
supply of physiotherapists are shown in Fig. 4.1, 
and data from a survey by the World Federation of 
Occupational Therapists showing the disparities 
in occupational therapists are shown in Fig. 4.2.
The lack of women in rehabilitation profes-
sions, and the cultural attitudes towards gender, 
affect rehabilitation services in some contexts. The 
low number of women technicians in India, for 
example, may partly explain why women with dis-
abilities were less likely than men to receive assis-
tive devices (112). Female patients in Afghanistan 
can be treated only by female therapists, and men 
only by men. Restrictions on travel for women 
Fig. 4.1. Physiotherapists per 10 000 population in selected countries
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Pakistan 
Burkina Faso 
Cote d'Ivoire 
Madagascar 
Myanmar 
Senegal 
Mali 
Rwanda 
Uganda 
Indonesia 
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Lesotho 
Zimbabwe 
Nigeria 
Sri Lanka 
Togo 
Morocco 
Swaziland 
Mauritius 
Zambia 
Cape Verde 
Jordan 
Kenya 
Namibia 
Iraq 
Egypt
Oman 
Bahrain 
Seychelles 
Tunisia 
South Africa 
United Kingdom
Canada 
Australia 
New Zealand 
USA
Finland 
Source (158).
Fig. 4.2. Occupational therapists per 10 000 population in selected countries
 
Russian Federation
Pakistan
Bangladesh
United Republic of Tanzania
India
Uganda
Sri Lanka
Indonesia
Jamaica
Zimbabwe
Trinidad & Tobago
Thailand
Namibia
Kenya
Philippines
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Colombia
Barbados
Latvia
South Africa
Czech Republic
Republic of Korea
Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
China, Macao SAR
Brazil
Spain
Singapore
Cyprus
Greece
France
Argentina
Ireland
Malta
Netherlands
Slovenia
Bermuda
USA
Canada
Finland
Germany
New Zealand
United Kingdom
Belgium
Norway
Australia
Iceland
Sweden
Denmark
Israel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Note: Many professional associations collect data on rehabilitation personnel. Professionals are not obliged, however, to 
be members or to respond to the survey questionnaires. This data was collated from 65 member organizations with a 93% 
response rate. 
Source (159).
 110
World report on disability
prevent female physiotherapists from participat-
ing in professional development and training 
workshops and limit their ability to make home 
visits (160).
Expanding education and training
Many developing countries do not have edu-
cational programmes for rehabilitation profes-
sionals. According to the 2005 global survey 
of 114 countries, 37 had not taken action to 
train rehabilitation personnel and 56 had not 
updated medical knowledge of health-care pro-
viders on disability (110).
Differences across countries in the type 
of training and the competency standards 
required influence the quality of services (92, 
136, 161). University training for rehabilitation 
personnel may not be feasible in all develop-
ing countries because of the academic expertise 
required, the time and expense, and the ability 
of national governments and NGOs to sustain 
the training (162–165). Long-term funding 
commitment from Governments and donors is 
required (136, 166).
Education for rehabilitation personnel – 
commonly institutional and urban-based – is 
not always relevant to the needs of the popu-
lation, especially in rural communities (167). 
In Afghanistan one study found that physical 
therapists with two years of training had dif-
ficulty with clinical reasoning and that clinical 
competencies varied, especially for managing 
complex disabilities and identifying their own 
training needs (168).
Given the global lack of rehabilitation pro-
fessionals, mixed or graded levels of training 
may be required to increase the provision of 
essential rehabilitation services. Where graded 
training is used, consideration should be given 
to career development and continuing educa-
tion opportunities between levels. 
University professional education – advo-
cated by developed countries and professional 
associations – builds discipline-specific quali-
fications in physical and occupational therapy, 
prosthetics and orthotics, and speech and lan-
guage, among others (162–165). Professional 
associations support minimum standards for 
training (162–164, 169). The complexity of 
working in resource-poor contexts suggests the 
importance of either university or strong tech-
nical diploma education (136). The feasibility 
of establishing and sustaining tertiary training 
needs is determined by several factors includ-
ing political stability, availability of trained 
educators, availability of financial support, 
educational standards within the country, and 
the cost and time for training.
Low- and middle-income countries such as 
China, India, Lebanon, Myanmar, Thailand, 
Viet Nam, and Zimbabwe have responded to 
the lack of professional resources by establish-
ing mid-level training programmes (92, 170). 
Rehabilitation training times have been short-
ened after wars and conflicts when the number 
of people with impairments has increased 
sharply – for example, in the United States 
after World War I, and in Cambodia after its 
civil war (126, 136, 171). Mid-level therapists 
are also relevant in developed countries: a col-
laborative project in north-eastern England 
compensated for difficulties in recruiting 
qualified professionals by training rehabilita-
tion assistants to work alongside rehabilita-
tion therapists (152).
Mid-level workers, therapists and techni-
cians can be trained as multipurpose rehabili-
tation workers with basic training in a range 
of disciplines (occupational therapy, physi-
cal therapy, speech therapy, for example), or 
as profession-specific assistants that provide 
rehabilitation services under supervision (152, 
170). Prosthetics and orthotics courses meet the 
WHO/ISPO standards in several developing 
countries including Afghanistan, Cambodia, 
Ethiopia, El Salvador, India, Indonesia, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Sri Lanka, 
Pakistan, Sudan, and Viet Nam (see Box 4.5) (92, 
172). A positive side-effect of mid-level train-
ing is that trained professionals are limited in 
their ability to emigrate to developed countries 
 111
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
(136). Mid-level training is also less expensive, 
and although insufficient by itself, it may be an 
option for extending services in the absence of 
full professional training (136).
Community-based workers – a third level 
of training – shows promise in addressing 
geographical access (173, 174). They can work 
across traditional health and social services 
boundaries to provide basic rehabilitation 
in the community while referring patients 
to more specialized services as needed (152, 
175). CBR workers generally have minimal 
training, and rely on established medical and 
rehabilitation services for specialist treatment 
and referral.
Providing opportunities for people with 
disabilities to train as rehabilitation personnel 
would broaden the pool of qualified people and 
could benefit patients through improved empa-
thy, understanding, and communication (176).
Training existing health-care 
personnel in rehabilitation
The duration of specialist training for doctors 
in Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine varies 
Box 4.5. Education in prosthetics and orthotics through the University Don Bosco
In 1996 the University Don Bosco in San Salvador, El Salvador, started the first formal training programme for 
prosthetics and orthotics in Central America, with support from the German Technical Cooperation organization.
The University Don Bosco, now the leading institution for prosthetics and orthotics education in Latin America, 
has graduated about 230 prosthetists and orthotists from 20 countries. Programmes continued to expand even 
after external funding ended. The university now employs nine full-time prosthetics and orthotics teachers, and 
cooperates with the International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics and other international organizations 
such as the World Health Organization (WHO), other universities, and private companies.
Several approaches were instrumental in the success of this training initiative:
 
■
Strong partnership. An established education institution with strong pedagogical expertise, University Don 
Bosco was identified to assume overall responsibility for the training. The German Technical Cooperation 
agency, experienced in developing prosthetics and orthotics training programmes in Asia and Africa, provided 
the technical and financial support.
 
■
Long-term vision for sustainable training provision. A six-month orientation phase enabled the different 
partners to agree on details of project implementation, including objectives, activities, indicators, responsibili-
ties, and resources. A 7–10 year strategy enabled the programme to become self-sustaining.
 
■
Internationally recognized guidelines. All University Don Bosco training programmes have been developed 
with support from the International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics, accredited based on the international 
guidelines for training developed by the Society and by WHO.
 
■
Capacity building. Technical content was developed and delivered by two advisors from the German Technical 
Cooperation for the initial three-year training programme (ISPO/WHO Category II). From the first intake of 25 
students, two outstanding graduates were selected for postgraduate studies in Germany. Following their return 
in 2000, responsibilities were gradually transferred from the advisors to the graduates. In 2000 the programme 
expanded to accept up to 25 students from all over Latin America, and in 2002 additional support from WHO 
helped establish a distance-learning programme for prosthetist and orthotist personnel with a minimum of 
five years of experience. The distance-learning programme, available in Spanish, Portuguese, English, and 
French, is now also offered in Angola and Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 2006 a five-year degree programme in 
prosthetics and orthotics (ISPO /WHO Category I) was started.
 
■
Ensuring recruitment. Prosthetic and orthotic technicians and engineers were integrated into the general 
health system in El Salvador, and support was provided to other countries to establish similar programmes.
 
■
Choosing appropriate technologies. Identifying and developing appropriate technologies ensured sustain-
able provision.
 112
World report on disability 
across the world: three years in China (Chinese 
Standards), at least four years in Europe (37), 
and five years in the United States (177). Some 
countries have used shorter courses to meet 
the urgent need for rehabilitation doctors: 
in China, for example, a one-year certificate 
course in applied rehabilitation, run between 
1990 and 1997, was developed at Tongji Medical 
University, Wuhan, graduating 315 doctors 
now working across 30 provinces (Nan, per-
sonal communication 2010).
Primary health-care workers can benefit 
from broad rehabilitation training (using the 
biopsychosocial framework proposed by the ICF) 
(178). In the absence of rehabilitation specialists, 
health staff with appropriate training can help 
meet service shortages or supplement services. 
For example, nurses and health-care assistants 
can follow up on therapy services (179). Training 
programmes 
for 
health-care 
professionals 
should be user-driven, need-based, and relevant 
to the roles of the professionals (180).
Building training capacity
Academic institutions and universities in 
developed countries and international NGOs 
– with support from international donors and 
in partnership with governments or a local 
NGO – can build training capacity by helping 
train educators and supporting the upgrade of 
training courses in developing countries (136, 
142, 181). The Cambodian School of Prosthetics 
and Orthotics, with La Trobe University in 
Australia, recently upgraded a programme 
from Category II (orthopaedic technologist) to 
a bachelor’s degree in Prosthetics and Orthotics 
using distance education (182). This approach 
has enabled students to remain in their home 
country, and is more cost-effective than full-
time study in Australia (182).
Where training capacity does not exist 
in one country, regional training centres may 
provide a transitional solution (see Box 4.5). 
Mobility India trains rehabilitation therapy 
assistants, and provides specific training in 
prosthetics and orthotics, to students from 
India, Bangladesh, Nepal, and Sri Lanka. But 
this approach generates only a limited number 
of graduates, and travel and subsistence increase 
costs – so it cannot meet the vast personnel 
needs of other developing countries.
Curricula content
Training for rehabilitation personnel should 
include an overview of relevant national and 
international legislation, including the CRPD, 
that promotes client-centred approaches and 
shared decision-making between people with 
disabilities and professionals (167).
The ICF can create a common understand-
ing among health-care staff, and facilitate 
communication, the use of assessment tools, 
and standardized outcome measures to better 
manage rehabilitation interventions (17, 178).
Tertiary and mid-level education can be 
made more relevant to the needs of people in 
rural communities by including content on 
community needs, using appropriate technolo-
gies, and using progressive education methods 
including active learning and problem-based 
orientation (167, 175, 183, 184). Including con-
tent on the social, political, cultural, and eco-
nomic factors that affect the health and quality 
of life of persons with disabilities can make 
the curriculum more relevant to the context in 
which rehabilitation personnel will work (167, 
185–187). Studies have also shown that interdis-
ciplinary team training develops collaboration, 
reduces staff burnout, improves rehabilitation 
implementation, and increases client participa-
tion and satisfaction (188).
Recruiting and retaining 
rehabilitation personnel
Mechanisms to ensure employment for reha-
bilitation graduates are vital to the future of 
graduates and the sustainability of training. 
The WHO code of practice on the recruitment 
of health-care workers (189) reflects a com-
mitment to strengthen health systems glob-
ally, and to address the unequal distribution 
 113
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
of health-care workers both within countries 
and throughout the world, particularly in sub-
Saharan Africa and developing countries. The 
code stresses the need for awareness of local 
health care needs in low-income countries, and 
for promotion of worker exchanges and train-
ing between countries.
Several countries have training pro-
grammes that target potential rehabilitation 
and health students from the local community, 
especially in rural or remote areas (190). In 
Nepal the Institute of Medicine accepts local, 
mid-level health workers with a minimum 
of three years’ experience for medical train-
ing. The rationale is that locally recruited and 
trained personnel may be better equipped and 
prepared for living in the local community 
(183). Thailand has used this strategy for rural 
recruitment and training, adapting it so that 
workers are assigned public sector positions in 
their home towns (190).
Even where training programmes exist, 
staff are often difficult to retain, particularly 
in rural and remote areas. Despite a huge need 
for rehabilitation services in both urban and 
rural Cambodia, for example, hospitals cannot 
afford to hire rehabilitation professionals (136). 
Like other health staff, retaining rehabilita-
tion professionals is affected by poor working 
conditions, safety concerns, poor management, 
conflict, inadequate training, and lack of career 
development and continuing education oppor-
tunities (68, 175, 190–192).
International demand for skills also influ-
ence where rehabilitation workers seek work 
(190, 193). Health-care workers often relocate 
from low-income countries to high-income 
countries, in search of better living standards, 
political stability, and professional opportuni-
ties (82, 144, 194, 195). While most attention 
has been given to medical and nursing pro-
fessionals, a wave of physical therapists have 
also emigrated from developing countries 
such as Brazil, Egypt, India, Nigeria, and the 
Philippines (196, 197).
Long-term retention of personnel, using 
various incentives and mechanisms, is funda-
mental to continuing services (see  Table 4.2).
Table 4.2. Incentives and mechanisms for retaining personnel
Mechanisms
Examples
Financial rewards
Financial bonuses for working in areas of need, or incentives such as subsidized housing, 
contributions to school fees, housing loans, and the provision of vehicles. In some countries 
governments subsidize training costs in return for a guaranteed period of service in rural or 
remote areas. Approaches should be evaluated and compared with the costs of alternative 
schemes such as the use of temporaries or overseas recruitment (190, 191, 194, 198).
 
Financial incentives for 
return to service
Expatriate rehabilitation professionals from developing countries can contribute significantly to 
the development of the rehabilitation infrastructure in their home countries. Providing financial 
incentives requires careful long-term evaluation (198).
 
Career development
Opportunities for promotion, recognition of skills and responsibilities, good supervision and 
support, practical training of resident medical and therapy workers (68, 181). Several countries 
are encouraging international undergraduate and graduate experience, with employers provid-
ing support – such as unpaid leave and subsidized travel costs.
 
Continuing education 
and professional 
development
Opportunities to attend in-service training, seminars and conferences, receive online and 
postgraduate training courses, and benefit from professional associations that promote quality 
in-service training (188, 195).
 
A good work 
environment
Improvements to building design, ensuring the safety and comfort of the workplace, and 
providing adequate equipment and resources for the work. Supportive and efficient manage-
ment practices, including good management of workloads and the recognition of service (175, 
190, 191, 194).
  
 114
World report on disability
Expanding and decentralizing 
service delivery
Rehabilitation services are often located too 
far from where a person with a disability lives 
(199–201). Major rehabilitation centres are usu-
ally located in urban areas; even basic therapeu-
tic services often are not available in rural areas 
(202, 203). Travelling to secondary or tertiary 
rehabilitation services can be costly and time-
consuming, and public transport is often not 
adapted for people with mobility difficulties (77, 
174). In Uganda two studies on clubfoot treat-
ment protocols found a significant association 
between treatment adherence and the distance 
patients had to travel to the clinic (38, 204).
Some people with disabilities have com-
plex rehabilitation needs requiring intensive 
or expert management in tertiary care settings 
(see Box 4.6) (77, 207, 208). However the major-
ity of people require fairly low-cost, modest 
rehabilitation services in primary and second-
ary health care settings (119, 207). Integrating 
rehabilitation into primary and secondary 
health care settings can:
 
■
Help coordinate the delivery of rehabilita-
tion services (126), and having an inter-
disciplinary health care team under one 
roof can provide essential health care at an 
affordable cost (209).
 
■
Improve availability, accessibility, and 
affordability (200) which can overcome 
barriers to referral, such as inaccessible 
locations, inadequate services, and the high 
costs of private rehabilitation (100, 126, 210).
 
■
Improve patient experience by ensuring 
services are available early and that wait-
ing time and travelling time are reduced. 
Together with patient involvement in ser-
vice development, this can produce better 
outcomes, improve compliance with treat-
ment, and increase satisfaction among 
patients and rehabilitation personnel (211).
Referral systems are required between dif-
ferent modes of service delivery (inpatient, out-
patient, home-based care) and levels of health 
service provision (primary, secondary, and 
tertiary care facilities and community settings) 
(100, 136, 212).
Integration 
and 
decentralization 
are 
therefore beneficial for people with conditions 
requiring regular or protracted interventions, 
and for elderly people (213). Evaluation of a pri-
mary care-based, low-vision service in Wales, 
showed that low-vision assessments increased 
by 51%; waiting time fell from more than six 
months to less than two months; travel time 
to the nearest provider was reduced for 80% of 
people; visual disability scores improved sig-
nificantly; and 97% of patients said that they 
found the service helpful (214).
Coordinated multidisciplinary 
rehabilitation
Coordination is required to ensure the con-
tinuity of care when more than one provider 
is involved in rehabilitation (216). The aim of 
coordinated rehabilitation is to improve func-
tional outcomes and reduce costs. Evidence 
has shown that the provision of coordinated, 
multidisciplinary rehabilitation services can be 
effective and efficient (208).
Multidisciplinary teams can convey many 
rehabilitation benefits to patients. For example, 
multidisciplinary rehabilitation for persons with 
disabilities associated with obstructive pulmo-
nary disease has been found to reduce the use of 
health services (217). Multidisciplinary therapy 
services for elderly people showed that patients’ 
ability to engage in activities of daily living 
improved, and the loss of functioning decreased 
(6, 218). Using a team approach to improve par-
ticipation in society for young people with phys-
ical disabilities has proven cost-effective (219).
Community-delivered services
Community-delivered rehabilitation interven-
tions are an important part of the continuum 
of rehabilitation services, and can help improve 
efficiency and effectiveness of inpatient rehabili-
tation services (220). A systematic review of the 
 115
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
Box 4.6. Brazil – Simplified rehabilitation programs in a hospital in São Paulo
São Paulo has seen a great increase in the number of people with injury-related disabilities. The Orthopaedic 
and Traumatology Institute at the Clinical Hospital of the Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo – a public 
referral hospital with 162 beds – receives the most severe cases of traumatic injury. Of the 1400 emergency 
patients admitted each month, about 50 have significant impairments that need extensive long-term rehabili-
tation services, including spinal cord injuries, hip fractures in the elderly, limb amputations, and patients with 
multiple injuries. In the 1980s and 1990s patients with injury-related disability could wait for a year or more 
before receiving placement at a rehabilitation centre. This delay increased the number of secondary complica-
tions – contractures, pressure sores, and infections – which reduced the effectiveness of rehabilitation services 
when they eventually became available.
In response, the Institute at the hospital created the Simplified Rehabilitation Program initially for people with 
spinal cord injuries, which was later extended to elderly persons with hip fractures and individuals with severe 
musculoskeletal injuries. The Program aims to prevent joint deformities and pressure sores, promote mobility 
and wheelchair transfers, manage bladder and bowel issues, control pain, improve self-care independence, and 
train caregivers (especially for quadriplegics and elderly patients).
The rehabilitation team also provides advice about assistive devices and home modifications. It comprises a 
physiatrist, physiotherapist, and rehabilitation nurse for the orientation work with patients and caregivers. In 
addition, a psychologist, social assistant, and occupational therapist may be involved for persons with multiple 
or complex impairments, such as those with quadriplegia. The team does not have its own specific unit in the 
hospital, but cares for patients on the general wards.
The Program is primarily educational and needs no special equipment. It usually starts in the second or third 
week after injury when the patient has become clinically stable, and continues for the two months that most 
patients remain in the hospital. Patients return for their first follow-up evaluation 30–60 days after discharge 
and periodically thereafter as needed. These visits focus on general medical care, prevention of complications, 
and basic rehabilitative care to maximize function. The Program has had a profound effect on the prevention of 
secondary complications (see table below).
Complications in patients with traumatic spinal cord injuries: comparative data between 
1981–1991 and 1999–2008
Complications
1981–1991 (n = 186)
1999–2008 (n = 424)
Percentage point reduction
Urinary infection
85%
57%
28
Pressure sore
65%
42%
23
Paina
86%
63%
23
Spasticity
30%
10%
20
Joint deformity
31%
8%
23
  
a Pain is chronic pain that interfered with functional recovery.
Note: Patients in the two time periods were fairly comparable in terms of age (mean 29 years before, 35 years after) and 
gender (70% male before, 84% male after). Etiology differed between the before and after groups, with 54% of patients 
in the before group having sustained gunshot wounds, compared with only 19% after. Level of injury in the before 
group was 65% paraplegic and 35% quadriplegic, while the after group was 59% paraplegic and 41% quadriplegic.
Sources (205, 206).
This example suggests that developing countries with limited resources and large numbers of injuries can benefit 
from basic rehabilitation strategies, to reduce secondary conditions. This requires:
 
■
acute care doctors recognizing patients with disabling injuries, and involving the rehabilitation team in their 
care as early as possible;
 
■
a small and well trained team in the general hospital;
 
■
basic rehabilitative care directed towards health promotion and prevention of complications, initiated soon 
after the acute phase of trauma care;
 
■
provision of basic equipment and supplies.
Source (215).
 116
World report on disability
Box 4.7. Physical assistance to earthquake victims and rehabilitation service strengthening 
in Gujarat, India
On 26 January 2001 an earthquake measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale struck Gujarat State, India. An estimated 
18 000 people were killed and 130 000 people were injured in the Kutchch District of Gujarat, creating a heavy 
burden on an already fragmented health care system. The response shows that overall care – particularly reha-
bilitation services for people with disabilities – can be considerably strengthened affordably and sustainably 
even in low-income and post-disaster settings.
In the wake of the disaster, a partnership between the state government of Gujarat, Handicap International (an 
international nongovernment organization) and the Blind People’s Association (a local cross-disability NGO) was 
established to build the capacity of existing services.
Tertiary level
 
■
The project improved equipment and infrastructure for physiotherapy and other aspects of facility-based 
rehabilitation at the Civil Paraplegic Hospital and in Kutchch.
 
■
It improved discharge planning for people with disabilities admitted to the Civil Paraplegic Hospital Centre 
through the training of social workers.
 
■
Prior to the earthquake no referral system existed. Referral rates improved for people with disabilities from 
the Civil Hospital to a new community network of 39 disability and development organizations supporting 
community-based rehabilitation services.
District, secondary level
 
■
The project improved rehabilitation service delivery by providing technical assistance to the Blind People’s 
Association to establish one secondary-level rehabilitation centre – providing prosthetics and orthotics, and 
physical therapy (by eight visually impaired physiotherapists) near the new Kutchch District Hospital. Nearly 
3000 people received orthopaedic devices, an additional 598 received free assistive devices through the 
Government assistance scheme, and 208 people were fitted with devices in their homes by physical therapists. 
The referral centre supported satellite centres for six months after the earthquake.
 
■
Coordination improved between different levels of government health providers, and between government 
health providers and nongovernmental organizations, with mechanisms for referral, treatment, and follow-up, 
which helped ensure access and continuity of service. An individual case record system and a directory of all 
rehabilitation facilities in and around Kutchch were developed and managed by the primary health care centres.
Community level
 
■
The project strengthened primary health care, training 275 health-care workers to identify people with disabili-
ties and provide appropriate interventions and referral. An evaluation eight months after the training showed 
high knowledge retention, with many workers able to identify children with disabilities under 10 months old.
 
■
It improved the provision of rehabilitation services at a community health centre through the establishment 
of a physiotherapy programme.
 
■
It included the people with disabilities in development initiatives by training 24 community development 
workers, in 84 of 128 villages, to identify people with disabilities, deliver basic care and refer.
 
■
It increased the proportion of persons with paraplegia having access to both hospital and community-based 
rehabilitation services.
 
■
It increased awareness among community and family members, disabled persons, and professionals about 
disability prevention and disability management, through publishing eight new awareness materials in the 
local language.
Initial activities in 2001–2002 focused on people with spinal cord injury, and mortality within five years of being 
discharged from the hospital came down from 60% before the programme to 4% afterwards. As the project became 
successful, it expanded both geographically and to cover all types of disabilities. It now encompasses the entire 
state of Gujarat, where disability-related activities have been integrated into all levels of the government-run 
health care system.
Source Handicap International, internal reports.
 117
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
effectiveness of community-based interventions 
to maintain physical function and independence 
in elderly people found that the interventions 
reduced the number of falls and admissions 
to nursing homes and hospitals, and improved 
physical function (6). Community-delivered 
services also respond to workforce shortages, 
geographical population dispersion, changing 
demographics, and technological innovations 
(175, 221). Efforts to provide rehabilitation more 
flexibly are increasing, including through home-
based services and schools (222). Rehabilitation 
services should be provided as close as possible 
to people’s homes and communities (223, 224).
In low-resource, capacity-constrained set-
tings, efforts should focus on accelerating the 
supply of services in communities through CBR 
(112, 175), complemented with referral to sec-
ondary services (see Box 4.7) (175). Examples 
of measures in community-based rehabilita-
tion include:
 
■
Identifying 
people 
with 
impairments 
and facilitating referrals. CBR workers in 
Bangladesh were trained as “key inform-
ants” to identify and refer children with 
visual impairments to specialist eye camps; 
referrals by the informants accounted 
for 64% of all referrals to the eye camps. 
Children were identified earlier and were 
more representative of the overall incidence 
of blindness across the community (225). 
A subsequent review of 11 similar studies 
that used Participatory Rural Appraisal and 
informants to identify disabled children 
concluded that community-based methods 
were consistently less expensive than other 
methods, and that children benefited from 
longer engagement with subsequent com-
munity interventions (226).
 
■
Delivering simple therapeutic strategies 
through rehabilitation workers, or taught 
to individuals with disabilities or a family 
member. Examples include adopting a 
better posture to prevent contractures, and 
training in daily living skills (227).
 
■
Providing individual or group-based edu-
cational, psychological, and emotional sup-
port services for persons with disabilities 
and their families. A study of a CBR model 
for people with chronic schizophrenia in 
rural India found that while the commu-
nity-based rehabilitation model was more 
time- and resource-intensive than outpa-
tient services, it was more efficient, better 
at overcoming economic, cultural, and 
geographic barriers, better for programme 
compliance, and appropriate for resource-
poor settings (211). Another study on CBR 
in Italy found that people with mental ill-
ness experienced improved interpersonal 
relationships and social inclusion. Very iso-
lated people also benefited from the close 
relationship developed between the patient 
and the CBR worker (228).
 
■
Involving the community. In Thailand a 
study in two rural districts building capac-
ity for CBR used group meetings for people 
with disabilities, their families, and com-
munity members to manage rehabilitation 
problems collaboratively (167).
Increasing the use and 
affordability of technology
Assistive devices
Many people around the world acquire assistive 
technology on the open market. Access to assis-
tive technology can be improved by improving 
economies of scale in purchasing and production 
to reduce cost. Centralized, large-scale collective 
purchasing, or consortium buying, nationally 
or regionally, can reduce costs. For example, the 
General Eye and Low Vision Centre in China, in 
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 
has a centralized system that purchases bulk sup-
plies of high-quality but affordable low-vision 
devices. The centre also undertakes quality control 
 118
World report on disability 
and distributes low-vision devices to more than 70 
non-commercial organizations in all regions (229).
Mass production can lower costs if the 
device uses universal design principles, and 
is marketed widely (see Chapter 6 for further 
details). Expanding markets beyond regional or 
national boundaries may generate the volume 
necessary to achieve economies of scale and to 
produce assistive devices at competitive prices 
(230, 231).
Manufacturing or assembling products 
locally, using local materials, can reduce cost 
and ensure that devices are suitable for the con-
text. Locally-made products may be complex 
items such as wheelchairs, or simpler items such 
as seating. Other production options include 
importing the components and assembling the 
final product locally. Some governments offer 
low-interest loans to enterprises producing aids 
for people with disabilities, while others – Viet 
Nam, for example – offer tax exemptions and 
other subsidies to such manufacturers (232).
Reducing duty and import taxes can 
help where countries need to import assistive 
devices – for instance, because the local market 
is too small to sustain local production. Viet 
Nam does not impose import taxes on assis-
tive devices for persons with disabilities (232), 
and Nepal has reduced duties for institutions 
importing assistive devices (233).
Even where free or subsidized schemes 
for provision of assistive devices are available, 
unless professionals and people with disabili-
ties are aware of their existence, they will not 
benefit from them, so information sharing and 
awareness is vital (112, 234).
To ensure that assistive devices are appro-
priate, suitable and of high quality (89, 235–
237), the devices need to:
 
■
Suit the environment. A large number of 
wheelchairs in low-income and middle-
income countries, donated by the interna-
tional community without related services, 
are rejected because they are not appropri-
ate for the user in their environment (238, 
239).
 
■
Be suitable for the user. Poor selection and 
fit of assistive devices, or lack of training in 
their use, may cause further problems and 
secondary conditions. Devices should be 
selected carefully and fitted properly. Users 
should be engaged in assessment and selec-
tion to minimize abandonment because of 
a mismatch between need and device.
 
■
Include adequate follow-up to ensure safe 
and efficient use. A study in rural Finland 
on why prescribed hearing aids remain 
unused found that follow-up care, including 
counselling, resulted in increased and more 
consistent use of the devices. Availability 
and affordability of local maintenance is also 
important. Access to batteries affects ongo-
ing hearing-aid use, for instance. Improved 
hearing-aid battery technologies are needed 
for resource-poor settings. A project in 
Botswana discovered that rechargeable bat-
teries using solar power offered a promising 
option (240).
Telerehabilitation
The use of information, communication, and 
related technologies for rehabilitation is an 
emerging resource that can enhance the capac-
ity and accessibility of rehabilitation measures 
by providing interventions remotely (241–243).
Telerehabilitation technologies include:
 
■
video and teleconferencing technologies in 
accessible formats;
 
■
mobile phones;
 
■
remote data-collection equipment and telem-
onitoring – for example, cardiac monitors.
Technology may be used by people with 
disabilities, rehabilitation workers, peers, 
trainers, supervisors, and community work-
ers and families.
Where the Internet is available, e-health 
(telehealth or telemedicine) and telereha-
bilitation techniques have enabled people in 
remote areas to receive expert treatment from 
 119
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
specialists located elsewhere. Examples of teler-
ehabilitation include:
 
■
telepsychiatry services (244), cardiac reha-
bilitation (245–247), speech and language 
therapy (248, 249), and cognitive reha-
bilitation for people with traumatic brain 
injury (250, 251);
 
■
remote assessments to provide home modi-
fication services to underserved elderly 
people (252);
 
■
training and support of health-care per-
sonnel (210);
 
■
computerized guidelines to help clinicians 
use appropriate interventions (253);
 
■
consultation between tertiary hospital and 
community hospitals for problems related 
to prosthetics, orthotics, and wheelchair 
prescription (254);
 
■
sharing professional expertise between 
countries, as well as at critical times such 
as in the aftermath of a disaster (181).
Growing evidence on the efficacy and 
effectiveness of telerehabilitation shows that 
telerehabilitation leads to similar or better 
clinical outcomes when compared to conven-
tional interventions (255). Further information 
on resource allocation and costs is needed to 
support policy and practice (255).
Expanding research and 
evidence-based practice
Some aspects of rehabilitation have benefited 
from significant research, but others have 
received little attention. Validated research 
on specific rehabilitation interventions and 
programmes for people with disabilities – 
including medical, therapeutic, assistive, and 
community-based rehabilitation – is limited 
(256–258). Rehabilitation lacks randomized 
controlled trials – widely recognized as the 
most rigorous method of testing interventions 
efficacy (259, 260).
Lack of reliable research hinders the 
development and implementation of effective 
rehabilitation policies and programmes. More 
research on rehabilitation in different contexts 
is needed, particularly on (261, 262):
 
■
the link between rehabilitation needs, 
receipt of services, health outcomes (func-
tioning and quality of life), and costs;
 
■
access barriers and facilitators for reha-
bilitation, models of service provision, 
approaches to human resource develop-
ment, financing modalities, among others;
 
■
cost–effectiveness and sustainability of 
rehabilitation measures, including com-
munity-based rehabilitation programmes.
Obstacles to strengthening research capac-
ity include insufficient rehabilitation research-
ers, inadequate infrastructure to train and 
mentor researchers, and the absence of partner-
ships between relevant disciplines and organi-
zations representing persons with disabilities.
Research on rehabilitation has several 
characteristics that differ fundamentally from 
biomedical research, and which can make the 
research difficult:
1. There is no common taxonomy of rehabili-
tation measures (12, 257).
2. Rehabilitation outcomes can be diffi-
cult to characterize and study (257) given 
the breadth and complexity of measures. 
Rehabilitation often employs several meas-
ures simultaneously, and involves workers 
from different disciplines. This can often 
make it difficult to measure changes resulting 
from interventions, such as the specific out-
comes from therapy compared to an assistive 
device where the two are used concurrently.
3. Few valid outcome measures for activity limi-
tations and participation restrictions can be 
reliably scored by different health profession-
als within a multidisciplinary team (263, 264).
4. Sample sizes are often too small. The range 
of disabilities is extremely large, and condi-
tions diverse. Rehabilitation measures are 
 120
World report on disability
highly individualized and based on health 
condition, impairments, and contextual fac-
tors, and often the numbers of people within 
homogeneous groups that can be included 
in research studies are small. This may pre-
clude the use of controlled trials (37).
5. The need to allow for participation of 
people with disabilities – in decision-mak-
ing through the process of rehabilitation 
– requires research designs and methods 
that may not be considered rigorous under 
current grading systems.
6. Research-controlled trials, which require 
blinding and placebo controls, may not be 
feasible or ethical if services are denied for 
control groups (260, 265).
Information and good 
practice guidelines
Information to guide good practice is essential 
for building capacity, strengthening rehabilita-
tion systems, and producing cost-effective ser-
vices and better outcomes.
Good rehabilitation practice uses research 
evidence. It is derived not from single studies, 
but from an interpretation of one or more stud-
ies, or systematic reviews of studies (265–267), 
and provides the best available research on 
techniques, effectiveness, cost–benefits, and 
consumer perspectives. Rehabilitation profes-
sionals can obtain information on good prac-
tices through:
 
■
Guidelines that apply research knowledge, 
usually on a specific health condition, to 
actual practice for clinicians.
 
■
An 
independent 
search 
for 
specific 
interventions.
 
■
Continuing professional education.
 
■
Clinical guidance notes on good practice 
from employers and health organizations.
 
■
Discipline-specific Internet databases that 
appraise the research for clinicians. A wide 
variety of sources, including general biblio-
graphic databases and databases specializ-
ing in rehabilitation research, are available 
on the Internet. Most of these databases 
have already evaluated the research for 
quality, provided ratings of research stud-
ies, and summarized the evidence.
Evidence-based 
practice 
attempts 
to 
apply the most recent, appropriate, and effec-
tive rehabilitation interventions drawn from 
research (259). Barriers to the development of 
guidelines and to the integration of evidence 
into practice include: lack of professional time 
and skills, limited access to evidence (includ-
ing language barriers), difficulty in arriving at 
a consensus, and adapting existing guidelines 
to local contexts. These issues are particularly 
relevant to developing countries (195, 268). A 
study from Botswana, for example, highlights 
the lack of policy implementation and use of 
research findings (269).
Where evidence is lacking, the expertise 
of clinicians and consumers could be used to 
develop consensus-based practice guidance. 
For instance, a “consensus conference” laid the 
foundation for WHO guidelines on the provi-
sion of manual wheelchairs in less-resourced 
settings. The guidelines were developed in 
partnership with the International Society for 
Prosthetics and Orthotics and the US Agency 
for International Development (270).
New 
Zealand’s 
pioneering 
Autistic 
Spectrum Disorder Guidelines, developed in 
response to gaps in service, provide a good 
example of the evidence-based approach. The 
guidelines cover identification and diagnosis of 
conditions, and discuss access to interventions 
and services (271). A wide range of stakehold-
ers were involved in developing the guidelines, 
including people with autism, parents of chil-
dren with autism, medical, educational, and 
community providers, and researchers from 
New Zealand and elsewhere, with particu-
lar attention to the perspectives and experi-
ences of Māori and Pacific people. As a result 
of these guidelines, proven programmes have 
been scaled-up, increasing numbers of people 
trained in assessment and diagnosis of autism, 
 121
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
and increasing numbers of people enquiring 
about and receiving information on the condi-
tion. A range of programmes to help support 
families of people with disabilities have also 
been started (272). Guidelines developed for 
one setting may need adaptation for implemen-
tation in another setting.
Research, data, and information
Better data are needed on service provision, 
service outcomes, and the economic benefits 
of rehabilitation (273). Evidence for the effec-
tiveness of interventions and programmes is 
extremely beneficial to:
 
■
guide policy-makers in developing appro-
priate services
 
■
allow rehabilitation workers to employ 
appropriate interventions
 
■
support 
people 
with 
disabilities 
in 
decision-making.
Long-term longitudinal studies are needed 
to ascertain if expenditure for health and 
health-related services decreases if rehabilita-
tion services are provided. Research is also 
needed on the effect rehabilitation has on fami-
lies and communities, for example, the benefits 
accrued when caregivers return to paid work, 
when support services or ongoing long-term 
care costs are reduced, and when persons with 
disabilities and their families feel less isolated. 
A broad approach is required as benefits of 
rehabilitation often accrue to a different gov-
ernment budget line from that funding reha-
bilitation (207).
Relevant strategies for addressing barriers 
in research include the following:
 
■
Involve end-users in planning and research, 
including people with disabilities and reha-
bilitation workers, to increase the probabil-
ity that the research will be useful (269, 274).
 
■
Use the ICF framework to help develop a 
global common language and assist with 
global comparisons (12, 17). 
 
■
Use a range of methodologies. More 
research such as that by the Cochrane 
Collaboration (Rehabilitation and Related 
Therapies) (208) is needed when feasible. 
Alternative, rigorous research method-
ologies are indicated, including qualitative 
research, prospective observational cohort 
design (259), or high-quality, quasi-experi-
mental designs that suit the research ques-
tions (265), including research studies on 
CBR (173).
 
■
Systematically disseminate results so that: 
policy across government reflects research 
findings, clinical practice can be evidence-
based, and people with disabilities and 
their families can influence the use of 
research (269).
 
■
Enhance the clinical and research environ-
ment. Providing international learning and 
research opportunities will often involve 
linking universities in developing countries 
with those in high-income and middle-
income countries (68). Countries in a par-
ticular region, such as South-East Asia, can 
also collaborate on research projects (275).
Conclusion and 
recommendations
The priority is to ensure access to appropriate, 
timely, affordable, and high-quality rehabilita-
tion interventions, consistent with the CRPD, 
for all those who need them.
In middle-income and high-income coun-
tries with established rehabilitation services, 
the focus should be on improving efficiency and 
effectiveness, by expanding the coverage and 
improving the relevance, quality, and afford-
ability of services.
In lower-income countries the focus should 
be on introducing and gradually expanding 
rehabilitation services, prioritizing cost-effec-
tive approaches.
 122
World report on disability
A broad range of stakeholders have roles to 
play:
 
■
Governments should develop, implement, 
and monitor policies, regulatory mecha-
nisms, and standards for rehabilitation 
services, as well as promoting equal access 
to those services.
 
■
Service providers should provide the high-
est quality of rehabilitation services.
 
■
Other stakeholders (users, professional 
organizations etc.) should increase aware-
ness, participate in policy development, 
and monitor implementation.
 
■
International cooperation can help share 
good and promising practices and provide 
technical assistance to countries that are 
introducing and expanding rehabilitation 
services.
Policies and regulatory mechanisms
 
■
Assess existing policies, systems, services, 
and regulatory mechanisms, identifying 
gaps and priorities to improve provision.
 
■
Develop or revise national rehabilitation 
plans, in accord with situation analysis, to 
maximize functioning within the popula-
tion in a financially sustainable manner.
 
■
Where policies exist, make the necessary 
changes to ensure consistency with the 
CRPD.
 
■
Where policies do not exist, develop poli-
cies, legislation and regulatory mechanisms 
coherent with the country context and with 
the CRPD. Prioritize setting of minimum 
standards and monitoring.
Financing
Develop funding mechanisms to increase cov-
erage and access to affordable rehabilitation 
services. Depending on each country’s specific 
circumstances, these could include a mix of:
 
■
Public funding targeted at persons with 
disabilities, with priority given to essential 
elements of rehabilitation including assis-
tive devices and people with disability who 
cannot afford to pay.
 
■
Promoting equitable access to rehabilita-
tion through health insurance.
 
■
Expanding social insurance coverage.
 
■
Public-private partnership for service 
provision.
 
■
Reallocation and redistribution of existing 
resources.
 
■
Support through international cooperation 
including in humanitarian crises.
Human resources
Increase the numbers and capacity of human 
resources for rehabilitation. Relevant strategies 
include:
 
■
Where specialist rehabilitation personnel 
are in short supply, develop standards in 
training for different types and levels of 
rehabilitation personnel that can enable 
career development and continuing educa-
tion across levels.
 
■
Establish strategies to build training 
capacity in accord with national rehabili-
tation plans.
 
■
Identify incentives and mechanisms for 
retaining personnel especially in rural 
and remote areas.
 
■
Train non-specialist health professionals 
(doctors, nurses, primary care workers) 
on disability and rehabilitation relevant to 
their roles and responsibilities.
Service delivery
Where there are none, or only limited, services 
introduce minimum services within existing 
 123
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
health and social service provision. Relevant 
strategies include:
 
■
Developing basic rehabilitation services 
within the existing health infrastructure.
 
■
Strengthening 
rehabilitation 
service 
provision 
through 
community-based 
rehabilitation.
 
■
Prioritizing early identification and inter-
vention strategies using community work-
ers and health personnel.
Where services exist, expand service cov-
erage and improve service quality. Relevant 
strategies include:
 
■
Developing models of service provision 
that encourage multidisciplinary and cli-
ent-centred approaches.
 
■
Ensuring availability of high quality ser-
vices in the community.
 
■
Improving efficiency by improved coordi-
nation between levels and across sectors.
In all settings, three principles are relevant:
 
■
Include service-users in decision-making.
 
■
Base interventions on sound research 
evidence.
 
■
Monitor and evaluate outcomes.
Technology
Increase access to assistive technology that is 
appropriate, sustainable, affordable, and acces-
sible. Relevant strategies include:
 
■
Establishing service provision for assistive 
devices.
 
■
Training users and following up.
 
■
Promoting local production.
 
■
Reducing duty and import tax.
 
■
Improving economies of scale based on 
established need.
To further enhance capacity, accessibility 
and coordination of rehabilitation measures the 
use of information and communication tech-
nologies - telerehabilitation - can be explored. 
Research and evidence-
based practice
 
■
Increase research and data on needs, type 
and quality of services provided, and 
unmet need (disaggregated by sex, age, and 
associated health condition).
 
■
Improve access to evidence-based guidelines 
on cost-effective rehabilitation measures.
 
■
Disaggregate expenditure data on rehabilita-
tion services from other health care services.
 
■
Assess the service outcomes and economic 
benefits of rehabilitation.
References
1. 
Stucki G, Cieza A, Melvin J. The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF): a unifying model 
for the conceptual description of the rehabilitation strategy. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine: official journal of the UEMS 
European Board of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, 2007,39:279-285. doi:10.2340/16501977-0041 PMID:17468799
2. 
Swedish disability policy: services and care for people with functional impairments: habilitation, rehabilitation, and technical 
aids [Article No. 2006–114–24]. Stockholm, Socialstyrelsen, The National Board of Health and Welfare, 2006 (http://www.
socialstyrelsen.se/Lists/Artikelkatalog/Attachments/9548/2006-114-24_200611424.pdf, accessed 11 May 2010).
3. 
Llewellyn G et al. Development and psychometric properties of the Family Life Interview. Journal of Applied Research in 
Intellectual Disabilities, 2010,23:52-62. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2009.00545.x
4. 
Learning disabilities and young children: identification and intervention [Fact sheet]. New York, National Joint Committee 
on Learning Disabilities, 2006 (http://www.ldonline.org/article/Learning_Disabilities_and_Young_Children%3A_
Identification_and_Intervention?theme=print, accessed 2 May 2010).
5. 
Storbeck C, Pittman P. Early intervention in South Africa: moving beyond hearing screening. International Journal of 
Audiology, 2008,47:Suppl 1S36-S43. doi:10.1080/14992020802294040 PMID:18781512
6. 
Beswick AD et al. Complex interventions to improve physical function and maintain independent living in elderly people: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet, 2008,371:725-735. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60342-6 PMID:18313501
7. 
Velema JP, Ebenso B, Fuzikawa PL. Evidence for the effectiveness of rehabilitation-in-the-community programmes. 
 124
World report on disability 
Leprosy Review, 2008,79:65-82. PMID:18540238
8. 
Norris G et al. Addressing Aboriginal mental health issues on the Tiwi Islands. Australasian Psychiatry: bulletin of Royal 
Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists, 2007,15:310-314. doi:10.1080/10398560701441687 PMID:17612884
9. 
Mola E, De Bonis JA, Giancane R. Integrating patient empowerment as an essential characteristic of the discipline of gen-
eral practice/family medicine. The European Journal of General Practice, 2008,14:89-94. doi:10.1080/13814780802423463 
PMID:18821139
10. Steiner WA et al. Use of the ICF model as a clinical problem-solving tool in physical therapy and rehabilitation medicine. 
Physical Therapy, 2002,82:1098-1107. PMID:12405874
11. Bickenbach JE et al. Models of disablement, universalism and the international classification of impairments, disabilities 
and handicaps. Social Science & Medicine (1982), 1999,48:1173-1187. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(98)00441-9 PMID:10220018
12. Stucki G, Reinhardt JD, Grimby G. Organizing human functioning and rehabilitation research into distinct scientific fields. 
Part II: Conceptual descriptions and domains for research. Journal of Rehabilitative Medicine: official journal of the UEMS 
European Board of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, 2007,39:299-307. doi:10.2340/16501977-0051 PMID:17468802
13. Rimmer JH. Use of the ICF in identifying factors that impact participation in physical activity/rehabilitation among people 
with disabilities. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2006,28:1087-1095. doi:10.1080/09638280500493860 PMID:16950739
14. World Health Organization International classification of functioning, disability, and health. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2001.
15. Stucki G, Ustün TB, Melvin J. Applying the ICF for the acute hospital and early post-acute rehabilitation facilities. Disability 
and Rehabilitation, 2005,27:349-352. doi:10.1080/09638280400013941 PMID:16040535
16. Stucki G et al. Rationale and principles of early rehabilitation care after an acute injury or illness. Disability and Rehabilitation, 
2005,27:353-359. doi:10.1080/09638280400014105 PMID:16040536
17. Rauch A, Cieza A, Stucki G. How to apply the International Classification of Functioning Disability and health (ICF) for 
rehabilitation management in clinical practice. European Journal of Physical Rehabilitation Medicine, 2008,44:439-442.
18. Forster A et al. Rehabilitation for older people in long-term care. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 
2009,1CD004294- PMID:19160233
19. Khan F et al. Multidisciplinary rehabilitation for adults with multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
(Online), 2007,2CD006036- PMID:17443610
20. Lacasse Y et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews (Online), 2006,4CD003793- PMID:17054186
21. Davies EJ et al. Exercise based rehabilitation for heart failure. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 
2010,4CD003331- PMID:20393935
22. Iyengar KP et al. Targeted early rehabilitation at home after total hip and knee joint replacement: Does it work? Disability 
and Rehabilitation, 2007,29:495-502. doi:10.1080/09638280600841471 PMID:17364804
23. Choi JH et al. Multimodal early rehabilitation and predictors of outcome in survivors of severe traumatic brain injury. The 
Journal of Trauma, 2008,65:1028-1035. doi:10.1097/TA.0b013e31815eba9b PMID:19001970
24. Petruševičienė D, Krisciūnas A. Evaluation of activity and effectiveness of occupational therapy in stroke patients at the 
early stage of rehabilitation. [Kaunas]Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania), 2008,44:216-224. PMID:18413989
25. Scivoletto G, Morganti B, Molinari M. Early versus delayed inpatient spinal cord injury rehabilitation: an Italian study. 
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2005,86:512-516. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2004.05.021 PMID:15759237
26. Nielsen PR et al. Costs and quality of life for prehabilitation and early rehabilitation after surgery of the lumbar spine. BMC 
Health Services Research, 2008,8:209- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-209 PMID:18842157
27. Global Early Intervention Network [website]. (http://www.atsweb.neu.edu/cp/ei/, accessed 11 May 2010).
28. Roberts G et al. Rates of early intervention services in very preterm children with developmental disabilities at age 2 years. 
Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health, 2008,44:276-280. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1754.2007.01251.x PMID:17999667
29. Clini EM et al. Effects of early inpatient rehabilitation after acute exacerbation of COPD. Respiratory Medicine, 2009,103:1526-
1531. doi:10.1016/j.rmed.2009.04.011 PMID:19447015
30. Rahman A et al. Cluster randomized trial of a parent-based intervention to support early development of children in a low-
income country. Child: Care, Health and Development, 2009,35:56-62. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2214.2008.00897.x PMID:18991970
31. Hadders-Algra M. General movements: a window for early identification of children at high risk for developmental disor-
ders. The Journal of Pediatrics, 2004,145:Supp112-18. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.05.017 PMID:15238899
32. Overview of Early Intervention. Washington, National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities, 2009 (http://
www.nichcy.org/babies/overview/Pages/default.aspx, accessed 2 May 2010).
33. Finch E et al. Physical rehabilitation outcome measures: a guide to enhanced clinical decision-making, 2nd editon. Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canadian Physiotherapy Association, 2002.
34. Scherer MJ. Assessing the benefits of using assistive technologies and other supports for thinking, remembering and 
learning. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2005,27:731-739. doi:10.1080/09638280400014816 PMID:16096225
 125
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
35. Scherer MJ et al. Predictors of assistive technology use: the importance of personal and psychosocial factors. Disability 
and Rehabilitation, 2005,27:1321-1331. doi:10.1080/09638280500164800 PMID:16298935
36. Turner-Stokes L et al. Evidence-based guidelines for clinical management of traumatic brain injury: British national guide-
lines. London, British Society of Rehabilitation Medicine Publications Unit, Royal College of Physicians, 2005.
37. Gutenbrunner C, Ward AB, Chamberlain MA. White book on Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine in Europe. Journal of 
Rehabilitation Medicine: official journal of the UEMS European Board of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, 2007,45:Suppl6-
47. PMID:17206318
38. Pirani S et al. Towards effective Ponseti clubfoot care: the Uganda sustainable clubfoot care project. Clinical Orthopaedics 
and Related Research, 2009,467:1154-1163. doi:10.1007/s11999-009-0759-0 PMID:19308648
39. Tindall AJ et al. Results of manipulation of idiopathic clubfoot deformity in Malawi by orthopaedic clinical officers using 
the Ponseti method: a realistic alternative for the developing world? Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics, 2005,25:627-629. 
doi:10.1097/01.bpo.0000164876.97949.6b PMID:16199944
40. Wallen M, Gillies D. Intra-articular steroids and splints/rest for children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis and adults with 
rheumatoid arthritis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 2006,1CD002824- PMID:16437446
41. Shah N, Lewis M. Shoulder adhesive capsulitis: systematic review of randomised trials using multiple corticosteroid injections. 
The British Journal of General Practice: the journal of the Royal College of General Practitioners, 2007,57:662-667. PMID:17688763
42. Bellamy N et al. Intraarticular corticosteroid for treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews (Online), 2006,2CD005328- PMID:16625636
43. Lambert RG et al. Steroid injection for osteoarthritis of the hip: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. 
Arthritis and Rheumatism, 2007,56:2278-2287. doi:10.1002/art.22739 PMID:17599747
44. Manheimer E et al. Meta-analysis: acupuncture for osteoarthritis of the knee. Annals of Internal Medicine, 2007,146:868-
877. PMID:17577006
45. Tomassini V et al. Comparison of the effects of acetyl L-carnitine and amantadine for the treatment of fatigue in multiple 
sclerosis: results of a pilot, randomised, double-blind, crossover trial. Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 2004,218:103-
108. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2003.11.005 PMID:14759641
46. Kranke P et al. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for chronic wounds. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 
2004,2CD004123- PMID:15106239
47. Quinn TJ et al. European Stroke Organisation (ESO) Executive CommitteeESO Writing CommitteeEvidence-based stroke 
rehabilitation: an expanded guidance document from the European Stroke Organisation (ESO) guidelines for manage-
ment of ischaemic stroke and transient ischaemic attack 2008. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine: official journal of the 
UEMS European Board of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, 2009,41:99-111. doi:10.2340/16501977-0301 PMID:19225703
48. Heywood F. Money well spent: the effectiveness and value of housing adaptations. Bristol, The Policy Press, 2001.
49. Fransen M, McConnell S, Bell M. Exercise for osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
(Online), 2003,3CD004286- PMID:12918008
50. Jolliffe J et al. Exercise-based rehabilitation for coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 
2009,1CD001800-
51. Rees K et al. Exercise based rehabilitation for heart failure. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 
2004,3CD003331- PMID:15266480
52. Legg L et al. Occupational therapy for patients with problems in personal activities of daily living after stroke: systematic 
review of randomised trials. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 2007,335:922- doi:10.1136/bmj.39343.466863.55 PMID:17901469
53. McConachie H et al. Difficulties for mothers in using an early intervention service for children with cerebral palsy in 
Bangladesh. Child: Care, Health and Development, 2001,27:1-12. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2214.2001.00207.x PMID:11136337
54. Heiman JR. Psychologic treatments for female sexual dysfunction: are they effective and do we need them? Archives of 
Sexual Behavior, 2002,31:445-450. doi:10.1023/A:1019848310142 PMID:12238613
55. Alexander MS, Alexander CJ. Recommendations for discussing sexuality after spinal cord injury/dysfunction in children, 
adolescents, and adults. The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine, 2007,30:Suppl 1S65-S70. PMID:17874689
56. Sipski ML et al. Effects of vibratory stimulation on sexual response in women with spinal cord injury. Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research and Development, 2005,42:609-616. doi:10.1682/JRRD.2005.01.0030 PMID:16586186
57. Waddell G, Burton AK, Kendall NAS. Vocational rehabilitation: what works, for whom and when? London, The Stationery 
Office, 2008.
58. Employment assistance for people with mental illness. Literature review. Commonwealth of Australia, 2008 (http://workplace.
gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/39A1C4CE-0DE3-4049-A410-8B61D5509C#(/0/MentalHealthEmplomentAssistanceLiteratureReview_
web.doc, accessed 7 November 2008).
59. Assistive Technology Act. United States Congress 2004 (Public Law 108–364) (http://www.ataporg.org/atap/atact_law.
pdf, accessed 12 December 2010)
 126
World report on disability
60. Hunt PC et al. Demographic and socioeconomic factors associated with disparity in wheelchair customizability among 
people with traumatic spinal cord injury. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2004,85:1859-1864. doi:10.1016/j.
apmr.2004.07.347 PMID:15520982
61. Evans JJ et al. Who makes good use of memory aids? Results of a survey of people with acquired brain injury. Journal of 
the International Neuropsychological Society: JINS, 2003,9:925-935. doi:10.1017/S1355617703960127 PMID:14632251
62. Olusanya BO. Classification of childhood hearing impairment: implications for rehabilitation in developing countries. 
Disability and Rehabilitation, 2004,26:1221-1228. doi:10.1080/09638280410001724852 PMID:15371023
63. Persson J et al. Costs and effects of prescribing walkers. Sweden, Center for Technology Assessment, 2007 (CMT rapport 2007:3).
64. Spillman BC. Changes in elderly disability rates and the implications for health care utilization and cost. The Milbank 
Quarterly, 2004,82:157-194. doi:10.1111/j.0887-378X.2004.00305.x PMID:15016247
65. Agree EM, Freedman VA. A comparison of assistive technology and personal care in alleviating disability and unmet need. 
The Gerontologist, 2003,43:335-344. PMID:12810897
66. Basavaraj V. Hearing aid provision in developing countries: an Indian case study. In: McPherson B, Brouillette R, eds. 
Audiology in developing countries. Boston, MA, Nova Science Publishers, 2008a.
67. Haig AJ. Developing world rehabilitation strategy II: flex the muscles, train the brain, and adapt to the impairment. 
Disability and Rehabilitation, 2007,29:977-979. doi:10.1080/09638280701480369 PMID:17577733
68. Tinney 
MJ 
et al. 
Medical 
rehabilitation 
in 
Ghana. 
Disability 
and 
Rehabilitation, 
2007,29:921-927. 
doi:10.1080/09638280701240482 PMID:17577726
69. Buntin MB. Access to postacute rehabilitation. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2007,88:1488-1493. 
doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2007.07.023 PMID:17964894
70. Ottenbacher KJ, Graham JE. The state-of-the-science: access to postacute care rehabilitation services. A review. Archives 
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2007,88:1513-1521. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2007.06.761 PMID:17964898
71. Kephart G, Asada Y. Need-based resource allocation: different need indicators, different results? BMC Health Services 
Research, 2009,9:122- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-9-122 PMID:19622159
72. K Graham S, Cameron ID. A survey of rehabilitation services in Australia. Australian Health Review: a publication of the 
Australian Hospital Association, 2008,32:392-399. doi:10.1071/AH080392 PMID:18666866
73. Darrah J, Magil-Evans J, Adkins R. How well are we doing? Families of adolescents or young adults with cerebral palsy 
share their perceptions of service delivery. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2002,24:542-549. doi:10.1080/09638280210121359 
PMID:12171644
74. Elrod CS, DeJong G. Determinants of utilization of physical rehabilitation services for persons with chronic and disa-
bling conditions: an exploratory study. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2008,89:114-120. doi:10.1016/j.
apmr.2007.08.122 PMID:18164340
75. Kroll T, Neri MT. Experiences with care co-ordination among people with cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, or spinal cord 
injury. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2003,25:1106-1114. doi:10.1080/0963828031000152002 PMID:12944150
76. Neri MT, Kroll T. Understanding the consequences of access barriers to health care: experiences of adults with disabilities. 
Disability and Rehabilitation, 2003,25:85-96. PMID:12554383
77. Dejong G et al. The organization and financing of health services for persons with disabilities. The Milbank Quarterly, 
2002,80:261-301. doi:10.1111/1468-0009.t01-1-00004 PMID:12101873
78. Chi MJ et al. Social determinants of emergency utilization associated with patterns of care. Health Policy (Amsterdam, 
Netherlands), 2009,93:137-142. PMID:19665250
79. Hatano T et al. Unmet needs of patients with Parkinson’s disease: interview survey of patients and caregivers. The Journal 
of International Medical Research, 2009,37:717-726. PMID:19589255
80. Fulda KG et al. Unmet mental health care needs for children with special health care needs stratified by socioeconomic 
status. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 2009,14:190-199. doi:10.1111/j.1475-3588.2008.00521.x
81. The Global Burden of Disease. 2004 Update. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008a. (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/
global_burden_disease/2004_report_update/en/index.htm, accessed 2 May 2010).
82. Landry MD, Ricketts TC, Verrier MC. The precarious supply of physical therapists across Canada: exploring national trends 
in health human resources (1991 to 2005). Human Resources for Health, 2007,5:23-http://www.human-resources-health.
com/content/5/1/23 doi:10.1186/1478-4491-5-23 PMID:17894885
83. Bo W et al. The demand for rehabilitation therapists in Beijing health organizations over the next five years. Disability and 
Rehabilitation, 2008,30:375-380. doi:10.1080/09638280701336496 PMID:17852203
84. Lysack JT et al. Designing appropriate rehabilitation technology: a mobility device for women with ambulatory disabili-
ties in India. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Rehabilitationsforschung. Revue 
Internationale de Recherches de Réadaptation, 1999,22:1-9. PMID:10207746
 127
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
85. Israsena P, Dubsok P, Pan-Ngum S. A study of low-cost, robust assistive listening system (ALS) based on digital wire-
less technology. Disability and Rehabilitation. Assistive Technology, 2008,3:295-301. doi:10.1080/17483100802323392 
PMID:19117189
86. Lamoureux EL et al. The effectiveness of low-vision rehabilitation on participation in daily living and quality of life. 
Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 2007,48:1476-1482. doi:10.1167/iovs.06-0610 PMID:17389474
87. Durkin M. The epidemiology of developmental disabilities in low-income countries. Mental Retardation and Developmental 
Disabilities Research Reviews, 2002,8:206-211. doi:10.1002/mrdd.10039 PMID:12216065
88. Deafness and hearing impairment. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010 (Fact sheet No. 300) (http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs300/en/print.html, accessed 7 June 2010)
89. McPherson B, Brouillette R. A fair hearing for all: providing appropriate amplification in developing countries. 
Communication Disorders Quarterly, 2004,25:219-223. doi:10.1177/15257401040250040601
90. Guidelines for hearing aids and services for developing countries. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
91. Lindstrom A. Appropriate technologies for assistive devices in low-income countries. In: Hsu JD, Michael JW, Fisk JR, eds. 
AAOS Atlas of orthoses and assistive devices. Philadelphia, PA, Mosby/Eslevier, 2008.
92. World Health Organization, International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics. Guidelines for training personnel in devel-
oping countries for prosthetics and orthotics services. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005.
93. Atijosan O et al. The orthopaedic needs of children in Rwanda: results from a national survey and orthopaedic service 
implications. Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics, 2009,29:948-951. PMID:19934715
94. Loeb ME, Eide AH, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Malawi: a national representative study. 
Oslo, SINFEF, 2004.
95. Eide AH, Yusman K. Living conditions among people with disabilities in Mozambique: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2009.
96. Eide AH et al. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zimbabwe: a representative regional survey. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2003.
97. Eide AH, Loeb ME, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zambia: a national representative study. 
Oslo, SINTEF, 2006.
98. Eide AH, van Rooy G, Loeb ME. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Namibia: a representative national 
survey. Oslo, SINTEF, 2003.
99. Eide AH, Øderud T. Assistive technology in low income countries. In: Maclachlan M, Swartz L, eds. Disability and interna-
tional development, Dordrecht, the Netherlands, Springer, 2009.
100. Eldar R et al. Rehabilitation medicine in countries of central/eastern Europe. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2008,30:134-141. 
doi:10.1080/09638280701191776 PMID:17852214
101. Zongjie Y, Hong D, Zhongxin X, Hui X. A research study into the requirements of disabled residents for rehabilitation 
services in Beijing. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2007,29:825-833. doi:10.1080/09638280600919657 PMID:17457741
102. Qiu ZY. Rehabilitation need of people with disability in China: analysis and strategies [in Chinese]. Beijing, Huaxia Press, 2007.
103. Carlson D, Ehrlich N. Assistive Technology and information technology use and need by persons with disabilities in the 
United States, 2001. Washington, DC, National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research, U.S. Department of 
Education, 2005 (http://www.ed.gov/rschstat/research/pubs/at-use/at-use-2001.pdf, accessed 27 April 2007).
104. Chiang PPC. The Global mapping of low vision services. Melbourne, University of Melbourne, 2010.
105. Miller AR et al. Waiting for child developmental and rehabilitation services: an overview of issues and needs. Developmental 
Medicine and Child Neurology, 2008,50:815-821. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03113.x PMID:18811706
106. Passalent LA, Landry MD, Cott CA. Wait times for publicly funded outpatient and community physiotherapy and occu-
pational therapy services: implications for the increasing number of persons with chronic conditions in Ontario, Canada. 
Physiotherapy Canada. Physiothérapie Canada, 2009,61:5-14. doi:10.3138/physio.61.1.5 PMID:20145747
107. El Sharkawy G, Newton C, Hartley S. Attitudes and practices of families and health care personnel toward children with 
epilepsy in Kilifi, Kenya. Epilepsy & Behavior: E&B, 2006,8:201-212. doi:10.1016/j.yebeh.2005.09.011 PMID:16275111
108. Unmet need for disability services: effectiveness of funding and remaining shortfall. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health 
and Welfare, 2002.
109. Cott C, Passalent LA, Borsey E. Ontario community rehabilitation: a profile of demand and provision. Toronto, Arthritis 
Community Research & Evaluation Unit, 2007 (Working Paper 07–1-A) (http://www.acreu.ca/pub/working-paper-07-01.
html, accessed 30 April 2010).
110. South-North Centre for Dialogue and Development. Global survey of government actions on the implementation of the 
standard rules of the equalisation of opportunities for persons with disabilities. Amman, Office of the UN Special Rapporteur 
on Disabilities, 2006:141.
 128
World report on disability 
111. Middleton JW et al. Issues and challenges for development of a sustainable service model for people with spinal cord injury 
living in rural regions. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2008,89:1941-1947. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2008.04.011 
PMID:18929022
112. People with disabilities in India: from commitments to outcomes. Washington, World Bank, 2009. (http://imagebank.world-
bank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2009/09/02/000334955_20090902041543/Rendered/PDF/502090WP0Pe
opl1Box0342042B01PUBLIC1.pdf, accessed 8 December 2010).
113. Birth defects: revision of draft resolution considered by the Executive Board at its 125th session reflecting comments and pro-
posals made by Bahamas, Canada, Chile, Mauritius, New Zealand, Oman and Paraguay. Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2009 (EB 126/10 Add. 1) (http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/EB126/B126_10Add1-en.pdf, accessed 2 May 2010).
114. de Souza N et al. The determination of compliance with an early intervention programme for high-risk babies in India. 
Child: Care, Health and Development, 2006,32:63-72. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2214.2006.00576.x PMID:16398792
115. Cooper SA et al. Improving the health of people with intellectual disabilities: outcomes of a health screening programme after 
1 year. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2006,50:667-677. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00824.x PMID:16901294
116. World Health Organization, Swedish Organizations of Disabled Persons International Aid Association. Part 1. Community-
Based Rehabilitation as we experienced it ... voices of persons with disabilities. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002.
117. Bigelow J et al. A picture of amputees and the prosthetic situation in Haiti. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2004,26:246-252. 
doi:10.1080/09638280310001644915 PMID:15164958
118. Lilja M et al. Disability policy in Sweden: policies concerning assistive technology and home modification services. Journal 
of Disability Policies Studies, 2003,14:130-135. doi:10.1177/10442073030140030101
119. Disability and rehabilitation status review of disability issues and rehabilitation services in 29 African Countries. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2004.
120. Modernizing sickness and disability policy: OECD thematic review on sickness, disability and work issues paper and progress 
report. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2008.
121. Digiacomo M et al. Health information system linkage and coordination are critical for increasing access to secondary 
prevention in Aboriginal health: a qualitative study. Quality in Primary Care, 2010,18:17-26. PMID:20359409
122. Hilberink SR et al. Health issues in young adults with cerebral palsy: towards a life-span perspective. Journal of 
Rehabilitation Medicine: official journal of the UEMS European Board of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, 2007,39:605-
611. doi:10.2340/16501977-0103 PMID:17896051
123. Holdsworth LK, Webster V, McFadyen A. Self-referral to physiotherapy: deprivation and geographical setting – is there a 
relationship? Results of a national trial. Physiotherapy, 2006,92:16-25. doi:10.1016/j.physio.2005.11.003
124. Holdsworth LK, Webster V, McFadyen A. What are the costs to NHS Scotland of self-referral to physiotherapy? Results of 
a national trial. Physiotherapy, 2007,93:3-11. doi:10.1016/j.physio.2006.05.005
125. Holdsworth LK, Webster V, McFadyen A. Physiotherapists’ and general practitioners’ views of self-referral and physi-
otherapy scope of practice: results from a national trial. Physiotherapy, 2008,94:236-243. doi:10.1016/j.physio.2008.01.006
126. Eldar R. Integrated institution–community rehabilitation in developed countries: a proposal. Disability and Rehabilitation, 
2000,22:266-274. doi:10.1080/096382800296728 PMID:10864129
127. Sickness, disability and work: keeping on track in the economic downturn. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, 2009 (Background paper).
128. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Geneva, United Nations, 2006 (http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/
disabilities-convention.htm, accessed 16 May 2009).
129. Palermo GB. The 1978 Italian mental health law–a personal evaluation: a review. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 
1991,84:99-102. PMID:1999825
130. Barbui C, Tansella M. Thirtieth birthday of the Italian psychiatric reform: research for identifying its active ingredients is 
urgently needed. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 2008,62:1021- doi:10.1136/jech.2008.077859 PMID:19008365
131. de Girolamo G et al. Compulsory admissions in Italy: results of a national survey. International Journal of Mental Health, 
2008,37:46-60. doi:10.2753/IMH0020-7411370404
132. McColl MA, Boyce W. Disability advocacy organizations: a descriptive framework. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2003,25:380-
392. doi:10.1080/0963828021000058521 PMID:12745947
133. Nunez G. Culture and disabilities. In: Drum CE, Krahn GL, Bersani H. Disability and Public Health, Washington, American 
Public Health Association, 2009:65–78.
134. The Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities. New York, United Nations, 1993 (http://
www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/dissre00.htm, accessed 16 May 2009).
135. Systems thinking for health systems strengthening. Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2009b
136. Dunleavy K. Physical therapy education and provision in Cambodia: a framework for choice of systems for development 
projects. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2007,29:903-920. doi:10.1080/09638280701240433 PMID:17577725
 129
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
137. Annual Report 2009. Phnom Penh, Disability Action Council, 2009. (http://www.dac.org.kh/cambodia_disability_
resource_center/download/local-doc/DAC_Annual_Report_2009.pdf, accessed 12 July 2010).
138. Crowley JS, Elias R. Medicaid’s role for people with disabilities. Washington, DC, Henry Kaiser Foundation, 2003.
139. Albrecht G, Seelman K, Bury M. Handbook of Disability Studies. London, Sage, 2003.
140. Sooful P, Van Dijk C, Avenant C. The maintenance and utilisation of government fitted hearing aids. Central European 
Journal of Medicine, 2009,4:110-118. doi:10.2478/s11536-009-0014-9
141. Veehof MM et al. What determines the possession of assistive devices among patients with rheumatic diseases? The influence 
of the country-related health care system. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2006,28:205-211. doi:10.1080/09638280500305064 
PMID:16467055
142. Haig AJ et al. The practice of physical and rehabilitation medicine in sub-Saharan Africa and Antarctica: a white paper or 
a black mark? Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine: official journal of the UEMS European Board of Physical and Rehabilitation 
Medicine, 2009,41:401-405. doi:10.2340/16501977-0367 PMID:19479150
143. Woo J et al. In patient stroke rehabilitation efficiency: influence of organization of service delivery and staff numbers. BMC 
Health Services Research, 2008,8:86- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-86 PMID:18416858
144. Mock C et al., eds. Strengthening care for the injured: Success stories and lessons learned from around the world. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2010.
145. Injuries, violence and disabilities biennial report 2008–2009. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
146. Injuries, violence and disabilities biennial report 2006–2007. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
147. Injuries, violence and disabilities biennial report 2004–2005. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.
148. Massive need for rehabilitation and orthopedic equipment. Takoma Park, MD, Handicap International, 2010 (http://www.
reliefweb.int/rw/rwb.nsf/db900SID/VVOS-7ZVSU6?OpenDocument, accessed 2 May 2010).
149. Goudge J et al. Affordability, availability and acceptability barriers to health care for the chronically ill: longitudinal case 
studies from South Africa. BMC Health Services Research, 2009,9:75- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-9-75 PMID:19426533
150. Brouillette R. The rehabilitation of hearing loss: challenges and opportunities in developing countries. In: McPherson B, 
Brouillette R, eds. Audiology in developing countries. Boston, MA, Nova Science Publishers, 2008b.
151. Dal Poz M et al., eds. Handbook on monitoring and evaluation of human resources for health – with special applications for 
low- and middle-income countries. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009.
152. Stanmore E, Waterman H. Crossing professional and organizational boundaries: the implementation of generic rehabili-
tation assistants within three organizations in the northwest of England. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2007,29:751-759. 
doi:10.1080/09638280600902836 PMID:17453998
153. Al Mahdy H. Rehabilitation and community services in Iran. Clinician in Management, 2002,11:57-60.
154. Wilson RD, Lewis SA, Murray PK. Trends in the rehabilitation therapist workforce in underserved areas: 1980–2000. 
The Journal of Rural Health: official journal of the American Rural Health Association and the National Rural Health Care 
Association, 2009,25:26-32. doi:10.1111/j.1748-0361.2009.00195.x PMID:19166558
155. O’Toole K, Schoo AM. Retention policies for allied health professionals in rural areas: a survey of private practitioners. 
Rural and Remote Health, 2010,10:1331- PMID:20443649
156. MacDowell M et al. A national view of rural health workforce issues in the USA. Rural and Remote Health, 
2010,10:1531- PMID:20658893
157. Saxena S et al. Resources for mental health: scarcity, inequity, and inefficiency. Lancet, 2007,370:878-889. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)61239-2 PMID:17804062
158. Global atlas of the health workforce. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (http://www.who.int/globalatlas/autologin/
hrh_login.asp, accessed 1 June 2009).
159. Occupational therapy human resources project 2010. Melbourne, World Federation of Occupational Therapists, 2010.
160. Wickford J, Hultberg J, Rosberg S. Physiotherapy in Afghanistan–needs and challenges for development. Disability and 
Rehabilitation, 2008,30:305-313. doi:10.1080/09638280701257205 PMID:17852310
161. Higgs J, Refshauge K, Ellis E. Portrait of the physiotherapy profession. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 2001,15:79-89. 
doi:10.1080/13561820020022891 PMID:11705073
162. World Confederation for Physical Therapy [website]. (http://www.wcpt.org/, accessed 8 December 2010)
163. World Federation of Occupational Therapists [website]. (http://www.wfot.org/schoolLinks.asp, accessed 8 December 2010).
164. International Association of Logopedics and Phoniatrics [website]. (http://ialp.info/joomla/, accessed 8 December 2010).
165. International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics [website]. (http://www.ispoint.org/, accessed 8 December 2010).
166. Leavitt R. The development of rehabilitation services and suggestions for public policy in developing nations. Pediatric 
Physical Therapy, 1995,7:112-117. doi:10.1097/00001577-199500730-00005
167. Nualnetre N. Physical therapy roles in community based rehabilitation: a case study in rural areas of north eastern 
Thailand. Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 2009,20:1-12.
 130
World report on disability 
168. Armstrong J, Ager A. Physiotherapy in Afghanistan: an analysis of current challenges. Disability and Rehabilitation, 
2006,28:315-322. doi:10.1080/09638280500160337 PMID:16492626
169. Smyth J. Occupational therapy training in Uganda: the birth of a profession. World Federation of Occupational Therapists 
Bulletin, 1996,34:26-31.
170. The education of mid-level rehabilitation workers: Recommendations from country experiences. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 1992.
171. Gwyer J. Personnel resources in physical therapy: an analysis of supply, career patterns, and methods to enhance avail-
ability. Physical Therapy, 1995,75:56-65, discussion 65–67. PMID:7809199
172. Annual progress report to WHO. Brussels, International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics, 2010.
173. Hartley S et al. Community-based rehabilitation: opportunity and challenge. Lancet, 2009,374:1803-1804. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(09)62036-5 PMID:19944850
174. Penny N et al. Community-based rehabilitation and orthopaedic surgery for children with motor impairment in an African 
context. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2007,29:839-843. doi:10.1080/09638280701240052 PMID:17577718
175. Increasing access to health workers in remote and rural areas through improved retention: Global policy recommendations. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
176. Shakespeare T, Iezzoni LI, Groce NE. Disability and the training of health professionals. Lancet, 2009,374:1815-1816. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62050-X PMID:19957403
177. Certification Booklet of Information 2010–2011 Examinations. Rochester, MN, ABPMR (American Board of Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation), 2010.
178. Reed GM et al. Three model curricula for teaching clinicians to use the ICF. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2008,30:927-941. 
doi:10.1080/09638280701800301 PMID:18484388
179. Atwal A et al. Multidisciplinary perceptions of the role of nurses and healthcare assistants in rehabilitation of older adults 
in acute health care. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 2006,15:1418-1425. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2702.2005.01451.x PMID:17038103
180. Fronek P et al. The effectiveness of a sexuality training program for the interdisciplinary spinal cord injury rehabilitation 
team. Sexuality and Disability, 2005,23:51-63. doi:10.1007/s11195-005-4669-0
181. Lee AC, Norton E. Use of telerehabilitation to address sustainability of international service learning in Mexico: pilot case 
study and lessons learned. HPA Resource, 2009,9:1-5.
182. Kheng S. The challenges of upgrading from ISPO Category II level to Bachelor Degree level by distance education. 
Prosthetics and Orthotics International, 2008,32:299-312. doi:10.1080/03093640802109764 PMID:18720252
183. Matock N, Abeykoon P. Innovative programmes of medical education in south-east Asia. New Delhi, World Health 
Organization, 1993.
184. Increasing the relevance of education for health professionals. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1993.
185. Watson R, Swartz L. Transformation through occupation. London, Whurr, 2004.
186. Chipps JA, Simpson B, Brysiewicz P. The effectiveness of cultural-competence training for health professionals in com-
munity-based rehabilitation: a systematic review of literature. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing/Sigma Theta Tau 
International, Honor Society of Nursing, 2008,5:85-94. doi:10.1111/j.1741-6787.2008.00117.x PMID:18559021
187. Niemeier JP, Burnett DM, Whitaker DA. Cultural competence in the multidisciplinary rehabilitation setting: are we 
falling short of meeting needs? Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2003,84:1240-1245. doi:10.1016/S0003-
9993(03)00295-8 PMID:12917868
188. Corrigan PW, McCracken SG. Training teams to deliver better psychiatric rehabilitation programs. Psychiatric Services 
(Washington, DC), 1999,50:43-45. PMID:9890577
189. International recruitment of health personnel: draft global code of practice [EB126/8]. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009c.
190. Lehmann U, Dieleman M, Martineau T. Staffing remote rural areas in middle- and low-income countries: a literature review 
of attraction and retention. BMC Health Services Research, 2008,8:19- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-19 PMID:18215313
191. Tran D et al. Identification of recruitment and retention strategies for rehabilitation professionals in Ontario, Canada: 
results from expert panels. BMC Health Services Research, 2008,8:249- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-249 PMID:19068134
192. Crouch RB. SHORT REPORT Education and research in Africa: Identifying and meeting the needs. Occupational Therapy 
International, 2001,8:139-144. doi:10.1002/oti.141 PMID:11823878
193. Global Health Workforce Alliance [web site]. (http://www.ghwa.org/?74028ba8, accessed 30 April 2010).
194. Willis-Shattuck M et al. Motivation and retention of health workers in developing countries: a systematic review. BMC 
Health Services Research, 2008,8:247- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-247 PMID:19055827
195. Magnusson L, Ramstrand N. Prosthetist/orthotist educational experience & professional development in Pakistan. 
Disability and Rehabilitation. Assistive Technology, 2009,4:385-392. doi:10.3109/17483100903024634 PMID:19817652
196. Oyeyemi A. Nigerian physical therapists’ job satisfaction: a Nigeria – USA comparison. Journal of African Migration, 
2002,1:1-19.
 131
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
197. Asis M. Health worker migration: the case of the Philippines. XVII general meeting of the Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Council. Sydney, 1–2 May 2007.
198. Bärnighausen T, Bloom DE. Financial incentives for return of service in underserved areas: a systematic review. BMC Health 
Services Research, 2009,9:86- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-9-86 PMID:19480656
199. Shaw A. Rehabilitation services in Papua New Guinea. Papua and New Guinea Medical Journal, 2004,47:215-227. 
PMID:16862945
200. De Angelis C, Bunker S, Schoo A. Exploring the barriers and enablers to attendance at rural cardiac rehabilitation pro-
grams. The Australian Journal of Rural Health, 2008,16:137-142. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1584.2008.00963.x PMID:18471183
201. Monk J, Wee J. Factors shaping attitudes towards physical disability and availability of rehabilitative support systems for 
disabled persons in rural Kenya. Asia Pacific Disability and Rehabilitation Journal, 2008,19:93-113.
202. The United Nations Standard Rules on the equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities: government responses to 
the implementation of the rules on medical care, rehabilitation, support services and personnel training [Part 1. Summary]. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001:20.
203. Siqueira FC et al. [Architectonic barriers for elderly and physically disabled people: an epidemiological study of the physi-
cal structure of health service units in seven Brazilian states] Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, 2009,14:39-44. PMID:19142307
204. Herman K. Barriers experienced by parents/caregivers of children with clubfoot deformity attending specific clinics in 
Uganda. Cape Town, Department of Physiotherapy in the Faculty of Community and Health Science, University of the 
Western Cape, 2006.
205. Greve JMD, Chiovato J, Batisttella LR. Critical evaluation: 10 years SCI rehabilitation treatment in a developing country 1981–
1991, Sao Pâulo, Brazil. Free paper in the 3rd Annual Scientific Meeting of the International Medical Society of Paraplegia. 
Kobe, Japan, 30 May–2 June 1994.
206. Souza DR et al. Characteristics of traumatic spinal cord injuries in a referral center: Institute of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, 
Clinical Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, IOT-HCFMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. Free paper in the International 
Society of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine World Congress. Instanbul, Turkey, 13–17 June 2009.
207. Turner-Stokes L. Politics, policy and payment–facilitators or barriers to person-centred rehabilitation? Disability and 
Rehabilitation, 2007,29:1575-1582. doi:10.1080/09638280701618851 PMID:17922328
208. Wade DT, de Jong BA. Recent advances in rehabilitation. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 2000,320:1385-1388. doi:10.1136/
bmj.320.7246.1385 PMID:10818031
209. Declaration of Alma-Ata: International Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6–12 September 1978. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 1978 (http://www.who.int/publications/almaata_declaration_en.pdf, accessed 2 May 2010).
210. Wakerman J et al. Primary health care delivery models in rural and remote Australia: a systematic review. BMC Health 
Services Research, 2008,8:276- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-276 PMID:19114003
211. Chatterjee S et al. Evaluation of a community-based rehabilitation model for chronic schizophrenia in rural India. The 
British Journal of Psychiatry: the journal of mental science, 2003,182:57-62. doi:10.1192/bjp.182.1.57 PMID:12509319
212. The World Health Report 2008: Primary health care, now more than ever. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (http://
www.who.int/whr/2008/en/index.html, accessed 11 April 2010).
213. Tyrell J, Burn A. Evaluating primary care occupational therapy: results from a London primary health care centre. British 
Journal of Therapy and Rehabilitation, 1996,3:380-385.
214. Ryan B et al. The newly established primary care based Welsh Low Vision Service is effective and has improved access to 
low vision services in Wales. Ophthalmic & Physiological Optics: the journal of the British College of Ophthalmic Opticians 
(Optometrists), 2010,30:358-364. doi:10.1111/j.1475-1313.2010.00729.x PMID:20492541
215. Mock C et al. Evaluation of trauma care capabilities in four countries using the WHO-IATSIC Guidelines for Essential 
Trauma Care. World Journal of Surgery, 2006,30:946-956. doi:10.1007/s00268-005-0768-4 PMID:16736320
216. Boling PA. Care transitions and home health care. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 2009,25:135-148, viii. doi:10.1016/j.
cger.2008.11.005 PMID:19217498
217. Griffiths TL et al. Results at 1 year of outpatient multidisciplinary pulmonary rehabilitation: a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet, 2000,355:362-368. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(99)07042-7 PMID:10665556
218. Legg L, Langhorne P. Outpatient Service TrialistsRehabilitation therapy services for stroke patients living at home: sys-
tematic review of randomised trials. Lancet, 2004,363:352-356. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(04)15434-2 PMID:15070563
219. Bent N et al. Team approach versus ad hoc health services for young people with physical disabilities: a retrospective 
cohort study. Lancet, 2002,360:1280-1286. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11316-X PMID:12414202
220. Turner-Stokes L, Paul S, Williams H. Efficiency of specialist rehabilitation in reducing dependency and costs of continuing 
care for adults with complex acquired brain injuries. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 2006,77:634-639. 
doi:10.1136/jnnp.2005.073411 PMID:16614023
221. Kendall E, Marshall C. Factors that prevent equitable access to rehabilitation for Aboriginal Australians with disabilities: 
the need for culturally safe rehabilitation. Rehabilitation Psychology, 2004,49:5-13. doi:10.1037/0090-5550.49.1.5
 132
World report on disability 
222. Ameratunga S et al. Rehabilitation of the injured child. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2009,87:327-328. 
doi:10.2471/BLT.09.057067 PMID:19551242
223. Watermeyer BS et al., eds. Disability and social change: South Africa agenda. Pretoria, Human Sciences Research Council, 2006.
224. Higgins L, Dey-Ghatak P, Davey G. Mental health nurses’ experiences of schizophrenia rehabilitation in China and India: 
a preliminary study. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, 2007,16:22-27. doi:10.1111/j.1447-0349.2006.00440.x 
PMID:17229271
225. Muhit MA et al. The key informant method: a novel means of ascertaining blind children in Bangladesh. The British Journal 
of Ophthalmology, 2007,91:995-999. doi:10.1136/bjo.2006.108027 PMID:17431019
226. Gona JK et al. Identification of people with disabilities using participatory rural appraisal and key informants: a prag-
matic approach with action potential promoting validity and low cost. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2010,32:79-85. 
doi:10.3109/09638280903023397 PMID:19925280
227. Hartley S, Okune J, eds. CBR Policy development and implementation. Norwich, University of East Anglia, 2008.
228. Barbato A et al. Outcome of community-based rehabilitation program for people with mental illness who are considered difficult 
to treat. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 2007,44:775-783. doi:10.1682/JRRD.2007.02.0041 PMID:18075936
229. General Eye and Low Vision Centre [web site]. (http://www.hksb.org.hk/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=arti
cle&id=39&Itemid=33, accessed 11 May 2010).
230. Bauer S, Lane J. Convergence of AT and mainstream products: keys to university participation in research, development 
and commercialization. Technology and Disability, 2006,18:67-78.
231. Lane J.. Delivering the D in R&D: recommendations for increasing transfer outcomes from development projects. Assistive 
Technology Outcomes and Benefits, 2008,(Fall special issue).
232. The Law on Persons with Disabilities. Hanoi, Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, 2010 (51/2010/QH12).
233. Production and distribution of assistive devices for people with disabilities [Part 1 chapter 5 and part 2 chapter 9]. 
Bangkok, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 1997.
234. Field MJ, Jette AM, eds. The future of disability in America. Washington, The National Academies Press, 2007.
235. Borg J, Lindström A, Larsson S. Assistive technology in developing countries: national and international responsibilities 
to implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Lancet, 2009,374:1863-1865. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(09)61872-9 PMID:19944867
236. Borg J, Larsson S. The right to assistive technology and its implementation. In: Bhanushali K, ed. UN convention on rights 
of persons with disabilities. Ahmedabad, India, ICFAI University Press, forthcoming.
237. Vuorialho A, Karinen P, Sorri M. Counselling of hearing aid users is highly cost-effective. European Archives of Oto-Rhino- 
Laryngology: official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS): affiliated with the German 
Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, 2006,263:988-995. doi:10.1007/s00405-006-0104-0 PMID:16799805
238. Mukherjee G, Samanta A. Wheelchair charity: a useless benevolence in community-based rehabilitation. Disability and 
Rehabilitation, 2005,27:591-596. doi:10.1080/09638280400018387 PMID:16019868
239. Oderud T et al. User satisfaction survey: an assessment study on wheelchairs in Tanzania. In: Sheldon S, Jacobs NA, 
eds. Report of a consensus conference on wheelchairs for developing countries, Bengaluru, India, 6–11 November 2006. 
Copenhagen, International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics, 2007:112–117.
240. Godisa [website]. (http://www.godisa.org/, accessed 17 December 2010).
241. Seelman KD, Hartman LM. Telerehabilitation: policy issues and research tools. International Journal of Telerehabilitation, 
2009,1:47-58. doi:10.5195/ijt.2009.6013
242. Taylor DM et al. Exploring the feasibility of video conference delivery of a self management program to rural participants 
with stroke. Telemedicine and e-Health, 2009,15:646-654. doi:10.1089/tmj.2008.0165 PMID:19694589
243. Vainoras A et al. Cardiological telemonitoring in rehabilitation and sports medicine. Studies in Health Technology and 
Informatics, 2004,105:121-130. PMID:15718601
244. Rowe N et al. Ten-year experience of a private nonprofit telepsychiatry service. Telemedicine and e-Health: the official 
journal of the American Telemedicine Association, 2008,14:1078-1086. doi:10.1089/tmj.2008.0037 PMID:19119830
245. Körtke H et al. New East-Westfalian Postoperative Therapy Concept: a telemedicine guide for the study of ambulatory 
rehabilitation of patients after cardiac surgery. Telemedicine Journal and e-health: the official journal of the American 
Telemedicine Association, 2006,12:475-483. doi:10.1089/tmj.2006.12.475 PMID:16942420
246. Giallauria F et al. Efficacy of telecardiology in improving the results of cardiac rehabilitation after acute myocardial infarc-
tion. Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease = Archivio Monaldi per le malattie del torace / Fondazione clinica del lavoro, IRCCS [and] 
Istituto di clinica tisiologica e malattie apparato respiratorio, Università di Napoli, Secondo ateneo, 2006,66:8-12. PMID:17125041
247. Ades PA et al. A controlled trial of cardiac rehabilitation in the home setting using electrocardiographic and voice tran-
stelephonic monitoring. American Heart Journal, 2000,139:543-548. doi:10.1016/S0002-8703(00)90100-5 PMID:10689271
248. Sicotte C et al. Feasibility and outcome evaluation of a telemedicine application in speech-language pathology. Journal 
of Telemedicine and Telecare, 2003,9:253-258. doi:10.1258/135763303769211256 PMID:14599327
 133
Chapter 4 
Rehabilitation
249. Theodoros DG. Telerehabilitation for service delivery in speech-language pathology. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 
2008,14:221-224. doi:10.1258/jtt.2007.007044 PMID:18632993
250. Tam SF et al. Evaluating the efficacy of tele-cognitive rehabilitation for functional performance in three case studies. 
Occupational Therapy International, 2003,10:20-38. doi:10.1002/oti.175 PMID:12830317
251. Man DW et al. A randomized clinical trial study on the effectiveness of a tele-analogy-based problem-solving programme 
for people with acquired brain injury (ABI). NeuroRehabilitation, 2006,21:205-217. PMID:17167189
252. Sanford JA, Butterfield T. Using remote assessment to provide home modification services to underserved elders. The 
Gerontologist, 2005,45:389-398. PMID:15933279
253. Damiani G et al. The effectiveness of computerized clinical guidelines in the process of care: a systematic review. BMC 
Health Services Research, 2010,10:2- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-10-2 PMID:20047686
254. Lemaire ED, Boudrias Y, Greene G. Low-bandwidth, Internet-based videoconferencing for physical rehabilitation consul-
tations. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 2001,7:82-89. doi:10.1258/1357633011936200 PMID:11331045
255. Kairy D et al. A systematic review of clinical outcomes, clinical process, healthcare utilization and costs associated with 
telerehabilitation. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2009,31:427-447. doi:10.1080/09638280802062553 PMID:18720118
256. Ebenbichler G et al. The future of physical & rehabilitation medicine as a medical specialty in the era of evidence-
based medicine. American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation/Association of Academic Physiatrists, 2008,87:1-3. 
doi:10.1097/PHM.0b013e31815e6a49 PMID:18158426
257. Dejong G et al. Toward a taxonomy of rehabilitation interventions: Using an inductive approach to examine the “black box” of 
rehabilitation. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 2004,85:678-686. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2003.06.033 PMID:15083447
258. Andrich R, Caracciolo A. Analysing the cost of individual assistive technology programmes. Disability and Rehabilitation. 
Assistive Technology, 2007,2:207-234. doi:10.1080/17483100701325035 PMID:19263539
259. Groah SL et al. Beyond the evidence-based practice paradigm to achieve best practice in rehabilitation medicine: a clini-
cal review. PM & R: the journal of injury, function, and rehabilitation, 2009,1:941-950. PMID:19797005
260. Johnston MV et al. The challenge of evidence in disability and rehabilitation research and practice: A position paper. Austin, 
National Centre for the Dissemination of Disability Research, 2009.
261. Wee J. Creating a registry of needs for persons with disabilities in a Northern Canadian community: the disability registry 
project. Asia Pacific Disability Rehabiliation Journal, 2009,20:1-18.
262. Cornielje H, Velema JP, Finkenflügel H. Community based rehabilitation programmes: monitoring and evaluation in order 
to measure results. Leprosy Review, 2008,79:36-49. PMID:18540236
263. Greenhalgh J et al. “It’s hard to tell”: the challenges of scoring patients on standardised outcome measures by multidisci-
plinary teams: a case study of neurorehabilitation. BMC Health Services Research, 2008,8:217- doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-217 
PMID:18945357
264. Lamoureux EL et al. The Impact of Vision Impairment Questionnaire: an evaluation of its measurement properties using 
Rasch analysis. Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 2006,47:4732-4741. doi:10.1167/iovs.06-0220 PMID:17065481
265. Dijkers M. When the best is the enemy of the good: the nature of research evidence used in systematic reviews and guidelines. 
Austin, TX, National Center for the Dissemination of Disability Research, 2009.
266. Sudsawad P. Knowledge translation: introduction to models, strategies, and measures. Austin, TX, Southwest Educational 
Development Laboratory, National Center for the Dissemination of Disability Research, 2007 (http://www.ncddr.org/kt/
products/ktintro/, accessed 2 May 2010).
267. Rogers J, Martin F. Knowledge translation in disability and rehabilitation research. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 
2009,20:110-126. doi:10.1177/1044207309332232
268. Turner TJ. Developing evidence-based clinical practice guidelines in hospitals in Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines and Thailand: values, requirements and barriers. BMC Health Services Research, 2009,9:235- doi:10.1186/1472-
6963-9-235 PMID:20003536
269. Mmatli TO. Translating disability-related research into evidence-based advocacy: the role of people with disabilities. 
Disability and Rehabilitation, 2009,31:14-22. doi:10.1080/09638280802280387 PMID:18946807
270. World Health Organization, International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics, United States Agency International 
Development. Guidelines on the provision of manual wheelchairs in less-resourced settings. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2008.
271. New Zealand autism spectrum disorder guideline. Wellington, New Zealand Ministries of Health and Education, 2008 
(http://www.moh.govt.nz/moh.nsf/indexmh/nz-asd-guideline-apr08, accessed 15 March 2010).
272. Disability support services. Wellington, New Zealand Ministry of Health, 2009 (http://www.moh.govt.nz/moh.nsf/
pagesmh/8594/$File/asd-newsletter-mar09.pdf, accessed 16 May 2009).
273. Tomlinson M et al. Research priorities for health of people with disabilities: an expert opinion exercise. Lancet, 
2009,374:1857-1862. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61910-3 PMID:19944866
 274. Stewart R, Bhagwanjee A. Promoting group empowerment and self-reliance through participatory research: a case 
study of people with physical disability. Disability and Rehabilitation, 1999,21:338-345. doi:10.1080/096382899297585 
PMID:10471164
275. Chino N et al. Current status of rehabilitation medicine in Asia: a report from new millennium Asian symposium on 
rehabilitation medicine. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine: official journal of the UEMS European Board of Physical and 
Rehabilitation Medicine, 2002,34:1-4. doi:10.1080/165019702317242631 PMID:11900256
 Chapter 5
Assistance and support
 “I don’t know what to do for my mum. She is my earthly god. My family has been so 
supportive and helpful. They carry or feed me when I cannot. They have paid my bills. 
They have cared and loved me…I don’t think [I will have children] unless when God does 
a miracle. I am very expensive to maintain, so how can I maintain my family?”
Irene
“In my town the programs work and the different social services talk to each other. 
The workers helped me get an apartment and gave me money for food when I didn’t have 
anything to eat. I would have been kicked out of my apartment maybe two times if the 
worker didn’t talk to my landlord because we were butting heads. I don’t know if I would 
have made it without them. Those people really care about me and are committed to me. 
They are like my family and respect me. With the right support like that, people can grow 
into the right things and that needs to be thought of more. We don’t need to be taken care 
of but to have someone to talk to and help us learn to solve our own problems.”
Corey 
“A revolution in life – and in my head! Personal Assistance [PA] means emancipation. 
PA means I am able to get up in the morning and to bed at night, that I can take care of 
my personal hygiene etc. but PA also means freedom to participate in society. I even have 
got a job! Now I can decide for myself how, when and by whom I shall be assisted. I get 
the housework and the gardening done, in addition to my personal things, and there are 
still hours left for recreational activities. I can also save hours, which makes it possible for 
me to go away on holiday.”
Ellen 
“At age 16 I was afraid to be ‘weird’. As I saw no way out I conducted some suicide 
attempts. This led to an involuntary admission in a mental hospital with long-term 
seclusion, coercive medication, fixation, even body cavity searches to prevent me from 
self-harm or suicide. Caregivers confined me for months and months. As a result, I felt 
unwelcome and useless. Their treatment was not helping me at all. I got more depressed 
and suicidal, and refused to cooperate. I have been raised with a strong feeling of justice, 
and I believed this was not good care. There was no trust between the caregivers and me, 
only a fierce struggle. I felt like I was on a dead end and I saw no way out. I did not care 
for my life anymore and expected to die.”
Jolijn 
 5
Assistance and support
137
For many people with disabilities, assistance and support are prerequisites 
for participating in society. The lack of necessary support services can make 
people with disabilities overly dependent on family members – and can pre-
vent both the person with disability and the family members from becom-
ing economically active and socially included. Throughout the world people 
with disabilities have significant unmet needs for support. Support services 
are not yet a core component of disability policies in many countries, and 
there are gaps in services everywhere.
No one model of support services will work in all contexts and meet all 
needs. A diversity of providers and models is required. But the overarch-
ing principle promoted by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (1) is that services should be provided in 
the community, not in segregated settings. Person-centred services are pref-
erable, so that individuals are involved in decisions about the support they 
receive and have maximum control over their lives.
Many persons with disabilities need assistance and support to achieve a 
good quality of life and to be able to participate in social and economic life 
on an equal basis with others (2). A sign language interpreter, for instance, 
enables a Deaf person to work in a mainstream professional environment. 
A personal assistant helps a wheelchair user travel to meetings or work. An 
advocate supports a person with intellectual impairment to handle money 
or make choices (2). People with multiple impairments or older persons 
may require support to remain in their homes. These individuals are thus 
empowered to live in the community and participate in work and other 
activities, rather than be marginalized or left fully dependent on family sup-
port or social protection (3, 4).
Most assistance and support comes from family members or social 
networks. State supply of formal services is generally underdeveloped, not-
for-profit organizations have limited coverage, and private markets rarely 
offer enough affordable support to meet the needs of people with disabilities 
(5–7). State funding of responsive formal support services is an important 
element of policies to enable the full participation of persons with disabili-
ties in social and economic life. States also have an important role in setting 
standards, regulating, and providing services (8). Also by reducing the need 
for informal assistance, these services can enable family members to partici-
pate in paid or income-generating activity.
 138
World report on disability
The CRPD sees support and assistance not 
as ends in themselves but as means to preserv-
ing dignity and enabling individual autonomy 
and social inclusion. Equal rights and partici-
pation are thus to be achieved, in part, through 
the provision of support services for people 
with disabilities and their families. Article 12 
restores the capacity of decision-making to 
people with disabilities. Respecting individual 
wishes and preferences – whether through 
supported decision-making or otherwise—is a 
legal imperative (see Box 5.1). Articles 19 and 
28 are concerned with “the right to live inde-
pendently and be included in the community” 
with an “adequate standard of living and social 
protection”. Article 21 upholds rights to free-
dom of expression and opinion and access to 
information through sign language and other 
forms of communication.
Evidence on the demand for and supply of 
support services and assistance is scarce, even 
in developed countries. This chapter presents 
evidence on the need and unmet need for sup-
port services, the barriers to formal provision, 
and what works in overcoming these barriers.
Understanding assistance 
and support
This chapter uses the phrase “assistance and 
support ” to cover a range of interventions 
labelled elsewhere as “informal care”, “support 
services”, or “personal assistance”, but as part 
Box 5.1. Personal ombudsmen for supported decision-making in Sweden
Article 12 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) ensures that people 
cannot lose legal capacity simply because of disability. People may require support to exercise that capacity, 
and safeguards will be needed to prevent the abuse of such support. The CRPD obliges governments to take 
appropriate and effective measures so that people have the support they need to exercise their legal capacity.
Supported decision-making can take many forms. It involves people with disabilities having supporters, or 
advocates, who know them, can understand and interpret their choices and desires, and can communicate these 
choices and desires to others. Forms of supported decision-making may include support networks, personal 
“ombudspeople”, community services, peer support, personal assistants and good advanced planning (9).
Satisfying these requirements is not always straightforward. People in institutions may be denied this support. 
There may be no relevant agencies. An individual may not be able to identify a trusted person. Also consider-
able effort and financial investment may be needed. However existing models of substitute decision-making or 
guardianship are also costly and complicated. Supported decision-making should thus be seen as a redistribution 
of existing resources, not as an additional expense (10). Examples of decision-making support models can be 
found in Canada and Sweden. The Personal Ombud (PO) programme in Skåne, the southernmost province of 
Sweden, supports people with psychosocial disabilities, helping them assert their legal rights and make major 
decisions about their lives (11).
PO-Skåne employs individuals with a professional degree – such as law or social work – who have the ability and 
interest to interact well with people with psychosocial disabilities. They do not work from an office but go out 
to meet the people they work with, wherever they are based. Only a verbal agreement is required to set up the 
service, which is confidential. This allows a relationship of trust to be established, even with individuals who have 
had experience of abuse by authorities claiming to help.
Once the PO relationship has been set up by agreement, the PO can act only on specific requests – for instance, 
to help the person obtain government benefits. Often, the greatest need is to talk about life. The PO may also be 
asked to help resolve long-standing problems, such as creating a better relationship with the family.
The PO programme has helped many people to manage their lives. The initial costs can be high, as people assert their 
rights and make full use of the services. But the costs fall as situations are resolved and the need for support declines.
Sources (12–14).
 139
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
of a broad category which also includes advo-
cacy, communication support, and other non-
therapeutic interventions.
Some of the more common types of assis-
tance and support services include:
 
■
community support and independent 
living – assistance with self-care, house-
hold care, mobility, leisure, and commu-
nity participation;
 
■
residential support services – independ-
ent housing and congregate living in group 
homes and institutional settings;
 
■
respite services – short-term breaks for 
caregivers and people with disabilities;
 
■
support in education or employment – such 
as a classroom assistant for a child with a dis-
ability, or personal support in the workplace;
 
■
communication support – such as sign-
language interpreters;
 
■
community access – including day care 
centres;
 
■
information and advice services – includ-
ing professional, peer support, advocacy, 
and supported decision-making;
 
■
assistance animals – such as dogs trained 
to guide people with a visual impairment.
This chapter deals mainly with assistance 
and support in the activities of daily life and 
community participation. Support services in 
education and employment, as well as envi-
ronmental adaptations, are discussed else-
where in the report.
When are assistance and 
support required?
The need for assistance and support can fluctu-
ate, depending on environmental factors, the 
stage of life, the underlying health conditions, 
and the level of individual functioning.
Key factors determining the need for sup-
port services are the availability of appropriate 
assistive devices, the presence and willingness 
of family members to provide assistance, and 
the degree to which the environment facili-
tates participation of people with disabilities, 
including older persons. When individuals 
with disabilities can independently get to a 
bathroom, for instance, they may not require 
another person to help them. When they have a 
suitable wheelchair, they may be able to negoti-
ate their local environment without assistance. 
And if mainstream services are accessible, there 
will be less requirement for specialized support.
The need for assistance and support 
changes through stages of the lifecycle. Formal 
support may include:
 
■
in childhood – respite care, special needs 
assistance in education;
 
■
in adulthood – advocacy services, residen-
tial support, or personal assistance in the 
workplace;
 
■
in old age – day centres, home-help ser-
vices, assisted living arrangements, nurs-
ing homes, and palliative care.
Often, problems in service provision occur 
between these stages – such as between child-
hood and adulthood (15).
Needs and unmet needs
Data are sparse on the needs for national formal 
support services. Chapter 2 discussed evidence 
on support services. Most of the evidence about 
support services and assistance in this chapter 
comes from developed countries. This does not 
imply that formal assistance and support are not 
equally relevant in low-income settings; it sug-
gests instead that they are rarely provided for-
mally or that data about them are not collected.
Population surveys in Australia, Canada, 
New Zealand, and the United States of America 
have shown that between 60% and 80% of people 
with disabilities generally have their needs met 
for assistance with everyday activities (16–19). 
Most of the support in these countries is from 
informal sources, such as families and friends. 
For example, a survey of 1505 non-elderly adults 
in the United States with disability found that:
 
■
70% relied on family and friends for assis-
tance with daily activities, and only 8% used 
home-health aides and personal assistants;
 140
World report on disability
 
■
42% reported having failed to move in or 
out of a bed or a chair because no one was 
available to help;
 
■
16% of home-care users reported problems 
paying for home care in the previous 12 
months;
 
■
45% of participants in the study worried 
that caring for them would become too 
much of a burden on the family;
 
■
23% feared having to go into a nursing 
home or other type of facility (20).
For most countries, including developed 
ones (21), and for many disability groups, there 
are large gaps in meeting needs for support:
 
■
Community support and independent 
living. In China there is a shortage of com-
munity support services for people with 
disabilities who need personal care and 
lack family support (6, 22). In New Zealand 
a household disability survey of 14 500 
children with physical disabilities reported 
that 10% of families reported unmet need 
for household care, and 7% for funding for 
respite care (23).
 
■
Communication support. Deaf people 
frequently have difficulties in recruiting 
and training interpreters, particularly in 
rural or isolated communities (24, 25) (see 
Box 5.2). A survey on the human rights sit-
uation of Deaf people found that 62 of the 
93 countries that responded have sign lan-
guage interpreting services, 43 have some 
kind of sign language interpreters training, 
and 30 countries had 20 or fewer qualified 
sign language interpreters, including Iraq, 
Madagascar, Mexico, Sudan, Thailand, and 
the United Republic of Tanzania (27). 
 
■
Respite services. In the United Kingdom 
a large study of family caregivers of adults 
with intellectual disability found that 33% 
had a high but unmet need for respite ser-
vices and 30% a high but unmet need for 
home-based services (28). A 2001 United 
States cross-sectional survey of children 
with special health care needs found that 
of the 38 831 respondents, 3178 (8.8%) 
reported a need for respite care in the prior 
12 months, especially among younger chil-
dren, mothers with low education, low-
income households, and minority race or 
ethnicity (29).
Social and demographic factors 
affecting demand and supply
Population growth affects the supply of care. 
Growth in older age cohorts and their rates of 
disability influence both supply and demand, 
and changes in family structure impact on the 
availability and willingness to provide care.
 
■
The ageing of consumers and ageing of 
family members who provide support point 
to a greatly increased demand for support 
services. The number of people aged 60 
years or over worldwide has roughly tripled 
– from 205 million in 1950 to 606 million 
in 2000 – and is projected to triple again 
by 2050 (30). The likelihood of acquiring 
a health condition increases as people age 
– something relevant to prospective users 
of support services and to family members 
who provide support.
 
■
Despite high proportions of young people 
in many countries – for example in Kenya 
50% of the population is under 15 years 
of age (31) – there has been a decrease in 
the number of children per family (32). 
Over 1980–2001 fertility rates declined in 
developed countries (from 1.5 to 1.2) and in 
developing countries (from 3.6 to 2.6). Even 
though infant and child mortality rates 
have been steadily falling in most coun-
tries, the counteracting impact of falling 
fertility rates is greater, with the net effect 
that smaller family sizes are projected (33), 
indicating less family care.
 
■
In most countries there has been an 
increase in geographical mobility. With 
young people moving more readily from 
rural areas to urban centres or abroad, 
and with changing attitudes, shared living 
arrangements within families are becom-
ing less common (33).
 141
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
It is uncertain whether informal care and 
existing provisions for supporting older people 
with a disability will cope with these demo-
graphic shifts (34). Modelling from Australia 
suggests that fears about future lack of caregiv-
ers may be misplaced (35).
Consequences for caregivers 
of unmet need for formal 
support services 
Informal care can be an efficient and cost-
effective way of supporting people with dis-
abilities. But exclusive reliance on informal 
support can have adverse consequences for 
caregivers.
 
■
Stress. The demands of caring often result in 
stress for families, particularly for women, 
who tend to be responsible for domestic 
labour, with care for family members with 
disability representing a significant share 
(36). In older age, men may also care for 
spouses (37). Factors contributing to stress – 
and possibly affecting the caregiver’s personal 
health – include increased time spent on care 
for the person with a disability, increased 
housework, disruptions to sleep, and the 
emotional impact of care (38). Caregivers 
also report isolation and loneliness (39).
Box 5.2. Signs of progress with community-based rehabilitation
The Ugandan government piloted a community-based rehabilitation (CBR) programme in Tororo district of Eastern 
Uganda in the 1990s, with support from partners, notably the Norwegian Association of the Disabled. During 
the initial phases Deaf people realized that they were missing out on rehabilitation services. They responded 
through their national umbrella organization – Uganda National Association of the Deaf (UNAD) – alerting the 
CBR managers and other development partners to the fact that Deaf people were being excluded because the 
CBR workers could not use sign language, and so could not communicate with them, and therefore could not 
help them to access services, information, and support.
Uganda Sign Language (USL), developed informally by UNAD in the 1970s, came to be formally recognized and 
approved by the Ugandan government in 1995. UNAD devised a pilot project for teaching CBR workers sign 
language in Tororo in 2003. The main objective was to enable Deaf people’s inclusion and participation in com-
munities and realize their full physical and mental potential. Twelve Deaf volunteers run USL training for the CBR 
workers, the Deaf people and their families. So far, more than 45 CBR workers have been taught sign language: 
although only about 10 are fluent, the rest have a basic USL, which allows them to greet Deaf people and to 
provide the key information about education and employment and health among other things.
Although the project has been largely successful, some major problems encountered include the high expectations 
from target groups, the inadequate funds to expand to a wider area, the persistence of negative attitudes, and 
the high illiteracy and poverty among Deaf people and their families. These obstacles have been tackled through 
sensitization and awareness campaigns, intensive fundraising activities, and collaboration with the government 
to mainstream Deaf people’s issues in their programmes and budgets.
The story of Okongo Joseph, a Deaf beneficiary, gives an idea of how such an initiative can change lives, by ena-
bling the CBR programmes to offer services that include the Deaf community. Okongo lives in a remote location, 
was born deaf, and never went to school, but has now learned sign language from UNAD volunteers who visited 
him at his home. Okongo writes:
“I would like to send my sincere vote of thanks to UNAD for the development you have brought to me as a Deaf 
person and to my family members at large. I have achieved a lot since this programme started. I really thank 
UNAD for the sign language programme they have taught me, my family and my new friends who work in CBR. 
I am now not a primitive person like before. The goat I was given is in good condition. I request for more from 
you. I wish you good luck.”
Source (26).
 142
World report on disability 
 
■
Fewer opportunities for employment. 
Where employment would otherwise be an 
option, caring for a family member with a 
disability is likely to result in lost economic 
opportunities, as caregivers either reduce 
their paid work or refrain from seeking it 
(40). An analysis of the General Household 
Survey in the United Kingdom found that 
informal care reduced the probability 
of working by 13% for men and 27% for 
women (41). In the United States members 
of families of children with developmental 
disabilities work fewer hours than members 
in other families, are more likely to have 
left their employment, have more severe 
financial problems, and are less likely to 
take on a new job (42, 43).
 
■
Excessive demands on children. When 
adults acquire a disability, children are often 
asked to help (44). Male children may be 
expected to enter the workforce to compen-
sate for a parent who is no longer working. 
Female children may be expected to con-
tribute to domestic tasks or to help support 
the parent with a disability. These increased 
demands on children may impair their 
education, and their health (45). In Bosnia 
and Herzegovina children aged 11–15 years 
whose parents were experiencing health 
problems or a disability were 14% more 
likely than other children in that age group 
to drop out of school (46). There are many 
examples, mainly from Africa, of children 
having to drop out of school because of a 
parent developing AIDS. In Uganda, among 
children aged 15–19 years whose parents 
had died of AIDS, only 29% continued their 
schooling undisrupted, 25% lost school 
time, and 45% dropped out of school (47).
 
■
Greater difficulties as family members 
age. As parents or other family mem-
bers contributing to care grow older and 
become frail or die, it can be difficult for 
the remaining family to continue provid-
ing care. The increased life expectancy 
of children with intellectual disabilities, 
cerebral palsy, or multiple disabilities 
suggests that parents may eventually be 
unable to continue providing care for their 
disabled family member. This is often a 
hidden unmet need, as families may not 
have sought formal support when the disa-
bled individual was younger, and may find 
it hard to seek help later in life. The needs 
of such families have not been adequately 
addressed in most countries (48), including 
such high-income countries as Australia 
(49) and the United States (50).
Policy responses to the support needs of infor-
mal caregivers can sometimes compete with the 
demands of people with disabilities for support 
for independent living and participation (51). The 
needs and rights of the informal caregiver should 
be separated from the needs and rights of the disa-
bled person. A balance must be found, so that each 
person has independence, dignity, and quality of 
life. Caring, despite its demands, has many positive 
aspects that need to be brought out (52). People with 
disabilities who do not have families able to provide 
the necessary support and assistance should be a 
priority in formal support services.
Provision of assistance and support 
Assistance and support are complex, because 
they are provided by different suppliers, funded 
in different ways, and delivered in different 
locations. In supply, the main divide is between 
informal care, provided by families and friends, 
and formal services, provided by government, 
non-profit organizations, and the for-profit 
sector. The cost of formal support can be met 
through state funding, raised through general 
taxation, through social insurance contribu-
tions by those covered by the scheme, through 
charitable or voluntary sector funding, through 
out-of-pocket payment to private service pro-
viders, or through a mixture of these methods. 
The services can be provided within a family 
setting or single occupancy, or congregate 
living in group homes or institutional settings.
While formal organized support services 
and programmes for people with disabilities 
 143
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
are common in high-income countries, they are 
a fairly new concept in many low-income and 
middle-income countries. But even in countries 
with well-developed systems of support, infor-
mal care and support from families and friends 
predominates, being indispensable and cost-
efficient. In all countries family support is essen-
tial (53). Across high-income countries families 
meet around 80% of the support needs of older 
people (52). In the United States more than 75% 
of people with disabilities receive assistance 
from unpaid informal caregivers (54). Among 
adults with developmental disabilities more 
than 75% live at home with family caregivers, 
and more than 25% of these caregivers are 60 
years or older, with another 35% aged between 
41 and 59 years. Fewer than 11% of people with 
developmental disabilities were living in super-
vised residential settings in 2006 (55).
Limited data are available on the eco-
nomic value of informal care, overwhelmingly 
performed by women. In 2005–2006 the esti-
mated value of all unpaid care in Australia was 
A$ 41.4 billion, the major part of all “welfare 
services resources”, which amounted to around 
A$ 72.6 billion (56). A Canadian study found 
that private expenditure, largely related to time 
costs for provision of assistance, accounted for 
85% of total home-care costs, which escalated 
as activity limitations increased (57).
Government-led service delivery was 
traditionally focused on institutional care. 
Governments have also provided day services 
such as home care and day centres for people 
living in the community. With the recent trend 
towards “contracting out” services, govern-
ments, particularly local ones, are shifting from 
being direct service providers to commission-
ing, retaining funding and regulatory functions 
such as assessment procedures, standard set-
ting, contracting, monitoring, and evaluation.
Nongovernmental organizations – also 
known as private not-for-profit, voluntary, or 
civil society organizations – have often appeared 
where governments have failed to provide for 
specific needs. Their advantages can include 
their potential for innovation, specialization, 
and responsiveness. NGOs often provide com-
munity-based and user-driven programmes to 
promote participation by people with disabili-
ties in their communities (58, 59). For example, 
in South Africa the Disabled Children’s Action 
Group was set up by parents of children with 
disabilities, predominantly from the black and 
coloured communities, in 1993. The aim of this 
low-cost, mutual support group is to promote 
inclusion and equal opportunities, particularly 
in education. It has 311 support centres, mostly 
in poorer areas, with 15 000 parent members 
and 10 000 children and young people actively 
involved. Its work has been supported by grants 
from international NGOs as well as national 
charities (60).
NGOs can partner with governments to 
deliver services for people with disabilities (61). 
They also frequently act as vehicles for testing 
new types of service provision and for evalu-
ating the outcomes. But many are small, with 
limited reach, so their good practices cannot 
always be disseminated and replicated more 
widely. Disadvantages may arise because of 
their fragile financial base and because they 
may have different priorities to government.
Private for-profit suppliers of residential 
and community support services exist in most 
societies, and their services are either con-
tracted by government, or paid directly by the 
client. They are often concentrated in particu-
lar areas of the care market, such as care for 
the elderly and home care. Where people with 
disabilities can afford to do so, they or their 
families may employ people to support them in 
activities of daily living.
In practice, people with disabilities receive 
a range of services from different providers. 
For example in Australia the Commonwealth–
State/Territory Disability Agreement sets the 
national framework to fund, monitor, and 
support services for 200 000 people with a dis-
ability. Community access and respite services 
had a high proportion of people using nongov-
ernment services. Employment services for 
people with disabilities were accessed almost 
exclusively through NGOs. Support services in 
 144
World report on disability 
the community were accessed mainly through 
government agencies (56).
Barriers to assistance 
and support 
Lack of funding
Social safety net programmes in developing 
countries typically amount to between 1% and 
2% of gross domestic product, and to about twice 
that in developed countries, although rates are 
variable (62). Upper middle-income and high-
income countries often provide a combination 
of cash programmes and a variety of social 
welfare services. In contrast, in many develop-
ing countries, a significant share of safety net 
resources is often allocated to cash programmes 
targeted at the poor and vulnerable households, 
with only a fraction going to the provision of 
social welfare services to vulnerable groups, 
including individuals with disabilities or their 
families. In low-income settings, social welfare 
services are often the only safety net, but the 
spending is low and programmes are frag-
mented and of a very small scale, reaching only 
a fraction of the needy population.
The lack of effective financing for support – 
or its distribution within a country – is a major 
obstacle to sustainable services. For example, in 
India, in 2005–06, the spending on the welfare 
of people with disabilities – which focused on 
support to national disability institutions, non-
government organizations providing services 
and spending on assistive devices – represented 
0.05% of Ministry of Social Justice and Welfare 
allocations (5).
In countries that lack social protection 
schemes, funding assistance and support can 
be problematic. Even in high-income countries, 
funding long-term care for older people is prov-
ing difficult (21, 63). An Australian study found 
that 61% of caregivers of people with profound 
or severe disabilities lacked any main source of 
assistance (64). In many middle-income and 
low-income countries governments cannot 
provide adequate services and commercial ser-
vice providers are either not available or not 
affordable for most households (65).
Governments often do not support the vol-
untary sector to develop innovative services able 
to meet the needs of families and individuals 
with disabilities. In Beijing, China, in addition 
to existing government welfare institutions, 
a small number of nongovernmental housing 
support agencies have been set up for children 
and young people with a disability. A study 
of four of them showed that the main service 
was skills training (6). The government does 
not support these organizations financially, 
though the local government subsidizes the fee 
for a small number of the most disadvantaged 
children or orphans (66). Instead, the services 
rely on fees paid by families and donations, 
including international assistance. As a result, 
the services are likely to be less affordable to 
users and their quality and staffing arrange-
ments will probably suffer (67). In India NGOs 
and independent living organizations are often 
successful in innovating and creating empow-
ering services, but they can rarely scale them up 
to wider coverage (5).
Lack of adequate human resources
Personal support workers – also known as direct 
care workers or home aides – play a vital role in 
community-based service systems, but there is 
a shortage of such workers in many countries 
(68–70). As the proportion of older people in 
a country increases, the demand for personal 
support workers will grow. In the United States, 
for example, the demand for personal support 
workers far exceeds their availability. But their 
numbers are growing, and it has been estimated 
that the number of home health aides will 
increase by 56% between 2004 and 2014 and 
the number of personal and home care aides 
by 41% (71). A study in the United Kingdom 
estimated that 76 000 individuals were already 
working as personal assistants funded through 
direct payments schemes (72).
 145
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
Many personal support workers are poorly 
paid and have inadequate training (70, 73). A 
United States study found that 80% of social 
care workers had no formal qualifications or 
training (74). Many workers may be working in 
social care temporarily, rather than as a career. 
A study in the United Kingdom found that only 
42% of personal assistants had qualifications 
in social care (72). Combined with their high 
turnover, the result can be substandard care and 
a lack of a stable relationship with the service 
user.
Many support workers are economic 
migrants, lacking skills and a career ladder. 
They are vulnerable to exploitation, particu-
larly given their precarious immigration status. 
The high demand for support workers in more 
affluent countries has led to an inflow of people, 
largely women, from neighbouring poorer coun-
tries – for instance, from the Plurinational State 
of Bolivia to Argentina or from the Philippines 
to Singapore. The knock-on effect of this migra-
tion – described as a “global care chain” (75) 
– is that in their home countries, other relatives 
have to step in to act as caregivers.
Inappropriate policies and 
institutional frameworks
From the 18th and 19th century onwards, the 
main framework for formal services was to 
provide support by placing persons with dis-
abilities in institutions. Until the 1960s people 
with intellectual impairments, mental health 
conditions, and physical and sensory impair-
ments usually lived in segregated residential 
institutions in developed countries (76–78). In 
developing countries institutions along similar 
lines were sometimes initiated by international 
NGOs, but the sector remained minimal com-
pared with high-income countries (79–81).
Although it was once thought humane 
to meet the needs of people with disabilities 
in asylums, colonies, or residential institu-
tions, these services have been widely criti-
cized (82, 83). Lack of autonomy, segregation 
from the wider community, and even human 
rights abuses are widely reported (see Box 5.3). 
People with disabilities worldwide have been 
demanding community-based services that 
offer greater freedom and participation. They 
have also promoted supportive relationships 
that allow them to exercise more control over 
their lives and to live in the community (85). 
The CRPD promotes policies and institutional 
frameworks that enable community living and 
social inclusion for people with disabilities.
Inadequate and 
unresponsive services
In some countries support services are avail-
able only to people living in sheltered housing 
projects or institutions and not to those living 
independently. Institution-based services have 
had limited success in promoting independence 
and social relationships (86). Where commu-
nity services do exist, people with disabilities 
have lacked choice and control over when 
they receive support in their homes. Disabled 
people often see relationships with profession-
als, seldom disabled themselves, as unequal and 
patronizing (87). Such relationships have also 
led to an unwanted dependency (88).
Some recent reviews reveal that while com-
munity living shows significant improvements 
over institutional living, people with disabili-
ties are still far from achieving a lifestyle com-
parable to that of people not disabled (2). For 
many people with intellectual impairments 
and mental health conditions, the main com-
munity service is attendance at a day centre, 
but a review of a range of studies failed to find 
good evidence of benefits (89). The commu-
nity service often fails to provide an entry to 
employment, produce greater satisfaction (85), 
or deliver meaningful adult activities (90).
Poor service coordination
Where services are delivered by different sup-
pliers – at local or national level, or from health, 
education, and housing, or from state, volun-
tary, and private suppliers – coordination has 
 146
World report on disability 
often been inadequate. Existing services and 
support schemes may be operated, in any given 
place, by a range of public or private provid-
ers. In India different NGOs or agencies serve 
different impairment groups, but the lack of 
coordination between them undermines their 
effectiveness (5). Multiple assessments and 
different eligibility criteria make life more 
difficult for people with disabilities and their 
families, particularly in the transition between 
services for young people and those for adults 
(91). Lack of knowledge about a disability can 
be a barrier to referrals for effective support 
services and care coordination (15), as can 
Box 5.3. Mental health system reform and human rights in Paraguay
In 2003 Disability Rights International (DRI) documented life-threatening abuses against people detained in the 
state-run psychiatric hospital in Paraguay. These included the detention in tiny cells of two boys, aged 17 and 18 
years, with diagnoses of autism. The boys had been held there, naked, for the previous four years, without access 
to toilets. The other 458 people in this institution also lived in atrocious conditions, which included:
 
■
open sewage, rotting garbage, broken glass, and excrement and urine strewn around wards and common areas;
 
■
inadequate staffing;
 
■
a lack of proper medical attention and medical record-keeping;
 
■
shortages of food and medicines;
 
■
the detention of children with adults;
 
■
a lack of adequate mental health services or rehabilitation.
DRI, along with the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), filed a petition with the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States, requesting urgent intervention on behalf 
of those held in the institution. In response, the Commission called on the Paraguayan government to take all 
necessary steps to protect the lives, health, and safety of those detained in the psychiatric hospital.
Deinstitutionalization agreement
In 2005 DRI and CEJIL signed an historic agreement with the Paraguayan government to initiate mental health 
reform in the country. The agreement was the first in Latin America to guarantee the rights of people with mental 
health disabilities to live in the community and receive services and support there. Paraguay also took steps to 
address the unhygienic conditions and to separate children from adults. A home for eight long-term hospital 
residents was opened in the community. One of the boys who had been detained naked in his cell returned to live 
with his family. But the ethos of human rights abuses and the lack of proper treatment in the hospital remained 
largely unchanged.
In July 2008 the Commission found in favour of a new petition that made charges of a series of deaths, numerous 
cases of sexual abuse, and grievous injuries inside the institution, all in the preceding six months. It called on 
the government to take immediate action to protect those in the institution and to investigate the deaths and 
allegations of abuse.
Reforms in line with human rights
The result: for the first time, a Member State of the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) formally committed 
itself to reform its public health system in accordance with regional human rights treaties and the recommenda-
tions of regional human rights bodies. The agreement stemmed in part from the technical collaboration of PAHO 
and WHO with the Paraguayan government on human rights and mental health.
Since the 2008 emergency measures, and following its ratification of the CRPD and the optional protocol, the 
Paraguayan government has taken positive steps towards mental health reform. The hospital’s in-patient popula-
tion has been reduced by almost half since 2003, and the government is expanding community-based services 
and support. Today 28 long-term hospital residents in group homes in the community, and a handful of “chronic 
patients” live independently, having joined the workforce. Another nine group homes are scheduled to open in 
the next two years.
Source (84).
 147
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
a lack of communication between different 
health and social care agencies.
Awareness, attitudes, and abuse
People with disabilities and their families often 
lack information about the services available, 
are disempowered, or are unable or unwilling to 
express their needs. A Chinese study of caregivers 
of stroke survivors found a need for information 
about recovery and stroke prevention, and for 
training in moving and handling (92). A study 
of family care for children with intellectual dis-
abilities in Pakistan revealed stigma in the com-
munity and lack of knowledge about effective 
interventions, causing distress for caregivers (93). 
A Belgian study of family caregivers of people 
with dementia found that lack of awareness of 
services was a major barrier to service use (94).
Empowerment through disability rights 
organizations, community-based rehabilitation 
organizations, self-advocacy groups, or other 
collective networks can enable individuals with 
disabilities to identify their needs and lobby for 
service improvement (95). Most countries that 
have developed support services have strong 
organizations of persons with disabilities and 
their families lobbying governments to reform 
policies on service delivery and to increase or 
at least maintain the resources allocated. In 
the United Kingdom support from a disabled 
people’s organization is an important influence 
on people with disabilities signing up for direct 
payment schemes (96).
As explored in Chapter 1, negative attitudes 
are a cross-cutting issue in the lives of people 
with disabilities. Negative attitudes towards 
disability may have particular implications for 
the quality of assistance and support. Families 
hide or infantilize children with disabilities, 
and caregivers might abuse or disrespect the 
people they work with.
Negative attitudes and discrimination also 
undermine the possibility for people with disa-
bilities to make friends, express their sexuality, 
and achieve the family life that non-disabled 
people take for granted (97).
People who need support services are usu-
ally more vulnerable than those who do not. 
People with mental health conditions and intel-
lectual impairments are sometimes subject to 
arbitrary detention in long-stay institutions 
with no right of appeal, in contravention of the 
CRPD (98, 99). Vulnerability – both in institu-
tions and in community settings – can range 
from the risk of isolation, boredom, and lack of 
stimulation, to the risk of physical and sexual 
abuse. Evidence suggests that people with dis-
abilities are at higher risk of abuse, for vari-
ous reasons, including dependence on a large 
number of caregivers and barriers to commu-
nication (100). Safeguards to protect people in 
both formal and informal support services are 
therefore particularly important (101).
Addressing the barriers to 
assistance and support
Achieving successful 
deinstitutionalization
A catalyst for the move from institutions to 
independent and community living was the 
adoption in 1993 of the United Nations Standard 
Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities 
for Persons with Disabilities, which promoted 
equal rights and opportunities for people with 
disabilities (102). Since these rules were issued, 
there has been a marked shift in many high-
income countries and countries in transition, 
from large residential institutions and nursing 
homes to smaller settings within the commu-
nity, along with the growth of the independ-
ent living movement (103–105). Countries such 
as Norway and Sweden have eliminated all 
institutional placements. Elsewhere – includ-
ing Australia, Belgium, Germany, Greece, the 
Netherlands, and Spain – institutional care 
exists alongside alternative community living 
arrangements (106).
In a major transformation in eastern 
Europe, countries no longer rely predominantly 
 148
World report on disability
on institutions (107). Alternative care services 
have been progressively developed – includ-
ing day care, foster care, and home support for 
people with disabilities (108). Romania closed 
70% of its institutions for children between 
2001 and 2007, but for adults the process has 
been slower (109). Alongside deinstitutionaliza-
tion, there has also been decentralization from 
central to local government and an expansion 
and diversification of social services and ser-
vice providers.
Plans for closing an institution and moving 
residents to community settings should be 
started early. Adequate resources need to be 
available for the new support infrastructure 
before attempts are made to alter the balance 
of care (110). Deinstitutionalization takes time, 
especially if individuals are to prepare for their 
new lives in the community and be involved in 
decisions about their accommodation and sup-
port services. Some “double funding” of insti-
tutional and community systems will therefore 
be needed during the transition, which may 
take several years.
The lesson from deinstitutionalization in 
various countries is that it requires a range of 
institutional assistance and support services, 
including:
 
■
health care
 
■
crisis response systems
 
■
housing assistance
 
■
income support
 
■
support for social networks of people living 
in the community.
Unless the agencies responsible for these ser-
vices work together, there is a danger that 
individuals will not obtain adequate support at 
crucial times in their lives (110). People with 
mental health conditions may need support and 
service coordination to reduce vulnerability to 
homelessness (111). Some countries, including 
Denmark and Sweden, have excellent coordi-
nation between health care, social service pro-
viders, and the housing sector, allowing people 
with disabilities to find living arrangements 
that suit their needs.
Outcomes of deinstitutionalization
Improvements in the quality of life and per-
sonal functioning have been found in several 
studies of people who move out of institutions 
into community settings (106, 112). A study in 
the United Kingdom of people with intellectual 
impairments 12 years after leaving residential 
institutions showed that both quality of life and 
care were better in the community than in hos-
pitals (113). Small-scale living arrangements 
offer people with intellectual impairments 
more friends, more access to mainstream facili-
ties, and more chances to acquire skills – they 
also result in greater satisfaction (85). Evidence 
from a Chinese study shows that residents with 
intellectual impairments in small residential 
homes experienced better outcomes at lower 
cost than persons living in medium-size group 
homes or institutions (114).
In some countries, deinstitutionalization 
programmes have converted institutions into 
alternative facilities, such as:
 
■
vocational training and resource centres;
 
■
rehabilitation centres providing specialist 
secondary and tertiary services;
 
■
smaller home units where people with 
complex impairments can live semi-inde-
pendently with some support;
 
■
respite facilities where people with disabili-
ties can come for short breaks and training;
 
■
clubs or similar centres for people with 
mental health issues to achieve peer sup-
port and respite;
 
■
emergency sheltered accommodation, not 
only for people with disabilities but for all who 
may be vulnerable to abuse or exploitation.
Comparison of costs
The mix of evidence on the relative costs and 
effectiveness of institutional and community 
services shows that community services, if well 
planned and resourced, have better outcomes 
but may not be cheaper.
In the United States the cost of public insti-
tutions for people with intellectual disabilities 
is considerably higher than that of commu-
nity-based services (115). However a review of 
 149
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
evidence from 28 European countries found 
slightly higher costs for community-based ser-
vices (110), but the study also found that the 
quality of life was generally better for people 
living outside institutions, particularly those 
who made the move from an institutional to 
a community setting. If well planned and ade-
quately resourced, community-based services 
were much more cost-effective than institu-
tional care. A personal assistance service eval-
uated by the Serbian Center for Independent 
Living found that the scheme was more cost-
effective than institutional care (116).
The European review also revealed a link 
between cost and quality, with lower cost institu-
tional systems tending to offer lower quality care. 
The conclusion: community systems of inde-
pendent and supported living – when effectively 
set up and managed, and when well planned to 
prepare services and individuals for the major 
change in support arrangements – delivered 
better overall outcomes than institutions (110).
In the United Kingdom research which 
found that user-controlled personal assistance 
schemes were cheaper than government-pro-
vided home care contributed to the adoption of a 
system of direct payments. But recent evidence is 
more cautious (117). Further research is needed 
to know whether paid personal assistance, which 
may substitute for informal care, increases costs 
to governments more than alternative arrange-
ments (118–121). User-controlled arrangements 
have the potential to promote individual inde-
pendence and to improve quality of life, but they 
are unlikely to produce major savings.
Creating a framework for 
commissioning effective 
support services
Governments may decide to provide a range of 
support services for all those in need – or they 
may target people who cannot afford to pay 
out of their own resources. Mobilizing finan-
cial resources will in both cases involve some 
pooling of funds.
A “pooled” system of revenue generation 
to finance support systems can include vari-
ous forms of prepayment, the most common 
being through national, regional or local taxa-
tion, social insurance (through employers), and 
private voluntary insurance. Each may require 
some financial contributions by people who use 
services or by their families (“user charges” or 
“co-payments”). Mechanisms where people pay 
for all services out of their own resources are 
the least equitable (122).
Many developed countries have support 
services covering all those who need them (21). 
In other countries access to public funding for 
support services depends on a means test, as 
in the United Kingdom, where about half of all 
spending on social support comes from pri-
vate sources (123). Other strategies to contain 
government spending on support services in 
countries with developed care systems include:
 
■
charges to users
 
■
restrictions on eligibility
 
■
case management to limit the use of services
 
■
budget-limited programmes (63).
In countries in transition that have 
invested widely in residential care, reallocating 
resources can help build community support 
services. In low-income and middle-income 
countries, for example in Yemen, there have 
been good examples of social funds financing 
support services (124).
Funding services
There are many ways to pay providers, with the 
main government mechanisms including:
 
■
retrospective fee-for-service payments;
 
■
direct budgetary allocations to decentral-
ized providers;
 
■
performance-based contracting;
 
■
consumer-directed services through devo-
lution of budgets to people with disabilities 
or their families.
Each method has its incentives and limita-
tions, and each therefore has the potential to 
 150
World report on disability
influence how cost-effective and equitable the 
support system is. The success of a support 
system depends on the mix, volume, and deploy-
ment of staff and other resource inputs and the 
services they deliver. In turn, these depend on 
how funds are made available through the vari-
ous commissioning arrangements. Devolved or 
direct payments to people with disabilities offer 
a relatively new commissioning option (125).
 
■
In Sweden the Personal Assistance Reform 
Act of 1994 ensured that individuals with 
extensive disabilities would be entitled to 
cash payments from the national social 
insurance fund to pay for assistance. The 
weekly number of assistance hours is deter-
mined on the basis of need. About 70% of 
users buy services from local governments, 
and 15% have organized themselves into 
user cooperatives that provide services. The 
remainder purchase services from private 
companies or directly employ assistants 
(126). More than 15 000 individuals in 
Sweden use state aid to purchase services 
to meet their care needs (127).
 
■
In the Netherlands the Persoonsgebonden-
budget is a similar direct payment system. 
The most common service purchased is 
personal assistance – from an existing 
informal care provider or a nonprofes-
sional private service provider. Introduced 
in 2003, when 50 000 people used the new 
style 
Persoongebondenbudget, 
120 000 
people were taking advantage of the scheme 
by 2010, when it was temporarily halted. 
The benefits include lower administrative 
costs and greater individualization of ser-
vices. Evaluations have found high levels 
of satisfaction, better quality of life, and 
greater independence (128).
 
■
In South Africa the Social Assistance Act of 
2004 established a direct payment known 
as “grant in aid”. Individuals who already 
receive old age, disability, or war veterans’ 
benefits qualify for this additional money 
if they require full-time care. But the small 
monthly allowance is insufficient to pay 
for support. The scheme is currently being 
reviewed by the Department of Social 
Development (129).
Because support and assistance services 
have been provided almost entirely by fami-
lies, formal support schemes could increase 
demand and substitute for informal care (121). 
Regulatory mechanisms, including eligibility 
criteria and sound and fair assessment proce-
dures, are necessary to ensure the most equi-
table and cost-effective use of resources, and to 
allow delivery services to grow gradually.
Assessing individual needs
Assessment is vital to meet the needs of people 
with disabilities. In high-income countries 
assessment is a general process of deciding 
which categories of people can be granted enti-
tlement, followed by evaluating individual need. 
It is generally carried out by formal systems for 
disability determination. In New Zealand, for 
instance, once eligibility for support services is 
established, access depends on (130):
 
■
A needs assessment. This identifies and 
ranks the care and support needs of a 
person, without taking into account pos-
sible funding and services;
 
■
Service coordination or planning. This 
identifies the most appropriate services and 
support options to meet the assessed needs, 
within the available funding;
 
■
Provision of services. This is generally a 
support package of services for the person 
with disability, as well as for the family, 
where appropriate.
Assessment, historically, was based on eligi-
bility according to medical criteria (124). The 
focus now is more on support needs to improve 
functioning, as reflected in the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health (ICF) (131). Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, 
and Nicaragua have recently introduced ICF-
based disability assessment systems.
In many countries assessment has been sep-
arated from the delivery of services, to remove a 
 151
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
conflict of interests. In the Netherlands, while 
independent assessment agencies feel that this 
makes the process more transparent and objec-
tive, care providers find it less accessible and 
efficient (132).
In the United Kingdom assessment has 
shifted from being service-led (fitting the indi-
vidual to the available service) to needs-based 
(with services appropriate to meet the need), 
and then to a focus on outcome (with personal-
ized social care through enhanced choice). Self-
assessment is an important part of this process. 
It is not always easy for service users to articu-
late their needs, so supported decision making 
may be indicated (47).
Regulating providers
The state has an important role in regulating, 
setting standards, inspecting, monitoring, 
and evaluating.
In the United Kingdom the Comprehensive 
Area Assessment evaluates the success of local 
authorities in implementing government policy, 
managing public resources, and responding to 
the needs of their communities. Social care 
providers, whether public, private, or vol-
untary, must register with the Care Quality 
Commission and face regular assessment and 
inspections. Social care providers are judged by 
seven criteria:
 
■
improving health and well-being.
 
■
improving the quality of life
 
■
making a positive contribution
 
■
choice and control
 
■
freedom from discrimination
 
■
economic well-being
 
■
personal dignity.
In countries where NGOs, assisted by 
foreign aid and local philanthropy, have been 
the main providers of support services, stable 
public regulatory frameworks and funding are 
needed to sustain and build on the services.
Regulatory frameworks should cover:
 
■
quality standards
 
■
contracting and funding procedures
 
■
an assessment system
 
■
allocation of resources (108).
In establishing regulatory frameworks, in 
whatever setting, people with disabilities and 
their families should be included, and service 
users should help in evaluating services (133). 
Service outcomes can improve when providers 
are accountable to consumers (8).
Supporting public-private-
voluntary services
A variety of suppliers from different sectors (public, 
private, voluntary) provide support services.
In high-income countries, assistance and 
support services were set up mostly by charities 
and self-help groups, with later support from 
the state. This approach is still in use:
 
■
In the past decade NGOs working on disabil-
ity have been set up in the Balkan countries. 
Many are delivering services, often initially in 
pilots, with the support of state funding, such 
as the Serbian Social Innovation Fund (134). 
An example is the pilot project for interpreting 
in Novi Pazar, Serbia, run by the Association 
of Deaf and Hard of Hearing People.
 
■
In India the National Trust Act – created 
as the result of a campaign for the rights 
of people with disabilities – has produced 
collaboration among a range of NGOs. 
The Act gives individuals with autism, 
cerebral palsy, intellectual impairment, 
or multiple impairments, as well as their 
families, access to government services 
to enable people with disabilities to live 
as independently as possible within their 
communities. It also encourages NGOs to 
collaborate, giving support to families who 
need it, and to facilitate the appointment of 
a legal guardian (135). Mechanisms under 
the Act offer training in personal assis-
tance, to support people with a range of 
disabilities in the community.
Some countries have gone beyond simply 
supporting NGO services, by tendering 
 152
World report on disability 
services formerly provided by the state to the 
private not-for-profit sector. In Ireland, with 
funding from the government, NGOs provide 
nearly all services for people with intellectual 
disabilities (136). The main aims have been to 
provide access to specialist and complementary 
support services – and for the tendering to raise 
quality and drive down prices. This model, 
widely used in high-income countries, is being 
adopted in transition and middle-income coun-
tries. Governments retain the regulatory role of 
licensing suppliers and monitoring standards. 
But as countries shift to contracting, the pro-
cesses for contracting and monitoring should 
be effective (108), to avoid neglect of clients or 
other abuses (137).
Where NGOs and disabled people’s 
organizations develop a role as service pro-
viders in a mixed economy of care, this can 
lead to tensions with their client base if they 
have to cut costs to remain competitive, or if 
they become more responsive to their funders 
than those they work with, or if advocacy 
roles are neglected in favour of service provi-
sion (138, 139).
Many countries have seen an expansion of 
private provision in mental health, following a 
fall in public provision (140), but a systematic 
review in 2003 found that not-for-profit pro-
viders had better performances in access, qual-
ity, and cost-efficiency than for-profit mental 
health inpatient services (141).
Although systems for public-private part-
nership are well developed in high-income 
countries, the situation is quite different in low-
income and middle-income countries. Support 
services are fairly recent, and there generally is 
little support from the state for NGOs and for-
profit organizations.
Coordinating flexible 
service provision
People with disabilities have needs for assis-
tance and support that are not neatly packaged 
into what a single provider can offer. Informal 
assistance and support are most effective when 
underpinned by a range of formal systems and 
services, whether public or private.
Formal assistance and support must be 
coordinated with health care, rehabilitation, 
and housing. For example, a range of residen-
tial support services – independent housing 
and congregate living in group homes and 
institutional settings – should be offered along-
side other support services, with the type and 
level based on assessed need (142). Research 
shows that a comprehensive package of hous-
ing adaptations and assistive technology for 
older people would be cost-effective because of 
reductions in need for formal care (143).
Several high-income countries have moved 
from providing generic services to a more indi-
vidualized and flexible system of service provi-
sion. This calls for a high level of interagency 
coordination to ensure effective and continual 
delivery of support.
In the United States the Illinois Home 
Based Support Services Program, a successful 
direct payment scheme, supports people with 
disabilities and their families to decide which 
services to buy, including respite care, personal 
assistance, home modifications, recreational 
and employment services, therapies, and trans-
portation. Families that used this service were 
less likely to place family members in institu-
tional care (144). Efficiencies resulted because 
families tended to not spend all the available 
funds, and home-based care costs were lower 
than those of institutionalization (144).
In a similar vein, several countries – includ-
ing Australia, Canada, and several European 
countries – have started to look at individual-
ized models of funding. In this approach, public 
funding from different sources is allocated 
according to an assessment of need. The com-
bined personal budget is then placed under the 
control of the individual to buy services, often 
within certain constraints, ranging from assis-
tive devices and therapy to personal assistance 
(145–147). Increasing the power of consumers, 
this can make services more accountable. In 
consumer-directed services the professionals are 
available when needed, but are not the dominant 
 153
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
partner. Appropriate legal frameworks and 
infrastructure can help develop personal assis-
tance schemes, not just for people with physical 
impairments but also people with intellectual 
impairments and mental health issues.
Consumer organizations also deliver com-
munity-based responses for mental health.
 
■
In Zambia the Mental Health Users Network 
provides a forum for users of mental health 
services to support each other and exchange 
ideas and information (148).
 
■
In the United States MindFreedom has “land-
ing zones” for communities to provide support 
and housing to people so that they can avoid 
hospitalization or institutionalization (99).
Consumer-directed services are often less 
costly and just as safe as professional-directed 
services (149–151). Consumer-directed ser-
vices probably substitute for informal care and 
can thus raise overall government costs (118, 
119). The choice offered by such quasi-markets 
depends on supply, which may be lacking, espe-
cially in rural areas (152).
Consumer-directed models may not always 
improve efficiency and quality. Service users may 
find the choice and bureaucracy overwhelming. 
Full flexibility through direct payments and 
personal assistance involves responsibilities as 
an employer – with all the associated admin-
istrative duties, such as accounting and com-
pleting tax returns, that may be unwelcome to 
individuals. Some of these tasks can be under-
taken by user cooperatives or agencies.
In practice, and depending on needs and 
preferences, people with disabilities may opt for 
varying levels of choice and control. In the United 
Kingdom, despite the growth of personal assistance 
schemes, the majority of people with disabilities 
still do not opt for direct payments (153, 154). So 
a range of models is needed, and further research 
should determine which models of personal assis-
tance are most effective and efficient (118–121).
Support for informal caregivers
Informal care will continue to be important 
for people with disabilities (155). Apart from 
meeting assistance and support needs, it may 
well also be cost-effective to provide support to 
family members and others providing informal 
care, as suggested by the Illinois Home Based 
Support Services Program.
 
■
Respite services – either in the home or 
outside the home – providing short-term 
breaks from caring (156). These have been 
developed in high-income countries and 
countries in transition, but unmet needs 
for respite are reported (157, 158).
 
■
Direct or indirect financial support. 
Countries in transition, including the 
Republic of Moldova and Serbia, and parts 
of South America, where pensions have been 
provided for otherwise unpaid caregivers, and 
developing countries, such as South Africa, 
provide some cash benefit for caregivers in 
families with people with disabilities (62, 159).
 
■
Psychosocial support services to improve 
family well-being.
 
■
Paid sick leave and other support from 
employers to facilitate family caring.
Families can benefit from opportunities for 
autonomy and support services. Early family 
support programmes within the developmental 
disabilities system emerged in the 1960s in the 
Nordic countries and Australia (160) and in the 
late 1970s and early 1980s in the United States. 
Families in consumer-directed programmes 
are more satisfied with services, and have fewer 
unmet needs and fewer out-of-pocket expenses 
for disability services than those in other types 
of programme (161, 162).
Families may also need training in working 
with caregivers, roles, boundary setting, and 
empowering their relative with disability. They 
may also need information about available ser-
vices. But a Japanese study found that provid-
ing information was not effective in reducing 
the burden on caregivers, whereas social com-
munication did help (163).
User involvement
User involvement has become a criterion for 
judging the quality of service delivery. The 
 154
World report on disability
European Quality in Social Services initiative 
includes effective partnerships and participa-
tion among the principles governing its qual-
ity certification – a process complementary 
to national quality certification. Users can be 
involved in service delivery in different ways, 
including (108, 138, 139):
 
■
in complaints procedures
 
■
during evaluation and feedback
 
■
as participants on management boards
 
■
as members of advisory groups of people 
with disabilities
 
■
in making decisions for themselves.
The concept of the “co-production” of support 
services has recently been promoted, bringing 
together the traditional organizations working on 
behalf of people with disabilities with organiza-
tions controlled by people with disabilities (164). 
It recognizes the contribution disabled people can 
make, based on their experiences, seeks to put dis-
abled people in control of service developments 
and service delivery, and provides non-disabled 
people with the role of a supportive ally.
The advantages of co-produced service 
organizations are: the focus is on the needs of 
the users, and the combined resources improve 
the possibility of reducing disabling barriers 
and creating equality and interdependence 
(165). The principles of co-production and 
user involvement have been put into practice 
around the world by organizations of people 
with disability and by parents of children with 
disabilities, whether in formal service delivery 
or community-based rehabilitation (166).
Mechanisms for independent living
Randomized trials in high-income countries 
have compared personal assistance with usual 
care for children with intellectual impairments, 
adults with physical impairments, and older 
persons without dementia. Personal assistance 
was generally preferred over other services, had 
benefits for some recipients, and may benefit 
caregivers (118–121).
Personal assistance schemes are not lim-
ited to those with physical impairments. A 
range of approaches can benefit people with 
intellectual impairments or mental health con-
ditions, including:
 
■
Advocates – where the person is supported 
one-on-one by a trained and skilled individ-
ual to make and carry through a decision.
 
■
Circles of support – networks of support-
ers and friends who know the person well 
and who can make decisions to which the 
person freely consents.
 
■
KeyRing or living support networks – 
where people with intellectual impair-
ments live in the community, but with a 
“community living worker” available to 
provide support and help make connec-
tions in the community.
 
■
User-controlled 
independent 
living 
trusts – similar to circles of support, but 
with a legal structure that sets up the 
necessary framework of decision-making 
around the individual.
 
■
Service brokerage – where a skilled sup-
porter enables the person to choose ser-
vices, helping with the assessment process 
and supporting implementation of assis-
tance packages. An agency can act as the 
named employer of support on behalf of an 
individual, if required.
Despite evidence of the benefits of direct 
payments, mental health users are underrepre-
sented in individualized funding arrangements 
in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and 
the United States (167).
Because of the lack of funds, personal 
assistance is rarely publicly provided in low-
income and middle-income settings. But some 
innovative programmes suggest that low-cost 
solutions can be effective and that independent 
living principles remain relevant (3).
 
■
In 2003 in Brazil there were 21 centres for 
independent living, with the first in Rio de 
Janeiro, already been operating for 15 years 
 155
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
(166). As elsewhere, the independent living 
movement brings together people from 
different impairment groups, and offers 
services such as peer support, information, 
training and personal assistance, with staff 
who themselves have disabilities. However, 
unlike those in developed countries, cen-
tres for independent living do not tend to 
receive money from the state, but instead 
have to raise their own funds, such as 
through employment brokerage services.
 
■
In the Philippines a national disabled peo-
ples organization has developed a multi-
sectoral programme in partnership with 
the Department of Education and the par-
ents association. It supports the training of 
teachers and parents on providing appro-
priate personal assistance, so that children 
with severe impairments can attend local 
mainstream schools. It works with more 
than 13 000 children in rural areas, offering 
joint training workshops with preschool 
children, parents, and teachers (168).
Building capacity of caregivers 
and service users
Training for support workers
Support workers, regardless of setting and 
service, need professional training (variously 
known as human services, social work, or social 
care) that takes into account the principles of 
the CRPD (169). While many workers lack post-
school education (74), further and higher edu-
cation programmes in social work and health 
and social care are increasingly available in 
high income countries. The United Kingdom 
offers a National Vocational Qualification in 
health and social care, achieved through dem-
onstrating competency at work and possession 
of background knowledge. Often, people with 
disabilities can complement any formal train-
ing with on-the-job instruction.
How the training is conducted is as impor-
tant as the content. In general, people with dis-
abilities prefer the personal assistance model 
where they direct the tasks, rather than have 
the social care worker provide the services 
(170). A new generation of support workers – 
including personal assistants, advocates, and 
those supporting people with intellectual dif-
ficulties – present a fresh approach to working 
with people with disabilities in the community 
and helping them attain their own goals and 
aspirations, based on respect for human rights 
rather than the traditional ethos of “care” (171).
Support for users of assistance 
and support services
Funding arrangements for personal assistance 
schemes must take into account the additional 
tasks that users of the schemes may be called on 
to perform. People receiving direct payments, 
for instance, should be properly supported 
so that complexities in the system are not the 
cause of additional stress or isolation. People 
with disabilities who employ support workers 
need to know how to manage staff and fulfil 
their employer responsibilities. A study in the 
United Kingdom found that 27% of people with 
disabilities employing personal assistants found 
becoming an employer daunting, and 31% found 
it difficult to cope with the administration (72).
Disabled peoples’ organizations and car-
egivers’ organizations help users benefit from 
consumer-directed services (96). Individualized 
funding models are most effective when coupled 
with other support services (117). Support is also 
needed to ensure that brokers and fund man-
agers are not excessively directive and that the 
quality of care is good. Some disabled peoples’ 
organizations – such as the Scottish Personal 
Assistant Employers’ Network – have launched 
recruitment and training programmes aimed at 
personal support workers and their supervisors, 
as well as at their potential employers with dis-
abilities and their families (172). In low-income 
settings, community-based rehabilitation pro-
grammes may be able to provide training to 
people with disabilities and their families to 
manage their support needs and create links 
with self-help groups for information and advice.
 156
World report on disability 
Developing community-
based rehabilitation and 
community home-based care
Community-based rehabilitation
In many low-income and middle-income coun-
tries, consumer-led, government-delivered, or 
NGO-delivered community-based rehabilitation 
(CBR) programmes are becoming a source of 
assistance and support for many people with dis-
abilities and their families. Many focus on infor-
mation provision, working closely with families, 
and facilitating disabled peoples’ participation in 
the community (173). They can also counter ten-
dencies towards overprotection by families. In all 
income settings, it may be useful for CBR workers, 
social workers, or community workers to bring 
together families who share similar experiences in 
supporting relatives with disabilities.
 
■
In Lesotho the leaders of nine branches of the 
national association of parents of disabled 
children found that parents required support 
in how to teach, train and handle their child; 
information about the rights of people with 
disabilities and how to work with profession-
als; and information on how to create teach-
ing aids and obtain equipment (174).
 
■
RUCODE, an NGO in the state of Tamil 
Nadu, India, runs community-based day-
care centres for children with intellectual 
disabilities and cerebral palsy, with the 
help of local government and parents. 
Each centre caters to around 10 children, 
with one teacher and one attendant at each 
centre and support from RUCODE staff. 
The community contributes the venue and 
provides lunch for the children.
 
■
In Nepal CBR programmes are imple-
mented in 35 districts by local NGOs, with 
the government providing funding, direc-
tion, advice, and monitoring at the national 
and district levels (175).
As the CBR model strengthens the qual-
ity of the relationship between people with 
disabilities and their families, it can bring 
significant support to people with disabilities 
and caregivers (176). Recently the principles 
of independent living have started to be intro-
duced within community-based rehabilita-
tion, which will help CBR services ensure 
greater self-determination for people with 
disabilities.
Community home-based care
Community home-based care is any support 
given, in their homes, to people who are ill and 
their families (177). The model, developed par-
ticularly to cope with HIV/AIDS, operates in 
many African and Asian countries, with care 
of orphans a special concern. A government 
community home-based care programme 
might provide food, transport, medication, 
respite care, cash allowances, and emotional 
and physical care.
Including assistance and support in 
disability policies and action plans
The inclusion of formal assistance and sup-
port services within a national disability 
policy and related action plan can improve 
community participation of persons with dis-
abilities, for example:
 
■
Australia’s Disability Discrimination Act 
(1992) encourages organizations to create 
action plans to eliminate discrimination in 
provision of goods, services and facilities 
(178).
 
■
New Zealand’s Disability Strategy (2001) 
offers a framework for government to begin 
removing barriers to the participation of 
people with disabilities (179).
 
■
Sweden’s “From Patient to Citizen” national 
action plan (2000) has a vision of complete 
access and seeks to eliminate discrimina-
tion at all levels (180).
CBR programmes can also promote local 
action plans in low-income and middle-
income countries (181).
 157
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
Conclusion and 
recommendations
Many persons with disabilities need assistance 
and support to achieve a good quality of life and 
to participate in social and economic activities 
on an equal basis with others. Across the world 
most of the assistance and support services 
are provided informally by family members or 
social networks. While informal care is invalu-
able, it is sometimes unavailable, inadequate 
or insufficient. Formal provision of assistance 
and support services, by contrast, is insufficient, 
especially in low-income settings: state supply 
of services is generally underdeveloped, not-for-
profit organizations have limited coverage, and 
private markets rarely offer enough support to 
meet the needs of people with disabilities. The 
result is significant unmet need for assistance 
and support services.
A multitude of stakeholders have roles in 
ensuring that adequate assistance and support 
services are accessible to persons with disabili-
ties. Government’s role is to ensure equal access 
to services including through making policies 
and implementing them; regulating service 
provision including setting standards and 
enforcing them; funding services for people 
with disabilities who cannot afford to purchase 
services; and if needed, organizing the provi-
sion of services. In planning and introducing 
formal assistance and support services, care-
ful consideration should be given to avoiding 
disincentives for informal care. Service users 
and disabled peoples’ organizations and other 
NGOs should increase awareness, lobby for the 
introduction of services, participate in policy 
development and monitor implementation of 
policies and service provision. Service provid-
ers should provide the highest quality of ser-
vices. Through international cooperation, good 
and promising cost-effective practices should 
be shared and technical assistance provided to 
countries that are introducing assistance and 
support services.
This chapter has discussed some of the 
models of organizing, funding, and delivering 
formal assistance and support services. No 
single model of support services will work in 
all contexts and meet all needs. Person-centred 
services are preferable, so that individuals 
are involved in decisions about the support 
they receive and have maximum control over 
their lives. The following measures are recom-
mended for countries introducing or develop-
ing assistance and support services.
Support people to live and 
participate in the community
Provide services in the community, not in resi-
dential institutions or segregated settings. For 
countries that have previously relied on insti-
tutional living:
 
■
Plan adequately for the transition to a 
community-based service model, includ-
ing human resources and sufficient fund-
ing for the transition phase.
 
■
Progressively 
develop 
and 
reallocate 
resources to build community support 
services, including the possible trans-
formation of institutions into alternative 
care services such as resource or day care 
centres.
Foster development of the 
support services infrastructure
 
■
Include the introduction and development 
of formal assistance and support services 
– customized to different economic and 
social environments – in national disabil-
ity action plans to improve participation of 
persons with disabilities.
 
■
Support the development of a range of 
providers – state, not-for-profit providers, 
for-profit entities, and individuals – and 
models to meet, in a cost-effective manner, 
the diverse assistance and support needs of 
people with disabilities.
 
■
Consider a variety of financing measures 
including: contracting out services to pri-
vate providers, offering tax incentives, 
and devolving budgets to people with 
 158
World report on disability
disabilities and their families for direct 
purchases of services.
 
■
In low-income and middle-income coun-
tries, support service provision through civil 
society organizations, which can expand the 
coverage and range of services. CBR pro-
grammes have been effective in delivering 
services to very poor and underserved areas.
Ensure maximum consumer 
choice and control
This is more likely to be achieved by formal ser-
vices when:
 
■
Services are individualized and flexible 
rather than “one size fits all” agency-based 
and controlled services.
 
■
Consumers are involved in decisions on the 
type of support and direct the care tasks 
wherever possible rather than being a pas-
sive recipient of care.
 
■
Providers are accountable to consumers 
and their relationship is regulated through 
a formal service arrangement.
 
■
“Supported decision-making” is available 
for people who have difficulties making 
choices independently – for example, 
people with severe intellectual impairment 
or mental health conditions.
Support families as assistance 
and support providers
Separate the needs and rights of informal car-
egivers from the needs and rights of persons 
with disabilities. A balance must be found so 
that each person has independence, dignity, 
and quality of life.
Promote collaboration between families 
and family organizations, governmental and 
nongovernmental 
organizations, 
including 
disabled peoples’ organizations, to provide 
support for families through a range of systems 
and services including by:
 
■
Arranging for respite care, which can pro-
vide a short break from care and psychosocial 
counselling to improve family well-being.
 
■
Providing direct or indirect financial support.
 
■
Providing information about the services 
available for caregivers and people with 
disabilities.
 
■
Organizing opportunities for families, who 
share similar experiences in supporting 
relatives with disabilities, to come together 
and offer mutual information and support.
Community-based 
rehabilitation 
workers, 
social workers, or community workers can 
provide these opportunities for families. Useful 
family-oriented approaches also include devel-
oping communities of care and social networks.
Step up training and 
capacity building
Effective assistance and support services 
require training of both care recipients and 
care providers, irrespective of whether the care 
is provided formally or informally.
 
■
Formal support workers, regardless of set-
ting and service, should be provided with 
relevant professional training, which takes 
into account the principles of the CRPD and 
preferably involves people with disabilities 
as trainers to sensitize and familiarize ser-
vice providers with their future clients.
 
■
Provide training to families on working 
with caregivers, defining roles, setting 
boundaries, and on how to empower their 
relative with disability.
 
■
In low-income settings, community-based 
rehabilitation programmes can provide 
training to people with disabilities and their 
families to manage their support needs and 
create links with self-help groups for infor-
mation and advice.
 
■
Persons with disabilities directly employ-
ing support workers using allocated public 
funds may need training and assistance in 
recruitment, management and fulfilling 
their employer responsibilities.
 
■
Training schemes for sign-language inter-
preters and advocacy workers will help 
improve supply of these vital personnel.
 159
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
Improve the quality of services
To ensure that formal assistance and support 
services are of good quality, the following are 
recommended:
 
■
Develop sound and fair disability assessment 
criteria and procedures, focusing on support 
needs to maintain and improve functioning. 
Use ICF as a guiding framework in develop-
ing disability assessment criteria.
 
■
Develop clear eligibility criteria for assis-
tance and support services and transparent 
decision-making processes. In resource-
constrained environments, focus on people 
with disabilities most in need of support 
services – those without any informal car-
egiver and limited means.
 
■
Set standards of services, enforce them, 
and monitor compliance.
 
■
Monitor service provision.
 
■
Keep updated records of users, providers, 
and services provided.
 
■
Ensure coordination across different gov-
ernment agencies and service providers, 
possibly through introducing case man-
agement, referral systems, and electronic 
record-keeping.
 
■
Establish complaints mechanisms.
 
■
Introduce mechanisms to detect and pre-
vent physical and sexual abuse in both resi-
dential and community settings.
 
■
Ensure that support staff have appropriate 
training, proper levels of pay, status, and 
working conditions.
 
■
Encourage the monitoring of service qual-
ity by disabled peoples’ organizations and 
other NGOs.
References
1. 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Geneva, United Nations, 2006 (http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/
disabilities-convention.htm, accessed 16 May 2009).
2. 
Verdonschot MM et al. Community participation of people with an intellectual disability: a review of empirical findings. 
Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2009,53:303-318. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2008.01144.x PMID:19087215
3. 
Takamine Y. The cultural perspectives of independent living and self-help movement of people with disabilities. Asia 
Pacific Journal on Disability, 1998, 1 (http://www.dinf.ne.jp/doc/english/asia/resource/z00ap/002/z00ap00208.html, 
accessed 15 July 2009).
4. 
Misra S, Orslene LE, Walls RT. Personal assistance services for workers with disabilities: views and experiences of employers. 
Journal of Rehabilitation, 2010,76:22-27.http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0825/is_1_76/ai_n50152435/accessed 5 
April 2010.
5. 
People with Disabilities in India: From Commitments to Outcomes. Washington, World Bank, 2009 (http://imagebank.world-
bank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2009/09/02/000334955_20090902041543/Rendered/PDF/502090WP0Pe
opl1Box0342042B01PUBLIC1.pdf, accessed 5 June 2010).
6. 
Fisher K, Jing L. Chinese disability independent living policy. Disability & Society, 2008,23:171-185. 
doi:10.1080/09687590701841216
7. 
Saetermoe C, Gómez J, Bámaca M, Gallardo C. A qualitative enquiry of caregivers of adolescents with severe disabilities 
in Guatemala City. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2004,26:1032-1047. doi:10.1080/09638280410001703512 PMID:15371040
8. 
World Development Report: Making Services Work for Poor People. Washington, World Bank, 2004.
9. 
Principles for implementation of CRPD Article 12. New York, International Disability Alliance, CRPD Forum, 2008 (http://
www.internationaldisabilityalliance.org/representation/legal-capacity-working-group/, accessed 20 August 2009).
10. From exclusion to equality: realizing the rights of persons with disabilities. Handbook for parliamentarians on the Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol. Geneva, United Nations, 2007 (http://www.un.org/dis-
abilities/default.asp?id=212, accessed 20 August 2009).
11. Jesperson M. Personal ombudsman in Skåne: a user-controlled service with personal agents. In: Stastny P, Lehmann P, 
eds. Alternatives beyond psychiatry. Shrewsbury, United Kingdom, Peter Lehmann Publishing, 2007:299–303.
12. Canadian Association for Community Living [web site]. (http://www.cacl.ca/, accessed 20 August 2009).
13. Nidus Personal Planning Resource Center and Registry [web site]. (http://www.rarc.ca/textual/home.htm, accessed 20 
August 2009).
14. Personal Ombud programme in Skåne, Sweden [web site]. (http://www.po-skane.org/, accessed 20 August 2009).
 160
World report on disability
15. Kroll T, Neri MT. Experiences with care co-ordination among people with cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, or spinal cord 
injury. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2003,25:1106-1114. doi:10.1080/0963828031000152002 PMID:12944150
16. ICF Australian user guide, version 1. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2003.
17. Participation and activity limitation survey. Ottawa, Statistics Canada, 2001.
18. Household disability survey. Wellington, Statistics New Zealand, 2001.
19. Adult disability follow-back surveys. Hyattsville, United States National Center for Health Statistics, 1998.
20. Understanding the health-care needs and experiences of people with disabilities. Menlo Park, Kaiser Family Foundation, 
2003.
21. Brodsky J, Habib J, Hirschfeld M. Key policy issues in long term care. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003.
22. Anonymous Disability advocate who speaks her mind. China Development Brief, 1 October, 2001 (http://www.chinadevel-
opmentbrief.com/node/182, accessed 28 November 2008).
23. Clark P, Macarthur J. Children with physical disability: gaps in service provision, problems joining in. Journal of Paediatrics 
and Child Health, 2008,44:455-458. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1754.2008.01327.x PMID:18557807
24. Napier J. Sign language interpreter training, testing, and accreditation: an international comparison. American Annals of 
the Deaf, 2004,149:350-359. doi:10.1353/aad.2005.0007 PMID:15646939
25. Yarger CC. Educational interpreting: understanding the rural experience. American Annals of the Deaf, 2001,146:16-30. 
PMID:11355073
26. Nkwangu R. Sign language and community based rehabilitation (CBR). In: Hartley S, Okune J, eds. CBR: inclusive policy 
development and implementation. Norwich, University of East Anglia, 2008:214–231.
27. Haualand H, Allen C. Deaf people and human rights. Helsinki, World Federation of the Deaf and Swedish National Association 
of the Deaf, 2009.
28. McConkey R. Fair shares? Supporting families caring for adult persons with intellectual disabilities. Journal of Intellectual 
Disability Research, 2005,49:600-612. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2005.00697.x PMID:16011553
29. Nageswaran S. Respite care for children with special health care needs. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 
2009,163:49-54. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2008.504 PMID:19124703
30. World population ageing, 1950–2050. New York, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2002 (http://
www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldageing19502050/index.htm, accessed 20 November 2008).
31. Kenya at a glance. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2008 (http://www.unicef.org/kenya/overview_4616.html, 
accessed 1 April 2010).
32. Ahmad OB, Lopez AD, Inoue M. The decline in child mortality: a reappraisal. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 
2000,78:1175-1191. PMID:11100613
33. Knodel J, Chayovan N. Intergenerational relationships and family care and support for Thai elderly. Ageing International, 
2009,33:15-27. doi:10.1007/s12126-009-9026-7
34. Malhotra R, Kabeer N. Demographic transition, inter-generational contracts and old age security: an emerging challenge for 
social policy in developing countries. Brighton, University of Sussex, Institute of Development Studies, 2002 (IDS Working 
Paper No. 157).
35. Jenkins A et al. The future supply of informal care 2003 to 2013: Alternative scenarios. Canberra, Australian Institute for Health 
and Welfare, 2003.
36. Budlender D. The statistical evidence on care and non-care work across six countries. Geneva, United Nations Research 
Institute for Social Development, 2008.
37. Dahlberg L, Demack S, Bambra C. Age and gender of informal carers: a population-based study in the UK. Health & Social 
Care in the Community, 2007,15:439-445. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2007.00702.x PMID:17685989
38. Rogers M, Hogan D. Family life with children with disabilities: the key role of rehabilitation. Journal of Marriage and the 
Family, 2003,65:818-833. doi:10.1111/j.1741-3737.2003.00818.x
39. Hartley S et al. How do carers of disabled children cope? The Ugandan perspective. Child: Care, Health and Development, 
2005,31:167-180. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2214.2004.00464.x PMID:15715696
40. Esplen E. Gender and care overview report. Brighton, BRIDGE, Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, 2009 
(http://www.bridge.ids.ac.uk/reports_gend_CEP.html#Care, accessed 16 June 2009).
41. Carmichael F, Charles S. The opportunity costs of informal care: does gender matter? Journal of Health Economics, 
2003,22:781-803. doi:10.1016/S0167-6296(03)00044-4 PMID:12946459
42. Anderson L et al. Children with disabilities: social roles and family impacts in the NHIS-D. DD Data Brief, 2002, 4(1) (http://
rtc.umn.edu/docs/dddb4-1.pdf, accessed 28 July 2009).
43. Parish SL et al. Economic implications of caregiving at midlife: comparing parents with and without children who have 
developmental disabilities. Mental Retardation, 2004,42:413-426. doi:10.1352/0047-6765(2004)42<413:EIOCAM>2.0.CO;2 
PMID:15516174
44. Aldridge J, Sharpe D. Pictures of young caring. Loughborough, University of Loughborough, 2007.
 161
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
45. Becker S, Becker F. Service needs and delivery following the onset of caring amongst children and young adults: evidence-
based review. Nottingham, Young Caregivers International Research and Evaluation, Commission for Rural Communities, 
2008 (http://www.ruralcommunities.gov.uk/files/CRC%20web36%20YCIRE.pdf, accessed 17 July 2009).
46. Mete C, ed. Economic implications of chronic illness and disability in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. Washington, 
World Bank, 2008.
47. Foster M et al. Personalised social care for adults with disabilities: a problematic concept for frontline practice. Health & 
Social Care in the Community, 2006,14:125-135. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2006.00602.x PMID:16460362
48. Menon DK, Peshawaria R, Ganguli R. Public policy issues in disability rehabilitation in developing countries of South-East 
Asia. In: Thomas M, Thomas MJ, eds. Selected readings in community based rehabilitation: disability and rehabilitation issues 
in South Asia. Bangalore, APDRJ Group Publication, 2002.
49. Bigby C, Ozanne E, Gordon M. Facilitating transition: elements of successful case management practice for older parents 
of adults with intellectual disability. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 2002,37:25-43. doi:10.1300/J083v37n03_04
50. Heller T, Caldwell J, Factor A. Aging family caregivers: policies and practices. Mental Retardation and Developmental 
Disabilities Research Reviews, 2007,13:136-142. doi:10.1002/mrdd.20138 PMID:17563896
51. Morris J. Pride against prejudice. London, Women’s Press, 1991.
52. McKee KJ et al. COPE PartnershipThe COPE index–a first stage assessment of negative impact, positive value 
and quality of support of caregiving in informal carers of older people. Aging & Mental Health, 2003,7:39-52. 
doi:10.1080/1360786021000006956 PMID:12554314
53. Askheim O. Personal assistance: direct payments or alternative public service? Does it matter for the promotion of user 
control? Disability & Society, 2005,20:247-260. doi:10.1080/09687590500060562
54. Thompson L. Long-term care: support for family caregivers. Washington, Georgetown University, 2004.
55. Braddock D, Hemp R, Rizzolo M. The state of the states in developmental disabilities, 7th ed. Washington, American 
Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 2008.
56. Australia’s welfare 2007. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2007 (Cat. No. 93).
57. Guerriere DN et al. Costs and determinants of privately financed home-based health care in Ontario, Canada. Health & 
Social Care in the Community, 2008,16:126-136. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2007.00732.x PMID:18290978
58. Holland D. Grass roots promotion of community health and human rights for people with disabilities in post-communist 
Central Europe: a profile of the Slovak Republic. Disability & Society, 2003,18:133-143. doi:10.1080/0968759032000052798
59. Kandyomunda B et al. The role of local NGOs in promoting participation in CBR. In: Hartley S, ed. Community-based 
rehabilitation (CBR) as a participatory strategy in Africa. Cornell University ILR School, New York, 2002.
60. Disabled children’s action group (DICAG) South Africa. Manchester, United Kingdom, Enabling Education Network, 2001 
(http://www.eenet.org.uk/key_issues/parents/stories/dicag.shtml, accessed 25 February 2008).
61. Fisher WF. Doing good? The politics and antipolitics of NGO practice. Annual Review of Anthropology, 1997,26:439-464. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.26.1.439
62. Weigand C, Grosh M. Levels and patterns of safety net spending in developing and transition countries. Washington, World 
Bank, 2008 (SP Discussion Paper No. 0817).
63. Home-based long-term care: report of a WHO study group. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2000.
64. Vecchio N. The use of support systems by informal caregivers: an Australian experience. Australian Journal of Primary 
Health, 2008,14:27-34.
65. Razavi S. The political and social economy of care in a development context: contextual issues, research questions and policy 
options. Geneva, United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, 2007.
66. Lu Y. The limitations of NGOs: a preliminary study of non-governmental social welfare organisations in China. London, Center 
for Civil Society, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2003 (CCS International Working Paper No. 13) (http://
www.lse.ac.uk/collections/CCS/pdf/IWP/IWP13LuYiyi.pdf, accessed 25 November 2008).
67. Fu T. Good will is not enough. China Development Brief, 2002 (http://www.chinadevelopmentbrief.com/node/161, 
accessed 26 July 2006).
68. The Future Supply of Long-Term Care Workers in relation to The Aging Baby Boom Generation – Report to United States 
Congress. Washington, United States Department of Health and Human Services, 2003 (http://aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/
reports/ltcwork.pdf, accessed 27 May 2010).
69. Blok W. Social Work in Poland: a helping profession in need. Social Work and Society Online News Magazine, 2007 (http://
www.socmag.net/?p=97, accessed 27 May, 2010).
70. Chu LW, Chi I. Nursing homes in China. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, 2008,9:237-243. doi:10.1016/j.
jamda.2008.01.008 PMID:18457798
71. Occupational employment and wages, May 2005. Washington, United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2006.
72. Employment aspects and workforce implications of direct payments. Leeds, United Kingdom, Skills for Care, 2008 (http://
www.skillsforcare.org.uk, accessed 24 March 2010).
 162
World report on disability
73. Jorgensen D et al. The providers’ profile of the disability support workforce in New Zealand. Health & Social Care in the 
Community, 2009,17:396-405. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2008.00839.x PMID:19220491
74. Mcfarlane L, Mclean J. Education and training for direct care workers. Social Work Education, 2003,22:385-399. 
doi:10.1080/02615470309140
75. Ehrenreich B, Hochschild A, eds. Global women: nannies, maids and sex workers in the new economy. London, Granta, 2003.
76. Scull A. Museum of Madness: The Social Organization of Insanity in Nineteenth Century England. New York, St. Martin’s Press, 
1979.
77. Wright D, Digby A, eds. From Idiocy to Mental Deficiency: historical perspectives on people with learning disabilities. London, 
Routledge, 1996.
78. Miller EJ, Gwynne GV. A life apart: a pilot study for residential institutions for the physically handicapped and the young 
chronic sick. London, Tavistock, 1972.
79. Zinkin P, McConachie H, eds. Disabled children and developing countries. London, Mac Keith Press, 1995.
80. Ingstad B, Whyte SR, eds. Disability and culture. Berkeley, University of California Press, 1995.
81. Turmusani M. Disabled people and economic needs in the developing world: a political perspective from Jordan. Aldershot, 
United Kingdom, Ashgate Publishing, 2003.
82. Parmenter TR. The present, past and future of the study of intellectual disability: challenges in developing countries. 
Salud Pública de México, 2008,50:Suppl 2s124-s131. PMID:18470339
83. Borbasi S et al. ‘No going back’ to institutional care for people with severe disability: reflections on practice through an 
interpretive study. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2008,30:837-847. doi:10.1080/09638280701419359 PMID:17852275
84. Disability Rights International [website]. (http://www.disabilityrightsintl.org/, accessed 8 March 2011).
85. Kozma A, Mansell J, Beadle-Brown J. Outcomes in different residential settings for people with intellectual disability: a 
systematic review. American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 2009,114:193-222. doi:10.1352/1944-
7558-114.3.193 PMID:19374466
86. Dobrzyńska E, Rymaszewska J, Kiejna A. [Needs of persons with mental disorders–definitions and literature review] 
Psychiatria Polska, 2008,42:515-524. PMID:19189596
87. Freidson E. Profession of Medicine: a study of the sociology of applied knowledge. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 1988
88. Barnes C, Mercer G. Independent Futures: creating user-led disability services in a disabling society. Bristol, Policy Press, 2006.
89. Catty JS et al. Day centers for severe mental illness. Cochrane database of systematic reviews (Online), 
2007,1CD001710- PMID:17253463
90. Perrins K, Tarr J. The quality of day care provision to encourage the transition to adulthood for young women with learning 
difficulties. Research in Post-Compulsory Education, 1998,3:93-109. doi:10.1080/13596749800200027
91. Stewart S. The use of standardized and non-standardized assessments in a social services setting: implications for prac-
tice. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 1999,62:417-423.
92. Mak AKM, Mackenzie A, Lui MHL. Changing needs of Chinese family caregivers of stroke survivors. Journal of Clinical 
Nursing, 2007,16:971-979. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2702.2006.01754.x PMID:17462048
93. Mirza I, Tareen A, Davidson LL, Rahman A. Community management of intellectual disabilities in Pakistan: a mixed 
methods study. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2009,53:559-570. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2009.01176.x 
PMID:19504727
94. Roelands M, Van Oost P, Depoorter AM. Service use in family caregivers of persons with dementia in Belgium: psycho-
logical and social factors. Health & Social Care in the Community, 2008,16:42-53. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2007.00730.x 
PMID:18181814
95. Charlton J. Nothing about us without us: disability oppression and empowerment. Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of 
California Press, 2000.
96. Riddell S et al. The development of direct payments: implications for social justice. Social Policy and Society, 2005,4:75-85. 
doi:10.1017/S1474746404002209
97. Shakespeare T, Gillespie-Sells K, Davies D. The sexual politics of disability: untold desires. London, Cassell, 1996.
98. Adams L. The right to live in the community: making it happen for people with intellectual disabilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
Montenegro, Serbia and Kosovo. Sarajevo, Disability Monitor Initiative for South East Europe, Handicap International 
Regional Office for South East Europe, 2008.
99. Agnetti G. The consumer movement and compulsory treatment: a professional outlook. International Journal of Mental 
Health, 2008,37:33-45. doi:10.2753/IMH0020-7411370403
100. Sobsey D. Violence and abuse in the lives of people with disabilities: the end of silent acceptance? Baltimore, Brookes 
Publishing, 1994.
101. Brown H. Safeguarding adults and children with disabilities against abuse. Strasbourg, Council of Europe, 2002.
 163
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
102. The Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities. Adopted by the United Nations General 
Assembly, forty-eighth session, resolution 48/96, annex, of 20 December 1993. New York, United Nations, 1993 (http://
www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/dissre00.htm, accessed 27 July 2009).
103. Mansell J, Ericsson K, eds. Deinstitutionalisation and community living: intellectual disability services in Britain, Scandinavia 
and the USA. London, Chapman and Hall, 1996.
104. Braddock D, Emerson E, Felce D, Stancliffe RJ. Living circumstances of children and adults with mental retardation or 
developmental disabilities in the United States, Canada, England and Wales, and Australia. Mental Retardation and 
Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 2001,7:115-121. doi:10.1002/mrdd.1016 PMID:11389566
105. Laragy C. Individualised funding in disability services. In: Eardley T, Bradbury B, eds. Competing visions: refereed proceed-
ings of the National Social Policy Conference 2001. Sydney, Social Policy Research Center, University of New South Wales, 
2002:263–278.
106. Mansell J. Deinstitutionalisation and community living: progress, problems and priorities. Journal of Intellectual & 
Developmental Disability, 2006,31:65-76. doi:10.1080/13668250600686726 PMID:16782591
107. Better health, better lives: children and young people with intellectual disabilities and their families. Bucharest, World 
Health Organization Europe, 2010 (Background paper for the conference, 26–27 November) (http://www.euro.who.
int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/126408/e94421.pdf, accessed 6 January 2011).
108. Chiriacescu D. Shifting the paradigm in social service provision: making quality services accessible for people with disabilities 
in South East Europe. Sarajevo, Disability Monitor Initiative for South East Europe, Handicap International Regional Office 
for South East Europe, 2008.
109. Protection of disabled persons. Bucharest, Romania Ministry of Labour, 2009 (http://www.mmuncii.ro/pub/imageman-
ager/images/file/Statistica/Buletin%20statistic/2009/handicap4_68.pdf, accessed 5 April 2010).
110. Mansell J et al. Deinstitutionalisation and community living—outcomes and costs: report of a European study [Volume 2: 
Main report]. Canterbury, Tizard Center, University of Kent, 2007.
111. Battams S, Baum F. What policies and policy processes are needed to ensure that people with psychiatric disabilities have 
access to appropriate housing? Social Science & Medicine (1982), 2010,70:1026-1034. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.12.007 
PMID:20116916
112. Davis D, Fox-Grage W, Gehshan S. Deinstitutionalization of persons with developmental disabilities: a technical assistance 
report for legislators. Denver, National Conference of State Legislatures, 2000 (http://www.mnddc.org/parallels2/pdf/00-
DPD-NCS.pdf, accessed 28 July 2009).
113. Hallam A et al. Service use and costs of support 12 years after leaving hospital. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual 
Disabilities, 2006,19:296-308. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2006.00278.x
114. Chou YC et al. Outcomes and costs of residential services for adults with intellectual disabilities in Taiwan: A comparative 
evaluation. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 2008,21:114-125. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2007.00373.x
115. Stancliffe R, Lakin C. Costs and outcomes of community services for people with intellectual disabilities. Baltimore, Brookes 
Publishing, 2004.
116. Dinkinć M, Momčilović J. Cost of independence: cost-benefit analysis of investing in the organization of personal assistant 
service for persons with disabilities in Serbia. Belgrade, Institute G17 Plus and Center for Independent Living, 2007.
117. Glendinning C et al. Evaluation of the individual budgets pilot program. York, University of York, 2008.
118. Mayo-Wilson E, Montgomery P, Dennis JA. Personal assistance for children and adolescents (0–18) with intellectual 
impairments. Cochrane database of systematic reviews (Online), 2008,3CD006858- PMID:18646172
119. Montgomery P, Mayo-Wilson E, Dennis JA. Personal assistance for older adults (65+) without dementia. Cochrane database 
of systematic reviews (Online), 2008,1CD006855- PMID:18254118
120. Mayo-Wilson E, Montgomery P, Dennis JA. Personal assistance for adults (19–64) with both physical and intellectual 
impairments. Cochrane database of systematic reviews (Online), 2008,2CD006860- PMID:18425973
121. Mayo-Wilson E, Montgomery P, Dennis JA. Personal assistance for adults (19–64) with physical impairments. Cochrane 
database of systematic reviews (Online), 2008,3CD006856- PMID:18646171
122. Carrin G, Mathauer I, Xu K, Evans DB. Universal coverage of health services: tailoring its implementation. Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization, 2008,86:857-863. doi:10.2471/BLT.07.049387 PMID:19030691
123. Cutting the cake fairly: CSCI review of eligibility criteria for social care. London, Commission for Social Care Inspection, 2008.
124. Cote A. Gate keeping: urgent need for reform to ensure fair and effective access to social protection entitlements. 
Disability Monitor Initiative–Middle East Journal, 2009,1:18-20.
125. Chisholm D, Knapp M. Funding of mental health services. In: Thornicroft G, ed. Oxford textbook of community mental 
health. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2010.
126. Ratzka AD. Independent living and attendant care in Sweden: a consumer perspective. New York, World Rehabilitation Fund, 
1986 (Monograph No. 34) (http://www.independentliving.org/docs1/ar1986spr.pdf, accessed 27 December 2007).
 164
World report on disability
127. Lilja M, Mansson I, Jahlenius L, Sacco-Peterson M. Disability policy in Sweden. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 
2003,14:130-135. doi:10.1177/10442073030140030101
128. de Klerk M, Schellingerhout R. Ondersteuning gewenst, Mensen met lichamelijke beperkingen en hun voorzieningen op 
het terrein van wonen, zorg, vervoer en welzijn (Support is Desired, people with physical disabilities and their support in 
the domains of living, care, transportation and well-being). Den Haag, SCP, May 2006, (http://www.scp.nl/publicaties/
boeken/9037702600/Ondersteuning_gewenst.pdf.
129. You and your grants 2009/10. Pretoria, South African Social Security Agency, 2009 (http://www.sassa.gov.za/applications/
cms/documents/file_build.asp?id=100000081, accessed 26 July 2009).
130. Disability support services: increasing participation and independence. Wellington, Ministry of Health, 2002.
131. International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.
132. Algera M, Francke AL, Kerkstra A, van der Zee J. An evaluation of the new home-care needs assessment policy in the 
Netherlands. Health & Social Care in the Community, 2003,11:232-241. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2524.2003.00424.x PMID:12823428
133. Jones K, Netten A, Francis J, Bebbington A. Using older home care user experiences in performance monitoring. Health & 
Social Care in the Community, 2007,15:322-332. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2006.00687.x PMID:17578393
134. Axelsson C, Granier P, Adams L. Beyond de-institutionalization: the unsteady transition towards an enabling system in South 
East Europe. Sarajevo, Disability Monitor Initiative for South East Europe, 2004.
135. Puri M. Assisted decision making: does the National Trust Act deliver? Disability India Network, n.d. (http://www.disabilityin-
dia.org/natTrust.cfm, accessed 10 October 2008).
136. Mulvany F, Barron S, McConkey R. Residential provision for adult persons with intellectual disabilities in Ireland. Journal 
of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 2007,20:70-76. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3148.2006.00306.x
137. Mandelstam M. Safeguarding vulnerable adults and the law. London, Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2009.
138. Acheson N. Service delivery and civic engagement: disability organisations in Northern Ireland Voluntas, 2001,12:279-293. 
doi:10.1023/A:1012395402144
139. Priestley M. Disability Politics and Community Care. London, Jessica Kingsley, 1998.
140. Hatfield B, Ryan T, Simpson V, Sharma I. Independent sector mental health care: a 1-day census of private and voluntary 
sector placements in seven Strategic Health Authority areas in England. Health & Social Care in the Community, 2007,15:407-
416. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2007.00698.x PMID:17685986
141. Rosenau PV, Linder SH. A comparison of the performance of for-profit and nonprofit U.S. psychiatric inpatient care provid-
ers since 1980. Psychiatric Services (Washington, D.C.), 2003,54:183-187. PMID:12556598
142. McConkey R et al. Variations in the social inclusion of people with intellectual disabilities in supported living schemes and 
residential settings. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2007,51:207-217. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00858.x 
PMID:17300416
143. Lansley P et al. Adapting the homes of older people: a case study of costs and savings. Building Research and Information, 
2004,32:468-483. doi:10.1080/0961321042000269429
144. Heller T, Caldwell J. Impact of a consumer-directed family support program on reduced out-of-home institutional place-
ment. Journal of Policy and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities, 2005,2:63-65. doi:10.1111/j.1741-1130.2005.00010.x
145. Pijl M. Home care allowances: good for many but not for all. Practice: Social Work in Action, 2000,12:55-65.
146. Rabiee P, Moran N, Glendinning C. Individual budgets: lessons from early users’ experiences, 2009. British Journal of Social 
Work, 2009,39:918-935. doi:10.1093/bjsw/bcm152
147. Carr S, Robins D. The implementation of individual budget schemes in adult social care. London, Social Care Institute for 
Excellence, 2009 (SCIE Research Briefing 20).
148. Vulnerable groups in development: the case for targeting mental health conditions. Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2010.
149. Benjamin AE, Matthias R, Franke TM. Comparing consumer-directed and agency models for providing supportive services 
at home. Health Services Research, 2000,35:351-366. PMID:10778820
150. Kim WM, White GW, Fox MH. Comparing outcomes of persons choosing consumer-directed or agency-directed personal 
assistance services. Journal of Rehabilitation, 2006,72:32-43.
151. Clark MJ, Hagglund KJ, Sherman AK. A longitudinal comparison of consumer-directed and agency-directed personal 
assistance service programmes among persons with physical disabilities. Disability and Rehabilitation, 2008,30:689-695. 
doi:10.1080/09638280701463878 PMID:17852213
152. Spall P, McDonald C, Zetlin D. Fixing the system? The experience of service users of the quasi-market in disability services 
in Australia. Health & Social Care in the Community, 2005,13:56-63. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2005.00529.x PMID:15717907
153. Priestley M et al. Direct payments and disabled people in the UK: supply, demand and devolution. British Journal of Social 
Work, 2007,37:1189-1204. doi:10.1093/bjsw/bcl063
 165
Chapter 5 
Assistance and Support
154. Stevens M et al. Choosing services or lifestyles: assessing the role of increasing choice in UK social care services. Journal 
of Social Policy, forthcoming
155. Grassman EJ, Whitaker A, Larsson AT. Family as failure? The role of informal help-givers to disabled people in Sweden. 
Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research, 2009,11:35-49. doi:10.1080/15017410802253518
156. Dougherty S et al. Planned and crisis respite for families with children: results of a collaborative study. Arlington, Child 
Welfare League of America, ARCH National Respite Network and Resource Center, 2002 (http://www.archrespite.org/
Collaborative%20Respite%20Report%20.pdf, accessed 15 April 2010).
157. Mansell I, Wilson C. Current perceptions of respite care: experiences of family and informal carers of people with a learning 
disability. Journal of Intellectual Disabilities: JOID, 2009,13:255-267. doi:10.1177/1744629509356725 PMID:20048347
158. Breaking point: families still need a break. London, Mencap, 2006 (http://www.mencap.org.uk/document.asp?id=297, 
accessed 15 April 2010).
159. Giménez DM. Género, previsión y ciudadanía social en América Latina (Gender, pensions and social citizenship in Latin 
America). Santiago, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2005 (Serie Mujer y Desarrollo No. 46).
160. Australia’s welfare 1993: services and assistance. Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 1993.
161. Caldwell J. Consumer-directed supports: economic, health, and social outcomes for families. Mental Retardation, 
2006,44:405-417. doi:10.1352/0047-6765(2006)44[405:CSEHAS]2.0.CO;2 PMID:17132035
162. Glendinning C et al. Individual budgets pilot program: impact and outcomes for caregivers. York, University of York, 2009.
163. Yamada M, Hagihara A, Nobutomo K. Coping strategies, care manager support and mental health outcome among 
Japanese family caregivers. Health & Social Care in the Community, 2008,16:400-409. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2007.00752.x 
PMID:18221487
164. Gillinson S, Green H, Miller P. Independent living: the right to be equal citizens. London, Demos, 2005.
165. Meyer J. A non-institutional society for people with developmental disability in Norway. Journal of Intellectual & 
Developmental Disability, 2003,28:305-308.
166. Bieler RB. Independent living in Latin America: progress in adapting a “First World” philosophy to the realities of the 
“Third World”. In: Garcia Alonso JV, ed. El movimiento de vida independiente: experiencias internacionales. Madrid, Spain, 
Fundación Luis Vives, 2003:218–242 (http://www.disabilityworld.org/11-12_03/il/latinamerica.shtml, accessed 31 March 
2010).
167. Spandler H, Vick N. Opportunities for independent living using direct payments in mental health. Health & Social Care in 
the Community, 2006,14:107-115. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2006.00598.x PMID:16460360
168. Ilagan V. Breaking the barriers: enabling children with disabilities in the Philippines. Development Outreach, 2005 July 
(http://devoutreach.com/july05/SpecialReportBreakingtheBarriers/tabid/908/Default.aspx, accessed 6 April 2010).
169. Windley D, Chapman M. Support workers within learning/intellectual disability services perception of their role, training 
and support needs. British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 2010,38:310-318. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3156.2010.00610.x
170. Determining the training needs of personal assistants working directly with personal assistance users. London, Independent 
Living Alternatives, 2008 (http://www.ilanet.co.uk/id15.html, accessed 5 April 2010).
171. Finkelstein V. Rethinking care in a society providing equal opportunities for all. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.
172. Larson S, Hewitt A. Staff recruitment, retention, training strategies for community human services organizations. Baltimore, 
Brookes Publishing, 2005.
173. Kishorekumar BD. Community based rehabilitation: an approach to empower the disabled. Hyderabad, ICFAI Books, 2009.
174. McConkey R, Alant E. Promoting leadership and advocacy. In: Alant E, Lloyd LL, eds. Augmentative and alternative com-
munication and severe disabilities: beyond poverty. London, Whurr Publishers, 2005:323–344.
175. Upadhyaya GP. Policy, programs and activities to protect and promote the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities in 
Nepal. Bangkok, Expert Group Meeting and Seminar on an International Convention to Protect and Promote the Rights 
and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, 2003 (http://www.worldenable.net/bangkok2003/papernepal2.htm, accessed 
25 November 2008).
176. Lysack C, Kaufert J. Comparing the origins and ideologies of the independent living movement and community based 
rehabilitation. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Rehabilitationsforschung. 
Revue Internationale de Recherches de Réadaptation, 1994,17:231-240. PMID:8002130
177. Community home-based care in resource limited settings: a framework for action. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002.
178. Australian Human Rights Commission [web site]. (www.hreoc.gov.au/disability_rights/, accessed 6 April 2010).
179. New Zealand disability strategy. Wellington, Ministry of Health, 2001 (www.odi.govt.nz/nzds, accessed 25 November 
2008).
180. Handisam [website]. (http://www.handisam.se/Tpl/NormalPage____297.aspx, accessed 6 April 2010).
181. CBR guidelines. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
  Chapter 6
Enabling environments
 “I have been forced to come up with practical solutions to face head-on with confi-
dence an ill-equipped environment to live an active life with Muscular Dystrophy while, 
in parallel, campaigning for a more inclusive society. Among these private efforts, I have 
had to hire a driver/assistant who provides me with the support needed for transportation 
purposes. It is not an uncommon sight in Port-au-Prince to witness my assistant carrying 
me as we climb several flights of stairs, even at the tax office to pay my dues!”
Gerald 
“After injury I felt that my social life has been affected so much, due to the difficulty of 
transportation and environment challenges, it is difficult to do the daily activities (visiting 
friends, going out…etc), as well as go to hospital appointments and rehabilitation. Before 
the injury I was an active member in the society, I had many friends and used to go out 
with them to do some activities and sports. But after the injury, it was difficult for me to 
go out with them, because the environment is not adapted for wheelchair users, either the 
streets, transportation, shops, restaurants, or other facilities.”
Fadi 
“I am joining a first gathering of a group that discusses professional topics in psychol-
ogy. The meeting was very stressful and frustrating for me, since I was not able to follow 
the group discussion. After the session was over, I called the instructor, told her about 
my hearing problem, and asked her permission to pass a special microphone between the 
speakers, a microphone that transmits their voices straight to my hearing-aids. To my 
surprise the instructor refused my request and said that it was not good for the group 
because it would ruin the atmosphere of spontaneity.”
Adva 
“The hardest obstacle for my independence has been the attitude of the people. They 
think that we can’t do many things. Also, the steps and architectural barriers. I had 
an experience in the Casa de la Cultura with the director. There were many steps and I 
couldn’t enter so I sent someone to call for help and when the director came, surprised, 
he said ‘what’s happened, what’s happened, why are you like this’. He thought that I was 
there to beg for money, and had not thought that I was working.”
Feliza
“Until I was 19 years old, I had no opportunities to learn sign language, nor had Deaf 
friends. After I entered a university, I learned sign language(s) and played an active role as 
a board member of Deaf clubs. Since I completed graduate school, I worked as a bio-sci-
entist in a national institute. I mainly communicate with my colleagues by hand-writing, 
while I use public sign language-interpreting service for some lectures and meetings. My 
Deaf partner and I have two Deaf children…my personal history gives me the distinct 
opinion that the sign language and Deaf culture are absolutely imperative for Deaf chil-
dren to rise to the challenge.”
Akio 
 6
Enabling environments
169
Environments – physical, social, and attitudinal – can either disable people 
with impairments or foster their participation and inclusion. The United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) stipu-
lates the importance of interventions to improve access to different domains 
of the environment including buildings and roads, transportation, infor-
mation, and communication. These domains are interconnected – people 
with disabilities will not be able to benefit fully from improvements in one 
domain if the others remain inaccessible.
An accessible environment, while particularly relevant for people with 
disabilities, has benefits for a broader range of people. For example, curb 
cuts (ramps) assist parents pushing baby strollers. Information in plain 
language helps those with less education or speakers of a second language. 
Announcements of each stop on public transit may aid travellers unfamiliar 
with the route as well as those with visual impairments. Moreover, the benefits 
for many people can help generate widespread support for making changes.
To succeed, accessibility initiatives need to take into account external 
constraints including affordability, competing priorities, availability of 
technology and knowledge, and cultural differences. They should also be 
based on sound scientific evidence. Often, accessibility is more easily achiev-
able incrementally – for example, by improving the features of buildings in 
stages. Initial efforts should aim to build a “culture of accessibility” and focus 
on removing basic environmental barriers. Once the concept of accessibility 
has become ingrained and as more resources become available, it becomes 
easier to raise standards and attain a higher level of universal design.
Even after physical barriers have been removed, negative attitudes can 
produce barriers in all domains. To overcome the ignorance and prejudice 
surrounding disability, education and awareness-raising is required. Such 
education should be a regular component of professional training in archi-
tecture, construction, design, informatics, and marketing. Policy-makers 
and those working on behalf of people with disabilities need to be educated 
about the importance of accessibility.
The information and communication environment is usually con-
structed by corporate bodies with significant resources, a global reach 
and – sometimes – experience with issues of accessibility. As a result new 
technologies with universal designs are usually adopted more quickly in 
the virtual rather than in the built environment. But even with the rapid 
 170
World report on disability
development of information and communi-
cation technology (ICT), accessibility can be 
limited by unaffordability and unavailability. 
As new technologies are created in rapid suc-
cession, there is a danger that access for people 
with disabilities will be overlooked and that 
expensive assistive technologies will be opted 
for, rather than universal design.
This chapter focuses on the environmental 
barriers to gaining access to buildings, roads, 
transport and information and communica-
tion and the measures needed to improve 
access (see Box 6.1).
Understanding access to 
physical and information 
environments
Access to public accommodations – buildings 
and roads – is beneficial for participation in 
civic life and essential for education, health 
care, and labour market participation (see 
Box 6.2). Lack of access can exclude people 
with disabilities, or make them dependent on 
others (6). As an example, if public toilets are 
inaccessible, people with disabilities will find it 
difficult to participate in everyday life.
Transportation 
provides 
independent 
access to employment, education, and health 
care facilities, and to social and recreational 
activities. Without accessible transportation, 
people with disabilities are more likely to be 
excluded from services and social contact (7, 8). 
In a study in Europe, transport was a frequently 
cited obstacle to the participation of people 
with disabilities (9). In a survey in the United 
States of America lack of transportation was 
the second most frequent reason for a person 
with disability being discouraged from seeking 
work (10). The lack of public transportation is 
itself a major barrier to access, even in some 
highly developed countries (11).
A lack of accessible communication and 
information affects the life of many disabled 
people (12–14). Individuals with communica-
tion difficulties, such as hearing impairment or 
Box 6.1. Definitions and concepts
Accessibility – in common language, the ability to reach, understand, or approach something or someone. In 
laws and standards on accessibility, it refers to what the law requires for compliance.
Universal design – a process that increases usability, safety, health, and social participation, through design 
and operation of environments, products, and systems in response to the diversity of people and abilities (1).
Usability, though, is not the only goal of universal design, and “adaption and specialized design” are a part of 
providing customization and choice, which may be essential for addressing diversity. Other overlapping terms 
for the same general concept are “design for all” and “inclusive design”.
Standard – a level of quality accepted as a norm. Sometimes standards are codified in documents such as 
“guidelines” or “regulations”, both with specific definitions, with different legal implications in different legal 
systems. An example is Part M of the Building Regulations in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland. Standards can be voluntary or compulsory.
Public accommodations – buildings open to and provided for the public, whether publicly owned (such as courts, 
hospitals, and schools) or privately owned (such as shops, restaurants, and sports stadia) as well as public roads.
Transportation – vehicles, stations, public transportation systems, infrastructure, and pedestrian environments.
Communication – “includes languages, text displays, Braille, tactile communication, large print, and accessible 
multimedia as well as written, audio, plain-language, human-reader and augmentative and alternative modes, 
means, and formats of communication, including accessible information and communication technology” (2). 
These formats, modes, and means of communication may be physical, but are increasingly electronic.
 171
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
Box 6.2. Political participation
Article 29 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) guarantees political 
rights to people with disabilities, first by highlighting the importance of accessible voting processes, electoral 
information and the right of people with disabilities to stand for election, and second, by advocating for people 
with disabilities to form and join their own organizations and participate in political life at every level.
Enabling environments are critical to promoting political participation. Physical accessibility of public meet-
ings, voting booths and machines, and other processes is necessary if people with disabilities are to participate. 
Accessibility of information – leaflets, broadcasts, web sites – is vital if people are to debate issues and exercise 
informed choice. For example, sign language and closed captioning on party political broadcasts would remove 
barriers to deaf people and those with hearing loss. People who are confined to their home or live in institutions 
may need postal voting or proxy voting to exercise their franchise. The wider question of attitudes is also relevant 
to whether people with disabilities are respected as part of the democratic process – as voters, election observers, 
commentators or indeed elected representatives – or identify with mainstream society (3). In particular, people 
with intellectual impairments and mental health conditions often face discriminatory exclusion from the voting 
process (4).
The International Foundation for Electoral Systems has worked in different countries to promote voter registra-
tion and remove barriers to participation by people with disabilities as voters and as candidates, for example, 
a voter education programme in Iraq, registration and voting support in Kosovo (in association with OSCE) and 
initiatives in Armenia, Bangladesh, and other countries. In the United Kingdom the voluntary organization United 
Response has campaigned and developed resources to promote electoral participation of people with intellectual 
impairments (5).
In India, while the 1995 Disability Act guaranteed equal opportunities to disabled people, this had no impact 
on subsequent electoral processes. The disability movement in India campaigned vigorously for access to the 
political system, particularly in the run-up to the 2004 elections. The Supreme Court passed an interim order 
for state governments to provide ramps in all polling booths for the second round of voting in 2004, with Braille 
information to be available in future elections. In 2007 the Supreme Court passed an order by which the Election 
Commission was directed to instruct all the State Governments and Union Territories to make the following 
provisions for the 2009 General Elections:
 
■
Ramps in all polling stations.
 
■
Braille numbers by ballot buttons on Electronic Voting Machines.
 
■
Separate queues for disabled people at polling stations.
 
■
Electoral staff trained to understand and respect the needs of people with disabilities.
As a result of the campaigning and awareness-raising, the leading parties explicitly mentioned disability issues 
in their 2009 manifestos.
Increased political participation of people with disabilities may result in progress towards more disability-
inclusive public policy. While progress has been achieved in making elections accessible, it is rare for people 
with disabilities to be elected to public positions. However, in countries including the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Germany, Ecuador, and Peru, persons with disabilities have held the highest office. In Uganda Section 
59 of the Constitution of 1995 states that “Parliament shall make laws to provide for the facilitation of citizens 
with disabilities to register and vote,” while Section 78 provides for representation of people with disabilities in 
Parliament. People with disabilities are elected through an electoral college system at all levels from village up to 
Parliament, giving influence which has resulted in disability-friendly legislation. Uganda has among the highest 
numbers of elected representatives with disabilities in the world.
Further information: http://www.electionaccess.org; http://www.ifes.org/disabilities.html; http://www.every-
votecounts.org.uk.
 172
World report on disability
speech impairment, are at a significant social 
disadvantage, in both developing and devel-
oped countries (15). This disadvantage is par-
ticularly experienced in sectors where effective 
communication is critical – such as those of 
health care, education, local government, and 
justice.
 
■
People who are hard of hearing may need 
speech-reading, assistive listening devices, 
and good environmental acoustics in 
indoor settings (16). Deaf and deafblind 
people use sign languages. They need bilin-
gual education in sign language and the 
national language, as well as sign language 
interpreters, including tactile or hands-on 
interpreters (17, 18). According to World 
Health Organization (WHO) estimates, in 
2005, around 278 million people worldwide 
have moderate to profound hearing loss in 
both ears (19).
 
■
People who are blind or have low vision 
require instruction in Braille, equipment 
to produce Braille materials, and access to 
library services that provide Braille, audio 
and large-print materials, screen read-
ers, and magnification equipment (20, 21). 
About 314 million people around the world 
have impaired vision, due either to eye dis-
eases or uncorrected refractive errors. Of 
this number, 45 million people are blind 
(22, 23).
 
■
People with intellectual impairments need 
information presented in clear and simple 
language (24). People who have severe 
mental health conditions need to encounter 
healthworkers who have the communica-
tion skills and confidence to communicate 
effectively with them (25).
 
■
Non-speaking individuals need access to 
“augmentative and alternative communi-
cation” systems and acceptance of these 
forms of communication where they live, 
go to school and work. These include com-
munication displays, sign language and 
speech-generating devices.
Available empirical evidence suggests 
that people with disabilities have significantly 
lower rates of ICT use than non-disabled people 
(26–29). In some cases they may be unable to 
access even basic products and services such as 
telephones, television and the Internet.
Surveys on access to and the use of digi-
tal media in developed countries have found 
that disabled people are half as likely as non-
disabled people to have a computer at home, 
and even less likely to have Internet access at 
home (30, 31). The concept of the digital divide 
refers not only to physical access to computers, 
connectivity, and infrastructure but also to the 
geographical, economic, cultural and social 
factors – such as illiteracy – that create barriers 
to social inclusion (31–36).
Addressing the barriers 
in buildings and roads
Prior to the CRPD the main instrument 
addressing the need for improved access was the 
United Nations Standard Rules on Equalization 
of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities, 
which lacked enforcement mechanisms. A 
United Nations survey in 2005 of 114 countries 
found that many had policies on accessibility, 
but they had not made much progress (37). Of 
those countries, 54% reported no accessibil-
ity standards for outdoor environments and 
streets, 43% had none for public buildings, and 
44% had none for schools, health facilities, and 
other public service buildings. Moreover, 65% 
had not started any educational programmes, 
and 58% had not allocated any financial 
resources to accessibility. Although 44% of 
the countries had a government body respon-
sible for monitoring accessibility for people 
with disabilities, the number of countries with 
ombudsmen, arbitration councils, or commit-
tees of independent experts was very low.
 173
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
The gap between creating an institu-
tional and policy framework and enforc-
ing it has been ascribed to various factors, 
including:
 
■
lack of financial resources;
 
■
a lack of planning and design capacity;
 
■
limited research and information;
 
■
a lack of cooperation between institutions;
 
■
a lack of enforcement mechanisms;
 
■
a lack of user participation;
 
■
geographic and climatic constraints;
 
■
a lack of a disability-awareness component 
in the training curricula of planners, archi-
tects and construction engineers.
Reports from countries with laws on acces-
sibility, even those dating from 20 to 40 years 
ago, confirm a low level of compliance (38–41). 
A technical survey of 265 public buildings 
in 71 cities in Spain found that not a single 
building surveyed was 100% compliant (40), 
and another in Serbia found compliance rates 
ranging between 40% and 60% (40). There are 
reports from countries as diverse as Australia, 
Brazil, Denmark, India, and the United States 
of similar examples of non-compliance (39, 40, 
42, 43). There is an urgent need to identify the 
most effective ways of enforcing laws and regu-
lations on accessibility – and to disseminate 
this information globally.
Developing effective policies
Experience shows that voluntary efforts on 
accessibility are not sufficient to remove bar-
riers. Instead, mandatory minimum standards 
are necessary. In the United States, for example, 
the first voluntary accessibility standard was 
introduced in 1961. When it became clear that 
the standard was not being used, the first law on 
accessibility, covering all federal buildings, was 
passed in 1968, after which standards were gen-
erally adhered to (44). In most countries that 
took measures early on, accessibility stand-
ards have evolved over time, especially in the 
domain of public accommodations. Recently 
some countries, such as Brazil, have extended 
their laws to private businesses that serve the 
public.
In new construction, full compliance with 
all the requirements of accessibility standards 
is generally feasible at 1% of the total cost (45–
47). Making older buildings accessible requires 
flexibility, because of technical constraints, 
issues of historic preservation and variability 
in the resources of the owners. Laws, such as 
the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act in the 
United States and the Disability Discrimination 
Act of 1995 in the United Kingdom, introduced 
legal terms such as “reasonable accommoda-
tions”, “without undue hardship”, and “techni-
cally infeasible”. These terms provided legally 
acceptable ways in which to accommodate the 
constraints in existing structures. The concept 
of “undue hardship”, for example, allows more 
leeway to small businesses than to large corpo-
rations in making renovations that are costly 
because of the nature of existing structures.
Expanding the scope of buildings covered 
by laws and standards after introducing a first 
stage of accessibility may be a better approach 
than trying to make everything fully accessible. 
For developing countries, a strategic plan with 
priorities and a series of increasing goals can 
make the most of limited resources. Policy and 
standards might, in the first instance, treat tra-
ditional construction in low-income rural areas 
differently from other types of construction – 
focusing, perhaps, on ground-floor access and 
access to public toilets. After experimenting with 
different approaches for a limited period, more 
extensive standards might be introduced, based 
on knowledge of what works. The CRPD refers 
to this strategy as “progressive realization”.
Improving standards
Standards for accessibility can create an ena-
bling environment (38–40). Evaluations of 
existing standards have found generally low 
awareness about the existence of standards. 
For those aware of the standards, concerns were 
raised about their appropriateness, especially 
for resource-poor settings, including rural 
 174
World report on disability
areas with traditional forms of construction 
and informal settlements. Relief workers, for 
instance, have reported accessibility standards 
to be inappropriate for the problems in refugee 
camps and reconstruction projects following 
natural disasters (48).
Contemporary standards have been devel-
oped through a largely consensual process. 
The participation of people with disabilities in 
developing standards is important for providing 
insight about the needs of users. But a systematic, 
evidence-based approach to standards is also 
needed. Evaluations of the technical accessibility 
provisions in high-income settings have found 
that wheelchair clearance and space require-
ments are often too low (49, 50). These shortcom-
ings stem from the changing characteristics of 
assistive technology such as bigger wheelchairs, 
from the advances in knowledge about how to 
facilitate access, and from the time lag for incor-
porating new knowledge into standards.
The basic features of access in new con-
struction should include:
 
■
provision of curb cuts (ramps)
 
■
safe crossings across the street
 
■
accessible entries
 
■
an accessible path of travel to all spaces
 
■
access to public amenities, such as toilets.
A compilation of data on 36 countries and 
areas in Asia and the Pacific showed that 72% 
have accessibility standards for either the built 
environment or public transport or both. An 
assessment of the content of standards and cov-
erage is required to understand the scope and 
application of these norms (51). Most acces-
sibility standards concentrate on the needs of 
people with mobility impairments. The rel-
evant standards, for instance, contain many 
criteria to ensure enough space and manoeu-
vring clearances for wheelchair and walking-
aid users. It is also important to meet the needs 
of people with sensory impairments, primarily 
avoiding hazards and finding the right way. To 
this end, communication methods have been 
devised – including visual alarms and better 
contrasts on signs, Braille signage, tactile 
paving, and dual modes on interactive devices, 
such as automated teller machines in banks and 
ticket machines.
Accessibility standards rarely explicitly 
address the needs of people with cognitive 
impairments or mental health conditions. 
Universal design guidelines do deal with mat-
ters such as better support for finding the way 
and for reducing stress which can be consid-
ered in accessibility standards (52).
Appropriate standards are needed for rural 
construction in developing countries. A study on 
accessibility in rural villages in Gujarat, India, 
found that current practices in affluent urban 
areas in India were not appropriate in these 
villages (53). Other studies on accessibility for 
persons with disability in developing countries 
have focused on hygiene and the use of water 
(54, 55) and proposed simple, low-cost solutions 
to make toilet facilities, water-carrying devices, 
water stands, and other facilities accessible.
Standards on accessibility are also needed 
in refugee camps and in informal settlements 
and reconstruction projects after a disaster. 
Studies of informal settlements in India and 
South Africa have found that the conditions 
there, as in poor rural areas, require different 
approaches to accessibility than urban areas – 
providing access to squat toilets and overcoming 
open drains, which create obstacles for wheel-
chair and pedestrian use. The serious security 
and privacy barriers in these communities are 
as important as independence in carrying out 
daily tasks (56). The Sphere Handbook, devel-
oped by more than 400 organizations around 
the world, sets out the minimum standards in 
a disaster response and includes approaches for 
meeting the needs of people with disabilities. 
In its 2010 update disability is addressed as an 
issue cutting across all the main sectors, includ-
ing water supply, sanitation, nutrition, food aid, 
shelter, and health services (57).
Standards in industrialized countries have 
driven a “global convergence” in accessibility 
standards (8) rather than standards in devel-
oping countries reflecting cultural or eco-
nomic conditions (58). Whether this accounts 
 175
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
for the lack of implementation of accessibility 
laws and standards in many countries requires 
further research.
The 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization developed an international 
accessibility standard using a consensual 
approach, though not all regions of the 
world are represented on the committee (59). 
International and regional organizations can 
help improve standards by providing rec-
ommendations for member countries. The 
European Concept for Accessibility Network 
has taken this approach by publishing a tech-
nical manual to help organizations develop 
standards and regulations incorporating uni-
versal design (60).
An international effort is needed to develop 
standards appropriate for different stages of 
policy evolution, different levels of resources, 
and cultural differences in construction.
Enforcing laws and regulations
The reporting guidelines for the CRPD obliges 
States Parties to report on progress in achieving 
Article 9 (Accessibility). Systematic compari-
son is difficult, but several practices can lead to 
better enforcement:
 
■
Laws with mandatory access standards are 
the most effective way to achieve accessibility. 
The first accessibility standard in the world 
– a voluntary one in the Unites States – dem-
onstrated a very low level of adoption (44). 
Similar results are reported in other countries 
(39–41, 61). Standards and compliance should 
be regulated and mandated by law.
 
■
Good design reviews and inspections ensure 
that accessibility will be provided from the 
day a building is completed. Accessibility 
standards thus need to be part of building 
regulations. The delays caused by the denial 
of permits for construction or occupancy 
should provide an incentive for builders and 
developers to meet the rules. If there are no 
design reviews or inspections, the law can 
require effective penalties for non-compli-
ance, as well as a mechanism for identifying 
non-compliance and correcting the offence. 
Government funding agencies – including 
those that fund health care facilities, trans-
portation, and schools – can also review plans 
as part of their approval process, using con-
sistent standards.
 
■
Accessibility audits can also be conducted 
by disability organizations – or even by 
individual citizens. Such audits can encour-
age compliance. In Malaysia, for example, 
groups working on behalf of disabled people 
are completing audits of major hotels (see 
Box 6.3). 
The lead agency
A lead government agency can be designated to 
take responsibility for coordinating the activi-
ties of other bodies involved with accessibility, 
particularly those that fund the construction 
of public buildings and monitoring the imple-
mentation of laws, regulations, and standards. 
Furthermore, it could oversee the licensing of 
design professionals, businesses, and services 
to ensure that accessibility is part of profes-
sional training curricula.
Implementing accessibility programmes 
requires adequate funding for the lead agency 
and other responsible agencies. Appropriate 
financing mechanisms need to be developed 
at various budget levels to ensure efficient flow 
of funding. There may often be penalties for 
non-compliance in access legislation, but the 
law may not be enforced, because of a lack of 
resources (38).
Monitoring
Monitoring and evaluation of the implemen-
tation of accessibility laws and standards 
will provide information to make continual 
improvements in accessibility for people 
with disabilities. An impartial monitoring 
body, preferably outside government, could 
be designated and funded to provide periodic 
independent evaluations of progress on acces-
sibility laws and standards and to recommend 
 176
World report on disability
improvements, as with the United States 
National Council on Disability (62, 63). This 
body should have a significant membership of 
people with disabilities. Without such monitor-
ing, there will be no pressure on governments 
to move towards full accessibility.
In addition to an official monitoring 
body, a network of local action organizations 
is essential for supporting the process. Such 
a network can also share information and 
help local building officials to review build-
ing plans, ensuring that a lack of knowledge 
among officials and designers does not under-
mine the goals of the law.
 
■
In Norway, after a monitoring exercise 
found that few local communities had car-
ried out any accessibility planning, the gov-
ernment set up pilot projects around the 
country, to make local communities better 
able to provide accessibility for people with 
disabilities (64).
 
■
In Winnipeg, Canada, a local action group 
worked with the municipal administration 
in an assessment of barriers, with recom-
mendations for their removal (65).
 
■
In Kampala, Uganda, following the develop-
ment of accessibility standards in association 
with the government, a National Accessibility 
Audit Team was created by Uganda National 
Association on Physical Disability (66).
There is an important role for people with 
disabilities and other members of the general 
public to be vigilant and seek redress, through 
legal and administrative actions, when build-
ing owners do not fulfil their obligations under 
the law. A combination of regulation, persua-
sion, and powerful interest groups can be most 
effective (see Box 6.3) (67).
Box 6.3. Buildings without barriers in Malaysia
In recent years Malaysian law has been changed to ensure that people with disabilities have the same rights 
and opportunities as others. Between 1990 and 2003 Malaysia introduced and revised the standard codes of 
practice on accessibility and mobility for people with disabilities. In 2008 the People with Disabilities Act was 
introduced. This legislation, harmonizing with the CRPD, promotes rights of access for persons with disabilities 
to public facilities, housing, transport, and ICT, as well as to education and employment, cultural life and sport.
The government priorities are to increase public awareness of the needs of disabled people and to encourage 
young designers to create more innovative and inclusive designs. Local authorities in the country require architects 
and builders to adhere to the Malaysian Standard Codes of Practice for building plans to be approved. After a 
building is constructed, an “access audit” examines its usability by disabled people. The purpose of this audit is:
 
■
to increase awareness among planners and architects about barrier-free environments for people with 
disabilities;
 
■
to ensure, in both new buildings and retrofitting, the use of universal design concepts and adherence to the 
standard codes relating to people with disabilities;
 
■
to evaluate the degree of access to existing public buildings and recommend improvements.
University schools of architecture can be a focus of education and research efforts for both students and practicing 
professionals. The International Islamic University in Malaysia recently introduced “barrier-free architecture” as 
an elective subject in its Bachelor of Architecture programme. In addition, the new Kaed Universal Design Unit 
at the university’s Kulliyyah School of Architecture and Urban Design seeks to:
 
■
create awareness of design issues for children, disabled people and older people;
 
■
conduct research and develop new technologies;
 
■
disseminate information;
 
■
educate the design profession and the public on design regulations.
 177
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
Education and campaigning
Education, along with technical assistance 
on enforcement procedures, is essential to 
improve awareness of the need for accessibil-
ity and understanding of universal design. 
Educational programmes should be targeted 
to all those involved in enforcing accessibil-
ity laws and standards – including people with 
disabilities, design educators and professionals 
(68), government regulators, business owners 
and managers, and building developers and 
contractors (see Box 6.4).
Box 6.4. Creating an environment for all in India
India had outlined provisions for accessibility in the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 and building by-laws on 
accessibility. Research in four districts of Gujarat, India – by a local development organization, UNNATI Organisation 
for Development Education – identified accessibility to physical spaces as a key area for mainstreaming the rights 
of people with disabilities. A project was launched to build awareness in the region on accessibility, increase the 
capacity for local action, and build strategic alliances for advocacy by:
 
■
setting up an informal “access resource group”, bringing together architects, builders, designers, engineers, 
people with disabilities, and development and rehabilitation professionals;
 
■
staging public events highlighting what can be done to improve access; greater stress was placed on the 
message that “access benefits all”. Campaigns had the greatest impact when user groups acted collectively 
for their rights;
 
■
conducting media training;
 
■
holding workshops on accessibility, including national policies on disability and access;
 
■
producing educational materials.
Initially, the access group contacted public and private institutions to raise awareness on the need for better 
accessibility. Within two years, they were receiving requests for audits. In these audits, members of the access 
group worked with people with disabilities to formulate technical recommendations.
Between 2003 and 2008, 36 audits were conducted of parks, government offices, academic institutions, banks, 
transport services, development organizations, and public events. Modifications were made in about half the 
venues, including:
 
■
providing accessible parking spaces, ramps, and lifts
 
■
installing accessible toilets
 
■
adjusting counter heights
 
■
providing tactile maps and improving signage.
For example, with government support, the State Administrative Training Institute for government officials 
in Ahmedabad, the state capital, has become a model of accessible building. Programmes of modifications 
required regular follow-up to support the implementation of recommendations for standard specifications. The 
maintenance of access features was best achieved when both users and managers of a space were aware of the 
importance of these features.
The project has shown architects and builders how to comply with the access provisions in the Persons with 
Disabilities Act 1995 and local access by-laws. A design institute in Ahmedabad now offers an elective course on 
universal design. People with disabilities have seen benefits in greater dignity, comfort, safety, and independ-
ence. All the same, non-compliance has resulted in new barriers. Accessibility for people with visual impairments 
remains a problem, with signage standards not commonly followed due to limited information in accessible 
user-friendly formats.
Source (69).
 178
World report on disability
Adopting universal design
Universal design is practical and affordable, 
even in developing countries (53, 54). Simple 
examples in lower income settings include:
 
■
a seating platform next to a communal 
hand pump to provide an opportunity for 
rest and enable small children to reach the 
pump (54);
 
■
ramped access and a concrete apron at 
the pump post to help wheelchair users, 
making it possible to bring large, wheeled 
water containers to the village pump and 
reduce the number of trips (53);
 
■
a bench fitted over a pit latrine, making 
latrine use easier (54).
An important application for universal 
design is to provide for emergency evacuations 
from buildings. Experience from major disasters 
has shown that people with disabilities and older 
people are often left behind (70). Other problems 
can also arise, such as when people dependent 
on ventilators are moved by unprepared first 
responders (71). In many places, work is being 
done on finding better management approaches 
for emergencies by improving building design, 
providing training, and running preparedness 
exercises (72, 73). Universal design can also help 
in enabling communications and assistance 
during evacuations, with new technologies 
ensuring that people with sensory and cogni-
tive impairments are kept informed about the 
emergency and not left behind.
Addressing the barriers in 
public transportation
Worldwide, initiatives to develop accessible 
public transportation systems focus primarily 
on:
 
■
improving accessibility to public transpor-
tation infrastructure and services;
 
■
setting up “special transport services” for 
people with disabilities;
 
■
developing campaigns and education pro-
grammes to improve policies, practices, 
and the use of services.
Specific obstacles are related to each of 
these goals.
Lack of effective programmes. Even where 
laws on accessible transportation exist, there 
is limited degree of compliance with the laws, 
especially in developing countries (7, 74). The 
benefits of universal design features are often 
not well understood. For this reason, many 
policy initiatives are not incorporated – such as 
using raised boarding platforms at the entrance 
to buses to reduce the boarding times for all pas-
sengers, as well as increasing accessibility (7).
Obstacles to special transport services 
and accessible taxis. Special transport services 
(STS) are designed specifically for people with 
disabilities or for other groups of passengers 
unable to access public or private transporta-
tion independently. STSs and taxis are forms 
of “demand-responsive transport” providing 
service only when requested by the customer. 
But accessible vehicles are expensive to pur-
chase, and the cost to the provider of operating 
the service is high. And if demand increases, 
for example due to population ageing, the eco-
nomic burden of STS, if provided by a public 
agency, can become unsustainable (75, 76).
For the service user, availability is often 
limited because of eligibility requirements 
and travel restrictions. While taxis are poten-
tially a very good way to supplement acces-
sible public transit, most taxi services do not 
provide accessible vehicles. In addition, there 
have been many instances of discrimination 
by taxi operators against people with disabili-
ties (77, 78).
Physical and information barriers. Typic- 
al barriers in transportation include inacces-
sible timetable information, a lack of ramps for 
vehicles, large gaps between platforms and vehi-
cles, a lack of wheelchair anchoring in buses, 
and inaccessible stations and stops (7, 79).
 179
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
Existing commuter rail systems and fer-
ries are particularly difficult to make accessible 
because of variations in platform heights, plat-
form gaps, and vehicle designs (80). Improved 
visual environments are needed to accommo-
date people with visual impairments and elderly 
people – for example, with colour-contrasting 
railings and better lighting (8).
Lack of continuity in the travel chain. The 
“travel chain” refers to all elements that make 
up a journey, from starting point to destination 
– including the pedestrian access, the vehicles, 
and the transfer points. If any link is inacces-
sible, the entire trip becomes difficult (81). 
Many mass transit providers, particularly in 
developing countries, have implemented acces-
sibility only partially, for example by providing 
a limited number of accessible vehicles on each 
route, making improvements only to the main 
stations, and providing access only on new lines.
Without accessibility throughout the travel 
chain, the job is incomplete. Inaccessible links 
require taking an indirect route, creating the 
barrier of longer travel times. The goal must be 
for people to have access to all vehicles and the 
full service area, as well as the pedestrian envi-
ronment (82). But progressive realization may 
be the most practical short-term response.
Lack of pedestrian access. A major obsta-
cle to maintaining continuity of accessibility in 
the travel chain is an inaccessible pedestrian 
environment, particularly in the immediate 
surroundings of stations. Common problems 
here include:
 
■
nonexistent 
or 
poorly 
maintained 
pavements;
 
■
inaccessible overpasses or underpasses;
 
■
crowded pavements in the vicinity of sta-
tions and stops;
 
■
hazards for people with visual impairments 
and deafblind people;
 
■
lack of traffic controls;
 
■
lack of aids at street crossings for people 
with visual impairments;
 
■
dangerous local traffic behaviours.
These can be a particular problem in low-
income urban environments.
Lack of staff awareness and other barri-
ers. Operators of transport often do not know 
how to use the accessibility features that are 
available or how to treat all passengers safely 
and courteously. Outright discrimination by 
operators, such as not stopping at a bus stop, is 
not uncommon. Operating rules may conflict 
with the need to assist people with disabilities. 
In many places there are no fixed procedures 
for identifying and resolving problems with the 
service. Overcrowding, a major problem, par-
ticularly in developing countries, contributes 
to disrespectful behaviour towards passengers 
with disabilities.
Improving policies
Including access to transportation as part of 
the overall legislation on disability rights is a 
step towards improving access. Standards for 
accessibility in developed countries, however, 
are not always affordable or appropriate in 
low-income and middle-income countries (7). 
Solutions should be found to meet challenges 
specific to developing country contexts. Where 
aid programmes provide significant funding to 
build new mass transit systems, access require-
ments can be included.
Coordinated political action, both national 
and local, is needed to pass laws and ensure 
that laws are enforced. Local action is particu-
larly important, not only when new systems 
are planned, but also to keep a running check 
on operations. National organizations in many 
countries have expertise in accessible transpor-
tation. Because of their special knowledge, they 
often receive government funding to document 
and disseminate best practices and offer training 
programmes to transport providers and to local 
groups working on behalf of disabled people.
National laws and rules on funding can 
oblige local transit authorities to have advisory 
bodies consisting of people with disabilities.
Fare structures are a critical element of 
local transit policies: reduced or free fares for 
people with disabilities, funded by local or 
national government, are a feature of most 
 180
World report on disability 
accessible public transportation initiatives, as 
in the Russian Federation.
Providing special transport 
services and accessible taxis
Transportation agencies can be required by law 
to provide STS as part of their service. In such 
a case this may be an incentive for agencies 
to increase accessibility in the overall system 
due to the eventual high cost of providing STS. 
While STS initially appears less costly and 
easier to implement than removing barriers to 
mass transportation, relying on that alone for 
accessible transport leads to segregation. And 
in the longer term it may result in high and pos-
sibly unsustainable costs as the proportion of 
older people in the population increases.
Shared vans. Shared vans equipped with 
lifts, individually owned and operated by 
licensed providers, can be a viable way to start 
an STS programme for fairly small initial public 
investment. In India a team of designers found 
inexpensive ways of making small vans acces-
sible for people with disabilities, with costs as 
low as US$ 224 (83). Having a wider passenger 
base can help make shared van services more 
sustainable in the longer term. In Curitiba, 
Brazil, owner-operated vans with lifts pick up 
passengers for a flat-rate fare.
Accessible taxis. Accessible taxis are an 
important part of an integrated accessible 
transportation system because they are highly 
demand-responsive (77, 84). Taxis and STSs are 
now being combined in many places. Sweden 
relies extensively on taxis for its STS, as do 
other countries (77, 85). In developing coun-
tries, accessible taxis are slower to come on line. 
Licensing regulations can require taxi fleets not 
to discriminate against people with disabilities. 
They can also require some or all vehicles to 
be accessible. In the United Kingdom a special 
initiative to make taxis accessible has resulted 
in a fleet that is 52% accessible (86).
Flexible transport systems. Innovative 
universal design solutions could increase 
availability and affordability. Information 
technology is making it possible to optimize 
routes and assign passengers to specific vehi-
cles in real-time while vehicles are on the 
road. Originally developed in Sweden using 
a fleet of shared ride vans and since intro-
duced in some other European countries, 
these “flexible transport systems” (FTSs) 
provide services on demand, at about half 
the cost of a taxi and with greater flexibility 
in reservation times, availability, and routes 
(85). The cost of accessible taxis, though, and 
the infrastructure for an FTS, may be pro-
hibitive for some developing countries (but 
note the examples of affordable van solutions 
from India and Brazil). As these innovations 
are adopted more widely, there should be 
attempts to make them cheaper and bring 
them to low-income and middle-income 
countries.
Universal design and 
removing physical barriers 
Making every vehicle entrance-accessible in 
existing systems may require purchasing new 
vehicles and, in some cases, renovating stops 
and stations. In Helsinki, Finland, the existing 
tram system was made accessible by using both 
these methods. The stops in the middle of the 
road are on safety islands equipped with short 
ramps at each end, accessed from the middle of 
marked pedestrian crossings. The islands are at 
the same level as the low floors of the new vehi-
cles. Passengers can now wait in a safer envi-
ronment, and there is no need to mount steps 
to enter the vehicle.
Portable lifts or manual folding ramps can 
create access to existing vehicles. But such solu-
tions should be viewed as temporary, because 
they require properly trained attendants avail-
able for every vehicle arrival or departure. Nor 
are elevated small platforms served by lifts or 
ramps the most effective solutions because 
of the difficulty of stopping a train or bus in 
exactly the right position.
 181
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
Rail systems. Bus and tram systems can 
potentially be renovated at relatively low cost 
over time as new vehicles go into service. But 
renovating existing rail systems presents vari-
ous technical difficulties, including (80):
 
■
dealing with the size of the gaps between 
vehicle floors and the platforms, which may 
be different at every station (87);
 
■
increasing space in vehicles for wheelchair 
access;
 
■
providing access to tracks at different levels 
within stations.
Technologies for automated lifts, bridge-
plates, and ramps overcome the problems with 
platforms. Some new accessible cars can be pro-
vided on each train, and their number can be 
increased over time. Old single-level cars can be 
renovated to provide space by removing exist-
ing seats or replacing them with folding seats. 
Elevators or inclined lifts to reach upper or 
lower platforms can also be installed. A useful 
starting initiative is to make the main stations 
fully accessible, along with accessible bus trans-
portation from the accessible stations to the 
locations served by the inaccessible stations.
In time more stations can be made accessi-
ble. Following the Transportation Accessibility 
Improvement Law (2000), the Tokyo subway 
system has become significantly more accessi-
ble: in 2002, 124 of the 230 stations in the Tokyo 
area had lifts; by 2008, 188 had lifts. A web site 
offers information on accessible routes.
Bus rapid transit systems. Large cities 
– including Beijing (China) and New Delhi 
(India) – have embarked on major programmes 
to upgrade their public transport, often using 
rail (88). There is a global trend towards “bus 
rapid transit” which is particularly pronounced 
in developing countries of Central and South 
America and of Asia. Low-floor buses are 
often used to provide access. Accessible bus 
rapid transit systems have been constructed 
in Curitiba (Brazil), Bogotá (Colombia), Quito 
(Ecuador) and more recently Ahmedabad 
(India) and Dar es Salaam (United Republic 
of Tanzania) (88). When cities host important 
international events new transit lines are often 
added to accommodate the expected large 
numbers of people attending (80). Although 
there can be resistance to new services from 
existing taxi operators and local residents (89), 
these projects offer the opportunity to create a 
good model that can subsequently be applied 
more widely in the country.
Alternative forms of transport. Rickshaw 
and pedicab services, common in many Asian 
cities, are gaining in popularity on other con-
tinents. An Indian design team has developed 
a type of pedicab that is easier for people with 
disabilities to get in and out of, improving 
access for all users and providing more comfort 
for the driver (83). Installing separate lanes and 
paths for bicycles, tricycles, and scooters can 
improve safety and accommodate the larger 
tricycle-style wheelchairs often used in Asia.
Universal design. Universal design is 
increasingly being adopted in bus and rail tran-
sit operations in high-income countries, as in 
Copenhagen’s underground rail system (76, 90, 
91). The most important universal design inno-
vation is the low-floor transit vehicle, adopted 
for heavy rail, light rail, trams, and buses, 
providing almost level access from curbs and 
short-ramp access from street levels.
Other examples of universal design include:
 
■
lifts or ramps on all transit vehicles – not 
only on a limited number;
 
■
a raised pad at a bus stop with ramp access, 
making it easier for someone with mobility 
impairment to enter a bus, helping visually 
impaired and cognitively impaired indi-
viduals find the stop, and improving the 
safety of all those waiting for a bus (79);
 
■
real-time information on waiting times;
 
■
smart cards for fare collection, gates, and 
ticketing;
 
■
visual and tactile warning systems at the 
edge of platforms – or full safety barriers 
along the entire platform;
 
■
railings and posts painted in bright con-
trasting colours;
 
■
audible signs to help people with visual 
impairments find gates and identify buses.
 182
World report on disability
 
■
web access to real-time information about 
accessible routes and temporary obstacles, 
such as a lift out of order (80).
Many of the universal design innovations 
mentioned above are generally too expensive 
for developing economies. Affordable univer-
sal design concepts are needed for low-income 
and middle-income countries. More research 
is needed to develop and test for effectiveness 
solutions that are inexpensive and appropriate 
for such countries. Some simple low-cost exam-
ples of universal design include:
 
■
lower first steps;
 
■
better interior and exterior handrails at 
entrances to buses;
 
■
priority seating;
 
■
improved lighting;
 
■
raised paved loading pads where there are 
no pavements;
 
■
the removal of turnstiles.
Curitiba’s integrated system is a good model 
of a less expensive universal design approach 
(see Box 6.5). Delhi Metro also incorporated 
universal design features in the design phase at 
little extra cost (43).
Box 6.5. Integrated public transport in Brazil
In 1970 the city of Curitiba, Brazil, introduced a modern transportation system designed from the start to replace 
a system of many poorly coordinated private bus lines. The aim was to provide public transport that would be 
so effective that people would find little need for private transport. The system was to provide full accessibility 
for people with disabilities, as well as benefits for the general population from the adoption of universal design. 
The new system includes:
 
■
express bus lines with dedicated right-of-way routes into the city centre;
 
■
conventional local bus routes connecting at major terminals;
 
■
interline “connector” buses travelling around the perimeter of the city;
 
■
“Parataxi” vans for door-to-terminal service for those requiring them.
All terminals, stops, and vehicles are designed to be accessible. At terminals used by different types of transport, 
local buses deliver passengers to the stops on the express bus system. The vehicles are large “bus-trains” – two-
unit or three-unit articulated buses, each carrying 250–350 people. These bus-trains load and unload directly 
onto raised platforms with the help of mechanized bridge plates that span the platform gap. All express bus 
terminals have ramps or lifts.
Private individuals operate the “parataxi” vans. Originally, these were designed specifically for people with dis-
abilities, as a means of getting from their homes to a station. There was not enough demand, though, to make 
the vans economically viable on this basis, and they are now available for all passengers.
The Curitiba system is a good example of universal design. It gives a high level of access, and the integrated 
system of local routes, interline routes, and express routes provides a convenient and seamless means of travelling. 
The vehicles for each type of line are colour-coded, making them easy to distinguish for those who do not read. 
Although there are newer rapid-transit systems in existence, lessons can be learned from Curitiba.
 
■
Even in developing countries accessibility can be provided relatively easily throughout a transportation system 
if it is an integral part of the overall plan from the start.
 
■
Platform boarding allows for the convenient and rapid movement of passengers and provides full accessibility.
 
■
The construction of “tube” stations requires the express buses to stop at a distance from the edge of the 
platform, to avoid hitting the curved station walls. In Curitiba, the emphasis was on improving the boarding 
and alighting from vehicles for people with mobility impairments. While certain features help other people 
with disabilities to find their way around the system, more attention needs to be paid to people with sensory 
and cognitive impairments.
 183
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
Assuring continuity in 
the travel chain
Establishing 
continuity 
of 
accessibility 
throughout the travel chain is a long-term 
goal. Creating steady improvements over a 
longer period requires campaigning, intelligent 
policy-making with appropriate resource allo-
cation, and effective monitoring. Methods for 
achieving the goal include (8, 92):
 
■
determining the initial priorities, through 
consultations with people with disabilities 
and service providers;
 
■
introducing accessibility features into regu-
lar maintenance and improvement projects;
 
■
developing 
low-cost 
universal 
design 
improvements that result in demonstrable 
benefits to a wide range of passengers, thus 
gaining public support for the changes.
Improving the quality of pavements and 
roads, installing ramps (curb cuts), and ensur-
ing access to transport facilities is a key aspect 
of the travel chain and indispensable for people 
with disabilities. Planning pedestrian access to 
stations involves a range of agencies – including 
highway departments, local business groups, 
parking authorities, and public safety depart-
ments – and would benefit from involvement by 
people with disabilities. Neighbourhood partic-
ipation will contribute local knowledge – such 
as the location for pedestrian crossings on dan-
gerous streets. Independent organizations with 
special expertise in pedestrian planning and 
design can help with local surveys and plans.
Improving education and training
Continual education of all those involved in 
transportation can make sure that an acces-
sible system is developed and maintained (92). 
Education should start with training for manag-
ers, so that they understand their legal obligations. 
Front-line staff need training about the range 
of disabilities, discriminatory practices, how to 
communicate with people with sensory impair-
ments, and the difficulties people with disabilities 
face when using transport (93). People with dis-
abilities can usefully be involved in such train-
ing programmes and through the programmes 
establish valuable communications links with 
transport staff. Disabled people’s groups also 
can collaborate with transport managers to set 
up “secret rider” programmes, in which people 
with various disabilities travel on transport as 
passengers to uncover discriminatory practices. 
Public awareness campaigns are a part of the 
educational process: posters, for instance, can 
teach passengers about priority seating.
Barriers to information 
and communication
Accessible information and communication 
technology covers the design and supply of 
information and communication technology 
products (such as computers and telephones) 
and services (telephony and television) includ-
ing web-based and phone-based services (94–
98). It relates to the technology – for example, 
control and navigation, through twisting a 
knob or clicking a mouse, and to the content 
– the sounds, images, and language produced 
and delivered by the technology.
ICT is a complex and fast-growing industry, 
worth some US$ 3.5 trillion worldwide (99). An 
increasing number of basic functions of society 
are organized with and delivered by ICT (100, 
101). Computer interfaces are used in many areas 
of public life – from banking machines to ticket 
dispensers (102). Automation is often promoted as 
a cost-saving measure by dispensing with human 
interfaces, yet this can disadvantage those persons 
with disabilities – and others – who will always 
need personal assistance with some tasks (103).
In particular, the Internet is increasingly 
a channel for conveying information about 
health, transport, education and many govern-
ment services. Major employers rely on online 
application systems for recruitment. Accessing 
general information online enables people with 
disabilities to overcome any potential physi-
cal, communication and transport barriers in 
 184
World report on disability
accessing other sources of information. ICT 
accessibility is therefore needed for people to 
participate fully in society.
People with disabilities, once they are able 
to access the web, value the health informa-
tion and other services provided on it (31). 
For example, one survey of Internet users 
with mental health conditions found that 
95% used the Internet for diagnostic-specific 
information, as opposed to 21% of the general 
population (104). Online communities can be 
particularly empowering for those with hear-
ing or visual impairments or autistic spec-
trum conditions (105) because they overcome 
barriers experienced in face-to-face contact. 
People with disabilities who are isolated value 
the Internet in enabling them to interact with 
others and potentially to conceal their differ-
ence (104, 106). For example, in the United 
Kingdom the state broadcasting company has 
set up a web site called “Ouch!” for people 
with disabilities (107) and created special 
web materials for people with intellectual 
impairments.
Future innovations in ICT could benefit 
people with disabilities and older persons by 
helping them overcome barriers of mobil-
ity, communication, and so on (108). When 
designing and distributing ICT equipment and 
services, developers should ensure that people 
with disabilities gain the same benefits as the 
wider population and that accessibility is taken 
into account from the outset.
Inaccessibility
Mainstream ICT devices and systems, such 
as telephones, television, and the Internet, are 
often incompatible with assistive devices and 
assistive technology, such as hearing aids or 
screen readers. Overcoming this requires:
 
■
designing the mainstream features for the 
widest possible range of user capabilities;
 
■
ensuring the device is adaptable for an even 
wider range of capabilities;
 
■
ensuring the device can connect with a 
wide range of user interface devices (109).
People with disabilities should have the 
same choice in everyday telecommunications as 
other people – in access, quality, and price (28).
 
■
People with hearing and speech impair-
ments, including the deafblind, need public 
or personal telephones with audio outputs 
adjustable in volume and quality, and equip-
ment compatible with hearing aids (28, 110).
 
■
Many people need text telephones or vide-
ophones with visual displays of text, or sign 
language in real-time telephone communi-
cations (111). A relay service with an opera-
tor is also required, so that users of text 
telephones and videophones can communi-
cate with users of ordinary voice telephones.
 
■
People who are blind or deafblind and 
cannot access visual displays at all require 
other options such as speech and audio and 
Braille (112). Those with low vision need 
visual presentations to be adjusted for font 
type and size, contrast, and use of colours.
 
■
People with dexterity impairments and 
upper extremity amputees may experi-
ence difficulties with devices requiring fine 
manipulation, such as small keyboards 
(113). Switch interfaces, alternative key-
boards or use of head and eye movement can 
be possible solutions to access computers.
 
■
To use computers and access the web, some 
people with disabilities need screen read-
ers, captioning services, and web page 
design features such as consistent naviga-
tion mechanisms (114–116).
 
■
People with cognitive impairments, includ-
ing age-related changes in memory, and 
older adults may find the various devices 
and online services difficult to understand 
(117–120). Plain language and simple oper-
ating instructions are important.
The lack of captioning, audio description 
and sign language interpretation limit informa-
tion access for people who are deaf and hearing 
impaired. In a survey conducted by the World 
Federation of the Deaf, only 21 of 93 countries 
were found to provide captioning of current 
affairs programmes and the proportion of 
 185
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
programmes with sign language was very low. 
In Europe only one tenth of national-language 
broadcasts of commercial broadcasters were 
provided with subtitles, only five countries 
provided programmes with audio description, 
and only one country had a commercial broad-
caster that provided audio description (28). A 
report on the situation in Asia has found that 
closed captioning or sign-language interpreta-
tion of television news broadcasts is limited 
(39). Where it is available, it is usually confined 
to large cities.
Furthermore, television programmes dis-
tributed over the Internet are not required to 
have closed captioning or video description – 
even if they originally contained captions or 
description when they were shown on televi-
sion. As the dissemination of television pro-
grammes expands, moving from broadcast to 
cable and Internet and from analogue to digi-
tal, there is greater uncertainty over regulatory 
frameworks and whether the same rights to 
have material subtitled still pertain.
Few public and even fewer commercial 
web sites are accessible (28, 116, 121). A United 
Nations “global audit” examined 100 home 
pages on the web drawn from five sectors in 20 
countries. Of these, only three achieved “single-
A” status, the most basic level of accessibility 
(2). A study in 2008 found that five of the most 
popular social networking sites were not acces-
sible to people with visual impairment (122). 
Surveys showing that disabled people have a 
much lower rate of web use than non-disabled 
people indicate that the barriers are associated 
with having a visual or dexterity impairment 
(31). Those who are deaf or have difficulties 
with mobility do not experience the same bar-
riers, if socioeconomic status is controlled for.
Lack of regulation
While many countries have laws covering ICT, 
the extent to which these cover accessible ICT 
is not well documented (51, 123). In developed 
countries, many ICT sectors are not covered 
by existing legislation. Some important gaps 
include business web sites, mobile telephony, tel-
ecommunications equipment, TV equipment, 
and self-service terminals (124). Rapid devel-
opment in ICT often leaves existing regulation 
outdated – for example, mobile phones often 
are not covered under legislation on telephony. 
Furthermore, technological developments and 
convergence across sectors blurs what were 
previously clear cut distinctions – for example, 
telephony over the Internet often falls outside 
the scope of legislation regarding landlines.
Standards for the development of ICT are 
lagging behind the development of accessibil-
ity standards for public accommodations and 
public transport. A compilation of data on 36 
countries and areas in Asia and the Pacific 
showed that only 8 governments reported that 
they had accessibility standards or guidelines 
for ICT while 26 reported to have accessibility 
standards for either the built environment or 
public transport or both (51).
From a legislative and policy perspective, 
sectoral approaches to ICT provide challenges. 
It may be impractical and inefficient to consider 
a wide range of sectoral legislation to be devel-
oped to address the full spectrum of ICT and 
their applications. Consistency of standards for 
the same product or for services across sectors 
would be more difficult to achieve with this 
type of vertical approach. Regulating services 
separately from equipment has also been found 
unhelpful in ensuring access to all supply chain 
components – content production, content 
transmission, and content rendering through 
end-user equipment (124). A key challenge is 
influencing decisions in the development of 
products and services far enough back in the 
supply chain to guarantee access.
Regulation of television and video does 
not always keep pace with technology and 
service developments. For example, video 
carried on computers and hand-held devices 
is not always accessible. The United States 
Telecommunications Act of 1996 regulated 
“basic” services, such as telephony. But it did 
not regulate “enhanced” services, such as the 
Internet. This allowed the Internet to flourish 
 186
World report on disability
without regulation, neglecting access require-
ments. With services converging and the dis-
tinction between basic and enhanced services 
steadily eroding, this has left major gaps in 
regulation (125). One study of United States 
web designers found that they would make web 
sites accessible only if the government required 
them to (126). Deregulation and self-regulation 
potentially undermine the scope for govern-
ment action to mandate disabled access (127).
Cost
The high cost of many technologies limits 
access for people with disabilities, particularly 
in low-income and middle-income countries. 
In particular, intermediate and assistive tech-
nology are often unaffordable or unavailable. 
For example, a United Kingdom study found 
that the most common reason for people with 
disabilities not using the Internet was cost – of 
the computer, of online access, and of assistive 
devices (128). A screen reader such as JAWS 
can cost US$ 1000 (102), though there are some 
open source versions, such as the Linux Screen 
Reader. Internet-based high-speed broadband 
technology has only made the differences more 
apparent. While this technology can deliver 
services that people with disabilities need, such 
as sign-language videophone, it is often not 
available, and when available, its cost makes it 
unaffordable for many (129).
Pace of technological change
Assistive technology for accessing ICT quickly 
becomes obsolete as new technology develops 
at an increasing rate (130–132). Almost every 
time new technology is introduced, people with 
disabilities do not obtain the full benefit (125).
Few ICTs are designed to be inherently 
accessible. Ways of resolving problems of access 
in one generation of computer hardware or 
software do not always carry over to the next 
generation. Mainstream software upgrades, 
for instance, make software from the previous 
generation obsolete – including peripherals, 
such as the screen readers used by disabled 
people.
Addressing the barriers to 
information and technology
Given the wide spectrum of ICT products, 
services, and sectors (commerce, health, edu-
cation, and so on) a multisectoral and multi-
stakeholder approach is required to ensure 
accessible ICT. Governments, industry and 
end-users all have a role in increasing acces-
sibility (28, 97, 109, 110, 127, 133, 134). That 
includes raising awareness of need, adopting 
legislation and regulations, developing stand-
ards and offering training.
An example of a partnership working 
towards these aims is G3ict, which is a public-
private partnership, part of the United Nations 
Global Alliance for ICT and Development. 
Among other activities, G3ict is assisting 
policy-makers around the world to implement 
the ICT accessibility dimension of the CRPD, 
with the help of a special “e-accessibility 
toolkit”. In collaboration with the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU), G3ict is 
also developing the first digital accessibility 
and inclusion index for people with disabilities. 
This is a monitoring tool surveying countries 
that have ratified the CRPD to measure how far 
they have implemented the digital accessibil-
ity provisions defined in it, scoring on 57 data 
points (135).
Improved ICT accessibility can be 
achieved by bringing together market regu-
lation and antidiscrimination approaches 
along with relevant perspectives on con-
sumer protection and public procurement 
(124). In Australia a complaint from a deaf 
customer led to a change in the mainstream 
telecommunications legislation to include 
a duty on operators to provide necessary 
equipment under equivalent conditions. 
Competition, rather than regulation, can also 
 187
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
drive improvements. In Japan a civil service 
magazine runs an “e-city” competition, and 
different municipalities strive to excel in 
information and communication categories 
that include criteria for accessibility (136).
Those producing and providing ICT-based 
products and services and those deploying ICT 
products and services have complementary roles 
in providing accessible ICT (124). Producers 
and providers can incorporate accessibility fea-
tures in the products and services they design 
and sell, and governments, banks, educational 
institutes, employers, travel agents, and the like 
can ensure that the products that they pro-
cure and use do not present access barriers to 
employees or customers with disabilities.
Legislation and legal action
States that currently address ICT accessibility 
do so through both bottom-up and top-down 
legislative approaches as well as non-legislative 
mechanisms. Top-down approaches impose 
direct obligations on those producing ICT 
products and services, such as close caption-
ing on TVs and relay features to enable people 
with hearing impairments to use the telephone 
system. Bottom-up approaches include con-
sumer protection and non-discrimination 
legislation that explicitly cover the accessibil-
ity of ICTs and protect the rights of users and 
consumers. For example, the Republic of Korea 
combines both approaches with the 2007 Korea 
Disability Discrimination Act and the 2009 
National Informatization Act, which together 
provide information access rights and reason-
able accommodation.
Evidence from a benchmarking study in 
Europe showed that countries with strong 
legislation and follow-up mechanisms tend to 
achieve higher levels of ICT access (137).
Legislation, such as the United States 
Television Circuitry Decoder Act, can be a 
way of ensuring that television manufacturers 
are required to include technology supporting 
closed captioning in addition to obliging cable 
providers to guarantee interoperability between 
the captioning services and receiver equipment 
(126). Legislation can also ensure subtitling of 
programmes. For example, the Danish Act on 
Radio and Television Broadcasting (2000) cre-
ates an obligation for public service television 
channels to promote access for disabled people, 
by subtitling (138).
Accessibility to public web sites can be 
addressed through a broad range of legisla-
tion directed towards the equality of persons 
with disabilities or as part of wider legisla-
tion on eGovernment or ICT. Vague antidis-
crimination legislation, the main legislative 
approach for business web sites, is unlikely 
to be effective. Where legislation exists, regu-
latory gaps can be addressed through revi-
sions such the United States 21st Century 
Communications and Video Accessibility Act 
and the Federal Communications Commission 
ruling that Voice Over Internet Protocol (the 
delivery of voice communications over the 
Internet which can improve access for visually 
impaired users) falls under Section 255 of the 
1996 Telecommunications Act. The legisla-
tive approach can be supported by a range of 
support measures – awareness-raising, train-
ing, monitoring, reporting, providing techni-
cal guidelines and standards, and labelling 
– for providers of public web sites, as in some 
European countries (124).
Legal challenges under disability discrimi-
nation laws have led to improvements in tel-
ecommunications service in several countries. 
In Australia, for instance, the decision in 1995 
in Scott and DPI v. Telstra defined telecommu-
nications access as a human right (100). Title IV 
of the Americans with Disabilities Act directed 
providers of telephone services to provide relay 
systems for customers with hearing or speech 
impairments at no additional cost, and compli-
ance has been very high (126).
Legal action can ensure compliance. In 
Australia, a landmark legal case involved a man 
who sued the Organizing Committee of the 
2000 Olympic Games in Sydney on the grounds 
 188
World report on disability
that its web site was not accessible. In response, 
the Organizing Committee claimed it would 
be excessively costly to make the required 
improvements. Even so, the Organizing 
Committee was found culpable by the Human 
Rights Equal Opportunities Commission and 
was fined. In Canada a complaint was filed 
against Air Canada because of its inaccessible 
ticketing kiosk. Although this was acknowl-
edged to be a barrier, the Canadian Transport 
Agency rejected the complaint, because, while 
it doesn’t comply with universal design princi-
ples, a check-in clerk could also issue boarding 
passes (102).
Where enforcement mechanisms rely on 
people with disabilities taking legal action, 
this can be expensive and time-consuming 
and require considerable knowledge and con-
fidence on the part of plaintiffs. Research is not 
available to show how many cases are brought, 
Box 6.6. Laws on accessible technology
Access to information and communication needs to be addressed in a wide range of laws to ensure full access for 
persons with disabilities, as in the United States.
Procurement. Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act requires electronic and information technology – such as 
federal web sites, telecommunications, software, and information kiosks – to be usable by people with disabilities. 
Federal agencies may not purchase, maintain, or use electronic and information technology that is not acces-
sible to people with disabilities, unless creating accessibility poses an undue burden (139). Other jurisdictions, 
including states and municipalities, as well as some institutions such as colleges and universities, have adopted 
all or parts of Section 508.
Closed captioning. Section 713 of the Communications Act (1996) obliges distributors of video programming to 
provide closed captioning on 100% of new, non-exempt English-language video programmes.
Emergency services. Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (1990) requires direct teletypewriter access 
to public safety answering points. Section 255 of the Communications Act (1996) requires common carriers to 
provide emergency access to public safety answering points.
Hearing-aid compatible telephones. Section 710 of the Communications Act (1996) requires all essential tel-
ephones and all telephones manufactured in or imported into the United States to be hearing-aid compatible. The 
obligation applies to all wireline and cordless telephones and to certain wireless digital telephones. Hearing-aid 
compatible telephones provide inductive and acoustic connections, allowing individuals with hearing aids and 
cochlear implants to communicate by telephone.
Telecommunications equipment and services. Section 255 of the Communications Act (1996) requires telecom-
munication service providers and manufacturers to make their services and equipment accessible to and usable 
by people with disabilities, if these things can be readily achievable.
Telecommunications relay services. Section 225 of the Communications Act (1996) establishes a nationwide 
system of telecommunications relay services. The law requires that common carriers make annual contribu-
tions based on their revenues to a federally administered fund supporting the provision of these services. 
Telecommunication relay service providers must connect relay calls initiated by users dialling 7-1-1. This requirement 
simplifies access to telecommunications relay services. The user does not have to remember the toll-free number 
for every state, but simply dials 7-1-1 and is automatically connected to the default provider in that state (140).
Television decoders. The Television Decoder Circuitry Act (1990) requires television receivers with picture 
screens 13 inches (330 mm) or greater to contain built-in decoder circuitry to display closed captions. The Federal 
Communications Commission also applies this requirement to computers equipped with television circuitry sold 
with monitors with viewable pictures of at least 13 inches. The requirement of built-in decoder circuitry applies to 
digital television sets with a screen measuring 7.8 inches (198 mm) in height and to stand-alone digital television 
tuners and digital set-top boxes. The Act also requires closed-captioning services to be available as new video 
technology is developed.
Source (140).
 189
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
how many succeed, and how the process can be 
improved (126).
Progress in achieving accessible ICT has 
been slow despite legislation (see Box 6.6) 
(103). As previously discussed, both top-down 
and bottom-up legislation is required. Other 
approaches, such as financial incentives for the 
development of accessible technologies and ser-
vices, might also be fruitful. Further research 
and information is needed on the types of leg-
islation and other measures that would be most 
appropriate to reach the various sectors and 
dimensions of information and communica-
tion access across different contexts is needed.
Standards
Article 9 of the CRPD calls for the develop-
ment of universal design and technical stand-
ards. Guidelines and standards have generally 
related to product safety, though ease of use has 
become more important. Standards organiza-
tions now take greater account of usability fac-
tors and stakeholder involvement in developing 
standards for ICT (127). Designers and manu-
facturers argue for voluntary standards, claim-
ing that mandatory guidelines could restrict 
innovation and competition. However, unless 
enshrined in legislation, there may be limited 
compliance with standards.
Certification for accessible ICT and 
labelling are possible supports to improving 
access. The United States Rehabilitation Act 
Amendments of 1998 require the Access Board 
to publish standards for information and com-
munication technology, including technical 
and functional performance criteria. Because 
of the size of the American market, effective 
regulation in the United States can drive acces-
sibility improvements in technologies, which 
are then reproduced worldwide (see Box 6.6).
Different countries have achieved differ-
ent levels of access, and not all technologies in 
developing countries have reached the access 
available elsewhere (97, 109, 110, 130, 132, 141, 
142). Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG) 1.0 remains the standard in most 
countries, although there is a shift towards 
Box 6.7. DAISY (Digital Accessible Information SYstem)
The DAISY consortium of talking-book libraries is part of the global transition from analogue to digital talking 
books. The aim of the consortium, launched in 1996, is to make all published information available – in an acces-
sible, feature-rich, and navigable format – to people with print-reading disabilities. This should be done at the 
same time as, and at no greater cost than, for people who are not disabled. In 2005, for example, Harry Potter 
and the Half-Blood Prince was made available in DAISY format to visually impaired children on the day the story 
was originally published.
The consortium also works in developing countries on building and improving libraries, training staff, producing 
software and content in local languages, and creating networks of organizations (141). It also seeks to influence 
international copyright laws and best practices to further the sharing of materials.
DAISY collaborates with international standards organizations on standards that have the widest adoption around 
the world and that are open and non-proprietary. It develops tools that can produce usable content, and has 
intelligent reading systems. DAISY DTBOOK-XML, for instance, is a single-source document for the distribution of 
several formats such as hard-copy print book, EPUB e-text book, Braille book, talking book, and large-print book.
AMIS (Adaptable Multimedia Information System), available in Afrikaans, Chinese, English, French, Icelandic, 
Norwegian, and Tamil, is a free, open-source, self-voicing system that can be downloaded from the DAISY site.
In Sri Lanka the Daisy Lanka Foundation is creating 200 local-language and 500 English-language digital talking 
books, including school curriculum textbooks and university materials. The books, produced by sighted and 
blind students working in pairs, will be disseminated through schools for the blind and a postal library. This will 
allow access to a wider range of materials for the blind than currently available in Braille. Local-language talking 
books will also help those who are illiterate or have low vision.
 190
World report on disability
WCAG 2.0. Efforts are under way to harmonise 
standards – for example, between the United 
States Section 508 and WCAG 2.0 accessibility 
requirements (143).
Two important developers of technical stand-
ards for accessible ICT products and services are 
the W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (144, 145) 
and the DAISY Consortium (146) (see Box 6.7).
Policy and programmes
Government telecommunications policies in 
several countries have improved in recent years, 
especially for landline phones. Where sectoral 
policies exist cross-cutting coordination may 
be indicated (124). Horizontal approaches may 
be able to address the barriers inherent in a sec-
toral approach. Policies on ICT accessibility in 
Australia, Canada, and the United States have set 
standards for other countries (28, 147). Sweden 
uses universal service obligations to ensure that 
telecommunications operators provide special 
services for people with disabilities. The Swedish 
National Post and Telecom Agency also offers 
speech support for people with speech and lan-
guage difficulties and discussion groups for deaf-
blind people (148).
While access to television is a fundamental 
problem for people who are deaf or blind, fea-
tures to enable access exist (110). Some of these 
features require technological improvements to 
equipment – for example enabling closed cap-
tioning. Other features require policy decisions 
by broadcasters – for example, providing sign 
language interpretation for news programmes 
or other broadcasts (17, 138). Video services 
with audio descriptions can make the visual 
images of media available to those who are 
blind or who have low vision. Emergency alerts 
can be communicated by sound and caption. 
Radio programming is particularly helpful for 
people who are visually impaired.
Public sector channels are often more 
easily regulated or persuaded to offer accessible 
broadcasts (149). In Europe news programmes 
with sign language interpretation are provided 
in countries including Ireland, Italy, Finland, 
and Portugal (138). In Thailand and Viet Nam 
daily news programmes are broadcast with 
sign language interpretation or closed caption-
ing. In India a weekly news programme broad-
casts in sign language. China, Japan, and the 
Philippines encourage broadcasters to provide 
such programming (39). Elsewhere:
 
■
In Colombia public service television is 
obliged to include closed captioning, sub-
titles, or sign language.
 
■
In Mexico there exists a requirement for 
captioning.
 
■
In Australia, where there are captioning 
requirements for both analogue and digital 
television, the target for captioning on prime 
time television is 70% of all programmes 
broadcast between 18:00 and midnight.
Further progress is possible as illustrated 
by Japan (Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications) having set a target of cap-
tioning 100% of programmes where captioning 
is technically possible, for both live and pre-
produced programmes, by 2017.
Several countries have initiatives to improve 
ICT accessibility such as:
 
■
Sri Lanka has several ICT accessibility 
projects, including improving payphone 
access for people with disabilities (110).
 
■
In Japan the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Communications (known 
until 2004 as the Ministry of Public 
Management, Home Affairs, Posts and 
Telecommunications) has set up a system 
to evaluate and correct access problems on 
web sites. The ministry also helps other 
government organizations make web sites 
more accessible for people with disabili-
ties including older persons.
 
■
South Africa has a National Accessibility 
Portal that can handle many languages. 
The portal is accessed by computers in 
service centres with accessible equip-
ment and through a telephone interface 
(142, 150). The portal serves as a one-stop 
shop for information, services and com-
munications for people with disabilities, 
 191
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
caregivers, the medical profession, and 
others providing services in the field of 
disability.
Procurement
Procurement policies in the public sector can 
also promote ICT accessibility (109, 142). Some 
governments have comprehensive legislation 
on ICT accessibility, including procurement 
policies requiring accessible equipment, such as 
Section 508 of the United States Rehabilitation 
Act (140, 147, 151). Government procurement 
policies can create incentives for the industry 
to adopt technical standards for universally 
designed technology (35, 97, 132, 134, 152, 153). 
The European Parliament and other bodies 
within the European Union have passed reso-
lutions on web accessibility and are harmo-
nizing public procurement policies (124). The 
European Union included ICT accessibility in 
its European Action Plan, which also covered 
investment in the research and development 
of accessible ICT and suggested strengthening 
the provisions on accessibility (151). Tools are 
available for promoting accessible procure-
ment, for example the Canadian Accessible 
Procurement Toolkit (154) and the United 
States Buy Accessible Wizard (155).
Universal design
Different people with disabilities prefer differ-
ent solutions to access barriers, and choice is a 
key principle in developing accessibility (102).
Accessible telephone handsets for landline 
phones are increasingly available. In developed 
countries telecommunications suppliers offer 
telephone equipment with features including: 
volume control, a voice-aid facility, large but-
tons, and visual signal alerts; a range of tel-
etypewriters, including a Braille teletypewriter 
and one with a large visual display; and adap-
tors for cochlear implant users.
Access innovations in mobile telephony 
include:
 
■
Hand-held devices, using mobile phones as 
platforms, can deliver a range of services, 
including (156):
 
–
aids for finding the way for blind people
 
–
route guidance for people with motor 
disabilities
 
–
video sign-language communication 
for deaf people
 
–
memory aids for older users and people 
with cognitive disabilities.
 
■
The “VoiceOver”, a screen reader that “speaks” 
whatever appears on the display of the 
“iPhone” mobile device, lets visually impaired 
users make calls, read e-mail, browse web 
pages, play music, and run applications (157).
 
■
The cognitive accessibility of mobile phones 
can be increased for people with intellec-
tual impairments (158). A special phone 
has been designed for those who find the 
ordinary mobile device too complicated, 
with a large back-lit keyboard and simple 
menus and access options (159).
 
■
In Australia the mobile telephone industry 
has launched a global information service for 
reporting the accessibility features of mobile 
phones (160). Australia and the United 
States also require that accessible informa-
tion be provided with telecom equipment.
 
■
Deaf people often use SMS (texting on 
mobile telephones) for face-to-face as well 
as long distance communication (161).
 
■
In Japan the Raku Raku phone has been 
universally designed, with a large screen, 
dedicated buttons, read aloud menus, voice 
input text messages, and an integrated 
DAISY player. More than 8 million have 
been sold, particularly for the ageing popu-
lation, previously an untapped market for 
mobile phone manufacturers (162).
Disabled people’s organizations have called 
for universal design in computers and the web 
– a proactive rather than reactive approach 
to accessible technology (163). For example, 
 192
World report on disability
screen-reader users often do not like the offer 
of a “text only” version of web sites, because 
they are less commonly updated: it is prefer-
able to make the graphic version accessible 
(164). Raising the Floor proposes a radical new 
approach: building alternative interface fea-
tures and services directly into the Internet, so 
that any users who need accessibility features 
can invoke the exact features they need on any 
computer they encounter, anywhere, anytime 
(165). Accessibility features in such operating 
systems as Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X 
already offer basic screen reading facilities, but 
awareness of those features is sometimes low.
Guidelines for designers and operators of 
web sites on how to deliver accessible content 
to hand-held mobile devices are also being pro-
duced by W3C (166).
Action by industry
There is a strong business case for removing bar-
riers and promoting usability (167). This requires 
focusing on “pull” factors, rather than the “push” 
factor of regulation, as well as challenging myths 
that accessibility is complex, uncool, expensive, 
and for the few (168). Accessibility can offer 
market benefits, particularly with an ageing 
population. Accessible web sites and services 
can be easier for all customers to use – hence, 
the term “electronic curb cuts” (167).
By the end of 2008 the number of mobile 
phone subscribers reached 4 billion (169). In 
Africa, for example, the number of mobile 
telephone users increased from 54 million to 
almost 350 million between 2003 and 2008 – 
far in excess of the number of landline users 
(169). One of the largest mobile providers in 
China is offering a special SIM card to users 
with disabilities. The discounted monthly fee of 
the service and the low charge for text messages 
makes it affordable for hard-of-hearing or deaf 
users. Card users can recharge their account by 
sending a text message. The company also has 
an audio version of its news service that allows 
people with visual impairment to listen to news 
reports (170).
A United Kingdom grocery supplier with an 
online service  has produced an accessible site 
in close consultation with the Royal National 
Institute of Blind People and a panel of visually 
impaired shoppers (171). The site offers an alter-
native to the high-graphic content of the main-
stream version of the site. Originally designed 
for visually-impaired users, the site attracts a 
much wider audience – with many fully sighted 
people finding the accessible site easier to use 
than other sites. Spending through the site is 
£13 million a year, almost 400 times the origi-
nal cost of £35 000 to develop the accessible site. 
And as a result of the access improvements, the 
site, at no extra cost, will be easy to use with 
personal digital assistants, web TV, and pocket 
computers with low-speed connections and 
limited screen sizes.
Recent research on barriers to inclusive 
design in communications equipment, prod-
ucts, and services – and on ways to address these 
barriers – suggests areas for improvement (172):
 
■
procurement processes that require tender-
ers to consider accessibility and usability;
 
■
better communication with stakeholders;
 
■
marketing of accessible products and ser-
vices as an ethical choice;
 
■
wider access to information and mecha-
nisms for sharing knowledge about the 
needs of older and disabled people.
Removing operational barriers can also 
enable companies to benefit from the exper-
tise of disabled workers. For example, major 
corporations have led the way in ensuring that 
employees can access assistive technologies 
and promote ICT accessibility. One company 
achieved a 40% reduction in bandwidth costs 
after introducing an accessible intranet solu-
tion. Getting disabled access right can enhance 
reputation, as well as potentially saving costs or 
improving sales (143).
 193
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
Role of nongovernmental 
organizations
Disabled people’s organizations have cam-
paigned for better access to ICT, based on a 
rights-based approach (102). This has included 
advocating for more regulation, trying to 
influence manufacturers and service providers 
to ensure access, and resorting to legal chal-
lenges in cases of non-compliance (127). Active 
involvement in nongovernmental organiza-
tions in oversight and enforcement has been 
identified as helpful in improving access (124).
Whether through organizations or as 
individuals, people with disabilities should 
be involved in the design, development, and 
implementation of ICTs (102). These steps would 
reduce costs and widen markets by ensuring that 
more people can use ICTs from the start (126).
Nongovernmental organizations can also 
undertake programmes to help persons with 
disabilities access to ICT – including offering 
related training to ensure digital literacy and 
skills. For example, the New Delhi branch of 
the Indian National Association for the Blind 
established a computer training and technology 
centre with accessible and affordable ICT for 
blind people and has been running initial and 
update courses for free since 1993. Courseware 
was developed in Braille, audio, large-print, and 
electronic-text formats to cater to people with 
visual impairment. Projects included devel-
oping Braille transcription software, search 
engines, and text-to-speech software in Hindi. 
Visually impaired students became trainees at 
the computer company sponsoring the centre. 
This model of training is being used in other 
countries. In Ethiopia the Adaptive Technology 
Center for the Blind, with support from United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO), created a computer 
training centre for people who are blind or visu-
ally impaired to gain skills in the use of ICT and 
improve their employment opportunities (173).
Conclusion and 
recommendations
Environments can either disable people with 
health problems or foster their participation 
and inclusion in social, economic, political, 
and cultural life. Improving access to buildings 
and roads, transportation, and information and 
communication can create an enabling environ-
ment which benefits not only disabled people but 
many other population groups as well. Negative 
attitudes are a key environmental factor which 
needs to be addressed across all domains.
This chapter argues that the prerequisites 
for progress in accessibility are: creation of a 
“culture of accessibility;” effective enforcement 
of laws and regulations; and better information 
on environments and their accessibility. To suc-
ceed, accessibility initiatives need to take into 
account affordability, availability of technology, 
knowledge, cultural differences, and the level 
of development. Solutions that work in tech-
nologically sophisticated environments may 
be ineffective in low-resource settings. The best 
strategy for achieving accessibility is usually 
incremental improvement. Initial efforts should 
focus on removing basic environmental barri-
ers. Once the concept of accessibility has become 
ingrained, and as more resources become avail-
able, it becomes easier to raise standards and 
attain a higher level of universal design.
Making progress in accessibility requires 
engagement of international and national 
actors, including international organizations, 
national governments, technology and prod-
ucts designers and producers, and persons 
with disabilities and their organizations. The 
following recommendations highlight specific 
measures that can improve accessibility.
Across domains of the environment
 
■
Accessibility policies and standards should 
meet the needs of all people with disabilities.
 
■
Monitor and evaluate the implementa-
tion of accessibility laws and standards. 
 194
World report on disability
An impartial monitoring body, prefer-
ably outside government, and with a sig-
nificant membership of disabled people, 
could be designated and funded to track 
progress on accessibility and recommend 
improvements.
 
■
Awareness-raising is needed to challenge 
ignorance and prejudice surrounding dis-
ability. Personnel working in public and 
private services should be trained to treat 
disabled customers and clients on an equal 
basis and with respect.
 
■
Professional bodies and educational insti-
tutions can introduce accessibility as a 
component in training curricula in archi-
tecture, construction, design, informatics, 
marketing, and other relevant profession-
als. Policy-makers and those working on 
behalf of people with disabilities need to be 
educated about the importance and public 
benefits of accessibility.
 
■
International organizations can play an 
important role by:
 
–
Developing and promoting global 
accessibility standards for each domain 
of the physical environment that are 
widely relevant, taking into account 
constraints such as cost, heritage, and 
cultural diversity.
 
–
Funding development projects that 
comply with relevant accessibility stand-
ards and promote universal design.
 
–
Supporting research to develop an 
evidence-based set of policies and 
good practices in accessibility and 
universal design, with particular 
emphasis on solutions appropriate in 
low-income settings.
 
–
Developing indices on accessibility 
and reliable methods of data collec-
tion to measure progress in improv-
ing accessibility.
 
■
Industry can make important contribu-
tions by promoting accessibility and uni-
versal design in the early stages of the 
design and development of products, pro-
grammes, and services.
 
■
Persons with disabilities and their organi-
zations should be involved in accessibility 
efforts – for example, in the design and 
development of policies, products and ser-
vices to assess the need of users, but also for 
monitoring progress and responsiveness.
Public accommodations 
– building and roads
 
■
Adopt universal design as the conceptual 
approach for the design of buildings and 
roads that serve the public.
 
■
Develop and mandate minimum national 
standards. Full compliance should be required 
for new construction of building and roads that 
serve the public. This comprises features such 
as ramps (curb cuts) and accessible entries; 
safe crossings across the street; an accessible 
path of travel to all spaces and access to public 
amenities, such as toilets. Making older build-
ings accessible requires flexibility.
 
■
Enforce laws and regulations by using design 
reviews and inspections; participatory 
accessibility audits; and by designating a lead 
government agency responsible for imple-
menting laws, regulations, and standards.
 
■
For developing countries a strategic plan 
with priorities and a series of increas-
ing goals can make the most of limited 
resources. Policy and standards should be 
flexible to account for differences between 
rural and urban areas.
Transportation
 
■
Introduce accessible transportation as part 
of the overall legislation on disability rights.
 
■
Identify strategies to improve the accessi-
bility of public transport, including:
 
–
Applying universal design principles 
in the design and operation of public 
transport, for example in the selection 
of new buses and trams or by remov-
ing physical barriers when renovating 
stops and stations.
 195
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
 
–
Requiring transportation agencies, in 
the short-term, to provide STS such as 
shared vans or accessible taxis.
 
–
Making public transport systems more 
flexible for the user by optimizing the 
use of information technology.
 
–
Make provisions for alternative forms 
of transport such as tricycles, wheel-
chairs, bicycles, and scooters by pro-
viding separate lanes and paths.
 
■
Establish 
continuity 
of 
accessibility 
throughout the travel chain by improving 
the quality of pavements and roads, pedes-
trian access, installing ramps (curb cuts), 
and ensuring access to vehicles.
 
■
To improve affordability of transport, sub-
sidize transport fares for people with disa-
bilities who may not be able to afford them.
 
■
Educate and train all parties involved in 
transportation: managers need to under-
stand their responsibilities and front-line 
staff need to ensure customer care. Public 
awareness campaigns can assist the edu-
cational process: posters, for example, can 
teach passengers about priority seating.
Access standards and universal design inno-
vations implemented in developed countries 
are not always affordable or appropriate in 
low-income and middle-income countries. 
Country-specific solutions can be found. Low-
cost examples include: lower first steps, better 
interior, and exterior handrails at entrances 
to buses, priority seating, improved lighting, 
raised paved loading pads where there are no 
pavements, and the removal of turnstiles.
Accessible information 
and communication
 
■
Consider a range of bottom-up and top-
down legislative and policy mechanisms 
including: consumer protection, non-dis-
crimination legislation covering informa-
tion and communication technologies and 
direct obligations on those developing ICT 
systems, products, and services.
 
■
In the public and private sector adopt poli-
cies on procurement which take into con-
sideration accessibility criteria.
 
■
Support the development of telephone 
relay, sign language, and Braille services.
 
■
When designing and distributing ICT 
equipment and services, developers should 
ensure that people with disabilities gain the 
same benefits as the wider population.
 
■
Producers and providers should incorpo-
rate accessibility features in the products 
and services they design and sell.
 
■
Support the education and training of per-
sons with disabilities to take advantage of 
ICT – including training to ensure digital 
literacy and skills.
References
1. 
Universal design. Syracuse, Global Universal Design Commission, 2009 (http://tinyurl.com/yedz8qu, accessed 18 January 
2010).
2. 
United Nations global audit of web accessibility. New York, United Nations, 2006 (http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/
gawanomensa.htm, accessed 17 February 2010).
3. 
Schur L et al. Enabling democracy: disability and voter turnout. Political Research Quarterly, 2002,55:167-190.
4. 
Redley M. Citizens with learning disabilities and the right to vote. Disability & Society, 2008,23:375-384. 
doi:10.1080/09687590802038894
5. 
Making democracy accessible. London, United Response, 2011 (http://www.unitedresponse.org.uk/press/campaigns/
mda/, accessed 17 March 2011). 
6. 
Meyers AR et al. Barriers, facilitators, and access for wheelchair users: substantive and methodologic lessons from a pilot 
study of environmental effects. Social Science & Medicine (1982), 2002,55:1435-1446. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(01)00269-6 
PMID:12231020
7. 
Roberts P, Babinard J. Transport strategy to improve accessibility in developing countries. Washington, World Bank, 2005.
8. 
Venter C et al. Towards the development of comprehensive guidelines for practitioners in developing countries. In: 
 196
World report on disability
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Mobility and Transport for Elderly and Disabled Persons (TRANSED 2004), 
Hamamatsu, 23–26 May 2004 (http://tinyurl.com/yb7lgpk, accessed 10 February 2010).
9. 
Leonardi M et al. MHADIE background document on disability prevalence across different diseases and EU countries. Milan, 
Measuring Health and Disability in Europe, 2009 (http://www.mhadie.it/publications.aspx, accessed 21 January 2010).
10. Loprest P, Maag E. Barriers to and supports for work among adults with disabilities: results from the NHIS-D. Washington, The 
Urban Institute, 2001.
11. Gonzales L et al. Accessible rural transportation: an evaluation of the Traveler’s Cheque Voucher Program. Community 
Development: Journal of the Community Development Society, 2006,37:106-115. doi:10.1080/15575330.2006.10383112
12. Country report: Bolivia. La Paz, Confederación Boliviana de la Persona con Discapacidad, 2009 (http://www.yorku.ca/drpi/, 
accessed 25 August 2009).
13. State of disabled people’s rights in Kenya. Nairobi, African Union of the Blind, 2007 (http://www.yorku.ca/drpi/, accessed 25 
August 2009).
14. Swadhikaar Center for Disabilities Information, Research and Resource Development. Monitoring the human rights of 
people with disabilities. Country report: Andhra Pradesh, India. Toronto, Disability Rights Promotion International, 2009 
(http://www.yorku.ca/drpi/India.html, accessed 10 February 2010).
15. Olusanya BO, Ruben RJ, Parving A. Reducing the burden of communication disorders in the developing world: an oppor-
tunity for the millennium development project. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 2006,296:441-444. 
doi:10.1001/jama.296.4.441 PMID:16868302
16. Accessibility guidelines. Stockholm, International Federation of Hard of Hearing, 2008 (http://www.ifhoh.org/pdf/acces-
sibilityguidelines2009.pdf, accessed 30 August 2009).
17. Deaf people and human rights. Stockholm, World Federation of the Deaf, Swedish National Association of the Deaf, 2009.
18. How do people who are deaf-blind communicate? London, Royal National Institute of the Deaf, 2009 (http://tinyurl.com/
ydkwvfl, accessed 30 August 2009).
19. Deafness and hearing impairment: fact sheet N°300. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010 (http://www.who.int/media-
centre/factsheets/fs300/en/index.html, accessed 1 July 2010).
20. Rowland W. Library services for blind: an African perspective. IFLA Journal, 2008,34:84-89. doi:10.1177/0340035208088577
21. Annual report 2008–2009. New Delhi, All India Confederation of the Blind, 2009 (http://www.aicb.org.in/AnnualReport/
AnualReport2009.pdf, accessed 30 August 2009).
22. Resnikoff S et al. Global data on visual impairment in the year 2002. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2004,82:844-
851. PMID:15640920
23. Resnikoff S et al. Global magnitude of visual impairment caused by uncorrected refractive errors in 2004. Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization, 2008,86:63-70. doi:10.2471/BLT.07.041210 PMID:18235892
24. Renblad K. How do people with intellectual disabilities think about empowerment and information and communication 
technology (ICT)? International Journal of Rehabilitation Research. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Rehabilitationsforschung. 
Revue Internationale de Recherches de Réadaptation, 2003,26:175-182. PMID:14501568
25. Iezzoni LI, Ramanan RA, Lee S. Teaching medical students about communicating with patients with major mental illness. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, 2006,21:1112-1115. doi:10.1111/j.1525-1497.2006.00521.x PMID:16970561
26. Kaye HS. Computer and Internet use among people with disabilities. Washington, United States Department of Education, 
National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research, 2000a (Disability Statistics Report 13).
27. Waddell C. Meeting information and communications technology access and service needs for persons with disabilities: major 
issues for development and implementation of successful policies and strategies. Geneva, International Telecommunication 
Union, 2008 (http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/study_groups/SGP_2006-2010/events/2007/Workshops/documents/05-success-
policies.pdf, accessed 25 August 2009).
28. Measuring progress of eAccessibility in Europe. Brussels, European Commission, 2007 (http://ec.europa.eu/information_
society/newsroom/cf/itemdetail.cfm?item_id=4280, accessed 27 August 2009).
29. Steinmetz E. Americans with disabilities: 2002. Washington, United States Census Bureau, 2006 (Household Economic 
Studies, Current Population Reports P70–107) (http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/disability/sipp/disab02/awd02.html, 
accessed 10 February 2010).
30. Kaye HS. Disability and the digital divide. Washington, United States Department of Education, National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research, 2000b.
31. Dobransky K, Hargittai E. The disability divide in Internet access and use. Information Communication and Society, 
2006,9:313-334. doi:10.1080/13691180600751298
32. Bridging the digital divide: issues and policies in OECD countries. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, 2001 (http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/10/0/27128723.pdf, accessed 18 August 2009).
33. Wolff L, MacKinnon S. What is the digital divide? TechKnowLogia, 2002, 4(3):7–9 (http://info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/
library/57449/digitaldivide.pdf, accessed 19 August 2009).
 197
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
34. Korean Society for Rehabilitation. Review paper: Korea. Paper presented at a regional workshop on “Monitoring the imple-
mentation of the Biwako Millennium Framework for action towards an Inclusive, barrier-free and right-based society for 
persons with disabilities in Asia and the Pacific,” Bangkok, 13–15 October 2004 (http://www.worldenable.net/bmf2004/
paperkorea.htm, accessed 21 August 2009)
35. The accessibility imperative: implications of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities for information and 
communication technologies. Georgia, G3ict, 2007.
36. World Summit on the Information Society. Geneva, 18–22 May 2009 [web site]. (http://www.itu.int/wsis/implementa-
tion/2009/forum/geneva/agenda_hl.html, accessed 3 August 2009).
37. South-North Centre for Dialogue and Development. Global survey on government action on the implementation of the 
standard rules on the equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities. Amman, Office of the UN Special Rapporteur 
on Disabilities, 2006:141.
38. Regional report of the Americas 2004. Chicago, International Disability Rights Monitor, 2004 (http://www.idrmnet.org/
content.cfm?id=5E5A75andm=3, accessed 9 February 2010).
39. Regional report of Asia 2005. Chicago, International Disability Rights Monitor, 2005 (http://www.idrmnet.org/content.
cfm?id=5E5A75andm=3, accessed 9 February 2010).
40. Regional report of Europe 2007. Chicago, International Disability Rights Monitor, 2007 (http://www.idrmnet.org/content.
cfm?id=5E5A75andm=3, accessed 9 February 2010).
41. Michailakis D. Government action on disability policy: a global survey. Stockholm, Institute on Independent Living, 1997 
(http://www.independentliving.org/standardrules/UN_Answers/UN.pdf, accessed 10 February 2010).
42. Mazumdar S, Geis G. Architects, the law and accessibility: architects’ approaches to the ADA in arenas. Journal of 
Architectural and Planning Research, 2003,20:199-220.
43. People with disabilities in India: from commitments to outcomes. Washington, World Bank. 2009.
44. Design for all Americans. Washington, National Commission on Architectural Barriers, United States Government Printing 
Office, 1968 (http://tinyurl.com/ye32n2o, accessed 10 February 2010).
45. Schroeder S, Steinfeld E. The estimated cost of accessibility. Washington, United States Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 1979.
46. Ratzka A. A brief survey of studies on costs and benefits of non-handicapping environments. Stockholm, Independent Living 
Institute, 1994.
47. Steven Winter Associates. Cost of accessible housing. Washington, United States Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 1993.
48. Whybrow S et al. Legislation, anthropometry, and education: the Southeast Asian experience. In: Maisel J, ed. The state of 
the science in universal design: emerging research and development. Dubai, Bentham Science Publishers, 2009.
49. Van der Voordt TJM. Space requirements for accessibility. In: Steinfeld E, Danford GS, eds. Measuring enabling environ-
ments. New York, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999:59–88.
50. Steinfeld E, Feathers D, Maisel J. Space requirements for wheeled mobility. Buffalo, IDEA Center, 2009.
51. Disability at a glance 2009: a profile of 36 Countries and areas in Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok, United Nations Economic and 
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2009.
52. Castell L. Building access for the intellectually disabled. Facilities, 2008,26:117-130. doi:10.1108/02632770810849463
53. Raheja G. Enabling environments for the mobility impaired in the rural areas. Roorkee, India, Department of Architecture 
and Planning, Indian Institute of Technology, 2008.
54. Jones H, Reed R. Water and sanitation for disabled people and other vulnerable groups: designing services to improve acces-
sibility. Loughborough, Loughborough University, Water and Development Centre, 2005 (http://wedc.lboro.ac.uk/
knowledge/details.php?book=978-1-84380-090-3, accessed 10 February 2010).
55. Jones H, Reed R. Supply and sanitation access and use by physically disabled people: reports of fieldwork in Cambodia, 
Bangladesh, Uganda. London, Department for International Development, 2003.
56. Tipple G et al. Enabling environments: reducing barriers for low-income disabled people. Newcastle, Global Urban Research 
Unit, Newcastle University, 2009 (http://www.ncl.ac.uk/guru/research/project/2965, accessed 10 February 2010).
57. Humanitarian charter and minimum standards in disaster response. Geneva, The Sphere Project, 2004 (http://www.sphere-
project.org/handbook/pages/navbook.htm?param1=0, accessed 3 February 2010).
58. Rapoport A, Watson N. Cultural variability in physical standards: people and buildings. New York, Basic Books, 1972.
59. Information technology: accessibility considerations for people with disabilities. Part 3: Guidance on user needs mapping., 
Geneva, International Organization for Standardization, 2008 (ISO/IEC DTR 29138-3). (http://www.jtc1access.org/docu-
ments/swga_341_DTR_29138_3_Guidance_on_User_Needs_Mapping.zip, accessed 3 September 2009).
60. Aragall F. Technical assistance manual 2003. Luxembourg, European Concept for Accessibility, 2003 (http://tinyurl.com/
yez3bv3, accessed 22 November 2009).
 198
World report on disability
61. Report of the special rapporteur on disability of the Commission for Social Development, 44th Session. New York, Economic 
and Social Council, Commission for Social Development, 2006 (E/CN.5/2006/4).
62. Promises to keep: a decade of federal enforcement of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Washington, National Council on 
Disability, 2000.
63. Implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act: challenges, best practices and opportunities for success. Washington, 
National Council on Disability, 2007.
64. Bringa OR. Norway’s planning approach to implement universal design. In: Preiser WFE, Ostroff E, eds. Universal design 
handbook. New York, McGraw Hill, 2001:29.1–29.12.
65. Ringaert L. User/expert involvement in universal design. In: Preiser WFE, Ostroff E, eds. Universal design handbook. New 
York, McGraw Hill, 2001:6.1–6.14.
66. Accessibility standards launched. Kampala, Uganda National Action on Physical Disability, 2010 (http://www.unapd.org/
news.php?openid=16, accessed 1 July 2010).
67. Ayres I, Braithwaite J. Responsive regulation: transcending the deregulation debate. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1995.
68. Lewis JL. Student attitudes towards impairment and accessibility: an evaluation of awareness training for urban planning 
students. Vocations and Learning, 2009,2:109-125. doi:10.1007/s12186-009-9020-y
69. Civil society engagement for mainstreaming disability in development process report of an action research project initiated in 
Gujarat with multi-stakeholder partnership. Gujarat, UNNATI and Handicap International, 2008.
70. World Disasters Report—focus on discrimination. Geneva, International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies, 2007 (http://www.ifrc.org/Docs/pubs/disasters/wdr2007/WDR2007-English.pdf, accessed 3 July 2010).
71. Steinfeld E. Evacuation of people with disabilities. Journal of Security Education, 2006,1:107-118. doi:10.1300/J460v01n04_10
72. Emergency management research and people with disabilities: a resource guide. Washington, United States Department 
of Education, 2008 (http://www.ed.gov/rschstat/research/pubs/guide-emergency-management-pwd.pdf, accessed 22 
November 2009).
73. Resources in emergency evacuation and disaster preparedness. Washington, United States Access Board, 2009 (http://www.
access-board.gov/evac.htm, accessed 18 August 2009).
74. Kuneida M, Roberts P. Inclusive access and mobility in developing countries. Washington, World Bank, 2006 (http://sitere-
sources.worldbank.org/INTTSR/Resources/07-0297.pdf, accessed 10 February 2010).
75. Stahl A. The provision of transportation for the elderly and handicapped in Sweden. Lund, Institutionen för Trafikteknik, 
Lunds Tekniska Högskola, 1995.
76. Wretstrand A, Danielson H, Wretstrand K. Integrated organization of public transportation: accessible systems for all 
passengers. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Mobility and Transport for Elderly and Disabled Persons 
(TRANSED 2007), Montreal, 18–22 June 2007 (http://www.tc.gc.ca/policy/transed2007/pages/1286.htm, accessed 6 
February 2008).
77. Oxley P. Improving access to taxis. Geneva, International Road Transport Union, 2007 (http://www.internationaltransport-
forum.org/europe/ecmt/pubpdf/07TaxisE.pdf, accessed 10 February 2010).
78. Accessible taxis. Dublin, National Council for the Blind of Ireland, 2003 (http://www.ncbi.ie/information-for/architects-
engineers/accessible-taxi-report, accessed 28 July 2009).
79. Rickert T. Bus rapid transit accessibility guidelines. Washington, World Bank, 2006 (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
DISABILITY/Resources/280658-1172672474385/BusRapidEngRickert.pdf, accessed 10 February 2010).
80. Steinfeld E. Universal design in mass transportation. In: Preiser WFE, Ostroff E, eds. Universal design handbook. New York, 
McGraw Hill, 2001:24.1–24.25.
81. Maynard A. Can measuring the benefits of accessible transport enable a seamless journey? Journal of Transport and Land 
Use, 2009,2:21-30.
82. Iwarsson S, Jensen G, Ståhl A. Travel chain enabler: development of a pilot instrument for assessment of urban public bus 
transport accessibility. Technology and Disability, 2000,12:3-12.
83. Singh M, Nagdavane N, Srivastva N. Public transportation for elderly and disabled. In: Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference on Mobility and Transport for Elderly and Disabled Persons (TRANSED 2007), Montreal, 18–22 June 2007 (http://
www.tc.gc.ca/policy/transed2007/pages/1288.htm, accessed 6 February 2007).
84. Moakley T. Advocacy for accessible taxis in New York City. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Mobility 
and Transport for Elderly and Disabled Persons (TRANSED 2007), Montreal, 18–22 June 2007 (http://www.tc.gc.ca/policy/
transed2007/pages/1257.htm, accessed 10 February 2010).
85. Nelson J, Masson B. Flexible friends. Swanley, ITS International, 2009 (http://www.itsinternational.com, accessed 28 July 
2009).
 199
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
86. Frye A, Macdonald D. Technical challenges of accessible taxis. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on 
Mobility and Transport for Elderly and Disabled Persons (TRANSED 2007), Montreal, 18–22 June 2007 (http://www.tc.gc.ca/
policy/transed2007/pages/1078.htm, accessed 20 July 2009).
87. Daamen W, De Boer E, De Kloe R. The gap between vehicle and platform as a barrier for the disabled. In: Proceedings of 
the 11th International Conference on Mobility and Transport for Elderly and Disabled Persons (TRANSED 2007), Montreal, 18–22 
June 2007 (http://www.tc.gc.ca/policy/transed2007/pages/1251.htm, accessed 10 February 2010).
88. Wright L. Planning guide: bus rapid transit. Eschborn, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit, 2004.
89. Dugger C. A bus system reopens rifts in South Africa. New York Times, 21 February 2010 (http://www.nytimes.
com/2010/02/22/world/africa/22bus.html, accessed 14 March 2010).
90. Burkhardt JE. High quality transportation services for seniors. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Mobility 
and Transport for Elderly and Disabled Persons, Montréal, 18–22 June 2007 (http://www.tc.gc.ca/policy/transed2007/
pages/1298.htm, accessed 2 February 2008).
91. Bendixen K. Copenhagen Metro: design for all—a must that calls for visibility. Dublin, EIDD, 2000 (http://tinyurl.com/
yz838pz, accessed 30 January 2010).
92. Meriläinen A, Helaakoski R. Transport, poverty and disability in developing countries. Washington, World Bank, 2001.
93. Rickert T. Transit Access training toolkit. Washington, World Bank, 2009. (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/
Resources/280658-1239044853210/5995073-1239044977199/TOOLKIT.ENG.CD.pdf, accessed 1 February 2010).
94. Mueller J et al. Assessment of user needs in wireless technologies. Assistive Technology: the official journal of RESNA, 
2005,17:57-71. doi:10.1080/10400435.2005.10132096 PMID:16121646
95. Gould M. Assessing the accessibility of ICT products. In: The accessibility imperative. New York, Global Initiative for Inclusive 
Information and Communication Technologies, 2007:41–48 (http://www.g3ict.com/resource_center/g3ict_book_-_
the_accessibility_imperative, accessed 27 August 2009).
96. Cooper RA, Ohnabe H, Hobson DA. An introduction to rehabilitation engineering. New York, Taylor and Francis, 2007.
97. Conference ITU. Geneva, 21 April 2008. Geneva, International Telecommunication Union, 2008 (http://www.itu.int/dms_
pub/itu-t/oth/06/12/T06120060010001PDFE.pdf, accessed 27 August 2009).
98. Ashok M, Jacko JA. Dimensions of user diversity. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor and 
Francis, 2009.
99. WITSA on the first day of WCIT 2008. San Francisco, CA, All Business, 2008 (http://www.allbusiness.com/economy-eco-
nomic-indicators/economic-conditions-growth/10540743-1.html, accessed 27 August 2009).
100. Goggin G, Newell C. Digital disability: the social construction of disability in new media. Lanham, Rowman and Littlefield, 
2003.
101. Helal S, Mokhtari M, Abdulrazak B, eds. The engineering handbook of smart technology for aging, disability and independ-
ence. Hoboken, John Wiley and Sons, 2008.
102. D’Aubin A. Working for barrier removal in the ICT area: creating a more accessible and inclusive Canada. The Information 
Society, 2007,23:193-201. doi:10.1080/01972240701323622
103. Goggin 
G, 
Newell 
C. 
The 
business 
of 
digital 
disability. 
The Information Society, 
2007,23:159-168. 
doi:10.1080/01972240701323572
104. Cook JA et al. Information technology attitudes and behaviors among individuals with psychiatric disabilities who 
use the Internet: results of a web-based survey. Disability Studies Quarterly, 2005,25:www.dsq-sds.org/article/
view/549/726accessed 1 July 2010).
105. Jaeger PT, Xie B. Developing online community accessibility guidelines for persons with disabilities and older adults. 
Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 2009,20:55-63. doi:10.1177/1044207308325997
106. Löfgren-Mårtenson L. Love in cyberspace: Swedish young people with intellectual disabilities and the Internet. 
Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research, 2008,10:125-138. doi:10.1080/15017410701758005
107. Ouch! It’s a disability thing. London, British Broadcasting Company, 2010 (http://www.bbc.co.uk/ouch/, accessed 21 
January 2010).
108. Gill J, ed. Making Life Easier: how new telecommunications services could benefit people with disabilities. Cost 219ter, 2005 
(http://www.tiresias.org/cost219ter/making_life_easier/index.htm, accessed 1 July 2010).
109. Meeting information and communications technology access and service needs for persons with disabilities: major issues for 
development and implementation of successful policies and strategies. Geneva, International Telecommunication Union, 
2008.
110. Report on ICT accessibility for persons with disabilities. Geneva, Telecommunication Development Bureau, International 
Telecommunication Union, 2008 (Document RGQ20/1/011-E).
111. Electronic and information technology accessibility standards (Section 508). Washington, United States Access Board, 2000 
(http://www.access-board.gov/sec508/standards.htm#Subpart_a, accessed 3 February 2010).
 200
World report on disability
112. Kinzel E, Jackoo JA. Sensory impairments. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor and Francis, 
2009.
113. Keates S. Motor impairments and universal access. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor 
and Francis, 2009.
114. Seeman L. Inclusion of cognitive disabilities in the web accessibility movement. Presentation at the 11th International World 
Wide Web Conference, Honolulu, HI, 7–11 May 2002. (http://www2002.org/CDROM/alternate/689/, accessed 25 August 
2009).
115. Job Accommodation Network [web site]. (http://www.jan.wvu.edu/, accessed 10 February 2010).
116. Hanson VL et al. Accessing the web. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor and Francis, 2009.
117. Lewis C. Cognitive disabilities. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor and Francis, 2009.
118. Kurniawan S. Age-related differences in the interface design process. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. 
London, Taylor and Francis, 2009.
119. Seniorwatch 2: assessment of the senior market for ICT. Brussels, European Commission, 2008a.
120. ICT and ageing: users, markets and technologies. Brussels, European Commission, 2009.
121. The web: access and inclusion for disabled people. Manchester, Disability Rights Commission, 2004 (http://joeclark.org/
dossiers/DRC-GB.html, accessed 25 August 2009).
122. State of the eNation reports. Reading, AbilityNet, 2008 (http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/enation, accessed 27 August 2009).
123. Global Initiative for Inclusive Information and Communication Technologies [web site]. (http://www.g3ict.com/about, 
accessed 25 August 2009).
124. Accessibility to ICT products and services by Disabled and elderly People: Towards a framework for further development 
of UE legislation or other coordination measures on eAccessibility. European Commission, Bonn, 2008b.
125. Kennard WE, Lyle EE. With freedom comes responsibility: ensuring that the next generation of technologies is accessible, 
usable and affordable. [The Journal of Communications Law and Policy]CommLaw Conspectus, 2001,10:5-22.
126. Jaeger PT. Telecommunications policy and individuals with disabilities: issues of accessibility and social inclusion in the 
policy and research agenda. Telecommunications Policy, 2006,30:112-124. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2005.10.001
127. Stienstra D, Watzke J, Birch GE. A three-way dance: the global good and accessibility in information technologies. The 
Information Society, 2007,23:149-158. doi:10.1080/01972240701323564
128. Piling D, Barrett P, Floyd M. Disabled people and the Internet: experiences, barriers and opportunities. York, Joseph Rowntree 
Foundation, 2004.
129. Davidson CM, Santorelli MJ. The Impact of Broadband on People with Disabilities. Washington, United States Chamber of 
Commerce, 2009.
130. Stephanidis C. Universal access and design for all in the evolving information society. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal 
access handbook. London, Taylor and Francis, 2009:1–10.
131. Emiliani PL. Perspectives on accessibility: from assistive technologies to universal access and design for all. In: Stephanidis 
C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor and Francis, 2009:2–17.
132. Vanderheiden GC. Standards and guidelines. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor and 
Francis, 2009.
133. Seelman KD. Technology for full citizenship: challenges for the research community. In: Winters J, Story MF, eds. Medical 
instrumentation: accessibility and usability considerations. New York, CRC Press, 2007.
134. Kemppainen E, Kemp JD, Yamada H. Policy and legislation as a framework of accessibility. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The 
universal access handbook. London, Taylor and Francis, 2009.
135. Leblois A. The digital accessibility and inclusion index. Paper prepared for the Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights, 2008 (www2.ohchr.org/.../GlobalinitiativeforinclusiveICT150909.doc, accessed 1 July 2010).
136. Yamada H. ICT accessibility standardization and its use in policy measures. New York, Global Initiative for Inclusive 
Information and Communication Technologies, 2007 (http://g3ict.org/resource_center/publications_and_reports/p/
productCategory_books/subCat_4/id_58, accessed 1 July 2010)
137. MeAC – measuring progress of eAccessibility in Europe: assessment of the status of eAccessibility in Europe. Bonn, European 
Commission, 2007.
138. Timmermans N. The status of sign languages in Europe, Strasbourg, Council of Europe Publishing, 2005.
139. Blanck P et al. Disability civil rights law and policy. St. Paul, Thomson/West, 2004.
140. Coalition of Organizations for Accessible Technology [web site]. (http://www.coataccess.org/node/2, accessed 30 August 
2009).
141. Manocha D. Critical issues for developing countries in implementing the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. In: The accessibility imperative. New York, Global Initiative for Inclusive Information and Communication 
 201
Chapter 6 
Enabling Environments
Technologies, 
2007:198–204 
(http://www.g3ict.com/resource_center/g3ict_book_-_the_accessibility_imperative, 
accessed 27 August 2009).
142. ITU Regional Workshop on ICT Accessibility for Persons with Disabilities for Africa Region, Lusaka, 15–16 July, International 
Telecommunication Union, 2008 [web site]. (http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/sis/PwDs/Seminars/Zambia/index.html, accessed 
12 February 2010).
143. Ashington N. Accessible Information and Communication Technologies: benefits to business and society. OneVoice for 
Accessible ICT, 2010 (www.onevoiceict.org, accessed 30 June 2010).
144. Introduction to web accessibility. World Wide Web Consortium, 2005 (http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/accessibility.php, 
accessed 20 August 2009).
145. Shared web experiences: barriers common to mobile device users and people with disabilities. World Wide Web Consortium, 
2005 (http://www.w3.org/WAI/mobile/experiences, accessed 20 August 2009).
146. DAISY Consortium [web site]. (http://www.daisy.org/about_us/, accessed 29 August 2009).
147. Assistive technology links. Ottawa, Industry Canada, 2009 (http://www.at-links.gc.ca/as, accessed 7 September 2009).
148. e-Accessibility policy toolkit for persons with disabilities: a joint ITU/G3ict toolkit for policy makers implementing the 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities [website]. (http://www.e-accessibilitytoolkit.org/, accessed 20 
January 2010).
149. Gregg JL. Policy-making in the public interest: a contextual analysis of the passage of closed-captioning policy. Disability 
& Society, 2006,21:537-550. doi:10.1080/09687590600786793
150. South African National Accessibility Portal [web site]. (http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1456669, accessed 25 
August 2009).
151. Situation of disabled people in the European Union: the European action plan 2008–2009. Communication from the 
Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of 
the Regions. Brussels, Commission of the European Communities, 2007 (COM (2007) 738 final).
152. Seelman KD. Technology for individuals with disabilities: government and market policies. In: Helal S, Mokhtari M, 
Abdulrazak B, eds. The engineering handbook of smart technology for aging, disability and independence. Hoboken, John 
Wiley and Sons, 2008:61–80.
153. Engelen J. eAccessibility standardization. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access handbook. London, Taylor and Francis, 
2009.
154. Accessible Procurement Toolkit. Industry Canada, Ottawa, 2010 (http://www.apt.gc.ca/, accessed 17 March 2011) 
155. GSA BuyAccessible.gov [web site]. (http://www.buyaccessible.gov/, accessed 17 March 2011) 
156. Kaikkonen A, Kaasinen E, Ketola P. Handheld devices and mobile phones. In: Stephanidis C, ed. The universal access hand-
book. London, Taylor and Francis, 2009.
157. An iPhone the Blind can get behind. Brooklyn, Abledbody, 2009 (http://abledbody.com/profoundlyyours/2009/06/08/an-
iphone-the-blind-can-get-behind/, accessed 29 August 2009).
158. Stock SE et al. Evaluation of cognitively accessible software to increase independent access to cellphone technology for 
people with intellectual disability. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2008,52:1155-1164. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2788.2008.01099.x PMID:18647214
159. Jitterbug [web site]. (http://www.jitterbug.com/Default.aspx, accessed 20 August 2009).
160. Mobile accessibility [web site]. Mobile Manufacturers Forum, 2009. (http://www.mobileaccessibility.info/, accessed 25 
August 2009).
161. Power MR, Power D, Horstmanshof L. Deaf people communicating via SMS, TTY, relay service, fax, and computers in 
Australia. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 2007,12:80-92. doi:10.1093/deafed/enl016 PMID:16950864
162. Irie T, Matsunaga K, Nagano Y. Universal design activities for mobile phone: Raku Raku phone. Fujitsu Science and 
Technology Journal, 2005, 41(1):78–85 (http://www.fujitsu.com/downloads/MAG/vol41-1/paper11.pdf, accessed 1 July 
2010).
163. Stephandis C, Emiliani PL. “Connecting” to the information society: a European perspective. Technology and Disability, 
1999,10:21-44.
164. Theofanos MF, Redish J. Guidelines for accessible and usable web sites: observing users who work with screen readers. 
Interaction, 2003,X:38-51.http://www.redish.net/content/papers/interactions.htmlaccessed 1 July 2010.
165. Raising the Floor [web site]. (http://raisingthefloor.net/about, accessed 27 August 2009).
166. Rabin J. McCathieNevile C, eds. Mobile web best practices 1.0: basic guidelines: W3C recommendation 29 July 2008. World 
Wide Web Consortium, 2008 (http://www.w3.org/TR/mobile-bp/, accessed October 2008).
167. Tusler A. How to make technology work: a study of best practices in United States electronic and information technology 
companies. Disability Studies Quarterly, 2005,25:www.dsq-sds.org/article/view/551/728accessed 1 July 2010.
168. Maskery H. Crossing the digital divide—possibilities for influencing the private-sector business case. The Information 
Society, 2007,23:187-191. doi:10.1080/01972240701323614
 169. Information Economy Report 2009: trends and outlook in turbulent times. Geneva, United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, 2009.
170. China Mobile provides special services for the Beijing Paralympics. Beijing, China Mobile, 2008 (http://www.chinamobile.
com/en/mainland/media/press080910_01.html, accessed 30 January 2010).
171. Employers Forum on Disability. Realising Potential [web site]. (www.realising-potential.org/case-studies/industry/e-
commerce.html, accessed 12 April 2011).
172. Access and inclusion: digital communications for all. London, Ofcom, 2009. (http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/
consultations/access/summary/access_inc.pdf, accessed 30 January 2010).
173. Adaptive Technology Center for the Blind [web site]. (www3.sympatico.ca/tamru/, accessed, accessed 30 January 2010).
 Chapter 7
Education
 “I joined a mainstream school near my house for easy access. Although I could go 
to school on my wheelchair and could go back home with ease if any need arose, there 
was not any type of accessibility within the school. There were stairs everywhere and no 
access to classes by any other means. The best thing that could be done was to place my 
classroom on first floor which meant that I had 15 steps to conquer to get into or out of 
my class. This was usually done by having two people carry me up and down everyday. To 
make things really worse there were no accessible toilets. This meant that I either had not 
to use the toilet the whole day or go back home and lose my classes for the day.”
Heba 
“I am 10 years old. I go to a regular school; I am in the 4th grade. We have a wonder-
ful teacher, and she does everything to make me feel comfortable. I use a wheelchair to get 
around and have a special desk and a special wheelchair at school. When there was no eleva-
tor in the school, my mother helped me to go up the stairs. Now there is an elevator, and I can 
go up by myself and I like it a lot. We also have a teacher who uses a wheelchair, just like me.”
Olga 
“[Being in an inclusive school] makes us learn how we can help each other and also 
understand that education is for everybody. In my former school both pupils and teach-
ers used to laugh at me when I failed to say something, since I couldn’t pronounce words 
properly and they wouldn’t let me talk. But in this school if students laugh at me, teachers 
stop them and they ask forgiveness.”
Pauline 
“I did not have formal education. There just wasn’t facilities. It didn’t make me feel 
good. But I can’t do much about that now. I just stayed at home. I was more or les self 
taught. I can read and articulate myself quite well. But the opportunities I would have 
wanted never occurred, so I was only able to reach a certain level, I could not get any 
further. Ideally I would have gone to university, studied history.”
James 
“By the time I reached Standard 6, I’d lost almost all of my sight. My dad didn’t want 
me to go to school once I was completely blind – I think he was afraid for me – but an 
NGO convinced him to let me continue. After I graduated primary school my father was 
happy for me to continue on to high school. The NGO provided the funding for my four 
years of high school and they helped me with my cane, a Brailler, books, computer…
things like that…”
Richard 
“I want to go to school because I want to learn, and I want to be educated, and I want 
to define my life, to be independent, to be strong, and also to live my life and be happy.”
Mia 
 7
Education
Estimates for the number of children (0–14 years) living with disabilities 
range between 93 million (1, 2) and 150 million (3). Many children and adults 
with disabilities have historically been excluded from mainstream education 
opportunities. In most countries early efforts at providing education or train-
ing were generally through separate special schools, usually targeting specific 
impairments, such as schools for the blind. These institutions reached only 
a small proportion of those in need and were not cost-effective: usually in 
urban areas, they tended to isolate individuals from their families and com-
munities (4). The situation began to change only when legislation started to 
require including children with disabilities in educational systems (5).
Ensuring that children with disabilities receive good quality education 
in an inclusive environment should be a priority of all countries. The United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) rec-
ognizes the right of all children with disabilities both to be included in the 
general education systems and to receive the individual support they require 
(see Box 7.1). Systemic change to remove barriers and provide reasonable 
accommodation and support services is required to ensure that children with 
disabilities are not excluded from mainstream educational opportunities.
The inclusion of children and adults with disabilities in education is 
important for four main reasons.
 
■
Education contributes to human capital formation and is thus a key 
determinant of personal well-being and welfare.
 
■
Excluding children with disabilities from educational and employment 
opportunities has high social and economic costs. For example, adults 
with disabilities tend to be poorer than those without disabilities, but 
education weakens this association (8).
 
■
Countries cannot achieve Education for All or the Millennium 
Development Goal of universal completion of primary education with-
out ensuring access to education for children with disabilities (9).
 
■
Countries that are signatories to the CRPD cannot fulfil their responsi-
bilities under Article 24 (see Box 7.1).
For children with disabilities, as for all children, education is vital in 
itself but also instrumental for participating in employment and other areas 
of social activity. In some cultures, attending school is part of becoming 
a complete person. Social relations can change the status of people with 
205
 206
World report on disability 
disabilities in society and affirm their rights 
(10). For children who are not disabled, con-
tact with children with a disability in an inclu-
sive setting can, over the longer term, increase 
familiarity and reduce prejudice. Inclusive edu-
cation is thus central in promoting inclusive 
and equitable societies.
The focus of this chapter is on the inclu-
sion of learners with disabilities in the con-
text of quality Education for All – a global 
movement that aims to meet the learning 
needs of all children, youth, and adults by 
2015 and on the systemic and institutional 
transformation needed to facilitate inclusive 
education.
Educational participation 
and children with disability
In general, children with disabilities are less 
likely to start school and have lower rates of 
staying and being promoted in school (8, 11). 
The correlations for both children and adults 
between low educational outcomes and having 
a disability is often stronger than the correla-
tions between low educational outcome and 
other characteristics – such as gender, rural 
residence, and low economic status (8).
Respondents with disability in the World 
Health Survey experience significantly lower 
rates of primary school completion and fewer 
mean years of education than respondents with-
out disability (see Table 7.1). For all 51 countries 
in the analysis, 50.6% of males with disability 
have completed primary school, compared with 
61.3% of males without disability. Females with 
disability report 41.7% primary school comple-
tion compared with 52.9% of females without 
disability. Mean years of education are similarly 
lower for persons with disability compared with 
persons without disability (males: 5.96 versus 
7.03 years respectively; females: 4.98 versus 6.26 
years respectively). In addition, education com-
pletion gaps are found across all age groups and 
are statistically significant for both sub-samples 
of low-income and high-income countries.
Turning to country-specific examples, 
evidence shows young people with disabilities 
are less likely to be in school than their peers 
without disabilities (8). This pattern is more 
pronounced in poorer countries (9). The gap in 
primary school attendance rates between disa-
bled and non-disabled children ranges from 
Box 7.1. The rights and frameworks
The human right of all people to education was first defined in the United Nations’ Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights of 1948 and further elaborated in a range of international conventions, including the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child and more recently in the CRPD.
In 1994 the World Conference on Special Needs Education in Salamanca, Spain produced a statement and frame-
work for action The Salamanca Declaration encouraged governments to design education systems that respond 
to diverse needs so that all students can have access to regular schools that accommodate them in child-centred 
pedagogy (5).
The Education for All Movement is a global movement to provide quality basic education for all children, youth 
and adults (6). Governments around the world have made a commitment to achieve, by 2015, the six EFA goals: 
expand early childhood care and education; provide free and compulsory education for all; promote learning 
and life skills for young people and adults; increase adult literacy by 50%; achieve gender parity by 2005, gender 
equality by 2015; and improve the quality of education (6).
In Article 24 the CRPD stresses the need for governments to ensure equal access to an “inclusive education system 
at all levels” and provide reasonable accommodation and individual support services to persons with disabilities 
to facilitate their education (7).
The Millennium Development Goal of universal primary completion stresses attracting children to school and ensur-
ing their ability to thrive in a learning environment that allows every child to develop to the best of their abilities.
 207
Chapter 7 
Education
10% in India to 60% in Indonesia, and for sec-
ondary education, from 15% in Cambodia to 
58% in Indonesia (see Fig. 7.1). Household data 
in Malawi, Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe 
show that between 9% and 18% of children of 
age 5 years or older without a disability had 
never attended school, but between 24% and 
39% of children with a disability had never 
attended (13–16).
Enrolment rates also differ according to 
impairment type, with children with physical 
impairment generally faring better than those 
with intellectual or sensory impairments. 
For example in Burkina Faso in 2006 only 
10% of deaf 7- to 12-year olds were in school, 
whereas 40% of children with physical impair-
ment attended, only slightly lower than the 
attendance rate of non-disabled children (17). 
In Rwanda only 300 of an estimated 10 000 
deaf children in the country were enrolled in 
primary and secondary schools, with another 
9 in a private secondary school (18).
In India a survey estimated the share of disa-
bled children not enrolled in school at more than 
five times the national rate, even in the more pros-
perous states. In Karnataka, the best performing 
major state, almost one quarter of children with 
disabilities were out of school, and in poorer such 
states as Madhya Pradesh and Assam, more than 
half (11). While the best-performing districts in 
India had high enrolment rates for children with-
out disabilities – close to or above 90%, school 
attendance rates of children with disabilities never 
exceeded 74% in urban areas or 66% in rural. Most 
special education facilities are in urban areas (19, 
20), so the participation of children with disabili-
ties in rural areas could be much worse than the 
aggregated data imply (19, 21).
Partly as a result of building rural schools 
and eliminating tuition fees, Ethiopia nearly 
Table 7.1. Education outcomes for disabled and not disabled respondents
Individuals
Low-income countries
High-income countries
All countries
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Not 
disabled
Disabled
Male
Primary school completion
 
55.6%
45.6%*
72.3%
61.7%*
61.3%
50.6%*
Mean years of education
6.43
5.63*
8.04
6.60*
7.03
5.96*
 
Female
Primary school completion
42.0%
32.9%*
72.0%
59.3%*
52.9%
41.7%*
Mean years of education
5.14
4.17*
7.82
6.39*
6.26
4.98*
 
18–49
Primary school completion
60.3%
47.8%*
83.1%
69.0%*
67.4%
53.2%*
Mean years of education
7.05
5.67*
9.37
7.59*
7.86
6.23*
 
50–59
Primary school completion
44.3%
30.8%*
68.1%
52.0%*
52.7%
37.6%*
Mean years of education
5.53
4.22*
7.79
5.96*
6.46
4.91*
 
60 and over
Primary school completion
30.7%
21.2%*
53.6%
46.5%*
40.6%
32.3%*
Mean years of education
3.76
3.21
5.36
4.60*
4.58
3.89*
  
Note: Estimates are weighted using WHS post-stratified weights, when available (probability weights otherwise) and 
age-standardized.
* t-test suggests significant difference from “Not disabled” at 5%.
Source (12).
 208
World report on disability 
doubled its net enrolment ratio, from 34% in 
1999 to 71% in 2007 (22). But there are no reli-
able data on the inclusion or exclusion of disad-
vantaged groups in education (23). A national 
baseline survey in 1995 estimated the number 
of children with disabilities of school age at 
around 690 000 (24). According to Ministry of 
Education data, there were 2276 children with 
disabilities in 1997 – or just 0.3% of the total – 
attending 7 special boarding schools, 8 special 
day schools and 42 special classes. Ten years 
later there were still only 15 special schools, but 
the number of special classes attached to regular 
government schools had increased to 285 (25).
Even in countries with high primary 
school enrolment rates, such as those in eastern 
Europe, many children with disabilities do not 
attend school. In 2002 the enrolment rates of 
disabled children between the ages of 7 and 15 
years were 81% in Bulgaria, 58% in the Republic 
of Moldova, and 59% in Romania, while those 
of children not disabled were 96%, 97%, and 
93%, respectively (26). Fig. 7.2 confirms the siz-
able enrolment gap for disabled young people 
between the ages of 16 and 18 years in selected 
countries of eastern Europe.
So, despite improvements in recent dec-
ades, children and youth with disabilities are 
less likely to start school or attend school than 
other children. They also have lower transition 
rates to higher levels of education. A lack of edu-
cation at an early age has a significant impact 
on poverty in adulthood. In Bangladesh the 
cost of disability due to forgone income from 
a lack of schooling and employment, both of 
people with disabilities and their caregivers, is 
estimated at US$ 1.2 billion annually, or 1.7% 
of gross domestic product (27).
Fig. 7.1. Proportion of children aged 6–11 years and 12–17 years with and without a disability 
who are in school
Children aged 6–11 years
Proportion attending school (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
The 
Plurinational
State of Bolivia
Burundi
Cambodia
Chad
Colombia
India 
Indonesia
Jamaica
Mongolia Mozambique Romania South Africa
Zambia
Proportion attending school (%)
The 
Plurinational
State of Bolivia
Burundi
Cambodia
Chad
Colombia
India 
Indonesia
Jamaica
Mongolia Mozambique Romania South Africa Zambia
Not disabled 
Disabled
Children aged 12–17 years
Source (8).
 209
Chapter 7 
Education
Understanding education 
and disability
What counts as disability or special educational 
need and how these relate to difficulties chil-
dren experience in learning is a much debated 
topic for policy-makers, researchers, and the 
wider community (28).
Data on children with disabilities who have 
special education needs are hampered by dif-
ferences in definitions, classifications, and cat-
egorizations (29, 30). Definitions and methods 
for measuring disability vary across countries 
based on assumptions about human difference 
and disability and the importance given to the 
different aspects of disability – impairments, 
activity limitations and participation restric-
tion, related health condition, and environ-
mental factors (see Chapter 2). The purpose 
and underlying intentions of classification 
systems and related categorization are multiple 
including: identification; determining eligibil-
ity; administrative; and guiding and monitor-
ing interventions (29, 30). Many countries are 
moving away from medically-based models of 
identification of health condition and impair-
ments, which located the difference in the indi-
vidual, towards interactional approaches within 
education, which take into consideration the 
environment, consistent with the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health (ICF) (28, 29).
There are no universally agreed definitions 
for such concepts as special needs education 
and inclusive education, which hampers com-
parison of data.
The category covered by the terms special 
needs education, special educational needs, 
and special education is broader than edu-
cation of children with disabilities, because 
it includes children with other needs – for 
example, through disadvantages resulting 
from gender, ethnicity, poverty, war trauma, 
or orphanhood (8, 31, 32). The Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) estimates that between 15% and 20% 
of learners will have a special educational need 
at some point in their school career (33). This 
chapter focuses on the education of learners 
with disabilities, rather than on those covered 
in the broader definition of special needs. But 
not every person with a disability necessarily 
has a special educational need.
The broad sense of inclusion is that the 
education of all children, including those with 
disabilities, should be under the responsibility 
of the education ministries or their equivalent, 
with common rules and procedures. In this 
model education may take place in a range of 
settings – such as special schools and centres, 
special classes in integrated schools or regular 
classes in mainstream schools – following the 
principle of “the least restrictive environment”. 
This interpretation assumes that all children 
can be educated and that regardless of the set-
ting or adaptations required, all students should 
have access to a curriculum that is relevant and 
produces meaningful outcomes.
A stricter sense of inclusion is that all chil-
dren with disabilities should be educated in 
regular classrooms with age-appropriate peers. 
This approach stresses the need for the whole 
school system to change. Inclusive education 
Fig. 7.2. School enrolment rates of children 
aged 16–18 years in selected 
European countries
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bulgaria
Georgia
Romania 
Republic of 
Moldova
Proportion of children enrolled (%)
Disabled
Not disabled
Source (26).
 210
World report on disability
entails identifying and removing barriers and 
providing reasonable accommodation, ena-
bling every learner to participate and achieve 
within mainstream settings.
Policy-makers need increasingly to dem-
onstrate how policies and practice lead to 
greater inclusion of children with disability and 
improved educational outcomes. Current statis-
tical data collected on the numbers of disabled 
pupils with special educational needs by set-
ting provide some indications on the situation 
in countries and can be useful for monitoring 
trends in provision of inclusive education – if 
there is a clear understanding of which groups 
of pupils are included in data collection (28). 
Data and information useful in informing and 
shaping policy would focus more on the qual-
ity, suitability, or appropriateness of the edu-
cation provided (28). Systematic collection of 
qualitative and quantitative data, which can be 
used longitudinally, is required for countries to 
map their progress and compare relative devel-
opments across countries (28).
Approaches to educating 
children with disabilities
There are different approaches around the 
world to providing education for people with 
disabilities. The models adopted include special 
schools and institutions, integrated schools, 
and inclusive schools.
Across European countries 2.3% of pupils 
within compulsory schooling are educated in 
a segregated setting – either a special school 
or a separate class in a mainstream school (see 
Fig. 7.3). Belgium and Germany rely heavily on 
special schools in which children with special 
needs are separated from their peers. Cyprus, 
Lithuania, Malta, Norway, and Portugal appear 
to include the majority of their students in regu-
lar classes with their same-age peers. A review 
of other OECD countries shows similar trends, 
with a general movement in developed countries 
towards inclusive education, though with some 
exceptions (31). In developing countries the 
move towards inclusive schools is just starting.
The inclusion of children with disabili-
ties in regular schools – inclusive schools – is 
widely regarded as desirable for equality and 
human rights. The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific 
and 
Cultural 
Organization 
(UNESCO) 
has put forward the following reasons for devel-
oping a more inclusive education system (35).
 
■
Educational. The requirement for inclusive 
schools to educate all children together 
means that the schools have to develop 
ways of teaching that respond to individual 
differences, to the benefit of all children.
 
■
Social. Inclusive schools can change atti-
tudes towards those who are in some 
way “different” by educating all children 
together. This will help in creating a just 
society without discrimination.
 
■
Economic. Establishing and maintaining 
schools that educate all children together 
is likely to be less costly than setting up a 
complex system of different types of schools 
specializing in different groups of children.
Inclusive education seeks to enable schools 
to serve all children in their communities (36). 
In practice, however, it is difficult to ensure 
the full inclusion of all children with dis-
abilities, even though this is the ultimate goal. 
Countries vary widely in the numbers of chil-
dren with disabilities who receive education 
in either mainstream or segregated settings, 
and no country has a fully inclusive system. A 
flexible approach to placement is important: 
in the United States of America, for example, 
the system aims to place children in the most 
integrated setting possible, while providing for 
more specialized placement where this is con-
sidered necessary (37). Educational needs must 
be assessed from the perspective of what is best 
for the individual (38) and the available finan-
cial and human resources within the country 
context. Some disability advocates have made 
the case that it should be a matter of individual 
 211
Chapter 7 
Education
choice whether mainstream or segregated set-
tings meet the needs of the child (39, 40).
Deaf students and those with intellec-
tual impairments argue that mainstreaming 
is not always a positive experience (41, 42). 
Supporters of special schools – such as schools 
for the blind, deaf, or deafblind – particularly 
in low-income countries, often point to the fact 
that these institutions provide high-quality 
and specialized learning environments. The 
World Federation of the Deaf argues that often 
the best environment for academic and social 
development for a Deaf child is a school where 
both students and teachers use sign language 
for all communication. The thinking is that 
simple placement in a regular school, without 
meaningful interaction with classmates and 
professionals, would exclude the Deaf learner 
from education and society.
Outcomes
The evidence on the impact of setting on edu-
cation outcomes for persons with disabilities is 
not conclusive. A review of studies on inclusion 
published before 1995 concluded that the studies 
were diverse and not of uniformly good quality 
(43). While placement was not the critical factor 
in student outcomes, the review found:
 
■
slightly better academic outcomes for stu-
dents with learning disabilities placed in 
special education settings;
Fig. 7.3. Delivery of education by type of model for selected European countries
Note: The data refer to pupils who have been 
officially identified as having SEN. However, many 
more pupils may receive support for their special 
educational needs but they are not “counted”. The 
only comparable data is the percentage of pupils 
who are educated in segregated settings. The 
European Agency for Development in Special Needs 
Education has an operational definition for segrega-
tion: “education where the pupil with special needs 
follows education in separate special classes or 
special schools for the largest part (80% or more) of 
the school day”, which most countries agree upon 
and use in data collection.
Denmark: data only collected for pupils with exten-
sive support needs who are generally educated in 
segregated settings; up to 23 500 receive support in 
the mainstream schools. Finland: data do not include 
126 288 learners with minor learning difficulties 
(e.g. dyslexia) who receive part-time special needs 
education in the mainstream schools. Ireland: no 
data available for pupils with SEN in mainstream sec-
ondary schools. Germany and the Netherlands: no 
data available on numbers of pupils in special classes 
in mainstream schools. Hungary, Luxembourg and 
Spain: “special schools” includes special classes in 
mainstream schools. Poland: special classes in main-
stream schools do not exist. Sweden, Switzerland: 
data indicate that pupils are educated in segregated 
settings, however data are not collected on those 
who receive support in inclusive settings.
Source (28, 34).
 212
World report on disability
 
■
higher dropout rates for students with 
emotional disturbances who were placed 
in general education;
 
■
better social outcomes for students with 
severe intellectual impairments who were 
taught in general education classes.
While children with hearing impairments 
gained some academic advantage in mainstream 
education, their sense of self suffered. In general, 
students with mild intellectual impairments 
appeared to receive the most benefit from place-
ment in supportive general education classes.
A review of research from the United States 
on special needs education concluded that the 
impact of the educational setting – whether 
special schools, special classes, or inclusive 
education – on educational outcomes could not 
be definitely established (44). It found that:
 
■
most of the studies reviewed were not of 
good quality methodologically, and depend-
ent measures varied widely across studies;
 
■
the researchers often had difficulty separat-
ing educational settings from the types and 
intensity of services;
 
■
the research was frequently conducted 
before critical policy changes took place;
 
■
much of the research focused on how to 
implement inclusive practices, not on 
their effectiveness.
There are some indications that the acquisi-
tion of communication, social, and behavioural 
skills is superior in inclusive classes or schools. 
Several researchers have documented such pos-
itive outcomes (45–48). A meta-analysis of the 
impact of setting on learning found a “small-
to-moderate beneficial effect of inclusive edu-
cation on the academic and social outcomes of 
special needs students” (49). A small number 
of studies have confirmed the negative impact 
of placement in regular education where indi-
vidualized supports are not provided (50, 51).
The inclusion of students with disabilities 
is generally not considered to have a negative 
impact on the educational performance of stu-
dents without disabilities (52–54). Concerns 
about the impact of inclusion of children with 
emotional and behavioural difficulties were 
more often expressed by teachers (53).
But where class sizes are large and inclusion 
is not well resourced, the outcomes can be diffi-
cult for all parties. There will be poor outcomes 
for children with disabilities in a general class 
if the classroom and teacher cannot provide the 
support necessary for their learning, develop-
ment, and participation. Their education will 
tend to end when they finish primary school, 
as confirmed by the low rates of progression 
to higher levels of education (55). In Uganda, 
when universal primary education was first 
introduced, there was a large influx of previ-
ously excluded groups of children, including 
those with disabilities. With few additional 
resources schools were overwhelmed, report-
ing problems with discipline, performance, and 
drop-out rates among students (56).
A proper comparison of learning outcomes 
between special schools and the inclusion of 
children with disabilities in mainstream schools 
has not been widely carried out, beyond the few 
smaller studies already mentioned. In developing 
countries, almost no research comparing out-
comes has been conducted. There is thus a need 
for better research and more evidence on social 
and academic outcomes. Box 7.2 presents data 
from a longitudinal study in the United States 
on the educational and employment outcomes 
of different groups of students with disabilities.
Barriers to education for 
children with disabilities
Many barriers may hinder children with dis-
abilities from attending school (59–61). In this 
chapter they are categorized under systemic 
and school-based problems.
System-wide problems
Divided ministerial responsibility
In some countries education for some or all 
children with disabilities falls under separate 
 213
Chapter 7 
Education
Box 7.2. Transition from school to work in the United States
All secondary education students with documented disabilities in the United States are protected by Section 504 
of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act and the American Disabilities Act. A subgroup of students with disabilities 
also meets the eligibility requirements under Part B of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). In 
the former category are students whose disability does not adversely affect their ability to learn, and who can 
progress through school with reasonable accommodations that enable them to have access to the same resources 
and learning as their peers. The students eligible under Part B of the IDEA are entitled to a “free and appropriate 
public education”, which is defined through their individualized education plan. This case study refers to students 
with such a plan.
The National Longitudinal Transition Study 2 (NLTS2) provides data about students with disabilities covered by 
IDEA. The NLTS2 was launched after a nationally representative survey in 2000 of a sample of 11 272 students 
aged 13–16 years who were receiving special education. Of this sample of disabled students, 35% were living 
in disadvantaged households with annual incomes of US$ 25 000 or less. In addition, 25% were living in single-
parent households. Of all sample students, 93.9% were attending regular secondary schools in 2000, 2.6% were 
attending special schools, and the remainder attending alternative, vocational, or other schools.
Graduation rates
The following figure shows the proportion of students aged 14–21 years who finished high school and the 
proportion who dropped out, over 10 years. 
Proportion of exiting students with disabilities, aged 14–21 years, who graduated, received 
a certificate, or dropped out, 1996–2005 
 
Proportion of students (%)
Graduated with a diploma 
Received  certifcate 
Dropped out
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1996–97
1997–98
1998–99
1999–00
2000–01
2001–02
2002–03
2003–04
2004–05
2005–06
Source (57).
Post-school outcomes
According to NLTS2, 85% of young people with disabilities were engaged in employment, post-secondary edu-
cation, or job training in the four years since leaving school. Of the sample students, 45% had enrolled in some 
type of post-secondary education, compared with 53% of students in the general population. Among those in 
post-secondary education, 6% had enrolled in business, vocational, or technical schools, 13% in a two-year college 
course, and 8% in a four-year college or university. Of young people within the same age ranges in the general 
population, 12% were enrolled in two-year colleges and 29% in four-year institutions (58).
About 57% of the young people with disabilities aged 17–21 years were employed at the time of the 2005 follow-
up, compared with the 66% among the same age group in the general population. Young people with intellectual 
impairments or multiple impairments were the least likely to be engaged in school, work, or preparation for work.
continues ...
 214
World report on disability
ministries 
such 
as 
Health, 
Social 
Welfare, 
or 
Social 
Protection (El Salvador, Pakistan, Bangladesh) 
 
or distinct Ministries of Special Education. In 
other countries (Ethiopia and Rwanda) respon-
sibilities for the education for disabled children 
are shared between ministries (25).
In India children with disabilities in spe-
cial schools fall under the responsibility of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
while children in mainstream schools come 
under the Department of Education in the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (32). 
This division reflects the cultural perception that 
children with disabilities are in need of welfare 
rather than equality of opportunity (11). This 
particular model tends to further segregate chil-
dren with disabilities, and shifts the focus from 
education and achieving social and economic 
inclusion to treatment and social isolation.
Lack of legislation, policy, 
targets, and plans
While there are many examples of initiatives 
to include children with disabilities in educa-
tion, a lack of legislation, policy, targets and 
plans tends to be a major obstacle in efforts 
to provide Education for All (62). The gaps in 
policy that are commonly encountered include 
a lack of financial and other targeted incentives 
for children with disabilities to attend school 
– and a lack of social protection and support 
services for children with disabilities and their 
families (63).
A review of 28 countries participating 
in the Education for All Fast Track Initiative 
Partnership found that 10 had a policy commit-
ment to include children with disabilities and 
also had some targets or plans on such issues 
as data collection, teacher training, access to 
school buildings, and the provision of addi-
tional learning materials and support (64). 
For example Ghana has enrolment targets, 
including one that all children with “nonsevere 
special educational needs” should be educated 
in mainstream schools by 2015. Djibouti and 
Mozambique mention targets for children in 
regular schools. Kenya is committed to increas-
ing the gross enrolment rate of disabled children 
to 10% by 2010 and also has targets for training 
teachers and providing equipment. However, 
while a further 13 countries mentioned disa-
bled children they provided little detail of their 
proposed strategies and five countries did not 
refer to disability or inclusion at all.
Inadequate resources
Limited or inappropriate resources are regarded 
as a significant barrier to ensuring inclusive edu-
cation for children with disabilities (65). A study 
in the United States found that the average cost 
for educating a child with a disability was 1.9 
times the cost for a child without a disability, with 
Young people with learning, cognitive, behavioural, or emotional impairments were 4–5 times more likely to have 
been involved with the criminal justice system than young people in the general population.
Young people with intellectual impairments were the least likely to have graduated with a diploma and had the 
lowest employment rates among all disability categories. Dropouts were far less likely to be engaged in post-school 
work or education and 10 times more likely than students with disabilities who finished high school to have been 
arrested.
Of the students with visual or hearing impairments, more than 90% received a regular diploma and were twice 
as likely as other students with a disability to have enrolled in some type of post-secondary school.
For some students, such as those with emotional disturbances, the educational outcomes are disturbingly low. 
Research is required to find forms of curricula, pedagogies, and assessment methods that take better account of 
students’ diverse needs within education and in the transition to work.
... continued
 215
Chapter 7 
Education
the multiplier ranging from 1.6 to 3.1 depending 
on the type and extent of the disability (66). In 
most developing countries it is difficult to reach 
all those in need even when educational systems 
are well planned and support inclusion.
National budgets for education are often lim-
ited and families are frequently unable to afford 
the costs of education (9, 17, 67). There are short-
ages of resources such as few schools, inadequate 
facilities, insufficient qualified teachers and a lack 
of learning materials (6). An assessment in 2006 
on the status of El Salvador’s capacity to create 
inclusive educational opportunities for students 
with disabilities found that there was limited 
funding to provide services to all students with 
disabilities (68).
The Dakar Framework for Action rec-
ognizes that achieving Education for All will 
require increased financial support by coun-
tries and increased development assistance 
from bilateral and multilateral donors (67). But 
this has not always been forthcoming, restrict-
ing progress (17).
School problems
Curriculum and pedagogy
Flexible approaches in education are needed 
to respond to the diverse abilities and needs of 
all learners (69). Where curricula and teaching 
methods are rigid and there is a lack of appro-
priate teaching materials – for example, where 
information is not delivered in the most appro-
priate mode such as sign language and teaching 
materials are not available in alternative formats 
such as Braille – children with disabilities are 
at increased risk of exclusion (69). Assessment 
and evaluation systems are often focused on 
academic performance rather than individual 
progress and therefore can also be restrictive 
for children with special education needs (69). 
Where parents have anxieties about the quality 
of mainstream schools, they are more likely to 
push for segregated solutions for their children 
with disabilities (17).
Inadequate training and 
support for teachers
Teachers may not have the time or resources 
to support disabled learners (70). In resource-
poor settings classrooms are frequently over-
crowded and there is a severe shortage of well 
trained teachers capable of routinely handling 
the individual needs of children with dis-
abilities (71, 72). The majority of teachers lack 
sign-language skills creating barriers for Deaf 
pupils (73). Other supports such as classroom 
assistants are also lacking. Advances in teacher 
education have not necessarily kept pace with 
the policy changes that followed the Salamanca 
Declaration. For example, in India the pre-
service training of regular teachers includes no 
familiarization with the education of children 
with special needs (64).
Physical barriers
Physical access to school buildings is an essen-
tial prerequisite for educating children with 
disabilities (65). Those with physical disabili-
ties are likely to face difficulties in travelling 
to school if, for example, the roads and bridges 
are unsuitable for wheelchair use and the dis-
tances are too great (17). Even if it is possible 
to reach the school, there may be problems of 
stairs, narrow doorways, inappropriate seating, 
or inaccessible toilet facilities (74).
Labelling
Children with disabilities are often categorized 
according to their health condition to deter-
mine their eligibility for special education 
and other types of support services (29). For 
example, a diagnosis of dyslexia, blindness, or 
deafness can facilitate access to technological 
and communication support and specialized 
teaching (75). But assigning labels to children 
in education systems can have negative effects 
including stigmatization, peer rejection, lower 
self-esteem, lower expectations, and limited 
opportunities (29). Students may be reluctant 
about revealing their disability due to negative 
 216
World report on disability
attitudes, thus missing out on needed sup-
port services (76). A study in two states of the 
United States examined the responses of 155 
preschool teachers to the inclusion of children 
with disabilities (77). Two distinct versions of 
a questionnaire were created, including short 
sketches describing children with disabilities. 
One included a “labelling” version that used 
terms such as cerebral palsy. The other did not 
use labels, but simply described the children. 
The teachers who completed the non-labelling 
version were more positive about including 
disabled children than those who completed 
the labelling version. This suggested that a 
label can lead to more negative attitudes and 
that adults’ attitudes were critical in develop-
ing policies on the education of children with 
disabilities.
Attitudinal barriers
Negative attitudes are a major obstacle to the 
education of disabled children (78, 79). In some 
cultures people with disabilities are seen as a 
form of divine punishment or as carriers of 
bad fortune (80, 81). As a result, children with 
disabilities who could be in school are some-
times not permitted to attend. A community-
based study in Rwanda found that perceptions 
of impairments affected whether a child with 
a disability attended school. Negative commu-
nity attitudes were also reflected in the language 
used to refer to people with disabilities (82, 83).
The attitudes of teachers, school admin-
istrators, other children, and even family 
members affect the inclusion of children with 
disabilities in mainstream schools (74, 84). 
Some school teachers, including head teach-
ers, believe they are not obliged to teach chil-
dren with disabilities (84). In South Africa it is 
thought that school attendance and completion 
are influenced by the belief of school admin-
istrators that disabled students do not have a 
future in higher education (85). A study com-
paring Haiti with the United States found that 
teachers in both countries generally favoured 
types of disabilities they perceived to be easier 
to work with in mainstream settings (36).
Even where people are supportive of stu-
dents with disabilities, expectations might be 
low, with the result that little attention is paid 
to academic achievement. Teachers, parents, 
and other students may well be caring but at 
the same time not believe in the capacity of 
the children to learn (86, 87). Some families 
with disabled students may believe that special 
schools are the best places for their children’s 
education (76).
Violence, bullying, and abuse
Violence against students with disabilities – by 
teachers, other staff, and fellow students – is 
common in educational settings (20). Students 
with disabilities often become the targets of 
violent acts including physical threats and 
abuse, verbal abuse, and social isolation. The 
fear of bullying can be as great an issue for 
children with disabilities as actual bullying 
(88). Children with disabilities may prefer to 
attend special schools, because of the fear of 
stigma or bullying in mainstream schools (88). 
Deaf children are particularly vulnerable to 
abuse because of their difficulties with spoken 
communication.
Addressing barriers 
to education
Ensuring the inclusion of children with 
disabilities in education requires both sys-
temic and school level change (89). As with 
other complex change, it requires vision, 
skills, incentives, resources, and an action 
plan (90). One of the most important ele-
ments in an inclusive educational system 
is strong and continuous leadership at the 
national and school levels – something that 
is cost-neutral.
 217
Chapter 7 
Education
System-wide interventions
Legislation
The success of inclusive systems of education 
depends largely on a country’s commitment to 
adopt appropriate legislation, develop policies 
and provide adequate funding for implementa-
tion. Since the mid-1970s Italy has had legisla-
tion in place to support inclusive education for 
all children with disabilities resulting in high 
inclusion rates and positive educational out-
comes (33, 91, 92).
New Zealand shows how government min-
istries can promote an understanding of the 
right to education of disabled students by:
 
■
publicizing support available for disabled 
children
 
■
reminding school boards of their legal 
responsibilities
 
■
reviewing information provided to parents
 
■
reviewing complaints procedures (93).
A survey of low-income and middle-income 
countries found that if political will is lacking, 
legislation will have only a limited impact (31). 
Other factors leading to a low impact include 
insufficient funding for education, and a lack of 
experience in educating people with disabilities 
or special educational needs.
Policy
Clear national policies on the education of chil-
dren with disabilities are essential for the devel-
opment of more equitable education systems. 
UNESCO has produced guidelines to assist 
policy-makers and managers to create poli-
cies and practices supportive of inclusion (94). 
Clear policy direction at the national level has 
enabled a wide range of countries to undertake 
major educational reforms – including Italy, 
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, 
and Viet Nam (see Box 7.3).
In 1987 Lesotho started work on a series 
of policies on special education. By 1991 it 
had established a Special Education Unit and 
launched a national programme of inclusive 
education (95). A 1993 study carried out in 
a quarter of the country’s primary schools, 
involving interviews with more than 2649 
teachers, found that 17% of children in Lesotho 
had disabilities and special educational needs 
(95). The national programme for inclusive 
education was launched in 10 pilot schools, 
one in each district of the country. Training 
in inclusive teaching was developed for teach-
ers in these schools, and for student teachers, 
with the help of specialists and people with dis-
abilities themselves. A recent study on inclusive 
education in Lesotho found variability in the 
way that teachers addressed the needs of their 
children (96). There was a positive effect on 
the attitudes of teachers, and without a formal 
policy it is unlikely that improvements would 
have occurred.
National plans
Creating or amending a national plan of action 
and establishing infrastructure and capacity to 
implement the plan are key to including children 
with disabilities in education (79). The implica-
tions of Article 24 of the CRPD are that institu-
tional responsibility for the education of children 
with disabilities should remain within the 
Ministry of Education (97), with coordination, 
as appropriate, with other relevant ministries. 
National plans for Education For All should:
 
■
reflect international commitments to the 
right of disabled children to be educated;
 
■
identify the number of disabled children 
and assess their needs;
 
■
stress the importance of parental support 
and community involvement;
 
■
plan for the main aspects of provision – 
such as making school buildings acces-
sible, and developing the curriculum, 
teaching methods, and materials to meet 
a diversity of needs;
 
■
increase capacity, through the expansion of 
provision and training programmes;
 
■
make available sufficient funds;
 218
World report on disability 
 
■
conduct monitoring and evaluation, and 
improve the qualitative and quantitative 
data on students (64).
Funding
There are basically three ways to finance special 
needs education, whether in specialized insti-
tutions or mainstream schools:
 
■
through the national budget, such as set-
ting up a Special National Fund (as in 
Brazil), financing a Special Education 
Network of Schools (as in Pakistan), or as 
a fixed proportion of the overall education 
budget (0.92% in Nicaragua and 2.3% in 
Panama);
 
■
through financing the particular needs of 
institutions – for materials, teaching aids, 
training, and operational support (as in 
Chile and Mexico);
 
■
through financing individuals to meet their 
needs (as in Denmark, Finland, Hungary, 
and New Zealand).
Other countries, including Switzerland and 
the United States, use a combination of funding 
methods that include national financing that 
Box 7.3. Inclusion is possible in Viet Nam – but more can be done
In the early 1990s Viet Nam launched a major programme of reform to improve the inclusion of students with 
disabilities in education. The Centre for Special Education worked with an international nongovernmental organi-
zation to set up two pilot projects, one rural and one urban. Local steering committees for each project were 
active in raising awareness in the community and conducting house-to-house searches for children who were 
missing from official school lists. The pilot projects identified 1078 children with a wide range of impairments 
who were excluded.
Training was provided to administrators, teachers, and parents on:
 
■
the benefits of inclusive education
 
■
special education services
 
■
individualized educational programmes
 
■
carrying out accommodation and environmental modifications
 
■
assessment
 
■
family services.
In addition, technical assistance was given in such areas as mobility training for blind students and training for 
parents on exercises to improve mobility for children with cerebral palsy.
Four years later, an evaluation found that 1000 of the 1078 children with disabilities had been successfully included 
in general education classes in local schools – an achievement welcomed by both teachers and parents. With 
international donor support a similar programme was conducted in three other provinces. Within three years 
attendance rates in regular classes of children with disabilities increased from 30% to 86%, and eventually 4000 
new students were enrolled in neighbourhood schools.
Follow-up evaluations found that teachers were more open to including students with disabilities than previously 
– and were better equipped and more knowledgeable about inclusive practices. Teachers and parents had also 
raised their expectations of children with disabilities. More important, the children were better integrated into 
their communities. The average cost of the programme for a student with disabilities in the inclusive setting was 
US$ 58 per year, compared with US$ 20 for a student without disabilities and US$ 400 for education in segregated 
settings. This sum did not cover specialized equipment – such as hearing aids, wheelchairs, and Braille printers, 
which many students with disabilities required and whose cost was prohibitive for most families.
Despite the progress, only around 2% of preschool and primary schools in Viet Nam are inclusive, and 95% of 
children with disabilities still do not have access to school (90). But the success of the pilot projects has helped 
change attitudes and policies on disability and has led to greater efforts on inclusion. The Ministry of Education 
and Training has committed itself to increase the percentage of children with disabilities being educated in regular 
classes. New laws and policies that support inclusive education are being implemented.
 219
Chapter 7 
Education
can be used flexibly for special needs education 
at the local level. The criteria for eligibility of 
funding can be complex. Whichever funding 
model is used, it should:
 
■
be easy to understand
 
■
be flexible and predictable
 
■
provide sufficient funds
 
■
be cost-based and allow for cost control
 
■
connect special education to general 
education
 
■
be neutral in identification and placement 
(98, 99).
One system for comparing data on resources 
between countries categorizes students accord-
ing to whether their needs arise from medical 
conditions, behavioural, or emotional condi-
tions, or socioeconomic or cultural disadvan-
tages (31). The resources dedicated to children 
with medical diagnoses remain the most con-
stant across ages. Those allocated to children 
with socioeconomic or cultural disadvantages 
are more heavily concentrated among younger 
age groups, and drop off sharply by secondary 
school (100). The decline in resources for these 
categories may reflect higher drop-out rates for 
these groups, especially in the later stages of 
secondary school, implying that the system is 
not meeting their educational needs.
Table 7.2 summarizes the data for a range 
of Central and South American countries, 
making comparisons with similar data from 
New Brunswick province in Canada, the United 
States, and the median of the OECD countries. 
It is clear that the Central and South American 
countries are providing resources for students 
with disabilities in the pre-primary and pri-
mary years. But there is a rapid fall-off of pro-
vision in the early secondary school period and 
no provision at all in the later secondary period. 
This contrasts with the OECD countries, which 
provide education for students with disabilities 
across the full age range, even though the pro-
vision is reduced at older ages.
Table 7.2. Percentage of students with disabilities receiving educational resources by country 
and by level of education
Country
Compulsory 
education (%)
Pre-primary 
(%)
Primary  
(%)
Lower  
secondary (%)
Upper  
secondary (%)
Belize
0.95
–
0.96
–
–
Brazil
0.71
1.52
0.71
0.06
–
Chile
0.97
1.31
1.17
1.34
–
Colombia
0.73
0.86
0.84
0.52
N/A
Costa Rica
1.21
4.39
1.01
1.48
N/A
Guyana
0.15
N/A
0.22
N/A
N/A
Mexico
0.73
0.53
0.98
0.26
–
Nicaragua
0.40
0.64
0.40
–
–
Paraguay
0.45
N/A
0.45
N/A
N/A
Peru
0.20
0.94
0.30
0.02
N/A
Uruguay
1.98
–
1.98
–
–
United States of America
5.25
7.38
7.39
3.11
3.04
New Brunswick province, 
Canada
2.89
–
2.19
3.80
3.21
Median of OECD countries
2.63
0.98
2.43
3.11
1.37
  
Note: Mexico is an OECD country. Only partial data are available for countries listed in italics.
N/A not applicable.
– not available/never collected.
Source (31, 101).
 220
World report on disability
Ensuring children with disabilities are able 
to access the same standard of education as 
their peers often requires increased financing 
(17). Low-income countries will require long-
term predictable financing to achieve this. In 
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Save 
the Children and the Swedish International 
Development Cooperation Agency provided 
long-term funding and technical support for an 
Inclusive Education Project from 1993–2009. 
The project resulted in a centralized, national 
approach to the development of policy and 
practice in inclusive education. Services began 
in 1993, when a pilot school opened in the capi-
tal, Vientiane. There are now 539 schools across 
141 districts providing inclusive education and 
specialized support for more than 3000 chil-
dren with disabilities (102).
While the costs of special schools and 
inclusive schools are difficult to determine it is 
generally agreed that inclusive settings are more 
cost-effective (33). Inclusion has the best chance 
of success when school funding is decentral-
ized, budgets are delegated to the local level, and 
funds are based on total enrolment and other 
indicators. Access to small amounts of flexible 
funds can promote new approaches (103).
School interventions
Recognizing and addressing 
individual differences
Education systems need to move away from 
more traditional pedagogies and adopt more 
learner-centred approaches which recognize 
that each individual has an ability to learn 
and a specific way of learning. The curricula, 
teaching methods and materials, assessment 
and examination systems, and the manage-
ment of classes all need to be accessible and 
flexible to support differences in learning pat-
terns (19, 69).
Assessment practices can facilitate or 
hinder inclusion (103). The need to attain aca-
demic excellence often pervades school cultures, 
so policies on inclusion need to ensure that all 
children reach their potential (104). Streaming 
into ability groups is often an obstacle to inclu-
sion whereas mixed-ability, mixed-age class-
rooms can be a way forward (17, 69). In 2005 the 
European Agency for Development in Special 
Needs Education studied forms of assessment 
that support inclusion in mainstream settings 
(105). Involving 50 assessment experts in 23 
countries, the study addressed how to move from 
a deficit – mainly medically-based – approach to 
an educational or interactive approach. The fol-
lowing principles were proposed:
 
■
Assessment procedures should promote 
learning for all students.
 
■
All students should be entitled to be part of 
all assessment procedures.
 
■
The needs of students with disabilities 
should be considered within all general 
assessment policies as well as within poli-
cies on disability-specific assessment.
 
■
The assessment procedures should comple-
ment each other.
 
■
The assessment procedures should aim to 
promote diversity by identifying and valu-
ing the progress and achievements of each 
student.
 
■
Inclusive assessment procedures should 
explicitly aim to prevent segregation by 
avoiding – as far as possible – forms of label-
ling. Instead, assessments should focus on 
learning and teaching practices that lead to 
more inclusion in a mainstream setting.
Individualized education plans are a useful 
tool for children with special educational needs 
to help them to learn effectively in the least 
restrictive environments. Developed through a 
multidisciplinary process, they identify needs, 
learning goals and objectives, appropriate 
teaching strategies, and required accommo-
dations and supports. Many countries such as 
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United 
Kingdom and the United States have policies 
and documented processes for such plans (106).
Creating an optimum learning environ-
ment will assist children in learning and 
achieving their potential (107). Information 
and communication technologies, including 
 221
Chapter 7 
Education
assistive technologies, should be used when-
ever possible (69, 108). Some students with dis-
abilities might require accommodations such 
as large print, screen readers, Braille and sign 
language, and specialized software. Alternative 
formats of examination may also be needed, 
such as oral examinations for non-readers. 
Learners with difficulty in understanding as 
a result of intellectual impairments may need 
adapted teaching styles and methods. The 
choices regarding reasonable accommodations 
will depend on the available resources (71).
Providing additional supports
To ensure the success of inclusive education 
policies some children with disabilities will 
require access to additional support services 
(5). The additional costs associated with these 
is likely to be offset in part by savings from stu-
dents in specialized institutions transferring to 
mainstream schools.
Schools should have access to specialist 
education teachers where required. In Finland 
the majority of schools are supported by at least 
one permanent special education teacher. These 
teachers provide assessments, develop individ-
ualized education plans, coordinate services, 
and provide guidance for mainstream teach-
ers (109). In El Salvador “support rooms” have 
been set-up in mainstream primary schools to 
provide services to students with special edu-
cation needs, including those with disabilities. 
The services include assessments of students, 
instruction on an individual basis or in small 
groups, support for general education teachers, 
and speech and language therapy and similar 
services. Support room teachers work closely 
with parents, and receive a budget from the 
Ministry of Education for training and salaries. 
In 2005 about 10% of the schools nationwide 
had support rooms (68).
Teaching assistants – also known as learn-
ing support assistants, or special needs assis-
tants – are increasingly used in mainstream 
classrooms. Their role varies in different set-
tings, but their main function is to support 
children with disabilities to participate in 
mainstream classrooms – they should not be 
regarded as substitute teachers. Their success-
ful deployment requires effective communica-
tion and planning with the classroom teacher, a 
shared understanding of their role and respon-
sibilities, and ongoing monitoring of the way 
support is provided (110, 111). There is a danger 
that extensive use of teaching assistants may 
discourage more flexible approaches and side-
line disabled children in class (93). Special needs 
assistants should not hinder children with dis-
abilities from interacting with non-disabled 
children or from engaging in age-appropriate 
activities (88).
Early identification and intervention can 
reduce the level of educational support chil-
dren with disabilities may require throughout 
their schooling and ensure they reach their 
full potential (107). Children with disabilities 
may require access to specialist health and 
education professionals such as occupational 
therapists, physiotherapists, speech therapists, 
and educational psychologists to support their 
learning (107). A review of early childhood 
interventions in Europe stressed the need for 
proper coordination among health, education, 
and social services (112).
Making better use of existing resources to 
support learning is also important, particu-
larly in poorer settings. For example, while 
schools in poor rural environments may have 
large class sizes and fewer material resources, 
stronger community involvement and posi-
tive attitudes can overcome these barriers (65). 
Many teaching materials that significantly 
enhance learning processes can be locally made 
(103). Special schools, where they exist, can be 
valuable for disability expertise (early identi-
fication and intervention) and as training and 
resource centres (5). In low-income settings 
itinerant teachers can be a cost-effective means 
of addressing teacher shortages, assisting chil-
dren with disabilities to develop skills – such as 
Braille literacy, orientation and mobility – and 
developing teaching materials (113).
 222
World report on disability
Building teacher capacity
The appropriate training of mainstream teach-
ers is crucial if they are to be confident and 
competent in teaching children with diverse 
educational needs. The principles of inclu-
sion should be built into teacher training 
programmes, which should be about attitudes 
and values not just knowledge and skills (103). 
Post-qualification training, such as that offered 
at Ethiopia’s Sebeta Teacher Training Institute, 
can improve provision and – ultimately – the 
rate of enrolment   of students with disabilities 
(see Box 7.4).
Teachers with disabilities should be 
encouraged as role models. In Mozambique a 
collaboration between a teacher training col-
lege and a national disabled people’s organi-
zation, ADEMO, trains teachers to work with 
learners with disabilities and also provides 
scholarships for students with disabilities to 
train as teachers (116).
Several resources can assist teachers to 
work towards inclusive approaches for students 
with disabilities such as:
 
■
Embracing diversity: Toolkit for creating 
inclusive, learning friendly environments 
contains nine self-study booklets to assist 
teachers to improve their skills in diverse 
classroom settings (107).
 
■
Module 4: Using ICTs to promote education 
and job training for persons with disabili-
ties in Toolkit of best practices and policy 
advice provides information on how infor-
mation and communication technologies 
can facilitate access to education for people 
with disabilities (108).
 
■
Education in emergencies: Including every-
one: INEE pocket guide to inclusive educa-
tion provides support for educators working 
in emergency and conflict situations (117).
Teacher training should also be supported 
by other initiatives that provide teachers with 
opportunities to share expertise and experi-
ences about inclusive education and to adapt 
and experiment with their own teaching meth-
ods in supportive environments (69, 102).
Where segregated schools feature promi-
nently, enabling special education teachers to 
make the transition to working in an inclu-
sive system should be a priority. In extend-
ing inclusive education, special schools and 
Box 7.4. Teacher education in Ethiopia
Teacher training on special educational needs has been conducted in Ethiopia since the 1990s, a focus for much 
international support. Until the early 1990s, teacher education on special educational needs was primarily through 
short nongovernmental organization-funded workshops. This approach did not produce lasting changes in teach-
ing and learning processes. Nor did it enable the government to be self-reliant in training special education staff.
Starting in 1992, with support from the Finnish government, a six-month training course was launched at a teacher 
training institute (114). This was part of a drive to support existing special schools, introduce more special classes, 
and increase the number of learners within mainstream classes with support from itinerant teachers. Fifty teachers 
received university education from Finnish universities – 6 in Finland itself, 44 through distance learning, which 
cost around 10% of the direct education.
Short support courses were developed at Addis Ababa University, and a special centre, the Sebeta Teacher Training 
Institute, was created as part of Sebeta School for the Blind. Between 1994 and 1998, 115 people graduated as 
special education teachers, and thousands of mainstream teachers received in-service training. But the facilities 
do not train enough teachers to meet the full demand for inclusive education (115).
Other regular colleges and universities in Ethiopia now offer special needs education courses to all students, and 
Sebeta continues to offer a 10-month course to qualified teachers. As a result of Sebeta’s training programme, 
there has been an expansion in the numbers of special classes and disabled children attending school. But using 
Ministry of Education statistics, it is estimated that only 6000 identified disabled children have access to education 
of a primary school population of nearly 15 million (64).
 223
Chapter 7 
Education
mainstream schools have to collaborate (62). In 
the Republic of Korea at least one special school 
in each district is selected by the government to 
work closely with a partner mainstream school, 
to encourage inclusion of disabled children 
through various initiatives such as peer support 
and group work (76).
Removing physical barriers
Principles of universal design should underlie 
policies of access to education. Many physical 
barriers are relatively straightforward to over-
come: changing physical layout of classrooms 
can make a major difference (118). Incorporating 
universal design into new building plans is 
cheaper than making the necessary changes to 
an old building and adds only around 1% to the 
total construction cost (119).
Overcoming negative attitudes
The physical presence of children with dis-
abilities in schools does not automatically 
ensure their participation. For participation 
to be meaningful and produce good learning 
outcomes, the ethos of the school – valuing 
diversity and providing a safe and supportive 
environment – is critical.
The attitudes of teachers are critical in ensur-
ing that children with disabilities stay in school 
and are included in classroom activities. A study 
carried out to compare the attitudes of teachers 
towards students with disabilities in Haiti and 
the United States showed that teachers are more 
likely to change their attitudes towards inclusion 
if other teachers demonstrate positive attitudes 
and a supportive school culture exists (36). Fear 
and a lack of confidence among teachers regard-
ing the education of students with disabilities can 
be overcome:
 
■
In Zambia teachers in primary and basic 
schools had expressed interest in includ-
ing children with disabilities, but believed 
that this was reserved for specialists. Many 
had fears that such conditions as albinism 
were contagious. They were encouraged to 
discuss their negative beliefs and to write 
about them reflectively (120).
 
■
In Uganda teachers’ attitudes improved 
simply by having regular contact with chil-
dren with disabilities (56).
 
■
In Mongolia a training programme on inclu-
sive education was run for teachers and par-
ents with the support of specialist teachers. 
The 1600 teachers trained had highly positive 
attitudes towards the inclusion of children 
with disabilities and towards working with 
the parents: the enrolment of children with 
disabilities in preschool facilities and primary 
schools increased from 22% to 44% (121).
The role of communities, 
families, disabled people, and 
children with disabilities
Communities
Approaches involving the whole community 
reflect the fact that the child is an integral 
member of the community and make it more 
likely that sustainable inclusive education for 
the child can be attained (see Box 7.5).
Community-based rehabilitation (CBR) 
projects have often included educational activi-
ties for children with disabilities and share the 
goal of inclusion (5, 125). CBR-related activities 
that support inclusive education include refer-
ring children with disabilities to appropriate 
schools, lobbying schools to accept children 
with disabilities, assisting teachers to support 
children with disabilities, and creating links 
between families and communities (59).
CBR workers can also be a useful resource 
to teachers in providing assistive devices, 
securing medical treatment, making the school 
environment accessible, establishing links to 
disabled people’s organizations, and finding 
employment or vocational training placements 
for children at the end of their school education.
Examples of innovative practices that link 
CBR to inclusive education can be found in 
many low-income countries:
 
■
In the Karamoja region of Uganda, where 
most people are nomads and only 11.5% 
of the population are literate, children’s 
 224
World report on disability
domestic duties are essential to the sur-
vival of their families. In this region a pro-
ject called Alternative Basic Education for 
Karamoja has been set up. This commu-
nity-based project has pushed for inclusion 
in education (126). It encourages the par-
ticipation of children with disabilities and 
school instruction in the local language. The 
curriculum is relevant to the community’s 
livelihood, containing instruction on such 
topics as livestock and crop production.
 
■
The Oriang project in western Kenya has 
introduced inclusive education in five pri-
mary schools. Technical and financial 
assistance is provided by Leonard Cheshire 
Disability (60). The support includes train-
ing new teachers and working with students, 
parents, teachers, and the wider community 
to change attitudes and build the right struc-
tures for delivering inclusive education. The 
project benefits 2568 children, of whom 282 
have a mild to severe disability (127).
Parents
Parents should be involved in all aspects of 
learning (128). The family is the first source 
of education for a child, and most learning 
occurs at home. Parents are frequently active 
in creating educational opportunities for their 
children, and they need to be brought on board 
Box 7.5. Sport for children with disabilities in Fiji
Since March 2005 the Fiji Paralympic Committee (FPC) and the Australian Sports Commission have worked 
together to provide inclusive sport activities for children with disabilities in Fiji’s 17 special education centres. 
These activities are part of the Australian Sports Outreach Program, an Australian government initiative that seeks 
to help individuals and organizations deliver high-quality, inclusive sport-based programmes that contribute to 
social development.
FPC’s grassroots programmes are designed to increase the variety and quality of sport choices available for 
children in Fijian schools. Its activities include:
 
■
Pacific Junior Sport – a games-based programme that provides opportunities for children to participate and 
develop their skills;
 
■
qito lai lai (“children’s games”) for smaller children;
 
■
arranging for sport federations – such as those of golf, table tennis, tennis, and archery – to run sessions in schools;
 
■
supporting schools so that students can play popular sports, such as football, volleyball, and netball, and 
paralympic sports such as boccia, goalball, and sitting volleyball;
 
■
managing regional and national sport tournaments, as well as festivals in which students test their skills in 
football, netball, and volleyball against children from mainstream schools;
 
■
providing role models through the athlete ambassador programme, in which athletes with a disability regularly 
visit schools, including mainstream schools.
Sport can improve the inclusion and well-being of people with a disability:
 
■
by changing what communities think and feel about people with a disability – and in that way reducing stigma 
and discrimination;
 
■
by changing what people with a disability think and feel about themselves – and in that way empowering 
them to recognize their own potential;
 
■
by reducing their isolation and helping them integrate more fully into community life;
 
■
by providing opportunities which assists young people to develop healthy body systems (musculoskeletal, 
cardiovascular) and improve coordination.
As a result of FPC’s work, each Friday afternoon across the country more than 1000 children with a disability are 
playing a sport. As the FPC’s sport development officer points out, “when people see children with a disability 
playing sport, they know that they are capable of doing many different things”.
Source (122–124).
 225
Chapter 7 
Education
to facilitate the process of inclusion. In several 
countries individual parents, often with the 
support of parents’ associations, have taken 
their governments to court, setting precedents 
that opened regular schools to children with 
disabilities. Inclusion Panama pressured the 
Panamanian government to change the law 
requiring children with disabilities to be edu-
cated in a separate system. In 2003, as a result 
of its campaign, the government introduced 
a policy to make all schools inclusive. NFU, a 
parents’ organization in Norway, has lent sup-
port to parents in Zanzibar to collaborate with 
the education ministry in introducing inclusive 
education. In 2009 a parents’ organization in 
Lebanon persuaded a teachers’ training college 
to conduct its practical training for teachers in 
the community instead of in institutions.
Disabled people’s organizations
Disabled people’s organizations also have a role 
in promoting the education of disabled children 
– for example, working with young disabled 
people, providing role models, encouraging 
parents to send their children to school and 
become involved in their children’s education, 
and campaigning for inclusive education. The 
Southern Africa Federation of the Disabled, 
for instance, has set up a range of programmes 
involving people with disabilities, including its 
children and youth programme, running for 
the past 15 years. The programme focuses on all 
aspects of discrimination and abuse of children 
with disabilities and their exclusion from edu-
cation and other social activities. However such 
organizations frequently lack the resources and 
capacity to develop their role in education.
Children with disabilities
The voices of children with disabilities them-
selves must be heard, though they frequently 
are not. In recent years children have been 
more involved in studies of their experi-
ences of education. The results of such child-
informed research are of great benefit for 
educational planners and policy-makers and 
can be a source of evidence as educational 
systems become more inclusive. Child-to-
child cooperation should be better used to 
promote inclusion (94).
Audiovisual methods have been particularly 
effective in bringing out the views of children in 
a range of socioeconomic settings (129, 130).
 
■
Young people in nine Commonwealth 
countries were consulted about their views 
on the CRPD through a series of focus 
groups. The right to education featured 
in the top three issues in three quarters of 
these groups (131).
 
■
In a refugee programme in Jhapa, Nepal, 
children with disabilities were found to be 
a neglected and vulnerable group (132). A 
full-time disability coordinator for the pro-
gramme was therefore appointed to under-
take participatory action research. Disabled 
children talked about their family lives and 
described how they were taunted if they 
left their homes. Both children and parents 
listed education as the top priority. After 18 
months more than 700 children had been 
integrated into schools, and sign-language 
training had been introduced in all refugee 
camps, for Deaf and non-deaf children.
 
■
In 
September 
2007 
the 
Portuguese 
Ministry of Education organized a Europe-
wide consultation in collaboration with 
the European Agency for Development in 
Special Needs Education (133). The young 
people consulted favoured inclusive educa-
tion, but insisted that each person should 
be able to choose where to be educated. 
Acknowledging that they gained social 
skills and experience of the real world in 
inclusive schools, they also said that indi-
vidualized specialist support had helped 
them to prepare for higher education.
Conclusion and 
recommendations
Children with disabilities are less likely than 
children without disabilities to start school and 
have lower rates of staying and being promoted 
 226
World report on disability
in school. Children with disabilities should 
have equal access to quality education, because 
this is key to human capital formation and their 
participation in social and economic life.
While children with disabilities have his-
torically been educated in separate special 
schools, inclusive mainstream schools in both 
urban and rural areas provide a cost-effective 
way forward. Inclusive education is better able 
to reach the majority and avoids isolating chil-
dren with disabilities from their families and 
communities.
A range of barriers within education poli-
cies, systems and services limit disabled chil-
dren’s mainstream educational opportunities. 
Systemic and school-level change to remove 
physical and attitudinal barriers and provide 
reasonable accommodation and support ser-
vices is required to ensure that children with 
disabilities have equal access to education.
A broad range of stakeholders – policy-
makers, 
school 
administrators, 
teachers, 
families, and children with and without dis-
abilities – can contribute to improving educa-
tional opportunities and outcomes for children 
with disabilities, as outlined in the following 
recommendations.
Formulate clear policies and 
improve data and information
 
■
Develop a clear national policy on the inclu-
sion of children with disabilities in education 
supported by the necessary legal frame-
work, institutions, and adequate resources. 
Definitions need to be agreed on what con-
stitutes “inclusive education” and “special 
educational needs”, to help policy-makers 
develop an equitable education system that 
includes children with disabilities.
 
■
Identify, through surveys, the level and 
nature of need, so that the correct support 
and accommodations can be introduced. 
Some students may require only modifica-
tions to the physical environment to gain 
access, while others will require intensive 
instructional support.
 
■
Establish monitoring and evaluation sys-
tems. Data on the numbers of learners with 
disabilities and their educational needs, 
both in special schools and in mainstream 
schools, can often be collected through 
existing service providers. Research is 
needed on the cost–effectiveness and effi-
ciency of inclusive education.
 
■
Share knowledge about how to achieve 
educational inclusion among policy-
makers, educators, and families. For 
developing countries the experience of 
other countries that have already moved 
towards inclusion can be useful. Model 
projects of inclusive education could be 
scaled up through local-to-regional-to-
global networks of good practice.
Adopt strategies to 
promote inclusion
 
■
Focus on educating children as close to the 
mainstream as possible. This includes, if 
necessary, establishing links between special 
education facilities and mainstream schools.
 
■
Do not build a new special school if no spe-
cial schools exist. Instead, use the resources 
to provide additional support for children 
with disabilities in mainstream schools.
 
■
Ensure an inclusive educational infrastruc-
ture – for example, by mandating minimum 
standards of environmental accessibility to 
enable access to school for children with dis-
abilities. Accessible transport is also vital.
 
■
Make teachers aware of their responsi-
bilities towards all children and build and 
improve their skills for teaching children 
with disabilities. Educating teachers about 
including children with disabilities should 
ideally take place in both pre-service and 
in-service teacher education. It should have 
a special emphasis on teachers in rural 
areas, where there are fewer services for 
children with disabilities.
 
■
Support teachers and schools to move away 
from a one-size-fits-all model towards 
flexible approaches that can cope with 
 227
Chapter 7 
Education
diverse needs of learners – for example, 
individualized education plans can ensure 
the individual needs of students with dis-
abilities are met.
 
■
Provide technical guidance to teachers that 
can explain how to group students, differ-
entiate instruction, use peers to provide 
assistance, and adopt other low-cost inter-
ventions to support students having learn-
ing difficulties.
 
■
Clarify and reconsider policies on the 
assessment, classification, and placement 
of students so that they take into considera-
tion the interactional nature of disability, 
do not stigmatize children, and benefit the 
individuals with disabilities.
 
■
Promote Deaf children’s right to educa-
tion by recognizing linguistic rights. Deaf 
children should have early exposure to sign 
language and be educated as multilinguals 
in reading and writing. Train teachers in 
sign language and provide accessible edu-
cational material.
Provide specialist services, 
where necessary
 
■
Increase investment in school infrastruc-
ture and personnel so that children with 
disabilities that are identified as having 
special educational needs obtain the needed 
support, and continue to receive that sup-
port during their education.
 
■
Make available speech and language ther-
apy, occupational therapy, and physiother-
apy to learners with moderate or significant 
disabilities. In the absence of specialist 
providers, use existing community-based 
rehabilitation services to support children 
in educational settings. If these resources 
are absent, an attempt should be made to 
develop these services gradually.
 
■
Consider introducing teaching assistants 
to provide special support to children with 
disabilities, while ensuring that this does 
not isolate them from other students.
Support participation
 
■
Involve parents and family members. 
Parents and teachers should jointly decide 
on the educational needs of a child. Children 
do better when families get involved, and 
this costs very little.
 
■
Involve the broader community in activi-
ties related to the education of children 
with disabilities. This is likely to be more 
successful than policy decisions handed 
down from above.
 
■
Develop links between educational ser-
vices and community-based rehabilitation 
– and other rehabilitation services, where 
they exist. In this way, scarce resources 
can be used more efficiently, and educa-
tion, health care, and social services can 
be properly integrated.
 
■
Encourage adults with disabilities and 
disabled people’s organizations to become 
more involved in promoting access to edu-
cation for children with disabilities.
 
■
Consult and involve children in decisions 
about their education.
References
1. 
Global burden of disease: 2004 update. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
2. 
World population prospects: the 2008 revision population database: highlights. United Nations, Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs, 2009 (http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/wpp2008/wpp2008_highlights.pdf, accessed 
12 January 2011).
3. 
The State of the World’s Children 2006: excluded and invisible. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2005.
4. 
The present situation of special education. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 1988.
5. 
Education for All. Salamanca framework for action. Washington, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 1994.
6. 
The Dakar framework for action: Education for All: meeting our collective commitments. Adopted by the World Education 
Forum, Dakar, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 26–28 April 2000. Paris, 2000a.
 228
World report on disability
7. 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. New York, United Nations, 2006.
8. 
Filmer D. Disability, poverty, and schooling in developing countries: results from 14 household surveys. The World Bank 
Economic Review, 2008,22:141-163. doi:10.1093/wber/lhm021
9. 
Education for All Global Monitoring Report. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2009.
10. Nott J. Impaired identities? Disability and personhood in Uganda and implications for an international policy on disability. 
Oslo, Department of Social Anthropology, University of Oslo, 1998.
11. People with disabilities in India: from commitments to outcomes. Washington, Human Development Unit, South Asia Region, 
World Bank, 2009.
12. World Health Survey. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002–2004 (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/en/, 
accessed 20 August 2009).
13. Loeb ME, Eide AH, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Malawi: a national representative study. 
Oslo, SINTEF, 2004.
14. Eide AH, van Rooy G, Loeb ME. Living conditions among people with disabilities in Namibia: a national, representative study. 
Oslo, SINTEF, 2003.
15. Eide AH, Loeb ME, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zambia. Oslo, SINTEF, 2006.
16. Eide AH et al. Living conditions among people with disabilities in Zimbabwe: a representative, regional study. Oslo, SINTEF, 
2003.
17. Reaching the marginalized EFA Global Monitoring Report 2010. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 2010.
18. Karangwa E, Kobusingye M. Consultation report on education of the Deaf in Rwanda. Kigali, Ministry of Education, 2007.
19. Porter GL. Disability and inclusive education. Paper prepared for the InterAmerican Development Bank seminar, Inclusion 
and Disability, Santiago, 2001 (http://www.disabilityworld.org/05-06_01/children/inclusiveed.shtml, accessed 1 May 
2009).
20. Summary report. Violence against children. UN Secretary-General’s report on violence against children. Thematic group on 
violence against children. Findings and recommendations. New York, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2005.
21. Singal N. Inclusive education in India: international concept, national interpretation. International Journal of Disability 
Development and Education, 2006,53:351-369. doi:10.1080/10349120600847797
22. Education for All global monitoring report 2009. Regional overview: sub-Saharan Africa. Paris, United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2009 (http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0017/001784/178418e.pdf, accessed 20 
August 2009).
23. Tirussew T. Overview of the development of inclusive education in the last fifteen years in Ethiopia. In: Savolainen H, 
Matero M, Kokkala H, eds. When all means all: experiences in three African countries with EFA and children with disabilities. 
Helsinki, Ministry for Foreign Affairs, 2006.
24. Kett M, Geiger M, Boersma M. Community-based rehabilitation and families in crisis. In: Hartley S, Okune J. CBR: inclusive 
policy development and implementation. Norwich, University of East Anglia, 2008.
25. Lewis I. Education for disabled people in Ethiopia and Rwanda. Manchester, Enabling Education Network, 2009.
26. Mete C, ed. Economic implications of chronic illness and disability in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Washington, 
World Bank, 2008.
27. Project appraisal document on a proposed credit to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for a disability and children-at-risk 
project project. Washington, World Bank, 2008 (http://tinyurl.com/yhuqa6u, accessed 19 October 2009).
28. SNE country data 2010: background information. Odense, European Agency for Development in Special Needs Education, 
2010. Unpublished.
29. Florian L et al. Cross-cultural perspectives on the classification of children with disabilities: Part 1 issues in the classifica-
tion of children with disabilities The Journal of Special Education, 2006,40:36-45. doi:10.1177/00224669060400010401
30. Educational Quality Improvement Program. Issues brief: educating children with disabilities: Who are the children with dis-
abilities? Washington, United States Agency for International Development, 2005 (http://www.equip123.net/webarticles/
anmviewer.asp?a=359&z=92, 12 January 2011).
31. Students with disabilities, learning difficulties and disadvantages: policies, statistics and indicators. Paris, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, 2007.
32. Naidhu A. Collaboration in the era of inclusion. In: Forlin C, Lian M-GJ, eds. Reform, inclusion and teacher education: toward 
a new era of special education in the Asia Pacific Region. London, Routledge, 2008.
33. Inclusive education at work: students with disabilities in mainstream schools. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, 1999.
34. Special needs education: country data 2010. Odense, European Agency for Development in Special Needs Education, 2010.
35. Understanding and responding to children’s needs in inclusive classrooms. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, 2001 (http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001243/124394e.pdf, accessed 13 August 2009).
 229
Chapter 7 
Education
36. Dupoux E, Wolman C, Estrada E. Teachers’ attitudes toward integration of students with disabilities in Haiti and the United 
States. International Journal of Disability Development and Education, 2005,52:43-58. doi:10.1080/10349120500071894
37. Silverstein J. Framework for understanding IDEA in general and the discipline provisions in particular. Washington, Center for 
Study and Advancement of Disability Policy, 2002.
38. Farrell P et al. SEN inclusion and pupil achievement in English schools. Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 
2007,7:172-178. doi:10.1111/j.1471-3802.2007.00094.x
39. Norwich B. Education, inclusion and individual differences: recognising and resolving dilemmas. British Journal of 
Educational Studies, 2002,50:482-502. doi:10.1111/1467-8527.t01-1-00215
40. Pitt V, Curtin M. Integration versus segregation: the experiences of a group of disabled students moving from mainstream 
school into special needs further education. Disability & Society, 2004,19:387-401. doi:10.1080/09687590410001689485
41. Foster S, Emerton G. Mainstreaming the Deaf student: A blessing or a curse? Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 1991,2:61-
76. doi:10.1177/104420739100200205
42. Fuchs D, Fuchs LS. Sometimes separate is better (education for learning disabled children). Educational Leadership, 
1994,54:22-27.
43. Hocutt AM. Effectiveness of special education: is placement the critical factor? The Future of children / Center for the Future 
of Children, the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, 1996,6:77-102. PMID:8689263
44. McLaughlin MJ et al. The education of children with disabilities and interpretations of equity: a review of policy and research. 
New York, Teachers College, Columbia University, 2008.
45. Fisher M, Meyer LH. Development and social competence after two years for students who enrolled in inclusive and self-
contained educational programs. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 2002,27:165-174. doi:10.2511/
rpsd.27.3.165
46. Kishi GS, Meyer LH. What children report and remember: A six-year follow-up of the effects of social contact between peers 
with and without severe disabilities. The Journal of the Association for Persons with Severe Handicaps, 1994,19:277-289.
47. Helmstetter E et al. Comparison of general and special education classrooms of students with severe disabilities. Education 
and Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 1998,33:216-227.
48. Peck CA, Donaldson J, Pezzoli M. Some benefits nonhandicapped adolescents perceive for themselves from their social 
relationships with peers who have severe handicaps. The Journal of the Association for Persons with Severe Handicaps, 
1990,15:241-249.
49. Baker ET, Wang MC, Walberg HJ. The effects of inclusion on learning. Educational Leadership, 1994–1995,52:33-35.
50. Baines L, Baines C, Masterson C. Mainstreaming: one school’s reality. Phi Delta Kappan, 1994,76:39-40.
51. Zigmond N, Baker JM. An exploration of the meaning and practice of special education in the context of full inclusion of 
students with learning disabilities. The Journal of Special Education, 1995,29:109-115. doi:10.1177/002246699502900201
52. Salend SJ, Duhaney LMG. The impact of inclusion on students with and without disabilities and their educators. Remedial 
and Special Education, 1999,20:114-126. doi:10.1177/074193259902000209
53. Kalambouka A et al. The impact of population inclusivity in schools on student outcomes. In: Research evidence in educa-
tion library. London, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University of London, 2005.
54. Dyson A et al. Inclusion and pupil achievement. London, Department for Education and Skills, 2004.
55. Schneider M et al. We also count! The extent of moderate and severe reported disability and the nature of the disability experi-
ence in South Africa. Pretoria, Department of Health and CASE, 1999.
56. Afako R et al. Implementation of inclusive education policies in Uganda. Collaborative research between the Centre of 
International Child Health and the Uganda National Institute of Special Education. Paris, United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2002.
57. Table 4–3. Students with disabilities served under IDEA, Part B, in the U.S. and outlying areas who exited school, by exit reason, 
reporting year, and student’s age: 1995–96 through 2004–05. Rockville, Data Accountability Centre, 2009 (https://www.
ideadata.org/tables30th/ar_4-3.xls, accessed 16 October 2009).
58. Newman L et al. The post-high school outcomes of youth with disabilities up to 4 years after high school: a report of findings 
from the National Longitudinal Transition Study-2 (NLTS2) (NCSER 2009–3017). Menlo Park, SRI International, 2009 (www.
nlts2.org/reports/2009_04/nlts2_report_2009_04_complete.pdf, accessed 22 October 2009).
59. Ogot O, McKenzie J, Dube S. Inclusive Education (IE) and community-based rehabilitation. In: Hartley S, Okune J, eds. CBR: 
inclusive policy development and implementation. Norwich, University of East Anglia, 2008.
60. Report to Comic Relief on Oriang Cheshire inclusive education project. London, Leonard Cheshire Disability, 2006.
61. Barton L, Armstrong F. Policy, experience and change: cross-cultural reflections on inclusive education. Dordrecht, Springer, 
2007.
62. Forlin C, Lian MGJ, eds. Reform, inclusion and teacher education: toward a new era of special education in the Asia Pacific 
Region. London, Routledge, 2008.
 230
World report on disability
63. Education access and retention for educationally marginalised children: innovations in social protection. KwaZulu-Natal, 
Mobile Task Team, Health Economics & HIV and AIDS Research Division, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 2005. (http://
www.schoolsandhealth.org/sites/ffe/Key%20Information/Education%20Access%20and%20Retention%20for%20
Educationally%20Marginalised%20Children.pdf, accessed 12 January 2011).
64. Bines H, Lei P, eds. Education’s missing millions: including disabled children in education through EFA FTI processes and 
national sector plans. Milton Keynes, World Vision UK, 2007 (http://www.worldvision.org.uk/upload/pdf/Education%27s_
Missing_Millions_-Main_Report.pdf, accessed 22 October 2009).
65. Stubbs S. Inclusive education: where there are few resources. Oslo, Atlas Alliance, 2008 (http://www.eenet.org.uk/theory_
practice/IE%20few%20resources%202008.pdf, accessed 20 July 2009).
66. Chambers J, Shkolnik J, Pérez M. Total expenditures for students with disabilities, 1999–2000: spending variation by disability. 
Palo Alto, American Institutes for Research, Center for Special Education Finance, 2003 (No. ED481398).
67. Education for all: global synthesis. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2000.
68. Hernandez G. Assessing El Salvador’s capacity for creating inclusive educational opportunities for students with disabilities 
using a capacity assessment framework. College Park, University of Maryland, 2006.
69. Policy Guidelines on Inclusion in Education, Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2009.
70. Wright SL, Sigafoos J. Teachers and students without disabilities comment on the placement of students with special 
needs in regular classrooms at an Australian primary school. Australasian Journal of Special Education, 1997,21:67-80. 
doi:10.1080/1030011970210203
71. Chimedza R, Peters S. Disability and special educational needs in an African context. Harare, College Press, 2001.
72. Proposal for a national plan for special needs education and related services in Rwanda. Kigali, Government of the Republic 
of Rwanda, 2005 (http://payson.tulane.edu/gsdl-2.73//collect/mohnonve/index/assoc/HASH2410. dir/doc.pdf, accessed 
18 August 2009).
73. Haualand H, Allen C. Deaf people and human rights. Helsinki, World Federation of the Deaf and Swedish National Association 
of the Deaf, 2009.
74. Researching our experience: a collection of writings by Zambian teachers. Mpika and Manchester, Enabling Education 
Network, 2003.
75. Macdonald SJ. Toward a sociology of dyslexia: exploring links between dyslexia, disability and social class. Saarbrücken, VDM 
Publishing House, 2009.
76. Kwon H. Inclusion in South Korea: the current situation and future directions. International Journal of Disability Development 
and Education, 2005,52:59-68. doi:10.1080/10349120500071910
77. Huang HH, Diamond KE. Early childhood teachers’ ideas about including children with disabilities in programs designed 
for typically developing children. International Journal of Disability Development and Education, 2009,56:169-182. 
doi:10.1080/10349120902868632
78. Price P. Education for All (EFA): an elusive goal for children with disabilities in developing countries in the Asian Pacific 
Region. Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 2003,14:3-9.
79. Inclusion International. Better education for all: when we’re included too. Salamanca, Instituto Universitario de Integracion 
en la Comunidad, 2009.
80. Ingstad B, Whyte SR, eds. Disability and culture. Berkley, University of California Press, 2005.
81. O’Sullivan C, MacLachlan M. Childhood disability in Burkina Faso and Sierra Leone: an exploratory analysis. In: M.Machlan, 
L.Swartz, eds. Disability and international development: towards inclusive global health. Dordrecht, Springer, 2009.
82. Karangwa E. Grassroots community-based inclusive education: exploring educational prospects for young people with dis-
abilities in the post-conflict Rwandan communities. Louvain, Centre for Disability, Special Needs Education and Child Care, 
2006 (https://repository.libis.kuleuven.be/dspace/handle/1979/424, accessed 1 July 2008).
83. Karangwa E, Ghesquière P, Devlieger P. The grassroots community in the vanguard of inclusion: the Rwandan perspective. 
International Journal of Inclusive Education, 2007,11:607-626.
84. Kvam MH, Braathen SH. Violence and abuse against women with disabilities in Malawi. Oslo, SINTEF, 2006.
85. Howell C. Changing public and professional discourse. In: Engelbrecht P, Green L, eds. Responding to the challenges of 
inclusive education in Southern Africa. Pretoria, Van Schaik Publishers, 2006:89–100.
86. Boersma FJ, Chapman JW. Teachers’ and mothers’ academic achievement expectations for learning disabled children. 
Journal of School Psychology, 1982,20:216-221. doi:10.1016/0022-4405(82)90051-6
87. McGrew KS, Evans J. Expectations for students with cognitive disabilities: Is the cup half empty or half full? Can the cup flow 
over? Minneapolis, National Center on Educational Outcomes, University of Minnesota, 2003 (http://education.umn.edu/
NCEO/OnlinePubs/Synthesis55.html, accessed 9 August 2010).
88. Watson N et al. Life as a disabled child: research report. Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh, 1998.
89. McGregor G, Vogelsberg RT. Inclusive schooling practices: pedagogical and research foundations. A synthesis of the literature 
that informs best practices about inclusive schooling. Baltimore, Paul H Brookes, 1998.
 231
Chapter 7 
Education
90. Villa RA et al. Inclusion in Viet Nam: more than a decade of implementation. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe 
Disabilities, 2003,28:23-32. doi:10.2511/rpsd.28.1.23
91. Begeny JC, Martens BK. Inclusionary education in Italy: a literature review and call for more empirical research. Remedial 
and Special Education, 2007,28:80-94. doi:10.1177/07419325070280020701
92. Cornoldi C et al. Teacher attitudes in Italy after twenty years of inclusion. Remedial and Special Education, 1998,19:350-356. 
doi:10.1177/074193259801900605
93. Disabled children’s right to education. Auckland, New Zealand Human Rights Commission, 2009.
94. Open file on inclusive education: support materials for managers and administrators. Paris, United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2003 (http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001321/132164e.pdf, accessed 13 
August 2009).
95. Khatleli P et al. Schools for all: national planning in Lesotho. In: O’Toole B, McConkey R, eds. Innovations in developing 
countries for people with disabilities. Chorley, Lisieux Publications, 1995.
96. Johnstone CJ, Chapman D. Contributions and constraints to the implementation of inclusive education in Lesotho. 
International Journal of Disability Development and Education, 2009,56:131-148. doi:10.1080/10349120902868582
97. Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and reports of the office of the High Commissioner 
and the Secretary-General: thematic study by the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on enhanc-
ing awareness and understanding of the convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. Geneva, Office of the High 
Commissioner on Human Rights, 2009 (http://www.un.org/disabilities/documents/reports/ohchr/A.HRC.10.48AEV.pdf, 
accessed 12 January 2011).
98. Hartman WT. State funding models for special education. Remedial and Special Education, 1992,13:47-58. 
doi:10.1177/074193259201300610
99. Parrish TB. Fiscal policies in special education: removing incentives for restrict placements. Palo Alto, Center for Special 
Education Finance, American Institutes for Research, 1994 (Policy Paper No. 4).
100. Student with disabilities, learning difficulties and disadvantages: statistics and indicators. Paris, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, 2005.
101. Students with disabilities, learning difficulties and disadvantages: statistics and indicators for curriculum access and equity 
(special educational needs) in the countries of the organisation of American States (OAS) – outputs. Paris, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, 2007b.
102. Grimes PA. Quality education for all: a history of the Lao PDR inclusive education project 1993–2009. Vientiane, Save the 
Children Norway, 2009.
103. Overcoming Exclusion through Inclusive Approaches in Education: a challenge and a vision, Paris, United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2003.
104. Slee R. Teacher education, government and inclusive schooling. In: Allen J, ed. Inclusion, participation and democracy. 
Dordrecht, Kluwer Publishers, 2003.
105. Assessment in inclusive settings: key issues for policy and practice. Odense, Denmark, European Agency for Development in 
Special Needs Education, 2007.
106. McCausland D. International experience in the provision of individual education plans for children with disabilities. Dublin, 
National Disability Authority, 2005.
107. Embracing diversity: toolkit for creating inclusive, learning-friendly environments. Bangkok, Thailand, United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2009 (http://www2.unescobkk.org/elib/publications/032revised/
index.htm, accessed 12 January 2011).
108. Toolkit of best practices and policy advice. Geneva, International Telecommunication Union, 2009 (http://www.connec-
taschool.org/itu-module-list, accessed 12 January 2011).
109. Takala M, Pirttimaa R, Törmänen M. Inclusive special education: the role of special education teachers in Finland. British 
Journal of Special Education, 2009,36:162-172. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8578.2009.00432.x
110. Jerwood L. Focus on practice: using special needs assistants effectively. British Journal of Special Education, 1999,26:127-
129. doi:10.1111/1467-8527.t01-1-00123
111. Logan A. The role of the special needs assistant supporting pupils with special educational needs in Irish mainstream 
primary schools. Support for Learning, 2006,21:92-99. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9604.2006.00410.x
112. Early childhood intervention: analysis of situations in Europe. Middlefart, Denmark, European Agency for Development in 
Special Needs Education, 2005.
113. Education for children with disabilities: improving access and quality. London, UK Department for International 
Development, 2010 (http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Media-Room/News-Stories/2010/Education-for-children-with-disabilities/, 
accessed 12 January 2011).
 232
World report on disability
114. Lasonen J, Kemppainen R, Raheem K. Education and training in Ethiopia: an evaluation of approaching EFA goals. Jyväskylä, 
Finland, Institute for Educational Research, University of Jyväskylä, 2005 (http://ktl.jyu.fi/arkisto/verkkojulkaisuja/TP_23_
Lasonen.pdf, accessed 30 September 2009).
115. Putting children at the centre of education: how VSO supports practice and policy in primary schools. Addis Ababa, VSO 
Ethiopia, 2008.
116. Schurmann E. Training disabled teachers in Mozambique. Manchester, Enabling Education, 2006 (Newsletter 10) (http://
www.eenet.org.uk/resources/eenet_newsletter/news10/page15.php, accessed 30 September 2009).
117. Education in emergencies: including everyone. INEE pocket guide to inclusive education. Geneva, Inter-Agency Network on 
Education in Emergencies, 2009.
118. Ferguson DL. International trends in inclusive education: the continuing challenge to teach one and everyone. European 
Journal of Special Needs Education, 2008,23:109-120. doi:10.1080/08856250801946236
119. Accessibility program and school restoration in Lisbon. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
2006.
120. Miles S. Engaging with teachers’ knowledge: promoting inclusion in Zambian schools. Disability & Society, 2009,24:611-
624. doi:10.1080/09687590903010990
121. Making schools inclusive: how change can happen: Save the Children’s experiences. London, Save the Children, 2008.
122. Development for all: towards a disability-inclusive Australian aid program 2009–2014. Canberra, Australian Agency for 
International Development, 2008a.
123. . Australian Agency for International DevelopmentSport and Development. Focus Magazine, 2008,b23:2-22.
124. Sport for Development and Peace International Working Group. Harnessing the power of sport for development and peace: 
recommendations to governments. Toronto, Right to Play, 2008.
125. International Labour Organization, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, World Health 
Organization. CBR: A strategy for rehabilitation, equalization of opportunities, poverty reduction and social inclusion of 
people with disabilities. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
126. Focas-Licht M. Alternative basic education for Karamoja, Uganda. Enabling Education, 2000, 4.
127. Chavuta AHP, Kimuli E, Ogot O. Community-based rehabilitation as part of inclusive education and development. In: 
Hartley S, ed. CBR as part of community development: a poverty reduction strategy. London, University College London, 
Centre for International Child Health, 2006:54–63 (http://www.afri-can.org/cbr_book.php, accessed 21 September 2009).
128. Brady JP et al. Evaluation of the Step By Step Program: executive summary. Arlington, VA, Improving Educational Quality 
and Children’s Resources International, 1999 (http://www.childrensresources.org/stepbystep.pdf, accessed 7 September 
2009).
129. Carrington S, Allen K, Osmolowski D. Visual narrative: a technique to enhance secondary students’ contribution to the 
development of inclusive, socially just school environments. Lessons from a box of crayons. Journal of Research in Special 
Educational Needs, 2007,7:8-15. doi:10.1111/j.1471-3802.2007.00076.x
130. Kaplan I, Lewis I, Mumba P. Picturing global educational inclusion? Looking and thinking across students’ pho-
tographs from the UK, Zambia and Indonesia. Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 2007,7:23-35. 
doi:10.1111/j.1471-3802.2007.00078.x
131. Rieser R. Implementing inclusive education: a Commonwealth guide to implementing Article 24 of the UN Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. London, Commonwealth Secretariat, 2008.
132. Schools for all: including disabled children in education. London, Save the Children UK, 2002.
133. Young people’s views on inclusive education: Lisbon declaration. Odense, Denmark, European Agency for Development in 
Special Needs Education, 2007.
 Chapter 8
Work and employment
 “My disabilities deprived me of the chance to participate in farming; nevertheless I 
didn’t give up. I raised ducks, sold aqua-cultural products, and traded waste materials. 
Although social discrimination and physical disability caused lots of difficulties, I never 
yielded. However, due to the hardship of the work, the ulcer on my right foot deteriorated, 
finally I had to have an amputation. Luckily with the help of friends and neighbours, I 
was successfully fitted with a prosthesis and restarted my career to seek a meaningful 
and independent life. From scratch, I began to raise cattle. I set up the Centre of Cattle 
Trading. It not only provides me a sufficient life, but also enables me to help many others 
who are also facing the challenges of leprosy.”
Tiexi 
“A lot of people, when I tried to get into university and when I applied for jobs, they 
struggled to see past the disability. People just assumed because I had a disability, that 
I couldn’t perform even the simplest of tasks, even as much as operating a fire extin-
guisher… I think the main reason I was treated differently, since I set out to become a 
nurse, was probably because people were scared, because they’ve never been faced with 
anyone like me before.”
Rachael 
“I work at the catering unit of an NGO, supplying meals to 25 people who work there 
and sewing dolls when I am not cooking. The products are made for shops who buy 
because of the good quality, not because the things are made by people with disabilities. I 
have many friends at work. We all have intellectual disabilities. I do not have any other job 
choices because no one else would hire someone like me. It is hard to think what I would 
do if I had more choices, but maybe I would like to sing and dance and make music.”
Debani 
“Before the earthquake we were a big family with seven children all with our wishes 
and dreams. But only three of us survived in the ruined blocks of the buildings. The US 
doctors managed to save only one of my legs. With prosthesis I restarted attending school. 
I was living with memories of past, which were only a few pictures left. Even though I 
acknowledged the need to further my education I had no wish to do it. The turning point 
in my life was an offer to work in the local TV channel as a starting journalist. At first I had 
the anticipation that disability could be a hindrance upon becoming a professional jour-
nalist. But I had a very warm welcome; I was encouraged and had an on-job training for 
becoming a journalist. Very soon I felt comfortable in my new environment and position, 
was given equal number of responsibilities as others had and was not given any privilege.”
Ani 
 8
Work and employment
235
Across the world, people with disabilities are entrepreneurs and self-
employed workers, farmers and factory workers, doctors and teachers, shop 
assistants and bus drivers, artists, and computer technicians (1). Almost 
all jobs can be performed by someone with a disability, and given the right 
environment, most people with disabilities can be productive. But as doc-
umented by several studies, both in developed and developing countries, 
working age persons with disabilities experience significantly lower employ-
ment rates and much higher unemployment rates than persons without dis-
abilities (2–9). Lower rates of labour market participation are one of the 
important pathways through which disability may lead to poverty (10–15). 
In Article 27 the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities (CRPD) “recognizes the right of persons with disabilities to 
work, on an equal basis with others; this includes the opportunity to gain a 
living by work freely chosen or accepted in a labour market and work envi-
ronment that is open, inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities” 
(16). Furthermore, the CRPD prohibits all forms of employment discrimi-
nation, promotes access to vocational training, promotes opportunities for 
self-employment, and calls for reasonable accommodation in the workplace, 
among other provisions.
A number of factors impact labour market outcomes for persons with 
disabilities including; productivity differentials; labour market imperfec-
tions related to discrimination and prejudice, and disincentives created by 
disability benefit systems (2, 17–19). To address labour market imperfections 
and encourage the employment of people with disabilities, many countries 
have laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of disability. Enforcing 
antidiscrimination laws is expected to improve access to the formal econ-
omy and have wider social benefits. Many countries also have specific meas-
ures, for example quotas, aiming to increase employment opportunities for 
people with disabilities (20). Vocational rehabilitation and employment ser-
vices – job training, counselling, job search assistance, and placement – can 
develop or restore the capabilities of people with disabilities to compete in 
the labour market and facilitate their inclusion in the labour market. At the 
heart of all this is changing attitudes in the workplace (see Box 8.1).
 236
World report on disability 
Understanding labour markets
Participation in the labour market
If people with disabilities and their households 
are to overcome exclusion, they must have access 
to work or livelihoods, breaking some of the cir-
cular links between disability and poverty (14, 
24–26). Some employers continue to fear that 
people with disabilities are unqualified and not 
productive (27, 28). But people with disabilities 
often have appropriate skills, strong loyalty and 
low rates of absenteeism, and growing numbers 
of companies find it efficient and profitable to 
hire people with disabilities (29, 30).
The participation of people with disabili-
ties in the labour force is important for other 
reasons:
 
■
Maximizing human resources. Productive 
engagement of persons with disabilities 
increases individual well-being and con-
tributes to the national output (31, 32).
 
■
Promoting human dignity and social 
cohesion. Apart from income, employment 
brings personal and social benefits, adding 
to a sense of human dignity and social 
cohesion (33). All individuals should be 
able to freely choose the direction of their 
personal lives, to develop their talents and 
capabilities to the full (16).
 
■
Accommodating the increasing num-
bers of people with disabilities in the 
working age population. The prevalence 
of disability is expected to increase in the 
coming decades because of a rise in chronic 
conditions together with improved health 
and medical rehabilitation services that 
preserve and prolong life. The ageing of 
the world’s population is also expected to 
increase the prevalence of disability. In all 
world regions the proportion of people over 
the age of 60 is predicted to rise over the 
next few decades (17, 18).
Labour market theory suggests, for reasons 
of both supply and demand, that the employ-
ment rate of people with disabilities will be 
lower than that of people without disabilities.
Box 8.1. Key concepts
The term “work” is broad and includes unpaid work in the home or in a family enterprise, paid work for another 
person or organization in the formal or informal economy, and self-employment.
Livelihood is “the means by which an individual secures the necessities of life” (21). It may involve work at home 
or in the community, work alone or in a group, or for an organization, a government body, or a business. It may 
be work that is remunerated in kind, in cash, or by a daily wage or a salary (21). In many countries, people with 
disabilities are found predominantly in non-wage or non-salary forms of work (22).
The “formal economy” is regulated by the government and includes employment in the public and private sectors 
where workers are hired on contracts, and with a salary and benefits, such as pension schemes and health insur-
ance. The “informal economy” is the unregulated part of a country’s economy. It includes small-scale agriculture, 
petty trading, home-based enterprises, small businesses employing a few workers, and other similar activities (22).
The term “labour force” refers to all adults of working age who are available, capable, and working or wanting to 
work (23). The “unemployed” includes people who are not employed but are available and searching for work. 
There are different indicators for measuring the work status of people with disabilities:
 
■
the unemployment rate is the number of unemployed people expressed as a percentage of the labour force;
 
■
the employment rate is the share of the working age population which works for pay;
 
■
the labour force participation rate is the proportion of the adult population which is economically active, 
whether employed or unemployed (22).
 
■
the employment ratio is the ratio of the employment rate of people with disabilities compared to the employ-
ment rate of the general population.
 237
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
On the supply side, people with disabili-
ties will experience a higher cost of working, 
because more effort may be required to reach 
the workplace and to perform the work, and 
in countries with more generous disability 
allowances, employment may result in a loss of 
benefits and health care coverage, whose value 
is greater than the wages that could be earned 
(34). So the “reservation wage” of a person with 
disability – the lowest wage a person is willing 
to work for – is likely to be higher than that 
of a person without a disability. The resulting 
“benefit trap” is a source of concern in many 
high-income countries (2, 35).
On the demand side, a health condition 
may make a person less productive, especially 
if the workplace environment does not accom-
modate people with disabilities. In such cir-
cumstances, the person would be expected to 
be offered a lower market wage. The effects of a 
disability on productivity are hard to calculate, 
because they depend on the nature of impair-
ment, the working environment, and the tasks 
required in the job. A blind person, for exam-
ple, might find it difficult to operate a crane but 
face no impediment to productivity as a tel-
ephone operator (36). In an agrarian economy 
most jobs are in the primary sector and involve 
heavy manual labour, which those with limited 
walking or carrying abilities may not be able to 
perform. In addition, a person with a disability 
may be offered a lower wage purely as a result 
of discrimination.
A higher reservation wage and a lower 
market wage thus make a person with disabil-
ity less likely to be employed than one without 
disability.
Employment rates
In many countries data on the employment of 
people with disabilities are not systematically 
available. Responses to an International Labour 
Organization (ILO) survey in 2003 showed 
that 16 of the 111 countries and territories 
responding had no data at all on employment 
in relation to disability (22). In low-income 
and middle-income countries, the availability 
of data continues to be limited, despite recent 
improvements (37). And in many of these coun-
tries, a significant proportion of people work in 
the informal economy, and so do not appear in 
all labour market statistics. Nor are they cov-
ered by employment legislation.
Data from several countries show that 
employment rates for people with disabilities 
are below that of the overall population (see 
Table 8.1 and see Table 8.2) with the employ-
ment ratio varying from lows of 30% in South 
Africa and 38% in Japan to highs of 81% in 
Switzerland and 92% in Malawi.
Because non-working people with disabili-
ties often do not look for jobs and are thus not 
counted as part of the labour force, the unem-
ployment rate may not give the full picture of 
their status in the labour market. Instead, the 
employment rate is more commonly used as an 
indicator of the labour market status of people 
with disabilities.
Analysis of the World Health Survey 
results for 51 countries gives employment 
rates of 52.8% for men with disability and 
19.6% for women with disability, compared 
with 64.9% for non-disabled men, and 29.9% 
for non-disabled women. A recent study from 
the Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) (2) showed that in 
27 countries working-age persons with disabili-
ties experienced significant labour market dis-
advantage and worse labour market outcomes 
than working-age persons without disabilities. 
On average, their employment rate, at 44%, was 
over half that for persons without disability 
(75%). The inactivity rate was about 2.5 times 
higher among persons without disability (49% 
and 20%, respectively).
The employment rate varies consider-
ably for people with different disabilities with 
individuals with mental health difficulties or 
intellectual impairments (28, 44) experienc-
ing the lowest employment rates. A British 
analysis found that people with mental health 
difficulties faced greater difficulties in gaining 
entry into the labour market and in obtaining 
 238
World report on disability 
earnings compared with other workers (45). 
Another study found that people with intellec-
tual impairments were three to four times less 
likely to be employed than people without disa-
bilities – and more likely to have more frequent 
and longer periods of unemployment. They 
were less likely to be competitively employed 
and more likely to be employed in segregated 
settings (46).
Types of employment
In many countries, labour markets are largely 
informal, with many self-employed workers. In 
Table 8.1. Employment rates and ratios in selected countries
Country
Year
Employment rate of people 
with disabilities (%)
Employment rate of 
overall population (%)
Employment ratio
Australiaa
2003
 
41.9
72.1
0.58
Austriaa
2003
43.4
68.1
0.64
Canadaa
2003
56.3
74.9
0.75
Germanya
2003
46.1
64.8
0.71
Indiab
2002
37.6
62.5
0.61
Japana
2003
22.7
59.4
0.38
Malawif
2003
42.3
46.2
0.92
Mexicoa
2003
47.2
60.1
0.79
Netherlandsa
2003
39.9
61.9
0.64
Norwaya
2003
61.7
81.4
0.76
Peruc
2003
23.8
64.1
0.37
Polanda
2003
20.8
63.9
0.33
South Africad
2006
12.4
41.1
0.30
Spaina
2003
22.1
50.5
0.44
Switzerlanda
2003
62.2
76.6
0.81
United Kingdoma
2003
38.9
68.6
0.57
USAe
2005
38.1
73.2
0.52
Zambiag
2005
45.5
56.5
0.81
  
Note: The employment rate is the proportion of the working age population (with or without disabilities) in employment. 
Definitions of working age differ across countries.
Sources: a (38); b (8); c (39); d (7); e (40); f (41); g (42).
Table 8.2. Employment rates, proportion of disabled and not disabled respondents
Individuals
Percent
Low-income countries
High-income countries
All countries
Not disabled
Disabled
Not disabled
Disabled
Not disabled
Disabled
Male
 
71.2
58.6*
53.7
36.4*
64.9
52.8*
Female
31.5
20.1*
28.4
19.6*
29.9
19.6*
18–49
58.8
42.9*
54.7
35.2*
57.6
41.2*
50–59
62.9
43.5*
57.0
32.7*
60.9
40.2*
60 and over
38.1
15.1*
11.2
3.9*
26.8
10.4*
  
Note: Estimates are weighted using WHS post-stratified weights, when available (probability weights otherwise), and age-
standardized. * t-test suggests significant difference from “Not disabled” at 5%.
Source (43).
 239
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
India, for example, 87% of people with disabili-
ties who work are in the informal sector (47).
People with disabilities may need flexibil-
ity in the scheduling and other aspects of their 
work – to give them proper time to prepare for 
work, to travel to and from work, and to deal 
with health concerns. Contingent and part-time 
work arrangements, which often provide flex-
ibility, may therefore be attractive to them. But 
such jobs may provide lower pay and fewer ben-
efits. Research in the United States of America 
has shown that 44% of workers with disabilities 
are in some contingent or part-time employ-
ment arrangement, compared with 22% of those 
without disabilities (48). Health issues were the 
most important factor explaining the high prev-
alence of contingent or part-time work.
Wages
If people with disabilities are employed, they 
commonly earn less than their counterparts 
without disabilities; women with disabilities 
commonly earn less than men with disabilities. 
The wage gaps between men and women with 
and without disabilities are thus as important 
as the difference in employment rates (45, 49). 
In the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland only half of the substantial 
difference in wages and participation rates 
between disabled and non-disabled male work-
ers was attributable to differences in productiv-
ity (19). Empirical research in the United States 
found that discrimination reduced wages and 
opportunities for employment. While preju-
dice had a strong effect for a relatively small 
minority of men with disabilities, it appeared 
relatively unimportant in determining wage 
differentials for a much larger group (36).
It is unclear whether the wage gap is as 
marked in developing countries. Recent stud-
ies in India have produced mixed results, with 
a significant wage gap found for males in rural 
labour markets in Uttar Pradesh but not for 
similar workers in Tamil Nadu (50, 51). Further 
research is needed in this area, based on nation-
ally representative data.
Barriers to entering 
the labour market
People with disabilities are disadvantaged in 
the labour market. For example, their lack of 
access to education and training or to financial 
resources may be responsible for their exclu-
sion from the labour market – but it could also 
be the nature of the workplace or employers’ 
perceptions of disability and disabled people. 
Social protection systems may create incentives 
for people with disabilities to exit employment 
onto disability benefits (2). More research is 
needed on factors that influence labour market 
outcomes for persons with disabilities.
Lack of access
Education and training are central to good and 
productive work for a reasonable income (52–
54). But young people with disabilities often 
lack access to formal education or to opportu-
nities to develop their skills – particularly in 
the increasingly important field of information 
technology (55–57). The gap in educational 
attainment between those with a disability 
and those without is thus an ever-increasing 
obstacle (9).
People with disabilities experience envi-
ronmental obstacles that make physical access 
to employment difficult. Some may not be able 
to afford the daily travel costs to and from work 
(58, 59). There may also be physical barriers to 
job interviews, to the actual work setting, and 
to attending social events with fellow employ-
ees (54). Access to information can be a further 
barrier for people with visual impairments (60).
A lack of access to funding is a major 
obstacle for anyone wanting to set up a busi-
ness. For a person with a disability, particu-
larly a disabled woman, it is usually even more 
difficult, given the frequent lack of collateral. 
Many potential lenders – wrongly – perceive 
people with disabilities to be high risks for 
loans. So credit markets can prevent people 
with disabilities from obtaining funds for 
investment (49).
 240
World report on disability 
Misconceptions about disability
Misconceptions about the ability of people with 
disabilities to perform jobs are an important 
reason both for their continued unemployment 
and – if employed – for their exclusion from 
opportunities for promotion in their careers 
(61). Such attitudes may stem from prejudice 
or from the belief that people with disabilities 
are less productive than their non-disabled 
counterparts (62). In particular, there may be 
ignorance or prejudice about mental health 
difficulties and about adjustments to work 
arrangements that can facilitate employment 
(45). Misconceptions are often prevalent not 
only among non-disabled employers but also 
among family members and disabled people 
themselves (9).
Some people with disabilities have low self-
expectations about their ability to be employed 
and may not even try to find employment. 
The social isolation of people with disabilities 
restricts their access to social networks, espe-
cially of friends and family members, that 
could help in finding employment (54).
Discrimination
Employers may discriminate against people 
with disabilities, because of misconceptions 
about their capabilities, or because they do not 
wish to include them in their workforce (63). 
Different impairments elicit different degrees 
of prejudice, with the strongest prejudice 
exhibited towards people with mental health 
conditions (36, 64). Of people with schizophre-
nia, 29% experienced discrimination in either 
finding or keeping a job, and 42% felt the need 
to conceal their condition when applying for 
work, education, or training (65).
Overprotection in labour laws
Several countries, particularly some in east-
ern Europe, retain a protective view towards 
workers with disabilities. Their labour codes 
mandate, for instance, shorter working days, 
more rest periods, longer paid leave, and higher 
severance pay for disabled workers, irrespec-
tive of the need (66). While these regulations 
are made with best intentions, they might in 
some cases lead employers to see workers with 
disabilities are less productive and more costly 
and thus less desirable than those without 
disabilities.
Addressing the barriers to 
work and employment
A variety of mechanisms have been used 
around the world to address barriers to the 
labour market:
 
■
laws and regulations
 
■
tailored interventions
 
■
vocational rehabilitation and training
 
■
self-employment and microfinance
 
■
social protection
 
■
working to change attitudes.
Not all of these reach workers in the infor-
mal sector, which predominates in many coun-
tries. Evidence on the costs and individual and 
social benefits, and outcomes of these mecha-
nisms is at best weak and sometimes even con-
tradictory (67–70). More research is needed to 
understand which measures improve labour 
market opportunities for people with disabili-
ties, and are cost-effective and sustainable.
Laws and regulations
Laws and regulations affecting employment for 
people with disabilities, found in many places 
(71), include anti-discrimination laws and 
affirmative action. General employment laws 
also often regulate retention and other employ-
ment-related issues of those who become disa-
bled while working. But the implementation 
and effectiveness of disability protection provi-
sions varies considerably. Often they are poorly 
enforced and not well known (47, 72).
 241
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
Anti-discrimination laws
Anti-discrimination laws make it illegal to make 
decisions about a person’s employment on the 
basis of their disability, as in Australia (1992), 
Canada (1986, 1995), New Zealand (1993), and 
the United States (1990). More recently, other 
countries have incorporated disability discrim-
ination clauses into more general legislation, as 
in Germany and South Africa (73), while Brazil 
and Ghana have anti-discrimination clauses on 
disability in their constitutions (71).
In the formal sector the reasonable accom-
modation requirement refers to adapting the 
job and the workplace to make employment 
easier for people with disabilities, where 
this does not impose an undue burden (see 
Article 2 of the CRPD). The requirements are 
expected to reduce employment discrimina-
tion, increase access to the workplace, and 
change perceptions about the ability of people 
with disabilities to be productive workers. 
Examples of reasonable accommodations 
include ensuring recruitment and selection 
procedures are accessible to all, adapting the 
working environment, modifying working 
times and other working arrangements, and 
providing screen-reader software and other 
assistive technologies (74).
Requirements for employers to make rea-
sonable accommodations can be voluntary, as 
in Denmark, or mandatory, as in the United 
States. The cost of the accommodations can be 
borne by employers, employees, or both.
There is mixed evidence on the success of 
anti-discrimination laws in bringing people 
with disabilities into the workforce (75). On the 
whole, such laws seem to have been more suc-
cessful in preventing discrimination among 
those who are already employed. Early research 
on the Americans with Disabilities Act suggested 
that implementation of the Act caused a decline 
in employment of people with disabilities (67). 
Possibly employers avoided potential litigation 
simply by not employing people with disabilities 
or perhaps the obligation to provide reasonable 
accommodation acted as a disincentive to taking 
on staff with disabilities (68).
More recent studies suggest that while the 
numbers of disabled people in employment did 
decline, this was not a result of the Americans 
with Disabilities Act but because of a new defi-
nition, used in the welfare support system, of 
what constituted disability (69). In the United 
Kingdom the Disability Discrimination Act 
had no impact in the period immediately after 
its introduction, and may have led to a fall in 
the employment rate (70). It may have been 
more effective as a disincentive to dismissing 
workers who developed a disabling condition 
than as a tool to promote hiring. But recent evi-
dence does suggest a narrowing of the employ-
ment gap in the United Kingdom (76), though 
the legislation may have helped disabled men 
more than disabled women (45).
Affirmative action
Some anti-discrimination measures call for 
“affirmative action” in employment. In 2000 
the Council of the European Union called on 
its member states to introduce, by 2006, poli-
cies on the employment of people with disabil-
ities (77). In response, Portugal, for instance, 
drew up a National Action Plan that included 
affirmative action to raise the number of people 
with disabilities in employment (78). In Israel 
affirmative action requirements for employers, 
set out in the Equal Rights for Persons with 
Disabilities Law of 1998, have been judicially 
upheld as legal, applying to both hiring and 
severance (79). Brazil also promotes affirma-
tive action in employment through its consti-
tutional anti-discrimination Clause 37 (71).
Tailored interventions
Quotas
Many countries stipulate quotas for the employ-
ment of people with disabilities in the public 
and private sectors. The implicit assumption is 
that, without quotas employers would turn away 
disabled workers because of discrimination, 
fears about lower productivity, or the potential 
increase in the cost of labour, for example the 
cost of accommodations (53, 73). However, the 
 242
World report on disability 
assumption that quotas correct labour market 
imperfections to the benefit of persons with 
disabilities is yet to be documented empirically, 
as no thorough impact evaluation of quotas on 
employment of persons with disabilities has 
been performed.
Germany has a quota of 5% for the employ-
ment of severely disabled employees in firms 
employing more than 20 people. In 2002 the 
figure for private firms was 3.4%, and in 2003 
7.1% for government employment (80). In 
South Africa government departments and 
state bodies are bound by statutory provisions 
stipulating that at least 2% of their workforce 
must consist of people with disabilities. But 
the quota in the state sector has not been met 
(81). Turkey has a 3% quota for firms with more 
than 50 workers, with the state paying all the 
employers’ social security contributions for 
disabled workers up to the limit of the quota, 
and half the contributions for disabled workers 
above the quota.
In many cases fines are imposed on employ-
ers who fail to meet their quotas. Such fines can 
be used to support initiatives to boost disability 
employment. In China companies that fail to 
meet the 1.5% quota pay a fee to the Disabled 
Persons Employment Security Fund, which 
supports training and job placement services 
for people with disabilities (82).
During the transition to free market econo-
mies, several countries in Eastern Europe and the 
former Soviet Union introduced quotas to replace 
the former system where jobs were set aside in 
specific industries for workers with disabilities. 
Fines for not meeting quotas paid for vocational 
rehabilitation and job training programmes. 
In 
most 
Organisation 
for 
Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) coun-
tries the rate of filling quotas ranges from 50% to 
70% (73, 83). Quotas attract controversy. They can 
be unpopular with employers, who would often 
rather pay a fine than attempt to fill their statutory 
quotas. Among disabled people’s organizations, 
they are sometimes regarded as diminishing the 
potential value of workers with disabilities (84).
Incentives to employers
If employers bear the cost of providing rea-
sonable accommodations, they may be less 
likely to hire people with disabilities – to avoid 
additional costs of labour. If employees bear 
the cost, their mobility in the market may be 
reduced because of the risk of incurring further 
accommodation-related expenses in a new job. 
To counter these obstacles, various financial 
incentives can be offered:
 
■
Tax incentives are often offered to employ-
ers, especially smaller employers (85).
 
■
Government employment agencies can 
provide advice and funding for employ-
ment-related accommodations, as with one 
state’s vocational rehabilitation agency in 
the United States (86).
 
■
Workplace modifications can be sup-
ported. In Australia the Department of 
Employment and Workplace Relations 
funds 
the 
Workplace 
Modifications 
Scheme, which provides up to A$ 10 000 
for modifications to accommodate new 
employees with disabilities (87).
Supported employment
Special employment programmes can make 
an important contribution to the employment 
of people with severe disabilities, particularly 
those with intellectual impairments and mental 
health conditions (38).
Supported employment can integrate 
people with disabilities into the competitive 
labour market. It provides employment coach-
ing, specialized job training, individually tai-
lored supervision, transportation, and assistive 
technology, all to enable disabled people to 
learn and perform better in their jobs (88). Its 
success has been documented for people with 
severe disabilities, including those with psy-
chiatric or intellectual impairment, learning 
disabilities, and traumatic brain injury (89–92).
Social firms and other social enterprises 
work in the open market, but have the social 
objective of employing people experienc-
ing the greatest disadvantage in the labour 
 243
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
market. Often such enterprises seek to give 
employment opportunities for persons with 
disabilities, particularly those with intellec-
tual impairments and mental health condi-
tions, alongside non-disabled people (93, 94). 
Recent estimates suggest there are around 
3800 social firms in Europe, predominantly 
in Germany and Italy, employing around 
43 000 people with disabilities (95). The evi-
dence base for social firms is currently weak. 
Where successful, it is argued that enterprises 
can result in savings for health and social care 
budgets, as well as social returns on invest-
ment, in the form of well-being and independ-
ence. For example, analysis of the Six Mary’s 
Place guesthouse project in Edinburgh (96) 
suggested that for every £1 invested, £5.87 
was returned in the form of savings in mental 
health and welfare benefits, new tax income, 
and increased personal income. Cost–benefit 
assessments of social firms and supported 
employment also need to include the wider 
health, social, and personal benefits (97).
Sheltered employment
Sheltered work provides employment in sepa-
rate facilities, either in a sheltered business or 
in a segregated part of a regular enterprise (73), 
and is intended for those who are perceived as 
unable to compete in the open labour market. 
For example, in Switzerland, a country with 
one of the highest employment rates for people 
with disabilities, much of the employment is 
in segregated settings (38). In France sheltered 
employment offers regular pay and full social 
security coverage for people with one third or 
less work capacity loss and merely symbolic 
remuneration for those with more than two 
thirds of work-capacity loss (38). Sheltered 
workshops are controversial, because they seg-
regate people with disabilities and are associ-
ated with the charity ethos. 
The CRPD promotes the opportunity for 
people with disabilities to work in an open 
labour market (16). However, there may be a 
disincentive for sheltered workshops to move 
disabled people onto the open labour market 
because they may then lose their “best work-
ers” (98). In New Zealand there have been 
attempts to make sheltered employment more 
professional and competitive and to ease the 
transition to the open market (see Box 8.2) 
(38). A recent European trend has been for 
sheltered workshops to transition to become 
social firms.
Employment agencies
General employment agencies have been 
encouraged – and in some cases required 
by law – to serve job seekers with disabili-
ties in the same setting as other job seekers, 
rather than referring people with disabilities 
to special placement services. In the United 
States the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 
brought together a wide range of job place-
ment programmes into the “One Stop Centers”. 
Countries such as Austria, Belgium, Denmark, 
and Finland include people with disabilities in 
services offered by mainstream employment 
agencies (101). Other countries have targeted 
services, such as BizLink, Singapore (102). 
More than 3000 employment service agencies 
for people with disabilities operate in China 
(103), where the Chinese Disabled Persons’ 
Federation has a leading role in fostering 
employment.
Thinking behind the provision of employment 
services for people with disabilities is changing:
 
■
There has been a move from a model of job 
placement that tried to fit people into avail-
able job openings to a “person-centred” 
model involving the interests and skills of 
the individual. The aim is to find a match 
that will lead to viable longer term employ-
ment and a life-long career (104).
 
■
There has been a shift from using sheltered 
employment towards supported employ-
ment – that is, from “train and place” to 
“place and train”. The idea is to employ 
people first, before they are trained, to help 
dispel beliefs that disabled people cannot 
perform a particular job (105–107).
 244
World report on disability 
Several successful user-controlled disabil-
ity employment services have been launched 
in recent years:
 
■
In Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, the Centro de 
Vida Independiente serves as an employ-
ment broker and ongoing support agency 
for disabled people (108).
 
■
In Spain Fundación ONCE was founded in 
1988 to promote training and employment 
and accessibility, funded by the national 
lottery – which is operated by ONCE, the 
association of blind people (109).
 
■
In 
Manchester, 
United 
Kingdom, 
“Breakthrough” is an innovative user-
controlled employment service that works 
with disabled people and employers, help-
ing to find and sustain employment and to 
find training for work (110).
 
■
In South Africa, Disability Employment 
Concerns was established in 1996 with 
the aim of emulating the ONCE model. 
Owned by disabled people’s organizations, 
it invests in and supports companies to 
promote disability employment equity tar-
gets (111, 112).
 
■
In India the National Centre for Promotion 
of Employment for Disabled People (113) 
sensitizes the corporate world, campaigns 
for access, promotes education, and raises 
awareness.
These programmes suggest that disabled 
people’s organizations could expand their range 
of activities for improving disability employ-
ment – such as job search and job matching, 
training in technology and other job skills, and 
in interview skills.
Disability management
Disability management refers to interventions 
applied to individuals in employment who develop 
a health condition or disability. The main elements 
of disability management are generally effective 
case management, education of supervisors, work-
place accommodation, and an early return to work 
with appropriate supports (114). The Canadian 
National Institute of Disability Management and 
Research (115) is an international resource that 
promotes education, training, and research on 
workplace-based reintegration – the process that 
Box 8.2. Improving vocational services for people with disabilities in New Zealand
In 2001 the New Zealand government launched Pathways to Inclusion to increase the participation of people 
with disabilities both in the workforce and in communities (99).
People with disabilities working in sheltered workshops had been paid less than the minimum wage, regardless 
of their skills or abilities.
Providers of sheltered employment, with advice and government funding, shifted their operations to include 
supported employment and community participation services. Although sheltered work is still part of a range of 
vocational services funded through the Ministry of Social Development, supported employment services have 
now largely replaced it.
An evaluation of the Pathways to Inclusion programme since its inception found the following (100):
 
■
the number of people participating in vocational services increased from 10 577 in 2003 to 16 130 in 2007;
 
■
employment outcomes have improved, with more participants either moving off benefits or declaring earn-
ings while remaining on benefits;
 
■
the number of providers of vocational services that aim to achieve paid employment increased from 44% to 
76% over three years;
 
■
the proportion of services providing segregated employment that paid at least the minimum wage all or most 
of the time increased from 10% in 2004 to 60% in 2007;
 
■
the number of service users moving off benefits or declaring earnings within 12 to 24 months of starting the 
service has increased – an indication of the long-term effectiveness of the services.
 245
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
maintains workers’ abilities while reducing costs 
of disability for employers and governments.
In the United Kingdom the Pathways to 
Work programme is an initiative providing sup-
port in the fields of employment and health for 
people claiming the Employment and Support 
Allowance. It consists of mandatory work-
related interviews and a range of services to 
help disabled people and those with health con-
ditions move into work. Personal advisers offer 
help in finding jobs, work-related training, and 
assistance in managing disabilities or health 
conditions. Early research with a sample of ben-
eficiaries found that the programme increased 
the probability of being employed by 7.4% (116).
People with disabilities are not a homo-
geneous group, and some subgroups require 
tailored approaches. The problems of impaired 
hearing, for instance, will differ from those of 
being blind (117, 118). Particular issues arise for 
people who have intermittent or episodic prob-
lems, such those with mental health difficulties.
Research has found considerable differ-
ences between countries in the proportion of 
people who return to work after the onset of dis-
ability, with figures in one study ranging from 
40% to 70% (119). Organizations with estab-
lished disability management programmes 
have improved the rates of return to work (see 
Box 8.3) (120).
Vocational rehabilitation 
and training
Vocational rehabilitation services develop 
or restore the capabilities of people with dis-
abilities so they can participate in the competi-
tive labour market. The services usually relate 
to job training, counselling, and placement. 
For example, in Thailand the Redemptorist 
Vocational School for the Disabled offers job 
placement as well as training in computer skills 
and business management (121). Mainstream 
vocational guidance and training programmes 
are less segregating than dedicated vocational 
training programmes.
Traditional training and 
mainstream programmes
In OECD countries there is insufficient invest-
ment in rehabilitation and employment meas-
ures, and take-up is low (122). In developing 
countries, vocational services tend to consist of 
small rehabilitation and training programmes 
(9, 123). Because of their high costs, such pro-
grammes fail to reach a significant proportion 
of their target group (124). Furthermore, tra-
ditional training programmes – focused on 
a limited range of specialized technical skills 
and provided in segregated centres – have not 
put many people with disabilities into jobs (38, 
Box 8.3. Returning to work in Malaysia
Social security programmes help people with disabilities engage in community and working life. Whether financed 
by social insurance or through tax-funded benefits, cash payments and in-kind benefits can provide a means 
of contributing to society. This, in turn, will create more positive attitudes towards people with disabilities and 
make society more “disability-inclusive”.
In Malaysia, following a year-long pilot scheme in 2005, the Social Security Organization is extending its Return 
to Work programme throughout the country, combining financial support through social security payments with 
physical and vocational rehabilitation to help workers with employment-related injuries and diseases return to work. 
A pilot demonstrated that, with rehabilitation, 60% of those injured in the workplace can return to full employment.
The programme works with rehabilitation service providers and has established links with several large employ-
ers to provide work for participants. A case manager coordinates the rehabilitation with the injured person and 
his or her family, employer, and doctor – bringing in professionals from different disciplines as needed, such as 
physical therapy, occupational therapy, counselling, and pain management.
 246
World report on disability 
125). Such programmes are typically in urban 
areas, often distant from where people with 
disabilities live. The trades they teach – such 
as carpentry and shoemaking – are frequently 
not responsive to changes in the labour market. 
In addition, an underlying assumption of these 
programmes tends to be that people with dis-
abilities are capable of only a limited number 
of occupations.
In South Africa, however, a mainstreaming 
approach, under the country’s National Skills 
Strategy, Sectoral Education and Training 
Authorities requires the allocation of 4% of 
traineeships to people with disabilities (111).
Alternative forms of training
Apart from imparting technical skills, recent 
programmes have also concentrated on improv-
ing the self-confidence of trainees and raising 
awareness of the wider business environment. 
The Persons with Disabilities’ Self-Initiative 
to Development programme in Bangladesh 
helps people with disabilities form self-help 
organizations within the community (126). In 
Soweto, South Africa, training in competen-
cies forms part of an entrepreneurship training 
programme, and the survival rate of businesses 
has been high (127).
Recent initiatives to provide alternative 
forms of training show promise:
 
■
Community-based vocational rehabili-
tation. Trainers are local artisans who 
provide trainees with the skills to become 
self-reliant in the community. In Nigeria 
participants are given training as well as 
help with microfinance, so that they can be 
self-employed when they have finished the 
programme (125).
 
■
Peer training. In Cambodia a successful 
home-based 
peer-training 
programme 
encourages village entrepreneurs in rural 
villages to teach technical and business 
skills to people with disabilities (128).
 
■
Early interventions. In Australia a project 
providing computer training to people 
with recent spinal cord injuries – while 
still in hospital – has increased the rates of 
return to further education and training 
or work (129).
 
■
Mentoring. In the United States collabora-
tion between the government and private 
enterprise provides summer internships to 
hundreds of young people with disabilities. 
This mentoring project – raising career 
awareness and building skills – has in many 
cases led to permanent placements at the 
employers offering the internships (130).
 
■
Continuity of training. Being able to keep 
in touch with rehabilitation centres, and to 
build on earlier training, is important. The 
Leprosy Mission in India sponsors associa-
tions of alumni from its vocational reha-
bilitation centres, enabling those trained 
to keep in touch with other graduates and 
with the training centres (see Box 8.4). 
Promoting employment and the develop-
ment of livelihoods is often undertaken through 
community-based rehabilitation (CBR), dis-
cussed throughout this Report. Interventions 
typically aim to:
 
■
teach skills for developing income-generat-
ing opportunities and for being employed;
 
■
impart knowledge about the labour market;
 
■
shape appropriate attitudes to work;
 
■
provide guidance on developing relation-
ships with employers to find a job or receive 
in-job training.
CBR also seeks to create support in the 
community for including people with disabili-
ties. A resource from the ILO offers examples 
of good practices on CBR and employment, 
together with practical suggestions for skills 
development, self-employment, and access to 
the job market (52).
Despite these promising initiatives, the 
evaluation of vocational rehabilitation is diffi-
cult and, in general, its effects are still largely 
unknown. The evaluation is made more difficult 
by the fact that disability benefits often act as 
disincentives to work, and by the wide range of 
different services provided to individuals (75).
 247
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
Self-employment and microfinance
Funding to help start small businesses can 
provide an alternative to scarce formal 
employment (131, 132). For self-employment 
programmes for people with disabilities to 
succeed, however, marketing skills, access to 
credit, and long-term support and follow-up 
are needed (133). The International Study on 
Income Generation Strategies analysed 81 self-
directed employment projects and highlighted 
four success factors: 
 
■
a self-directed identity (self-confidence, 
energy, risk-taking); 
 
■
relevant knowledge (literacy and numer-
acy, technical skills, business skills); 
 
■
availability of resources (advice, capital, 
marketing assistance); 
 
■
an enabling social and policy environment 
(political support, community develop-
ment, disability rights). 
It identified successful examples of income gen-
eration schemes from Jamaica, the Philippines, 
and Thailand (134).
Many people with disabilities have few assets 
to secure loans, and may have lived in poverty for 
years. Microfinance programmes are in principle 
open to all, including disabled people. But anecdo-
tal evidence suggests that few people with disabili-
ties benefit from such schemes. Some microfinance 
programmes have been set up by disability NGOs 
and others target people with disabilities, but more 
evidence is needed on their effectiveness.
 
■
a targeted microfinance programme in 
Ethiopia had a positive impact on the lives 
of women who became disabled during 
war (135);
 
■
Handicap International evaluated 43 pro-
jects and found that targeted microfinance 
schemes were beneficial and that almost 
two thirds of them were sustainable (132);
 
■
a disability organization typically faces dif-
ficulties in developing and administering 
Box 8.4. Vocational training at the Leprosy Mission
The Leprosy Mission in India runs vocational training centres for young people affected by leprosy. Students 
are taught a wide range of technical skills – including car repairing, tailoring, welding, electronics, radio and 
television repairing, stenography, silk production, offset printing, and computing. The qualifications obtained by 
those graduating are officially recognized by the government. The schools also teach other types of skills, such 
as business management and core life skills.
Core life skills are taught through the timetable and activities of the centres, nurtured through the examples of the staff.
The aims are to develop:
 
■
personal skills – including those related to self-esteem, positive thinking, motivation, goal setting, problem 
solving, decision-making, time management, and stress management;
 
■
coping mechanisms – including how to deal with one’s sexuality, shyness, loneliness, depression, fear, anger, 
alcoholism, failure, criticism, and conflict;
 
■
fitness for a job – including leadership skills, team work skills, and career planning.
In interviews and focus group discussions, former students were asked to name the most important thing they had 
learned from their training. No one mentioned technical skills. Instead, they mentioned discipline, punctuality, 
obedience, personality development, self-confidence, responsibility, and communication skills.
The Leprosy Mission’s training centres have a job placement rate of more than 95%.
Among the reasons for the success are that the Mission has active job placement officers with good relations 
with local employers, who know that graduates from the Mission’s training centres will be of a high standard, 
and the training centres have a strong alumni association that keeps graduates in touch with each other and 
with their training centre.
 248
World report on disability 
microfinance programmes, and targeted 
microfinance programmes set up by a dis-
ability organization can reach only a small 
number of people with disabilities (136).
A review of the literature found obstacles 
in mainstream microfinance, so provisional 
schemes run by NGOs and disabled people’s 
organizations can help, because they give rise 
to social inclusion, participation, and empow-
erment. But both approaches are needed to 
achieve wider coverage and sustainability, given 
that microfinance has great social and economic 
impact for persons with disabilities (137).
Social protection
Long-term disability benefits can provide dis-
incentives for people to seek employment and 
return to work (2, 138, 139). This is especially 
the case for those who are less skilled or whose 
jobs, if they were seeking them, would be lower 
paying. One reason is that the benefit provides 
a regular income – even though small – that 
the person can rely on. Loss of this regular pay-
ment and reliance on menial, low-paid work 
may result in no regular income and little sense 
of security (34).
But social assistance benefits can also 
have positive effects on employment for people 
with disabilities. Returning to work after dis-
ability may involve a period of unemploy-
ment and income insecurity. Social assistance 
programmes therefore need to take this into 
account when planning the transitional phases 
away from and back onto benefits. Such transi-
tions should be factored into the benefit pro-
grammes so that people feel an incentive to 
work, while at the same time being secure in the 
knowledge that a benefit is still available should 
they not succeed (73).
The growth in disability benefit costs and the 
low employment rates for people with disabili-
ties are concerns for policy-makers in develop-
ing countries (2, 7, 35, 140). In OECD countries 
there has been substantial growth in disability 
beneficiary rates over the past decade, which 
now represents around 6% of working age popu-
lation (2, 141). Disability benefits have become 
a benefit of last resort because: unemployment 
benefits are harder to access, early retirement 
schemes have been phased out, and low-skilled 
workers face labour market disadvantages (2). 
Spending on disability benefits is an increas-
ing burden on public finances, rising to as 
much as 4–5% of GDP in countries such as the 
Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. People with 
mental health difficulties make up the majority 
of claims in most countries. People almost never 
leave disability benefits for a job (2).
System reform to replace passive benefits 
with active labour market programmes can 
make a difference. Evidence from Hungary, 
Italy, the Netherlands, and Poland suggests 
that tighter obligations for employers to pro-
vide occupational health services and to sup-
port reintegration, together with stronger work 
incentives for workers and better employment 
supports, can help disability beneficiaries into 
work (2).
The work disincentives of benefit pro-
grammes, together with the common percep-
tion that disability is necessarily an obstacle to 
work, can be significant social problems (38). So 
the status of disability should be independent of 
the work and income situation. Disability should 
be recognized as a health condition, interacting 
with contextual factors, and should be distinct 
from eligibility for and receipt of benefits, just 
as it should not automatically be treated as an 
obstacle to work (38, 142). Assessment should 
focus on the capacity for work, not disability. 
Guidance for doctors should emphasize the 
value and possibility of work and keep sickness 
absence as short as possible (2).
To ensure that social protection for people 
with disabilities does not operate as a disincen-
tive to seeking employment, one policy option 
is to separate the income support element from 
the element to compensate for the extra costs 
incurred by people with disabilities. Temporary 
entitlements plus cost of disability components 
 249
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
irrespective of work status, more flexible in-
work payments, and options for putting ben-
efits on hold while trying work are preferred 
options (122, 141).
Time-limited disability benefits may 
be another way to increase employment 
for disabled people, with particular impor-
tance for younger people (2). Germany, the 
Netherlands, and Norway recently adopted 
such programmes to encourage the return to 
work (143). These schemes accept the fact that 
some people have severe disabilities that will 
last for a longer period, but recognize that, 
with intervention, returning to work is pos-
sible. The limited duration of the benefit is in 
itself an incentive for people to return to work 
by the time benefits end. A critical factor in 
making the limited duration of the benefit an 
incentive to return to work, however, is the 
way in which the time-limited programme is 
linked to the permanent programme. If the 
transition to the permanent programme is 
smooth and expected by recipients, the incen-
tive to return to the labour force is reduced. 
But there is no firm evidence on the effective-
ness of time-limited benefits in encouraging 
the return to work.
Another priority is making sure it pays to be 
in work (2). The United Kingdom has recently 
been experimenting with ways outside the 
traditional disability benefit system to encour-
age people with disabilities to work (139). A 
Working Tax Credit is paid to a range of lower 
income employed and self-employed people, 
administered by the taxation authorities. A 
person qualifies for the disability element of the 
Working Tax Credit if he or she works at least 
16 hours a week, has a disability that puts them 
at a disadvantage of finding a job, or receives 
a qualifying benefit such as the long-term dis-
ability pension. The idea is to encourage work 
among low-income households with a member 
with disabilities. The credit, introduced in April 
2003, has proved complex to administer. But an 
early evaluation suggests that it is encouraging 
people to enter work and reducing previous dis-
incentives for young people to seek work (144).
Working to change attitudes
Many disabled people’s organizations already 
attempt to change perceptions on disability at 
the community level. Anecdotal evidence sug-
gests that employing a disabled person in itself 
changes attitudes within that workplace (54, 
145). In the United States, companies already 
employing a disabled person are more likely to 
employ other disabled people (1).
Many awareness campaigns have targeted 
specific conditions:
 
■
the BBC World Service Trust has conducted 
a large-scale awareness campaign in India 
to counter misconceptions on leprosy;
 
■
in New Zealand the organization Like 
Minds has worked to change public atti-
tudes to people with mental health condi-
tions (146);
 
■
various initiatives have tackled the myths, 
ignorance, and fear often surrounding 
HIV/AIDS (147).
Light is a public electricity utility in Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil, employing disabled people 
and generating positive publicity for its 
actions (148). On the reverse of the company’s 
monthly electricity bill is a picture of a wheel-
chair, with the message:
“At Light, the number of workers 
with disabilities is greater than that 
required by law. The reason is simple – 
for us, the most important thing is to 
have valuable people.”
In the United Kingdom the Employers’ 
Forum on Disability has developed innova-
tive approaches for changing perceptions of 
disability (see Box 8.5). Similar initiatives 
have been developed in Australia, Germany, 
South Africa, Sri Lanka, and the United 
States. More data are needed to understand 
which interventions can shift embedded 
attitudes on disability and best promote 
positive attitudes about disability in the 
workplace.
 250
World report on disability 
People with disabilities must also be ena-
bled to progress up the career ladder (152). 
Evidence suggests that people with disabilities 
may lack opportunities for promotion, because 
their employers are reluctant to place them in 
roles where they manage others (153). In the 
United States greater knowledge about legis-
lation on disability employment is associated 
with more positive attitudes towards the rights 
of disabled people in the workplace (154).
Trades unions also have a role in improv-
ing the employment conditions of people with 
disabilities (155), particularly in the public 
sector. Trades unions have a record of concern 
about occupational health and safety, and more 
recently have started to make the prevention of 
disability and issues of accommodation part of 
their bargaining agenda (156).
Conclusion and 
recommendations
Almost all jobs can be performed productively 
by someone with a disability, and given the 
right environment, most people with disabili-
ties can be productive. But working age per-
sons with disabilities experience significantly 
lower employment rates and much higher 
rates of unemployment than persons without 
disabilities.
This is due to many factors, including lack of 
access to education and vocational rehabilitation 
and training, lack of access to financial resources, 
disincentives created by disability benefits, the 
inaccessibility of the workplace, and employers’ 
perceptions of disability and disabled people. 
Box 8.5. The Employers’ Forum on Disability
The Employers’ Forum on Disability (EFD) was the world’s first employers’ organization to promote equality for 
people with disabilities. Pioneered by the business community in the United Kingdom in the late 1980s, it is a non-
profit organization, funded entirely by its 400 employer members, including more than 100 global corporations.
EFD does not help disabled people directly. Instead, it makes it easier for employers to employ and do business 
with disabled people. It encourages businesses to view disability in terms of equal opportunities, capability, and 
investment in human potential – rather than as quotas, medicine, and incapacity.
In the United Kingdom, employers campaigned alongside the disability movement to replace the previous quota 
system – which required employers to hire people because they were disabled – with anti-discrimination laws, 
requiring employers to treat disabled people fairly. EFD played an important role in this campaign, with its mem-
bers showing the way forward by implementing the provisions of the proposed anti-discrimination legislation 
before it was introduced.
EFD also ran the first leadership programme for disabled people and has worked closely with a group of disabled 
associates who act as advisors and ambassadors worldwide. Two of these advisors sit on the EFD board.
An important achievement of EFD was the creation of a benchmark, the Disability Standard, which sets a per-
formance standard for businesses with regard to disability, reported every two years. In 2007 most companies 
in the top 25% of businesses, as assessed by the Disability Standard benchmark, had been EFD members for at 
least five years.
To introduce similar initiatives, EFD has worked with employer networks in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, 
Germany, the Russian Federation, Spain, Sri Lanka, and Viet Nam. The EFD model has been welcomed as an 
alternative to the traditional approach of seeing the employer as the problem.
EFD has also pioneered a systematic approach to targeted recruitment, enabling employers and providers in the 
United Kingdom to bring thousands into work.
The employment rate of people with disabilities in the United Kingdom has risen by 8 percentage points since 
1991. While no single factor is responsible for this increase, EFD has played a significant part.
Sources (149–151).
 251
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
In improving labour market opportuni-
ties for people with disabilities many stake-
holders have a role, including government, 
employers, disabled people’s organizations, 
and trade unions. The Report’s recommenda-
tions to improve access to labour markets for 
people with disabilities are presented here by 
key actors.
Governments
Laws and regulations
 
■
Enact and enforce effective anti-discrimi-
nation legislation.
 
■
Ensure that public policies are harmonized 
to provide incentives and support for indi-
viduals with disabilities to seek employ-
ment, and for employers to hire them.
Changing attitudes
 
■
Promote awareness among employers of 
their duty not to discriminate, and of the 
means available to them to support the 
employment of people with disabilities.
 
■
Instil a belief among the public that 
people with disabilities can work, given 
the proper support.
 
■
As employers, lead by example in promot-
ing the employment of disabled people in 
the public sector.
Public programmes
 
■
Make mainstream vocational guidance and 
training programmes accessible to people 
with disabilities.
 
■
Make mainstream employment services 
available to persons with disabilities on an 
equal basis with other job seekers.
 
■
Develop services tailored to individual and 
community needs, rather than services of a 
“one-size-fits-all” nature.
 
■
Ensure that mainstream social protection 
programmes include people with disabili-
ties, while at the same time supporting their 
return to work, and not creating disincentives 
to those seeking work or returning to work.
 
■
Design safety net interventions to promote 
labour market inclusion of disabled people 
by including assistance and support services 
or covering the additional costs incurred by 
those who enter employment – such as the 
cost of travel to work and of equipment.
 
■
Adjust disability assessment systems so 
that they assess the positive aspects of 
functioning (as opposed to disability) and 
capacity to work. 
 
■
Monitor and evaluate labour market pro-
grammes aimed at facilitating and increas-
ing employment of persons with disabilities 
and scale up those that deliver results with 
focus on inclusive, not segregated solutions. 
 
■
Provide adequate and sustainable funding 
for training programmes, to build a skilled 
workforce of people with disabilities.
Data collection
 
■
Include persons with disabilities in labour 
market data collection activities, for 
instance labour force survey.
 
■
Use internationally agreed (for example ILO) 
labour market indicators to measure and 
monitor the labour market status and liveli-
hood experiences of people with disabilities.
Employers
 
■
Hire people with disabilities, making rea-
sonable accommodations available where 
needed.
 
■
Set up disability management programmes 
to support the return to work of employees 
who become disabled.
 
■
Develop partnerships with local employ-
ment agencies, educational institutions, 
skill training programmes, and social 
enterprises to build a skilled workforce that 
includes people with disabilities.
 
■
Ensure that all supervisors and human 
resource personnel are acquainted with the 
requirements for accommodation and non-
discrimination with regard to individuals 
with disabilities.
 252
World report on disability 
 
■
For larger businesses, aim to become model 
employers of people with disabilities.
Other organizations: NGOs 
including disabled people’s 
organizations, microfinance 
institutions, and trade unions
 
■
For organizations providing mainstream 
training opportunities, include people 
with disabilities.
 
■
Provide targeted support when mainstream 
opportunities are not available.
 
■
Support community-based rehabilitation, 
to enhance the development of skills and 
enable people with disabilities to make a 
decent living.
 
■
Where the informal economy is predomi-
nant, promote micro-enterprises and self-
employment for people with disabilities.
 
■
For microfinance institutions, improve 
access to microfinance for persons with 
disabilities through better outreach, 
accessible information and customized 
credit conditions.
 
■
Support the development of networks of 
people with disabilities that can campaign 
for the rights of people with disabilities.
 
■
For labour unions, make disability issues, 
including accommodations, part of their 
bargaining agendas.
References
1. 
Domzal C, Houtenville A, Sharma R. Survey of employer perspectives on the employment of people with disabilities. McLean 
VA, CESSI, 2008.
2. 
Sickness, disability and work: breaking the barriers. A synthesis of findings across OECD countries. Paris, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010.
3. 
Houtenville AJ, et al., eds. Counting working-age people with disabilities. What current data tell us and options for improve-
ment. Kalamazoo, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2009.
4. 
Mitra S, Posarac A, Vick B. Disability and poverty in developing countries: a snapshot from the World Health Survey. 
forthcoming.
5. 
Contreras DG, et al.. Socio-economic impact of disability in Latin America: Chile and Uruguay. Santiago, Universidad de Chile, 
Departemento de Economia, 2006.
6. 
Mete C, ed. Economic implications of chronic illness and disability in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. Washington, 
World Bank, 2008.
7. 
Mitra S. The recent decline in the employment of persons with disabilities in South Africa, 1998–2006.  South African 
Journal of Economics, 2008,76:480-492. doi:10.1111/j.1813-6982.2008.00196.x
8. 
Mitra S, Sambamoorthi U. Employment of persons with disabilities: evidence from the National Sample Survey. Economic 
and Political Weekly, 2006,a41:199-203.
9. 
People with disabilities in India: from commitments to outcomes. Washington, World Bank, 2009. (http://imagebank.world-
bank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2009/09/02/000334955_20090902041543/Rendered/PDF/502090WP0Pe
opl1Box0342042B01PUBLIC1.pdf, accessed 2 February 2011).
10. Scott K, Mete C. Measurement of disability and linkages with welfare, employment, and schooling. In: Mete C, ed. Economic 
implications of chronic illness and disability in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. Washington, World Bank, 2008 
(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/Resources/Regions/ECA/EconomicImplicationsMete.pdf, accessed 2 
February 2011).
11. Zaidi A, Burchardt T. Comparing incomes when needs differ: equivalization for the extra costs of disability in the UK. 
Review of Income and Wealth, 2005,51:89-114. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4991.2005.00146.x
12. Braitwaite J, Mont D. Disability and poverty: a survey of the World Bank poverty assessments and implications. ALTER 
European Journal of Disability Research, 2009,3:219-232.
13. Haveman R, Wolfe B. The economic well being of the disabled: 1962–1984. The Journal of Human Resources, 1990,25:32-54. 
doi:10.2307/145726
14. Hoogeveen JG. Measuring welfare for small but vulnerable groups: poverty and disability in Uganda. Journal of African 
Economies, 2005,14:603-631. doi:10.1093/jae/eji020
15. Peiyun . SLivermore G. Long-term poverty and disability among working age adults. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 
2008,19:244-256. doi:10.1177/1044207308314954
 253
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
16. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. New York, United Nations, 2006.
17. Averting the Old Age Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and Promote Growth. New York. Washington, World Bank and Oxford 
University Press, 1994 (http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/1994/09/01/0000
09265_3970311123336/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf, accessed 2 February 2011).
18. Kinsella K, Velkoff V. An aging world [United States Census Bureau, Series P95/01–1]. Washington, United States Government 
Printing Office, 2001.
19. Kidd MP, Sloane PJ, Ferko I. Disability and the labour market: an analysis of British males. Journal of Health Economics, 
2000,19:961-981. doi:10.1016/S0167-6296(00)00043-6 PMID:11186853
20. Quinn G, Degener T. The current use and future potential of the United Nations human rights instruments in the context 
of disability. Geneva, United Nations, 2002 (http://www.ohchr.org/EN/PublicationsResources/Pages/SpecialIssues.aspx, 
accessed 2 July 2009).
21. CBR guidelines. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
22. The employment situation of people with disabilities: towards improved statistical information. Geneva, International Labour 
Organization, 2007.
23. Brandolini A, Cipollone P, Viviano E. Does the ILO definition capture all employment? [Temi de discussione del Servizio Studi 
No. 529]. Rome, Banca d’Italia, 2004 (http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/econo/temidi/td04/td529_04/td529/
tema_529.pdf, accessed 18 March 2008).
24. Yeo R, Moore K. Including disabled people in poverty reduction work: “nothing about us, without us” World Development, 
2003,31:571-590. doi:10.1016/S0305-750X(02)00218-8
25. Fujiura GT, Yamaki K, Czechowicz S. Disability among ethnic and racial minorities in the United States. Journal of Disability 
Policy Studies, 1998,9:111-130. doi:10.1177/104420739800900207
26. Harriss-White B. On to a loser: disability in India. In: Harriss-White B, Subramanian S, eds. Essays on India’s social sector in 
honour of S. Guhan. New Delhi, Sage Publications, 1999:135–163.
27. Roberts S et al. Disability in the workplace: employers’ and service providers’ responses to the Disability Discrimination Act in 
2003 and preparation for 2004 changes. London, Department of Work and Pensions Research Summary, 2004.
28. Ready, willing, and disabled: survey of UK employers. London, Scope, 2003 (http://www.scope.org.uk/work/, accessed 17 
March 2008).
29. Bagshaw M. Ignoring disability: a wasted opportunity. Wellington, National Equal Opportunities Network, 2006 (http://
www.neon.org.nz/newsarchive/bagshawplusfour/, accessed 18 June 2009).
30. Unger D. Employers’ attitudes toward persons with disabilities in the workforce: myths or realities? Focus on Autism and 
Other Developmental Disabilities, 2002,17:2-10. doi:10.1177/108835760201700101
31. Buckup S. The price of exclusion: the economic consequences of excluding people with disabilities from the world of work. 
Geneva, International Labour Organization, 2009.
32. McDaid D, Knapp M, Raja S. Barriers in the mind: promoting an economic case for mental health in low- and middle-
income countries. World Psychiatry: official journal of the World Psychiatric Association (WPA), 2008,7:79-86. PMID:18560485
33. Becker D et al. Long-term employment trajectories among participants with severe mental illness in supported employ-
ment. Psychiatric Services (Washington, D.C.), 2007,58:922-928. PMID:17602007
34. Stapleton D et al. Exploratory study of health care coverage and employment of people with disabilities: literature review. 
Washington, United States Department of Health and Human Services, 1997 (http://aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/Reports/eshc-
clit.htm, accessed 3 July 2009).
35. Kemp PA, Sundén A, Bakker Tauritz B, eds. Sick societies? Trends in disability benefits in post-industrial welfare states. Geneva, 
International Social Security Association, 2006.
36. Baldwin ML, Johnson WG. Labor market discrimination against men with disabilities. The Journal of Human Resources, 
1994,29:1-19. doi:10.2307/146053
37. Montes A, Massiah E. Disability data: survey and methods issues in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, Inter-
American Development Bank, 2002.
38. Transforming disability into ability: policies to promote work and income security for disabled people. Paris, Organisation for 
Economic Co-Operation and Development, 2003.
39. Maldonado Zambrano S. Trabajo y discapacidad en el Perú: mercado laboral, políticas públicas e inclusión social (Work and 
disability in Peru: labour market, public policies and social inclusion). Lima, Fodo Editorial del Congreso del Perú, 2006.
40. Houtenville AJ, Erickson WA, Lee CG. Disability statistics from the American Community Survey (ACS). Ithaca, Cornell 
University Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on Disability Demographics and Statistics, 2007.
41. Loeb ME, Eide AH. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Malawi: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2004.
42. Eide AH, Loeb ME. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zambia: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2006.
 254
World report on disability
43. World Health Survey. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002–2004 (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/en/, 
accessed 2 February 2011).
44. Thornicroft G. Shunned: discrimination against people with mental illness. London, Oxford University Press, 2006.
45. Jones MK, Latreille PL, Sloane PJ. Disability, gender and the British labour market. Oxford Economic Papers, 2006,58:407-
449. doi:10.1093/oep/gpl004
46. Verdonschot MM et al. Community participation of people with an intellectual disability: a review of empirical findings. 
Journal of Intellectual Disability Research: JIDR, 2009,53:303-318. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2008.01144.x PMID:19087215
47. Mitra S, Sambamoorthi U. Government programmes to promote employment among persons with disabilities in India. 
Indian Journal of Social Development, 2006,b6:195-213.
48. Schur L. Barriers or opportunities? The causes of contingent and part-time work among people with disabilities. Industrial 
Relations, 2003,42:589-622.
49. Microfinance and people with disabilities [Social Finance Highlight 1]. Geneva, International Labour Organization, 2007.
50. Mitra S, Sambamoorthi U. Disability and the rural labour market in India: evidence for males in Tamil Nadu. World 
Development, 2008,36:934-952. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2007.04.022
51. Mitra S, Sambamoorthi U. Wage differential by disability status in an agrarian labour market in India. Applied Economics 
Letters, 2009,16:1393-1398. doi:10.1080/13504850802047011
52. Skills development through community-based rehabilitation. Geneva, International Labour Organization, 2008.
53. Vocational rehabilitation and employment of people with disabilities [Report of a European conference,Warsaw–Konstancin 
Jeziorna, Poland, 23–25 October 2003]. Geneva, International Labour Organization, 2004 (http://www.ilo.org/skills/what/
pubs/lang — en/docName — WCMS_106627/index.htm, accessed 23 June 2009).
54. Strategies for skills acquisition and work for people with disabilities: a report submitted to the International Labour 
Organization. Geneva, International Labour Organization, 2006 (http://www.hsrc.ac.za/research/output/outputDocu-
ments/4388_Schneider_Strategiesforskills.pdf, accessed 23 June 2009).
55. Russell C. Education, employment and training policies and programmes for youth with disabilities in four European countries. 
Geneva, International Labour Organization, 1999.
56. Burchardt T. The education and employment of disabled young people. York, Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 2004.
57. Eide AH, et al. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zimbabwe: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2003.
58. Policy recommendations. Measuring Health and Disability in Europe, 2008 (http://www.mhadie.it/home3.aspx, accessed 
24 June 2009).
59. Roberts P, Babinard J. Transport strategy to improve accessibility in developing countries. Washington, World Bank, 2004 
(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTTSR/Resources/accessibility-strategy.pdf, accessed 17 January 2011).
60. Butler SE et al. Employment barriers: access to assistive technology and research needs. Journal of Visual Impairment & 
Blindness, 2002,96:664-667.
61. Shier M, Graham J, Jones M. Barriers to employment as experienced by disabled people: a qualitative analysis in Calgary 
and Regina, Canada. Disability & Society, 2009,24:63-75. doi:10.1080/09687590802535485
62. Gartrell A. ‘A frog in a well’: the exclusion of disabled people from work in Cambodia. Disability & Society, 2010,25:289-301. 
doi:10.1080/09687591003701207
63. Waghorn G, Lloyd C. The employment of people with mental illness. Australian e-Journal for the Advancement of Mental 
Health, 2005, 4 (http://www.auseinet.com/journal/vol4iss2suppl/waghornlloyd.pdf, accessed 3 July 2009).
64. Baldwin ML, Marcus SC. Perceived and measured stigma among workers with serious mental illness. Psychiatric Services 
(Washington, D.C.), 2006,57:388-392. PMID:16524998
65. Thornicroft G et al. INDIGO Study GroupGlobal pattern of experienced and anticipated discrimination against people with 
schizophrenia: a cross-sectional survey. Lancet, 2009,373:408-415. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61817-6 PMID:19162314
66. Kuddo A. Labor Laws in Eastern European and Central Asian Countries: minimum norms and practices [SP Discussion Paper 
0920]. Washington, World Bank, 2009
67. Acemoglu D, Angrist J. Consequences of employment protection? The case of the Americans with Disabilities Act. The 
Journal of Political Economy, 2001,109:915-957. doi:10.1086/322836
68. Mitra S, Stapleton D. Disability, work and return to work. In: Lewin D, ed. Contemporary issues in industrial relations, labor 
and employment relations. Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 2006:251–284.
69. Houtenville AJ, Burkhauser RV. Did the employment of people with disabilities decline in the 1990s, and was the ADA 
responsible? A replication and robustness check of Acemoglu and Angrist (2001) [Research brief]. Ithaca, Cornell University, 
Employment and Disability Institute, 2004 (http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/edicollect/91, accessed 15 May 2009).
70. Bell D, Heitmueller A. The Disability Discrimination Act in the UK: helping or hindering employment among the disabled? 
Journal of Health Economics, 2009,28:465-480. doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2008.10.006 PMID:19091434
 255
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
71. Degener T. Disability discrimination law: a global comparative approach. In: Lawson A Gooding C, eds. Disability rights in 
Europe: from theory to practice. Portland, Hart Publishing, 2005.
72. Opini BM. A review of the participation of disabled persons in the labour force: the Kenyan context Disability & Society, 
2010,25:271-287. doi:10.1080/09687591003701181
73. Mont D. Disability employment policy [SP Discussion Paper 0413]. Washington, World Bank, 2004.
74. Enforcement guidance on reasonable accommodation and undue hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Washington, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 2002 (http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/accommodation.
html, accessed 3 June 2009).
75. Stapleton DC, Burkhauser RV, eds. The decline in employment of people with disabilities: a policy puzzle. Kalamazoo, UpJohn 
Institute, 2003.
76. Jones MK. Is there employment discrimination against the disabled? Economics Letters, 2006,92:32-37. doi:10.1016/j.
econlet.2006.01.008
77. Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000, establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment 
and occupation. Brussels, European Union, 2000 (http://ec.europa.eu/employment_social/news/2001/jul/directive78ec_
en.pdf, accessed 15 June 2009).
78. Pereira de Melo H. Article 13 network of disability discrimination law experts. Country: Portugal. Oporto, Department of 
Bioethics and Ethical Medics, Oporto University, 2004.
79. Israel: 2003 IDRM [International Disability Rights Compendium] Compendium Report. Chicago, Center for International 
Rehabilitation, 2003 (http://www.ideanet.org/content.cfm?id=5B5C76, accessed 22 June 2009).
80. Waldschmidt A, Lingnau K. Report on the employment of disabled people in European countries: Germany. Academic 
Network of European Disability Experts, 2007 (http://www.disability-europe.net/content/pdf/DE%20Employment%20
report.pdf, accessed 15 June 2009).
81. Commission for Employment Equity. Annual report 2007–2008. Pretoria, Department of Labour, 2008 (http://www.info.
gov.za/view/DownloadFileAction? id=90058, accessed 2 February 2009).
82. Thornton P. Employment quotas, levies, and national rehabilitation funds for persons with disabilities: pointers for policy and 
practice. Geneva, International Labour Organization, 1998 (http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?ar
ticle=1083&context=gladnetcollect, accessed 17 March 2008).
83. Heyer K. From special needs to equal rights: Japanese disability law. Asian-Pacific Law and Policy Journal, 2000, 7.
84. Waddington L, Diller M. Tensions and coherence in disability policy: the uneasy relationship between social welfare 
and civil rights models of disability in American, European and international employment law. In: Breslin ML, Yee S, eds. 
Disability rights law and policy. Ardsley, Transnational Publishers, 2002.
85. Tax incentives. Job Accommodation Network, ADA Library (online), undated (http://www.jan.wvu.edu/media/tax.html, 
accessed 7 December 2008).
86. Funding assistive technology and accommodations. Boston, National Center on Workforce and Disability, 2008 (http://
www.onestops.info/article.php?article_id=22, accessed 7 December 2008).
87. Mungovan A et al. Education to employment package: a website for graduates with disabilities and employers. Sydney, 
Workplace Modification Scheme, New South Wales Department of Education and Training, University of Western Sydney, 
1998 (http://pubsites.uws.edu.au/rdlo/employment/tafe/services/T_S_work_mod.htm, accessed 7 December 2008).
88. What is supported employment? Washington, United States Department of Labor, Office of Disability Employment Policy, 
1993 (http://www.dol.gov/odep/archives/fact/supportd.htm, accessed 18 October 2007).
89. Handbook: supported employment. Willemstad, World Organization for Supported Employment (http://www.wase.net/
handbookSE.pdf, accessed 17 March 2008).
90. Crowther RE et al. Helping people with severe mental illness to obtain work: systematic review. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 
2001,322:204-208. doi:10.1136/bmj.322.7280.204 PMID:11159616
91. Wehman P, Revell G, Kregel J.. Supported employment: a decade of rapid growth and impact. American Rehabilitation, 1998,
92. Cook JA et al. Integration of psychiatric and vocational services: a multisite randomized, controlled trial of supported 
employment. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 2005,162:1948-1956. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.10.1948 PMID:16199843
93. Secker J, Dass S, Grove B. Developing social firms in the UK: a contribution to identifying good practice. Disability & Society, 
2003,18:659-674. doi:10.1080/0968759032000097870
94. Warner R, Mandiberg J. An update on affirmative businesses or social firms for people with mental illness. Psychiatric 
Services (Washington, D.C.), 2006,57:1488-1492. PMID:17035570
95. Social Firms Europe CEFEC [web site]. (http://www.socialfirmseurope.org/, accessed 18 March 2011). 
96. Durie S, Wilson L. Six Mary’s place: social return on investment report. Edinburgh, Forth Sector, 2007 (Series Report No. 1). 
(http://www.socialfirms.org.uk/FileLibrary/Resources/Quality%20&%20Impact/SROI%20report%20-%20Six%20
Marys%20Place.pdf, accessed 19 January 2011).
 256
World report on disability
97. Schneider J. Is supported employment cost effective? A review. International Journal of Psychosocial Rehabilitation, 
2003,7:145-156.
98. Hyde M. Sheltered and supported employment in the 1990s: the experiences of disabled workers in the UK. Disability & 
Society, 1998,13:199-215. doi:10.1080/09687599826786
99. Pathways to inclusion: improving vocational services for people with disabilities. Wellington, New Zealand Department of 
Labour, 2001 (http://www.odi.govt.nz/documents/publications/pathways.pdf, accessed 17 July 2009).
100. Pathways to inclusion: strategy evaluation [Final evaluation report]. Wellington, New Zealand Ministry of Social 
Development, 2008 (http://www.msd.govt.nz/about-msd-and-our-work/publications-resources/evaluation/pathways-
inclusion/pathways-to-inclusion-strategy-evaluation.html, accessed 20 July 2009).
101. Thornton P, Lunt N. Employment policies for disabled people in eighteen countries: a review. York, Social Policy Research Unit, 
University of York, 1997.
102. Bizlink: Employment for People with Disabilities [web site].(http://www.bizlink.org.sg/, accessed 18 March 2011). 
103. Guozhong EZ. Inclusion of persons with disabilities in China. Asia Pacific Rehabilitation Journal, 2006, 17. (http://www.dinf.
ne.jp/doc/english/asia/resource/apdrj/v172006/index.html, accessed 2 February 2011).
104. O’Brien C, O’Brien J. A little book about person-centered planning. Toronto, Canada, Inclusion Press, 1998.
105. Moxley DP, Finch JR, eds. Sourcebook of rehabilitation and mental health practice. Amsterdam, Kluwer, 2003.
106. Burns T et al. The Effectiveness of Supported Employment for People with Severe Mental Illness: A Randomised Control 
Trial. Lancet, 2007,370:1146-1152. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61516-5 PMID:17905167
107. Corrigan PW, McCracken SG. Place first, then train: an alternative to the medical model of psychiatric rehabilitation. Social 
Work, 2005,50:31-39. PMID:15688678
108. Bieler RB. Independent living in Latin America: progress in adapting a “First World” philosophy to the realities of the “Third 
World”. Disability World, 2003, 21 (http://www.disabilityworld.org/11-12_03/il/latinamerica.shtml, accessed 8 June 2009).
109. Funación ONCE [web site]. (http://www.fundaciononce.es/EN/Pages/Portada.aspx, accessed 18 March 2011).
110. Gradwell L. Missing pieces: the voluntary sector and community sector’s potential for inclusive employment. In: Roulstone 
A, Barnes C, eds. Working futures? Disabled people, policy and social inclusion. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
111. Rowland W. Nothing about us without us: inside the disability rights movement of South Africa. Pretoria, UNISA Press, 2004.
112. Disability Empowerment Concerns [web site]. (http://www.dectrust.co.za/, accessed 18 March 2011).
113. National Centre for Promotion of Employment of Disabled People [web site]. (http://www.ncpedp.org/, accessed 18 
March 2011). 
114. Managing disability in the workplace: ILO code of practice. Geneva, International Labour Organization, 2002.
115. National Institute of Disability Management and Research [web site]. (http://www.nidmar.ca/index.asp, accessed 18 
March 2011). 
116. Bewley H, Dorsett R, Haile G. The impact of Pathways to Work [DWP research report 435]. Leeds, Corporate Document 
Services, 2007.
117. Harris J, Thornton P. Barriers to labour market participation: the experience of Deaf and hard of hearing people. In: Barnes 
C, Roulstone A, eds. Working futures: disabled people, policy and social inclusion. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
118. Simkiss P. Work matters: visual impairment, disabling barriers and employment options. In: Barnes C, Roulstone A, eds. 
Working futures: disabled people, policy and social inclusion. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
119. Bloch FS, Prins R, eds. Who returns to work and why? A six-country study on work incapacity and reintegration. Geneva, 
International Social Security Association, 2001.
120. Buys N. Editorial to the first issue. International Journal of Disability Management Research, 2006,1:1-2.
121. The Redemptorist Vocational School for People with Disabilities [web site]. (www.rvsd.ac.th, accessed 18 March 201).
122. OECD Thematic review on sickness, disability and work: Issues paper and progress report. Paris, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development. 2008.
123. Metts RL. Disability issues, trends, and recommendations for the World Bank (full text and annexes). Washington, World 
Bank, 2000 (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/Resources/280658-1172606907476/DisabilityIssuesMetts.
pdf, accessed 2 February 2011).
124. Guzman CZ et al. The Philippines disability survey: a collaborative survey. Manila, Department of Health and the University 
of the Philippines, 2002.
125. Alade EB. Community-based vocational rehabilitation (CBVR) for people with disabilities: experiences from a pilot project 
in Nigeria. British Journal of Special Education, 2004,31:143-149. doi:10.1111/j.0952-3383.2004.00345.x
126. Kalimullah NA, de Klerk T. Encompassing all: impact study of the PSID program of BPKS. Dhaka, Protibandhi Kallyan Somity, 2008.
127. Coleridge P. Economic empowerment. In: Barron T, Amerena P, eds. Disability and inclusive development. London, Leonard 
Cheshire International, 2007.
128. Replicating success: a handbook and manual on alleviating poverty through peer training. Geneva, International Labour 
Organization, 2007.
 257
Chapter 8 
Work and employment
129. Evaluation of the Spinal Cord Injury Project. East Balmain, WestWoodSpice Human Services Consultants, 2002, (http://www.
bvet.nsw.gov.au/pdf/SpinalCordProjectFinalReport2302.pdf, accessed 14 June 2010)
130. Timmons J et al. Paving the way to work: a guide to career-focused mentoring for youth with disabilities. Washington, National 
Collaborative on Workforce and Disability for Youth, Institute for Educational Leadership, 2006.
131. Harris C. Self-employment of disabled people in developing countries. Disability World 2003, 21 (http://www.disability-
world.org/11-12_03/employment/ selfemployment.shtml, accessed 7 January 2011)
132. Good practices for the economic inclusion of people with disabilities in developing countries: funding mechanisms for self-
employment. Woking, Handicap International, 2006.
133. Perry DA, ed. Moving forward: toward decent work for people with disabilities. Examples of good practice in vocational train-
ing and employment from Asia and the Pacific. Geneva, International Labour Organization, 2003.
134. Neufeldt AH. Self-directed employment and economic independence in low-income countries. In: O’Toole B, McConkey R, 
eds. Innovations in Developing Countries for People with Disabilities. London, Lisieux Hall, 1995 (http://www.aifo.it/english/
resources/online/books/cbr/innovations/11neufeldt.pdf, accessed 7 January 2011).
135. Doing business in Tigray: case studies of women entrepreneurs with disabilities in Ethiopia. Geneva, International Labour 
Organization, 2006 (http://www.ilo.org/public/english/region/afpro/addisababa/publ/tigraycasestudy.pdf, accessed 18 
February 2008).
136. Dyer S. Credit is a need and a right: inclusive policy and practice in micro finance. In: Heinicke-Motsch K, Sygall S, eds. 
Building an inclusive development community: a manual on including people with disabilities in international development 
programs. Bloomfield, Kumarian Press, 2004.
137. Cramm JM, Finkelflügel H. Exclusion of disabled people from microcredit in Africa and Asia: a literature study. Asia Pacific 
Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 2008,19:15-33.
138. Marin B, Prinz C, Queisser M, eds. Transforming disability welfare policies: towards work and equal opportunities. Aldershot, 
Ashgate, 2004.
139. Corden A. Benefits and tax credits: enabling systems or constraints? In: Barnes C, Roulstone A, eds. Working futures: 
disabled people, policy and social inclusion. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
140. Pearson M, Prinz C. Challenging the disability benefit trap across the OECD. In: Barnes C, Roulstone A, eds. Working futures: 
disabled people, policy and social inclusion. Bristol, Policy Press, 2005.
141. Is informal normal? Toward more and better jobs in developing countries. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation 
and Development, 2009.
142. The International Classification of Functioning. Disability and Health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.
143. Mitra S. Temporary and partial disability programs in nine countries: what can the United States learn from other coun-
tries? Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 2009,20:14-27. doi:10.1177/1044207308315283
144. Mulheirn I, Pisani M. The labour supply effect of the working tax credit: a quasi-experimental evaluation. London, Her Majesty’s 
Treasury, 2006 (http://wpeg.group.shef.ac.uk/refereeing2006/papers20006/Pisani.pdf, accessed 18 March 2008).
145. We count. Leamington Spa, BasicNeeds UK Trust, 2009 (http://www.basicneeds.org/download/We%20Count%20-%20
Issue%207.pdf, accessed 3 June 2009).
146. Henderson C, Thornicroft G. Stigma and discrimination in mental illness: Time to Change. Lancet, 2009,373:1928-1930. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61046-1 PMID:19501729
147. Reducing HIV stigma and discrimination: a critical part of national AIDS programmes. Geneva, Joint United Nations 
Programme on HIV/AIDS, 2007.
148. Light abre 90 vagas para deficientes (Ninety openings for people with disabilities at Light). São José do Rio Preto, Excelência 
Educação, Carreira & Concursos, 2008 (http://www.excelenciaglobal.com.br/noticias/?nt=9848, accessed 3 July 2009).
149. Employers’ Forum on Disability [website]. (http://www.efd.org.uk/, accessed 2 February 2011).
150. Disability Standard [website]. (http://www.disabilitystandard.com/, accessed 2 February 2011).
151. Realising Potential [website]. (http://www.realising-potential.org/, accessed 2 February 2011).
152. Shah S. Career success of disabled high-flyers. London, Jessica Kingsley, 2005.
153. Shakespeare T, Thompson S, Wright M. No laughing matter: medical and social experiences of restricted growth. 
Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research, 2010,12:19-31. doi:10.1080/15017410902909118
154. Hernandez B, Keys C, Balcazar F. Employer attitudes toward workers with disabilities and their ADA employment rights: a 
literature review. Journal of Rehabilitation, 2000,66:4-16.
155. Shrey D et al. Disability management best practices and joint labour-management collaboration. International Journal of 
Disability Management Research, 2006,1:52-63. doi:10.1375/jdmr.1.1.52
156. Jodoin S, Harder H. Strategies to enhance labour-management cooperation in the development of disability man-
agement programs. International Journal of Disability, Community, and Rehabilitation, 2004, 3 (http://www.ijdcr.ca/
VOL03_04_CAN/articles/jodoin.shtml, accessed 23 June 2009).
  Chapter 9
The way forward: recommendations
  9
The way forward: recommendations
261
Disability is part of the human condition. Almost everyone will be tem-
porarily or permanently impaired at some point in life, and those who 
survive to old age will experience increasing difficulties in functioning. 
Disability is complex and the interventions required to overcome dis-
ability disadvantage are multiple, systemic, and will vary depending on 
context.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CRPD), adopted in 2006, aims to “promote, protect and ensure the full and 
equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all per-
sons with disabilities, and to promote respect for their inherent dignity” (1). 
It reflects the major shift in global understanding and responses towards dis-
ability. The World report on disability has assembled the best available scien-
tific information on disability so as to understand and help improve the lives 
of people with disabilities and facilitate the implementation of the CRPD.
This chapter summarizes the Report’s findings about what is known 
about disability and makes final recommendations to assist stakeholders in 
overcoming the barriers that people with disabilities experience.
Disability: a global concern
What do we know about people with disabilities?
Higher estimates of prevalence
More than a billion people are estimated to live with some form of disability, 
or about 15% of the world’s population (based on 2010 global population 
estimates). This is higher than previous World Health Organization esti-
mates, which date from the 1970s and suggested a figure of around 10%.
According to the World Health Survey around 785 million (15.6%) per-
sons 15 years and older live with a disability, while the Global Burden of 
Disease estimates a figure of around 975 million (19.4%) persons. Of these, 
the World Health Survey estimates that 110 million people (2.2%) have very 
significant difficulties in functioning, while the Global Burden of Disease 
estimates that 190 million (3.8%) have “severe disability” – the equivalent 
of disability inferred for conditions such as quadriplegia, severe depression, 
 262
World report on disability 2011
or blindness. Only the Global Burden of Disease 
measures childhood disability (0–14 years) 
which is estimated to be 95 million (5.1%) chil-
dren of which 13 million (0.7%) have “severe 
disability”.
Growing numbers
The number of people with disabilities is grow-
ing. There is a higher risk of disability at older 
ages, and national populations are growing 
older at unprecedented rates. There is also a 
global increase in chronic health conditions, 
such as diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and 
mental disorders, which will influence the 
nature and prevalence of disability. Patterns of 
disability in a particular country are influenced 
by trends in health conditions and trends in 
environmental and other factors – such as road 
traffic crashes, natural disasters, conflict, diet, 
and substance abuse.
Diverse experiences
The disability experience resulting from the inter-
action of health conditions, personal factors, and 
environmental factors varies greatly. While disa-
bility correlates with disadvantage, not all people 
with disabilities are equally disadvantaged. 
Women with disabilities experience gender dis-
crimination as well as disabling barriers. School 
enrolment rates also differ among impairments, 
with children with physical impairment gener-
ally faring better than those with intellectual or 
sensory impairments. Those most excluded from 
the labour market are often those with mental 
health difficulties or intellectual impairments. 
People with more severe impairments often 
experience greater disadvantage.
Vulnerable populations
Disability disproportionately affects vulnerable 
populations. There is a higher disability preva-
lence in lower-income countries than in higher-
income countries. People from the poorest 
wealth quintile, women, and older people have 
a higher prevalence of disability. People who 
have a low income, are out of work, or have low 
educational qualifications are at an increased 
risk of disability. Data from selected countries 
show that children from poorer households 
and those in ethnic minority groups are at sig-
nificantly higher risk of disability than other 
children.
What are the disabling barriers?
The CRPD and the International Classification 
of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) 
both highlight the environmental factors that 
restrict participation for people with disabili-
ties. This Report has documented widespread 
evidence of barriers, including the following.
 
■
Inadequate policies and standards. Policy 
design does not always take into account 
the needs of people with disabilities, or 
existing policies and standards are not 
enforced. Examples include a lack of 
clear policy of inclusive education, a lack 
of enforceable access standards in physi-
cal environments, and the low priority 
accorded to rehabilitation.
 
■
Negative attitudes. Beliefs and prejudices 
constitute barriers when health-care work-
ers cannot see past the disability, teachers 
do not see the value in teaching children 
with disabilities, employers discriminate 
against people with disabilities, and family 
members have low expectations of their 
relatives with disabilities.
 
■
Lack of provision of services. People with 
disabilities are particularly vulnerable to 
deficiencies in services such as health care, 
rehabilitation, or support and assistance.
 
■
Problems with service delivery. Issues 
such as poor coordination among services, 
inadequate staffing, staff competencies, and 
training affect the quality and adequacy of 
services for persons with disabilities.
 
■
Inadequate funding. Resources allocated 
to implementing policies and plans are 
often inadequate. Strategy papers on pov-
erty reduction, for instance, may mention 
disability but without considering funding.
 263
Chapter 9 
The way forward: recommendations
 
■
Lack of accessibility. Built environments 
(including public accommodations) trans-
port systems and information are often 
inaccessible. Lack of access to transport is 
a frequent reason for a person with a dis-
ability being discouraged from seeking 
work or prevented from accessing health 
care. Even in countries with laws on acces-
sibility, compliance in public buildings is 
often very low. The communication needs 
of people with disabilities are often unmet. 
Information is frequently unavailable in 
accessible formats, and some people with 
disabilities are unable to access basic infor-
mation and communication technologies 
such as telephones and television.
 
■
Lack of consultation and involvement. 
Often people with disabilities are excluded 
from decision-making in matters directly 
affecting their lives.
 
■
Lack of data and evidence. A lack of rigor-
ous and comparable data on disability and 
evidence on programmes that work often 
impedes understanding and action.
How are the lives of people 
with disabilities affected?
These barriers contribute to the disadvantages 
experienced by people with disabilities, such 
as the following.
 
■
They 
have 
poor 
health 
outcomes. 
Depending on the group and setting, per-
sons with disabilities may experience greater 
vulnerability to preventable secondary 
conditions and co-morbidities, untreated 
mental health conditions, poor oral health, 
higher rates of HIV infection, higher rates 
of obesity, and premature mortality.
 
■
They have lower educational achieve-
ments. Children with disabilities are less 
likely to start school than their peers with-
out disabilities. They also have lower rates 
of staying in school and of being promoted, 
as well as lower transition rates to post-
school education.
 
■
They are less economically active. People 
with disabilities have lower employ-
ment rates than people without disabili-
ties. Where people with disabilities are 
employed, they commonly earn less than 
their counterparts without disabilities.
 
■
They experience higher rates of poverty. 
Households with a person with a dis-
ability have higher rates of poverty than 
households without disabled members. 
As a group and across settings, people 
with disabilities have worse living condi-
tions and fewer assets. Poverty may lead 
to disability, through malnutrition, poor 
health care, and dangerous working or 
living conditions. Disability may lead to 
poverty through lost earnings, due to lack 
of employment or underemployment, and 
through the additional costs of living with 
disability, such as extra medical, housing, 
and transport costs.
 
■
They cannot always live independently or 
participate fully in community activities. 
Reliance on institutional solutions, lack of 
community living, inaccessible transport 
and other public facilities, and negative atti-
tudes leave people with disabilities depend-
ent on others and isolated from mainstream 
social, cultural, and political opportunities.
Recommendations
The evidence in this Report suggests that many 
of the barriers people with disabilities face are 
avoidable and the disadvantages associated with 
disability can be overcome. The following nine 
recommendations for action are cross-cutting 
and guided by the more specific recommenda-
tions at the end of each chapter.
Implementing 
the 
recommendations 
requires involving different sectors – health, 
education, social protection, labour, transport, 
housing – and different actors – governments, 
civil society organizations (including disa-
bled people’s organizations), professionals, the 
263
 264
World report on disability
private sector, and people with disabilities and 
their families.
It is essential that countries tailor their 
actions to their specific contexts. Where coun-
tries are limited by resource constraints, some 
of the priority actions, particularly those requir-
ing technical assistance and capacity-building, 
can be included within the framework of inter-
national cooperation (see Box 9.1).
Recommendation 1: Enable 
access to all mainstream 
policies, systems and services
People with disabilities have ordinary needs 
– for health and well-being, for economic and 
social security, to learn and develop skills, and 
to live in their communities. These needs can 
and should be met in mainstream programmes 
and services. Mainstreaming not only fulfils 
the human rights of persons with disabilities, 
it is also more effective.
Mainstreaming is the process by which 
governments and other stakeholders ensure 
that persons with disabilities participate 
equally with others in any activity and service 
intended for the general public, such as educa-
tion, health, employment, and social services. 
Barriers to participation need to be identified 
and removed, possibly requiring changes to 
laws, policies, institutions, and environments.
Mainstreaming requires a commitment at 
all levels, and needs to be considered across all 
sectors and built into new and existing legisla-
tion, standards, policies, strategies, and plans. 
Adopting universal design and implementing 
reasonable accommodations are two important 
Box 9.1. An example of inclusive international cooperation
In November 2008 the Australian Government launched its strategy “Development for all: towards a disability-
inclusive Australian aid program”. The strategy marks a significant change in the way Australia’s aid is designed 
and delivered. Development for All is about improving the reach and effectiveness of development assistance by 
ensuring that people with disabilities are included, contribute and benefit equally from development efforts.
In preparing the strategy AusAID, the Australian government’s development aid agency, conducted consultations 
in most of the developing countries where AusAID works, involving people with disabilities, their families and 
caregivers, government representatives, nongovernmental organizations, and service providers. Almost 500 
written submissions were received in the process. 
During the consultations overseas-based AusAID staff – often with little experience of relating to people with 
disabilities – were supported to engage with local disabled people’s organizations. The direct involvement of 
AusAID staff was an important step in commencing the process of building institutional understanding of the 
importance of disability-inclusive development. Many came away better informed about disability issues and 
more confident about spending time with people with disabilities.
Two years into implementation, there are strong signs that the strategy is working:
 
■
People with disabilities are more visible and taking a central role in decision- making, ensuring that Australia’s 
development policies and programmes are shaped to better take account of their requirements.
 
■
Australia’s support is bolstering partner Government’s efforts, such as in Papua New Guinea, Cambodia and Timor-
Leste, towards more equitable national development that benefits all citizens, including people with disability.
 
■
Investments in leadership by people with disabilities, together with advocacy by Australian leaders internation-
ally, is helping to increase the priority and resources for inclusive development globally. 
 
■
AusAID’s processes, systems and information about the aid programme are more accessible to people with 
disabilities. Key programme areas such as scholarships have revised guidelines resulting in increased number 
of scholars with disabilities. 
The strategy takes a rights-based approach, is sensitive to the diversity of people with disabilities, gender issues, 
and focuses on children with disabilities. 
 265
Chapter 9 
The way forward: recommendations
strategies. Mainstreaming also requires effec-
tive planning, adequate human resources, and 
sufficient financial investment – accompanied 
by specific measures such as targeted pro-
grammes and services (see Recommendation 2) 
to ensure that the diverse needs of people with 
disabilities are adequately met.
Recommendation 2: Invest in 
specific programmes and services 
for people with disabilities
In addition to mainstream services, some people 
with disabilities may require access to specific 
measures, such as rehabilitation, support ser-
vices, or training. Rehabilitation – including 
assistive technologies such as wheelchairs, hear-
ing aids, and white canes – improves function-
ing and independence. A range of well-regulated 
assistance and support services in the commu-
nity can meet needs for care, enabling people 
to live independently and to participate in the 
economic, social, and cultural lives of their 
communities. Vocational rehabilitation and 
training can open labour market opportunities.
While there is a need for more services, there 
is also a need for better, more accessible, flexible, 
integrated, and well-coordinated multidiscipli-
nary services, particularly at times of transi-
tion such as between child and adult services. 
Existing programmes and services need to be 
reviewed to assess their performance and make 
changes to improve their coverage, effectiveness, 
and efficiency. The changes should be based on 
sound evidence, appropriate in terms of culture 
and other local contexts, and tested locally.
Recommendation 3: Adopt a 
national disability strategy 
and plan of action
While disability should be a part of all devel-
opment strategies and action plans, it is also 
recommended that a national disability strat-
egy and plan of action be adopted. A national 
disability strategy sets out a consolidated and 
comprehensive long-term vision for improving 
the well-being of persons with disabilities and 
should cover both mainstream policy and pro-
gramme areas and specific services for persons 
with disabilities.
The development, implementation, and 
monitoring of a national strategy should bring 
together a broad range of stakeholders including 
relevant government ministries, nongovernmen-
tal organizations, professional groups, disabled 
people and their representative organizations, 
the general public, and the private sector.
The strategy and action plan should be 
informed by a situation analysis, taking into 
account such factors as the prevalence of 
disability, needs for services, social and eco-
nomic status, effectiveness and gaps in cur-
rent services, and environmental and social 
barriers. The strategy should establish pri-
orities and have measurable outcomes. The 
plan of action operationalizes the strategy in 
short and medium terms by laying out con-
crete actions and timelines for implementa-
tion, defining targets, assigning responsible 
agencies, and planning and allocating needed 
resources.
Mechanisms are needed to make it clear 
where the responsibility lies for coordination, 
decision-making, regular monitoring and 
reporting, and control of resources.
Recommendation 4: Involve 
people with disabilities
People with disabilities often have unique 
insights about their disability and their situ-
ation. In formulating and implementing poli-
cies, laws, and services, people with disabilities 
should be consulted and actively involved.
Disabled people’s organizations may need 
capacity-building and support to empower 
people with disabilities and advocate for their 
needs. When suitably developed and funded, 
they can also play a role in service delivery – 
for example, in information provision, peer 
support, and independent living.
 266
World report on disability
At an individual level, persons with dis-
abilities are entitled to control over their lives 
and therefore need to be consulted on issues 
that concern them directly – whether in health, 
education, rehabilitation, or community living. 
Supported decision-making may be necessary 
to enable some individuals to communicate 
their needs and choices.
Recommendation 5: Improve 
human resource capacity
The attitudes and knowledge of people work-
ing in, for example, education, health care, 
rehabilitation, social protection, labour, law 
enforcement, and the media are particularly 
important for ensuring non-discrimination 
and participation.
Human resource capacity can be improved 
through effective education, training, and 
recruitment. A review of the knowledge and 
competencies of staff in relevant areas can pro-
vide a starting point for developing appropriate 
measures to improve them. Relevant training 
on disability, which incorporates human rights 
principles, should be integrated into current 
curricula and accreditation programmes. 
In-service training should be provided to cur-
rent practitioners providing and managing ser-
vices. For example, strengthening the capacity 
of primary health care workers, and ensuring 
availability of specialist staff where required, 
contribute to effective and affordable health 
care for people with disabilities.
Many countries have too few staff work-
ing in fields such as rehabilitation and special 
education. Developing standards in training 
for different types and levels of rehabilitation 
personnel can assist in addressing resource 
gaps. There are also shortages of care workers 
and sign language interpreters. Measures to 
improve staff retention may be relevant in some 
settings and sectors.
Recommendation 6: Provide 
adequate funding and 
improve affordability
Existing public services for people with dis-
abilities are often inadequately funded, affect-
ing the availability and quality of such services. 
Adequate and sustainable funding of publicly 
provided services is needed to ensure that they 
reach all targeted beneficiaries and that good 
quality services are provided. Contracting out 
service provision, fostering public-private part-
nerships, notably with not-for profit organiza-
tions, and devolving budgets to persons with 
disabilities for consumer-directed care can 
contribute to better service provision.
During the development of the national 
disability strategy and related action plans, the 
affordability and sustainability of the proposed 
measures should be considered and adequately 
funded through relevant budgets. Programme 
costs and outcomes should be monitored and 
evaluated, so that more cost-effective solutions 
are developed and implemented.
Often people with disabilities and their 
families have excessive out-of-pocket expenses. 
To improve the affordability of goods and ser-
vices for people with disabilities and to offset 
the extra costs associated with disability, par-
ticularly for poor and vulnerable persons with 
disabilities, consideration should be given to 
expanding health and social insurance cover-
age, ensuring that people with disabilities have 
equal access to public social services, ensur-
ing that poor and vulnerable people with dis-
abilities benefit from poverty-targeted safety 
net programmes, and introducing fee-waivers, 
reduced transport fares, and reduced import 
taxes and duties on assistive technologies.
 267
Chapter 9 
The way forward: recommendations
Recommendation 7: Increase 
public awareness and 
understanding of disability
Mutual respect and understanding contrib-
ute to an inclusive society. Therefore it is 
vital to improve public understanding of dis-
ability, confront negative perceptions, and 
represent disability fairly. For example, edu-
cation authorities should ensure that schools 
are inclusive and have an ethos of valuing 
diversity. Employers should be encouraged to 
accept their responsibilities towards staff with 
disabilities.
Collecting information on knowledge, 
beliefs and attitudes about disability can help 
identify gaps in public understanding that 
can be bridged through education and public 
information. Governments, voluntary organi-
zations, and professional associations should 
consider running social marketing campaigns 
that change attitudes on stigmatized issues such 
as HIV, mental illness, and leprosy. Involving 
the media is vital to the success of these cam-
paigns and to ensuring the dissemination of 
positive stories about persons with disabilities 
and their families.
Recommendation 8: Improve 
disability data collection
Internationally, methodologies for collect-
ing data on people with disabilities need to be 
developed, tested cross-culturally, and applied 
consistently. Data need to be standardized and 
internationally comparable for benchmarking 
and monitoring progress on disability poli-
cies, and for the implementation of the CRPD 
nationally and internationally.
Nationally, disability should be included 
in data collection. Uniform definitions of dis-
ability, based on the ICF, can allow for interna-
tionally comparable data. Understanding the 
numbers of people with disabilities and their 
circumstances can improve country efforts 
to remove disabling barriers and provide 
appropriate services for people with disabili-
ties. As a first step, national population census 
data can be collected in line with recommen-
dations from the United Nations Washington 
Group on Disability and the United Nations 
Statistical Commission. A cost-effective and 
efficient approach is to include disability ques-
tions – or a disability module – in existing 
sample surveys such as a national household 
survey, national health survey, general social 
survey, or labour force survey. Data need to 
be disaggregated by population features, such 
as age, sex, race, and socioeconomic status, 
to uncover patterns, trends, and information 
about subgroups of persons with disabilities.
Dedicated disability surveys can also gain 
more comprehensive information on disability 
characteristics, such as prevalence, health con-
ditions associated with disability, and use of 
and need for services including rehabilitation. 
Administrative data collection can be a useful 
source of information on users and on types, 
amounts, and cost of services, if standard dis-
ability identifiers are included.
Recommendation 9: Strengthen 
and support research on disability
Research is essential for increasing public 
understanding about disability issues, inform-
ing disability policy and programmes, and effi-
ciently allocating resources.
This Report recommends several areas for 
research on disability including:
 
■
the impact of environmental factors (poli-
cies, physical environment, attitudes) on 
disability and how to measure it;
 
■
the quality of life and well-being of people 
with disabilities;
 
■
barriers to mainstream and specific ser-
vices, and what works in overcoming them 
in different contexts;
 
■
accessibility and universal design program-
mes appropriate for low-income settings;
 
■
the interactions among environmental fac-
tors, health conditions, and disability – and 
between disability and poverty;
 268
World report on disability
 
■
the cost of disability and the cost–effec-
tiveness of public spending on disability 
programmes.
Research requires focused investments in 
human and technical capacity, particularly in 
low-income and middle-income countries. A 
critical mass of trained researchers on disabil-
ity needs to be built. Research skills should be 
strengthened in a range of disciplines, includ-
ing epidemiology, disability studies, health 
and rehabilitation, special education, econom-
ics, sociology, and public policy. International 
learning and research opportunities, linking 
universities in developing countries with those 
in high-income and middle-income countries, 
can also be useful.
Conclusion
The CRPD established an agenda for change. 
This World report on disability has documented 
the current situation for people with disabili-
ties. It has highlighted gaps in knowledge and 
stressed the need for further research and 
policy development. It has also provided rec-
ommendations for action towards achieving a 
society that is inclusive and enabling, providing 
equal opportunities for each person with a dis-
ability to fulfil their potential.
Translating recommendations 
into action
To implement the recommendations, strong 
commitment and actions are required from a 
broad range of stakeholders. While national 
governments have the most significant role, 
other players also have important roles. The fol-
lowing highlights some of the actions that the 
various stakeholders can take.
Governments can:
 
■
Review and revise existing legislation and 
policies for consistency with the CRPD; 
review and revise compliance and enforce-
ment mechanisms.
 
■
Review mainstream and disability-spe-
cific policies, systems, and services to 
identify gaps and barriers and to plan 
actions to overcome them.
 
■
Develop a national disability strategy and 
action plan, establishing clear lines of respon-
sibility and mechanisms for coordination, 
monitoring and reporting across sectors.
 
■
Regulate service provision by introducing 
service standards and by monitoring and 
enforcing compliance.
 
■
Allocate adequate resources to existing 
publicly-funded services and appropriately 
fund the implementation of the national 
disability strategy and plan of action.
 
■
Adopt national accessibility standards 
and ensure compliance in new buildings, 
in transport, and in information and 
communication.
 
■
Introduce measures to ensure that people 
with disabilities are protected from poverty 
and benefit adequately from mainstream 
poverty alleviation programmes.
 
■
Include disability in national data collec-
tion systems and provide disability-disag-
gregated data wherever possible.
 
■
Implement 
communication 
campaigns 
to increase public knowledge and under-
standing of disability.
 
■
Establish channels for people with disabili-
ties and third parties to lodge complaints 
on human rights issues and laws that are 
not implemented or enforced.
United Nations agencies and develop-
ment organizations can:
 
■
Include disability in development aid pro-
grammes, using the twin-track approach 
(mainstreaming and targeted).
 
■
Exchange information and coordinate 
actions – to agree on priorities for initia-
tives to learn lessons and to reduce duplica-
tion of effort.
 269
Chapter 9 
The way forward: recommendations
 
■
Provide technical assistance to countries to 
build capacity and strengthen existing pol-
icies, systems and services – for example, 
by sharing good and promising practices.
 
■
Contribute to the development of inter-
nationally comparable research method-
ologies for collecting and analysing data 
relating to people with disabilities.
 
■
Regularly include relevant disability data 
into statistical publications.
Disabled people’s organizations can:
 
■
Support people with disabilities to become 
aware of their rights, to live independently, 
and to develop their skills.
 
■
Support children with disabilities and 
their families to ensure inclusion in 
education.
 
■
Represent the views of their constituency to 
international, national, and local decision-
makers and service providers, and advo-
cate for their rights.
 
■
Contribute to the evaluation and moni-
toring of services, and collaborate with 
researchers to support applied research 
that can contribute to service development.
 
■
Promote public awareness and under-
standing by professionals about the rights 
of persons with disabilities – for example, 
through campaigning, advocacy, and disa-
bility-equality training.
 
■
Conduct audits of environments, transport, 
and other systems and services to promote 
barrier removal.
Service providers can:
 
■
Carry out access audits, in partnership with 
local disability groups, to identify physical 
and information barriers that may exclude 
persons with disabilities.
 
■
Ensure that staff are adequately trained 
about disability, implementing training 
as required and including service users in 
developing and delivering training.
 
■
Develop individual service plans in con-
sultation with disabled people, and their 
families where necessary.
 
■
Introduce case management, referral sys-
tems, and electronic record-keeping to 
coordinate and integrate service provision.
 
■
Ensure that people with disabilities are 
informed of their rights and the mecha-
nisms for complaints.
Academic institutions can:
 
■
Remove barriers to the recruitment and 
participation of students and staff with 
disabilities.
 
■
Ensure that professional training courses 
include adequate information about dis-
ability, based on human rights principles.
 
■
Conduct research on the lives of persons 
with disabilities and on disabling barri-
ers, in consultation with disabled people’s 
organizations.
The private sector can:
 
■
Promote diversity and inclusion in work-
ing environments.
 
■
Facilitate employment of persons with dis-
abilities, ensuring that recruitment is equi-
table, that reasonable accommodations are 
provided, and that employees who become 
disabled are supported to return to work.
 
■
Remove barriers of access to microfinance, 
so that persons with disabilities can develop 
their own businesses.
 
■
Develop a range of quality support services 
for persons with disabilities and their fami-
lies at different stages of the life cycle.
 
■
Ensure that construction projects, such as 
public accommodations, offices and hous-
ing include adequate access for persons 
with disabilities.
 
■
Ensure that ICT products, systems, and 
services are accessible to persons with 
disabilities.
 270
World report on disability
Communities can:
 
■
Challenge and improve their own beliefs 
and attitudes.
 
■
Protect 
the 
rights 
of 
persons 
with 
disabilities.
 
■
Promote the inclusion and participation of 
disabled people in their community.
 
■
Ensure that community environments 
are accessible for people with disabilities, 
including schools, recreational areas and 
cultural facilities.
 
■
Challenge violence against and bullying of 
people with disabilities.
People with disabilities and their families 
can:
 
■
Support other people with disabilities 
through peer support, training, informa-
tion, and advice.
 
■
Promote the rights of persons with dis-
abilities within their local communities – 
for example by conducting access audits, 
delivering disability equality training, and 
campaigning for human rights.
 
■
Become involved in awareness-raising and 
social marketing campaigns.
 
■
Participate 
in 
forums 
(international, 
national, local) to determine priorities for 
change, to influence policy, and to shape 
service delivery.
 
■
Participate in research projects.
References
1. 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Geneva, United Nations, 2006 (http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/
disabilities-convention.htm, accessed 10 March 2011).
 271
Technical appendix A
Estimates of disability prevalence (%) and of years of health lost due to disability (YLD), by country
Member State
Disability 
prevalence from 
WHS, 2002–2004a 
Census
Disability survey or component in 
other surveys
YLDs per 100 
persons in 
2004
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
1
Afghanistan
2005 Imp, AL, PR
2.7 (1)
15.3
2
Albania
2008
Imp
3.4 (2)
7.8
3
Algeria
1992
1.2 (3)
8.0
4
Andorra
6.8
5
Angola
14.4
6
Antigua and Barbuda
8.8
7
Argentina
2001
Imp, AL
7.1 (4)
8.7
8
Armenia
7.9
9
Australia
2006
4.4 (5)
2003
20.0 (6)
6.8
10
Austria
2002 Imp, AL, PR
12.8 (7)
6.7
11
Azerbaijan
8.2
12
Bahamas
2000
Imp
4.3 (8)
2001
Imp
5.7 (9)
9.0
13
Bahrain
1991
Imp
0.8 (10)
7.6
14
Bangladesh
31.9
2005
Imp
2.5 (11)
10.1
15
Barbados
2000
Imp
4.6 (12)
8.5
16
Belarus
8.4
17
Belgium
2002 Imp, AL, PR
18.4 (7)
6.9
18
Belize
2000
Imp, AL, PR
5.9 (13)
10.0
19
Benin
2002
Imp
2.5 (14)
1991
1.3 (10)
11.0
21
Bhutan
2005
Imp
3.4 (15)
2000
Imp
3.5 (16)
9.5
22
Bolivia (Plurinational 
State of)
2001
Imp
3.1 (17)
2001
Imp
3.8 (18)
10.8
23
Bosnia and Herzegovina
14.6
7.6
24
Botswana
2001
Imp
3.5 (19)
13.8
25
Brazil
18.9
2000
Imp
14.9 (20)
1981
Imp
1.8 (10)
10.1
26
Brunei Darussalam
7.4
27
Bulgaria
7.9
28
Burkina Faso
13.9
12.1
29
Burundi
13.5
continues ...
 272
World report on disability
Member State
Disability 
prevalence from 
WHS, 2002–2004a 
Census
Disability survey or component in 
other surveys
YLDs per 100 
persons in 
2004
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
30
Cambodia
2008
1.4 (21)
1999
Imp
2.4 (11)
10.8
31
Cameroon
11.7
32
Canada
2001
Imp, AL, PR 18.5 (22)
2006 Imp, AL, PR
14.3 (23)
6.9
33
Cape Verde
1990
Imp
2.6 (10)
8.1
34
Central African Republic
1988
1.5 (10)
13.1
35
Chad
20.9
13.6
36
Chile
2002
Imp
2.2 (24)
2004 Imp, AL, PR
12.9 (25)
8.1
37
China
2006
Imp
6.4 (26)
7.7
38
Colombia
2005
Imp, AL, PR
6.4 (27)
1991
Imp
5.6 (10)
10.2
39
Comoros
1980
1.7 (10)
10.0
40
Congo
1974
1.1 (10)
11.0
41
Cook Islands
7.7
42
Costa Rica
2000
Imp
5.4 (28)
1998
Imp
7.8 (28)
7.9
43
Côte d’Ivoire
13.8
44
Croatia
13.9
2001
Imp
9.7 (29)
2009 Imp, AL, PR
11.3 (30)
7.4
45
Cuba
2003
Imp
4.2 (31)
2000
Imp
7.0 (31)
8.2
46
Cyprus
1992
AL
6.4 (32)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
12.2 (7)
7.4
47
Czech Republic
11.7
2007 Imp, AL, PR
9.9 (33)
7.0
48
Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea
9.5
49
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
13.6
50
Denmark
2002 Imp, AL, PR
19.9 (7)
7.1
51
Djibouti
10.5
52
Dominica
2002
Imp
6.1 (34)
8.8
53
Dominican Republic
11.1
2002
Imp
4.2 (35)
2007
Imp
2.0 (36)
9.8
54
Ecuador
13.6
2001
Imp
4.6 (37)
2005 Imp, AL, PR
12.1 (37)
9.2
55
Egypt
2006
1.2 (38)
1996
Imp
4.4 (38)
8.6
56
El Salvador
1992
Imp
1.8 (39)
2003
Imp, AL
1.5 (39)
9.8
57
Equatorial Guinea
12.3
58
Eritrea
9.5
59
Estonia
11.0
2000
Imp
7.5 (40)
2008 Imp, AL, PR
9.9 (40)
7.9
60
Ethiopia
17.6
1984
3.8 (10)
11.3
61
Fiji
1996
Imp, AL
13.9 (11)
8.6
62
Finland
5.5
2002 Imp, AL, PR
32.2 (7)
7.2
63
France
6.5
2002 Imp, AL, PR
24.6 (7)
6.8
64
Gabon
11.0
65
Gambia
11.0
66
Georgia
15.6
7.6
67
Germany
2007
Imp
8.4 (41)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
11.2 (7)
6.7
... continued
continues ...
 273
Technical appendix A
Member State
Disability 
prevalence from 
WHS, 2002–2004a 
Census
Disability survey or component in 
other surveys
YLDs per 100 
persons in 
2004
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
68
Ghana
12.8
11.1
69
Greece
2002 Imp, AL, PR
10.3 (7)
6.3
70
Grenada
8.9
71
Guatemala
2002
Imp
6.2 (42)
2005 Imp, AL, PR
3.7 (42)
10.0
72
Guinea
11.7
73
Guinea-Bissau
12.7
74
Guyana
2002
Imp, AL, PR
2.2 (43)
11.5
75
Haiti
2003
Imp
1.5 (44)
11.7
76
Honduras
2000
Imp
1.8 (45)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
2.6 (46)
9.5
77
Hungary
10.5
2001
Imp
3.1 (47)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
11.4 (7)
7.9
78
Iceland
2008
7.4 (48)
6.0
79
India
24.9
2001
Imp
2.1 (49)
2002
Imp
1.7 (11)
10.5
80
Indonesia
2007 Imp, AL, PR
21.3 (50)
10.4
81
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
2006
Imp
1.5 (51)
9.3
82
Iraq
1977
Imp
0.9 (10)
19.4
83
Ireland
4.3
2006
Imp, AL, PR
9.3 (52)
2006 Imp, AL, PR
18.5 (53)
6.7
84
Israel
15.8
6.2
85
Italy
2002 Imp, AL, PR
6.6 (7)
6.1
86
Jamaica
2001
Imp
6.2 (54)
8.7
87
Japan
2005
5.0 (55)
5.5
88
Jordan
1994
Imp
1.2 (10)
2001
12.6 (56)
7.9
89
Kazakhstan
14.2
2006
3.0 (11)
10.1
90
Kenya
15.2
1989
Imp
0.7 (10)
10.8
91
Kiribati
2004
Imp
3.8 (11)
9.6
92
Kuwait
6.9
93
Kyrgyzstan
2008 Imp, AL, PR
20.2 (57)
9.6
94
Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic
8.0
2004
8.0 (11)
10.5
95
Latvia
18.0
2009
5.2 (16)
8.0
96
Lebanon
2002
1.5 (58)
9.1
97
Lesotho
11.4
98
Liberia
1971
0.8 (10)
1997
Imp
16.4 (59)
13.9
99
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
1984
Imp
1.5 (10)
1995
1.7 (10)
7.8
100 Lithuania
2001
Imp
7.5 (60)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
8.4 (7)
8.0
101 Luxembourg
10.2
2002 Imp, AL, PR
11.7 (7)
6.8
102 Madagascar
2003
Imp, AL
7.5 (61)
10.7
103 Malawi
14.0
1983
2.9 (10)
2004 Imp, AL, PR
10.6 (62)
13.1
104 Malaysia
4.5
2000
0.4 (63)
8.0
105 Maldives
2003
Imp
3.4 (11)
10.2
106 Mali
9.8
1987
2.7 (10)
13.0
continues ...
... continued
 274
World report on disability
Member State
Disability 
prevalence from 
WHS, 2002–2004a 
Census
Disability survey or component in 
other surveys
YLDs per 100 
persons in 
2004
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
107 Malta
2005
Imp, AL. PR
5.9 (64)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
8.5 (7)
6.3
108 Marshall Islands
1999
Imp
1.6 (65)
8.2
109 Mauritania
24.9
1988
1.5 (10)
11.0
110 Mauritius
13.1
2000
Imp
3.5 (66)
9.1
111 Mexico
7.5
2000
Imp
1.8 (67)
2002
AL. PR
8.8 (68)
8.2
112 Micronesia (Federated 
States of)
7.0
113 Monaco
6.5
114 Mongolia
2005
3.5 (11)
9.0
115 Montenegro
7.4 (69)
116 Morocco
32.0
1982
1.1 (10)
2004
5.12 (70)
8.7
117 Mozambique
1997
Imp
1.9 (71)
2009 Imp, AL, PR
6.0 (72)
12.5
118 Myanmar
6.4
1985
Imp
2.0 (73)
2007
Imp
2.0 (16)
9.8
119 Namibia
21.4
2001
Imp
5.0 (74)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
1.6 (75)
10.2
120 Nauru
9.5
121 Nepal
21.7
2001
Imp
0.5 (76)
2001
Imp
1.6 (11)
11.1
122 Netherlands
2002 Imp, AL, PR
25.6 (7)
6.4
123 New Zealand
2001 Imp, AL, PR
20.0 (77)
6.9
124 Nicaragua
2003 Imp, AL, PR
10.3 (78)
8.5
125 Niger
1988
1.3 (10)
13.7
126 Nigeria
1991
0.5 (10)
13.2
127 Niue
8.4
128 Norway
4.3
2002 Imp, AL, PR
16.4 (7)
6.8
129 Oman
2005
0.5 (79)
7.2
130 Pakistan
13.4
1998
Imp
2.5 (80)
9.6
131 Palau
7.8
132 Panama
2000
Imp
1.8 (81)
2005 Imp, AL, PR
11.3 (81)
8.4
133 Papua New Guinea
9.4
134 Paraguay
10.4
2002
Imp
1.1 (82)
2002
Imp, AL
3.0 (82)
9.4
135 Peru
2007
Imp, AL, PR 10.9 (83)
2006 Imp, AL, PR
8.7 (84)
9.4
136 Philippines
28.8
2000
Imp
1.2 (85)
9.2
137 Poland
2002
AL
14.3 (86)
7.3
138 Portugal
11.2
2001
Imp
6.2 (87)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
19.9 (7)
7.0
139 Qatar
1986
0.2 (10)
7.1
140 Republic of Korea
2005
Imp
4.6 (11)
7.6
141 Republic of Moldova
8.6
142 Romania
2009 Imp, AL, PR
19.0 (88)
7.9
143 Russian Federation
16.4
10.0
144 Rwanda
13.3
145 Saint Kitts and Nevis
9.0
... continued
continues ...
 275
Technical appendix A
Member State
Disability 
prevalence from 
WHS, 2002–2004a 
Census
Disability survey or component in 
other surveys
YLDs per 100 
persons in 
2004
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
146 Saint Lucia
2001
Imp
5.1 (89)
8.7
147 Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines
2001
imp
4.6 (89)
9.0
148 Samoa
2002
3.0 (90)
7.0
149 San Marino
6.2
150 Sao Tome and Principe
1991
4.0 (10)
10.0
151 Saudi Arabia
1996
Imp
4.5 (91)
8.1
152 Senegal
15.5
1988
1.1 (10)
11.3
153 Serbia
2008 Imp, AL, PR
7.4 (92)
7.4 (93)
154 Seychelles
2007
Imp
1.3 (16)
8.8
155 Sierra Leone
2004
2.4 (94)
14.7
156 Singapore
2003
Imp
3.0 (11)
6.6
157 Slovakia
12.1
2002 Imp, AL, PR
8.2 (7)
7.7
158 Slovenia
2002 Imp, AL, PR
19.5 (7)
7.1
159 Solomon Islands
2004
Imp
3.5 (11)
7.9
160 Somalia
14.3
161 South Africa
24.2
2001
Imp, PR
5.0 (95)
1998 Imp, AL, PR
5.9 (96)
12.2
162 Spain
9.5
2008
Imp, AL
8.5 (97)
6.2
163 Sri Lanka
12.9
2001
Imp
1.6 (98)
1986
Imp
2.0 (10)
11.5
164 Sudan
1993
1.6 (10)
1992
1.1 (10)
12.2
165 Suriname
1980
Imp
2.8 (99)
10.1
166 Swaziland
35.9
1986
2.2 (10)
13.0
167 Sweden
19.3
2002 Imp, AL, PR
19.9 (7)
6.5
168 Switzerland
2007 Imp, AL, PR
14.0 (100)
6.2
169 Syrian Arab Republic
1981
1.0 (10)
1993
0.8 (10)
7.7
170 Tajikistan
2007
1.9 (101)
8.7
171 Thailand
2007 Imp, AL, PR
2.9 (102)
9.4
172 The former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia
7.3
173 Timor Leste
2002
1.5 (11)
11.0
174 Togo
1970
0.6 (10)
11.4
175 Tonga
2006
2.8 (103)
6.9
176 Trinidad and Tobago
2000
Imp, AL
4.2 (104)
9.2
177 Tunisia
16.3
1994
1.2 (10)
1989
0.9 (10)
7.5
178 Turkey
20.6
2002
Imp, AL
12.3 (105)
7.5
179 Turkmenistan
9.1
180 Tuvalu
8.0
181 Uganda
2002
Imp
3.5 (106)
2006
Imp
7.2 (107)
12.7
182 Ukraine
14.8
8.8
183 United Arab Emirates
10.8
7.3
... continued
continues ...
 276
World report on disability
References
1. 
Islamic State of Afghanistan, and Handicap International. National Disability Survey in Afghanistan. Towards well-being for 
Afghans with disabilities: the health challenge. Lyon, Handicap International, 2005 (http://www.handicap-international.fr/
uploads/media/HI_HEALTH_REPORTFINAL2_01.pdf, accessed 27 January 2010).
2. 
Disability in Albania: annual report 2007–2008. Tirana, Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities Department 
and National Observatory of Persons with Disabilities, 2008.
3. 
Human functioning and disability: Algeria, 1992 survey. New York, Statistics Division, United Nations (http://unstats.un.org/
unsd/demographic/sconcerns/disability/disab2.asp, accessed 27 January 2010).
4. 
National survey of persons with disabilities (2002–2003). Buenos Aires, National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, 2003 
(http://www.indec.mecon.ar/, accessed 27 January 2010).
5. 
People with a need for assistance: a snapshot, 2006. Canberra, Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2008 (http:www.abs.gov.au/
AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/4445.0Main+Features12006?OpenDocument, accessed 27 January 2010).
6. 
Disability, ageing and carers: summary of findings, 2003. Canberra, Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2004 (http://tinyurl.com/
ykbapow, accessed 25 March 2010).
7. 
Living conditions in Europe: data 2002–2005. Luxembourg, EUROSTAT, 2007 (http://tinyurl.com/yab3l94, accessed 25 March 
2010). [Note: Prevalence data are valid for people aged 16–64 years.]
8. 
The 2000 census of population and housing report. Nassau, Department of Statistics (http://statistics.bahamas.gov.bs/down-
load/022740800.pdf, accessed 6 March 2010).
9. 
Bahamas living conditions survey 2001. Nassau, Department of Statistics, 2004. (http://statistics.bahamas.gov.bs/archives.
php?cmd=view&id=3, accessed 2 February 2010).
10. Bahrain: 1991 census. New York, United Nations Disability Statistics Database (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/
sconcerns/disability/disab2.asp, accessed 2 February 2010).
11. Disability at a glance: a profile of 28 countries and areas in Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok, United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2006 (http://unescap.org/esid/psis/disability/publications/glance/disability%20at%20
a%20glance.pdf, accessed 2 February 2010).
... continued
Member State
Disability 
prevalence from 
WHS, 2002–2004a 
Census
Disability survey or component in 
other surveys
YLDs per 100 
persons in 
2004
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
Year
ICF 
component
Prevalence 
184 United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern 
Ireland
2001
Imp, AL, PR 17.6 (108)
2002 Imp, AL, PR
27.2 (7)
7.1
185 United Republic of 
Tanzania
2008 Imp, AL, PR
7.8 (109)
12.7
186 United States of America
2000
Imp, AL, PR 19.3 (110)
2007 Imp, AL, PR
14.9 (111)
7.9
187 Uruguay
4.6
2004 Imp, AL, PR
7.6 (112)
9.0
188 Uzbekistan
8.0
189 Vanuatu
1999
1.4 (113)
7.6
190 Venezuela (Bolivarian 
Republic of)
2001
Imp
4.2 (114)
9.1
191 Viet Nam
5.8
2005
6.4 (11)
7.8
192 Yemen
2004
Imp
1.9 (115)
1998
1.7 (56)
12.9
193 Zambia
14.8
2000
Imp
2.7 (10)
2006 Imp, AL, PR
11.0 (116)
14.2
194 Zimbabwe
16.9
2003 Imp, AL, PR
18.0 (117)
12.3
(a) WHS results are weighted and age standardized
Abbreviations for ICF components: AL=activity limitations; Imp=impairments; PR=participation restrictions.
 277
Technical appendix A
12. Trevor D. Disability statistics in Barbados [Datos de discapacidad en el Caribe]. Kingston, Inter-American Development Bank, 
2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 2 February 2010).
13. Statistical Institute of Belize [web site]. (http://www.statisticsbelize.org.bz/, accessed 2 February 2010).
14. Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse Economique [web site]. (http://www.insae-bj.org, accessed 2 February 
2010).
15. Disability at a glance: a profile of 28 countries and areas in Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok, United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2006 (http://unescap.org/esid/psis/disability/publications/glance/disability%20at%20
a%20glance.pdf, accessed 2 February 2010).
16. From official statistics provided to the WHO regional office.
17. Chumacero Viscarra M. Statistics on persons with disability in Bolivia [Datos de discapacidad en la región Andina]. Lima, Inter-
American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 2 February 2010).
18. National Statistics Office [web site]. (http://www.ine.gov.bo/default.aspx, accessed 2 February 2010).
19. 2001 Population census atlas: Botswana. Gaborone, Botswana Central Statistics Office, 2005 (http://www.cso.gov.bw/images/
stories/Census_Publication/pop%20atlas.pdf, accessed 6 March 2010).
20. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística [web site]. (http://www.ibge.gov.br/english/estatistica/populacao/censo2000/
default_populacao.shtm, accessed 2 February 2010).
21. General population census of Cambodia 2008. Phnom Penh, National Institute of Statistics, 2008.
22. Census of Canada. Ottawa, Statistics Canada, 2001 (http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census01/home/index.cfm, accessed 6 
March 2010).
23. Prevalence of disability in Canada 2006. Ottawa, Statistics Canada (http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-628-x/2007002/4125019-
eng.htm, accessed 2 February 2010).
24. Zepeda M. First national study on disability: summary of results [Estadísticas de discapacidad en el Cono Sur]. Buenos Aires, 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 2 February 2010).
25. First national study on disability. Santiago, Government of Chile, 2004 (http://www.ine.cl/canales/chile_estadistico/encues-
tas_discapacidad/pdf/estudionacionaldeladiscapacidad(ingles).pdf, accessed 2 February 2010).
26. National Bureau of Statistics of China [web site]. (http://www.stats.gov.cn, accessed 2 February 2010).
27. González CI. First meeting on disability statistics in the Andean region [Datos de discapacidad en la región Andina]. Lima, 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 2 February 2010).
28. González ME. Disability statistics: experiences since the implementation of the household survey and population census 
[Estadística sobre personas con discapacidad en Centroamérica]. Managua, Inter-American Development Bank, 2004 (http://
tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 2 February 2010).
29. Republic of Croatia, Central Bureau of Statistics [web site]. (http://www.dzs.hr, accessed 3 February 2010).
30. Benjak T, Petreski N. Izvješće o osobama s invaliditetom u Republici Hrvatskoj. Zagreb, Croatian National Institute of Public 
Health, 2009 (http://www.hzjz.hr/epidemiologija/kron_mas/invalidi08.pdf, accessed 3 February 2010).
31. Oficina Nacional de Estadísticas [web site]. (http://www.one.cu, accessed 3 February 2010).
32. Census 1992. Nicosia, Statistical Service of the Republic of Cyprus (http://www.mof.gov.cy/mof/cystat/statistics.nsf/index_gr/
index_gr?OpenDocument, accessed 3 February 2010).
33. Czech Statistical Office [web site]. (http://www.czso.cz/csu/2008edicniplan.nsf/p/3309-08, accessed 3 February 2010).
34. Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica [web site]. (http://www.dominica.gov.dm/cms/index.php?q=node/28, 
accessed 3 February 2010).
35. La discapacidad en República Dominicana: un perfil a partir de datos censales. Santo Domingo, National Disability Council and 
Pan American Health Organization, 2006.
36. Encuesta de demografía y salud: República Dominicana. Calverton, Centro de Estudios Sociales y Demográficos and ORC 
Macro, 2007.
37. Parrales EMM. Disability statistics in the 2001 census [Datos de discapacidad en la región Andina]. Lima, Inter-American 
Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
38. Population and housing census 2006: population distribution by physical status. Cairo, Central Agency for Mobilization and 
Statistics, 2006 (http://www.msrintranet.capmas.gov.eg/ows-img2/pdf/tab10_e.pdf, accessed 3 February 2010).
39. Corleto MA. Characterization of disability in El Salvador following the EHPM 2003 [Estadística sobre personas con discapacidad 
en Centroamérica]. Managua, Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 
2010).
40. Limitations of everyday activities of persons aged 16 and older due to health problems by sex and age group. Tallinn, Population 
and Social Statistics Department, 2008 (http://pub.stat.ee/px-web.2001/Dialog/varval.asp?ma=PH81&ti=LIMITATIONS+OF
+EVERYDAY+ACTIVITIES+OF+PERSONS+AGED+16+AND+OLDER+DUE+TO+HEALTH+PROBLEMS+BY+SEX+AND+AGE+GR
OUP&path=./I_Databas/Social_life/05Health/05Health_status/&lang=1, accessed 3 February 2010).
 278
World report on disability
41. Statistisches Bundesamt Deutschland [web site]. (http://www.destatis.de/jetspeed/portal/cms/Sites/destatis/Internet/DE/
Presse/pm/2008/07/PD08__258__227.psml, accessed 3 February 2010). [Note: Prevalence rate refers only to persons with 
severe disability (more than 50% of “degree of disability”).]
42. Lee Leiva JRS. Planning the first national survey on disability [Armonización regional de la definición de discapacidad]. Buenos 
Aires, Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
43. Luke DA. Disability data: census and other sources [Datos de discapacidad en el Caribe]. Kingston, Inter-American Development 
Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
44. L’Institut Haïtien de Statistique et d’Informatique [web site]. (http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/ihsi.htm, accessed 3 February 
2010).
45. García M, Rodriguez RD. Harmonization of the definition of disability [Armonización regional de la definición de discapacidad]. 
Buenos Aires, Argentina Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
46. García M. Data on disability in Honduras [Datos sobre discapacidad en Honduras]. Tegucigalpa, Instituto Nacional de 
Estadística and Inter-American Development Bank, 2002 (http://www.iadb.org/sds/SOC/publication/gen_6191_4149_s.
htm, accessed 4 April 2010).
47. Hungarian Central Statistical Office [web site]. (http://portal.ksh.hu, accessed 3 February 2010).
48. Social insurance administration, invalidity and rehabilitation pensioners and recipients of invalidity allowances 1986–2008. 
Reykjavik, Tryggingastofnun, 2009 (http://www.tr.is/media/frettir/stadtolur//2008_Tafla1_22_net.xls, accessed 3 February 
2010). [Note: Prevalence rate refers only to persons with severe disability (more than 50% of “degree of disability”).].
49. Census of India. New Delhi, Office of the Registrar General (http://www.censusindia.net, accessed 3 February 2010).
50. Report of baseline health research. Jakarta, National Institute of Health Research and Development, Ministry of Health, 2008.
51. General results of Iran census 2006: population and housing. Tehran, National Statistics Office, Statistical Centre of Iran, 2006.
52. Census 2006: principal socio-economic results. Dublin, Central Statistics Office, 2006 (http://www.cso.ie/census/census2006re-
sults/PSER/PSER_Tables%2031-38.pdf, accessed 3 February 2010).
53. National disability survey. Dublin, Central Statistics Office, 2008 (http://www.cso.ie/releasespublications/documents/
other_releases/nationaldisability/National%20Disability%20Survey%202006%20First%20Results%20full%20report.pdf, 
accessed 3 February 2010).
54. Bartley M. Measurement of disability data: Jamaica’s experience with censuses and surveys [Estadísticas de discapacidad en el 
Cono Sur]. Buenos Aires, Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
55. Annual report on government measures for persosn with disabilities. Tokyo, Cabinet Office, 2005 (http://www8.cao.go.jp/
shougai/english/annualreport/2005/h17_report.pdf, accessed 3 February 2010).
56. A note on disability issues in the Middle East and North Africa. Washington, World Bank, 2005 (http://siteresources.worldbank.
org/DISABILITY/Resources/Regions/MENA/MENADisabilities.doc, accessed 3 February 2010).
57. Disability data from the annual report of the Ministry of Health and the Republican Medical Information Centre: Health of the 
population and functioning of health facilities in 2008. Bishkek, Ministry of Health, 2009. Population data from: Main social and 
demographic characteristics of population and number of housing units. Bishkek, National Statistical Committee of the Kyrgyz 
Republic, 2009.
58. National human development report: Lebanon 2001–2002. Beirut, United Nations Development Programme, 2002.
59. National needs assessment survey of the injured and disabled. Monrovia, Centers for the Rehabilitation of the Injured and 
Disabled, 1997.
60. Statistikos Departmentas [web site]. (http://db1.stat.gov.lt/statbank/default.asp?w=1680, accessed 3 February 2010).
61. Rapport d’enquête: coordination des soins aux personnes handicapées. Antananarivo, Ministère de la Santé, 2003.
62. Loeb ME, Eide AE. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Malawi: a national representative study. Trondheim, 
SINTEF, 2004 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCMalawi.pdf, accessed 3 February 2010).
63. Country profile: Malaysia. Bangkok, Asia-Pacific Development Center on Disability, 2006 (http://www.apcdfoundation.org/
countryprofile/malaysia/index.html, accessed 25 March 2010). [Note: “Prevalence data” refers to registered persons with 
disabilities.]
64. National Statistics Office of Malta [web site]. (http://www.nso.gov.mt, accessed 3 February 2010).
65. Census 1999. Majuro, Republic of the Marshall Islands Census, 1999 (http://www.pacificweb.org/DOCS/rmi/pdf/99census.
pdf, accessed 6 March 2010).
66. Central Statistics Office. Republic of Mauritius [web site]. (http://www.gov.mu/portal/goc/cso/census_1.htm, accessed 3 
February 2010).
67. Lerma RV. Generating disability data in Mexico [Estadística sobre personas con discapacidad en Centroamérica]. Managua, 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2004 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
68. Bases de datos en formato de cubo dinámico. Mexico City, Sistema Nacional de Información en Salud, 2008 (http://dgis.salud.
gob.mx/cubos.html, accessed 3 February 2010).
 279
Technical appendix A
69. The YLD estimate for 2004 is reported for Serbia and Montenegro.
70. Enquête nationale sur le handicap. Rabat, Secrétariat d’Etat chargé de la Famille, de l’Enfance et des Personnes Handicapées, 
2006 (http://www.alciweb.org/websefsas/index.htm, accessed 10 March 2010).
71. Disability. Maputo, Instituto Nacional de Estatística (http://www.ine.gov.mz/Ingles/censos_dir/recenseamento_geral/
deficiencia, accessed 3 February 2010).
72. Eide HE, Kamaleri Y. Health research, living conditions among people with disabilities in Mozambique: a national repre-
sentative study. Oslo, SINTEF, 2009 (http://www.sintef.no/upload/Helse/Levekår%20og%20tjenester/LC%20Report%20
Mozambique%20-%202nd%20revision.pdf, accessed 4 April 2010).
73. Department of Statistics. Malaysia [web site]. (http://www.statistics.gov.my, accessed 3 February 2010).
74. Namibia 2001: population and housing census. Windhoek, National Planning Commission (http://www.npc.gov.na/census/
index.htm, accessed 3 February 2010).
75. Eide AH, van Rooy G, Loeb ME. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Namibia: a representative, national 
study. Oslo, SINTEF, 2003 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCNamibia.pdf, accessed 3 February 2010).
76. Table 22: Population by type of disability, age groups and sex for regions. Kathmandu, National Planning Commission Secretariat, 
Central Bureau of Statistics (http://www.cbs.gov.np/Population/National%20Report%202001/tab22.htm, accessed 3 
February 2010).
77. Disability counts 2001. Wellington, Statistics New Zealand, 2002 (http://www2.stats.govt.nz/domino/external/pasfull/
pasfull.nsf/0/4c2567ef00247c6acc256e6e006bcf1f/$FILE/DCounts01.pdf, accessed 3 February 2010).
78. Paguaga ND. Statistics on persons with disabilities [Estadística sobre personas con discapacidad en Centroamérica]. Managua, 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2004 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
79. Number of recipients of social welfare by case (various years). Muscat, National Statistics, 2006 (http://www.moneoman.gov.
om/stat_book/2006/fscommand/SYB_2006_CD/social/social_4-20.htm, accessed 3 February 2010).
80. Population census organization. Islamabad, Statistics Division, 2004 (http://www.statpak.gov.pk/depts/fbs/publications/
compendium_gender2004/gender_final.pdf, accessed 10 March 2010).
81. Quesada LE. Statistics on persons with disabilities [Estadística sobre personas con discapacidad en Centroamérica]. Managua, 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2004 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
82. Barrios O. Regional harmonization of the definition of disability [Armonización regional de la definición de discapacidad]. 
Buenos Aires, Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
83. Census 2007. Lima, National Statistics Office, 2008 (http://www.inei.gob.pe/, accessed 25 March 2010). [Note: data correspond 
to percentage of surveyed homes with a person with disability.]
84. Araujo GR. Various statistics on disability in Peru [Datos de discapacidad en la región Andina]. Lima, Inter-American 
Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 3 February 2010).
85. A special release based on the results of Census 2000. Manila, National Statistics Office, 2005 (http://www.census.gov.ph/data/
sectordata/sr05150tx.html, accessed 10 March 2010).
86. Central Statistical Office [web site]. (http://www.stat.gov.pl, accessed 4 February 2010).
87. Instituto Nacional de Estatística [web site] (http://www.ine.pt, accessed 4 February 2010).
88. Statistics annual book. Bucharest, Ministry of Health, 2008.
89. The Caribbean (Studies and Perspectives Series, No. 7). Port of Spain, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America 
and the Caribbean, Statistics and Social Development Unit, 2008.
90. Country profile: Samoa. Bangkok, Asia-Pacific Development Center on Disability, 2006 (http://www.apcdfoundation.org/
countryprofile/samoa/index.html, accessed 25 March 2010). [Note: “Prevalence data” refers to people aged 15 years and 
older.]
91. Country profile on disability: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Washington, World Bank and JICA Planning and Evaluation Department, 
2002 
(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/Resources/Regions/MENA/JICA_Saudi_Arabia.pdf, 
accessed 
4 
February 2010).
92. From official statistics provided by the Ministry of Health to the WHO regional office. Note: data only valid for age group 
16–64 years and only in relation to disabilities recorded in the occupational statistics.
93. The YLD estimate for 2004 is reported for Serbia and Montenegro.
94. 2004 population and housing census: mortality and disability. Freetown, Statistics Sierra Leone and UNFPA, 2006 (http://www.
sierra-leone.org/Census/Mortality and Disability.pdf, accessed 4 February 2010).
95. Prevalence of disability in South Africa, Census 2001. Pretoria, Statistics South Africa, 2005 (http://www.statssa.gov.za/
PublicationsHTML/Report-03-02-44/html/Report-03-02-44.html, accessed 4 February 2010).
96. Department of Health Facts and Statistics [web site]. (http://www.doh.gov.za/facts/index.html, accessed 4 February 2010).
 280
World report on disability
97. Instituto Nacional de Estadística, [web site] (http://www.ine.es/en/inebmenu/mnu_salud_en.htm, accessed 4 February 
2010).
98. Census of population and housing 2001: disabled persons by type and disability, age and sex. Colombo, National Statistics Office, 
2001 (http://www.statistics.gov.lk/PopHouSat/PDF/Disability/p11d2%20Disabled%20persons%20by%20Age%20and%20
Sex.pdf, accessed 4 February 2010).
99. Hunte A. Disability studies in Suriname [Datos de discapacidad en el Caribe]. Kingston, Inter-American Development Bank, 
2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 4 February 2010).
100. National Statistics Office of Switzerland [web site]. (http://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/portal/fr/index/themen/20/06.html, 
accessed 4 February 2010).
101. From official statistics provided to the WHO regional office. Note: data refer to working-age population.
102. National Statistics Office of Thailand [web site]. (http://portal.nso.go.th/otherWS-world-context-root/index.jsp, accessed 4 
February 2010).
103. National disability identification survey. Nuku’alofa, Tonga Department of Statistics, 2006 (http://www.spc.int/prism/Country/
to/Stats/pdfs/Disability/NDIS06.pdf, accessed 4 February 2010).
104. Schmid K, Vézina S, Ebbeson L. Disability in the Caribbean. A study of four countries: a socio-demographic analysis of the 
disabled. UNECLAC Statistics and Social Development Unit, 2008 (http://www.eclac.org/publicaciones/xml/2/33522/L.134.
pdf, accessed 4 February 2010).
105. Turkey disability survey. Ankara, Turkish Statistical Institute, 2002 (http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/VeriBilgi.do?tb_id=5&ust_id=1, 
accessed 4 February 2010).
106. Census 2002. Kampala, Uganda Bureau of Statistics (http://www.ubos.org/index.php?st=pagerelations2&id=16&p=rela
ted%20pages%202:2002Census%20Results, accessed 10 March 2010).
107. Uganda national household survey 2005–2006: report on the socio-economic module. Kampala, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 
2006 (http://www.ubos.org/onlinefiles/uploads/ubos/pdf%20documents/UNHSReport20052006.pdf, accessed 4 April 
2010).
108. United Kingdom National Statistics [web site]. (http://www.statistics.gov.uk, accessed 4 February 2010).
109. Tanzania disability survey 2008. Dar es Salaam, National Bureau of Statistics, 2008. (http://www.nbs.go.tz/index.
php?option=com_phocadownload&view=category&id=71:dissability&Itemid=106#, accessed 10 March 2010).
110. Census 2000. Washington, United States Census Bureau (http://www.census.gov/main/www/cen2000.html, accessed 6 
March 2010).
111. American community survey 2007. Washington, United States Census Bureau (http://www.census.gov/acs/, accessed 4 
February 2010). [Note: Prevalence data are valid for people aged 5 years and older.]
112. Damonte AM. Regional harmonization of the definition of disability [Armonización regional de la definición de discapacidad]. 
Buenos Aires, Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 4 February 2010).
113. Vanuatu: disability country profile. Suva, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, 2009 (http://www.forumsec.org/pages.cfm/
strategic-partnerships-coordination/disability/, accessed 2 June 2009).
114. León A. Venezuela: characterization of people with disability, Census 2001 [Datos de discapacidad en la región Andina]. Lima, 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://tinyurl.com/ylgft9x, accessed 4 February 2010).
115. Central Statistical Organization [web site]. (http://www.cso-yemen.org/publication/census/second_report_demogra-
phy_attached.pdf, accessed 4 February 2010).
116. Eide AH, Loeb ME, eds. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zambia: a national representative study. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2006 (http://www.sintef.no/upload/Helse/Levekår%20og%20tjenester/ZambiaLCweb.pdf, accessed 7 December 
2009).
117. Eide AH et al. Living conditions among people with activity limitations in Zimbabwe: a representative regional survey. Oslo, 
SINTEF, 2003 (http://www.safod.org/Images/LCZimbabwe.pdf, accessed 4 February 2010).
 281
Technical appendix B
Overview of global and regional initiatives on 
disability statistics
There are numerous databases (including web sites) and studies of various 
international and national organizations that have compiled disability sta-
tistics (1–9).
To illustrate some of the current initiatives to improve disability statis-
tics, the work of five organizations is described here. They are:
 
■
The United Nations Washington Group on Disability Statistics.
 
■
The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the 
Pacific (UNESCAP).
 
■
The WHO Regional Office for the Americas/Pan American Health 
Organization (PAHO).
 
■
The European Statistical System (ESS).
 
■
The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE).
The United Nations Washington Group on Disability Statistics
The Washington Group was set up by the United Nations Statistical Commission 
in 2001 as an international, consultative group of experts to facilitate the meas-
urement of disability and the comparison of data on disability across countries 
(10). At present, 77 National Statistical Offices are represented in the Washington 
Group, as well as seven international organizations, six organizations that rep-
resents people with disabilities, the United Nations Statistics Division, and three 
other United Nations-affiliated bodies.
As described in Chapter 2, the Washington Group created a short set of 
six questions for use in censuses and surveys, following the Fundamental 
Principles of Official Statistics and consistent with the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) (11). These ques-
tions, when used in combination with other census data, assess the degree 
of participation of people with disabilities in education, employment, and 
social life – and can be used to inform policy on equalization of opportu-
nities. The United Nations Principles and Recommendations for Population 
and Housing Censuses incorporates the approach taken by the Washington 
Group (12).
 282
The recommended Washington Group 
short set of questions thus aims to identify the 
majority of the population with difficulties in 
functioning in six core domains of function-
ing (seeing, hearing, mobility, cognition, self-
care, communication); difficulties that have 
the potential to limit independent living or 
social integration if appropriate accommoda-
tion is not made. The Washington Group short 
set of census questions underwent a series of 
cognitive and field tests in 15 countries before 
being finalized (13).
A second priority was to recommend 
one or more extended sets of survey items to 
measure the different aspects of disability, or 
principles for their design, that could be used 
as components of population surveys or as sup-
plements to special surveys. The extended set 
of questions has undergone cognitive testing in 
10 countries, with further field-testing taking 
place in five countries in Asia and the Pacific – 
in collaboration with the UNESCAP Statistical 
Division – and one in Europe.
The Washington Group is also involved 
in building capacity in developing countries 
to collect data on disability, for example by 
training government statisticians on disability 
measurement methodology. In addition, it has 
produced a series of papers that:
 
■
describe its work for disabled peoples’ 
organizations (14);
 
■
can assist national statistical offices (15);
 
■
show how disability is interpreted using the 
short set of six questions (16);
 
■
give examples of how the short set of ques-
tions can be used to monitor the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities (CRPD) (17).
United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific
The UNESCAP has been working to improve 
disability measurement and statistics in line 
with the Biwako “Millennium Framework 
for Action towards an Inclusive, Barrier-Free 
and Rights-Based Society”. They have imple-
mented a joint ESCAP/WHO disability project 
(2004–06) – based on the ICF – to improve the 
availability, quality, comparability, and policy 
relevance of disability statistics in the region.
An ongoing project entitled – Improvement 
of Disability Measurement and Statistics in 
Support of the Biwako Millennium Framework 
and Regional Census Programme – funded 
by the United Nations Development Account 
builds on the momentum generated by the 
earlier project. The project – implemented by 
the UNESCAP’s Statistics Division in close 
collaboration with internal and external part-
ners including the United Nations Statistics 
Division, the Washington Group, World Health 
Organization (WHO), and selected national 
statistical offices in the region (18) – is designed 
to be linked to other global initiatives involving 
disability data collection through population 
censuses and surveys such as the Washington 
Group. The project combines several compo-
nents including:
 
■
country pilot tests of standard question sets;
 
■
targeted training of statistical experts and 
health professionals;
 
■
country advisory services;
 
■
development of knowledge management 
tools and the establishment of a regional 
network of national disability statistics 
experts working within governments, to 
facilitate cross-country cooperation.
The Pan American Health Organization
In Latin America and the Caribbean, PAHO 
has established a strategic initiative to improve 
and standardize disability data through the 
application of the ICF. The initiative takes the 
form of a network of governmental and non-
governmental organizations involved in the 
collection and use of disability data. It serves 
two broad purposes. At country level, the focus 
is on building capacity and providing technical 
assistance for disability information systems. 
At the regional level, the initiative promotes 
World report on disability
 283
the sharing of knowledge and best practice and 
the development of standard measurement and 
operational guidelines (19).
The European Statistical System
Over the past decade, ESS has undertaken 
a project in the European Union to achieve 
comparable statistics on health and disability 
through surveys (20). As a result, a consist-
ent framework of household and individual 
surveys measuring health and disability is 
now being implemented within the European 
Union. Common questions on disability have 
been integrated into the various European-wide 
surveys. Several general questions, for instance, 
have been included on activity restrictions in 
the European Union–Statistics on Income and 
Living Conditions (EU–SILC) surveys which 
replaced the European Community Household 
Panel. The EU–SILC includes a “disability” 
question on “longstanding limitations in activ-
ities due to a health problem” (known as the 
Global Activity Limitation Indicator – GALI – 
question) that is used in the calculation of the 
Healthy Life Years structural indicator. Special 
surveys, such as the European Health Interview 
Survey (EHIS), and the European Survey on 
Health and Social Integration (ESHSI) – have 
also been developed. The EHIS in its first round 
(2008–10) included questions on domains of 
functioning including seeing, hearing, walk-
ing, self-care, and domestic life. The ESHSI 
addresses additional domains of functioning as 
well as environmental factors including mobil-
ity, transport, accessibility to buildings, educa-
tion and training, employment, internet use, 
social contact and support, leisure pursuits, 
economic life, attitudes, and behaviour.
Variables and questions for these different 
surveys all are linked to the ICF structure.
Each of these surveys also contains the 
European Union’s core set of social variables, 
which allows for a breakdown by socioeconomic 
factors. Importance has been attached to trans-
lating the common questions into the various 
languages of the European Union, to testing the 
questions and to using a common implementa-
tion schedule and methodology. Results from a 
special survey, the European Health Interview 
Survey, will gradually become available in the 
coming years. The ESHSI is planned for imple-
mentation in 2012.
United Nations Economic Commission 
for Europe – Budapest Initiative 
on Measuring Health Status
In 2004, under the aegis of UNECE, a Joint 
Steering Group and Task Force on Measuring 
Health Status was set up with the UNECE, 
the Statistical Office of the European Union 
(EUROSTAT) and WHO. The Task Force has 
been known as the Budapest Initiative since its 
first meeting in Budapest in 2005 (21).
The main purpose of the Budapest Initiative 
was to develop a new common instrument, 
based on the ICF, to measure health state suit-
able for inclusion in interview surveys. The 
objectives were to obtain basic information 
on population health which can also be used 
to describe trends in health over time within 
a country, across subgroups of the population 
and across countries within the framework of 
official national statistical systems. Health state 
measures functional ability in terms of capacity 
– and not other aspects of health such as deter-
minants and risk factors, disease states, use of 
health care, and environmental barriers and 
facilitators (21, 22). This information is useful 
for both the profiling of health of different pop-
ulations, and also for subsequent development 
of summary indices of population health such 
as those used by the Global Burden of Disease. 
The Budapest Initiative questions cover vision, 
hearing, walking and mobility, cognition, 
affect (anxiety and depression), and pain – and 
use different response categories relevant to the 
particular domain (23).
The Budapest initiative also works to coor-
dinate with existing groups and build on exist-
ing work carried out by the ESS, the World 
Technical appendix B
 284
Health Survey, the joint United States of America 
and Canada survey and the Washington 
Group. For example, the Washington Group 
and the Budapest Initiative – with support 
from UNESCAP – are carrying out cognitive 
and field testing of an extended question set 
developed by the Washington Group/Budapest 
Initiative collaboration.
References
1. 
United Nations disability statistics database (DISTAT). New York, United Nations, 2006 (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demo-
graphic/sconcerns/disability/disab2.asp, accessed 9 December 2009).
2. 
United Nations demographic yearbook, special issue: population ageing and the situation of elderly persons. New York, 
United Nations, 1993.
3. 
Human development report 1997. New York, United Nations Development Programme and Oxford University Press, 1997.
4. 
Filmer D. Disability, poverty and schooling in developing countries: results from 11 household surveys. Washington, World Bank, 
2005, 
(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Resources/SP-Discussion-papers/Disability-DP/0539.
pdf, accessed 9 December 2009).
5. 
Statistics on the employment situation of people with disabilities: a compendium of national methodologies. Geneva, 
International Labour Organization, 2003.
6. 
Disability at a glance: a profile of 28 countries and areas in Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok, United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2004.
7. 
Data on disability. Washington, Inter-American Development Bank, 2005 (http://www.iadb.org/sds/soc/site_6215_e.
htm#Prevalence, accessed 9 December 2009).
8. 
Disability and social participation in Europe. Brussels, EUROSTAT, 2001.
9. 
Lafortune G, Balestat G. Trends in severe disability among the elderly people: assessing the evidence in 12 OECD countries and 
the future implications. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2007 (OECD Health Working 
Papers No. 26) (http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/13/8/38343783.pdf, accessed 9 December 2009).
10. Washington Group on Disability Statistics. Atlanta, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2009 (http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/washington_group.htm, accessed 9 December 2009).
11. Statistical Commission Report on the Special Session, New York, 11–15 April 1994. New York, United Nations Economic and 
Social Council, 1994 (Supplement No. 9, Series No. E/CN.3/1994/18).
12. Principles and recommendations for population and housing censuses: revision 2. New York, United Nations, 2008 (Statistical 
Papers Series M, No. 67/Rev.2) (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/sources/census/docs/P&R_Rev2.pdf).
13. Washington Group on Disability Statistics. In: Statistical Commission forty-first session, 23–26 February 2010. New York, 
United Nations Economic and Social Council, 2010 (E/CN.3/2010/20) (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/doc10/2010-
20-WashingtonGroup-E.pdf, accessed 29 December 2010).
14. Disability information from censuses. Hyattsville, Washington Group on Disability Statistics, 2008 (http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/washington_group/meeting8/DPO_report.pdf, accessed 9 December 2009).
15. Development of an internationally comparable disability measure for censuses. Hyattsville, Washington Group on Disability 
Statistics, 2008 (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/washington_group/meeting8/NSO_report.pdf, accessed 9 December 
2009).
16. Understanding and interpreting disability as measured using the WG short set of questions. Hyattsville, Washington Group 
on Disability Statistics, 2009 (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/washington_group/meeting8/interpreting_disability.pdf, 
accessed 9 December 2009).
17. Monitoring the United Nations (UN) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Hyattsville, Washington Group on 
Disability Statistics, 2008 (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/washington_group/meeting8/UN_convention.htm, accessed 
9 December 2009).
18. Improvement of disability measurement and statistics in support of Biwako Millennium Framework and Regional Census 
Programme. Bangkok, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2010 (http://www.unes-
cap.org/stat/disability/index.asp#recent_activities, accessed 29 December 2010).
19. Vásquez A, Zepeda M. An overview on the state of art of prevalence studies on disability in the Americas using the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF): conceptual orientations and operational guidelines with regard to 
the application of the ICF in population studies and projects of intervention. Santiago, Programa Regional de Rehabilitación, 
Pan American Health Organization, 2008.
World report on disability 
 285
20. EUROSTAT. Your key to European statistics. Luxembourg, European Commission, n.d. (http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu, 
accessed 9 December 2009).
21. Health state survey module: Budapest Initiative: mark 1. In: Fifty-fifth plenary session, Conference of European Statisticians, 
Geneva, 11–13 June 2007. Geneva, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 2007 (ECE/CES/2007/6) (http://www.
unece.org/stats/documents/ece/ces/2007/6.e.pdf, accessed 29 December 2010).
22. Health as a multi-dimensional construct and cross-population comparability. In: Conference of European Statisticians, 
Joint UNCE/WHO/Eurostat meeting on the measurement of health status, Budapest, Hungary, 14–16 November 2005. United 
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 2005 (Working Paper No. 1) (http://www.unece.org/stats/documents/ece/ces/
ge.13/2005/wp.1.e.pdf, accessed 29 December 2010).
23. Revised terms of reference of UNECE/WHO/EUROSTAT steering group and task force on measuring health status. In: 
Conference of European Statisticians, First Meeting of the 2009/2010 Bureau, Washington, D.C., 15–16 October 2009. Geneva, 
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 2009 (ECE/CES/BUR/2009/Oct/11) (http://www.unece.org/stats/docu-
ments/ece/ces/bur/2009/mtg1/11.e.pdf, accessed 29 December 2010).
Technical appendix B
  287
Technical appendix C
Design and implementation of the World Health 
Survey
The World Health Survey was implemented in 70 countries. The sample 
sizes ranged from 700 in Luxembourg to 38 746 in Mexico. The respond-
ents were men and women older than 18 years living in private households. 
All samples were drawn from a current national frame using a multistage 
cluster design so as to allow each household and individual respondent to 
be assigned a known nonzero probability of selection, with the following 
exceptions: in China and India, the surveys were carried out in selected 
provinces and states; in the Comoros, the Republic of the Congo, and Côte 
d’Ivoire, the surveys were restricted to regions where over 80% of the popu-
lation resided; in Mexico, the sample was intended to provide subnational 
estimates at the state level. The face-to-face interviews were carried out by 
trained interviewers. The individual response rates (calculated as the ratio 
of completed interviews among selected respondents in the sample, and 
excluding ineligible respondents from the denominator) ranged from 63% 
in Israel to 99% in the Philippines.
The health module in the World Health Survey was closely synchronized 
with the revision of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health (ICF). The aim was not to capture individual impairments, but to 
provide a cross-sectional snapshot of functioning among the respondents in 
the different country surveys that could be aggregated to the population level. 
Respondents were not asked about health conditions or about the duration of 
their limitation in functioning.
To develop a World Health Survey module for health state description, 
an item pool was constructed and the psychometric properties of each ques-
tion documented (1). Qualitative research identified the core constructs in 
different countries. The questionnaire was tested extensively before the start 
of the main study. The pilot testing was carried out initially in three coun-
tries in United Republic of Tanzania, the Philippines and Colombia and 
subsequently used in World Health Organization’s (WHO) MultiCountry 
Survey Study in 71 surveys in 61 countries. Of these surveys, 14 were car-
ried out using an extensive face-to-face interview of respondents covering 
 288
World report on disability
21 domains of health with sample size of more 
than 88 000 respondents (1). The World Health 
Survey survey instrument was then developed 
in several languages and further refined using 
cognitive interviews and cultural applicability 
tests. Rigorous translation protocols devised 
by panels of bilingual experts, focused back-
translations, and in-depth linguistic analy-
ses were used to ensure culturally relevant 
questions. Between February and April 2002, 
revised modules for health state descrip-
tion were further tested in China, Myanmar, 
Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Turkey, and the United 
Arab Emirates.
Short and long versions of the survey 
instrument were then developed. The survey 
instrument asked about difficulties over 
the last 30 days in functioning in eight life 
domains: mobility, self care, pain and dis-
comfort, cognition, interpersonal activities, 
vision, sleep and energy, and affect. For each 
domain, two questions of varying difficulty 
were asked in the long version of the surveys, 
while a single question was asked in the short 
version. The questions in the World Health 
Survey in the different domains were very 
similar or identical to questions that had been 
asked in national and international surveys 
on health and disability. They spanned the 
levels of functioning within a given domain 
and focused as far as possible on the intrinsic 
capacities of individuals in that domain. In 
the case of mobility, for example, respondents 
were asked about difficulties with moving 
around and difficulties with vigorous activi-
ties. In the case of vision, they were asked 
about difficulties with near and distant vision. 
The response scale for each item was identical 
on a 5 point scale ranging from no difficulty 
(a score of 1) to extreme difficulty or cannot 
do (a score of 5). The prevalence of difficulties 
in functioning was estimated across sex, age, 
place of residence and wealth quintiles.
Analysis of the World Health 
Survey, including derivation 
of threshold for disability
Data from 69 countries were used in the analy-
ses for this Report. Data from Australia were 
excluded as the survey was carried out partly as 
a drop-and-collect survey and partly as a tele-
phone interview and it was not possible to com-
bine these estimates due to unknown biases. 
Data were weighted for 59 of the 69 surveys based 
on complete sampling information. Individual 
country estimates are presented in Appendix A 
excluding those countries that were unweighted: 
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Greece, 
Italy, Netherlands, and the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland (all short 
version surveys) and Guatemala and Slovenia 
(both long version surveys) or where the sur-
veys were not nationally representative: China, 
the Comoros, the Republic of the Congo, and 
Côte d’Ivoire. The survey in India was carried 
out in six states, these estimates were weighted 
to provide national estimates and the results 
have been included in Appendix A. Pooled 
prevalence estimates were calculated from 
weighted and age-standardized data from 59 of 
the 69 countries
While the sample sizes in each country 
in the survey vary, for the purposes of the 
pooled estimates the post-stratified weights 
were used with no specific adjustment to the 
individual survey sample size. The United 
Nations population database was used for 
post-stratification correction of the sample 
weights and for the sex standardization. For 
age standardization, the WHO world stand-
ard population was used (2).
Detailed information on the quality metrics 
of each survey in terms of representativeness, 
response rates, item non-response and person 
non-response are available from the World 
 289
Technical appendix C
Health Survey web site: http://www.who.int/
healthinfo/survey/whsresults/en/index.html
Respondents reporting 
different levels of difficulty
Data on 16 items are available from 53 
countries, with the remaining 16 countries 
providing data on eight items. Table C.1 shows 
the proportion of respondents who responded 
in each category.
A much larger proportion of respondents 
reported severe (10.3%) or extreme (9.7%) dif-
ficulties with vigorous activities than in the 
areas of self-care and interpersonal relation-
ships. Once vigorous activities are excluded, 
8.4% of respondents reported having extreme 
difficulties or being unable to function in at 
least one area of functioning. Furthermore, 
3.3% of respondents reported extreme dif-
ficulties in functioning in two or more areas 
and 1.7% reported extreme difficulties in 
functioning in three or more areas. Difficulties 
with self-care and interpersonal relation-
ships, which includes participation in com-
munity and dealing with conflicts, were the 
least common, while difficulties with mobil-
ity and pain were among the most commonly 
reported. Across all domains, difficulties in 
functioning were more common in older age 
groups and among women.
Table C.1. Proportion of respondents reporting different levels of difficulty on 16 World Health 
Survey domains of functioning
None
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Extreme
Mobility
Moving around
64.8
16.5
11.4
5.9
1.3
Vigorous activity
50.7
16.0
13.3
10.3
9.7
 
Self-care
Self-care
79.8
10.7
5.9
2.6
1.0
Appearance, grooming
80.4
10.7
6.0
2.2
0.9
 
Pain
Bodily aches and pains
45.2
26.3
16.8
9.5
2.2
Bodily discomfort
49.2
24.9
16.1
8.0
1.8
 
Cognition
Concentrating, remembering
61.5
20.0
11.8
5.5
1.3
Learning
65.6
17.3
9.8
4.7
2.5
 
Interpersonal relationships
Participation in community
76.8
13.1
6.6
2.4
1.2
Dealing with conflicts
74.4
14.4
6.7
3.0
1.5
 
Vision
Distance vision
75.4
11.6
7.1
4.3
1.6
Near vision
76.3
11.9
7.0
3.8
1.0
 
Sleep and energy
Falling asleep
60.9
18.9
10.0
6.6
1.6
Feeling rested
57.2
22.1
13.1
6.2
1.4
 
Affect
Feeling depressed
56.1
22.5
12.9
6.6
2.0
Worry, anxiety
51.2
22.9
14.0
8.3
3.6
  
 290
World report on disability
These proportions are not to be construed 
as the prevalence of disability in the population. 
Difficulties in functioning are not equivalent to 
specific impairments. A person with a particu-
lar health condition would be likely to expe-
rience a constellation of limitations. For the 
purpose of this Report and in keeping with the 
ICF, disability is conceptualised as a decrement 
in functioning above a chosen threshold. It is 
measured by a vector of a constellation of items 
that span a set of domains that measure this 
construct in the most parsimonious manner.
Calculating the composite score
A composite score for each individual was 
calculated across all the 16 items to estimate 
where each individual in the survey would be 
placed on a latent dimension of functioning. An 
Item Response Theory (IRT) approach using a 
Rasch model was used to construct this score 
(see Fig. C.1 for the cumulative distribution of 
the IRT scores). Rasch models help to transform 
raw data from the categorical ordered self-report 
scale of difficulty to an equal-interval scale. 
Equality of intervals is achieved through log 
transformations of raw data odds, and abstrac-
tion is accomplished through probabilistic equa-
tions. This transformation for the partial credit 
model allows not only for a hierarchical order of 
difficulty of the items but for different thresholds 
of item categories as well.
The original 16-item health module was 
analysed with the Rasch Rating Scale model 
using the WINSTEPS computer program. 
Surveys that used only 8 items and those that 
used the full 16 items were analysed together 
in this model to yield a common scale across 
all surveys. A calibration was obtained for 
each item. To determine how well each item 
contributed to the common global function-
ing measurement, chi squared (χ2) goodness-
of-fit statistics, known as Infit Mean Squares 
(MNSQ), were also calculated. The Infit 
MNSQ ranged from 0.77 to 1.38 (SD = 0.27). 
Only the domain of vision slightly exceeded 
the recommended item misfit threshold of 
1.3, but this domain was retained in the 
analysis. The Dimensionality Map – a prin-
cipal components factor plot on the residuals 
– showed no existence of a secondary factor. 
To test Differential Item Functioning (DIF) 
by country, the logistic-regression approach 
described by Zumbo was used (3). The 
pseudo-R2 change of 0.02 showed a tolerable 
DIF effect. Finally, to take into account each 
particular item calibration for the 16 health 
items, raw scores were transformed through 
Rasch modelling into a new scale of scores, 
with 0 = no difficulty and 100 = complete 
difficulty.
Determining the threshold for 
the prevalence of disability
Since the score range derived from the IRT 
model was continuous, to divide the popula-
tion into “disabled” and “not disabled” groups 
it was necessary to decide on a threshold value.
The average of scores from respondents 
who reported extreme difficulties or total 
inability in any of the eight domains of func-
tioning was calculated for all countries. People 
reporting extreme difficulties in functioning in 
these domains are considered disabled in most 
data collection strategies for estimating disabil-
ity prevalence. The average scores of respond-
ents who reported having been diagnosed with 
a chronic disease – such as arthritis, angina, 
Fig. C.1. Cumulative Distribution of IRT 
disability scores
IRT disability score
General population percentile 
100
80
0
60
40
20
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
 291
Technical appendix C
asthma, diabetes, and depression – were also 
computed. The respondents diagnosed with 
these conditions included those with and 
without current treatment. Respondents in 
the World Health Survey who reported being 
on current treatment had a higher score than 
those not on current treatment. Given that 
these chronic diseases are associated with dis-
ability, it is justifiable to use them as indicator 
conditions to set a meaningful threshold for 
significant disability. The average score for all 
these groups – those reporting extreme dif-
ficulties and those reporting chronic diseases 
– was around 40, with a range from 0 (no func-
tioning difficulty) to 100 (complete difficulty). 
Therefore 40 was chosen as the threshold point 
between “disabled” and “not disabled” for all 
survey respondents. It should be noted that the 
Global Burden of Disease class of moderate dis-
ability, used to generate the estimates of dis-
ability from the Global Burden of Disease data 
as reported in Chapter 2, includes conditions 
such as arthritis and angina that were also used 
in the analysis of the World Health Survey data 
to set this threshold.
To assess the sensitivity of these results, 
the item on vigorous activities was dropped 
from the estimation of the score and the same 
steps followed for setting a threshold and deriv-
ing the proportion of those “disabled”. These 
Table C.2. Showing different thresholds (40 and 50) and related disability prevalence rates from 
multidomain functioning levels in 59 countries by country level, sex, age, place of 
residence and wealth
Population 
subgroup
Threshold of 40
Threshold of 50
Higher 
income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
Lower 
income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
All countries 
(standard 
error)
Higher income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
Lower income 
countries 
(standard 
error)
All countries 
(standard 
error)
Sex
Male
9.1 (0.32)
13.8 (0.22)
12.0 (0.18)
1.0 (0.09)
1.7 (0.07)
1.4 (0.06)
Female
14.4 (0.32)
22.1 (0.24)
19.2 (0.19)
1.8 (0.10)
3.3 (0.10)
2.7 (0.07)
 
Age group
18–49
6.4 (0.27)
10.4 (0.20)
8.9 (0.16)
0.5 (0.06)
0.8 (0.04)
0.7 (0.03)
50–59
15.9 (0.63)
23.4 (0.48)
20.6 (0.38)
1.7 (0.23)
2.7 (0.19)
2.4 (0.14)
60 and over
29.5 (0.66)
43.4 (0.47)
38.1 (0.38)
4.4 (0.25)
9.1 (0.27)
7.4 (0.19)
 
Place of 
residence
Urban
11.3 (0.29)
16.5 (0.25)
14.6 (0.19)
1.2 (0.08)
2.2 (0.09)
2.0 (0.07)
Rural
12.3 (0.34)
18.6 (0.24)
16.4 (0.19)
1.7 (0.13)
2.6 (0.08)
2.3 (0.07)
 
Wealth quintile
Q1(poorest)
17.6 (0.58)
22.4 (0.36)
20.7 (0.31)
2.4 (0.22)
3.6 (0.13)
3.2 (0.11)
Q2
13.2 (0.46)
19.7 (0.31)
17.4 (0.25)
1.8 (0.19)
2.5 (0.11)
2.3 (0.10)
Q3
11.6 (0.44)
18.3 (0.30)
15.9 (0.25)
1.1 (0.14)
2.1 (0.11)
1.8 (0.09)
Q4
8.8 (0.36)
16.2 (0.27)
13.6 (0.22)
0.8 (0.08)
2.3 (0.11)
1.7 (0.08)
Q5(richest)
6.5 (0.35)
13.3 (0.25)
11.0 (0.20)
0.5 (0.07)
1.6 (0.09)
1.2 (0.07)
 
Total
11.8 (0.24)
18.0 (0.19)
15.6 (0.15)
2.0 (0.13)
2.3 (0.09)
2.2 (0.07)
  
Source (4).
 292
World report on disability
analyses show that the disability prevalence 
rates dropped from 17.5% to 15.6%. Therefore, 
based on this sensitivity test, it was decided to 
drop the item for vigorous activities from the 
estimates.
The estimates of disability prevalence using 
the difficulties in functioning framework and 
the method described above are presented in 
Table C.2. The threshold of 40 produces an esti-
mate of 15.6% of the population experiencing 
disability. Raising this threshold to a score of 50 
(the mean score for those who report extreme 
difficulties in three or more items of function-
ing, see Table C.3) produces an estimate of 2.2% 
of people with very significant disability (see 
Table C.2).
Measuring wealth in the 
World Health Survey
Wealth – an indicator of the long-running eco-
nomic status of households – was derived using 
a dichotomous hierarchical ordered probit 
(DIHOPIT) model.
The premise is that wealthier house-
holds are more likely to own a given set of 
assets, thus providing an indicator of eco-
nomic status. Asset-based approaches avoid 
some of the reporting biases that arise from 
self-reported income. The method has been 
used in previous cross-national studies of 
economic status and health in developing 
countries (5, 6).
The effects of asset ownership and household 
characteristics on household wealth were simul-
taneously estimated using a random-effects 
probit model (DIHOPIT), with the hierarchical 
error term at the household level. The output of 
the model is a set of covariate coefficients and 
asset cut points. The covariate coefficients rep-
resent the underlying relationship between each 
sociodemographic predictor and the “latent 
wealth variable”. The asset cut points represent 
the threshold on the wealth scale above which 
a household is more likely to own a particu-
lar asset. This “asset ladder” was then applied 
to every household in each survey to produce 
adjusted estimates of household wealth.
Comparison with the Global 
Burden of Disease
To compare the disability prevalence rates 
obtained from the World Health Survey with 
the estimates of “years lived with disability” 
(YLD) from the Global Burden of Disease study, 
a correlation coefficient was calculated. This 
produced a Spearman rank order correlation 
of 0.46 and a Pearson product moment correla-
tion of 0.35, indicating a moderate correlation 
between the two approaches. While the two 
approaches estimate disability with different 
methods, the moderate degree of correlation 
between them suggests that these approaches, 
at triangulation with better primary data, 
could provide fairly reliable estimates of dis-
ability prevalence. It should also be noted that 
Table C.3. IRT score based on different thresholds of item categories
 
N
%
mean IRT
SE
None
46 069
18.59
2.49
0.03
Severe
48 678
19.53
37.45
0.04
Extreme1+
25 344
8.98
40.75
0.07
Extreme2+
11 970
3.6
45.53
0.08
Extreme3+
6 361
1.88
49.54
0.08
  
a. Severe difficulty in at least one item.
b. Extreme difficulty in at least one item.
c. Extreme difficulty in at least two items.
d. Extreme difficulty in three or more items.
 293
Technical appendix C
alternative approaches to defining and quanti-
fying disability would produce different esti-
mates of prevalence.
Limitations of the World Health Survey
Like all approaches to prevalence estimation, 
the World Health Survey methodology has 
its limitations and uncertainties. For exam-
ple, there remain substantially greater varia-
tions across countries in reported disability 
than may be plausible. There could have been 
systematic reporting biases in levels of func-
tioning and in other aspects of self-reported 
health. Like other household interview sur-
veys and censuses, the World Health Survey is 
based entirely on self-report. It is quite likely 
that this leads to variations, because people 
understand questions differently and pick 
categories on the scale based on their expe-
riences, expectations and culture. Despite 
attempts to ensure adequate conceptual trans-
lations and uniform understanding of ques-
tions and responses, these problems may not 
have been entirely eliminated. While IRT is 
supposedly population-invariant, it may not 
be able to adjust for these systematic report-
ing variations. This produces some problems 
in comparing results across populations. To 
address this issue of comparability – how dif-
ferent respondents used response categories 
– the surveys included anchoring vignettes 
that were intended to calibrate the respond-
ents’ description of their own functioning. 
Statistical methods have been developed 
for correcting biases (or variations) in self-
reported functioning using such calibration 
data (7). However, while these methods have 
demonstrated the existence of “biases” in self-
reported functioning, they have so far not been 
found to adequately correct for these biases.
Ideally, self-reported disability data from 
surveys (where responses may often reflect a 
concern with activity limitations or partici-
pation restrictions) should be compared and 
combined with independent expert assessment 
of functioning that measure decrements in 
functioning in multiple domains to validate the 
self-reports and correct for reporting biases.
A decision has been made in this analysis 
to set a threshold for disability on a continuous 
functioning status score that is contestable. The 
scores could have been affected by reporting 
biases; the choice of threshold; and diagnosis 
of chronic diseases that were based on algo-
rithms using questions based on symptoms 
and were not corroborated with other tests for 
these chronic diseases. It is possible that both 
false-positives and false-negatives are included 
in this sample.
There are several other limitations of the 
World Health Survey data including: not all 
surveys were nationally representative; not all 
survey data were weighted; the inclusion of only 
two high-income countries using the long ver-
sion of the survey; the choice of parsimonious 
domains of health could have possibly excluded 
respondents with functioning problems in 
other areas such as hearing, breathing, and 
so on; there were no independent validations 
of self-reported data through examinations 
or health records; and both institutionalised 
populations and children were excluded from 
the survey. Future data collection efforts on 
disability prevalence and determinants should 
attempt to address these shortcomings.
Discussion of approach
Several conceptual points will remain contro-
versial in this approach. First, the decision on 
where to place the threshold is made during 
the analysis of the data rather than being set a 
priori – before or during the data collection – as 
would be the case, for example, if one were to use 
a set of impairment categories where only those 
individuals above a certain level of impairment 
were captured during data collection.
It is always necessary to set a threshold and 
there is no “gold standard” for where this line 
should be drawn. What is important is not so 
much where the line is drawn, as the reasons 
justifying that decision. This is because deci-
sions about thresholds should be based on a 
 294
World report on disability
range of considerations. A policy-maker, for 
example, needs to know the implications of 
each level of severity that could be chosen as 
a threshold in terms of pensions, health insur-
ance and other disability-related programmes. 
Decisions about resource allocation cannot be 
avoided. The benefit of a transparent process of 
setting thresholds is that these decisions can be 
publicly debated, rather than hidden in some 
categorical listing of “severe disabilities”.
Second, these World Health Survey preva-
lence estimates are based on averaging, and will 
result in a distribution around the threshold. 
While individuals included in this estimate of 
“disability” from the World Health Survey include 
individuals with severe and/or extreme difficul-
ties in functioning in any one given domain (e.g. 
those likely to be captured in surveys of disability 
that focus predominantly on impairments), the 
estimate also includes some people who may 
have mild levels of difficulty in functioning in 
multiple domains who may not be considered 
disabled by traditional definitions. Equally, some 
respondents who reported severe or extreme dif-
ficulties in functioning in one domain, but who 
had an overall score below the 40% threshold are 
excluded. For example, of the 1.4% of respond-
ents who reported severe or extreme difficul-
ties with moving around, 18% were below the 
threshold. A detailed analysis of these reporting 
patterns suggests that these errors of exclusion 
do not have a significant impact on the pooled 
estimates presented in the Report.
Third, the World Health Survey asked about 
decrements in functioning in the past month, 
thereby including those with relatively acute 
problems, which may be short-lived. Other 
approaches to disability measurement only 
consider chronic problems that have lasted six 
months or longer.
Finally, it would be desirable to incorporate 
measures of the attitudinal and built environ-
ment within such surveys, so as to explore the 
interaction between the features of the indi-
vidual and the features of the environment 
which contribute to producing disability, and 
to disentangle the complexity of the experi-
ence of disability. The feasibility of such even 
more complex exercises need to be examined 
in resource constrained contexts.
References
1. 
Üstün TB et al. The World Health Survey. In: Murray CJL, Evans DB, eds. Health systems performance assessment: debates, 
methods and empiricism. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003:797–808.
2. 
Ahmad OB et al. Age Standardization of Rates: a new WHO standard. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.
3. 
Zumbo BD. A handbook on the theory and methods of Differential Item Functioning (DIF): logistic regression modeling as a 
unitary framework for binary and Likert-type (ordinal) item scores. Ottawa, Directorate of Human Resources Research and 
Evaluation, Department of National Defence, 1999.
4. 
World Health Survey. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002–2004.
5. 
Ferguson B et al. Estimating permanent income using asset and indicator variables. In: Murray CJL, Evans DB, eds. Health 
systems performance assessment: debate, new methods, and new empiricism. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003.
6. 
Gakidou E et al. Improving child survival through environmental and nutritional interventions: the importance of target-
ing interventions toward the poor. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 2007,298:1876-1887. doi:10.1001/
jama.298.16.1876 PMID:17954539
7. 
Tandon A et al. Statistical models for enhancing cross-population comparability. In: Murray CJL, Evans DB, eds. Health 
systems performance assessment: debates, methods and empiricism. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003:727–746.
 295
Technical appendix D
Global Burden of Disease methodology 
The Global Burden of Disease study introduced a new metric – the “disability 
adjusted life year” (DALY) – to simultaneously quantify the burden of disease 
from premature mortality and from disability (1).
The DALY is a metric for lost years of healthy life from mortality and 
disability. For a particular disease or injury, DALYs are calculated as the sum 
of the years of life lost due to premature mortality (YLL) in a population, 
and the years of full health lost due to disability (YLD) from incident cases 
of the disease or injury. The years lived in states of less than full health are 
converted to the equivalent number of lost years of full health using health-
state valuations, or “disability weights”. The disability weights provide a 
single average numerical score between 0 (for full health) and 1 (for health 
states equivalent to death).
YLD have been calculated for disabling sequelae of a comprehensive set 
of diseases and injuries. The country-level rates of YLD given in Appendix A 
are estimated by imputation from regional-level estimates, making use of 
available country-specific estimates for around 20 causes and country-spe-
cific analyses of cause-specific mortality. They are computed by summing 
YLD across all diseases and injuries, for all ages and both sexes, without 
further adjustments for co-morbidity, and dividing the result by the total 
population.
The original Global Burden of Disease study established disability 
severity weights for 22 sample “indicator conditions”, using an explicit 
“trade-off” protocol in a formal exercise involving health workers from all 
regions of the world. Subsequent valuation exercises carried out in various 
settings have closely matched the results of the original Global Burden of 
Disease exercise (2). The weights obtained were then grouped into seven 
classes, with Class I having a weight between 0.00 and 0.02 and Class 
VII a weight between 0.7 and 1.0 (1). To generate disability weights for 
the remainder of the approximately 500 disabling sequelae in the study, 
participants in the study were asked to estimate distributions across the 
seven classes for each sequela.
 296
World report on disability
296
The Global Burden of Disease 2004 update 
estimated age and sex-specific prevalence for 
632 disease and injury sequelae pairings for 17 
subregions of the world in 2004 (3). These were 
used, together with the estimated distributions 
of cases across the seven disability classes, to 
estimate the prevalence of disability by severity 
class. Results are presented here for the preva-
lence of “severe” disability, defined as severity 
Classes VI and VII – the equivalent of having 
blindness, Down syndrome, quadriplegia, 
severe depression, or active psychosis. They are 
also presented for “moderate and severe” disa-
bility, defined as severity Classes III and higher 
– the equivalent of having angina, arthritis, low 
vision, or alcohol dependence.
The Global Burden of Disease prevalence 
estimates cannot simply be added, because 
they were calculated without regard for mul-
tiple pathologies or co-morbidities. In other 
words, it is possible for a given individual to 
fall within more than one disability level if they 
have more than one health condition. In adding 
the prevalence of disabilities across sequelae, 
an adjustment for co-morbidity has been made 
that takes into account the increased probabil-
ity of having certain pairs of conditions (4). 
Estimates of disability from the Global Burden 
of Disease study were limited to conditions that 
last six months or more. The estimates there-
fore excluded conditions such as fractures from 
which most people tend to recover without 
residual problems in functioning.
The Global Burden of Disease prevalence 
estimates are based on systematic assessments 
of the available data on incidence, prevalence, 
duration, and severity of a wide range of condi-
tions, often relying on inconsistent, fragmented 
or partial data available from different studies. 
As a result, there are still substantial data gaps 
and uncertainties. Improving population-level 
information on the incidence, prevalence and 
health states associated with major health con-
ditions remains a major priority for national and 
international health and statistical agencies.
Analyses of the Global Burden of Disease 
2004 data found that of the nearly 6.5 billion 
of the world’s population in 2004, an estimated 
2.9% had severe disability and 15.3% had mod-
erate or severe disability. This was generally the 
case around the world, though moderate levels 
of disability were more common in low-income 
and middle-income countries, especially in 
those aged 60 years and over. Thus, although 
the proportion of older people was greater in 
high-income countries, older people in these 
countries were relatively less disabled than their 
counterparts in low-income and middle-income 
countries. Disability was also more common 
among children in low-income and middle-
income countries (see Chapter 2, Table 2.2).
When the major causes, globally, of dis-
ability are considered, adult onset hearing loss 
and refractive errors are the most common. 
Mental disorders such as depression, alcohol 
use disorders and psychoses such as bipolar 
disorder and schizophrenia also appear in the 
top 20 causes (see Table D.1). The pattern dif-
fers between the high-income countries, on 
the one hand, and middle-income and low-
income countries, on the other, in that many 
more people in the latter group of countries 
experience disability associated with prevent-
able causes, such as unintentional injuries and 
infertility arising from unsafe abortion and 
maternal sepsis. The data also highlight the 
lack of interventions in developing countries 
for easily treated conditions such as hearing 
loss, refractive errors and cataracts. Disability 
associated with unintentional injuries among 
younger people is far more common in low-
income countries.
 297
Technical appendix D
297
Table D.1. Prevalence of moderate and severe disability (in millions), by leading health 
condition associated with disability, and by age and income status of countries
Health condition (b, c)
High-income countries (a) 
(with a total population 
of 977 million)
Low-income and 
middle-income 
countries (with a total 
population of 5 460 
million)
World 
(population 
6 437 million)
0–59 years
60 years 
and over
0–59 years
60 years 
and over
All ages
1
Hearing loss (d)
7.4
18.5
54.3
43.9
124.2
2
Refractive errors (e)
7.7
6.4
68.1
39.8
121.9
3
Depression
15.8
0.5
77.6
4.8
98.7
4
Cataracts
0.5
1.1
20.8
31.4
53.8
5
Unintentional injuries
2.8
1.1
35.4
5.7
45.0
6
Osteoarthritis
1.9
8.1
14.1
19.4
43.4
7
Alcohol dependence and problem 
use
7.3
0.4
31.0
1.8
40.5
8
Infertility due to unsafe abortion 
and maternal sepsis
0.8
0.0
32.5
0.0
33.4
9
Macular degeneration (f)
1.8
6.0
9.0
15.1
31.9
10
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease
3.2
4.5
10.9
8.0
26.6
11
Ischaemic heart disease
1.0
2.2
8.1
11.9
23.2
12
Bipolar disorder
3.3
0.4
17.6
0.8
22.2
13
Asthma
2.9
0.5
15.1
0.9
19.4
14
Schizophrenia
2.2
0.4
13.1
1.0
16.7
15
Glaucoma
0.4
1.5
5.7
7.9
15.5
16
Alzheimer and other dementias
0.4
6.2
1.3
7.0
14.9
17
Panic disorder
1.9
0.1
11.4
0.3
13.8
18
Cerebrovascular disease
1.4
2.2
4.0
4.9
12.6
19
Rheumatoid arthritis
1.3
1.7
5.9
3.0
11.9
20
Drug dependence and problem use
3.7
0.1
8.0
0.1
11.8
  
Notes: a. High-income countries are those with 2004 Gross National Income per capita of US$ 10 066 or more in 2004, as 
estimated by the World Bank (5).
b. GBD disability classes III and above.
c. Disease and injury associated with disability. Conditions are listed in descending order by global all-age prevalence.
d. Includes adult onset hearing loss, excluding that due to infectious causes; adjusted for availability of hearing aids.
e. Includes presenting refractive errors; adjusted for availability of glasses and other devices for correction.
f. Includes other age-related causes of vision loss apart from glaucoma, cataracts and refractive errors.
Source (3).
 298
World report on disability
References
1. 
Murray CJL, Lopez AD, eds. The Global Burden of Disease: a comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from dis-
eases, injuries and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020, 1st ed. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1996.
2. 
Salomon JA, Murray CJL. Estimating health state valuations using a multiple-method protocol. In: Murray CJL et al., 
eds. Summary measures of population health: concepts, ethics, measurement and applications. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2002.
3. 
The Global Burden of Disease, 2004 update. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
4. 
Mathers CD, Iburg KM, Begg S. Adjusting for dependent comorbidity in the calculation of healthy life expectancy. 
Population Health Metrics, 2006,4:4- doi:10.1186/1478-7954-4-4 PMID:16620383
5. 
Data and statistics: country groups. Washington, World Bank, 2004 (http://go.worldbank.org/D7SN0B8YU0, accessed 4 
January 2010).
 299
Technical appendix E
World Health Survey analysis for Chapter 3 – 
Health
A total of 51 countries were included in the analysis.
 
■
High-income and high-middle-income countries (20): Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Brazil, Croatia, Czech Republic, Dominican Republic, 
Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Namibia, the Russian Federation, Slovakia, Spain, South Africa, Turkey, 
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay.
 
■
Low-income and low-middle-income countries (31): Bangladesh, Burkina 
Faso, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Ethiopia, 
Georgia, Ghana, India, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malawi, 
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, 
Paraguay, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tunisia, Ukraine, Viet Nam, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Countries were selected as follows. Starting with an initial 70 coun-
tries, 11 were excluded because of the absence of Pweight or Psweight: 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Italy, 
the Netherlands, Slovenia, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland. Eight countries were excluded for using short-form ques-
tionnaire: Finland, France, Ireland, Israel, Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal, 
and Sweden.
Estimates are weighted using World Health Survey post-stratified weights, 
when available (probability weights otherwise) and age-standardized. T-Tests 
are performed on results across disability status. Significant differences found 
between “disabled” and “not-disabled” are reported at 5%.
  301
Glossary
Accessibility
Accessibility describes the degree to which 
an environment, service, or product allows 
access by as many people as possible, in 
particular people with disabilities.
Accessibility standards
A standard is a level of quality accepted as 
the norm. The principle of accessibility may 
be mandated in law or treaty, and then spec-
ified in detail according to international or 
national regulations, standards, or codes, 
which may be compulsory or voluntary.
Activity
In the ICF, the execution of a task or action 
by an individual. It represents the individ-
ual perspective of functioning.
Activity limitations
In the ICF, difficulties an individual may 
have in executing activities. An activ-
ity limitation may range from a slight 
to a severe deviation in terms of quality 
or quantity in executing the activity in a 
manner or to the extent that is expected of 
people without the health condition.
Affirmative action
The proactive recruitment of people with 
disabilities.
Appropriate technology
Assistive technology that meets people’s 
needs, uses local skills, tools, and materi-
als, and is simple, effective, affordable, and 
acceptable to its users.
Assessment
A process that includes the examination, 
interaction with, and observation of indi-
viduals or groups with actual or potential 
health conditions, impairments, activity 
limitations, or participation restrictions. 
Assessment may be required for rehabili-
tation interventions, or to gauge eligibility 
for educational support, social protection, 
or other services.
Augmentative and alternative 
communication
Methods of communicating that supple-
ment or replace speech and handwriting 
– for example, facial expressions, symbols, 
pictures, gestures, and signing.
Assistive devices; also 
assistive technology
Any device designed, made or adapted to 
help a person perform a particular task. 
Products may be specially produced or gen-
erally available for people with a disability.
 302
World report on disability
Barriers
Factors in a person’s environment that, 
through their absence or presence, limit 
functioning and create disability – for exam-
ple, inaccessible physical environments, a 
lack of appropriate assistive technology, and 
negative attitudes towards disability.
Body functions
In the ICF the physiological functions of 
body systems. Body refers to the human 
organism as a whole and this includes the 
brain. The ICF classifies body functions 
under several areas including mental func-
tions, sensory functions and pain, voice 
and speech functions, and neuromusculo-
skeletal and movement-related functions.
Body structures
In the ICF the structural or anatomical 
parts of the body such as organs, limbs, 
and their components classified according 
to body systems.
Braille
A system of writing for individuals who are 
visually impaired that uses letters, num-
bers, and punctuation marks made up of 
raised dot patterns.
Capacity
A construct within the ICF that indicates 
the highest probable level of function-
ing that a person may achieve, measured 
in a uniform or standard environment: 
reflects the environmentally adjusted 
ability of the individual.
CBR (community-based 
rehabilitation)
A strategy within general community devel-
opment for rehabilitation, equalization of 
opportunities, poverty reduction, and social 
inclusion of people with disabilities. CBR is 
implemented through the combined efforts 
of people with disabilities themselves, their 
families, organizations, and communities, 
and the relevant governmental and nongov-
ernmental health, education, vocational, 
social, and other services.
CBR worker (community-based 
rehabilitation worker)
CBR workers may be paid employees or vol-
unteers. They carry out a range of activities 
within CBR programmes including identi-
fication of people with disabilities, support 
for families, and referral to relevant services.
Condition – primary
A person’s main health condition that may be 
associated with impairment and disability.
Condition – secondary
An additional health condition that arises 
from the increased susceptibility to a con-
dition caused by the primary condition – 
though it may not occur in every individual 
with that primary condition.
Condition – co-morbid
An additional health condition that is inde-
pendent of and unrelated to the primary 
health condition.
 303
Glossary
Conditional cash transfer
Cash payments to targeted eligible house-
holds conditional on measurable behaviour.
Contextual factors
Factors that together constitute the com-
plete context of an individual’s life, and in 
particular the background against which 
health states are classified in the ICF. There 
are two components of contextual factors: 
environmental factors and personal factors.
De-institutionalization
Refers to the transfer of people with dis-
abilities or other groups from institutional 
care, to life in the community.
Digital divide
Refers to the gap between individuals, 
households, businesses, and geographic 
areas at different socioeconomic levels with 
regard to both their opportunities to access 
information and communication technol-
ogies and to their use of the Internet for a 
wide variety of activities.
Disability
In the ICF, an umbrella term for impair-
ments, activity limitations, and participa-
tion restrictions, denoting the negative 
aspects of the interaction between an indi-
vidual (with a health condition) and that 
individual’s contextual factors (environ-
mental and personal factors).
Disability discrimination
Any distinction, exclusion, or restriction 
on the basis of disability that has the pur-
pose or effect of impairing or nullifying the 
recognition, enjoyment, or exercise on an 
equal basis with others, of all human rights 
and fundamental freedoms: includes denial 
of reasonable accommodation.
Disability management
Interventions and case management strat-
egies used to address the needs of people 
with disabilities who had experience of 
work before the onset of disability. The key 
elements are often effective case manage-
ment, supervisor education, workplace 
accommodation, and early return to work 
with appropriate supports.
Disabled people’s organizations
Organizations or assemblies established to 
promote the human rights of disabled people, 
where most the members as well as the gov-
erning body are persons with disabilities.
Early intervention
Involves strategies which aim to intervene 
early in the life of a problem and provide 
individually tailored solutions. It typically 
focuses on populations at a higher risk of 
developing problems, or on families that 
are experiencing problems that have not 
yet become well established or entrenched.
 304
World report on disability 2011
Education – inclusive
Education which is based on the right of all 
learners to a quality education that meets 
basic learning needs and enriches lives. 
Focusing particularly on vulnerable and 
marginalized groups, it seeks to develop 
the full potential of every individual.
Education – special
Includes children with other needs – for 
example, through disadvantages resulting 
from gender, ethnicity, poverty, learning 
difficulties, or disability – related to their 
difficulty to learn or access education com-
pared with other children of the same age. 
In high-income countries this category can 
also include children identified as “gifted and 
talented”. Also referred to as special needs 
education and special education needs.
Enabling environments
Environments which support participation 
by removing barriers and providing enablers.
Environmental factors
A component of contextual factors within 
the ICF, referring to the physical, social, and 
attitudinal environment in which people 
live and conduct their lives – for example, 
products and technology, the natural envi-
ronment, support and relationships, atti-
tudes, and services, systems, and policies.
Equalization of opportunities
The process through which the various sys-
tems of society and the environment, such 
as services, activities, information, and 
documentation, are made available to all, 
particularly to persons with disabilities.
Facilitators
Factors in a person’s environment that, 
through their absence or presence, improve 
functioning and reduce disability – for exam-
ple, an accessible environment, available 
assistive technology, inclusive attitudes, and 
legislation. Facilitators can prevent impair-
ments or activity limitations from becoming 
participation restrictions, since the actual 
performance of an action is enhanced, 
despite the person’s problem with capacity.
Frail elderly
Older persons (usually over 75 years old) 
who have a health condition that may inter-
fere with the ability to independently per-
form activities of daily living.
Functioning
An umbrella term in the ICF for body func-
tions, body structures, activities, and par-
ticipation. It denotes the positive aspects 
of the interaction between an individual 
(with a health condition) and that indi-
vidual’s contextual factors (environmental 
and personal factors).
Global Burden of Disease (GBD)
A measurement of impact of disease com-
bining years of life lost to premature mor-
tality plus years of life lost to time lived in 
states of less than full health, measured by 
disability-adjusted life-years.
Health
A state of well-being, achieved through 
the interaction of an individual’s physical, 
mental, emotional, and social states.
 305
Glossary
Health conditions
In the ICF an umbrella term for dis-
ease (acute or chronic), disorder, injury, 
or trauma. A health condition may also 
include other circumstances such as preg-
nancy, ageing, stress, congenital anomaly, 
or genetic predisposition.
Health promotion
The process of enabling people to increase 
control over, and improve, their health.
Impairment
In the ICF loss or abnormality in body 
structure or physiological function (includ-
ing mental functions), where abnormality 
means significant variation from estab-
lished statistical norms.
Incidence
The number of new cases during a speci-
fied time period
Inclusive society
One that freely accommodates any person 
with a disability without restrictions or 
limitations.
Independent living
Independent living is a philosophy and a 
movement of people with disabilities, based 
on the right to live in the community but 
including self-determination, equal oppor-
tunities, and self-respect.
Informal care
Assistance or support given by a family 
member, friend, neighbour, or volunteer, 
without pay.
Informal economy
Economic activity that is neither taxed 
nor regulated by a government and not 
included in that government’s gross 
national product.
Institution
Any place in which persons with disabili-
ties, older people, or children live together 
away from their families. Implicitly, a 
place in which people do not exercise full 
control over their lives and their day-to-
day activities. An institution is not defined 
merely by its size.
Intellectual impairment
A state of arrested or incomplete develop-
ment of mind, which means that the person 
can have difficulties understanding, learn-
ing, and remembering new things, and in 
applying that learning to new situations. 
Also known as intellectual disabilities, 
learning disabilities, learning difficulties, 
and formerly as mental retardation or 
mental handicap.
 306
World report on disability 2011
International Classification 
of Functioning, Disability 
and Health (ICF)
The classification that provides a unified 
and standard language and framework for 
the description of health and health-related 
states. ICF is part of the “family” of inter-
national classifications developed by the 
World Health Organization.
Measure
In the ICF an activity or set of activities 
aimed at improving body functions, body 
structures, activities, and participation by 
intervening at the level of the individual, 
person, or society.
Mainstream services
Services available to any member of a pop-
ulation, regardless of whether they have 
a disability – for example, public trans-
port, education and training, labour and 
employment services, housing, health and 
income support systems.
Margin of health
The level of vulnerability to health prob-
lems. For example, the risk of developing 
secondary conditions or the risk of experi-
encing health conditions earlier in life.
Mental health condition
A health condition characterized by altera-
tions in thinking, mood, or behaviour 
associated with distress or interference 
with personal functions. Also known as 
mental illness, mental disorders, psycho-
social disability. 
Microfinance programmes
Small-scale funding for small business 
start-ups that can provide an alternative to 
formal employment.
Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs)
Eight quantified targets, set out in the 
Millennium Declaration, for attainment by 
2015, comprising end to poverty and hunger, 
universal education, gender equality, child 
health, maternal health, combating HIV/
AIDS, environmental sustainability, and 
global partnership.
Mixed economy of care
A variety of suppliers from different sectors 
(public, private, voluntary, mixed) provid-
ing health care to one population
Morbidity
The state of poor health. Morbidity rate is 
the number of illnesses or cases of disease 
in a population.
Nongovernmental 
organization (NGO)
An organization, with no participation 
or representation by government, which 
works for the benefits of its members or 
of other members of the population, also 
known as a civil society organization.
Occupational therapy
Promoting health and well-being through 
occupation. The primary goal of occupa-
tional therapy is to enable people to par-
ticipate in the activities of everyday life. 
 307
Glossary
Occupational therapists achieve this out-
come by enabling people to do things that 
will enhance their ability to participate, or 
by modifying the environment to better 
support participation.
Participation
In the ICF, a person’s involvement in a life 
situation, representing the societal per-
spective of functioning.
Performance
A construct within the ICF that describes 
what individuals do in their current envi-
ronment, including their involvement in 
life situations. The current environment is 
described using environmental factors.
Personal assistant
An individual who supports or assists a 
person with disability and is answerable 
to them directly.
Personal factors
A component of contextual factors within 
the ICF that relate to the individual – for 
example, age, gender, social status, and 
life experiences. 
Physical and rehabilitation 
medicine doctors
Carry out services to diagnose health con-
ditions, assess functioning and prescribe 
medical and technological interventions 
that treat health conditions and opti-
mize functional capacity. Also known as 
physiatrists.
Physiotherapy
Provides services to individuals to develop, 
maintain, and maximize movement poten-
tial and functional ability throughout the 
lifespan. Also known as physical therapy.
Prevalence
All the new and old cases of an event, disease, 
or disability in a given population and time.
Prosthetist–orthotist
Provide prosthetic and orthotic care and 
other mobility devices aimed at improving 
functioning in people with physical impair-
ments. Orthotic care involves external 
appliances designed to support, straighten 
or improve the functioning of a body part; 
prosthetic interventions involve an artifi-
cial external replacement for a body part.
Psychologist
A professional specializing in diagnosing 
and treating diseases of the brain, emotional 
disturbance, and behaviour problems, more 
often through therapy than medication.
Quality of life
An individual’s perception of their posi-
tion in life in the context of the culture and 
value systems in which they live, and in 
relation to their goals, expectations, stand-
ards, and concerns. It is a broad-ranging 
concept, incorporating in a complex way 
the person’s physical health, psychological 
state, level of independence, social relation-
ships, personal beliefs, and relationship to 
environmental factors that affect them.
 308
World report on disability
Quota
In the context of employment, quota or res-
ervation is an obligation to employ a fixed 
number or fixed proportion of people from 
a particular group.
Reasonable accommodation
Necessary and appropriate modification 
and adjustment not imposing a dispropor-
tionate or undue burden, where needed in a 
particular case, to ensure that persons with 
disabilities enjoy or exercise, on an equal 
basis with others, all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms.
Rehabilitation
A set of measures that assists individuals 
who experience or are likely to experience 
disability to achieve and maintain opti-
mal functioning in interaction with their 
environment.
Reservation wage
The lowest wage at which a person is will-
ing to work.
Risk factor
A risk factor is an attribute or exposure that 
is causally associated with an increased 
probability of a disease or injury.
Schools – inclusive
Children with disabilities attend regular 
classes with age-appropriate peers, learn 
the curriculum to the extent feasible, and 
are provided with additional resources and 
support depending on need.
Schools – integrated
Schools that provide separate classes and 
additional resources for children with 
disabilities, which are attached to main-
stream schools.
Schools – special
Schools that provide highly specialized 
services for children with disabilities and 
remain separate from broader educational 
institutions; also called segregated schools.
Screen-reader software
Screen readers are a form of assistive tech-
nology potentially useful to people who 
are blind, visually impaired, illiterate, or 
have specific learning difficulties. Screen-
readers attempt to identify and interpret 
what is being displayed on the screen and 
represent to the user with text-to-speech, 
sound icons, or a Braille output device.
Sheltered employment
Employment in an enterprise established 
specifically for the employment of per-
sons with disabilities, but which may also 
employ nondisabled people.
Sign language interpreter
A sign-language interpreter is a person 
trained to interpret information from sign 
language into speech and vice versa. Sign 
languages vary across the world.
Social firm
A business set up to create employment 
for persons with disabilities or those who 
are otherwise disadvantaged in the labour 
market.
 309
Glossary
Social assistance
Noncontributory transfers targeted at the 
poor or vulnerable. These may include food 
or jobs instead of, or as well as, cash and 
may include compliance conditions (condi-
tional cash transfers).
Social protection
Programmes to reduce deprivation arising 
from conditions such as poverty, unem-
ployment, old age, and disability.
Social worker
Professional social workers restore or 
enhance the capacity of individuals or 
groups to function well in society, and help 
society accommodate their needs.
Specific learning disability
Impairments in information processing 
resulting in difficulties in listening, reason-
ing, speaking, reading, writing, spelling, 
or doing mathematical calculations – for 
example, dyslexia.
Speech and language therapy
Aimed at restoring people’s capacity to 
communicate effectively and to swallow 
safely and efficiently.
Supported employment
Supported job placements providing the 
opportunity for integration in the main-
stream workforce.
Therapy
The activities and interventions concerned 
with restoring and compensating for loss 
of function, and preventing or slowing 
deterioration in functioning in every area 
of a person’s life.
Universal design
The design of products, environments, 
programmes, and services to be usable 
by all people, to the greatest extent pos-
sible, without the need for adaptation or 
specialized design.
Vocational rehabilitation 
and training
Programmes designed to restore or develop 
the capabilities of people with disabilities 
to secure, retain and advance in suitable 
employment – for example, job training, 
job counselling, and job placement services.
  311
Index
[A] 
Aboriginal Australians  104–105
Abuse  146, 147, 216
Academic institutions, recommendations for  269
Accessibility  65, 169–170, 263
 
addressing barriers  172–183, 186–193
 
adopting universal design  177–178, 181–182
 
audits  175, 176, 177
 
buildings and roads  172–178
 
defined  170, 301
 
education and campaigns  176, 177, 183, 193
 
information and communication technology  169–172,  
 
183–193
 
lead agency  175
 
monitoring  175–176, 193
 
policies  173, 179
 
progressive realization  173, 179
 
recommendations  193–195
 
transportation  170, 178–183
 
work and employment  239
Accessibility standards
 
defined  301
 
enforcing  175
 
improving  173–175
 
non-compliance  173
 
recommendations  193, 194–195
Accommodations, reasonable, see Reasonable 
accommodations
Action plans, national, see National disability strategies 
and action plans
Activity  301
Activity limitations  5, 301
 
measuring  22–23, 97
Advocates  137, 154, 155
Affect, difficulties with  289
Affirmative action  241, 301
Affordability
 
general health care  65, 66–70, 82
 
improving  266
 
rehabilitation  106–108, 117–119
Affordable Care Act, 2010, United States  67
Afghanistan  33, 109–110
Ageing
 
family caregivers  142
 
global population  34–35, 36, 140
Age-related conditions, vulnerability to  59
Albania  11
Alcohol use disorders  297
Americans with Disabilities Act, 1990, United States  
173, 187, 188, 213, 241
Amputees  75, 184
Animals, assistance  139
Appointment systems  74
Appropriate technology  111, 301
Architecture, schools of  176
Argentina  37, 145
Armenia  171
Arthritis  33, 297
Assessment
 
defined  301
 
disability  11
 
individual needs  150–151
 
within schools  220
Assistance and support  137–159
 
addressing barriers to  147–156
 
assessing individual needs  150–151
 
barriers to  144–147
 
building capacity of caregivers and service users  155, 158
 
determinants of need  139
 
funding  142, 144, 149–150, 157–158
 
needs and unmet needs  40–41, 42, 139–140
 
policies  145, 156
 
provision  142–144
 
range of interventions  138–139
 
recommendations  157–159, 265
 
within schools  221, 227
 
social and demographic factors affecting  140–141
Assistance and support services  137
 
commissioning  149
 
consumer-directed  152–153, 158
 
coordination  145–147, 152–155
 
developing infrastructure  157–158
 
formal  142–143, 157
 
improving quality  159
 
inadequate and unresponsive  145
 
informal see Informal care
 
institutional see Institutional care
 
support for users  155, 158
 
types  139
 
user involvement  153–154
 312
World report on disability
Assistance animals  139
Assistive devices/technology  101
 
defined  301
 
funding difficulties  106–107
 
increasing affordability  117–118, 123
 
pace of change  186
Asthma  297
Attitudes, negative, see Negative attitudes
Audits, accessibility  175, 176, 177
Augmentative and alternative communication  172, 
301
Australia  4–6, 35, 39, 43
 
assistance and support  41, 139, 142, 143–144, 152–153,  
 
154, 156
 
education  220
 
enabling environments  173, 186, 187, 189–190, 191
 
foreign aid  107, 264
 
general health care  61, 73, 75, 77, 79
 
health risk behaviours  59
 
noncommunicable chronic diseases  33
 
rehabilitation  104–105, 108
 
work and employment  238, 240, 242, 246, 249
Austria  211, 238, 244
Autistic spectrum disorders  120–121
Autonomy, lack of  9
Availability  65
[B] 
Back problems  33
Bangladesh
 
education  208, 214
 
financial assistance  11, 70
 
general health care  60
 
political participation  171
 
rehabilitation  101, 117, 246
 
risk trends  37
Barriers  6, 262–263
 
assistance and support  144–147
 
defined  302
 
education of disabled children  212–216
 
general health care  62–64
 
information and communication  170–172, 178, 183–186
 
physical environment  170, 172–173, 178–179
 
rehabilitation  104–105
 
work and employment  239–240
Belgium  34, 147, 210, 211, 244
Belize  219
Benefit trap  237
Benefits payments, disability  11, 43, 248–249
Bio-psycho-social model  4
Blindness, see Visual impairment
Body functions  302
Body structures  302
Bolivia  145, 208
Bosnia and Herzegovina  40, 43, 142
Botswana  118, 120
Braille  172, 302
Brazil  11, 22, 33
 
access to health care  70, 75
 
assistance and support  154–155
 
education  218, 219
 
enabling environments  173, 180, 181, 182
 
rehabilitation programs  115
 
work and employment  240, 241, 244, 249
Budapest Initiative on Measuring Health Status  
283–284
Buildings  172–178
 
emergency evacuations  178
 
improving accessibility  173–178
 
lack of access  170, 172–173
 
recommendations  194
Bulgaria  208, 209, 211
Bullying  216
Burkina Faso  207
Burundi  208
Bus rapid transit systems  181, 182
Bus systems  180–181
[C] 
Cambodia
 
education and training  207, 208, 246
 
rehabilitation  105–106, 110, 112, 113
Canada  33, 44, 108
 
assistance and support  139, 143, 152–153, 154
 
education  219, 220
 
enabling environments  176, 187, 189–190
 
work and employment  238, 240, 244
Cancer screening  60–61, 71
Capabilities approach, Amartya Sen  10–11
Capacity  5, 302
 
legal  78
 
measuring effect of environment  38
Captioning  184, 187, 188, 190
Care coordination  76–77
Care plan, individualized  77
Care Quality Commission, United Kingdom  151
Caregivers
 
formal see Support workers, personal
 
informal see Informal caregivers
Cash transfers
 
conditional  70, 303
 
unconditional  70
Catastrophic health expenditure  67, 69
CBR, see Community-based rehabilitation
CBR Guidelines  13
 313
Index
Censuses  22, 23, 45, 267
Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL)  146
Cerebral palsy  60, 98, 101, 156
Cerebrovascular disease  297
Chad  208
Children  36–37
 
assistance and support  139, 143, 156
 
disability prevalence  29, 30, 36, 262
 
disability risk factors  36–37
 
of disabled parents  142
 
education see under Education
 
health conditions  33
 
measuring disability  24, 36
 
rehabilitation  97, 98, 101, 102, 117
 
risk of unintentional injury  60
 
views on education  225
Chile  40, 218, 219
China  11, 37, 41, 103
 
assistance and support  140, 144, 147, 148
 
enabling environments  181, 190, 192
 
rehabilitation  110, 112, 117–118
 
work and employment  242, 244
Chronic diseases, noncommunicable  33
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  61, 114, 297
Circles of support  154
Clubfoot  99, 114
Cognitive impairment (see also Dementia; Intellectual 
impairment)
 
enabling environments  174, 184
 
rehabilitation  101
 
World Health Survey  289
Collaboration, intersectoral  105–106
Colombia
 
disability assessment  150
 
education  208, 219
 
enabling environments  181, 190
 
general health care  69, 76
Commission on Social Determinants of Health, WHO  4
Communication
 
accessible  170–172
 
alternative formats  74
 
assistive technologies  101
 
defined  170
 
difficulties  72, 170–172
 
within health care sector  104–105
 
between service providers  72, 77
 
support  139, 140
 
technology see Information and communication   
 
technology
Communications Act 1996, United States  188
Communities
 
lack of participation  263
 
recommendations for  270
 
role in education  223–224
Community home-based care  156
Community support (services)  139, 157
 
cost comparisons  148–149
 
inadequacy  145
 
transition to  147–148, 157
 
unmet needs  140
Community-based rehabilitation (CBR)  6–7, 13, 73, 
114–117
 
Deaf people  141
 
defined  302
 
developing  156
 
inclusive education and  223–224, 227
 
limited resources and infrastructure  104
 
vocational training  246
 
workers  111, 302
Community-based services
 
general health care  71, 75
 
mental health  106, 146
 
vocational rehabilitation  246
Co-morbid conditions  32, 58, 59, 302
Computers  172, 184
Conditional cash transfers  70, 303
Conflicts, armed  34, 108
Consensus-based practice guidance  120
Consultation, lack of  263
Consumer health informatics  77
Consumer-directed support services  152–153, 158
Contextual factors  303
Continuing education and professional development  
79, 113
Continuity of training  246
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CRPD)  3, 9–10, 261
 
accessibility standards  175
 
assistance and support  11, 137, 138
 
conception of disability  4
 
education of disabled people  205, 206
 
general health care  8, 65
 
general principles  9
 
legal capacity  78
 
political rights  171
 
rehabilitation  95
 
work and employment  235, 243
Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989)  9
Conversion handicap  10
Coordination
 
assistance and support services  145–147, 152–155
 
general health care  76–77
 
multidisciplinary rehabilitation services  114
Co-payments  149
Co-produced support services  154
Costa Rica  219 
 314
World report on disability
Costs
 
education of disabled children  214–215
 
information and communication technology  185–186
 
institutional and community services  148–149
 
social assistance benefits  248
Costs of disability  42–44, 266
 
as cause of poverty  39–40
 
direct  43
 
extra costs of living  10, 43
 
indirect  44
 
need for better data  47
Credit markets  239
Croatia  103
Cuba  150
Curb cuts  174, 182–183
Curriculum content  79, 112, 215
Cyprus  210, 211
Czech Republic  38, 103, 211
[D] 
DAISY (Digital Accessible Information SYstem)  189
Data
 
general health care  80–81, 83
 
improving comparability  46
 
lack of  263
 
rehabilitation  121
Data collection
 
ICF framework  25, 31–32, 45
 
recommendations  45–46, 267
 
work and employment  251
Deafness, see Hearing impairment
Decentralization, rehabilitation services  114–117
Decision-making, supported  138, 158
Deinstitutionalization  147–148, 157
 
cost comparisons  148–149
 
defined  303
 
mental health patients  106, 146
 
outcomes  148
Demand-responsive transport  178, 179–180
Dementia  59, 147, 297 (see also Cognitive impairment)
Demographics  34–37, 140
Denmark
 
assistance and support  148
 
education  211, 218
 
enabling environments  173, 181, 187
 
work and employment  241, 244
Dental care  61
Depression  58, 60, 297
Design reviews, buildings  175
Developed countries, see High-income countries
Developing countries, see Low- and middle-income 
countries
Development, disability and  10–13
Development aid  107–108, 264
Development organizations, recommendations for  
268–269
Developmental disabilities, see Intellectual impairment
Dexterity impairments  184, 185
Diabetes  59, 61, 75, 97
Differential Item Functioning (DIF)  290
Difficulties in functioning
 
prevalence  24–32, 44
 
World Health Survey respondents  289–290
Digital accessibility and inclusion index  186
Digital divide  172, 303
Dignity  9, 236
Direct care workers, see Support workers, personal
Disability  3–13, 261–262
 
concept  3–4
 
defined  4, 5, 303
 
as a development issue  10–13
 
diversity  7–8, 262
 
environmental factors  4–7
 
human rights  9–10
 
major causes  32–34, 296, 297
 
measuring  21–24
 
prevalence see Prevalence of disability
 
prevention  8
 
threshold for  26–27, 29–31, 290–292, 293–294
Disability Act, 1995, India  171
Disability Action Council, Cambodia  105–106
Disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs)  28, 295
Disability discrimination  6, 147
 
defined  303
 
by employers  240
 
legislation  9, 235, 240–241
Disability Discrimination Act, 2005, United Kingdom  6, 
173, 241
Disability Discrimination Act, 2007, Republic of Korea  
187
Disability management  244–245, 303
Disability Rights International (DRI)  146
Disability weights  28, 29, 295
Disabled Children’s Action Group, South Africa  143
Disabled people’s organizations  147, 303
 
information and communication technology and   
 
192–193
 
microfinance programmes  247–248
 
recommendations for  252, 269
 
role in education  225
 
state support for  69–70, 151, 152
 
support for service users  155
Disasters  108, 173, 174, 178
Discrimination, see Disability discrimination
Diversity of disability  7–8, 262
Djibouti  214
Down syndrome  59, 73
Drug dependence and problem use  297
 315
Index
[E] 
E-accessibility toolkit  186
Early interventions  246, 303
Earthquakes  116
Economy
 
formal  236
 
informal  236
Ecuador  171, 181
Education (see also Schools; Training)
 
children with disabilities  39, 205–227
addressing barriers  216–225
approaches to delivery  210–211
assistance and support  139
barriers  212–216
legislation, policies, targets and plans  214, 216–217
ministerial responsibility  212–214, 217
outcomes  211–212, 213–214, 263
participation rates  10, 206–208
recommendations  225–227
resources/funding  214–215, 218–220
rights and frameworks  206
role of communities, families and disabled people  
223–225
terminology  209–210
 
health care workers  78–79
 
inclusive  209–210, 226–227, 304
 
rehabilitation personnel  108, 110–111
 
school teachers  215
 
special (needs)  209, 210, 304
 
work and employment and  239
Education for All (EFA)  205, 206, 215
 
Fast Track Initiative Partnership  214
 
national plans  217–218
Educational/awareness campaigns  6, 7, 267
 
enabling environments  176, 177, 183, 193, 194
 
HIV/AIDS prevention  74
 
work and employment  249
Egypt  37
El Salvador  110, 111, 214, 215, 221
Elderly people, see Older persons
Electoral participation  171
Electronic medical records  77
Emergency situations  178, 188, 190
Emigration, health care workers  113
Employers
 
attitudes  239–240, 249–250, 251
 
disability discrimination  240
 
incentives to  242
 
recommendations to  251
Employers’ Forum on Disability, United Kingdom  249, 
250
Employment  39, 235–252 (see also Labour market)
 
accessibility  239
 
addressing barriers  240–250
 
barriers  239–240
 
health insurance availability  67
 
impact of disability  10
 
importance  236
 
misconceptions about disability  240
 
opportunities of caregivers  142
 
quotas  241–242, 308
 
recommendations  250–252
 
sheltered  243, 308
 
supported  139, 242–243, 309
 
tailored interventions  241–245
 
types  238–239
Employment agencies  243–244
Employment rates  236, 237, 238, 263
Employment ratios  236, 238
Employment services  235
Empowerment  147
Enabling environments  169–195, 304 (see also 
Accessibility)
Environmental factors  4–7
 
defined  304
 
effect on health conditions  37, 38
 
ICF emphasis  5
 
measuring effect on disability  38
 
need for better data  46
Epilepsy  72–73
Equalization of opportunities  304
Estonia  211
Ethiopia  110, 193, 207–208, 214, 222, 247
European Agency for Development in Special Needs 
Education  211, 220, 225
European Concept for Accessibility Network  175
European Quality in Social Services  154
European Statistical System (ESS)  283
European Union  190–191, 241
Evidence, lack of  263
Evidence-based practice, rehabilitation  120–121, 123
Exercise therapy  100, 101
[F] 
Facilitators  76, 304
Families
 
caregivers see Informal caregivers
 
involvement in health service delivery  75–76
 
providing support for  153, 158
 
recommendations for  270
 
role in education  224–225
Females
 
barriers to health care  63
 
with disabilities  8, 12
 
prevalence of disability  28, 30, 31
 
rehabilitation professions  109–110
Ferries  178
Fiji Paralympic Committee (FPC)  223 
 316
World report on disability
Financial incentives
 
employers  242
 
skilled personnel  113
Financing/funding
 
assistance and support  142, 144, 149–150, 157–158
 
education  215, 218–220
 
general health care  66–70, 82
difficulties in access to  67, 68
options  67–69
targeted to disabled people  69–70
 
inadequacies  262
 
informal caregivers  153
 
recommendations  266
 
rehabilitation  106–108, 122
 
small businesses  239, 246–248
Finland
 
education  211, 218, 221
 
enabling environments  180, 190
 
hearing aid use  118
 
work and employment  244
Flexible transport systems (FTS)  180
Formal economy  236
Frail elderly  304
France  79, 211, 243
Functioning  304 (see also Difficulties in functioning)
Funding, see Financing/funding
[G] 
G3ict  186
Gambia  72–73
Gaza  34
Gender differences
 
barriers to health care  62–64
 
disability prevalence  28, 30, 31
 
educational participation  206, 207
Georgia  209
Germany  38, 41, 107, 147
 
accessibility  70–71, 171
 
education  210, 211
 
work and employment  238, 240, 241, 242, 248–249
Ghana  37, 72, 104, 108, 214, 240
Global Alliance for ICT and Development  186
Global Burden of Disease (GBD)  28–31, 261–262, 304
 
compared to World Health Survey  29–31, 292–293
 
methodology  295–297
Global care chain  145
Global disability prevalence  25–31, 44, 291, 292, 296, 
297
Governments, recommendations for  251, 268
Greece  147, 211
Guatemala  8
Guidelines, good practice  80, 120–121
Guyana  104, 219
[H] 
Habilitation  96
Haiti  104, 107, 216, 223
Health
 
defined  57, 304
 
inequalities  61, 65
 
margin of  57, 306
 
people with disabilities  57–63, 263
Health care, general  57–83
 
addressing barriers to  62–81
 
needs and unmet needs  58, 60–62
 
recommendations  81–83
Health care providers
 
communication issues  72, 77
 
incentives to  70
 
reasonable accommodations  73, 74
Health care workers  77–80
 
attitudes and misconceptions  77–78
 
education and training  78–79
 
recommendations  83
 
recruitment and retention  112–113
 
resources for  80
 
training in rehabilitation  111–112
Health conditions  5, 32–34
 
co-morbid  32, 58, 59, 302
 
defined  305
 
disability prevalence by  297
 
diversity  7–8
 
effect of environment  37, 38
 
need for better data  47
 
poverty related  10
 
prevention  8
 
primary  57–58, 302
 
research needs  81
 
risk trends  37
 
secondary  58–59, 302
 
trends  32–34
Health facilities
 
barriers to  70–71
 
structural modifications  74
Health information systems  104–105
Health insurance
 
difficulties in access to  67, 68
 
private  67
 
providing affordable  69
 
rehabilitation coverage  107, 108
 
social  67
Health promotion  60–61, 73, 305
Health risk behaviours  59
Health services
 
barriers to access  6, 61, 62–64
 
barriers to delivery  70–77
 
coordination  76–77
 
people-centred  75–76
 
provision  4–6
 317
Index
 
reasonable accommodations  73, 74
 
research  80–81
 
specialist  73–75
Healthy People 2010  65
Hearing aids  101, 102, 118, 188
Hearing impairment  26, 72
 
assistance and support  137, 140, 141
 
disability prevalence  297
 
education of children  207, 211, 212, 214, 216, 227
 
information and communication technology  170–172,  
 
184, 186, 190, 191, 192
 
rehabilitation  97, 101, 102
Heart disease  33, 61, 297
High-income countries
 
assistance and support  139–140, 143, 144, 150, 152–153
 
costs of disability  43
 
education of disabled children  207, 210, 219
 
enabling environments  181
 
general health care  60, 62, 63–64, 66, 67, 71
 
needs for services and assistance  41
 
population ageing  35, 36
 
poverty and disability  39
 
prevalence of disability  27, 28, 30, 31
 
rehabilitation  107, 108–109, 110
 
work and employment  238, 242
HIV/AIDS  32, 74, 156, 249
Home aides, see Support workers, personal
Housing adaptations  100
Human resources
 
assistance and support  144–145
 
general health care  77–80, 83
 
improving capacity  266
 
maximizing  236
 
rehabilitation  108–113, 122
Human rights  9–10, 146
Humanitarian crises  34, 108
Hungary  103, 211, 218, 248
[I] 
Iceland  39, 211
ICF, see International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health
Illinois Home Based Support Services Program  152
Immunizations  37, 60
Impairments  5
 
defined  305
 
measuring  21–22
Incidence  305
Inclusive education  209–210, 226–227, 304
Inclusive international cooperation  264
Inclusive schools  210–211, 308
Inclusive society  305
Income support  70
Independent living  139, 263, 305
 
mechanisms for  154–155
 
unmet needs  140
Independent living trusts, user controlled  154 
India  33
 
assistance and support  144, 146, 151, 156
 
community-based rehabilitation  6–7, 13, 116, 117
 
education  207, 208, 214, 215
 
enabling environments  171, 173, 174, 177, 180, 181
 
general health care  63, 70, 75, 79
 
information and communication technology  190,  
 
192–193
 
leprosy campaigns  7
 
rehabilitation personnel  108, 109, 110, 112
 
rehabilitation services  107, 108, 116
 
work and employment  238, 239, 244, 246, 247, 249
Individual differences, recognizing and addressing  
220–221
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 
United States  213
Indonesia  110, 207, 208
Inequalities  9
Infectious diseases  32–33
Infit Mean Squares (MNSQ)  290
Informal care  139, 143, 157
 
defined  305
 
factors affecting availability  140–141
Informal caregivers
 
adverse consequences for  141–142
 
ageing  142
 
factors affecting availability  140–141
 
involvement in health service delivery  75–76
 
providing support for  153, 158
Informal economy  236, 305
Information, lack of  147
Information and advice services  139
Information and communication technology (ICT)  77, 
169–170, 183–193
 
action by industry  191–192
 
barriers  170–172, 178, 183–186
 
costs  185–186
 
inaccessibility  184–185
 
lack of access  172
 
laws and regulations  185, 186–188
 
nongovernmental organizations and  192–193
 
overcoming barriers  186–193
 
pace of change  186
 
policy and programmes  189–190
 
procurement  188, 190–191
 
recommendations  195
 
schools  220–221, 222
 
standards  185, 188–189
 
universal design  191
 318
World report on disability
Information campaigns, see Educational/awareness 
campaigns
Injuries, traumatic  34, 297
 
higher risk  60
 
rehabilitation programs  115
Inspections, buildings  175
Institution, defined  305
Institutional care  145, 146 (see also 
Deinstitutionalization)
 
cost comparisons  148–149
 
development of alternatives  106, 147–148, 157
Insurance, health, see Health insurance
Intellectual impairment  8, 33
 
assistance and support  143, 147, 148–149, 152, 154, 156
 
defined  305
 
education  211, 212, 213–214
 
general health care  72, 73, 75
 
information and communication technology  172, 191
 
premature death  60, 61
 
risk of secondary conditions  59, 60
 
work and employment  237, 242
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health (ICF)  5, 306
 
conception of disability  4, 5
 
framework for data collection  25, 31–32, 45
 
studies on met and unmet needs  41
International cooperation, inclusive  264
International Foundation for Electoral Systems  171
International Labour Organization (ILO)  237, 246
International Organization for Standardization  
174–175
International Telecommunications Union (ITU)  186
Internet
 
access to  172, 183, 185–186
 
accessibility of content  183–185, 187, 189, 190, 191
 
rehabilitation databases  120
 
rehabilitation technologies  118–119
 
self-management programmes  77
Interpersonal relationships, difficulties with  289
Involvement of disabled people  263, 265–266, 270
 
assistance and support services  153–154
 
health management  75, 76
Iodine consumption  37
Iran  37
Iraq  140, 171
Ireland  23, 39, 43, 152, 190, 211
Israel  241
Italy  38, 107, 190
 
community-based rehabilitation  117
 
education  217
 
mental health law reform  106
 
work and employment  242, 248
Item Response Theory (IRT)  290, 293
[J] 
Jamaica  208, 247
Japan
 
assistance and support  153
 
enabling environments  181, 186, 190, 191
 
foreign aid  107
 
work and employment  237, 238
[K] 
Kenya  140, 214, 224
KeyRing  154
Korea, Republic of  39, 72, 187, 223
Kosovo  171
[L] 
Labelling  215–216
Labour force  236
Labour force participation rate  236
Labour laws, overprotective  240
Labour market  235–252 (see also Employment; Work)
 
addressing barriers  240–250
 
barriers  239–240
 
laws and regulations  240–241, 251
 
participation  236–238
 
recommendations  250–252
Lao People’s Democratic Republic  217, 220
Laws and regulations
 
accessibility  173, 175, 178, 179
 
disability discrimination  9, 235, 240–241
 
education of disabled children  214, 217
 
general health care  65, 82
 
information and communication technology  185,  
 
186–188
 
rehabilitation  104–105, 106, 122
 
social care providers  151
 
work and employment  240–241, 251
Lead agency, accessibility  175
Learning disabilities, see Intellectual impairment
Learning disability, specific  309
Learning support assistants  221
Least restrictive environment principle  209
Lebanon  110, 225
Legislation, see Laws and regulations
Leprosy  7, 33, 249
Leprosy Mission, India  246, 247
Lesotho  23, 156, 217
Lifts  180–181
Linkage studies  46
Lithuania  210, 211
Livelihood  236
Longitudinal studies  46, 121 
 
 319
Index
Low- and middle-income countries
 
assistance and support  144, 149, 154–155
 
children at risk of disability  36–37
 
disability prevalence  27, 28, 30, 31
 
education  207, 220
 
emigration of skilled personnel  113
 
enabling environments  173, 174, 181–182
 
general health care  60, 62, 63–64, 66, 67
 
measuring disability  22–23, 25
 
needs for services and assistance  41
 
population ageing  35, 36
 
poverty and disability  39–40
 
rehabilitation  99, 107–109, 110–111
 
service delivery  71, 73
 
work and employment  238, 245
Low birth weight  37
Luxembourg  211
[M] 
Madagascar  33, 140
Mainstream schools  209–211, 221, 222–223
Mainstream services  264–265, 306
Mainstream vocational training  245–246
Mainstreaming  264–265
Malaria  32–33
Malawi  23, 40, 103
 
clubfoot treatment  99
 
educational participation  207
 
need for services  41, 42
 
resource directory  80
 
work and employment  237, 238
Malaysia  175, 176, 245
Males
 
barriers to health care  63
 
prevalence of disability  28, 30, 31
Malta  210, 211
Margin of health  57, 306
Measure  306
Measurement of disability  21–24
Medical equipment  71, 74
Medical model  4
Medical training  78, 79
Medicare, United States  69
Men, see Males
Mental handicap, see Intellectual impairment
Mental health conditions  8
 
assistance and support  153, 154
 
barriers to health care  73
 
communication needs  172
 
defined  306
 
disability prevalence  296, 297
 
negative attitudes  6
 
premature death  60, 61
 
work and employment  237, 242–243
Mental health services  62
 
access to  67, 71, 75
 
reform  106, 146
Mentoring  246
Mexico  37, 39, 190
 
assistance and support  140, 150
 
education  218, 219
 
work and employment  238
Microfinance programmes  246–248, 252, 306
Migrants, as personal support workers  145
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  12, 306
 
education  205, 206
Mixed economy of care  152, 306
Mobile phones  185, 191, 192
Mobility impairments
 
accessibility standards  174
 
assistive devices  101
 
World Health Survey  289
Mobility India  13, 112
Moderate and severe disability
 
children  30, 36
 
defined  296
 
gender differences  30, 31
 
prevalence  29, 30, 296, 297
Moldova, Republic of  153, 208, 209
Mongolia  208, 223
Monitoring, accessibility  175–176, 193
Morbidity  306
Morocco  41
Mortality rates  60, 61
Mozambique
 
disability studies  23, 103
 
education  208, 214, 222
 
HIV/AIDS prevention  74
 
leprosy  33
Multidisciplinary rehabilitation services  114
Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS), UNICEF  
36–37
Musculoskeletal impairment  102
Myanmar  110
[N] 
Namibia  40, 41, 42, 103, 207
National Council on Disability, United States  175
National disability statistics  25, 31, 271–276
 
improving comparability  46
 
recommendations  45–46
 
standardized approach  25, 26–27
 
variability  23, 25
National disability strategies and action plans  265
 
assistance and support  156, 157
 
education  214, 217–218
 
rehabilitation  105–106, 122
National Disability Survey (NDS), Ireland  23
 320
World report on disability
National Informatization Act, 2009, Republic of Korea  
187
National Institute of Disability Management and 
Research, Canada  244
National Longitudinal Transition Study 2 (NLTS2), 
United States  213–214
National Trust Act, India  151
Natural disasters  108, 173
Needs and unmet needs
 
health care  60–62
 
rehabilitation  102–103
 
services and assistance  40–41, 42, 139–140
Needs assessment  150
Negative attitudes  6–7, 147, 169, 262
 
education of disabled children  216, 223–225
 
work and employment  239–240, 249–250, 251
Nepal  33, 104, 113, 118, 156, 225
Netherlands  39, 43, 75
 
assistance and support  147, 150, 151
 
assistive devices  107
 
education  211
 
work and employment  238, 248–249
New Zealand  69, 107, 120–121
 
assistance and support  139, 140, 150, 156
 
education  217, 218, 220
 
work and employment  240, 243, 249
Nicaragua  75, 150, 218, 219
Nigeria  33, 61, 101, 246
Noncommunicable chronic diseases  33
Nongovernmental organizations (NGO)  306
 
assistance and support  143, 144, 151–152, 156
 
information and communication technology and   
 
192–193
 
microfinance programmes  247–248
 
recommendations for  252
 
state support for  69–70, 151–152
Norway  6, 39, 43, 107
 
assistance and support  147
 
education  210, 211, 225
 
enabling environments  176
 
work and employment  238, 248–249
Nursing students  79
[O] 
Obesity  59
Occupational therapists  108, 109
Occupational therapy  79, 306–307
Older persons  34–36
 
assistance and support  139
 
barriers to health care  64
 
disability prevalence  27, 28, 30, 35–36, 296
 
rehabilitation services  117
 
self-reporting of disability  24
Ombudsmen, personal  138
Oral health care services  61
Orthotics  102
Orthotists, see Prosthetists–orthotists
Osteoporosis  59
Out-of-pocket payments  70
[P] 
Pain  58–59, 289
Pakistan  33, 110, 147, 214, 218
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)  146, 
282–283
Panama  218, 225
Paraguay  146, 219
Parents  224–225, 227
Participation, defined  307
Participation restrictions  5
 
measuring  22–23, 97
Pedestrian access  179, 183
Pedicab services  181
Peer training  246
People with disabilities
 
engagement with  105
 
involvement see Involvement of disabled people
 
recommendations for  270
People with Disabilities Act, 2008, Malaysia  176
People-centred health services  75–76
Performance  5, 307
 
measuring effect of environment  38
Personal Assistance Reform Act, 1994, Sweden  150
Personal assistance schemes  150, 152–153, 154–155
Personal assistants  137, 155, 307
Personal factors  5, 307
Personal ombudsmen  138
Personal support workers, see Support workers, 
personal
Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995, India  177
Peru  171, 219, 238
Philippines  145, 155, 190, 247
Physical and rehabilitation medicine doctors  307
Physical barriers  169
 
general health care  70–72
 
schools  215, 223
 
transportation  180–181
 
work and employment  239
Physical inactivity  59
Physical therapists  108, 110
Physiotherapists  108, 109, 110
Physiotherapy  108, 307
Poland  211, 248 
 321
Index
Policies
 
accessibility  173, 179
 
assistance and support  145, 156
 
education of disabled children  214, 217, 226
 
general health care  65, 82
 
inadequate  262
 
inclusive education  210
 
information and communication technology  189–190
 
mainstream  264–265
 
rehabilitation  104–105, 122
Polio  33
Political participation  171
Ponseti clubfoot treatment  99
Pooled funding  149
Poor people
 
disability prevalence  27, 28
 
financial aid  70
 
rehabilitation targeting  108
Portugal  190, 210, 211, 225, 241
Poverty  10, 12, 39–40, 263
Practice guidelines  80, 120–121
Premature death  60, 61
Prepayment systems  149
Prevalence, defined  307
Prevalence of disability  24–32, 261–262
 
country-reported  25, 31, 271–276
 
different studies compared  29–32, 292–293
 
factors affecting estimates  22–24
 
global estimates  25–31, 44, 291, 292, 296, 297
 
global studies see Global Burden of Disease; World Health  
 
Survey
 
by health condition  297
 
labour market and  236
 
need for better data  31–32, 44–47
 
use of data  24
Prevention
 
disability  8
 
disease  60–61
Primary health care
 
rehabilitation services  114
 
rehabilitation training  112
 
service delivery  72, 73, 75, 76
 
targeted funding  69–70
Primary health conditions  57–58, 302
Primary prevention  8
Private assistance and support services  143, 152
Private health insurance  67
Private sector, recommendations for  269
Productivity  44, 237
Progressive realization strategy  173, 179
Prostheses  102
Prosthetists–orthotists  108, 307
 
education and training  110, 111, 112
Psychologists  108, 307
Psychosocial support services, informal caregivers  153
Public accommodations
 
defined  170
 
improving accessibility  173
 
lack of access  170, 172, 173
 
recommendations  194
Public awareness campaigns, see Educational/
awareness campaigns
Public transportation  170, 178–183
Public-private partnerships  108, 152
[Q] 
Qualitative research needs  46–47
Quality of health care  65
Quality of life  307
Quality of support services, improving  159
Quotas, employment  241–242, 308
[R] 
Radio and Television Broadcasting Act, 2000, Denmark  
187
Rail systems  178, 180–181
Raising the Floor initiative  191
Ramps  174, 180, 181, 182–183
Rasch models  290
Reasonable accommodations  9, 264–265
 
built environment  173
 
defined  308
 
general health care  70, 73, 74
 
schools  221
 
workplace  241
Recruitment, rehabilitation personnel  112–113
Referrals
 
general health care  72, 77
 
rehabilitation services  105, 114, 117
Refractive errors  296, 297
Refugee camps  173, 174
Regulations, see Laws and regulations
Rehabilitation  95–123
 
addressing barriers to  103–121
 
barriers to  104–105
 
defined  96, 308
 
evidence-based practice  120–121, 123
 
measures and outcomes  95–97
 
needs and unmet needs  102–103
 
process  96
 
recommendations  121–123, 265
 
research  119–121, 123
 
settings  101–102
 
technologies  117–119, 123
 
vocational see Vocational rehabilitation and training
Rehabilitation Act (and amendments), United States  
188, 189, 190 
 322
World report on disability
Rehabilitation doctors  108
 
training  111–112
Rehabilitation International  74
Rehabilitation medicine  97–100
Rehabilitation personnel  108–113, 122
 
community based  111, 302
 
education and training  108, 110–111
 
mid-level  110–111
 
professional  110
 
recruiting and retaining  112–113
Rehabilitation services
 
barriers to access  104–105
 
community-based see Community-based rehabilitation
 
coordinated multidisciplinary  114
 
delivery  114–117, 122–123
 
funding  106–108, 122
 
national plans  105–106
Remote areas, see Rural areas
Reproductive health services  61
Reproductive rights  78
Republic of Korea  39, 72, 187, 223
Research
 
disability  46–47, 267–268
 
general health care  80–81, 83
 
participation in  81
 
rehabilitation  119–121, 123
Reservation wage  237, 308
Residential support services  139, 145
Respite services  139, 140, 153, 158
Rheumatism  33
Rickshaws  181
Risk factor, defined  308
Road traffic injuries  34
Roads  170, 172–178, 194
Romania  11, 148, 208, 209
RUCODE  156
Rural (and remote) areas
 
disability prevalence  28
 
education  221
 
enabling environments  174
 
health care services  70
 
rehabilitation personnel  112, 113
 
rehabilitation services  103, 114
Russian Federation  11, 79, 179
Rwanda  75, 102, 207, 214, 216
[S] 
Safety net interventions, social  11, 144
Salamanca Declaration (1994)  206, 215
Sanitation  13, 37
Schizophrenia  6, 59, 60, 61, 297
 
discrimination by employers  240
 
rehabilitation  97, 117
 
research needs  81
School teachers
 
attitudes  216, 222–223
 
special education  221, 222
 
support  215, 221, 227
 
training  215, 217, 222–223, 226
Schools
 
attendance rates  206–208, 209
 
barriers within  215–216
 
inclusive  210–211, 308
 
integrated  308
 
interventions in  220–223
 
mainstream  209–211, 221, 222–223
 
physical barriers  215, 223
 
special  210, 211, 226, 308
 
support services  221, 227
 
years of completed education  206, 207
Screening, cancer  60–61, 71
Screen-reader software  186, 191, 308
Secondary health care settings, rehabilitation  114, 116
Secondary health conditions  58–59, 302
Secondary prevention  8
Self-advocacy groups  147
Self-care, difficulties with  289
Self-employment  246–248
Self-management approaches  75, 76
Self-reported disability  23–24
Sen, Amartya  10–11
Serbia  149, 151, 153, 173
Service brokerage  154
Service delivery
 
alternative models  74
 
general health care  70–77, 82–83
 
problems  262
 
rehabilitation  114–117, 122–123
Service providers, recommendations for  269
Services (see also Assistance and support services; 
Health services; Rehabilitation services)
 
lack of provision  262
 
mainstream  264–265, 306
 
needs and unmet needs  40–41, 42
Severe disability
 
children  36
 
defined  296
 
gender differences  31
 
prevalence  29, 30, 44, 261
Sex ratio, disability prevalence  28, 30, 31
Sexual abuse  59
Sexual health services  61
Sexual rights  78
Shared vans  179–180
Sheltered employment  243, 308
Sick leave, informal caregivers  153
Sierra Leone  40
Sign language  141, 172, 184, 190
 323
Index
Sign language interpreters  137, 140, 308
Singapore  145, 244
Situation analysis  265
Sleep and energy, difficulties with  289
Slovakia  39, 103
Slovenia  38, 103, 211
Smoking  59
Social assistance  11, 43, 248–249, 309
Social Assistance Act, 2004, South Africa  150
Social care providers, regulation  151
Social care workers, see Support workers, personal
Social cohesion, promoting  236
Social firms  242–243, 308
Social health insurance  67
Social marketing  6, 7
Social model  4
Social protection  11, 144, 248–249, 251, 309
Social workers  108, 309
Socioeconomic status  39–40
South Africa
 
anti-discrimination laws  240
 
assistance and support  40, 70, 143, 150, 153
 
education  208, 216
 
enabling environments  174, 190
 
rehabilitation  108
 
work and employment  237, 238, 241–242, 244, 245–246
Southern Africa Federation of the Disabled  225
Spain  38, 147, 173, 211, 238, 244
Special (needs) education  209, 210, 304
Special education teachers  221, 222
Special needs assistants  221
Special schools  210, 211, 226
Special transport services (STS)  178, 179–180
Specialist health care  58, 73–75
Speech and language therapy  309
Speech impairments
 
information and communication technology  172, 184,  
 
190
 
rehabilitation  101, 108
Sphere Handbook  174
Spinal cord injuries  58, 60, 76, 115, 246
Sport activities, inclusive  223
Sri Lanka  35, 110, 189, 190, 249
Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for 
People with Disabilities (1993)  9, 147, 172
Standards
 
accessibility see Accessibility standards
 
defined  170
 
inadequate  262
 
information and communication technology  185,  
 
188–189
Statistical Office of the European Union (EUROSTAT)  
283 
Statistics
 
global and regional initiatives  281–284
 
national see National disability statistics
Sterilization, involuntary  78
Stigma  6–7, 147
Stress  141
Stroke survivors  147
Subtitles  187
Sudan  110, 140
Support, see Assistance and support
Support workers, personal  144–145 (see also Personal 
assistants)
 
training  155, 158
Supported decision-making  138, 158
Supported employment  139, 242–243, 309
Surveys  22–24
 
recommendations  45, 267
 
standardization  24
Sweden  34, 39, 41, 43, 107
 
assistance and support  147, 148, 150, 156
 
education  211
 
enabling environments  180, 189–190
 
supported decision-making  138
Switzerland  211, 218–219, 237, 238, 243
[T] 
Taiwan, China  69
Talking books, digital  189
Tanzania, United Republic of  74, 110, 140, 181
Targeted interventions  73, 74
Taxis, accessible  178, 180
Teachers, school, see School teachers
Teaching assistants  221, 227
Telecommunications
 
accessibility  184, 186, 188, 189–190
 
regulation  185, 186, 187
 
universal design features  191
Telemedicine  77
Telephones  184, 187, 188, 189–190, 191
Telerehabilitation  118–119, 123
Television  184–185, 187, 188, 190
Television Decoder Circuitry Act, 1990, United States  
187, 188
Tertiary health care settings, rehabilitation  114, 116
Tertiary prevention  8
Thailand
 
communication support  140, 190
 
rehabilitation  110, 113, 117
 
risk trends  37
 
work and employment  245, 247
Therapy  100–101, 309
Threshold for disability  26–27, 29–31, 290–292, 
293–294 
 324
World report on disability
Togo  110
Toilets  13, 170, 174
Tonga  41
Trachoma  33
Trades unions  250, 252
Training (see also Education)
 
building capacity for  111, 112
 
disability  266
 
health care workers  78–79
 
rehabilitation personnel  108, 110–111
 
school teachers  215, 217, 222–223, 226–227
 
support service users  155, 158
 
support workers  155, 158
 
transport managers  183
 
vocational see Vocational rehabilitation and training
Tram systems  180
Transport operators  179
 
education and training  183
Transportation
 
accessible  170, 178–183, 194–195
 
barriers  178–179
 
defined  170
 
fare structures  179
 
to health care facilities  71–72
 
physical barriers  180–181
 
policies  179
 
to rehabilitation centres  114
 
universal design  181–182
Transportation Accessibility Improvement Law, 2000, 
Japan  181
Travel chain, continuity in  178–179, 182–183, 194
Turkey  242
21st Century Communications and Video Accessibility 
Act, United States  187
[U] 
Uganda  75
 
assistance and support  142
 
assistive technologies  101
 
clubfoot treatment  99, 114
 
community-based rehabilitation  141
 
education  212, 223
 
enabling environments  171, 176
Uganda National Association of the Deaf (UNAD)  141
Undue hardship concept  173
Unemployment  39, 236 (see also Employment)
UNESCO, see United National Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization
UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS)  
36–37
United Kingdom  39, 43, 107
 
assistance and support  140, 142, 147, 149, 151, 153, 154
 
deinstitutionalization  148
 
education  211, 220
 
enabling environments  171, 180, 183–184, 185–186, 192
 
general health care  61, 70, 75, 76, 79, 81
 
personal assistants  144, 145, 155
 
rehabilitation  100, 101, 114
 
risk of premature death  60, 61
 
work and employment  238, 239, 241, 244, 249, 250
United National Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO)  193, 210, 217
United Nations
 
agencies, recommendations for  268–269
 
General Assembly  12
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for 
Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP)  24, 282, 284
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
(UNECE)  283–284
United Nations Washington Group on Disability 
Statistics  45, 281–282, 284
 
questions  25, 26–27, 281–282
United Republic of Tanzania  74, 110, 140, 181
United States of America
 
assistance and support  139–140, 142, 143, 148–149, 152,  
 
153
 
causes of disability  33, 59
 
education  210, 212, 213–215, 216, 218–219, 223
 
enabling environments  171, 173, 175
 
foreign aid  107
 
general health care  61
addressing barriers  65
affordability  67, 69, 70
human resource barriers  79
improving service delivery  72, 73, 76
 
information and communication technology  185, 187,  
 
188, 189–190, 191
 
labour force participation  22, 238
 
life expectancy  60
 
personal support workers  144, 145
 
rehabilitation  101, 103, 107, 108, 112
 
transportation problems  170
 
work and employment  239, 241, 242, 243–244, 246,  
 
249–250
Universal design  264–265
 
assistive devices  118
 
built environment  177–178
 
defined  170, 309
 
health care equipment  74
 
information and communication technology  191
 
school buildings  223
 
transport systems  181–182
 325
Index
Universities
 
education of health care workers  78, 79
 
education of rehabilitation personnel  110
 
schools of architecture  176
Unmet needs, see Needs and unmet needs
Urban areas
 
disability prevalence  28
 
mental health services  71
 
rehabilitation services  114
Uruguay  40, 219
User charges  149
User involvement (see also Involvement of disabled 
people)
 
support services  153–154
[V] 
Vans, shared  179–180
Videophones  184
Viet Nam
 
assistive devices  118
 
costs of disability  40, 43
 
education and training  110, 217, 218
 
news broadcasts  190
Violence  59, 216
Visual impairment
 
congenital  58
 
disability prevalence by specific causes  297
 
education of children  214
 
information and communication technology  172, 184,  
 
185, 189, 192–193
 
rehabilitation  97, 101, 114, 117
 
trachoma-related  33, 181
 
transportation  178
 
World Health Survey  289
Vocational Rehabilitation Act, United States  213
Vocational rehabilitation and training  235, 245–246, 
247, 251, 309
Voluntary services, support for  151–152
Voting  171
Vulnerable groups
 
assistance and support  147
 
disability prevalence  27, 34–37, 262
[W] 
W3C Web Accessibility Initiative  189
Wages  239
 
lower  237, 263
 
reservation  237, 308
Waiting times  103, 114
Washington Group, see United Nations Washington 
Group on Disability Statistics
Wealth, measuring, World Health Survey  292
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)  189
Web sites, see Internet
Wheelchairs  4, 118, 174
Women, see Females
Work  235–252 (see also Employment; Labour market)
 
accessibility  239
 
addressing barriers  240–250
 
barriers  239–240
 
concepts  236
 
importance  236
 
misconceptions about disability  239–240
 
recommendations  250–252
 
tailored interventions  241–245
Workforce Investment Act, 1998, United States  
243–244
World Federation for the Deaf  211
World Health Reports  67–69, 71
World Health Survey (WHS)
 
analytical methods  288–292, 299
 
compared to Global Burden of Disease  29–31, 292–293
 
design and implementation  287–294
 
disability prevalence  25–28, 29–31, 261–262
 
educational participation  206, 207
 
employment rates  237
 
general health care  60, 62–64, 66, 67, 71
 
limitations  293
 
measuring wealth  292
 
threshold for disability  26–27, 29–31, 290–292, 293–294
World Programme of Action Concerning Disabled People 
(1982)  9
World Psychiatric Association  6
[Y] 
Years of health lost due to disability (YLD)  28, 271–
276, 295
Yemen  149
[Z] 
Zambia  40, 103
 
assistance and support  153
 
education  207, 208, 223
 
measuring disability  23, 25, 26–27
 
need for services  41, 42
 
work and employment  238
Zanzibar  225
Zimbabwe  23, 40, 72
 
educational participation  207
 
need for services  41, 42
 
rehabilitation  103, 110
 