 Altered Brain Activity in Unipolar Depression Revisited Meta-
analyses of Neuroimaging Studies
Veronika I. Müller, PhD, Edna C. Cieslik, PhD, Ilinca Serbanescu, MSc, Angela R. Laird, 
PhD, Peter T. Fox, MD, and Simon B. Eickhoff, MD
Institute of Clinical Neuroscience and Medical Psychology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-
University, Düsseldorf, Germany (Müller, Cieslik, Serbanescu, Eickhoff); Institute of Neuroscience 
and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany (Müller, Cieslik, Eickhoff); 
Department of Physics, Florida International University, Miami (Laird); Research Imaging Institute, 
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio (Fox); Research Service, South Texas 
Veterans Administration Medical Center, San Antonio (Fox); State Key Laboratory for Brain and 
Cognitive Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (Fox)
Abstract
IMPORTANCE—During the past 20 years, numerous neuroimaging experiments have 
investigated aberrant brain activation during cognitive and emotional processing in patients with 
unipolar depression (UD). The results of those investigations, however, vary considerably; 
moreover, previous meta-analyses also yielded inconsistent findings.
OBJECTIVE—To readdress aberrant brain activation in UD as evidenced by neuroimaging 
experiments on cognitive and/or emotional processing.
DATA SOURCES—Neuroimaging experiments published from January 1, 1997, to October 1, 
2015, were identified by a literature search of PubMed, Web of Science, and Google Scholar using 
different combinations of the terms fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging), PET (positron 
emission tomography), neural, major depression, depression, major depressive disorder, unipolar 
depression, dysthymia, emotion, emotional, affective, cognitive, task, memory, working memory, 
inhibition, control, n-back, and Stroop.
Corresponding Author: Veronika I. Müller, PhD, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich, Wilhelm-
Johnen-Straße, D-52428 Jülich, Germany (v.mueller@fz-juelich.de). 
Author Contributions: Dr Müller had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and 
the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Müller, Cieslik, Serbanescu, Fox, Eickhoff.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Müller, Cieslik, Serbanescu, Laird, Eickhoff. Drafting of the manuscript: Müller.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Cieslik, Serbanescu, Laird, Fox, Eickhoff.
Statistical analysis: Müller, Cieslik, Eickhoff.
Obtained funding: Fox, Eickhoff.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Laird, Fox.
Study supervision: Eickhoff.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Role of Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources had no role in design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and 
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Supplemental content at jamapsychiatry.com
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
JAMA Psychiatry. 2017 January 01; 74(1): 47–55. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.2783.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 STUDY SELECTION—Neuroimaging experiments (using fMRI or PET) reporting whole-brain 
results of group comparisons between adults with UD and healthy control individuals as 
coordinates in a standard anatomic reference space and using an emotional or/and cognitive 
challenging task were selected.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS—Coordinates reported to show significant activation 
differences between UD and healthy controls during emotional or cognitive processing were 
extracted. By using the revised activation likelihood estimation algorithm, different meta-analyses 
were calculated.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES—Meta-analyses tested for brain regions consistently 
found to show aberrant brain activation in UD compared with controls. Analyses were calculated 
across all emotional processing experiments, all cognitive processing experiments, positive 
emotion processing, negative emotion processing, experiments using emotional face stimuli, 
experiments with a sex discrimination task, and memory processing. All meta-analyses were 
calculated across experiments independent of reporting an increase or decrease of activity in major 
depressive disorder. For meta-analyses with a minimum of 17 experiments available, separate 
analyses were performed for increases and decreases.
RESULTS—In total, 57 studies with 99 individual neuroimaging experiments comprising in total 
1058 patients were included; 34 of them tested cognitive and 65 emotional processing. Overall 
analyses across cognitive processing experiments (P > .29) and across emotional processing 
experiments (P > .47) revealed no significant results. Similarly, no convergence was found in 
analyses investigating positive (all P > .15), negative (all P > .76), or memory (all P > .48) 
processes. Analyses that restricted inclusion of confounds (eg, medication, comorbidity, age) did 
not change the results.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE—Inconsistencies exist across individual experiments 
investigating aberrant brain activity in UD and replication problems across previous neuroimaging 
meta-analyses. For individual experiments, these inconsistencies may relate to use of uncorrected 
inference procedures, differences in experimental design and contrasts, or heterogeneous clinical 
populations; meta-analytically, differences may be attributable to varying inclusion and exclusion 
criteria or rather liberal statistical inference approaches.
Unipolar depression (UD) is one of the leading causes of disease burden worldwide.1 In line 
with the characteristic symptoms of low mood and reduced activity and concentration,2 
patients with UD show impairments of emotional and cognitive processing.3,4 Numerous 
neuro-imaging experiments5-8 have investigated the neural correlates underlying these 
impairments, but their results vary considerably. This variance might be attributable to 
sampling effects in this heterogeneous disorder but also to the high degree of experimental 
and analytic flexibility in neuroimaging. Consequently, several quantitative meta-analyses 
have been performed to delineate brain regions consistently implicated in UD9-14 (Figure 1 
illustrates the different steps of a meta-analysis). However, these meta-analyses also yielded 
inconsistent findings (Figure 2).
This divergence across meta-analytic findings is perplexing. Several factors contribute to this 
predicament. First, most previous meta-analyses9,10,12-14 used the activation likelihood 
estimation (ALE) approach to determine convergence of findings across experiments. Given 
Müller et al.
Page 2
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that the null distribution in ALE reflects a random spatial association between findings 
across the entire brain, all included coordinates must be derived from whole-brain analyses. 
To our knowledge, most classic, explicit region-of-interest (ROI) analyses were not 
considered in previous UD meta-analyses. In contrast, hidden ROI analyses were often 
included by way of considering experiments of partial-brain coverage or reporting contrasts 
that were masked with a main effect in control individuals. However, inclusion of such 
results in neuroimaging meta-analyses render the null distribution and hence inference 
inappropriate (eTable 1 in the Supplement shows ROIs included in previous meta-analyses).
Second, most previous meta-analyses attempted to correct for multiple comparisons by 
controlling the (voxel-level) false discovery rate (FDR), which is invalid for topological 
inference on smooth data15,16 and leads to inflated positive findings. Third, some earlier 
meta-analyses were performed across relatively low numbers of experiments. These meta-
analyses have low power and are prone to yield clusters of convergence that are almost 
exclusively driven by single experiments.16 Together, these factors may implicate a high 
number of spurious findings.
Finally, the focus of investigation has been variable across meta-analyses, with some 
summarizing cognitive and emotional experiments, others focusing on emotional or 
cognitive ones only, and yet others focusing on more specific aspects. Although in itself 
perfectly reasonable, this heterogeneity combined with the bias introduced by including ROI 
analyses and the high likelihood of false-positive findings may explain the heterogeneity 
seen in Figure 2.
Thus, the objective of the present investigation is to readdress aberrant brain activation 
during cognitive and emotional processing in UD using strict quality control and state-of-
the-art meta-analyses. Furthermore, we aim to evaluate whether the lack of replication of 
meta-analyses in UD is the result of methodological problems or to differences in the 
specific focus of investigations. We thus performed analyses comparable to all objectives of 
previous meta-analyses. The present work is not a reproduction of previous meta-analyses 
(ie, including the same experiments as well as the same analytic procedures) but rather a 
conceptual replication of them. If inconsistent results of previous meta-analyses are 
attributable to differences in the specific focus of investigation, we should be able to 
replicate previous results with the respective meta-analysis focusing on the same aspect. A 
failure of replication, however, would point to methodological problems.
Methods
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Details on the literature research can be found in the eMethods in the Supplement. In brief, 
neuroimaging experiments published from January 1, 1997, to October 1, 2015, were 
identified by a literature search of PubMed, Web of Science, and Google Scholar. To provide 
comprehensive, best-practice analyses of aberrant activation in patients with UD, we applied 
inclusion and exclusion criteria discussed below.
Müller et al.
Page 3
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Criteria Related to the Investigation Participants—Included experiments 
statistically contrasted neural activation between an adult (>18 years) UD group (based on 
DSM-IV-TR17 and DSM-518 or International Statistical Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision2) and a group of healthy controls. Experiments 
investigating patients with comorbidities were included, but with the criterion of UD as the 
main diagnosis. Exclusion of comorbidity would have reduced the size of the experiments 
by half. Furthermore, we only included experiments investigating patients with UD and 
current depressive clinical symptoms, whereas those experiments that investigated effects in 
groups with remission of symptoms were excluded. Successful treatment and symptom 
improvement have been shown to lead to normalization of neural functioning.19,20
In the event that a study reported contrasts of different UD groups (eg, psychotic and 
nonpsychotic UD) against the same control group, only the results of the group that was 
most similar to those investigated in most of the studies (eg, nonpsychotic) were included. 
Therefore, we avoided inclusion of results that are based on the same control group and 
possibly reflect peculiarities of these groups. Analyses of group contrasts across several 
patient groups (ie, main effect of group comparing patients with UD, patients with 
schizophrenia, and controls) were only included when reporting post hoc results specific to 
the UD (vs control) group.
Criteria Related to Experimental Design and Contrasts—We only included 
experiments that used an emotional or a cognitive task and reported group differences or 
group × condition interactions in task-related brain activity. Consequently, resting-state 
experiments and those reporting correlations and interactions with other variables (eg, group 
× performance interaction, correlation with clinical parameters) were excluded because they 
reflect task-unrelated and strongly specific effects, respectively. To keep the included 
contrasts and tasks as homogenous as possible we applied the following criteria.
First, emotional tasks were operationally defined as involving presentation of an emotional 
visual or auditory stimulus. At the contrast level, only group differences (UD vs controls) or 
group × condition interactions in an emotional vs nonemotional condition were included, 
whereas experiments investigating group effects (or interactions) between 2 emotional 
conditions (ie, sad vs happy) were excluded. These latter experiments report specific valence 
effects that strongly depend on the valence of the target and subtraction condition and cancel 
out general emotional processes. In addition, this exclusion criterion avoids multiple 
contrasts of the same participant groups (see below).
Furthermore, we excluded emotional regulation experiments, given that most studies 
contrasted a reappraisal against an emotional viewing condition and focused pre-dominantly 
on regulatory mechanisms rather than emotional processing. These tasks can hence be 
expected to yield brain activations associated with cognitive regulation, whereas emotion-
related regions are attenuated.21 In addition, experiments focusing on anticipatory 
processing of emotions were excluded owing to the low number of available studies (n = 1).
Second, cognitive tasks were operationally defined as involving a cognitive paradigm. At the 
contrast level, experiments were included that reported group differences (or interactions) 
Müller et al.
Page 4
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 between patients with UD and controls in a cognitive challenge compared with a control 
(less challenge or baseline) condition. Experiments investigating error-related activity were 
excluded (n = 3). This criterion was applied because most included cognitive experiments 
focused on activity in response to predominantly correct responses.
Studies reporting pharmacologic or psychological UD treatment effects were only included 
if they reported between-group differences at baseline or main effects of diagnosis. 
Treatment × group interactions were not considered.
To minimize the possibility that meta-analytic results are driven by within-group effects,22 
we limited the contribution of a particular group of participants to 1 experiment per class 
(with 2 classes for cognitive [increase and decrease] and 4 classes for emotional [increase, 
decrease, and positive and negative valence] tasks). Hence, if a study reported more than 1 
contrast within the same class, these findings were pooled into a single experiment. For 
example, when a study reported between-group effects in response to angry and fearful 
faces, the coordinates of the 2 effects were coded as a single negative experiment 
(information on where this criterion applied is given in eTable 2B in the Supplement).
Criteria Related to Technical Aspects—We included only experiments that reported 
results of whole-brain group analyses as coordinates in a standard reference space 
(Talairach23 or Montreal Neurological Institute [MNI]24). We excluded studies with results 
obtained in ROI analyses (n = 17), experiments not covering the whole brain during image 
acquisition (n = 3), or experiments masking the group differences (or derived from a 
conjunction) with another contrast (n = 5) (the eMethods in the Supplement provides a 
detailed explanation).
Because the standard templates used in SPM (Statistical Parametric Mapping) since version 
SPM96 and FSL (FMRIB Software Library) are in MNI space, coordinates of experiments 
using SPM or FSL were treated as MNI coordinates if the authors did not explicitly report a 
transformation from MNI to Talairach space or the use of a different brain template.
These criteria resulted in inclusion of 57 studies with 99 different experiments (eTable 2 in 
the Supplement and Figure 3).
Different Meta-analytic Groupings
We performed 16 different meta-analyses (Figure 3), with 12 of them corresponding to 
previously investigated meta-analytic questions (results of the overall analyses are reported 
in the eResults in the Supplement). We first calculated analyses across experiments 
independently if they reported increased or decreased brain activity in UD (compared with 
controls) (see eMethods in the Supplement for an explanation of the advantages of the 
pooled analysis). Because most previous meta-analyses reported their results separately for 
increases and decreases, we performed these analyses as well.
Separate meta-analyses were only performed when a sufficient number of experiments were 
available (>17 experiments).16 Thus, analyses differentiating between increases and 
decreases in UD were not performed for sex discrimination, memory, face stimuli, and 
Müller et al.
Page 5
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 positive processing, and for negative processing only a subanalysis for increases was 
calculated (Figure 3). All analyses (except those with <17 experiments) were repeated to 
examine (1) patients not receiving medication, (2) patients without comorbidities, (3) 
patients without late-life or geriatric depression, and (4) corrected results.
Activation Likelihood Estimation
The ALE meta-analyses22,25-27 were conducted according to standard procedures used 
previously.28 A detailed description can be found in the eMethods in the Supplement and 
Figure 1. All results were thresholded at a cluster-level corrected threshold of P < .05 
(cluster-forming threshold at voxel-level P < .001).16
Results
A total of 57 studies with 99 individual neuroimaging experiments, comprising 1058 
patients were included in this analysis. There were 34 cognitive processing experiments and 
75 emotional processing experiments; 50 experiments reported increased brain activity in 
UD, and 49 experiments reported decreased brain activity in UD.
Meta-analyses Across Emotional Experiments
None of the 9 emotional meta-analyses revealed any significant results (all emotional: 65 
experiments [P > .69]; increases: 33 experiments [P > .47]; decreases: 32 experiments [P > .
58]; negative valence: 33 experiments [P > .76]; negative valence increases: 19 experiments 
[P > .12]; positive valence: 19 experiments [P > .15]; emotional faces: 32 experiments [P > .
80]; negative emotional faces: 18 experiments [P > .75]; sex discrimination: 17 experiments 
[P > .41]). Figure 4A displays the distribution of foci of the emotional analyses.
Meta-analyses Across Cognitive Experiments
None of the 4 cognitive meta-analyses revealed any significant results (all cognitive: 34 
experiments [P > .63]; increases: 17 experiments [P > .29]; decreases: 17 experiments [P > .
97]; memory: 19 experiments [P > .48]). Figure 4B displays the distribution of foci of the 
cognitive analyses.
Meta-analyses Controlling for Confounds
Analyses restricted to (1) patients not receiving medication, (2) patients without 
comorbidity, and (3) patients without late-life or geriatric depression revealed similar results 
(eResults in the Supplement). When restricting the analyses to experiments using corrected 
statistics (COR), the analyses across experiments of negative emotional processing revealed 
significant convergence in the left thalamus extending into hippocampus (x = −18, y = −36, 
z = −4; 5 experiments contributing). All other analyses did not reveal significant 
convergence (COR all emotional: 38 experiments [P > .82]; COR increases emotional: 20 
experiments [P > .27]; COR decreases emotional: 18 experiments [P > .23]; COR all 
cognitive: 23 experiments [P > .61]) (eResults in the Supplement provides details).
Müller et al.
Page 6
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Discussion
Inconsistency of Neuroimaging Experiments in UD
Our most important result is the lack of significant convergence in almost all meta-analyses, 
which should not be attributable to a lack of statistical power. In particularly, Eickhoff et al16 
recently showed that for clusterwise corrected ALE meta-analyses, a minimum of 17 
experiments is needed to achieve power of 80% to detect an effect occurring in one-third of 
the underlying population of experiments. This criterion was met by all performed analyses, 
with most being substantially larger and hence holding sufficient power to detect more 
subtle effects. Moreover, despite the stringent inclusion and exclusion criteria, our work 
represents, to our knowledge, the largest meta-analysis of task-based neuroimaging 
experiments in UD to date.
We thus argue that our results indicate a lack of (spatial) convergence among neuroimaging 
findings in UD. Such heterogeneity and failure to confirm previous effects may be 
attributable to different factors, including experimental flexibility, that is, differences in 
experimental design and procedures.29 For example, emotional processing (65 experiments) 
was tested by presenting faces (32 experiments [49.2%]), images (14 experiments [21.6%]), 
words (13 experiments [20%]), and other stimuli (6 experiments [9.2%]); in these 
experiments, participants were instructed to passively watch or listen (15 experiments 
[23.1%]) or to evaluate the presented emotion (10 experiments 15.4%]) or sex (17 
experiments [26.2%]) or had another task (23 experiments [35.4%]) (eTable 2B in the 
Supplement provides a detailed description of each experiment). In further acknowledgment 
of the heterogeneity of investigated emotions and other variations in experimental settings 
(stimulus duration, intertrial intervals, etc), the lack of convergence may be attributed to 
experimental differences across experiments. Thus, our results may reflect that the current 
imaging literature on UD is so heterogeneous that no generalized effects may be found. For 
example, no general effect in emotional processing in UD may exist, but rather a different 
impairment may be associated with explicit judgment of the emotion in faces compared with 
passive observation of emotional faces. The different tasks and stimuli used might thus lead 
to different effects, which are then not consistent across studies. Unfortunately, too few 
experiments in UD are similar enough to enable more specific analyses that would definitely 
address such ambiguity. Thus, concrete conclusions about the neurobiology of aberrant 
emotional and cognitive processing in UD can only be drawn when enough experiments are 
similar in procedure and analyzed sample to calculate more specific meta-analyses. In our 
view, a key contribution to this situation is that new experiments that are too similar to 
previously published ones are harder to navigate successfully through the peer-review 
process. Scientists are incentivized to design innovative procedures that differ from previous 
reports, resulting in a wide range of isolated findings on various paradigms and procedures 
that lack consistency and do not generalize.
An independent source of heterogeneity is provided by differences in the investigated 
populations,30 for example, regarding medication,31,32 age, prevalence of UD subtypes (eg, 
chronic vs first-episode), and comorbidities.33 Specifically, the latter aspect is variable in 
UD neuroimaging, with 51 (51.5%) of the experiments included in the present analyses 
Müller et al.
Page 7
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 excluding all individuals with any other Axis I diagnosis, others excluding specific 
comorbidities (eg, psychosis), and many not providing sufficient detail on the treatment of 
individuals with comorbidities. Furthermore, small sample sizes in some experiments34 
might have additionally contributed to inconsistent results.
Finally, analytical flexibility, such as the choices of analysis software, preprocessing 
parameters, and most important, the specific contrasts calculated (ie, interactions or main 
effects), further adds to the heterogeneity of the current literature. We should highlight that 
38 (38.4%) of all 99 experiments included in our analyses performed statistical inference 
without correction for multiple comparisons that additionally used various different 
thresholds. Although Lieberman and Cunningham35 have argued that uncorrected inference 
is more sensitive to meaningful (small) effects, it also contaminates the literature with false-
positive findings.36 Unfortunately, taking into account an existing publication bias with 
negative results being less likely to be published compared with positive ones,37 such false-
positive findings based on invalid inference may actually be more likely to be published than 
null findings using valid inference. The only significant cluster we found was when we 
restricted the analyses to just corrected results. This finding additionally highlights the need 
for functional magnetic resonance imaging studies to correct for multiple comparisons and 
avoid false-positive findings. In summary, results indicate that neuroimaging results of UD 
are not consistent across experiments, which is most likely owing to a combination of 
experimental flexibility, heterogeneity across samples, and the widespread practice of 
uncorrected inference as well as publishing biases.
Failure to Replicate Meta-analyses
The observed lack of convergence across neuroimaging experiments of UD is at odds with 
the fact that previous meta-analyses in UD yielded significant findings.9-14 However, 
considering the inconsistent findings across these previous meta-analyses, we argue that the 
current null result might actually reflect the most faithful representation of the current task-
based neuroimaging evidence in UD. Nevertheless, the fact that not only individual studies 
but also meta-analyses in UD have provided inconsistent findings is troubling. Reasons for 
this inconsistency may be methodological problems of previous analyses or the slightly 
varying scopes of them, with some focusing on general emotional or cognitive processing14; 
others focusing specifically on negative,9,11 sad,13 or positive9 emotions; and others pooling 
cognitive and affective processing.10,12 Although this methodological inconsistency should 
certainly explain some of the variability, the fact that we computed analyses for almost every 
scope previously addressed (except sad processing owing to a low number of experiments) 
but could not replicate any finding indicates a more generalized problem. Thus, based on the 
present results, we conclude that inconsistencies across previous meta-analyses are not 
owing to differences in their research question but rather to problems and differences in their 
methods.
One factor seems to be the trade-off between robustness of the meta-analysis and 
heterogeneity and quality of the included experiments. Including more experiments ensures 
that convergence is not driven by single experiments and provides higher power for smaller 
effects,16 but often also compromises the homogeneity of the included experiments (eg, 
Müller et al.
Page 8
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pooling different tasks) and their quality (eg, including underpowered experiments). We tried 
to achieve a balance between homogeneity and robustness by setting strict inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. However, these efforts might have contributed to different results 
compared with previous meta-analyses in UD. For example, Graham and colleagues12 
included resting-state data and Diener and colleagues10 included experiments in remitted 
UD, whereas others (including the present study) excluded these. Unfortunately, however, a 
detailed description of inclusion and exclusion criteria is often lacking in publications of 
meta-analytic results. A related problem that complicates comparison across meta-analyses 
is that most do not report in detail which specific experiments and contrasts were included, 
but only list the included studies. Given that most studies report several contrasts, just listing 
a study as included does not allow for reproducible meta-analyses.
Another contribution to the inconsistency of previous meta-analyses and their discrepancy to 
the present null result might be less stringent exclusion criteria regarding experiments that 
do not reflect whole-brain analyses (eTable 1 in the Supplement). As mentioned, given that 
the null space in ALE is the entire brain, this aspect is crucial to render the analysis 
unbiased. In turn, inclusion of such studies will yield a self-fulfilling prophecy because 
regions that are more often specifically investigated will tend to show artificially high 
convergence. Thus, some previous meta-analyses might be biased by experiments that do not 
investigate aberrant activity in UD across the whole brain.
Still the biggest contribution is likely technical in nature. One important aspect is the small 
sample sizes, particularly in respect to the earliest neuroimaging meta-analyses. In addition 
to having low power and generalizability, an ALE-specific problem of small sample sizes is 
that in such analyses convergence is often driven by only 1 or 2 experiments.16 Thus, 
previous meta-analyses in UD across a small number of experiments (eg, Fitzgerald and 
collegues9 included <7 experiments) might have revealed convergence that is largely 
attributable to a single experiment. Moreover, we note that most of the previous meta-
analyses9,10,12-14 in UD controlled for the FDR. However, conventional (voxel-wise) FDR 
correction is not appropriate for inference on neuroimaging analyses such as ALE,16 
because topological inference on spatially smooth data (eg, ALE maps) may lead to spurious 
clusters.15 In particular, the combination of low sample size and FDR thresholding may have 
rendered previous meta-analyses very liberal, leading to an excessive emphasis on apparent 
convergence across the literature. Furthermore, the FDR correction in GingerALE prior to 
version 2.3.2 featured a bug,38 which could have further exaggerated the problem of overly 
lenient thresholds in the previous meta-analyses on UD.
Recommendations and Outlook
Our results not only indicate inconsistencies across individual experiments investigating 
aberrant brain activity in UD, but in addition point to problems related to replication of 
neuroimaging meta-analyses. We suggest that this situation is not specific to UD and 
functional imaging because in 2011 and 2012, 3 different meta-analyses on structural 
changes in autism39-41 were published that demonstrated some correspondence but 
importantly also some discrepancies. As outlined above, these discrepancies may relate to 
Müller et al.
Page 9
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 various conceptual and technical factors, but definite conclusions are difficult given the lack 
of descriptions at a level of detail that would enable full reproduction.
For clinical neuroimaging we would thus recommend a stronger focus on replication studies, 
rather than designing complex and newer paradigms. Furthermore, to make replication 
studies possible, authors must clearly report the specific characteristics of their sample (ie, 
comorbidity, age range, medication, and chronicity) and correct their results for multiple 
comparisons.
Neuroimaging meta-analysis is still a maturing yet rapidly developing field. As such, we 
consider the current case as motivation to formulate basic recommendations for future meta-
analyses:
•
Meta-analyses should be calculated across a reasonable amount of experiments16 
but concurrently be as homogeneous as possible with respect to the process 
investigated.
•
The inclusion of explicit ROI analyses must be avoided, and attention should also 
be dedicated to exclude other cases of restricted analysis space.
•
Voxel-level FDR thresholding is not a valid approach for statistical inference on 
smooth data, including neuroimaging meta-analyses.
•
Meta-analyses should provide detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria, including 
a motivation for making these choices.
•
Reporting standards must be improved to allow full reproducibility,42 which 
includes listing the included studies and specific contrasts.
Last, we note that although our results indicate inconsistencies in results of clinical 
neuroimaging and meta-analyses, we are still optimistic for the future of neuroimaging. In 
particular, reproducibility, replication, and data sharing have gained increased attention in 
the last few years. Our results and recommendations should thus contribute to the awareness 
of the importance of reproducing previous results.
Conclusions
The present study not only indicates inconsistencies across results of neuroimaging 
experiments in UD, but also points to replication problems of neuroimaging meta-analyses. 
These problems highlight the importance of replicating previous results of clinical 
neuroimaging studies and emphasize the need for better reporting and analysis standards (eg, 
no inclusion of ROI studies, no FDR correction) for meta-analyses.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Funding/Support: This study was supported by grants EI 816/4-1 and LA 3071/3-1 from the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft, grant R01-MH074457 from the National Institute of Mental Health, the Helmholtz 
Müller et al.
Page 10
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Portfolio Theme “Supercomputing and Modelling for the Human Brain,” and grant agreement 604102 from the 
European Union Seventh Framework Program FP7/2007-2013.
REFERENCES
1. Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Collaborators. Global, regional, and national incidence, 
prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 
countries, 1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet. 
2015; 386(9995):743–800. [PubMed: 26063472] 
2. World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health 
Problems. World Health Organization; Geneva, Switzerland: 2010. 10th Revision (ICD-10)
3. Snyder HR. Major depressive disorder is associated with broad impairments on neuropsychological 
measures of executive function: a meta-analysis and review. Psychol Bull. 2013; 139(1):81–132. 
[PubMed: 22642228] 
4. Kohler CG, Hoffman LJ, Eastman LB, Healey K, Moberg PJ. Facial emotion perception in 
depression and bipolar disorder: a quantitative review. Psychiatry Res. 2011; 188(3):303–309. 
[PubMed: 21601927] 
5. Fitzgerald PB, Srithiran A, Benitez J, et al. An fMRI study of prefrontal brain activation during 
multiple tasks in patients with major depressive disorder. Hum Brain Mapp. 2008; 29(4):490–501. 
[PubMed: 17525987] 
6. Canli T, Sivers H, Thomason ME, Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Gabrieli JD, Gotlib IH. Brain activation to 
emotional words in depressed vs healthy subjects. Neuroreport. 2004; 15(17):2585–2588. [PubMed: 
15570157] 
7. Müller VI, Cieslik EC, Kellermann TS, Eickhoff SB. Crossmodal emotional integration in major 
depression. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014; 9(6):839–848. [PubMed: 23576809] 
8. Siegle GJ, Thompson W, Carter CS, Steinhauer SR, Thase ME. Increased amygdala and decreased 
dorsolateral prefrontal BOLD responses in unipolar depression: related and independent features. 
Biol Psychiatry. 2007; 61(2):198–209. [PubMed: 17027931] 
9. Fitzgerald PB, Laird AR, Maller J, Daskalakis ZJ. A meta-analytic study of changes in brain 
activation in depression. Hum Brain Mapp. 2008; 29(6):683–695. [PubMed: 17598168] 
10. Diener C, Kuehner C, Brusniak W, Ubl B, Wessa M, Flor H. A meta-analysis of neurofunctional 
imaging studies of emotion and cognition in major depression. Neuroimage. 2012; 61(3):677–685. 
[PubMed: 22521254] 
11. Hamilton JP, Etkin A, Furman DJ, Lemus MG, Johnson RF, Gotlib IH. Functional neuroimaging of 
major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis and new integration of base line activation and neural 
response data. Am J Psychiatry. 2012; 169(7):693–703. [PubMed: 22535198] 
12. Graham J, Salimi-Khorshidi G, Hagan C, et al. Meta-analytic evidence for neuroimaging models of 
depression: state or trait? J Affect Disord. 2013; 151(2):423–431. [PubMed: 23890584] 
13. Lai CH. Patterns of cortico-limbic activations during visual processing of sad faces in depression 
patients: a coordinate-based meta-analysis. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014; 26(1):34–43. 
[PubMed: 24275771] 
14. Palmer SM, Crewther SG, Carey LM, START Project Team. A meta-analysis of changes in brain 
activity in clinical depression. Front Hum Neurosci. 2015; 8:1045. [PubMed: 25642179] 
15. Chumbley JR, Friston KJ. False discovery rate revisited: FDR and topological inference using 
Gaussian random fields. Neuroimage. 2009; 44(1):62–70. [PubMed: 18603449] 
16. Eickhoff SB, Nichols TE, Laird AR, et al. Behavior, sensitivity, and power of activation likelihood 
estimation characterized by massive empirical simulation. Neuroimage. 2016; 137:70–85. 
[PubMed: 27179606] 
17. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th. 
Amercian Psychiatric Association; Washington, DC: 2000. 
18. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th. 
American Psychiatric Association; Washington, DC: 2013. 
Müller et al.
Page 11
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Dichter GS, Felder JN, Smoski MJ. The effects of brief behavioral activation therapy for 
depression on cognitive control in affective contexts: an fMRI investigation. J Affect Disord. 2010; 
126(1-2):236–244. [PubMed: 20421135] 
20. Ritchey M, Dolcos F, Eddington KM, Strauman TJ, Cabeza R. Neural correlates of emotional 
processing in depression: changes with cognitive behavioral therapy and predictors of treatment 
response. J Psychiatr Res. 2011; 45(5):577–587. [PubMed: 20934190] 
21. Buhle JT, Silvers JA, Wager TD, et al. Cognitive reappraisal of emotion: a meta-analysis of human 
neuroimaging studies. Cereb Cortex. 2014; 24(11):2981–2990. [PubMed: 23765157] 
22. Turkeltaub PE, Eickhoff SB, Laird AR, Fox M, Wiener M, Fox P. Minimizing within-experiment 
and within-group effects in activation likelihood estimation meta-analyses. Hum Brain Mapp. 
2012; 33(1):1–13. [PubMed: 21305667] 
23. Talairach, J., Tournoux, P. Co-planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain. Thieme; New York, 
NY: 1988. 
24. Collins DL, Neelin P, Peters TM, Evans AC. Automatic 3D intersubject registration of MR 
volumetric data in standardized Talairach space. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 1994; 18(2):192–205. 
[PubMed: 8126267] 
25. Eickhoff SB, Laird AR, Grefkes C, Wang LE, Zilles K, Fox PT. Coordinate-based ALE meta-
analysis of neuroimaging data: a random-effects approach based on empirical estimates of spatial 
uncertainty. Hum Brain Mapp. 2009; 30(9):2907–2926. [PubMed: 19172646] 
26. Eickhoff SB, Bzdok D, Laird AR, Kurth F, Fox PT. Activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis 
revisited. Neuroimage. 2012; 59(3):2349–2361. [PubMed: 21963913] 
27. Turkeltaub PE, Eden GF, Jones KM, Zeffiro TA. Meta-analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of 
single-word reading: method and validation. Neuroimage. 2002; 16(3):765–780. Pt 1. [PubMed: 
12169260] 
28. Cieslik EC, Mueller VI, Eickhoff CR, Langner R, Eickhoff SB. Three key regions for supervisory 
attentional control: evidence from neuroimaging meta-analyses. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2015; 
48:22–34. [PubMed: 25446951] 
29. Maxwell SE, Lau MY, Howard GS. Is psychology suffering from a replication crisis? what does 
“failure to replicate” really mean? Am Psychol. 2015; 70(6):487–498. [PubMed: 26348332] 
30. Doose-Grünefeld S, Eickhoff SB, Müller VI. Audiovisual emotional processing and neurocognitive 
functioning in patients with depression. Front Integr Neurosci. 2015; 9:3. [PubMed: 25688188] 
31. Davidson RJ, Irwin W, Anderle MJ, Kalin NH. The neural substrates of affective processing in 
depressed patients treated with venlafaxine. Am J Psychiatry. 2003; 160(1):64–75. [PubMed: 
12505803] 
32. Fu CH, Williams SC, Cleare AJ, et al. Attenuation of the neural response to sad faces in major 
depression by antidepressant treatment: a prospective, event-related functional magnetic resonance 
imaging study. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004; 61(9):877–889. [PubMed: 15351766] 
33. Cusi AM, Nazarov A, Holshausen K, Macqueen GM, McKinnon MC. Systematic review of the 
neural basis of social cognition in patients with mood disorders. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2012; 
37(3):154–169. [PubMed: 22297065] 
34. Button KS, Ioannidis JP, Mokrysz C, et al. Power failure: why small sample size undermines the 
reliability of neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013; 14(5):365–376. [PubMed: 23571845] 
35. Lieberman MD, Cunningham WA. Type I and type II error concerns in fMRI research: re-
balancing the scale. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2009; 4(4):423–428. [PubMed: 20035017] 
36. Bennett CM, Wolford GL, Miller MB. The principled control of false positives in neuroimaging. 
Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2009; 4(4):417–422. [PubMed: 20042432] 
37. Ioannidis JP, Munafò MR, Fusar-Poli P, Nosek BA, David SP. Publication and other reporting 
biases in cognitive sciences: detection, prevalence, and prevention. Trends Cogn Sci. 2014; 18(5):
235–241. [PubMed: 24656991] 
38. Eickhoff SB, Laird AR, Fox PM, Lancaster JL, Fox PT. Implementation errors in the GingerALE 
Software: description and recommendations. Hum Brain Mapp. [published online August 11, 
2016]. doi:10.1002/hbm.23342. 
Müller et al.
Page 12
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 39. Duerden EG, Mak-Fan KM, Taylor MJ, Roberts SW. Regional differences in grey and white matter 
in children and adults with autism spectrum disorders: an activation likelihood estimate (ALE) 
meta-analysis. Autism Res. 2012; 5(1):49–66. [PubMed: 22139976] 
40. Nickl-Jockschat T, Habel U, Michel TM, et al. Brain structure anomalies in autism spectrum 
disorder: a meta-analysis of VBM studies using anatomic likelihood estimation. Hum Brain Mapp. 
2012; 33(6):1470–1489. [PubMed: 21692142] 
41. Via E, Radua J, Cardoner N, Happé F, Mataix-Cols D. Meta-analysis of gray matter abnormalities 
in autism spectrum disorder: should Asperger disorder be subsumed under a broader umbrella of 
autistic spectrum disorder? Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011; 68(4):409–418. [PubMed: 21464365] 
42. Nichols, TE., Das, S., Eickhoff, SB., et al. Best practices in data analysis and sharing in 
neuroimaging using MRI. http://biorxiv.org/content /early/2016/05/20/054262. Posted May 20, 
2016. Accessed May 28, 2016
Müller et al.
Page 13
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Key Points
Question
How consistent are results of experiments investigating aberrant brain activity in unipolar 
depression and previous meta-analyses testing this topic?
Findings
This conceptual replication of meta-analyses of 99 neuroimaging experiments in unipolar 
depression did not reveal any convergence, which is at odds with the findings of previous 
meta-analyses.
Meaning
This result highlights the importance of reproducing previous results to be able to 
discover real effects for individual neuroimaging studies and for meta-analyses.
Müller et al.
Page 14
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Schematic Illustration of the Steps of a Meta-analysis
In step 1, coordinates reported in the experiments included in the analysis are extracted by 
creating a table with all x, y, and z coordinates in either Montreal Neurological Institute 
(MNI) or Talairach space. In this example, the coordinates of more than 3 experiments were 
included indicated by the ellipses at the end of the example table. In step 2, these 
coordinates are transformed into the same coordinate space and projected on a brain 
template for display. For example, the first coordinate reported in experiment 1 is projected 
on a brain template based on its x, y, and z coordinates (marked in blue). In step 3, the 
spatial uncertainty associated with each coordinate is accounted for by modeling gaussian 
probability distributions around each coordinate. In step 4, the resulting activation likelihood 
estimation scores are compared with a null distribution reflecting a random spatial 
association between experiments, and results are thresholded and corrected for multiple 
comparisons.
Müller et al.
Page 15
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Illustration of Reported Peak Coordinates of Convergence Found in Previous Meta-
analyses Investigating Aberrant Brain Activation in Unipolar Depression
Mixed processing indicates analyses across cognitive and emotional experiments. Each color 
represents a separate meta-analysis. Hardly any overlap is seen between colors, showing that 
results of previous meta-analyses investigating a similar topic are inconsistent. A, Previous 
meta-analyses of emotional processing experiments only include Fitzgerald et al,9 Hamilton 
et al,11 Lai et al,13 and Palmer et al.14 B, Previous meta-analyses of cognitive processing 
experiments includes Palmer et al14; of mixed processing, Diener et al10 and Graham et al.12
Müller et al.
Page 16
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Flowchart of the Different Steps Conducted
In total 16 different meta-analyses including 57 studies and 99 experiments were calculated. 
ALE indicates activation likelihood estimation; ROI, region of interest; and UD, unipolar 
depression.
Müller et al.
Page 17
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Render of the Distribution of Coordinates Included in the Present Meta-analysis
Red indicates increased activation in unipolar depression (UD), whereas blue shows all foci 
reported as decreased activity in UD. Color transparency indicates the depth of the 
coordinate related to the cortical surface.
Müller et al.
Page 18
JAMA Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
