 Constructing High-Stakes Surgical Decisions: It's Better to Die 
Trying
Michael J. Nabozny, MD1, Jacqueline M. Kruser, MD2, Nicole M. Steffens, MPH1, Karen J. 
Brasel, MD, MPH3, Toby C. Campbell, MD4, Martha E. Gaines, JD, LLM5, and Margaret L. 
Schwarze, MD, MPP1,6
1Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin
2Department of Medicine, Northwestern University. Chicago, Illinois
3Department of Surgery, Oregon Health & Science University. Portland, Oregon
4Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin
5Center for Patient Partnerships, University of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin
6Department of Medical History and Bioethics, University of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin
Abstract
Objective—To explore high-stakes surgical decision making from the perspective of seniors and 
surgeons.
Background—A majority of older chronically ill patients would decline a low-risk procedure if 
the outcome was severe functional impairment. However, 25 percent of Medicare beneficiaries 
have surgery in their last three months of life, which may be inconsistent with their preferences. 
How patients make decisions to have surgery may contribute to this problem of unwanted care.
Methods—We convened four focus groups at senior centers and two groups of surgeons in 
Madison and Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where we showed a video about a decision regarding a 
choice between surgery and palliative care. We used qualitative content analysis to identify 
themes about communication and explanatory models for end-of-life treatment decisions.
Results—Seniors(N = 37) and surgeons (N = 17) agreed that maximizing quality of life should 
guide treatment decisions for older patients. However, when faced with an acute choice between 
surgery and palliative care, seniors viewed this either as a choice between life and death or a 
decision about how to die. Although surgeons agreed that very frail patients should not have 
surgery they held conflicting views about presenting treatment options.
Conclusions—Seniors and surgeons highly value quality of life but this notion is difficult to 
incorporate in acute surgical decisions. Some seniors use values to consider a choice between 
surgery and palliative care, while others view this as a simple choice between life and death. 
Correspondence: Margaret L. Schwarze, MD, MPP, G5/315 CSC, 600 Highland Ave, Madison, WI 53792, Phone: 608-265-4420, 
Fax: 608-265-1148, schwarze@surgery.wisc.edu. 
Reprints will not be available from the authors.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Ann Surg. 2016 January ; 263(1): 64–70. doi:10.1097/SLA.0000000000001081.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Surgeons acknowledge challenges framing decisions and describe a clinical momentum that 
promotes surgical intervention.
Introduction
Operations on older patients with chronic illnesses are common and increasing1 such that 25 
percent of Medicare beneficiaries will have a surgical procedure within the last three months 
of life.2 Surgery on frail elderly patients generally has a limited ability to prolong survival or 
return patients to the quality of life they had before surgery.3, 4 As a majority of older, 
chronically ill patients report they would decline even a low-risk intervention if the likely 
outcome was severe functional impairment,5 surgery can burden older frail patients with 
aggressive treatments they do not want. Because patients who receive surgery near the end 
of life are more likely to spend time in intensive care (ICU) or have a prolonged 
hospitalization,2 a decision to proceed with surgery can start a clinical trajectory that is 
inconsistent with personal preferences and goals.
Surgeons are often called upon in acute situations to consider invasive treatments that 
significantly impact patients' quality of life. These pivotal encounters are made more 
difficult because the surgeon and patient rarely have a pre-existing relationship and patients' 
preferences are often not precisely defined in an advance directive or may change during a 
specific acute illness.6-8 Furthermore, surgeons' conversations are framed by the structure of 
informed consent which functions poorly as a vehicle for decision making.9 Although shared 
decision making holds promise for improving high-stakes clinical decision making by 
aligning patients' values with the appropriate treatment choice, contemporary efforts to 
improve shared decision making between patients and surgeons have focused on the out 
patient setting.10, 11
Given the disconnect between the widely-held beliefs of older patients and the treatments 
they receive at the end of life, we theorize that the decision to proceed with surgery for frail 
elderly patients who are unlikely to benefit from surgery contributes to the problem of 
unwanted care. In this paper we explore the challenges of high-stakes surgical decision 
making from the perspective of seniors and surgeons using qualitative content analysis of 
focus group discussions.
Methods
We developed a tool to help structure in-the-moment conversations between surgeons and 
patients that would help align surgical treatments with the outcomes frail elderly patients 
prefer. We then recruited seniors and surgeons in Wisconsin for focus groups to provide 
feedback and refine our communication tool called “best case/worst case.”12 Although the 
primary aim of our study was to seek input on the tool (results described in a different 
manuscript), both seniors and surgeons also reported their experiences and beliefs about 
making difficult treatment decisions. In this study, we analyze the content about high-stakes, 
in-the-moment decisions in the setting of a choice between surgery and palliative care.
Nabozny et al.
Page 2
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Focus Group Participants
We convened four focus groups at senior centers and two groups of surgeons in Madison 
and Milwaukee, WI. We used purposeful sampling to target senior centers with different 
socio-economic and ethnic-racial backgrounds. We included English-speaking adults age 60 
and older who reported experience with a difficult medical decision for themselves or a 
loved one in the past 10 years. We then sub-selected those who expressed interest in the 
study by age and sex.
We included surgeons who practice general, vascular, cardiothoracic and neurologic surgery 
from private and academic practices who in the last 3 months had treated at least one elderly 
patient with a non-elective surgical problem and at least one patient who required admission 
to the intensive care unit (ICU). We used a snowball sampling technique whereby 2 
investigators (MLS, KJB) emailed 5 surgeons in their local area and asked each surgeon to 
identify 5-10 surgeons who might meet our inclusion criteria; these surgeons were then 
invited to participate. Study investigators were subsequently blinded to the identification of 
all surgeon-respondents with the exception of one member of the research team (NMS) who 
invited 10 surgeons from each city who expressed interest and met inclusion criteria based 
on the surgeon's practice characteristics, age, and gender.
Each focus group session was audio recorded and transcribed verbatim and identifying 
information of respondents was redacted. Seniors and surgeons gave written informed 
consent and received cash honoraria at the completion of the 90-minute session. This study 
was approved by the Social Sciences Institutional Review Board of the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison.
Focus Group Guide
A trained moderator from the University of Wisconsin Survey Center facilitated each 90 
minute session. Seniors were prompted to describe their experience making a decision that 
was preference-sensitive by asking participants to describe a medical decision that involved 
a “trade-off” between desirable and undesirable outcomes. The facilitator then described a 
scenario about a frail, 79 year-old woman with multiple comorbidities and a tender 
thoracoabdominal aneurysm (TAA) (see Box1), and asked participants to describe what they 
might want to know if they had to make a decision about surgical treatment. (for focus group 
guide, see Supplemental Digital Content 1)
Next, the moderator showed a 7-minute video of a surgeon discussing treatment options for 
TAA with the patient described in the scenario. The surgeon in the video used our novel 
communication tool called “best case/worse case” to present treatment options as a choice 
between surgery and palliative care.12,13 (for transcript, see Supplemental Digital Content 2) 
Two vascular surgeons independently reviewed the video to confirm that the presentation 
accurately represented the range of outcomes for surgery and palliative care based on the 
patient's comorbidities. The facilitator then asked seniors questions derived from the 
Decision Aid Acceptability Scale13 and Decisional Conflict Scale14 that were modified to fit 
the focus group format. Focus group participants completed a short anonymous exit survey 
that included demographic questions and the Control Preferences Scale.15
Nabozny et al.
Page 3
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Surgeon focus groups followed the same format with two modifications. First, surgeons 
were asked to describe the challenges of talking with frail, elderly patients about surgery. 
Then the moderator described a frail 83-year-oldwoman with multiple comorbidities, 
including dementia, who presented with toxic mega colon from C. difficile colitis (see Box 
2). We instructed surgeons to assume the role of consulting surgeon and queried them about 
their discussion of treatment options with this patient and her family. Surgeons then watched 
the same video shown to seniors of an older woman with a tender TAA and were asked 
modified questions from the Decision Aid Acceptability Scale13 and Decisional Conflict 
Scale.14
Analysis
We used content analysis to analyze each written transcript inductively without pre-
formulated hypotheses or theories.16 After independent analysis of the first transcript by all 
seven investigators, at least three members of the research team convened to discuss each 
coded phrase or idea. This procedure was repeated for each subsequent transcript using the 
technique of constant-comparison, whereby codes were continually refined against previous 
uses of the code17 ultimately developing a catalogue of consensus codes that we used for all 
6 focus group transcripts. This allowed for new codes to arise as they presented in the data 
and for continual refinement of codes as patterns emerged. We used the group process of 
code reconciliation to generate higher level concepts about patient-surgeon communication, 
decisional needs of seniors and explanatory models about end-of-life treatment decisions. 
We ceased conducting focus groups when we reached theoretical saturation, i.e. when 
concepts, themes and trends were found to have a predictable degree of regularity within the 
data. We used NVivo software (QSR International) for data management.
Researchers
The research team has shared experience of high-stakes decision making in critically ill 
elderly patients and represents an intentional collection of diverse professional backgrounds: 
surgery (MJN, KJB, MLS), intensive care (KJB), internal medicine (JMK, TCC), palliative 
care (KJB, TCC) patient advocacy (NMS, MEG) and public health (NMS).These different 
professional identities allowed us to consider a variety of interpretations of the data and 
manage assumptions and role-based biases throughout analysis.
Results
Thirty-seven seniors and seventeen surgeons participated in the focus groups. Participants 
had a range of educational backgrounds, nearly 75% of senior participants were women and 
over 80% of surgeon participants were men. The majority of seniors preferred to have either 
a major role in decision making or share some responsibility with their doctor. (Table 1)
During discussions about aging and long-term goals, both seniors and surgeons voiced 
strongly held beliefs about the importance of maintaining independence and quality of life at 
the end of life. When presented with an in-the-moment treatment decision, seniors used two 
models to evaluate the choice between surgery and palliative care, one of which did not 
incorporate previously stated preferences about quality of life. Likewise, surgeons described 
Nabozny et al.
Page 4
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the presentation of treatment options in this setting using a variety of choice constructions 
and identified forces beyond the decision-making conversation that promote surgical 
intervention.
Seniors on quality of life
There was broad consensus among seniors about the desire to maintain quality of life near 
the end of life, worry about the potential for dying poorly, and fear of living in a nursing 
home. Seniors regularly asserted that quality of life, and not life prolongation, should guide 
medical decision making for older patients. They were particularly concerned about their 
future ability to converse with relatives, ambulate, avoid suffering, and make decisions. 
Seniors noted that loss of independence was abhorrent and frequently endorsed death as 
preferable in comparison to prolonged life where they would be dependent on family or 
other care providers for basic needs. One senior said, “If I'm going to go, then you just take 
me at 79 when my mind is good, my health is good, and, I mean, my brain is good, because I 
don't want to live [to] 80 and be dependent.”
Seniors believed that living in a nursing home would lead to personal suffering, loneliness, 
depression and a downward trajectory toward the end of life. Only one senior expressed a 
positive view of nursing homes based on her mother's experience at a “good” nursing home. 
Seniors viewed living in a nursing home as so undesirable that if long-term residence in a 
nursing home was described as a possible outcome of a medical decision this would force 
the option most likely to prevent nursing home residence. For example, during the initial 
discussion about trade-offs, one senior describing her choice about pacemaker insertion said, 
“I didn't have a choice… I'd have to go to a nursing home and be taken care of, or get the 
pacemaker.”
Choosing between surgery and palliative care
Although seniors largely asserted that quality of life and avoidance of dependency should 
guide medical decisions for older patients, when presented with a specific choice between 
surgery and palliative care for a patient with a tender TAA where the best postoperative 
outcome was described as functional dependence in a nursing home, many respondents did 
not use this information to determine their choice. Instead, seniors in all four focus groups 
understood the decision to have surgery or palliative care in one of two ways: 1) a choice 
between life and death, or 2) a choice about how to die. (Table 2)
Choosing Life or Death—Within the life-or-death framework seniors asserted that it was 
obligatory to choose life and thus choose surgery. This sentiment was expressed in various 
ways; a moral imperative to continue living; a religious act - putting faith in God to decide 
between life and death; and a notion that it is not acceptable to choose death. Seniors 
reported that failure to do everything possible to stay alive or a decision to take a less 
aggressive stance would be associated with profound guilt; declining any life prolonging 
measure was evading responsibility to live and choosing death would disappoint others. 
Several seniors expressed dismay that palliative care was presented as an option; they 
believed all interventions that had a chance of preventing death should be done without 
question or deliberation. Some seniors noted that it was not up to them to make life or death 
Nabozny et al.
Page 5
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 decisions and appealed to divine intervention, for example “if someone said that was going 
to rupture in a day or so, I would do everything possible, and I would say, I'm having that 
surgery and put it in the Lord's hands.”
Seniors also explained that it was preferable to die during attempts to prolong life: they 
believed it was better to die trying. This conviction hinged on two beliefs; 1) that surgery 
was something that could be attempted and then easily stopped if the outcome was 
undesirable and 2) when death is the outcome of surgery it is painless. Although the surgeon 
in the video specifically noted that perioperative death would occur much later in the ICU 
and did not mention intraoperative death as a possibility, seniors maintained a belief that if 
death were to occur it would be in the operating room, something they viewed as painless. 
Furthermore, seniors valued death in the operating room as it satisfied the need to pursue life 
and avoided the emotional hazards associated with deciding to withdraw life sustaining 
treatments later. Thus surgery was a good choice because if death occurred, it was both 
painless and out of the patient's control.
Seniors' rationale for choosing surgical intervention was also based on doubt about the 
accuracy of the information provided. They believed the surgeon was concealing the 
possibility that surgery would go “well” and despite the surgeon's statements to the contrary 
they believed that by choosing surgery the patient could lead “a normal life” afterwards. 
Seniors' distrust of information was not necessarily directed at the surgeon; instead they felt 
betrayed by medicine in general. They struggled to believe that medical technology had 
nothing else to offer a frail, elderly woman with multiple comorbidities and asymptomatic 
TAA. Seniors made requests for a “second or third opinion” and insisted “there must be 
other options.” Several seniors wanted to know what a “successful” surgery would look like 
as opposed to a markedly reduced functional state that was described in the best case 
scenario with surgery.
Choosing how to die—Seniors who considered palliative care as a legitimate treatment 
strategy viewed death as the likely outcome of both surgery and palliative care. (Table 2) 
Although they noted that the patient might live longer if she chose to have surgery, they 
believed that the patient's condition after surgery would be highly undesirable. They 
reasoned that the patient would ultimately die even with surgery, therefore surgical 
intervention and life prolongation was not worthwhile. Within this construct they made 
statements about how they would want their own death to proceed: they wanted it to be 
peaceful and without undue burden on their families. They wanted to maximize comfort, 
pain control and time with family members. For example, “he's telling me… I'm going to die 
anyway, so I'd rather say goodbye to my family and just give me pain control … so I'd tell 
them bye.”
These seniors believed that life as it was before the patient developed a tender TAA was not 
a possible outcome of surgical intervention. Thus, they would prefer to avoid suffering that 
could not restore their previous health state. One senior said, “No, I wouldn't go through the 
surgery when he say[s] to you, I know I'm going to die anyway… I don't want to deal with a 
nursing home or be unable to do stuff by myself, so I'd rather just go on and not suffer 
anymore.” Seniors who used this construction to evaluate treatment options viewed death as 
Nabozny et al.
Page 6
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a natural event and palliative care as a rational and acceptable option. These seniors also 
desired control over the dying process. For example, “death is natural for everybody. It's 
just, I think everyone would like to have some control over how they're going to die.”
Surgeons on quality of life
Like seniors, surgeons emphasized the importance of quality of life when evaluating 
treatment options for older patients, and noted that morbidity was a far more important 
outcome than mortality. Surgeons were less precise about their definition of poor quality of 
life describing it as “loss of function” or “permanent functional difficulties.” Surgeons 
similarly reported that living in a nursing home was “miserable” or a “fate worse than 
death” and shared concerns about the power of the nursing home to motivate decision 
making.
Presentation of options
There was consensus, though not unanimous, that both the patient with a tender TAA and 
the patient with toxic megacolon described in the surgeons' focus group script had non-
survivable problems and that even with surgery the outcome was decidedly poor. Surgeons 
agreed that there was ethical tension between their obligation to limit the burdens of surgery 
to patients who would have a valuable outcome and their duty to rescue the critically ill 
patient. Surgeons differed about the right way to frame this treatment discussion and noted 
how difficult it was to communicate their professional opinion that even though surgery 
could be done, it should not be done.
Some surgeons believed the likelihood of a good outcome was so small and the burdens of 
treatment were so high, that they would not offer surgery to the patients we described or 
others they described with similarly non-salvageable conditions. (Table 3) For example, 
“Sometimes people want something done I won't ethically [or] morally do. I'm not in favor 
of cutting off a septic leg in an 88-year-old comatose lady from a nursing home because 
there's no future.” Surgeons gave two explanations for this strategy 1) they would not want 
their own mother operated on under these circumstances and 2) their professional duty 
required that they avoid burdening patients with an intervention when there was no 
reasonable expectation for survival.
Other surgeons reported that they would offer and perform surgery if the patient and/or 
family insisted, but they would frame the decision-making conversation in a way that would 
bias the choice against surgery. For example, “I mean, you, we've made our decision that 
probably this patient really doesn't warrant a surgery … And so you make that decision 
when you go see that patient, and you're going to steer the patient and the family in the 
direction of conservative [treatment] …” Still others noted they would present the decision 
for surgery or palliative care as an individual choice about the trade offs between risks and 
benefits; they would present the options and let the patient and family to decide whether 
surgery should be performed. “… I see my job to try and help them understand what their 
options are. Their job is to choose, you know.”
Nabozny et al.
Page 7
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clinical Momentum
Surgeons expressed resignation that the patients described would have an operation, 
regardless of the value of surgery for the patient. This was attributed to factors outside the 
surgeon's control; end-of-the-day or middle-of-the-night consults, inadequate time for 
decision making, and expectations from consulting physicians. Surgeons noted that before 
they even spoke with the patient or family the operating room had been called, in good faith 
by someone trying to expedite care, and that it was just easier to operate than to explain to 
the family why surgery was not the right treatment.
Surgeons described a progression of clinical momentum whereby the diagnosis of a surgical 
problem pushed the care trajectory along an inevitable course towards intervention that they 
were unable to stop. Surgeons believed that patients and families presume a surgical 
consultation signals surgery is the appropriate treatment strategy. Surgeons also held 
referring physicians accountable for starting a process that did not consider the patient's 
overall health. For example, “I'll get some woman in the office who's 75, smoked all her life, 
on oxygen, in a wheelchair, on anti-coagulated [sic] for her heart disease. Somebody gets a 
mammogram. They find a little spot. They biopsy the little spot. It's a little cancer. She'll 
show up with six family members who are just all, you know, this cancer has got to be 
treated, when the woman has got a life expectancy probably less than two years.” Another 
surgeon described an emergency consultation for a patient with severe dementia and 
subdural hemorrhage. He was frustrated and baffled that he had been asked by the 
emergency room physician to treat the patient's acute bleeding. “[I told him] well, the best-
case scenario is I get her back to being [an]end-stage Alzheimer's patient who's completely 
aphasic and not ambulatory. And they go, ‘oh, we guess we never thought of that.’”
Discussion
Seniors and surgeons universally agreed that maximizing quality of life and avoiding loss of 
independence should guide treatment decisions for older patients. However, when faced 
with an acute choice between surgery and palliative care where the best surgical outcome is 
described as prolonged hospitalization and long-term nursing home care, seniors viewed this 
either as a choice between life and death or a decision about how to die. Seniors who saw 
this decision as a life or death choice felt it was morally unacceptable to choose death and it 
would be better to die in the operating room where death would be determined by the 
surgeon and/or God. Others believed that surgery would only prolong the dying process and 
expressed a desire to control how they die emphasizing comfort and time with family.
Although surgeons agreed that very frail patients should not have surgery they held 
conflicting views about how to present treatment options; some surgeons would not offer 
surgery, others would heavily favor palliative care and some would state the options and let 
the patient or family decide. Surgeons noted several factors beyond their control that 
contribute to a clinical momentum promoting surgical intervention despite professional 
concerns that surgery is not valuable. These findings are important because they suggest that 
misunderstandings and faulty expectations determine the outcome of high-stakes surgical 
decision making. Observation of these challenges to surgical decision making presents an 
Nabozny et al.
Page 8
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 opportunity to assist frail elderly patients and their families in the setting of acute surgical 
illness and has important implications for surgeons, patients and policy makers.
For surgeons, it is critical to appreciate and dispel false assumptions about treatment 
outcomes for frail elderly patients. It is not surprising that patients who feel it is better to die 
trying would choose an operation with 60% mortality because they believe that death would 
occur painlessly and out of their control in the operating room. As intra operative death is a 
rare occurrence, surgeons need to illustrate the cascade of postoperative complications and 
interventions that typically precede postoperative death rather than simply stating the 
statistical probability of death. Surgeons will also need to describe the range of surgical 
outcomes for the individual patient within the context of the patient's overall prognosis with 
careful attention to the patient's health trajectory before surgical illness. Given patient 
skepticism and popular notions about the capacity of modern medicine18 this may require 
support from surgical colleagues or the patient's primary care physician. While the logistics 
of this strategy are onerous, the chance to avoid an unwanted burdensome intervention may 
be invaluable to the patient and his/her family. Furthermore, such efforts may prevent 
surgeon frustration, dismay and emotional accountability stemming from downstream 
withdrawal of postoperative life supporting treatments.19-21,20
For patients, our data show that aligning personal preferences with treatment decisions is 
extremely difficult in the acute setting. Because physicians in general discuss treatments and 
fail to offer information about long-term prognosis22-24 patients and their families are 
woefully unprepared for an acute event and struggle to place a decision about surgery within 
the larger context of their overall health. Instead they use heuristics to choose surgery 25 and 
may not incorporate their previously stated preferences and values about quality of life. 
These overly simplified decisions may lead to unwanted invasive treatments at the end of 
life. We are hopeful that some seniors were able to do the harder work of imagining their 
reaction to future health states and could see that the best outcome of surgery was a state 
where quality of life was not acceptable. Future efforts to improve decision making will 
need to focus on helping patients move from intuitive-emotional decision making and 
embrace effortful and more analytic decision making.26
For policy makers, specifically hospital administrators, we have identified a link between 
current systems to encourage efficiency and unwanted care. Hospital processes that increase 
efficiency may benefit patients through provision of earlier treatment, reduced length of stay 
and decreased hospital costs. However, these same efficiencies inhibit opportunity for 
deliberation between doctors and patients about whether intervention is even appropriate. 
This is further compounded by messages inferred from physicians requesting surgical 
consultation and family expectations to produce a powerful force of clinical momentum that 
favors intervention and is difficult to reverse with a simple conversation between surgeon 
and patient.
Our study highlights an ethical tension for surgeons about how to discuss possible 
treatments for patients who are unlikely to survive postoperatively. When surgeons present 
surgery as a possible option, patients and their families may view surgery as beneficial even 
though the surgeon thinks differently.27 The harms that ensue from this misunderstanding 
Nabozny et al.
Page 9
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 include not only the burden of unwanted treatment at the end of life but also decisional 
regret for family members who assume responsibility for a treatment decision leading to 
their loved one's death if they decline surgery. In addition, our data highlight that seniors 
prefer to make difficult decisions in conjunction with their physician rather than choose 
from a menu of treatment options. As such, a better strategy would focus the discussion on 
prognosis and goals (as opposed to treatments and choices) and culminate with a strong 
recommendation from the surgeon. While many acute surgical illnesses do not predictably 
lead to grim outcomes like those described in our focus group, it is important to recognize 
and avoid the unnecessary damage incurred by presenting patients and families with a 
choice when the benefits of surgery are so limited.22
Our study has several limitations. The focus group script was designed to elicit feedback 
regarding a communication tool, thus there were no prompts or mechanism to explore the 
themes described herein more fully. The surgeon in the video noted that death was the most 
likely outcome of surgery and stated that choosing supportive care was an 
“acknowledgment” that the aneurysm would be fatal. Although this structure is significantly 
different than “if we don't operate you will die,” the conversation portrayed in the video may 
have influenced the “life or death” construct our senior respondents reported. While we 
purposefully selected seniors who had experience making difficult medical decisions, all 
participants were community dwelling and presumably had some distance from the prospect 
of acute illness. Consistent with prospect theory, less healthy participants may have 
expressed stronger preferences for life sustaining interventions 28 or have a broader 
definitions about acceptable quality of life. Further more our study was not designed to 
examine how religious belief influences decisions but it is likely that such beliefs impact 
these difficult choices.29 Finally, surgeons in Wisconsin may have distinctly different 
viewpoints on invasive treatments at the end of life given known geographic variations in 
treatment styles.30
Conclusions
Although seniors and surgeons highly value quality of life at the end of life, this notion is 
difficult to incorporate in acute surgical decisions. Some seniors are able to use their values 
to consider a choice between surgery and palliative care, while others view this as a simple 
choice between life and death, and choosing life is obligatory. Surgeons acknowledge 
significant challenges framing decisions about surgery with limited value and cite forces 
beyond the decision-making conversation that promote surgical intervention.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Ken Croes, PhD from the UW Survey Center for his moderation of the focus 
groups, Layton “Bing” Rikkers, MD for his role as study champion, the Collaborative Center for Health Equity 
(ICTR CCHE), and the Community-Academic Aging Research Network (CAARN) for their help with focus group 
participant recruitment, the Qualitative Research Group (ICTR QRG) and Nora Jacobson, PhD for assistance with 
Nabozny et al.
Page 10
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 study design and presentation of results and Bob Arnold, MD for his comments on an earlier version of this 
manuscript.
Financial Support: Dr. Schwarze is supported by a training award (KL2TR000428) from the Clinical and 
Translational Science Award (CTSA) program, through the NIH National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences (NCATS), grant (UL1 TR000427) and the Greenwall Foundation (Greenwall Faculty Scholars Program.) 
The project described was also supported by the National Institute for Minority Health and Health Disparities 
Center of Excellence program, through the UW Collaborative Center for Health Equity (CCHE) grant 
(5P60MD003428.) These funding sources had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, 
management, analysis, or interpretation of the data; and preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript for 
publication. No other financial support was declared for the remaining authors.
References
1. Barnato AE, McClellan MB, Kagay CR, et al. Trends in inpatient treatment intensity among 
Medicare beneficiaries at the end of life. Health Serv Res. 2004; 39:363–75. [PubMed: 15032959] 
2. Kwok AC, Semel ME, Lipsitz SR, et al. The intensity and variation of surgical care at the end of 
life: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2011; 378:1408–13. [PubMed: 21982520] 
3. Finlayson E, Zhao S, Boscardin WJ, et al. Functional status after colon cancer surgery in elderly 
nursing home residents. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012; 60:967–73. [PubMed: 22428583] 
4. Finlayson E, Fan Z, Birkmeyer JD. Outcomes in octogenarians undergoing high-risk cancer 
operation: a national study. J Am Coll Surg. 2007; 205:729–34. [PubMed: 18035254] 
5. Fried TR, Bradley EH, Towle VR, et al. Understanding the treatment preferences of seriously ill 
patients. N Engl J Med. 2002; 346:1061–6. [PubMed: 11932474] 
6. White DB, Arnold RM. The evolution of advance directives. JAMA. 2011; 306:1485–6. [PubMed: 
21972313] 
7. Fagerlin A, Schneider CE. Enough. The failure of the living will. Hastings Cent Rep. 2004; 34:30–
42. [PubMed: 15156835] 
8. Sudore RL, Fried TR. Redefining the “planning” in advance care planning: preparing for end-of-life 
decision making. Ann Intern Med. 2010; 153:256–61. [PubMed: 20713793] 
9. Pecanac KE, Kehler JM, Brasel KJ, et al. It's Big Surgery: Preoperative Expressions of Risk, 
Responsibility, and Commitment to Treatment After High-Risk Operations. Ann Surg. 2014; 
259:458–463. [PubMed: 24253139] 
10. Kaplan AL, Crespi CM, Saucedo JD, et al. Decisional Conflict in Economically Disadvantaged 
Men With Newly Diagnosed Prostate Cancer: Baseline Results From a Shared Decision-Making 
Trial. Cancer. 2014
11. An introduction to patient decision aids. BMJ. 2013; 347:f4147. [PubMed: 23881944] 
12. Schwarze ML, Kehler JM, Campbell TC. Navigating High Risk Procedures with More than Just a 
Street Map. J Palliat Med. 2013; 16:1169–1171. [PubMed: 24003993] 
13. O'Connor, A.; Cranney, A. [Accessed July 7, 2013] User Manual - Acceptability. 1996. document 
on the InternetAvailable at: http://decisionaid.ohri.ca/docs/develop/User_Manuals/
UM_Acceptability.pdf
14. O'Connor, AM. [Accessed January 23, 2014] Decisional Conflict Scale. 1993. [updated 2005]. 
Available at: www.ohri.ca/decisionaid
15. Degner LF, Sloan JA, Venkatesh P. The Control Preferences Scale. Can J Nurs Res. 1997; 29:21–
43. [PubMed: 9505581] 
16. Kondracki NL, Wellman NS, Amundson DR. Content analysis: review of methods and their 
applications in nutrition education. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2002; 34:224–30. [PubMed: 12217266] 
17. Mays N, Pope C. Assessing quality in qualitative research. BMJ. 2000; 320:50–52. [PubMed: 
10617534] 
18. O'Rourke, M. What's Wrong With Me? The New Yorker. New York, NY: Condé Nast; 2013. p. 
32-37.
19. Cassell J, Buchman TG, Streat S, et al. Surgeons, intensivists, and the covenant of care: 
administrative models and values affecting care at the end of life--Updated. Crit Care Med. 2003; 
31:1551–7. [PubMed: 12771632] 
Nabozny et al.
Page 11
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 20. Schwarze ML, Bradley CT, Brasel KJ. Surgical “buy-in”: the contractual relationship between 
surgeons and patients that influences decisions regarding life-supporting therapy. Crit Care Med. 
2010; 38:843–8. [PubMed: 20048678] 
21. Bosk, CL. Error Rank Responsibility. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press; 1979. p. 36-70.
22. Russ AJ, Kaufman SR. Family perceptions of prognosis, silence, and the “suddenness” of death. 
Cult Med Psychiatry. 2005; 29:103–23. [PubMed: 16108205] 
23. Smith AK, Williams BA, Lo B. Discussing overall prognosis with the very elderly. N Engl J Med. 
2011; 365:2149–51. [PubMed: 22150033] 
24. Lamont EB, Christakis NA. Prognostic disclosure to patients with cancer near the end of life. Ann 
Intern Med. 2001; 134:1096–105. [PubMed: 11412049] 
25. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science. 1974; 
185:1124–31. [PubMed: 17835457] 
26. Kahneman, D. Thinking Fast and Slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux; 2011. 
27. Blinderman CD, Krakauer EL, Solomon ML. Time to Revise the Approach to Determining 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Status. JAMA. 2012; 307:917–918. [PubMed: 22396511] 
28. Winter L, Parker B. Current health and preferences for life-prolonging treatments: an application 
of prospect theory to end-of-life decision making. Soc Sci Med. 2007; 65:1695–707. [PubMed: 
17655996] 
29. Boyd EA, Lo B, Evans LR, et al. “It's not just what the doctor tells me:” factors that influence 
surrogate decision-makers' perceptions of prognosis. Crit Care Med. 2010; 38:1270–5. [PubMed: 
20228686] 
30. Barnato AE, Herndon MB, Anthony DL, et al. Are regional variations in end-of-life care intensity 
explained by patient preferences?: A Study of the US Medicare Population. Med Care. 2007; 
45:386–93. [PubMed: 17446824] 
Nabozny et al.
Page 12
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Thoracoabdominal Aneurysm Scenario
Nabozny et al.
Page 13
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Toxic Megacolon Scenario: Surgeon Focus Groups
Nabozny et al.
Page 14
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nabozny et al.
Page 15
Table 1
Participant Characteristics
Seniors (N=37)
Number (%)
Male
10 (27)
Age, (yr)
 60-69
15 (41)
 70-79
10 (27)
 >80
12 (32)
Race/Ethnicity*
 White
26 (70)
 Black or African American
3 (8)
 Hispanic
5 (13)
 Other
1 (3)
Education*
 Some high school or less
1 (3)
 High school diploma or GED
10 (27)
 Occasional college or some college
9 (24)
 College degree
9 (24)
 Professional or graduate degree
6 (16)
Seniors' Decision Making Preferences†
 I prefer to make the decision about which treatment I will receive.
4 (11)
 I prefer to make the final decision about my treatment after seriously considering my doctor's opinion.
18 (49)
 I prefer that my doctor and I share responsibility for deciding which treatment is best for me.
6 (16)
 I prefer that the doctor makes the final decision about treatment that will be used, but seriously considers my opinion.
1 (3)
 I prefer leaving all decisions about my treatment to my doctors.
0 (0)
 Multiple responses
7 (19)
Surgeons (N=17)
Male
14 (82)
Specialty‡
 General (colorectal, surgical oncology, trauma)
10 (59)
 Vascular
4 (24)
 Cardiothoracic
4 (24)
 Neurosurgery
2 (12)
Practice Location
 Academic
12 (71)
 Private Practice
5 (29)
*Two seniors did not respond
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nabozny et al.
Page 16
†One senior did not respond
‡Several surgeons practiced general and vascular surgery i.e. percentage >100%
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nabozny et al.
Page 17
Table 2
How seniors decide between surgery and palliative care
Decision Construct
Underlying reasoning
Quotes
Life or death
Imperative to choose life
•
Guilt/disappoint others
•
Only God decides life and 
death
•
Cannot explicitly choose 
death
•
“I didn't have the right morally to decline the surgery.”
•
“Go ahead and have the surgery and get it, put it in the hands 
of the man that is going to take care of you.”
•
“It all depends how much you want to live. Do you want to get 
well? Have faith in God and your doctor.”
It's better to die trying
•
It's painless to die in the 
operating room
•
Demonstrates intent to live
•
Death in surgery is okay 
because it is controlled by 
someone else(surgeon/God)
•
“She had a lot of stuff, but, you know, a lot of … but I felt that 
if I make a decision, and she would pass while they were doing 
the surgery, at least I took the initiative of, you know, giving 
her that chance.”
•
“it's important and necessary that you should get the surgery. It 
might not turn out the best, but it's better for you if you do have 
the surgery.”
•
“I mean, two days, it's going to break. I would say, well, give 
me the operation, and if I live, I live. I mean, to me, there's no 
choice.”
Life is better than stated
•
Disbelief about outcomes/
options
•
Surgeon is wrong/
misinformed
•
Surgery might be 
“successful”
•
“First question is, well, let's see, if I reduce the blood pressure, 
or is there something you could do to strengthen that piece of 
artery or something?”
•
“But we all know that miracles can happen.”
•
“I might like to have some examples of when [surgery] has 
been a successful… That in some cases, a surgery goes very 
well, and you can resume almost a normal life.”
How to die
Death is the outcome of surgery and 
supportive care
•
Death now or death later
•
Surgery will prolong dying
•
“And it's when you die, or in this one, you die… You just die 
sooner or later.”
•
“and even in here, you know, either/or, they're telling her, 
you're going to die either way. It's just that one will take right 
away, and the other one, it would be prolonged.”
Desire to control how death occurs
•
To be with family
•
Pain controlled
•
Peacefully
•
“I don't want to deal with a nursing home or be unable to do 
stuff by myself, so I'd rather just go on and not suffer anymore. 
I'd rather go in peace, say bye to my family, let all them 
gather.”
•
“I'm going to die anyway, so I'd rather say goodbye to my 
family and just give me pain control so I could, as much as 
they could control the pain, and I know I'm fitting to go, so I'd 
tell [family] bye.”
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nabozny et al.
Page 18
Table 3
Surgeons' presentation of treatment options for very frail patients.
Choice Presentation
Rationale
Quotes
No choice
Surgery is not offered
•
Outcome is unacceptable
•
Professional duty to avoid 
burdensome treatment
“If you're not going to survive, you're not going to survive, and 
there's really no reason to take someone to surgery to do an autopsy 
and, you know, send the bill to Medicare.”
“And one of the things I always tell them is that surgery is not a 
success if you just make it through an operation and are disabled 
the rest of your life. That's not successful surgery.”
Biased choice
•
Surgeon has decided patient 
should not have surgery
•
Frames the decision to favor 
non-operative strategy
“I mean, you, we've made our decision that probably this patient 
really doesn't warrant a surgery …And so you make that decision 
when you go see that patient, and you're going to steer the patient 
and the family in the direction of conservative [treatment]”
Simple choice
•
Patient/family to decide 
based on options presented
•
Surgeon suppresses/does not 
present own opinion about 
value of surgery
“Well, I don't think anybody in this room thinks [she should have 
an operation], and yet, we keep talking about presenting her with 
the choices.”
“… I see my job to try and help them understand what their options 
are. Their job is to choose, you know.”
“But usually, I won't tell until patients ask my opinion.”
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
