 Youth-Onset Type 2 Diabetes
Consensus Report: Current Status,
Challenges, and Priorities
Diabetes Care 2016;39:1635–1642 | DOI: 10.2337/dc16-1066
Type 2 diabetes is a significant and increasing burden in adolescents and young
adults. Clear strategies for research, prevention, and treatment of the disease in
these vulnerable patients are needed. Evidence suggests that type 2 diabetes in
children is different not only from type 1 but also from type 2 diabetes in adults.
Understanding the unique pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes in youth, as well as
the risk of complications and the psychosocial impact, will enable industry,
academia, funding agencies, advocacy groups, and regulators to collectively
evaluate both current and future research, treatment, and prevention approaches.
This Consensus Report characterizes type 2 diabetes in children, evaluates the
fundamental differences between childhood and adult disease, describes the cur-
rent therapeutic options, and discusses challenges to and approaches for developing
new treatments.
Youth-onset type 2 diabetes is an emerging disorder in children, adolescents, and
young adults with unique challenges in both research and clinical care. Type 2 di-
abetes has a disproportionate impact on youth of ethnic/racial minorities and from
disadvantaged backgrounds (Fig. 1) and occurs in complex psychosocial and cultural
environments that make durable lifestyle change elusive and adherence to medical
recommendations a struggle. Furthermore, these complexities hinder successful
recruitment into and completion of research programs (1), leaving large gaps in
knowledge on pathophysiology and treatment optimization.
Type 2 diabetes in youth clearly differs from type 1 diabetes and more closely
resembles the pathophysiology in adults: insulin resistance and nonautoimmune
b-cell failure. However, youth-onset type 2 diabetes displays unique aspects, such
as rapidly progressive b-cell decline (Fig. 2) and accelerated development of di-
abetes complications. Treatment options for youth-onset type 2 diabetes are in-
adequate, limited to two approved drugs (insulin and metformin) and the
promotion of healthy lifestyles. Comprehensive, coordinated, and innovative strat-
egies for the investigation, prevention, and treatment of youth-onset type 2 di-
abetes are urgently needed.
OBJECTIVES
The American Diabetes Association, in collaboration with the American Academy
of Pediatrics, International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes, and
Pediatric Endocrine Society, conducted a consensus conference. The goal was to
review the current state of knowledge and controversies surrounding youth-
onset type 2 diabetes, including similarities and differences between childhood
and adult disease, current therapeutic options, and unmet clinical and research
needs, in order to make specific recommendations regarding research priorities
1Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado
SchoolofMedicine,andDepartmentofEndocrinology,
Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO
2Section of Psychology, Department of Pediat-
rics, Baylor College of Medicine Education at
Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX
3American Diabetes Association, Alexandria, VA
4Clinical Development, Daiichi Sankyo, New York,
NY
5Department of Pediatrics and Harold Hamm
Diabetes Center–Children’s, The University of
Oklahoma College of Medicine, Oklahoma City,
OK
6Indiana University School of Medicine, Indian-
apolis, IN
7School of Public Health, The City University of
New York, New York, NY
8The University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
9Pediatrics and Community Health, Northern
Navajo Medical Center, Navajo Area Indian
Health Service, Shiprock, NM
10Department of Pediatrics, Health Sciences Cen-
tre Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Canada
11Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and
Yale Center for Clinical Investigation, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT
Corresponding author: Philip Zeitler, philip.
zeitler@childrenscolorado.org.
© 2016 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the work
is properly cited, the use is educational and not
for profit, and the work is not altered. More in-
formation is available at http://diabetesjournals
.org/site/license.
Kristen J. Nadeau,1 Barbara J. Anderson,2
Erika G. Berg,3 Jane L. Chiang,3
Hubert Chou,4 Kenneth C. Copeland,5
Tamara S. Hannon,6 Terry T.-K. Huang,7
Jane L. Lynch,8 Jeff Powell,9
Elizabeth Sellers,10
William V. Tamborlane,11 and
Philip Zeitler1
Diabetes Care Volume 39, September 2016
1635
CONSENSUS REPORT
 and creation of a sustainable clinical
research infrastructure that supports
treatment development.
A CASE STUDY: THE FACE OF
YOUTH-ONSET TYPE 2 DIABETES
R.Y., an 11-year-old youth of American
Indian heritage, was diagnosed with
type 2 diabetes during a routine school
physical exam. Her mother had re-
cently moved the family from a stressful
urban environment of domestic vio-
lence, financial distress, frequent school
changes, unstable housing, and lack of
consistent parental supervision back
home to her childhood community.
Before the move, R.Y. had developed
poor school performance, oppositional
behavior, and severe weight gain. R.Y.’s
mother wondered if R.Y.’s diabetes
diagnosis was due to gestational dia-
betes mellitus, witnessing physical
abuse, or social inequalities. The return
to the Native American community
benefitted R.Y., with improvements in
R.Y.’s school performance, relation-
ships, and disciplinary issues, as well
as improvement in family cohesion.
However, the family continued to face
barriers to adopting a healthy life-
style: long drives to school, a health
clinic, or grocery store; financial strains;
and few safe outdoor areas. R.Y. exem-
plifies the complexity of the social
milieu common to youth with type 2
diabetes (2).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The incidence of type 2 diabetes in
youth has increased dramatically over
the past 20 years. In the U.S., estimates
are as high as 5,000 new cases per year
(3). Prevalence increases with age, tri-
pling from age 10–14 years to 15–18
years (4). Although rates in adult men
and women are similar, adolescent girls,
for reasons that remain unclear, have a
60% higher prevalence rate than boys
(4). Disadvantaged racial/ethnic groups
are at higher risk of disease at all ages,
but the association is especially strong in
youth (4) (Fig. 1).
Indigenous children around the world
bear the greatest burden of youth-onset
type 2 diabetes (5). American Indians
have the highest rates of youth-onset
type 2 diabetes in the U.S. (6). More-
over, in the SEARCH for Diabetes in
Youth (SEARCH) study, a population-
based registry of youth with diabetes
from five representative U.S. catchment
sites, nearly half of American Indian
youth with diabetes had an A1C .9.5%
(7). Available global data indicate con-
siderable variation in incidence and
prevalence, depending on ethnicity
and geographical region. Rates of youth-
onset type 2 diabetes are lowest in
Europe. The increasing incidence re-
ported in China and India is of particular
concern, given their large populations
(8,9).
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The Treatment Options for type 2 Dia-
betes in Adolescents and Youth (TODAY)
study was a multicenter trial that exam-
ined the durability of glycemic control in
699 U.S. youth randomized to metfor-
min, metformin plus rosiglitazone, or
metformin plus an intensive lifestyle in-
tervention for up to 6 years, while also
providing pathophysiological insight
into the disease (10,11). Surprisingly,
loss of glycemic control was rapid in
many of the participants, despite a
mean baseline diabetes duration of
only 7.8 months. Lower initial b-cell
reserve and higher A1C following initia-
tion of metformin were significant inde-
pendent predictors of loss of glycemic
control (12,13).
A decline in b-cell function also occurs
in adults with type 2 diabetes, though
not as rapidly as in youth (Fig. 2) (11,
14–16). In particular, the rate of loss of
Figure 2—b-Cell failure rates in adults versus youth with type 2 diabetes. A comparison of
medication treatment failure rates and percent change in surrogate measures of insulin sensi-
tivity and b-cell function as reported in the TODAY study (youth) versus adult studies (A Diabetes
Outcome Progression Trial [ADOPT], U.S. Department of Defense Database [US DOD], and UK
Prospective Diabetes Study [UKPDS]). Note that the studies had different primary end points and
therefore this is an approximate comparison, as there have been no head-to-head comparisons
(11,12,14–16,67,68). Met, metformin; Rosi, rosiglitazone.
Figure 1—Prevalence of youth-onset type 2 diabetes by race/ethnicity. 2009 prevalence of
type 2 diabetes among youth, as published by the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study (4).
Prevalence is reported per 10,000 population at risk for type 2 diabetes (ages 10–19 years).
AA, African American; AI, American Indian; API, Asian Pacific Islander; H, Hispanic; NHW, non-
Hispanic white.
1636
Consensus Report
Diabetes Care Volume 39, September 2016
 glycemic control on either metformin
monotherapy or combination therapy
with rosiglitazone in TODAY appears to be
three- to fourfold higher than published
rates in adults. Although the studies in
Fig. 2 had different primary end points
and lacked head-to-head prospective
evaluations, the outcomes suggest
that b-cell failure may be more rapid
in youth than in adults. Thus, efforts
are needed to preserve b-cell function
in youth before significant deterioration
occurs.
PUBERTY
Puberty is associated with significant
changes in physiology, including a tran-
sient reduction in insulin sensitivity by
;50% in lean, healthy children as they
enter puberty (17). To compensate, in-
sulin secretion must increase recipro-
cally, which may lead to hyperglycemia
in youth with limited b-cell capacity due
to genetic, epigenetic, and/or lifestyle
factors. Thus puberty, similar to preg-
nancy,createsahigh-risktimefordiabetes
development in susceptible individuals.
Furthermore, reminiscent of gestational
diabetes mellitus, diabetes onset during
puberty may be reversible in some youth
due to the dynamic nature of the under-
lying insulin resistance. Other potentially
modifiable risk factors influencing insulin
sensitivity include adiposity, diet, physical
activity, sleep, and stressdall markedly
abnormal in youth-onset type 2 diabetes
(18,19).
COMPLICATIONS
Diabetes duration and glycemic control
are closely associated with the develop-
ment of microvascular complications
in type 1 diabetes and in adult-onset
type 2 diabetes. However, evidence of
microvascular complications and risk
markers for macrovascular complica-
tions are often present at the time of
diagnosis of type 2 diabetes in youth.
At enrollment into the TODAY study,
14% of participants had a blood pres-
sure at the 95th percentile or greater,
13% had microalbuminuria, 80% had a
low HDL cholesterol level, and 10% had
high triglycerides (18). Similarly, in
Canadian First Nations youth with
type 2 diabetes, 37% had elevated triglyc-
erides and apolipoprotein B levels and
12% and 14% of male and female youth,
respectively, had systolic blood pressure
greater than the 95th percentile (20).
Rapid progression of complications is
also seen; current evidence in First Na-
tions youth with type 2 diabetes shows
that renal and neurological complications
begin to appear within 5 years of diagno-
sis, and major complications (dialysis,
blindness, or amputation) start to
manifest 10 years after diagnosis
(21,22).
In the TODAY study, 10% of female
adolescents became pregnant during
the first 6 years of the study despite an
aggressive program of preconception
counseling and access to birth control
(23). When adolescents with type 2 di-
abetes become pregnant, fetuses are
exposed to the metabolic consequences
of diabetes that likely contribute to an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes and
earlier age of diagnosis in the offspring
(24,25). Moreover, in the TODAY study
;30% of pregnancies were complicated
by preterm birth or fetal malformation.
PSYCHOSOCIAL ASPECTS AND
CARE DELIVERY
The World Health Organization defines
the social determinants of health as “the
conditions in which people are born,
grow, work, live, and age,” which are
“the fundamental drivers” of many
health conditions (26). Socioeconomic
status (SES), as determined by income,
education, and employment, among
other factors, is the primary social de-
terminant of health impacting youth
and families living with type 2 diabetes.
Egerter et al. (27) documented how
parental educational attainment af-
fects the health of all family members
through impacts on the parents’ insur-
ance options, the safety and social sup-
port available, choices for housing, and
opportunities for healthy eating and
physical activity in the neighborhood.
In 50% of the TODAY study families,
the highest educational level attained
by a parent was a high school diploma
or less (18). Globally, many populations
at high risk for youth-onset type 2 dia-
betes also have high rates of poverty
and low parental educational attainment
(28).
McEwen and Stellar (29) introduced
the concept of “allostatic load” to de-
scribe how chronic exposure to social
and environmental stressors negatively
impact body weight, metabolism, blood
pressure, and the sympathetic nervous
system. Genetics also plays a role in
individual vulnerability or resilience to SES
adversity, and, conversely, social factors
can alter whether a gene is expressed or
suppressed through epigenetic pathways
(30,31).
Youth with type 2 diabetes and their
family members experience multiple
stressors in their daily lives. However,
stress and other social determinants
are poorly addressed in standard medi-
cal care (32). Alternate models of care
delivery are likely needed to address
stress and will require broad and inten-
sive intervention (33).
LIFESTYLE, COMMUNITY, AND
COORDINATED INTERVENTIONS
FOR THE PREVENTION AND
TREATMENT OF YOUTH-ONSET
TYPE 2 DIABETES
Lifestyle intervention is considered the
first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes
in adults. However, most pediatric life-
style intervention studies have focused
on youth affected by obesity or predia-
betes (34–36), not specifically on youth
with type 2 diabetes. The majority of
interventions have examined individual-
level behavior modification, targeting
diet and/or physical activity with classic
health education and social-cognitive
models. The TODAY study is the only
trial to date combining lifestyle and
drug therapy in youth with type 2 diabetes
(11).
Bright Bodies Weight Management
Program for Children, an intensive
12-month behavior modification inter-
vention in obese youth without diabetes,
demonstrated significant treatment-
induced reductions in BMI, total choles-
terol, and insulin resistance estimated by
HOMA of insulin resistance; results
were sustained at 12-month postinter-
vention (37). In addition, when applied
over 6 months to youth with prediabe-
tes, Bright Bodies showed significantly
more reduction in 2-h glucose com-
pared with standard care participants
(38). However, among children already
diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, the ev-
idence for lifestyle intervention effects
is limited and less clear. In the TODAY
study, lifestyle strategies in combina-
tion with metformin therapy did not
perform better than metformin alone
in delaying progression of hyperglycemia
(11).
Given the complex social and environ-
mental context surrounding youth with
care.diabetesjournals.org
Nadeau and Associates
1637
 type 2 diabetes, individual-level lifestyle
interventions may not be sufficient to
target the complex interplay of family
dynamics (39), mental health (40,41),
community readiness (42), and the
broader environmental system (43).
The few pediatric obesity interventions
to date with psychosocial outcomes
have reported mixed findings, including
decreased anxiety (44) and improved
psychosocial functioning and social
performance (45) but no change in
perceived or measured stress (46).
One alternate model of pediatric care
delivery, the patient-centered medi-
cal home, is designed specifically to
address the social context of pa-
tient care (32) by including three key
componentsdcomprehensive, interdis-
ciplinary care; patient/family-centered
care; and coordinated caredwith all
health and community resources housed
under one roof. A related approach is
to increase community readiness by
assessing a community’s self-identified
needs, mobilizing community leaders
and internal and external resources,
increasing public knowledge, and
cultivating a sense of priority in the
community (47). Environmental strate-
gies could target community access to
healthy foods, physical activity, and
health care (48,49). Importantly, com-
munity engagement and cocreation of
both the content and implementation
of interventions may be key to effective
and sustained impact (50,51).
ADDITIONAL KNOWLEDGE GAPS
IN YOUTH-ONSET TYPE 2
DIABETES
Further limiting the development of
best practices for evaluating and treat-
ing youth-onset type 2 diabetes are gaps
in our understanding of normal and
abnormal glucose metabolism during
adolescence and development of com-
plications and the long-term outcomes
of youth-onset type 2 diabetes (Table 1).
Indeed, even the definitions of predia-
betes and type 2 diabetes in youth are
not evidence based, as they have simply
been extrapolated from glycemic indi-
ces predicting microvascular complica-
tions in adults. Dysglycemia appears to
be transient in some youth, who may
not need long-term drug treatment, and
others rapidly lose glycemic control on
oral monotherapy and require multiple-
drug treatment (52). Given this heteroge-
neity, algorithms to predict disease
trajectory would enable customized
approaches to patients.
Research is needed to better under-
stand what diabetes complications may
require pediatric-specific approaches.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease occurs
in both youth and adults with type 2
diabetes (53), but the pathological phe-
notype is unique and appears more
aggressive in youth. The kidney func-
tion measures for adults are inappro-
priate for youth (54), and little is known
about the long-term outcomes for youth-
onset dyslipidemia, hypertension, kidney
disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease,
and cardiovascular dysfunction (55). The
impact on glycemic control of the sleep
abnormalities endemic among adoles-
cents is also unknown (56).
RECRUITMENT CHALLENGES IN
CLINICAL AND TRANSLATIONAL
RESEARCH
Despite the development of more than
10 different classes of antidiabetes
medications since the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) approval of
sulfonylurea agents in 1984, metfor-
min remains the only oral medication
approved for use in children today
(57,58). Although numerous formula-
tions of insulin are commonly used in
youth-onset type 2 diabetes, they have
not been studied for the specific in-
dication of pediatric type 2 diabetes.
FDA regulations require a commitment
from pharmaceutical sponsors to com-
plete an assessment of safety and effi-
cacy in pediatric patients for all new
active ingredients, indications, or dos-
age forms as a condition of new drug ap-
proval (with similar mandates in Europe)
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/
guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/
guidances/ucm079756.pdf). Therefore,
numerous new drug pharmacokinetic
studies and safety and efficacy trials in
youth-onset type 2 diabetes are currently
under way or are committed by pharma-
ceutical sponsors as a prerequisite for
new drug approval in adults. However,
the mandated pediatric trials are having
substantial difficulty completing enroll-
ment. As a consequence, individuals
with youth-onset diabetes have benefit-
ted minimally, if at all, from the develop-
ment of new therapeutic agents. Barriers
to study execution include the small num-
ber ofavailable study participants,restric-
tive study eligibility criteria, small number
ofresearch sites with dedicatedresources
for pediatric type 2 diabetes trials, socio-
economic challenges inherent in the af-
fected population, and growing number
of trials competing for the limited pool of
available patients (Fig. 3).
Why have so many diabetes drugs
been studied, yet none approved for
use in children? The answer is as com-
plex as the environment in which youth-
onset type 2 diabetes occurs. Clinical
trial recruitment for youth with type 2
diabetes is a relatively new endeavor
and has had limited success (59–61). As an
Table 1—Gaps in knowledge in youth-onset type 2 diabetes
c How do insulin resistance and insulin secretion differ between youth and adults? Do
differences in glucose/insulin physiology require a different approach to prevention and
treatment?
c What are the definitions of prediabetes and diabetes in youth-onset type 2 diabetes? Current
definitions are based on extrapolation from adults and are not evidence based.
c What are the implications of transient hyperglycemia seen in some youth and the rapid
progression of b-cell dysfunction seen in others?
c What are the implications of physiological barriers (cardiac, vascular, autonomic, muscle
mitochondrial dysfunction) to exercise seen in obese youth and youth with type 2 diabetes?
c What are the best approaches to understanding kidney function in youth with obesity and
type 2 diabetes and what is the natural history of the renal hyperfiltration characteristic of
these youth?
c How do the unique physiology of adolescent sleep and endemic poor sleep patterns of youth
contribute to development of type 2 diabetes and associated disorders?
c What is the optimal approach to management of comorbidities and complications in
youth-onset type 2 diabetes, including lipids, blood pressure, and microalbuminuria?
c What is the impact of stress and historical trauma on the development, presentation, and
management of youth-onset type 2 diabetes?
c What are effective ways to increase compliance with lifestyle interventions and medication in
adolescents with type 2 diabetes?
1638
Consensus Report
Diabetes Care Volume 39, September 2016
 example of the challenges in recruitment
in youth-onset type 2 diabetes, the
SEARCH study aimed to register pediat-
ric patients with both type 1 and type 2
diabetes. Yet, despite the same well-
funded, full-time, dedicated research
staff, the case ascertainment time from
diagnosis was two times longer in youth-
onset type 2 diabetes than in type 1 di-
abetes (62). Similarly, the duration of the
TODAY study recruitment had to be ex-
tended substantially, and although the
well-funded, full-time TODAY research
staff were ultimately successful in ran-
domizing 699 youth, recruitment took
5.5 years (18).
Recruitment for pharmaceutical trials
has been even less successful due to the
interaction between specific regulatory
requirements, need to demonstrate re-
duction in the glycemic surrogate A1C,
and realities of youth-onset type 2 dia-
betes (18). For example, entry criteria,
such as the typical 7–10% A1C ranges,
often do not reflect the trajectory of
youth-onset type 2 diabetes. As noted
previously, the population of youth
with type 2 diabetes appears to be het-
erogeneous, with two large subsets
and a bimodal distribution. One subset
has durable normalization of glycemia
on initial monotherapy with A1C in the
nondiabetic range, while another group
has a rapidly progressing course and
very elevated values requiring insulin
treatment. Thus, only a small number
of individuals remain in the range typical
of pharmaceutical trial inclusion criteria,
an A1C .7.0% on treatment with diet/
exercise or metformin monotherapy.
The Pediatric Diabetes Consortium
Type 2 Diabetes Registry (63) demon-
strated that this criteria alone excludes
;87% of potentially eligible partici-
pants. More recently, some trials have
changed the criteria to allow partici-
pants on a stable dose of basal insulin
who have an A1C $6.5% and #10.5%.
Although an improvement, these eligi-
bility criteria still exclude ;53% of po-
tential participants, as 38% of patients
included in the registry have an A1C
,6.5% and 15% have an A1C $10.5%
(63). Exclusion criteria seen in some
trials, such as elevated liver enzymes,
prior ketoacidosis, or common comorbid
conditions, can further restrict the eligi-
bility pool.
The rationale for excluding partici-
pants with an A1C ,6.5% in pharma-
ceutical trials is a consequence of the
glucocentric A1C-lowering design and
the recognition that it may be difficult
to lower A1C further in patients with
already well-controlled diabetes, as
well as outstanding questions regarding
the benefit of further lowering of A1C.
However, this approach fails to take into
consideration the observation that a
substantial proportion of youth initially
in good glycemic control ultimately of-
ten fail to maintain glycemic control
(11,64) within a relatively short time
period. Therefore, studies of add-on
therapy could include adolescents with
A1C ,6.5% on metformin because
many would be expected to show an
abrupt increase in A1C over time while
on metformin alone. The superiority of
an add-on medication could then be
tested in its ability to prevent the loss
of glycemic control.
U.S. (FDA) and European (European
Medicines Agency) pediatric type 2 di-
abetes investigation plans historically
required a stand-alone pharmacokinetics/
pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) study and
a phase III efficacy and safety study.
This approach substantially increases
both the number of participants and
the time to completion required. How-
ever, the results of stand-alone PK/PD
studies to date indicate that the PK
properties of diabetes drugs in adoles-
cent patients with type 2 diabetes are
not significantly different from those in
adults (64). As a result, more recent pe-
diatric study plans have waived the need
for a stand-alone PK study and instead
confirmed exposure of the predicted
dose through sparse sampling of PK pa-
rameters embedded within the pivotal
pediatric safety and efficacy study, al-
lowing for more rapid progress. How-
ever, some recent phase III study plans
continue to require the analysis of the
safety and efficacy of different doses of
the experimental drug, again increasing
the number of required participants.
The clinical presentation of new-onset
type 2 diabetes is another barrier. Youth
with new-onset type 1 diabetes typically
require urgent attention and families
eagerly seek opportunities to participate
Figure 3—Few patients with youth-onset type 2 diabetes are available to participate in clinical
trials. The population of youth-onset type 2 diabetes is small, approximately 20,000–25,000 in
the U.S., compared with the approximately 20 million adults. Barriers to clinical trial participa-
tion include the paucity of centers with dedicated resources for pediatric type 2 diabetes trials,
SES challenges inherent to the population, and the many study entry requirements that exclude
study eligibility before and after formal study screening procedures (69). T2D, type 2 diabetes.
*Numbers are from Imperatore et al. (69).
care.diabetesjournals.org
Nadeau and Associates
1639
 in clinical research in hopes of finding a
cure. In contrast, the majority of youth
with type 2 diabetes have subtler initial
symptoms; many families express relief
at what is perceived as a familiar and
less severe form of diabetes. Insulin, if
started initially, is often stopped, adding
to the perception of a milder disease.
As a result, families may be less likely
to accept the potential risks of an exper-
imental medication. Furthermore, studies
must recruit youth quickly to stay within
the pediatric age range of ,18 years
for eligibility yet may also have to wait
for the youth to fail initial metformin
monotherapy.
As mentioned previously, the SES
challenges (65,66) of families of youth
with type 2 diabetes decrease the ability
to obtain clinical care or prioritize re-
search participation. In addition, fami-
lies with an existing high burden of
diabetes-related disease often have
fatalistic beliefs regarding the inevitable
progression of diabetes. This perception
further decreases the motivation to
sustain consistent medical care or par-
ticipate in research, and youth are often
lost to follow-up within a year of diagno-
sis. Past history of ethical maltreatment
of certain ethnic groups in research also
creates attitudes of distrust and appre-
hension among family members. The
high risk for losing contact, combined
with early rapid deterioration of b-cell
function, creates missed opportunities
to recruit youth who meet study eligibility
criteria.
SOLUTIONS
Given the realities of the epidemiology,
biology, and SES characteristics of
youth-onset type 2 diabetes, as well as
the experience of clinical research to
date, progress in understanding the
pathophysiology of the disease in youth
and successful completion of clinical tri-
als for this population will require
1. Prioritization of clinical and transla-
tional research addressing the gaps
in knowledge regarding the appar-
ently unique physiological features
of youth-onset type 2 diabetes. In
addition to the importance of un-
derstanding the fundamental bio-
logy, a fuller understanding of the
similarities and differences be-
tween youth-onset and adult-onset
type 2 diabetes will be critical to
potential creative regulatory ap-
proaches to new drug approval
based on extrapolation from adult
trials.
2. Increased exploration of the psycho-
logical and SES aspects of youth-onset
type 2 diabetes. An improved under-
standing of the ways in which the
environment contributes to the
pathophysiology of the disorder,
as well as to challenges in treatment
and research recruitment, will be
necessary for development and de-
livery of feasible and successful
interventions.
3. Development of formalized collab-
orative networks of investigators
and centers with recognized exper-
tise in clinical studies of youth-
onset type 2 diabetes. Progress in
studying, understanding, and treat-
ing this rare disorder cannot be
achieved by sole investigators who
are unlikely to have access to suffi-
cient numbers of affected individu-
als. Rather, consortia, such as the
Children’s Oncology Group, have
promoted remarkable progress in
addressing other rare disorders and
should be looked to as models.
4. Collaboration among academic lead-
ers, government and charitable
sponsors, industry, and regulatory
agencies to delineate research prior-
ities and strategies. This should in-
clude consideration for treatment
strategy trials that clarify how to ap-
proach treatment of affected youth
rather than only individual drug reg-
istration trials. There is also a need
to prioritize outcomes other than
glycemic control, including preserva-
tion of b-cell function, improvement
in insulin sensitivity, weight control,
lowering cardiovascular disease risk,
and reduction of other diabetes
complications.
5. Increasing research and infrastruc-
ture capacity for youth-onset type 2
diabetes through the development
of purpose-built research centers of
excellence that are uniquely staffed
and maintained. Such centers will
more successfully address the re-
cruitment and retention obstacles
characteristic of the population
than current models consisting of
short-term trials that enroll a few pa-
tients per site.
6. Promote development of appropriate
study design, monitoring of recruit-
ment and retention, and a central
coordinating center to support the
research teams (e.g., institutional re-
view board and convening logistics,
budgeting, supplies, certification,
data management, and stakeholder
engagement). These consortia could
use a hybrid approach to funding: a
modestamountofcommitted support
at each site to build and maintain the
research team, supplemented by pay-
ment for the number of participants
enrolled in active treatment trials.
7. Increasing the proportion of youth
with type 2 diabetes who participate
in clinical drug trials through
a. More flexible enrollment criteria,
including wider A1C and age
ranges (i.e., allowing a participant
who is over 18 years but who de-
veloped diabetes prior to age 18
years) and fewer exclusion crite-
ria (i.e., concomitant medica-
tions, hypertension, elevated liver
enzymes);
b. Trial designs appropriate for the
typical youth with type 2 diabetes,
including flexibility of scheduling,
minimization of visit number and
burden, andparentand participant
reimbursement, including recogni-
tion of the sacrifices of school and
work time these studies require;
and
c. Creative strategies to overcome
barriers to care and research, in-
cluding telemedicine, mobile or
community-based research sites,
and engagement of affected youth,
their families, and communities in
theresearchprocesstoidentifyout-
comes that are important and rele-
vant to the population.
8. Increasing efficiency of pharmaceuti-
cal registration studies by focusing
on high-impact trials of novel agents
and exploration of innovative trial
designs, such as multi-agent studies
to eliminate duplicative placebo
control groups (60), and elimination
of low-priority trials, such as fixed-
dose combinations or new dosage
formulations.
9. Harmonization of national and in-
ternational regulatory guidelines to
ensureinclusionofdiversepopulations,
broad relevance of the results, and im-
proved efficiency in protocol approval.
1640
Consensus Report
Diabetes Care Volume 39, September 2016
 SUMMARY
Not only is it essential for health care
providers to understand the pathophys-
iological differences in youth versus
adults but also it is imperative that the
biology and environment of youth-onset
type 2 diabetes continue to be studied
due to the urgent need for targeted
treatments and patient-centered care
in what appears to be a more aggressive
disease in youth. Therefore, a focus on
improving the knowledge base regard-
ing the pathophysiology of youth-onset
type 2 diabetes, finding the most effec-
tive approach to working with this pop-
ulation, and using more realistic and
efficient study designs and interven-
tion types appropriate to this popula-
tion is required to help improve the
care of youth with type 2 diabetes
worldwide.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to
thank the American Diabetes Association for
the inspiration and support for the development
of this conference. In addition, we would like
to thank the American Academy of Pediatrics,
Pediatric Endocrine Society, and International
Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes
for their cosponsorship and collaboration.
The success of the conference was due to the
contributions of multiple individuals, and the
authors would like to specifically thank Jill
Kadish (American Diabetes Association) for her
invaluable logistics support and Ashley Butler
(Baylor College of Medicine) for her contribu-
tions to the content. The authors would also
like to acknowledge the invaluable participation
of Janina Karras, from the European Medicines
Agency, and Lisa Yanoff and Lily Mulugeta, from
the FDA.
Funding and Duality of Interest. All authors
have completed the United Competing Interest
form at www.icmje.org/conflicts-of-interest
(available upon request from E.G.B.) and de-
clare the following conflicts of interest. The au-
thors acknowledge an unrestricted education
grant from Novo Nordisk Inc. H.C. is employed
at Daiichi Sankyo Pharma Development. K.C.C.
has received honoraria from Daiichi Sankyo.
T.S.H. has received grants from the National
Institutes of Health, Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality, and JBP Foundation and has
received other support from Eli Lilly & Co. J.L.L.
has received grants from Daiichi Sankyo and
Pediatric Diabetes Consortium Jaeb Center for
Health Research and has received other support
from Novo Nordisk and the American Academy
of Pediatrics. W.V.T. has received personal fees
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Jans-
sen, Medtronic, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, and
Takeda. P.Z. has received personal fees from
Daiichi Sankyo, Janssen, Bristol-Myers Squibb,
Merck, Takeda, and AstraZeneca. No other po-
tential conflicts of interest relevant to this ar-
ticle were reported.
References
1. Zeitler P, Chou HS, Copeland KC, Geffner M.
Clinical trials in youth-onset type 2 diabetes:
needs, barriers, and options. Curr Diab Rep
2015;15:28
2. Berends LM, Ozanne SE. Early determinants
of type-2 diabetes. Best Pract Res Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 2012;26:569–580
3. Lawrence JM, Imperatore G, Pettitt DJ, et al.
Incidence of diabetes in United States youth by
diabetes type, race/ethnicity, and age, 2008–
2009 (Abstract). Diabetes 2014;63(Suppl. 1):
A407
4. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Saydah S, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Prevalence
of type 1 and type 2 diabetes among children
and adolescents from 2001 to 2009. JAMA 2014;
311:1778–1786
5. Fazeli Farsani S, van der Aa MP, van der Vorst
MMJ, Knibbe CA, de Boer A. Global trends in the
incidence and prevalence of type 2 diabetes in
children and adolescents: a systematic review
and evaluation of methodological approaches.
Diabetologia 2013;56:1471–1488
6. Petitti DB, Klingensmith GJ, Bell RA, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group. Gly-
cemic control in youth with diabetes: the
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. J Pediatr
2009;155:668–672.e1–e3
7. Hamman RF, Bell RA, Dabelea D, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
The SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study: ratio-
nale, findings, and future directions. Diabetes
Care 2014;37:3336–3344
8. Fu J, Prasad HC. Changing epidemiology of
metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes in Chi-
nese youth. Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:447
9. Prasad AN. Type 2 diabetes mellitus in young
need for early screening. Indian Pediatr 2011;
48:683–688
10. Kelsey MM, Geffner ME, Guandalini C,
et al.; Treatment Options for type 2 Diabetes
in Adolescents and Youth (TODAY) Study Group.
Presentation and effectiveness of early treat-
ment of type 2 diabetes in youth: lessons from
the TODAY study. Pediatr Diabetes 2016;17:
212–221
11. Zeitler P, Hirst K, Pyle L, et al.; TODAY Study
Group. A clinical trial to maintain glycemic con-
trol in youth with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2012;366:2247–2256
12. TODAY Study Group. Effects of metformin,
metformin plus rosiglitazone, and metformin
plus lifestyle on insulin sensitivity and b-cell func-
tion in TODAY. Diabetes Care 2013;36:1749–1757
13. Zeitler P, Hirst K, Copeland KC, et al.; TODAY
Study Group. HbA1c after a short period of
monotherapy with metformin identifies durable
glycemic control among adolescents with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:2285–2292
14. Rascati K, Richards K, Lopez D, Cheng L-I,
Wilson J. Progression to insulin for patients
with diabetes mellitus on dual oral antidiabetic
therapy using the US Department of Defense
Database. Diabetes Obes Metab 2013;15:901–
905
15. Kahn SE. Clinical review 135: The impor-
tance of beta-cell failure in the development
and progression of type 2 diabetes. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2001;86:4047–4058
16. Kahn SE, Lachin JM, Zinman B, et al.; ADOPT
Study Group. Effects of rosiglitazone, glyburide,
and metformin on b-cell function and insulin
sensitivity in ADOPT. Diabetes 2011;60:1552–
1560
17. Hannon TS, Janosky J, Arslanian SA. Longi-
tudinal study of physiologic insulin resistance
and metabolic changes of puberty. Pediatr Res
2006;60:759–763
18. Copeland KC, Zeitler P, Geffner M, et al.;
TODAY Study Group. Characteristics of adoles-
cents and youth with recent-onset type 2 dia-
betes: the TODAY cohort at baseline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:159–167
19. Klingensmith GJ, Connor CG, Ruedy KJ,
et al.; Pediatric Diabetes Consortium. Presenta-
tion of youth with type 2 diabetes in the Pedi-
atric Diabetes Consortium. Pediatr Diabetes
2016;17:266–273
20. Sellers EAC, Yung G, Dean HJ. Dyslipidemia
and other cardiovascular risk factors in a
Canadian First Nation pediatric population with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Pediatr Diabetes 2007;
8:384–390
21. Hannon TS, Arslanian SA. The changing face
of diabetes in youth: lessons learned from stud-
ies of type 2 diabetes. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2015;
1353:113–137
22. Dart AB, Martens PJ, Rigatto C, Brownell
MD, Dean HJ, Sellers EA. Earlier onset of com-
plications in youth with type 2 diabetes. Diabe-
tes Care 2014;37:436–443
23. Klingensmith GJ, Pyle L, Nadeau KJ, et al.;
TODAY Study Group. Pregnancy outcomes in
youth with type 2 diabetes: the TODAY study
experience. Diabetes Care 2016;39:122–129
24. Dabelea D, Hanson RL, Lindsay RS, et al. In-
trauterine exposure to diabetes conveys risks
for type 2 diabetes and obesity: a study of di-
scordant sibships. Diabetes 2000;49:2208–2211
25. Mendelson M, Cloutier J, Spence L, Sellers
E, Taback S, Dean H. Obesity and type 2 diabe-
tes mellitus in a birth cohort of First Nation
children born to mothers with pediatric-onset
type 2 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;12:219–
228
26. World Health Organization. Social Determi-
nants of Health. The Solid Facts. 2nd edition.
Wilkinson R, Marmot M, Eds. [Internet]. Available
from http://www.euro.who.int/en/publications/
abstracts/social-determinants-of-health.-the-
solid-facts. Accessed 21 December 2015
27. Egerter S, Braveman P, Sadegh-Nobari T,
Grossman-Kahn R, Dekker M. Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation Commission to Build a
Healthier America. Exploring the Social Deter-
minants of Health. Education and Health, Issue
Brief 5 [Internet], 2011. http://www.rwjf.org/
en/library/research/2011/05/education-matters-
for-health.html. Accessed 21 December 2015
28. Gracey M, King M. Indigenous health part 1:
determinants and disease patterns. Lancet
2009;374:65–75
29. McEwen BS, Stellar E. Stress and the indi-
vidual. Mechanisms leading to disease. Arch In-
tern Med 1993;153:2093–2101
30. Braveman P, Gottlieb L. The social determi-
nants of health: it’s time to consider the causes
of the causes. Public Health Rep 2014;129
Suppl. 2:19–31
31. Duncan AE, Auslander WF, Bucholz KK,
Hudson DL, Stein RI, White NH. Relationship
between abuse and neglect in childhood and di-
abetes in adulthood: differential effects by sex,
care.diabetesjournals.org
Nadeau and Associates
1641
 national longitudinal study of adolescent
health. Prev Chronic Dis 2015;12:E70
32. Garg A, Jack B, Zuckerman B. Addressing
the social determinants of health within the
patient-centered medical home: lessons from
pediatrics. JAMA 2013;309:2001–2002
33. Glazier RH, Bajcar J, Kennie NR, Willson K. A
systematic review of interventions to improve
diabetes care in socially disadvantaged popula-
tions. Diabetes Care 2006;29:1675–1688
34. Brackney DE, Cutshall M. Prevention of
type 2 diabetes among youth: a systematic re-
view, implications for the school nurse. J Sch
Nurs 2015;31:6–21
35. Ho M, Garnett SP, Baur LA, et al. Impact of
dietary and exercise interventions on weight
change and metabolic outcomes in obese chil-
dren and adolescents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized trials. JAMA Pediatr
2013;167:759–768
36. McGavock J, Dart A, Wicklow B. Lifestyle
therapy for the treatment of youth with type 2
diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2015;15:568
37. Savoye M, Nowicka P, Shaw M, et al. Long-
term results of an obesity program in an ethni-
cally diverse pediatric population. Pediatrics
2011;127:402–410
38. Savoye M, Caprio S, Dziura J, et al. Reversal
of early abnormalities in glucose metabolism in
obese youth: results of an intensive lifestyle
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care
2014;37:317–324
39. Protudjer JLP, Dumontet J, McGavock JM.
My voice: a grounded theory analysis of the
lived experience of type 2 diabetes in adoles-
cence. Can J Diabetes 2014;38:229–236
40. Hood KK, Beavers DP, Yi-Frazier J, et al. Psy-
chosocial burden and glycemic control during
the first 6 years of diabetes: results from the
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. J Adolesc
Health 2014;55:498–504
41. Anderson BJ, Edelstein S, Abramson NW,
et al. Depressive symptoms and quality of life
in adolescents with type 2 diabetes: baseline
data from the TODAY study. Diabetes Care
2011;34:2205–2207
42. Frerichs L, Brittin J, Robbins R, et al.
SaludABLEOmaha: improving readiness to ad-
dress obesity through healthy lifestyle in a Mid-
western Latino community, 2011–2013. Prev
Chronic Dis 2015;12:E20
43. Huang TT, Drewnosksi A, Kumanyika S,
Glass TA. A systems-oriented multilevel frame-
work for addressing obesity in the 21st century.
Prev Chronic Dis 2009;6:A82
44. Benavides S, Caballero J. Ashtanga yoga
for children and adolescents for weight man-
agement and psychological well being: an
uncontrolled open pilot study. Complement
Ther Clin Pract 2009;15:110–114
45. ShalitinS,Ashkenazi-HoffnungL,Yackobovitch-
Gavan M, et al. Effects of a twelve-week random-
ized intervention of exercise and/or diet on
weight loss and weight maintenance, and other
metabolic parameters in obese preadolescent
children. Horm Res 2009;72:287–301
46. Weigensberg MJ, Lane CJ, ´
Avila Q, et al.
Imagine HEALTH: results from a randomized pi-
lot lifestyle intervention for obese Latino ado-
lescents using Interactive Guided ImagerySM.
BMC Complement Altern Med 2014;14:28
47. Edwards RW, Jumper-Thurman P, Plested
BA, Oetting ER, Swanson L. Community readi-
ness: research to practice. J Community Psychol
2000;28:291–307
48. Committee on Accelerating Progress in
Obesity Prevention, Institute of Medicine. Ac-
celerating Progress in Obesity Prevention:
Solving the Weight of the Nation. 1st ed.
Washington, D.C., National Academies Press,
2012, 478 pp
49. The Oxford Handbook of the Social Science
of Obesity. 1st ed. Oxford, U.K., Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2011
50. Shaibi GQ, Konopken Y, Hoppin E, Keller CS,
Ortega R, Castro FG. Effects of a culturally
grounded community-based diabetes preven-
tion program for obese Latino adolescents. Di-
abetes Educ 2012;38:504–512
51. Collective Impact Forum [Internet]. Avail-
able from https://collectiveimpactforum.org.
Accessed 21 October 2015
52. Bacha F, Pyle L, Nadeau K, et al.; TODAY
Study Group. Determinants of glycemic control
in youth with type 2 diabetes at randomization
in the TODAY study. Pediatr Diabetes 2012;13:
376–383
53. Mencin AA, Loomba R, Lavine JE. Caring for
children with NAFLD and navigating their care
into adulthood. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
2015;12:617–628
54. Bjornstad P, Maahs DM, Cherney DZ, et al.
Insulin sensitivity is an important determinant
of renal health in adolescents with type 2 dia-
betes. Diabetes Care 2014;37:3033–3039
55. Nadeau KJ, Zeitler PS, Bauer TA, et al. Insulin
resistance in adolescents with type 2 diabetes is
associated with impaired exercise capacity. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:3687–3695
56. Matthews KA, Pantesco EJ. Sleep character-
istics and cardiovascular risk in children and ad-
olescents: an enumerative review. Sleep Med
2016;18:36–49
57. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Available from
https://clinicaltrials.gov. Accessed 6 January
2016
58. U.S. Food and Drug Administration [Inter-
net]. Available from http://www.fda.gov.
Accessed 6 January 2016
59. Tamborlane WV, Klingensmith G. Crisis in
care: limited treatment options for type 2 dia-
betes in adolescents and youth. Diabetes Care
2013;36:1777–1778
60. Karres J, Pratt V, Guettier J-M, et al. Joining
forces: a call for greater collaboration to study
new medicines in children and adolescents with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2665–
2667
61. Karres J, Tomasi P. New medicines for
type 2 diabetes in adolescents: many products,
few patients. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 2013;
6:227–229
62. Crume TL, Hamman RF, Isom SP, et al. Fac-
tors influencing time to case ascertainment in
youth with type 1 (T1D) and type 2 diabetes
(T2D) in the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study
(Abstract). Diabetes 2013;62(Suppl. 1):A412
63. Nambam B, Silverstein J, Cheng P, et al.;
Pediatric Diabetes Consortium. A cross-sectional
view of the current state of treatment of youth
with type 2 diabetes in the USA: enrollment data
from the Pediatric Diabetes Consortium Type 2
Diabetes Registry. Pediatr Diabetes. 11 March
2016 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10.1111/
pedi.12377
64. Tamborlane WV, Haymond MW, Dunger D,
et al.; NICHD Diabetes Working Group. Expanding
treatment options for youth with type 2 diabetes:
current problems and proposed solutions: a white
paper from the NICHD Diabetes Working Group.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:323–329
65. Anderson BJ, McKay SV. Barriers to glycemic
control in youth with type 1 diabetes and type 2
diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;12:197–205
66. Song SH. Complication characteristics be-
tween young-onset type 2 versus type 1 diabe-
tes in a UK population. BMJ Open Diabetes Res
Care 2015;3:e000044
67. Kahn SE, Haffner SM, Heise MA, et al.;
ADOPT Study Group. Glycemic durability of
rosiglitazone, metformin, or glyburide mono-
therapy. N Engl J Med 2006;355:2427–2443
68. Matthews DR, Cull CA, Stratton IM, Holman
RR, Turner RC; UK Prospective Diabetes Study
(UKPDS) Group. UKPDS 26: Sulphonylurea
failure in non-insulin-dependent diabetic
patients over six years. Diabet Med 1998;15:
297–303
69. Imperatore G, Boyle JP, Thompson TJ, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group. Pro-
jections of type 1 and type 2 diabetes burden in
the U.S. population aged ,20 years through
2050: dynamic modeling of incidence, mortal-
ity, and population growth. Diabetes Care 2012;
35:2515–2520
1642
Consensus Report
Diabetes Care Volume 39, September 2016
