 UC San Francisco
UC San Francisco Previously Published Works
Title
Official American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious 
Diseases Society of America Clinical Practice Guidelines: Treatment of Drug-Susceptible 
Tuberculosis
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1kx81070
Journal
CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASES, 63(7)
ISSN
1058-4838
Authors
Nahid, P
Dorman, SE
Alipanah, N
et al.
Publication Date
2016-10-01
DOI
10.1093/cid/ciw376
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 Clinical Infectious Diseases
I D S A G U I D E L I N E
Official American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of
America Clinical Practice Guidelines: Treatment of
Drug-Susceptible Tuberculosis
Payam Nahid,1 Susan E. Dorman,2 Narges Alipanah,1 Pennan M. Barry,3 Jan L. Brozek,4 Adithya Cattamanchi,1 Lelia H. Chaisson,1 Richard E. Chaisson,2
Charles L. Daley,5 Malgosia Grzemska,6 Julie M. Higashi,7 Christine S. Ho,8 Philip C. Hopewell,1 Salmaan A. Keshavjee,9 Christian Lienhardt,6
Richard Menzies,10 Cynthia Merrifield,1 Masahiro Narita,12 Rick O’Brien,13 Charles A. Peloquin,14 Ann Raftery,1 Jussi Saukkonen,15 H. Simon Schaaf,16
Giovanni Sotgiu,17 Jeffrey R. Starke,18 Giovanni Battista Migliori,11 and Andrew Vernon8
1University of California, San Francisco; 2Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; 3California Department of Public Health, Richmond; 4McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada;
5National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado; 6World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland; 7Tuberculosis Control Section, San Francisco Department of Public Health, California; 8Division of
Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; 9Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts; 10McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 11WHO Collaborating Centre for TB and Lung Diseases, Fondazione S. Maugeri Care and Research Institute, Tradate, Italy;
12Tuberculosis Control Program, Seattle and King County Public Health, and University of Washington, Seattle; 13Ethics Advisory Group, International Union Against TB and Lung Disease, Paris, France;
14University of Florida, Gainesville; 15Boston University, Massachusetts; 16Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; 17University of Sassari, Italy;
and 18Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
The American Thoracic Society, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Infectious Diseases Society of America jointly
sponsored the development of this guideline for the treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis, which is also endorsed by the Eu-
ropean Respiratory Society and the US National Tuberculosis Controllers Association. Representatives from the American Academy
of Pediatrics, the Canadian Thoracic Society, the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, and the World Health
Organization also participated in the development of the guideline. This guideline provides recommendations on the clinical and
public health management of tuberculosis in children and adults in settings in which mycobacterial cultures, molecular and phe-
notypic drug susceptibility tests, and radiographic studies, among other diagnostic tools, are available on a routine basis. For all
recommendations, literature reviews were performed, followed by discussion by an expert committee according to the Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation methodology. Given the public health implications of prompt diag-
nosis and effective management of tuberculosis, empiric multidrug treatment is initiated in almost all situations in which active
tuberculosis is suspected. Additional characteristics such as presence of comorbidities, severity of disease, and response to treatment
influence management decisions. Specific recommendations on the use of case management strategies (including directly observed
therapy), regimen and dosing selection in adults and children (daily vs intermittent), treatment of tuberculosis in the presence of
HIV infection (duration of tuberculosis treatment and timing of initiation of antiretroviral therapy), as well as treatment of extrap-
ulmonary disease (central nervous system, pericardial among other sites) are provided. The development of more potent and better-
tolerated drug regimens, optimization of drug exposure for the component drugs, optimal management of tuberculosis in special
populations, identification of accurate biomarkers of treatment effect, and the assessment of new strategies for implementing regi-
mens in the field remain key priority areas for research. See the full-text online version of the document for detailed discussion of the
management of tuberculosis and recommendations for practice.
Keywords.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis; HIV infections; antitubercular agents; case management; public health.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The American Thoracic Society (ATS), Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention (CDC), and Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) jointly sponsored the development of this
guideline on the treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis,
which is also endorsed by the European Respiratory Society
(ERS) and the US National Tuberculosis Controllers Association
(NTCA). This guideline provides recommendations on the clin-
ical and public health management of tuberculosis in children
and adults in settings in which mycobacterial cultures, molecular
Received 4 June 2016; accepted 6 June 2016; published online 10 August 2016.
These guidelines were endorsed by the European Respiratory Society (ERS) and the US Na-
tional Tuberculosis Controllers Association (NTCA). It is important to realize that guidelines can-
not always account for individual variation among patients. They are not intended to supplant
physician judgment with respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. The spon-
soring and endorsing societies consider adherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with the
ultimate determination regarding their application to be made by the physician in the light of
each patient’s individual circumstances.
Correspondence: P. Nahid, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco General Hos-
pital, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, 1001 Potrero Ave, 5K1, San Francisco, CA 94110
(pnahid@ucsf.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®
2016;63(7):e147–95
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw376
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e147
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 and phenotypic drug susceptibility tests, and radiographic stud-
ies, among other diagnostic tools, are available on a routine basis.
Nine PICO (population, intervention, comparators, outcomes)
questions and associated recommendations, developed based
on the evidence that was appraised using GRADE (Grading of
Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation)
methodology [1, 2], are summarized below. A carefully selected
panel of experts, screened for conflicts of interest, including spe-
cialists in pulmonary medicine, infectious diseases, pharmacoki-
netics, pediatrics, primary care, public health, and systematic
review methodology were assembled and used GRADE methods
to assess the certainty in the evidence (also known as the quality
of evidence) and strength of the recommendations (see Supple-
mentary Appendix A: Methods and Table 1). This executive
summary is a condensed version of the panel’s recommenda-
tions. Additional detailed discussion of the management of pul-
monary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis is available in the full-
text version of this guideline.
OBJECTIVES OF ANTITUBERCULOSIS THERAPY
Treatment of tuberculosis is focused on both curing the individ-
ual patient and minimizing the transmission of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis to other persons, thus, successful treatment of tu-
berculosis has benefits both for the individual patient and the
community in which the patient resides.
The objectives of tuberculosis therapy are (1) to rapidly re-
duce the number of actively growing bacilli in the patient, there-
by decreasing severity of the disease, preventing death and
halting transmission of M. tuberculosis; (2) to eradicate popula-
tions of persisting bacilli in order to achieve durable cure (pre-
vent relapse) after completion of therapy; and (3) to prevent
acquisition of drug resistance during therapy.
The decision to initiate combination chemotherapy for tu-
berculosis is based on clinical, radiographic, laboratory, patient,
and public health factors (Figure 1). In addition, clinical judg-
ment and the index of suspicion for tuberculosis are critical in
making a decision to initiate treatment. For example, in patients
(children and adults) who, based on these considerations, have
a high likelihood of having tuberculosis or are seriously ill with
a disorder suspicious for tuberculosis, empiric treatment with a
4-drug regimen (Tables 2 and 3) should be initiated promptly
even before the results of acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear micros-
copy, molecular tests, and mycobacterial culture are known.
Sixty-five years of investigation, including many clinical tri-
als, have consistently supported the necessity of treating with
multiple drugs to achieve these treatment objectives, minimize
drug toxicity, and maximize the likelihood of treatment com-
pletion [3, 4]. The success of drug treatment, however, depends
upon many factors, and numerous studies have found an in-
creased risk of relapse among patients with signs of more exten-
sive disease (ie, cavitation or more extensive disease on chest
radiograph) [5–9], and/or slower response to treatment (ie, de-
layed culture conversion at 2–3 months) [4, 6, 10, 11].
ORGANIZATION AND SUPERVISION OF TREATMENT
Because of the public health implications of prompt diagnosis and
effective treatment of tuberculosis, most low-incidence countries
designate a government public health agency as legal authority for
controlling tuberculosis [12, 13]. The optimal organization of tu-
berculosis treatment often requires the coordination of public and
private sectors [14–16]. In most settings, a patient is assigned a
public health case manager who assesses needs and barriers that
may interfere with treatment adherence [17]. With active input
from the patient and healthcare providers, the case manager, to-
gether with the patient, develops an individualized “case manage-
ment plan” with interventions to address the identified needs and
barriers [18–20] (see PICO Question 1 and Supplementary Ap-
pendix B, Evidence Profiles 1–3). The least restrictive public
health interventions that are effective are used to achieve adher-
ence, thereby balancing the rights of the patient and public safety.
Given that tuberculosis treatment requires multiple drugs be
given for several months, it is crucial that the patient be involved
in a meaningful way in making decisions concerning treatment
supervision and overall care. International standards have been
developed that also emphasize the importance of using patient-
centered approaches to the management of tuberculosis [14–16].
Key considerations when developing a case management plan
include (1) improving “treatment literacy” by educating the
Table 1.
Interpretation of “Strong” and “Conditional” Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation-Based Recommendations
Implications
for:
Strong Recommendation
Conditional Recommendation
Patients
Most individuals in this situation would want the recommended course
of action, and only a small proportion would not.
The majority of individuals in this situation would want the suggested
course of action, but many would not.
Clinicians
Most individuals should receive the intervention. Adherence to this
recommendation according to the guideline could be used as a
quality criterion or performance indicator. Formal decision aids are
not likely to be needed to help individuals make decisions consistent
with their values and preferences.
Recognize that different choices will be appropriate for individual
patients and that you must help each patient arrive at a management
decision consistent with his or her values and preferences. Decision
aids may be useful in helping individuals to make decisions
consistent with their values and preferences.
Policy
The recommendation can be adopted as policy in most situations.
Policymaking will require substantial debate and involvement of various
stakeholders.
Source: Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation Working Group [1, 2].
e148 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 patient about tuberculosis and its treatment, including possible
adverse effects [21,22];(2) discussing expected outcomes of treat-
ment, specifically the ability to cure the patient of the disease; (3)
reviewing methods of adherence support and plans for assessing
response to therapy; and (4) discussing infectiousness and infec-
tion control measures using terminology that is appropriate to
the culture, language, age, and reading level of the patient [23].
For non-English-speaking patients, the use of medical interpreter
services is preferred over using family or friends as interpreters
[24]. Relevant information should be reinforced at each visit.
Other components of the case management plan include, but
are not limited to, setting up patient reminders and systems to
follow-up missed appointments [23, 25–29], use of incentives
and enablers [30, 31], field and home visits [32], and integration
and coordination of tuberculosis care with the patient’s primary
and specialty care (including mental health services, if appropri-
ate and requested by the patient) (Table 4).
PICO Question 1: Does adding case management interventions to
curative therapy improve outcomes compared to curative therapy
alone among patients with tuberculosis? (Case management is
defined as patient education/counseling, field/home visits,
integration/coordination of care with specialists and medical home,
patient reminders, and incentives/enablers).
Recommendation 1: We suggest using case management
interventions during treatment of patients with tuberculosis
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
Given the critical importance of chemotherapy, both to the
patient and to the public, approaches to ensuring adherence
to the treatment regimen are a major focus of the overall man-
agement plan. To maximize completion of therapy, manage-
ment strategies should utilize a broad range of approaches
(see “Patient-Centered Care and Case Management” in the
full-text version of the guideline). Among these, directly ob-
served therapy (DOT), the practice of observing the patient
swallow their antituberculosis medications, has been widely
used as the standard of practice in many tuberculosis programs,
and deserves special emphasis (see PICO Question 2 and Sup-
plementary Appendix B, Evidence Profile 4). The systematic re-
view conducted to obtain evidence in support of this practice
guideline did not find any significant differences between self-
administered therapy (SAT) and DOT when assessing several
outcomes of interest, including mortality, treatment comple-
tion, and relapse. However, DOT was significantly associated
with improved treatment success (the sum of patients cured
and patients completing treatment) and with increased sputum
smear conversion during treatment, as compared to SAT. Be-
cause DOT is a multifaceted public health intervention that is
not amenable to the conventional clinical trial approaches to as-
sessing benefits, and because participation in DOT can be ad-
vantageous for early recognition of adverse drug reactions and
treatment irregularities, for allowing providers to establish
Figure 1.
Factors to be considered in deciding to initiate treatment empirically for active tuberculosis (TB) (prior to microbiologic confirmation). Abbreviations: AFB, acid-fast
bacilli; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IGRA, interferon-γ release assay; Mtb, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TST, tuberculin skin test.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e149
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 rapport with the patient and for addressing treatment compli-
cations expeditiously, DOT remains the standard of practice in
the majority of tuberculosis programs in the United States [33–
35] and Europe [15] (Table 5). To be consistent with the prin-
ciples of patient-centered care noted previously, decisions re-
garding the use of DOT must be made in concert with the
patient [14–16]. For example, DOT can be provided in the of-
fice, clinic, or in the “field” (patient’s home, place of employ-
ment, school, or any other site that is mutually agreeable) by
appropriately trained personnel [32].
PICO Question 2: Does self-administered therapy (SAT) have similar
outcomes compared to directly observed therapy (DOT) in patients
with various forms of tuberculosis?
Recommendation 2: We suggest using DOT rather than SAT for
routine treatment of patients with all forms of tuberculosis
(conditional recommendation; low certainty in the evidence).
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT REGIMENS
The preferred regimen for treating adults with tuberculosis
caused by organisms that are not known or suspected to be
drug resistant is a regimen consisting of an intensive phase of
2 months of isoniazid (INH), rifampin (RIF), pyrazinamide
(PZA), and ethambutol (EMB) followed by a continuation
phase of 4 months of INH and RIF (see Tables 2, 3, 10, 11,
and Supplementary Appendix C) [3, 36, 37]. The intensive
phase of treatment consists of 4 drugs (INH, RIF, PZA, EMB)
because of the current proportion of new tuberculosis cases
worldwide caused by organisms that are resistant to INH [38–
41]; however, if therapy is being initiated after drug susceptibil-
ity test results are known and the patient’s isolate is susceptible
to both INH and RIF, EMB is not necessary, and the intensive
phase can consist of INH, RIF, and PZA only. EMB can be dis-
continued as soon as the results of drug susceptibility studies
demonstrate that the isolate is susceptible to INH and RIF. Pyr-
idoxine (vitamin B6) is given with INH to all persons at risk of
neuropathy (eg, pregnant women; breastfeeding infants; per-
sons infected with human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]; pa-
tients with diabetes, alcoholism, malnutrition, or chronic renal
failure; or those who are of advanced age) [42, 43].
With respect to administration schedule, the preferred fre-
quency is once daily for both the intensive and continuation
phases (see PICO Questions 3 and 4 and Supplementary Ap-
pendix B, Evidence Profiles 5–11). Although administration of
antituberculosis drugs using DOT 5 days a week has been re-
ported in a large number of studies, it has not been compared
with 7-day administration in a clinical trial. Nonetheless, on the
basis of substantial clinical experience, experts believe that
5-days-a-week drug administration by DOT is an acceptable
alternative to 7-days-a-week administration, and either approach
Table 2.
Drug Regimens for Microbiologically Confirmed Pulmonary Tuberculosis Caused by Drug-Susceptible Organisms
Regimen
Intensive Phase
Continuation Phase
Range of
Total
Doses
Commentsc,d
Regimen
Effectiveness
Druga
Interval and Doseb
(Minimum Duration)
Drugs
Interval and Doseb,
c (Minimum
Duration)
1
INH
RIF
PZA
EMB
7 d/wk for 56 doses
(8 wk), or
5 d/wk for 40 doses
(8 wk)
INH
RIF
7 d/wk for 126
doses (18 wk),
or
5 d/wk for 90
doses (18 wk)
182–130
This is the preferred regimen for patients with newly
diagnosed pulmonary tuberculosis.
Greater
Lesser
2
INH
RIF
PZA
EMB
7 d/wk for 56 doses
(8 wk), or
5 d/wk for 40 doses
(8 wk)
INH
RIF
3 times weekly for
54 doses (18
wk)
110–94
Preferred alternative regimen in situations in which
more frequent DOT during continuation phase is
difficult to achieve.
3
INH
RIF
PZA
EMB
3 times weekly for 24
doses (8 wk)
INH
RIF
3 times weekly for
54 doses (18
wk)
78
Use regimen with caution in patients with HIV and/or
cavitary disease. Missed doses can lead to
treatment failure, relapse, and acquired drug
resistance.
4
INH
RIF
PZA
EMB
7 d/wk for 14 doses
then twice weekly
for 12 dosese
INH
RIF
Twice weekly for
36 doses (18
wk)
62
Do not use twice-weekly regimens in HIV-infected
patients or patients with smear-positive and/or
cavitary disease. If doses are missed, then
therapy is equivalent to once weekly, which is
inferior.
Abbreviations: DOT, directly observed therapy; EMB, ethambutol; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; INH, isoniazid; PZA, pyrazinamide; RIF, rifampin.
a Other combinations may be appropriate in certain circumstances; additional details are provided in the section “Recommended Treatment Regimens.”
b When DOT is used, drugs may be given 5 days per week and the necessary number of doses adjusted accordingly. Although there are no studies that compare 5 with 7 daily doses, extensive
experience indicates this would be an effective practice. DOT should be used when drugs are administered <7 days per week.
c Based on expert opinion, patients with cavitation on initial chest radiograph and positive cultures at completion of 2 months of therapy should receive a 7-month (31-week) continuation phase.
d Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 25–50 mg/day, is given with INH to all persons at risk of neuropathy (eg, pregnant women; breastfeeding infants; persons with HIV; patients with diabetes, alcoholism,
malnutrition, or chronic renal failure; or patients with advanced age). For patients with peripheral neuropathy, experts recommend increasing pyridoxine dose to 100 mg/day.
e See [426]. Alternatively, some US tuberculosis control programs have administered intensive-phase regimens 5 days per week for 15 doses (3 weeks), then twice weekly for 12 doses.
e150 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Table 3.
Dosesa of Antituberculosis Drugs for Adults and Childrenb
Drug
Preparation
Population
Daily
Once-Weekly
Twice-Weekly
Thrice-Weekly
First-line drugs
Isoniazid
Tablets (50 mg, 100 mg, 300 mg); elixir (50
mg/5 mL); aqueous solution (100 mg/mL)
for intravenous or intramuscular injection.
Note: Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 25–50 mg/
day, is given with INH to all persons at risk
of neuropathy (eg, pregnant women;
breastfeeding infants; persons with HIV;
patients with diabetes, alcoholism,
malnutrition, or chronic renal failure; or
patients with advanced age). For patients
with peripheral neuropathy, experts
recommend increasing pyridoxine dose to
100 mg/d.
Adults
5 mg/kg (typically
300 mg)
15 mg/kg
(typically
900 mg)
15 mg/kg (typically
900 mg)
15 mg/kg (typically
900 mg)
Children
10–15 mg/kg
. . .
20–30 mg/kg
. . .b
Rifampin
Capsule (150 mg, 300 mg). Powder may be
suspended for oral administration.
Aqueous solution for intravenous injection.
Adultsc
10 mg/kg (typically
600 mg)
. . .
10 mg/kg (typically
600 mg)
10 mg/kg (typically
600 mg)
Children
10–20 mg/kg
. . .
10–20 mg/kg
. . .b
Rifabutin
Capsule (150 mg)
Adultsd
5 mg/kg (typically
300 mg)
. . .
Not recommended
Not recommended
Children
Appropriate dosing for children is unknown. Estimated at 5 mg/kg.
Rifapentine
Tablet (150 mg film coated)
Adults
10–20 mg/kge
. . .
. . .
Children
Active tuberculosis: for children ≥12 y of age, same dosing as for adults,
administered once weekly. Rifapentine is not FDA-approved for treatment of active
tuberculosis in children <12 y of age.
Pyrazinamide
Tablet (500 mg scored)
Adults
See Table 10
. . .
See Table 10
See Table 10
Children
35 (30–40) mg/kg
. . .
50 mg/kg
. . .b
Ethambutol
Tablet (100 mg; 400 mg)
Adults
See Table 11
. . .
See Table 11
See Table 11
Childrenf
20 (15–25) mg/kg
. . .
50 mg/kg
. . .b
Second-line drugs
Cycloserine
Capsule (250 mg)
Adultsg
10–15 mg/kg total
(usually 250–500
mg once or twice
daily)
There are inadequate data to support intermittent
administration.
Children
15–20 mg/kg total
(divided 1–2 times
daily)
Ethionamide
Tablet (250 mg)
Adultsh
15–20 mg/kg total
(usually 250–500
mg once or twice
daily)
There are inadequate data to support intermittent
administration.
Children
15–20 mg/kg total
(divided 1–2 times
daily)
Streptomycin
Aqueous solution (1 g vials) for IM or IV
administration.
Adults
15 mg/kg daily. Some clinicians prefer 25 mg/kg 3 times weekly.
Patients with decreased renal function may require the 15 mg/kg dose to be given
only 3 times weekly to allow for drug clearance.
Children
15–20 mg/kg [427]
. . .
25–30 mg/kgi
. . .
Amikacin/
kanamycin
Aqueous solution (500 mg and 1 g vials) for
IM or IV administration.
Adults
15 mg/kg daily. Some clinicians prefer 25 mg/kg 3 times weekly.
Patients with decreased renal function, including older patients, may require the 15
mg/kg dose to be given only 3 times weekly to allow for drug clearance.
Children
15–20 mg/kg [427]
. . .
25–30 mg/kgi
. . .
Capreomycin
Aqueous solution (1 g vials) for IM or IV
administration.
Adults
15 mg/kg daily. Some clinicians prefer 25 mg/kg 3 times weekly.
Patients with decreased renal function, including older patients, may require the 15
mg/kg dose to be given only 3 times weekly to allow for drug clearance.
Children
15–20 mg/kg [427]
. . .
25–30 mg/kgi
. . .
Para-amino
salicylic acid
Granules (4 g packets) can be mixed in and
ingested with soft food (granules should
not be chewed). Tablets (500 mg) are still
available in some countries, but not in the
United States. A solution for IV
administration is available in Europe.
Adults
8–12 g total (usually
4000 mg 2–3
times daily)
There are inadequate data to support intermittent
administration.
Children
200–300 mg/kg total
(usually divided
100 mg/kg given 2
to 3 times daily)
Levofloxacin
Tablets (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg); aqueous
solution (500 mg vials) for IV injection.
Adults
500–1000 mg daily
There are inadequate data to support intermittent
administration.
Children
The optimal dose is not known, but clinical data suggest 15–20 mg/kg [427]
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e151
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 may be considered as meeting the definition of “daily” dosing.
There are alternative regimens that are variations of the pre-
ferred regimen, which may be acceptable in certain clinical
and/or public health situations (see “Other Regimens” and
“Treatment in Special Situations” in the full-text version of
the guideline).
PICO Question 3: Does intermittent dosing in the intensive phase
have similar outcomes compared to daily dosing in the intensive
phase for treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis?
Recommendation 3a: We recommend the use of daily rather than
intermittent dosing in the intensive phase of therapy for drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (strong recommendation;
moderate certainty in the evidence).
Recommendation 3b: Use of thrice-weekly therapy in the intensive
phase (with or without an initial 2 weeks of daily therapy) may be
considered in patients who are not HIV infected and are also at low
risk of relapse (pulmonary tuberculosis caused by drug-susceptible
organisms, that at the start of treatment is noncavitary and/or smear
negative) (conditional recommendation; low certainty in the
evidence).
Recommendation 3c: In situations where daily or thrice-weekly DOT
therapy is difficult to achieve, use of twice-weekly therapy after an
initial 2 weeks of daily therapy may be considered for patients who
are not HIV-infected and are also at low risk of relapse (pulmonary
tuberculosis caused by drug-susceptible organisms, that at the start
of treatment is noncavitary and/or smear negative) (conditional
recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence). Note: If doses
are missed in a regimen using twice-weekly dosing, then therapy is
equivalent to once weekly, which is inferior (see PICO Question 4).
Table 3
continued.
Drug
Preparation
Population
Daily
Once-Weekly
Twice-Weekly
Thrice-Weekly
Moxifloxacin
Tablets (400 mg); aqueous solution (400 mg/
250 mL) for IV injection
Adults
400 mg daily
There are inadequate data to support intermittent
administration.j
Children
The optimal dose is not known. Some experts use 10 mg/kg daily dosing, though
lack of formulations makes such titration challenging. Aiming for serum
concentrations of 3–5 µL/mL 2 h postdose is proposed by experts as a reasonable
target.
Abbreviations: FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IM, intramuscular; INH, isoniazid; IV, intravenous.
a Dosing based on actual weight is acceptable in patients who are not obese. For obese patients (>20% above ideal body weight [IBW]), dosing based on IBW may be preferred for initial doses.
Some clinicians prefer a modified IBW (IBW + [0.40 × (actual weight – IBW)]) as is done for initial aminoglycoside doses. Because tuberculosis drug dosing for obese patients has not been
established, therapeutic drug monitoring may be considered for such patients.
b For purposes of this document, adult dosing begins at age 15 years or at a weight of >40 kg in younger children. The optimal doses for thrice-weekly therapy in children and adolescents have
not been established. Some experts use in adolescents the same doses as recommended for adults, and for younger children the same doses as recommended for twice-weekly therapy.
c Higher doses of rifampin, currently as high as 35 mg/kg, are being studied in clinical trials.
d Rifabutin dose may need to be adjusted when there is concomitant use of protease inhibitors or nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
e TBTC Study 22 used rifapentine (RPT) dosage of 10 mg/kg in the continuation phase of treatment for active disease [9]. However, RIFAQUIN and PREVENT TB safely used higher dosages of
RPT, administered once weekly [164, 210]. Daily doses of 1200 mg RPT are being studied in clinical trials for active tuberculosis disease.
f As an approach to avoiding ethambutol (EMB) ocular toxicity, some clinicians use a 3-drug regimen (INH, rifampin, and pyrazinamide) in the initial 2 months of treatment for children who are
HIV-uninfected, have no prior tuberculosis treatment history, are living in an area of low prevalence of drug-resistant tuberculosis, and have no exposure to an individual from an area of high
prevalence of drug-resistant tuberculosis. However, because the prevalence of and risk for drug-resistant tuberculosis can be difficult to ascertain, the American Academy of Pediatrics and most
experts include EMB as part of the intensive-phase regimen for children with tuberculosis.
g Clinicians experienced with using cycloserine suggest starting with 250 mg once daily and gradually increasing as tolerated. Serum concentrations often are useful in determining the
appropriate dose for a given patient. Few patients tolerate 500 mg twice daily.
h Ethionamide can be given at bedtime or with a main meal in an attempt to reduce nausea. Clinicians experienced with using ethionamide suggest starting with 250 mg once daily and gradually
increasing as tolerated. Serum concentrations may be useful in determining the appropriate dose for a given patient. Few patients tolerate 500 mg twice daily.
i Modified from adult intermittent dose of 25 mg/kg, and accounting for larger total body water content and faster clearance of injectable drugs in most children. Dosing can be guided by serum
concentrations.
j RIFAQUIN trial studied a 6-month regimen. Daily isoniazid was replaced by daily moxifloxacin 400 mg for the first 2 months, followed by once-weekly doses of moxifloxacin 400 mg and RPT
1200 mg for the remaining 4 months. Two hundred twelve patients were studied (each dose of RPT was preceded by a meal of 2 hard-boiled eggs and bread). This regimen was shown to be
noninferior to a standard daily administered 6-month regimen [164].
Table 4.
Possible Components of a Multifaceted, Patient-Centered Treatment Strategy
Enablers
Incentives
Interventions to assist the patient in completing therapy [130]
Interventions to motivate the patient, tailored to individual patient
wishes and needs and, thus, meaningful to the patient [130]
Transportation vouchers [30]
Food stamps or snacks and meals [30]
Convenient clinic hours and locations [30]
Restaurant and grocery store coupons [30]
Clinic personnel who speak the languages of the populations served [428]
Assistance in finding or provision of housing [429]
Reminder systems and follow-up of missed appointments [28]
Clothing or other personal products [30]
Social service assistance (referrals for substance abuse treatment and counseling,
housing, and other services) [429]
Books [428]
Outreach workers (bilingual/bicultural as needed; can provide many services related
to maintaining patient adherence, including provision of directly observed therapy,
follow-up on missed appointments, monthly monitoring, transportation, sputum
collection, social service assistance, and educational reinforcement) [428]
Stipends [30]
Integration of care for tuberculosis with care for other conditions [428]
Patient contract [30]
e152 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Recommended baseline and follow-up evaluations for
patients suspected of having tuberculosis and treated with
first-line medications are summarized in Figure 2. During treat-
ment, a sputum specimen for AFB smear and culture are ob-
tained at monthly intervals until 2 consecutive specimens are
negative on culture. Duration of the continuation phase regi-
men hinges on the microbiological status at the end of the in-
tensive phase of treatment; thus, obtaining sputum specimens
at the time of completion of 2 months of treatment is critical if
sputum culture conversion to negative has not already been
documented. The culture result of a sputum specimen ob-
tained at the completion of the intensive phase of treatment
(2 months) has been shown to correlate with the likelihood
of relapse after completion of treatment for pulmonary tuber-
culosis, albeit with low sensitivity [9, 44–46]. Cavitation on the
initial chest radiograph has also been shown to be a risk factor
for relapse [9, 47]. In patients treated for 6 months, having
both cavitation and a positive culture at completion of 2
months of therapy has been associated with rates of relapse
of approximately 20% compared with 2% among patients
with neither factor [9, 45].
In view of this evidence, for patients who have cavitation on
the initial chest radiograph and who have positive cultures at
completion of 2 months of therapy, expert opinion is to extend
the continuation phase with INH and RIF for an additional 3
months (ie, a continuation phase of 7 months in duration, cor-
responding to a total of 9 months of therapy). Additional factors
to be considered in deciding to prolong treatment in patients
with either cavitation or a positive culture at 2 months (but
not both) might include being >10% below ideal body weight;
being an active smoker; having diabetes, HIV infection, or any
other immunosuppressing condition; or having extensive dis-
ease on chest radiograph [46, 48–52].
Interruptions in therapy are common in the treatment of tu-
berculosis. When interruptions occur, the person responsible for
supervision must decide whether to restart a complete course of
treatment or simply to continue as intended originally. In gene-
ral, the earlier the break in therapy and the longer its duration,
the more serious the effect and the greater the need to restart
treatment from the beginning (Table 6). Continuous treatment
is more important in the intensive phase of therapy when the ba-
cillary population is highest and the chance of developing drug
resistance greatest. During the continuation phase, the number
of bacilli is much smaller and the goal of therapy is to kill the
persisting organisms. The duration of the interruption and the
bacteriologic status of the patient prior to and after the
Table 5.
Examples of Priority Situations for the Use of Directly Observed
Therapy
Patients With the Following Conditions/Circumstances [17, 130, 137, 139,
430, 431]:
• Positive sputum smears
• Delayed culture conversion (sputum obtained at/after
completion of intensive-phase therapy is culture-positive)
• Treatment failure
• Relapse
• Drug resistance
• Homelessness
• Current or prior substance abuse
• Use of intermittent dosing
• HIV infection
• Previous nonadherence to therapy
• Children and adolescents
• Mental, emotional or physical disability (ie, cognitive deficits such as
dementia; neurological deficits; medically fragile patients; or patients with
blindness or severe loss of vision)
• Resident at correctional or long-term care facility
• Previous treatment for active or latent tuberculosis
Abbreviation: HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
Figure 2.
Baseline and follow-up evaluations for patients treated with first-line
tuberculosis medications. Shading around boxes indicates activities that are optional
or contingent on other information. 1Obtain sputa for smear and culture at baseline,
then monthly until 2 consecutive specimens are negative. Collecting sputa more
often early in treatment for assessment of treatment response and at end of treat-
ment is optional. At least one baseline specimen should be tested using a rapid
molecular test. 2Drug susceptibility for isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol (EMB), and
pyrazinamide should be obtained. Repeat drug susceptibility testing if patient re-
mains culture positive after completing 3 months of treatment. Molecular resistance
testing should be performed for patients with risk for drug resistance. 3Obtain chest
radiograph at baseline for all patients, and also at month 2 if baseline cultures are
negative. End-of-treatment chest radiograph is optional. Other imaging for monitor-
ing of extrapulmonary disease. 4Monitor weight monthly to assess response to treat-
ment; adjust medication dose if needed. 5Assess adherence and monitor
improvement in tuberculosis symptoms (eg, cough, fever, fatigue, night sweats) as
well as development of medication adverse effects (eg, jaundice, dark urine, nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, fever, rash, anorexia, malaise, neuropathy, arthralgias).
6Patients on EMB: baseline visual acuity (Snellen test) and color discrimination
tests, followed by monthly inquiry about visual disturbance and monthly color dis-
crimination tests. 7Liver function tests only at baseline unless there were abnormal-
ities at baseline, symptoms consistent with hepatotoxicity develop, or for patients
who chronically consume alcohol, take other potentially hepatotoxic medications, or
have viral hepatitis or history of liver disease, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection, or prior drug-induced liver injury. 8Baseline for all patients. Further mon-
itoring if there are baseline abnormalities or as clinically indicated. 9HIV testing in all
patients. CD4 lymphocyte count and HIV RNA load if positive. 10Patients with hep-
atitis B or C risk factor (eg, injection drug use, birth in Asia or Africa, or HIV infection)
should have screening tests for these viruses. 11Fasting glucose or hemoglobin A1c
for patients with risk factors for diabetes according to the American Diabetes As-
sociation including: age >45 years, body mass index >25 kg/m2, first-degree relative
with diabetes, and race/ethnicity of African American, Asian, Hispanic, American
Indian/Alaska Native, or Hawaiian Native/Pacific Islander. Abbreviations: ALT, ala-
nine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e153
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 interruption are also important considerations (see “Interrup-
tions in Therapy” in the full-text version of the guideline).
PICO Question 4: Does intermittent dosing in the continuation phase
have similar outcomes compared to daily dosing in the continuation
phase in patients with drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis
patients?
Recommendation 4a: We recommend the use of daily or thrice-
weekly dosing in the continuation phase of therapy for drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (strong recommendation;
moderate certainty in the evidence).
Recommendation 4b: If intermittent therapy is to be administered in
the continuation phase, then we suggest use of thrice-weekly instead
of twice-weekly therapy (conditional recommendation; low certainty
in the evidence). This recommendation allows for the possibility of
some doses being missed; with twice-weekly therapy, if doses are
missed then therapy is equivalent to once weekly, which is inferior.
Recommendation 4c: We recommend against use of once-weekly
therapy with INH 900 mg and rifapentine 600 mg in the continuation
phase (strong recommendation; high certainty in the evidence). In
uncommon situations where more than once-weekly DOT is difficult
to achieve, once-weekly continuation phase therapy with INH 900 mg
plus rifapentine 600 mg may be considered for use only in HIV-
uninfected persons without cavitation on chest radiography.
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF TREATMENT
Guidance on the practical aspects of tuberculosis treatment,
drug–drug interactions, therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM),
and management of adverse effects are available in the full-text
version of this guideline. In brief, mild adverse effects usually
can be managed with treatment directed at controlling the symp-
toms; severe effects usually require the offending drug(s) to be
discontinued, and may require expert consultation on manage-
ment. If a drug is permanently discontinued, then a replacement
drug, typically from a different drug class, is included in the reg-
imen. Patients with severe tuberculosis often require the initiation
of an alternate regimen during the time the offending drug(s) are
held. In general, for complicated diagnostic or management
situations, consultation with local and state health departments
is advised. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention’s Division of Tuberculosis Elimination funds tu-
berculosis regional training and medical consultation centers
(http://www.cdc.gov/tb/education/rtmc/), which provide medical
consultation to programs and health providers on management
of tuberculosis. In Europe, the World Health Organization
(WHO)/ERS Tuberculosis Consilium (https://www.tbconsilium.
org) provides similar consultation services regarding the diagno-
sis and treatment of tuberculosis.
Gastrointestinal reactions are common, especially early in
therapy [53].The optimum approach to management of epigas-
tric distress or nausea with tuberculosis drugs is not clear. To
minimize symptoms, patients receiving SAT may take the med-
ications at bedtime. Gastrointestinal intolerance not associated
with hepatotoxicity can be treated with antacids, which have
less impact on absorption or peak concentration of first-line
drugs than administration with food [54]. Any combination
of otherwise unexplained nausea, vomiting, and abdominal
pain is evaluated with a physical examination and liver function
tests, including alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate ami-
notransferase (AST), bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase to as-
sess for possible hepatotoxicity [55]. Drug-induced hepatitis is
the most frequent serious adverse reaction to the first-line
drugs. INH, RIF, and PZA can cause drug-induced liver injury
(DILI), which is suspected when the ALT level is ≥3 times the
upper limit of normal in the presence of hepatitis symptoms, or
≥5 the upper limit of normal in the absence of symptoms. In
either situation, hepatotoxic drugs are stopped immediately
and the patient is evaluated carefully. Other causes of abnormal
liver function tests must be excluded before diagnosing drug-
induced hepatotoxicity (Table 7). An official American Thoracic
Society statement on the hepatotoxicity of antituberculosis
Table 6.
Management of Treatment Interruptionsa
Time Point of
Interruption
Details of Interruption
Approach
During intensive
phase
Lapse is <14 d in duration
Continue treatment to complete planned total number of doses (as long as
all doses are completed within 3 mo)
Lapse is ≥14 d in duration
Restart treatment from the beginning
During continuation
phase
Received ≥80% of doses and sputum was AFB smear
negative on initial testing
Further therapy may not be necessary
Received ≥80% of doses and sputum was AFB smear
positive on initial testing
Continue therapy until all doses are completed
Received <80% of doses and accumulative lapse is <3
mo in duration
Continue therapy until all doses are completed (full course), unless
consecutive lapse is >2 mo
If treatment cannot be completed within recommended time frame for
regimen, restart therapy from the beginning (ie, restart intensive phase,
to be followed by continuation phase)b
Received <80% of doses and lapse is ≥3 mo in
duration
Restart therapy from the beginning, new intensive and continuation phases
(ie, restart intensive phase, to be followed by continuation phase)
Abbreviation: AFB, acid-fast bacilli.
a According to expert opinion, patients who are lost to follow-up (on treatment) and brought back to therapy, with interim treatment interruption, should have sputum resent for AFB smear,
culture, and drug susceptibility testing.
b The recommended time frame for regimen, in tuberculosis control programs in the United States and in several European countries, is to administer all of the specified number of doses for the
intensive phase within 3 months and those for the 4-month continuation phase within 6 months, so that the 6-month regimen is completed within 9 months.
e154 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 therapy (http://www.thoracic.org/statements/resources/mtpi/
hepatotoxicity-of-antituberculosis-therapy.pdf) provides addi-
tional details on the management of tuberculosis in the set-
ting of drug-induced liver injury, as well as suggestions on
drug rechallenge [56]; however, the optimal approach to rein-
troducing tuberculosis treatment after hepatotoxicity is still
not known [57, 58].
TREATMENT IN SPECIAL SITUATIONS
Detailed recommendations on the management of tuberculosis in
special situations (HIV infection, extrapulmonary tuberculosis,
culture-negative pulmonary tuberculosis, advanced age, children,
tuberculosis during pregnancy and breastfeeding, renal disease,
and hepatic disease, among others) are available in the full-text
version of this guideline. Five PICO questions with summary rec-
ommendations pertinent to the management of tuberculosis in
HIV patients, steroid use in pericardial or meningeal tuberculosis,
and culture-negative tuberculosis are summarized below.
HIV Infection
Treatment of tuberculosis in patients with HIV infection has
several important differences compared with treatment of pa-
tients who do not have HIV infection. The need for antiretrovi-
ral therapy (ART), the potential for drug–drug interactions,
especially between the rifamycins and antiretroviral agents
(Table 8), paradoxical reactions that may be interpreted as clin-
ical worsening, and the potential for developing resistance to ri-
famycins when using intermittent tuberculosis therapy are
some of these differences. Detailed information on these topics
is provided in the full-text version of this practice guideline. In
regard to duration of treatment for drug-susceptible pulmonary
tuberculosis in the presence of HIV infection, our updated sys-
tematic review of randomized trials and cohort studies compar-
ing various durations of tuberculosis therapy (6 months vs 8
months or longer), most of which were conducted prior to
the era of highly active ART, showed that the risk of recurrence
is lower when the continuation phase of treatment is extended.
However, it is important to note that the majority of these stud-
ies were reports on nonrandomized cohorts, most were com-
pleted prior to the era of routine antiretroviral use, many
tested intermittent regimens and few distinguished between re-
infection and relapse (see “HIV Infection” in the full-text
version of the guideline). As discussed below, based on data
that show significant reductions in mortality and AIDS-defining
illnesses, patients with HIV infection and tuberculosis should
receive ART in conjunction with daily antituberculosis medica-
tions. For HIV-infected patients receiving ART, we suggest
using the standard 6-month daily regimen consisting of an in-
tensive phase of 2 months of INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB followed
by a continuation phase of 4 months of INH and RIF for the
treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis. In the
uncommon situation in which an HIV-infected patient does
not receive ART during tuberculosis treatment, we suggest ex-
tending the continuation phase with INH and RIF for an addi-
tional 3 months (ie, a continuation phase of 7 months in
duration, corresponding to a total of 9 months of therapy) for
treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (see
PICO Question 5 and Supplementary Appendix B, Evidence
Profile 12). As is noted for drug-susceptible pulmonary tuber-
culosis in patients without HIV coinfection, the continuation
phase is extended in specific situations that are known to in-
crease risk for relapse, as well as for selected extrapulmonary
sites of disease, namely tuberculous meningitis, and bone,
joint, and spinal tuberculosis (see “Identification and Manage-
ment of Patients at Increased Risk of Relapse” and “Extrapul-
monary Tuberculosis” in the full-text version of the guideline).
PICO Question 5: Does extending treatment beyond 6 months improve
outcomes compared to the standard 6-month treatment regimen
among pulmonary tuberculosis patients coinfected with HIV?
Recommendation 5a: For HIV-infected patients receiving ART, we
suggest using the standard 6-month daily regimen consisting of an
intensive phase of 2 months of INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB followed by a
continuation phase of 4 months of INH and RIF for the treatment of
drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (conditional
recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
Recommendation 5b: In uncommon situations in which HIV-infected
patients do NOT receive ART during tuberculosis treatment, we
suggest extending the continuation phase with INH and RIF for an
additional 3 months (ie, a continuation phase of 7 months in duration,
corresponding to a total of 9 months of therapy) for treatment of drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (conditional recommendation; very
low certainty in the evidence).
Use of intermittent tuberculosis treatment regimens in HIV-
infected patients has been associated with high rates of relapse
and the emergence of drug resistance [9, 59]. In a trial of rifabu-
tin (RFB)–based antituberculosis therapy in combination with
antiretroviral drugs, patients treated with twice-weekly RFB
had a relapse rate of 5.3%, but 8 of 9 patients with relapse
had acquired rifamycin resistance [60]. Relapse and resistance
were associated with low CD4 lymphocyte counts, as all recur-
rences occurred in patients with baseline CD4 lymphocyte
counts <100 cells/µL. In the pharmacokinetic substudy of the
trial, lower plasma concentrations of RFB and INH were iden-
tified as key risk factors for acquiring rifamycin resistance [61].
More recently, the use of a thrice-weekly RIF-based regimen
during the intensive and continuation phases of treatment
was associated with a higher rate of relapse and emergence of
Table 7.
Other Causes of Abnormal Liver Function Tests That Should Be
Excluded
Viral hepatitis (hepatitis A, B, and C in all patients; Epstein-Barr virus,
cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex in immunosuppressed patients)
Biliary tract disease
Alcohol
Other hepatotoxic drugs (eg, acetaminophen, acetaminophen-containing
multiagent preparations, lipid-lowering agents, other drugs)
Select herbal and dietary supplements
Source: American Thoracic Society [56].
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e155
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Table 8.
Clinically Significant Drug–Drug Interactions Involving the Rifamycinsa
Drug Class
Drugs Whose Concentrations Are Substantially
Decreased by Rifamycins
Comments
Antiretroviral agents
HIV-1 protease inhibitors (lopinavir/ritonavir, darunavir/
ritonavir, atazanavir, atazanavir/ritonavir)
RFB preferred with protease inhibitors. For ritonavir-boosted regimens, give
RFB 150 mg daily. Double-dose lopinavir/ritonavir can be used with RIF
but toxicity increased. Do not use RIF with other protease inhibitors.
NNRTIs
Nevirapine
Efavirenz
Rilpivirine
Complera (fixed-dose combination tablet containing
emtricitabine, rilpivirine, TDF)
Etravirine
RIF decreases exposure to all NNRTIs. If nevirapine is used with RIF, lead-in
nevirapine dose of 200 mg daily should be omitted and 400 mg daily
nevirapine dosage given. With RIF, many experts advise that efavirenz be
given at standard dosage of 600 mg daily, although FDA recommends
increasing efavirenz to 800 mg daily in persons >60 kg. In young children
double-dose lopinavir/ritonavir given with RIF results in inadequate
concentrations – super-boosted Lopinavir/ritonavir is advised (if available)
by some experts. Rilpivirine and etravirine should not be given with RIF.
RFB can be used with nevirapine and etravirine at usual dosing. Efavirenz
and RFB use requires dose increase of RFB to 600 mg daily, as such RIF is
preferred. Rilpivirine should not be given with RFB.
INSTIs
Raltegravir
Dolutegravir
Elvitegravir (coformulated with cobicistat, tenofovir and
emtricitabine as Stribild)
Genvoya (fixed-dose combination tablet containing
elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir
alafenamide)
Increase dose of raltegravir to 800 mg twice daily with RIF, although clinical
trial data show similar efficacy using 400 mg twice daily. Dolutegravir
dose should be increased to 50 mg every 12 h with RIF. Do not use RIF
with elvitegravir. RFB can be used with all INSTIs.
CCR5 inhibitors
Maraviroc
RIF should not be used with maraviroc. RFB can be used with maraviroc.
Anti-infectives
Macrolide antibiotics (azithromycin, clarithromycin,
erythromycin)
Azithromycin has no significant interaction with rifamycins. Coadministration
of clarithromycin and RFB results in significant bidirectional interactions
that can increase RFB to toxic levels increasing the risk of uveitis.
Erythromycin is a CYP3A4 substrate and clearance may increase in setting
of rifamycin use.
Doxycycline
May require use of a drug other than doxycycline.
Azole antifungal agents (ketoconazole, itraconazole,
voriconazole, fluconazole, posaconazole,
isavuconazole)
Itraconazole, ketoconazole, and voriconazole concentrations may be
subtherapeutic with any of the rifamycins. Fluconazole can be used with
rifamycins, but the dose of fluconazole may have to be increased.
Atovaquone
Consider alternate form of Pneumocystis jirovecii treatment or prophylaxis.
Chloramphenicol
Consider an alternative antibiotic.
Mefloquine
Consider alternate form of malaria prophylaxis.
Hormone therapy
Ethinylestradiol, norethindrone
Women of reproductive potential on oral contraceptives should be advised to
add a barrier method of contraception when on a rifamycin.
Tamoxifen
May require alternate therapy or use of a non-rifamycin-containing regimen.
Levothyroxine
Monitoring of serum TSH recommended; may require increased dose of
levothyroxine.
Narcotics
Methadone
RIF and RPT use may require methadone dose increase.
RFB infrequently causes methadone withdrawal.
Anticoagulants
Warfarin
Monitor prothrombin time; may require 2- to 3-fold warfarin dose increase.
Immunosuppressive
agents
Cyclosporine, tacrolimus
RFB may allow concomitant use of cyclosporine and a rifamycin; monitoring
of cyclosporine and tacrolimus serum concentrations may assist with
dosing.
Corticosteroids
Monitor clinically; may require 2- to 3-fold increase in corticosteroid dose.
Anticonvulsants
Phenytoin, lamotrigine
TDM recommended; may require anticonvulsant dose increase.
Cardiovascular
agents
Verapamil, nifedipine, diltiazem (a similar interaction is
also predicted for felodipine and nisoldipine)
Clinical monitoring recommended; may require change to an alternate
cardiovascular agent.
Propranolol, metoprolol
Clinical monitoring recommended; may require dose increase or change to
an alternate cardiovascular drug.
Enalapril, losartan
Monitor clinically; may require a dose increase or use of an alternate
cardiovascular drug.
Digoxin (among patients with renal insufficiency),
digitoxin
TDM recommended; may require digoxin or digitoxin dose increase.
Quinidine
TDM recommended; may require quinidine dose increase.
Mexiletine, tocainide, propafenone
Clinical monitoring recommended; may require change to an alternate
cardiovascular drug.
Theophylline
Theophylline
TDM recommended; may require theophylline dose increase.
Sulfonylurea
hypoglycemics
Tolbutamide, chlorpropamide, glyburide, glimepiride,
repaglinide
Monitor blood glucose; may require dose increase or change to an alternate
hypoglycemic drug.
Hypolipidemics
Simvastatin, fluvastatin
Monitor hypolipidemic effect; may require use of an alternate
antihyperlipidemic drug.
e156 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 rifamycin resistance in HIV-infected individuals not receiving
antiretrovirals compared with HIV-infected patients also re-
ceiving antiretrovirals or HIV-uninfected patients [62]. Based
in part on systematic reviews conducted to obtain evidence in
support of this guideline, our expert opinion is that treatment
of HIV-related tuberculosis be given daily in both the intensive
and continuation phases to avoid recurrent disease and the
emergence of rifamycin resistance (see “Recommended Treat-
ment Regimens” in the full-text version of the guideline).
Mortality among patients with HIV and tuberculosis is high,
principally due to complications of immunosuppression and oc-
currence of other HIV-related opportunistic diseases. Co-
trimoxazole (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) prophylaxis has
been shown to reduce morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected
patients with newly diagnosed tuberculosis [63–65].Whereas co-
trimoxazole is recommended by WHO for all HIV-infected peo-
ple with active tuberculosis disease regardless of the CD4 cell
count [66],in high-income countries, co-trimoxazole is primarily
used in HIV-infected patients with CD4 counts <200 cells/µL
[67]. The use of ART during tuberculosis treatment in persons
with HIV infection also reduces mortality rates significantly
and decreases the risk of developing AIDS-related conditions.
We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to address
the concurrent initiation of ART with tuberculosis treatment. On
the basis of high certainty in the evidence that the benefits out-
weigh the harms, we recommend that patients with tuberculosis
and HIV infection receive ART during antituberculosis treat-
ment. ART should ideally be started within 2 weeks for those pa-
tients with a CD4 count <50 cells/µL and by 8–12 weeks for those
with a CD4 count ≥50 cells/µL (see PICO Question 6 and Sup-
plementary Appendix B, Evidence Profile 13). An exception is
HIV-infected patients with tuberculous meningitis, in whom
ART is not initiated in the first 8 weeks of antituberculosis ther-
apy (see full-text version of the guideline). The concurrent ad-
ministration of antiretrovirals and rifamycins is a major
therapeutic challenge, and additional details on the coadminis-
tration of these medications, including the use of RFB, are avail-
able in the full-text version of this guideline.
PICO Question 6: Does initiation of ART during tuberculosis
treatment compared to at the end of tuberculosis treatment improve
outcomes among tuberculosis patients coinfected with HIV?
Recommendation 6: We recommend initiating ART during
tuberculosis treatment. ART should ideally be initiated within the first
2 weeks of tuberculosis treatment for patients with CD4 counts <50
cells/µL and by 8–12 weeks of tuberculosis treatment initiation for
patients with CD4 counts ≥50 cells/µL (strong recommendation; high
certainty in the evidence). Note: an exception is patients with HIV
infection and tuberculous meningitis (see Immune Reconstitution
Inflammatory Syndrome).
Patients with HIV infection and tuberculosis are at increased
risk of developing paradoxical worsening of symptoms, signs,
or clinical manifestations of tuberculosis after beginning anti-
tuberculosis and antiretroviral treatments. These reactions pre-
sumably develop as a consequence of reconstitution of immune
responsiveness brought about by ART, and are designated as the
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). Tuber-
culosis IRIS has been noted to be more common in participants
with earlier ART initiation and CD4+ cell counts <50 cells/µL
[68]. Signs of IRIS may include high fevers, worsening respira-
tory symptoms, increase in size and inflammation of involved
lymph nodes, new lymphadenopathy, expanding central ner-
vous system lesions, worsening of pulmonary parenchymal in-
filtrations, new or increasing pleural effusions, and development
of intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal abscesses [69]. Such find-
ings are attributed to IRIS only after excluding other possible
causes, especially tuberculosis treatment failure from drug-resis-
tant tuberculosis or another opportunistic disease, such as non-
Hodgkin lymphoma or infection.
Management of IRIS is symptomatic. Based on expert opin-
ion, for most patients with mild IRIS, tuberculosis and an-
tiretroviral therapies can be continued with the addition of
anti-inflammatory agents such as ibuprofen. For patients with
worsening pleural effusions or abscesses, drainage may be nec-
essary. For more severe cases of IRIS, treatment with corticoste-
roids is effective. In a placebo-controlled trial of prednisone for
patients with moderate IRIS, prednisone 1.25 mg/kg/day signif-
icantly reduced the need for hospitalization or surgical
Table 8
continued.
Drug Class
Drugs Whose Concentrations Are Substantially
Decreased by Rifamycins
Comments
Psychotropic drugs
Nortriptyline
TDM recommended; may require dose increase or change to alternate
psychotropic drug.
Haloperidol, quetiapine
Monitor clinically; may require a dose increase or use of an alternate
psychotropic drug.
Benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, triazolam), zolpidem,
buspirone)
Monitor clinically; may require a dose increase or use of an alternate
psychotropic drug.
Abbreviations: CCR5, C chemokine receptor type 5; CYP, cytochrome P450; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; INSTI, integrase strand transfer
inhibitor; NNRTI, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor; RFB, rifabutin; RIF, rifampin; RPT, rifapentine; TDF, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate; TDM, therapeutic drug monitoring; TSH,
thyroid-stimulating hormone.
a See the following useful websites for updated information regarding drug interactions: AIDSinfo, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, University of California San Francisco, University
of Liverpool, Indiana University, and University of Maryland.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e157
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 procedures [70]. For patients who develop IRIS, prednisone
may be given at a dose of 1.25 mg/kg/day (50–80 mg/day) for
2–4 weeks, with tapering over a period of 6–12 weeks or longer.
Tuberculous Pericarditis
Based on small studies that have shown mortality and morbidity
benefits [71–73], corticosteroids have previously been universally
recommended in combination with a standard 6-month regimen
(Table 2) for treating tuberculosis pericarditis; however, a recent
placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial with 1400 partici-
pants did not find a difference in the combined primary endpoint
of the trial, which included mortality, cardiac tamponade, or con-
strictive pericarditis, between patients treated with adjunctive cor-
ticosteroids vs placebo [74]. A subgroup analysis, however, did
suggest a benefit in preventing constrictive pericarditis. Similarly,
a systematic review conducted to obtain evidence in support of
this guideline did not find a statistically significant benefit in
terms of mortality or constrictive pericarditis from the use of cor-
ticosteroids [71–75]. Therefore, we suggest that adjunctive corti-
costeroids should not be used routinely in the treatment of
patients with pericardial tuberculosis (see PICO Question 7 and
Supplementary Appendix B, Evidence Profile 14). However, se-
lective use of corticosteroids in patients who are at the highest
risk for inflammatory complications might be appropriate.
Such patients might include those with large pericardial effusions,
those with high levels of inflammatory cells or markers in pericar-
dial fluid, or those with early signs of constriction [76].
PICO Question 7: Does the use of adjuvant corticosteroids in
tuberculous pericarditis provide mortality and morbidity benefits?
Recommendation 7: We suggest initial adjunctive corticosteroid
therapy not be routinely used in patients with tuberculous pericarditis
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
Tuberculous Meningitis
Chemotherapy for tuberculous meningitis is initiated with
INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB in an initial 2-month phase.
After 2 months of 4-drug therapy, for meningitis known or
presumed to be caused by susceptible strains, PZA and
EMB may be discontinued, and INH and RIF continued for
an additional 7–10 months, although the optimal duration
of chemotherapy is not defined. Based on expert opinion, re-
peated lumbar punctures should be considered to monitor
changes in cerebrospinal fluid cell count, glucose, and protein,
especially early in the course of therapy. In children with tu-
berculous meningitis, the American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP) lists an initial 4-drug regimen composed of INH,
RIF, PZA, and ethionamide, if possible, or an aminoglycoside,
followed by 7–10 months of INH and RIF as the preferred reg-
imen [77]. There are no data from controlled trials to guide
the selection of EMB vs an injectable or ethionamide as the
fourth drug for tuberculosis meningitis [78]. Most societies
and experts recommend the use of either an injectable or
EMB. For adults, based on expert opinion, our guideline
committee prefers using EMB as the fourth drug in the regi-
men for tuberculous meningitis.
The role of adjunctive corticosteroid therapy in the treatment
of tuberculous meningitis has been reported by numerous stud-
ies [79–91], and our updated systematic review found a mortal-
ity benefit from the use of adjuvant corticosteroids. Therefore,
we recommend adjunctive corticosteroid therapy with dexame-
thasone or prednisolone tapered over 6–8 weeks for patients
with tuberculous meningitis (see PICO Question 8 and Supple-
mentary Appendix B, Evidence Profile 15).
PICO Question 8: Does the use of adjuvant corticosteroids in
tuberculous meningitis provide mortality and morbidity benefits?
Recommendation 8: We recommend initial adjunctive corticosteroid
therapy with dexamethasone or prednisolone tapered over 6–8
weeks for patients with tuberculous meningitis (strong
recommendation; moderate certainty in the evidence).
Culture-Negative Pulmonary Tuberculosis in Adults
Failure to isolate M. tuberculosis from appropriately collected
sputum specimens in persons who, because of clinical or radio-
graphic findings, are suspected of having pulmonary tuberculo-
sis does not exclude a diagnosis of active tuberculosis. Some
causes of failure to isolate organisms include low bacillary pop-
ulations, inadequate sputum specimens, temporal variations in
the number of expelled bacilli, overgrowth of cultures with other
microorganisms, and errors in specimen processing [92]. Alter-
native diagnoses must be considered and appropriate diagnostic
studies undertaken in patients who appear to have culture-
negative tuberculosis. At a minimum, patients suspected of hav-
ing pulmonary tuberculosis have 2 sputum specimens (using
sputum induction with hypertonic saline if necessary) for
AFB smears and cultures for mycobacteria or for rapid molec-
ular testing for M. tuberculosis as part of the diagnostic evalua-
tion. Other diagnostic procedures, such as bronchoscopy with
bronchoalveolar lavage and biopsy, are considered before mak-
ing a presumptive diagnosis of culture-negative tuberculosis.
Patients who, on the basis of careful clinical and radiographic
evaluation, are thought to have pulmonary tuberculosis should
have treatment initiated with INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB even
when the initial sputum smears are negative. If M. tuberculosis
is isolated in culture or a rapid molecular test is positive, treat-
ment for active disease is continued for a full, standard 6-month
course (Table 2), if appropriate based on drug susceptibility test
results. Patients who have negative cultures but who still are pre-
sumed to have pulmonary tuberculosis should have thorough
clinical and radiographic follow-up after 2–3 months of therapy
[93]. If there is clinical or radiographic improvement and no
other etiology is identified, treatment should be continued.
The optimum treatment regimens and duration for smear-
negative, culture-negative tuberculosis have not been convincing-
ly established. We performed a systematic review that evaluated
treatment regimens of varying durations in adult patients with
e158 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 culture-negative, paucibacillary tuberculosis, and we suggest
that a 4-month treatment regimen is adequate for smear-
negative, culture-negative pulmonary tuberculosis (see PICO
Question 9 and Supplementary Appendix B, Evidence Profile
16). Operationally, treatment is initiated with an intensive
phase of INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB daily and continued even
when the initial bacteriologic studies are negative. If all cultures
on adequate samples are negative (defining culture-negative tu-
berculosis) and there is clinical or radiographic response after 2
months of intensive phase therapy, the continuation phase with
INH and RIF can be shortened to 2 months. Alternatively, if
there is concern about the adequacy of workup or the accuracy
of the microbiologic evaluations, a standard 6-month regimen re-
mains preferred (see Table 2 and “Culture-Negative Pulmonary
Tuberculosis” in the full-text version of the guideline) [14, 15].
PICO Question 9: Does a shorter duration of treatment have similar
outcomes compared to the standard 6-month treatment duration
among HIV-uninfected patients with paucibacillary tuberculosis (ie,
smear negative, culture negative)?
Recommendation 9: We suggest that a 4-month treatment regimen is
adequate for treatment of HIV-uninfected adult patients with AFB
smear- and culture-negative pulmonary tuberculosis (conditional
recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
CONCLUSIONS
Treatment of tuberculosis is focused on both curing the individ-
ual patient and minimizing the transmission of M. tuberculosis
to other persons, thus, successful treatment of tuberculosis has
benefits both for the individual patient and the community in
which the patient resides. A 4-drug regimen of INH, RIF, PZA,
and EMB remains the preferred initial treatment for drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis. Treatment is initiated
promptly even before AFB smear microscopy, molecular tests,
and mycobacterial culture results are known in patients with
high likelihood of having tuberculosis or those seriously ill
with a disorder suspicious for tuberculosis. Initiation of treat-
ment should not be delayed because of negative AFB smears
for patients in whom tuberculosis is suspected and who have
a life-threatening condition. There are variations of the pre-
ferred regimen that are appropriate in certain public health sit-
uations or in special clinical situations. Additional detailed and
extensively referenced information on treatment of tuberculosis
in special situations (patients with renal disease or hepatic dis-
ease, those of advanced age, etc), the use of case management
strategies (including DOT), regimen and dosing selection in
adults and children (daily vs intermittent), the role of TDM,
treatment of tuberculosis in the presence of HIV infection (du-
ration of tuberculosis treatment and timing of initiation of
ART), treatment of tuberculosis in children, treatment of tuber-
culosis during pregnancy, and treatment of extrapulmonary tu-
berculosis, as well as key research priorities, are provided in the
full-text version of this practice guideline.
BACKGROUND
The ATS, the CDC, and the IDSA have jointly developed this
guideline for the treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis.
This document provides guidance on the clinical and public
health management of tuberculosis in low-incidence countries.
The current document differs from its predecessor, published
in 2003 [94],in 3 important areas. First, the process by which the
recommendations were developed was substantially modified.
For the first time, the Guideline Writing Committee based its rec-
ommendations on the certainty in the evidence (also known as
the quality of evidence) assessed according to the GRADE meth-
odology (see Supplementary Appendix A: Methods), which in-
corporates patient values and costs as well as judgments about
trade-offs between benefits and harms [1, 2]. A carefully selected
panel of experts, screened for conflicts of interest, including spe-
cialists in pulmonary medicine, infectious diseases, pharmacoki-
netics, pediatrics, primary care, public health, and systematic
review methodology were assembled to assess the evidence sup-
porting each recommendation. The GRADE method was used to
assess the certainty in the evidence and to rate the strength of the
recommendations. Second, the ERS has become an endorser of
the statement, along with the US NTCA. Representatives from
the AAP, the Canadian Thoracic Society, the International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, and the WHO
also participated in the development of this guideline. Together,
these committee members served to provide broader input, there-
by expanding the applicability of the guidance beyond North
America to include Europe and other low-incidence settings.
Last, practice guidelines for the treatment of drug-resistant tuber-
culosis (including INH monoresistance) are no longer included in
this statement and are now covered in a separate practice guideline
under development by the ATS, CDC, ERS, and IDSA.
Whereas significant changes have been made, the current
document also retains many of the basic principles of tubercu-
losis care described in the 2003 version. As before, a fundamen-
tal aspect of tuberculosis care, regardless of the treatment
selected, is ensuring patient adherence to the drug regimen
and successful completion of therapy. The responsibility for
successful treatment of tuberculosis is placed primarily on the
provider or program initiating therapy rather than on the pa-
tient. It is well established that appropriate treatment of tuber-
culosis rapidly renders the patient noninfectious, prevents drug
resistance, minimizes the risk of disability or death from tuber-
culosis, and nearly eliminates the possibility of relapse [95]. Pro-
vider responsibility is a central concept in treating patients with
tuberculosis, no matter what the source of their care.
The recommendations in this statement are not applicable
under all epidemiological circumstances or across all levels of
resources that are available to tuberculosis control programs
worldwide. It should be emphasized that these guidelines are in-
tended for areas in which mycobacterial cultures, molecular and
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e159
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 phenotypic drug susceptibility tests, and radiographic facilities
are available on a routine basis—typically low-incidence (<100
tuberculosis cases per million population), well-resourced
countries, where in some settings tuberculosis epidemiology is
at or nearing preelimination levels (<10 cases per million) [96,
97]. The WHO has developed tuberculosis practice guidelines
(currently under revision) specifically for high-incidence, re-
source-limited areas of the world [98].
OBJECTIVES OF ANTITUBERCULOSIS THERAPY
Treatment of tuberculosis is focused on both curing the individ-
ual patient and minimizing the transmission of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis to other persons; successful treatment of tuberculo-
sis has benefits both for the individual patient and the commu-
nity in which the patient resides.
The objectives of tuberculosis therapy are:
1.
To reduce the bacillary population rapidly thereby de-
creasing severity of the disease, preventing death and halting
transmission of M. tuberculosis;
2.
To eradicate persisting bacilli in order to achieve durable
cure (prevent relapse) after completion of therapy; and
3.
To prevent acquisition of drug resistance during therapy.
Sixty-five years of investigation, including many clinical tri-
als, have consistently supported the requirement for treatment
with multiple drugs to achieve these objectives, minimize drug
toxicity, and maximize the likelihood of treatment completion
[3,4].The most effective agents to curtail rapid multiplication of
tuberculous bacilli are INH and the fluoroquinolones. Persisting
bacilli appear to curtail their metabolic activity; drugs known to
be effective against such persisters include the rifamycins and
PZA, the latter with activity believed limited to special microen-
vironments of relatively increased acidity [99].
Objective 1: Rapid killing of multiplying bacilli (“bactericidal ef-
fect”): Rapid reduction in the number of replicating bacilli reduces
mortality risk [100, 101], and appears to diminish infectiousness,
but even optimal therapy on average requires 4–5 weeks to render
sputum cultures negative [102–105]. Studies of early bactericidal
activity (EBA) measure the rate of decline in bacillary numbers
in sputum during the initial 1–2 weeks of treatment; EBA studies
have been used in the initial evaluation of virtually every new tu-
berculosis drug since 1980 [106,107].However, the relationship of
a drug or regimen’s EBA to its ability to achieve durable cure is still
uncertain [108].For example, INH has a remarkable EBA but acts
only slowly on persisting bacilli; RIFat the dose currently used (10
mg/kg) has moderate EBA but potent activity against persisters;
and PZA has almost no measurable EBA, but acts potently to assist
in achieving durable cure [99, 109].
Objective 2: Achievement of relapse-free cure (“sterilizing ef-
fect”): Demonstration of relapse-free cure requires lengthy clin-
ical trials. Among the few drugs effective in preventing relapse,
the most prominent have been the rifamycins. Rapid and
reliable measurement of the sterilizing effect of antituberculous
agents remains elusive. In vitro models are not entirely predic-
tive [110, 111]. The most commonly used animal model is the
murine model, which has reliably reproduced the results of
standard short-course chemotherapy [112]; however, the mu-
rine model has been criticized because mice do not develop cav-
ities and caseous necrosis, pathologic hallmarks of human
tuberculosis [113]. Other animal models have been proposed,
but none fully replicates the human response to M. tuberculosis
[114]. Recent evidence suggests that extracellular bacilli in ne-
crotic material within cavities may be the major challenge to
prevention of relapse after therapy. Studies using sensitive ana-
lytic tools such as positron emission tomography–computed to-
mography scanning and matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization mass spectrometry imaging in experimental animals
and in patients undergoing pulmonary resection have provided
evidence of the marked differences in the ability of key drugs
(RIF, PZA, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin) to penetrate into pulmo-
nary tissue, into the cellular granuloma, and into caseous mate-
rial within cavities [115–119]. However, the pathologic sites
from which relapses arise remain unclear.
Objective 3: Protection against acquisition of drug resistance
(through use of multidrug therapy): The basic biology underlying
the acquisition of drug resistance is well understood, though the
details involving some individual agents are still uncertain. As a
rule, genetic mutations conferring substantial resistance to indi-
vidual antituberculous agents occur at constant low rates. For ex-
ample, rifamycins act primarily by inhibiting the action of
bacterial RNA polymerase in the translation of DNA to RNA,
by binding to and obstructing access to a subunit of the bacterial
RNA polymerase. Mutations in a relatively limited (81 base pairs
[bp]) genomic segment encoding for this subunit lead to obstruc-
tion of rifamycin binding to the polymerase β subunit (rpoB);
more than half a dozen amino acid substitutions conferring RIF
resistance have been well described. In the case of PZA, resistance
is most often conferred by mutations in the pncA gene, which en-
codes for an amidase that is required to convert PZA, a prodrug,
into its active form, pyrazinoic acid. The pncA mutations occur
throughout the 350-bp gene, with no notable preference for
specific mutations yet described. INH is also a prodrug requir-
ing activation by a bacterial catalase-peroxidase enzyme (en-
coded by katG), coupling with NADH, and binding to an
acyl carrier protein reductase (encoded by inhA); the process
inhibits the synthesis of mycolic acid needed for the mycobac-
terial cell wall. Resistance to INH arises through multiple
mechanisms, including loss of the katG-encoded catalase per-
oxidase activity, and overexpression or alterations in the inhA-
encoded reductase [120].
The frequency of mutation engendering resistance to specific
agents was estimated some 40 years ago; the highest proportion
of resistant mutants expected in an unselected bacterial popula-
tion were 3.5 × 10−6 for INH and 3.1 × 10−8 for RIF [4, 121].
e160 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Because these mutations generally occur independently, the like-
lihood of simultaneous resistance mutations to both INH and
RIF is in the range of 11 × 10−14. Thus, in patients with very
high bacillary burdens, the occurrence of mutations conferring
resistance to a single drug is likely, to 2 drugs is possible, but
to 3 drugs is highly unlikely [10]. Acquisition of drug resistance
might occur more readily if there is irregular or sporadic drug
taking, inadequate drug absorption, inadequate drug dosing, or
ill-informed use of single drug treatment (either by error, or be-
cause tuberculosis has not been recognized or considered). If re-
sistance to a specific drug occurs, then the resistant clone will
possess an advantage relative to susceptible strains when con-
fronted with that drug, and will have no advantage (or possibly
a modest disadvantage, if the mutation confers some biologic
“cost”) if the drug is not used. In the situation of the standard
3-drug regimen (INH, RIF, PZA), 3 circumstances must likely
be present for resistance to RIF to emerge: (1) some mutant ba-
cilli resistant to RIF must be present or appear; (2) the bacilli
must be exposed to RIF to favor multiplication of the resistant
bacteria; and (3) INH and PZA must not be present in sufficient
concentration to offset the survival advantage enjoyed by the
RIF-resistant clones; this could occur because they are not em-
ployed at all (ie, single drug therapy), or because some combina-
tion of circumstances affects the other drugs (eg, a nonacidic
compartment is involved thereby disadvantaging PZA, and
INH happens to be rapidly metabolized [so-called rapid acetyla-
tion due to genetic polymorphisms affecting N-acetyl transfer-
ase], so that INH is not present in adequate concentration) [59].
Multiple Factors Influence the Outcome of Tuberculosis Treatment
Multiple interrelated factors have been associated with the out-
come of tuberculosis therapy. These include:
•
Patient factors, such as age, comorbid conditions, immu-
nologic competence, nutritional status, alcohol abuse;
•
Radiographic features, such as extent of disease, presence
and size of cavities;
•
Microbiologic factors, such as baseline colony count, cul-
ture positivity at 2 or 3 months;
•
Genetic factors, including individual genetic features of
drug absorption and metabolism, individual vulnerability to
toxicities, immunologic characteristics;
•
Programmatic factors, including adherence support inter-
ventions (enhancers, enablers, monitoring, supervision/DOT),
dosing frequency;
•
Pharmacokinetic factors, such as absorption, metabo-
lism, protein binding, drug clearance, total drug quantities
administered;
•
Bacillary factors, such as drug tolerance, strain susceptibil-
ities to drugs in the regimen; and
•
Regimen factors, such as number of active drugs, bacterici-
dal and sterilizing potency, synergy or antagonism, and dura-
tion of therapy in relation to drugs employed.
The success of therapy depends upon many diverse elements,
only some of which are presently predictable, identifiable, or
modifiable. Numerous studies have found an increased risk of
relapse among patients with signs of more extensive disease
(ie, cavitation or more extensive disease on chest radiograph)
[5–9], and/or slower response to treatment (ie, culture status
at 2 or 3 months) [4,6,10,11].Better understanding of the caus-
al pathways through which these elements exert their effect, and
greater ability to identify and quantify each of these, should lead
to increased therapeutic success, and will inform efforts to de-
velop shorter, less toxic, and better-tolerated treatment regi-
mens in the future [122].
ORGANIZATION AND SUPERVISION OF TREATMENT
PICO Question 1: Does adding case management interventions to
curative therapy improve outcomes compared to curative therapy
alone among patients with tuberculosis?
(Case management is defined as patient education/counseling, field/
home visits, integration/coordination of care with specialists and
medical home, patient reminders, incentives/enablers).
Recommendation 1: We suggest using case management
interventions during treatment of patients with tuberculosis
(conditional recommendation; low certainty in the evidence).
PICO Question 2: Does self-administered therapy (SAT) have similar
outcomes compared to directly observed therapy (DOT) in patients
with various forms of tuberculosis?
Recommendation 2: We suggest using DOT rather than SAT for
routine treatment of patients with all forms of tuberculosis
(conditional recommendation; low certainty in the evidence).
Role of Health Department
Due to the public health implications of prompt diagnosis and
effective treatment of tuberculosis, most low-incidence coun-
tries designate a government public health agency as having
legal authority for controlling tuberculosis [12,13].To effective-
ly carry out this charge, the public health agency conducts on-
going epidemiologic surveillance of tuberculosis, ensures access
to quality-assured microbiological laboratory services, main-
tains an uninterrupted supply of antituberculosis medications,
and monitors and reports treatment outcomes [13]. The public
health agency may also have the authority to apply legal mea-
sures in situations of nonadherence as a last resort where other
interventions have been pursued without effect. In some juris-
dictions diagnostic and treatment services are provided directly
by the public health agency, whereas in others, these services are
provided by the private sector or by a combination of public and
private providers.
Patient-Centered Care and Case Management
Patient-centered care respects an individual’s right to partici-
pate actively as an informed partner in decisions and activities
related to tuberculosis diagnosis and treatment [123, 124]. The
Institute of Medicine defines patient-centered care as “provid-
ing care that is respectful of and responsive to individual patient
preferences, needs, and values, and ensuring that patient values
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e161
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 guide all clinical decisions” [125]. Given that tuberculosis treat-
ment requires multiple drugs be given for several months, it is
crucial that the patient be involved in a meaningful way in mak-
ing decisions concerning treatment supervision and overall
care. International standards have been developed that also sup-
port using patient-centered approaches to the management of
tuberculosis [14–16].
The optimal organization of tuberculosis treatment often re-
quires the coordination not only of primary and specialty clinical
care services, but also community-based organizations and agen-
cies in the public and private sectors [14–16].The inherent com-
plexities of the healthcare delivery system combined with the
diversity of characteristics of patients are best addressed by pro-
viding individualized patient-centered case management [13]. In
most settings, a patient is assigned a case manager who assesses
needs and barriers that may interfere with treatment adherence
[17].With active input from the patient and healthcare providers,
the case manager, together with the patient, develops an individ-
ualized case management plan with interventions to address the
identified needs and barriers [18–20]. The plan is reviewed peri-
odically and revised as needed with the patient and medical team
to evaluate the clinical response to therapy, monitor potential
drug toxicities, and address any challenges identified with adher-
ence. The spectrum of interventions for achieving adherence may
range from routine monthly monitoring to legal confinement
[126, 127], with confinement being used only as a last resort.
The least restrictive public health interventions that are effective
are used to achieve adherence.
Key considerations when developing a case management
plan include (1) improving “treatment literacy” by educating
the patient about tuberculosis and its treatment, including pos-
sible adverse effects [21, 22]; (2) discussing expected outcomes
of treatment, specifically the ability to cure the patient of the
disease; (3) reviewing methods of supervision and assessing re-
sponse to therapy; and (4) discussing infectiousness and infec-
tion control measures using terminology that is appropriate to
the culture, language, age, and reading level of the patient [23].
For non-English-speaking patients, the use of medical inter-
preter services is preferred over using family or friends as inter-
preters [24]. Relevant information should be reinforced at each
visit. Other components of the patient-centered case manage-
ment plan include, but are not limited to, setting up patient re-
minders and systems to follow-up missed appointments [23,28,
29], use of incentives and enablers [25–27, 30, 31], field and
home visits [32], integration and coordination of tuberculosis
care with the patient’s primary and specialty care, and legal in-
terventions when indicated (Table 4). Overall, the quality of ev-
idence is variable in the few studies examining the impact of
case management interventions on outcomes such as treatment
success; however, these studies suggest that for the most part,
patient-centered case management interventions are helpful
with
little
evidence
of
harm
to
patients
[128]
(see
Supplementary Appendix B, Evidence Profiles 1–3). For these
reasons, we suggest using case management interventions dur-
ing treatment of patients with tuberculosis (Recommendation 1:
conditional recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
Approaches to Ensuring Adherence and Treatment Success
Given the critical importance of chemotherapy, both to the pa-
tient and to the public, approaches to ensuring adherence to the
treatment regimen are a major focus of the overall management
plan. To maximize completion of therapy, management strate-
gies should utilize a broad range of approaches. Among these,
DOT, the practice of observing the patient swallow her or his
antituberculosis medications, has been widely used and de-
serves special emphasis. To be consistent with the principles
of patient-centered care, decisions regarding the use of DOT
must be made in concert with the patient [14–16]. For example,
DOT can be provided in the office, clinic, or in the “field” (pa-
tient’s home, place of employment, school, or any other site that
is mutually agreeable) by appropriately trained personnel [32].
DOT enables early identification of adverse drug reactions, clin-
ical worsening of tuberculosis, and nonadherence [33]. More-
over, frequent contact with the patient allows providers to
facilitate linkage to other medical care and services.
However, the implementation of DOT may not be readily
feasible when resources are limited [129]. In such circumstanc-
es, patients who are more likely to present a transmission risk to
others or are more likely to have difficulty with adherence are
prioritized for DOT [17]. In addition, experts advise that
DOT must be used with regimens that use intermittent drug ad-
ministration because of the potential serious consequences of
missed doses. Careful attention is needed to ensure that inges-
tion of the medication is, in fact, observed, as the use of DOT
does not guarantee ingestion of all doses of every medication
[130]. Patients may miss appointments, may not actually swal-
low the tablets or capsules, or may deliberately regurgitate the
medications. Consequently, the use of DOT does not mitigate
the continued need for monitoring for signs of treatment fail-
ure. DOT is also advised for all patients residing in institutional
settings such as hospitals, nursing homes, opiate replacement
clinics, or correctional facilities. In special populations such as
individuals with treatment failure, recurrence, or at risk for
disseminated tuberculosis (eg, HIV coinfected), experts recom-
mend against the use of SAT given the risks involved in devel-
oping drug resistance (Table 5). In recent years, DOT has
expanded to other modalities such as web-based video and mo-
bile phones, which have been well received by both patients and
health department staff [131–133]. Special attention to main-
taining patient privacy is needed when web-based and wireless
modalities are used for monitoring.
Systematic reviews of studies conducted in countries with
high, medium, and low burdens of tuberculosis have not
shown improvement in cure or treatment completion in
e162 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 patients receiving their antituberculosis treatment by DOT
compared with SAT [134–136]. The systematic review conduct-
ed to obtain evidence in support of this practice guideline also
did not find any significant differences between SAT and DOT
when assessing several outcomes of interest, including mortali-
ty, treatment completion, and relapse (see Supplementary Ap-
pendix B, Evidence Profile 4). However, DOT was significantly
associated with improved treatment success (the sum of patients
cured and patients completing treatment) and with increased
sputum smear conversion during treatment, as compared to
SAT. Because DOT is a multifaceted public health intervention
that is not amenable to the conventional clinical trials ap-
proaches to assessing benefits, and because participation in
DOT can be advantageous for early recognition of adverse
drug reactions and treatment irregularities, for allowing provid-
ers to establish rapport with the patient and for addressing treat-
ment complications expeditiously, DOT remains the standard
of practice in the majority of tuberculosis programs in the Unit-
ed States [33–35] and Europe [15]. Population-based studies
(representing a low quality of evidence) have suggested that tu-
berculosis treatment by DOT in comparison to SAT is associat-
ed with a reduction in the acquisition and transmission of drug-
resistant M. tuberculosis (Texas), increased treatment success in
HIV-infected patients receiving RFB-containing regimens,
shorter duration for completion of treatment (New York
City), higher treatment completion rates in incarcerated pa-
tients transitioning to the community (Chicago), and a reduc-
tion in mortality and loss to follow-up (Brazil) [34, 137–140].
Consequently, we suggest using DOT rather than SAT for rou-
tine treatment of patients for all forms of tuberculosis (Recom-
mendation 2: conditional recommendation; low certainty in the
evidence).
Transfers Between Jurisdictions
Patients being treated for tuberculosis who move from one ju-
risdiction to another before completion of therapy are more
likely to be lost to follow-up than patients who do not move
[141]. In the United States, health departments track patients
via interjurisdictional referrals, and can use other patient track-
ing mechanisms (eg, TBNet at http://www.migrantclinician.org/
services/network/tbnet.html) for patients who travel interna-
tionally) [142–144].
Legal Interventions to Protect Public Health
In extreme circumstances, nonadherent patients may be subject
to legal intervention in the form of court-ordered medical ex-
amination, DOT, completion of therapy, or civil or criminal de-
tention for completion of tuberculosis treatment when less
restrictive measures have been tried and shown to fail [126,
127, 145]. These situations involve special circumstances such
as drug resistance, evidence of treatment failure or relapse,
and continued concern for transmission in the community,
thereby justifying the temporary restriction of individual rights
to protect the public’s health and safety. Public health laws exist
in most jurisdictions that allow these legal interventions, at least
for patients who remain infectious, but they should be pursued
as a plan of last resort. In the United States, health departments
have the sole authority to initiate legal action, and generally the
interventions produce good outcomes with treatment comple-
tion rates >95% [126, 127]. Outside the United States, legal au-
thority to enforce tuberculosis adherence may originate in other
government agencies outside the health department [146].
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT REGIMENS
PICO Question 3: Does intermittent dosing in the intensive phase
have similar outcomes compared to daily dosing in the intensive
phase for treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis?
Recommendation 3a: We recommend the use of daily rather than
intermittent dosing in the intensive phase of therapy for drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (strong recommendation;
moderate certainty in the evidence).
Recommendation 3b: Use of thrice-weekly therapy in the intensive
phase (with or without an initial 2 weeks of daily therapy) may be
considered in patients who are not HIV-infected and are also at low
risk of relapse (pulmonary tuberculosis caused by drug-susceptible
organisms, that at the start of treatment is noncavitary and/or smear
negative) (conditional recommendation; low certainty in the
evidence).
Recommendation 3c: In situations where daily or thrice-weekly DOT
therapy is difficult to achieve, use of twice-weekly therapy after an
initial 2 weeks of daily therapy may be considered for patients who
are not HIV-infected and are also at low risk of relapse (pulmonary
tuberculosis caused by drug-susceptible organisms, that at the start
of treatment is noncavitary and/or smear negative) (conditional
recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence). Note: If doses
are missed in a regimen using twice-weekly dosing then therapy is
equivalent to once weekly, which is inferior (see PICO Question 4).
PICO Question 4: Does intermittent dosing in the continuation phase
have similar outcomes compared to daily dosing in the continuation
phase in patients with drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis
patients?
Recommendation 4a: We recommend the use of daily or thrice-
weekly dosing in the continuation phase of therapy for drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (strong recommendation;
moderate certainty in the evidence).
Recommendation 4b: If intermittent therapy is to be administered in
the continuation phase, then we suggest use of thrice-weekly instead
of twice-weekly therapy (conditional recommendation; low certainty
in the evidence). This recommendation allows for the possibility of
some doses being missed; with twice-weekly therapy, if doses are
missed then therapy is equivalent to once weekly, which is inferior.
Recommendation 4c: We recommend against use of once-weekly
therapy with INH 900 mg and rifapentine (RPT) 600 mg in the
continuation phase (strong recommendation; high certainty in the
evidence). In uncommon situations where more than once-weekly
DOT is difficult to achieve, once-weekly continuation phase therapy
with INH 900 mg plus RPT 600 mg may be considered for use only in
HIV-uninfected persons without cavitation on chest radiography.
Deciding to Initiate Treatment
Empiric treatment with a 4-drug regimen is initiated promptly
in patients (children and adults) with high likelihood of having
tuberculosis or those seriously ill with a disorder suspicious for
tuberculosis, even before AFB smear microscopy, molecular
tests, and mycobacterial culture results are known. Initiation
of treatment is not delayed because of negative AFB smears
for patients in whom tuberculosis is suspected and who have
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e163
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 a life-threatening condition. The decision to initiate combina-
tion chemotherapy for tuberculosis is based on multiple factors
including clinical, radiographic, laboratory, patient, and public
health factors (Figure 1). Clinical judgment and index of suspi-
cion also play a critical role in deciding to initiate treatment. In
addition to smear microscopy and mycobacterial culture, CDC
recommends the use of a rapid molecular test on at least one
specimen from each patient with signs and symptoms of pul-
monary tuberculosis for whom a diagnosis of tuberculosis is
being considered but has not been established, and for whom
the test result would alter case management or tuberculosis con-
trol activities [147]. Use of molecular tests directly on clinical
samples has been shown to shorten time to diagnosis, and
some tests have the additional ability to provide information
on drug susceptibility [147, 148].
In the presence of a clinical syndrome compatible with tuber-
culosis, a positive AFB smear provides strong inferential evi-
dence for the diagnosis of tuberculosis. If the diagnosis is
confirmed by isolation of M. tuberculosis or a positive rapid mo-
lecular test, or is strongly inferred from clinical or radiographic
improvement consistent with a response to tuberculosis treat-
ment, the regimen is continued to complete a standard course
of therapy. In patients with a positive AFB smear, but a negative
rapid molecular test (including an assessment for polymerase
chain reaction inhibitors, reported to be present in 2%–5% of
respiratory specimens tested by nucleic acid amplification
tests [149, 150]), it is unlikely that the positive smear is due to
M. tuberculosis, particularly when molecular testing of a second
smear-positive specimen is also negative [147]. If empiric treat-
ment is started, cultures throughout are negative, and there is no
response to treatment, yet the interferon-γ release assay (IGRA)
or purified protein derivative (PPD)–tuberculin skin test (TST)
is positive, consideration is given to treatment of latent tubercu-
losis infection using the following options: (1) stop treatment if
RIF and PZA were included in the initial empiric 4-drug ther-
apy, administered for at least 2 months [151];(2) continue treat-
ment with RIF, with or without INH, for a total of 4 months; (3)
give 12 weekly doses of INH/RPT by DOT [152]; or (4) contin-
ue treatment with INH for a total of 9 months [83, 153, 154]. In
patients in whom there is a low suspicion for active tuberculosis
(not initially treated), if cultures remain negative, the IGRA or
PPD-TST is positive (≥5 mm), and the abnormal chest radio-
graph is unchanged after 2 months (ATS/CDC class 4), treat-
ment for latent tuberculosis infection is indicated [155]. If not
previously treated, these patients are at increased risk for devel-
opment of active tuberculosis with case rates 2.5–19 times high-
er than those of persons infected by M. tuberculosis with normal
chest radiographs [156–159]. These patients are high-priority
candidates for treatment of latent tuberculosis infection.
If clinical suspicion for active tuberculosis is low, the options
are to begin treatment with combination chemotherapy or to
defer treatment until additional data have been obtained to
clarify the situation (usually within 2 months). An advantage
of the early use of combination chemotherapy is that once active
disease is excluded by negative cultures and lack of clinical or
radiographic response to treatment, the patient will have com-
pleted 2 months of combination treatment that can be applied
to the total duration of treatment for latent tuberculosis infec-
tion. Even when the suspicion for active tuberculosis is low,
treatment for latent tuberculosis infection with a single drug
is not initiated until active tuberculosis has been excluded, usu-
ally by negative cultures.
In general, for complicated diagnostic or management situa-
tions, consultation with local and state health departments is
advised. In the United States, the CDC’s Division of Tuberculo-
sis Elimination funds tuberculosis regional training and medical
consultation centers (http://www.cdc.gov/tb/education/rtmc/),
which provide medical consultation to programs and health
providers on management of tuberculosis. In Europe, the
WHO
and
ERS
Tuberculosis
Consilium
(https://www.
tbconsilium.org) provides similar consultation services regard-
ing the diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis.
Regimens
The preferred regimen and other choices are listed in Table 2.
Patient factors should be considered when selecting administra-
tion schedule (intermittency), and in some instances regimen
composition. Feasibility of DOT is sometimes an additional
consideration when selecting frequency of administration.
Regimens for adults and children are identical except in uncom-
mon circumstances where it may be acceptable to omit EMB
from the initial treatment regimen for young children (see
“Children”). For all regimens, patients are treated until they
have received the specified total number of doses for the treat-
ment regimen (ie, not solely based on duration of treatment).
Preferred Regimen
The preferred regimen for treating adults with tuberculosis
caused by organisms that are not known or suspected to be
drug resistant is a regimen consisting of an intensive phase of
2 months of INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB followed by a continu-
ation phase of 4 months of INH and RIF [3, 36, 37]. To reduce
the risk of relapse, the continuation phase of treatment is ex-
tended for an additional 3 months for patients who had cavita-
tion on the initial (or follow-up) chest radiograph and, in
addition, are culture positive at the time of completion of the
intensive phase of treatment.
The intensive phase of treatment consists of 4 drugs (INH,
RIF, PZA, EMB) because of the current proportion of new tu-
berculosis cases worldwide caused by organisms that are resis-
tant to INH [38–41]; however, if therapy is being initiated after
drug susceptibility test results are known and the patient’s iso-
late is susceptible to both INH and RIF, EMB is not necessary,
and the intensive phase can consist of INH, RIF, and PZA only.
EMB can be discontinued as soon as the results of drug
e164 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 susceptibility studies demonstrate that the isolate is susceptible
to INH and RIF.
With respect to administration schedule, the preferred fre-
quency is once daily for both the intensive and continuation
phases. Based on systematic reviews conducted to obtain evi-
dence in support of this guideline (see Supplementary Appen-
dix B, Evidence Profiles 5–10), we recommend the use of daily
rather than intermittent dosing in the intensive phase of thera-
py for drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (Recommenda-
tion 3a: strong recommendation; moderate certainty in the
evidence). For the continuation phase, based on systematic re-
views conducted to obtain evidence in support of this guideline
(see Supplementary Appendix B, Evidence Profiles 5–10), we
recommend use of daily or thrice-weekly dosing for the contin-
uation phase of therapy (Recommendation 4a: strong recom-
mendation; moderate certainty in the evidence). Although
administration of antituberculosis drugs using DOT 5 days a
week has been reported in a large number of studies, it has
not been compared with 7-day administration in a clinical
trial. Nonetheless, on the basis of substantial clinical experience,
experts believe that 5-days-a-week drug administration by DOT
is an acceptable alternative to 7-days-a-week administration,
and either approach may be considered as meeting the defini-
tion of “daily” dosing. Patient-centered care, case management,
and DOT are discussed in the “Organization and Supervision of
Treatment” section of this guideline.
Other Regimens
There are alternative regimens that are variations of the pre-
ferred regimen. As described below, alternative regimens may
be acceptable in certain clinical and/or public health situations
(see “Treatment in Special Situations”). An administration fre-
quency of less than daily in the intensive phase of treatment is
generally not preferred.
Thrice-Weekly Dosing Throughout
In HIV-uninfected patients with noncavitary disease caused by
drug-susceptible organisms, thrice-weekly (ie, 3 times per
week) dosing throughout both intensive and continuation phases
of treatment by DOT may be considered when daily treatment is
not feasible or poorly tolerated. Thrice-weekly dosing has been
associated with higher rates of treatment failure, relapse, and ac-
quired drug resistance in high-quality systematic reviews [36,
160]. The risks for these poor outcomes of treatment were higher
in HIV-infected patients (especially if not treated with antiretro-
virals), and patients with cavitary disease or baseline drug resis-
tance. Based on evidence supporting the recommendations
obtained through systematic reviews (see Supplementary Appen-
dix B, Evidence Profiles 5,6,8–10), use of thrice-weekly therapy in
the intensive phase (with or without an initial 2 weeks of daily
therapy) may be considered in patients who are not HIV-infected
and are also at low risk of relapse (pulmonary tuberculosis caused
by drug-susceptible organisms, that at the start of treatment is
noncavitary and/or smear negative) (Recommendation 3b: condi-
tional recommendation; low certainty in the evidence).
Twice-Weekly Dosing Throughout or Twice-Weekly Dosing After
2–3 Weeks of Daily Dosing
Twice-weekly dosing (ie, 2 times per week) either throughout
treatment or after an initial period of 2–3 weeks of daily therapy
is not generally recommended because of a lack of high-quality
evidence to support its use, and because in twice-weekly thera-
py, if doses are missed then therapy is equivalent to once weekly,
which is inferior (see “Once-Weekly Continuation Phase,”
below). However, some tuberculosis programs have reported
longstanding programmatic treatment success with an initial
daily regimen followed by twice-weekly therapy [161], and
this regimen remains in use by some public health programs
in the United States. In situations where daily or thrice-weekly
DOT therapy is difficult to achieve, use of twice-weekly therapy
after an initial 2 weeks of daily therapy may be considered for
patients who are not HIV infected and are also at low risk of
relapse (pulmonary tuberculosis caused by drug-susceptible or-
ganisms, that at the start of treatment is noncavitary and/or
smear negative) (Recommendation 3c: conditional recommen-
dation; very low certainty in the evidence) (see Supplementary
Appendix B, Evidence Profile 7).
Twice-Weekly Continuation Phase
Twice weekly treatment in the continuation phase has been
studied in clinical trials [36], and is used by US tuberculosis
control programs. Based on our systematic review, if intermit-
tent therapy during the continuation phase is considered, then
we suggest use of thrice-weekly instead of twice-weekly ther-
apy. (Recommendation 4b: conditional recommendation; low
certainty in the evidence) (see Supplementary Appendix B,
Evidence Profiles 5–8). As noted above for twice-weekly regi-
mens, anadvantage of athrice-weekly regimen isthat itallows for
the possibility of some doses being missed; with twice-weekly
therapy, if doses are missed then therapy is equivalent to once
weekly, which is inferior (see “Once-Weekly Continuation
Phase,” below).
Once-Weekly Continuation Phase
In clinical trials, once-weekly treatment with INH plus RPT 600
mg was less active than standard RIF-based treatment [9,162].In
the Tuberculosis Trials Consortium (TBTC) Study 22, character-
istics independently associated with increased risk of failure or
relapse were sputum culture positivity at the end of intensive
phase, cavitation on chest radiograph, being underweight, bilat-
eral pulmonary involvement, and being a non-Hispanic white
person [9]. Furthermore, relapse with rifamycin-monoresistant
tuberculosis occurred among HIV-infected tuberculosis pa-
tients treated with the once-weekly INH/RPT continuation
phase regimen [59]. In uncommon situations where more
than once-weekly DOT is difficult to achieve, once-weekly con-
tinuation phase therapy with INH 900 mg plus RPT 600 mg
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e165
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 may be considered for use only in HIV-uninfected persons
without cavitation on chest radiography. Otherwise, we recom-
mend against use of once-weekly therapy with INH 900 mg plus
RPT 600 mg (Recommendation 4c: strong recommendation;
high certainty in the evidence) (see Supplementary Appendix
B, Evidence Profile 11).
Alternative Regimen Composition
In some cases, either because of intolerance to first-line drugs or
the presence of monoresistance, an alternative regimen may be
required. If PZA cannot be included in the initial regimen, or
the isolate is determined to be resistant to PZA (an unusual cir-
cumstance, except for M. bovis and M. bovis var BCG), experts
recommend a regimen consisting of INH, RIF, and EMB for the
initial 2 months followed by INH and RIF for 7 months given
either daily or thrice weekly.
Fluoroquinolones (Moxifloxacin and Levofloxacin)
In scenarios in which EMB or INH cannot be used, the role of
moxifloxacin or levofloxacin has not been established through
clinical trials. Experts on occasion use moxifloxacin or levoflox-
acin in place of EMB during intensive phase in adults in whom
EMB cannot be used, or in place of INH throughout treatment
in adults in whom INH cannot be used (see Supplementary Ap-
pendix C: Drugs in Current Use for details on adverse effects of
fluoroquinolones, including QT prolongation).
There is no evidence that moxifloxacin or levofloxacin can be
used in place of a rifamycin or PZA while maintaining a
6-month treatment duration. If a rifamycin cannot be included
in the initial regimen due to resistance or intolerance, then a
regimen based on the principles described for treating drug-re-
sistant tuberculosis is used. In situations in which several of the
first-line agents cannot be used because of intolerance, regimens
based on the principles described for treating drug-resistant tu-
berculosis are used.
Importantly, all alternative regimens using fluoroquinolones in
place of EMB or INH are 6 months or longer in duration. There is
definitive clinical trial evidence that 4-month daily regimens that
substitute moxifloxacin or gatifloxacin for EMB, or moxifloxacin
for INH, are significantly less effective than the preferred, stan-
dard daily 6-month treatment for drug-susceptible pulmonary
tuberculosis [5, 163, 164]. Therefore we recommend against the
routine use of 4-month fluoroquinolone-containing regimens
for treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis.
A single randomized trial showed that a regimen of daily mox-
ifloxacin/RIF/PZA/EMB for 2 months followed by once-weekly
1200 mg RPT + 400 mg moxifloxacin for 4 continuation phase
months had relapse rates similar to the standard 6-month regi-
men given daily [164]. Use of this regimen (including a daily
moxifloxacin-containing intensive phase) may be considered. It
is important to note that each dose of RPT was preceded by a
meal of 2 boiled eggs and slices of bread, provided to increase
the absorption of RPT. If this regimen is used, it is ideally
implemented within the context of program-based operational
research with suitable monitoring [165]. Of note, there is no ev-
idence that a once-weekly continuation phase comprised of 1200
mg RPT + 400 mg moxifloxacin after 2 months of intensive
phase INH/RIF/PZA/EMB (ie, without moxifloxacin in place
of EMB in the intensive phase), would achieve similar outcomes.
Baseline and Follow-up Evaluations
Recommended baseline and follow-up evaluations for patients
suspected of having tuberculosis and treated with first-line med-
ications are summarized in Figure 2. At baseline, patients in
whom pulmonary tuberculosis is suspected have 3 appropriate
sputum specimens collected for microscopic examination and
mycobacterial culture, and at least one specimen is tested with
a rapid molecular test. When the lung is the site of disease, 3
sputum specimens are obtained 8–24 hours apart [166, 167].
In patients who are not producing sputum spontaneously, in-
duction of sputum using aerosolized hypertonic saline or bron-
choscopy (performed under appropriate infection-control
procedures) may be necessary to obtain specimens. Susceptibil-
ity testing for INH, RIF, EMB, and PZA is performed on an ini-
tial positive culture, regardless of the source. A rapid molecular
test for drug resistance is performed in patients at risk for drug-
resistant tuberculosis, and when resources permit, may be per-
formed in all patients [15, 168]. Second-line drug susceptibility
testing should be done only in reference laboratories and is lim-
ited to specimens from patients who have had prior therapy,
have been in contact with a patient with known multidrug or
extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis, have suspected or dem-
onstrated resistance to RIF and/or other first-line drugs, are un-
able to tolerate RIF, or who have positive cultures after >3
months of treatment [15, 168].
During treatment of patients with pulmonary tuberculosis, at
a minimum, a sputum specimen for AFB smear and culture are
obtained at monthly intervals until 2 consecutive specimens are
negative on culture. Duration of the continuation phase regi-
men hinges on the microbiological status at the end of the in-
tensive phase of treatment, thus, obtaining sputum specimens at
the time of completion of 2 months of treatment is critical if
sputum culture conversion to negative has not already been
documented. For patients who had positive AFB smears at
the time of diagnosis, follow-up smears may be obtained at
more frequent intervals (for example, every 2 weeks until 2 con-
secutive specimens are negative) to provide an early assessment
of the response to treatment, especially for patients in situations
with high risk of transmission. On occasion, AFB-positive sputa
are culture-negative; this occurs most frequently among patients
with far-advanced cavitary tuberculosis after the first few
months of treatment. It is thought that AFB smear positive
(but culture-negative) sputa contain organisms that are dead
and that their presence is not a sign of treatment failure, even
when noted later in treatment. Dead organisms also can cause
e166 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 a positive result on molecular tests; routine performance of mo-
lecular tests on follow-up sputum samples, after an initial pos-
itive test, is not useful.
Drug susceptibility tests are repeated on M. tuberculosis isolat-
ed in culture from sputum obtained after a patient has been on
treatment for ≥3 months. As described in the “Treatment Fail-
ure” section, patients who have M. tuberculosis isolated in culture
from sputum obtained after 4 months of treatment are consid-
ered as having failed treatment and managed accordingly.
For patients with positive cultures at diagnosis, a repeat chest
radiograph at completion of 2 months of treatment may be use-
ful but is not essential. Tuberculosis programs often conduct a
chest radiograph at completion of therapy as it provides a base-
line against which subsequent examinations can be compared,
but, as with the 2-month examination, it is not essential. When
the initial sputum cultures are negative, a presumptive diagnosis
can be made if radiographic improvement is noted, generally by
the time 2–3 months of treatment have been completed [93].
Thus, based on expert opinion, in patients with negative initial
cultures, a chest radiograph is recommended after 2–3 months
of treatment and at the completion of treatment to document
response to therapy. Generally, systematic follow-up after com-
pletion of therapy is not necessary.
In addition to the microbiological and imaging examinations
discussed here, other appropriate assessments and laboratory
tests are summarized in Figure 2. For patients with extrapulmo-
nary tuberculosis, the frequency and kinds of evaluations will
depend on the sites involved and the ease with which specimens
can be obtained. Monitoring assessments for patients treated
with second-line drugs are listed by drug in Supplementary Ap-
pendix C: Drugs in Current Use.
Identification and Management of Patients at Increased Risk of Relapse
The culture result of a sputum specimen obtained at the com-
pletion of the intensive phase of treatment (2 months) has been
shown to correlate with the likelihood of relapse after comple-
tion of treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis, albeit with low
sensitivity [9, 44–46]. Cavitation on the initial chest radiograph
has also been shown to be a risk factor for relapse [9, 47]. In pa-
tients treated for 6 months, having both cavitation and a posi-
tive culture at completion of 2 months of therapy has been
associated with rates of relapse of approximately 20% compared
with 2% among patients with neither factor [9, 45].
The most effective means of decreasing the likelihood of re-
lapse for patients at risk has not yet been determined by clinical
trials; however, indirect evidence from a controlled clinical trial
and an observational study among patients with pulmonary tu-
berculosis in Hong Kong showed that prolonging treatment de-
creased the rate of relapse [47, 169]. It has also been reported
that for patients at high risk of relapse, prolongation of the
once-weekly INH/RPT continuation phase from 4 to 7 months
resulted in a decreased rate of relapse [170].
In view of this evidence, for patients who have cavitation on
the initial chest radiograph and who have positive cultures at
completion of 2 months of therapy, expert opinion is to extend
the continuation phase with INH and RIF for an additional 3
months (ie, a continuation phase of 7 months in duration, cor-
responding to a total of 9 months of therapy).
Because patients who had either cavitation on the initial chest
radiograph or a positive culture at 2 months had an increased
rate of relapse [9, 45], patients with one or the other of these
risk factors are followed more closely and consideration given
to extending treatment duration if there are suggestions of a
poor response. Additional factors to be considered in deciding
to prolong treatment in patients with either cavitation or a pos-
itive culture at 2 months (but not both) might include being
>10% below ideal body weight; being a smoker; having diabetes,
HIV infection, or other immunosuppressing condition; or hav-
ing extensive disease on chest radiograph [46, 48–52].
Interruptions in Therapy
Interruptions in therapy are common in the treatment of tuber-
culosis. When interruptions occur, the person responsible for
supervision must decide whether to restart a complete course
of treatment or simply to continue as intended originally. In ge-
neral, the earlier the break in therapy and the longer its dura-
tion, the more serious the effect and the greater the need to
restart treatment from the beginning. Continuous treatment is
more important in the intensive phase of therapy when the ba-
cillary population is highest and the chance of developing drug
resistance greatest. During the continuation phase, the number
of bacilli is much smaller and the goal of therapy is to kill the
persisting organisms. The duration of the interruption and the
bacteriologic status of the patient prior to and after the interrup-
tion are also important considerations.
There isnoevidenceupon whichtobasedetailedrecommenda-
tionsfor managing interruptions intreatment,and norecommen-
dations will coverall of the situationsthat mayarise. The approach
summarized in Table 6 (modified from the New York City Bureau
of Tuberculosis Control [171]) is presented as an example.
When interruptions are due to an interim loss of follow-up,
at the time the patient is returned to treatment, additional spu-
tum are obtained for repeat culture and drug susceptibility test-
ing. If the cultures are still positive, the treatment regimen is
restarted. If sputum cultures are negative, the patient could be
treated as having culture-negative tuberculosis and given an ad-
ditional 4 months of INH and RIF chemotherapy, as long as the
original specimen was drug susceptible and the original inten-
sive phase regimen included INH, RIF, and PZA. Regardless of
the timing and duration of the interruption, DOT is used sub-
sequently. If the patient was already being managed with DOT,
additional measures will be necessary to ensure completion of
therapy. Consultation with an expert is advised to assist in man-
aging treatment interruptions.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e167
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Definition of Completion of Therapy
The determination of whether or not treatment has been com-
pleted is based on the total number of doses taken—not solely
on the duration of therapy (Table 2). Tuberculosis control pro-
gram practice in the United States and in several European
countries is to administer all of the specified number of
doses for the intensive phase within 3 months and those for
the 4-month continuation phase within 6 months, so that
the 6-month regimen is completed within 9 months. If these
targets are not met, the patient must be considered to have in-
terrupted therapy and be managed as described above
(Table 6).
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF TREATMENT
Drug Administration
In general, tuberculosis drugs are administered together, at one
dosing so as to achieve maximal peak serum concentrations and
to facilitate DOT. Bioavailability of all of the drugs (except for
RPT) is greatest when taken on an empty stomach. The excep-
tion is RPT, for which bioavailability increases by up to 86%
with high-fat meals [172]. If medications need to be combined
with food or liquid for dosing, keep in mind that INH absorp-
tion decreases when combined with glucose or lactose; crushed
INH tablets in foods containing low glucose, such as sugar-free
pudding, are stable. However, crushed tablets mixed with food
should not be stored for later use [173]. The commercially pre-
pared INH elixir uses sorbitol as the vehicle; sorbitol may also
cause diarrhea, thereby limiting its use.
Parenteral drug administration is indicated for severely ill pa-
tients who cannot take oral therapy, and may be useful for the
uncommon patient with suspected or documented malabsorp-
tion. Of the first-line drugs, parenteral preparations of INH and
RIF, as well as most fluoroquinolones, are available.
Fixed-Dose Combination Preparations
Clinical trials and a recent systematic review have concluded
that overall, there is no significant difference between fixed-
dose combinations (FDCs) and single-drug combinations
for key outcomes, including sputum smear or culture con-
version, failure, relapse, death, serious adverse events, or
adverse events that lead to discontinuation of therapy
[174–178]. The patient-specific advantages to using FDC
drugs include ease of administration and the potential for
reducing medication errors. The key program and clini-
cian-specific advantage of FDC formulations is the simplifi-
cation of drug supply management (procurement, storage,
and distribution) and simpler prescription writing. If
FDCs are used, clinicians should be aware that FDC and
non-FDC products have similar commercial names with dif-
ferent drug compositions, including Rifadin (RIF only),
Rifamate (INH and RIF), and Rifater (INH, RIF, and
PZA) (see Supplementary Appendix C).
Management of Common Adverse Effects
Mild adverse effects usually can be managed with treatment di-
rected at controlling the symptoms; severe effects usually re-
quire the offending drug(s) to be discontinued. If a drug is
permanently discontinued, then a replacement drug, typically
from a different drug class, is included in the regimen. Patients
with severe tuberculosis often require the initiation of an alter-
nate regimen during the time the offending drug(s) are held.
Management of serious adverse effects often requires expert
consultation. The suggested practices listed below for handling
common adverse effects during treatment (ordered from most
to least common) are based on expert opinion.
Gastrointestinal Upset; Nausea, Vomiting, Poor Appetite,
Abdominal Pain
Gastrointestinal reactions are common, especially early in ther-
apy [53]. The optimum approach to management of epigastric
distress or nausea with tuberculosis drugs is not clear. To min-
imize symptoms, patients receiving SAT may take the medica-
tions at bedtime. Gastrointestinal intolerance not associated
with hepatotoxicity can be treated with antacids, which have
less impact on absorption or peak concentration of first-line
drugs than administration with food [54]. Some experts report
success with proton pump inhibitors for reducing gastrointesti-
nal upset. Any combination of otherwise unexplained nausea,
vomiting, and abdominal pain is evaluated with a physical
examination and liver function tests, including ALT, AST, bilir-
ubin, and alkaline phosphatase to assess for possible hepatotox-
icity [55]. Alternatively, a light snack (low-fat food) such as a
cracker might suffice for some patients. Either option is prefer-
able to splitting a dose or changing to a second-line drug. It is
important to note that divalent cations (calcium, iron, zinc) as
occur in some antacids and nutritional supplements are not co-
administered with fluoroquinolones because they decrease ab-
sorption of the drug, possibly leading to treatment failure [179].
Rash
All antituberculosis drugs can cause a rash, the severity of which
determines management [180]. If the rash is mainly itchy with-
out mucous membrane involvement or systemic signs such as
fever, treatment is symptomatic with antihistamines, and all an-
tituberculosis medications can be continued. A petechial rash is
more concerning and suggests thrombocytopenia from a rifa-
mycin (ie, RIF, RFB, RPT) hypersensitivity [181]. If the platelet
count is low, the rifamycin is permanently stopped and the
platelet count closely monitored until definite improvement is
noted. Drugs are also stopped if the patient has a generalized
erythematous rash. Fever and/or mucous membrane involve-
ment suggests Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal ne-
crosis, or drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic
symptoms syndrome or drug hypersensitivity syndrome. Hy-
persensitive reactions to multiple antituberculosis drugs have
been noted, particularly in persons with HIV infection [180].
e168 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Some experts manage severe systemic reactions in the inpatient
setting, using an interval of several days between drug rechal-
lenges, closely monitoring markers of hypersensitivity (such
as rash, fever, transaminitis, eosinophilia, pruritus, etc). If any
of these markers develop, then the drug is stopped and identi-
fied as the offender, eliminating it from the regimen. Systemic
corticosteroids may be used to treat severe systemic reactions.
Using steroids to treat systemic reactions, even in the setting
of severe tuberculosis, has not worsened outcomes [182].
When the rash has substantially improved, medications can
be restarted individually at intervals of 2–3 days. RIF is restarted
first (the most potent drug), followed by INH, then EMB or
PZA. If the rash recurs, the last drug added is stopped. If the
first 3 drugs have been restarted without a rash, the fourth
drug is not restarted unless the rash was mild and that drug es-
sential. Research evaluating drug provocation tests or drug de-
sensitization strategies is needed [180].
Drug Fever
Drug fever is essentially a diagnosis of exclusion. Other causes of
fever such as tuberculosis (fever may persist 2 months or longer
into treatment) [183, 184]; paradoxical reaction, especially in
HIV-infected patients (See “HIV Infection”) [185–187]; and
superinfection must be excluded. Patients with drug fever gener-
ally feel well despite body temperatures ≥39°C. Drug fever does
not follow a specific pattern and eosinophilia need not be present.
Stopping drugs usually resolves the fever within 24 hours. Once
afebrile, the patient should restart drugs individually every 2–3
days, similar to the approach to drug rechallenge for rash.
Hepatotoxicity
Drug-induced hepatitis is the most frequent serious adverse re-
action to the first-line drugs (see “Hepatic Disease” and Supple-
mentary Appendix C). INH, RIF, and PZA can cause drug-
induced liver injury, which is suspected when the ALT level is
≥3 times the upper limit of normal in the presence of hepatitis
symptoms, or ≥5 times the upper limit of normal in the absence
of symptoms [56]. If the ALT level is <5 times the upper limit of
normal, toxicity can be considered mild, an ALT level 5–10
times normal defines moderate toxicity, and an ALT level >10
times normal (ie, >500 IU) is severe.
An asymptomatic increase in ALT concentration occurs in
nearly 20% of patients treated with the standard 4-drug regimen
[188, 189]. In the absence of symptoms, therapy should not be
altered because of modest asymptomatic elevations of ALT,
but the frequency of clinical and laboratory monitoring should
be increased. In most patients, asymptomatic ALT elevations
resolve spontaneously. However, if ALT levels are ≥5 times the
upper limit of normal (with or without symptoms) or ≥3 times
normal in the presence of symptoms, hepatotoxic drugs are
stopped immediately and the patient is evaluated carefully. Simi-
larly, a significant increase in bilirubin and/or alkaline phospha-
tase is cause for a prompt evaluation; disproportionate increases
in bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase (as compared to increases
in serum ALT) may be seen with RIF hepatotoxicity [56].
Other causes of abnormal liver tests must be excluded before
diagnosing drug-induced hepatitis (Table 7). If ALT levels are
consistent with hepatotoxicity, all hepatotoxic drugs must be
stopped and serum ALT and prothrombin time or international
normalized ratio (INR) levels followed until levels return to
baseline. Consult a liver specialist if the patient’s clinical or lab-
oratory status continues to worsen.
Once the ALT concentration returns to <2 times the upper
limit of normal, antituberculosis medications are restarted indi-
vidually (see [56] for additional details). In patients with elevat-
ed baseline ALT from preexisting liver disease, drugs are
restarted when the ALT returns to near-baseline levels. The op-
timal approach to reintroducing tuberculosis treatment after
hepatotoxicity is not known [57, 58]; however, most tuberculo-
sis programs use sequential reintroduction of drugs. Because
RIF is much less likely to cause hepatotoxicity than INH or
PZA, it is restarted first. If there is no increase in ALT after ap-
proximately 1 week, INH may be restarted. PZA can be started 1
week after INH if ALT does not increase. If symptoms recur or
ALT increases, the last drug added should be stopped. If RIF
and INH are tolerated and hepatitis was severe, PZA can be as-
sumed to be responsible and is discontinued. In this last cir-
cumstance, depending on the number of doses of PZA taken,
severity of disease, and bacteriological status, the total duration
of therapy might be extended to 9 months.
Optic Neuritis
EMB-related visual impairment during treatment of active tu-
berculosis has been estimated to occur in 22.5 per 1000 persons
(2.25%) receiving EMB at standard doses [190](see Supplemen-
tary Appendix C). The onset of optic neuritis is usually >1
month after treatment initiation but can occur within days
[191, 192]. The opinion of experts is that baseline visual acuity
(Snellen test) and color discrimination tests followed by month-
ly color discrimination tests are performed during EMB use. To
avoid permanent deficits, EMB is promptly discontinued if vi-
sual abnormalities are found. If vision does not improve with
cessation of EMB, experts recommend stopping INH as well,
as it is also a rare cause of optic neuritis [193].
Drug–Drug Interactions
Interactions Affecting Antituberculosis Drugs
Drug–drug interactions can change the concentrations of the
drugs involved. Relatively few interactions substantially change
antituberculosis drug concentrations; much more often, the an-
tituberculosis drugs cause clinically relevant changes in the con-
centrations of other drugs. The exceptions to this general rule
are RFB and the fluoroquinolones.
•
Inhibitors of CYP3A increase the serum concentrations of
RFB and one of its metabolites (25-O-desacetyl-rifabutin),
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e169
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 sometimes producing toxicities. For example, administering ri-
tonavir, a very potent CYP3A inhibitor, with the standard daily
dose of RFB (300 mg) increases the serum concentrations of
RFB (4-fold) and 25-O-desacetyl-rifabutin (35-fold) [194] and
is associated with increased rates of leukopenia, arthralgias, skin
discoloration, and anterior uveitis [195, 196]. Conversely, ad-
ministering RFB with a CYP3A inducer such as efavirenz or
phenytoin may decrease RFB concentrations [197], and this
may lead to clinical failures and the selection of rifamycin-resis-
tant M. tuberculosis. Recommendations for RFB dose adjust-
ments are available at AIDSinfo, and at the CDC website
(http://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/guidelines/tb_hiv_drugs/
default.htm). Because interactions are complex and given the
rapid emergence of new data on antiretroviral therapy (ART),
the management of HIV-related tuberculosis cases should in-
volve a physician with experience in this field.
•
Absorption of the fluoroquinolones is markedly decreased
by ingestion of medications containing divalent cations (calci-
um, iron, zinc) including antacids [198,199];supplements or vi-
tamins containing calcium, iron, or zinc [200]; sucralfate [201];
and the chewable tablet formulation of didanosine [202]. These
drug interactions can be avoided by ingesting medications con-
taining divalent cations at least 2 hours apart from fluoroquin-
olones [203]. In addition, moxifloxacin serum concentrations
are decreased by 25%–30% in the presence of RIF due to the
induction of phase II metabolic enzymes (sulfation and glucur-
onidation) [204]. RPT and RFB also may decrease moxifloxacin
serum concentrations, though the clinical significance of these
drug–drug interactions in individual patients is uncertain.
Antituberculosis Drugs Affecting Other Drugs
Drug Interactions Due to Rifamycins
Most of the clinically relevant drug–drug interactions involving
the antituberculosis drugs are due to the effect of the rifamycins
(RIF, RFB, and RPT) on the metabolism of other drugs [205].All
of the rifamycins are inducers of a variety of metabolic pathways,
particularly those involving the various isozymes of the cyto-
chrome P450 (CYP) system [206]. By inducing the activity of
metabolic enzymes, rifamycins decrease the serum concentra-
tions of many drugs, sometimes to subtherapeutic levels [207].
RIF is the most potent enzyme inducer and RFB the least,
while RPT’s potency depends on its frequency of administration
[208,209].Daily RPT is at least as potent as daily RIF, while once-
weekly RPT (as used in combination with INH for latent tuber-
culosis infection [210]) has limited effects on other drugs.
The well-described, clinically relevant, drug–drug interactions
involving the rifamycins are presented in Table 8 [206,211]; how-
ever, many possible interactions involving the rifamycins have
not been fully investigated and additional clinically relevant in-
teractions undoubtedly will be described. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to check all concomitant medications for possible, as well as
confirmed, drug–drug interactions with rifamycins.
Rifamycin inductive effects typically take approximately 1–2
weeks to reach steady state after the rifamycin is started, and in-
ductive effects typically resolve over approximately 2 weeks after
the rifamycin is discontinued [209]. If the dose of a medication
is increased to compensate for the effect of a rifamycin, it is crit-
ical to reduce the dose within 2 weeks after the rifamycin is dis-
continued and its inductive effect resolves.
RFB can be used in place of RIF if there is an unacceptable
drug–drug interaction between RIF and another drug such as
cyclosporine [212, 213] and most of the HIV-1 protease inhib-
itors [208, 214, 215]. All the rifamycins may cause unacceptable
decreases in the serum concentrations of certain drugs such as
itraconazole [216–218].
Drug Interactions Due to INH
INH is a relatively potent inhibitor of several CYP isozymes
[219, 220] and increases concentrations of some drugs to the
point of toxicity such as the anticonvulsants phenytoin [221,
222] and carbamazepine [223, 224]. INH also increases concen-
trations of benzodiazepines metabolized by oxidation, such as
diazepam [225] and triazolam, but not those metabolized by
conjugation, such as oxazepam [226]. Of note, the inductive ef-
fect of RIF on CYP isozymes outweighs the inhibitory effect of
INH, so that the overall effect of combined therapy with RIF
and INH is a decrease in the concentrations of drugs such as
phenytoin [227] and diazepam [225].
INH may increase toxicity of other drugs—acetaminophen
[228], valproate [229], serotonergic antidepressants [230], war-
farin [231],and theophylline [232]—but these potential interac-
tions have not been well studied. A possible interaction between
INH and disulfiram was initially described [233];however, a ret-
rospective study found that disulfiram was safe when added to
intermittent, directly observed INH-containing tuberculosis
treatment [234].
Drug Interactions Due to the Fluoroquinolones
Ciprofloxacin [235]inhibits the metabolism of theophylline and
can cause clinical theophylline toxicity [236];however, levoflox-
acin [237], gatifloxacin [238], and moxifloxacin [239] do not af-
fect theophylline metabolism.
Useful Websites Regarding Drug Interactions
Useful websites regarding drug interactions (tuberculosis/HIV
and other) are available through the following hyperlinks:
AIDSinfo, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
University of
California
San
Francisco,
University of
Liverpool, Indiana University, and University of Maryland.
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
TDM generally consists of measurements of drug concentra-
tions in serum specimens typically collected at 2 and 6 hours
after a dose of the drug, or drugs, in question. Other sampling
times may be used for selected situations. Blood samples are
centrifuged; the serum is harvested and frozen, and then
e170 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 shipped frozen to a reference laboratory. Quality-assured labo-
ratories in the United States and in Europe offer assays for some
or all of the antituberculosis drugs [240, 241]. There are no pro-
spective randomized trials that clearly define the role of TDM
for antituberculosis drugs. As such, opinions vary regarding
the utility of TDM. Experts generally use TDM as a special-
ized tool, providing insight into the adequacy of drug dosing
[242]. For example, serum concentrations of tuberculosis
drugs among children and HIV-infected patients with tuber-
culosis are frequently lower than those in healthy volunteers,
at the same (mg/kg body weight) dose [243–246]. In some
reports, lower concentrations did not have an impact on
treatment response or cure [247–249]. Other reports have
found an association between low drug exposure and failure,
relapse, and acquired rifamycin resistance [250–252]. TDM
cannot predict who will be cured, fail, or relapse; however,
it does allow for timely, informed decisions regarding the
need for dose adjustment when necessary. Experts suggest
that TDM may be particularly helpful in situations in
which drug malabsorption, drug underdosing, or clinically
important drug–drug interactions are suspected (Table 9).
Examples of situations in which TDM may be useful include
(1) patients with delayed sputum conversion or treatment
failure not explained by nonadherence or drug resistance;
(2) patients with medical conditions (eg, reduced renal func-
tion) that are suspected of leading to subtherapeutic or toxic
drug concentrations; and (3) patients undergoing treatment
for drug-resistant tuberculosis.
TREATMENT IN SPECIAL SITUATIONS
HIV Infection
PICO Question 5: Does extending treatment beyond 6 months improve
outcomes compared to the standard 6-month treatment regimen
among pulmonary tuberculosis patients coinfected with HIV?
Recommendation 5a: For HIV-infected patients receiving ART, we
suggest using the standard 6-month daily regimen consisting of an
intensive phase of 2 months of INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB followed by a
continuation phase of 4 months of INH and RIF for the treatment of
drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (conditional
recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
Recommendation 5b: In uncommon situations in which HIV-infected
patients do NOT receive ART during tuberculosis treatment, we
suggest extending the continuation phase with INH and RIF for an
additional 3 months (ie, a continuation phase of 7 months in duration,
corresponding to a total of 9 months of therapy) for treatment of drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis (conditional recommendation; very
low certainty in the evidence).
PICO Question 6: Does initiation of ART during tuberculosis treatment
compared to at the end of tuberculosis treatment improve outcomes
among tuberculosis patients coinfected with HIV?
Recommendation 6: We recommend initiating ART during tuberculosis
treatment. Antiretroviral therapy should ideally be initiated within the
first 2 weeks of tuberculosis treatment for patients with CD4 counts
<50 cells/µL and by 8–12 weeks of tuberculosis treatment initiation for
patients with CD4 counts ≥50 cells/µL (strong recommendation; high
certainty in the evidence). Note: an exception is patients with HIV
infection and tuberculous meningitis (see Immune Reconstitution
Inflammatory Syndrome).
Both the CDC and WHO recommend routine HIV testing
and counseling to all patients with presumptive and diagnosed
tuberculosis [253, 254]. Treatment of tuberculosis in patients
with HIV infection has several important differences compared
with treatment of patients who do not have HIV infection.
These differences include the need for ART, the potential for
drug–drug interactions, especially between the rifamycins and
antiretroviral agents, paradoxical reactions that may be inter-
preted as clinical worsening, and the potential for developing
resistance to rifamycins when using intermittent tuberculosis
therapy. Because of the strong epidemiological association be-
tween HIV and tuberculosis infections and the clinical consid-
erations discussed below, all individuals diagnosed with
tuberculosis are tested for HIV infection.
Clinical Trials of Treatment for Tuberculosis in HIV-Infected Patients
There have been a number of prospective studies, including 4
randomized controlled trials, of 6-month regimens for the treat-
ment of pulmonary tuberculosis in patients with HIV infection
for which recurrence data were reported [59,247,248,255–257].
All reported a good early clinical response to tuberculosis ther-
apy. The time required for sputum culture conversion from pos-
itive to negative and tuberculosis treatment failure rates were
similar to these indices of treatment efficacy in patients with-
out HIV infection. Recurrence of tuberculosis after treatment
completion may be due to relapse or reinfection. Relapse of
tuberculosis in HIV-infected individuals is associated with non-
adherence to treatment, use of intermittent regimens, and with
low plasma drug concentrations, all of which also contribute to
the emergence of rifamycin resistance [9, 59–62, 250]. Reinfec-
tion with a new strain of M. tuberculosis is well documented in
patients with HIV infection and occurs in settings where trans-
mission is more common, such as in countries with high rates of
tuberculosis or congregate living facilities (eg, prisons or hospi-
tals) where infection control is inadequate. A study in Demo-
cratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) found that
extending treatment from 6 to 12 months reduced the recur-
rence rate from 9% to 3% [255]. A randomized trial in Haiti
found that 6-month treatment with a standard regimen
Table 9.
Conditions or Situations in Which Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
May Be Helpful
Poor response to tuberculosis treatment despite adherence and fully
drug-susceptible Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain
Severe gastrointestinal abnormalities: severe gastroparesis, short bowel
syndrome, chronic diarrhea with malabsorption
Drug–drug interactions
Impaired renal clearance: renal insufficiency, peritoneal dialysis, critically ill
patients on continuous renal replacement
HIV infection
Diabetes mellitus
Treatment using second-line drugs
Abbreviation: HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e171
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 followed by 12 months of INH preventive therapy reduced re-
currences from 7.8 per 100 person-years to 1.4 per 100 person-
years [258]. Therefore, in areas where reinfection is likely, the
opinion of experts is that secondary preventive therapy with
INH may be justified.
In regard to duration of treatment for drug-susceptible pul-
monary tuberculosis in the presence of HIV infection, the stan-
dard regimen currently used worldwide is the 6-month regimen
consisting of an intensive phase of 2 months of INH, RIF, PZA,
and EMB followed by a continuation phase of 4 months of INH
and RIF [10, 67, 98]. There is, however, a paucity of data on the
optimal duration of tuberculosis treatment for HIV-infected pa-
tients receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART),
though it is widely believed that the standard 6-month regimen
is effective and achieves tuberculosis cure rates comparable to
those reported for HIV-uninfected patients. In the TB-HAART
(Early Versus Delayed Initiation of HAART for HIV-Infected
Adults With Newly Diagnosed Pulmonary Tuberculosis) trial,
patients with CD4 counts ≥220 cells/µL were randomized on
timing of ART initiation [259]. All patients were treated with
the standard 6-month regimen for tuberculosis and were fol-
lowed for 12 months. Among patients who completed treat-
ment, recurrence of tuberculosis occurred in 2.0%, providing
indirect but supportive evidence that a 6-month regimen is ef-
fective in HIV-infected patients receiving ART. In our updated
systematic review of randomized trials and cohort studies com-
paring various durations of tuberculosis therapy (6 months vs 8
months or longer), most of which were conducted prior to the
era of HAART, we found that the risk of recurrence is lower
when the continuation phase of treatment is extended.
However, it is important to note that the majority of these stud-
ies were reports on nonrandomized cohorts, most were complet-
ed prior to the era of routine antiretroviral use, many tested
intermittent regimens, and few distinguished between reinfec-
tion and relapse (see Supplementary Appendix B). As discussed
below, based on data that show significant reductions in mortal-
ity and AIDS-defining illnesses, patients with HIV infection and
tuberculosis should receive ART in conjunction with daily anti-
tuberculosis medications. For HIV-infected patients receiving
ART, we suggest using the standard 6-month daily regimen con-
sisting of an intensive phase of 2 months of INH, RIF, PZA, and
EMB followed by a continuation phase of 4 months of INH and
RIF for the treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculo-
sis (Recommendation 5a: conditional recommendation; very low
certainty in the evidence) (see Supplementary Appendix B,
Evidence Profile 12). In the uncommon situation in which an
HIV-infected patient does NOT receive ART during tuberculosis
treatment, we suggest extending the continuation phase with
INH and RIF for an additional 3 months (ie, a continuation
phase of 7 months in duration, corresponding to a total of 9
months of therapy) for treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary
tuberculosis (Recommendation 5b: conditional recommenda-
tion; very low certainty in the evidence). As is noted for drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis in patients without HIV co-
infection, the continuation phase is extended in specific situa-
tions that are known to increase risk for relapse (see
“Identification and Management of Patients at Increased Risk
of Relapse”), as well as for selected extrapulmonary sites of dis-
ease, namely tuberculous meningitis, and bone, joint, and spinal
tuberculosis (see “Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis”).
Table 10.
Suggested Pyrazinamide Doses, Using Whole Tablets, for Adults Weighing 40–90 kga
Regimen
Weight, kgb,c
40–55
56–75
76–90
Daily (mg/kg)
1000 mg (18.2–25.0)
1500 mg (20.0–26.8)
2000 mg (22.2–26.3)
Thrice weekly (mg/kg)
1500 mg (27.3–37.5)
2500 mg (33.3–44.6)
3000 mg (33.3–39.5)
Twice weekly (mg/kg)
2000 mg (36.4–50.0)
3000 mg (40.0–53.6)
4000 mg (44.4–52.6)
a With normal renal function.
b Based on estimated lean body weight. Optimal doses for obese patients are not established.
c Numbers in parentheses are the calculated mg/kg doses for patients at the highest and lowest body weights in the weight band.
Table 11.
Suggested Ethambutol Dosages, Using Whole Tablets, for Adults Weighing 40–90 kga
Regimen
Weight, kgb,c
40–55
56–75
76–90
Daily (mg/kg)
800 mg (14.5–20.0)
1200 mg (16.0–21.4)
1600 mg (17.8–21.1)
Thrice weekly (mg/kg)
1200 mg (21.8–30.0)
2000 mg (26.7–35.7)
2400 mg (26.7–31.6)
Twice weekly (mg/kg)
2000 mg (36.4–50.0)
2800 mg (37.3–50.0)
4000 mg (44.4–52.6)
a With normal renal function.
b Based on estimated lean body weight. Optimal doses for obese patients are not established.
c Numbers in parentheses are the calculated mg/kg doses for patients at the highest and lowest body weights in the weight band.
e172 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Use of intermittent tuberculosis treatment regimens in HIV-
infected patients has been associated with high rates of relapse
and the emergence of drug resistance. In TBTC Study 22, pa-
tients with HIV infection who received once-weekly RPT and
INH or twice-weekly RIF and INH in the continuation phase
had an unacceptably high rate of relapse: 5 of 30 (16.7%) in
the former and 3/31 (9.8%) in the latter group [9]. In addition,
for those receiving weekly therapy, 4 patients relapsing had ac-
quired rifamycin resistance, which was associated with low
serum concentrations of INH and was presumably the result
of unopposed rifamycin exposure [59]. In a trial of RFB-based
antituberculosis therapy in combination with antiretroviral
drugs, patients treated with twice-weekly RFB had a relapse
rate of 5.3%, but 8 of 9 relapses had acquired rifamycin resis-
tance [60]. Relapse and resistance were associated with low
CD4 lymphocyte counts, as all recurrences occurred in patients
with baseline CD4 lymphocyte counts <100 cells/µL. In the
pharmacokinetic substudy of the trial, lower plasma concentra-
tions of RFB and INH were identified as key risk factors for ac-
quiring rifamycin resistance [250]. More recently, the use of a
thrice-weekly RIF-based regimen during the intensive and con-
tinuation phases of treatment was associated with a higher
rate of relapse and emergence of rifamycin resistance in HIV-
infected individuals not receiving antiretrovirals compared
with HIV-infected patients also receiving antiretrovirals or
HIV-uninfected patients [62]. Based in part on systematic re-
views conducted to obtain evidence in support of this guideline,
our expert opinion is that treatment of HIV-related tuberculosis
be given daily in both the intensive and continuation phases to
avoid recurrent disease and the emergence of rifamycin resis-
tance (see “Recommended Treatment Regimens”).
Mortality among patients with HIV and tuberculosis is high,
principally due to complications of immunosuppression and
occurrence of other HIV-related opportunistic diseases. In
this regard, the value of co-trimoxazole (trimethoprim-sulfa-
methoxazole) prophylaxis in reducing morbidity and mortality
in HIV-infected patients with newly diagnosed tuberculosis is
well established [63–65]. Whereas the WHO recommends rou-
tine co-trimoxazole prophylaxis for all HIV-infected people
with active tuberculosis disease regardless of the CD4 cell
count [66], in high-income countries, co-trimoxazole prophy-
laxis is primarily used in tuberculosis patients coinfected with
HIV with CD4 counts <200 cells/µL [67]. The use of ART dur-
ing tuberculosis treatment in persons with HIV infection also
reduces mortality rates significantly for those with advanced
HIV disease and decreases the risk of developing AIDS-related
conditions. The Starting Antiretroviral therapy at Three Points
in Tuberculosis (SAPiT) trial randomized patients with tuber-
culosis and HIV with CD4 lymphocyte counts <500 cells/µL
to initiate ART after 2 weeks (immediate), 8 weeks (early), or
6 months (deferred) of tuberculosis treatment [260].Patients re-
ceiving immediate or early ART had a 56% reduction in the
relative risk of death compared with patients receiving deferred
ART (5.6 per 100 person-years vs 12.1 per 100 person-years).
The benefit of ART given immediately or early was seen in pa-
tients with CD4 lymphocyte counts <200 cells/µL and 200–500
cells/µL. Subsequently, the Cambodian Early Versus Late Intro-
duction of Antiretrovirals trial showed that initiation of ART
within 2 weeks of starting antituberculosis treatment reduced
mortality rate by 34% compared to starting after 8 weeks, in a
population of HIV-infected individuals with very low CD4 cell
counts (median, 25 cells/µL) [261]. The Immediate vs Deferred
Start of Anti-HIV Therapy in HIV-Infected Adults Being Treat-
ed for Tuberculosis (STRIDE) trial and the second phase of the
SAPiT study, both of which compared immediate (2 weeks)
with early (8–12 weeks) ART for HIV-infected patients begin-
ning antituberculosis treatment, showed that immediate therapy
was associated with significantly lower rates of progression of
HIV disease to new AIDS-defining conditions or death com-
pared to early therapy for patients with CD4 counts <50 cells/
µL, but starting ART within 2 weeks was not superior to starting
at 8 weeks for individuals with CD4 counts >50 cells/µL [262,
263]. All of these studies also showed that immediate ART was
associated with significantly greater rates of IRIS, most of which
was not severe.
More recently, the TB-HAART trial found that among pa-
tients with HIV and CD4 counts >220 cells/µL, immediate initi-
ation of ART did not reduce mortality compared with waiting
until completion of 6 months of antituberculosis treatment to
start ART [259]. Unlike the SAPiT and STRIDE trials, however,
TB-HAART did not assess progression of HIV disease as a study
endpoint. Although the study did not find a survival benefit in
patients with HIV-related tuberculosis and higher CD4 lympho-
cyte counts, it did confirm the safety of co-treatment of tubercu-
losis and HIV infection and documented good outcomes of
tuberculosis treatment in those patients receiving dual therapy.
We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to ob-
tain evidence in support of this guideline, which included the 4
trials above and 4 additional studies (see Supplementary Ap-
pendix B, Evidence Profile 13) [259–266]. We found that the
overall reduction in mortality with ART initiated during treat-
ment of tuberculosis was 24% (risk ratio, 0.76; 95% confidence
interval [CI], .57–1.01). The overall risk of HIV disease progres-
sion was reduced by 34% with early or immediate ART (4 stud-
ies: risk ratio, 0.66; 95% CI, .47–.91). Initiation of ART during
antituberculosis therapy was associated with an increased risk of
IRIS (8 studies: risk ratio, 1.88; 95% CI, 1.31–2.69). Our meta-
analysis identified no increase in the risk of other adverse events
or poor outcome of tuberculosis therapy. Consequently, on the
basis of high certainty in the evidence that the benefits outweigh
the harms, we recommend that patients with tuberculosis and
HIV infection receive ART during antituberculosis treatment.
Antiretroviral therapy should ideally be started within 2 weeks
for those patients with a CD4 count <50 cells/µL and by 8–12
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e173
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 weeks for those with a CD4 count ≥50 cells/µL (Recommenda-
tion 6: strong recommendation; high certainty in the evidence).
An important exception is HIV-infected patients with tubercu-
lous meningitis, in whom ART should not be initiated in the
first 8 weeks of antituberculosis therapy (see “Immune Recon-
stitution Inflammatory Syndrome”).
Concurrent Administration of Antiretrovirals and Rifamycins
Interaction of RIF with antiretroviral agents is a major treat-
ment concern (see “Drug–Drug Interactions”). RIF is a potent
inducer of drug metabolizing enzymes in the CYP family and
drug transporters such as P-glycoprotein [206]. Coadministra-
tion of RIF with drugs metabolized or transported by these
compounds may lead to reductions in exposure and loss of ef-
ficacy [207]. HIV protease inhibitors are metabolized by
CYP3A4, and their concomitant administration with RIF
leads to >80% reductions in serum concentrations of the prote-
ase inhibitors and loss of therapeutic benefit. RIF also increases
the metabolism of nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibi-
tors (NNRTIs), integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs),
and CCR-5 inhibitors. Detailed recommendations for coadmin-
istration of rifamycins and antiretroviral drugs have been pub-
lished by the CDC, and we support these guidelines [215].
The NNRTI efavirenz is the most widely used antiretroviral
drug and is the preferred initial treatment for HIV (in combi-
nation with other antiretroviral drugs) in many countries. Co-
administration of RIF-containing antituberculosis regimens
with efavirenz results in satisfactory antiviral efficacy, despite re-
ductions in trough efavirenz concentrations [267, 268]. INH is
an inhibitor of an alternative, minor CYP pathway involved in
efavirenz metabolism. Thus, when INH and RIF are given to in-
dividuals with genetic polymorphisms associated with slow efa-
virenz clearance, efavirenz serum concentrations may reach
supratherapeutic levels. The US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) recommends that the dosage of efavirenz be increased
from 600 mg/day to 800 mg/day for patients weighing >60 kg
on the basis of pharmacokinetic modeling of data from healthy
volunteers; however, data from clinical studies, including the
STRIDE study, do not support this advice [267, 268], and
many other experts believe that efavirenz should be adminis-
tered at the standard dose of 600 mg/day in patients receiving
standard dose RIF-containing regimens. A treatment-shortening
trial evaluating high-dose daily RPT used in combination with
efavirenz-based ART for HIV-infected patients is under way
(ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02410772).
The NNRTI nevirapine has also been studied as an alternative
treatment for HIV-infected patients with tuberculosis [269].
However, RIF also reduces concentrations of nevirapine, a drug
that induces its own metabolism [270]. Due to this autoinduc-
tion, nevirapine is initially given at a dosage of 200 mg/day for
2 weeks and then increased to 200 mg/twice daily or 400 mg/
once daily. When nevirapine is started during antituberculosis
treatment, use of the 200 mg daily lead-in dose can lead to sub-
therapeutic concentrations, loss of antiviral efficacy, and emer-
gence of drug resistance [271–273]. Therefore, expert opinion
is that if nevirapine is used during treatment with RIF, the initi-
ation dose should be at the full 400-mg daily dosage (200 mg
twice daily or 400 mg daily).
The INSTIs are now considered first-line agents for HIV
infection in the United States and in Europe. Raltegravir and
dolutegravir are metabolized mainly by uridine 5′-diphospho-
glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 [274, 275], and concomitant use of
RIF reduces trough concentrations significantly. The “Raltegravir
for the treatment of patients co-infected with HIV and tubercu-
losis” (Reflate TB) trial showed that coadministration of RIF-
based antituberculosis treatment and raltegravir at 400 mg/twice
daily was associated with similar antiviral effectiveness compared
to coadministration of RIF-based antituberculosis treatment and
raltegravir 800 mg twice daily; both were somewhat more effec-
tive than efavirenz 600 mg daily [274].However, pharmacokinet-
ic data favor increasing the dose to 800 mg twice daily, and expert
opinion in the United States favors this strategy [276]. Pharma-
cokinetic studies demonstrate that coadministration of RIF and
dolutegravir at a dosage of 50 mg given twice daily results in ad-
equate trough concentrations of dolutegravir [275]. A clinical
study of patients with active tuberculosis given RIF and dolute-
gravir is under way (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02178592).
RFB is less potent an inducer of CYP isoenzymes and may be
used in patients receiving ART; however, RFB itself is metabo-
lized by CYP3A enzymes, and the antiretroviral agent ritonavir
(used to boost protease inhibitor levels) inhibits CYP3A en-
zymes, which increases concentrations of RFB. High concentra-
tions of RFB are associated with an increased risk of uveitis and
other toxicities, so dose adjustment of the standard RFB dosage
of 300 mg daily is necessary [215].
Expert opinion is to use RFB at a dose of 150 mg/day or 300
mg every other day as part of a combination antituberculosis
regimen for patients receiving ritonavir-boosted protease inhib-
itors [214]. In patients receiving dose-adjusted RFB because of
concomitant protease inhibitor use, frequent assessment of ad-
herence to both medicines is prudent, as discontinuation of the
protease inhibitor while continuing dose-adjusted RFB (ie, in
the context of DOT tuberculosis therapy but self-administered
antiretrovirals) would be expected to result in subtherapeutic
concentrations of the rifamycin, possibly with consequent
poor treatment outcome and acquired rifamycin resistance. Efa-
virenz is also a CYP3A inducer, and when RFB is coadminis-
tered with this agent the RFB dosage needs to be increased to
600 mg/day; however, indications to use RFB instead of RIF
in patients receiving efavirenz are rare.
When RFB is not available and treatment with a protease in-
hibitor is required because of resistance to NNRTIs and/or
INSTIs, use of RIF with a lopinavir/ritonavir regimen may be
attempted. For adults, this generally entails increasing the
e174 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 dosage of lopinavir/ritonavir from 400 mg/100 mg twice daily
to 800 mg/200 mg twice daily over 2 weeks. This so-called
“double dosing” of boosted lopinavir may result in hepatotoxic-
ity and careful clinical monitoring is necessary [215]. Alterna-
tively, “super boosting” of lopinavir, though poorly tolerated in
adults, is sometimes effective, especially in children. In this in-
stance, the dosage of lopinavir is maintained at 400 mg twice
daily, but ritonavir dosage is increased from 100 mg twice
daily to 400 mg twice daily. Super boosting of ritonavir is poorly
tolerated in adults, however, and the double-dosing strategy is
preferred. These complicated interactions underscore the im-
portance of expert consultation in treating individuals with con-
current HIV and tuberculosis infections. For situations
involving complex drug–drug interactions, some clinicians pre-
fer to measure the concentrations of the interacting drugs, and
to dose these drugs based upon individualized data [242].
Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome
Transient worsening of tuberculosis symptoms and lesions in
response to antituberculous therapy has previously been report-
ed in HIV-uninfected patients [277]. Patients with HIV infec-
tion and tuberculosis are at an increased risk of developing
paradoxical worsening of symptoms, signs, or clinical mani-
festations of tuberculosis after beginning antituberculosis and
antiretroviral treatments. These reactions develop as a conse-
quence of reconstitution of immune responsiveness brought
about by ART, and are designated as the IRIS. Tuberculosis
IRIS has been noted to be more common in participants with
earlier ART initiation and CD4+ lymphocyte counts <50 cells/
µL. In the STRIDE study, IRIS occurrence was infrequent at
7.6%. When tuberculosis IRIS occurred, the majority (69%) of
cases were mild to moderate in severity; however, 31% were hos-
pitalized with tuberculosis IRIS and more than half received
corticosteroids [68]. Signs of IRIS may include high fevers,
worsening respiratory symptoms, increase in size and inflam-
mation of involved lymph nodes, new lymphadenopathy, ex-
panding central nervous system (CNS) lesions, worsening of
pulmonary parenchymal infiltrations, new or increasing pleural
effusions, and development of intra-abdominal or retroperito-
neal abscesses [69]. Such findings are attributed to IRIS only
after excluding other possible causes, especially tuberculosis
treatment failure from drug-resistant tuberculosis or another
opportunistic disease, such as non-Hodgkin lymphoma or in-
fection. Antiretroviral treatment of patients with incubating,
subclinical tuberculosis may also result in what is called “un-
masking IRIS,” where tuberculosis symptoms and clinical man-
ifestations become more pronounced, though whether this
represents normal progression of untreated tuberculosis is not
known [187].
The relative risk of developing IRIS for patients who receive
ART during therapy for tuberculosis is 1.88 (95% CI, 1.31–
2.69), and those who start ART within 2 weeks after starting
tuberculosis therapy have higher rates than those who start be-
tween 8–12 weeks [261–263]. In general, development of IRIS
does not worsen treatment outcomes for either tuberculosis
or HIV infection, and most episodes can be managed sympto-
matically. An exception to this is the development of IRIS in pa-
tients with CNS tuberculosis, where IRIS may cause severe or
fatal neurological complications. In a study of patients with tu-
berculosis meningitis and HIV infection, early initiation of ART
(within 2 weeks) was associated with increased rates of adverse
events and higher mortality [278]. Thus, ART is not initiated in
the first 8 weeks of antituberculosis therapy for patients with
HIV infection and tuberculous meningitis (or other CNS tuber-
culosis), even for patients with CD4 cell counts <50 cells/µL.
Management of IRIS is symptomatic. Based on expert
opinion, for most patients with mild IRIS, tuberculosis and an-
tiretroviral therapies can be continued with the addition of anti-
inflammatory agents such as ibuprofen. For patients with
worsening pleural effusions or abscesses, drainage may be nec-
essary. For more severe cases of IRIS, treatment with corticoste-
roids is effective. In a placebo-controlled trial of prednisone for
patients with moderate IRIS, prednisone 1.25 mg/kg/day sig-
nificantly reduced the need for hospitalization or surgical pro-
cedures [70]. For patients who develop IRIS, prednisone may be
given at a dose of 1.25 mg/kg/day (50–80 mg/day) for 2–4
weeks, with tapering over a period of 6–12 weeks or longer.
Controlled trials investigating whether treatment with nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory agents or corticosteroids can prevent
the development of IRIS are under way or in development.
Children
Children commonly develop tuberculosis as a complication of
the initial infection with M. tuberculosis (primary tuberculosis).
The radiographic presentation of primary tuberculosis in chil-
dren is characterized by intrathoracic lymphadenopathy with or
without lung opacities, occasionally presenting with lymph
node enlargement to a degree that there is compression of air-
ways with or without hyperinflation or collapse of lobe or lung;
breakthrough of node(s) in the airways can manifest with lobar
or segmental infiltration, and a miliary pattern [279, 280]. The
diagnosis of tuberculosis in children is challenging, especially in
young children (<5 years) due to the paucibacillary nature of the
disease. Depending on the setting and resources, diagnosis is
microbiologically confirmed in only 15%–50% of pediatric
cases, and clinical case definitions for tuberculosis in children
have recently been updated [281]. Children, rarely, and adoles-
cents, more frequently, can also develop adult-type tuberculosis
(upper lobe opacities and cavitation associated with sputum
production). The lesions of primary tuberculosis have fewer
M. tuberculosis organisms than those of adult-type pulmonary
tuberculosis; thus, treatment failure, relapse, and development
of secondary resistance are less common events among children
when standard treatment regimens are initiated in a timely
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e175
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 manner. However, it is often more difficult to isolate M. tuber-
culosis from a child with pulmonary tuberculosis than from an
adult. Therefore, choosing appropriate treatment drugs often
requires the results of specimen culture and drug susceptibility
tests from the person presumed to be the source of the child’s
infection. Based on expert opinion, when drug resistance is sus-
pected or no source-case isolate is available, attempts to isolate
organisms are critical; approaches including obtaining 3 early
morning gastric aspirations (optimally during hospitalization),
sputum induction [282], bronchoalveolar lavage [283], or tissue
biopsy must be considered. Any information gained from molec-
ular and phenotypic tests conducted on these samples is used to
select an individualized regimen for the patient. Because tubercu-
losis in infants and children <4 years of age is more likely to dis-
seminate and result in subsequent morbidity and mortality,
empiric treatment is started as soon as the diagnosis is suspected,
and particular care is given to drug dosage selection as an impor-
tant component of achieving adequate concentrations of bacteri-
cidal drugs in body fluids, including the cerebrospinal fluid [284].
Several controlled and many observational trials of 6-month
therapy in children with known or presumed drug-susceptible
pulmonary tuberculosis have been published [285]. Based on
systematic reviews of the literature, both the AAP [77] and
the WHO [286, 287], list a 4-drug regimen (INH, RIF, PZA,
and EMB) for 2 months followed by a 2-drug (INH and RIF)
regimen for 4 months as the preferred regimen for children
with suspected or confirmed pulmonary tuberculosis. The
AAP Red Book also states that children who are receiving
EMB should be monitored monthly for visual acuity and red-
green color discrimination if they are old enough to cooperate.
The AAP further notes that the use of EMB in young children
whose visual acuity cannot be monitored requires consideration
of risks and benefits, but it can be used routinely to treat tuber-
culosis disease in infants and children unless otherwise contra-
indicated [77]. As an approach to avoiding EMB ocular toxicity,
some clinicians use a 3-drug regimen (INH, RIF, and PZA) in
the initial 2 months of treatment for children who are HIV un-
infected, have no prior tuberculosis treatment history, are living
in an area of low prevalence of drug-resistant tuberculosis, and
have no exposure to an individual from an area of high preva-
lence of drug-resistant tuberculosis. However, because the prev-
alence of and risk for drug-resistant tuberculosis can be difficult to
ascertain, the AAP and most experts include EMB as part of the
intensive phase regimen for children with tuberculosis. Pyridox-
ine, 25–50 mg/day, is given to infants, children, and adolescents
undergoing INH treatment if they have nutritional deficiencies,
symptomatic HIV infection, or are breastfeeding. Pyridoxine is
also given to breastfeeding infants of mothers who are receiving
INH [42, 77, 288, 289]. The lack of approved pediatric dosage
forms for most antituberculosis medications has resulted in the
creation and use of improvised formulations. This has entailed
crushing tablets or opening capsules to access the drug, followed
by weighing or proportioning of the contents that are in turn ad-
mixed with food or prepared into a suspension. With the recent
development of child-friendly antituberculosis formulations meet-
ing the dosage guidelines set by the WHO, procedures for making
such improvised formulations should no longer be needed [290].
In the United States, DOT has become the default program-
matic approach to treating children with tuberculosis [17].
Based on expert opinion, parents should not supervise DOT
for their children. Even when drugs are administered under
DOT, tolerance of the medications must be monitored closely.
When feasible, daily dosing is preferred by experts [77, 279,
287]; however, twice- or thrice-weekly dosing has also been
endorsed during the continuation phase of treatment for
HIV-uninfected children in settings where DOT is well estab-
lished [77] (see Supplementary Appendix C and Table 3 for
dosing of antituberculosis drugs in children).
Monitoring response to treatment in children can be chal-
lenging because of the difficulties in demonstrating M. tubercu-
losis in children. Clinical and radiographic worsening may not
be accompanied by positive AFB smears or mycobacterial cul-
tures. According to experts, continued child growth and devel-
opment while on treatment for tuberculosis usually predicts a
positive outcome of treatment. A decision to modify the drug
regimen should be undertaken with caution. Changes to the
regimen are usually based on clinical and radiographic grounds.
However, experts note that hilar adenopathy and resultant atel-
ectasis in children on occasion can require 1–2 years to resolve;
thus, an improving but persistent abnormality on a chest radio-
graph in an asymptomatic child is not believed to justify an ex-
tension of therapy. If there is concern that poor treatment
response may be due to possible drug-resistant tuberculosis, ex-
pert opinion is that the child should be fully reinvestigated, ver-
ifying contact history and source case drug susceptibility test
results, as well as obtaining additional specimens for cultures
and drug susceptibility testing.
According to expert opinion, most forms of extrapulmonary
tuberculosis in children can be treated with the same regimens
as pulmonary disease [77, 286]; however, for children with con-
firmed or suspected tuberculous meningitis or osteoarticular tu-
berculosis caused by a drug-susceptible organism, expert
opinion is that the duration of the continuation phase should
be extended (See “Tuberculous Meningitis”). For tuberculous
meningitis, the AAP lists an initial 4-drug regimen of INH,
RIF, PZA, and an aminoglycoside or ethionamide for 2 months,
followed by 7–10 months of INH and RIF. For patients who
may have acquired tuberculosis in geographic areas where resis-
tance to streptomycin is common, kanamycin, amikacin, or
capreomycin is used instead of streptomycin [77]. Fluoroquin-
olones have been studied in adults with tuberculous meningitis
[291], and these studies provide some evidence in support of
their use; however, there have been no published trials of
their use for tuberculous meningitis in children.
e176 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis
PICO Question 7: Does the use of adjuvant corticosteroids in
tuberculous pericarditis provide mortality and morbidity benefits?
Recommendation 7: We suggest initial adjunctive corticosteroid
therapy not be routinely used in patients with tuberculous pericarditis
(conditional recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
PICO Question 8: Does the use of adjuvant corticosteroids in
tuberculous meningitis provide mortality and morbidity benefits?
Recommendation 8: We recommend initial adjunctive corticosteroid
therapy with dexamethasone or prednisolone tapered over 6–8
weeks for patients with tuberculous meningitis (strong
recommendation; moderate certainty in the evidence).
Tuberculosis can involve virtually any organ or tissue in the
body. The principles underlying the treatment of pulmonary tu-
berculosis also apply to extrapulmonary disease. Chemotherapy
for extrapulmonary tuberculosis is initiated with INH, RIF,
PZA, and EMB in an initial 2-month phase. After 2 months
of 4-drug therapy, for extrapulmonary tuberculosis known or
presumed to be caused by susceptible strains, PZA and EMB
may be discontinued, and INH and RIF continued during a
continuation phase. Increasing evidence, including randomized
controlled trials, suggests that 6–9 month INH and RIF-con-
taining regimens are effective for the majority of extrapulmo-
nary sites of disease. The exception is tuberculous meningitis
where the optimal duration of therapy has not been established
through randomized controlled trials, but most experts and so-
ciety guidelines prescribe 12 months of treatment [78,292]. The
opinion of experts is that the preferred frequency of dosing for
extrapulmonary tuberculosis is once daily for both the intensive
and continuation phases. No randomized controlled trials have
studied intermittent drug administration for extrapulmonary
tuberculosis. If intermittent regimens are used, experts believe
that highly intermittent, once-weekly regimens should be avoid-
ed because of insufficient experience with this regimen in ex-
trapulmonary tuberculosis. In regard to treatment monitoring,
bacteriologic evaluation is often limited by the difficulty in ob-
taining follow-up specimens. Sputum specimens are obtained
when there is concurrent pulmonary involvement, otherwise,
response to treatment in extrapulmonary diseases is often
judged on the basis of clinical and radiographic findings.
Lymph Node Tuberculosis
We believe a 6-month regimen is adequate for initial treatment of
all patients with drug-susceptible tuberculous lymphadenitis
[293–298]. Affected lymph nodes may enlarge and new nodes
can appear during or after therapy without any evidence of bac-
teriological relapse [293, 295, 296, 299]. Therapeutic lymph node
excision is not indicated except in unusual circumstances. For
large lymph nodes that are fluctuant and appear to be about to
drain spontaneously, aspiration has been reported by some ex-
perts to be beneficial, although this approach has not been exam-
ined systematically. Incision and drainage techniques applied to
cervical lymphadenitis, however, have been reported to be
associated with prolonged wound discharge and scarring [300].
Of note, the majority of lymphatic cases of mycobacterial disease
in US children are caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria [301].
Bone, Joint, and Spinal Tuberculosis
Six- to 9-month regimens containing RIF for treatment of
bone, joint, and spinal tuberculosis are at least as effective as
18-month regimens that do not contain RIF [302–304]. Because
of the difficulties in assessing response, however, some experts
tend to favor the 9-month duration, and in the setting of exten-
sive orthopedic hardware, some experts extend the duration of
treatment further to 12 months. Several trials found no additional
benefit of surgical debridement in combination with chemother-
apy compared with chemotherapy alone for spinal tuberculosis
[80, 303–306]. As such, uncomplicated cases of spinal tuberculo-
sis are managed with medical rather than surgical treatment.
However, based on expert opinion, surgery can be considered
in situations in which (1) there is poor response to chemotherapy
with evidence of ongoing infection or ongoing deterioration; (2)
relief of cord compression is needed in patients with persistence
or recurrence of neurologic deficits; or (3) there is instability of
the spine [307]. Spinal tuberculosis with evidence of meningitis
is managed as tuberculous meningitis, including consideration of
adjunctive corticosteroids (see Tuberculous Meningitis).
Pericardial Tuberculosis
A 6-month regimen is adequate for patients with pericardial tu-
berculosis. Based on small studies that have shown mortality
and morbidity benefits [71–73], corticosteroids have previously
been universally recommended as adjunctive therapy for tuber-
culous pericarditis, however, a recent placebo-controlled ran-
domized clinical trial with 1400 participants did not find a
difference in the combined primary endpoint of the trial,
which included mortality, cardiac tamponade, or constrictive
pericarditis, between patients treated with adjunctive corticoste-
roids vs placebo [74]. A subgroup analysis, however, did suggest
a benefit in preventing constrictive pericarditis. Similarly, a sys-
tematic review conducted to obtain evidence in support of this
guideline did not find a statistically significant benefit in terms
of mortality or constrictive pericarditis from the use of cortico-
steroids (see Supplementary Appendix B, Evidence Profile 14)
[71–75]. Therefore, we suggest that adjunctive corticosteroids
should not be used routinely in the treatment of patients with
pericardial tuberculosis (Recommendation 7: conditional rec-
ommendation; very low certainty in the evidence). However, se-
lective use of glucocorticoids in patients who are at the highest
risk for inflammatory complications might be appropriate. Such
patients might include those with large pericardial effusions,
those with high levels of inflammatory cells or markers in peri-
cardial fluid, or those with early signs of constriction [76].
Pleural Tuberculosis
A standard 6-month regimen (Table 2) is also adequate for
treating pleural tuberculosis. Some clinicians consider using
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e177
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 adjunctive corticosteroid therapy for tuberculous pleural effu-
sions, and a number of studies have examined the risks and ben-
efits of this approach [308]. Four have been prospective, double
blind, and randomized [309–311], one of which was conducted
in patients with HIV infection [312].In all 4 studies, prednisone
(or prednisolone) administration did not confer a beneficial ef-
fect on residual pleural thickening or prevention of other long-
term pleural sequelae. In one study, an increased risk for Kaposi
sarcoma was noted with the use of prednisolone in HIV-associ-
ated tuberculous pleurisy [312]. Based on these randomized
clinical trials and a systematic review, there is no evidence to
support the routine use of adjunctive corticosteroids in patients
with tuberculous pleurisy.
Tuberculous empyema, a chronic, active infection of the
pleural space containing a large number of tubercle bacilli, usu-
ally occurs when a cavity ruptures into the pleural space. Treat-
ment consists of drainage (often requiring a surgical procedure)
and antituberculous chemotherapy [313]. The optimum dura-
tion of treatment for this unusual form of tuberculosis has
not been established.
Tuberculous Meningitis
Tuberculous meningitis remains a potentially devastating dis-
ease associated with a high morbidity and mortality in children
and adults, despite prompt initiation of adequate chemotherapy
[314]. HIV-infected individuals appear to be at increased risk
for developing tuberculous meningitis, but the clinical features
of the disease are similar to those in tuberculous meningitis pa-
tients without HIV infection [315–317]. High short-term mor-
bidity and mortality is reported regardless of HIV serostatus
[315–317]; however, 9-month survival was further decreased
in HIV-infected patients compared with HIV-uninfected pa-
tients in one cohort study [318].
Chemotherapy for tuberculous meningitis is initiated with
INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB in an initial 2-month phase. After
2 months of 4-drug therapy, for meningitis known or presumed
to be caused by susceptible strains, PZA and EMB may be dis-
continued, and INH and RIF continued for an additional 7–10
months, although the optimal duration of chemotherapy is not
defined. Based on expert opinion, repeated lumbar punctures
should be considered to monitor changes in cerebrospinal
fluid cell count, glucose, and protein, especially early in the
course of therapy. In children with tuberculous meningitis,
the AAP lists an initial 4-drug regimen of INH, RIF, PZA,
and ethionamide or an aminoglycoside for 2 months (in place
of EMB), followed by 7–10 months of INH and RIF [77]. There
are no data from controlled trials to guide the selection of EMB
vs an injectable or ethionamide as the fourth drug for tubercu-
losis meningitis [78].Most societies and experts recommend the
use of either an injectable or EMB. For adults, based on expert
opinion, our writing committee prefers using EMB as the fourth
drug. Fluoroquinolones, as well as higher doses of intravenous
RIF, are being evaluated in adults with tuberculous meningitis
[291,
319];
a
large
randomized
controlled
trial
(ISRCTN61649292) is under way to evaluate the impact on re-
ducing mortality of levofloxacin combined with higher-dose ri-
fampicin during the intensive phase of treatment [320].Selected
complications of tuberculous meningitis warranting neurosur-
gical referral include hydrocephalus, tuberculous cerebral ab-
scess, and clinical situations in which there is paraparesis [78].
A number of studies have examined the role of adjunc-
tive corticosteroid therapy in the treatment of tuberculous men-
ingitis [79–91]. Our updated systematic review found a
mortality benefit from the use of adjuvant corticosteroids (See
Supplementary Appendix B, Evidence Profile 15). Therefore, we
recommend adjunctive corticosteroid therapy with dexametha-
sone or prednisolone tapered over 6–8 weeks for patients with
tuberculous meningitis (Recommendation 8: strong recommen-
dation; moderate certainty in the evidence).
Disseminated Tuberculosis
Based on expert opinion, a standard daily 6-month regimen
(Table 2) is adequate for tuberculosis at multiple sites and for
miliary tuberculosis; however, supporting data from controlled
clinical trials are limited. Some experts believe concurrent cor-
ticosteroid therapy is indicated for treating severe respiratory
failure or adrenal insufficiency caused by disseminated tubercu-
losis [321–323], though the role of adjunct corticosteroid treat-
ment in patients with miliary tuberculosis remains unclear
[324]. Patients with disseminated tuberculosis may have con-
comitant neurologic complications, with indolent symptoms
of CNS involvement, which should be appropriately worked
up [325]. Treatment recommendations for tuberculous menin-
gitis are followed when there is CNS involvement.
Genitourinary Tuberculosis
Renal tuberculosis is treated primarily with medical rather than
surgical therapy, and expert opinion is that a standard daily
6-month regimen (Table 2) is adequate [326–329]. If ureteral
obstruction occurs, procedures to relieve the obstruction are
indicated. In cases of hydronephrosis and progressive renal in-
sufficiency due to obstruction, renal drainage by stenting or
nephrostomy is advised by experts [330]. Nephrectomy is con-
sidered when there is a nonfunctioning or poorly functioning
kidney, particularly if hypertension or continuous flank pain
is present. Dose adjustment is required in patients with coexis-
tent renal failure. Tuberculosis of the female or male genital
tract responds well to standard chemotherapy, although surgery
may be indicated for residual, large, tubo-ovarian abscesses.
A positive urine culture for M. tuberculosis is a component of
the diagnostic assessment of genitourinary tuberculosis [331].
A positive urine culture for M. tuberculosis is also sometimes
seen in tuberculosis patients with advanced HIV infection, and
may reflect disseminated disease and/or occult genitourinary
tract involvement. Rarely, a positive culture may occur in the
e178 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 absence of any abnormalities on urinalysis and does not neces-
sarily represent invasive genitourinary tract involvement [332].
Abdominal Tuberculosis
Expert opinion is that a 6-month regimen is adequate for pa-
tients with peritoneal or intestinal tuberculosis [333–335].
The nonspecific presentation of abdominal tuberculosis
means that a high index of suspicion is an important factor
in early diagnosis and initiation of treatment [336, 337]. Data
on adjunctive corticosteroid therapy in the treatment of tuber-
culous peritonitis are limited [338]; thus, experts believe it
should not be prescribed routinely.
Other Sites of Involvement
As noted above, tuberculosis can involve any organ or tissue.
When treating tuberculosis in sites other than those mentioned,
the basic principles of therapy apply, but experts should be
consulted.
Culture-Negative Pulmonary Tuberculosis in Adults
PICO Question 9: Does a shorter duration of treatment have similar
outcomes compared to the standard 6-month treatment duration
among HIV-uninfected patients with paucibacillary tuberculosis (ie,
smear negative, culture negative)?
Recommendation 9: We suggest that a 4-month treatment regimen is
adequate for treatment of HIV-uninfected adult patients with AFB
smear- and culture-negative pulmonary tuberculosis (conditional
recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence).
Failure to isolate M. tuberculosis from appropriately collected
sputum specimens in persons who, because of clinical or radio-
graphic findings, are suspected of having pulmonary tuber-
culosis does not exclude a diagnosis of active pulmonary
tuberculosis. Some causes of failure to isolate organisms include
the recent use of antibiotics with bactericidal activity against
M. tuberculosis (eg, fluoroquinolones), low bacillary popula-
tions, inadequate sputum specimens, temporal variations in
the number of expelled bacilli, overgrowth of cultures with
other microorganisms, and errors in specimen processing
[92]. Alternative diagnoses must be considered and appropriate
diagnostic studies undertaken in patients who appear to have
culture-negative tuberculosis. At a minimum, patients suspect-
ed of having pulmonary tuberculosis have 2 sputum specimens
(using sputum induction with hypertonic saline if necessary)
for AFB smears and cultures for mycobacteria or for rapid mo-
lecular testing for M. tuberculosis as part of the diagnostic evalu-
ation. Other diagnostic procedures, such as bronchoscopy with
bronchoalveolar lavage and biopsy, are considered before making
a presumptive diagnosis of culture-negative tuberculosis.
Patients who, on the basis of careful clinical and radiographic
evaluation, are thought to have pulmonary tuberculosis should
have treatment initiated with INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB even
when the initial sputum smears are negative. If M. tuberculosis
is isolated in culture or a rapid molecular test is positive,
treatment for active disease is continued for a full, standard 6-
month course (Table 2), if appropriate based on drug suscept-
ibility test results. Patients who have negative cultures but who
still are presumed to have pulmonary tuberculosis should have
thorough clinical and radiographic follow-up after 2 months of
therapy. If there is clinical or radiographic improvement and no
other etiology is identified, treatment should be continued.
The optimum treatment regimens and duration for culture-
negative tuberculosis have not been convincingly established.
We performed a systematic review that evaluated 4- and
6-month treatment regimens using available clinical trials
data in adult (>15 years of age) patients. No clinical trials
data on shortened treatments in children were available. A
study from Hong Kong demonstrated that for adults with
smear-negative, culture-positive, and culture-negative pulmo-
nary tuberculosis, a 4-month regimen of INH, RIF, streptomy-
cin, and PZA given either daily or thrice weekly was highly
successful [339]. In Arkansas, a 4-month INH and RIF regimen
for culture-negative tuberculosis was successful with only 1.2%
relapses during an average follow-up of 44 months [340]. In
Singapore, a study of a small number of patients with smear-
negative and either culture-positive or culture-negative tuber-
culosis treated with INH, RIF, and PZA daily for 2 months
followed by INH and RIF either daily or thrice weekly for 2
months showed a high degree of success in both groups [341].
Overall, these 3 studies report a proportion relapsing of only
1.9% among a total of 940 patients treated for 4 months, all
of whom had at least 3 negative smears/cultures prior to starting
therapy. Our systematic review of available clinical trials data in
adult (>15 years of age) patients did not identify a significant
difference in the risk of relapse in culture-negative tuberculosis
treated for either 4 or 6 months (see Supplementary Appendix
B, Evidence Profile 16). Consequently, we suggest that a 4-
month treatment regimen is adequate for HIV-uninfected
adults with culture-negative pulmonary tuberculosis (condition-
al recommendation; very low certainty in the evidence). Opera-
tionally, treatment is initiated with an intensive phase of INH,
RIF, PZA, and EMB daily and continued in all patients suspect-
ed of having pulmonary tuberculosis even when the initial bac-
teriologic studies are negative. If all cultures on samples deemed
to be adequate are negative and there is clinical or radiographic
response after 2 months of intensive phase therapy, the contin-
uation phase with INH and RIF can be shortened to 2 months.
Clinical and radiographic response, assessed at the end of treat-
ment, is used to determine whether an extension in treatment to
a full standard 6-month regimen is needed. Alternatively, if
there is concern about the adequacy of workup or the accuracy
of the microbiologic evaluations, a standard 6-month regimen
remains preferred (Table 2) [14, 15].
On occasion, patients who are being evaluated for pulmonary
tuberculosis will be found to have positive AFB smears but neg-
ative cultures. Potential causes include the possibilities that the
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e179
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 acid-fast organisms are fastidious mycobacteria other than
M. tuberculosis complex, that they are nonviable M. tuberculo-
sis, or that the results are due to laboratory error (false-positive
smear, or false-negative culture). The approach in such cases is
individualized on the basis of clinical and radiographic findings,
as well as the results of rapid molecular diagnostic studies; dis-
cussion with the microbiologist performing the cultures is pru-
dent. If clinical suspicion of tuberculosis is high, particularly if
there is clinical and radiologic improvement since the start of
therapy, then therapy is continued for a minimum of 6 months
as for culture-positive pulmonary tuberculosis.
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
Treatment for tuberculosis is initiated whenever the probability of
maternal disease is moderate to high because of the risk of un-
treated tuberculosis to a pregnant woman and her fetus [342–
345]. Although antituberculosis drugs cross the placenta, they
do not appear to have teratogenic effects in humans [346–349].
However, the inclusion of PZA in the treatment regimen for preg-
nant women is controversial in the United States. The FDA pre-
viously classified all 4 first-line drugs, INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB,
as having equal potential for teratogenicity (all assigned to cate-
gory C according to the previous FDA letter-based classification
system, which is currently being revised [350]). We suggest that
clinicians evaluate the risks and benefits of prescribing PZA on
a case-by-case basis, allowing the patient to make an informed
and educated decision, recognizing that for all first-line drugs,
risk cannot be ruled out as there are no adequate and well-
controlled studies in humans, but potential benefits warrant use
of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks. It is also
important to recognize that PZA has been used extensively in
high-burden countries for many years, and is recommended by
the WHO for tuberculosis in pregnancy, as part of the standard
treatment regimen [98]. Expert opinion is that in pregnant
women with tuberculosis and HIV, extrapulmonary or severe tu-
berculosis, it is more beneficial to include PZA in the treatment
regimen than to not include PZA. If a decision is made to exclude
PZA from the regimen, a minimum of 9 months of INH, RIF, and
EMB is used for most pregnant women with drug-susceptible tu-
berculosis. Expert consultation should be sought when first-line
drugs cannot be used due to adverse effects or antibiotic resis-
tance, when there is extensive disease and/or a risk of noncompli-
ance. Although the fetal effects of many second-line drugs are not
well established, small case series of pregnant women treated with
second-line drugs (from studies in drug-resistant tuberculosis)
suggest that good outcomes are achievable and that termination
of the pregnancy is not necessary [351–354].Overall, the absence
of high-quality studies combined with estimates of >200 000 cases
of tuberculosis in pregnant women each year highlight the need
for additional research in this area [355, 356].
Breastfeeding is encouraged for women who are deemed
noninfectious and are being treated with first-line agents. The
small concentrations of antituberculosis drugs measured in
breast milk have not been reported to produce toxic effects in
the nursing infant [77]. Conversely, drugs in breast milk should
not be considered to serve as effective treatment for active tuber-
culosis or latent tuberculosis infection in a nursing infant.
Whenever INH is given to a pregnant or nursing woman, sup-
plementary pyridoxine, 25–50 mg/day, is prescribed [42, 43,
357, 358]. According to the AAP, supplementary pyridoxine
(1–2 mg/kg/day) is also prescribed to exclusively breastfed in-
fants, even those not receiving INH [77, 289].
Renal Disease
Patients with renal insufficiency or end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) are immunocompromised [359]. Tuberculosis patients
with chronic renal failure have worse clinical outcomes than
those without renal failure, and, thus, experts recommend close
monitoring during tuberculosis treatment [360]. The pharmaco-
kinetics of antituberculosis drugs are altered as some are cleared
by the kidneys and/or removed via hemodialysis [361, 362].
Therefore, dose adjustment in patients with renal insufficiency
or ESRD may be required (Table 3 and Table 12). Decreasing
the dose lowers peak serum drug concentrations and can com-
promise treatment efficacy. Based on expert opinion, the interval
between drug doses in patients with a creatinine clearance of <30
mL/minute and those receiving hemodialysis should be increased
instead. In patients with borderline renal function, a 24-hour
urine collection may be needed to more accurately define the de-
gree of renal insufficiency prior to making regimen changes [242,
363]. Insufficient data exist to guide dosing recommendations for
patients with a reduced but >30 mL/min creatinine clearance. In
such patients, standard doses are used by experts, but measure-
ment of serum concentrations 2 and 6 hours after timed admin-
istration can be used to assist with optimizing drug dosages.
RIF and INH are metabolized by the liver, and conventional
dosing can be used in the setting of renal insufficiency. Although
PZA is metabolized by the liver, its metabolites (pyrazinoic acid
and 5-hydroxy-pyrazinoic acid) may accumulate in patients with
renal insufficiency. EMB is approximately 80% cleared by the
kidneys and may accumulate in patients with renal insufficiency.
Experts suggest a longer interval between doses (ie, thrice weekly)
for PZA and EMB [242, 363]. With hemodialysis, PZA and, pre-
sumably, its metabolites are cleared to a significant degree, INH
and EMB are cleared to some degree, and RIF is not cleared by
hemodialysis [361]. The fluoroquinolones are also cleared vari-
ably by the kidneys. Levofloxacin undergoes greater renal clear-
ance than moxifloxacin [179]. Postdialysis administration of all
antituberculosis medications is preferred to facilitate DOT and
to avoid premature clearance of drugs such as PZA. Monitoring
serum drug concentrations, along with careful clinical and phar-
macological assessment, in patients with ESRD, may be neces-
sary. ESRD patients are often taking other medications that
interact with antituberculosis drugs or have comorbid clinical
e180 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 conditions that could affect drug absorption, such as diabetes
mellitus with gastroparesis. For patients receiving peritoneal dial-
ysis, there is currently a paucity of pharmacokinetic and dosing
data, and the dosages in Table 12 may not apply to patients re-
ceiving peritoneal dialysis. Such patients may require close mon-
itoring
for
toxicity,
and
measurements
of
the
serum
concentrations of antituberculosis drugs before and after perito-
neal dialysis should be considered.
Hepatic Disease
Tuberculosis treatment in patients with preexisting advanced
liver disease poses significant challenges. The likelihood of
drug-induced hepatitis is increased with prior advanced liver dis-
ease [364], liver transplant [365], or hepatitis C infection [366,
367].Abnormal baseline aminotransferases alone are an indepen-
dent risk factor for DILI [364, 368]. Experts recommend that pa-
tients with a history of injection drug use, birth in Asia or Africa
(or other hepatitis virus endemic regions), or HIV infection have
hepatitis B and C virus screening at baseline (Table 7). For pa-
tients with marginal hepatic reserve, superimposed DILI [56]
may be severe, even life-threatening [369]. Fluctuations of
serum aminotransferases and total bilirubin from preexisting
liver disease can confound monitoring for DILI. Hepatic tuber-
culosis may also cause elevated aminotransferases, which im-
prove with effective tuberculosis treatment.
Regimens with fewer potentially hepatotoxic agents are select-
ed in patients with advanced liver disease or whose serum ALT is
>3 times the upper limit of normal at baseline (and not thought
to be caused by tuberculosis). The crucial efficacy of INH and
particularly RIF warrant their use and retention, if at all possible,
even in the face of preexisting liver disease. Expert consultation is
advisable. Adjustments during treatment may be necessary. Drug
susceptibility testing to fluoroquinolones and injectables is indi-
cated if use of these drugs is being considered.
Alternative regimens for use in patients with hepatic disease
include:
•
Treatment without PZA: PZA has often been implicated in
DILI. A potential regimen could be INH, RIF, and EMB for 2
months, followed by 7 months of INH and RIF [370, 371].
•
Treatment without INH and PZA: For advanced liver dis-
ease patients, RIF and EMB with a fluoroquinolone, injectable,
or cycloserine for 12–18 months, depending on the extent of the
disease and response could be considered [372].
•
Treatment without INH: Based on outcomes of studies on
INH-resistant tuberculosis, a regimen of RIF, PZA, and EMB
with or without a fluoroquinolone could be considered for a
total duration of at least 6 months [373]. Although this regimen
has 2 potentially hepatotoxic medications, it has the advantage
of retaining a treatment duration of 6 months.
•
Regimens with little or no potential hepatotoxicity: For
patients with severe, unstable liver disease, EMB combined
with a fluoroquinolone, cycloserine, and second-line injectable
for 18–24 months (similar to an multidrug-resistant tuber-
culosis regimen) can be considered [374]. Some experts avoid
aminoglycosides in patients with severe, unstable liver disease
due to concerns about renal insufficiency or bleeding from
the site of injected medication due to thrombocytopenia and/
or coagulopathy.
Table 12.
Dosing Recommendations for Adult Patients With Reduced Renal Functiona
Drug
Change in Frequency?
Recommended Dose and Frequency for Patients With Creatinine
Clearance <30 mL/min, or Patients Receiving Hemodialysis
Isoniazid
No
300 mg once daily, or 900 mg 3 times/wk
Rifampin
No
600 mg once daily, or 600 mg 3 times/wk
Pyrazinamide
Yes
25–35 mg/kg/dose 3 times/wk (not daily)
Ethambutol
Yes
20–25 mg/kg/dose 3 times/wk (not daily)
Levofloxacin
Yes
750–1000 mg/dose 3 times/wk (not daily)
Moxifloxacin
No
400 mg once daily
Cycloserine
Yes
250 mg once daily, or 500 mg/dose 3 times/wkb
Ethionamide
No
250–500 mg/dose daily
Para-amino salicylic acid
No
4 g/dose twice daily
Streptomycin
Yes
15 mg/kg/dose 2-3 times/wk (not daily)
Capreomycin
Yes
15 mg/kg/dose 2-3 times/wk (not daily)
Kanamycin
Yes
15 mg/kg/dose 2-3 times/wk (not daily)
Amikacin
Yes
15 mg/kg/dose 2-3 times/wk (not daily)
•
Standard doses are given unless there is intolerance.
•
The medications should be given after hemodialysis on the day of hemodialysis.
•
Monitoring of serum drug concentrations should be considered to ensure adequate drug absorption, without excessive accumulation, and to assist in avoiding toxicity.
•
Data currently are not available for patients receiving peritoneal dialysis. Until data become available, begin with doses recommended for patients receiving
hemodialysis and verify adequacy of dosing using serum concentration monitoring.
•
In patients with 30–50 mL/min creatinine clearance, standard doses are used by experts, but measurement of serum concentrations 2 and 6 hours after timed
administration can be used to assist with optimizing drug dosages.
a Including adult patients receiving hemodialysis.
b The appropriateness of 250-mg daily doses has not been established. There should be careful monitoring for evidence of neurotoxicity.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e181
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Monitoring of Treatment in Hepatic Disease
Data to guide the monitoring of patients with preexisting severe
liver disease are scarce. Clinical monitoring and patient educa-
tion for manifestations of liver injury is warranted for all pa-
tients [56]. Experts in the field recommend measuring serum
aminotransferases and total bilirubin concentrations every
1–4 weeks for at least the first 2–3 months of treatment. The
INR may also be periodically followed for patients with severe
hepatic impairment [56, 375, 376]. An increase in serum ALT is
more specific for hepatocellular injury than an increase in AST,
which can also signify abnormalities in muscle, heart, or kidney
[56, 377]. In patients with more advanced preexisting disease,
such as those with cirrhosis or encephalopathy, the ALT thresh-
olds for treatment interruption have not been defined. Some ex-
perts recommend, in addition to weekly or twice-weekly ALT
monitoring, interrupting treatment for only a 3-fold elevation
of ALT, even if asymptomatic [375, 376]. Reintroduction of an-
tituberculous treatment may entail rechallenge and/or substitu-
tion of agents, while trying to retain the most effective
medications [56]. Whenever feasible, management of tubercu-
losis in the setting of severe hepatic disease is undertaken in
consultation with experts.
Advanced Age
The risk of drug-induced hepatitis and other serious adverse ef-
fects increases with advancing age because of less efficient drug
elimination due to reduced renal and hepatic clearance [56].Be-
cause PZA is the most common culprit [378, 379], the benefits
of including PZA in the initial regimen for elderly patients with
modest disease and low risk of drug resistance may be out-
weighed by the risk of serious adverse events. Consequently,
some experts avoid the use of PZA during the intensive phase
among patients >75 years of age. In such cases, the initial reg-
imen consists of INH, RIF, and EMB. If PZA is not used during
the intensive phase, then the total duration of tuberculosis treat-
ment should be extended to at least 9 months. When the elderly
patient has active tuberculosis with high bacillary burden (ie, bi-
lateral cavitation) and, thus, treatment failure or the develop-
ment of drug resistance is a concern, benefits and risks of
adding PZA or a fluoroquinolone (eg, levofloxacin, moxifloxa-
cin) vs no fourth drug should be carefully considered. The risk
of drug interaction is increased in the elderly and consideration
may need to be given to dose adjustments or use of alternative
regimens. Careful clinical monitoring to detect intolerance and
adverse reactions is warranted.
Other Comorbid Conditions
As noted previously, the CDC and WHO recommend routine
HIV testing and counseling to all patients with presumptive
and diagnosed tuberculosis [253, 254]. Experts also recommend
that patients with a history of injection drug use, HIV infection,
or birth in Asia or Africa (or other hepatitis virus endemic
regions) undergo hepatitis B and C virus screening at baseline.
Based on limited data, some experts also suggest screening for
helminthic infections, including malaria, strongyloides, and
schistosomiasis in patients originating from regions hyperen-
demic for these diseases. In general, tuberculosis treatment for
patients with diseases or conditions that alter immune respon-
siveness, including HIV infection, parasitic and helminthic in-
fections, hematologic or reticuloendothelial malignancies,
immunosuppressive therapy (eg, TNF-α inhibitors) [380],
chronic renal failure [381], diabetes mellitus, and malnutrition
is based on the standard, daily 6-month regimen (Table 2).
Nonetheless, decisions regarding treatment of comorbidities
and the duration of tuberculosis treatment can be individual-
ized, taking into account disease severity, organs involved,
and response to treatment. For example, based on increased
rates of tuberculosis recurrence, some experts suggest extending
the total duration of tuberculosis treatment to 9 months in
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus [49, 50, 382, 383]. Similarly,
for patients with silicotuberculosis, data demonstrate that cure
rate is improved if the continuation phase is extended by at least
2 months [169, 384]. Based on data suggesting increased mor-
tality with shorter durations of treatment, some experts also
suggest extending the total duration of tuberculosis treatment
to at least 9 months for all solid organ transplant recipients
[385].
The management of immunosuppressive therapy in patients
who develop active tuberculosis varies based on the comorbid
condition. If possible, steps are taken to correct immunodefi-
ciency. In patients with rheumatologic disease, expert opinion
is that TNF-α inhibitor therapy is held if clinically feasible,
when active tuberculosis is suspected or confirmed. There is
no consensus on when TNF-α inhibitor therapy can be re-
sumed. However, small case series suggest that it is safe to resu-
me TNF-α inhibitor therapy in patients who complete at least 2
months of antituberculosis treatment and have a good clinical
response [380, 386, 387]. The decision to restart TNF-α inhibi-
tor treatment should be individualized, taking into account the
clinical need for immunosuppressive therapy, the extent of tu-
berculosis disease, and clinical response to antituberculosis
treatment. Of note, severe IRIS-like reactions in the setting of
holding TNF-α inhibitor treatment have been reported [388].
In solid organ transplant recipients, significant pharmacological
interactions can occur between rifamycin-based antituberculo-
sis regimens (particularly RIF) and calcineurin inhibitors or ra-
pamycin; on this basis, strict monitoring of serum drug
concentrations is needed to prevent rejection [389].
RECURRENT TUBERCULOSIS, TREATMENT
FAILURE, AND DRUG RESISTANCE
Recurrent Tuberculosis
Recurrence refers to the circumstance in which a patient whose
sputa had become and remained culture negative while
e182 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 receiving antituberculosis drugs becomes culture positive or ex-
periences clinical or radiographic deterioration consistent with
active tuberculosis after completion of therapy. In such patients,
vigorous efforts are made to establish a diagnosis and to obtain
microbiologic confirmation of the relapse to enable testing for
drug resistance. True relapses, defined as recurrent tuberculosis
caused by the same strain as was identified at baseline, are
thought to be due to failure of chemotherapy to sterilize the
host tissues, thereby enabling endogenous recrudescence of
the original infection. In high-incidence settings or where infec-
tion control is poor, however, exogenous reinfection with a new
strain of M. tuberculosis may be responsible for the apparent re-
currence (in this context, not referred to as relapse) [390, 391].
Patients at risk for relapses are those with extensive disease at
baseline and whose sputum cultures remain positive after comple-
tion of the intensive phase of treatment [9,392].However, the sen-
sitivity of culture-positive status at 2 months for predicting relapse
is low [46].Most relapses occur within the first 6–12 months after
completion of therapy [393]. In the majority of patients with tu-
berculosis caused by drug-susceptible organisms who were treated
by DOT with rifamycin-containing regimens, relapses occur with
susceptible organisms [394, 395]. However, the risk of acquired
drug resistance is substantial in patients who have a relapse
after receiving SAT, a highly intermittent regimen in the setting
of HIV infection, a non-rifamycin-containing regimen (including
receiving only INH and EMB in the continuation phase of treat-
ment), or a second-course of a first-line regimen reinforced by
streptomycin [59,60,396–400].In addition, if initial drug suscept-
ibility testing was not performed and the patient fails or relapses
with a rifamycin-containing regimen using DOT, a high likeli-
hood exists that the organisms were resistant from the outset
[399, 401, 402]. To help guide regimen selection, rapid molecular
tests have been used at the time of suspected recurrence as an ap-
proach to rapidly identifying the presence of resistance-conferring
mutations; however, the detection of M. tuberculosis DNA and
RIF resistance have been reported as being false positive [403]. Ex-
perts suggest caution in interpreting results from molecular tests
used at the time of suspected recurrence.
The selection of empiric treatment regimens for patients with
relapses is based on the prior treatment scheme. For patients with
relapse who were treated for drug-susceptible tuberculosis using
DOT, experts recommend retreatment using the standard inten-
sive phase regimen until the results of susceptibility tests are
known. For patients who did not receive DOT or had irregular
treatment, it is prudent to infer a higher risk of acquired drug re-
sistance. Whenever feasible, rapid molecular and phenotypic di-
agnostics for detection of drug resistance should be used to
inform regimen selection. When immediate treatment initiation
is necessary, consider the use of an expanded empiric regimen in
consultation with experts in the treatment of drug-resistant dis-
ease. If started, an expanded empiric regimen is administered
until the results of susceptibility tests are known and commonly
consists of the standard intensive phase regimen of daily INH,
RIF, PZA, and EMB, plus a later-generation fluoroquinolone,
an injectable, and depending on the severity of disease or the an-
ticipated extensiveness of resistance, an additional second-line
drug [404]. All drugs are administered using DOT. An expanded
regimen is indicated especially in patients with impaired immu-
nity, limited respiratory reserve, CNS involvement, other life-
threatening circumstances, or any other situation in which treat-
ment with an inadequate regimen could have severe consequenc-
es to the individual or the community.
When epidemiological circumstances render exogenous rein-
fection the most likely cause of apparent relapse, the regimen
choice is influenced by the drug susceptibility pattern of the
presumed source case and/or drug-resistance testing. If the pre-
sumed source case is known to have drug-resistant organisms,
an expanded empiric regimen based on the resistance profile of
the putative source case may be suitable.
Poor Treatment Response and Treatment Failure
In the United States, treatment failure is defined as continuously
or recurrently positive cultures after 4 months (5 months in
Europe and WHO guidelines [98]) of treatment in a patient re-
ceiving appropriate chemotherapy. Among patients with drug-
susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis, even with extensive lung
cavitation, 90%–95% will be culture negative after 3 months
of treatment with a regimen that contains INH and RIF. During
this time, the vast majority of patients show clinical improve-
ment, including reduced fever, reduced cough, and weight
gain. Thus, patients with persistently positive cultures after 3
months of chemotherapy, with or without ongoing symptoms,
are evaluated carefully to identify the cause of delayed response.
Multiple reasons for poor treatment response and treatment
failure exist. For patients not receiving DOT, one explanation
may be nonadherence to the treatment regimen. Among pa-
tients receiving DOT, cryptic nonadherence (spitting out or de-
liberately regurgitating tablets or capsules) or failure of the
healthcare system to reliably deliver the drugs may be a cause.
Other potential reasons include unrecognized drug resistance
(drug susceptibility testing not done, misreported, or misinter-
preted; reinfection with a drug-resistant strain), malabsorption
(diarrhea, or prior resection surgery of the stomach or small in-
testine, or taking tuberculosis medications with antacids or
other drugs/substances that might bind or interfere with drug
absorption), or diabetes mellitus with or without gastroparesis
[198, 199, 201, 405–410]. Some experts use TDM to evaluate
poor drug exposure as a contributing factor to treatment failure
[242]. Laboratory error (eg, cross-contamination or mislabeling
of specimens) is also a possible reason for a positive culture in a
patient who is doing well clinically [411].
Clinicians should be alert, as well, to the possibility of tran-
sient clinical or radiographic worsening (paradoxical reactions),
despite appropriate therapy that would eventually result in cure.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e183
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 Examples of this include ongoing inflammation at sites of
lymphadenitis, worsened abnormalities on chest radiographs
after several months of treatment, or the new appearance of
pleural effusions during therapy for pulmonary tuberculosis.
Such paradoxical worsening during treatment can occur in
HIV-uninfected patients, as well as in HIV-infected patients
(see “Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome”). The
diagnosis of a paradoxical reaction is made only after a thor-
ough evaluation has excluded other etiologies, particularly tu-
berculosis treatment failure and drug resistance.
For patients who meet criteria for treatment failure, the pos-
sible reasons listed above should be addressed promptly. Recent
mycobacterial isolates should be sent to a reference laboratory
for susceptibility testing to both first-and second-line drugs.
If clinicians are not familiar with the management of drug-
resistant tuberculosis, immediate referral to, or consultation
with a specialty center is indicated. If treatment failure is pre-
sumably due to drug resistance and the patient is seriously ill
or has a positive sputum AFB smear, an empiric regimen is
started immediately and continued until susceptibility tests
are available to guide therapy; however, if the patient’s clinical
presentation is not severe, one may either initiate an empiric re-
treatment regimen or wait for drug susceptibility results from a
recent isolate. Of note, patients who are not on the correct reg-
imen remain infectious [102, 412].
A single new drug is never to be added to a failing regimen as
it can lead to amplification of drug resistance, including ac-
quired resistance to the newly added drug [413]. To lessen the
likelihood of increasing resistance, it is generally prudent to add
2–3 new drugs to which susceptibility could logically be inferred
(eg, using regional drug-resistance surveillance data and the pa-
tient’s history of medication use). When drug susceptibility re-
sults are available, the regimen is adjusted accordingly.
Tuberculosis Caused by Drug-Resistant Organisms
Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacilli are continually undergoing
spontaneous mutations that create resistance to individual antitu-
berculosis drugs; however, the frequency of these mutations is suf-
ficiently low that with appropriate combination chemotherapy
that is reliably ingested, clinically significant resistance is very un-
likely to develop [121, 414]. Acquired drug resistance can occur,
however, when there is a large bacillary population (such as in
pulmonary cavities), an inadequate drug regimen, a combined
failure of both the patient and the provider to ensure that an ad-
equate regimen is ingested, or malabsorption of one or more an-
tituberculosis drugs [415, 416]. During extended or repeated
treatment, amplification of resistance to multiple agents may
occur. Patients with acquired drug resistance may transmit their
strains to others who, if they develop tuberculosis, will have pri-
mary drug resistance. Notable clinical and demographic risk fac-
tors for drug-resistant tuberculosis include having a previous
episode of tuberculosis treatment (in particular if the regimen
was inadequate or adherence to the regimen was low), originating
from or living for an extended period in a country with a high
prevalence of drug-resistant tuberculosis, and having a history
of exposure to an index case with drug-resistant tuberculosis.
Comprehensive guidance on the management of drug-
resistant tuberculosis is beyond the scope of this document,
though international guidelines exist [404]. An ATS/CDC/
ERS/IDSA practice guideline for the management of drug-
resistant tuberculosis is also currently under development
using GRADE methodology.
RESEARCH AGENDA FOR TUBERCULOSIS
TREATMENT
Much progress has been made over the last 10 years in the treat-
ment of tuberculosis [109, 417]. The corpus of knowledge on
new drug combinations, drug interaction with antiretrovirals,
methods of dosing, and timing of dosing is increasing. Based
on the writing of this guideline, however, several priority
areas in need of additional research were identified.
New Antituberculosis Drugs and Regimens
Treatment of tuberculosis remains centered around the same
6-month, 4-drug regimen introduced >40 years ago. The iden-
tification of more potent drugs and drug regimens that permit
shortening the duration of treatment remains a key priority.
A number of new drugs and regimens for tuberculosis are cur-
rently being investigated in clinical trials. This includes repur-
posed drugs (eg, daily high-dose RPT and higher dosages of
RIF, linezolid and carbapenems) and new drugs (eg, bedaqui-
line, delamanid, and pretomanid [formerly PA-824]). High-
dose, daily RPT is being tested in a treatment-shortening
phase 3 clinical trial, with dosage selected based on dose-rang-
ing, drug-exposure optimization studies (ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier: NCT02410772) [418]. Pretomanid is being tested as
part of a combination regimen including moxifloxacin and PZA
for the treatment of both drug-susceptible and drug-resistant
tuberculosis (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02193776). Be-
daquiline, approved by the US FDA for treatment of multi-
drug-resistant tuberculosis in 2012, is also being investigated
in drug-susceptible disease as part of a combination regimen in-
cluding pretomanid and PZA and/or clofazimine in a phase 2
study (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01691534). Broadly,
the tuberculosis therapeutics development field would greatly
benefit from dose-ranging and drug–drug interaction studies
for new and existing drugs so as to identify the drug exposures
and optimal combinations necessary to achieve maximal effica-
cy, while improving safety and tolerability.
Biomarkers of Treatment Effect and Individualization of Therapy
The success of therapy depends upon many diverse factors and
only some are presently predictable, identifiable, or modifiable.
Inclusion of biomarker substudies that assess both microbial
and host biomarkers within phase 3 clinical trials will yield
e184 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 important knowledge on the factors that impact therapeutic suc-
cess. Additionally, data on pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
properties that influence drug safety and efficacy, data on drug
penetration and distribution, and the pursuit of sensitive and spe-
cific biomarkers that can reliably predict relapse will be critically
important to advancing the tuberculosis therapeutics field [116,
418, 419]. New biomarkers of treatment effect that can be imple-
mented in the field and accurately monitor response to treatment
on an individual basis may also allow for the individualization of
the duration of treatment [420].However, a considerable increase
in investment in fundamental research is needed to develop and
validate biomarkers of durable cure [421].
Treatment of Tuberculosis in Special Situations
Based on the writing of this guideline, the need for additional
research was notable for treatment of tuberculosis in special sit-
uations. In particular, there is a paucity of high-quality studies
on tuberculosis in pregnant women, breastfeeding women, and
children. A recent US National Institutes of Health convened
workshop examining the inclusion of pregnant and postpartum
women in tuberculosis drug trials has provided consensus state-
ments to help accelerate research in this area [422]. The lack of
pediatric dosage forms of most antituberculosis medications has
up to now necessitated using crushed tablets or opening cap-
sules and creating suspensions to facilitate dosing in young chil-
dren, and additionally has hampered inclusion of children in
drug trials. As a result of key partnerships and concerted invest-
ments in pediatric therapeutics research, an affordable, high-
quality, child-friendly fixed-dose combination meeting WHO
quality assurance metrics is now being produced; however,
these products are not yet registered in the United States or
Europe [290]. Broadly, to address the paucity of data on the
optimal treatment of children with tuberculosis, the drug devel-
opment field should design trials to be more inclusive of chil-
dren as study participants across key stages of therapeutics
research, from pharmacokinetic studies through to phase 3 clin-
ical trials. Examples of ongoing tuberculosis treatment trials
that enroll children and adolescents are the SHINE study
(Shorter Treatment for Minimal TB in Children Study;
ISRCTN63579542), and TBTC Study 31/ACTG A5349 (Rifa-
pentine-Containing Tuberculosis Treatment Shortening Regi-
mens; NCT02410772) [423].
Implementation Research
Even as new drugs and new regimens are being developed, there
remains a critical need to improve the delivery of tuberculosis
treatment. DOT has been the dominant mode of treatment de-
livery, but evidence supporting its use has been weak. Strategies
that are more convenient for patients and less resource-inten-
sive for public health programs should be further explored
[424]. For example, in low-incidence countries, early studies
have shown that video DOT using smartphones is feasible,
has high patient uptake, and is associated with similar
adherence rates as in-person DOT [131]. Research to improve
tuberculosis treatment delivery strategies should be informed
by behavioral studies and/or implementation science frame-
works, which have been shown to increase the likelihood of
identifying successful multifaceted individual behavior change
and health system interventions. Finally, research on the opti-
mal introduction of new drugs is needed (even after approval
from regulatory bodies) so as to provide data that will facilitate
key implementation decisions around programmatic feasibility,
cost-effectiveness, and optimal approaches to surveillance of
drug resistance and prevention of emergence of new drug resis-
tance [425].
Supplementary Data
Supplementary materials are available at http://cid.oxfordjournals.org.
Consisting of data provided by the author to benefit the reader, the posted
materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the author, so
questions or comments should be addressed to the author.
Notes
Acknowledgments.
Our sincerest gratitude for the support provided by
Kevin Wilson, MD (Chief, Documents and Patient Education, American
Thoracic Society); Judy Corn (Director, Documents and Patient Education,
American Thoracic Society); Jennifer Padberg (Director of Clinical Affairs,
Infectious Diseases Society of America [IDSA]); and Phil LoBue, MD (Di-
rector of the Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention [CDC]) in the development of this guideline.
Guideline Writing Committee Chairs, Members, And Methodologists.
Guideline Committee Chairs: Payam Nahid, MD, MPH, University of
California, San Francisco (Chair, American Thoracic Society); Susan
E. Dorman, MD, Johns Hopkins University, Maryland (Chair, IDSA); Gio-
vanni Battista Migliori, MD, World Health Organization (WHO) Collabo-
rating Centre for TB and Lung Diseases, Fondazione S. Maugeri Care and
Research Institute, Tradate, Italy (Chair, European Respiratory Society); An-
drew Vernon, MD, MHS, Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National
Center for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD), and TB Prevention, CDC, Georgia
(Chair, CDC).
Writing Committee Members. Narges Alipanah, MD, University of Cal-
ifornia, San Francisco; Pennan Barry, MD, MPH, California Department of
Public Health; Jan Brozek, MD, PhD, McMaster University, Ontario, Can-
ada; Adithya Cattamanchi, MD, MAS, University of California,
San
Francisco;
Lelia
Chaisson,
MSc,
University
of
California,
San Francisco; Richard Chaisson, MD, Johns Hopkins University, Mary-
land; Charles L. Daley, MD, National Jewish Health, Colorado; Susan
E. Dorman, MD, Johns Hopkins University, Maryland; Malgosia Grzemska,
MD, PhD, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland; Julie Higashi,
MD, San Francisco Department of Public Health, TB Control, California;
Christine S. Ho, MD, Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center
for HIV, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC, Georgia; Philip Hopewell, MD,
University of California, San Francisco; Salmaan A. Keshavjee, MD, PhD,
Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts; Christian Lienhardt, MD, PhD,
World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland; Richard Menzies, MD,
McGill University, Quebec, Canada; Cynthia Merrifield, RN, University of
California, San Francisco; Giovanni Battista Migliori, MD, WHO Collabo-
rating Centre for TB and Lung Diseases, Fondazione S. Maugeri Care and
Research Institute, Tradate, Italy; Payam Nahid, MD, MPH, University of
California, San Francisco; Masahiro Narita, MD, Seattle and King County
TB Control and University of Washington; Rick O’Brien, MD, Ethics Advi-
sory Group, International Union against TB and Lung Disease, Paris,
France; Charles Peloquin, Pharm. D., University of Florida; Ann Raftery,
RN, PHN, MS, University of California, San Francisco; Jussi Saukkonen,
MD, Boston University, Massachusetts; H. Simon Schaaf, MD, Department
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e185
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 of Paediatrics and Child Health, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South
Africa; Giovanni Sotgiu, MD, PhD, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy; Jef-
frey R. Starke, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas; Andrew Vernon,
MD, MHS, Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC, Georgia.
GRADE Methodology Group.
Narges Alipanah, MD, University of
California, San Francisco; Jan Brozek, MD, PhD, McMaster University,
Ontario, Canada; Adithya Cattamanchi, MD, MAS, University of California,
San Francisco; Lelia Chaisson, MSc, University of California, San Francisco;
Richard Menzies, MD, McGill University, Quebec, Canada; Payam Nahid,
MD, MPH, University of California, San Francisco; Giovanni Sotgiu, MD,
University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
Financial support.
Support for this guideline was provided by the
American Thoracic Society, the IDSA, and the CDC.
Potential conflicts of interest.
The authors have reported to the Amer-
ican Thoracic Society the following: P. M. B. reported that his spouse previ-
ously owned stocks or options of Merck. R. E. C. reported service as a
consultant and ownership of stocks or options for Merck. C. L. D. received
research support from Insmed and served on data and safety monitoring
boards of Otsuka America Pharmaceutical and Sanofi Pasteur. C. A. P. re-
ceived research support from Jacobus Pharmaceuticals. J. S. reported service
on a data safety and monitoring board of Otsuka Pharmaceuticals. A. V. re-
ported serving as the chief of a CDC clinical research branch doing clinical
trials in tuberculosis, which supports and works with the TB Trials Consor-
tium (TBTC) that collaborates with pharmaceutical companies, which may
provide support such as drug supplies or laboratory funding for pharmaco-
kinetic substudies. Specifically, Sanofi Aventis has provided approximately
$2.8 million in unrestricted grants to the CDC Foundation to facilitate or
support TBTC work related to rifapentine, including contract research
staff, pharmacokinetic substudies, travel to TBTC scientific meetings for in-
vited speakers, and expenses related to fulfillment of company requests for
data and data formats as part of use of TBTC data in support of regulatory
filings. TBTC has studies under way involving rifapentine and levofloxacin
that may have relevance for future regimens for drug-susceptible tuberculo-
sis and for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. All other authors report no po-
tential conflicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure
of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant
to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Schunemann HJ, Jaeschke R, Cook DJ, et al. An official ATS statement: grading
the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations in ATS guidelines and
recommendations. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 174:605–14.
2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
3. Fox W, Ellard GA, Mitchison DA. Studies on the treatment of tuberculosis un-
dertaken by the British Medical Research Council tuberculosis units, 1946–1986,
with relevant subsequent publications. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 1999; 3(10 suppl 2):
S231–79.
4. Mitchison D, Davies G. The chemotherapy of tuberculosis: past, present and fu-
ture. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2012; 16:724–32.
5. Gillespie SH, Crook AM, McHugh TD, et al. Four-month moxifloxacin-based
regimens for drug-sensitive tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2014; 371:1577–87.
6. Zierski M, Bek E. Side-effects of drug regimens used in short-course chemotherapy
for pulmonary tuberculosis. A controlled clinical study. Tubercle 1980; 61:41–9.
7. Phillips PP, Fielding K, Nunn AJ. An evaluation of culture results during treat-
ment for tuberculosis as surrogate endpoints for treatment failure and relapse.
PLoS One 2013; 8:e63840.
8. Aber VR, Nunn AJ. Short term chemotherapy of tuberculosis. Factors affecting
relapse following short term chemotherapy [in French]. Bull Int Union Tuberc
1978; 53:276–80.
9. Benator D, Bhattacharya M, Bozeman L, et al. Rifapentine and isoniazid once a
week versus rifampicin and isoniazid twice a week for treatment of drug-suscep-
tible pulmonary tuberculosis in HIV-negative patients: a randomised clinical
trial. Lancet 2002; 360:528–34.
10. Menzies D, Elwood K. Treatment of tuberculosis disease. Canadian Tuberculosis
Standards. 7th ed. Centre for Communicable Diseases and Infection Control,
Public
Health
Agency
of
Canada,
2014.
Available
at:
http://www.
respiratoryguidelines.ca/sites/all/files/Canadian_TB_Standards_7th_Edition_
ENG.pdf.
11. Weiner M, Burman W, Vernon A, et al. Low isoniazid concentrations and out-
come of tuberculosis treatment with once-weekly isoniazid and rifapentine. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 167:1341–7.
12. Essential components of a tuberculosis prevention and control program. Recom-
mendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis.
MMWR Recomm Rep 1995; 44(RR-11):1–16.
13. Taylor Z, Nolan CM, Blumberg HM. Controlling tuberculosis in the United
States. Recommendations from the American Thoracic Society, CDC, and the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. MMWR Recomm Rep 2005; 54
(RR-12):1–81.
14. Hopewell PC, Pai M, Maher D, Uplekar M, Raviglione MC. International stan-
dards for tuberculosis care. Lancet Infect Dis 2006; 6:710–25.
15. Migliori GB, Zellweger JP, Abubakar I, et al. European Union standards for tu-
berculosis care. Eur Respir J 2012; 39:807–19.
16. Hopewell PC, Fair EL, Uplekar M. Updating the International Standards for Tu-
berculosis Care. Entering the era of molecular diagnostics. Ann Am Thorac Soc
2014; 11:277–85.
17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Managing tuberculosis patients and
improving adherence. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2014.
18. Munro SA, Lewin SA, Smith HJ, Engel ME, Fretheim A, Volmink J. Patient ad-
herence to tuberculosis treatment: a systematic review of qualitative research.
PLoS Med 2007; 4:e238.
19. Tahan HA. A ten-step process to develop case management plans. Lippincotts
Case Manag 2002; 7:231–42.
20. Garner P, Smith H, Munro S, Volmink J. Promoting adherence to tuberculosis
treatment. Bull World Health Organ 2007; 85:404–6.
21. Clark PM, Karagoz T, Apikoglu-Rabus S, Izzettin FV. Effect of pharmacist-led
patient education on adherence to tuberculosis treatment. Am J Health Syst
Pharm 2007; 64:497–505.
22. Liefooghe R, Suetens C, Meulemans H, Moran MB, De Muynck A. A randomised
trial of the impact of counselling on treatment adherence of tuberculosis patients
in Sialkot, Pakistan. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 1999; 3:1073–80.
23. M’Imunya JM, Kredo T, Volmink J. Patient education and counselling for pro-
moting adherence to treatment for tuberculosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2012; 5:CD006591.
24. Flores G. The impact of medical interpreter services on the quality of health care:
a systematic review. Med Care Res Rev 2005; 62:255–99.
25. Krishnaswami KV, Somasundaram PR, Tripathy SP, Vaidyanathan B, Radhak-
rishna S, Fox W. A randomised study of two policies for managing default in
out-patients collecting supplies of drugs for pulmonary tuberculosis in a large
city in South India. Tubercle 1981; 62:103–12.
26. Kunawararak P, Pongpanich S, Chantawong S, et al. Tuberculosis treatment with
mobile-phone medication reminders in northern Thailand. Southeast Asian J
Trop Med Public Health 2011; 42:1444–51.
27. Tanke ED, Leirer VO. Automated telephone reminders in tuberculosis care. Med
Care 1994; 32:380–9.
28. Liu Q, Abba K, Alejandria MM, Sinclair D, Balanag VM, Lansang MA.
Reminder systems to improve patient adherence to tuberculosis clinic appoint-
ments for diagnosis and treatment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 11:
CD006594.
29. Iribarren S, Beck S, Pearce PF, et al. TextTB: a mixed method pilot study evaluating
acceptance, feasibility, and exploring initial efficacy of a text messaging interven-
tion to support TB treatment adherence. Tuberc Res Treat 2013; 2013:349394.
30. Lutge EE, Wiysonge CS, Knight SE, Volmink J. Material incentives and enablers
in the management of tuberculosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 1:
CD007952.
31. Martins N, Morris P, Kelly PM. Food incentives to improve completion of tuber-
culosis treatment: randomised controlled trial in Dili, Timor-Leste. BMJ 2009;
339:b4248.
32. Wright CM, Westerkamp L, Korver S, Dobler CC. Community-based directly ob-
served therapy (DOT) versus clinic DOT for tuberculosis: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of comparative effectiveness. BMC Infect Dis 2015; 15:210.
33. Chaulk CP, Kazandjian VA. Directly observed therapy for treatment completion
of pulmonary tuberculosis: consensus statement of the Public Health Tuberculo-
sis Guidelines Panel. JAMA 1998; 279:943–8.
34. Liu SY, Li JH, Schluger NW. DOT and timely treatment completion among
Asian-born immigrant tuberculosis patients. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2005;
9:884–9.
35. Stop TB USA Tuberculosis Elimination Plan Committee. A call for action on
the tuberculosis elimination plan for the United States. 2010. Available at:
http://www.thoracic.org/advocacy/stop-tb/Eliminate_TB_USA.pdf. Accessed 23
December 2015.
36. Menzies D, Benedetti A, Paydar A, et al. Effect of duration and intermittency of
rifampin on tuberculosis treatment outcomes: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. PLoS Med 2009; 6:e1000146.
e186 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 37. Menzies D, Benedetti A, Paydar A, et al. Standardized treatment of active tuber-
culosis in patients with previous treatment and/or with mono-resistance to iso-
niazid: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 2009; 6:e1000150.
38. LoBue PA, Moser KS. Isoniazid- and rifampin-resistant tuberculosis in San Diego
County, California, United States, 1993–2002. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2005;
9:501–6.
39. Hoopes AJ, Kammerer JS, Harrington TA, Ijaz K, Armstrong LR. Isoniazid-
monoresistant tuberculosis in the United States, 1993 to 2003. Arch Intern
Med 2008; 168:1984–92.
40. Jenkins HE, Zignol M, Cohen T. Quantifying the burden and trends of isoniazid
resistant tuberculosis, 1994–2009. PLoS One 2011; 6:e22927.
41. Yuen CM, Jenkins HE, Rodriguez CA, Keshavjee S, Becerra MC. Global and re-
gional burden of isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis. Pediatrics 2015; 136:e50–9.
42. Snider DE Jr. Pyridoxine supplementation during isoniazid therapy. Tubercle
1980; 61:191–6.
43. Visser ME, Texeira-Swiegelaar C, Maartens G. The short-term effects of anti-
tuberculosis therapy on plasma pyridoxine levels in patients with pulmonary
tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2004; 8:260–2.
44. Mitchison DA. Assessment of new sterilizing drugs for treating pulmonary tuber-
culosis by culture at 2 months. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993; 147:1062–3.
45. Jo KW, Yoo JW, Hong Y, et al. Risk factors for 1-year relapse of pulmonary tu-
berculosis treated with a 6-month daily regimen. Respir Med 2014; 108:654–9.
46. Horne DJ, Royce SE, Gooze L, et al. Sputum monitoring during tuberculosis
treatment for predicting outcome: systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Infect Dis 2010; 10:387–94.
47. Chang KC, Leung CC, Yew WW, Ho SC, Tam CM. A nested case-control study
on treatment-related risk factors for early relapse of tuberculosis. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2004; 170:1124–30.
48. Khan A, Sterling TR, Reves R, Vernon A, Horsburgh CR. Lack of weight gain and
relapse risk in a large tuberculosis treatment trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2006; 174:344–8.
49. Baker MA, Harries AD, Jeon CY, et al. The impact of diabetes on tuberculosis
treatment outcomes: a systematic review. BMC Med 2011; 9:81.
50. Wang JY, Lee MC, Shu CC, et al. Optimal duration of anti-TB treatment in pa-
tients with diabetes: nine or six months? Chest 2015; 147:520–8.
51. Leung CC, Yew WW, Chan CK, et al. Smoking adversely affects treatment re-
sponse, outcome and relapse in tuberculosis. Eur Respir J 2015; 45:738–45.
52. Ahmad Khan F, Minion J, Al-Motairi A, Benedetti A, Harries AD, Menzies D.
An updated systematic review and meta-analysis on the treatment of active tuber-
culosis in patients with HIV infection. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:1154–63.
53. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Core curriculum on tuberculosis:
what the clinician should know. 6th ed. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2013.
54. Lin MY, Lin SJ, Chan LC, Lu YC. Impact of food and antacids on the pharma-
cokinetics of anti-tuberculosis drugs: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J
Tuberc Lung Dis 2010; 14:806–18.
55. Navarro VJ, Senior JR. Drug-related hepatotoxicity. N Engl J Med 2006;
354:731–9.
56. Saukkonen JJ, Cohn DL, Jasmer RM, et al. An official ATS statement: hepatotox-
icity of antituberculosis therapy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 174:935–52.
57. Sharma SK, Singla R, Sarda P, et al. Safety of 3 different reintroduction regimens
of antituberculosis drugs after development of antituberculosis treatment-in-
duced hepatotoxicity. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 50:833–9.
58. Chang KC, Leung CC. The best approach to reintroducing tuberculosis treatment
after hepatotoxicity is still open to debate. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51:366–7; author
reply 367–8.
59. Vernon A, Burman W, Benator D, Khan A, Bozeman L. Acquired rifamycin
monoresistance in patients with HIV-related tuberculosis treated with once-
weekly rifapentine and isoniazid. Tuberculosis Trials Consortium. Lancet
1999; 353:1843–7.
60. Burman W, Benator D, Vernon A, et al. Acquired rifamycin resistance with
twice-weekly treatment of HIV-related tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2006; 173:350–6.
61. Weiner M, Benator D, Burman W, et al. Association between acquired rifamycin
resistance and the pharmacokinetics of rifabutin and isoniazid among patients
with HIV and tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:1481–91.
62. Narendran G, Menon PA, Venkatesan P, et al. Acquired rifampicin resistance in
thrice-weekly antituberculosis therapy: impact of HIV and antiretroviral therapy.
Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:1798–804.
63. Nunn AJ, Mwaba P, Chintu C, et al. Role of co-trimoxazole prophylaxis in reduc-
ing mortality in HIV infected adults being treated for tuberculosis: randomised
clinical trial. BMJ 2008; 337:a257.
64. Suthar AB, Granich R, Mermin J, Van Rie A. Effect of cotrimoxazole on mortal-
ity in HIV-infected adults on antiretroviral therapy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Bull World Health Organ 2012; 90:128C–38C.
65. Wiktor SZ, Sassan-Morokro M, Grant AD, et al. Efficacy of trimethoprim-sul-
phamethoxazole prophylaxis to decrease morbidity and mortality in HIV-1-in-
fected patients with tuberculosis in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 1999; 353:1469–75.
66. Guidelines on post-exposure prophylaxis for HIV and the use of co-trimoxazole
prophylaxis for HIV-related infections among adults, adolescents and children:
recommendations for a public health approach: December 2014 supplement to
the 2013 consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating
and preventing HIV infection. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2014.
67. Masur H, Brooks JT, Benson CA, et al. Prevention and treatment of opportunistic
infections in HIV-infected adults and adolescents: updated Guidelines from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institutes of Health, and
HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin
Infect Dis 2014; 58:1308–11.
68. Luetkemeyer AF, Kendall MA, Nyirenda M, et al. Tuberculosis immune recon-
stitution inflammatory syndrome in A5221 STRIDE: timing, severity, and impli-
cations for HIV-TB programs. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2014; 65:423–8.
69. Meintjes G, Lawn SD, Scano F, et al. Tuberculosis-associated immune reconsti-
tution inflammatory syndrome: case definitions for use in resource-limited set-
tings. Lancet Infect Dis 2008; 8:516–23.
70. Meintjes G, Wilkinson RJ, Morroni C, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial
of prednisone for paradoxical tuberculosis-associated immune reconstitution in-
flammatory syndrome. AIDS 2010; 24:2381–90.
71. Strang JI, Kakaza HH, Gibson DG, Girling DJ, Nunn AJ, Fox W. Controlled trial
of prednisolone as adjuvant in treatment of tuberculous constrictive pericarditis
in Transkei. Lancet 1987; 2:1418–22.
72. Strang JI, Kakaza HH, Gibson DG, et al. Controlled clinical trial of complete
open surgical drainage and of prednisolone in treatment of tuberculous pericar-
dial effusion in Transkei. Lancet 1988; 2:759–64.
73. Hakim JG, Ternouth I, Mushangi E, Siziya S, Robertson V, Malin A. Double blind
randomised placebo controlled trial of adjunctive prednisolone in the treatment
of effusive tuberculous pericarditis in HIV seropositive patients. Heart 2000;
84:183–8.
74. Mayosi BM, Ntsekhe M, Smieja M. Immunotherapy for tuberculous pericarditis.
N Engl J Med 2014; 371:2534.
75. Reuter H, Burgess LJ, Louw VJ, Doubell AF. Experience with adjunctive cortico-
steroids in managing tuberculous pericarditis. Cardiovasc J S Afr 2006; 17:233–8.
76. Chaisson RE, Post WS. Immunotherapy for tuberculous pericarditis. N Engl J
Med 2014; 371:2535.
77. American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on Infectious Diseases. 2015 Red
Book: Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. 30th ed. Elk Grove Vil-
lage, IL: AAP, 2015.
78. Thwaites G, Fisher M, Hemingway C, et al. British Infection Society guidelines
for the diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis of the central nervous system in
adults and children. J Infect 2009; 59:167–87.
79. Ashby M, Grant H. Tuberculous meningitis treated with cortisone. Lancet 1955;
268:65–6.
80. O’Toole RD, Thornton GF, Mukherjee MK, Nath RL. Dexamethasone in tuber-
culous meningitis. Relationship of cerebrospinal fluid effects to therapeutic effi-
cacy. Ann Intern Med 1969; 70:39–48.
81. Escobar JA, Belsey MA, Duenas A, Medina P. Mortality from tuberculous men-
ingitis reduced by steroid therapy. Pediatrics 1975; 56:1050–5.
82. Girgis NI, Farid Z, Hanna LS, Yassin MW, Wallace CK. The use of dexametha-
sone in preventing ocular complications in tuberculous meningitis. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg 1983; 77:658–9.
83. Girgis NI, Farid Z, Kilpatrick ME, Sultan Y, Mikhail IA. Dexamethasone
adjunctive treatment for tuberculous meningitis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1991;
10:179–83.
84. Kumarvelu S, Prasad K, Khosla A, Behari M, Ahuja GK. Randomized controlled
trial of dexamethasone in tuberculous meningitis. Tuber Lung Dis 1994;
75:203–7.
85. Chotmongkol V, Jitpimolmard S, Thavornpitak Y. Corticosteroid in tuberculous
meningitis. J Med Assoc Thai 1996; 79:83–90.
86. Dooley DP, Carpenter JL, Rademacher S. Adjunctive corticosteroid therapy for
tuberculosis: a critical reappraisal of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 1997;
25:872–87.
87. Schoeman JF, Van Zyl LE, Laubscher JA, Donald PR. Effect of corticosteroids on
intracranial pressure, computed tomographic findings, and clinical outcome in
young children with tuberculous meningitis. Pediatrics 1997; 99:226–31.
88. Thwaites GE, Nguyen DB, Nguyen HD, et al. Dexamethasone for the treatment
of tuberculous meningitis in adolescents and adults. N Engl J Med 2004;
351:1741–51.
89. Prasad K, Singh MB. Corticosteroids for managing tuberculous meningitis. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2008; 1:CD002244.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e187
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 90. Malhotra HS, Garg RK, Singh MK, Agarwal A, Verma R. Corticosteroids (dex-
amethasone versus intravenous methylprednisolone) in patients with tubercu-
lous meningitis. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2009; 103:625–34.
91. Critchley JA, Young F, Orton L, Garner P. Corticosteroids for prevention of mor-
tality in people with tuberculosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Infect Dis 2013; 13:223–37.
92. Ho J, Marks GB, Fox GJ. The impact of sputum quality on tuberculosis diagnosis:
a systematic review. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2015; 19:537–44.
93. Gordin FM, Slutkin G, Schecter G, Goodman PC, Hopewell PC. Presumptive di-
agnosis and treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis based on radiographic findings.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1989; 139:1090–3.
94. American Thoracic Society; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Infec-
tious Diseases Society of America. Treatment of tuberculosis. MMWR Recomm
Rep 2003; 52(RR-11):1–77.
95. Zumla A, Raviglione M, Hafner R, von Reyn CF. Tuberculosis. N Engl J Med
2013; 368:745–55.
96. D’Ambrosio L, Dara M, Tadolini M, et al. Tuberculosis elimination: theory and
practice in Europe. Eur Respir J 2014; 43:1410–20.
97. Lonnroth K, Migliori GB, Abubakar I, et al. Towards tuberculosis elimination:
an action framework for low-incidence countries. Eur Respir J 2015; 45:
928–52.
98. World Health Organization. TB publications. Available at: http://www.who.int/
tb/publications/en/. Accessed 6 June 2016.
99. Zhang Y, Mitchison D. The curious characteristics of pyrazinamide: a review. Int
J Tuberc Lung Dis 2003; 7:6–21.
100. Tiemersma EW, van der Werf MJ, Borgdorff MW, Williams BG, Nagelkerke NJ.
Natural history of tuberculosis: duration and fatality of untreated pulmonary tu-
berculosis in HIV negative patients: a systematic review. PLoS One 2011; 6:
e17601.
101. Tuberculosis in Tanzania: a follow-up of a national sampling survey of drug re-
sistance and other factors. Tubercle 1977; 58:55–78.
102. Dharmadhikari AS, Mphahlele M, Venter K, et al. Rapid impact of effective treat-
ment on transmission of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
2014; 18:1019–25.
103. Fitzwater SP, Caviedes L, Gilman RH, et al. Prolonged infectiousness of tubercu-
losis patients in a directly observed therapy short-course program with standard-
ized therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51:371–8.
104. Telzak EE, Fazal BA, Pollard CL, Turett GS, Justman JE, Blum S. Factors influ-
encing time to sputum conversion among patients with smear-positive pulmo-
nary tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 1997; 25:666–70.
105. Long R, Bochar K, Chomyc S, et al. Relative versus absolute noncontagiousness of
respiratory tuberculosis on treatment. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;
24:831–8.
106. Jindani A, Aber VR, Edwards EA, Mitchison DA. The early bactericidal activity
of drugs in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1980;
121:939–49.
107. Jindani A, Dore CJ, Mitchison DA. Bactericidal and sterilizing activities of anti-
tuberculosis drugs during the first 14 days. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;
167:1348–54.
108. Diacon AH, Donald PR. The early bactericidal activity of antituberculosis drugs.
Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2014; 12:223–37.
109. Zumla A, Nahid P, Cole ST. Advances in the development of new tuberculosis
drugs and treatment regimens. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2013; 12:388–404.
110. Hu Y, Mangan JA, Dhillon J, et al. Detection of mRNA transcripts and active
transcription in persistent Mycobacterium tuberculosis induced by exposure to
rifampin or pyrazinamide. J Bacteriol 2000; 182:6358–65.
111. Gumbo T, Louie A, Deziel MR, Parsons LM, Salfinger M, Drusano GL. Selection
of a moxifloxacin dose that suppresses drug resistance in Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis, by use of an in vitro pharmacodynamic infection model and mathemat-
ical modeling. J Infect Dis 2004; 190:1642–51.
112. Nuermberger E. Using animal models to develop new treatments for tuberculosis.
Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 29:542–51.
113. Canetti G. The tubercle bacillus in the pulmonary lesion of man; histobacteriol-
ogy and its bearing on the therapy of pulmonary tuberculosis. American rev. ed.
New York: Springer, 1955.
114. Russell DG, Barry CE 3rd, Flynn JL. Tuberculosis: what we don’t know can, and
does, hurt us. Science 2010; 328:852–6.
115. Lenaerts A, Barry CE 3rd, Dartois V. Heterogeneity in tuberculosis pathology,
microenvironments
and
therapeutic
responses.
Immunol
Rev
2015;
264:288–307.
116. Dartois V. The path of anti-tuberculosis drugs: from blood to lesions to mycobac-
terial cells. Nat Rev Microbiol 2014; 12:159–67.
117. Kempker RR, Barth AB, Vashakidze S, et al. Cavitary penetration of levofloxacin
among patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Antimicrob Agents Che-
mother 2015; 59:3149–55.
118. Prideaux B, Dartois V, Staab D, et al. High-sensitivity MALDI-MRM-MS imag-
ing of moxifloxacin distribution in tuberculosis-infected rabbit lungs and granu-
lomatous lesions. Anal Chem 2011; 83:2112–8.
119. Prideaux B, Via LE, Zimmerman MD, et al. The association between sterilizing ac-
tivity and drug distribution into tuberculosis lesions. Nat Med 2015; 21:1223–7.
120. Zhang Y, Yew WW. Mechanisms of drug resistance in Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis: update 2015. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2015; 19:1276–89.
121. David HL. Probability distribution of drug-resistant mutants in unselected pop-
ulations of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Appl Microbiol 1970; 20:810–4.
122. Vernon AA, Iademarco MF. In the treatment of tuberculosis, you get what you
pay for. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 170:1040–2.
123. Robinson JH, Callister LC, Berry JA, Dearing KA. Patient-centered care and ad-
herence: definitions and applications to improve outcomes. J Am Acad Nurse
Pract 2008; 20:600–7.
124. TB CARE. Patient centered approach. Available at: http://www.tbcare1.org/
reports/reports/download.php?file=TB_CARE_I_Patient_Centered_Approach.
pdf. Accessed 12 November 2015.
125. Institute of Medicine. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the
21st century. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2001.
126. Gasner MR, Maw KL, Feldman GE, Fujiwara PI, Frieden TR. The use of legal
action in New York City to ensure treatment of tuberculosis. N Engl J Med
1999; 340:359–66.
127. Pursnani S, Srivastava S, Ali S, Leibert E, Rogers L. Risk factors for and outcomes
of detention of patients with TB in New York City: an update: 2002–2009. Chest
2014; 145:95–100.
128. Suwankeeree W, Picheansathian W. Strategies to promote adherence to treatment
by pulmonary tuberculosis patients: a systematic review. Int J Evid Based Healthc
2014; 12:3–16.
129. Lienhardt C, Ogden JA. Tuberculosis control in resource-poor countries: have we
reached the limits of the universal paradigm? Trop Med Int Health 2004; 9:833–41.
130. Burman WJ, Cohn DL, Rietmeijer CA, Judson FN, Sbarbaro JA, Reves RR. Non-
compliance with directly observed therapy for tuberculosis. Epidemiology and ef-
fect on the outcome of treatment. Chest 1997; 111:1168–73.
131. Mirsaeidi M, Farshidpour M, Banks-Tripp D, Hashmi S, Kujoth C, Schraufnagel
D. Video directly observed therapy for treatment of tuberculosis is patient-orient-
ed and cost-effective. Eur Respir J 2015; 46:871–4.
132. Krueger K, Ruby D, Cooley P, et al. Videophone utilization as an alternative to
directly observed therapy for tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2010;
14:779–81.
133. Hoffman JA, Cunningham JR, Suleh AJ, et al. Mobile direct observation treat-
ment for tuberculosis patients: a technical feasibility pilot using mobile phones
in Nairobi, Kenya. Am J Prev Med 2010; 39:78–80.
134. Volmink J, Garner P. Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 4:CD003343.
135. Pasipanodya JG, Gumbo T. A meta-analysis of self-administered vs directly ob-
served therapy effect on microbiologic failure, relapse, and acquired drug resis-
tance in tuberculosis patients. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:21–31.
136. Karumbi J, Garner P. Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 5:CD003343.
137. Moonan PK, Quitugua TN, Pogoda JM, et al. Does directly observed therapy
(DOT) reduce drug resistant tuberculosis? BMC Public Health 2011; 11:19.
138. King L, Munsiff SS, Ahuja SD. Achieving international targets for tuberculosis
treatment success among HIV-positive patients in New York City. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis 2010; 14:1613–20.
139. Kim S, Crittenden K. Treatment completion among TB patients returned to the
community from a large urban jail. J Community Health 2007; 32:135–47.
140. Reis-Santos B, Pellacani-Posses I, Macedo LR, Golub JE, Riley LW, Maciel EL.
Directly observed therapy of tuberculosis in Brazil: associated determinants
and impact on treatment outcome. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2015; 19:1188–93.
141. Cummings KC, Mohle-Boetani J, Royce SE, Chin DP. Movement of tuberculosis
patients and the failure to complete antituberculosis treatment. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1998; 157(4 pt 1):1249–52.
142. Harlow T. TB net tracking network provides continuity of care for mobile TB pa-
tients. Am J Public Health 1999; 89:1581–2.
143. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Federal air travel restrictions for
public health purposes—United States, June 2007-May 2008. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2008; 57:1009–12.
144. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Public health interventions involv-
ing travelers with tuberculosis—U.S. ports of entry, 2007–2012. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2012; 61:570–3.
145. World Health Organization. Guidance on ethics of tuberculosis prevention, care
and control. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2010.
146. van Hest NA, Aldridge RW, de Vries G, et al. Tuberculosis control in big cities
and urban risk groups in the European Union: a consensus statement. Euro Sur-
veill 2014; 19.
e188 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 147. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated guidelines for the use of
nucleic acid amplification tests in the diagnosis of tuberculosis. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2009; 58:7–10.
148. Boehme CC, Nicol MP, Nabeta P, et al. Feasibility, diagnostic accuracy, and ef-
fectiveness of decentralised use of the Xpert MTB/RIF test for diagnosis of tuber-
culosis and multidrug resistance: a multicentre implementation study. Lancet
2011; 377:1495–505.
149. Flores LL, Pai M, Colford JM Jr, Riley LW. In-house nucleic acid amplification
tests for the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum specimens:
meta-analysis and meta-regression. BMC Microbiol 2005; 5:55.
150. Dinnes J, Deeks J, Kunst H, et al. A systematic review of rapid diagnostic tests for
the detection of tuberculosis infection. Health Technol Assess 2007; 11:1–196.
151. Gordin F, Chaisson RE, Matts JP, et al. Rifampin and pyrazinamide vs isoniazid
for prevention of tuberculosis in HIV-infected persons: an international random-
ized trial. Terry Beirn Community Programs for Clinical Research on AIDS, the
Adult AIDS Clinical Trials Group, the Pan American Health Organization, and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Study Group. JAMA 2000;
283:1445–50.
152. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for use of an iso-
niazid-rifapentine regimen with direct observation to treat latent Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011; 60:1650–3.
153. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Core curriculum on tuberculosis.
6th ed. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2013.
154. Getahun H, Matteelli A, Abubakar I, et al. Management of latent Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection: WHO guidelines for low tuberculosis burden countries.
Eur Respir J 2015; 46:1563–76.
155. Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection. This
official statement of the American Thoracic Society was adopted by the ATS
Board of Directors, July 1999. This is a Joint Statement of the American Thoracic
Society (ATS) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). This
statement was endorsed by the Council of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America. (IDSA), September 1999, and the sections of this statement. Am J Re-
spir Crit Care Med 2000; 161(4 pt 2):S221–47.
156. Efficacy of various durations of isoniazid preventive therapy for tuberculosis: five
years of follow-up in the IUAT trial. International Union Against Tuberculosis
Committee on Prophylaxis. Bull World Health Organ 1982; 60:555–64.
157. Grzybowski S, Fishaut H, Rowe J, Brown A. Tuberculosis among patients with
various radiologic abnormalities, followed by the chest clinic service. Am Rev Re-
spir Dis 1971; 104:605–8.
158. Comstock GW, Woolpert SF. Preventive treatment of untreated, nonactive tuber-
culosis in an Eskimo population. Arch Environ Health 1972; 25:333–7.
159. Grzybows S, Mckinnon NE, Tuters L, Pinkus G, Philipps R. Reactivations in in-
active pulmonary tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1966; 93:352.
160. Chang KC, Leung CC, Yew WW, Chan SL, Tam CM. Dosing schedules of 6-
month regimens and relapse for pulmonary tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2006; 174:1153–8.
161. Sterling TR, Alwood K, Gachuhi R, et al. Relapse rates after short-course (6-
month) treatment of tuberculosis in HIV-infected and uninfected persons.
AIDS 1999; 13:1899–904.
162. Tam CM, Chan SL, Lam CW, et al. Rifapentine and isoniazid in the continuation
phase of treating pulmonary tuberculosis. Initial report. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1998; 157(6 pt 1):1726–33.
163. Merle CS, Fielding K, Sow OB, et al. A four-month gatifloxacin-containing reg-
imen for treating tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2014; 371:1588–98.
164. Jindani A, Harrison TS, Nunn AJ, et al. High-dose rifapentine with moxifloxacin
for pulmonary tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2014; 371:1599–608.
165. Lienhardt C, Cobelens FG. Operational research for improved tuberculosis con-
trol: the scope, the needs and the way forward. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2011;
15:6–13.
166. Cuevas LE, Yassin MA, Al-Sonboli N, et al. A multi-country non-inferiority clus-
ter randomized trial of frontloaded smear microscopy for the diagnosis of pul-
monary tuberculosis. PLoS Med 2011; 8:e1000443.
167. Davis JL, Cattamanchi A, Cuevas LE, Hopewell PC, Steingart KR. Diagnostic ac-
curacy of same-day microscopy versus standard microscopy for pulmonary tu-
berculosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2013;
13:147–54.
168. Diagnostic Standards and Classification of Tuberculosis in Adults and Children.
This official statement of the American Thoracic Society and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention was adopted by the ATS Board of Directors,
July 1999. This statement was endorsed by the Council of the Infectious
Disease Society of America, September 1999. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2000; 161(4 pt 1):1376–95.
169. A controlled clinical comparison of 6 and 8 months of antituberculosis chemo-
therapy in the treatment of patients with silicotuberculosis in Hong Kong. Hong
Kong Chest Service/Tuberculosis Research Centre, Madras/British Medical Re-
search Council. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991; 143:262–7.
170. Bock NN, Sterling TR, Hamilton CD, et al. A prospective, randomized, double-
blind study of the tolerability of rifapentine 600, 900, and 1,200 mg plus isoniazid
in the continuation phase of tuberculosis treatment. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2002; 165:1526–30.
171. Bureau of Tuberculosis Control, New York City Department of Health and Men-
tal Hygiene. Clinical policies and protocols. 4th ed. New York: DOHMH, 2008.
172. Zvada SP, Van Der Walt JS, Smith PJ, et al. Effects of four different meal types on
the population pharmacokinetics of single-dose rifapentine in healthy male vol-
unteers. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010; 54:3390–4.
173. Peloquin CA, Durbin D, Childs J, Sterling TR, Weiner M. Stability of antituber-
culosis drugs mixed in food. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45:521.
174. Gallardo CR, Rigau Comas D, Valderrama Rodriguez A, et al. Fixed-dose com-
binations of drugs versus single-drug formulations for treating pulmonary tuber-
culosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 5:CD009913.
175. Monedero I, Caminero JA. Evidence for promoting fixed-dose combination
drugs in tuberculosis treatment and control: a review. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
2011; 15:433–9.
176. Albanna AS, Smith BM, Cowan D, Menzies D. Fixed-dose combination antitu-
berculosis therapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Respir J 2013;
42:721–32.
177. Nunn AJ, Cook SV, Burgos M, et al. Results at 30 months of a randomised trial of
FDCs and separate drugs for the treatment of tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
2014; 18:1252–4.
178. Lienhardt C, Cook SV, Burgos M, et al. Efficacy and safety of a 4-drug fixed-dose
combination regimen compared with separate drugs for treatment of pulmonary
tuberculosis: the Study C randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2011; 305:
1415–23.
179. Fish DN, Chow AT. The clinical pharmacokinetics of levofloxacin. Clin Pharma-
cokinet 1997; 32:101–19.
180. Lehloenya RJ, Dheda K. Cutaneous adverse drug reactions to anti-tuberculosis
drugs: state of the art and into the future. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2012;
10:475–86.
181. Mehta YS, Jijina FF, Badakere SS, Pathare AV, Mohanty D. Rifampicin-induced
immune thrombocytopenia. Tuber Lung Dis 1996; 77:558–62.
182. Palmero D, Castagnino J, Musella RM, Mosca C, Gonzalez Montaner P, de Ca-
sado GC. Difficult clinical management of anti-tuberculosis DRESS syndrome.
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2013; 17:76–8.
183. Bark CM, Dietze R, Okwera A, Quelapio MI, Thiel BA, Johnson JL. Clinical
symptoms and microbiological outcomes in tuberculosis treatment trials. Tuber-
culosis (Edinb) 2011; 91:601–4.
184. Kiblawi SS, Jay SJ, Stonehill RB, Norton J. Fever response of patients on therapy
for pulmonary tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1981; 123:20–4.
185. Chien JW, Johnson JL. Paradoxical reactions in HIV and pulmonary TB. Chest
1998; 114:933–6.
186. Bell LC, Breen R, Miller RF, Noursadeghi M, Lipman M. Paradoxical reactions
and immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome in tuberculosis. Int J Infect
Dis 2015; 32:39–45.
187. Meintjes G, Rabie H, Wilkinson RJ, Cotton MF. Tuberculosis-associated immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome and unmasking of tuberculosis by antire-
troviral therapy. Clin Chest Med 2009; 30:797–810, x.
188. Steele MA, Burk RF, DesPrez RM. Toxic hepatitis with isoniazid and rifampin. A
meta-analysis. Chest 1991; 99:465–71.
189. Tostmann A, Boeree MJ, Aarnoutse RE, de Lange WC, van der Ven AJ, Dekhuij-
zen R. Antituberculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity: concise up-to-date review. J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008; 23:192–202.
190. Ezer N, Benedetti A, Darvish-Zargar M, Menzies D. Incidence of ethambutol-re-
lated visual impairment during treatment of active tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis 2013; 17:447–55.
191. Chan RY, Kwok AK. Ocular toxicity of ethambutol. Hong Kong Med J 2006;
12:56–60.
192. Talbert Estlin KA, Sadun AA. Risk factors for ethambutol optic toxicity. Int Oph-
thalmol 2010; 30:63–72.
193. Keeping JA, Searle CW. Optic neuritis following isoniazid therapy. Lancet 1955;
269:278.
194. Cato A 3rd, Cavanaugh J, Shi H, Hsu A, Leonard J, Granneman R. The effect of
multiple doses of ritonavir on the pharmacokinetics of rifabutin. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 1998; 63:414–21.
195. Torseth J, Bhatia G, Harkonen S, et al. Evaluation of the antiviral effect of rifa-
butin in AIDS-related complex. J Infect Dis 1989; 159:1115–8.
196. Griffith DE, Brown BA, Girard WM, Wallace RJ Jr. Adverse events associated
with high-dose rifabutin in macrolide-containing regimens for the treatment of
Mycobacterium avium complex lung disease. Clin Infect Dis 1995; 21:594–8.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e189
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 197. Weiner M, Benator D, Peloquin CA, et al. Evaluation of the drug interaction be-
tween rifabutin and efavirenz in patients with HIV infection and tuberculosis.
Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:1343–9.
198. Nix DE, Watson WA, Lener ME, et al. Effects of aluminum and magnesium ant-
acids and ranitidine on the absorption of ciprofloxacin. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1989; 46:700–5.
199. Frost RW, Lasseter KC, Noe AJ, Shamblen EC, Lettieri JT. Effects of aluminum
hydroxide and calcium carbonate antacids on the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1992; 36:830–2.
200. Polk RE, Healy DP, Sahai J, Drwal L, Racht E. Effect of ferrous sulfate and mul-
tivitamins with zinc on absorption of ciprofloxacin in normal volunteers. Anti-
microb Agents Chemother 1989; 33:1841–4.
201. Lehto P, Kivisto KT. Effect of sucralfate on absorption of norfloxacin and oflox-
acin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994; 38:248–51.
202. Sahai J, Gallicano K, Oliveras L, Khaliq S, Hawley-Foss N, Garber G. Cations in
the didanosine tablet reduce ciprofloxacin bioavailability. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1993; 53:292–7.
203. Lomaestro BM, Bailie GR. Effect of multiple staggered doses of calcium on the
bioavailability of ciprofloxacin. Ann Pharmacother 1993; 27:1325–8.
204. Nijland HM, Ruslami R, Suroto AJ, et al. Rifampicin reduces plasma concentra-
tions of moxifloxacin in patients with tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2007;
45:1001–7.
205. Aristoff PA, Garcia GA, Kirchhoff PD, Showalter HD. Rifamycins—obstacles and
opportunities. Tuberculosis (Edinb) 2010; 90:94–118.
206. Baciewicz AM, Chrisman CR, Finch CK, Self TH. Update on rifampin, rifabutin,
and rifapentine drug interactions. Curr Med Res Opin 2013; 29:1–12.
207. Niemi M, Backman JT, Fromm MF, Neuvonen PJ, Kivisto KT. Pharmacokinetic
interactions with rifampicin: clinical relevance. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003;
42:819–50.
208. Narita M, Stambaugh JJ, Hollender ES, Jones D, Pitchenik AE, Ashkin D. Use of
rifabutin with protease inhibitors for human immunodeficiency virus-infected
patients with tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2000; 30:779–83.
209. Burman WJ, Gallicano K, Peloquin C. Comparative pharmacokinetics and phar-
macodynamics of the rifamycin antibacterials. Clin Pharmacokinet 2001;
40:327–41.
210. Sterling TR, Villarino ME, Borisov AS, et al. Three months of rifapentine and
isoniazid for latent tuberculosis infection. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:2155–66.
211. Finch CK, Chrisman CR, Baciewicz AM, Self TH. Rifampin and rifabutin drug
interactions: an update. Arch Intern Med 2002; 162:985–92.
212. Vandevelde C, Chang A, Andrews D, Riggs W, Jewesson P. Rifampin and ansa-
mycin interactions with cyclosporine after renal transplantation. Pharmacother-
apy 1991; 11:88–9.
213. Lopez-Montes A, Gallego E, Lopez E, et al. Treatment of tuberculosis with rifa-
butin in a renal transplant recipient. Am J Kidney Dis 2004; 44:e59–63.
214. Loeliger A, Suthar AB, Ripin D, et al. Protease inhibitor-containing antiretroviral
treatment and tuberculosis: can rifabutin fill the breach? Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
2012; 16:6–15.
215. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Managing drug interactions in the
treatment of HIV-related tuberculosis. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2013.
216. Drayton J, Dickinson G, Rinaldi MG. Coadministration of rifampin and itraco-
nazole leads to undetectable levels of serum itraconazole. Clin Infect Dis 1994;
18:266.
217. Jaruratanasirikul S, Sriwiriyajan S. Effect of rifampicin on the pharmacokinetics
of itraconazole in normal volunteers and AIDS patients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
1998; 54:155–8.
218. Doble N, Shaw R, Rowland-Hill C, Lush M, Warnock DW, Keal EE. Pharmaco-
kinetic study of the interaction between rifampicin and ketoconazole. J Antimi-
crob Chemother 1988; 21:633–5.
219. Self TH, Chrisman CR, Baciewicz AM, Bronze MS. Isoniazid drug and food in-
teractions. Am J Med Sci 1999; 317:304–11.
220. Desta Z, Soukhova NV, Flockhart DA. Inhibition of cytochrome P450 (CYP450)
isoforms by isoniazid: potent inhibition of CYP2C19 and CYP3A. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2001; 45:382–92.
221. Miller RR, Porter J, Greenblatt DJ. Clinical importance of the interaction of phe-
nytoin and isoniazid: a report from the Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance
Program. Chest 1979; 75:356–8.
222. Kutt H, Brennan R, Dehejia H, Verebely K. Diphenylhydantoin intoxication. A
complication of isoniazid therapy. Am Rev Respir Dis 1970; 101:377–84.
223. Block SH. Carbamazepine-isoniazid interaction. Pediatrics 1982; 69:494–5.
224. Wright JM, Stokes EF, Sweeney VP. Isoniazid-induced carbamazepine toxicity
and vice versa: a double drug interaction. N Engl J Med 1982; 307:1325–7.
225. Ochs HR, Greenblatt DJ, Roberts GM, Dengler HJ. Diazepam interaction with
antituberculosis drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1981; 29:671–8.
226. Ochs HR, Greenblatt DJ, Knuchel M. Differential effect of isoniazid on triazolam
oxidation and oxazepam conjugation. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1983; 16:743–6.
227. Kay L, Kampmann JP, Svendsen TL, et al. Influence of rifampicin and isoniazid
on the kinetics of phenytoin. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1985; 20:323–6.
228. Murphy R, Swartz R, Watkins PB. Severe acetaminophen toxicity in a patient re-
ceiving isoniazid. Ann Intern Med 1990; 113:799–800.
229. Jonville AP, Gauchez AS, Autret E, et al. Interaction between isoniazid and val-
proate: a case of valproate overdosage. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1991; 40:197–8.
230. Judd FK, Mijch AM, Cockram A, Norman TR. Isoniazid and antidepressants: is
there cause for concern? Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1994; 9:123–5.
231. Rosenthal AR, Self TH, Baker ED, Linden RA. Interaction of isoniazid and war-
farin. JAMA 1977; 238:2177.
232. Torrent J, Izquierdo I, Cabezas R, Jane F. Theophylline-isoniazid interaction.
DICP 1989; 23:143–5.
233. Whittington HG, Grey L. Possible interaction between disulfiram and isoniazid.
Am J Psychiatry 1969; 125:1725–9.
234. Burman WJ, Terra M, Breese P, Cohn D, Reves R. Lack of toxicity from concom-
itant directly observed disulfiram and isoniazid-containing therapy for active tu-
berculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2002; 6:839–42.
235. Robson RA, Begg EJ, Atkinson HC, Saunders DA, Frampton CM. Comparative
effects of ciprofloxacin and lomefloxacin on the oxidative metabolism of theoph-
ylline. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1990; 29:491–3.
236. Raoof S, Wollschlager C, Khan FA. Ciprofloxacin increases serum levels of the-
ophylline. Am J Med 1987; 82(4A):115–8.
237. Gisclon LG, Curtin CR, Fowler CL, Williams RR, Hafkin B, Natarajan J. Absence
of a pharmacokinetic interaction between intravenous theophylline and orally ad-
ministered levofloxacin. J Clin Pharmacol 1997; 37:744–50.
238. Niki Y, Hashiguchi K, Miyashita N, Nakajima M, Matsushima T. Influence of
gatifloxacin, a new quinolone antibacterial, on pharmacokinetics of theophylline.
J Infect Chemother 1999; 5:156–62.
239. Stass H, Kubitza D. Lack of pharmacokinetic interaction between moxifloxacin, a
novel 8-methoxyfluoroquinolone, and theophylline. Clin Pharmacokinet 2001;
40(suppl 1):63–70.
240. Srivastava S, Peloquin CA, Sotgiu G, Migliori GB. Therapeutic drug manage-
ment: is it the future of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis treatment? Eur Respir
J 2013; 42:1449–53.
241. Esposito S, Codecasa LR, Centis R. The role of therapeutic drug monitoring in
individualised drug dosage and exposure measurement in tuberculosis and
HIV co-infection. Eur Respir J 2015; 45:571–4.
242. Alsultan A, Peloquin CA. Therapeutic drug monitoring in the treatment of tuber-
culosis: an update. Drugs 2014; 74:839–54.
243. Donald PR, Maritz JS, Diacon AH. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics of rifampicin in adults and children in relation to the dosage recommended
for children. Tuberculosis (Edinb) 2011; 91:196–207.
244. Zvada SP, Denti P, Donald PR, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of rifampicin,
pyrazinamide and isoniazid in children with tuberculosis: in silico evaluation of
currently recommended doses. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:1339–49.
245. Peloquin CA, Nitta AT, Burman WJ, et al. Low antituberculosis drug concentra-
tions in patients with AIDS. Ann Pharmacother 1996; 30:919–25.
246. Sahai J, Gallicano K, Swick L, et al. Reduced plasma concentrations of anti-
tuberculosis drugs in patients with HIV infection. Ann Intern Med 1997;
127:289–93.
247. Chaisson RE, Clermont HC, Holt EA, et al. Six-month supervised intermittent
tuberculosis therapy in Haitian patients with and without HIV infection. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1996; 154(4 pt 1):1034–8.
248. el-Sadr WM, Perlman DC, Matts JP, et al. Evaluation of an intensive intermit-
tent-induction regimen and duration of short-course treatment for human im-
munodeficiency virus-related pulmonary tuberculosis. Terry Beirn Community
Programs for Clinical Research on AIDS (CPCRA) and the AIDS Clinical Trials
Group (ACTG). Clin Infect Dis 1998; 26:1148–58.
249. Chideya S, Winston CA, Peloquin CA, et al. Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and
pyrazinamide pharmacokinetics and treatment outcomes among a predominant-
ly HIV-infected cohort of adults with tuberculosis from Botswana. Clin Infect Dis
2009; 48:1685–94.
250. Boulanger C, Hollender E, Farrell K, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of rifabu-
tin in combination with lopinavir-ritonavir in patients with HIV infection and
active tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 49:1305–11.
251. Jenny-Avital ER, Joseph K. Rifamycin-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis in
the highly active antiretroviral therapy era: a report of 3 relapses with acquired
rifampin resistance following alternate-day rifabutin and boosted protease inhib-
itor therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:1471–4.
252. Pasipanodya JG, McIlleron H, Burger A, Wash PA, Smith P, Gumbo T. Serum
drug concentrations predictive of pulmonary tuberculosis outcomes. J Infect
Dis 2013; 208:1464–73.
253. World Health Organization. WHO policy on collaborative TB/HIV activities:
guidelines for national programmes and other stakeholders. Geneva, Switzerland:
WHO, 2012.
e190 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 254. Branson BM, Handsfield HH, Lampe MA, et al. Revised recommendations for
HIV testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant women in health-care settings.
MMWR Recomm Rep 2006; 55(RR-14):1–17; quiz CE1-4.
255. Perriens JH, St Louis ME, Mukadi YB, et al. Pulmonary tuberculosis in HIV-in-
fected patients in Zaire. A controlled trial of treatment for either 6 or 12 months.
N Engl J Med 1995; 332:779–84.
256. Kennedy N, Berger L, Curram J, et al. Randomized controlled trial of a drug reg-
imen that includes ciprofloxacin for the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Clin Infect Dis 1996; 22:827–33.
257. Kassim S, Sassan-Morokro M, Ackah A, et al. Two-year follow-up of persons
with HIV-1- and HIV-2-associated pulmonary tuberculosis treated with short-
course chemotherapy in West Africa. AIDS 1995; 9:1185–91.
258. Fitzgerald DW, Desvarieux M, Severe P, Joseph P, Johnson WD Jr, Pape JW. Ef-
fect of post-treatment isoniazid on prevention of recurrent tuberculosis in HIV-
1-infected individuals: a randomised trial. Lancet 2000; 356:1470–4.
259. Mfinanga SG, Kirenga BJ, Chanda DM, et al. Early versus delayed initiation of
highly active antiretroviral therapy for HIV-positive adults with newly diagnosed
pulmonary tuberculosis (TB-HAART): a prospective, international, randomised,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2014; 14:563–71.
260. Abdool Karim SS, Naidoo K, Grobler A, et al. Timing of initiation of anti-
retroviral drugs during tuberculosis therapy. N Engl J Med 2010; 362:697–706.
261. Blanc FX, Sok T, Laureillard D, et al. Earlier versus later start of antiretroviral
therapy in HIV-infected adults with tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2011;
365:1471–81.
262. Havlir DV, Kendall MA, Ive P, et al. Timing of antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1
infection and tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:1482–91.
263. Abdool Karim SS, Naidoo K, Grobler A, et al. Integration of antiretroviral therapy
with tuberculosis treatment. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:1492–501.
264. Manosuthi W, Mankatitham W, Lueangniyomkul A, et al. Time to initiate anti-
retroviral therapy between 4 weeks and 12 weeks of tuberculosis treatment in
HIV-infected patients: results from the TIME study. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr 2012; 60:377–83.
265. Shao HJ, Crump JA, Ramadhani HO, et al. Early versus delayed fixed dose com-
bination abacavir/lamivudine/zidovudine in patients with HIV and tuberculosis
in Tanzania. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2009; 25:1277–85.
266. Sinha S, Shekhar RC, Singh G, et al. Early versus delayed initiation of antiretro-
viral therapy for Indian HIV-infected individuals with tuberculosis on antituber-
culosis treatment. BMC Infect Dis 2012; 12:168.
267. Luetkemeyer AF, Rosenkranz SL, Lu D, et al. Relationship between weight, efa-
virenz exposure, and virologic suppression in HIV-infected patients on rifampin-
based tuberculosis treatment in the AIDS Clinical Trials Group A5221 STRIDE
Study. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:586–93.
268. Dooley KE, Denti P, Martinson N, et al. Pharmacokinetics of efavirenz and treat-
ment of HIV-1 among pregnant women with and without tuberculosis coinfec-
tion. J Infect Dis 2015; 211:197–205.
269. Jiang HY, Zhang MN, Chen HJ, Yang Y, Deng M, Ruan B. Nevirapine versus efa-
virenz for patients co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Int J Infect Dis 2014; 25:130–5.
270. Cohen K, van Cutsem G, Boulle A, et al. Effect of rifampicin-based antitubercular
therapy on nevirapine plasma concentrations in South African adults with HIV-
associated tuberculosis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2008; 61:389–93.
271. van Oosterhout JJ, Kumwenda JJ, Beadsworth M, et al. Nevirapine-based antire-
troviral therapy started early in the course of tuberculosis treatment in adult Ma-
lawians. Antivir Ther 2007; 12:515–21.
272. Boulle A, Van Cutsem G, Cohen K, et al. Outcomes of nevirapine- and efavirenz-
based antiretroviral therapy when coadministered with rifampicin-based antitu-
bercular therapy. JAMA 2008; 300:530–9.
273. Avihingsanon A, Manosuthi W, Kantipong P, et al. Pharmacokinetics and 48-
week efficacy of nevirapine: 400 mg versus 600 mg per day in HIV-tuberculosis
coinfection receiving rifampicin. Antivir Ther 2008; 13:529–36.
274. Grinsztejn B, De Castro N, Arnold V, et al. Raltegravir for the treatment of pa-
tients co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis (ANRS 12 180 Reflate TB): a multi-
centre, phase 2, non-comparative, open-label, randomised trial. Lancet Infect Dis
2014; 14:459–67.
275. Dooley KE, Sayre P, Borland J, et al. Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of
the HIV integrase inhibitor dolutegravir given twice daily with rifampin or once
daily with rifabutin: results of a phase 1 study among healthy subjects. J Acquir
Immune Defic Syndr 2013; 62:21–7.
276. Wenning LA, Hanley WD, Brainard DM, et al. Effect of rifampin, a potent in-
ducer of drug-metabolizing enzymes, on the pharmacokinetics of raltegravir.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009; 53:2852–6.
277. Cheng SL, Wang HC, Yang PC. Paradoxical response during anti-tuberculosis
treatment in HIV-negative patients with pulmonary tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis 2007; 11:1290–5.
278. Torok ME, Yen NT, Chau TT, et al. Timing of initiation of antiretroviral therapy
in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)—associated tuberculous meningitis.
Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:1374–83.
279. Perez-Velez CM, Marais BJ. Tuberculosis in children. N Engl J Med 2012;
367:348–61.
280. Lucas S, Andronikou S, Goussard P, Gie R. CT features of lymphobronchial tu-
berculosis in children, including complications and associated abnormalities. Pe-
diatr Radiol 2012; 42:923–31.
281. Graham SM, Cuevas LE, Jean-Philippe P, et al. Clinical case definitions for clas-
sification of intrathoracic tuberculosis in children: an update. Clin Infect Dis
2015; 61(suppl 3):S179–87.
282. Zar HJ, Hanslo D, Apolles P, Swingler G, Hussey G. Induced sputum versus gas-
tric lavage for microbiological confirmation of pulmonary tuberculosis in infants
and young children: a prospective study. Lancet 2005; 365:130–4.
283. Somu N, Swaminathan S, Paramasivan CN, et al. Value of bronchoalveolar lavage
and gastric lavage in the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in children. Tuber
Lung Dis 1995; 76:295–9.
284. Donald PR. The chemotherapy of tuberculous meningitis in children and adults.
Tuberculosis (Edinb) 2010; 90:375–92.
285. Perez-Velez CM. Pediatric tuberculosis: new guidelines and recommendations.
Curr Opin Pediatr 2012; 24:319–28.
286. World Health Organization. Rapid advice: treatment of tuberculosis in children.
Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2010.
287. World Health Organization. Guidance for national tuberculosis programmes on
the management of tuberculosis in children. 2nd ed. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO,
2014.
288. van der Watt JJ, Harrison TB, Benatar M, Heckmann JM. Polyneuropathy, anti-
tuberculosis treatment and the role of pyridoxine in the HIV/AIDS era: a system-
atic review. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2011; 15:722–8.
289. Engorn B, Flerlage J; Johns Hopkins Hospital. Children’s Medical and Surgical
Center. The Harriet Lane Handbook: a manual for pediatric house officers.
20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby/Elsevier, 2015.
290. Graham SM, Grzemska M, Gie RP. The background and rationale for a new
fixed-dose combination for first-line treatment of tuberculosis in children. Int J
Tuberc Lung Dis 2015; 19(suppl 1):3–8.
291. Thwaites GE, Bhavnani SM, Chau TT, et al. Randomized pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic comparison of fluoroquinolones for tuberculous meningitis.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011; 55:3244–53.
292. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Tuberculosis: prevention, di-
agnosis, management and service organisation (NICE guideline 33), 2016. www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/ng33. Accessed 1 June 2016.
293. Campbell IA, Dyson AJ. Lymph node tuberculosis: a comparison of treatments
18 months after completion of chemotherapy. Tubercle 1979; 60:95–8.
294. Short course chemotherapy for tuberculosis of lymph nodes: a controlled trial.
British Thoracic Society Research Committee. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1985;
290:1106–8.
295. Jawahar MS, Sivasubramanian S, Vijayan VK, et al. Short course chemotherapy
for tuberculous lymphadenitis in children. BMJ 1990; 301:359–62.
296. Six-months versus nine-months chemotherapy for tuberculosis of lymph nodes:
preliminary results. British Thoracic Society Research Committee. Respir Med
1992; 86:15–9.
297. Campbell IA, Ormerod LP, Friend JA, Jenkins PA, Prescott RJ. Six months versus
nine months chemotherapy for tuberculosis of lymph nodes: final results. Respir
Med 1993; 87:621–3.
298. Yuen AP, Wong SH, Tam CM, Chan SL, Wei WI, Lau SK. Prospective random-
ized study of thrice weekly six-month and nine-month chemotherapy for cervical
tuberculous lymphadenopathy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997; 116:189–92.
299. Campbell IA, Dyson AJ. Lymph node tuberculosis: a comparison of various
methods of treatment. Tubercle 1977; 58:171–9.
300. Mandell DL, Wald ER, Michaels MG, Dohar JE. Management of nontuberculous
mycobacterial cervical lymphadenitis. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2003;
129:341–4.
301. Wolinsky E. Mycobacterial lymphadenitis in children: a prospective study of 105
nontuberculous cases with long-term follow-up. Clin Infect Dis 1995; 20:954–63.
302. A controlled trial of six-month and nine-month regimens of chemotherapy in
patients undergoing radical surgery for tuberculosis of the spine in Hong
Kong. Tenth report of the Medical Research Council Working Party on Tuber-
culosis of the Spine. Tubercle 1986; 67:243–59.
303. Controlled trial of short-course regimens of chemotherapy in the ambulatory
treatment of spinal tuberculosis. Results at three years of a study in Korea.
Twelfth report of the Medical Research Council Working Party on Tuberculosis
of the Spine. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1993; 75:240–8.
304. Five-year assessment of controlled trials of short-course chemotherapy regimens of
6, 9 or 18 months’ duration for spinal tuberculosis in patients ambulatory from the
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e191
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 start or undergoing radical surgery. Fourteenth report of the Medical Research
Council Working Party on Tuberculosis of the Spine. Int Orthop 1999; 23:73–81.
305. Pattisson PR. Pott’s paraplegia: an account of the treatment of 89 consecutive pa-
tients. Paraplegia 1986; 24:77–91.
306. Jutte PC, Van Loenhout-Rooyackers JH. Routine surgery in addition to chemo-
therapy for treating spinal tuberculosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 1:
CD004532.
307. Nene A, Bhojraj S. Results of nonsurgical treatment of thoracic spinal tuberculo-
sis in adults. Spine J 2005; 5:79–84.
308. Engel ME, Matchaba PT, Volmink J. Corticosteroids for tuberculous pleurisy. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 4:CD001876.
309. Lee CH, Wang WJ, Lan RS, Tsai YH, Chiang YC. Corticosteroids in the treatment
of tuberculous pleurisy. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study.
Chest 1988; 94:1256–9.
310. Galarza I, Canete C, Granados A, Estopa R, Manresa F. Randomised trial of cor-
ticosteroids in the treatment of tuberculous pleurisy. Thorax 1995; 50:1305–7.
311. Wyser C, Walzl G, Smedema JP, Swart F, van Schalkwyk EM, van de Wal BW.
Corticosteroids in the treatment of tuberculous pleurisy. A double-blind, place-
bo-controlled, randomized study. Chest 1996; 110:333–8.
312. Elliott AM, Luzze H, Quigley MA, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial of the use of prednisolone as an adjunct to treatment in HIV-
1-associated pleural tuberculosis. J Infect Dis 2004; 190:869–78.
313. Sahn SA, Iseman MD. Tuberculous empyema. Semin Respir Infect 1999;
14:82–7.
314. Chiang SS, Khan FA, Milstein MB, et al. Treatment outcomes of childhood tu-
berculous meningitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis
2014; 14:947–57.
315. Dube MP, Holtom PD, Larsen RA. Tuberculous meningitis in patients with and
without human immunodeficiency virus infection. Am J Med 1992; 93:520–4.
316. Berenguer J, Moreno S, Laguna F, et al. Tuberculous meningitis in patients infect-
ed with the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J Med 1992; 326:668–72.
317. Porkert MT, Sotir M, Parrott-Moore P, Blumberg HM. Tuberculous meningitis at
a large inner-city medical center. Am J Med Sci 1997; 313:325–31.
318. Thwaites GE, Duc Bang N, Huy Dung N, et al. The influence of HIV infection on
clinical presentation, response to treatment, and outcome in adults with Tuber-
culous meningitis. J Infect Dis 2005; 192:2134–41.
319. Ruslami R, Ganiem AR, Dian S, et al. Intensified regimen containing rifampicin
and moxifloxacin for tuberculous meningitis: an open-label, randomised con-
trolled phase 2 trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2013; 13:27–35.
320. Heemskerk D, Day J, Chau TT, et al. Intensified treatment with high dose rifam-
picin and levofloxacin compared to standard treatment for adult patients with
tuberculous meningitis (TBM-IT): protocol for a randomized controlled trial.
Trials 2011; 12:25.
321. Huseby JS, Hudson LD. Miliary tuberculosis and adult respiratory distress syn-
drome. Ann Intern Med 1976; 85:609–11.
322. Murray HW, Tuazon CU, Kirmani N, Sheagren JN. The adult respiratory distress
syndrome associated with miliary tuberculosis. Chest 1978; 73:37–43.
323. Yokoyama T, Toda R, Kimura Y, Mikagi M, Aizawa H. Addison’s disease induced
by miliary tuberculosis and the administration of rifampicin. Intern Med 2009;
48:1297–300.
324. Sharma SK, Mohan A, Sharma A, Mitra DK. Miliary tuberculosis: new insights
into an old disease. Lancet Infect Dis 2005; 5:415–30.
325. Garg RK, Sharma R, Kar AM, et al. Neurological complications of miliary tuber-
culosis. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2010; 112:188–92.
326. Gow JG. Genito-urinary tuberculosis. A study of the disease in one unit over a
period of 24 years. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1971; 49:50–70.
327. Christensen WI. Genitourinary tuberculosis: review of 102 cases. Medicine (Bal-
timore) 1974; 53:377–90.
328. Simon HB, Weinstein AJ, Pasternak MS, Swartz MN, Kunz LJ. Genitourinary tu-
berculosis. Clinical features in a general hospital population. Am J Med 1977;
63:410–20.
329. Skutil V, Varsa J, Obsitnik M. Six-month chemotherapy for urogenital tubercu-
losis. Eur Urol 1985; 11:170–6.
330. Carl P, Stark L. Indications for surgical management of genitourinary tuberculo-
sis. World J Surg 1997; 21:505–10.
331. Abbara A, Davidson RN, Medscape. Etiology and management of genitourinary
tuberculosis. Nat Rev Urol 2011; 8:678–88.
332. Peter J, Green C, Hoelscher M, Mwaba P, Zumla A, Dheda K. Urine for the di-
agnosis of tuberculosis: current approaches, clinical applicability, and new devel-
opments. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2010; 16:262–70.
333. Bastani B, Shariatzadeh MR, Dehdashti F. Tuberculous peritonitis—report of 30
cases and review of the literature. Q J Med 1985; 56:549–57.
334. Demir K, Okten A, Kaymakoglu S, et al. Tuberculous peritonitis—reports of 26
cases, detailing diagnostic and therapeutic problems. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2001; 13:581–5.
335. Singhal A, Gulati A, Frizell R, Manning AP. Abdominal tuberculosis in Bradford,
UK: 1992–2002. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005; 17:967–71.
336. Mamo JP, Brij SO, Enoch DA. Abdominal tuberculosis: a retrospective review of
cases presenting to a UK district hospital. QJM 2013; 106:347–54.
337. Rasheed S, Zinicola R, Watson D, Bajwa A, McDonald PJ. Intra-abdominal and
gastrointestinal tuberculosis. Colorectal Dis 2007; 9:773–83.
338. Alrajhi AA, Halim MA, al-Hokail A, Alrabiah F, al-Omran K. Corticosteroid
treatment of peritoneal tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 27:52–6.
339. A controlled trial of 3-month, 4-month, and 6-month regimens of chemotherapy
for sputum-smear-negative pulmonary tuberculosis. Results at 5 years. Hong
Kong Chest Service/Tuberculosis Research Centre, Madras/British Medical Re-
search Council. Am Rev Respir Dis 1989; 139:871–6.
340. Dutt AK, Moers D, Stead WW. Smear- and culture-negative pulmonary
tuberculosis: four-month short-course chemotherapy. Am Rev Respir Dis 1989;
139:867–70.
341. Teo SK, Tan KK, Khoo TK. Four-month chemotherapy in the treatment of
smear-negative pulmonary tuberculosis: results at 30 to 60 months. Ann Acad
Med Singapore 2002; 31:175–81.
342. Snider DE Jr, Layde PM, Johnson MW, Lyle MA. Treatment of tuberculosis dur-
ing pregnancy. Am Rev Respir Dis 1980; 122:65–79.
343. Jana N, Vasishta K, Jindal SK, Khunnu B, Ghosh K. Perinatal outcome in preg-
nancies complicated by pulmonary tuberculosis. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1994;
44:119–24.
344. Davidson PT. Managing tuberculosis during pregnancy. Lancet 1995;
346:199–200.
345. Figueroa-Damian R, Arredondo-Garcia JL. Pregnancy and tuberculosis: influ-
ence of treatment on perinatal outcome. Am J Perinatol 1998; 15:303–6.
346. Llewelyn M, Cropley I, Wilkinson RJ, Davidson RN. Tuberculosis diagnosed dur-
ing pregnancy: a prospective study from London. Thorax 2000; 55:129–32.
347. Czeizel AE, Rockenbauer M, Olsen J, Sorensen HT. A population-based case-
control study of the safety of oral anti-tuberculosis drug treatment during preg-
nancy. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2001; 5:564–8.
348. Nguyen HT, Pandolfini C, Chiodini P, Bonati M. Tuberculosis care for pregnant
women: a systematic review. BMC Infect Dis 2014; 14:617.
349. Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Yaffe SJ. Drugs in pregnancy and lactation: a reference
guide to fetal and neonatal risk. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins Health, 2015.
350. US Food and Drug Administration. Pregnancy, lactation, and reproductive po-
tential: labeling for human prescription drug and biological products, content
and format. Draft guidance for industry. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/
UCM425398.pdf. Accessed 23 December 2015.
351. Tabarsi P, Moradi A, Baghaei P, et al. Standardised second-line treatment of mul-
tidrug-resistant tuberculosis during pregnancy. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2011;
15:547–50.
352. Palacios E, Dallman R, Munoz M, et al. Drug-resistant tuberculosis and pregnancy:
treatment outcomes of 38 cases in Lima, Peru. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:1413–9.
353. Khan M, Pillay T, Moodley J, Ramjee A, Padayatchi N. Pregnancies complicated
by multidrug-resistant tuberculosis and HIV co-infection in Durban, South Af-
rica. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2007; 11:706–8.
354. Shin S, Guerra D, Rich M, et al. Treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis
during pregnancy: a report of 7 cases. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:996–1003.
355. Sugarman J, Colvin C, Moran AC, Oxlade O. Tuberculosis in pregnancy: an es-
timate of the global burden of disease. Lancet Glob Health 2014; 2:e710–6.
356. Mathad JS, Gupta A. Tuberculosis in pregnant and postpartum women: epidemi-
ology, management, and research gaps. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:1532–49.
357. Biehl JP, Vilter RW. Effects of isoniazid on pyridoxine metabolism. J Am Med
Assoc 1954; 156:1549–52.
358. Atkins JN. Maternal plasma concentration of pyridoxal phosphate during preg-
nancy: adequacy of vitamin B6 supplementation during isoniazid therapy. Am
Rev Respir Dis 1982; 126:714–6.
359. Kurts C, Panzer U, Anders HJ, Rees AJ. The immune system and kidney
disease: basic concepts and clinical implications. Nat Rev Immunol 2013;
13:738–53.
360. Baghaei P, Marjani M, Tabarsi P, et al. Impact of chronic renal failure on anti-
tuberculosis treatment outcomes. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2014; 18:352–6.
361. Malone RS, Fish DN, Spiegel DM, Childs JM, Peloquin CA. The effect of hemo-
dialysis on isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1999; 159(5 pt 1):1580–4.
362. Malone RS, Fish DN, Spiegel DM, Childs JM, Peloquin CA. The effect of hemo-
dialysis on cycloserine, ethionamide, para-aminosalicylate, and clofazimine.
Chest 1999; 116:984–90.
363. Launay-Vacher V, Izzedine H, Deray G. Pharmacokinetic considerations in the
treatment of tuberculosis in patients with renal failure. Clin Pharmacokinet 2005;
44:221–35.
e192 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 364. Sun HY, Chen YJ, Gau CS, Chang SC, Luh KT. A prospective study of hepatitis
during antituberculous treatment in Taiwanese patients and a review of the liter-
ature. J Formos Med Assoc 2009; 108:102–11.
365. Singh N, Paterson DL. Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in solid-organ
transplant recipients: impact and implications for management. Clin Infect Dis
1998; 27:1266–77.
366. Chien JY, Huang RM, Wang JY, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection increases hep-
atitis risk during anti-tuberculosis treatment. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2010;
14:616–21.
367. Lomtadze N, Kupreishvili L, Salakaia A, et al. Hepatitis C virus co-infection in-
creases the risk of anti-tuberculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity among patients
with pulmonary tuberculosis. PLoS One 2013; 8:e83892.
368. Teleman MD, Chee CB, Earnest A, Wang YT. Hepatotoxicity of tuberculosis che-
motherapy under general programme conditions in Singapore. Int J Tuberc Lung
Dis 2002; 6:699–705.
369. Schenker S, Martin RR, Hoyumpa AM. Antecedent liver disease and drug toxic-
ity. J Hepatol 1999; 31:1098–105.
370. Combs DL, O’Brien RJ, Geiter LJ. USPHS Tuberculosis Short-Course Chemo-
therapy Trial 21: effectiveness, toxicity, and acceptability. The report of final re-
sults. Ann Intern Med 1990; 112:397–406.
371. A controlled trial of 6 months’ chemotherapy in pulmonary tuberculosis. Final
report: results during the 36 months after the end of chemotherapy and beyond.
British Thoracic Society. Br J Dis Chest 1984; 78:330–6.
372. Hong YP, Kim SC, Chang SC, Kim SJ, Jin BW, Park CD. Comparison of a daily
and three intermittent retreatment regimens for pulmonary tuberculosis admin-
istered under programme conditions. Tubercle 1988; 69:241–53.
373. Mitchison DA, Nunn AJ. Influence of initial drug resistance on the response to
short-course chemotherapy of pulmonary tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1986;
133:423–30.
374. Franke MF, Appleton SC, Mitnick CD, et al. Aggressive regimens for multidrug-
resistant tuberculosis reduce recurrence. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56:770–6.
375. Kumar N, Kedarisetty CK, Kumar S, Khillan V, Sarin SK. Antitubercular therapy
in patients with cirrhosis: challenges and options. World J Gastroenterol 2014;
20:5760–72.
376. Durand F, Jebrak G, Pessayre D, Fournier M, Bernuau J. Hepatotoxicity of anti-
tubercular treatments. Rationale for monitoring liver status. Drug Saf 1996;
15:394–405.
377. Dufour DR, Lott JA, Nolte FS, Gretch DR, Koff RS, Seeff LB. Diagnosis and mon-
itoring of hepatic injury. I. Performance characteristics of laboratory tests. Clin
Chem 2000; 46:2027–49.
378. Yee D, Valiquette C, Pelletier M, Parisien I, Rocher I, Menzies D. Incidence of
serious side effects from first-line antituberculosis drugs among patients treated
for active tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 167:1472–7.
379. Chang KC, Leung CC, Yew WW, Lau TY, Tam CM. Hepatotoxicity of pyrazina-
mide: cohort and case-control analyses. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008;
177:1391–6.
380. Cantini F, Prignano F, Goletti D. Restarting biologics and management of pa-
tients with flares of inflammatory rheumatic disorders or psoriasis during active
tuberculosis treatment. J Rheumatol Suppl 2014; 91:78–82.
381. Ahmed AT, Karter AJ. Tuberculosis in California dialysis patients. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis 2004; 8:341–5.
382. Jimenez-Corona ME, Cruz-Hervert LP, Garcia-Garcia L, et al. Association of di-
abetes and tuberculosis: impact on treatment and post-treatment outcomes. Tho-
rax 2013; 68:214–20.
383. Jorgensen ME, Faurholt-Jepsen D. Is there an effect of glucose lowering treatment
on incidence and prognosis of tuberculosis? A systematic review. Curr Diab Rep
2014; 14:505.
384. Lin TP, Suo J, Lee CN, Lee JJ, Yang SP. Short-course chemotherapy of pulmonary
tuberculosis in pneumoconiotic patients. Am Rev Respir Dis 1987; 136:808–10.
385. Aguado JM, Herrero JA, Gavalda J, et al. Clinical presentation and outcome of tu-
berculosis in kidney, liver, and heart transplant recipients in Spain. Spanish Trans-
plantation Infection Study Group, GESITRA. Transplantation 1997; 63:1278–86.
386. Kim YJ, Kim YG, Shim TS, et al. Safety of resuming tumour necrosis factor in-
hibitors in patients who developed tuberculosis as a complication of previous
TNF inhibitors. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2014; 53:1477–81.
387. Suh YS, Kwok SK, Ju JH, Park KS, Park SH, Yoon CH. Safe re-administration of
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) inhibitors in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis or ankylosing spondylitis who developed active tuberculosis on previous
anti-TNFalpha therapy. J Korean Med Sci 2014; 29:38–42.
388. Rivoisy C, Tubach F, Roy C, et al. Paradoxical anti-TNF-associated TB worsen-
ing: frequency and factors associated with IRIS. Joint Bone Spine 2016; 83:173–8.
389. Aguado JM, Torre-Cisneros J, Fortun J, et al. Tuberculosis in solid-organ trans-
plant recipients: consensus statement of the group for the study of infection in
transplant recipients (GESITRA) of the Spanish Society of Infectious Diseases
and Clinical Microbiology. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:1276–84.
390. Small PM, Shafer RW, Hopewell PC, et al. Exogenous reinfection with multidrug-
resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis in patients with advanced HIV infection. N
Engl J Med 1993; 328:1137–44.
391. van Rie A, Warren R, Richardson M, et al. Exogenous reinfection as a cause of
recurrent tuberculosis after curative treatment. N Engl J Med 1999; 341:1174–9.
392. Tam CM, Chan SL, Kam KM, Goodall RL, Mitchison DA. Rifapentine and iso-
niazid in the continuation phase of a 6-month regimen. Final report at 5 years:
prognostic value of various measures. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2002; 6:3–10.
393. Nunn AJ, Phillips PP, Mitchison DA. Timing of relapse in short-course chemo-
therapy trials for tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2010; 14:241–2.
394. Mitchison DA. Role of individual drugs in the chemotherapy of tuberculosis. Int J
Tuberc Lung Dis 2000; 4:796–806.
395. Controlled trial of 2, 4, and 6 months of pyrazinamide in 6-month, three-times-
weekly regimens for smear-positive pulmonary tuberculosis, including an assess-
ment of a combined preparation of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide. Re-
sults at 30 months. Hong Kong Chest Service/British Medical Research
Council. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991; 143(4 pt 1):700–6.
396. Suarez PG, Floyd K, Portocarrero J, et al. Feasibility and cost-effectiveness of
standardised second-line drug treatment for chronic tuberculosis patients: a na-
tional cohort study in Peru. Lancet 2002; 359:1980–9.
397. Weis SE, Slocum PC, Blais FX, et al. The effect of directly observed therapy on
the rates of drug resistance and relapse in tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 1994;
330:1179–84.
398. Jindani A, Nunn AJ, Enarson DA. Two 8-month regimens of chemotherapy for
treatment of newly diagnosed pulmonary tuberculosis: international multicentre
randomised trial. Lancet 2004; 364:1244–51.
399. Kritski AL, Rodrigues de Jesus LS, Andrade MK, et al. Retreatment tuberculosis
cases. Factors associated with drug resistance and adverse outcomes. Chest 1997;
111:1162–7.
400. Heldal E, Arnadottir T, Cruz JR, Tardencilla A, Chacon L. Low failure rate in
standardised retreatment of tuberculosis in Nicaragua: patient category, drug
resistance and survival of ‘chronic’ patients. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2001;
5:129–36.
401. Chavez Pachas AM, Blank R, Smith Fawzi MC, Bayona J, Becerra MC, Mitnick
CD. Identifying early treatment failure on category I therapy for pulmonary tu-
berculosis in Lima Ciudad, Peru. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2004; 8:52–8.
402. Yoshiyama T, Yanai H, Rhiengtong D, et al. Development of acquired drug resis-
tance in recurrent tuberculosis patients with various previous treatment out-
comes. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2004; 8:31–8.
403. Boyles TH, Hughes J, Cox V, Burton R, Meintjes G, Mendelson M. False-positive
Xpert(R) MTB/RIF assays in previously treated patients: need for caution in in-
terpreting results. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2014; 18:876–8.
404. Falzon D, Jaramillo E, Schunemann HJ, et al. WHO guidelines for the program-
matic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: 2011 update. Eur Respir J
2011; 38:516–28.
405. Bifani PJ, Plikaytis BB, Kapur V, et al. Origin and interstate spread of a New York City
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis clone family. JAMA 1996;
275:452–7.
406. Nosocomial transmission of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis among HIV-infected
persons—Florida and New York, 1988–1991. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
1991; 40:585–91.
407. Tandon RK, Bansal R, Kapur BM, Shriniwas. A study of malabsorption in intes-
tinal tuberculosis: stagnant loop syndrome. Am J Clin Nutr 1980; 33:244–50.
408. Berning SE, Huitt GA, Iseman MD, Peloquin CA. Malabsorption of antitubercu-
losis medications by a patient with AIDS. N Engl J Med 1992; 327:1817–8.
409. Gurumurthy P, Ramachandran G, Hemanth Kumar AK, et al. Malabsorption of
rifampin and isoniazid in HIV-infected patients with and without tuberculosis.
Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38:280–3.
410. Bento J, Duarte R, Brito MC, et al. Malabsorption of antimycobacterial drugs as a
cause of treatment failure in tuberculosis. BMJ Case Rep 2010; 2010.
411. Burman WJ, Stone BL, Reves RR, et al. The incidence of false-positive cultures for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 155:321–6.
412. Riley RL, Mills CC, Nyka W, et al. Aerial dissemination of pulmonary tubercu-
losis. A two-year study of contagion in a tuberculosis ward. 1959. Am J Epidemiol
1995; 142:3–14.
413. Seung KJ, Gelmanova IE, Peremitin GG, et al. The effect of initial drug resistance
on treatment response and acquired drug resistance during standardized short-
course chemotherapy for tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:1321–8.
414. David HL, Newman CM. Some observations on the genetics of isoniazid resis-
tance in the tubercle bacilli. Am Rev Respir Dis 1971; 104:508–15.
415. Canetti G. Present aspects of bacterial resistance in tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir
Dis 1965; 92:687–703.
416. Mahmoudi A, Iseman MD. Pitfalls in the care of patients with tuberculosis. Common
errors and their association with the acquisition of drug resistance. JAMA 1993;
270:65–8.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e193
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 417. Lienhardt C, Raviglione M, Spigelman M, et al. New drugs for the treatment of
tuberculosis: needs, challenges, promise, and prospects for the future. J Infect Dis
2012; 205(suppl 2):S241–9.
418. Dorman SE, Savic RM, Goldberg S, et al. Daily rifapentine for treatment of pul-
monary tuberculosis. A randomized, dose-ranging trial. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2015; 191:333–43.
419. Nahid P, Saukkonen J, Mac Kenzie WR, et al. CDC/NIH Workshop. Tuberculosis
biomarker and surrogate endpoint research roadmap. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2011; 184:972–9.
420. Heyckendorf J, Olaru ID, Ruhwald M, Lange C. Getting personal: perspectives on
individualized treatment duration in multidrug-resistant and extensively drug-
resistant tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 190:374–83.
421. Warner DF, Mizrahi V. Shortening treatment for tuberculosis—to basics. N Engl
J Med 2014; 371:1642–3.
422. Gupta A, Mathad JS, Abdel-Rahman SM, et al. Toward earlier inclusion of preg-
nant and postpartum women in tuberculosis drug trials: consensus statements
from an international expert panel. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:761–9.
423. Murray S, McKenna L, Pelfrene E, Botgros R. Accelerating clinical drug develop-
ment for children with tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2015; 19(suppl 1):69–74.
424. Falzon D, Raviglione M, Bel EH, Gratziou C, Bettcher D, Migliori GB. The role of
eHealth and mHealth in tuberculosis and tobacco control: a WHO/ERS consul-
tation. Eur Respir J 2015; 46:307–11.
425. World Health Organization. Introduction and rational use of new drugs and drug
regimens for TB treatment. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2015.
426. Cohn DL, Catlin BJ, Peterson KL, Judson FN, Sbarbaro JA. A 62-dose, 6-month
therapy for pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis. A twice-weekly, di-
rectly observed, and cost-effective regimen. Ann Intern Med 1990; 112:407–15.
427. Schaaf HS, Garcia-Prats AJ, Donald PR. Antituberculosis drugs in children. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2015; 98:252–65.
428. Volmink J, Matchaba P, Garner P. Directly observed therapy and treatment ad-
herence. Lancet 2000; 355:1345–50.
429. LoBue PA, Cass R, Lobo D, Moser K, Catanzaro A. Development of housing pro-
grams to aid in the treatment of tuberculosis in homeless individuals: a pilot
study. Chest 1999; 115:218–23.
430. Ehman M, Shaw T, Cass A, et al. Developing and using performance measures
based on surveillance data for program improvement in tuberculosis control. J
Public Health Manag Pract 2013; 19:E29–37.
431. Mitruka K, Winston CA, Navin TR. Predictors of failure in timely tuberculosis
treatment completion, United States. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2012; 16:1075–82.
432. Davies G, Cerri S, Richeldi L. Rifabutin for treating pulmonary tuberculosis. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2007; CD005159.
433. Controlled clinical trial of four 6-month regimens of chemotherapy for pulmo-
nary tuberculosis. Second report. Second East African/British Medical Research
Council Study. Am Rev Respir Dis 1976; 114:471–5.
434. Controlled clinical trial of four short-course regimens of chemotherapy for two
durations in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis. Second report. Third East
African/British Medical Research Council Study. Tubercle 1980; 61:59–69.
435. Controlled trial of 6-month and 9-month regimens of daily and intermittent
streptomycin plus isoniazid plus pyrazinamide for pulmonary tuberculosis
in Hong Kong. The results up to 30 months. Am Rev Respir Dis 1977;
115:727–35.
436. A service program of antituberculosis chemotherapy with five drugs for four
months in the treatment of drug addicts and prisoners with pulmonary tubercu-
losis in Hong Kong. Hong Kong Chest Service/British Medical Research Council.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1980; 122:417–24.
437. Hafner R, Cohn JA, Wright DJ, et al. Early bactericidal activity of isoniazid in
pulmonary tuberculosis. Optimization of methodology. The DATRI 008 Study
Group. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 156(3 pt 1):918–23.
438. Mitchell JR, Zimmerman HJ, Ishak KG, et al. Isoniazid liver injury: clinical spec-
trum, pathology, and probable pathogenesis. Ann Intern Med 1976; 84:181–92.
439. Nolan CM, Goldberg SV, Buskin SE. Hepatotoxicity associated with isoniazid
preventive therapy: a 7-year survey from a public health tuberculosis clinic.
JAMA 1999; 281:1014–8.
440. Kopanoff DE, Snider DE Jr, Caras GJ. Isoniazid-related hepatitis: a U.S. Public
Health Service cooperative surveillance study. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;
117:991–1001.
441. Franks AL, Binkin NJ, Snider DE Jr, Rokaw WM, Becker S. Isoniazid hepatitis
among pregnant and postpartum Hispanic patients. Public Health Rep 1989;
104:151–5.
442. Millard PS, Wilcosky TC, Reade-Christopher SJ, Weber DJ. Isoniazid-related
fatal hepatitis. West J Med 1996; 164:486–91.
443. Salpeter SR. Fatal isoniazid-induced hepatitis. Its risk during chemoprophylaxis.
West J Med 1993; 159:560–4.
444. Snider DE Jr, Caras GJ. Isoniazid-associated hepatitis deaths: a review of available
information. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992; 145(2 pt 1):494–7.
445. Moulding TS, Redeker AG, Kanel GC. Twenty isoniazid-associated deaths in one
state. Am Rev Respir Dis 1989; 140:700–5.
446. Lubing HN. Peripheral neuropathy in tuberculosis patients treated with isoniazid.
Am Rev Tuberc 1953; 68:458–61.
447. Ormerod LP, Horsfield N. Frequency and type of reactions to antituberculosis
drugs: observations in routine treatment. Tuber Lung Dis 1996; 77:37–42.
448. Grant AD, Mngadi KT, van Halsema CL, Luttig MM, Fielding KL, Churchyard
GJ. Adverse events with isoniazid preventive therapy: experience from a large
trial. AIDS 2010; 24(suppl 5):S29–36.
449. Siddiqui MA, Khan IA. Isoniazid-induced lupus erythematosus presenting with
cardiac tamponade. Am J Ther 2002; 9:163–5.
450. Borchers AT, Keen CL, Gershwin ME. Drug-induced lupus. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2007; 1108:166–82.
451. Rothfield NF, Bierer WF, Garfield JW. Isoniazid induction of antinuclear anti-
bodies. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 1978; 88:650–2.
452. Smith CK, Durack DT. Isoniazid and reaction to cheese. Ann Intern Med 1978;
88:520–1.
453. Toutoungi M, Carroll RL, Enrico JF, Perey L. Cheese, wine, and isoniazid. Lancet
1985; 2:671.
454. Baciewicz AM, Self TH. Isoniazid interactions. South Med J 1985; 78:714–8.
455. Taylor AW, Mosimaneotsile B, Mathebula U, et al. Pregnancy outcomes in HIV-
infected women receiving long-term isoniazid prophylaxis for tuberculosis and
antiretroviral therapy. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 2013; 2013:195637.
456. Ludford J, Doster B, Woolpert SF. Effect of isoniazid on reproduction. Am Rev
Respir Dis 1973; 108:1170–4.
457. Weber WW, Hein DW. Clinical pharmacokinetics of isoniazid. Clin Pharmaco-
kinet 1979; 4:401–22.
458. Donald PR. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of antituberculosis agents in
adults and children. Tuberculosis (Edinb) 2010; 90:279–92.
459. Bowersox DW, Wintebauer RH, Stewart GL, Orme B, Barron E. Isoniazid dosage
in patients with renal failure. N Engl J Med 1973; 289:84–7.
460. Vikrant S, Agarwal SK, Gupta S, et al. Prospective randomized control trial of
isoniazid chemoprophylaxis during renal replacement therapy. Transpl Infect
Dis 2005; 7:99–108.
461. Dickinson JM, Mitchison DA. Experimental models to explain the high steriliz-
ing activity of rifampin in the chemotherapy of tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis
1981; 123(4 pt 1):367–71.
462. Girling DJ. Adverse reactions to rifampicin in antituberculosis regimens. J Anti-
microb Chemother 1977; 3:115–32.
463. Girling DJ, Hitze KL. Adverse reactions to rifampicin. Bull World Health Organ
1979; 57:45–9.
464. Grosset J, Leventis S. Adverse effects of rifampin. Rev Infect Dis 1983; 5(suppl 3):
S440–50.
465. Aquinas M, Allan WG, Horsfall PA, et al. Adverse reactions to daily and inter-
mittent rifampicin regimens for pulmonary tuberculosis in Hong Kong. Br Med J
1972; 1:765–71.
466. Villarino ME, Ridzon R, Weismuller PC, et al. Rifampin preventive therapy for
tuberculosis infection: experience with 157 adolescents. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1997; 155:1735–8.
467. Martinez E, Collazos J, Mayo J. Hypersensitivity reactions to rifampin. Pathoge-
netic mechanisms, clinical manifestations, management strategies, and review of
the anaphylactic-like reactions. Medicine (Baltimore) 1999; 78:361–9.
468. Brasil MT, Opromolla DV, Marzliak ML, Nogueira W. Results of a surveillance
system for adverse effects in leprosy’s WHO/MDT. Int J Lepr Other Mycobact
Dis 1996; 64:97–104.
469. Steingart KR, Jotblad S, Robsky K, et al. Higher-dose rifampin for the treatment
of pulmonary tuberculosis: a systematic review. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2011;
15:305–16.
470. Poole G, Stradling P, Worlledge S. Potentially serious side effects of high-dose
twice-weekly rifampicin. Br Med J 1971; 3:343–7.
471. Sanders WE Jr. Rifampin. Ann Intern Med 1976; 85:82–6.
472. Blajchman MA, Lowry RC, Pettit JE, Stradling P. Rifampicin-induced immune
thrombocytopenia. Br Med J 1970; 3:24–6.
473. Lee CH, Lee CJ. Thrombocytopenia—a rare but potentially serious side effect of
initial daily and interrupted use of rifampicin. Chest 1989; 96:202–3.
474. Agrawal A, Gutch M, Jain N, Singh A. Do not miss rifampicin-induced throm-
bocytopenic purpura. BMJ Case Rep 2012; 2012.
475. de Paula M, Saiz LC, Gonzalez-Revalderia J, Pascual T, Alberola C, Miravalles E.
Rifampicin causes false-positive immunoassay results for urine opiates. Clin
Chem Lab Med 1998; 36:241–3.
476. Steen JS, Stainton-Ellis DM. Rifampicin in pregnancy. Lancet 1977; 2:604–5.
477. Holdiness MR. Cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics of the antituberculosis
drugs. Clin Pharmacokinet 1985; 10:532–4.
478. Acocella G. Clinical pharmacokinetics of rifampicin. Clin Pharmacokinet 1978;
3:108–27.
e194 • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • Nahid et al
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
 479. Grassi C, Peona V. Use of rifabutin in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Clin Infect Dis 1996; 22(suppl 1):S50–4.
480. Chien JY, Chien ST, Huang SY, Yu CJ. Safety of rifabutin replacing rifampicin in
the treatment of tuberculosis: a single-centre retrospective cohort study. J Anti-
microb Chemother 2014; 69:790–6.
481. McGregor MM, Olliaro P, Wolmarans L, et al. Efficacy and safety of rifabutin in
the treatment of patients with newly diagnosed pulmonary tuberculosis. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1996; 154:1462–7.
482. Shafran SD, Deschenes J, Miller M, Phillips P, Toma E. Uveitis and pseudo-
jaundice during a regimen of clarithromycin, rifabutin, and ethambutol. MAC
Study Group of the Canadian HIV Trials Network. N Engl J Med 1994;
330:438–9.
483. Lin HC, Lu PL, Chang CH. Uveitis associated with concurrent administration of
rifabutin and lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra). Eye (Lond) 2007; 21:1540–1.
484. Le Gars L, Collon T, Picard O, Kaplan G, Berenbaum F. Polyarthralgia-arthritis
syndrome induced by low doses of rifabutin. J Rheumatol 1999; 26:1201–2.
485. Chen CP, Hsu YH, Hong SJ. Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused
by rifabutin. Arch Dermatol 2009; 145:1069–70.
486. Mycobutin/rifabutin [product insert]. New York: Pharmacia and Upjohn, 2015.
Available
at:
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2015/
050689s022lbl.pdf Accessed 1 April 2016.
487. Strolin Benedetti M, Pianezzola E, Brughera M, Fraier D, Castelli MG. Concen-
trations of rifabutin in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid in cynomolgus monkeys. J
Antimicrob Chemother 1994; 34:600–3.
488. Malessa R, Diener HC, Olbricht T, Bohmer B, Brockmeyer NH. Successful treat-
ment of meningoencephalitis caused by Mycobacterium avium intracellulare in
AIDS. Clin Investig 1994; 72:850–2.
489. DeVincenzo JP, Berning SE, Peloquin CA, Husson RN. Multidrug-resistant tu-
berculosis meningitis: clinical problems and concentrations of second-line anti-
tuberculous medications. Ann Pharmacother 1999; 33:1184–8.
490. Blaschke TF, Skinner MH. The clinical pharmacokinetics of rifabutin. Clin Infect
Dis 1996; 22(suppl 1):S15–21; discussion S22.
491. Bassilios N, Launay-Vacher V, Hamani AA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and dosage
adjustment of rifabutin in a haemodialysis patient. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2002; 17:531–2.
492. Girling DJ. The role of pyrazinamide in primary chemotherapy for pulmonary
tuberculosis. Tubercle 1984; 65:1–4.
493. McDermott W, Ormond L, Muschenheim C, Deuschle K, McCune R Jr,
Tompsett R. Pyrazinamide-isoniazid in tuberculosis. Am Rev Tuberc 1954;
69:319–33.
494. Campagna M, Calix A, Hauser G. Observations on the combined use of pyrazi-
namide (Aldinamide) and isoniazid in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis;
a clinical study. Am Rev Tuberc 1954; 69:334–50.
495. Pasipanodya JG, Gumbo T. Clinical and toxicodynamic evidence that high-dose
pyrazinamide is not more hepatotoxic than the low doses currently used. Anti-
microb Agents Chemother 2010; 54:2847–54.
496. Girling DJ. Adverse effects of antituberculosis drugs. Drugs 1982; 23:56–74.
497. Jenner PJ, Ellard GA, Allan WG, Singh D, Girling DJ, Nunn AJ. Serum uric acid
concentrations and arthralgia among patients treated with pyrazinamide-con-
taining regimens in Hong Kong and Singapore. Tubercle 1981; 62:175–9.
498. Solangi GA, Zuberi BF, Shaikh S, Shaikh WM. Pyrazinamide induced hyperuri-
cemia in patients taking anti-tuberculous therapy. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
2004; 14:136–8.
499. Taki H, Ogawa K, Murakami T, Nikai T. Epidemiological survey of hyperurice-
mia as an adverse reaction to antituberculous therapy with pyrazinamide. Kekka-
ku 2008; 83:497–501.
500. Tosun AK, Koca NT, Karatas GK. Acute gouty arthritis during pyrazinamide
treatment: a case report. Mod Rheumatol 2004; 14:306–8.
501. Cullen JH, Early LJ, Fiore JM. The occurrence of hyperuricemia during pyrazi-
namide-isoniazid therapy. Am Rev Tuberc 1956; 74(2 pt 1):289–92.
502. Tan WC, Ong CK, Kang SC, Razak MA. Two years review of cutaneous adverse
drug reaction from first line anti-tuberculous drugs. Med J Malaysia 2007;
62:143–6.
503. Lehloenya RJ, Todd G, Badri M, Dheda K. Outcomes of reintroducing anti-tu-
berculosis drugs following cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Int J Tuberc Lung
Dis 2011; 15:1649–57.
504. Choonhakarn C, Janma J. Pyrazinamide-induced lichenoid photodermatitis. J
Am Acad Dermatol 1999; 40:645–6.
505. Maurya V, Panjabi C, Shah A. Pyrazinamide induced photoallergy. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis 2001; 5:1075–6.
506. Ellard GA, Humphries MJ, Gabriel M, Teoh R. Penetration of pyrazinamide into
the cerebrospinal fluid in tuberculous meningitis. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1987;
294:284–5.
507. Ellard GA. Absorption, metabolism and excretion of pyrazinamide in man. Tu-
bercle 1969; 50:144–58.
508. Five-year follow-up of a controlled trial of five 6-month regimens of chemother-
apy for pulmonary tuberculosis. Hong Kong Chest Service/British Medical Re-
search Council. Am Rev Respir Dis 1987; 136:1339–42.
509. World Health Organization. Ethambutol efficacy and toxicity: literature review
and recommendations for daily and intermittent dosage in children. Geneva,
Switzerland: WHO, 2006.
510. Varughese A, Brater DC, Benet LZ, Lee CS. Ethambutol kinetics in patients with
impaired renal function. Am Rev Respir Dis 1986; 134:34–8.
511. Chen HY, Lai SW, Muo CH, Chen PC, Wang IJ. Ethambutol-induced optic neu-
ropathy: a nationwide population-based study from Taiwan. Br J Ophthalmol
2012; 96:1368–71.
512. Mustak H, Rogers G, Cook C. Ethambutol induced toxic optic neuropathy in
HIV positive patients. Int J Ophthalmol 2013; 6:542–5.
513. Tugwell P, James SL. Peripheral neuropathy with ethambutol. Postgrad Med J
1972; 48:667–70.
514. Doster B, Murray FJ, Newman R, Woolpert SF. Ethambutol in the initial treat-
ment of pulmonary tuberculosis. U.S. Public Health Service tuberculosis therapy
trials. Am Rev Respir Dis 1973; 107:177–90.
515. Bobrowitz ID. Ethambutol in pregnancy. Chest 1974; 66:20–4.
516. Lewit T, Nebel L, Terracina S, Karman S. Ethambutol in pregnancy: observations
on embryogenesis. Chest 1974; 66:25–6.
517. Pilheu JA, Maglio F, Cetrangolo R, Pleus AD. Concentrations of ethambutol in
the cerebrospinal fluid after oral administration. Tubercle 1971; 52:117–22.
518. Strauss I, Erhardt F. Ethambutol absorption, excretion and dosage in patients
with renal tuberculosis. Chemotherapy 1970; 15:148–57.
519. Moulding T, Dutt AK, Reichman LB. Fixed-dose combinations of anti-
tuberculous medications to prevent drug resistance. Ann Intern Med 1995;
122:951–4.
520. Briasoulis A, Agarwal V, Pierce WJ. QT prolongation and torsade de pointes in-
duced by fluoroquinolones: infrequent side effects from commonly used medica-
tions. Cardiology 2011; 120:103–10.
521. Owens RC Jr, Ambrose PG. Antimicrobial safety: focus on fluoroquinolones. Clin
Infect Dis 2005; 41(suppl 2):S144–57.
522. Lipsky BA, Baker CA. Fluoroquinolone toxicity profiles: a review focusing on
newer agents. Clin Infect Dis 1999; 28:352–64.
523. Bradley JS, Kauffman RE, Balis DA, et al. Assessment of musculoskeletal toxicity
5 years after therapy with levofloxacin. Pediatrics 2014; 134:e146–53.
524. Thee S, Garcia-Prats AJ, Donald PR, Hesseling AC, Schaaf HS. Fluoroquinolones
for the treatment of tuberculosis in children. Tuberculosis (Edinb) 2015;
95:229–45.
525. Mase SR, Jereb JA, Gonzalez D, et al. Pharmacokinetics and dosing of levoflox-
acin in children treated for active or latent multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, Fed-
erated States of Micronesia and Republic of the Marshall Islands. Pediatr Infect
Dis J 2016; 35:414–21.
526. Schaefer C, Amoura-Elefant E, Vial T, et al. Pregnancy outcome after prenatal
quinolone exposure. Evaluation of a case registry of the European Network of
Teratology Information Services (ENTIS). Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
1996; 69:83–9.
527. Czock D, Husig-Linde C, Langhoff A, et al. Pharmacokinetics of moxifloxacin
and levofloxacin in intensive care unit patients who have acute renal
failure and undergo extended daily dialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2006;
1:1263–8.
528. Tsaganos T, Kouki P, Digenis P, Giamarellou H, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Ka-
nellakopoulou K. Pharmacokinetics of levofloxacin after single and multiple oral
doses in patients undergoing intermittent haemodialysis. Int J Antimicrob
Agents 2008; 32:46–9.
529. Barth J, Jager D, Mundkowski R, Drewelow B, Welte T, Burkhardt O. Single- and
multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of intravenous moxifloxacin in patients with se-
vere hepatic impairment. J Antimicrob Chemother 2008; 62:575–8.
530. Ho CC, Chen YC, Hu FC, Yu CJ, Yang PC, Luh KT. Safety of fluoroquinolone use
in patients with hepatotoxicity induced by anti-tuberculosis regimens. Clin Infect
Dis 2009; 48:1526–33.
531. Liu Q, Abba K, Alejandria MM, Balanag VM, Berba RP, Lansang MA. Reminder
systems and late patient tracers in the diagnosis and management of tuberculosis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008; 4:CD006594.
ATS/CDC/IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for Drug-Susceptible TB • CID 2016:63 (1 October) • e195
 at Univ of Calif - San Francisco on September 22, 2016
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
