 EC O N O M I C S
Copyright © 2019
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
originalU.S.Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Evaluating the impacts of protected areas on human
well-being across the developing world
R. Naidoo1,2*, D. Gerkey3, D. Hole4, A. Pfaff5, A. M. Ellis6, C. D. Golden7, D. Herrera8, K. Johnson9†,
M. Mulligan10, T. H. Ricketts11, B. Fisher11
Protected areas (PAs) are fundamental for biodiversity conservation, yet their impacts on nearby residents are
contested. We synthesized environmental and socioeconomic conditions of >87,000 children in >60,000 households
situated either near or far from >600 PAs within 34 developing countries. We used quasi-experimental hierarchical
regression to isolate the impact of living near a PA on several aspects of human well-being. Households near PAs with
tourism also had higher wealth levels (by 17%) and a lower likelihood of poverty (by 16%) than similar households
living far from PAs. Children under 5 years old living near multiple-use PAs with tourism also had higher height-for-age
scores (by 10%) and were less likely to be stunted (by 13%) than similar children living far from PAs. For the largest and
most comprehensive socioeconomic-environmental dataset yet assembled, we found no evidence of negative PA im-
pacts and consistent statistical evidence to suggest PAs can positively affect human well-being.
INTRODUCTION
The world has committed, through the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), to halt biodiversity loss and
increase protected area (PA) coverage (Aichi Target 11 and SDG 15)
and to reduce multidimensional poverty by half by 2030 (SDG 1.2)
(1, 2). It is crucial to determine whether these goals are synergistic or
antagonistic. Recent calls to evaluate interactions between SDGs have
highlighted that achieving one goal in isolation may actually have neg-
ative consequences for sustainable development foci of other goals (3).
Therefore, is the expansion of the world’s PA network—a cornerstone
of biodiversity conservation strategies (4–6)—likely to enhance the
prospects of achieving global goals around poverty alleviation and
human health or to hamper them?
Whether conservation activities benefit or harm people living near
PAs has been debated extensively (7, 8). The empirical foundation for
the debate has been shaped by research using different methodologies
across varying temporal and spatial scales (9–13), making it difficult to
derive general insights. A recent meta-analysis of 1043 studies con-
cluded that empirical evidence for impacts of PAs on human well-being
remains thin: Only 8% of studies examining impacts on material living
standards and 1% of studies analyzing impacts on health used rigorous,
quantitative methods and data (14, 15). In addition, a separate system-
atic review found that the few studies that used comparable, quantitative
approaches produced a mix of positive and negative outcomes that were
highly dependent on context and methodology, making it virtually im-
possible to detect any global patterns in PA impacts on human well-
being (16). To detect these patterns, we need data on PAs, environmental
conditions, and indicators of well-being that are sufficiently fine-grained
to reflect complex dynamics at local scales but that are consistent and
comprehensive enough to enable analyses at global scales. We also
require an analytical approach that can disentangle the many, complex
factors that shape multidimensional human well-being, allowing the
independent impacts of PAs to be revealed.
To address these challenges, we developed a georeferenced database
comprising information on ~300,000 children and ~190,000 households
across 34 countries in the developing world (Fig. 1) (17). We merged
household Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS; table S1) on ma-
ternal and reproductive health, childhood growth, and household
assets with spatial data layers characterizing the biophysical environment
and the world’s PAs (18). While human well-being includes multiple
dimensions that can be measured in many ways (19), our database
allowedustoselectproxiesfortwoimportantaspectsofwell-being:health
and material living standards (15). For both, we examined average PA
impacts and whether there was evidence of “pro-poor” impacts [i.e., dif-
ferential impacts of PAs on the least well-off people (20)]. Our outcome
variables for health were early childhood (age 6 to 60 months) height-
for-age growth scores relative to internationally consistent World Health
Organization (WHO) standards and whether a child is stunted (stunting
affects more than 160 million children, often limiting physical and cog-
nitive growth for life, and is defined as whether a height-for-age score is
more than two SDs lower than WHO benchmarks) (21). For material
living standards,theoutcome variableswere aninternationallystandard-
ized household wealth score (derived from the presence or absence in
households of a variety of durable goods and assets related to living
standards) and whether a household is poor (defined as a household
wealth score of less than 1000 international dollars) (22). Rather than
construct a multidimensional index of well-being or poverty (23), we
analyzed each of these outcome variables separately to allow for possible
differential PA impacts on each metric and to avoid any perception that
our well-being indicators are comprehensive enough to warrant their
own multidimensional index.
To analyze the impact of proximity to a PA on these dimensions of
well-being, we identified all households within the database that were
located within 10 km of a PA of International Union for Conservation
of Nature (IUCN) classes I to VI (24). This distance conforms with pre-
vious thresholds at which PAs are thought to exert ecological and socio-
economic impacts (10), although we tested the sensitivity of our results
to this threshold (see Materials and Methods). Since PAs are not
1WWF-US, Washington, DC, USA. 2Institute for Resources, Environment, and Sustain-
ability, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 3Anthropology, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. 4Conservation International, Washington, DC,
USA. 5Sanford School of Public Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 6Duke
Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC, USA. 7Harvard School of Public Health,
Cambridge, MA, USA. 8Environmental Defense Fund, Washington, DC, USA. 9United
States Agency for International Development (USAID), Washington, DC, USA. 10De-
partment of Geography, King’s College London, London, UK. 11Gund Institute for
Ecological Economics, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: robin.naidoo@wwfus.org
†Disclaimer: The findings and interpretations in this paper do not necessarily reflect
the view of the US Agency for International Development, the US Department of
Agriculture, or the United States government.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Naidoo et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaav3006
3 April 2019
1 of 7
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 situated randomly in landscapes but rather tend to occur in more
isolated, less productive areas (25), people living near PAs may also sys-
tematically differ in socioeconomic attributes that may confound any
assessment of well-being (26). We therefore used a conceptual model
(Fig. 2) along with quasi-experimental matching techniques (27, 28)
to create a “control” group located further than 10 km from PAs that
were, on average and in relevant ways, similar to people living close to
PAs. We aggregated all children and households living near and far
from PAs across all countries and then used Bayesian regression
modeling techniques (29) to estimate the impact of PA proximity on
our four outcome variables while accounting for the hierarchical, non-
independent nature of our data (see Materials and Methods). We also
assessed whether PAs with different characteristics—age, size, IUCN
categorization, and the documented presence of tourism—exerted dif-
ferential impacts on the health and wealth of nearby households (table
S2) and examined how sensitive our results were to possible hidden bias
due to unobserved confounding variables, using Rosenbaum bounds
(table S3).
RESULTS
After matching (fig. S1 and tables S2 and S4), the best impact estimation
regression models showed strong effects, in the expected direction, of
factors typically associated with human well-being gains. A mother’s
education level was the strongest predictor of height-for-age scores
and likelihood of stunting, while living in an urban (versus rural) area
was the strongest predictor of increased wealth and decreased likelihood
of being poor (Fig. 3 and fig. S2). We also observed strong effects for
breastfeeding (children not breastfed had lower height-for-age scores
and a higher likelihood of being stunted) and for distance to the nearest
road (households closer to roads had higher household wealth and a
lower likelihood of being poor). For all well-being outcomes, there were
also strong effects of survey year; height-for-age and household wealth
scores increased, and the likelihood of being stunted or poor decreased,
over the 15 years of DHS surveys. This result reflects the general
advances in development seen around the world during this period
(30). That our statistical models demonstrate the same well-being as-
sociations that have been extensively documented elsewhere provides
Fig. 1. Geographic distribution of developing country household surveys. (A) Global distribution of surveys. (B) Inset of Nepal. Dots represent sampling clusters
(blue, further than 10 km from a PA; red, within 10 km) in relation to International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) categories I to VI PAs (green polygons) in
countries with surveys.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Naidoo et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaav3006
3 April 2019
2 of 7
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 confidence in our results for PA proximity on health and wealth out-
comes.However,theyalsodemonstratethevalueof integratingenviron-
mental and socioeconomic data: Elevation and tree cover (negative) and
human population density and rainfall (positive) had similar effects on
health and wealth outcomes as several of the socioeconomic variables
(Fig. 3 and fig. S2).
We used our statistical models to simulate predictions for how
proximity to PAs of different types affects the health and wealth of
people (Fig. 4). We find that all else equal, a hypothetical move of
rural households to within 10 km of PAs with documented tourist
visits would result in significantly higher wealth scores (by 16.7% on
average) and a lower likelihood of poverty (by 16.1%) compared to
similar rural households living further than 10 km from a PA. These
impacts rise to 20.1 and 25.7% for wealth and poverty likelihood, re-
spectively, for a scenario where households shift to living close to
multiple-use PAs (IUCN categories V and VI), rather than those under
stricter protection (IUCN categories I to IV), where tourism has been
documented. Similarly, a hypothetical shift to living near multiple-use
PAs where tourism has been documented would, all else equal, increase
children’s height-for-age growth scores by 9.8% and reduce the likeli-
hood of stunting by 13.4%, compared to similar children living further
than 10 km from a PA. The likelihood of poverty would also be 8.8%
lower for households that shift to live near multiple-use PAs, even with
no documented tourism at these PAs. In contrast, no early childhood
growth gains were observed for scenarios where children hypothetically
move close to PAs where no tourism has been documented, nor would
wealth scores be higher in households moving adjacent to PAs without
such tourism. There was also no evidence for any negative impacts of
PAs on human well-being in any of our scenarios.
Context for these PA impacts can be generated by using our models
to simulate well-being impacts for variables whose human development
effects are more commonly studied (Fig. 4). For example, a hypothetical
switch from a rural to an urban household, holding everything else con-
stant, results in a 14.7% increase in height-for-age growth scores and a
20.1% reduction in stunting likelihood, while ceasing breastfeeding for
children would result, all else equal, in a 15.3% greater chance of being
stunted and a 15.7% reduction in height-for-age growth scores. For
wealth, a simulated increase in the number of years of education (from
amedianof4to7)resultsinhouseholdwealthscoresthatare34%higher
and a likelihood of being poor that is 34% lower. These examples
underscore the fact that the PA impacts we describe are not only sta-
tistically significant but also of comparable magnitude to changes in
socioeconomic conditions that are typically associated with improved
well-being or reduced poverty in the developing world (30). The excep-
tion to this comparability was the impact on wealth for a rural-to-urban
switch of households [a dominant driver of improvements in multi-
dimensional poverty (30)], which results in a greater than doubling of
household wealth scores and an 84% reduction in the likelihood of
being poor (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
Our results demonstrate that for a truly widespread dataset, going far
beyond the spatial scope of previous studies, there is empirical evidence
Protected
area (PA)
More tourism
Better 
health
More income
Improved
ecosystem
condition
Directly or 
indirectly provides 
opportunities for 
tourism
Leads to the active 
conservation and/or 
restoration of 
ecosystems within a 
PA
Provides 
jobs/income 
directly or 
indirectly 
through informal 
markets, 
increased 
infrastructure
Increases wild plant and 
animal populations in and 
near the PA, which are 
collected and sold at local 
market
Increases wild plant and animal populations in or near 
the PA (consumption as food or medicine improves 
health) and/or improves air and/or water quality near 
the PA, resulting in reduced disease and better health
Used to invest in household 
or livelihood assets
Used to buy food or 
medicines
Improvements in local infrastructure, including 
roads that increase access to existing 
healthcare facilities or may result in the 
provision of health care facilities directly
Increased 
wealth
Fig. 2. Conceptualizing PA impacts. Possible mechanisms of PA impacts on the health and wealth of nearby people. Individual pathways can be combined to
conceptualize an impact mechanism; e.g., pathway ADG suggests how PAs can lead to better health outcomes via income gains from PA-related tourism employment
that are then spent on improving children’s health.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Naidoo et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaav3006
3 April 2019
3 of 7
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 that PAs can positively affect human well-being in developing countries.
We suggest that there are at least four possible pathways or mecha-
nisms (31) through which this could be occurring. PAs with docu-
mented tourist visits (~15% of all PAs in our dataset), regardless of
management class, had strong positive impacts on household wealth
outcomes. This suggests firstly that such PAs may improve household
wealth by generating income or other material benefits via tourism-
related employment or affiliated markets that can then be spent on
household assets (Fig. 2, pathway ADH). Second, multiple-use PAs
where tourism has been documented also resulted in increased height-
for-age scores and reduced likelihood of stunting among children. The
tourism component of this impact may reflect increased household
income that is being spent, in part, on additional food, medicine, or
medical clinic visits that improve children’s health (Fig. 2, pathway
ADG). These tourism-related pathways for PA impacts provide further
evidence that the impacts of nature-based tourism can be positive for
people and for wildlife (32–35).
The third pathway through which PAs affect human well-being was
unrelated to tourism. The likelihood of being poor was reduced in
households living near multiple-use PAs (IUCN categories V and VI,
~1/3 of all PAs in our database), as compared to similar households
living further than 10 km from a PA. This suggests that multiple-use
PAs lead to improved environmental conditions experienced by nearby
households and that their accessibility—unlike categories I to IV PAs—
then allows people to benefit from a greater abundance of useful plants
and animals via harvest and sales at markets, resulting in income that
can be spent on household assets (Fig. 2, pathway BFH). Last, tourism
alone did not improve children’s health outcomes; improvements were
seen only in combination with proximity to multiple-use PAs. This sug-
gests a role for improved environmental conditions to positively affect
health via pathways BE and BFG (Fig. 2), as has been documented else-
where (36), although the fact that benefits are seen only at multiple-use
PAs suggests that an increased availability of natural resources, rather
than enhanced air or water quality, drives the positive impacts. More
generally, the synthetic relationships described here across multiple
countries can motivate further field studies that test mechanisms for
Fig. 3. Postmatching regression model results. Regression coefficients and 95%
credible intervals from Bayesian hierarchical models for the impacts of proximity
to PA, as well as additional matching covariates and interactions (e.g., “Within 10 km ×
PA tourism”), on height-for-age growth scores (A) and likelihood of poverty (B). For (A),
positive regression coefficients indicate variables that are associated with increased
height-for-age scores in children under 5 years old. For (B), negative regression coeffi-
cients indicate variables that are associated with a reduction in the likelihood of house-
hold poverty. See fig. S2 for regression results for likelihood of stunting and household
wealth scores. Colored symbols represent different categories of predictor variables:
green, PAs; blue, environmental conditions; brown, socioeconomic information.
Table S2 provides a detailed description of the matching covariates.
Fig. 4. Simulated well-being impacts of PA proximity. Predicted impacts (%)
of proximity to PAs of various types, as well as impacts of changes in socio-
economic condition, relative to a baseline scenario, for height-for-age scores
and likelihood of stunting of young children and household wealth scores and
likelihood of poverty. Baseline = rural household located greater than 10 km from
a strict (IUCN categories I to IV) PA having no tourism, with children that are
breastfed. x axis is broken because of high percentage impacts of urban residency
on household wealth and likelihood of poverty.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Naidoo et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaav3006
3 April 2019
4 of 7
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 PA impacts in specific countries and PAs; data from such additional
empirical research will also strengthen the global evidence base used
to assess PA–human well-being relationships.
We recognize that a more complete evaluation of well-being impacts
of PAs would include additional aspects we could not capture here be-
cause of limitations in the availability of high-resolution, global datasets.
These include additional components of multidimensional well-being
(19), social equity (37), historical displacements and exclusions (38),
the opportunity costs of PAs (39), environmental governance (40),
and less-tangible PA benefits that are difficult to quantify (19, 41). In
addition, our results are based on the location of current PAs, meaning
that there is no guarantee that they will hold if PA expansion occurs in
areas that are systematically different from existing locations. Last, given
DHS survey limitations, our analysis is largely cross-sectional. While
preprocessing data by matching and then estimating impacts via regres-
sion can perform as well as or better than difference-in-difference
estimators (42), it would nevertheless be desirable, where data exist
for particular PAs and/or countries, to assess how well-being impacts
evolve over time after PA establishment. Despite these caveats, our
results suggest that rather than displaying any negative effects, sev-
eral types of PAs across the developing world have positive impacts
on important aspects of human well-being. That multiple-use PAs
and PAs with documented tourism improve health and wealth out-
comes for the least well-off people in the developing world suggests
that the expansion of appropriately managed PAs can make an im-
portant contribution to SDGs that target poverty reduction, food se-
curity, health, and livelihoods (SDGs 1, 2, 3, and 8). Advancing this
area of research will be critical to further inform how targeted invest-
ment in PAs can support global goals around both biodiversity con-
servation and human development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Database—Children, households, environmental conditions,
and PAs
The database from which health, wealth, and some of the matching
covariates were extracted is more fully described in (17). Briefly, data
from all DHS surveys (18) that have been conducted in 39 developing
countries since 2000 were included in an initial database. The DHS
program conducts nationally and subnationally representative surveys,
implemented using a stratified two-stage cluster sampling design, across
the developing world. These publicly accessible surveys contain de-
tailed demographic and socioeconomic data at both the individual and
household level, obtained by interviewing women and men aged 15 to
49 on a variety of issues related to livelihoods, household assets, repro-
ductive health, family planning, and child health. After eliminating in-
stances where relevant DHS data for our analyses were missing, this
resulted in 312,727 observations across 33 countries for early childhood
growth and 190,794 observations across 34 countries for household
wealth. Key blocks of missing data occurred in Indonesia, Peru, and
the Philippines, where questions on stunting were not asked in some
or all DHS survey years.
We used global spatial data layers on elevation, annual precipitation,
tree cover, roads, anthropogenic land transformation, and human pop-
ulation density to characterize the biophysical environment of DHS
sampling clusters within which the households in our database were
contained. For elevation and annual precipitation, we extracted the
corresponding value at each cluster, while for roads, we calculated the
distance to the nearest road. For tree cover, anthropogenic land
transformation, and human population density, we calculated the aver-
age value in a 10-km buffer around each DHS cluster.
We used the 2013 version of the World Database on Protected Areas
(22) to assess whether DHS sampling clusters were located within or
outside a 10-km radius to a PA. We restricted our analysis to PAs in
IUCN categories I to VI, removing those PAs that were unclassified
since we could not be sure of their management objectives. We also
merged previously developed databases on the prevalence of tourism
at PAs, classifying PAs with any demonstrable level of visitation as hav-
ing associated tourism (33, 34).
Matching methods
Within countries and DHS survey years, we used a genetic matching
algorithm that weighted the matching covariates to achieve optimal bal-
ance (43). The set of matching covariates reflected our understanding of
conditions that (i) might differ among near/far from PA respondents
and (ii) were likely to influence the health and wealth outcome variables.
Controlling for variables that impact the likelihood of being in treated
versus control groups while simultaneously affecting treatment out-
comes is a key principle for the assessment of causal impacts from treat-
ment (28). Description of the matching covariates and the rationale for
their inclusion are found in table S2. We assessed the resulting covariate
balance across one to four matches, ultimately using two matches,
sampled without replacement, for each near-PA respondent as a
compromise between final sample size (more matches = greater power
to detect impacts), bias (larger samples = lower balance), and country-
level sampling constraints (some countries did not have enough obser-
vations that were further than 10 km from a PA to reach n = 4 or n = 3
matching without replacement).
Our country-by-country matching yielded a final dataset of 87,033
children and 60,041 households across 34 countries, including 28,913
children and 20,022 households situated within 10 km of one of
603 PAs (Fig. 2). For the analysis of early childhood growth, matching
to the most similar controls resulted in 91% of cases having a resulting
mean standardized difference below the 0.25 threshold that is recom-
mended for subsequent regression estimation (28). For the final dataset
on which we ultimately assessed PA-proximity impacts on early child-
hood growth, mean standardized differences for covariates were all be-
low 0.25 (table S4 and fig. S1). Matching to the most similar control
households for the wealth analyses produced similar values, with mean
standardized differences below 0.25 for 89% of the 333 country-variable
combinations and for all variables in the final wealth dataset.
Impact estimation regressions
After matching, we used Bayesian hierarchical regression models to
quantify the impact of PA proximity on the health/wealth outcomes,
while accounting for the nonindependence of respondents at three
levels: (i) individuals/households within DHS clusters, (ii) DHS clusters
associated with individual PAs, and (iii) PAs within countries. We con-
structed a set of candidate models that varied in (i) hierarchical struc-
ture, including random intercepts for sampling cluster and country, and
random slopes and intercepts for PAs and countries; and (ii) whether
the original matching variables were included in the final regression,
since including matching variables in the estimation regression may fur-
ther reduce bias in estimating the treatment effect, as well as allow any
remaining impacts of these variables to be explicitly quantified within
the treated-matched set (table S2) (44). Continuous variables were stan-
dardized by centering and dividing by two SDs so that their coefficients
were directly comparable and on the same scale as binary variables,
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Naidoo et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaav3006
3 April 2019
5 of 7
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 including the proximity-to-PA treatment variable (45). Support for
these impact estimation models was calculated using leave-one-out
cross-validation (loo); resulting values and interpretation are analogous
to Akaike information criterion values in frequentist model-selection
procedures, and 95% SEs for the difference in loo scores were calculated
and used to assess whether best models were statistically better than
next-best models (46). The best impact estimation model included all
of the matching variables in the final regression, as well as the full hier-
archical structure (i.e., random intercepts for sampling cluster and ran-
dom slope plus intercept for PA and country). Support for this model
was dominant with respect to the other candidate models for all four
outcomes (table S5). All analyses were conducted in the statistical com-
puting software R, particularly using the packages cobalt (47), Matching
(48), arm (49), brms (50), and loo (51).
Simulating impacts of PA proximity
To assess the well-being impacts of proximity to PAs of various types,
we simulated a baseline scenario in which predicted values of our out-
come measures of well-being were derived from posterior simulations
of the Bayesian hierarchical models. For this baseline scenario, we gen-
erated predictions holding all continuous predictor variables at their
mean values, while binary variables were assigned either a 1 or 0, de-
pending on which value was most frequently encountered in the data.
The baseline scenario assumed a rural household living greater than
10 km from a strictly protected (IUCN classes I to IV) PA that had no
associated tourism and whose mothers breastfed their children. We
subsequently simulated a variety of scenarios that reflected changes in
these conditions (Fig. 4), collecting median, lower 95%, and upper 95%
values over 1000 simulations for the following impact measure
I ¼ WS1 � WS0=WS0 � 100
where I represents the percentage change in the well-being outcome
under the alternative scenario relative to the baseline scenario, WS1 is
the predicted value for the well-being indicator of interest (i.e., height-
for-age score, probability of stunting, household wealth score, and prob-
ability of being poor) under the alternate scenario, and WS0 is the
equivalent measure under the baseline scenario.
Assessing sensitivity of our model results
We assumed that people living within 10 km of a PA were near
enough to be affected by its presence, while those further than 10 km
were unlikely to be. While there is strong empirical and theoretical
evidence for the validity of this threshold (10), we also tested for im-
pacts at two alternative distance thresholds. We reran allof ourmatching
models and subsequent impact estimation regressions using 5 and
20 km, respectively, as alternate distance-to-PA thresholds. The re-
sulting impact estimation models showed few differences in regression
coefficient values (fig. S3). The 95% Bayesian credible intervals for
coefficients of all predictor variables overlapped with one another re-
gardless of the proximity-to-PA distance threshold used. When exam-
ining impacts of PAs on well-being outcomes using these different
thresholds (fig. S4), we saw that despite a greater sample size and
therefore greater power to detect impacts, all well-being impacts at a
distance of 20 km are no longer statistically greater than zero except
for those associated with household wealth scores, and even these have
declined in absolute value relative to estimates at 10 km. This suggests
that a distance of 20 km from a PA may be too great for PA impacts to
extend out to. On the other hand, at a distance of 5 km, household
wealth and poverty impacts increase, but height-for-age and stunting
impacts decrease and are no longer statistically greater than zero. This
may be a function of reduced sample size and power; 95% Bayesian
credible intervals are larger at the 5-km versus 10-km threshold, re-
flecting increased variability of estimates. However, it also suggests
that potential impacts at a 5-km threshold are being dampened because
of the presence in the control group of households that are between 5
and 10 km from a PA and yet are seeing well-being improvements, as
per the analysis presented in Results. Note that the well-being im-
pacts associated with changes in socioeconomic variables (Fig. 4) re-
main relatively robust to PA-proximity threshold changes.
We also assessed how sensitive our model results were to the pres-
ence of hidden bias via an unobserved covariate that might strongly
affect selection into the treatment. We used the Rosenbaum bounds
approach as implemented in the “sensitivitymult” package in R (52),
which calculates whether differences in outcomes between treated
and untreated observations remain statistically significant as the value
G, which represents the odds of an observed covariate affecting dif-
ferences between treated and untreated, increases. Lower values of G
(i.e., close to 1) indicate models that are highly sensitive to the presence
of hidden bias, with greater values of G indicating models that are more
robust to such bias. In our case, the values of G at which treatment dif-
ferences are no longer significant due to hidden bias (table S3) are
similar to those from other studies that have looked at PA impacts
on poverty (13, 53, 54) and can be characterized as emanating from
models that are moderately sensitive to possible hidden bias. Note that
this test does not imply that a powerful and unobserved confounding
variable does exist; it merely assesses the sensitivity of matching models
to hidden bias if such a variable were in existence.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/4/eaav3006/DC1
Fig. S1. Assessment of matching effectiveness.
Fig. S2. Postmatching regression model results.
Fig. S3. Sensitivity of impact regression model results to PA-proximity threshold.
Fig. S4. Sensitivity of scenario simulations to PA-proximity threshold.
Table S1. Countries with DHS and associated number of observations used to assess impacts
of PAs on human well-being.
Table S2. Summary of matching covariates and PA characteristics used in quasi-experimental
evaluation of the impacts of PA proximity on human well-being.
Table S3. Critical P values from sensitivity tests (Rosenbaum bounds) to hidden bias, showing
G values at which significant differences between observations within versus beyond 10 km
from a PA disappear.
Table S4. Absolute values of the mean standardized differences for unmatched versus
matched comparison groups of children and households within and beyond 10 km of a PA.
Table S5. Evaluation of candidate models for estimating impact of proximity to PA on growth
scores, stunting, household wealth, and poverty.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. T. M. Brooks, S. H. M. Butchart, N. A. Cox, M. Heath, C. Hilton-Taylor, M. Hoffmann,
N. Kingston, J. P. Rodríguez, S. N. Stuart, J. Smart, Harnessing biodiversity and
conservation knowledge products to track the Aichi Targets and Sustainable
Development Goals. Biodiversity 16, 157–174 (2015).
2. J. D. Sachs, Goal-based development and the SDGs: Implications for development
finance. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 31, 268–278 (2015).
3. M. Nilsson, D. Griggs, M. Visbeck, Policy: Map the interactions between Sustainable
Development Goals. Nature 534, 320–322 (2016).
4. F. M. Pouzols, T. Toivonen, E. Di Minin, A. S. Kukkala, P. Kullberg, J. Kuusterä,
J. Lehtomäki, H. Tenkanen, P. H. Verburg, A. Moilanen, Global protected area
expansion is compromised by projected land-use and parochialism. Nature 516, 383–386
(2014).
5. J. E. M. Watson, N. Dudley, D. B. Segan, M. Hockings, The performance and potential of
protected areas. Nature 515, 67–73 (2014).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Naidoo et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaav3006
3 April 2019
6 of 7
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 6. C. L. Gray, S. L. L. Hill, T. Newbold, L. N. Hudson, L. Börger, S. Contu, A. J. Hoskins, S. Ferrier,
A. Purvis, J. P. W. Scharlemann, Local biodiversity is higher inside than outside terrestrial
protected areas worldwide. Nat. Commun. 7, 12306 (2016).
7. D. Roe, The origins and evolution of the conservation-poverty debate: A review of key
literature, events and policy processes. Oryx 42, 491–503 (2008).
8. W. M. Adams, R. Aveling, D. Brockington, B. Dickson, J. Elliott, J. Hutton, D. Roe, B. Vira,
W. Wolmer, Biodiversity conservation and the eradication of poverty. Science 306,
1146–1149 (2004).
9. T. Clements, S. Suon, D. S. Wilkie, E. J. Milner-Gulland, Impacts of protected areas on local
livelihoods in Cambodia. World Dev. 64, S125–S134 (2014).
10. J. A. Oldekop, G. Holmes, W. E. Harris, K. L. Evans, A global assessment of the social and
conservation outcomes of protected areas. Conserv. Biol. 30, 133–141 (2015).
11. C. J. Gardner, M. E. Nicoll, T. Mbohoahy, K. L. L. Oleson, A. N. Ratsifandrihamanana,
J. Ratsirarson, L.-A. R. de Roland, M. Virah-Sawmy, B. Zafindrasilivonona, Z. G. Davies,
Protected areas for conservation and poverty alleviation: Experiences from Madagascar.
J. Appl. Ecol. 50, 1289–1294 (2013).
12. P. West, J. Igoe, D. Brockington, Parks and peoples: The social impact of protected areas.
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 35, 251–277 (2006).
13. K. S. Andam, P. J. Ferraro, K. R. E. Sims, A. Healy, M. B. Holland, Protected areas reduced
poverty in Costa Rica and Thailand. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 9996–10001 (2010).
14. M. C. McKinnon, S. H. Cheng, S. Dupre, J. Edmond, R. Garside, L. Glew, M. B. Holland,
E. Levine, Y. J. Masuda, D. C. Miller, I. Oliveira, J. Revenaz, D. Roe, S. Shamer, D. Wilkie,
S. Wongbusarakum, E. Woodhouse, What are the effects of nature conservation on
human well-being? A systematic map of empirical evidence from developing countries.
Environ. Evid. 5, 8 (2016).
15. M. C. McKinnon, S. H. Cheng, R. Garside, Y. J. Masuda, D. C. Miller, Sustainability: Map the
evidence. Nature 528, 185–187 (2015).
16. A. S. Pullin, M. Bangpan, S. Dalrymple, K. Dickson, N. R. Haddaway, J. R. Healey, H. Hauari,
N. Hockley, J. P. G. Jones, T. Knight, C. Vigurs, S. Oliver, Human well-being impacts of
terrestrial protected areas. Environ. Evid. 2, 19 (2013).
17. D. Herrera, A. Ellis, B. Fisher, C. D. Golden, K. Johnson, M. Mulligan, A. Pfaff, T. Treuer,
T. H. Ricketts, Upstream watershed condition predicts rural children’s health across 35
developing countries. Nat. Commun. 8, 811 (2017).
18. D. J. Corsi, M. Neuman, J. E. Finlay, S. V. Subramanian, Demographic and Health Surveys:
A profile. Int. J. Epidemiol. 41, 1602–1613 (2012).
19. E. Woodhouse, K. M. Homewood, E. Beauchamp, T. Clements, J. Terrence McCabe,
D. Wilkie, E. J. Milner-Gulland, Guiding principles for evaluating the impacts of
conservation interventions on human well-being. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B 370,
20150103 (2015).
20. E. Beauchamp, T. Clements, E. J. Milner-Gulland, Assessing medium-term impacts of
conservation interventions on local livelihoods in Northern Cambodia. World Dev. 101,
202–218 (2018).
21. World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund, Global Nutrition Targets
2025: Stunting Policy Brief (World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 2014).
22. D. J. Hruschka, D. Gerkey, C. Hadley, Estimating the absolute wealth of households.
Bull W. H. O. 93, 483–490 (2015).
23. S. Alkire, M. E. Santos, Measuring acute poverty in the developing world: Robustness and
scope of the multidimensional poverty index. World Dev. 59, 251–274 (2014).
24. International Union for Conservation of Nature, UN Environment World Conservation
Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC), “The World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA)”
(Cambridge, UK: UNEP-WCMC, 2013); www.protectedplanet.net.
25. L. N. Joppa, A. Pfaff, High and far: Biases in the location of protected areas. PLOS ONE 4,
e8273 (2009).
26. J.-C. Fotso, Child health inequities in developing countries: Differences across urban and
rural areas. Int. J. Equity Health 5, 9 (2006).
27. E. A. Stuart, D. B. Rubin, Best practices in quasi–experimental designs: Matching methods
for causal inference, in Best Practices in Quantitative Social Science, J. Osborne, Ed.
(Sage Publications, 2007), pp. 155–176.
28. E. A. Stuart, Matching methods for causal inference: A review and a look forward. Stat. Sci.
25, 1–21 (2010).
29. A. Gelman, J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, D. B. Dunson, A. Vehtari, D. B. Rubin, Bayesian Data
Analysis (CRC Press, ed. 3, 2013).
30. UNDP, Human Development Report 2016: Human Development for Everyone (United
Nations Development Programme, 2017).
31. P. J. Ferraro, M. M. Hanauer, Through what mechanisms do protected areas affect
environmental and social outcomes? Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 370,
20140267 (2015).
32. P. J. Ferraro, M. M. Hanauer, Quantifying causal mechanisms to determine how protected
areas affect poverty through changes in ecosystem services and infrastructure. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 4332–4337 (2014).
33. R. Naidoo, B. Fisher, A. Manica, A. Balmford, Estimating economic losses to tourism in
Africa from the illegal killing of elephants. Nat. Commun. 7, 13379 (2016).
34. A. Balmford, J. M. H. Green, M. Anderson, J. Beresford, C. Huang, R. Naidoo, M. Walpole,
A. Manica, Walk on the wild side: Estimating the global magnitude of visits to protected
areas. PLOS Biol. 13, e1002074 (2015).
35. B. den Braber, K. L. Evans, J. A. Oldekop, Impact of protected areas on poverty, extreme
poverty, and inequality in Nepal. Conserv. Lett. 11, e12576 (2018).
36. S. C. Bauch, A. M. Birkenbach, S. K. Pattanayak, E. O. Sills, Public health impacts of ecosystem
change in the Brazilian Amazon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 7414–7419 (2015).
37. N. Zafra-Calvo, U. Pascual, D. Brockington, B. Coolsaet, J. A. Cortes-Vazquez,
N. Gross-Camp, I. Palomo, N. D. Burgess, Towards an indicator system to assess equitable
management in protected areas. Biol. Conserv. 211, Part A, 134–141 (2017).
38. D. Brockington, J. Igoe, Eviction for conservation: A global overview. Conserv. Soc. 4,
424–470 (2006).
39. J. M. H. Green, B. Fisher, R. E. Green, J. Makero, P. J. Platts, N. Robert, M. Schaafsma,
R. Kerry Turner, A. Balmford, Local costs of conservation exceed those borne by the
global majority. Glob. Ecol. Conserv. 14, e00385 (2018).
40. M. Lockwood, Good governance for terrestrial protected areas: A framework, principles
and performance outcomes. J. Environ. Manage. 91, 754–766 (2010).
41. S. Stolton, N. Dudley, B. Avcıoğlu Çokçalışkan, D. Hunter, K.-Z. Ivanić, E. Kanga,
M. Kettunen, Y. Kumagai, N. Maxted, J. Senior, M. Wong, K. Keenleyside, D. Mulrooney,
J. Waithaka, Values and benefits of protected areas, in Protected Area Governance and
Management, G. L. Worboys, M. Lockwood, A. Kothari, S. Feary, I. Pulsford, Eds.
(ANU Press, 2015), pp. 145–168.
42. P. J. Ferraro, J. J. Miranda, The performance of non-experimental designs in the
evaluation of environmental programs: A design-replication study using a large-scale
randomized experiment as a benchmark. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 107, 344–365 (2014).
43. A. Diamond, J. S. Sekhon, Genetic matching for estimating causal effects: A general
multivariate matching method for achieving balance in observational studies.
Rev. Econ. Stat. 95, 932–945 (2013).
44. A. Pfaff, J. Robalino, C. Sandoval, D. Herrera, Protected area types, strategies and impacts in
Brazil’s Amazon: Public protected area strategies do not yield a consistent ranking of
protected area types by impact. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 370, 20140273 (2015).
45. A. Gelman, Scaling regression inputs by dividing by two standard deviations. Stat. Med.
27, 2865–2873 (2008).
46. A. Vehtari, A. Gelman, J. Gabry, Practical Bayesian model evaluation using leave-one-out
cross-validation and WAIC. Stat. Comput. 27, 1413–1432 (2017).
47. N. Greifer, cobalt: Covariate balance tables and plots. R package version 2.0.0 (2017).
48. J. S. Sekhon, Multivariate and propensity score matching software with automated
balance optimization: The matching package for R. J. Stat. Softw. 42, 1–52 (2011).
49. A. Gelman, J. Hill, Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models
(Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007).
50. P.-C. Bürkner, brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models using Stan.
J. Stat. Softw. 80, 1–28 (2017).
51. A. Vehtari, A. Gelman, J. Gabry, loo: Efficient leave-one-out cross-validation and WAIC for
Bayesian models. R package version 1.1.0 (2016); https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=loo.
52. P. R. Rosenbaum, Two R packages for sensitivity analysis in observational studies.
Observational Stud. 1, 1–17 (2015).
53. G. Canavire-Bacarreza, M. M. Hanauer, Estimating the impacts of Bolivia’s protected areas
on poverty. World Dev. 41, 265–285 (2013).
54. K. S. Andam, P. J. Ferraro, M. M. Hanauer, The effects of protected area systems on
ecosystem restoration: A quasi-experimental design to estimate the impact of Costa
Rica’s protected area system on forest regrowth. Conserv. Lett. 6, 317–323 (2013).
Acknowledgments
Funding: Funding was provided by a National Socio-Environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC)
Pursuit awarded to B.F. and T.H.R. Author contributions: R.N., T.H.R., and B.F. conceived the
study. A.M.E., K.J., and D.He. led the data compilation. R.N. led the data analysis with the
assistance of A.P., D.G., C.D.G., and D.Ho. D.G. prepared the map in Fig. 2. R.N., D.G., D.Ho., and
A.P. wrote the manuscript with the input of all the other authors. Competing interests: The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data
needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the
Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the
authors and from IFC at https://dhsprogram.com/data/ for non-commercial use.
Submitted 3 September 2018
Accepted 8 February 2019
Published 3 April 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aav3006
Citation: R. Naidoo, D. Gerkey, D. Hole, A. Pfaff, A. M. Ellis, C. D. Golden, D. Herrera, K. Johnson,
M. Mulligan, T. H. Ricketts, B. Fisher, Evaluating the impacts of protected areas on human well-
being across the developing world. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav3006 (2019).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Naidoo et al., Sci. Adv. 2019;5:eaav3006
3 April 2019
7 of 7
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Evaluating the impacts of protected areas on human well-being across the developing world
Fisher
R. Naidoo, D. Gerkey, D. Hole, A. Pfaff, A. M. Ellis, C. D. Golden, D. Herrera, K. Johnson, M. Mulligan, T. H. Ricketts and B.
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aav3006
 (4), eaav3006.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/4/eaav3006
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/04/01/5.4.eaav3006.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/4/eaav3006#BIBL
This article cites 45 articles, 4 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
