 Inflammatory Memory Sensitizes Skin Epithelial Stem Cells to 
Tissue Damage
Shruti Naik1,†,*, Samantha B. Larsen1,†, Nicholas C. Gomez1, Kirill Alaverdyan1, Ataman 
Sendoel1, Shaopeng Yuan1, Lisa Polak1, Anita Kulukian1, Sophia Chai1, and Elaine Fuchs1,*
1Robin Chemers Neustein Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA
Summary
The body’s first line of defense against environmental assaults, the skin barrier is maintained by 
epithelial stem cells (EpSCs). Despite EpSCs’ vulnerability to inflammatory pressures, neither the 
primary response nor its enduring consequences are understood. Here, we unearth a prolonged 
memory to acute inflammation that enables EpSCs to hasten barrier restoration following 
subsequent tissue damage. This functional adaptation does not require skin resident macrophages 
or T cells. Rather, EpSCs maintain chromosomal accessibility at key stress response genes that are 
activated by the primary stimulus. Upon a secondary challenge, genes governed by these domains 
are transcribed rapidly. Fueling this memory is Aim2, encoding an activator of the inflammasome. 
Absence of AIM2 or its downstream effectors, Caspase-1 and Interleukin-1β, erases EpSCs’ 
ability to recollect inflammation. While EpSCs benefit from inflammatory tuning by heightening 
their responsiveness to subsequent stressors, this enhanced sensitivity likely increases their 
susceptibility to autoimmune and hyperproliferative disorders, including cancer.
Adult stem cells (SCs) maintain and repair tissues in health and disease. As such, these cells 
must sense and respond to environmental assaults. Epithelial barriers are especially 
vulnerable as they are exposed to a range of commensal and pathogenic microbes and 
noxious agents. How epithelial tissues, and in particular their long-lived SCs, respond to and 
cope with recurrent inflammation-provoking signals is unknown.
Epithelial stem cells (EpSCs), housed in the innermost (basal) layer of skin epithelium, can 
self-renew and also execute a terminal differentiation program that generates a constant 
upward flux of barrier cells1, 2. Defined niche factors emanating from the basement 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and 
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: fuchslb@rockefeller.edu, snaik@rockefeller.edu.
†Authors contributed equally to this work
Requests for materials should be addressed to Elaine Fuchs (fuchslb@rockefeller.edu).
Contributions: S.N, S.B.L, and E.F. conceptualized the study, designed experiments, and wrote the manuscript. S.N and S.B.L 
performed all animal, flow cytometry, microscopy, and genomic experiments. N.G. and A.S. analyzed the ATAC-seq and RNA-seq 
data sets. K.A. performed qPCR validations, cell culture experiments and cloned TRE-Aim2 overexpression construct. S.Y. assisted 
with culture studies and statistical analysis for wound healing studies. L.P. performed abrasion wound studies. A.K. helped design the 
TRE-Aim2 overexpression construct. S.C. engineered the Krt10CreER mice.
Authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 October 26; 550(7677): 475–480. doi:10.1038/nature24271.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 membrane and underlying dermis induce molecular programs that maintain EpSC identity 
and lineage commitment3, 4. How EpSCs endure assaults and restore normalcy is less clear, 
and yet their ability to do so is vital to survival. Here, we focused on how skin epithelial SCs 
respond to inflammatory stimuli. In doing so, we uncovered a capacity of EpSCs to learn 
from their experience for the sake of long-term tissue fitness and function.
Lineage tracing EpSCs in inflammation
To examine how SCs are impacted by inflammation, we utilized a model of skin 
inflammation induced by toll like receptor 7 (TLR7) and NALP3 agonist imiquimod 
(IMQ)5–7. In agreement with prior reports6, topical IMQ application elicited 
hyperthickening and parakeratosis primarily within epidermis and upper hair follicle 
(infundibulum), accompanied by EpSC hyperproliferation and apoptosis, peaking at day 6 
(D6) (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1a). By D30, these striking perturbations subsided.
Given these self-resolving features, we wondered whether D6 inflammation-sensitized SCs 
and/or their progeny contribute to epidermal homeostasis following resolution of 
inflammation. To track SC dynamics, we utilized inducible-marker based fate mapping2 
with Rosa-LSL-YFP reporter mice harboring CreER driven by the Krt14 or Krt10 promoter. 
Keratin 14 (K14) is present in all skin EpSCs, and at low doses of tamoxifen, Krt14CreER 
preferentially labels EpSCs of epidermis (and infundibulum). In contrast, Krt10CreER is 
expessed in differentiating layers (Extended Data Fig. 1b).
Tamoxifen-treated Krt14CreER;Rosa-LSL-YFP mice8 were topically treated with IMQ and 
lineage-traced for up to 180D post-inflammation. YFP+ cells persisted at equivalent numbers 
as naïve (control) skin despite restoration of homeostasis by D30 (Extended Data Fig. 1b,c).
2. Since Cre-recombinase was not activated without tamoxifen (Extended Data Fig. 1d), the 
YFP+ EpSCs were long-lived and had survived the inflammatory assault. By contrast, 
Krt10CreER-activated YFP+ cells though present initially were shed within 6D indicating 
that once progenitors commit to terminal differentiation, they do not revert even in response 
to IMQ (Extended Data Fig. 1b,e).
Enhanced wound healing post-inflammation
The persistence of inflammation-experienced EpSCs long after restoration of homeostasis 
led us to address whether this assault may have had a lasting impact on them and/or their 
microenvironment. We therefore challenged inflammation-recovered skin with a secondary 
assault, in this case wounding. Strikingly, post-inflamed (PI) mice closed their wounds 
~2.5X faster than naïve mice. The enhanced wound response by inflammation-experienced 
skin occurred even when the initial assault had occurred 180D earlier (Fig. 1b and Extended 
Data Fig. 2a and 2b).
To determine whether this heightened sensitivity might be triggered by other inflammatory 
stimuli, we replaced IMQ with topical treatments of vitamin D analog MC903 (to model 
atopic dermatitis)9, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA)10 (inflammation-induced 
hyperplasia), epidermal abrasion wounding (“sterile” wound)11, or infection with fungal 
pathogen Candida albicans12. In all cases, wounds healed faster in inflammation-
Naik et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experienced skin (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 2c). These results underscored the 
generality of the response, indicating that once skin is sensitized to inflammation, it reacts 
faster when faced with a secondary assault.
Following a full-thickness wound, re-epithelialization is mediated by sensitized epidermal 
EpSCs, which transiently express K1713. Inflammation-experienced skin displayed 
enhanced epidermal thickness and accelerated re-epithelialization, but showed similar 
proliferation rates (Fig. 1d, e and Extended Data Fig. 2d). Re-epithelialization by the 
migrating K14+ and integrin α5+ epidermal tongue neared completion by D5 in wounded 
post-inflamed skin, healing 2D faster than naïve counterparts.
To exclude myofibroblast-mediated dermal contraction as a significant contributor to 
augmented wound closure post-inflammation, we affixed a silicone splint around full-
thickness wounds14. Inflammation-experienced mice still exhibited enhanced re-
epithelialization and accelerated wound repair (Fig. 1f and Extended Data Fig. 2e). 
Moreover, using an assay that specifically measures keratinocyte migration (Extended Data 
Fig. 2f), we found that keratinocyte outgrowth from ex vivo explants post-inflammation13 
was more robust than controls (Fig. 1g). These findings suggest that inflammation induces 
long-term changes in EpSCs that enhance their capacity to react swiftly to a secondary 
assault.
IMQ intrinsically sensitizes EpSCs
EpSCs receive cues from their local milieu as well as from infiltrating immune cells and 
circulating factors that direct wound repair. Thus, we evaluated the relative importance of 
these secondary effectors on the sensitization of inflammation-experienced skin to 
wounding. When IMQ was applied to half the dorsal skin, pathology remained restricted to 
the treatment site (local), and upon subsequent wounding, distal sites closed comparably to 
control skin (Fig. 2a,b and Extended Data Fig. 3a). Thus, EpSC memory of inflammation 
was not transmitted through systemic (circulating) factors to naïve sites.
We next tested whether the heightened responsiveness of inflammation-experienced EpSCs 
was secondarily dependent upon memory of resident innate and adaptive immune cells15. 
CD45+ cells and various innate immune cell subsets [Langerhans cells (LCs), dermal 
dendritic cells (DDCs), macrophages (Mac), eosinophils (Eos), γδ T cells, dermal γδ T 
cells (γδ TCRlow), dendritic epidermal T cells (DETCs, γδ TCRhigh)] returned to normal 
levels by D30 post-inflammation (Extended Data Fig. 3b,c). Moreover, depletion of skin 
resident macrophages prior to wounding showed no obvious impact on the wound repair 
advantage displayed by EpSCs post-inflammation (Fig. 2c).
The initial psoriatic-like response triggered by IMQ is dependent upon dermal γδ TCRlow T 
lymphocytes that express RORC (retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor C)7 (Fig. 
2d). Additionally, relative to control, RORC+ adaptive immune cells were elevated in IMQ-
treated skin both at the peak of inflammation (5.0X) and in post-inflamed skin (1.8X) and in 
close proximity to epidermis and HFs (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 3d,e).
Naik et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Consistent with the involvement of tissue resident T cells in wound repair and pathogen 
responses12, 16, wounds closed slower when inflammation-experienced or naïve skins were 
depleted of their RORC+ lymphocytes. Notably however, even after RORC+ cell depletion, 
inflammation-experienced skin still closed wounds ~2X faster compared to naïve skin 
counterparts. Moreover Rag2-null mice, which mount an inflammatory response to IMQ 
despite the absence of B and T cells,7 also exhibited faster wound closure post-inflammation 
as compared to naïve skin. These data are compiled in Fig. 2f–h and Extended Data Fig. 3f–
i.
EpSC memory at the chromatin level
Memory of prior exposure to inflammatory stimuli has long been thought to be exclusive to 
immune cells. We posited that the heightened responsiveness of post-inflamed EpSCs to 
tissue damage may involve chromatin dynamics analogous to those recently described for 
innate immune memory17. To this end, we purified epidermal EpSCs from IMQ-treated skin 
at the zenith of inflammation (D6) and after their return to normal homeostasis (D30 and 
D180) (Extended Data Fig. 4a–c). We then employed Assay for Transposase Accessible 
Chromatin with high-throughput sequencing (ATAC-seq)18. Agnostic to specific types of 
epigenetic modifications, this strategy enables global identification of accessible chromatin 
states.
Independent biological replicates showed strong correlation (R2≥0.97). ATAC signals were 
enriched at transcription start sites (TSS) and distal regulatory elements CCCTC-binding 
factor (CTCF) sites, and were similarly distributed over various genomic and intergenic 
regions in all samples (Extended Data Fig. 4d,e). Although EpSC-specific genes, such as 
Klf5 and Krt14, showed similar chromatin accessibility patterns, striking differences were 
seen between D6 IMQ-treated and control EpSCs (Fig. 3a and Extended data Fig. 4f–h). 
44,414 peaks19 (31% of total) surfaced after IMQ treatment. Associated genes20 were 
enriched (p<10−12) in motifs21 for key epidermal transcription factors (TFs) [AP-1 (Jun, 
Fos, ATF members), AP2γ, KLF5, ETS2, GRHL2/3, p63], as well as TFs such as NF-κB, 
and STAT1/3, whose activation has been associated with inflammation.
By D30 after IMQ-exposure, many peaks had resolved. Notably however, >2,000 IMQ-
induced peaks were maintained, suggestive of an epigenetic memory. Some peaks were even 
present at D180, long after inflammation had resolved. PANTHER pathway analysis of their 
assigned genes revealed enrichment for inflammation- and hyperproliferation-associated 
pathways, including apoptosis signaling, interleukin signaling, oxidative stress response, 
RAS and PI3 kinase pathways (Fig. 3a–d and Extended Data Fig. 4g).
Associated with peaks persisting post-inflammation were DNA sequences enriched for both 
epidermal and inflammation-induced TF motifs (Fig. 3e). STAT3 was notable as it is known 
to be phosphorylated and activated upon IMQ treatment7. While it was re-activated in the 
secondary wound response, STAT3 activity was not maintained during the interim (Fig. 3f).
Naik et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Inflammation-sensing chromatin elements
Our data thus far suggest that inflammation-activated TFs facilitate the initial opening of 
certain chromatin domains, which then bind epidermal TFs and other chromatin modifiers 
present in both inflammatory/stress and post-inflamed/homeostatic states. The model further 
predicts that domains maintained post-inflammation should serve as accessible platforms for 
accelerated re-activation upon a secondary assault (Fig. 4a).
We tested two important facets of this model. First, we interrogated the ability of these 
persisting chromatin peaks to function as inflammation-sensing elements. Using our EpSC-
specific in utero lentiviral delivery method22 (Methods), we engineered mice harboring Pgk-
H2B-RFP and EGFP transgenes driven by one of several accessible genomic regions 
sustained post-inflammation. In contrast to Pgk-H2B-RFP, expressed throughout virally 
transduced skin epithelium, the EGFP reporters were not activated until IMQ was 
administered, underscoring their potential to act as tissue damage sensors (Fig. 4b).
If the persisting open chromatin domains post-inflammation are physiologically relevant to 
the functional EpSC memory, then they should participate in the accelerated wound repair 
that we observe in inflammation-experienced mice. To test this possibility, we wounded the 
skin of D30 post-inflamed mice, and 12 hrs later we evaluated the transcriptional response of 
EpSCs within a ~0.5mm2 radius of the wound edge. In parallel, we transcriptionally profiled 
the epidermal EpSCs from Ctrl and IMQ treated skins at D6 and D30 post-inflammation.
In line with the epidermal pathology, EpSCs from D6 IMQ treated skin displayed dramatic 
transcriptome changes relative to control counterparts. Changes correlated well with genes 
featuring newly acquired ATAC peaks (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 5a–c). While only a 
few of these genes were still transcribed at D30 (FDR <0.05), this picture changed rapidly 
upon wounding (Fig. 4c,d). Of the 140 genes upregulated within 12hrs post-injury, 73 (52%) 
were associated with ATAC-seq peaks that were acquired during and sustained after IMQ 
treatment (FDR<0.05). Given that wound re-epithelialization did not peak until D5 post-
wounding, this early activation of genes associated with inflammation-experienced 
chromatin accessible regions was notable.
Downstream effectors of EpSC memory
To understand how these “inflammatory memory” chromatin elements might confer a 
wound repair advantage, we first performed pathway analysis of the rapid-response 
transcripts (p-adj<0.05) whose genes harbor these chromatin elements. Within the top terms 
was “inflammasome signaling” (Fig. 4e). This included not only ‘Absent in Melanoma 2’ 
(AIM2)23, implicated previously in skin disease and cancer24, 25, but also other downstream 
components of the AIM2 inflammasome. AIM2 was particularly intriguing in that its 
transcript was sustained in EpSCs at D30 and D180 post-inflammation, and also increased 
following wounding (Fig. 4c,f). Consistent with our finding that the EpSC memory response 
did not rely upon RORC+ cells, Aim2 was sustained in inflammation-experienced skin 
depleted of its RORC population (Extended Data Fig. 5d).
Naik et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Loss- and gain-of-function studies revealed a role for AIM2 in endowing inflammation-
experienced EpSCs with their heightened sensitivity to a secondary assault. Aim2-null mice 
failed to show an inflammation-experienced wound repair advantage (Fig. 4g and Extended 
Data Fig. 5e). Additionally, when we engineered and tested mice whose skin epithelium 
harbored an LV-transduced, doxycycline-inducible Aim2 cDNA (TRE-Aim2), we 
discovered that in the absence of IMQ-preconditioning, elevated Aim2 expression was 
sufficient to augment wound repair (Fig. 4h and Extended Data Fig. 5f). Altogether, these 
data underscore a role for AIM2 as a key mediator of the wound repair advantage in post-
inflamed EpSCs.
In intestine, AIM2 suppresses stem cell proliferation26, 27 by indirectly inhibiting 
pAKTSer473 (Extended Data Fig. 6a). However in epidermis, post-inflamed wounds had 
higher levels of pAKTSer473 and equivalent numbers of proliferating EpSCs to control 
wounds (Fig. 1e, Extended Data Fig. 2d, 6b). Therefore, we focused on AIM2’s role in the 
inflammasome pathway that is triggered upon infection or tissue damage24, 28.
A central downstream effector of AIM2 is Caspase-1 (CASP1). CASP1 transcription and 
activity launched quickly within 12hrs of injury in post-inflamed relative to naïve skin (Fig. 
5a). Moreover, when CASP1’s activity was blocked by AC-YVAD-cmk29, wound-healing 
rates were unaffected in naïve skin, and reduced to naïve levels in inflammation-experienced 
skin (Fig. 5b and Extended Data Fig. 6c). This was not attributable to CASP1-dependent 
pyroptosis, since both control and post-inflamed wound edge EpSCs exhibited minimal and 
equivalent levels of cell death (Extended Data Fig. 6d).
CASP1 promotes maturation and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL18 and IL1β. 
Indeed, post-inflamed skin displayed increases in Il18 transcription and IL18 and IL1β 
proteins over naïve skin (Fig. 5c). To determine if AIM2 acts through cytokine production to 
accelerate wound repair, we repeated our experiments with Il18 and Il1r1 null mice. 
Although IL18 was dispensable, without IL1R1, required for IL1β-signaling, inflammation-
experienced skin failed to enhance wound repair (Fig. 5d,e and Extended Data Fig. 6e,f). 
Consistent with these findings, the addition of recombinant IL1β, but not IL18, enhanced 
keratinocyte migration from naïve skin explants (Fig. 5f). Conversely, when doxycycline-
treated TRE-Aim2 mice were injected with IL1R1 blocking antibodies, their rate of wound 
closure was comparable to that seen in untreated, naïve control mice (Fig. 5g and Extended 
Data Fig. 6f). Taken together, these data point to AIM2 and its downstream effectors CASP1 
and IL1β as central regulators of the heightened wound repair response seen in 
inflammation-experienced skin (Fig. 5h).
Discussion
Tissue adaptation to inflammation has been attributed to innate memory within macrophages 
and natural killer cells, and to persisting tissue resident memory T cells16, 17. Hence it was 
surprising to find that inflammatory memory is also an intrinsic feature of long-lived EpSCs, 
enabling them to respond more rapidly to a secondary assault. Sifting through the myriad of 
potential contributing factors offers avenues for future research. For instance, although 
overall skin basal cell numbers remained unchanged, distinct EpSC pools that do not 
Naik et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 participate in naïve skin responses, might become sensitized to do so by inflammation. Our 
current study points to a mechanistic paradigm set for memory T cells and trained innate 
immune cells17, 16, namely that EpSCs “remember” a primary inflammatory stimulus by 
maintaining certain changes to their chromosomal landscape that were induced at the time of 
assault. We show that these changes endow EpSCs with the ability to accelerate their 
response to subsequent stressors.
Most chromatin changes maintained in EpSCs after IMQ treatment were not accompanied 
by sustained transcription of their associated genes, nor did inflammation-induced TFs 
remain active. Since inflammation was necessary to render these chromatin domains 
accessible and yet not to maintain them once opened, the evidence implies that EpSC TFs 
and other chromatin modifiers present in normal homeostasis can propagate these chromatin 
sites made accessible during inflammation.
While underlying mechanisms are likely complex, our reporter analyses indicate that 
sustained open chromatin domains possess the information needed to sense tissue damage. 
Moreover, by remaining open long after the inflammation resolves, these sensors appear to 
have functional relevance in a secondary assault. Consistent with this notion, more than half 
the genes induced early and selectively at the wound edge of inflammation-experienced skin 
were associated with these sustained open chromatin domains.
The inflammasome pathway was featured prominently among these rapid responders. Our 
gain-and loss-of-function studies with AIM2, CASP1, IL1β and IL1R1 underscore the 
importance of this pathway in conferring a wound repair advantage to inflammation-
experienced EpSCs. Intriguingly, intestinal epithelial cells can also sense tissue damage and 
they express AIM228, raising the tantalizing possibility that EpSCs in other tissues possess a 
similar AIM2 inflammasome-mediated memory of a primary assault.
As beneficial as it may seem to retain inflammatory memory in order to hasten barrier 
restoration the next time a breach occurs, heightened sensitivity to tissue damage may not 
always be a blessing. Genetic alterations that mobilize SCs more rapidly are often associated 
not only with accelerated wound repair, but also increased cancer susceptibility30. Indeed, 
individuals with gain-of-function mutations in inflammasome components can show 
increased risk of epidermal cancers31, 32. Our findings suggest that the inflammation-
experienced memory in EpSCs may also underlie the recurrent skin inflammation displayed 
by patients with autoimmune disorders such as psoriasis and atopic dermatitis. Overall, the 
inflammation-induced rewiring of EpSCs that we have unearthed here is likely to have major 
implications for future therapeutics aimed at enhancing adaptive features and counteracting 
maladaptive ones.
METHODS
Animals
The following mouse strains were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory: C57BL/6J, 
B6.FVB-Tg(Rorc-Cre)1Litt/J (Rorc-Cre), C57BL/6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(HBEGF)Awai/J 
B6-Rosa26iDTR33, B6.129X1-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(EYFP)Cos/J, B6.129P2-
Naik et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Aim2Gt(CSG445)Byg/J, B6.129S7-Il1r1tm1Imx/J, and B6.129P2-Il18tm1Aki/J. Tg(Rorc-
EGFP)Ebe mice34 were a gift from Dr. Gerard Eberl (Institut Pasteur). Tg(Ly6a-Cre)1Isg 
mice35 were a gift from Dr. Isidro Sanchez-Garcia (Universidad de Salamanca). 
Krt14CreER8 and Krt14rtTA36 mice were previously generated in the Fuchs’ lab. 
Krt10CreER transgenic mice were generated by retrieving the murine Krt10 promoter region 
(8416bp fragment upstream of the Krt10 start codon) from bacterial artificial chromatin 
DNA (CHORI clone ID: RP23-336D20) and then inserting it upstream of the Beta-Globin 
Intron-CreER–polyA, analogous to our Krt14CreER8 transgene. All keratin promoter driven 
CreER mice were then each crossed to Rosa26Flox-Stop-Flox-YFP mice37. All animal 
studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice were bred 
and maintained under specific-pathogen-free conditions at the AAALAC (Association for 
Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International)-accredited 
Comparative Bioscience Center at the Rockefeller University and housed in accordance with 
the procedures outlined in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. When 
possible, preliminary experiments were performed to determine requirements for sample 
size, taking into account resources available and ethical, reductionist animal use. Animal 
studies were not performed in a blinded fashion. Animals were assigned randomly to 
experimental groups. The number of animals shown in each figure is indicated in the legends 
as n=X mice per group.
Skin inflammation models
The dorsal skin of 8 week old mice in the telogen (resting) phase of the hair cycle were 
shaved with clippers and then subjected to topical application or treatment of the skin as 
below:
Imiquimod—Mice were treated with either ~1 mg/cm2 skin of 5% imiquimod cream 
(Perrigo) or control Vanicream (Pharmaceutical Specialties Inc.) for six consecutive days as 
previously described6.
Epidermal abrasion wounds—Mice were treated with depilatory agent Nair (Church 
and Dwight). A 2 cm2 area was then wounded shallowly with a rotary drill (Model 520 
Dremel) as previously described11 to remove the epidermis and induce re-epithelialization of 
the wounded skin.
TPA—Mice were topically treated with 40 nM/3cm2 skin 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-
acetate (TPA) (Sigma-Aldrich) in acetone or acetone alone daily for five consecutive days10.
MC903—Mice were topically treated with 2 nM/3cm2 skin of vitamin D analog 
Calcipotriol (MC903) (Tocris Bioscience) in EtOH or EtOH alone for 14 consecutive days 
as previously described9.
Candida albicans (Fungi) infection—Mice were infected with 106 Candida albicans 
(ATCC36801) as previously described12.
Naik et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lineage Tracing
At 8 weeks of age during the telogen (resting) phase of the hair cycle, mice were treated 
with 10 µg/ml of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (TAM) in corn oil (Sigma-Aldrich) by intraperitoneal 
(i.p.) injection for 3 consecutive days at the following doses: Krt14CreER;RosaYFP treated 
with 10 µg of TAM, and K10CreER;RosaYFP treated with 100 µg of TAM. Two days after 
the last tamoxifen treatment, the dorsal skin of a cohort of mice was analyzed for YFP 
expression by flow cytometry and immunofluorescence (Day 0 time point). Upon 
confirmation of YFP expression the remaining cohort mice were treated with the 
aforementioned IMQ regimen and analyzed at days 6, 30, and 180 post-treatment.
EdU pulse
For 5’-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU) pulse experiments, mice were injected 
intraperitoneally (50 µg/g) (Sigma-Aldrich) at specified intervals (typically 1–4 hrs) before 
analysis.
Punch Biopsy and Splint Wounds
The dorsal skin of mice was shaved at indicated time points after imiquimod treatment. After 
visually confirming that hair follicles in the shaved area were in telogen (resting) phase of 
the hair cycle, 6 mm biopsy punches (Miltex) were used to make full-thickness wounds. 
Wound closure was assessed macroscopically with an engineer's caliper daily. 3 mm wounds 
were splinted with 8 mm silicone splints as previously described14. Wound closure was 
assessed macroscopically with an engineer's caliper daily. Wound area was calculated by 
applying the area of an ellipse (π*r1*r2) to the two diameter measurements on the y-axis, 
and x-axis of the wound. One-, two- and three-phase decay model of curve fitting was 
performed for wound healing assays. The two- and three-phase decay analyses showed 
minimal contributions from second (Kslow Ctrl=0.00015 PI=0.0017) phase and generated an 
“ambiguous fit” error indicating wide confidence intervals and that the software (PRISM 
GraphPad) is unable to find a unique curve to fit the data. Therefore, wound healing rate 
constants were calculated using a One-Phase Decay Model (PRISM GraphPad).
Diptheria toxin administration
Mice were intraperitonially (i.p.) injected with 200 ng of Diptheria Toxin (Sigma Aldrich) 
twice daily for 5 consecutive days. Mice were maintained on a sulfatrim diet and 0.5 mg/ml 
oral fluconazole (Citron Pharma) supplemented in drinking water throughout the course of 
treatment and subsequent wounding experiment.
Caspase inhibitor administration
Mice were i.p. injected with 0.6 mM of Ac-YVAD-cmk (Caymon Chemicals) 29, 38 1 day 
prior to wounding and then daily for the first five days of the wound response.
Clodronate liposome administration
Mice were i.p. injected with either 200 µl clodronate or control liposomes (http://
www.clodronateliposomes.org) 8 day prior to and then every two days until wounding.
Naik et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Anti-IL1R1 administration
Mice were i.p. injected with 0.2 µg of Anti-IL1R1 antibody (JAMA-147) or Armenian 
Hamster Isotype control (BioXCell) 1 day prior to wounding and then daily for the first five 
days of the wound response.
In utero lentiviral (LV) transduction
Transductions were achieved by in utero injection of lentivirus into the amniotic sacs of E9.5 
mice22. At E9.5, the surface ectoderm exists as a single layer of unspecified K14+ EpSC 
progenitors, which become stably transduced by LV within 24 hrs. High LV titers enable 
highly efficient and selective transduction of the entire embryonic skin epithelium, without 
affecting other skin cell types. In utero injections are non-invasive and do not alter 
embryonic development or elicit inflammatory responses in the skin. The DNA carried by 
the lentivirus is stably propagated into adulthood within the skin epithelium, including the 
epidermis and hair follicles. In utero LV deliveries were used for all ATAC-peak reporters 
and for delivery of TRE-Aim2 expression.
Doxycycline Feed Administration
Mice transduced with LV-TRE-Aim2 were placed on 2 mg/kg doxycycline feed (Bioserv) at 
postnatal day 53 and maintained on doxycycline diet throughout the course of wound repair.
Cell Isolation and Tissue Processing
Keratinocyte isolation was adapted from a previously described protocol39. Briefly, dorsal 
skin was shaved and digested using either 0.25% Trypsin/EDTA (Gibco) or Collagenase 
(Sigma) to obtain a single cell suspension. Immune cells from 1 cm2 pieces of skin were 
isolated after digestion with Liberase TM (Roche) based on an adapted protocol13. To isolate 
wound edge epithelial stem cells, 0.5 mm2 of skin adjacent to wound was excised and 
digested in collagenase.
In vitro explant migration assay
The in vitro explant migration assay was performed as previously described13. 2 mm punch 
biopsies (Miltex) were taken from the back skin after hair depilation. The skin was adhered 
to the bottom of a fibronectin-coated plate with matrigel (Corning) and cultured in 300 µM 
Ca2+ keratinocyte growth media made as previously described40. Explants supplemented 
with recombinant IL18 and IL1β (Peprotech) received 50 ng/mL of the cytokine daily. 
Outgrowth of Keratin 14+ cells from explants was imaged at indicated time-points using the 
10X objective of a Nikon Eclipse TS100 microscope equipped with an Exfo X-Cite Series 
120 and a Hamamatsu ORCA-ER Digital Camera. Images were analyzed with ImageJ 
software.
Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting
Female mice were used for sorting experiments at all time points and conditions to obtain 
maximal cell numbers. Single cell suspensions were stained with antibodies (Extended Data 
Table 1) at predetermined concentrations in a 100 µl staining buffer (PBS containing 5%FBS 
and 1% HEPES) per 106 cells. Stained cells were re-suspended in 4’,6-diamidino-2-
Naik et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phenylindole (DAPI) in FACS buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) prior to analysis. Data were acquired 
on LSRII Analyzers (BD Biosciences) and then analyzed with FlowJo program. 
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was conducted using Aria Cell Sorters (BD 
Biosciences) into either staining buffer or Trizol LS (Invitrogen).
Immunofluorescence and Image Analysis
Immunofluorescence staining protocols were adapted from13. Briefly tissue was fixed in 4% 
paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min at room temperature or 4 hours at 4°C. Tissue was 
washed 3X with PBS and switched to 20% sucrose overnight and subsequently washed. 
Tissue was then embedded in OCT (Tissue Tek), frozen, cryosectioned (14–20 µm). Sections 
were permeabilized, blocked and stained with primary and then secondary fluorescence 
conjugated antibody. Nuclei were stained using 4’6’-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). EdU 
and TUNEL Click-It reaction were performed according to manufacturer's directions (Life 
Technologies). For pSTAT3 immunofluorescence, sections were fixed in methanol for 20 
minutes at −20°C before primary and secondary antibody labeling. For complete list of 
antibodies see Extended Data Table 2. Migrating tongue was determined by measuring the 
length of Keratin14+ Integrin-α5+ cells. Percentage of wound-edge proliferating EpSCs was 
determined by counting EdU+ Keratin14+ cells per total number of Keratin17+ cells (Fig 1e, 
Extended Data Fig 2d). Data were analyzed using ImageJ Software.
Confocal Microscopy and Image Processing
Images were acquired with an AxioOberver.Z1 epifluorescence microscope equipped with a 
Hamamatsu ORCA-ER camera and an ApoTome.2 (Carl Zeiss) slider. Tiled and stitched 
images of sagittal sections were collected using a 20X or 40X objective, controlled by Zen 
software (Carl Zeiss). Maximal projection Z-stacks are presented and co-localizations were 
interpreted only in single Z-stacks. Z-stacks were projected using ImageJ software. RGB 
images were assembled in Adobe Illustrator CC2015.3.
Histology
Skin tissue was fixed in PBS containing 10% formalin, paraffin embedded, sectioned (0.8 
mm) and stained with hematoxylin and eosin by Histowiz Inc. Stained slides were scanned 
at 40X magnification using Aperio AT2. Slides were visualized and epidermal thickness was 
analyzed using Aperio Image Scope software.
Gross Images
Animals were imaged using a Leica DFC310 FX fitted with a Schott Fostec Ace fiber optic 
light source and a Leica microscope video lens objective 0.63x no. 10447367.
RNA Purification, Quantitative PCR and RNA-Sequencing
Quantitative PCR: Individual animals were used for qPCR experiments. Total RNA was 
purified from either whole skin biopsies, flash frozen and then homogenized with a Bessman 
Tissue Pulverizer (SpectrumTM) or FACS purified keratinocyte populations using Direct-zol 
RNA MiniPrep kit (Zymo Research) per manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts of 
RNA were reverse-transcribed using the superscript VILO cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen). 
Naik et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cDNAs for each sample were normalized to equal amounts using primers against Actb. 
XpressRef Universal Total RNA (Qiagen) was used as a negative control to assess FACS 
population purity. For complete list of qPCR primers refer to Extended Data Table 1.
RNA-seq: 3–4 animals were pooled per condition for each RNA-seq experiment. Total RNA 
was isolated from FACS purified keratinocyte populations using Direct-zol RNA MiniPrep 
kit (Zymo Research) per manufacturer’s instructions. Quality of the RNA for sequencing 
was determined using Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, all samples used had RNA integrin 
numbers (RIN) > 9. Poly-A selection and library preparation using Illumina TrueSeq mRNA 
sample preparation kit and sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 2500 or HiSeq 4000 machines was 
performed by Weill Cornell Medical College Genomic Core facility, 50 bp Single-end 
FASTQ sequences were aligned to mouse genome (GRCm38/mm10) using STAR41 and 
transcripts were annotated using Gencode release M9. Differential gene expression analysis 
was performed using DESeq2 package42 using the gene counts output from STAR read 
aligner42.
Ingenuity pathways analyses were performed on differentially expressed genes 12hrs post-
wounding. Abbreviated pathways are presented in Fig 4e. Complete terms are as follows: 
Granulocyte Adhesion and Diapedesis, Inflammasome Pathway Signaling, Graft-versus-
Host Disease Signaling, LXR/RXR Activation, Role of Osteoblasts, Osteoclasts and 
Chondrocytes in Rheumatoid Arthritis, TREM1 Signaling, Regulation of Cytokine 
Production in Intestinal Epithelial Cells by IL-17A/F, Hepatic Cholestasis, Allograft 
Rejection Signaling, Cdc42 Signaling.
ATAC-Seq
Assay was performed on 100K FACS purified cells as previously described18, 43. Briefly, 
cells were lysed in ATAC lysis buffer for 5 minutes and then transposed with TN5 
transposase (Illumina) for 30 minutes. Samplewere barcoded and sequencing library was 
prepared according to manufacturer's guidelines (Illumina) and sequenced on an Illumina 
HiSeq 2500.
For sequencing data analysis 50 bp paired-end FASTQs were aligned to mouse genome 
(GRCm38/mm10) as previously described43. Correlation between replicates was measured 
by first calling peaks in each replicate, merging the peak sets, followed by plotting Log2 
transformed signal against individual replicates. Aligned reads for the two replicates were 
then merged and peaks called on the merged dataset. Genomic annotation of peaks was 
performed using the Cis-regulatory Element Annotation System (CEAS)44.
Average ATAC signals for transcription start sites (TSS, +/− 3000 bp) and for chromatin 
insulator protein CTCF sites (+/− 1000 bp) were plotted for each sample CTCF sites were 
derived from CTCF peaks called in E14.5 C57BL/6 limb embryo from ENCODE 
(Accession: ENCFF001YAK) and converted to mm10 coordinates using liftOver. Average 
tag count is calculated by averaging the number of reads overlapping each base pair per 
million mapped reads. (Number of reads at each base pair)/(Total readcounts ×106). X-axis 
is distance from either the CTCF of TSS site.
Naik et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ATAC-Seq peaks were determined algorithmically using Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq 
2 (MACS2) algorithm with the option “--keep-dup all” to keep duplicates generated by 
combining experimental replicates45. Each peak is of varying size representing regions of 
signal enrichment over background. Shared peaks were defined as regions that had ≥ 1base 
pair overlap between the two datasets. Unique peaks were then defined as regions that had 
no overlap. Regions where signal intensity did not meet the threshold (FDR<0.01) for 
statistical significance over background were considered “closed”.
Z-score transformations were performed to normalize data across various samples and time 
points. ATAC signals per base-pair over the mouse genome (GRCm38/mm10), excluding the 
mitochondrial and Y chromosome, were scored and then averaged over 500 bp non-
overlapping genomic windows. Background signal was then filtered out by excluding 
genomic windows that averaged less than 1 in any replicates. Data was clustered using 
Cluster 3.0 and visualized using GENE-E software46. Significantly different windows were 
assayed between samples by t-test (p-value < 0.05).
Sequencing data tracks were presented using University of California Santa Cruz genome 
browser47. Unique peaks at from day 6 and day 30 control and IMQ treated EpSCs, and 
overlapping peaking from day 6 and day 30 IMQ treated EpSCs were subject to ontology 
analysis using Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotation Tool (GREAT)20 with whole 
mouse genome (GRCm38/mm10) as the background. PANTHER pathways analysis was 
used to compare peak-associated genes with known pathways. Abbreviated terms are 
presented in Fig 3d. Complete terms are as follows: Apoptosis signaling pathway, PDGF 
signaling pathway, Histamine H1 receptor mediated signaling pathway, Notch signaling 
pathway, Thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor signaling pathway, Oxidative stress 
response, Oxytocin receptor mediated signaling pathway, Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor 
1/3 signaling pathway, Interleukin signaling pathway, Ras Pathway, Angiotensin II signaling 
through G proteins and b-arrestin, PI3 kinase pathway. Motif analysis of these regions was 
performed using HOMER software48. Selected ontologies and MOTIFS are displayed. 
Values below the false positive range (1e-10 to 1e-12) calculated based on cumulative 
binomial distributions by this algorithm were considered statistically significant.
Peak Reporters
Genomic regions with enriched signal in post-inflamed EpSCs associated with Aim2 (Peak1 
- Chr1:173,420,163–173,420,883, Peak 2 - Chr1:173,422,670–173,423,721) Armc6 
(Chr8:70,221,668–70,222,912), Aoah (Chr13:20,935,623–20,936,830), and Cotl1 
(Chr8:119,810,704–119,812,768) (Fig. 4c) were PCR amplified from keratinocytes genomic 
DNA and cloned into a pLKO-PGK-H2B-mRFP1-“Peak”-minSV40-EGFP vector3. After 
sequence verification individual plasmids were packaged into a lentivirus injected in utero 
into the amniotic sacs of E9.5 C57BL/6 embryos, as described above.
Inducible Aim2 Mice
Murine Aim2 cDNA was amplified from FACS purified EpSCs and cloned downstream of 
the TRE and minimal promoter of the pLKO-TRE-PGK-H2BmRFP1 vector.3 After 
sequence verification the plasmid was packaged into a lentivirus for in utero injection into 
Naik et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the amniotic cavity of K14rtTA E9.5 embryos. Aim2 induction was verified by qPCR 7 days 
after doxycycline administration to activate rtTA, which in turn binds to the TRE element.
CASPASE 1 Fluorometric Assay and Cytokine Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISAs)
Tissue lysates from 0.5 mm2 wound edge skin 12hrs post-injury were prepared by freeze 
thawing and then dissociating tissue with a tissue lyser (Qiagen). Lysates were assayed for 
CASP1 activity and cytokine levels. CASPASE-1/ICE flourometric assay (R&D) and IL1β 
(eBioscience) and IL18 (MBL international) ELISAs were performed according to 
manufacturer’s instructions. Tissue caspase activity is reported as units (U) based on 
recombinant human CASP1 (Sigma-Aldrich) standard. All assays were normalized to total 
protein levels in lysate as measured by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher).
Statistics
Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean, mean ± standard deviation, or 
mean ± 95% confidence interval. Group sizes were determined based on the results of 
preliminary experiments. Mice were assigned at random to groups. Experiments were not 
performed in a blinded fashion. Statistical significance for all wound healing studies was 
determined with the two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test with a 95% confidence interval 
under the untested assumption of normality. Within each group there was an estimate of 
variation, and the variance between groups was similar. Statistical significance of ATAC-seq 
peak and peak-gene comparisons was calculated using either a Mann-Whitney test or 
random permutation. Significance enriched of transcription factor MOTIFs were determined 
by cumulative binomial distributions. Significance of Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) 
was determined by right-tailed fishers exact test. Statistical analysis was calculated using 
either Prism software (GraphPad), DESeq2, IPA, or in R.
Data Availability
All data sets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study either presented in 
this published article, source data and supplementary files or are available from the 
corresponding authors on reasonable request. Genomic data sets generated during and/or 
analyzed during the current study are available in the GSE92967 repository.
Naik et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1. Lineage tracing of skin stem cells and progeny during and after acute skin 
inflammation
a, Epifluorescence images and corresponding quantifications of TUNEL+ basal cells at D6 
of imiquimod treatment (or vehicle Ctrl) and at D30 following treatment (n=7. P<0.0001, 
non-significant (ns, P>0.05)). b, Schematic, immunofluorescence images, and 
quantifications of tamoxifen(TAM)-induced (corn oil control, Ctrl) RosaYFP reporter 
lineage tracing with: Krt14CreER, expressed by K14+ EpSCs and Krt10CreER, expressed 
by K10+ terminally differentiating cells., intraperitoneal (i.p.) (n=4. all time points P>0.05). 
Plots depict percentage of YFP+ cells relative to pre-imiquimod (D0) baselines 
(corresponding flow cytometric plots in Extended Data Fig. 1c,e). Arrows mark examples of 
YFP+ cells. c, Lineage tracing of Krt14CreER; RosaYFP at indicated times. Left, flow 
cytometric analysis of Integrin-α6+Sca1+CD34−YFP+ epidermal keratinocytes. Right, 
immunofluorescence of tamoxifen-activated EpSCs, lineage traced by YFP+ to include 
progeny (n=3). d, Flow cytometry of Krt14CreER;Rosa YFP cells from the skin epidermis 
of animals that were lineage traced starting from IMQ treatment and analyzed at D180 
(n=2). e, Analysis of Krt10CreER;RosaYFP skins, lineage-traced beginning during IMQ or 
Ctrl treatment (n=3). Top, flow cytometric analysis of side YFP+ cells. Bottom, 
representative immunofluorescence images. All scale bars= 50 µm. Dotted lines demarcate 
Naik et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the dermo-epidermal border. Arrows mark representative YFP+ keratinocytes; DAPI (blue), 
4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. All plots represent mean ± SEM. n=x biologically 
independent animals per group. Significance for all plots was determined using two-tailed t-
test at 95% confidence interval. All experiments have been replicated ≥ 2 times.
Extended Data Fig. 2. Enhanced wound repair in post-inflamed epidermis
a, One phase decay modeling of wound repair in D30 inflammation-experienced (post-
inflamed, PI) or vehicle treated control (Ctrl) mice (see Fig. 1b). Note: relative to two or 
three phase decay models (not shown), the data (shown at right) best fit this model, and was 
therefore used for all subsequent wound repair data. b, Temporal wound closure analysis 
overlaid with one phase decay analysis at D180 post-inflammation (n=3). c, Temporal 
wound closure analysis overlaid with one phase decay analysis of skins at D30 post-
treatment with a variety of different inflammation-inducing agents: Calcipotriol (MC903), 
Naik et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), epidermal abrasion (Wound), or 106 Candida 
albicans infection (n=4). See Fig. 1c for rate constants. d, Immunofluorescence images of 
wound edge labeled with the following antibodies: anti-EdU to mark proliferating cells, anti-
K17 to mark wound-sensitized keratinocytes, integrin α5 to mark the migrating wound 
tongue that re-epithelializes the wound bed and K14, which marks the epidermal 
progenitors, expanded at the wound site. Vertical dotted lines mark the initial wound edge; 
arrows mark the edge of the extended epithelial tongue (n=3). Wound bed (w.b.). Scale 
bars=100 µm. See Fig. 1e for quantifications. e, Representative images of silicone splinted 3 
mm full thickness wounds from D30 Ctrl or PI animals (n=4). Scale bars=3 mm. See Fig. 1f 
for quantifications. f, Migration assays were performed on skin explants (see Fig. 1g), in the 
presence or absence of mitomycin C for 5 days under conditions that quantitatively abrogate 
keratinocyte cell proliferation. Note that epidermal migration rates are similar irrespective of 
whether cell proliferation was impaired (n=3, 3 technical replicates per animal. two-tailed t-
test, P>0.05). All plots represent mean± S.E.M. For individual data points in b and c see 
source data. n=x biologically independent animals per group. All experiments have been 
replicated ≥ 2 times.
Naik et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 3. The wound-healing advantage conferred to EpSCs is confined to the site of 
inflammation and is occurs even when skin RORC+ cells are ablated
a, Temporal wound closure analysis overlaid with one phase decay analysis of 
inflammation-experienced (PI) and vehicle control (Ctrl) skins, comparing the wound 
closure rates at sites distal and local to the topical application. Wound healing was initiated 
at D30 after IMQ treatment, a time when morphological signs of epidermal homeostasis 
were restored (n=3). Plot display data combined from 3 independent experiments, see rate 
constants in Fig. 2b. b, c, Flow cytometric analysis of total immune (CD45+) cells, αβTCR, 
γδTCRlow (Dermal γδT cells), Dendritic epidermal T cells (DETC), Langerhans cells (LC), 
dermal dendritic cells (DDC), macrophages (Mac), and eosinophils (Eos) from control and 
D30 post-inflamed skins. Quantifications shown at right (n≥3). d, Immunofluorescence 
images and quantification of T cells from RorcEGFP mice at the peak (D6) of inflammation 
(see Fig. 2e for post-inflammation). (n=3. P=0.0056). Arrows point to RORC+ CD3ε+ cells, 
thought to be the major drivers of IMQ-induced inflammation. Dotted lines demarcate 
dermo-epidermal borders. e, Flow cytometric analysis of frequency and cellular distribution 
Naik et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of RORC+ cells at D30 post-inflammation (n=4 P=0.0005). Proportion of αβTCR, 
γδTCRlow and double negative (innate lymphoid cells) within RORC (GFP)+ gate displated 
adjacent to total GFP+ cell quantification. f, Depletion of RORC+ cells does not result in a 
compensatory increase in other skin T cell populations (n=2). g, Immunofluorescence of 
skin sections showing effective DT-mediated ablation of all CD3ε+RORC+ cells (yellow) in 
RorcCre;Rosa-LSL-iDTR (RorcDTR) mice (n=3). These mice activate DTR from the 
Rosa26 locus only in RORC+ cells, enabling their selective ablation. DT, diphtheria toxin; 
DTR, DT receptor. h, Wounds heal faster in post-inflamed skin despite ablation of skin 
RORC+ cells (n=3). For corresponding rate constants in e–g, see Fig. 2f. i, Despite absence 
of T and B lymphocytes, Rag2-null mice still mount a response to IMQ and display 
accelerated wound-healing after return to homeostasis at D30 PI (n=3). KO, knockout. For 
rate constants see Fig. 2h. Scale bar: d, 100 µm and g, 50 µm. non-significant (ns, P>0.05). 
All plots represent mean± S.E.M. For individual data points in a, h, and i see source data. 
n=x biologically independent animals per group. Significance for all plots was determined 
using a two-tailed t-test at 95% confidence interval. All experiments have been replicated ≥ 
2 times.
Extended Data Fig. 4. Analysis of accessible chromatin in EpSCs during and after inflammation
Naik et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Immunofluorescence analysis of basal epidermal stem cell (EpSC) specific markers in 
inflamed and control skin. Scale bars=100 µm. b, Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) 
strategy for isolation of EpSCs (Integrins α6+β1+Sca1+), with exclusion of CD45+, CD31+, 
CD117+, and CD140a+ non-epidermal cells, as well as dead (DAPI+), and doublets (side-
scatter-width, SSC-Whigh and forward-scatter-width, FSC-Whigh). c, Quantitative PCR 
validation of EpSC purity (left) using total murine RNA as a control (right). Trp63 and Klf5 
are specific for EpSCs; the others are not expressed by EpSCs (n=3 mice pooled per group). 
d, Density plots depicting enrichment of ATAC-seq signals at transcription start sites (TSS) 
±3 kb and around CTCF factor binding sites. X-axis depicts respective distance ±1 kb from 
each of these domains. e, Distribution of ATAC-seq peaks within defined genomic regions. 
UTR, untranslated regions of predicted mRNAs. f, Genomic browser shots of peaks enriched 
in EpSC-specific genes Klf5 and Krt14 and unaffected by IMQ. Arrows denote direction of 
transcription. g, (Top) Absolute numbers of ATAC-seq peaks from D6 inflamed, D30/D180 
post-inflamed, and control EpSCs. (Bottom) Numbers and frequencies of ATAC-seq peaks 
that are shared in D6 inflamed and either D30 or D180 post-inflamed EpSCs. h, 
Transcription factor motif enrichment (cumulative binomial distributions, P<10−12) within 
the ATAC-seq peaks of D6 inflamed EpSCs n≥3. For further details regarding this figure, see 
Fig. 3a–e. n=x biologically independent animals per group. All experiments have been 
replicated ≥ 2 times.
Naik et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 5. Enrichment of inflammasome transcripts in wound edge EpSCs of 
inflammation-experienced skin
a,b, Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) strategy and qPCR verification of wound-
edge EpdSCs purity from skins that were either treated with IMQ or vehicle and then 
allowed to return to homeostasis prior to wounding at D30 (n=3 pooled mice per group). 
Relevant antibodies and exclusion of dead cells and doublets were described in the legend to 
Extended data Fig. 4. c, Matched ATAC-seq and RNA-seq analysis reveal that 91% of 
differentially expressed genes in D6 inflamed versus control EpSCs are associated with 
newly acquired ATAC-seq peaks. For further data regarding experiments in a–c, see Fig. 4c–
Naik et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 e. d, Sustained Aim2 transcription at D30 post-inflammation in mice depleted of RORC+ 
cells. n=3. See also Fig. 4f. n=6 (two tailed t-test with 95% confidence interval, P=0.0028) e, 
Aim2-null mice do not show enhanced wound healing post-inflammation. n=3. For further 
data, see Fig. 4g. f, Aim2 induction in EpSCs is sufficient to augment wound healing in 
naïve mice. n=4. For further data, see Fig. 4h. For individual data points in e and f see source 
data. All plots represent mean ± SEM. KO, knockout; OE, overexpression. n=x biologically 
independent animals per group. Experiments a–e replicated ≥2 times, f was performed one 
time.
Extended Data Fig. 6. Dissecting AIM2’s downstream effectors
a, Model depicting possible effectors downstream of AIM2. b, c, AKTSer473 expression and 
TUNEL labeling, respectively, in control and D30 post-inflamed wounds (n=3). d, See Fig. 
5b for schematic and further data relating to the experiment. Ac-YVAD-cmk reduces re-
epithelialization rates of wounded, post-inflamed skin to naïve, vehicle control levels (n=3). 
e, Absence of Il18 does not hamper the enhanced injury response of post-inflamed skin 
(n=3). For further data, see Fig. 5d. f, Absence of IL1β-signaling, achieved in Il1r1-null 
mice, abrogates the enhanced injury response of post-inflamed skin (n=4). For further data, 
see Fig. 5e. g, Anti-IL1R1 treatment reverses the wound repair advantage conferred by 
Naik et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 epidermal Aim2 overexpression in naïve mice (n=4). For further data see Fig. 5g. For 
individual data points in d–g see source data. KO, knockout; OE, overexpression. Scale bars 
= b, 100 µm and c, 50 µm. n=3. All plots represent mean ± SEM. n=x biologically 
independent animals per group. Experiments a–f have been replicated ≥ 2 times, g was 
performed one time.
Extended Data Table 1
List of Quantitative PCR (qPCR) Primers
Gene Name
Forward Primer
Reverse Primer
βactin
ccaaccgtgaaaagatgacc
accagaggcatacgggaca
Aim2
caggcaattgcatctgagag
cgcctcacaaagattttcact
Casp1
cccactgctgatagggtgac
gcataggtacataagaatgaactgga
Il1β
agttgacggaccccaaaag
agctggatgctctcatcagg
Il18
caaaccttccaaatcacttcct
tccttgaagttgacgcaaga
Trp63
cactctccatgccctcca
gcccaaccttgctaagaaact
Klf5
gattcacaacccaaatttacctg
ctttgtataaacttttgtgcaacca
Lhx2
cagcttgcgcaaaagacc
taaaaggttgcgcctgaact
Cd34
gaaccgtcgcagttggag
tccaccattctccgtgtaataa
Sox10
atgtcagatgggaacccaga
gtgtttggggtggttggag
Pdgfra
aagacctgggcaagaggaac
gaacctgtctcgatggcact
Ptprc(CD45)
ttcagaaaatgcaacagtgaca
ccaactgacatctttcaggtatga
Vcam1
tggtgaaatggaatctgaacc
gacccagatggtggtttcc
Runx1
ctccgtgctacccactcact
atgacggtgaccagagtgc
Lef1
ctgaaatccccaccttctac
tgggataaacaggctgacct
Extended Data Table 2
List of Flow Cytometry and Immunofluorescence Antibodies
Antibodies
Source
Identifier
Chicken Anti-Mouse GFP
Abcam
Cat# ab13970
Rabbit Anti-Mouse Keratin 14
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Rabbit Anti-Mouse Keratin 10
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Rabbit Anti-Mouse Keratin 24
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Rabbit Anti-Mouse Keratin 17
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Guinea Pig Anti-Mouse Keratin 5
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Rat Anti-Mouse MERTK clone: DS5MMER PE
eBioscience
Cat# 12-5751-80
Rabbit Anti-Mouse p-Akt(S473) clone: D9E
Cell Signaling
Cat# 4060S
Rabbit Anti-Mouse RFP
MBL
Cat# PM005
Rat Anti-Mouse CD49e (integrin-a5) clone: 5H10-27
BD Pharmingen
Cat# 553319
Rat Anti-Mouse CD3e clone: 17A2
Biolegend
Cat# 100212
Armenian Hamster Anti-Mouse gdTCR clone: GL3
Biolegend
Cat# 1181011
Naik et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Antibodies
Source
Identifier
Armenian Hamster Anti-Mouse TCRb Clone: H57-597 PerCp/
Cy5.5
Biolegend
Cat# 109227
Armenian Hamster Anti-Mouse gdTCR clone: GL3 AF647
Biolegend
Cat# 118133
Anti-Mouse CD24 Clone: M1/69 PerCP/Cy5.5
eBiosciences
Cat# 45-0242-80
Anti-Mouse CD11b-PacBlue Clone: M1/70
Biolegend
Cat# 101223
Anti-Mouse CD64-PerCP-Cy5 Clone: X54-5/7.1
Biolegend
Cat# 139307
Anti-Mouse CD11c-PECy7Clone: N418
Biolegend
Cat# 117317
Anti-Mouse I-A/I-E (MHCII) PerCp/Cy5.5 Clone: 107625
Biolegend
Cat# 107625
Rat Anti-Mouse Siglec-F Clone: E50-2440 PE
BD Pharmingen
Cat# 552128
Anti-Mouse Ly6c-FITC Clone: HK1.4
Biolegend
Cat# 128005
Anti-Mouse CD34 eFluor 660 Clone: RAM34
eBiosciences
Cat# 50-0341-82
Anti-Mouse Ly-6A/E (Sca-1) Clone D7 APC/Cy7
Biolegend
Cat# 108126
Purified Anti-Human/Mouse CD49f Clone: GoH3
Biolegend
Cat# 313602
Anti Human/Mouse Cd49f PE Clone: GoH3
eBiosciences
Cat# 12-0495-81
APC/Cy7 Anti-Mouse CD45 Clone: 30-F11
Biolegend
Cat# 103116
Biotin Anti-Mouse CD45 Clone: 30-F11
Biolegend
Cat# 103104
Biotin Anti Mouse CD117 (c-kit) Clone: 2B8
Biolegend
Cat# 105804
Biotin Anti-Mouse CD140a Clone: APA5
Biolegend
Cat# 135910
Biotin Anti-Mouse CD31 Clone: 390
Biolegend
Cat# 102404
Rabbit Anti-pStat3 (Tyr705) Clone: D3A7
Cell Signaling
Cat# 9145
Anti-Mouse/Rat CD29 Clone: HMB1-1
Biolegend
Cat# 102214
Purified Anti-Mouse/Rat CD29 Clone: HMB1-1
Biolegend
Cat# 102201
FITC Streptavidin
Biolegend
Cat# 405202
Donkey Anti-Rabbit AF488 conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Cat# 711-545-152
Donkey Anti-Rabbit AF546, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Cat# 711-165-152
Donkey Anti-Rabbit AF647, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Cat# 711-605-152
Donkey Anti-Rat AF488, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Cat# 712-545-150
Donkey Anti-Rat AF647, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Cat# 712-605-150
DyLight 594 Goat Anti-Armenian Hamster AF594, conjugated 
secondary antibody Clone: Poly4055
Biolegend
Cat# 405504
Acknowledgments
We thank M. Nikolova, E. Wong and J. Levorse for technical assistance, and Y. Miao, I. Matos, Y. Ge, B. Keyes 
(Fuchs’ lab) and R.Yi (U Colorado) for discussions. FACS was conducted by Rockefeller’s Flow Cytometry Core 
(S. Mazel, director); ATAC-seq and RNA-seq were conducted by Rockefeller’s Genomics Core and Weill Cornell 
Genomics Center, respectively. E.F. is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. S.N. is a Fellow 
supported by the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation (DRG-2183-14) and L'Oreal USA For Women in 
Science. S.B.L. is funded by an NIH Ruth L. Kirschstein Predoctoral Fellowship (F31-AR068920-01A1). A.S. is 
funded by People Programme Marie Curie Actions (no629861). This study was supported by grants from the 
Robertson Foundation, National Psoriasis Foundation (CEN5402062), Pfizer (WI206828), and NIH (R01-
AR31737).
Naik et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Blanpain C, Fuchs E. Plasticity of epithelial stem cells in tissue regeneration. Science. 2014; 
344:1242281–1242281. [PubMed: 24926024] 
2. Alcolea MP, Jones PH. Lineage Analysis of Epidermal Stem Cells. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives 
in Medicine. 2014; 4:a015206–a015206. [PubMed: 24384814] 
3. Adam RC, et al. Pioneer factors govern super-enhancer dynamics in stem cell plasticity and lineage 
choice. Nature. 2015; 521:366–370. [PubMed: 25799994] 
4. Hsu Y-C, Li L, Fuchs E. Emerging interactions between skin stem cells and their niches. Nat. Med. 
2014; 20:847–856. [PubMed: 25100530] 
5. Kanneganti T-D, et al. Bacterial RNA and small antiviral compounds activate caspase-1 through 
cryopyrin/Nalp3. Nature. 2006; 440:233–236. [PubMed: 16407888] 
6. van der Fits L, et al. Imiquimod-Induced Psoriasis-Like Skin Inflammation in Mice Is Mediated via 
the IL-23/IL-17 Axis. The Journal of Immunology. 2009; 182:5836–5845. [PubMed: 19380832] 
7. Flutter B, Nestle FO. TLRs to cytokines: Mechanistic insights from the imiquimod mouse model of 
psoriasis. European Journal of Immunology. 2013; 43:3138–3146. [PubMed: 24254490] 
8. Vasioukhin V, Degenstein L, Wise B, Fuchs E. The magical touch: genome targeting in epidermal 
stem cells induced by tamoxifen application to mouse skin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1999; 
96:8551–8556. [PubMed: 10411913] 
9. Li M, et al. Topical vitamin D3 and low-calcemic analogs induce thymic stromal lymphopoietin in 
mouse keratinocytes and trigger an atopic dermatitis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2006; 
103:11736–11741. [PubMed: 16880407] 
10. Thomson CA, McColl A, Cavanagh J, Graham GJ. Peripheral inflammation is associated with 
remote global gene expression changes in the brain. Journal of neuroinflammation. 2014; 11:73. 
[PubMed: 24708794] 
11. Levy V, Lindon C, Zheng Y, Harfe BD, Morgan BA. Epidermal stem cells arise from the hair 
follicle after wounding. FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American 
Societies for Experimental Biology. 2007; 21:1358–1366. [PubMed: 17255473] 
12. Naik S, et al. Commensal-dendritic-cell interaction specifies a unique protective skin immune 
signature. Nature. 2015; 520:104–108. [PubMed: 25539086] 
13. Keyes BE, et al. Impaired Epidermal to Dendritic T Cell Signaling Slows Wound Repair in Aged 
Skin. Cell. 2016; 167:1323–1338.e14. [PubMed: 27863246] 
14. Dunn L, et al. Murine model of wound healing. Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE. 
2013:e50265. [PubMed: 23748713] 
15. Naik S, et al. Compartmentalized control of skin immunity by resident commensals. Science. 2012; 
337:1115–1119. [PubMed: 22837383] 
16. Clark RA. Resident memory T cells in human health and disease. Science translational medicine. 
2015; 7:269rv1–269rv1.
17. Netea MG, et al. Trained immunity: A program of innate immune memory in health and disease. 
Science. 2016; 352:aaf1098–aaf1098. [PubMed: 27102489] 
18. Buenrostro, JD., Wu, B., Chang, HY., Greenleaf, WJ. ATAC-seq: A Method for Assaying 
Chromatin Accessibility Genome-Wide. John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2001. 
19. Feng J, Liu T, Qin B, Zhang Y, Liu XS. Identifying ChIP-seq enrichment using MACS. Nature 
Protocols. 2012; 7:1728–1740. [PubMed: 22936215] 
20. McLean CY, et al. GREAT improves functional interpretation of cis-regulatory regions. Nature 
biotechnology. 2010; 28:495–501.
21. Heinz S, et al. Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-
regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Molecular cell. 2010; 38:576–
589. [PubMed: 20513432] 
22. Beronja S, Livshits G, Williams S, Fuchs E. Rapid functional dissection of genetic networks via 
tissue-specific transduction and RNAi in mouse embryos. Nat. Med. 2010; 16:821–827. [PubMed: 
20526348] 
Naik et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 23. DeYoung KL, et al. Cloning a novel member of the human interferon-inducible gene family 
associated with control of tumorigenicity in a model of human melanoma. Oncogene. 1997; 
15:453–457. [PubMed: 9242382] 
24. Man SM, Karki R, Kanneganti T-D. AIM2 inflammasome in infection, cancer, and autoimmunity: 
Role in DNA sensing, inflammation, and innate immunity. European Journal of Immunology. 
2016; 46:269–280. [PubMed: 26626159] 
25. Dombrowski Y, et al. Cytosolic DNA triggers inflammasome activation in keratinocytes in 
psoriatic lesions. Science translational medicine. 2011; 3:82ra38–82ra38.
26. Man SM, et al. Critical Role for the DNA Sensor AIM2 in Stem Cell Proliferation and Cancer. 
Cell. 2015; 162:45–58. [PubMed: 26095253] 
27. Wilson JE, et al. Inflammasome-independent role of AIM2 in suppressing colon tumorigenesis via 
DNA-PK and Akt. Nat. Med. 2015; 21:906–913. [PubMed: 26107252] 
28. Hu B, et al. The DNA-sensing AIM2 inflammasome controls radiation-induced cell death and 
tissue injury. Science. 2016; 354:765–768. [PubMed: 27846608] 
29. Zhang F, et al. The caspase-1 inhibitor AC-YVAD-CMK attenuates acute gastric injury in mice: 
involvement of silencing NLRP3 inflammasome activities. Scientific reports. 2016; 6:24166. 
[PubMed: 27053298] 
30. Ge Y, et al. Stem Cell Lineage Infidelity Drives Wound Repair and Cancer. Cell. 2017; 169:636–
650.e14. [PubMed: 28434617] 
31. Zhong FL, et al. Germline NLRP1 Mutations Cause Skin Inflammatory and Cancer Susceptibility 
Syndromes via Inflammasome Activation. Cell. 2016; 167:187–202.e17. [PubMed: 27662089] 
32. Farshchian M, et al. Tumor cell-specific AIM2 regulates growth and invasion of cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma. Oncotarget. 2017; 5
33. Buch T, et al. A Cre-inducible diphtheria toxin receptor mediates cell lineage ablation after toxin 
administration. Nature Methods. 2005; 2:419–426. [PubMed: 15908920] 
34. Lochner M, et al. In vivo equilibrium of proinflammatory IL-17+ and regulatory IL-10+ Foxp3+ 
RORgamma t+ T cells. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2008; 205:1381–1393. [PubMed: 
18504307] 
35. Mainardi S, et al. Identification of cancer initiating cells in K-Ras driven lung adenocarcinoma. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2014; 111:255–260. [PubMed: 24367082] 
36. Nguyen H, Rendl M, Fuchs E. Tcf3 governs stem cell features and represses cell fate determination 
in skin. Cell. 2006; 127:171–183. [PubMed: 17018284] 
37. Srinivas S, et al. Cre reporter strains produced by targeted insertion of EYFP and ECFP into the 
ROSA26 locus. BMC developmental biology. 2001; 1:4. [PubMed: 11299042] 
38. Rabuffetti M, et al. Inhibition of caspase-1-like activity by Ac-Tyr-Val-Ala-Asp-chloromethyl 
ketone induces long-lasting neuroprotection in cerebral ischemia through apoptosis reduction and 
decrease of proinflammatory cytokines. J. Neurosci. 2000; 20:4398–4404. [PubMed: 10844008] 
39. Nowak JA, Fuchs E. Isolation and culture of epithelial stem cells. Methods in molecular biology 
(Clifton, N.J.). 2009; 482:215–232.
40. Rheinwald JG, Green H. Epidermal growth factor and the multiplication of cultured human 
epidermal keratinocytes. Nature. 1977; 265:421–424. [PubMed: 299924] 
41. Dobin A, et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England). 
2013; 29:15–21.
42. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq 
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014; 15:550. [PubMed: 25516281] 
43. Buenrostro JD, Giresi PG, Zaba LC, Chang HY, Greenleaf WJ. Transposition of native chromatin 
for fast and sensitive epigenomic profiling of open chromatin, DNA-binding proteins and 
nucleosome position. Nature Methods. 2013; 10:1213–1218. [PubMed: 24097267] 
44. Shin H, Liu T, Manrai AK, Liu XS. CEAS: cis-regulatory element annotation system. 
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England). 2009; 25:2605–2606.
45. Zhang Y, et al. Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 2008; 9:R137. 
[PubMed: 18798982] 
Naik et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D. Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide 
expression patterns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1998; 95:14863–14868. [PubMed: 9843981] 
47. Speir ML, et al. The UCSC Genome Browser database: 2016 update. Nucleic acids research. 2016; 
44:D717–25. [PubMed: 26590259] 
48. Heinz S, et al. Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-
regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Molecular cell. 2010; 38:576–
589. [PubMed: 20513432] 
Naik et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Enhanced epidermal wound repair post-inflammation
a, IMQ treatment schematic and corresponding histopathology (n=3, P<0.0001). EdU+ basal 
epidermal and upper hair follicle (infundibulum) cells (n=3, P=0.01) DAPI, 4’,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole. b, Accelerated wound-healing in 30D (n=17, P<0.0001) and 
180D (n=5, P=0.0003) post-inflamed (PI) versus Ctrl skin (images n=3). Rate calculated 
from wound area: D30 see adjacent graph; D180 see Extended Data Fig. 2b; individual data 
points see source data. c, Accelerated closure irrespective of initial inflammatory stimulus 
(n≥4). MC903 (P=0.0001), Calcipotriol; TPA, 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate 
(P=0.0014); Wound, epidermal abrasion (P=0.0027); Fungi, 106 Candida albicans infection 
Naik et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (P=0.0029). Rate calculated from wound area in Extended Data Fig. 2c. d, Accelerated re-
epithelialization in inflammation-experienced skin (n=3). Lines denote initial wound edges 
and arrows mark wound bed (w.b.). e, Quantifications of Integrin-α5+, K14+ epidermal 
tongue (n=4. D3 P=0.034, D5 P=0.037) and K14+, K17+,EdU+ proliferating wound-edge 
basal cells (n≥2). f, Wound closure of silicone-splinted, 3 mm full-thickness wounds (n=3. 
D5 P<0.0001, D10 P=0.0374). g, Analysis of K14+ keratinocyte D10 ex vivo explants 
outgrowth. Yellow and red lines mark outgrowth boundary and distance, respectively (n≥14. 
P=0.0006). Scale bars: (a-EdU), 50 µm; (a-histology), d 200 µm; b, 2 mm; g, 500 µm. Plots 
depict mean ± SEM. n=x biologically independent animals. Experiments replicated ≥ 2 
times and significance determined using two-tailed t-test (95% confidence). Non-significant 
(ns, P>0.05).
Naik et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Resident skin macrophages and T cells are dispensable for enhanced wound closure 
post-inflammation
a, Epidermal hyperthickening is confined to initial inflammation site. (n=3, ≥3 images/
animal. **P=0.0019, ***P=0.0009). b, D30 wound closure is accelerated only at sites of 
prior IMQ treatment. n=12. P<0.0001. c, Clodronate liposome mediated resident 
macrophage depletion before wounding does not alter wound repair advantage post-
inflammation (PI) (Flow n=2. wound rate n≥4. Ctrl P=0.0419, Clodronate P=0.0266). d, 
Skin RORC+ cell populations. e, RORC+ T cells (white arrows) are elevated at D30 PI (n≥3, 
3 images/animal. P=0.0056). Experiments performed with RorcEGFP mice. Lines denote 
dermo-epidermal border, *denotes autofluorescence, and yellow box denotes magnified area 
in adjacent panel. f, Wounds heal faster in PI skin despite ablation of skin RORC+ cells 
(Flow cytometry, n=4, P=0.0008). Schematic of RORC+ cell depletion and wound repair 
using Rosa-LSL-iDTR (Ctrl) and RorcCre;Rosa-LSL-iDTR (RorcDTR) mice (n=5. Ctrl 
P=0.005, RorcDTR P=0.0053). DT, diphtheria toxin; DTR, DT receptor. g, Rag2-null mice 
mount a IMQ response (n=3, 3 images/ animal) and h, display accelerated wound-healing at 
D30 PI (n=5. P=0.0136). KO, knockout. Rate calculated from wound area: b, Extended Data 
Naik et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3a; c, see source data; g Extended Data Fig. 3h; h, Extended Data Fig. 3i. Plots depict 
mean ± SEM. Scale bars: a, 200 µm; e, g, 50 µm. n=x biologically independent animals. 
Experiments replicated ≥ 2 times and significance was determined using a two-tailed t-test 
(95% confidence). Non-significant (ns, P>0.05).
Naik et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. EpSCs possess memory of inflammation at the chromatin level
a, Heatmaps (two tailed t-test, P<0.05) and Venn diagrams of ATAC-seq signals (500 bp 
genomic windows) of D6 inflamed versus naïve EpSCs (n=3). Numbers of genomic 
windows displayed (n) below heatmaps; peak percentages are indicated on diagrams. b, 
Venn diagram of ATAC-seq peaks (numbers indicated on diagram) unique to D6 IMQ and 
D30 post-IMQ EpSCs (random permutation, P<10−4). c, Snapshot of genomic loci whose 
chromatin-accessible peaks are opened by inflammation at D6 and persist up to 180D 
following resolution. d, PANTHER pathways analysis of 2041 shared, inflammation-
induced peaks between D6 IMQ and D30 post-IMQ EpSCs. e, Transcription factor motif 
enrichment within shared peaks in (b) (n=3. cumulative binomial distributions, P<10−12). f, 
Epidermal STAT3 activation (pSTAT3Y705) in D6 inflamed and D30-PI skin 12hrs post-
wounding, but not in D30-PI unwounded skin (n=3).Wound bed (w.b.). Scale bars: 50 µm. 
n=x biologically independent animals. Experiments replicated ≥ 2 times.
Naik et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. EpSC memory encodes inflammatory sensors that rapidly reactivate to enhance 
secondary wound responses
a, Model of EpSC inflammatory memory. InfTFs, inflammation induced transcription 
factors. b, Persisting accessible chromatin domains induced by inflammation, can drive 
inflammation-specific EGFP reporter activity in EpSCs in vivo. n=2. Schematic of in utero 
lentiviral transduction of skin epithelium. Pgk-H2B-RFP expression marks transduced 
EpSCs. Scale bar, 50 µm. Lines demarcate dermo-epidermal border. c, Differences between 
transcriptomes of D6 inflamed or D30 post-inflamed (PI) ± wounding, relative to respective 
control EpSCs. Shown are MA plots, number (n) of significant differentially expressed 
transcripts (FDR<0.05) noted on the figure and depicted by red dots (n=4). d, Of 140 
transcripts upregulated rapidly after wounding of PI versus control skin (grey), 73 (dark 
grey) were encoded by genes (red) associated with chromatin accessible domains that were 
unique to post-inflamed EpSCs. (random permutation, P<10−4). e, Ingenuity Pathways 
Analysis of up-regulated transcripts in post-inflamed 12 hr wound edge EpSCs relative to 
control (n=4. right-tailed fisher exact test, P values plotted). f, Elevated Aim2 transcription 
associated with inflammation, memory and rapid wound response in post-inflamed skin, 
post-wounding (p.w.), (n≥2. two tailed t-test, D6 and 12hr p.w. P=<0.0001, D180 P= 
0.0001). g, Aim2-null mice do not show enhanced wound healing post-inflammation (n≥2. 
two tailed t-test, WT P=0.0002). h, Epithelial Aim2 overexpression is sufficient to augment 
wound healing in naïve mice (n=2). Plots depict mean ± SEM. Rate calculated from wound 
area: g, Extended Data Fig. 4e; h, Extended Data Fig. 4f. KO, knockout, TRE, tetracycline 
Naik et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 response element, OE, Overexpression. n=x biologically independent animals. Experiments 
replicated ≥ 2 times.
Naik et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Dissecting the downstream effectors of the AIM2 inflammasome in enhancing wound 
re-epithelialization of inflammation-experienced skin
a, Elevated levels of Casp1 transcript (P=0.0025) and CASP1 activity (P=0.0014) in D30 
post-inflamed skin, 12hr after wounding (n=3). b, Schematic depicts the experiment. Ac-
YVAD-cmk reduces CASP1 activity (left) and wound repair rate (right) post-inflammation 
to control wound levels (CASP1 activity n=2, wound repair, n=5. P=0.0018, non-significant 
(ns, P>0.05)). c, Elevated levels of Il18 transcripts (n=3, P=0.0014), IL18 (n=4, P=0.0202) 
and IL1β protein (n=3, P=0.0073) in PI skin post-wounding, but not Il1β transcripts (n=2). 
d, Enhanced injury response of post-inflamed skin in the absence of Il18 (n=3. Wildtype 
(WT) P=0.0146; knockout (KO) P=0.0019). e, Absence of IL1β-signaling, achieved in Il1r1-
null mice, abrogates the enhanced injury response of post-inflamed skin (n=4. WT 
P=0.0155; KO P=0.0086) f, Recombinant IL1β, but not IL18 (50 ng/ml), accelerates 
outgrowth of K14+ keratinocytes in D5 ex vivo skin explants. Dotted and red lines mark 
outgrowth border and distance, respectively (n=3; 3 technical replicates/mouse. P=0.0128). 
Naik et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Scale bars: 500 µm. g, Anti-IL1R1 treatment reverses the wound repair advantage conferred 
by epidermal Aim2 overexpression in naïve mice. intraperitoneal (i.p.) (n=3. Control IgG 
P=0.0055, α-IL1R1 P=0.0007). h, Summary of the downstream AIM2 effectors in post-
inflamed skin, ASC, Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD. Rate 
calculated from wound area: b, Extended Data Fig. 6d; d, Extended Data Fig. 6e; e, 
Extended Data Fig. 6f; g, Extended Data Fig. 6g. Plots depict mean ± SEM. n=x biologically 
independent animals. Experiments a–f replicated ≥ 2 times, g was performed 1 time. 
Significance determined using two-tailed t-test (95% confidence). Non-significant (ns, 
P>0.05).
Naik et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
