 July 10, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674
154
Key Words: cardiac arrest, sudden  
◼ cardiopulmonary resuscitation  
◼ health services research ◼ quality 
improvement ◼ qualitative research
Sources of Funding, see page 162
Editorial, see p 164
BACKGROUND: In-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA) is common, and 
outcomes vary substantially across US hospitals, but reasons for these 
differences are largely unknown. We set out to better understand how 
top-performing hospitals organize their resuscitation teams to achieve 
high survival rates for IHCA.
METHODS: We calculated risk-standardized IHCA survival to 
discharge rates across American Heart Association Get With The 
Guidelines–Resuscitation registry hospitals between 2012 and 2014. 
We identified geographically and academically diverse hospitals in the 
top, middle, and bottom quartiles of survival for IHCA and performed 
a qualitative study that included site visits with in-depth interviews of 
clinical and administrative staff at 9 hospitals. With the use of thematic 
analysis, data were analyzed to identify salient themes of perceived 
performance by informants.
RESULTS: Across 9 hospitals, we interviewed 158 individuals from 
multiple disciplines including physicians (17.1%), nurses (45.6%), other 
clinical staff (17.1%), and administration (20.3%). We identified 4 
broad themes related to resuscitation teams: (1) team design, (2) team 
composition and roles, (3) communication and leadership during IHCA, 
and (4) training and education. Resuscitation teams at top-performing 
hospitals demonstrated the following features: dedicated or designated 
resuscitation teams; participation of diverse disciplines as team members 
during IHCA; clear roles and responsibilities of team members; better 
communication and leadership during IHCA; and in-depth mock codes.
CONCLUSIONS: Resuscitation teams at hospitals with high IHCA survival 
differ from non–top-performing hospitals. Our findings suggest core 
elements of successful resuscitation teams that are associated with better 
outcomes and form the basis for future work to improve IHCA.
© 2018 American Heart Association, Inc.
Brahmajee K.  
Nallamothu, MD, MPH
Timothy C. Guetterman, 
PhD
Molly Harrod, PhD
Joan E. Kellenberg, MS, 
MPH
Jessica L. Lehrich, MS
Steven L. Kronick, MD, MS
Sarah L. Krein, PhD, RN
Theodore J. Iwashyna, 
MD, PhD
Sanjay Saint, MD, MPH
Paul S. Chan, MD, MSc
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
How Do Resuscitation Teams at Top-
Performing Hospitals for In-Hospital 
Cardiac Arrest Succeed? 
A Qualitative Study
https://www.ahajournals.org/journal/circ
Circulation
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674 
July 10, 2018
155
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
A
pproximately 200 
000 patients experience an 
in-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA) each year in 
the United States.1 Early initiation of cardiopul-
monary resuscitation and defibrillation are critical for 
improving survival, given that every minute of delayed 
treatment decreases survival by 10%.2 It is not surpris-
ing that hospitals have chosen to dedicate substantial 
resources to train healthcare providers in resuscitation 
and establish facility-wide emergency response systems 
to optimize their performance and improve outcomes 
of patients experiencing cardiac arrest. Despite these 
sizeable investments, however, overall rates of in-hos-
pital survival after these events remain poor, with sub-
stantial variation noted across facilities.3,4
On the surface, this variation in survival follow-
ing IHCA may seem surprising. Established guidelines 
provide logical, sequential algorithms for advanced 
cardiac life support (ACLS) that are widely accepted 
and used across much of the world; thus, providers at 
most hospitals attempt to deliver the same treatments 
for the same reasons after the same ACLS training.5,6 
Yet, these algorithms largely focus on guiding individu-
als on technical tasks at a patient’s bedside. They have 
less frequently addressed complex issues surrounding 
the implementation of these algorithms in real-world 
settings and the fact that teams, and not individuals, 
are ultimately responsible for providing resuscitation at 
hospitals. This is changing because recent guidelines7 
have begun to expand on these topics given that the 
structure of resuscitation teams is known to vary across 
hospitals.8 However, there remains little empirical infor-
mation to guide facilities on the optimal configuration 
of resuscitation teams despite their universal presence 
in hospitals over the past 5 decades.
Accordingly, we performed a qualitative study with 
the explicit purpose of better understanding how top-
performing hospitals organize their resuscitation teams 
to achieve high survival rates for IHCA. Through in-
depth site visits and detailed interviews of staff at mul-
tiple hospitals, we identified common themes linked to 
better outcomes by using a methodological approach 
that has been applied in diverse areas ranging from 
infection prevention to heart attack care.9–11 Our find-
ings help unpack IHCA as a complex human task involv-
ing multiple individuals and provide novel insights that 
complement a large and growing literature of quanti-
tative studies detailing differences in resuscitation care 
across hospitals.
METHODS
Study Design and Sampling
Data and study materials will not be made available to other 
researchers for purposes of reproducing the results given the 
sensitive nature of the interviews and the potential for reiden-
tification of individuals. We conducted a qualitative study, 
which included in-depth interviews of clinical and adminis-
trative staff at top-, middle-, and bottom-performing hospi-
tals in regard to risk-standardized survival for patients with 
IHCA. Using data from the national prospective Get With The 
Guidelines-Resuscitation registry, we identified hospitals with 
at least 20 patients with inhospital cardiac arrest between 
January 1, 2012, and December 31, 2014 (n=192). We then 
used a previously described and validated method to calculate 
risk-standardized rates of survival to discharge for each hos-
pital for each calendar year.12 This method was developed to 
specifically facilitate hospital comparisons and allowed us to 
rank each hospital into quartiles of performance. We focused 
on risk-standardized rates of survival to discharge rather than 
other outcomes (eg, return of spontaneous circulation) to 
provide a global measure of performance for resuscitation 
teams.
We defined top-performing hospitals as those consistently 
in the highest quartile for each of 3 calendar years (2012–
2014), middle-performing hospitals as those consistently in 
the middle 2 quartiles for each year, and bottom-performing 
hospitals as those consistently in the lowest quartile for each 
year. Next, we purposefully selected hospitals from each of 
these groups for site visits, taking into account several cri-
teria determined a priori, including teaching status, number 
of staffed beds, and US census region. In selecting facilities, 
we used the concept of information power as suggested by 
Malterud et al.13 This approach provides a pragmatic method 
for sample selection based on certain key parameters (eg, 
Clinical Perspective
What Is New?
• In-hospital cardiac arrest is common and outcomes 
are variable across US hospitals, but the reasons for 
these differences are largely unknown.
• Through site visits that included in-depth inter-
views of 158 clinical and administrative staff at 9 
hospitals, we used qualitative methods to identify 4 
broad themes related to resuscitation teams at top-
performing hospitals in in-hospital cardiac arrest 
that distinguished them from non–top-performing 
hospitals: (1) team design, (2) team composition 
and roles, (3) communication and leadership dur-
ing in-hospital cardiac arrest, and (4) training and 
education.
What Are the Clinical Implications?
• Our findings suggest core elements of successful 
resuscitation teams that are associated with better 
outcomes.
• Although additional work is required to validate 
these findings in larger cohorts of hospitals, our 
results may assist individual hospitals to examine 
their own care processes for in-hospital cardiac 
arrest and provide specific, actionable recommen-
dations to improve management of these high-risk 
patients.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
July 10, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674
156
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
study aim, sample specificity, use of theory) but with spe-
cific attention to identifying a sample that will provide robust 
information directly related to the research question. This led 
us to focus on a larger number of top-performing hospitals as 
the most informative cases for investigating factors that pro-
mote better success during cardiac arrest; however, we still 
selected a few middle- and bottom-performing hospitals to 
gain a comparative view.
We approached 12 hospitals for site visits and 9 hospitals 
agreed to participate. One top-performing hospital declined 
after initially agreeing because of unexpected personal issues 
that prevented its leader of resuscitation services from par-
ticipating, whereas another top-performing hospital and 
1 bottom-performing hospital were concerned about the 
workload required. At each participating institution, the indi-
vidual linked to the hospital’s participation in the Get With 
The Guidelines-Resuscitation registry, typically the director of 
resuscitation, was asked for her (or his) assistance with iden-
tifying key staff members involved in IHCA for interviews. Key 
staff we suggested for interviews included individuals from 
the hospital’s resuscitation team, rapid response or emer-
gency medical team, and resuscitation committee, as well as 
physician trainees, nurses, attending physicians and adminis-
trative leadership in emergency medicine, hospital medicine, 
critical care, quality improvement, and general administration, 
as well. Once specific names were provided, potential par-
ticipants were recruited by research staff through e-mail and 
by phone. Participation was voluntary and interviews were 
confidential. We conducted site visits until additional inter-
views produced no new concepts (ie, thematic saturation was 
reached). The institutional review board at the University of 
Michigan Medical School approved the research procedures 
and all study subjects provided written informed consent.
Data Collection and Measures
Investigators with experience in qualitative research, medi-
cine, and nursing conducted in-depth, semistructured inter-
views. In most instances, interviews were conducted in-person 
for 1 hour with individual participants with modest incentives 
provided (ie, $20 gift card). In rare situations, we conducted 
interviews in groups with 2 to 5 participants, if requested, and 
when the participants represented similar resuscitation roles 
at a given hospital (eg, house staff). Overall, we found that 
the types of comments and concepts discussed did not dif-
fer substantially between individual and group interviews. For 
each interview, we typically included 2 researchers (1 clinician 
scientist, 1 qualitative research expert) to balance content 
and methodological expertise. One researcher was primarily 
conducting the interview, whereas the other took notes and 
prompted the discussion with questions to clarify or elaborate 
on ideas.
We initially built the interview guide based on a clinical 
framework developed from expert opinion and conceptu-
ally using the Tuckman stages of group organization.14 This 
was subsequently enriched by using the empirical results of 
a national survey that we conducted within Get With The 
Guidelines-Resuscitation hospitals and previously published.15 
We then specifically piloted this interview guide at 2 insti-
tutions (ie, the University of Michigan and Ann Arbor VA 
Medical Center) before applying it during the site visits. This 
pilot testing allowed us to revise the questions to improve 
clarity and understanding.
Interviews began with a question about an individual’s role 
at the hospital and in resuscitation. We then inquired about 
their perspectives on care of patients before, during, and after 
IHCA, often asking participants to describe their involvement in 
a recent or memorable IHCA as an example. We asked specifi-
cally about teamwork and leadership during resuscitation and 
quality efforts in IHCA and other areas. Finally, we asked about 
holistic processes around IHCA, including data collection, over-
all views about their hospital’s best practices, and their most 
needed areas of improvement. All interviews were conducted 
using a standard semistructured interview guide that included 
open-ended questions to elicit detailed accounts about par-
ticipants’ experiences with IHCA, with subsequent probing 
questions based on the interviewee’s response (Table 1). All 
interviews were audio recorded, transcribed by independent, 
professional transcriptionists, and then deidentified for analysis.
Data Analysis
We performed thematic analysis to develop and apply consis-
tent and comprehensive coding to the open-ended, textual 
data from the interview transcripts.16–18 This approach to con-
ducting qualitative analysis has been widely applied in health 
research19 and is well suited to answer questions around indi-
vidual experiences, views, and opinions, and to evaluate prac-
tices and processes across organizations, as well. Iteratively 
developed codes, which reflect the emergent themes of these 
data, allow for verbatim quotations or observations to be 
catalogued into their essential concepts.
We followed a generally recommended process to con-
struct a preliminary codebook.20 Each member of the research 
team read several interview transcripts to ensure content 
immersion. The research team then developed a codebook 
together using examples from the data. Next, transcripts from 
Table 1. Interview Guide Topics
Sample Open-Ended Questions for Interviews
1.  
Let’s start by having you describe what you do.
2.  
Please describe your hospital’s policies and practices related to 
preventing IHCA and selecting patients appropriate for resuscitation 
care.
3.  
Please describe the process by which your hospital responds to the 
event of IHCA.
4.  
Please describe how your hospital cares for patients following IHCA if 
they survive.
5.  
Who is responsible for oversight and QI efforts related to IHCA at your 
hospital? (eg, CPR committee)
6.  
In the last 3 years, please describe the major initiatives your hospital has 
undertaken to improve care of patients with IHCA.
7.  
Please describe your perception of administrative support for QI efforts 
and specifically for initiatives related to IHCA at your hospital.
8.  
If you could change 1 thing about the IHCA care processes at your 
hospital, what would it be?
9.  
If you were helping other hospitals improve IHCA care, how would you 
recommend they structure a program?
CPR indicates cardiopulmonary resuscitation; IHCA, in-hospital cardiac 
arrest; and QI, quality improvement.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674 
July 10, 2018
157
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
the initial 2 sites were coded and discussed by multiple team 
members to ensure intercoder agreement and further refine 
the codebook. Codes were defined within categories, struc-
tured initially on the timeline of IHCA (concepts related to 
before, during, and after the event), and reviewed after suc-
cessive site visits. This allowed us to refine the properties and 
dimensions of existing codes, and to identify new codes to fit 
concepts as they developed from the data, as well. Multiple 
team members coded 25% of the same transcripts for the 
first 5 sites to enhance consistency.
All research team members reviewed the coded transcripts 
and collated data, as well, from code reports around single 
codes to identify broader patterns of meaning (ie, themes). 
In this phase, we evaluated the themes against the data to 
develop a detailed analysis of each and to decide on an infor-
mative name for each theme. The process of refining codes 
and describing themes continued after each site visit until we 
found no new concepts in remaining transcripts, thus ensur-
ing thematic saturation. To enhance rigor, we triangulated in 
at least 3 ways: (1) having multiple investigators code data 
and participate in analysis and interpretation; (2) performing 
interviews with multiple informants; and (3) collecting hospital 
documents and protocols about resuscitation, and attending 
resuscitation committee meetings at sites whenever pos-
sible. The diversity of backgrounds and experiences among 
the research team promoted a more in-depth discussion and 
understanding of the conceptual content of the data. We 
involved all research team members in regular team meetings 
during the analytic phase with disagreements discussed openly 
and consensus reached through collaborative discussions.
We maintained documentation through minutes from 
team meetings of the construction of the code structures and 
definitions, and the principles, as well, that we used in defin-
ing and applying the codes to theme development. Using the 
coded data, we summarized key themes in tables that helped 
describe the hospitals’ experiences with IHCA and resusci-
tation teams. We entered all data in MAXQDA to facilitate 
review, analysis, and reporting. The authors had full access to 
the data and take full responsibility for its integrity. All authors 
have read and agree to the article as written.
RESULTS
Study Hospitals and Staff
Tables 2 and 3 (including the Table in the online-only 
Data Supplement) display characteristics of the 9 hos-
pitals and key staff that participated in the study. Over-
all, we interviewed between 12 and 29 participants per 
hospital for a total of 158 individuals across multiple 
disciplines, including physicians, nurses, other clinical 
staff, and administration. In total, there were 78 hours 
and 29 minutes of interviews, yielding 778 
482 tran-
scribed words.
Themes of IHCA Performance
Based on the perceptions of the participants, we iden-
tified 4 broad themes that distinguished resuscitation 
teams at top-performing hospitals in IHCA in compari-
son with non–top-performing hospitals (Table 4). These 
themes reflected (1) team design, (2) team composi-
tion and roles, (3) communication and leadership, and 
(4) training and education. Differences across these 4 
themes are discussed in greater detail in the next sec-
tions, including representative quotations.
Team Design
In general, top-performing hospitals had dedicated or 
designated resuscitation teams versus ad hoc resuscita-
tion teams at non–top-performing hospitals. Dedicated 
teams were used by many top-performing hospitals 
and referred to the presence of a core group of nursing 
or respiratory therapy staff with no clinical responsibili-
ties during a given shift that superseded their roles on 
a resuscitation team.
I think what we have is again the fact that you have 
the ‘team’…You’re not waiting for someone to leave 
something that they’re doing. You have a dedicated 
team that’s this is all they’re doing, waiting for us, 
like having a fire service…You’re not looking who will 
respond today.
—Attending Critical Care Physician; Hospital A; 
 
Top-Performing
Frequently, these team members had specific clini-
cal expertise used for other emergency services such as 
rapid-response teams or other acute conditions.
They do rapid response, they do code response, they 
are part of our sepsis team and our difficult airway 
response team…
—Critical Care Nurse; Hospital H; Top-Performing
Some top-performing hospitals had designated, 
rather than dedicated, teams. What distinguished 
Table 2. Hospital Characteristics
Hospital
Region
No. of 
Staffed 
Beds
Mean Risk-
Standardized 
Survival Rate, 
Percentile, 
2012–2014
Mean 
No. of In-
Hospital 
Cardiac 
Arrests 
per Year, 
2012–
2014
Teaching 
Status
A
Midwest
>800
95.5
288.0
Major
B
West
200–400
12.9
25.3
Non 
teaching
C
South
>400–800
97.3
93.3
Non 
teaching
D
Midwest
200–400
87.7
57.0
Major
E
West
200–400
56.1
68.7
Minor
F
South
>800
2.9
130.7
Minor
G
Midwest
200–400
81.7
73.3
Minor
H
Northeast
>800
88.7
140.7
Major
I
Northeast
>400–800
5.4
129.3
Minor
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
July 10, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674
158
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
designated teams was that their nursing and respira-
tory therapy staff may have other clinical responsi-
bilities that involved direct patient care, but systems 
were in place for shedding these quickly when an 
IHCA occurred.
Our [ICU Floor Nurse] can’t get off the unit…she 
would let the supervisor know at the beginning of her 
shift, and say I’m not going to be able to go to a code 
tonight if it gets, if one gets called. So then they come 
up with a plan beforehand, on who’s going to assume 
that role so they’re not doing it in the moment, during 
the crisis.
—Nurse Supervisor; Hospital G; Top-Performing
In contrast, non–top-performing hospitals created 
resuscitation teams ad hoc in response to an IHCA.
We don’t assign code nurses anymore. As soon as 
we hear it called, you will see if there’s people in the 
hallway, or a head sticking out doors.
—Critical Care Nurse; Hospital B; Bottom-Performing
So, we’ve got a broken process of who would respond 
to codes…And that’s another one of my wish lists is 
to either consolidate that in some form or fashion or, 
again, to have a dedicated team...
—Respiratory Therapist; Hospital F; Bottom-Performing
I know some hospitals have code teams…No, we 
don’t have that…we don’t have a code team.
—Resident Physician; Hospital I; Bottom-Performing
Team Composition and Roles
Team composition did not differ across hospitals in re-
gard to inclusion of physicians, nurses, anesthesia, and 
respiratory therapists. Top-performing hospitals reported 
more support staff (eg, pharmacy, clerical, security, and 
spiritual staff) for their emergency response systems, and 
greater acknowledgment of the diversity and experience 
required to fully perform resuscitation care, as well. One 
top-performing hospital also described greater familiar-
ity among team members as an advantage.
The team’s been working together for so many years that 
they’ve built up a really great rapport, and they know 
each other’s skill and their deficits…team work wise…
and that’s the only reason why you have the outcome.
—Clinical Nurse Specialist and Educator; Hospital C; 
Top-Performing
Table 3. Type of Staff Interviewed at Study Hospitals
Type of Staff
No. of Interviews
Physicians (nonadministration)
  
Critical care and emergency medicine 
physician
9
  
Anesthesiologist
3
  
Hospitalist and other
9
  
Resident physician
6
Nurses (nonadministration)
  
Nurse manager
11
  
Nurse practitioner/clinical nurse specialist/
certified registered nurse anesthetist
4
  
Nurse educator
12
  
Nurse code team member or emergency 
department/critical care nurse
35
  
Emergency department/intensive care unit/
coronary care unit director/supervisor
10
Other staff (nonadministration)
  
Pharmacy
8
  
Respiratory therapist code team member
9
  
Other (intravenous/laboratory code team 
member, ECG, biomedical services, chaplain, 
security)
10
Administration
  
Senior leadership (president, vice president, 
chief medical and nursing officers
9
  
Director of service lines (eg, critical care, 
emergency medicine, anesthesia, cardiac 
catheterization laboratory, pharmacy)
9
  
Quality and data management team
9
  
Other (department administrator, advanced 
cardiac life support trainer)
5
Total
158
Table 4. Recommendations for Resuscitation Teams
Theme
Recommendations
Team design
Hospitals should establish dedicated or designated 
teams for in-hospital cardiac arrest.
Team composition 
and roles
Hospitals should ensure the participation of 
diverse disciplines during in-hospital cardiac arrest, 
including physician, nursing, respiratory therapy, 
and pharmacy expertise.
Hospitals should develop systems to include 
trainees while ensuring the availability of advanced 
expertise as needed.
Hospitals should define clear roles and 
responsibilities of team members before or early 
during in-hospital cardiac arrest so tasks are clearly 
delineated in the early minutes of the event. These 
should include a focus on core skills including 
chest compressions, airway management, and 
intravenous access.
Communication and 
leadership
Hospitals should encourage the development of 
approaches that improve communication (eg, 
closed-loop communication) and emphasize 
respect across multiple disciplines. When 
communication breaks down, the hospital should 
have a system in place to correct behavioral issues 
without being punitive.
Leadership during in-hospital cardiac arrest 
requires focus. Identifying high-quality and clearly 
identified leaders within resuscitation teams is 
essential for successful teamwork.
Training and 
educational efforts
Hospitals should implement mock codes that 
are (1) regular and unscheduled; (2) occur in 
actual patient rooms and high-risk areas; (3) 
multidisciplinary; and (4) include post–mock code 
debriefing.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674 
July 10, 2018
159
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
Top-performing hospitals also tended to have clearly 
defined roles and responsibilities for team members 
during an IHCA.
Fifteen years ago when I started it was a free for all…. 
So when (Medical Director) took over and, and kind 
of structured everything…You just show up and you 
know what you’re supposed to do, and there’s no 
screaming and there’s no yelling.
—Critical Care Nurse; Hospital G; Top-Performing
At non–top-performing hospitals, specific roles and 
responsibilities of members were less clear, even well into 
the response, generating variable degrees of distress.
Very honestly things are more chaotic…I just feel a dif-
ferent level of anxiety when you come to these codes 
and roles are not always as clearly defined.
—Critical Care Attending Physician; Hospital E; 
Middle-Performing
It’s kind of situation by situation…Respiratory always 
goes right to the airway to start with the airway, which 
is intuitive, and then in terms of the other staff, it just 
kind of depends. They seem to be comfortable assign-
ing their own roles…
—Emergency Medicine Physician; Hospital B; 
Bottom-Performing
We also saw major differences in the presence of 
resident physicians and their function during an IHCA. 
At non–top-performing hospitals, resident physicians 
were, at times, described as a weakness given the fre-
quent turnover of trainees.
I don’t mean [residents] suck, but look at what we 
give ‘em. They come in as first years, they don’t know 
anything. They come in as second years, they sort of 
know what’s going on. By the third year, they’re start-
ing their stride. They start to get good at what they 
do, and then they graduate and leave, and then we’re 
back to the people that are being fed through the PEZ 
container…
—ACLS Instructor; Hospital I; Bottom-Performing
At top-performing hospitals, on the other hand, 
specific back-up plans for resident physicians involved 
more experienced clinicians.
What happens a lot is the MICU resident will take 
ownership of the code and then the fellow will be as a 
supportive role. And depending on their code experi-
ence, you know, they might fly pretty much indepen-
dently or they might need some guidance in terms of 
either fellow suggestions or nursing suggestions…
—Critical Care Nurse; Hospital H; Top-Performing
Top-performing hospitals also spent time empowering 
bedside nurses in their roles as first responders, includ-
ing allowing them to defibrillate without the presence 
of physicians if indicated.
When I came here, the policy was nurses couldn’t 
press the button to defibrillate. They could charge the 
monitor, they could recognize Vfib, they couldn’t press 
the button…it looked like the ceiling of the Sistine 
Chapel where one physician’s finger was reaching 
across and trying to make contact with the button. 
And (Nurse Leader) and (Physician Leader) and others 
realized that that was ridiculous. We couldn’t get a 
physician in the room in 2 minutes reliably, and they 
certainly wouldn’t be up to speed on what needed to 
be done, so nurses defibrillate now….
—Nursing Educator; Hospital A; Top-Performing
One thing that has frustrated me or did frustrate me 
as a bedside nurse, was that I was ACLS trained, I 
was ACLS trained to administer medications…But the 
culture was “never,” you know, you never push epi, 
you never do anything without a doctor even though 
we are being trained…We did make a decision about 
2014…our shocks are now delivered within 1 min-
ute…CPR is generally delivered or started in under 1 
minute for a witnessed cardiac arrest for certain.
—Critical Care Nurse; Hospital H; Top-Performing
Hospitals perceived essential skills like chest compres-
sions quite differently when performed by different in-
dividuals in these roles. In 1 top-performing hospital, 
chest compressions were highly valued and their per-
formance was limited to specific individuals (eg, a criti-
cal care nurse):
I mean the days of, you know, letting the nursing stu-
dent or the paramedic student do the CPR, they just...
they don’t really happen anymore.
—Emergency Medicine Nurse; Hospital G; 
Top-Performing
In contrast, a bottom-performing hospital valued this 
skill less and suggested it was easily performed by less 
experienced providers.
We teach the techs that they can do compressions 
in code situations. If we have nursing students, we’ll 
let them do compressions. We have plenty of people 
to rotate through in general so we’ll rotate anyone 
through to do compressions.
—Nursing Education; Hospital F; Bottom-Performing
Last, crowd control was universally considered a prob-
lem because of the arrival of nonteam members.
Our biggest problem is too many people show up…
We have codes where there’s 17 to 22 people who 
respond…So sometimes it’s difficult determining 
who’s in charge of this code…
—Nursing Supervisor; Hospital I; Bottom-Performing
Communication and Leadership
Top-performing hospitals described different patterns 
of communication that encouraged multidisciplinary 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
July 10, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674
160
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
discussion and mutual respect across team members. 
This did not mean that communication was universal-
ly perfect or that tension never arose, but that specific 
mechanisms to address breakdowns were available.
I think we have really good codes, and then we have 
codes that don’t run well. On really good codes, the 
communication is fantastic…If I had to do a percent-
age, probably 75 are good communication, and 
there’s 25 that aren’t.
—Critical Care Nurse; Hospital H; Top-Performing
We’re very, very fortunate in that my great partner is 
our senior medical director here at the hospital, so he 
and I work very closely together. So I’ll hear it in fact 
more from him…He’ll say, hey, did you hear about 
[the resuscitation team] had a call last night, there was 
a concern between [team nurse] and the physician…
So that lets me know that I didn’t even have to be part 
of that process. It got escalated appropriately and [the 
senior medical director]…will take whatever feedback 
and then do whatever investigating needs to happen.
—Senior Nursing Officer; Hospital C; Top-Performing
At non–top-performing hospitals, communication 
during an IHCA was described more frequently as cha-
otic, confusing, or unsatisfactory with gaps in practices 
endorsed by guidelines like closed-loop communication 
where team members explicitly acknowledge and ver-
balize requests as they are done.
Communication just needs to get better. There are 
some residents who are really good at giving direct 
orders or finding roles, closing the loop, all that stuff. 
But, there are some who aren’t trained on that and 
they don’t know how to do it and so, will talk softly or 
they won’t give a complete order and things kind of 
get lost.
—Critical Care Nurse; Hospital I; Bottom-Performing
Interviewer: Would you be able to identify one or two 
things that you really think—as it pertains to resusci-
tation care specifically—where you would like to see 
things improved further…? Participant: Communica-
tion. Closed-loop communication.
—Nurse Coordinator; Hospital E; Middle-Performing
Another key part of communication was the pres-
ence of strong leadership during the IHCA.
Intensivists usually will take over… you role model 
off of him. So if he is calm and, you know, every-
thing seems to be calm. So I have seen a lot of codes 
where if they get real anxious, then it makes the 
whole room anxious.
—Nurse Manager; Hospital A; Top-Performing
At 1 top-performing hospital, good leadership was 
highly valued, regardless of whether the team leader 
was a physician or nurse. Indeed, a coleadership model 
with nurses who were specialized members of the re-
suscitation team was highlighted.
Interviewer: So who’s running the code?
Participant: Again, if there’s a physician there, then 
usually...most of the time it’s going to be the [resus-
citation team] nurse because she is ACLS certified, so 
she’s going to be calling the drugs and things like that. 
The physician may come in and sort of weigh in on 
what’s happening, but they’re looking to the [resusci-
tation team] nurse a lot of times.
—Respiratory Therapist; Hospital C; Top-Performing
There is just a very wonderful collaboration that is felt 
between the hospitalists and the [resuscitation team]. 
When they’re…a hospitalist responds to a code, they 
respond, but they defer to the [resuscitation team]. 
Meaning, not that the hospitalist is being lazy but that 
they know that…their expertise, and they defer to 
them because of that expertise.
—Clinical Nurse and Educator; Hospital C; 
Top-Performing
Training and Educational Efforts
All hospitals discussed training and educational efforts 
around resuscitation, but varied in their implementa-
tion of these efforts. A notable example was mock 
codes, which were described as more in-depth at top-
performing hospitals. Specifically, mock codes were: (1) 
unplanned and held on a regular basis, (2) conducted 
in actual patient rooms rather than simulated environ-
ments, (3) multidisciplinary, and (4) included structured 
postdebriefing.
One top-performing hospital described mock codes 
in high-risk areas targeted for improvement because of 
low traffic or a higher incidence of codes. They also 
focused on teamwork and communication during the 
mock codes.
So the mock codes will typically actually take place in 
areas that are maybe a low traffic area or someplace 
not everybody knows where it’s located so that it 
helps facilitate people finding their way through the 
building.
—Pharmacist; Hospital D; Top-Performing
 If there’s codes happening outside of the ICU or CCU, 
then we target those areas for mock codes.
—Critical Care Nurse Educator; Hospital D; 
 
Top-Performing
“And it’s all about team training, less clinical, more 
team…
—Cardiology Physician; Hospital D; Top-Performing
Non–top-performing hospitals did not describe the 
same type of processes for mock codes. When present 
at these hospitals, mock codes were generally perfunc-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674 
July 10, 2018
161
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
tory, not multidisciplinary and conducted in simulated 
environments.
There’s too many people who…well, I’m busy with 
other things. You can’t be pulling me away for this 
stuff [mock codes], you know, that kind of an attitude. 
And to me, that’s really the only way you get a true 
mock code, you know.
—Clinical Nurse and ACLS Instructor; Hospital I; 
Bottom-Performing
On the mock code side, generally physicians don’t 
participate in the mock code…
—Nurse Educator; Hospital F; Bottom-Performing
Beyond mock codes, top-performing hospitals often 
enhanced their educational opportunities by introduc-
ing newer teaching approaches that often emphasized 
multidisciplinary care.
The ACLS is more about teamwork in allowing every-
one to experience each of the roles so that they have a 
deeper understanding of how the team works. We call 
it a sport, you know, it’s because…it requires commu-
nication, it requires performance. And you don’t learn 
to play football by yourself.
—ACLS Instructor; Hospital A; Top-Performing
DISCUSSION
We describe the findings from a national qualita-
tive study to understand how top-performing hos-
pitals organize their resuscitation teams to achieve 
high survival rates in patients with IHCA. Based on 
the perceptions of the participants we interviewed, 
we discovered 4 broad themes that distinguish top-
performing hospitals: team design, team composi-
tion and roles, communication and leadership, and 
training and educational efforts. In general, we noted 
that top-performing hospitals had formally organized 
teams composed of members from diverse disci-
plines with delineated roles and responsibilities. We 
also found top-performing hospitals more commonly 
encouraged strong communication and leadership 
during an IHCA while supporting training and educa-
tional efforts like comprehensive mock codes. To our 
knowledge, this is the first multicenter evaluation of 
the performance of resuscitation teams during IHCA 
using qualitative methods, and we believe our results 
will be valuable to hospitals interested in improving 
outcomes for these events.
Providing high-quality resuscitation can be difficult 
for hospitals. IHCAs are sudden and unexpected events 
that can stress the resources of even the most resilient 
organizations. After the initial publication of seminal 
studies of the potential life-saving benefit of chest 
compressions, noninvasive ventilation, and defibrilla-
tion in the early 1960s,21–23 reports began to surface 
about different hospitals’ approaches to providing re-
suscitation.24–26 Given widespread concerns about the 
best processes for applying these treatments, numer-
ous professional organizations then developed proto-
cols to standardize cardiopulmonary resuscitation, basic 
life support, and ACLS. In the 1970s, these protocols 
were standardized by groups like the American Heart 
Association into ACLS, a focus of resuscitation care 
that has continued largely uninterrupted over almost 
5 decades.27 Regulatory organizations have also been 
interested in ensuring adequate provision of resusci-
tation. For example, The Joint Commission mandates 
standardized policies and procedures for providing 
resuscitation services within healthcare organizations, 
including the availability of emergency equipment and 
adequate training of individual providers.28
Despite this considerable attention to IHCA, sur-
prisingly few recommendations have been made 
about how resuscitation teams should be ideally con-
structed. National data suggest up to a quarter of 
hospitals may not even have resuscitation teams and 
the variability around practices in the design, composi-
tion, and roles and responsibilities of team members 
is believed to be substantial.8 Furthermore, it is un-
certain whether differences in many of these features 
lead to differences in IHCA performance. It is in this 
context that our findings are particularly striking and 
useful because we noted substantial differences in 
the ways that top-performing hospitals distinguished 
themselves. We summarize these findings in Table 4 as 
a set of potential recommendations for clinicians and 
hospital administrators to consider in designing their 
systems for resuscitation.
Our findings highlight the importance of dedicated 
or designated resuscitation teams at hospitals. Top-per-
forming hospitals described dedicated teams as a pow-
erful way of achieving the consistent clinical expertise 
and teamwork required for effectively managing these 
high-stakes events. However, dedicated teams are not 
likely to be feasible at many hospitals, as they can re-
quire resource investments that may be barriers for 
some facilities. This constraint led other top-performing 
hospitals to use designated teams where resuscitation 
team members are identified a priori as predetermined 
responders to an IHCA. We also found that some top-
performing hospitals sought ways to leverage the clini-
cal expertise of resuscitation teams in different ways 
across their hospitals to offset resource investments. An 
analogy raised by 1 hospital was the current trend to 
still have dedicated firefighters available for fires while 
expanding their involvement with other critical emer-
gencies.29
Our findings also indicate that hospitals need to care-
fully craft the composition of their teams and the roles 
and responsibilities of the providers on these teams. 
Ideally, inclusion of members of the team should con-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
July 10, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674
162
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
sider the cognitive and technical skills that are required 
to perform a successful resuscitation, not simply titles. 
One top-performing hospital seemed to find great suc-
cess by being very specific about assigning roles and 
responsibilities so that individual responders knew what 
to do immediately on arrival at an IHCA. At other top-
performing hospitals, there was a focus on delineating 
team member roles and responsibilities as early as pos-
sible during an IHCA.
Improving communication and leadership during 
an IHCA should also be a top priority for facilities, al-
though our findings also suggest that these elements 
are influenced by factors related to other themes. For 
example, hospitals with a dedicated team were likely to 
face fewer challenges with communication and leader-
ship by virtue of a smaller cohort of providers being 
responsible for all acute resuscitation care. Finally, our 
data revealed the benefits of incorporating mock codes 
into training and educational efforts. Key features of a 
robust mock code program to more accurately simulate 
real-world IHCAs included conducting events that were 
nonscheduled, held in actual patient rooms and at all 
times of day, and multidisciplinary. Mock codes should 
also be efficient to achieve staff buy-in and include mul-
tidisciplinary post–mock code debriefing.
Although we used established techniques to im-
prove the rigor of our findings, our study has limita-
tions. First, we visited hospitals at a single point in 
time. The non–top-performing hospitals could have 
been on a trajectory toward improvement that was 
not captured in our data. To minimize this possibil-
ity, we calculated risk-standardized survival rates 
over a 3-year period from the cohort of hospitals we 
used for selection and focused on those with con-
sistent performance in each of the 3 years for IHCA 
survival. Second, our interviews were based on the 
perceptions of the informants, and there is always 
the possibility of social desirability response bias in 
this type of work, which would occur if participants 
misrepresented their experiences to provide desirable 
answers. In a similar vein, we also could not account 
for whether providers at hospitals were aware of their 
organization’s  Get With The Guidelines-Resuscitation 
scores that are provided to participants in the regis-
try. To address these concerns, we interviewed several 
key staff in each hospital to obtain a comprehensive 
picture of care and used scripted probes during our 
semistructured interviews to elicit specific details that 
would be difficult to misrepresent (eg, how are re-
suscitation teams designed). We also encouraged re-
spondents to share both positive and negative experi-
ences. Third, we focused only on hospitals enrolled in 
a large national registry and were limited in our abil-
ity to evaluate very small hospitals (<200 beds) with 
few cases of IHCA. Although our findings are specific 
to these sites, the detailed nature of the data allows 
an assessment of the degree to which similar issues 
might occur at other institutions supporting transfer-
ability of key processes. Additional work will need to 
confirm the generalizability of our findings to other 
organizations. Finally, our study identified key themes 
that we hypothesize influence performance in IHCA. 
Additional work is needed to develop specific tools 
for measuring underlying features related to these 
themes and to quantitatively test the impact of these 
constructs among a larger sample of hospitals. Thus, 
this work requires confirmation.
For nearly 5 decades, resuscitation teams have been 
deployed in hospitals using variable approaches large-
ly based on anecdote and convenience, rather than 
evidence. Results of this study move us forward from 
simply describing types of hospitals with consistently 
higher survival rates after IHCA to understanding po-
tential keys to their success. Although additional work 
is required to validate these findings in larger cohorts 
of hospitals, our results will assist individual hospitals in 
examining their own care processes for IHCA and pro-
vide specific, actionable recommendations to improve 
management of these high-risk patients.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Received January 11, 2018; accepted April 12, 2018.
The online-only Data Supplement, podcast, and transcript are avail-
able as an online-only Data Supplement at https://www.ahajournals.org/
journal/circ/doi/suppl/10.1161/circulationaha.118.033674.
Correspondence
Brahmajee K. Nallamothu, MD, MPH, University of Michigan Medical School, 
Internal Medicine-Cardiovascular Medicine, North Campus Research Complex, 
2800 Plymouth Road, Building 16, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. E-mail bnallamo@
umich.edu
Affiliations
Departments of Internal Medicine (B.K.N., J.E.K., J.L.L., S.L. Krein, T.J.I., S.S.), 
Family Medicine (T.C.G.), and Emergency Medicine (S.L. Kronick), University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor. Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Center for 
Clinical Management Research, MI (B.K.N., S.L. Krein, T.J.I., S.S.). Department 
of Internal Medicine, Saint Luke’s Health System, Kansas City, MO (P
.S.C.).
Acknowledgments
This article does not necessarily represent the position of the US government or 
the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Sources of Funding
This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01HL123980). 
Dr Nallamothu also received funding from Veterans Affairs Health Services Re-
search and Development (IIR 13–079) during this period and receives honoraria 
from the American Heart Association for editorial work. Dr Krein is supported 
by a Veterans Affairs Health Services Research and Development Service re-
search career scientist award (RCS 11–222). Dr Chan receives funding from 
the National Institutes of Health and has received consultant funding from the 
American Heart Association and Optum Rx.
Disclosures
None.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nallamothu et al 
Resuscitation Teams at Top-Performing Hospitals
Circulation. 2018;138:154–163. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.033674 
July 10, 2018
163
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
ARTICLE
REFERENCES
 1. Merchant RM, Yang L, Becker LB, Berg RA, Nadkarni V, Nichol G, Carr 
BG, Mitra N, Bradley SM, Abella BS, Groeneveld PW; American Heart As-
sociation Get With The Guideline–Resuscitation Investigators. Incidence of 
treated cardiac arrest in hospitalized patients in the United States. Crit Care 
Med. 2011;39:2401–2406. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182257459.
 2. Ali B, Zafari AM. Narrative review: cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiovascular care: review of the current guidelines. Ann Intern 
Med. 2007;147:171–179.
 3. Girotra S, Nallamothu BK, Spertus JA, Li Y, Krumholz HM, Chan PS; 
American Heart Association Get with the Guidelines–Resuscitation Inves-
tigators. Trends in survival after in-hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:1912–1920. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1109148.
 4. Chan PS, Nallamothu BK. Improving outcomes following in-hospital 
cardiac arrest: life after death. JAMA. 2012;307:1917–1918. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2012.3504.
 5. Neumar RW, Shuster M, Callaway CW, Gent LM, Atkins DL, Bhanji F, 
Brooks SC, de Caen AR, Donnino MW, Ferrer JM, Kleinman ME, Kronick 
SL, Lavonas EJ, Link MS, Mancini ME, Morrison LJ, O’Connor RE, Samson 
RA, Schexnayder SM, Singletary EM, Sinz EH, Travers AH, Wyckoff MH, 
Hazinski MF. Part 1: Executive Summary: 2015 American Heart Associa-
tion Guidelines Update for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergen-
cy Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2015;132(18 suppl 2):S315–S367. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000252.
 6. Link MS, Berkow LC, Kudenchuk PJ, Halperin HR, Hess EP
, Moitra VK, 
Neumar RW, O’Neil BJ, Paxton JH, Silvers SM, White RD, Yannopoulos D, 
Donnino MW. Part 7: adult advanced cardiovascular life support: 2015 
American Heart Association Guidelines Update for Cardiopulmonary Re-
suscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2015;132(18 
suppl 2):S444–S464. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000261.
 7. Bhanji F, Finn JC, Lockey A, Monsieurs K, Frengley R, Iwami T, Lang E, 
Ma MH, Mancini ME, McNeil MA, Greif R, Billi JE, Nadkarni VM, Bigham 
B; Education, Implementation, and Teams Chapter Collaborators. Part 8: 
education, implementation, and teams: 2015 International Consensus on 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Sci-
ence With Treatment Recommendations. Circulation. 2015;132(16 suppl 
1):S242–S268. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000277.
 8. Edelson DP
, Yuen TC, Mancini ME, Davis DP
, Hunt EA, Miller JA, Abella 
BS. Hospital cardiac arrest resuscitation practice in the United States: a 
nationally representative survey. J Hosp Med. 2014;9:353–357. doi: 
10.1002/jhm.2174.
 9. Bradley EH, Curry LA, Webster TR, Mattera JA, Roumanis SA, Radford MJ, 
McNamara RL, Barton BA, Berg DN, Krumholz HM. Achieving rapid door-to-
balloon times: how top hospitals improve complex clinical systems. Circula-
tion. 2006;113:1079–1085. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.590133.
 10. Curry 
LA, 
Spatz 
E, 
Cherlin 
E, 
Thompson 
JW, 
Berg 
D, 
Ting 
HH, 
Decker 
C, 
Krum-
holz HM, Bradley EH. What distinguishes top-performing hospitals in acute 
myocardial infarction mortality rates? A qualitative study. Ann Intern Med. 
2011;154:384–390. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-154-6-201103150-00003.
 11. Krumholz HM, Bradley EH, Curry LA. Promoting publication of rigorous 
qualitative research. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013;6:133–134. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.113.000186.
 12. Chan PS, Berg RA, Spertus JA, Schwamm LH, Bhatt DL, Fonarow GC, 
Heidenreich PA, Nallamothu BK, Tang F, Merchant RM; AHA GWTG-Re-
suscitation Investigators. Risk-standardizing survival for in-hospital cardiac 
arrest to facilitate hospital comparisons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:601–
609. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.05.051.
 13. Malterud K, Siersma VD, Guassora AD. Sample size in qualitative interview 
studies: guided by information power [published online ahead of print 
November 27 2015]. Qual Health Res. doi:10.1177/1049732315617444.
 14. Tuckman BW, Jensen MAC. Stages of small-group development revisited. 
Group Organ Stud. 1977;2:419–427.
 15. Chan PS, Krein SL, Tang F, Iwashyna TJ, Harrod M, Kennedy M, Lehrich 
J, Kronick S, Nallamothu BK; American Heart Association’s Get With the 
Guidelines–Resuscitation Investigators. Resuscitation practices associated 
with survival after in-hospital cardiac arrest: a nationwide survey. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2016;1:189–197. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2016.0073.
 16. Terry G. Doing thematic analysis. In: Lyons E, Coyle A, eds. Analysing 
Qualitative Data in Psychology. 2nd ed. London: Sage; 2016:104–118.
 17. Creswell JW. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among 
Five Approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc; 2012.
 18. Kuckartz U. Qualitative Text Analysis: A Guide to Methods, Practice & Us-
ing Software. London, UK: SAGE Publications, Ltd: 2014.
 19. Braun V, Clarke V. What can “thematic analysis” offer health and wellbe-
ing researchers? Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2014;9:26152.
 20. Curry LA, Nembhard IM, Bradley EH. Qualitative and mixed meth-
ods provide unique contributions to outcomes research. Circulation. 
2009;119:1442–1452. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.742775.
 21. Kouwenhoven WB, Jude JR, Knickerbocker GG. Closed-chest cardiac mas-
sage. JAMA. 1960;173:1064–1067.
 22. Safar P
, Brown TC, Holtey WJ, Wilder RJ. Ventilation and circulation with 
closed-chest cardiac massage in man. JAMA. 1961;176:574–576.
 23. Zoll PM, Linenthal AJ, Zarsky LRN. Ventricular fibrillation: treatment and 
prevention by external electric currents. N Engl J Med 1960;262:105–112.
 24. Johnson JD. A plan of action in cardiac arrest. A detailed plan for treat-
ment of hospitalized patients. JAMA. 1963;186:468–472.
 25. Coburn WV. Code blue: emergency procedure for cardiac arrest. Hospi-
tals. 1964;38:46–49.
 26. Phillips JH, Burch GE. Management of cardiac arrest. Am Heart J. 
1964;67:265–277.
 27. Carveth SW, Burnap TK, Bechtel J, McIntyre K, Donegan J, Buch-
man RJ, Reese HE. Training in advanced cardiac life support. JAMA. 
1976;235:2311–2315.
 28. Joint Commission and Resuscitation–Resuscitation Central. http://
www.resuscitationcentral.com/documentation/joint-commision-and- 
resuscitation. Accessed October 18, 2017.
 29. Firefighters Train to Fight Terrorists, Too. NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/
templates/story/story.php?storyId=127303858. Accessed December 14, 
2017.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
