 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26639 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26639
www.nature.com/scientificreports
The analysis of the influence of 
fractal structure of stimuli on 
fractal dynamics in fixational eye 
movements and EEG signal
Hamidreza Namazi1, Vladimir V. Kulish1 & Amin Akrami2
One of the major challenges in vision research is to analyze the effect of visual stimuli on human vision. 
However, no relationship has been yet discovered between the structure of the visual stimulus, and 
the structure of fixational eye movements. This study reveals the plasticity of human fixational eye 
movements in relation to the ‘complex’ visual stimulus. We demonstrated that the fractal temporal 
structure of visual dynamics shifts towards the fractal dynamics of the visual stimulus (image). The 
results showed that images with higher complexity (higher fractality) cause fixational eye movements 
with lower fractality. Considering the brain, as the main part of nervous system that is engaged in eye 
movements, we analyzed the governed Electroencephalogram (EEG) signal during fixation. We have 
found out that there is a coupling between fractality of image, EEG and fixational eye movements. The 
capability observed in this research can be further investigated and applied for treatment of different 
vision disorders.
Eye-movement refers to the voluntary or involuntary movement of the eyes, helping in acquiring, fixating and 
tracking visual stimuli. While we fixate our gaze, the eye movements drive our visual experience. In fact, our 
visual system has a built-in contradiction: when we direct our gaze at an object of interest, our eyes are never still. 
Therefore the analysis of perception, physiology, and computational modelling of fixational eye movements is 
critical to our understanding of vision in general, and also to the understanding of the neural computations that 
work to overcome neural adaptation in normal subjects as well as in clinical patients.
For a long time, phenomena which do not have a regular or predictable pattern tended to be ignored and not 
worthy to study. But, it is now found that irregular patterns can provide adequate explanations for many natural 
phenomena. Fractal theory is proposed to study these irregular patterns. Nowadays, it is common knowledge that 
fractal phenomena are ubiquitous in nature. Since Mandelbrot1 showed self-similarity properties in geometry, 
scientists in different fields have tried to apply the fractal theory in order to explain irregular and apparently 
ambiguous patterns and many articles have been published indicating fractal properties. Fractal dimension is 
a measure used to quantify fractal patterns. In fact, fractal dimension can be viewed as an index of complexity, 
which shows how a detail in a pattern changes with the scale at which it is measured.
Although, in medical science, fractal properties have been reported for various cases such as DNA2, Blood ves-
sel and pulmonary vessels3, heart sound4, heart rate5, EEG signal6, bone structure7 and human stride time series8, 
there have been limited works which analyzed the fractal dynamics of eye movements as a random walk. Besides 
some works which found out the fractal nature of fixational eye movements9,10, some scientists have worked on 
analysis of eye movements in healthy or unhealthy subjects. Some of these works considered the fractal analysis 
of eye movements without considering the fractal structure of visual stimuli. For instance, Schmeisser et al.11 ana-
lyzed the eye movements of normal and abnormal readers for evidence of chaotic, nonlinear dynamical behav-
iour. Based on their results, the computed fractal dimension of the system’s presumed attractor directly related 
to qualitative assessment of reading ability. In another work, Belyaev et al.12 analyzed the fractal dimension of 
eye movements of subjects while they were looking at different images. The results of their study showed that the 
fractal dimension of trajectory of eyes movement in small degree depends on image type, and also on an f angle 
1School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 2School of 
Mechanical engineering, University of Tehran, Iran. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed 
to H.N. (email: hnamazi@ntu.edu.sg)
received: 17 March 2016
Accepted: 06 May 2016
Published: 24 May 2016
OPEN
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26639 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26639
of its vision. Also, it was shown that the fractal dimension strongly changes depending on the specific observer, 
and also from a type of the eyes movements (fixings or saccades). Also look at13–15. Some studies analyzed the 
eye movements without considering its fractal dynamics, but focusing on fractal structure of visual stimulus. 
For instance, Nagai et al. investigated the relationship between the gaze location and fractal dimension of visual 
stimulus. Their analysis showed that fractal dimension was higher for those areas where gaze was concentrated 
than for other areas16. In a recent study Marlow et al. investigated the dynamic structure of human gaze over time 
during free viewing of computer-generated fractal images using the Hurst exponent. They found out that the 
Hurst exponent was invariant across all participants, including those with distinct changes to higher order visual 
processes due to neural degeneration17. Wu et al.18 analyzed the temporal dynamics of eye movements for sub-
jects who were looking at scenes with different fractal dimensions. They found out that temporal dynamics of eye 
movements were related to differences in scene complexity and clutter. Also look at19. Based on all these studies, 
stimuli have a powerful draw on the allocation of subjects’ eyes attention.
Beside all works on this area of research, the effect of fractal content of stimulus on fractal dynamics of eye 
movements and EEG signal has not been investigated yet. In this paper, we propose a novel analysis in order 
to reveal the effect of structural features of the visual stimuli on human vision. Particularly, we indicate that 
how fractal structure of a visual stimulus plays significant role on fractal dynamics of eye movements. First, we 
examine fractal dimensions of some pictures. Then, we record eye movements and EEG signals of subjects while 
looking at pictures, and analyze their fractal exponents. We analyze the coupling between the fractal structure of 
stimulus and eye movements by linking it to the nervous system. Finally, discussion and recommendation will 
be drawn.
Method
Eye movements in looking at different patterns or reading can be idealized as an alternating sequence of fixations 
and saccades that move through visual stimuli in discrete steps. When we watch a scene, fixation duration and 
saccade length vary greatly. Considering that fixation duration and saccade length are random variables generated 
by an underlying stochastic process, the goal of this study was to analyze the effect of fractal structure of visual 
stimulus on fractal dynamics of human fixational eye movements. Based on Fig. 1, tremor, drift, and micro sacca-
des are different components of fixational eye movements20–22. Physiological drift and micro saccades are the two 
most important components of fixational eye movements. Physiological drift is a slow random component that 
could be characterized as a diffusion process. Micro saccades are rapid small-amplitude movements. Tremor is a 
small-amplitude, oscillatory component superimposed to drift.
We have used three visual stimuli with different fractal exponents. These stimuli were Apollonian gasket, 
Sierpinski Hexagon and Penrose tiling. We computed the fractal dimension for each stimulus using a MATLAB 
based code that we have written. This code computes the fractal dimension based on box counting method23.
We asked the subjects to look at each stimulus, and analyzed the fractal structure of their resultant eye move-
ment time series to determine its relation with the stimuli used. In order to explain the eye movements by linking 
it to the nervous system, we also collected the EEG signals of subjects in this experiment. This analysis was due to 
the fact that eye movements appear to be initiated by a small cortical region in the brain’s frontal lobe. Also, the 
brain is engaged in perception of stimuli. A schematic of the experimental design is presented in Fig. 2.
Based on this methodology, we concurrently collected eye movements and EEG signal and then analyzed their 
fractal property by computing the fractal dimension.
Data collection. 
In this research the experiments were carried out on 60 voluntary healthy students, 30 males 
and 30 females with the age of 22–24 years old, with normal vision (without any vision problem). The subjects 
never wore glasses. Prior to the experiment, each subject was examined and interviewed by a physician to ensure 
no vision problem, neurological deficit, pain condition, or medication affects the vision or EEG data collection. 
The nature of study was explained to participants before the experiments and then the written informed consent 
was obtained from them. All procedures were approved by the Internal Review Board of Nanyang Technological 
University and the approval for experimentation involving human subjects was issued by the university. The 
study was carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines. It is noteworthy that the identity of all subjects 
remains confidential.
Figure 1. Example of fixational eye movements. 
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26639 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26639
In an electrically shielded, acoustically isolated and dimly illuminated room, three visual stimuli with different 
fractal dimension were applied on subjects and we asked them to view each photograph as they would normally 
look at scenes. The visual stimuli are shown in Fig. 3. In this figure, the third stimulus (Penrose tiling) has a bigger 
fractal dimension than the second stimulus (Sierpinski Hexagon), which itself has a bigger fractal dimension than 
first stimulus (Apollonian gasket). It should be mentioned that it was endeavoured to insulate the subjects from all 
other external stimuli. This ensures that the response measured in the eye movement and EEG signals is primarily 
due to the stimulus applied.
We used an Eyelink 1000 (SR Research, Ottawa, ON, Canada) eye-tracking system in order to record partici-
pants’ eye movements at 1000 Hz. The images, with the size of 768 × 768 pixels, were presented to participants on 
the monitor of a computer from 60 cm distance. The images were subtending the vertical and horizontal visual 
angles of 24°. The participants looked at the computer monitor while with their heads positioned in a chin rest.
The EEG data used in this research were collected using Mindset 24 device, a 24-channel topographic 
neuro-mapping instrument, which measures 24 channels of data. In this research, the electrode impedance was 
kept lower than 5 KΩ and the sampling frequency was 256 Hz. Mindmeld 24 software was used for the collection 
of data using Mindset 24 machine. The software gives data in the form of .bin files which can be processed to give 
text files (.txt) that are required for further processing.
At first, eye movements and EEG signals were collected for 3 seconds in non-stimulus condition while the 
monitor showed the white screen. Then, the first stimulus appeared on the computer screen for 3 seconds and 
then it disappeared and the white screen appeared. This trend was continued for the second and third stimuli with 
inter-stimulus interval of 10 seconds. It should be mentioned that a bipolar electrooculogram (EOG, vertical and 
horizontal) was recorded for off-line artifacts rejection.
Figure 2. A schematic of the experiment. 
Figure 3. Three visual stimuli (with their fractal dimension) applied on subjects. 
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26639 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26639
In the first day 5 trials were collected in case of each stimulus from each subject. The data collections were 
repeated in the second day for each subject in order to examine the reproducibility of the results from experi-
ments. By repeating the experiments in the second day, a total of 10 trials were collected in case of each stim-
ulus from each subject for further analysis. It is noteworthy that physician monitored the subjects during all 
experiments.
Data analysis. 
Raw eye-movement data were pre-processed using a program written in MATLAB by remov-
ing fixations that occurred around eye blinks or outside the presentation screen. Only distracted fixations and the 
two adjacent non-distracted fixations (served as baseline) were processed further. This program then generated 
the filtered eye movements time series and computes its fractal dimension.
In case of analysis of EEG data, as the recorded data were noisy, at first the EEG signals were filtered using 
Wavelet toolbox in MATLAB and then were processed for computing of fractal dimension. It should be men-
tioned here that, although EEG data were recorded from 24 electrodes, the analysis was done on the data governed 
from the left occipital (O1) electrode (near to the location of the visual primary sensory area). This electrode was 
chosen based on the nearest place to the visual sensory area which shows the strongest response that can be seen 
in the signal recorded from this electrode compared to other electrodes.
It is noteworthy that computation of fractal dimension in case of eye movement time series and EEG signal 
was based on the box counting method6.
It should be mentioned that all subjects and all trials were included in the analysis. The data were inspected for 
differences between right and left eyes using statistical analysis.
Statistical Analysis. 
Mean values for the dependent variables –fractal scaling exponent of fixational 
eye movements– were compared across visual stimulus and no stimulus conditions with a one-way repeated 
measures ANOVA. Mauchly’s test (α = 
 0.05) was implemented to test for sphericity. In fact, Mauchly’s sphe-
ricity test is a statistical test used to validate a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). As another 
statistical test, post-hoc test was run to confirm where the differences occurred between groups (multiple 
comparisons). Trend analysis was performed across conditions when ordered according to the fractal prop-
erties of the visual stimuli e.g. increasing the fractal exponent from the first to the third image. For a repeated 
measures design, we used Omega squared (ω2) as an unbiased measure of effect size suitable for small sam-
ples; In order to do pairwise comparisons effect size, r, was used. All statistical analyses were performed using 
SPSS software. It is noteworthy in order to have robust results, all assumptions in case of each statistical test 
were fulfilled.
Results
We conducted Two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test with 95% confidence level in order to test the governed 
data from right and left eyes. As the result of the test indicated that the data for the right and left eyes are not dif-
ferent, here we report the results for the right eye.
Mauchly’s test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had not been violated. There was a significant effect 
of the visual stimulus on the fractal exponent of the fixational eye movements (P < 
 0.05), with an effect size 
ω2 = 0.86. In general, the application of the visual stimulus reduced the fractal dimension of fixational eye move-
ments. A significant linear trend between visual stimulus conditions was observed (P < 0.05), indicating that the 
third stimulus (Penrose tiling) yielded a bigger change in the fractal dimension of fixational eye movements than 
the second stimulus (Sierpinski Hexagon), followed by the first stimulus (Apollonian gasket), mirroring the trend 
in fractal properties of the visual stimulus themselves i.e. the third stimulus bigger than the second stimulus, 
bigger than the first stimulus (Fig. 4). The effect size calculations between different conditions suggest that the 
third stimulus led to the greatest change in the fractal exponent of fixational eye movements with large effect sizes 
(r > 0.5) observed across all Penrose tiling comparisons (Table 1).
As mentioned before, eye movements are initiated by a small cortical region in the brain’s frontal lobe and 
then brain precepts the stimulus. Thus, the observed trend in fixational eye movements should be related to the 
Figure 4. Fractal dimension of the visual stimuli is shown on the right for illustration purposes. Fractal 
analysis of the fixational eye movements across different stimuli, for all subjects, is shown on the left. Error bars 
are standard deviations.
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26639 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26639
EEG signal. In other words, there should be a coupling between fractal properties of visual stimulus, EEG signal 
and eye movements. In order to test this coupling and explain the behaviour seen in Fig. 4, we bring the results of 
analysis of EEG signals in Fig. 5.
Based on Fig. 5, similarly there was a significant effect of visual stimulus on the fractal exponent of the EEG 
signal (P < 
 0.05), with an effect size ω2 = 
 0.76. A significant linear trend between visual stimulus conditions was 
observed (P < 
 0.05), indicating that the third stimulus yielded a bigger change in the fractal dimension of the 
EEG signal than the second stimulus, followed by the first stimulus, mirroring the trend in fractal properties of 
the visual stimulus themselves i.e. the third stimulus bigger than the second stimulus, bigger than the first stim-
ulus. Effect size calculations between conditions suggest that the third stimulus led to the greatest change in the 
fractal exponent of the EEG signal with large effect sizes (r > 0.5) observed across all Penrose tiling comparisons 
(Table 1).
The behaviour seen in our analysis can be explained through information theory. The image with a higher 
fractal dimension contains more information which accordingly transferred to the brain due to stimulation. The 
Hurst exponent which is indicator of the memory of the system can be discussed here. The Hurst exponent (H) 
is a statistical measure used to classify time series. The Hurst exponent can have any value between 0 and 1. If 
the Hurst exponent has a value between 0 and 0.5, it means that the process is anti-persistent i.e. the trend of the 
value of the process at the next instant will be opposite to the trend in the previous instant. Secondly, a value of H 
between 0.5 and 1 means that the process is persistent i.e., the trend of the value of the process at the next instant 
will be the same as the trend in the previous instant. Finally, If H = 0.5, the process is considered to be truly ran-
dom (e.g., Brownian motion). It means that there is absolutely no correlation between any values of the process. 
We have shown before that as information is transferred to the brain in any form of stimulation, the value of the 
Hurst exponent increases24. In other words, the brain memory increases due to stimulation. If more information 
is transferred to the brain, we will have a bigger increment in the value of the Hurst exponent. On the other hand, 
increasing the value of the Hurst exponent will cause decreasing of the complexity of the signal which is mapped 
on decrement of its fractal dimension6. So, it is clear that by choosing the stimulus that is more fractal and con-
tains more information, we will see a bigger reduction in EEG signal fractal dimension.
It is noteworthy that, based on the effect size analysis, the visual stimulus had a bigger effect on the fractal 
dynamics of eye movements than the EEG signal. This is due to the fact that the stimulus has a bigger effect on eye 
movements and less effect on EEG signals. In other words, when we look at an image, our eyes process all parts of 
the image, but they will only send a message to the brain about those parts of the image that are more important 
to us (bigger than the threshold stimulus), and accordingly will cause perception. In summary, an adaptation 
occurred in the EEG signal and eye movements’ dynamics as a result of looking at visual stimuli.
Condition
Eye movement’s fractal dimension
EEG signal’s fractal dimension
Effect size (r)
Effect size (r)
No stimulus vs. Apollonian gasket 
0.83
0.78
No stimulus vs. Sierpinski Hexagon
0.90
0.92
No stimulus vs. Penrose tiling
0.96
0.93
Apollonian gasket vs. Sierpinski Hexagon
0.58
0.49
Apollonian gasket vs. Penrose tiling
0.89
0.74
Sierpinski Hexagon vs. Penrose tiling
0.79
0.58
Table 1.  Effect sizes for pairwise comparisons.
Figure 5. Fractal analysis of the EEG signals across different stimuli, for all subjects. Error bars are standard 
deviations.
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26639 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26639
Discussion
In this paper we analyzed the effect of fractal property of visual stimuli on fractal dynamics of human fixational 
eye movements. In order to explain the eye movements by linking it to the nervous system, we also analyzed the 
EEG signals of subjects. Our findings demonstrated plasticity of the visual-motor phenomenon during looking at 
visual stimuli, as the trend across the fractal structure of visual stimuli is mirrored in the trend across the reduc-
tion of fractal exponent of EEG signal and fixational eye movements. It was shown that the third stimulus with a 
higher value of fractal dimension caused a bigger change in the fractal exponent of the EEG signal and fixational 
eye movements, compared to the second and first stimuli. This behaviour was seen in comparison between the 
second and first stimuli as well. Based on the results the EEG signal was affected less than eye movements due to 
stimulation.
The method discussed in this research can be further applied in case of patients with some vision diseases 
that deteriorate their eye movements focus, in order to study the fractal behaviour of fixational eye movements in 
case of different fractal visual stimuli. Based on the result of analysis, scientists could be able to advise on proper 
visual stimuli in order to improve the patient’s vision. On the other hand, developing a mathematical model 
which makes a link between the fractal properties of visual stimulus and the fixational eye movements can be 
investigated. This model can be developed based on our recent fractional diffusion model of EEG signals which 
was developed in24. This model can be well employed for further investigations in vision science and engineering.
References
1. Mandelbrot, B. The fractal geometry of nature (Macmillan, 1983).
2. Namazi, H., Kulish, V. V., Delaviz, F. & Delaviz, A. Diagnosis of skin cancer by correlation and complexity analyses of damaged 
DNA. Oncotarget 6, 42623–42631 (2015).
3. Horst, K. H., Manfred, G. & Heinz-Otto, P. Fractal aspects of three-dimensional vascular constructive optimization. Math. Biosci. 
Interac. 55–66, doi: 10.1007/3-7643-7412-8 (2005).
4. Anandarup, M., Nidhi, P. & Anirban, R. Heart murmur detection using fractal analysis of phonocardiograph signals. Int. J. Comput. 
Appl. 88, doi: 10.5120/15407-3928 (2014).
5. Tan, C. O., Cohen, M. A., Eckberg, D. L. & Taylor, J. A. Fractal properties of human heart period variability: physiological and 
methodological implications. J. Physiol. 1, 3929–41 (2009).
6. Namazi, H. et al. A signal processing based analysis and prediction of seizure onset in patients with epilepsy. Oncotarget 7, 342–350 
(2015).
7. Kyung-Hoe, Huh. et al. Fractal analysis of mandibular trabecular bone: optimal tile sizes for the tile counting method. Imaging Sci. 
Dent. 41, 71–78 (2011).
8. Hunt, N., McGrath, D. & Stergiou, N. The influence of auditory-motor coupling on fractal dynamics in human gait. Sci. Rep. 4, 5879, 
doi: 10.1038/srep05879 (2014).
9. Billock, V. A., Guzman, G. C. & Scott Kelso, J. A. Fractal time and 1/f spectra in dynamic images and human vision. Physica D: 
Nonlinear Phenomena 148, 136–146 (2001).
10. Wang, Q. et al. On relationships between fixation identification algorithms and fractal box counting methods. Proceedings of the 
Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications. 67–74, doi: 10.1145/2578153.2578161 (2014).
11. Schmeisser, E. T., McDonough, J. M., Bond, M., Hislop, P. D. & Epstein, A. D. Fractal analysis of eye movements during reading. 
Optom. Vis. Sci. 78, 805–14 (2001).
12. Belyaev, R. V., Kolesov, V. V., Men’shikova, G. Y., Popov, A. M. & Ryabenkov, V. I. The analysis of types of the eyes movement by 
fractal algorithms. RENSIT. 6, 30–43 (2014).
13. Foisy, A., Gaertner, C., Matheron, E. & Kapoula, Z. Controlling posture and vergence eye movements in quiet stance: effects of thin 
plantar inserts. PLoS ONE 10, e0143693, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143693 (2015).
14. Aştefănoaei, C., Pretegiani, E., Optican, L. M., Creangă, D. & Rufa, A. Eye movement recording and nonlinear dynamics analysis – 
the case of saccades. Rom. J. Biophys. 23, 81–92 (2013).
15. Yoshimatsu, H., Yamada, M., Murakami, S. & Fujii, M. Fractal dimension analysis of binocular miniature eye movement drift 
components of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Proceeding of 14th Annual International Conference of the IEEE- Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society 1, 81–83 (1992).
16. Nagai, M., Oyana-Higa, M. & Miao, T. Relationship between image gaze location and fractal dimension. Proceeding of IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 4014–4018, doi: 10.1109/ICSMC.2007.4414253 (2007).
17. Marlow, C. A. et al. Temporal structure of human gaze dynamics is invariant during free viewing. PLoS ONE 10, doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0139379 (2015).
18. Wu, D. W., Anderson, N. C., Bischof, W. F. & Kingstone A. Temporal dynamics of eye movements are related to differences in scene 
complexity and clutter. J. Vis. 14, doi: 10.1167/14.9.8 (2014).
19. Foulsham, T. & Kingstone, A. Asymmetries in the direction of saccades during perception of scenes and fractals: Effects of image 
type and image features. Vis. Res. 50, 779–795 (2010).
20. Cornsweet, T. N. Determination of the stimuli for involuntary drifts and saccadic eye movements. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 46, 987– 988 
(1956).
21. Ditchburn, R. W. The function of small saccades. Vis. Res. 20, 271–272 (1980).
22. Martinez-Conde, S., Macknik, S. L., Troncoso, X. G. & Hubel, D. H. Microsaccades: A neurophysiological analysis. Trends Neurosci. 
32, 463–475 (2009).
23. Lia, J., Dub, Q. & Suna, C. An improved box-counting method for image fractal dimension estimation. Pattern Recogn. 42, 
2460–2469 (2009).
24. Namazi, H. & Kulish, V. V. Fractional diffusion based modelling and prediction of human brain response to external stimuli. 
Comput. Math. Methods Med. 2015, 148534, doi: 10.1155/2015/148534 (2015).
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the grant from Ministry of Education, Singapore. Grant number RG119/15.
Author Contributions
H.N. designed the study, did the data collection and analysis, and drafted the manuscript. V.V.K. and A.A. helped 
in the data collection and drafting the manuscript.
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26639 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26639
Additional Information
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Namazi, H. et al. The analysis of the influence of fractal structure of stimuli on fractal 
dynamics in fixational eye movements and EEG signal. Sci. Rep. 6, 26639; doi: 10.1038/srep26639 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
RETRACTED
 1
Scientific RepoRts | 8:46985 | DOI: 10.1038/srep46985
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Retraction: The analysis of the 
influence of fractal structure of 
stimuli on fractal dynamics in 
fixational eye movements and EEG 
signal
Hamidreza Namazi, Vladimir V. Kulish & Amin Akrami
Correction to: Scientific Reports https://doi.org/10.1038/srep26639; published online 24 May 2016; updated 01 
June 2018
This Article has been retracted by Scientific Reports at the request of Nanyang Technological University. An inves-
tigation at Nanyang Technological University found that ethical approval for the reported experiments was not 
sought from their Internal Review Board.
The Authors do not agree with the Retraction.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Publisher 2018
OPEN
