 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
www.nature.com/scientificreports
The Analysis of the Influence of 
Odorant’s Complexity on Fractal 
Dynamics of Human Respiration
Hamidreza Namazi1, Amin Akrami2 & Vladimir V. Kulish1
One of the major challenges in olfaction research is to relate the structural features of the odorants 
to different features of olfactory system. However, no relationship has been yet discovered between 
the structure of the olfactory stimulus, and the structure of respiratory signal. This study reveals 
the plasticity of human respiratory signal in relation to ‘complex’ olfactory stimulus (odorant). We 
demonstrated that fractal temporal structure of respiration dynamics shifts towards the properties of 
the odorants used. The results show for the first time that more structurally complex a monomolecular 
odorant will result in less fractal respiratory signal. On the other hand, odorant with higher entropy will 
result the respiratory signal with lower entropy. The capability observed in this research can be further 
investigated and applied for treatment of patients with different respiratory diseases.
One useful approach to study the scaling properties of many biological time series is to apply methods derived 
from the concept of self-similar (fractal) processes1–5. The fractal behavior shows the long-range correlations in 
these time series, which means the fluctuations in time series would be correlated with variations of hundreds of 
point earlier (presence of memory), and the correlations strength would decay in a power law manner.
The respiratory time series as the feature of respiratory system is governed as the result of inhalation and exha-
lation. The measurements of respiration time series (inter breath interval) reveal a combination of randomness 
and order, characteristic of fractal random processes6,7. For instance, Szeto et al. found out that breathing data 
on fetal lambs is fractal8. In another research, West et al. investigated that the fractal dimension of inter-breath 
intervals (IBI) and R–R intervals (RRI) decreases with increasing levels of exercise and is unaffected by hyper-
baric exposure9. In case of analysing the effect of age and gender, Peng et al. found out that IBI time series in case 
of healthy elderly male has smaller value of fractal dimension compared to the young male, young female, and 
elderly female subjects10. Analysing the fractal properties of breathing data during sleep by Larsen et al. showed 
that fractal properties of IBI time series do not differ with sleep state for infants. Based on the observations they 
suggested that some of the respiratory variability that occurs during sleep in infants may be the product of deter-
ministic processes11. See also12,13. In general, respiration time series like most physiological processes has a fractal 
dimension between D = 1 (regular process) and D = 1.5 (an uncorrelated random process).
On the other hand, some researchers have focused on analysing the entropy of respiration time series. 
Caldirola et al. found out patients with panic disorder show greater entropy in baseline respiratory patterns, 
which reflects higher levels of irregularity and complexity in their respiratory function14. In another study, 
Angelini et al. showed that multi scale entropy calculated on lung volume time series significantly differs in 
patients and healthy subjects, and confirmed the complexity-loss theory of aging and disease15. In analysing the 
relative contributions of maturation to the dynamic behaviour of respiration during ontogeny, Akay et al. found 
out that the entropy were high during the first seven days of the postnatal age, and decreased for the 12–19 days, 
and increased during subsequent 26–31 days age. They suggested the unique decrease in the entropy values in 
12–19 days age could be due to a reduction in the number of dendritic terminals per cell for this age range16. By 
computing the approximate entropy, Burioka et al. showed that respiratory movements are more regular during 
stage IV sleep than during other stages of consciousness17. See also18,19.
Besides all efforts done on analysis of breathing time series, no work has been done relating the complexity of stim-
uli (odorant in this research) to the complexity of respiratory time series. In this research we hypothesize that complex-
ity of odorant should affect the breathing complexity. To test this hypothesis, we examine the quantitative relationship 
1School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 2School of 
Metallurgy and Material engineering, University of Tehran, Iran. Correspondence and requests for materials should 
be addressed to H.N. (email: hnamazi@ntu.edu.sg)
received: 30 January 2016
Accepted: 11 May 2016
Published: 31 May 2016
OPEN
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
between the structural complexity of odorants and the fractal nature of respiratory signals. In the second step of this 
research we chose entropy as a tool in order to link the entropy of odorant with the entropy of respiratory signal.
Method
In this research in order to analyse the influence of different odorants’ complexities on fractal dynamics of human 
respiration we need to quantify the odorant’s complexity. We do this job by considering the molecular complexity 
as an index of how complicated an odorant molecular structure is. This complexity is based on bond connectivity, 
diversity of non-hydrogen atoms and symmetry. In general, molecules and compounds that are small and/or 
highly symmetric with few distinct atom types (or elements) have low complexity. Here, we use Bertz formula for 
calculation of odorant molecular complexity20:
=
+
C
C
C
(1)
n
e
In equation (1), C is molecular complexity, Cn stands for skeletal complexity which is a function of bond 
connectivity (n) and Ce is a function of element diversity or kinds of atoms. Cn and Ce are composed of two terms 
which are an overall complexity term and a symmetry term subtracted from it, so as to reduce skeletal complexity 
(Cn) or element diversity (Ce) when the molecule is symmetric or atoms of the same kind are present.
Another property that we consider about odorant is entropy. Based on third law of thermodynamic, at abso-
lute zero, 0 °K, all substances are assumed to have zero entropy since at that temperature mobility of electrons, 
atoms or molecules of a compound is zero. So, whatever factor (such as temperature) tended to increase mobility 
of electrons, atoms or molecules of a compound causes to increase entropy of that compound. For instance, 
when a substance is warmed from, 0 °K, more kinetic energy is added to its electrons, atoms and molecules, so its 
entropy increases alongside its temperature.
Here we have two features for investigation about odorants which are molecular complexity and entropy. In 
order to analyse the influence of odorants we use these two features versus fractal dimension and entropy for 
respiratory signals.
In this research we do our analysis on inter breath interval (IBI) time series. This time series maps the time 
period for one complete cycle of respiration (end-to-end inspiration) versus time or interval number. The algo-
rithms for generation and analysis of IBI time series are described in data analysis section.
Data collection. 
Subjects in this research consisted of 20 women and 20 men (age 25 ± 1 years) with general 
health condition. The subjects were non-smoker and free of any known neurological, cardiovascular (checked 
through ECG) and respiratory diseases and didn’t drink alcohol or caffeine-containing beverages for more than 
48 hours before the recording session.
All procedures were approved by the Internal Review Board of Nanyang Technological University and the 
approval for experimentation involving human subjects was issued by the university. The study was carried out 
in accordance with the approved guidelines. The nature of study was explained to participants before the exper-
iments and then the written informed consent was obtained from them. It is noteworthy that the identity of all 
subjects remains confidential.
In this research we choose five odorants. Then, on one side we study the variations of odorants’ complexity 
versus IBI time series fractal dimension. On the other side, we study the variations of odorants’ entropies versus 
IBI time series approximate entropy.
All experiments were done in an electrically shielded, acoustically isolated, and dimly illuminated room to 
insulate the subjects from all other external stimuli which may affect the respiratory signal. During the data 
collection subjects were sitting comfortably and instructed to focus on counting their respiratory rate and not 
allowed to talk or have any movement.
Since the vapor concentration of non-diluted odorants would be likely to correlate with molecular complexity, 
odorant concentrations were equalized by dilution in mineral oil according to their respective vapor pressure 
value, so as to achieve an approximate gas-phase partial pressure of 1 Pa. We presented each odorant in 10 ml 
vials and absorbed on scentless polypropylene fabric in order to optimize evaporation and air/oil partitioning. 
To further ensure that the resulting vapor concentrations did not differ according to molecular complexity, con-
centrations were measured for odorants using an olfactometer connected to a gas analyser. The output odorous 
air was fed into the gas analyser using a 4 mm tube (20 cm length). Each odorant was presented 5 times in the gas 
analyser with the duration of 3 sec and inter-stimulus interval of 2 min. No significant difference was observed in 
vapor concentration between odorants with different complexities.
In this research we used Respiratory Inductance Plethysmography (RIP) method for the collection of respira-
tory signals. RIP is an accurate plethysmography method which is frequently used to estimate lung volume from 
respiratory movements. In our experiments we used a RIP device (Respitrace, Ambulatory Monitoring, Ardsley, 
NY) which consists of a demodulator, an oscillator, and two wired elastic cloth bands. Signals were obtained from 
two elastic respiratory transducer bands, one placed around the rib cage under the armpits and the other around 
the abdomen at the level of the umbilicus (belly button). These transducers were connected to an oscillator and 
subsequent frequency demodulation device in order to obtain digital waveforms. In this research we used the 
summation of two governed signals (from two transducer bands). This summation was generated by sum channel 
of device. The recorded signal was sampled at 250 Hz and saved using the device software in the computer and 
used for analysis. The schematic of RIP method is shown in Fig. 1.
In the first round, the data collection was done without any stimulus. After that in order to test the effect of 
each odorant, we presented the odorant vial 1 cm below the subject’s nose and subjects sniffed at each vial pres-
entation, and we collected the respiratory signal. We collected the data five times in case of each odorant with 
inter-stimulus interval of 2 min. After finishing the data collection for the first odorant we wait for 10 min and 
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
then we presented next odorant to subjects with the same procedure and continued to test all odorants. The data 
collections were repeated in the second day for each subject in order to examine the reproducibility of the results 
from experiments. By repeating the experiments in the second day totally 10 trials were collected in case of each 
odorant from each subject.
Data analysis. 
The respiratory signals are used as an indirect measurement of chest movement and lung vol-
ume. Since fluctuations of breath to breath cycle periods is of interest, it is necessary to map the respiratory signal 
only to relative changes in lung volume. So, from each digitized respiratory signal, the inter breath interval (IBI) 
was determined using an algorithm written in MATLAB (please see the supplementary material).
In fact, there are two issues which should be considered in analysis of respiratory time series. First, because of intrinsic 
 
respiratory oscillations as well as external fluctuations (due to environmental noise), the signals are very complex. Second, 
 
the signals are highly non-stationary. Figure 2 shows the digitized lung volume signal (time series) from a healthy 
subject.
In order to extract IBI time series, the developed algorithm should detect the main peaks of these 
non-stationary and noisy signals. In fact the detection of peaks is preferred, since the signal near its trough 
becomes relatively flat, and thus it is difficult to accurately identify the locations of the minimums. Thus, the algo-
rithm should find all the local maxima which are correspond to the end points of inspiration.
However, due to signal noise and some transient physiologic interruptions there are some false peaks in the 
signal which algorithm should not consider them as local maxima. For instance, based on Fig. 2 in the expiration 
phase, while the respiratory signal moving downward, there may be brief increases of lung volume which creates 
local maxima in the signal. As it is clear in this figure, this local maxima is much smaller than the overall trend, so 
the program should not consider this local maxima and it should assume that the expiration phase persists. This 
behaviour can be seen also during the inspiration phase.
In the algorithm we adapt the moving average analysis technique that has been widely used in time series 
analysis21. This algorithm detects the main respiration peaks besides reducing noise in the signal. Considering a 
window of width W of the signal (X), the moving average over this window (XW) is defined as the average value of 
the signal at the preceding period of length W:
∑
=
=
−
−
X
t
W
X
( )
1
(2)
W
i
W
t
i
0
1
where t stands for the time.
Figure 1. Schematic of RIP method. 
Figure 2. The digitized respiratory signal. 
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
In order to detect the local peaks, two moving averages should be considered, one with a large window value 
W1 (slow-varying trend), and another one with a small window value W2 (fast-varying trend). For algorithm 
analysis, crossover points of these two moving averages are important. In fact, when the value of short-term 
moving average exceeds the value of long-term moving average, the signal is on an upward trend because the 
average of its recent history is greater than the average of its longer-term history. The values of short-term moving 
average diverge more and more as the signal continue on its upward behaviour. When the value of short-term 
moving average has the maximum difference with the value of long-term moving average, the signal is around 
its peak. The two moving averages approach each other as the signal moves downward, and finally the value of 
long-term moving average exceeds the value of the short-term moving average. Each true respiration peak is 
located between the crossover points where the short term moving average crosses over to values above and then 
below the long-term moving average curve.
In fact, the locations of peak points of smoothed time series generated by subtracting two moving averages are 
same with the locations of original signal peaks.
It is noteworthy in order to smooth out the local maxima generated by noise and pauses, W1 and W2 should 
be chosen carefully. Also, in order to optimize our algorithm first we examined a small subset of data. Then, we 
applied the optimized window sizes to the complete database.
To correct some misdetection by the algorithm, we inspected the time series visually after the algorithm auto-
matically found the main inspiratory peaks of the respiration cycles. After we removed the false peaks (it was less 
than 1%) from the signal, another program generates the IBI time series which shows the interval size (vertical 
axis) versus interval number (horizontal axis). It should be noted that subsequent analysis was not very sensitive 
to this small amount of missing data.
For further investigation we analyzed each subject’s IBI time series by another MATLAB based programs 
which compute fractal dimension and entropy of IBI time series based on Box counting method22 and approx-
imate entropy techniques23 respectively which are widely used in analysis of fractal time series (please see the 
supplementary material). 
Statistical Analysis. 
Mean values for the dependent variables (fractal dimension and approximate entropy 
of IBI time series) were compared across no odorant and odorant breathing conditions with a one-way fixed-effect 
ANOVA. Mauchly’s test (α = 
 0.05) was conducted in order to test for sphericity. Trend analysis was performed 
across conditions when ordered according to the properties of the olfactory stimuli. For a repeated measures 
design, we used Omega squared (ω2) as an unbiased measure of effect size suitable for small samples; In order 
to do pairwise comparisons effect size, r, was used. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software.
Results
In this research in order to analyze the effect of odorant’s molecular complexity and entropy on respiratory signal 
fractal dimension and entropy respectively, five pleasant odorants (Fig. 3) have been selected from Fenaroli’s 
Handbook of Flavor Ingredients24, which is a reliable and standard reference. The book includes expanded infor-
mation on aroma and taste thresholds, and the most current regulatory information. Three dimensional molec-
ular drawings were obtained from PubChem database Table 1 displays molecular complexity and entropy of the 
selected odorants.
As can be seen in Table 1, molecular complexity of selected odorants varies between 19.9 (Amyl alcohol) and 
135 (Diethyl succinate). Molecular complexity values in this study were computed based on James B. Hendrickson 
et al. work25. As was mentioned before (also look at Fig. 3), in general, molecules and compounds that are small 
and/or highly symmetric with few distinct atom types (or elements) have low complexity. For instance, at the 
molecular level, Diethyl succinate (C8H14O4) is more complex than Amyl alcohol (C5H12O) because it is heav-
ier and less symmetric than Amyl alcohol.
Figure 3. Molecular structure of selected odorants. 
Name
Compound
Molecular complexity
Entropy 
.
(
)
cal
mol K
Amyl alcohol
C5H12O
19.9
95.38
Benzyl alcohol
C7H8O
55.4
85.55
Butyl lactate
C7H14O3
101
125.86
Dimethyl succinate
C6H10O4
114
118.24
Diethyl succinate
C8H14O4
135
136.29
Table 1.  Molecular complexity and entropy of selected odorants.
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
Also, as can be seen in Table 1, the entropy of selected odorants varies between 85.55 (Benzyl alcohol) to 
136.29 (Diethyl succinate). In this study, the value of each odorant’s entropy in 25 °C was governed from (http://
realtime.molinstincts.com/). As it is clear in Table 1, there is not any coupling between complexity and entropy 
variations of odorants.
No difference was observed between male and female subjects. Mauchly’s test indicated that the assumption of 
sphericity had not been violated for either outcome variable (fractal dimension & approximate entropy). Figure 4 
shows the variation of mean of IBI time series fractal dimension in case of different odorants (on the left side), 
and the molecular complexity of odorants (on the right side). The results indicate the mean of all data governed 
from subjects in case of each odorant.
Considering Fcrit(5,234) = 
 2.25 at α = 
 0.05, based on Table 2 the result of statistical analysis [F(5,234) = 82.5, 
p = 
 0.001] indicates that there was a significant effect of olfactory stimulus on the fractal exponent of IBI time 
series, with an effect size ω2 = 0.57.
As it is clear in Fig. 4, in general, breathing an odorant decreases the IBI fractal dimension. A significant linear 
trend between smelling conditions was observed (p = 
 0.003), indicating that Diethyl succinate smelling condi-
tion yielded lower fractal dimension of IBI time series than Dimethyl succinate smelling condition, followed by 
Butyl lactate, Benzyl alcohol and Amyl alcohol smelling conditions respectively. Effect size calculations between 
conditions suggest that Diethyl succinate breathing condition led to greatest changes in the IBI time series frac-
tal exponent, observed across all Diethyl succinate comparisons (Table 3). In overall, the IBI time series fractal 
dimension decreases more by choosing odorants with higher molecular complexity. As fractal dimension stands 
for the complexity of a system, so it can be said that complexity of respiratory signal decreases more by choosing 
odorants with higher molecular complexity.
In another comparison, Fig. 5 shows the variations of IBI time series approximate entropy in case of different 
odorants (on the left side), and the odorants’ entropy (on the right side).
Considering Fcrit(5,234) = 
 2.25 at α = 
 0.05, based on Table 4 the result of statistical analysis [F(5,234)= 
95, 
p = 
 0.001] indicates that there was a significant effect of olfactory stimulus on the approximate entropy of IBI time 
series, with an effect size ω2 = 0.44.
As it is clear in Fig. 5, in general, breathing an odorant decreases the IBI time series approximate entropy. A 
significant linear trend between smelling conditions was observed (p = 0.0001), indicating that Diethyl succinate 
smelling condition yielded lower approximate entropy of IBI time series than Butyl lactate smelling condition, 
followed by Dimethyl succinate, Amyl alcohol and Benzyl alcohol smelling conditions respectively. Effect size 
calculations between conditions suggest that Diethyl succinate breathing condition led to greatest changes in the 
IBI time series entropy, observed across all Diethyl succinate comparisons (Table 5). In overall, the IBI time series 
approximate entropy decreases more by choosing odorants with higher entropy.
In summary, an adaptation occurred in respiration dynamics as a result of olfactory stimulation, where the 
odorants with higher molecular complexity/higher entropy will have greater influence on the complexity and 
entropy of human respiration respectively.
Figure 4. IBI time series fractal dimension in case of different odorants (on the left side), and the 
molecular complexity of odorants (on the right side). Error bars are standard deviations.
SS
df
MS
F
p
Between
0.824
5
0.165
82.5
0.001
Within
0.579
234
0.002
Total
1.403
239
Table 2.  The result of ANOVA test in case of IBI time series fractal dimension (95% confidence interval).
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
Discussion
In this research for the first time we analyzed the influence of odorant’s molecular complexity on the complexity 
of respiration time series. We did this job by analysing the odorant’s molecular complexity and IBI time series 
fractal dimension. The result of our analysis showed that by choosing an odorant with higher molecular complex-
ity, the respiration signal is less complex, having smaller value of fractal dimension. On the other hand, we also 
investigated the behaviour of variations of respiration time series approximate entropy versus odorant’s entropy. 
The similar trend was observed in this case also, where by choosing an odorant with higher entropy, the entropy 
of respiration time series will decrease more. Statistical analysis also showed that odorant with higher molecular 
complexity or higher entropy has greater effect on fractal dynamics and entropy of respiratory signal respectively. 
In overall it can be said that there is a coupling between odorant’s complexity and IBI time series fractal dimen-
sion. Also, there is a coupling between odorant’s entropy and IBI time series approximate entropy.
The reason behind what was observed in this research can be investigated by linking to the nervous system. 
In fact when we smell an odorant, it is sensed by a patch of olfactory receptor neurons at the top of nasal passage 
behind nose. These neurons are out in the open where they can come into contact with the air. They have hair-like 
projections called cilia that increase their surface area26. An odorant molecule binds to these cilia to trigger the 
Condition
Effect size (r)
No odorant vs. Amyl alcohol
0.58
No odorant vs. Benzyl alcohol
0.60
No odorant vs. Butyl lactate
0.82
No odorant vs. Dimethyl succinate
0.83
No odorant vs. Diethyl succinate
0.90
Amyl alcohol vs. Benzyl alcohol
0.10
Amyl alcohol vs. Butyl lactate
0.56
Amyl alcohol vs. Dimethyl succinate
0.60
Amyl alcohol vs. Diethyl succinate
0.75
Benzyl alcohol vs. Butyl lactate
0.43
Benzyl alcohol vs. Dimethyl succinate
0.58
Benzyl alcohol vs. Diethyl succinate
0.67
Butyl lactate vs. Dimethyl succinate
0.22
Butyl lactate vs. Diethyl succinate
0.51
Dimethyl succinate vs. Diethyl succinate
0.23
Table 3.  Effect sizes for pairwise comparisons in analysis of IBI time series fractal dimension.
Figure 5. IBI time series approximate entropy in case of different odorants (on the left side), and the 
odorants’ entropy (on the right side). Error bars are standard deviations.
SS
df
MS
F
p
Between
0.475
5
0.095
95
0.001
Within
0.326
234
0.001
Total
0.801
239
Table 4.  The result of ANOVA test in case of IBI time series approximate entropy (95% confidence 
interval).
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
neuron and then a message will be sent to the brain in the form of a signal and causes we perceive a smell. In3 
we showed that when human senses an external stimulus the value of the Hurst exponent for the EEG signal 
increases from 0.5. By increasing the Hurst exponent the fractal dimension decreases. We believe that when 
human smells an odorant with higher molecular complexity or higher entropy, this stimulus will have stronger 
effect on human brain, so accordingly the EEG signal will have smaller value of fractal dimension or entropy 
respectively. Thus, these stronger effects on human brain will accordingly stimulate the human lung more. So, 
the human respiration signal which is governed from lung volume variations will have smaller value of fractal 
dimension or entropy respectively. This hypothesis needs to be worked on more by simultaneous analysis of the 
effects of different odorants with different complexities on human EEG and respiratory signals.
Here we did our analysis in case of healthy subjects. These experiments can be further applied in case of sub-
jects with some respiration diseases in order to investigate how much the odorant’s complexity or entropy affects 
the respiration system. Also, these analyses would guide on-going efforts to develop realistic models of respiratory 
control. In general, increased understanding of the relationship between odorants and the respiratory system 
shall speed up clinical practice in drug and design development which yields to therapy of different respiration 
diseases.
References
1. Sedjelmaci, I. & Bereksi-Reguig, F. Fractal Analysis of the Electrocardiogram Signal. J. Mech. Med. Biol. 14, 1450055, doi: 10.1142/
S0219519414500559 (2014).
2. Wu, D. W., Anderson, N. C., Bischof, W. F. & Kingstone, A. Temporal dynamics of eye movements are related to differences in scene 
complexity and clutter. J. Vis. 14, doi: 10.1167/14.9.8 (2014).
3. Namazi, N. & Kulish, V. V. Fractional Diffusion Based Modelling and Prediction of Human Brain Response to External Stimuli. 
Comput. Math. Methods Med. 2015, 148534, doi: 10.1155/2015/148534 (2015).
4. Gupta, V., Suryanarayanan, S. & Reddy, N. P. Fractal analysis of surface EMG signals from the biceps. Int. J. Med. Inform. 45, 185–92 
(1997).
5. Gómez, C., Mediavilla, A., Hornero, R., Abásolo, D. & Fernández, A. Use of the Higuchi’s fractal dimension for the analysis of MEG 
recordings from Alzheimer’s disease patients. Med. Eng. Phys. 31, 306–13 (2009).
6. Bassingthwaighte, J. B., Liebovitch, L. S. & West, B. J. Fractal Physiology (Oxford University Press, 1994).
7. Fadel, P. J., Barman, S. M., Phillips, S. W. & Gebber, G. L. Fractal fluctuations in human respiration. J. Appl. Physiol. 97, 2056–2064 
(2004).
8. Szeto, H. H. et al. Fractal properties in fetal breathing dynamics. Am. J. Physiol. 263, R141–R147 (1992).
9. West, B. J., Griffin, L. A., Frederick, H. J. & Moon, R. E. The independently fractal nature of respiration and heart rate during exercise 
under normobaric and hyperbaric conditions. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 145, 219–233 (2005).
10. Peng, C. K. et al. Quantifying Fractal Dynamics of Human Respiration: Age and Gender Effects. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 30, 683–692 
(2002).
11. Larsen, P. D., Elder, D. E., Tzeng, Y. C., Campbell, A. J. & Galletly, D. C. Fractal characteristics of breath to breath timing in sleeping 
infants. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 139, 263–70 (2004).
12. Kaplan, V., Zhang, J. N., Russi, E. W. & Bloch. K. E. Detection of inspiratory flow limitation during sleep by computer assisted 
respiratory inductive plethysmography. Eur. Respir. J. 15, 570–8 (2000).
13. Goldman, L. J., Jarabo, R. M. & Gomez, R. G. Airway pressure alters wavelet fractal dynamics and short-range dependence of 
respiratory variability. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 161, 29–40 (2008).
14. Caldirola, D., Bellodi, L., Caumo, A., Migliarese, G. & Perna, G. Approximate entropy of respiratory patterns in panic disorder. Am. 
J. Psychiatry. 161, 79–87 (2004).
15. Angelini, L. et al. Multiscale analysis of short term heart beat interval, arterial blood pressure, and instantaneous lung volume time 
series. Artif. Intell. Med. 41, 237–250 (2007).
16. Akay, M., Moodie, K. L. & Hoopes, P. J. Age Related Alterations in the Complexity of Respiratory Patterns. J. Integr. Neurosci. 2, 
165–78 (2003).
17. Burioka, N. et al. Approximate entropy of human respiratory movement during eye-closed waking and different sleep stages. Chest. 
123, 80–6 (2003).
Condition
Effect size (r)
No odorant vs. Benzyl alcohol
0.29
No odorant vs. Amyl alcohol
0.62
No odorant vs. Dimethyl succinate
0.76
No odorant vs. Butyl lactate
0.94
No odorant vs. Diethyl succinate
0.95
Benzyl alcohol vs. Amyl alcohol
0.25
Benzyl alcohol vs. Dimethyl succinate
0.52
Benzyl alcohol vs. Butyl lactate
0.70
Benzyl alcohol vs. Diethyl succinate
0.76
Amyl alcohol vs. Dimethyl succinate
0.40
Amyl alcohol vs. Butyl lactate
0.66
Amyl alcohol vs. Diethyl succinate
0.74
Dimethyl succinate vs. Butyl lactate
0.19
Dimethyl succinate vs. Diethyl succinate
0.40
Butyl lactate vs. Diethyl succinate
0.41
Table 5.  Effect sizes for pairwise comparisons in analysis of IBI time series approximate entropy.
RETRACTED
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:26948 | DOI: 10.1038/srep26948
18. Elder, D. E., Larsen, P. D., Campbell, A. J. & Galletly, D. C. Cardioventilatory coupling and inter-breath variability in children 
referred for polysomnography. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 181, 1–7 (2012).
19. White, C. E. et al. Lower interbreath interval complexity is associated with extubation failure in mechanically ventilated patients 
during spontaneous breathing trials. J. Trauma. 68, 1310–6 (2010).
20. Hendrickson, J. B., Huang, P. & Toczko, A. G. Molecular complexity: a simplified formula adapted to individual atoms. J. Chem. Inf. 
Model. 27, 63–67 (1987).
21. Edwards, R. D., Magee, J. & Bassetti, W. H. C. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, Tenth Edition (Taylor & Francis Group, 2012).
22. Namazi, H. et al. A signal processing based analysis and prediction of seizure onset in patients with epilepsy. Oncotarget 7, 342–350 
(2015).
23. Pincus, S. M., Gladstone, I. M. & Ehrenkranz, R. A. A regularity statistic for medical data analysis. J. Clin. Monit. Comput. 7, 335–345 
(1991).
24. Burdock, G. A. Fenaroli’s Handbook of Flavor Ingredients. Sixth Edition (CRC press, 2009).
25. Hendrickson, J. B., Huang, P. & Toczko, A. G. Molecular complexity: a simplified formula adapted to individual atoms. J. Chem. Inf. 
Comput. Sci. 27, 63–67 (1987).
26. Sell, C. S. Chemistry and the Sense of Smell (Wiley, 2014).
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the grant from Ministry of Education, Singapore. Grant number RG119/15.
Author Contributions
H.N. designed the study, did the data collection and analysis, and drafted the manuscript. A.A. chose the odorants 
and computed their complexity and helped in drafting the manuscript. V.V.K. helped in drafting the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Namazi, H. et al. The Analysis of the Influence of Odorant’s Complexity on Fractal 
Dynamics of Human Respiration. Sci. Rep. 6, 26948; doi: 10.1038/srep26948 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
RETRACTED
 1
Scientific RepoRts | 8:46982 | DOI: 10.1038/srep46982
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Retraction: The Analysis of the 
Influence of Odorant’s Complexity 
on Fractal Dynamics of Human 
Respiration
Hamidreza Namazi, Amin Akrami & Vladimir V. Kulish
Correction to: Scientific Reports https://doi.org/10.1038/srep26948; published online 31 May 2016; updated 01 
June 2018
This Article has been retracted by Scientific Reports at the request of Nanyang Technological University. An inves-
tigation at Nanyang Technological University found that ethical approval for the reported experiments was not 
sought from their Internal Review Board.
The Authors do not agree with the Retraction.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Publisher 2018
OPEN
