 Pharmacognosy Magazine
Phcog.Net - Bringing Medicinal Plant Researchers Together
Publication of Pharmacognosy Network Worldwide
www.phcog.com 
ISSN : 0973-1296 
July-September  2016 | Volume 12 | Issue 47 | Supplement 4
CAB Abstracts, Caspur, Chemical Abstracts, CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure), CSA databases, DOAJ, EBSCO Publishing’s Electronic Databases, Excerpta 
Medica / EMBASE, Genamics JournalSeek, Google Scholar, Health & Wellness Research Center, Health Reference Center Academic, Hinari, Index Copernicus, Indian 
Science Abstracts, Journal Citation Reports, National Science Library, OpenJGate, PrimoCentral, ProQuest, PubMed, Pubmed Central, Science Citation Index Expanded, 
Scimago Journal Ranking, SCOLOAR, SCOPUS, SIIC databases, Summon by Serial Solutions, Ulrich’s International Periodical Directory and Web of Science.
Pharmacognosy Magazine   •   Volume 12   •   Issue 47   •   July-September 2016   •   Pages 389-496
Included
®
Impact Factor  for 2015: 0.831
 © 2016 Pharmacognosy Magazine | Published by Wolters Kluwer ‑ Medknow 
S441
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Pharmacogn. Mag.
A multifaceted peer reviewed journal in the field of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products
www.phcog.com | www.phcog.net
ABSTRACT
Background: Colon cancer (CC) is the third commonly diagnosed cancer 
and the second leading cause of mortality in the US when compared to 
India where prevalence is less. Possible reason could be the vegetarian 
diet comprising spices used in curry powders. Researchers believe that 
70% of the cases are associated with diet. Spices have inherited a rich 
tradition for their flavor and medicinal properties. Researchers have been 
oriented towards spices present in food items for their antitumorigenic 
properties. Objective: We investigated the effects of sambar as a 
preventive measure for 1,2-dimethyl hydrazine (DMH)-induced CC in 
Wistar albino rats. Materials and Methods: The animals were divided 
into three groups (n = 6) namely control, DMH, and sambar. At the end 
of the experimental period, the animals were killed using anesthesia and 
the colons and livers were examined. Results: All the treatment groups 
exhibited a significant change in the number of aberrant crypt foci (ACF). 
Sambar group showed a significant change in the colonic GSH when 
compared to both normal and DMH groups. A significant reduction in the 
liver GSH was noted in the sambar group. Only sambar group showed a 
significant change in the liver catalase levels when compared to DMH. 
There was a significant reduction in the colonic nitrite in the sambar-treated 
group; 2.94 ± 0.29 when compared to DMH control at 8.09 ± 1.32. On the 
contrary, a significant rise in the liver nitrite levels was observed in the 
sambar-treated rats. Conclusion: Sambar may prevent the risk of CC when 
consumed in dietary proportions.
INTRODUCTION
Cancer is a threat to the developed and developing nations and is the 
second most common cause of death. It results from abnormalities in 
normal mechanisms governing cell behavior. Cells being the smallest and 
most basic structural and functional unit of the human body undergo 
proliferation, differentiation, and several other biological processes to 
maintain the normal cycle of life. This whole phenomenon is controlled 
by various proteins and cell signaling mechanisms at the cellular and 
molecular level. Irregularity in any one step results in unregulated 
proliferation of cells. Thus, we can say that cancer represents a group 
of diseases that involves upregulated proliferation of cells leading to 
formation of tumor.
Sambar is a very popular South Indian dish that is eaten with rice and/or 
rice preparations like idlis, dosas, etc. Many versions of Sambar powder 
(ingredients differ) exist, varying from region to region. Indian spices that 
go into the making of this powder are coriander seeds, fenugreek seeds, 
turmeric rhizomes, black pepper, curry leaves, cumin seeds, and asafoetida. 
Spices are generally considered to be safe by the USFDA in the proportions 
used in food. In Asia, the intake of turmeric, a component of curry powder, 
has been reported to lower the incidence of colon cancer (CC).[1-3]
There are scientific reports stating the beneficial effects of Indian spices 
and condiments in cancer prevention.[4] CC is the third most commonly 
diagnosed cancer in the US, whereas in India the incidence is the lowest.[2,3] 
Almost 70% of the incidence of CC is linked to diet. This may also be 
attributed to lifestyle factors.[5] A possible explanation is the vegetarian 
Sambar, an Indian Dish Prevents the Development of Dimethyl 
Hydrazine–Induced Colon Cancer: A Preclinical Study
Vutturu Ganga Prasad, Neetinkumar Reddy, Albi Francis, Pawan G. Nayak, Anoop Kishore, Krishnadas Nandakumar, 
Mallikarjuna C. Rao, Rekha Shenoy 
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution‑Non Commercial‑Share Alike 3.0 License, which allows others to remix, 
tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as the author is credited 
and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
Cite this article as: Prasad VG, Reddy N, Francis A, Nayak PG, Kishore A, 
Nandakumar K, Rao MC, Shenoy R. Sambar, an Indian dish prevents the 
development of dimethyl hydrazine-induced colon cancer: A preclinical study. 
Phcog Mag 2016;12:441-5.
Department of Pharmacology, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India 
Submitted: 05-01-2016 
Revised: 02-02-2016  
Published: 30-09-2016
• Sambar comprises a variety of spices that exhibited both pro- and antioxidant 
properties in different tissues, leading to its overall beneficial effect in 
this model.
Correspondence: 
Dr. Krishnadas Nandakumar,  
Department of Pharmacology,  
Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,  
Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India.  
E-mail: mailnandakumar77@gmail.com; 
nandakumar.k@manipal.edu
DOI: 10.4103/0973-1296.191454
Key words: Aberrant crypt foci, dimethyl hydrazine, sambar, spices  
SUMMARY
• Consumption of sambar significantly reduced aberrant crypt foci in DMH-
induced colon cancer model
• Sambar treatment prevented DMH-induced oxidative changes in the colonic
tissue, indicating its antioxidant role
Abbreviations used: ACF: aberrant crypt foci, CC: colon cancer, DMH: 
1,2-dimethyl hydrazine, GSH: glutathione, IL
-6: Interleukin-6, TNF-α: Tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha.
Access this article online
Website: www.phcog.com
Quick Response Code:
 VUTTURU GANGA PRASAD, et al.: Sambar consumption prevents colon cancer in rats
S442 
Pharmacognosy Magazine, Jul-Sep 2016, Vol 12, Issue 47 (Supplement 4)
diet comprising spices used in curry powders.[6] Hence, the study was 
proposed to investigate the activity of sambar in 1,2-dimethyl hydrazine 
(DMH)-induced CC models in albino rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals
DMH was procured from Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC, St. Louis, MO, USA. 
Glutathione, trichloroacetic acid, and 5,5-dithio-bis-(2-nitrobenzoic 
acid) (DTNB) were purchased from HiMedia Laboratories, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India. TNF-alpha kits (Catalog # KRC3011) were procured 
from Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA. Carboxy methyl cellulose 
was purchased from S D Fine-Chem Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, 
India. 5-fluorouracil was procured from Biochem Pharmaceuticals 
Industries Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. Potassium chloride 
and hydrogen peroxide (LR grade) were bought from Merck KGaA, 
Darmstadt, Germany. BCA reagent was from ThermoFisher Scientific 
India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, Maharashtra, India, and sodium nitrite was 
procured from LOBA Chemie Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
Animals
Male Wistar rats inbred at Central Animal Research Facility, Manipal 
University, Manipal, were used in the study. Animals were acclimatized 
to the experimental room having temperature 23 ± 3°C, controlled 
humidity 75%, and 12:12 hour light and dark cycle. Rats were housed in 
sterile polypropylene cages containing sterile paddy husk as a bedding 
material. The animals were fed with autoclaved feed and water. Eight- to 
ten-weeks old male rats weighing 120 ± 10 g were used for the study. The 
animal care and handling was carried out in accordance to guidelines 
issued by Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC), Manipal 
University, Manipal. The protocol was approved by IAEC with reference 
no. IAEC/KMC/79/2014.
Grouping and dosing regimen
Animals were divided into three groups (n = 6) namely, normal control, 
DMH control, and sambar. The normal control received 0.25% CMC, p.o. 
CC in rats was induced using DMH as per our previously standardized 
protocol.[7] In brief, rats were pretreated with only sambar (6 mL/kg, p.o.) 
or vehicle (water; 6 mL/kg, p.o.) for an initial period of 8 weeks. After 
8 weeks, DMH was administered weekly once for 20 weeks (dose of 20 
mg/kg, i.p. for 10 weeks and thereafter 30 mg/kg, i.p. for next 10 weeks). 
Sambar/vehicle treatment was continued for an additional 20 weeks.
Composition of sambar
The ingredients present in sambar powder used for the study are listed 
below:
 
Dried long fruit of Capsicum annum var. annum (dried chilli pepper) 
= 1000 g
 
Dried seeds of Coriandrum sativum seeds (coriander seeds) = 1000 g
 
Cooked and dried unripe drupes of the Piper nigrum (black pepper) 
= 500 g
 
Dried seeds of Cuminum cyminum (cumin) = 400 g
 
Dried seeds of Trigonellafoenum graecum (fenugreek) = 30 g
 
Dried rhizome of Curcuma caesia (black turmeric) = 100 g
 
Oryza sativa var. ponni (rice) = 200 g
The above mentioned components were ground to a fine powder at 
Saraswathi Traders and Flour Mills, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India (using 
Danish Type Flour Mill, Model No: 2059072, manufactured by Nilax 
Overseas, Rajkot, Rajasthan, India).
Next, 25 g of yellow pigeon peas cooked in pressure cooker for 15 min 
and 6 g of the sambar powder (Indian spices) were boiled for 10 min. 
The sambar obtained was cooled and shaken well before administration 
to animals.
Parameters assessed in DMH-induced CC model
At the end of the study, the animals from each group were killed and the 
colons and livers dissected and perfused with an ice cold saline trans 
cardially. The tissues were blot dried, weighed, and 10% of homogenate 
was prepared with ice-cold (150 mM) potassium chloride solution using 
a homogenizer (RQ-127A/D, REMI House, Mumbai, Maharashtra, 
India). The homogenate was used for the following estimations, viz., 
GSH,[8] catalase,[9] nitrite,[10] and TNF-α.[11]
During the killing of animals, the entire colon was removed, opened 
longitudinally, and rinsed in saline. Cecum was excised. A piece of colon 
of 8 cm each was fixed on a filter paper in 10% buffered formalin for 24 
hours and then stained with 0.1% methylene blue in phosphate buffer 
saline for 20 min for aberrant crypt foci (ACF) counting. Specimens were 
carefully examined, mucosal side uppermost, at 40x magnification under 
a compound light microscope and the number of ACF was determined. 
ACF incidence, polyps and ACF count, the colon length/weight ratio, 
and histopathological examinations were recorded.
Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and 
significant differences among the treatment groups were evaluated by 
post-hoc Tukey’s test. The results were considered significant at P < 0.05. 
All statistical analyses were done using fully functional demo of Prism 
version 5.03 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).
RESULTS
The spleen and liver index
There were no significant changes in the liver index of the normal 
control, DMH, and sambar treatments [Figure 1A]. The same was true 
of the spleen index [Figure 1B]. These results indicate that DMH did not 
produce hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. 
Colon L/W ratio
The normal control showed a significant change in the colon L/W ratio 
at 12.255 ± 0.718 when compared to DMH control at 9.476 ± 0.549 at P 
< 0.01. A significant change was noted in the colon L/W ratio of DMH 
control with respect to sambar group at 11.782 ± 0.320. No significant 
change was observed between normal and sambar treatments [Figure 2]. 
Number of ACF/5 cm2 and number of ACF/cm2
Treatment with DMH produced structural changes in colon, leading 
to the formation of ACF. Pretreatment with sambar along with DMH 
significantly (P < 0.01) reduced AFC [Figure 3A and B], indicating that 
sambar could protect against DMH-induced colonic changes. 
Figure 1 : (A) Liver and (B) spleen indices of the normal, DMH, and 
pretreated sambar groups. Data is represented as mean ± SEM of six 
values
 VUTTURU GANGA PRASAD, et al.: Sambar consumption prevents colon cancer in rats
Pharmacognosy Magazine, Jul-Sep 2016, Vol 12, Issue 47 (Supplement 4) 
S443
GSH in the liver and colon homogenate
There was no change in the colonic and liver GSH of normal control 
versus DMH control. Sambar group showed a significant change in 
the colonic GSH when compared to both normal and DMH control. A 
significant reduction in the liver GSH was noted at 0.98 ± 0.07 when 
compared to 7.229 ± 2.67 and 10.88 ± 0.93 of normal control and DMH 
controls, respectively [Figure 4A and D]. 
Catalase in the liver and colon homogenate
No significant change was observed in the colonic catalase in any of the 
treatment groups. Only sambar group showed a significant (P < 0.05) change 
in the liver catalase levels when compared to DMH [Figure 4B and E].
Nitrite content in the liver and colon homogenate
There was a significant reduction in the colonic nitrite in the sambar-
treated group; 2.94 ± 0.29 when compared to DMH control at 8.09 ± 
1.32. On the contrary, a significant rise in the nitrite levels was observed 
in the sambar-treated rats; 3.61 ± 0.38 when compared to DMH group at 
0.95 ± 0.12 [Figure 4C and F].
Measurement of TNF-α level
TNF-α levels in colonic tissue increased in DMH-treated group as 
compared to normal control group. Treatment with sambar resulted in 
a mild elevation of TNF-α levels as compared to DMH group. However, 
the changes are nonsignificant [Figure 5].
Histopathological results
In the normal rats, the epithelium was intact with no signs of dysplasia, 
adenoma, or carcinoma.
In the DMH group, mucosal polyps, ACF, and adenoma of colon were 
seen in 5 out of 6 rats. In all the rats severe dysplasia was observed in 
the DMH group. Mild hyperplasia with few crypts interspersed in the 
stromal tissues was observed in the sambar treatment group. There was 
also a reduced incidence of adenoma formation in the colon on treatment 
with sambar [Figure 6 and Figure 7]. 
DISCUSSION
The present study was undertaken to investigate the protective actions 
of sambar, a popular South Indian dish, in DMH-induced colon 
carcinogenesis in rodents.
CC is a complex process, which involves initiation, promotion, 
progression, and invasive phases from the development of a normal crypt 
to an adenoma.[12] Thus, an intervention into any one of these phases 
of colon carcinogenesis can be an effective strategy for the prevention 
of CC. Chronic inflammation is a well-recognized risk factor for the 
development of human cancer.[13] In the present study, the DMH control 
animals showed an initiation of ACF, promotion into adenoma, and a 
significant increase in inflammatory mediator levels of TNF-α.
DMH is a known carcinogen used to study sporadic forms of colon 
carcinoma resulting in a reproducible experimental in vivo model for 
pre-clinical screening of test compounds.[14] Metabolism of DMH leads 
to the formation of azoxymethane (AOM), methylazoxymethanol 
Figure 2 : Colon L/W ratio of the normal, DMH, and pretreated sambar 
groups. aP < 0.01 versus control and bP < 0.05 versus DMH. Data is 
represented as mean ± SEM of six values
Figure 3 : Number of aberrant crypt foci per (A) 5 cm2 and (B) cm2 in the 
normal, DMH, and pretreated sambar groups. a P < 0.001 versus control 
and b P < 0.01 versus DMH. Data is represented as mean ± SEM of six 
values
Figure 4 : Glutathione (A), catalase (B), and nitrite (C) levels in the colon 
homogenate of the various groups. Glutathione (D), catalase (E), and 
nitrite (F) levels in the liver homogenate of the various groups. aP < 0.05 
versus control and b P < 0.05 versus DMH. Data is represented as mean ± 
SEM of six values
Figure 5 : TNF-alpha levels in the colon homogenate of 
the normal, DMH, and pretreated sambar groups. Data is 
represented as mean ± SEM of six values
 VUTTURU GANGA PRASAD, et al.: Sambar consumption prevents colon cancer in rats
S444 
Pharmacognosy Magazine, Jul-Sep 2016, Vol 12, Issue 47 (Supplement 4)
(MAM), and methyl diazonium ions, which involve alkylation of colonic 
mucosal DNA.[15] The primary metabolite of DMH, that is, AOM that 
is responsible for methylation at the O6 position of guanine occurs 
within 6–12 h of DMH injection. ACFs are considered to be the earliest 
hallmark of colon carcinogenesis. They are the focal lesions of colonic 
mucosa consisting of several enlarged/aberrant/elliptical shape crypts, 
which can be differentiated from normal crypts.[16] Considering this 
fact, we confirmed the induction of CC and grouped the animals by 
evaluating the colonic ACFs with methylene blue staining. The mutations 
in k-ras, hypo-Met-DNA in ACFs lead to the development of small and 
large adenoma, which will further develop into adenocarcinoma by the 
mismatch repair and p53 mutation.[17] We observed the initial lesions 
of ACF and development of small adenoma in DMH control group, 
whereas only ACFs and polyps, but not adenomas, were noted in rest 
of the groups.
No significant differences were noted in the liver and spleen indices of 
the pretreated sambar group, which suggests that the treatment is not 
harmful to the liver. The colon length/weight ratio of the various groups 
also indicated that sambar was at par with the control group. Colorectal 
carcinogenesis is associated with the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, 
wherein adenomas, spurred by acquired genetic mutations, evolve into 
CC.[17] Pretreatment with sambar in the DMH-induced CC significantly 
reduced the precursors of adenoma.
Previous reports have established that the spices like cumin and 
black pepper suppress colon carcinogenesis in the presence of the 
procarcinogen DMH.[18] The same spices may be responsible for 
the protective effect in the present study; however, for substantial 
evidence detailed studies are required to investigate the effects of the 
individual spices upon pretreatment. Black turmeric has been previously 
investigated for its anticarcinogenic properties in liver cancer induced 
by diethyl nitrosamine.[19] Based on this finding, the protective effect 
of sambar powder could also be attributed to black turmeric in DMH-
induced CC. The incidence of colonic tumor has been seen to reduce to 
16.6% on adding fenugreek to the diet of DMH-treated rats,[20] which 
confirms the potential of fenugreek in our study as well. However, 
the role of Capsicum annuum remains ambiguous, for which detailed 
studies are required, both for the prevention and treatment of CC.[21] 
Considering the properties of these individual spices, we can conclude 
that their combined presence in sambar could exert an overall protective 
effect against the development of CC when consumed in the diet.
The hepatic catalase levels rose significantly, which suggests the overall 
endogenous antioxidant potential. The enhanced levels of nitrite in 
the colon and not in the liver state that DMH is a specific toxicant to 
the colon only. The pretreated sambar group has significantly declined 
the colonic nitrite level when compared to DMH, which suggests that 
sambar could reduce the free radical–induced damage by DMH in the 
colonic tissue.
In the liver, DMH treatment did not significantly alter the oxidative 
markers like GSH, nitrite, and catalase. This indicates that the dose 
of DMH used for the induction of CC did not have any deleterious 
effect on the liver markers. Whereas, DMH caused oxidative stress in 
the colonic tissue as seen by an elevation in GSH, catalase, and nitrite 
levels. Treatment with sambar caused an elevation of catalase and nitrite 
levels and depletion of the GSH levels, indicating the presence of pro-
oxidants in the spices present in sambar. Sambar treatment prevented 
DMH-induced oxidative changes in the colonic tissue indicating its 
antioxidant role. The constituents present in sambar exhibited both 
pro- and antioxidant properties in different tissues, which might have 
led to an overall beneficial effect in colonic tissue as is evident from the 
physiological and histological parameters assessed.
There are reports indicating DMH administration increases levels of 
TNF-α, IL-6, and causes oxidative stress.[22] The increase in ACF count 
and number of polyps were used to evaluate the extent of damage to 
the colon caused by DMH. DMH treatment showed an increase in 
ACF count with adenoma. The sambar-treated group maintained a 
lower number of ACF and polyps. However, there was no significant 
difference in the TNF-α levels across the groups. Thus, we could 
conclude that sambar was able to reduce oxidative stress in the colonic 
tissue without affecting the inflammatory mediators  thereby preventing 
the development of CC.
Acknowledgement
We are thankful to Manipal University for providing facilities to perform 
this study
Financial support and sponsorship
The authors acknowledge the funding provided by Manipal College of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Manipal University for this study. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest. 
REFERENCES
1. Mohandas KM, Desai DC. Epidemiology of digestive tract cancers in India. V. Large and small 
bowel. Indian J Gastroenterol 1999;18:118-21.
2. Mohandas KM. Colorectal cancer in India: controversies, enigmas and primary prevention. 
Indian J Gastroenterol 2011;30:3-6.
3. Pathy S, Lambert R, Sauvaget C, Sankaranarayanan R. The incidence and survival rates of 
colorectal cancer in India remain low compared with rising rates in East Asia. Dis Colon 
Rectum 2012;55:900-6.
Figure 6 : Surface view of unsectioned colonic mucosa stained with 
methylene blue (40×). In the control group, the crypts appeared normal. 
In the DMH group, yellow circles indicate methylene blue–stained ACF 
consisting of two large elliptical crypts. Sambar-treated group showed 
reduced number of ACF. Red arrows indicate the normal crypts
Figure 7 : Histopathological analysis of the colonic mucosa with 
hematoxylin and eosin staining. Normal epithelium with no signs of 
dysplasia, adenoma, or carcinoma is noted in the control group. Severe 
dysplasia (arrows) was observed in the DMH group. Mild hyperplasia, crypts 
were well interspersed with the stromal tissues in the sambar treatment
 VUTTURU GANGA PRASAD, et al.: Sambar consumption prevents colon cancer in rats
Pharmacognosy Magazine, Jul-Sep 2016, Vol 12, Issue 47 (Supplement 4) 
S445
4. Kaefer CM, Milner JA. The role of herbs and spices in cancer prevention. J Nutr Biochem 
2008;19:347-61.
5. Anand P
, Kunnumakkara AB, Sundaram C, Harikumar KB, Tharakan ST
, Lai OS, et al. Cancer 
is a preventable disease that requires major lifestyle changes. Pharm Res 2008;25:2097-116.
6. Aggarwal B, Prasad S, Sung B, Krishnan S. Prevention and treatment of colorectal cancer by 
natural agents from Mother Nature. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep 2013;9:37-56.
7
. Prasad VG, Kawade S, Jayashree BS, Reddy ND, Francis A, Nayak PG, et al. Iminoflavones 
combat 1,2-dimethyl hydrazine-induced aberrant crypt foci development in colon cancer. 
Biomed Res Int 2014;Article ID 569130
8. Moron MS, Depierre JW, Mannervik B. Levels of glutathione, glutathione reductase and 
glutathione S-transferase activities in rat lung and liver. Biochim Biophys Acta 1979;582:67-78.
9. Aebi H. Catalase in vitro. Methods Enzymol 1984;105:121-6.
10. Guevara I, Iwanejko J, Dembińska-Kieć A, Pankiewicz J, Wanat A, Anna P
. et al. Determination 
of nitrite/nitrate in human biological material by the simple Griess reaction. Clin Chim Acta 
1998;274:177-88.
11. Habig WH, Jakoby WB. Assays for differentiation of glutathione S-transferases. Methods 
Enzymol 1981;77:398-405.
12. Wali RK, Stoiber D, Nguyen L, Hart J, Sitrin MD, Brasitus T
, et al. Ursodeoxycholic acid 
inhibits the initiation and post-initiation phases of azoxymethane induced colonic tumor 
development. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2002;11:1316-21.
13. Tanaka T
. Development of an inflammation-associated colorectal cancer model and its 
application for research on carcinogenesis and chemoprevention. Int J Inflam 2012;Article 
ID 658786.
ABOUT AUTHOR
Dr. K. Nandakumar, Started his career as a Pharmacist in 1999. He 
completed his doctoral degree in Pharmaceutical Sciences in 2006. He 
started his academic career as Senior Lecturer, later promoted as Assistant 
Professor and presently working as Associate Professor at Manipal College 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Manipal University. He is actively involved in 
research and has 61 Scopus-indexed publications, 2 awards and several 
Industry-academic research grants to his name. His area of research 
includes chemobrain, metabolic disorders and preclinical evaluation of 
drugs. He is a peer-reviewer for many leading journal and an editorial 
member of eCAM. He is also one of the leading reviewers in the field of 
Pharmacy and Pharmacology as per Publons
K. Nandakumar
14. LaMont JT
, O'Gorman TA. Experimental colon cancer. Gastroenterol 1978;75:1157-69.
15. Fiala ES. Investigations into the metabolism and mode of action of the colon carcinogens 
1,2-dimethyl hydrazine and azoxymethane. Cancer 1977;40:2436-45.
16. Rodrigues MA, Silva LA, Salvadori DM, De Camargo JL, Montenegro MR. Aberrant crypt 
foci and colon cancer: comparison between a short- and medium-term bioassay for colon 
carcinogenesis using dimethyl hydrazine in Wistar rats. Braz J Med Biol Res 2002;35:351-5.
17
. Sakai E, Takahashi H, Kato S, Uchiyama T
, Hosono K, Endo H, et al. Investigation of the 
prevalence and number of aberrant crypt foci associated with human colorectal neoplasm. 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2011;20:1918-24.
18. Nalini N, Manju V, Menon VP
. Effect of spices on lipid metabolism in 1,2 dimethyl 
 
hydrazine-induced rat colon carcinogenesis. J Med Food 2006;9:237-45.
19. Hadem KH, Sharan RN, Kma L. Inhibitory potential of methanolic extracts of Aristolochia 
tagala and Curcuma caesia on hepatocellular carcinoma induced by diethylnitrosamine in 
BALB/c mice. J Carcinog 2014;13:7
.
20. Devasena T
, Venugopal MP
. Fenugreek seeds modulate 1,2-dimethyl hydrazine induced 
hepatic oxidative stress during colon carcinogenesis. Ital J Biochem 2007;56:28-34.
21. Anonymous Final report on the safety assessment of capsicum annuum extract, capsicum 
annuum fruit extract, capsicum annuum resin, capsicum annuum fruit powder, capsicum 
frutescens fruit, capsicum frutescens fruit extract, capsicum frutescens resin, and capsaicin. 
Int J Toxicol 2007;26:3-106.
22. Umesalma S, Sudhandiran G. Differential inhibitory effects of the polyphenol ellagic acid 
on inflammatory mediators NF-κB, iNOS, COX-2, TNF-α, and IL
-6 in 1,2 dimethyl hydrazine-
induced rat colon carcinogenesis. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 2010;107:650-5.
