 UC Irvine
Clinical Practice and Cases in Emergency Medicine
Title
Pediatric Death Due to Myocarditis After Exposure to Cannabis
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1n10w5pc
Journal
Clinical Practice and Cases in Emergency Medicine, 1(3)
ISSN
2474-252X
Authors
Nappe, Thomas M.
Hoyte, Christopher O.
Publication Date
2017
DOI
10.5811/cpcem.2017.1.33240
License
CC BY 4.0
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 Clinical Practice and Cases in Emergency Medicine 
166 
Volume I, no. 3: August 2017
Case RepoRt
 
Pediatric Death Due to Myocarditis 
After Exposure to Cannabis 
 
Thomas M. Nappe, DO*
Christopher O. Hoyte, MD*†
Section Editor: Shadi Lahham, MD, MS  
 
  
Submission history: Submitted November 29, 2016; Revision received January 20, 2017; Accepted January 21, 2017  
Electronically published March 16, 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_cpcem  
 
DOI: 10.5811/cpcem.2017.1.33240
Since marijuana legalization, pediatric exposures to cannabis have increased.1 To date, pediatric deaths 
from cannabis exposure have not been reported. The authors report an 11-month-old male who, following 
cannabis exposure, presented with central nervous system depression after seizure, and progressed to 
cardiac arrest and died. Myocarditis was diagnosed post-mortem and cannabis exposure was confirmed. 
Given the temporal relationship of these two rare occurrences – cannabis exposure and sudden death 
secondary to myocarditis in an 11-month-old – as well as histological consistency with drug-induced 
myocarditis without confirmed alternate causes, and prior reported cases of cannabis-associated 
myocarditis, a possible relationship exists between cannabis exposure in this child and myocarditis 
leading to death. In areas where marijuana is commercially available or decriminalized, the authors urge 
clinicians to preventively counsel parents and to include cannabis exposure in the differential diagnosis of 
patients presenting with myocarditis. [Clin Pract Cases Emerg Med. 2017;1(3):166–170.]
INTRODUCTION
Since marijuana legalization, pediatric exposures to 
cannabis have increased, resulting in increased pediatric 
emergency department (ED) visits.1 Neurologic toxicity 
is most common after pediatric exposure; however, 
gastrointestinal and cardiopulmonary toxicity are reported.1 
According to a retrospective review of 986 pediatric cannabis 
ingestions from 2005 to 2011, pediatric exposure has been 
specifically linked to a multitude of symptoms including, 
but not limited to, drowsiness, lethargy, irritability, seizures, 
nausea and vomiting, respiratory depression, bradycardia 
and hypotension.1 Prognosis is often reassuring.1 Specific 
myocardial complications related to cannabis toxicity 
that are well documented in adolescence through older 
adulthood include acute coronary syndrome, cardiomyopathy, 
myocarditis, pericarditis, dysrhythmias and cardiac arrest.2-4 To 
date, there are no reported pediatric deaths from myocarditis 
after confirmed, recent cannabis exposure. The authors report 
an 11-month-old male who, following cannabis exposure, 
presented in cardiac arrest after seizure and died. Myocarditis 
was diagnosed post-mortem and cannabis exposure was 
confirmed. Analyses of serum cannabis metabolites, post-
Denver Health and Hospital Authority, Rocky Mountain Poison and Drug Center, 
Denver, Colorado
University of Colorodo School of Medicine at Anschutz Medical Center, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Aurora, Colorado
mortem infectious testing, cardiac histopathology, as well as 
clinical course, support a potential link between the cannabis 
exposure and myocarditis that would justify preventive 
parental counseling and consideration of urine drug screening 
in this reported setting. 
CASE REPORT
An 11-month-old male with no known past medical 
history presented to the ED with central nervous system 
(CNS) depression and then went into cardiac arrest. The 
patient was lethargic for two hours after awakening that 
morning and then had a seizure. During the prior 24-48 
hours, he was irritable with decreased activity and was later 
retching. He was noted to be healthy before developing these 
symptoms. Upon arrival in the ED, he was unresponsive with 
no gag reflex. Vital signs were temperature 36.1o Celsius, 
heart rate 156 beats per minute, respiratory rate 8 breaths per 
minute, oxygen saturation 80% on room air. Physical exam 
revealed a well-nourished, 20.5 lb., 11-month-old male, with 
normal development, no trauma, normal oropharynx, normal 
tympanic membranes, no lymphadenopathy, tachycardia, 
clear lungs, normal abdomen and Glasgow Coma Scale 
*
†
 Volume I, no. 3: August 2017 
167 
Clinical Practice and Cases in Emergency Medicine
Nappe et al. 
Pediatric Death Due to Myocarditis After Exposure to Cannabis
rating of 4. He was intubated for significant CNS depression 
and required no medications for induction or paralysis. 
Post-intubation chest radiograph is shown in Image 2. He 
subsequently became bradycardic with a heart rate in the 
40s with a wide complex rhythm. Initial electrocardiogram 
(ECG) was performed and is shown in Image 1. He then 
became pulseless, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was 
initiated. Laboratory analysis revealed sodium 136 mmol/L, 
potassium 7.7 mmol/L, chloride 115 mmol/L, bicarbonate 8.0 
mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 24 mg/dL, creatinine 0.9 mg/dL, 
and glucose 175 mg/dL Venous blood gas pH was 6.77. An 
ECG was repeated (Image 3). He received intravenous fluid 
resuscitation, sodium bicarbonate infusion, calcium chloride, 
insulin, glucose, ceftriaxone and four doses of epinephrine. 
Resuscitation continued for approximately one hour but the 
patient ultimately died. 
Further laboratory findings in the ED included a 
complete blood count (CBC) with differential, liver function 
tests (LFTs), one blood culture and toxicology screen. 
CBC demonstrated white blood cell count 13.8 K/mcL 
with absolute neutrophil count of 2.5 K/mcL and absolute 
lymphocyte count of 10.7 K/mcL, hemoglobin 10.0 gm/
dL, hematocrit 34.7%, and platelet count 321 K/mcL. LFTs 
showed total bilirubin 0.6 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 
77 IU/L, and alanine transferase 97 IU/U. A single blood 
culture from the right external jugular vein revealed aerobic 
gram-positive rods that were reported two days later as 
Bacillus species (not Bacillus anthracis). Toxicology 
screening revealed urine enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
positive for tetrahydrocannabinol-carboxylic acid (THC-
COOH) and undetectable serum acetaminophen and salicylate 
concentrations. Route and timing of exposure to cannabis 
were unknown. 
Autopsy revealed a non-dilated heart with normal 
coronary arteries. Microscopic examination showed a severe, 
diffuse, primarily lymphocytic myocarditis, with a mixed 
cellular infiltrate in some areas consisting of histiocytes, 
plasma cells, and eosinophils. Myocyte necrosis was also 
observed. There was no evidence of concomitant bacterial 
or viral infection based on post-mortem cultures obtained 
from cardiac and peripheral blood, lung pleura, nasopharynx 
and cerebrospinal fluid. Post-mortem cardiac blood analysis 
confirmed the presence of Δ-9-carboxy-tetrahydrocannabinol 
(Δ-9-carboxy-THC) at a concentration of 7.8 ng/mL. 
Additional history disclosed an unstable motel-living 
situation and parental admission of drug possession, 
including cannabis. 
DISCUSSION
As of this writing, this is the first reported pediatric 
death associated with cannabis exposure. Given the existing 
relationship between cannabis and cardiovascular (CV) toxicity, 
as well as the temporal progression of events, post-mortem 
analysis, and previously reported cases of cannabis-induced 
myocarditis, the authors propose a relationship between cannabis 
exposure in this patient and myocarditis, leading to cardiac arrest 
and ultimately death. This occurrence should justify consideration 
of urine drug screening for cannabis in pediatric patients 
presenting with myocarditis of unknown etiology in areas where 
cannabis is widely used. In addition, parents should be counseled 
Image 1. Initial electrocardiogram demonstrating wide-complex tachycardia.
 Clinical Practice and Cases in Emergency Medicine 
168 
Volume I, no. 3: August 2017
Pediatric Death Due to Myocarditis After Exposure to Cannabis 
Nappe et al.
resistance with acute use and bradycardia in more chronic 
use.2,5-7. These effects are believed to be multifactorial, 
and evidence suggests that cannabinoid effect on the 
autonomic nervous system, peripheral vasculature, cardiac 
microvasculature, and myocardial tissue and Purkinje fibers 
are all likely contributory.2 The pathogenesis of myocarditis 
is not fully understood. In general, myocarditis results from 
direct damage to myocytes from an offending agent such 
as a virus, or in this case, potentially a toxin. The resulting 
cellular injury leads to a local inflammatory response. 
Destruction of cardiac tissue may result in myocyte necrosis 
and arrhythmogenic activity, or cellular remodeling in chronic 
myocarditis.8,9 
Autopsy findings in this patient were consistent 
with noninfectious myocarditis as a cause of death. The 
histological findings of myocyte necrosis with mature 
lymphocytic mixed cellular infiltrate are consistent with 
drug-induced, toxic myocarditis.10 The presence of THC 
metabolites in the patient’s urine and serum, most likely 
secondary to ingestion, is the only uncovered risk factor 
in the etiology for his myocarditis. This is highly unlikely 
attributable to passive exposure. 11,12
It is difficult to extrapolate a specific time of cannabis 
ingestion given the unknown dose of THC, the individual 
variability of metabolism and excretion, as well as the lack of 
data on this topic in the pediatric population and post-mortem 
redistribution (PMR) kinetics. However, the THC metabolite 
detected in the patient’s blood, Δ-9-carboxy-THC, is known 
to peak in less than six hours and be detectable for at least 
a day, while the parent compound, tetrahydrocannabinol 
Image 2. Post-intubation chest radiograph. Measurement 
indicates distance of endotracheal tube tip above carina.
regarding measures to prevent such exposures. 
The progressive clinical presentation of this patient during 
the prior 24-48 hours, including symptoms of somnolence, 
lethargy, irritability, nausea, seizure and respiratory 
depression are consistent with previously documented, known 
complications of recent cannabis exposure in the pediatric 
population.1 It is well known that common CV effects of 
cannabis exposure include tachycardia and decreased vascular 
Image 3. Repeat electrocardiogram showing disorganized rhythm, peri-arrest.
 Volume I, no. 3: August 2017 
169 
Clinical Practice and Cases in Emergency Medicine
Nappe et al. 
Pediatric Death Due to Myocarditis After Exposure to Cannabis
(THC), is expected to rapidly metabolize and distribute 
much more quickly, being potentially undetectable six 
hours after exposure in an infrequent user.13 The parent 
compound was below threshold for detection in this patient’s 
blood. In addition, if cannabis ingestion occurred the day 
of presentation, it would have been more likely that THC 
would have been detected with its metabolite after PMR.14,15 
Given this information, the authors deduce that cannabis 
consumption occurred within the recent two to six days, 
assuming this was a single, acute high-potency ingestion. This 
time frame would overlap with the patient’s symptomatology 
and allow time for the development of myocarditis, thus 
supporting cannabis as the etiology. 
The link between cannabis use and myocarditis has been 
documented in multiple teenagers and young adults.16-18 In 2008 
Leontiadis reported a 16-year-old with severe heart failure 
requiring a left ventricular assist device, associated with biopsy-
diagnosed myocarditis.16 The authors attributed the heart failure 
to cannabis use of unknown chronicity.16 In 2014 Rodríguez-
Castro reported a 29-year-old male who had two episodes of 
myopericarditis several months apart.17 Each episode occurred 
within two days of smoking cannabis. 18 In 2016, Tournebize 
reported a 15-year-old male diagnosed with myocarditis, 
clinically and by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, after 
initiating regular cannabis use eight months earlier.18 There were 
no other causes for myocarditis, including infectious, uncovered 
by these authors, and no adulterants were identified in these 
patients’ consumed marijuana.16-18 Unlike our patient, all three 
of these previously reported patients recovered. 
In the age of legalized marijuana, children are at increased 
risk of exposure, mainly through ingestion of food products, 
or “edibles.”19 These products are attractive in appearance and 
have very high concentrations of THC, which can make small 
exposures exceptionally more toxic in small children. 19,20
Limitations in this report include the case study design, 
the limitations on interpreting an exact time, dose and route 
of cannabis exposure, the specificity of histopathology being 
used to classify etiology of myocarditis, and inconsistent 
blood culture results. The inconsistency in blood culture 
results also raises concern of a contributing bacterial etiology 
in the development of myocarditis, lending to the possibility 
that cannabis may have potentially induced the fatal 
symptomatology in an already-developing silent myocarditis. 
However, due to high contaminant rates associated with 
bacillus species and negative subsequent blood cultures, 
the authors believe this was more likely a contaminant.21 In 
addition, the patient had no source of infection on exam or 
recent history and was afebrile without leukocytosis.22 All of 
his subsequent cultures from multiple sites were negative. 
CONCLUSION
Of all the previously reported cases of cannabis-
induced myocarditis, patients were previously healthy and 
no evidence was found for other etiologies. All of the prior 
reported cases were associated with full recovery. In this 
reported case, however, the patient died after myocarditis-
associated cardiac arrest. Given two rare occurrences with a 
clear temporal relationship – the recent exposure to cannabis 
and the myocarditis-associated cardiac arrest – we believe 
there exists a plausible relationship that justifies further 
research into cannabis-associated cardiotoxicity and related 
practice adjustments. In states where cannabis is legalized, 
it is important that physicians not only counsel parents on 
preventing exposure to cannabis, but to also consider cannabis 
toxicity in unexplained pediatric myocarditis and cardiac 
deaths as a basis for urine drug screening in this setting. 
Address for Correspondence: Thomas M. Nappe, DO, Denver 
Health and Hospital Authority, Rocky Mountain Poison and Drug 
Center, 1391 Speer Blvd, Denver, CO 80204. Email: dr.thomas.
nappe@gmail.com.
Conflicts of Interest: By the CPC-EM article submission 
agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, 
funding sources and financial or management relationships that 
could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors 
disclosed none.
Copyright: © 2017 Nappe et al. This is an open access article 
distributed in accordance with the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY 4.0) License. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
1. Wang GS, Roosevelt G, Le Lait MC, et al. Association of 
unintentional pediatric exposures with decriminalization of marijuana 
in the United States. Ann Emerg Med. 2014;63(6):684-9. 
2. Panayiotides IM. What is the association of cannabis consumption 
and cardiovascular complications? Subst Abuse. 2015;9:1-3.
3. Bachs L, Mørland H. Acute cardiovascular fatalities following 
cannabis use. Forensic Sci Int. 2001;124(2-3):200-3.
4. Aryana A, Williams MA. Marijuana as a trigger of cardiovascular 
events: Speculation or scientific certainty? Int J Cardiol. 
2007;118(2):141-4. 
5. Jones RT. Cardiovascular system effects of marijuana. J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2002;42(11 Suppl):58S-63S.
6. Sidney S. Cardiovascular consequences of marijuana use. J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2002;42(11 Suppl):64S-70S.
7. Benowitz NL, Jones RT. Cardiovascular effects of prolonged 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol ingestion. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
1975;18(3):287-97.
 Clinical Practice and Cases in Emergency Medicine 
170 
Volume I, no. 3: August 2017
Pediatric Death Due to Myocarditis After Exposure to Cannabis 
Nappe et al.
8. Kindermann I, Barth C, Mahfoud F, et al. Update on myocarditis. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(9):779-92. 
9. Cooper LT Jr. Myocarditis. N Eng J Med. 2009;360(15):1526-38.
10. Aretz HT, Billingham ME, Edwards WD, et al. Myocarditis. A 
histopathologic definition and classification. Am J Cardiovasc Pathol. 
1987;1(1):3-14.
11. Perez-Reyes M, Di Guiseppi S, Mason AP, et al. Passive inhalation 
of marihuana smoke and urinary excretion of cannabinoids. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 1983;34(1):36-41. 
12. Cone EJ, Bigelow GE, Herrmann ES, et al. Nonsmoker exposure 
to secondhand cannabis smoke. III. Oral fluid and blood drug 
concentrations and corresponding subjective effects. J Anal Toxicol. 
2015;39(7):497-509. 
13. Huestis MA, Henningfield JE, Cone EJ. Blood cannabinoids. II. 
Models for the prediction of time of marijuana exposure from plasma 
concentrations of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and 11-nor-9-
carboxy-delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THCCOOH). J Anal Toxicol. 
1992;16(5):283-90.
14. Giroud C, Ménétrey A, Augsburger M, et al. Delta(9)-THC, 11-OH-
Delta(9)-THC and Delta(9)-THCCOOH plasma or serum to whole 
blood concentrations distribution ratios in blood samples taken from 
living and dead people. Forensic Sci Int. 2001;123(2-3):159-64.
15. Holland MG, Schwope DM, Stoppacher R, et al. Postmortem 
redistribution of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 11-hydroxy-THC 
(11-OH-THC), and 11-nor-9-carboxy-THC (THCCOOH). Forensic Sci 
Int. 2011;212(1-3):247-51.
16. Leontiadis E, Morshuis M, Arusoglu L, et al. Thoratec left ventricular 
assist device removal after toxic myocarditis. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2008;86(6):1982-5.
17. Rodríguez-Castro CE, Alkhateeb H, Elfar A, et al. Recurrent 
myopericarditis as a complication of marijuana use. Am J Case Rep. 
2014;15:60-2. 
18. Tournebize J, Gibaja V, Puskarczyk E, et al . Myocarditis associated 
with cannabis use in a 15-year-old boy: A rare case report. Int J 
Cardiol. 2016;203:243-4. 
19. Wang GS, Roosevelt G, Heard K. Pediatric marijuana exposures in a 
medical marijuana state. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167(7):630-3. 
20.  MacCoun RJ, Mello MM. Half-baked--the retail promotion of 
marijuana edibles. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(11):989-91. 
21. Hall KK, Lyman JA. Updated review of blood culture contamination. 
Clin Microbiol Rev. 2006;19(4):788-802. 
22. Sard B, Bailey MC, Vinci R. An analysis of pediatric blood cultures in 
the postpneumococcal conjugate vaccine era in a community hospital 
emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2006;22(5):295-300. 
