 Common developmental genome deprogramming in 
schizophrenia – role of Integrative Nuclear FGFR1 Signaling 
(INFS)
S. T. Narla1,2, Y-W. Lee1, C.A. Benson1,2, P. Sarder1, K. Brennand3, E.K. Stachowiak1,2, and 
M.K. Stachowiak1,2,*
1Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY, USA
2Western New York Stem Cell Culture and Analysis Center, State University of New York at 
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, New 
York, NY, USA
Abstract
The watershed-hypothesis of schizophrenia asserts that over 200 different mutations dysregulate 
distinct pathways that converge on an unspecified common mechanism(s) that controls disease 
ontogeny. Consistent with this hypothesis, our RNA-sequencing of neuron committed cells 
(NCCs) differentiated from established iPSCs of 4 schizophrenia patients and 4 control subjects 
uncovered a dysregulated transcriptome of 1349 mRNAs common to all patients. Data reveal 
global dysregulation of developmental genome, deconstruction of coordinated mRNA, and mRNA 
networks, and the formation of aberrant, new coordinated mRNA networks indicating a concerted 
action of the responsible factor(s). Sequencing of miRNA transcriptomes demonstrated an 
overexpression of 16 miRNAs and deconstruction of coordinated miRNA–mRNA networks in 
schizophrenia NCCs. ChiPseq revealed that the nuclear (n) form of FGFR1, a pan-ontogenic 
regulator, is overexpressed in schizophrenia NCCs and overtargets dysregulated mRNA and 
miRNA genes. The nFGFR1 targeted 54% of all human gene promoters and 84.4% of 
schizophrenia dysregulated genes. The upregulated genes reside within major developmental 
pathways that control neurogenesis and neuron formation, whereas downregulated genes are 
involved in oligodendrogenesis. Our results indicate (i) an early (preneuronal) genomic etiology of 
schizophrenia, (ii) dysregulated genes and new coordinated gene networks are common to 
unrelated cases of schizophrenia, (iii) gene dysregulations are accompanied by increased nFGFR1-
genome interactions, and (iv) modeling of increased nFGFR1 by an overexpression of a nFGFR1 
lead to up or downregulation of selected genes as observed in schizophrenia NCCs. Together our 
results designate nFGFR1 signaling as a potential common dysregulated mechanism in 
investigated patients and potential therapeutic target in schizophrenia.
*Correspondence should be addressed to Michal K. Stachowiak Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, SUNY, 3435 Main 
Street, 206A Farber Hall, Buffalo, N.Y. 14214, mks4@buffalo.edu tel. (716) 829 3540. 
Competing Financial Interests: authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Schizophr Res. 2017 July ; 185: 17–32. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2016.12.012.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
Schizophrenia; developmental hypothesis; genome regulation; miRNA Fibroblast Growth Factor 
Receptor 1
Introduction
Schizophrenia is one of the most debilitating mental illnesses worldwide (Hanzawa et al., 
2013), with a lifetime prevalence of about 1.5 – 2% (Saha et al., 2005), and current 
treatments are only partially effective (Blanchard et al., 2011; Rummel-Kluge et al., 2012). 
Although the primary onset of schizophrenia is during adolescence to young adulthood, 
schizophrenia is commonly thought to be a neurodevelopmental disorder(Fatemi and 
Folsom, 2009; Rehn and Rees, 2005). According to the neurodevelopmental hypothesis, 
both genetic and environmental factors broadly affect the brain development and thus 
contribute to the etiology of schizophrenia. (Kneeland and Fatemi, 2013). The early 
developmental origin of schizophrenia is supported by the changes in brain morphology, 
which most likely develop in utero during the late first and early second trimester (Kneeland 
and Fatemi, 2013). Studies of such changes have revealed improperly clustered neurons in 
layers II, III and V of the cortex (Arnold et al., 1997), differences in a number of 
nonpyramidal neurons in CA2 and in hippocampal shape (Benes et al., 1998), hypoplastic 
dopamine neurons, and cerebellar atrophy (Akbarian et al., 1993; Bogerts et al., 1983; 
Connor et al., 2004; Schiller et al., 2006). Additionally, disorganization of the white matter 
tract has been observed in schizophrenia (Davis et al., 2003), suggesting that the disease 
affects the development and function of not only neurons, but also oligodendrocytes. The 
wide spread of brain malformations are thought to underlie the variety of clinical findings: 
positive symptoms (delusions and hallucinations), negative symptoms (affective flattening, 
amotivation and anhedonia) (Blanchard et al., 2011; Foussias et al., 2011), and cognitive 
symptoms (disorganized speech and cognitive deficits) (DSM 4th edition). Abnormal 
development during the first trimester is also consistent with minor physical anomalies 
associated with schizophrenia (Lloyd et al., 2008).
Current evidence points to schizophrenia as a familial disorder with a complex mode of 
inheritance and variable expression (Sullivan et al., 2003). Due to the polygenetic nature of 
schizophrenia and its complexity, it has been difficult to dissect out the underlying genetic 
mechanisms. Schizophrenia linkage studies are generally characterized by a lack of highly 
significant and consistently reproducible results (Need et al., 2009). The advent of high-
throughput sequencing allowed researchers to look at hundreds of thousands of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) simultaneously. To date, over 600 SNPs have been found 
to have statistically significant associations with schizophrenia (GWAS Catalog)(Welter et 
al., 2014). However, like the linkage studies, GWAS have been inconsistent, even with 
respect to the top few genes identified. A common theme in the investigation of copy-
number variants in schizophrenia is an enrichment of those that are rare (< 1% minor allele 
frequency) and large (>100kb) CNVs (International Schizophrenia, 2008; Malhotra et al., 
2011; Walsh et al., 2008), and those that occur de novo (Kirov et al., 2012; Malhotra et al., 
2011; Xu et al., 2008). Even the strongest genetic predictors of schizophrenia appear in only 
Narla et al.
Page 2
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1–2% of schizophrenia cases (International Schizophrenia, 2008; Stefansson et al., 2008; Xu 
et al., 2008). Hence, the genetic causes of schizophrenia appear to be a multiplicity of rare 
risk alleles and schizophrenia has been defined as s a common, rare-variant disease.
In 2006, Cannon and Keller proposed a watershed hypothesis (Cannon and Keller, 2006) to 
explain how so many different mutations throughout the genome give rise to a common 
disease like schizophrenia. According to this hypothesis, individual mutations dysregulate 
distinct biological pathways that in turn converge on a common ontogenic pathway(s). 
Dysregulation of such common pathway leads to developmental malformations, which 
increase the risk of the disease. However, the nature of these pathways and their organization 
have not been understood.
The candidate pathway investigated in present study is one recently described as pan-
ontogenic, Integrative Nuclear FGFR1 Signaling (INFS) (Stachowiak, 2011; Stachowiak et 
al., 2015; Stachowiak et al., 2007), which integrates signals from diverse pathways in which 
the schizophrenia-linked mutations have been found. Genetic experiments have positioned 
the fgfr1 gene at the top of the gene regulatory network that governs gastrulation and 
subsequent development of the major body axis, nervous system, muscles, and bones, by 
affecting downstream mRNAs that control the cell cycle, pluripotency and differentiation 
(Chioni and Grose, 2012; Ciruna and Rossant, 2001; Ciruna et al., 1997; Dequeant and 
Pourquie, 2008; Partanen et al., 1998), as well as microRNAs (miRNAs) (Bobbs et al., 2012; 
Stuhlmiller and Garcia-Castro, 2012). This regulation is executed by a single protein, the 
nuclear isoform of FGFR1 (nFGFR1), which operates at the interface of genomic and 
epigenomic information, integrates signals from diverse developmental pathways and 
provides feedback regulation of those pathways. (Chioni and Grose, 2012; Fang et al., 2005; 
Han et al., 2015; Stachowiak and Stachowiak, 2016; Terranova et al., 2015).
Evidence from RNA-seq and ChIP-seq analyses has delineated global and direct gene 
programing by nFGFR1 and its partner CREB Binding Protein (CBP), which guide 
pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) towards development into multipotent neural 
progenitor cells (NPCs) and towards further differentiation(Stachowiak and Stachowiak, 
2016; Terranova et al., 2015). nFGFR1 cooperates with a multitude of transcription factors 
(TFs), including RXR, RAR, and orphan nuclear receptors, and targets thousands of genes 
that encode mRNAs or miRNAs in top ontogenic networks. nFGFR1 binds to the promoters 
of ancient proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, in addition to those encoding 
metazoan morphogens that delineate the body axis, and that construct the nervous system as 
well as the mesodermal and endodermal tissues (Stachowiak and Stachowiak, 2016; 
Terranova et al., 2015). The discovery of pan-ontogenic gene programming by INFS 
expands our understanding of ontogeny, and could also help to understand developmental 
pathologies such as schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders.
Jungerius reported that single nucleotide point mutations in the fgfr1 gene are linked to 
schizophrenia (Jungerius et al., 2008). Furthermore, manipulation of FGFR1 function in 
dopaminergic neurons of transgenic mice led to developmental brain malformation and 
behavioral changes that the mimic the positive, negative and cognitive deficits observed in 
humans (Stachowiak et al., 2013a). Although a number of mouse models of schizophrenia 
Narla et al.
Page 3
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exist, it is unclear how accurately effects on the mouse genome recapitulate human disease. 
A robust human-based system is needed to study schizophrenia and to understand the 
pathways and mechanisms involved. Postmortem analysis of brain tissues from 
schizophrenia patients is affected by lifetime events such as substance abuse, drug treatment, 
and fluctuations in brain pH caused by hypoxia or nutritional deficiency (Deep-Soboslay et 
al., 2011). Moreover, a body of evidence for the early in utero origination of schizophrenia 
indicates that elucidation of the genomic-developmental etiology of this disease will require 
a focus on the early stages of neuro-ontogenesis. To this end, human induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPSCs) are invaluable. In 2011, two laboratories reported successful development 
of iPSCs from schizophrenic patients (Brennand et al., 2011; Chiang et al., 2011). Brennand 
et al. had developed iPSCs from four patients diagnosed with schizophrenia or its schizo-
affective variant, and from control non-schizophrenic subjects (Brennand et al., 2011). These 
iPSCs were differentiated into mature neurons and their gene expression was analyzed using 
an mRNA microarray. 596 genes were differentially expressed in neurons derived from 
schizophrenic patients versus controls, reflecting the phenotypic differences between the 
differentiated neuronal populations (Brennand et al., 2011). Previous work has shown that 
schizophrenia hiPSC-derived NPCs have aberrant migration (Brennand et al., 2014b) and 
cellular polarity (Yoon et al., 2014), perturbed WNT signaling (Srikanth et al., 2015; Topol 
et al., 2015b), increased oxidative stress (Brennand et al., 2014b; Paulsen et al., 2011; 
Robicsek et al., 2013) and altered responses to environmental stressors (Hashimoto-Torii et 
al., 2014); while schizophrenia hiPSC-derived neurons exhibit decreased neurite number 
(Brennand et al., 2011), reduced synaptic maturation (Brennand et al., 2011; Robicsek et al., 
2013; Wen et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2014) and synaptic activity (Wen et al., 2014; Yu et al., 
2014), and blunted activity-dependent response (Roussos et al., 2016). Extensive 
immunocytochemical validation of the NPC lines used in the present study showed they are 
positive for diverse NPC markers including nestin, Sox2, vimentin, Pax6 and 
TBR2(Brennand et al., 2015). Furthermore, comparisons of the NPC microarray gene 
expression profiles to AllenBbrain Span Atlas of the developing human brain using 
Spearmen Rank Correlation Analysis, showed the highest similarility to the first trimester 
human fetal brain tissue.
To investigate the early neural developmental origin of schizophrenia, we used the same 
established iPSCs from four schizophrenia and four control individuals as described in 
(Brennand et al., 2011). The iPSCs were developed into NPCs, which were then briefly (2 
days) stimulated to initiate differentiation, producing neuron-committed cells (NCCs). We 
tested the hypothesis that the NCCs from different patients share transcriptional 
dysregulation of one or more developmental gene programs, and that INFS is a common 
cause of those changes. To this end, we performed RNA-seq and nFGFR1 ChIP-seq 
experiments. Our results reveal that different schizophrenia cases have common 
dysregulated transcriptomes as well as newly formed coordinated gene networks. The gene 
dysregulation is accompanied by increased interactions of nFGFR1 with the mRNA and 
miRNA genes, and can be modeled in human ESCs by transfection of a nuclear variant of 
FGFR1. These results indicate that schizophrenia is programmed early (before neurons 
develop), and designate INFS as a one common dysregulated mechanism of the Cannon and 
Keller model of schizophrenia and a prospective target for therapeutic interventions.
Narla et al.
Page 4
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Experimental/Materials and Methods
Plasmids and transfections
Plasmids expressing FGFR1 constructs: FGFR1 (TK-)-deleted tyrosine kinase domain, 
FGFR1 (SP-/NLS)-signal peptide replaced with the nuclear localization signal (NLS) from 
the SV40 large T antigen, and FGFR1 (SP-/NLS) (TK-) were described in (Peng et al., 2001; 
Peng et al., 2002). All transfections were carried out using Fugene 6, per manufacturer’s 
instructions. hESC-derived NPCs were transfected using 6 μg of either control β-gal, 
FGFR1(SP-/NLS) or FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) per well in a 6-well plate. Three wells were 
combined into a single sample.
IPSCs and ESCs culture and differentiation
Human induced pluripotent stem cell lines (Brennand et al., 2011) (Table 1) were 
differentiated into NPCs as described previously (Brennand et al., 2011). To initiate neuronal 
development, NPCs were cultured in neuronal differentiating media for 2 days (DMEM/F12, 
1× N2, 1× B27-RA, 20 ng ml−1 BDNF (Peprotech), 20 ng ml−1 GDNF (Peprotech), 1 mM 
dibutyryl-cyclic AMP (Sigma), and 200 nM ascorbic acid (Sigma). After two days of 
treatment, the neuron comitted cells (NCCs) were harvested for RNAseq and ChiP-seq 
analyses. RNAseq analysis of mRNA transcriptomes were performed on established and 
characterzed iPSC lines from all 4 patient and 4 control individuals (Brennand et al., 2011) 
(Table 1). Further information about genotype and CNV analysis can be found in previous 
publication(Brennand et al., 2011). Due to financial constrains, RNAseq of miRNA 
transcriptomes were performed on 3 control and 3 schziophrenia lines.
hESC line, H9, from WiCell Research Institute (Madison, WI), was used for these 
experiments under the approval of the Committee for Stem Cell Research Oversight at 
SUNY-Buffalo. hESCs were differentiated into NPCs utilizing the same protocol as for 
iPSCs. In brief, hESCs were transferred to a non-adherent plate (Corning). Embryoid bodies 
were grown in suspension in N2 medium (DMEM/F12-GlutaMAX (Invitrogen), 1× N2 
(Invitrogen). After seven days, embryoid bodies were plated in N2 medium with 1 μg ml−1 
laminin (Invitrogen) onto polyornithine (PORN)/laminin-coated plates. Visible rosettes 
formed within one week and were detached using Neural Rosette Selection reagent (Stem 
Cell). Rosettes were cultured in NPC medium (DMEM/F12, 1x N2, 1x B27-RA 
(Invitrogen), 1 μg ml−1 laminin and 20 ng ml−1 FGF2). NPCs were then transferred from 
polyornithine/laminin-coated plates onto matrigel-coated plates and were maintained in NPC 
media. NPCs were differentiated into NCCs with neuronal differentiating media for 2 days.
Antibody verification
The nuclear presence of FGFR1 was demonstrated in several laboratories in non-
transformed cells (Maher, 1996; Reilly and Maher, 2001), cancer cell lines (Bryant and 
Stow, 2005; Peng et al., 2001; Stachowiak et al., 2003; Stachowiak et al., 1996a, b), stem 
cells and in the rat and mouse brain (Clarke et al., 2001; Gonzalez et al., 1995) (Fang et al., 
2005; Leadbeater et al., 2006; Stachowiak et al., 2003) using an array of antibodies that 
target different FGFR1 epitopes. Furthermore, transfected FGFR1-EGFP in live cells was 
detected using native fluorescence and FGFR1-Flag using αFlag. Gene targeting by FGFR1 
Narla et al.
Page 5
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was shown by EMSA and ChiP assays using diverse FGFR1 antibodies: SC121, Abcam 
ab10646, FGFR1McAb6, Abcam FGFR1 Mab; (SC 121G) (Baron et al., 2012b; Chioni and 
Grose, 2012; Fang et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2002). FGFR1-
DNA interactions were not detected in cells that do not express endogenous FGFR1 and 
were restored by transfection of FGFR1 (Fang et al., 2005). Gene binding by FGFR1-flag 
was verified with αFlag (Lee et al., 2012). Dynamic transcription-dependent interactions of 
FGFR1-EGFP with chromatin was shown in live cells by confocal microscopy and FRAP 
(Dunham-Ems et al., 2009). In the present study, we used ChiP- and ChiPseq-validated 
αFGFR1, Abcam ab10646 (Lee et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2012; Narla et al., 2013; Terranova et 
al., 2015). Detection of nFGFR1 by this antibody is prevented by siRNA knock down of 
FGFR1 mRNA (Coleman et al., 2014). The ChiP validated Notch1 antibodies were obtained 
as a gift from Dr. Jon C. Aster (Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA) and used as 
previously in ChIPseq assays (Wang et al., 2011).
ChIP-Seq
ChIP was performed with 250 μg of chromatin DNA and 4 μg of FGFR1 or Notch1 
antibodies using the Invitrogen MAGnify kits, according to manufacturer’s instructions and 
as previously described (Terranova et al., 2015), with slight modifications. Genomic DNA 
was precipitated with ethanol, treated with RNase A and proteinase K, and purified using the 
Qiagen PCR purification kit. ChiPseq analyses required a major expansion of the CNC 
cultures. Cells from twelve 35 mm plates were pooled together and the immunoprecipitated 
chromatin was further processed using the Tru-seq ChIP Sample Preparation Kit. The 
purified library DNA was captured on an Illumina flowcell for cluster generation and 
sequenced on an Illumina Hi-seq 2500, following the manufacturer’s protocols.
RNA-seq and RT-qPCR
RNAseq was performed as previously described (Terranova et al., 2015). RNA was extracted 
using Trizol or the Qiagen RNA extraction kit, according to manufacturer’s instructions. 
RNA was prepared using the Tru-Seq RNA kit and purified library cDNA was captured on 
an Illumina flowcell for cluster generation and sequenced on an Illumina Hi-seq 2500, 
following the manufacturer’s protocols. For independent mRNA assays, cDNA synthesis 
was carried out using 1 μg of RNA and the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad; Hercules 
CA). One tenth of the synthesized cDNA was used as the template for real time-quantitative 
PCR. 25 μl real-time PCR reactions were performed on the BioRad MyiQ Cycler with iQ 
SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad). RT-qPCR using the amplification cycles: initial 
denaturation for 8:30 min at 95C, followed by 35x cycle 2 (denaturation for 15 s at 95C and 
annealing for 1 min at 60C). Melt curve data collection was enabled by decreasing the set 
point temperature after cycle two by 0.58C. The specificity of amplicons was confirmed by 
generating the melt curve profile of all amplified products. Levels of individual mRNAs 
were analyzed relative to GADPH mRNA (Terranova et al., 2015).
ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data processing
For ChIP-seq, raw RASTQ reads were aligned to the homo sapien genome build hg19 
(UCSC) using bowtie2. All peaks were called using Model-based Analysis of ChIP-
Narla et al.
Page 6
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Seq(MACS) version 2.0 using a q-value cutoff of 0.01(Zhang et al., 2008). MACS2 uses a 
dynamic Poisson distribution to calculate peaks.
RNA-seq results were analyzed using the tuxedo pipeline and its statistics (Trapnell et al., 
2012). Raw FASTQ reads were mapped to the homo sapiens genome build hg19 (UCSC) 
using tophat 2. These mapped reads were assembled into transcripts and gene expression 
levels using Cufflinks version 2.0.2. Transcript assemblies were merged together using 
Cuffmerge and Cuffdiff was used to determine significant differences in gene expression 
(FPKM) between control and schizophrenia cell lines. Heatmaps of differentially expressed 
genes were generated using R.
Raw data of next- generation sequencing data can be found at GEO: ChIP-seq GSE92873, 
RNA-seq GSE92874, miRNA-seq GSE92875
Results
Schizophrenia patients share a common pattern of gene dysregulation
To identify all genes for which the mRNA was expressed in NCC lines from both controls 
and patients, we performed RNA-seq using an Illumina HiSeq2500 instrument. Raw data 
were analyzed using the Tuxedo pipeline (Bowtie2 -> Tophat2 -> Cufflinks2) and aligned to 
the UCSC genome hg19 build. The expression levels of over 24,000 genes were assessed 
using the Tuxedo pipeline. We found 15,279 genes expressed at detectable levels (63%) in 
all eight samples, whereas 4,582 genes (19%) were not detectable in any of the eight 
samples. The remaining 4,470 (18%) were (Figure 1A) not detected in all eight samples and 
were eliminated from further analysis due to their near-threshold expression. Out of the 
15,279 genes, 1,349 showed expression levels that differed significantly between the 
schizophrenia and control NCC lines (FC ≥ −/+1.5 and q value ≥ 0.05). Among these 
dysregulated genes, 839 were upregulated, and 510 were downregulated in schizophrenia 
NCC (Figure 1B).
We used Gene Ontology (GO) to identify functions of the dysregulated genes. In 
overrepresentation analysis, the 1349 dysregulated genes were tested for the likelihood of 
belonging to a specific biological category and were then compared to a randomly selected 
group from among all human genes. This analysis revealed that many neuronal GO 
categories were overrepresented (Table S1) including genes involved in neural crest 
development, synaptic plasticity, learning, memory, and synapse organization. Several GO 
groups related to glial development were also overrepresented, including those involved in 
the processes of myelination, axon ensheathment, glial cell differentiation, and 
oligodendrocyte differentiation. Lastly, GO groups related to general ontogeny, including 
regulators of endothelial cell differentiation, artery development, collagen metabolic process, 
and mesenchyme differentiation, were also overrepresented among the dysregulated genes 
(Table S1).
Next, pathway analysis was performed using Reactome, an open-source, manually curated 
and peer-reviewed database of pathways and biological processes (Haw et al., 2011). This 
analysis estimated gene overrepresentation within specific pathways, taking into account 
Narla et al.
Page 7
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gene interactions. Due to the limitations of manual curation and incomplete knowledge of 
genes in pathways, out of the initial 1349 differentially regulated genes, only 886 were 
mapped to Reactome. The identified pathways clustered around the terms: neuronal systems, 
developmental biology, and extracellular organization (Table S2). One hub was centered 
around the neurotransmitter release cycle and included pathways related to the release cycles 
for dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine, and glutamate neurotransmitters (Fig. S1). L1cam 
signaling, which plays a role in axonal growth (Pollerberg et al., 2013), was also 
significantly overrepresented (Fig. S2), as were Notch Signaling, various extracellular 
matrix pathways, and transcriptional regulation by TP-53 (Table S2).
Further analysis was performed using Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA), a proprietary 
curation of pathways by Qiagen. Analysis by IPA of the 1349 commonly dysregulated genes 
n schizophrenia NCC revealed multiple neuronal pathways, such as axonal guidance (Figure 
S3), glutamate receptor signaling (Figure S4), CREB signaling in neurons, and dopamine 
degradation (Table S3, Figure 1C). Number of the IPA-identified neuronal development 
pathways were overrepresented consistent with the Reactome analysis. These included 
Notch signaling (Figure S5), Wnt/β-catenin signaling (Figure S6), and pluripotency 
regulation (Table S3, Figure 1D). Other affected pathways represented major general 
signaling pathways, such as PI3K/AKT signaling, eNOS signaling, and VEGF signaling 
(Figure 1D), as shown in Table S3. Together, these analyses revealed that the dysregulation 
of gene expression in NCCs derived from patients with schizophrenia was centered on 
neuronal genes as well as other developmental genes.
To further characterize the observed gene dysregulation, we performed separate analyses of 
genes that were upregulated and genes that were downregulated in schizophrenia NCCs. 
Genes involved in glial differentiation and axon ensheathment, were present only in the 
downregulated category (Table S4) while, neuronal ontologies such as axonogenesis, 
neurotransmitter transport, and learning were overrepresented in the upregulated group 
(Table S5). IPA analysis indicated that in many pathways, genes were up- and 
downregulated, but in certain pathways, the majority of dysregulated genes leaned more in 
one direction or the other. For example, the majority of dysregulated genes in glutamate 
receptor signaling, CREB signaling in neurons, Notch signaling, and dopamine degradation 
were downregulated, whereas most of those involved in axon guidance, p53 signaling, 
cholesterol biosynthesis, PI3K/AKT signaling, tight-junction signaling, and STAT3 pathway 
signaling were upregulated (Figure 1E). Analysis of pathways through Reactome verified 
segregation of distinct pathways between the up- and downregulated categories. The 
upregulated genes were involved in neurotransmitter release, axon guidance, (TP53-
dependent) transcription of cell cycle genes, and development (Table S6); whereas 
downregulated genes were involved in cell junction organization, cell-cell junctions, 
neurotransmitter receptor binding, and cell-cell communication (Table S7).
To identify genes that were co-regulated, we performed a pairwise correlation network 
analysis. First, we correlated the expression of all 1349 dysregulated genes in pairs (Figure 
2A), for 909,226 correlations. In control cells (n=4), the distribution of correlations was flat, 
whereas in patients cells (n=4) peaks were present at the edges of both positive (the same 
direction) correlations and negative (opposite direction) correlations. Next, we implemented 
Narla et al.
Page 8
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a cutoff of 0.9 to identify and focus on genes for which expression was highly correlated. 
The 200 most connected genes from control and patient networks were analyzed using 
circular network graphs. A common feature of both networks was that the top 200 genes 
were highly interconnected (Figure 2B). However, the sets of most connected genes in 
control and patient cells were different. The top 200 genes interconnected in controls were 
largely unconnected in patients and vice versa (Supplemental Figure 7). These results 
suggest that whereas the control networks were disrupted in the patient NCCs, a new 
network of connected genes formed in their place. Control networks included both up- and 
downregulated genes. In the schizophrenia networks, however, the up- and downregulated 
genes clearly segregated into separate networks indicate a concerted up- and down gene 
dysregulation.
Common dysregulated miRNAs in schizophrenia NCCs
Factors that could elicit a concerted dysregulation of transcriptome included miRNAs, which 
influence overlapping gene sets in a coordinated fashion. miRNAs influence gene expression 
at the transcription level, by promoting mRNA degradation and by inhibiting mRNA 
translation (Bartel, 2009; Younger and Corey, 2011). Earlier studies have shown that some 
miRNAs may be dysregulated in the brains of schizophrenia patients (de Bartolomeis et al., 
2015; Hill et al., 2014). We performed small-RNA seq (Terranova et al., 2015) to identify 
and to measure the miRNA levels in NCC lines from the three controls (C1, C2, C4) and 
three schizophrenic patients (P1, P2, P3). The expression of 1391 miRNAs was quantified 
utilizing the CLC Genomics Workbench and the most up-to-date miRBASE. Among these, 
440 miRNAs were expressed in all six samples, whereas 479 miRNAs were not detected in 
any of the samples. The remaining 472 miRNAs were detected only in some samples at the 
threshold levels of detection and, therefore, were eliminated from further analysis. Out of 
440 miRNAs expressed in all six samples, 16 were differentially expressed in patients as 
compared to controls (Fig 3A). All 16 miRNAs were upregulated, but to different degrees 
(1.5- to >70-fold). In contrast, in control cells the expression levels of these individual 
miRNAs were similar. TargetScan and MirTarBase analyses predicted that the overexpressed 
miRNAs may interact with >400 dysregulated mRNAs, in a largely overlapping manner as 
illustrated on Figure 3B.
Given the complexity of these individual miRNA-mRNA interactions, we analyzed relations 
between the networks of miRNAs and their target mRNA. First, we preformed pairwise 
correlations of the 16 miRNAs (Figure 3C) which revealed a high degree of positive 
correlation in control NCCs. This high correlation was consistent with the model in which 
different miRNAs controlled shared mRNA targets. In schizophrenia NCCs, the correlation 
among 16 miRNAs was lost. Subsequently, we modeled the miRNA correlations based on 
the correlations among their targeted mRNAs by constructing combined miRNA-mRNA 
networks using protocol of Huttenhower et. al. (Huttenhower et al., 2009). In control NCCs, 
the predicted and actual miRNA networks were similar (Fig. 3D). In contrast, in the 
schizophrenia NCCs, the predicted miRNA networks differed markedly from the observed 
networks. This result indicated a disruption of the miRNA-mRNA network in the 
schizophrenia NCCs.
Narla et al.
Page 9
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 nFGFR1 binds throughout the genome
Another candidate factor that could potentially contribute to the concerted transcriptome 
dysregulation in schizophrenia is panontogenic INFS. To identify sites of the genome 
targeted by nFGFR1, we performed ChIP-seq of both control and patient samples. Initially, 
we performed a detailed ChiP-seq analysis of a single control line, female C4, and a single 
patient line, female P3 (Table 1 in Experimental Methods/Materials), using previously 
tested, ChiP and ChiPseq validated anti-FGFR1 antibody (Terranova et al., 2015). IP and 
input samples were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2500. Raw data were aligned to the UCSC 
hg19 human genome using the Bowtie2 tool. Peaks were identified with MACS2 at a q-
value ≤ 0.01. The input sequences were used as the background from which peaks were 
called. This ensured that our peak identification was not influenced by a biased 
fragmentation of the genome. DNA sequences located at the center of the specific peak are 
expected to be more conserved than the random DNA sequences away from the binding site. 
This was verified in both our control and patient conservation plots using the Conservation 
Plot feature of Cistrome. (Supplemental figure 8A).
In the control sample, 22,432 peaks of FGFR1 binding were identified. More peaks were 
found in the patient sample (34, 346; Figure 4A). In both the control and patient samples, 
peaks were distributed throughout the genome and across all chromosomes. In both control 
and patient DNA, the highest concentrations of FGFR1 peaks were on chromosomes 17, 19, 
and 22, and the lowest were on chromosome 13. However, this enrichment was not observed 
when the values were normalized to gene density. Thus, the chromosomal differences in 
nFGFR1 binding reflect the distribution of genes across the chromosomes.
Next, we analyzed the distribution of nFGFR1 peaks within various genomic regions. The 
most upstream transcription start sites (TSS) in individual genes were identified and used as 
landmarks for promoters and 5′UTRs. Overall, in both control and patient genomes, the 
peaks were located primarily within the promoters (±1kb), 5′ UTRs, introns, and distal 
intergenic regions. Distribution of overall genomic length was compared to that of FGFR1 
peaks to identify potential sites of enrichment in certain genomic regions. We observed a 
large enrichment of peaks in the promoters (>20 Fold) and 5′UTRs (>5fold), and a small 
enrichment (>2fold) in downstream DNA (Figure 4B). In contrast, peaks were not enriched 
in introns and intergenic regions. The distribution of nFGFR1 peaks was similar in both the 
control and patient samples.
To identify the locations of the additional ~12,000 peaks that were present only in 
schizophrenia NCCs, we tabulated the number of peaks in each genome location (Figure 
4C). A two-fold increase was found in distal promoters (1–3kb from TSS) and downstream 
promoters (0–3kb). Interestingly, a majority of peaks unique to patient samples were 
distributed within introns and distal intergenic regions.
Binding of nFGFR1 to active genes
To determine how nFGFR1 binding relates to gene expression, we first identified the set of 
peaks at the proximal promoters (+/− 1kb of the TSS) of all of the genes in the human 
genome. For this analysis, all TSS within a gene that could potentially be used to produce 
Narla et al.
Page 10
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 alternative transcripts were taken into account. For the proximal promoters of all the 
annotated human genes (24,331), nFGFR1 bound to 13,182 in control and to 15,324 genes 
in patient cells. nFGFR1 also bound to the distal promoters (1 to 3kb from TSS) of 377 
genes in control cells and 672 genes in patient cells. In majority of those genes (>80%) 
nFGFR1 bound also to the proximal promoter suggesting its cooperative regulation. 
Approximately 90% of genes that were expressed in all eight samples had promoters 
targeted by nFGFR1 (Figure 5A). Thus, in both control and schizophrenia NCC nFGFR1 
primarily associated with the promoters of active genes.
Among the 1,349 genes dysregulated in schizophrenia NCCs, nFGFR1 bound the proximal 
promoters of 1,124 genes in patient cells and 929 genes in control cells (Fig. 5B). Likewise, 
the number of dysregulated genes in which nFGFR1 bound to distal promoters was greater 
in schizophrenia (96 genes) than in control cells (63 genes). In both control and patient cells 
915 genes were bound by nFGFR1 (Figure 5C). Of these, 592 were upregulated, and 323 
downregulated, in patient samples. 203 genes (128 upregulated and 75 downregulated) were 
bound by nFGFR1 only in patient cells. Only 12 genes were bound by nFGFR1 exclusively 
in control cells. Those genes were found upregulated (3 genes) and downregulated (9 genes) 
in patient cells (Figure 5C). Finally, 219 genes were not bound by nFGFR1. Among these, 
115 were upregulated and 104 were downregulated in patient cells. In summary, the majority 
of dysregulated genes have promoters targeted by nFGFR1 and the number of genes bound 
nFGFR1 was increased in schizophrenia NCCs
Categories of dysregulated genes targeted by nFGFR1 were identified using GO, IPA, and 
Reactome. Due to their small number, the 14-dysregulated genes that bound nFGFR1 only in 
control cells (listed in Table S8) were not analyzed. As found for all 1,349 dysregulated 
genes, the 915 genes in which nFGFR1 was bound in both control and schizophrenia NCCs 
overrepresented the pathways involved in axon guidance, neurotransmitter release, and glial-
cell differentiation (GO, Table S9). Pathway analysis using Reactome revealed that nFGFR1 
targeted the pathways including neurotransmitter release, axon guidance, TP53-regulated 
cell cycle genes, and L1Cam signaling (Table S10). IPA verified and identified pathways 
such as axonal guidance, PI3K/AKT signaling, Notch signaling, and Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling. Overall, the 915 genes bound by nFGFR1 were distributed among pathways that 
overlap with those selected by analysis of all dysregulated genes (Table S11).
Second, we analyzed the 203 genes bound in patient cells but not in controls. GO terms for 
neuron development, axon guidance, extracellular matrix, and others were overrepresented 
in this set (Table S12). Reactome pathway analysis revealed a spread across various 
functions, including Notch signaling, RHO GTPase pathways, p75 NTR axonogenesis 
pathway, and MHC Class 1 Antigen processing and presentation (Table S13). In this case, 
IPA also revealed axonal guidance signaling, tight junction signaling, urea cycle, along with 
others. The 203 genes, which were targeted by nFGFR1 only in schizophrenia cells, were 
engaged in the same functions as the remaining genes targeted by nFGFR1 in both control 
and patient cells (Table S14).
In addition to the nFGFR1 binding gene sets, we also analyzed the 211 dysregulated genes 
to which nFGFR1 did not bind. Overrepresented GO terms included synaptic transmission 
Narla et al.
Page 11
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and neuron projection development (Table S15). Reactome analysis showed that 
overrepresented pathways involved in hemostasis, metabolism, lipid digestion, and the 
regulation of cell death. These categories were not overrepresented in the set of the 1,124 
nFGFR1-targeted genes (Table S16). In addition, IPA identified glutamate receptor 
signaling, calcium signaling, and CREB signaling in neurons among these nFGFR1 no-
binding genes (Table S17). However, neither IPA nor Reactome identified key 
developmental pathways, such Wnt signaling or Notch signaling, among the genes that did 
not bind nFGFR1. Thus, categories of dysregulated genes that were targeted by nFGFR1 
differed from those that did not bind nFGFR1.
The relationship between gene dysregulation and nFGFR1 binding was analyzed further in 
915 genes targeted by nFGFR1 in both control and patient cells. To compare nFGFR1 
binding at the same sites of control and patient genomes we used MACS2 analysis to 
determine the nFGFR1 binding score. The score reflects the abundance of nFGFR1 at a 
particular genomic locus in a cell population. The binding was compared only when the 
centers of peaks in control and patient cells were within 50 base pairs of each other. This 
analysis showed that 15,451 peaks had a stronger binding (higher binding score) in patients 
than in control cells. Out of the 915 genes that bound nFGFR1 in both samples, 828 showed 
stronger nFGFR1 binding in patient cells. The average binding profile of nFGFR1 over the 
genome showed a sharp increase in nFGFR1 binding score near the promoter (Figure 6A). 
This binding was stronger in schizophrenia NCCs than in control NCCs. These differences 
were verified in a separate ChiP-seq experiment on a pair of male control and male patient 
NCCs (Figure S8B).
Total of 15,451 peaks had a higher binding score in patient than in control cells. Examples of 
the loci (Disc1, FZD1, Sox3 TH, and WNT genes) with increased nFGFR1 binding in 
schizophrenia NCCs are shown on Figure 6B and Figure S8C. Relatively few peaks, 102 
located on 24 genes, had binding scores higher in control cells than in schizophrenia NCCs. 
Only three of these genes were dysregulated, GAS7 was downregulated, and HIF3A and 
TFAP2C upregulated.
nFGFR1-targted motifs
Although nFGFR1 lacks a DNA binding domain, it can bind to promoters indirectly through 
CBP, which interacts with diverse TFs. Analysis of Motif Enrichment (AME) program 
identified number of overrepresented sequences targeted by nFGFR1. nFGFR1 bound at 
canonical target sequences of RAR, RXR, Nurr, and CREB, all of which were shown 
interact with nFGFR1 (Baron et al., 2012b; Lee et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2012; Peng et al., 
2002; Terranova et al., 2015). In addition, we identified motifs for various TFs, including 
homeodomain (HOX) family, Krüppel-like factor (KLF), sex determining region-Y box 
(Sox), and octamer-binding transcription factor (OCT). Importantly, in patient NCCs, but not 
in control cells, nFGFR1 bound at the motif of the chromatin organizing CTCF protein. 
Similarly, motifs for Olig1 and Olig2 were targeted by nFGFR1 only in patient cells. Next, 
we determined if specific motifs were overrepresented only in the dysregulated genes. We 
found that members of the HOX, high mobility box family (which include SOXs) and zinc 
finger proteins (ZNF354C) were overrepresented in the nFGFR1 peaks on dysregulated 
Narla et al.
Page 12
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 genes relative to all nFGFR1 peaks. Also, number of nFGFR1-targeted motifs (i.e., Esrrg, 
Mybl2, MAFB, HoxB5, and NR2C2) were enriched among the upregulated genes. 
Downregulated genes were enriched for the FGFR1-targeted Olig1, Sox2, Creb3l1, Pax6, 
and PDX1 motifs (Figure S9).
Co-targeting of gene promoters by Notch1 and nFGFR1
Several of the nFGFR1-targeted motifs are known to bind an important developmental TF – 
Notch1 (Wang et al., 2011). We performed ChiP-seq with a Notch1 Ab to determine whether 
nFGFR1 may be targeting any part of the genome in schizophrenia NCCs together with 
Notch1. Hence, we identified genomic locations in which binding of nFGFR1 and Notch1 
overlapped by at least 1 base pair (bp) in the same ChiP-seq sample. Conservation of Notch1 
binding is plotted on Figure S10A. The total number of Notch1 peaks was 21,508, and 
nearly half of these (9,664) colocalized with nFGFR1 peaks (Figure S10B). Even though we 
found no general enrichment for Notch peaks at the promoters or 5′UTR, the overlapping 
nFGFR1/Notch-1 peaks were enriched in these regions (Figure S10C). In contrast, the 
Notch1-only peaks were enriched in the intergenic part of genome (Figure S10C, D). Thus, 
Notch1 may regulate gene promoters together with nFGFR1 but act independently 
elsewhere. Among 1,349 genes dysregulated in schizophrenia NCCs, <20 had promoter sites 
that were targeted only by Notch1. In contrast, nearly half (560) of the dysregulated genes 
had promoter sites cotargeted by Notch1 and nFGFR1 (Figure S10E).The numbers of those 
genes that were upregulated (57%) and number of genes which were downregulated (63%) 
were similar. Thus, nFGFR1 could act together with Notch-1 to affect gene expression in 
schizophrenia NCCs. The examples of genes which are regulated by nFGFR1 (Chris PLOS) 
and are targeted by both the nFGFR1 and Notch1 include PAX3, IRX3, ID3 (Figure S11).
nFGFR1-targeting miRNAs
Among 440 miRNAs expressed by control and schizophrenia NCCs, the promoter sites of 
68 (15%) were bound by nFGFR1 (Table S18). Among 16 miRNAs that were dysregulated 
in schizophrenia NCCs, 5 (miR-132, miR-17, miR-2V, miR-124 and miR-219a) were 
targeted by nFGFR1. For miR-132 (Figure 6C) and other miRNAs genes (not shown), the 
strength of nFGFR1 binding was increased in schizophrenia NCCs.
Role of nFGFR1 in dysregulation
Previous work showed that an increase in nFGFR1 can lead to changes in the transcriptional 
activity of diverse genes (Baron et al., 2012a; Baron et al., 2012b; Lee et al., 2013; Lee et 
al., 2012; Stachowiak et al., 2013b; Terranova et al., 2015). Here, in schizophrenia NCCs, 
we observed an increase in nFGFR1 binding accompanied by altered gene activities. 
Increased nFGFR1 binding to NuRE, RARE, nBRE, CRE, AP1, NfkB, and Ebox were 
previously shown to activate transcription, whereas binding to Smad targeted site, inhibited 
transcription (Terranova et al., 2015). Also, nFGFR1 activated the promoters of neural genes 
βIII- tubulin, doublecortin (Lee et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2012; Narla et al., 2013), Pax, Id3, 
Cdx1, IRX3, and Hox A, but inhibited promoters of pluripotency Klf4, STAT3, and Sox2 
genes (Terranova et al., 2015). To inquire further if the increased nFGFR1 binding plays a 
role in genome-wide dysregulation of gene expression in schizophrenia cells, we transfected 
FGFR1(SP-)(NLS) or a control β-galactosidase expressing vector into hESC-derived NCCs, 
Narla et al.
Page 13
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which were differentiated into a neuronal lineage as described for iPSCs. qPCR of selected 
genes, Olig2, Disc1, TH, Wnt 7B, Neurod4, NCAM, and Olig1 showed that transfection of 
constitutive active nuclear FGFR1(SP-)(NLS) resulted in a change in mRNA expression 
(Figure 7). Olig1, Olig2, and NCAM mRNA were downregulated to a similar to that 
observed in patient cells. mRNA of TH, WNt7B, and Neurod4 was upregulated by 
FGFR1(SP-)(NLS), similar to the upregulation found in the schizophrenia NCCs. The 
NCAM is one of several genes targted by both R1 and Notch1.
Discussion
The present investigation into iPSCs neural progeny supports the watershed hypothesis of 
schizophrenia, revealing early developmental, common dysregulation of the genome, in four 
patients with diverse genetic backgrounds and different schizophrenia-linked copy-number 
variants. The common 1349 dysregulated genes displayed varying degrees of dysregulation 
in the individual patients, including the siblings. Variations in the expression of these 
individual genes were not observed in unrelated control subjects, and thus, may represent 
different forms of the disease. The gene dysregulation in schizophrenia was observed also in 
the mature neuronal populations differentiated from the same four control and four 
schizophrenia patients iPSCs as used in the present studies (Brennand et al., 2011). Indeed, 
these earlier studies concluded that neuronal populations develop differently from 
schizophrenia than from control iPSCs and that the synaptic connectivity is altered among 
the schizophrenia neurons. Many of the changes in gene expression observed in mature 
neurons could reflect differences in the types of neurons that were generated from the patient 
and control IPSCs (Brennand et al., 2015; Brennand and Gage, 2011; Brennand et al., 
2014a; Brennand et al., 2011). To identify the genomic mechanisms that lead to altered 
neuronal and brain development and thus underlie the etiology of schizophrenia, we focused 
on early neural development, i.e., the transition from NPCs into the committed neuronal 
stage, NCCs.
Gene ontology and pathway analyses (both Reactome and IPA) revealed that many of the 
dysregulated NCC genes are involved in pathways that govern the early stages of neural 
development, e.g., Wnt/Beta-Catenin signaling, Notch signaling, ERK/MAPK signaling, 
PI3K/AKT signaling, and growth hormone signaling. The dysregulated genes reside also in 
pathways that guide axonal guidance and myelination, glial differentiation, as well as 
signaling by dopamine and glutamate receptors and CREB signaling in neurons. This type of 
changes may forecast malfunctions in maturing and in mature neuronal systems.
Our recent studies have shown that nFGFR1 interacts with the same genes which were 
affected in the schizophrenia NCCs pathways also in the mouse genome (Stachowiak and 
Stachowiak, 2016; Terranova et al., 2015). Like in the mouse genome, in both control and 
schizophrenia NCCs, the nFGFR1 peaks are enriched at the promoters (both distal and 
proximal) and 5′ UTRs (Terranova et al., 2015), and are found primarily on expressed 
genes. Of all annotated human genes (24,331), 54% (13,182 genes) were bound by nFGFR1 
in control and patients NCCs. However, among the 1324 dysregulated genes, nFGFR1 
bound to 84.4% (1,118) dysregulated genes. The majority of nFGFR1 peaks were in the 
same location in control and patient NCCs.
Narla et al.
Page 14
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 While many pathways had both up- and downregulated genes, in several 
neurodevelopmental pathways, the number of upregulated genes was higher than that of 
downregulated genes in schizophrenia NCCs. The upregulated genes are involved in the 
differentiation and maturation of neurons and in axonal guidance, whereas the 
downregulated genes are involved in glial differentiation and myelination. An in-depth 
analysis of selected pathways revealed a concerted augmentation of the pro-neuronal 
developmental mechanisms and an attenuation of pro-glial/anti-neuronal signaling. For 
instance, within the pro-neuronal Wnt pathway, the schizophrenia NCCs displayed a 
concerted activation of genes that enhance Wnt signals and repression of genes that inhibit 
the Wnt signals (Figure S6). In contrast, genes within the Notch1 pathway, which inhibits 
neuronal development but promotes gliogenesis, displayed a concerted downregulation 
(Figure S5). A similar coordinated downregulation was found in schizophrenia NCCs genes 
that mediate glutamatergic transmission (Figure S4). The latter suggests that the glutamate 
synaptic insufficiency is programmed during early neural development. Together, these 
findings imply that in the context of schizophrenia, neural progenitor cells may exit from the 
cell cycle prematurely and differentiate into neurons, and that the development of glia, 
specifically oligodendroglia, is suppressed. These gene dysregulation could therefore 
account for the excessive numbers of small neurons often found in schizophrenia brains 
upon post-mortem examination (Akbarian et al., 1993; Connor et al., 2004; Schiller et al., 
2006), and for the abnormal myelination observed by MRI and PET imaging (Palaniyappan 
et al., 2013).
Many of the genes dysregulated in schizophrenia NCCs are involved in general ontogenic 
pathways. Their malfunction could impact neural development as well potentially make it 
vulnerable to schizophrenia-linked environmental factors(Hamlyn et al., 2013). The early 
neuronal committed cells used in our study, still express number of non-neural genes, some 
of which were dysregulated in patients’ NCCs. Changes in the activities of genes involved in 
angiogenesis, development of muscles and other tissues may be predictive of non-neural 
developmental changes, more frequently observed in the schizophrenia compared to the 
control population. The well-known examples include curved fifth digit, asymmetrical ears, 
hypertelorism, etc. (Compton and Walker, 2009). Programing development of the 
schizophrenia iPSCs to non-neural tissues may further elaborate our findings,
Within the dysregulated transcriptome of schizophrenia NCCs, we observed a marked rise in 
the number of genes displaying a highly correlated expression. The analysis of the 200 most 
connected genes revealed a unique set of genes whose expression was highly correlated in 
control NCCs and different sets of genes that were highly correlated in the schizophrenia 
NCCs. Within the patient network, the upregulated genes correlated almost exclusively with 
other upregulated genes, while the downregulated correlated with the downregulated genes. 
Such separation was not observed within the control network in which up and 
downregulated genes displayed strong regulatory connection.
The control networks, which became disrupted in patient NCCs, included genes involved in 
neural development and cell motility both of which are affected in schizophrenia (Fatemi 
and Folsom, 2009). The newly formed highly correlated networks in schizophrenia NCCs 
included genes involved in the biology of the extracellular matrix, consistent with the 
Narla et al.
Page 15
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 proposed role of brain extracellular matrix in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia 
(Berretta, 2012). In addition, analysis of all 15,279 genes expressed by schizophrenia NCCs 
revealed increased positive correlation among genes that participate in brain development, 
cell motility, differentiation, synaptogenesis as well as glutamatergic transmission, all 
implicated in the etiology of schizophrenia (Figure S12).
The formation of the coordinated changes in gene activities and the separate up- and down-
networks in schizophrenia NCCs suggested a concerted action of a global gene activator/
inhibitor. Our present investigation points to two types of global gene regulators that may be 
involved: miRNAs and nFGFR1. In schizophrenia NCCs, we found a concerted 
dysregulation of 19 miRNAs, all of which were overexpressed, albeit to a different extent. 
Within this group, mir-132 (Miller et al., 2012), mir-134 (Moreau et al., 2011; Santarelli et 
al., 2011), mir-218 (Perkins et al., 2007), and mir-17 (Shi et al., 2012) had previously been 
implicated in schizophrenia (Miller et al., 2012; Santarelli et al., 2011). Postmortem human 
studies revealed that miRNAs are upregulated in schizophrenia brain accompanied by an 
increase in the expression of DICER and other miRNA processing genes (Santarelli et al., 
2011). In schizophrenia NCCs, we found no changes in the expression of miRNA processing 
genes. Therefore, the upregulation of the 16 specific miRNAs may not be due to generalized 
changes in miRNA processing. In control NCCs, the expression of these 16 miRNAs showed 
high level of correlation consistent with the largely shared population of their 440 targeted 
mRNAs (Figure 4B). This highly correlated network of miRNAs can be correctly modeled 
based on their target mRNAs expression. In contrast, in schizophrenia NCCs, the expression 
of 16 miRNAs was not correlated and was disconnected from their highly correlated target 
mRNA network (Fig 3D). We hypothesize that separation of miRNAs and a malfunctioning 
mRNA gene regulator that takes over the control of mRNA genes, causing their hyper-
correlation, could enforce mRNAs networks. Another possibility is suggested by the study 
of Schmiedel (Schmiedel et al., 2015), who showed that miRNAs may be more effective in 
controlling mRNAs expressed at low versus high levels (Schmiedel et al., 2015). Thus, the 
efficacy of miRNAs may change as their targeted mRNA become dysregulated in 
schizophrenia NCCs. Further studies, including manipulation of individual miRNAs, and 
new computational techniques that analyze global genome miRNA-mRNA interactions as a 
function of their levels, could to shed light on the mechanisms of the disintegration of joint 
miRNA-mRNA network in schizophrenia NCCs.
A novel mechanism that could elicit global genomic dysregulation as observed in 
schizophrenia NCCs is the pan-ontogenic INFS. Similar as found in mouse ESCs and NCCs 
(Terranova et al., 2015), nFGFR1 binds throughout all chromosomes in human NCCs. Like 
in the mouse genome, in both control and schizophrenia NCCs, the nFGFR1 peaks are 
enriched at the promoters (both distal and proximal) and 5′ UTRs (Terranova et al., 2015), 
and are found primarily (90%) on expressed genes. Of all annotated human genes (24,331), 
54% (13,182 genes) were bound by nFGFR1 in control and patient NCCs. Among 1118 
nFGFR1 targeted dysregulated genes, nFGFR1 bound to 915 genes, in both the control and 
patient genomes, and to 203 genes in only the patient genome. The majority of nFGFR1 
peaks were in the same location in control and patient NCCs. However, the total number of 
peaks was higher in patient NCCs, and the overall binding to the nFGFR1 promoter stronger 
in schizophrenia NCCs than in control cells. Thus, the increase in nFGFR1 binding and de-
Narla et al.
Page 16
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 novo targeting of gene promoters by nFGFR1 in schizophrenia cells may contribute to the 
observed gene dysregulation. Analysis by qPCR confirmed that the increase in nFGFR1 in 
the nucleus is sufficient to increase expression of the exemplary neuronal genes, TH, 
WNT7B, and Neurod4, as well as to suppress the expression of the oligodendrocytic genes, 
Olig1, Olig2 and NCAM, thus modeling the changes observed in patient cells. Furthermore, 
nFGFR1 targeted motifs, many of which were the same in the mouse genome (Terranova et 
al., 2015), are effectively regulated by nFGFR1. For example, increased binding of nFGFR1 
to DNA motifs targeted by Nur (NuRE, NBRE), RAR and RXR (RARE), CREB (CRE), 
myc (Ebox), AP1 and NfκB promotes transcription by RNA Polymerase II. In contrast 
nFGFR1 binding to the Smad site inhibits transcription (Stachowiak et al., 2015; Terranova 
et al., 2015). Therefore, the generalized increase in nFGFR1 binding could lead to global 
changes in gene activities as observed in schizophrenia cells.
Our investigation has revealed a close relationship between the nFGFR1 and the Notch1 
systems the significance of which will require further investigation. Among genes whose 
expression is dysregulated in schizophrenia NCCs, Notch pathway genes showed a 
concerted suppression (Figure S10), and several of those genes (i.e., NOTCH2, DTX4, 
HES5, MAML2, HEY2, DLL3, and JAG11) were directly targeted by nFGFR1 (Table S2, 
S11). Also, many of the nR1 regulated genes (IRX3, ID3, PAX3(Terranova et al., 2015) and 
NCAM present study) ) are targeted by both nR1 and Notch (Figure S11). Thus R1 may 
control expression of genes involed in Notch synthesis and signaling as well as interact with 
the Notch1 targted genes. The global interactions between the nFGFR1 and Notch systems 
could play an important role in the etiology of schizophrenia and thus should be addressed 
by future experiments.
In addition to the nFGFR1 peaks that were associated with the proximal promoters, we 
observed changes in the number of peaks in the distal promoters and the intergenic regions 
in schizophrenia NCCs. The role of distal intergenic binding by nFGFR1 is under 
investigation. It is possible that these peaks play a role in chromatin organization. Motif 
analysis revealed that in the patient NCC genome, nFGFR1 targets DNA motifs that are 
bound by CTCF, a chromatin insulator and an organizer of topologically associating 
domains (Ciabrelli and Cavalli, 2015). Therefore, the binding of FGFR1 to CTCF in these 
distal regions may be related to global gene dysregulation over longer distances in 
developing schizophrenia neurons.
In conclusion, our detailed investigation of global transcriptomes in four different 
schizophrenia patients and four unrelated control subjects lends strong support to the 
watershed model of the polygenic, rare variant disease, schizophrenia. Our investigation 
designates pan-ontogenic INFS as a potential central, converging mechanism, which 
receives aberrant signals from schizophrenia genes and elicits genome dysregulation in 
differentiating neural progenitor cells (Fig. 8).
Overactive INFS may dysregulate multitudes of common, nFGFR1-targeted developmental 
pathways in patients with different schizophrenia-linked mutations. Given that nFGFR1 is 
both sufficient and essential for neuronal programing of stem and neural progenitor cells 
(transfected constitutively active nuclear (FGFR1(SP-/NLS) induces neuronal differentiation 
Narla et al.
Page 17
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in ESC and NPC, while the dominant negative (FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) prevents retinoic 
acid, cAMP, NGF or BMP4 neuronal programing (Fang et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2013; Lee et 
al., 2012; Stachowiak et al., 2003)), treatments that target the overactive INFS may reduce 
developmental progression of brain malformations and emerge as a potential strategy for 
treating schizophrenia and other neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism. Our 
findings warrant further INFS-focused investigation of the diverse groups of patients.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Michael Buck (NextGen Sequencing and Expression Analysis Core, SUNY, Buffalo), Drs. Barbara 
Birkaya and Scott Doyle and graduate students Brandon Decker, David Freedman and Seerat Elahi for critical 
discussion of this work. This work was supported by grants from New York State Department of Health (NYSTEM 
C026415, C026714), National Science Foundation (CBET-1555720) and Patrick P. Lee Foundation to MKS. KB 
was supported by grants from NIH (R01 MH101454 and R01 MH106056), and the New York Stem Cell 
Foundation.
References
Akbarian S, Bunney WE Jr, Potkin SG, Wigal SB, Hagman JO, Sandman CA, Jones EG. Altered 
distribution of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate-diaphorase cells in frontal lobe of 
schizophrenics implies disturbances of cortical development. Archives of general psychiatry. 1993; 
50(3):169–177. [PubMed: 7679891] 
Arnold SE, Ruscheinsky DD, Han LY. Further evidence of abnormal cytoarchitecture of the entorhinal 
cortex in schizophrenia using spatial point pattern analyses. Biological psychiatry. 1997; 42(8):639–
647. [PubMed: 9325556] 
Baron O, Foerthmann B, Lee YW, Terranova C, Ratzka A, Stachowiak EK, Grothe C, Claus P, 
Stachowiak MK. Cooperation of nuclear FGFR1 and Nurr1 offers a new interactive mechanism in 
postmitotic development of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. The Journal of biological 
chemistry. 2012a
Baron O, Forthmann B, Lee YW, Terranova C, Ratzka A, Stachowiak EK, Grothe C, Claus P, 
Stachowiak MK. Cooperation of nuclear fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 and nurr1 offers new 
interactive mechanism in postmitotic development of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. The 
Journal of biological chemistry. 2012b; 287(24):19827–19840. [PubMed: 22514272] 
Bartel DP. MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions. Cell. 2009; 136(2):215–233. 
[PubMed: 19167326] 
Benes FM, Kwok EW, Vincent SL, Todtenkopf MS. A reduction of nonpyramidal cells in sector CA2 
of schizophrenics and manic depressives. Biological psychiatry. 1998; 44(2):88–97. [PubMed: 
9646890] 
Berretta S. Extracellular matrix abnormalities in schizophrenia. Neuropharmacology. 2012; 62(3):
1584–1597. [PubMed: 21856318] 
Blanchard JJ, Kring AM, Horan WP, Gur R. Toward the next generation of negative symptom 
assessments: the collaboration to advance negative symptom assessment in schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia bulletin. 2011; 37(2):291–299. [PubMed: 20861151] 
Bobbs AS, Saarela AV, Yatskievych TA, Antin PB. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling during 
gastrulation negatively modulates the abundance of microRNAs that regulate proteins required for 
cell migration and embryo patterning. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2012; 287(46):38505–
38514. [PubMed: 22995917] 
Bogerts B, Hantsch J, Herzer M. A morphometric study of the dopamine-containing cell groups in the 
mesencephalon of normals, Parkinson patients, and schizophrenics. Biological psychiatry. 1983; 
18(9):951–969. [PubMed: 6640008] 
Narla et al.
Page 18
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Brennand K, Savas JN, Kim Y, Tran N, Simone A, Hashimoto-Torii K, Beaumont KG, Kim HJ, Topol 
A, Ladran I, Abdelrahim M, Matikainen-Ankney B, Chao SH, Mrksich M, Rakic P, Fang G, Zhang 
B, Yates JR 3rd, Gage FH. Phenotypic differences in hiPSC NPCs derived from patients with 
schizophrenia. Molecular psychiatry. 2015; 20(3):361–368. [PubMed: 24686136] 
Brennand KJ, Gage FH. Concise review: the promise of human induced pluripotent stem cell-based 
studies of schizophrenia. Stem cells. 2011; 29(12):1915–1922. [PubMed: 22009633] 
Brennand KJ, Landek-Salgado MA, Sawa A. Modeling heterogeneous patients with a clinical 
diagnosis of schizophrenia with induced pluripotent stem cells. Biological psychiatry. 2014a; 
75(12):936–944. [PubMed: 24331955] 
Brennand KJ, Silvas J, Kim Y, Tran N, Simone A, Ladran I, Beaumont K, Kim H-J, Mrksich M, Fang 
G, Zhang B, Yates JR 3rd, Gage FH. Phenotypic differences in hiPSC NPCs derived from patients 
with schizophrenia. Molecular psychiatry. 2014b
Brennand KJ, Simone A, Jou J, Gelboin-Burkhart C, Tran N, Sangar S, Li Y, Mu Y, Chen G, Yu D, 
McCarthy S, Sebat J, Gage FH. Modelling schizophrenia using human induced pluripotent stem 
cells. Nature. 2011; 473(7346):221–225. [PubMed: 21490598] 
Bryant DM, Stow JL. Nuclear translocation of cell-surface receptors: lessons from fibroblast growth 
factor. Traffic. 2005; 6(10):947–954. [PubMed: 16138907] 
Cannon TD, Keller MC. Endophenotypes in the genetic analyses of mental disorders. Annual review 
of clinical psychology. 2006; 2:267–290.
Chiang CH, Su Y, Wen Z, Yoritomo N, Ross CA, Margolis RL, Song H, Ming GL. Integration-free 
induced pluripotent stem cells derived from schizophrenia patients with a DISC1 mutation. 
Molecular psychiatry. 2011; 16(4):358–360. [PubMed: 21339753] 
Chioni AM, Grose R. FGFR1 cleavage and nuclear translocation regulates breast cancer cell behavior. 
J Cell Biol. 2012; 197(6):801–817. [PubMed: 22665522] 
Ciabrelli F, Cavalli G. Chromatin-driven behavior of topologically associating domains. J Mol Biol. 
2015; 427(3):608–625. [PubMed: 25280896] 
Ciruna B, Rossant J. FGF signaling regulates mesoderm cell fate specification and morphogenetic 
movement at the primitive streak. Dev Cell. 2001; 1(1):37–49. [PubMed: 11703922] 
Ciruna BG, Schwartz L, Harpal K, Yamaguchi TP, Rossant J. Chimeric analysis of fibroblast growth 
factor receptor-1 (Fgfr1) function: a role for FGFR1 in morphogenetic movement through the 
primitive streak. Development. 1997; 124(14):2829–2841. [PubMed: 9226454] 
Clarke WE, Berry M, Smith C, Kent A, Logan A. Coordination of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 
(FGFR1) and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) trafficking to nuclei of reactive astrocytes around 
cerebral lesions in adult rats. Molecular and cellular neurosciences. 2001; 17(1):17–30. [PubMed: 
11161466] 
Coleman SJ, Chioni AM, Ghallab M, Anderson RK, Lemoine NR, Kocher HM, Grose RP. Nuclear 
translocation of FGFR1 and FGF2 in pancreatic stellate cells facilitates pancreatic cancer cell 
invasion. EMBO molecular medicine. 2014; 6(4):467–481. [PubMed: 24503018] 
Compton MT, Walker EF. Physical manifestations of neurodevelopmental disruption: are minor 
physical anomalies part of the syndrome of schizophrenia? Schizophrenia bulletin. 2009; 35(2):
425–436. [PubMed: 18990714] 
Connor SE, Ng V, McDonald C, Schulze K, Morgan K, Dazzan P, Murray RM. A study of 
hippocampal shape anomaly in schizophrenia and in families multiply affected by schizophrenia or 
bipolar disorder. Neuroradiology. 2004; 46(7):523–534. [PubMed: 15205862] 
Davis KL, Stewart DG, Friedman JI, Buchsbaum M, Harvey PD, Hof PR, Buxbaum J, Haroutunian V. 
White matter changes in schizophrenia: evidence for myelin-related dysfunction. Archives of 
general psychiatry. 2003; 60(5):443–456. [PubMed: 12742865] 
de Bartolomeis A, Iasevoli F, Tomasetti C, Buonaguro EF. MicroRNAs in Schizophrenia: Implications 
for Synaptic Plasticity and Dopamine-Glutamate Interaction at the Postsynaptic Density. New 
Avenues for Antipsychotic Treatment Under a Theranostic Perspective. Molecular neurobiology. 
2015; 52(3):1771–1790. [PubMed: 25394379] 
Deep-Soboslay A, Benes FM, Haroutunian V, Ellis JK, Kleinman JE, Hyde TM. Psychiatric brain 
banking: three perspectives on current trends and future directions. Biological psychiatry. 2011; 
69(2):104–112. [PubMed: 20673875] 
Narla et al.
Page 19
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dequeant ML, Pourquie O. Segmental patterning of the vertebrate embryonic axis. Nature reviews 
Genetics. 2008; 9(5):370–382.
Dunham-Ems SM, Lee YW, Stachowiak EK, Pudavar H, Claus P, Prasad PN, Stachowiak MK. 
Fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1) nuclear dynamics reveal a novel mechanism in 
transcription control. Molecular biology of the cell. 2009; 20(9):2401–2412. [PubMed: 19261810] 
Fang X, Stachowiak EK, Dunham-Ems SM, Klejbor I, Stachowiak MK. Control of CREB-binding 
protein signaling by nuclear fibroblast growth factor receptor-1: a novel mechanism of gene 
regulation. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2005; 280(31):28451–28462. [PubMed: 
15929978] 
Fatemi SH, Folsom TD. The neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia, revisited. 
Schizophrenia bulletin. 2009; 35(3):528–548. [PubMed: 19223657] 
Foussias G, Mann S, Zakzanis KK, van Reekum R, Agid O, Remington G. Prediction of longitudinal 
functional outcomes in schizophrenia: the impact of baseline motivational deficits. Schizophrenia 
research. 2011; 132(1):24–27. [PubMed: 21771567] 
Gonzalez AM, Berry M, Maher PA, Logan A, Baird A. A comprehensive analysis of the distribution of 
FGF-2 and FGFR1 in the rat brain. Brain Res. 1995; 701(1–2):201–226. [PubMed: 8925285] 
Hamlyn J, Duhig M, McGrath J, Scott J. Modifiable risk factors for schizophrenia and autism--shared 
risk factors impacting on brain development. Neurobiology of disease. 2013; 53:3–9. [PubMed: 
23123588] 
Han X, Xiao Z, Quarles LD. Membrane and integrative nuclear fibroblastic growth factor receptor 
(FGFR) regulation of FGF-23. J Biol Chem. 2015; 290(33):20101. [PubMed: 26276855] 
Hanzawa S, Bae JK, Bae YJ, Chae MH, Tanaka H, Nakane H, Ohta Y, Zhao X, Iizuka H, Nakane Y. 
Psychological impact on caregivers traumatized by the violent behavior of a family member with 
schizophrenia. Asian journal of psychiatry. 2013; 6(1):46–51. [PubMed: 23380317] 
Hashimoto-Torii K, Torii M, Fujimoto M, Nakai A, El Fatimy R, Mezger V, Ju MJ, Ishii S, Chao SH, 
Brennand KJ, Gage FH, Rakic P. Roles of heat shock factor 1 in neuronal response to fetal 
environmental risks and its relevance to brain disorders. Neuron. 2014; 82(3):560–572. [PubMed: 
24726381] 
Haw RA, Croft D, Yung CK, Ndegwa N, D’Eustachio P, Hermjakob H, Stein LD. The Reactome 
BioMart. Database : the journal of biological databases and curation 2011. 2011:bar031.
Hill MJ, Donocik JG, Nuamah RA, Mein CA, Sainz-Fuertes R, Bray NJ. Transcriptional consequences 
of schizophrenia candidate miR-137 manipulation in human neural progenitor cells. Schizophrenia 
research. 2014; 153(1–3):225–230. [PubMed: 24556472] 
Huttenhower C, Haley EM, Hibbs MA, Dumeaux V, Barrett DR, Coller HA, Troyanskaya OG. 
Exploring the human genome with functional maps. Genome Res. 2009; 19(6):1093–1106. 
[PubMed: 19246570] 
International Schizophrenia C. Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications increase risk of 
schizophrenia. Nature. 2008; 455(7210):237–241. [PubMed: 18668038] 
Jungerius BJ, Hoogendoorn ML, Bakker SC, Van’t Slot R, Bardoel AF, Ophoff RA, Wijmenga C, 
Kahn RS, Sinke RJ. An association screen of myelin-related genes implicates the chromosome 
22q11 PIK4CA gene in schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry. 2008; 13(11):1060–1068. [PubMed: 
17893707] 
Kirov G, Pocklington AJ, Holmans P, Ivanov D, Ikeda M, Ruderfer D, Moran J, Chambert K, 
Toncheva D, Georgieva L, Grozeva D, Fjodorova M, Wollerton R, Rees E, Nikolov I, van de 
Lagemaat LN, Bayes A, Fernandez E, Olason PI, Bottcher Y, Komiyama NH, Collins MO, 
Choudhary J, Stefansson K, Stefansson H, Grant SG, Purcell S, Sklar P, O’Donovan MC, Owen 
MJ. De novo CNV analysis implicates specific abnormalities of postsynaptic signalling complexes 
in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Molecular psychiatry. 2012; 17(2):142–153. [PubMed: 
22083728] 
Kneeland RE, Fatemi SH. Viral infection, inflammation and schizophrenia. Progress in neuro-
psychopharmacology & biological psychiatry. 2013; 42:35–48. [PubMed: 22349576] 
Leadbeater WE, Gonzalez AM, Logaras N, Berry M, Turnbull JE, Logan A. Intracellular trafficking in 
neurones and glia of fibroblast growth factor-2, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 and heparan 
Narla et al.
Page 20
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sulphate proteoglycans in the injured adult rat cerebral cortex. J Neurochem. 2006; 96(4):1189–
1200. [PubMed: 16417571] 
Lee YW, Stachowiak EK, Birkaya B, Terranova C, Capacchietti M, Claus P, Aletta JM, Stachowiak 
MK. NGF-induced cell differentiation and gene activation is mediated by integrative nuclear 
FGFR1 signaling (INFS). PloS one. 2013; 8(7):e68931. [PubMed: 23874817] 
Lee YW, Terranova C, Birkaya B, Narla S, Kehoe D, Parikh A, Dong S, Ratzka A, Brinkmann H, 
Aletta JM, Tzanakakis ES, Stachowiak EK, Claus P, Stachowiak MK. A novel nuclear FGF 
Receptor-1 partnership with retinoid and Nur receptors during developmental gene programming 
of embryonic stem cells. J Cell Biochem. 2012; 113(9):2920–2936. [PubMed: 22539306] 
Lloyd T, Dazzan P, Dean K, Park SB, Fearon P, Doody GA, Tarrant J, Morgan KD, Morgan C, 
Hutchinson G, Leff J, Harrison G, Murray RM, Jones PB. Minor physical anomalies in patients 
with first-episode psychosis: their frequency and diagnostic specificity. Psychological medicine. 
2008; 38(1):71–77. [PubMed: 17662165] 
Maher PA. Nuclear Translocation of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors in response to FGF-2. 
The Journal of cell biology. 1996; 134(2):529–536. [PubMed: 8707835] 
Malhotra D, McCarthy S, Michaelson JJ, Vacic V, Burdick KE, Yoon S, Cichon S, Corvin A, Gary S, 
Gershon ES, Gill M, Karayiorgou M, Kelsoe JR, Krastoshevsky O, Krause V, Leibenluft E, Levy 
DL, Makarov V, Bhandari A, Malhotra AK, McMahon FJ, Nothen MM, Potash JB, Rietschel M, 
Schulze TG, Sebat J. High frequencies of de novo CNVs in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. 
Neuron. 2011; 72(6):951–963. [PubMed: 22196331] 
Miller BH, Zeier Z, Xi L, Lanz TA, Deng S, Strathmann J, Willoughby D, Kenny PJ, Elsworth JD, 
Lawrence MS, Roth RH, Edbauer D, Kleiman RJ, Wahlestedt C. MicroRNA-132 dysregulation in 
schizophrenia has implications for both neurodevelopment and adult brain function. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109(8):3125–3130. [PubMed: 22315408] 
Moreau MP, Bruse SE, David-Rus R, Buyske S, Brzustowicz LM. Altered microRNA expression 
profiles in postmortem brain samples from individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. 
Biological psychiatry. 2011; 69(2):188–193. [PubMed: 21183010] 
Narla ST, Klejbor I, Birkaya B, Lee YW, Morys J, Stachowiak EK, Prokop D, Bencherif M, 
Stachowiak MK. Activation of developmental nuclear fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 signaling 
and neurogenesis in adult brain by alpha7 nicotinic receptor agonist. Stem cells translational 
medicine. 2013; 2(10):776–788. [PubMed: 24014683] 
Need AC, Attix DK, McEvoy JM, Cirulli ET, Linney KL, Hunt P, Ge D, Heinzen EL, Maia JM, 
Shianna KV, Weale ME, Cherkas LF, Clement G, Spector TD, Gibson G, Goldstein DB. A 
genome-wide study of common SNPs and CNVs in cognitive performance in the CANTAB. Hum 
Mol Genet. 2009; 18(23):4650–4661. [PubMed: 19734545] 
Palaniyappan L, Al-Radaideh A, Mougin O, Gowland P, Liddle PF. Combined white matter imaging 
suggests myelination defects in visual processing regions in schizophrenia. 
Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013; 38(9):1808–1815. [PubMed: 23558741] 
Partanen J, Schwartz L, Rossant J. Opposite phenotypes of hypomorphic and Y766 phosphorylation 
site mutations reveal a function for Fgfr1 in anteroposterior patterning of mouse embryos. Genes 
& development. 1998; 12(15):2332–2344. [PubMed: 9694798] 
Paulsen BD, Maciel RD, Galina A, da Silveira MS, Souza CD, Drummond H, Pozzato EN, Junior HS, 
Chicaybam L, Massuda R, Setti-Perdigao P, Bonamino M, Belmonte-de-Abreu PS, Castro NG, 
Brentani H, Rehen SK. Altered oxygen metabolism associated to neurogenesis of induced 
pluripotent stem cells derived from a schizophrenic patient. Cell Transplant. 2011
Peng H, Moffett J, Myers J, Fang X, Stachowiak EK, Maher P, Kratz E, Hines J, Fluharty SJ, 
Mizukoshi E, Bloom DC, Stachowiak MK. Novel nuclear signaling pathway mediates activation 
of fibroblast growth factor-2 gene by type 1 and type 2 angiotensin II receptors. Molecular biology 
of the cell. 2001; 12(2):449–462. [PubMed: 11179427] 
Peng H, Myers J, Fang X, Stachowiak EK, Maher PA, Martins GG, Popescu G, Berezney R, 
Stachowiak MK. Integrative nuclear FGFR1 signaling (INFS) pathway mediates activation of the 
tyrosine hydroxylase gene by angiotensin II, depolarization and protein kinase C. J Neurochem. 
2002; 81(3):506–524. [PubMed: 12065659] 
Narla et al.
Page 21
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Perkins DO, Jeffries CD, Jarskog LF, Thomson JM, Woods K, Newman MA, Parker JS, Jin J, 
Hammond SM. microRNA expression in the prefrontal cortex of individuals with schizophrenia 
and schizoaffective disorder. Genome biology. 2007; 8(2):R27. [PubMed: 17326821] 
Pollerberg GE, Thelen K, Theiss MO, Hochlehnert BC. The role of cell adhesion molecules for 
navigating axons: density matters. Mechanisms of development. 2013; 130(6–8):359–372. 
[PubMed: 23183391] 
Rehn AE, Rees SM. Investigating the neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia. Clinical and 
experimental pharmacology & physiology. 2005; 32(9):687–696. [PubMed: 16173923] 
Reilly JF, Maher PA. Importin beta-mediated nuclear import of fibroblast growth factor receptor: role 
in cell proliferation. J Cell Biol. 2001; 152(6):1307–1312. [PubMed: 11257130] 
Robicsek O, Karry R, Petit I, Salman-Kesner N, Muller FJ, Klein E, Aberdam D, Ben-Shachar D. 
Abnormal neuronal differentiation and mitochondrial dysfunction in hair follicle-derived induced 
pluripotent stem cells of schizophrenia patients. Mol Psychiatry. 2013
Roussos P, Guennewig B, Kaczorowski DC, Barry G, Brennand KJ. Activity-Dependent Changes in 
Gene Expression in Schizophrenia Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Neurons. JAMA 
Psychiatry. 2016; 73(11):1180–1188. [PubMed: 27732689] 
Rummel-Kluge C, Komossa K, Schwarz S, Hunger H, Schmid F, Kissling W, Davis JM, Leucht S. 
Second-generation antipsychotic drugs and extrapyramidal side effects: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of head-to-head comparisons. Schizophrenia bulletin. 2012; 38(1):167–177. 
[PubMed: 20513652] 
Saha S, Chant D, Welham J, McGrath J. A systematic review of the prevalence of schizophrenia. PLoS 
medicine. 2005; 2(5):e141. [PubMed: 15916472] 
Santarelli DM, Beveridge NJ, Tooney PA, Cairns MJ. Upregulation of dicer and microRNA expression 
in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex Brodmann area 46 in schizophrenia. Biological psychiatry. 
2011; 69(2):180–187. [PubMed: 21111402] 
Schiller D, Zuckerman L, Weiner I. Abnormally persistent latent inhibition induced by lesions to the 
nucleus accumbens core, basolateral amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex is reversed by clozapine 
but not by haloperidol. Journal of psychiatric research. 2006; 40(2):167–177. [PubMed: 15882871] 
Schmiedel JM, Klemm SL, Zheng Y, Sahay A, Bluthgen N, Marks DS, van Oudenaarden A. Gene 
expression. MicroRNA control of protein expression noise. Science. 2015; 348(6230):128–132. 
[PubMed: 25838385] 
Shi W, Du J, Qi Y, Liang G, Wang T, Li S, Xie S, Zeshan B, Xiao Z. Aberrant expression of serum 
miRNAs in schizophrenia. Journal of psychiatric research. 2012; 46(2):198–204. [PubMed: 
22094284] 
Srikanth P, Han K, Callahan DG, Makovkina E, Muratore CR, Lalli MA, Zhou H, Boyd JD, Kosik KS, 
Selkoe DJ, Young-Pearse TL. Genomic DISC1 Disruption in hiPSCs Alters Wnt Signaling and 
Neural Cell Fate. Cell reports. 2015; 12(9):1414–1429. [PubMed: 26299970] 
Stachowiak EK, Fang X, Myers J, Dunham S, Stachowiak MK. cAMP-induced differentiation of 
human neuronal progenitor cells is mediated by nuclear fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 
(FGFR1). J Neurochem. 2003; 84(6):1296–1312. [PubMed: 12614330] 
Stachowiak MK, Birkaya B, Aletta JM, Narla ST, Benson CA, Decker B, Stachowiak EK. Nuclear 
FGF Receptor-1 and CREB Binding Protein: An Integrative Signaling Module. Journal of cellular 
physiology. 2015; 230(5):989–1002. [PubMed: 25503065] 
Stachowiak MK, Kucinski A, Curl R, Syposs C, Yang Y, Narla S, Terranova C, Prokop D, Klejbor I, 
Bencherif M, Birkaya B, Corso T, Parikh A, Tzanakakis ES, Wersinger S, Stachowiak EK. 
Schizophrenia: a neurodevelopmental disorder--integrative genomic hypothesis and therapeutic 
implications from a transgenic mouse model. Schizophrenia research. 2013a; 143(2–3):367–376. 
[PubMed: 23231877] 
Stachowiak MK, Kucinski A, Curl R, Syposs C, Yang Y, Narla S, Terranova C, Prokop D, Klejbor I, 
Bencherif M, Birkaya B, Corso T, Parikh A, Tzanakakis ES, Wersinger S, Stachowiak EK. 
Schizophrenia: a neurodevelopmental disorder - integrative genomic hypothesis and therapeutic 
implications from a transgenic mouse model. Schizophrenia research. 2013b; 143(2–3):367–376. 
[PubMed: 23231877] 
Narla et al.
Page 22
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Stachowiak MK, Maher PA, Joy A, Mordechai E, Stachowiak EK. Nuclear accumulation of fibroblast 
growth factor receptors is regulated by multiple signals in adrenal medullary cells. Molecular 
biology of the cell. 1996a; 7(8):1299–1317. [PubMed: 8856671] 
Stachowiak MK, Maher PA, Joy A, Mordechai E, Stachowiak EK. Nuclear localization of functional 
FGF receptor 1 in human astrocytes suggests a novel mechanism for growth factor action. Brain 
research Molecular brain research. 1996b; 38(1):161–165. [PubMed: 8737680] 
Stachowiak MK, Maher PA, Stachowiak EK. Integrative nuclear signaling in cell development--a role 
for FGF receptor-1. DNA and cell biology. 2007; 26(12):811–826. [PubMed: 18021009] 
Stachowiak MK, Stachowiak EK. Evidence-Based Theory for Integrated Genome Regulation of 
Ontogeny-An Unprecedented Role of Nuclear FGFR1 Signaling. Journal of cellular physiology. 
2016; 231(6):1199–1218. [PubMed: 26729628] 
Stachowiak, MK., Stachowiak, EK., Aletta, JM., Tzanakakis, ES. A common integrative nuclear 
signaling module for stem cell development. In: Stachowiak, MK., EST, editors. Stem Cells from 
mechanisms to technologies. World Scientific; 2011. p. 87-132.
Stefansson H, Rujescu D, Cichon S, Pietilainen OP, Ingason A, Steinberg S, Fossdal R, Sigurdsson E, 
Sigmundsson T, Buizer-Voskamp JE, Hansen T, Jakobsen KD, Muglia P, Francks C, Matthews 
PM, Gylfason A, Halldorsson BV, Gudbjartsson D, Thorgeirsson TE, Sigurdsson A, Jonasdottir A, 
Jonasdottir A, Bjornsson A, Mattiasdottir S, Blondal T, Haraldsson M, Magnusdottir BB, Giegling 
I, Moller HJ, Hartmann A, Shianna KV, Ge D, Need AC, Crombie C, Fraser G, Walker N, 
Lonnqvist J, Suvisaari J, Tuulio-Henriksson A, Paunio T, Toulopoulou T, Bramon E, Di Forti M, 
Murray R, Ruggeri M, Vassos E, Tosato S, Walshe M, Li T, Vasilescu C, Muhleisen TW, Wang 
AG, Ullum H, Djurovic S, Melle I, Olesen J, Kiemeney LA, Franke B, Sabatti C, Freimer NB, 
Gulcher JR, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A, Andreassen OA, Ophoff RA, Georgi A, Rietschel M, 
Werge T, Petursson H, Goldstein DB, Nothen MM, Peltonen L, Collier DA, St Clair D, Stefansson 
K. Group. Large recurrent microdeletions associated with schizophrenia. Nature. 2008; 455(7210):
232–236. [PubMed: 18668039] 
Stuhlmiller TJ, Garcia-Castro MI. FGF/MAPK signaling is required in the gastrula epiblast for avian 
neural crest induction. Development. 2012; 139(2):289–300. [PubMed: 22129830] 
Sullivan PF, Kendler KS, Neale MC. Schizophrenia as a complex trait: evidence from a meta-analysis 
of twin studies. Archives of general psychiatry. 2003; 60(12):1187–1192. [PubMed: 14662550] 
Terranova C, Narla ST, Lee YW, Bard J, Parikh A, Stachowiak EK, Tzanakakis ES, Buck MJ, Birkaya 
B, Stachowiak MK. Global Developmental Gene Programing Involves a Nuclear Form of 
Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor-1 (FGFR1). PloS one. 2015; 10(4):e0123380. [PubMed: 
25923916] 
Topol A, English JA, Flaherty E, Rajarajan P, Hartley BJ, Gupta S, Desland F, Zhu S, Goff T, Friedman 
L, Rapoport J, Felsenfeld D, Cagney G, Mackay-Sim A, Savas JN, Aronow B, Fang G, Zhang B, 
Cotter D, Brennand KJ. Increased abundance of translation machinery in stem cell-derived neural 
progenitor cells from four schizophrenia patients. Transl Psychiatry. 2015a; 5:e662. [PubMed: 
26485546] 
Topol A, Zhu S, Hartley BJ, English J, Hauberg ME, Tran N, Rittenhouse CA, Simone A, Ruderfer 
DM, Johnson J, Readhead B, Hadas Y, Gochman PA, Wang YC, Shah H, Cagney G, Rapoport J, 
Gage FH, Dudley JT, Sklar P, Mattheisen M, Cotter D, Fang G, Brennand KJ. Dysregulation of 
miRNA-9 in a Subset of Schizophrenia Patient-Derived Neural Progenitor Cells. Cell reports. 
2016; 15(5):1024–1036. [PubMed: 27117414] 
Topol A, Zhu S, Tran N, Simone A, Fang G, Brennand KJ. Altered WNT Signaling in Human Induced 
Pluripotent Stem Cell Neural Progenitor Cells Derived from Four Schizophrenia Patients. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2015b; 78(6):e29–34. [PubMed: 25708228] 
Trapnell C, Roberts A, Goff L, Pertea G, Kim D, Kelley DR, Pimentel H, Salzberg SL, Rinn JL, 
Pachter L. Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq experiments with 
TopHat and Cufflinks. Nature protocols. 2012; 7(3):562–578. [PubMed: 22383036] 
Walsh T, McClellan JM, McCarthy SE, Addington AM, Pierce SB, Cooper GM, Nord AS, Kusenda 
M, Malhotra D, Bhandari A, Stray SM, Rippey CF, Roccanova P, Makarov V, Lakshmi B, Findling 
RL, Sikich L, Stromberg T, Merriman B, Gogtay N, Butler P, Eckstrand K, Noory L, Gochman P, 
Long R, Chen Z, Davis S, Baker C, Eichler EE, Meltzer PS, Nelson SF, Singleton AB, Lee MK, 
Rapoport JL, King MC, Sebat J. Rare structural variants disrupt multiple genes in 
Narla et al.
Page 23
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurodevelopmental pathways in schizophrenia. Science. 2008; 320(5875):539–543. [PubMed: 
18369103] 
Wang H, Zou J, Zhao B, Johannsen E, Ashworth T, Wong H, Pear WS, Schug J, Blacklow SC, Arnett 
KL, Bernstein BE, Kieff E, Aster JC. Genome-wide analysis reveals conserved and divergent 
features of Notch1/RBPJ binding in human and murine T-lymphoblastic leukemia cells. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108(36):14908–14913. [PubMed: 21737748] 
Welter D, MacArthur J, Morales J, Burdett T, Hall P, Junkins H, Klemm A, Flicek P, Manolio T, 
Hindorff L, Parkinson H. The NHGRI GWAS Catalog, a curated resource of SNP-trait 
associations. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42(Database issue):D1001–1006. [PubMed: 24316577] 
Wen Z, Nguyen HN, Guo Z, Lalli MA, Wang X, Su Y, Kim NS, Yoon KJ, Shin J, Zhang C, Makri G, 
Nauen D, Yu H, Guzman E, Chiang CH, Yoritomo N, Kaibuchi K, Zou J, Christian KM, Cheng L, 
Ross CA, Margolis RL, Chen G, Kosik KS, Song H, Ming GL. Synaptic dysregulation in a human 
iPS cell model of mental disorders. Nature. 2014
Xu B, Roos JL, Levy S, van Rensburg EJ, Gogos JA, Karayiorgou M. Strong association of de novo 
copy number mutations with sporadic schizophrenia. Nature genetics. 2008; 40(7):880–885. 
[PubMed: 18511947] 
Xu J, Hartley BJ, Kurup P, Phillips A, Topol A, Xu M, Ononenyi C, Foscue E, Ho SM, Baguley TD, 
Carty N, Barros CS, Muller U, Gupta S, Gochman P, Rapoport J, Ellman JA, Pittenger C, Aronow 
B, Nairn AC, Nestor MW, Lombroso PJ, Brennand KJ. Inhibition of STEP61 ameliorates deficits 
in mouse and hiPSC-based schizophrenia models. Molecular psychiatry. 2016
Yoon KJ, Nguyen HN, Ursini G, Zhang F, Kim NS, Wen Z, Makri G, Nauen D, Shin JH, Park Y, 
Chung R, Pekle E, Zhang C, Towe M, Hussaini SM, Lee Y, Rujescu D, St Clair D, Kleinman JE, 
Hyde TM, Krauss G, Christian KM, Rapoport JL, Weinberger DR, Song H, Ming GL. Modeling a 
genetic risk for schizophrenia in iPSCs and mice reveals neural stem cell deficits associated with 
adherens junctions and polarity. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 15(1):79–91. [PubMed: 24996170] 
Younger ST, Corey DR. Transcriptional gene silencing in mammalian cells by miRNA mimics that 
target gene promoters. Nucleic acids research. 2011; 39(13):5682–5691. [PubMed: 21427083] 
Yu DX, Di Giorgio FP, Yao J, Marchetto MC, Brennand K, Wright R, Mei A, McHenry L, Lisuk D, 
Grasmick JM, Silberman P, Silberman G, Jappelli R, Gage FH. Modeling hippocampal 
neurogenesis using human pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cell Reports. 2014; 2(3):295–310. 
[PubMed: 24672753] 
Zhang Y, Liu T, Meyer CA, Eeckhoute J, Johnson DS, Bernstein BE, Nusbaum C, Myers RM, Brown 
M, Li W, Liu XS. Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome biology. 2008; 
9(9):R137. [PubMed: 18798982] 
Narla et al.
Page 24
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
RNAseq of control and schizophrenia NCCs. A) Distribution of gene expression across 8 
samples: 4 control and 4 schizophrenia NCC lines. 15,279 expressed genes (mRNAs) were 
detected in all 8 samples. 4470 expressed genes were detected in some but not all samples. 
4582 annotated genes were not detected in any sample. B) Heatmap of 1349 genes that were 
dysregulated in all 4 schizophrenia NCCs samples (FC ≥ −/+1.5 and q value ≥ 0.05). Among 
these, 839 were upregulated and 510 were downregulated. Raw expression data were log 
transformed and then centered to the median of all 8 samples. Red indicates higher value 
than median, green indicates lower value than median. C–E) IPA analysis of dysregulated 
genes. The number on the right represents the total number of genes in the pathway. The bar 
height represents the percentage of genes in the pathway that were found to be dysregulated. 
Green represents downregulated genes. C) Neuronal pathways, D) developmental pathways, 
and E) pathways that are predominantly up- or downregulated.
Narla et al.
Page 25
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
A) Histogram of pairwise correlations. Correlation was performed using 4 control and 4 
patient NCCs samples. A flat distribution of correlation is observed in controls, while in 
patients an increase in the number of positively and negatively correlated genes was 
observed. B) Top 200 nodes (genes whose expression is highly correlated with that of 
multiple other genes) in control and in patient NCCs were identified. Yellow represents 
upregulated genes, and blue represents downregulated genes. Grey lines link pairs of genes 
whose correlation is greater than 0.9. In the control set, two separate networks are observed 
and each contains both upregulated and downregulated genes. In the patient set the 
upregulated and downregulated genes form two separate networks.
Narla et al.
Page 26
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
A) NCCs from three control subjects and three patients were analyzed. Heatmap shows 16 
dysregulated miRNA genes (all upregulated) in patient NCCs. Raw expression data were log 
transformed, and then centered to the median of all 6 samples. Red indicates higher value 
than median, green indicates, lower value than median. B) 16 dysregulated miRNAs (Green) 
target 440 dysregulated mRNA (Blue). Each gray line indicates a connection between an 
miRNA and an mRNA. C) In pairwise correlation of dysregulated miRNA genes a high 
correlation is observed in control NCCs (n=3), but not in patient NCCs (n=3). D) Modeled 
versus actual miRNA-mRNA correlations. Red line shows correlations for miRNAs 
predicted based on correlations of their target mRNAs as in (Huttenhower et al., 2009). Blue 
line shows measured correlations between miRNAs and their target mRNAs. In control 
NCCs the predicted and actual correlations are similar. In patients, the patterns of predicted 
and actual correlations differ markedly.
Narla et al.
Page 27
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
A) Distribution of nFGFR1 peaks throughout the genomes of NCCs from a female control 
(C4) and a female patient (P3). nFGFR1 binds to all chromosomes. The binding profiles are 
similar for both control and patient genomes. B) Distributions of nFGFR1 peaks in genomes 
of control and patient NCCss. In patients, a two-fold increase is observed in introns, distal 
intergenic regions, downstream (0–3kb), and distal promoters (1–3kb). C) Enrichment of 
nFGFR1 peaks in genomes of control and patient NCCs within the promoters and 
bidirectional promoters, and downstream of the TSS. No enrichment is observed in introns 
or intergenic regions.
Narla et al.
Page 28
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
A) nFGFR1 binds to 54% of all annotated human genes in control (C4) NCCs and to 63% in 
schizophrenia patient (P3) NCCs. B) nFGFR1 binds to 915 dysregulated genes under both 
conditions, and to an additional 203 genes in schizophrenia NCCs only. In total, nFGFR1 
binds to 84% of the genes that are dysregulated in schizophrenia NCCs. Only 14 genes are 
targeted by nFGFR1 in control but not schizophrenia NCCs.
Narla et al.
Page 29
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
A) Conservation plot of sequences of FGFR1 peaks in NCCs from a female control (C4) and 
female patient (P3). The expected increase in conservation was observed near the center of 
the nFGFR1 peak. B) Strength of nFGFR1 binding across a modeled average gene in NCCs 
from female C4 (blue) and male P3 (red). C) UCSC genome browser views of nFGFR1 
binding for Disc1, FZD1, and Sox3. Tag distribution of nFGFR1 – increased binding is 
observed in patient (P3) compared to control (C4).
Narla et al.
Page 30
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Overexpression of constitutively active nuclear FGFR1(NLS/SP-) affects expression of 
selected schizophrenia dysregulated genes. Human ESCs were stimulated to differentiate 
into NPCs and transfected with constitutively active nuclear FGFR1(NLS/SP-) or control β-
galactosidase (β-gal). Transfected NPCs were induced to commit to a neuronal lineage 
(NCCs) within 2 days of treatment, and specific mRNAs were analyzed by RT-qPCR. 
FGFR1(NLS/SP-) transfection upregulates TH, Wnt7B, and Neurod4 mRNAs and 
downregulates Olig2, Olig1, and NCAM mRNAs.
Narla et al.
Page 31
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. 
Disruption of INFS in schizophrenia. “Feed-Forward-and-Gate” signaling by INFS during 
development(Fang et al., 2005; Stachowiak et al., 2015). Neurogenic signals generated by 
diverse extracellular stimuli (S: neurotransmitters, hormones, growth factors, cell contact 
receptors) are propagated through signaling pathways (SiP; cAMP, Ca++/PKC, MAPK, etc.) 
to sequence-specific transcription factors (TF: CREB, AP1, NfkB, Smads, Klf4, Stat3, RXR/
RAR, etc.). In parallel, newly synthesized nFGFR1 translocates into the nucleus and “feeds 
forward” (F-F) developmental signals directly to CREB binding protein (CBP), an essential 
transcriptional co-activator and gene-gating factor. The coupled activation of TFs and CBP 
by nFGFR1 allows genes to respond to developmental signals in a coordinated fashion. In 
addition, INFS reinforces or turns off the input signals via a feedback loop (Stachowiak et 
al., 2013a). * marks signaling pathways in which schizophrenia-linked genes have been 
found, including cAMP, G-protein, PKC, MAPK, NfkB, CREB, RXR, and Nurr1 pathways 
(Stachowiak et al., 2013a). In schizophrenia and other neurodevelopmental diseases, 
mutations of these individual genes, including “weak” copy variations, could deregulate this 
auto-regulated genomic circuit (red lines) and thus lead to broad molecular and 
developmental dysfunction.
Narla et al.
Page 32
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Narla et al.
Page 33
Table 1
Description of clinical information available for control and SZ patients
The information in the table is from (Topol et al., 2015a; Topol et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2016). Fibroblasts from all repository patients and controls have 
been recently genotyped by PsychChip and exome sequencing(Brennand et al., 2011). CNV analysis was published in (Brennand et al., 2011).
Patient ID
Coriell ID
Sex
Ethnicity
Age at Biopsy 
(years)
Age of Onset 
(years)
Phenotype
Hospitalizations?
Family History
C1
BJ
M
Causasian
0
-
-
-
unknown
C2
GM03440
M
Causasian
20
-
-
-
unknown
C4
GM04506
F
Causasian
20
-
-
-
unknown
C6
AG09429
F
Causasian
25
-
-
-
unknown
P1
GM02038
M
Causasian
22
6
suicide
?
unknown
P2
GM01792
M
Causasian Jewish / 
Scandanavian
26
unknown
episodes of agitation, delusions of 
persecution, and fear of assassination; at 
age four mild features of pervasive 
developmental disorder
?
father and sister affected; 
brother autistic at age four
P3
GM01835
F
Causasian Jewish
27
unknown
drug abuse; schizo-affective disorder
Yes
father and brother affected
P4
GM02497
M
Causasian Jewish
23
15
paralogical thinking, affective shielding, 
splitting of affect from content, and 
suspiciousness
Yes
affected father, anorexic /
schizoid sister
Schizophr Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
