    
1   
Apparent   thinning   of   visual   cortex   during   childhood   is   associated   with   myelination,   not   pruning   
   
   
Authors   and   affiliations   Vaidehi   S.   Natu1,2,   Jesse   Gomez3,   Michael   Barnett4,   Brianna   Jeska1,   Evgeniya   
Kirilina5,   6,   Carsten   Jaeger5,   Zonglei   Zhen1,   Siobhan   Cox1,   Kevin   S.   Weiner7,8,   Nikolaus   Weiskopf5,   Kalanit   
Grill-­‐Spector1,3,9      
   
1Department   of   Psychology,   Stanford   University,   Stanford,   CA   94305   
2   Department   of   Neurological   Surgery,   University   of   Texas   Southwestern   Medical   Center,   Dallas,   TX,   75390   
3Neurosciences   Program,   Stanford   University,   Stanford,   CA   94305   
4University   of   Pennsylvania,   Philadelphia,   PA,   19104   
5Department   of   Neurophysics,   Max   Planck   Institute   for   Human   Cognitive   and   Brain   Sciences,   Leipzig,   
Germany,   04103   
6Center   for   Cognitive   Neuroscience   Berlin,   Free   University   Berlin,   14195,   Berlin,   Germany   
7Department   of   Psychology,   University   of   California,   Berkeley,   Berkeley,   CA   94720   
8Helen   Wills   Neuroscience   Institute,   University   of   California,   Berkeley,   Berkeley,   CA   94720   
9Stanford   Neurosciences   Institute,   Stanford   University,   Stanford,   CA   94305   
   
Corresponding   Author:   Vaidehi   S.   Natu:   Department   of   Psychology,   Stanford   University,   Stanford,   
California,   94305;   vnatu@stanford.edu   
Conflict   of   Interest:   The   authors   declare   no   competing   financial   interests.   
   
Acknowledgements:   
This   
research   
was   
funded   
by   
NIH   
grants   
1RO1EY   
02231801A1   
and   
1R01EY02391501A1   to   KGS,   5T32EY020485   to   VSN,   and   NRSA   F31EY027201   to   JG.   We   thank   Prof.   Dr.   
Thomas   Arendt   from   the   Paul   Flechsig   Institute   of   Brain   Research,   University   of   Leipzig,   for   providing   post   
mortem   brain   tissue   samples.   The   project   was   supported   by   the   European   Research   Council   under   the   
European   Union's   Seventh   Framework   Programme   (FP7/2007-­‐2013)   /   ERC   grant   agreement   n°   616905,   
and   the   BMBF   (01EW1711A   &   B)   in   the   framework   of   ERA-­‐NET   NEURON.   
   
Keywords:   development,   cortical   thickness,   fMRI,   quantitative   MRI,   diffusion   MRI,   visual   cortex,   myelin,   
morphology   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
2   
Abstract   
Microstructural   mechanisms   underlying   apparent   cortical   thinning   during   childhood   development   are   
unknown.   Using   functional,   quantitative,   and   diffusion   magnetic   resonance   imaging   in   children   and   adults,   
we   tested   if   tissue   growth   (lower   T1   relaxation   time   and   mean   diffusivity   (MD))   or   pruning   (higher   T1   and   
MD)   underlies   cortical   thinning   in   ventral   temporal   cortex   (VTC).   After   age   5,   T1   and   MD   decreased   in   mid   
and   deep   cortex   of   functionally-­‐defined   regions   in   lateral   VTC,   and   in   their   adjacent   white   matter.   T1   and   
MD   decreases   were   (i)   consistent   with   tissue   growth   related   to   myelin   proliferation,   which   we   verified   
with   adult   postmortem   histology   and   (ii)   correlated   with   apparent   cortical   thinning.   Thus,   contrary   to   
prevailing   theories,   cortical   tissue   does   not   thin   during   childhood,   it   becomes   more   myelinated,   shifting   
the   gray-­‐white   matter   boundary   deeper   into   cortex.   As   tissue   growth   is   prominent   in   regions   with   
protracted   functional   development,   our   data   suggest   an   intriguing   hypothesis   that   functional   
development   and   myelination   are   interlinked.   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
3   
As   the   brain   develops   from   infancy   to   adulthood,   magnetic   resonance   imaging   (MRI)   shows   that   
cortex   thins1-­‐6.   Early   sensory   regions   thin   before   higher-­‐level   frontal   and   temporal   regions1,   3.   However,   
the   mechanisms   underlying   cortical   thinning   during   development   are   not   well   understood.      
Three   developmental   theories   have   been   proposed   to   explain   cortical   thinning   across   
development:   pruning,   myelination,   and   cortical   morphology.   Pruning,   evaluated   using   cross-­‐sectional   
histological   studies   on   post   mortem   brains,   suggests   that   the   removal   of   inefficient   synapses,   dendrites,   
and   neurons   leads   to   cortical   tissue   loss7-­‐9.   This   subsequently   produces   thinner   cortex   in   adulthood.   
Pruning   is   thought   to   improve   neural   processing   by   optimizing   brain   circuits   for   particular   operations.   
Myelination   suggests   that   the   myelin   sheath   wrapping   axons   grows   during   development2,   10-­‐13,   thus   
increasing   the   efficiency   of   saltatory   conduction,   and   leading   to   faster   and   more   reliable   information   
transmission.   As   myelin   increases   raise   the   intensity   of   voxels   in   T1-­‐weighted   anatomical   images,   voxels   
close   to   the   gray-­‐white   matter   boundary   will   appear   brighter   in   adults   than   children,   thus   shifting   the   
gray-­‐white   boundary   deeper   into   cortex   in   adults14.   Cortical   morphology   (cortical   folding   and   surface   area)   
suggests   that   during   development   sulcification   and   surface   area   increase   due   to   mechanical   forces15,   16,   
thereby   producing   thinner   cortex   in   adulthood17.   These   mechanisms   are   not   mutually   exclusive   as   a   
combination   of   pruning,   increased   myelination,   and   morphological   alterations   may   result   in   thinner   cortex   
in   adulthood.   
Advances   in   quantitative   MRI   (qMRI)18-­‐20   and   diffusion   MRI   (dMRI)21   provide   independent   and   
complementary   non-­‐invasive,   measurements   of   gray   and   white   matter   tissue   properties,   allowing   us   to   
disambiguate   developmental   hypotheses   in   the   living   human   brain.   Quantitative   MRI   enables   the   
measurement   and   comparison   across   individuals   of   the   amount   of   non-­‐water   tissue   within   a   voxel   
(macromolecular   tissue   volume,   MTV)   and   the   relaxation   time   (T1),   which   depend   on   tissue   composition   
(e.g.,   tissue   containing   myelin,   reduces   T1   more   than   tissue   without   it).   Additionally,   mean   diffusivity   (MD),   
obtained   from   dMRI,   depends   on   the   size,   density,   and   structure   of   the   space   within   tissue   through   which   
water   diffuses   and   provides   additional   insight   into   microstructural   changes   during   development20,22.      
How   can   these   MRI   measurements   differentiate   the   three   developmental   hypotheses?   Although   
we   cannot   measure   microstructure   directly   using   in   vivo   MRI,   we   can   distinguish   these   theories   because   
their   effects   on   microstructure   within   a   voxel   differs.   Pruning   results   in   developmental   reductions   in   
synaptic   spines7,   dendrites,   and   neurons.   Although,   the   magnitude   of   the   effect   of   pruning   on   T1   or   MD   
remains   unknown,   pruning   results   in   less   cortical   tissue   for   protons   to   exchange   energy   with   and   less   
hindrance   on   diffusion   of   water   molecules,   predicting   higher   T1   and   MD   in   adult’s   cortex   than   children’s.   
In   contrast,   myelination   predicts   developmental   changes   to   both   white   and   gray   matter.   In   the   white   
matter,   increased   myelination   predicts   lower   T1
18,23   and   reduced   MD20,22.   Myelination   is   most   pronounced   
in   deep   cortical   layers   closer   to   gray-­‐white   boundary,   which   contains   more   afferent   and   efferent   
projections,   than   layers   close   to   pial   surface24,   25.   Thus,   in   gray   matter,   developmental   myelination   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
4   
predicts   lower   T1
26,27
   and   lower   MD   in   adult’s   than   children’s   cortex,   especially   in   deeper   layers.   Finally,   
developmental   changes   in   cortical   morphology   predict   no   development   of   either   T1   or   MD   of   gray   or   
white   matter.   Instead   it   predicts   morphological   changes   in   the   local   cortical   curvature   and   surface   area.      
We   applied   these   novel   methods   to   address   developmental   theories   of   cortical   thinning.   We   
obtained   multiple   independent   measures   of   fMRI,   qMRI,   and   dMRI   in   27   children   (ages   5-­‐9,   N=12,   9   
female;   ages   10-­‐12,   N=15,   5   female)   and   30   adults   (ages   22-­‐28,   11   female).   We   used   fMRI   to   define   
functional   regions   of   interest   (fROIs)   selective   to   faces,   characters,   and   places   within   ventral   temporal   
cortex   (VTC)   of   each   participant   using   a   functional   localizer   experiment   (Fig.   S1a).   We   focused   on   these   
VTC   regions   for   two   reasons.   First,   accumulating   evidence   shows   differential   functional28-­‐31   and   
anatomical   development26   across   VTC,   whereby   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions   show   prolonged   
development   compared   to   place-­‐selective   regions.   Thus,   examination   of   the   development   of   cortical   
thickness   (CT)   within   VTC   allows   testing   if   thinning   is   guided   by   uniform   or   heterogeneous   mechanisms   
across   a   cortical   expanse.   Second,   functional   regions   within   VTC   can   be   identified   in   each   participant’s   
brain   without   spatial   smoothing,   and   have   a   reliable   arrangement   with   respect   to   the   cortical   folding32,   33.   
Thus,   studying   VTC   offers   enhanced   precision   for   examining   developmental   mechanisms   of   thinning   and   
an   opportunity   to   test   the   relationship   between   cortical   thinning   and   morphology.   After   localizing   
functional   regions   of   interest   (fROIs)   in   each   participant,   we   measured:   (1)   CT   of   each   fROI,   (2)   T1   and   MD   
in   white   matter   adjacent   to   each   fROI   using   qMRI   and   dMRI,   respectively,   (3)   T1   and   MD   in   gray   matter   of   
each   fROI   across   intra-­‐cortical   depths,   and   (4)   cortical   curvature   of   each   fROI.   We   compared   these   
measurements   across   age   groups   to   determine   which   factors   develop   and   if   so,   whether   these   
developments   are   region-­‐specific   or   region-­‐general.   Finally,   we   tested   if   cortical   thinning   is   linked   to   
development   of   T1,   MD,   or   cortical   curvature.   
   
Results   
First,   we   verified   that   data   quality   was   not   lower   in   children   than   adults.   Due   to   excessive   motion   
(>   2   voxels)   during   fMRI,   data   from   3   out   of   30   adults   and   1   out   of   27   children   were   removed   from   further   
analysis.   In   the   remaining   26   children   and   27   adults,   we   found   no   significant   differences   in   motion   during   
scan   (F2,100=2.61,   p>0.05,   Fig.   S1b).   fMRI   timeseries   signal-­‐to-­‐noise   ratio   (tSNR)   across   VTC   was   higher   in   
children   than   adults   (main   effect   of   age:   F2,100=37.49,   p<0.05,   Fig.   S1c).   For   dMRI,   data   from   2   children,   4   
preteens,   and   3   adults   were   excluded   because   of   excessive   motion   above   2   voxels   (1   voxel   =   2   x   2   x   2   
mm3),   leaving   20   children   (ages   5-­‐9,   N=9,   ages   10-­‐12,   N=11)   and   24   adults   (ages   22-­‐28)   for   dMRI   analyses.   
After   these   exclusions,   there   was   no   significant   difference   across   age   groups.   These   quality   control   
analyses   demonstrate   that   (i)   we   can   obtain   high   quality   measurements   in   children   and   (ii)   any   
developments   that   we   report   are   likely   not   driven   by   nonspecific   differences   between   age   groups   such   as   
head   motion   or   lower   tSNR.      
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
5   
In   each   participant’s   brain,   we   defined   fROIs   selective   for   faces   (pFus-­‐faces   and   mFus-­‐faces,   
which   together   are   referred   to   as   the   fusiform   face   area34,   35),   characters   (pOTS-­‐chars   and   mOTS-­‐chars   
located   in   the   occipital   temporal   sulcus   (OTS),   and   also   referred   as   visual   word   form   area,   VWFA,   1   and   2,   
respectively36,   37),   and   places   (CoS-­‐places,   also   referred   as   parahippocampal   place   area38)   from   the   
localizer   experiment.   We   were   able   to   localize   these   fROIs   even   in   our   youngest   participants   (Fig.   1a   and   
Supplemental   Table   1).   Additionally,   in   each   subject   we   generated   whole   brain   maps   of   T1   and   MD,   and   
measured   mean   T1   and   MD   values   in   each   subject’s   fROIs   and   their   adjacent   white   matter.   
   
   
Figure   1.   Cortical   thickness   (CT)   decreases   from   age   5   to   adulthood   in   category-­‐selective   regions   of   
ventral   temporal   cortex   (VTC).   (a)   Functional   regions   in   the   left   ventral   temporal   cortex   (VTC)   of   three   
example   subjects,   ages   5,   10,   and   22   years.   fROIs   were   defined   by   contrasting   responses   to   one   category   
versus   others,   with   a   t>3,   voxel-­‐level   threshold.   (b)   Average   CT   in   face-­‐selective   regions   in   the   lateral   
fusiform   gyrus   (pFus-­‐faces   and   mFus-­‐faces,   which   together   are   also   referred   to   as   the   fusiform   face   area,   
FFA),   character-­‐selective   regions   in   the   occipito-­‐temporal   sulcus,   OTS,   (pOTS-­‐characters   and   mOTS-­‐
characters,   which   are   also   referred   to   as   the   visual   word   form   area,   VWFA),   and   a   place-­‐selective   region   in   
the   collateral   sulcus   (CoS-­‐places,   also   referred   to   as   the   parahippocampal   place   area,   PPA)   across   children   
(ages   5-­‐9,   N=11,   10-­‐12,   N=15)   and   adults   (ages   22-­‐28   years,   N=27).   CT   is   significantly   higher   in   children   
than   adults   in   all   fROIs   (F2,384=78.74,   p<0.05).   Bar   height:   average   CT;   Dots:   individual   subject’s   CT.   LH:   left   
hemisphere.   RH:   right   hemisphere.   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
6   
   
VTC   thins   from   childhood   to   adulthood   
Maps   of   CT   on   each   subject’s   cortical   surface   were   generated   using   FreeSurfer39   from   T1   images.   
Our   measurements   of   CT   are   consistent   with   prior   ex   vivo40   and   in   vivo   studies2   (Fig.   S2).   In   general,   CT   
decreased   with   age   across   VTC,   except   for   a   region   near   the   temporal   pole   in   which   CT   increased   with   age   
(interaction   between   age   of   subject   and   anatomical   parcel,   F16,900   =   19.48,   p<0.05,   Figs.   S3a,b).   
Measurements   of   CT   in   fROIs   of   VTC   showed   that   cortex   thinned   from   age   5   to   adulthood   in   face-­‐,   
character-­‐,   and   place-­‐selective   regions   (main   effect   of   age,   3-­‐way   repeated   measures   analysis   of   variance   
(ANOVA)   with   factors:   age   of   subject   (5-­‐9/10-­‐12/22-­‐28   years),   fROI   (face-­‐/place-­‐/character-­‐selective),   and   
hemisphere   (left/right),   F2,384   =78.74,   p<0.05,   Fig.   1b).   Children’s   cortex   (ages   5-­‐9)   was   on   average   
0.73±0.11   mm   thicker   than   adults’.   The   smallest   difference   was   observed   in   right   CoS-­‐places   (0.46   mm)   
and   the   largest   difference   in   right   mFus-­‐faces   (0.97   mm).   Additionally,   CT   varied   across   fROIs   (main   effect   
of   fROI,   F2,384   =21.00,   p<0.05),   whereby   cortex   was   thinnest   in   CoS-­‐places   (2.56±0.45   mm),   which   lies   close   
to   the   fundus   of   the   collateral   sulcus   (CoS),   and   thickest   in   mFus-­‐faces   (2.97±0.65mm),   which   lies   on   the   
lateral   fusiform   gyrus.   There   was   also   a   small   but   significant   hemispheric   difference,   as   left   hemisphere   
fROIs   were   thinner   than   the   right   ones   (F1,384   =4.99,   p<0.05).   As   cortex   thins,   the   volume   of   all   fROIs   did   
not   decrease.   There   was   no   significant   development   in   the   volume   of   character-­‐   and   place-­‐selective   
regions   (p=n.s.),   and   a   developmental   increase   in   the   volume   of   face-­‐selective   regions   (F2,206=5.2,   p<0.05).   
   
In   functionally   defined   white   matter   (FDWM),   T1   relaxation   time   and   MD   decrease   from   childhood   to   
adulthood.   
As   we   found   substantial   development   in   CT,   we   first   examined   if   these   developments   may   be   
related   to   changes   in   white   matter   properties   adjacent   to   each   fROI.   Therefore,   we   dilated   each   fROI   5   
mm   into   the   white   matter   (Fig.   2a   and   Methods),   which   we   refer   to   as   functionally-­‐defined-­‐white-­‐matter   
(FDWM41).   We   estimated   T1   (Fig.   2b)   and   MD   (Fig.   2c)   in   FDWM   of   face-­‐,   character-­‐,   and   place-­‐selective   
fROIs   in   each   participant.   Results   were   similar   for   fROIs   from   the   same   domain.   Thus,   in   subsequent   main   
figures   we   show   a   single   fROI   from   each   domain:   face-­‐selective   mFus-­‐faces,   character-­‐selective   mOTS-­‐
chars,   and   place-­‐selective   CoS-­‐places.   Data   from   additional   face   (pFus-­‐faces)   and   character   fROIs   (pOTS-­‐
chars)   are   in   Figs.   S4,   S6.      
Results   show   differential   development   of   T1   in   FDWM   (interaction   between   age   of   subject   and   
fROI,   F4,384=2.54,   p<0.05,   Figs.   2d   and   S4a).   T1   progressively   decreased   from   age   5-­‐9   to   10-­‐12   to   adulthood   
in   the   FDWM   near   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions   (Fs>18.12,   ps<0.05).   However,   there   was   no   
significant   change   in   T1   in   FDWM   of   place-­‐selective   cortex   after   age   5   (F2,98=2.3,   p=n.s.)   In   FDWM   where   T1   
decreased,   MTV   concomitantly   significantly   increased   with   age.   (Fig.   S5).   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
7   
Figure   2.   Development   of   T1   relaxation   time   and   mean   diffusivity   (MD)   in   functionally-­‐defined   white   
matter   (FDWM)   of   VTC.   (a)   Section   of   a   coronal   slice   showing   face-­‐selective   mFus-­‐faces   (red)   in   the   right   
hemisphere   of   an   example   adult   brain   and   its   associated   FDWM   (white),   which   was   generated   by   dilating   
the   fROI   into   the   adjacent   white   matter.   (b-­‐c)   Coronal   slice   in   an   example   adult   brain   showing   T1   and   MD   
maps,   respectively.   T1   and   MD   are   lower   in   myelinated   white   matter   than   in   the   gray   matter.   (d)   Box   plots   
showing   median   (thick   line),   25th   and   75th   percentile   (box),   and   range   (whiskers)   of   T1   across   participants   
of   each   age   group   in   bilateral   mFus-­‐faces   (red),   left   mOTS-­‐characters   (blue),   and   bilateral   CoS-­‐places   
(green).   Crosshairs   indicate   outliers.   T1   progressively   decreased   from   ages   5-­‐9   (N=11)   to   10-­‐12   (N=15)   to   
adulthood   (N=27)   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions,   but   not   in   CoS-­‐places.   (e)   Box   plots   showing   
MD   in   the   same   fROIs.   Like   T1,   MD   also   progressively   decreased   from   ages   5-­‐9   (N=9)   to   10-­‐12   (N=11)   to   
adulthood   (N=24)   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions,   but   not   in   CoS-­‐places.   In   all   box   plots:   light   
colors:   5-­‐9   year   olds;   medium   colors:   10-­‐12   year   olds,   and   dark   colors:   22-­‐28   year   olds.   LH:   left   hemisphere.   
RH:   right   hemisphere.      
   
MD   in   FDWM   also   revealed   differential   development   (interaction   between   age   of   subject   and   
fROI,   F4,320=4.64,   p<0.05).   MD   monotonically   decreased   in   FDWM   near   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   fROIs   
from   age   5   to   adulthood   (Fs>8.77,   ps<0.05,   Figs.   2e   and   S4b).   However,   there   was   no   development   in   MD   
of   FDWM   near   CoS-­‐places   (F2,80=2.57,   p>0.05).   Decreases   in   both   T1   and   MD   in   FDWM   next   to   face-­‐   and   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
8   
character-­‐selective   fROIs   (but   not   place-­‐selective   cortex)   are   consistent   with   the   hypothesis   that   
development   of   white   matter   near   these   fROIs   is   associated   with   increased   myelination.      
   
In   mid   and   deep   cortical   depths,   T1   and   MD   decrease   from   childhood   to   adulthood   
Next,   we   tested   if   there   are   tissue   developments   in   cortex.   We   evaluated   T1   and   MD   in   each   fROI   
across   cortical   depths   in   equidistant   steps   (10   steps   for   T1   and   8   steps   for   MD),   extending   from   the   pial   
surface   to   gray-­‐white   matter   boundary,   with   the   last   two   steps   inside   the   white   matter   (Fig.   S6).      
Data   reveal   three   findings.   First,   mean   T1   decreased   with   age   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   
cortex   (Fs>4.37,   p<0.05),   but   not   in   place-­‐selective   cortex   (F2,98=0.35,   p=n.s.).   Second,   examination   of   T1   
across   cortical   depth   shows   that   T1   near   the   gray-­‐white   matter   boundary   was   lower   than   T1   in   superficial   
layers   of   gray   matter   (main   effect   of   cortical   depth   in   a   4-­‐way   ANOVA   with   factors   of   age   of   subject,   fROI,   
hemisphere,   and   depth,   see   online   methods,   F4,1920   =   3450.47,   p<0.05,   Fig.   3a).   Third,   across   cortical   
depths,   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   fROIs,   the   largest   development   in   T1   occurred   away   from   the   
superficial   pial   surface   and   was   more   prominent   in   mid   cortical   depths   (interaction   between   age   of   
subject   and   depth   in   4-­‐way   ANOVA   with   factors   of   age   of   subject,   fROI,   hemisphere,   and   depth,   F8,1920   =   
17.51,   p<0.05,   Fig.   3a).   In   contrast,   in   CoS-­‐places,   T1   curves   largely   overlapped   across   age   groups.   Data   
from   pFus-­‐faces   and   pOTS-­‐chars   are   in   Fig.   S7a.      
Notably,   T1   curves   were   shifted   leftward   in   adults   compared   to   children.   In   other   words,   
comparable   T1   values   were   more   superficial   in   adults   than   children.   For   example,   T1   at   the   gray-­‐white   
boundary   in   5–9   year-­‐olds   was   equivalent   to   T1   at   ~80%   depth   in   adults.   To   quantify   this   shift,   we   fitted   a   
maximum   log-­‐likelihood   function   to   each   subject’s   T1   curve,   and   estimated   the   inflection   point   of   the   
curve,   which   reflects   the   depth   at   which   slope   is   maximal   (Fig.   3b).   Results   revealed   that   the   depth   of   this   
inflection   point   was   closer   to   the   pial   surface   in   adults   than   children,   with   larger   development   in   face-­‐   and   
character-­‐selective   fROIs   than   in   place-­‐selective   fROIs   (significant   interaction   between   age   of   subject   and   
fROI,   F4,384   =   3.89,   p<0.05).      
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
9   
   
Figure   3.   Development   of   T1   in   gray   matter   as   a   function   of   cortical   depth.   (a)   T1   curves   across   
equidistant   intra-­‐cortical   depths   from   the   pial   surface   into   adjacent   white   matter   tissue   in   bilateral   mFus-­‐
faces   (red),   left   mOTS-­‐characters   (blue),   and   bilateral   CoS-­‐places   (green)   across   the   three   age   groups.   
(Same   subjects   as   Fig.   2d).   Errorbars:   standard   error   of   the   mean   (SEM)   across   participants   within   an   age   
group.   (b)   Box   plots   of   the   inflection   point   of   T1   curves   across   age   groups.   The   inflection   point   reflects   the   
cortical   depth   at   which   slope   of   the   T1   curve   is   maximal.   LH:   left   hemisphere.   RH:   right   hemisphere.   Same   
conventions   as   Fig   2.   
   
The   development   of   MD   across   intra-­‐cortical   depths   is   more   complex   as   gray   matter   is   not   as   
directionally   organized   as   white   matter   (Figs.   S7b,   S8a).   Across   age   groups,   MD   decreased   from   the   pial   
surface   to   the   gray-­‐white   matter   boundary   (interaction   between   age   of   subject   and   cortical   depth:   
F6,1248=8.26,   p<0.05).   Analysis   of   MD   revealed   differential   development   across   fROIs   (significant   
interaction   between   age   of   subject   and   fROI,   F4,1248=4.01,   p<0.05).   There   were   prominent   developmental   
decreases   in   MD   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   fROIs   (Fs>4.13,   p<0.05),   but   not   in   place-­‐selective   cortex   
(F2,324=0.39,   p=n.s.).   Additionally,   within   face-­‐selective   fROIs,   MD   development   was   observed   in   deeper   
cortical   layers   than   superficial   layers   (F6,   540=4.82,   p<0.05).      
   
Together,   results   show   that   both   T1   and   MD   in   cortex   decrease   from   age   5   to   adulthood   
suggesting   microstructural   tissue   growth   and   not   tissue   loss.      
   
Development   of   T1   and   MD   in   gray   matter   correlates   with   CT      
Does   tissue   growth   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions   correlate   with   apparent   cortical   
thinning?   We   reasoned   that   if   thinning   relates   to   developments   in   tissue   properties   then   there   will   be   a   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
10   
significant   positive   correlation   between   CT   and   T1   (or   MD).   To   test   this,   we   quantified   in   each   fROI   the   
relationship   between   CT   and   T1   (or   MD)   across   cortical   depths.   In   face-­‐selective   (bilateral   pFus-­‐faces   and   
mfus-­‐faces)   and   character-­‐selective   fROIs   (bilateral   pOTS-­‐chars   and   left   mOTS-­‐chars),   we   found   a   
significant   positive   correlation   between   CT   and   T1   (Rs>0.48,   ps<0.05)   and   between   CT   and   MD   (Rs>0.36,   
ps<0.05).   The   highest   correlation   was   between   CT   and   T1   at   ~50%   cortical   depth   from   the   pial   surface   (Fig.   
4)   and   between   CT   and   MD   at   ~80%   cortical   depth   (Fig.   S8b).   The   correlation   between   CT   with   T1   
remained   significant   after   age   was   partialled   out   (Fig.   4;   same   for   MD,   Fig.   S8b).   In   CoS-­‐places,   where   we   
did   not   find   development   of   tissue   properties,   we   also   did   not   find   a   significant   correlation   between   CT   
and   T1   (right:   CoS-­‐places,   R=0.3,   p=n.s.)   or   CT   and   MD   (Rs<-­‐.06;   ps=n.s.),   except   for   a   significant   correlation   
between   CT   and   T1   at   ~50%   depth   in   left   CoS-­‐places   (R=0.47,   p<0.05;   significant   after   age   partialled   out).   
Together,   these   analyses   suggest   that   in   mid   and   deep   cortical   depths   of   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   
fROIs,   participants   with   more   tissue   (lower   T1   and   MD)   have   a   thinner   cortex   than   those   with   less   tissue   
(higher   T1   and   MD).   
   
Figure   4.   T1   and   MD   in   mid   and   deep   cortical   depths   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   areas   correlates   
with   cortical   thickness   (CT).   (a)   Red:   scatter   plot   showing   a   significant   positive   correlation   between   CT   of   
mFus-­‐faces   and   T1   at   mid   cortical   depth   (~50%   projection   into   gray   matter).   Blue:   same   for   left   mOTS-­‐
characters.   Each   point   reflects   data   from   one   participant.   Children   are   indicated   in   lighter   colors   than   
adults.   LH:   left   hemisphere.   RH:   right   hemisphere.   
   
Cortical   curvature   and   surface   area   are   linked   to   developmental   thinning   in   CoS-­‐places      
Our   measurements   did   not   find   tissue   development   in   CoS-­‐places   even   as   the   CoS-­‐places   thins   
from   age   5   to   adulthood   (Fig.   1b).   Thus,   we   next   asked   if   cortical   thinning   in   CoS-­‐places   is   linked   to   
morphological   changes   including   changes   in   cortical   curvature   and   surface   area.      
As   CoS-­‐places   is   in   a   sulcus33   and   sulcal   fundi   are   typically   thinner   than   sulcal   walls   and   gyri39,   we   
examined   if   developmental   changes   to   the   curvature   of   CoS-­‐places   or   developmental   shifts   in   the   location   
of   CoS-­‐places   towards   the   fundus   may   explain   cortical   thinning.   In   morphological   terms,   the   bottom   of   the   
sulcus,   or   the   fundus,   has   the   largest   positive   curvature   (more   concavity)   than   the   sulcal   wall   or   a   gyrus   
(less   concavity).   Analysis   of   cortical   curvature   implemented   in   FreeSurfer   revealed   that   adults’   CoS-­‐places   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
11   
was   on   a   more   concave   surface   than   children’s   (main   effect   of   age   with   factors   age   of   subject   and   
hemisphere,   F2,98=3.47,   p<0.05,   Fig.   5a).   In   contrast,   there   was   no   curvature   development   in   face-­‐   or   
character-­‐selective   fROIs   (Fs<1.45,   ps=n.s.).   Further,   we   found   a   significant   negative   correlation   between   
CT   and   curvature   in   CoS-­‐places   (Fig.   5b,   right:   R=-­‐0.43,   p<0.05,   significant   when   age   partialled   out;   left:   
R=-­‐0.34,   p<0.05,   n.s.   when   age   partialled   out).   That   is,   more   concave   CoS-­‐places   was   associated   with   
thinner   cortex.   There   was   no   significant   correlation   between   CT   and   curvature   in   bilateral   pFus-­‐faces,   
mFus-­‐faces,   and   left   pOTS-­‐chars   (Rs>-­‐0.3,   ps>.05),   but   we   found   a   negative   correlation   in   left   mOTS-­‐chars   
and   right   pOTS-­‐chars   (Rs<-­‐0.33,   ps<0.05;   significant   when   age   partialled   out).   Overall,   results   suggest   that   
adults’   thinner   CoS-­‐places   might   be   situated   in   the   fundus   of   the   CoS   as   compared   to   children’s   thicker   
CoS-­‐places.      
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Figure   5.   Cortical   thickness   of   CoS-­‐places   is   linked   to   development   in   cortical   curvature.   (a)   Box   plots   
showing   median   (thick   line),   25th   and   75th   percentile   (box),   and   range   (whiskers)   of   curvature   across   
participants   of   each   age   group   in   bilateral   CoS-­‐places.   Positive   numbers   indicate   concave   surfaces   (sulcal   
folds)   and   negative   numbers   indicate   convex   surfaces   (gyral   folds).   (b)   Scatterplot   and   correlation   
between   CT   and   cortical   curvature   of   CoS-­‐places.   Each   dot   represents   a   participant.   (c)   Probabilistic   group   
maps   of   the   right   CoS-­‐places   in   children   (left)   and   adults   (right).   Color   indicates   %   participants   in   which   
each   vertex   is   included   in   their   CoS-­‐places   fROI.   Data   from   both   age   groups   are   shown   on   the   FreeSurfer   
average   cortical   surface   from   39   independent   adults64.   Adults’   CoS-­‐places   tends   to   be   localized   in   the   
fundus   of   the   CoS.   Children’s   CoS-­‐places   is   less   consistently   found   in   the   fundus   and   tends   to   be   
distributed   along   the   lateral-­‐medial   axis   of   the   CoS.   (d)   Box   plots   showing   median   (thick   line),   25th   and   75th   
percentile   (box),   and   range   (whiskers)   of   surface   area   across   participants   of   each   age   group   in   bilateral   
CoS.   Surface   area   of   the   CoS   increases   from   age   5   to   adulthood   in   both   hemispheres.   LH:   left   hemisphere.   
RH:   right   hemisphere.   Children   are   indicated   by   lighter   colors.   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
12   
To   explore   this   prediction,   we   visualized   the   location   of   CoS-­‐places   on   the   cortical   sheet,   by   
generating   a   group   map   of   CoS-­‐places   in   children   (N=26)   and   adults   (N=27)   using   cortex-­‐based   alignment   
to   the   FreeSurfer   average   brain.   As   shown   in   Fig.   5c   for   the   right   hemisphere,   while   some   of   the   children’s   
CoS-­‐places   is   within   the   fundus   of   the   CoS,   there   is   variability   across   subjects   along   the   lateral-­‐medial   axis   
of   the   CoS.   In   comparison,   adults’   CoS-­‐places   is   less   variable   and   is   consistently   localized   in   the   CoS   
fundus.      
Change   in   structural-­‐functional   coupling   across   development   is   not   associated   with   growth   in   the   
volume   of   CoS-­‐places   (p=n.s.).   Thus,   we   tested   for   morphological   changes   in   the   CoS.   That   is,   we   
examined   (i)   if   cortex   stretches   during   development42,   and   (ii)   if   areal   expansion   is   coupled   with   thinner   
cortex.   We   derived   the   CoS   from   the   FreeSurfer   anatomical   parcellation   in   each   subject,   and   evaluated   if   
its   surface   area,   including   and   surrounding   CoS-­‐places,   develops.   Surface   area   of   the   CoS   expands   with   
age   (main   effect   of   age,   F2,100=4.07,   p<0.05,   Fig.   5d)   and   it   was   negatively   correlated   with   CT   in   both   
hemispheres   (Rs<-­‐.41,   ps<0.05;   significant   when   age   partialled   out).   Together,   results   suggest   that   
thinning   in   place-­‐selective   cortex   is   linked   to   morphological   developments   whereby   the   cortex   stretches   
and   leads   to   the   location   of   adult’s   CoS-­‐places   to   be   consistently   in   the   fundus.   
   
Increased   myelination   as   likely   mechanism   underlying   cortical   thinning   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   
areas.   
What   cellular   mechanism   underlies   tissue   growth   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   fROIs?   We   
hypothesized   that   one   tissue   compartment   that   may   affect   cortical   development   of   T1   and   MD   may   be   
myelin.   However,   little   is   presently   known   about   the   myelination   of   axons   in   VTC,   and   how   deep   into   
cortex   they   penetrate.   Addressing   this   question   requires   measurements   of   myelin   in   histological   tissue   
slices   of   postmortem   brains.      
While   we   were   unable   to   obtain   pediatric   postmortem   tissue   slices   to   measure   myelin   
development,   we   were   able   to   leverage   tissue   differences   across   fROIs   as   a   proxy   of   developmental   
myelination   changes   and   to   examine   the   effect   of   myelin   on   in   vivo   cortical   tissue   measurement.   That   is,   
another   aspect   of   our   results   revealed   that   in   adults,   but   not   children,   relaxation   rate   (R1=1/T1)   was   higher   
in   face-­‐selective   fROIs   (bilateral   pFus-­‐faces   and   left   mFus-­‐faces)   than   in   CoS-­‐places   (Fig.   6a).   In   other   
words,   tissue   of   face-­‐   and   place-­‐selective   regions   is   undifferentiated   in   childhood,   and   development   leads   
to   differentiated   R1   across   adult   face-­‐   and   place-­‐selective   fROIs.   We   reasoned   that   if   myelin   contributes   to   
the   development   of   R1   in   face-­‐selective   cortex,   then   face-­‐selective   cortex   in   adults   should   be   more   
myelinated   than   place-­‐selective   cortex,   and   especially   so   in   deeper   cortical   layers.      
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
13   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Figure   6.   Validation   of   adult   in   vivo   data   using   adult   post-­‐mortem   myeloarchitecture.   (a)   In   vivo   
measurement   of   relaxation   rate   (R1=1/T1[1/sec])   shows   greater   R1   in   right   pFus-­‐faces   than   CoS-­‐places   in   
middle   and   deep   cortical   layers.   Data   are   averaged   across   27   adults.   Errorbars:   SEM.   (b)   In   vivo   example   
adult   coronal   slice   showing   the   location   of   pFus-­‐faces   (red)   and   CoS-­‐places   (green)   with   respect   to   the   
mid-­‐fusiform   sulcus   (MFS),   fusiform   gyrus   (FG),   and   collateral   sulcus   (CoS).   (c)   Photograph   of   a   
postmortem   section   of   subject   (S1)   showing   tissue   block   that   was   used   for   histology.   Green:   CoS;   Red:   
lateral   FG.   (d)   A   sample   30   microns   thick   histological   section   of   sample   S1,   stained   with   modified   Gallyas   
stain   for   myelin.   Dashed   red:   MFS/lateral   FG;   Dashed   green:   CoS;   All   slices   from   each   subject   in   Fig.   S9.   (e-­‐
f)   Same   as   (d)   zoomed   on   the   CoS   (e)   and   lateral   FG   (f)   to   illustrate   the   penetration   of   myelin   and   radial   
fibers   across   cortex.   (g)   High-­‐resolution   (50   microns)   T2*   weighted   image   of   the   same   section   as   (d)   
illustrating   differentiation   of   MR   contrast   measurements   across   cortex   consistent   with   the   myelin   staining   
in   d-­‐f.   (h)   Measurements   of   optical   density   across   depths   in   each   of   the   5   postmortem   brains   (S1-­‐S5)   for   
an   anatomical   section   along   the   CoS   (green)   and   lateral   FG   (red).      
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
14   
   
To   identify   these   regions   in   postmortem   histological   slices,   we   need   anatomical   markers.   Prior   
research   from   our   lab   identified   reliable   anatomical   landmarks   that   predict   face-­‐selective   and   place-­‐
selective   regions   in   VTC:   the   mid-­‐fusiform   sulcus   (MFS)   predicts   face-­‐selective   regions32   and   the   
intersection   of   the   anterior   lingual   sulcus   and   CoS   predict   CoS-­‐places33   (Fig.   6b).   We   identified   these   
landmarks   in   coronal   sections   (30   microns   thick)   from   5   postmortem   brains   that   contained   the   fusiform   
gyrus   (FG),   MFS,   CoS,   and   calcarine   sulcus   (Fig.   6c),   and   then   stained   histological   sections   containing   these   
landmarks   for   myelin   using   modified   Gallyas   stain43   (Figs.   6d-­‐f).   We   estimated   myelin   as   optical   density   
(OD),   which   indicates   the   index   of   light   refracted   through   the   tissue   (more   myelin   produces   a   darker   stain,   
Fig.   6d,   Fig.   S9).      
Myelin   stained   coronal   sections   (example:   Fig.   6d;   all   brains:   Fig.   S9)   revealed   striking   laminar   
differences   across   cortex.   Within   cortex,   deeper   cortical   layers   had   higher   myelin   than   superficial   layers.   
The   differentiated   pattern   is   also   evident   in   high-­‐resolution   (50   microns)   T2*   weighted   image   of   the   same   
brain   (Fig.   6g).   Zooming   in   on   the   CoS   (Fig.   6e)   and   FG   (Fig.   6f),   we   noted   two   interesting   observations:   (1)   
myelinated   fibers   project   roughly   orthogonal   to   the   cortical   surface   and   the   depth   of   myelin   penetration   
varies   between   FG   and   CoS.   Myelin   penetrates   about   ~54%   into   the   cortex   in   FG,   but   only   penetrates   
~36%   in   CoS.   This   is   consistent   with   prior   findings   using   equivolume   models44,   45   that   report   deeper   myelin   
penetration   in   cortical   layers   of   gyri   than   sulci   to   compensate   for   thickness.   (2)   The   amount   of   myelin   is   
greater   (darker   stains)   in   FG   than   in   CoS   and   this   difference   is   not   just   due   to   sulcal   vs.   gyral   differences   in   
myelination,   as   the   Stria   of   Gennari   in   V1   (Fig.   6d)   in   calcarine   sulcus,   is   strongly   myelinated.      
We   quantified   these   observations   by   measuring   normalized   optical   density   profiles   along   
equidistance   depths   from   the   pial   surface   to   white   matter   for   MFS/FG   and   CoS   in   each   post   mortem   brain.   
Myelin   content   increased   from   superficial   layers   to   deeper   cortical   layers   (Fig.   6h).   Importantly,   estimated   
myelin   in   MFS/FG   was   greater   than   in   CoS   in   depths   away   from   the   pial   surface   in   4   out   of   5   brains   (Fig.   
6h),   which   is   largely   consistent   with   our   in   vivo   R1   data   (Fig.   6a).      
Thus,   for   the   first   time,   using   histological   analyses   of   the   MFS/FG   and   CoS,   we   show   that   
myelination   is   a   likely   mechanism   underlying   differences   in   adult   in   vivo   T1   measurements   across   these   
regions.   Although   we   do   not   have   pediatric   data,   results   are   consistent   with   the   idea   that   higher   
myelination   in   face-­‐   than   place-­‐selective   cortex   in   adults   is   due   to   increased   myelination   across   
development.      
   
Discussion   
Combining   CT,   qMRI,   dMRI,   and   histology   measures   for   the   first   time,   our   study   offers   the   first   
mechanistic   understanding   of   development   of   cortical   thickness,   which   is   one   of   the   most   widely   used   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
15   
measures   of   brain   development.   First,   we   found   no   evidence   of   pruning   after   age   5   in   any   region   in   VTC.   
Moreover,   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions,   qMRI   and   dMRI   revealed   decreases   in   T1   and   MD,   both   
of   which   occurred   in   mid   and   deep   gray   matter   and   in   the   adjacent   white   matter.   These   decreases   are   
associated   with   more   tissue,   rather   than   less   tissue   as   predicted   by   pruning.   Second,   myelin   staining   in   
postmortem   brains   showed   that   myelin   penetrates   into   gray   matter   particularly   in   the   FG,   providing   
evidence   that   myelin   is   a   significant   contributor   to   T1   and   MD   development   in   face-­‐   and   character-­‐
selective   regions,   measured   in   the   present   study.   Third,   we   found   heterogeneous   mechanisms   of   cortical   
thinning   across   VTC.   Different   than   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions,   there   was   no   development   of   
gray   or   white   matter   of   the   CoS-­‐places,   instead   thinning   was   coupled   with   morphological   changes.   
Critically,   our   results   suggest   a   rethinking   of   mechanisms   of   brain   development,   providing   evidence   that   
after   age   5,   myelin   increases   in   the   FG   and   OTS,   and   the   CoS   undergoes   morphological   changes.      
Several   innovations   in   our   study   have   enabled   the   advancement   of   understanding   mechanisms   of   
cortical   thinning   across   development.   First,   the   use   of   individual   subject   analyses   with   no   spatial   
smoothing   and   tissue   measurements   across   cortical   depths   has   increased   the   precision   of   measurements   
from   centimeters,   in   prior   work   employing   group   analyses,   smoothing,   and   large   macroanatomical   
landmarks1-­‐5,   to   millimeters.   Second,   leveraging   our   understanding   of   functional-­‐structural   relationships   in   
VTC32,   46,   we   identified   relevant   landmarks   in   postmortem   brain   slices   and   validated   in   vivo   measurements   
with   ground   truth   measurements   of   myelin.   Third,   we   obtained   independent   measurements   of   T1   from   
qMRI18,   19,   47   and   MD   from   dMRI21   in   both   gray   and   white   matter.   These   complementary   measurements   
yielded   consistent   results   of   growth   in   both   tissue   types,   strengthening   our   findings.   These   advancements   
not   only   provide   striking   empirical   evidence   supporting   developmental   theories   of   increased   myelination   
in   deeper   gray   matter   and   its   adjacent   white   matter2,   11,   13,   but   also   underscore   the   utility   of   obtaining   
multiple   measurements   in   the   same   individual   to   glean   insights   into   developmental   mechanisms.      
Our   data   provide   evidence   that   increased   myelination   of   axons   during   childhood   is   a   key   source   
of   cortical   thinning   in   VTC   after   age   5.   While   prior   imaging   studies   documented   pervasive   thinning   
throughout   childhood,   which   we   replicate   (Figs.   1,S2,S3),   till   now   the   underlying   mechanisms   have   been   
hypothetical.   Some   researchers   have   speculated   that   cortex   thins   due   to   synaptic   pruning   and   cell   loss3.   
However,   others   argued   that   thinning   is   likely   not   due   to   tissue   loss   because   they   found   developmental   
increases   in   gray   and   white   matter   volume1,   2.   Therefore,   they   speculated   that   thinning   may   be   due   to   a   
shift   in   the   gray-­‐white   boundary   from   increased   myelin.   Three   of   our   findings   support   the   latter   
hypothesis   for   the   development   of   face-­‐   and   character-­‐selective   regions.   First,   we   found   age-­‐related   
decreases   in   T1   and   MD   in   white   matter   next   to   these   regions.   As   myelin   explains   90%   of   the   variance   in   T1   
of   white   matter48,   this   finding   is   likely   explained   by   increased   myelination.   Second,   in   cortex,   we   found   
decreases   in   T1   and   MD   far   from   the   pial   surface.   Third,   myelin   staining   in   ex   vivo   adult   brains   shows   that   
myelin   penetrates   deep   into   cortex,   especially   in   the   FG.   Thus,   our   findings   provide   evidence   for   myelin   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
16   
proliferation   into   the   cortical   neuropil   during   childhood   rather   than   tissue   loss,   which   suggests   a   
rethinking   of   the   term   ‘cortical   thinning’   to   describe   structural   development   of   gray   matter.   In   other   
words,   our   data   suggests   that   increased   myelin   during   development   brightens   the   gray-­‐white   matter   
interface,   shifting   the   boundary   deeper   into   cortex   in   adults.   While   our   data   suggest   that   myelin   is   a   key   
contributor,   our   prior   measurements   and   simulations   indicate   that   tissue   growth   affecting   T1   cannot   be   
exclusively   due   to   myelin   increases26.   Growth   in   additional   microstructures   including   glia22,   49,   dendritic   
arbors,   synapses50,   and   iron   development   in   glia   and   myelin20   likely   contribute   to   T1   development.   
Is   it   possible   that   pruning   still   occurs   during   development?   One   possibility   is   that   pruning   occurs   
earlier   in   development,   e.g.   during   infancy7,   8.   A   second   possibility   is   that   pruning   after   age   5   is   smaller   in   
magnitude   compared   to   myelination,   and   therefore   the   net   effect   on   MRI   measurements   is   dominated   by   
myelination.   Third,   it   is   possible   that   our   voxels   and   field   strength   do   not   have   sufficient   sensitivity   to   
measure   pruning-­‐related   developments   where   the   cortex   is   thin,   highly   gyrified,   or   strongly   myelinated20.   
Future   measurements   with   high-­‐field   MRI   and   submillimeter   resolution,   and   histology   of   pediatric   and   
adult   postmortem   brains   can   test   these   possibilities51.   
Another   interesting   finding   is   that   different   mechanisms   underlie   apparent   thinning   in   face-­‐   and   
character-­‐selective   cortex   vs.   place-­‐selective   cortex,   which   is   merely   2   cm   away.   In   CoS-­‐places,   there   was   
no   development   in   either   gray   or   white   matter   tissue.   Instead,   CT   was   correlated   with   the   curvature   of   
CoS-­‐places   and   the   surface   area   of   CoS.   This   suggests   that   the   CoS   may   stretch,   perhaps   deepening   the   
sulcus   in   adulthood,   resulting   in   cortical   thinning.   Several   mechanistic   forces   may   alter   this   cortical   
landscape   during   childhood,   including   axonal   tension15,   cytoarchitectural   patterning52,   and   differential   
elasticity   properties   between   white   and   gray   matter16.   Our   findings   that   morphological   changes   play   a   
role   in   cortical   thinning,   highlight   that   mechanical   forces,   an   overlooked   factor   of   brain   development,   
should   be   considered   not   only   during   embryonic   development,   but   also   during   childhood.   
What   may   explain   the   differential   mechanisms   of   cortical   tissue   development   across   VTC?   One   
possibility   is   that   different   mechanisms   affect   development   of   sulci   vs.   gyri.   However,   our   data   suggest   
that   this   is   not   the   case.   Both   CoS-­‐places   and   mOTS-­‐chars   are   in   sulci   and   the   latter   exhibits   tissue   growth,   
while   the   former   does   not.   Likewise,   both   CoS-­‐places   and   V1   are   in   sulci   and   the   latter   has   significant   
myelination   (Stria   of   Gennari   in   V1,   Fig.   6d),   while   the   former   does   not.   Another   possibility   is   interplay   
between   functional   and   structural   development.   Face-­‐26,   28-­‐30,   53,54   and   character-­‐selective   regions31,   54-­‐56   
show   a   protracted   development   compared   to   object-­‐   and   place-­‐selective   regions   in   VTC.   Research   on   
oligodendrocytes   and   their   progenitor   cells   indicate   that   development   of   myelin   is   activity-­‐dependent57.   
Based   on   this   work   and   our   findings,   we   propose   a   new   intriguing   hypothesis:   cortical   regions   that   exhibit   
protracted   functional   development   will   exhibit   protracted   myelin   development,   and   consequently   
prolonged   apparent   cortical   thinning.   This   hypothesis   can   be   tested   in   future   research.   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
17   
In   conclusion,   a   major   goal   of   neuroscience   is   to   understand   mechanisms   of   brain   
development.   Our   study   demonstrates   the   feasibility   of   evaluating   tissue   properties   in   gray   and   white   
matter   in   children   and   adults   using   3T   MRI.   Additionally,   our   study   is   transformative   because   it   
underscores   the   significance   of   measuring   microstructural   and   morphological   changes   to   brain   tissue   
across   the   lifespan,   rather   than   just   volumetric   and   thickness   measures.   Further,   as   increased   myelin   
during   development   brightens   cortex,   our   measurements   have   implications   for   (i)   widespread   algorithms   
estimating   CT,   brain   volume,   and   tissue   type   (gray   vs.   white   matter)   from   MRI,   (ii)   generating   age-­‐
appropriate   brain   atlases,   and   (iii)   large-­‐scale   studies   of   brain   development   and   neuroanatomy   including   
the   Adolescent   Brain   Cognitive   Development   (ABCD)58   study   and   the   Human   Connectome   Project   (HCP)59,   
as   these   studies   will   impact   future   policies   that   promote   the   health   and   well-­‐being   of   children.   Finally,   our   
data   have   important   ramifications   for   understanding   typical60   and   atypical   brain   development   as   well   as   
for   clinical   conditions   implicating   myelin   and   morphology   including   autism61,   dyslexia62,   and   multiple   
sclerosis63.      
   
Authors’   Contributions:   VSN   designed   fMRI   experiment,   collected   and   analyzed   fMRI,   qMRI,   dMRI,   
analyzed   post   mortem   data,   and   wrote   the   manuscript;   JG   contributed   to   experiment   design,   MR   data   
collection,   and   analysis;   MB   and   BJ   contributed   to   the   collection   and   analysis   of   MR   data.   ZZ   contributed   
to   the   analyses   of   dMRI.   SC   contributed   to   defining   anatomical   ROIs.   KSW   contributed   to   discussions   on   
post-­‐mortem   data.   EK,   CJ,   and   NW   contributed   to   the   collection   of   post   mortem   brains,   MR   of   post   
mortem   brain,   and   generation   of   histological   myelin   stains.   KGS   oversaw   all   components   of   the   study,   and   
wrote   the   manuscript.   All   co-­‐authors   have   read   and   approved   the   submitted   manuscript.      
   
Competing   interests   statement.   Authors   have   no   competing   interests.   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
18   
References.   
   
1.   Sowell,   E.R.,   et   al.   Mapping   cortical   change   across   the   human   life   span.   Nat   Neurosci   6,   309-­‐315   (2003).   
2.   Sowell,   E.R.,   et   al.   Longitudinal   mapping   of   cortical   thickness   and   brain   growth   in   normal   children.   J   
Neurosci   24,   8223-­‐8231   (2004).   
3.   Gogtay,   N.,   et   al.   Dynamic   mapping   of   human   cortical   development   during   childhood   through   early   
adulthood.   Proc   Natl   Acad   Sci   U   S   A   101,   8174-­‐8179   (2004).   
4.   Shaw,   P.,   et   al.   Intellectual   ability   and   cortical   development   in   children   and   adolescents.   Nature   440,   
676-­‐679   (2006).   
5.   Amlien,   I.K.,   et   al.   Organizing   Principles   of   Human   Cortical   Development-­‐-­‐Thickness   and   Area   from   4   to   
30   Years:   Insights   from   Comparative   Primate   Neuroanatomy.   Cereb   Cortex   26,   257-­‐267   (2016).   
6.   Walhovd,   K.B.,   et   al.   Through   Thick   and   Thin:   a   Need   to   Reconcile   Contradictory   Results   on   Trajectories   
in   Human   Cortical   Development.   in   Cereb   Cortex   1472-­‐1481.   
7.   Huttenlocher,   P.R.,   et   al.   Synaptic   density   in   human   frontal   cortex   -­‐   developmental   changes   and   effects   
of   aging.   in   Brain   Res   195-­‐205   (Netherlands   
United   States,   1979).   
8.   Rakic,   P.,   Bourgeois,   J.P.,   Eckenhoff,   M.F.,   Zecevic,   N.   &   Goldman-­‐Rakic,   P.S.   Concurrent   overproduction   
of   synapses   in   diverse   regions   of   the   primate   cerebral   cortex.   Science   232,   232-­‐235   (1986).   
9.   Petanjek,   Z.,   Judas,   M.,   Kostovic,   I.   &   Uylings,   H.B.   Lifespan   alterations   of   basal   dendritic   trees   of   
pyramidal   neurons   in   the   human   prefrontal   cortex:   a   layer-­‐specific   pattern.   Cereb   Cortex   18,   915-­‐929   
(2008).   
10.   Flechsig,   P.   Anatomie      des      menschen   Gehirns      und      Rückenmarksauf   Myelogenetischer   Grudlage   .   
Georg   Thime,   Leipzig   4.   (1920).   
11.   Yakovlev,   P.L.   &   Lecours,   A.R.   The   myelogenetic   cycles   of   regional   maturation   of   the   Brain.   In:   
Minkowski,   editor.   Regional   Development   of   the   Brain   in   Early   Life.   (Oxford:   Blackwell,   1967).   
∂s   
13.   Miller,   D.J.,   et   al.   Prolonged   myelination   in   human   neocortical   evolution.   Proc   Natl   Acad   Sci   U   S   A   109,   
16480-­‐16485   (2012).   
14.   Salat,   D.H.,   et   al.   Age-­‐associated   alterations   in   cortical   gray   and   white   matter   signal   intensity   and   gray   
to   white   matter   contrast.   Neuroimage   48,   21-­‐28   (2009).   
15.   Van   Essen,   D.C.   A   tension-­‐based   theory   of   morphogenesis   and   compact   wiring   in   the   central   nervous   
system.   Nature   385,   313-­‐318   (1997).   
16.   Tallinen,   T.,   Chung,   J.Y.,   Biggins,   J.S.   &   Mahadevan,   L.   Gyrification   from   constrained   cortical   expansion.   
Proc   Natl   Acad   Sci   U   S   A   111,   12667-­‐12672   (2014).   
17.   Hogstrom,   L.J.,   Westlye,   L.T.,   Walhovd,   K.B.   &   Fjell,   A.M.   The   structure   of   the   cerebral   cortex   across   
adult   life:   age-­‐related   patterns   of   surface   area,   thickness,   and   gyrification.   Cereb   Cortex   23,   2521-­‐2530   
(2013).   
18.   Mezer,   A.,   et   al.   Quantifying   the   local   tissue   volume   and   composition   in   individual   brains   with   
magnetic   resonance   imaging.   Nat   Med   19,   1667-­‐1672   (2013).   
19.   Lutti,   A.,   Dick,   F.,   Sereno,   M.I.   &   Weiskopf,   N.   Using   high-­‐resolution   quantitative   mapping   of   R1   as   an   
index   of   cortical   myelination.   Neuroimage   93   Pt   2,   176-­‐188   (2014).   
20.   Edwards,   L.J.,   Kirilina,   E.,   Mohammadi,   S.   &   Weiskopf,   N.   Microstructural   imaging   of   human   neocortex   
in   vivo.   Neuroimage   (2018).   
21.   Beaulieu,   C.   The   basis   of   anisotropic   water   diffusion   in   the   nervous   system   -­‐   a   technical   review.   NMR   
Biomed   15,   435-­‐455   (2002).   
22.   Zatorre,   R.J.,   Fields,   R.D.   &   Johansen-­‐Berg,   H.   Plasticity   in   gray   and   white:   neuroimaging   changes   in   
brain   structure   during   learning.   Nat   Neurosci   15,   528-­‐536   (2012).   
23.   Yeatman,   J.D.,   Wandell,   B.A.   &   Mezer,   A.A.   Lifespan   maturation   and   degeneration   of   human   brain   
white   matter.   Nat   Commun   5,   4932   (2014).   
24.   Dinse,   J.,   et   al.   A   cytoarchitecture-­‐driven   myelin   model   reveals   area-­‐specific   signatures   in   human   
primary   and   secondary   areas   using   ultra-­‐high   resolution   in-­‐vivo   brain   MRI.   Neuroimage   114,   71-­‐87   (2015).   
25.   Vogt,   C.   &   Vogt,   O.   Ergebnisse   unserer   hirnforschung.   1.-­‐4.   Mitteilung.   .   279–461   (J.   Psychol.   Neurol.,   
1919).   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
19   
26.   Gomez,   J.,   et   al.   Microstructural   proliferation   in   human   cortex   is   coupled   with   the   development   of   
face   processing.   Science   355,   68-­‐71   (2017).   
27.   Whitaker,   K.J.,   et   al.   Adolescence   is   associated   with   genomically   patterned   consolidation   of   the   hubs   
of   the   human   brain   connectome.   Proc   Natl   Acad   Sci   U   S   A   113,   9105-­‐9110   (2016).   
28.   Scherf,   K.S.,   Behrmann,   M.,   Humphreys,   K.   &   Luna,   B.   Visual   category-­‐selectivity   for   faces,   places   and   
objects   emerges   along   different   developmental   trajectories.   Dev   Sci   10,   F15-­‐30   (2007).   
29.   Peelen,   M.V.,   Glaser,   B.,   Vuilleumier,   P.   &   Eliez,   S.   Differential   development   of   selectivity   for   faces   and   
bodies   in   the   fusiform   gyrus.   Dev   Sci   12,   F16-­‐25   (2009).   
30.   Golarai,   G.,   et   al.   Differential   development   of   high-­‐level   visual   cortex   correlates   with   category-­‐specific   
recognition   memory.   Nat   Neurosci   10,   512-­‐522   (2007).   
31.   Saygin,   Z.M.,   et   al.   Connectivity   precedes   function   in   the   development   of   the   visual   word   form   area.   
Nat   Neurosci   19,   1250-­‐1255   (2016).   
32.   Weiner,   K.S.,   et   al.   The   mid-­‐fusiform   sulcus:   a   landmark   identifying   both   cytoarchitectonic   and   
functional   divisions   of   human   ventral   temporal   cortex.   Neuroimage   84,   453-­‐465   (2014).   
33.   Weiner,   K.S.,   et   al.   Defining   the   most   probable   location   of   the   parahippocampal   place   area   using   
cortex-­‐based   alignment   and   cross-­‐validation.   Neuroimage   170,   373-­‐384   (2017a.)   
34.   Kanwisher,   N.,   McDermott,   J.   &   Chun,   M.M.   The   fusiform   face   area:   a   module   in   human   extrastriate   
cortex   specialized   for   face   perception.   J   Neurosci   17,   4302-­‐4311   (1997).   
35.   Weiner,   K.S.   &   Grill-­‐Spector,   K.   Sparsely-­‐distributed   organization   of   face   and   limb   activations   in   human   
ventral   temporal   cortex.   Neuroimage   52,   1559-­‐1573   (2010).   
36.   Cohen,   L.,   et   al.   The   visual   word   form   area:   spatial   and   temporal   characterization   of   an   initial   stage   of   
reading   in   normal   subjects   and   posterior   split-­‐brain   patients.   Brain   123,   291-­‐307   (2000).   
37.   Stigliani,   A.,   Weiner,   K.S.   &   Grill-­‐Spector,   K.   Temporal   Processing   Capacity   in   High-­‐Level   Visual   Cortex   Is   
Domain   Specific.   J   Neurosci   35,   12412-­‐12424   (2015).   
38.   Epstein,   R.   &   Kanwisher,   N.   A   cortical   representation   of   the   local   visual   environment.   Nature   392,   
   598-­‐601   (1998).   
39.   Fischl,   B.   &   Dale,   A.M.   Measuring   the   thickness   of   the   human   cerebral   cortex   from   magnetic   
resonance   images.   Proc   Natl   Acad   Sci   U   S   A   97,   11050-­‐11055   (2000).   
40.   Von   Economo,   C.V.   The   cytoarchitectonics   of   the   human   cerebral      cortex   (Oxford   Medical   Publications,   
London,   1929).   
41.   Gomez,   J.,   et   al.   Functionally   defined   white   matter   reveals   segregated   pathways   in   human   ventral   
temporal   cortex   associated   with   category-­‐specific   processing.   Neuron   85,   216-­‐227   (2015).   
42.   Lemaitre,   H.,   et   al.   Normal   age-­‐related   brain   morphometric   changes:   nonuniformity   across   cortical   
thickness,   surface   area   and   gray   matter   volume?   Neurobiol   Aging   33,   617   e611-­‐619   (2012).   
43.   Gallyas,   F.   Silver   staining   of   myelin   by   means   of   physical   development.   Neurol   Res   1,   203-­‐209   (1979).   
44.   Bok,   S.   Der   Ein   fl   uß   der   in   den   Furchen   und   Windungen   auftretenden   Krümmungen   der   Großhirnrinde   
auf   die   Rindenarchitektur.   682   –   750   (Z.   Gesamte   Neurol.      Psychiatr.   ,   1929).   
45.   Waehnert,   M.D.,   et   al.   Anatomically   motivated   modeling   of   cortical   laminae.   Neuroimage   93   Pt   2,   210-­‐
220   (2014).   
46.   Weiner,   K.S.,   et   al.   The   Cytoarchitecture   of   Domain-­‐specific   Regions   in   Human   High-­‐level   Visual   Cortex.   
Cereb   Cortex   27,   146-­‐161   (2017b).   
47.   Tardif,   C.L.,   et   al.   Advanced   MRI   techniques   to   improve   our   understanding   of   experience-­‐induced   
neuroplasticity.   Neuroimage   131,   55-­‐72   (2016).   
48.   Stuber,   C.,   et   al.   Myelin   and   iron   concentration   in   the   human   brain:   a   quantitative   study   of   MRI   
contrast.   Neuroimage   93,   95-­‐106   (2014).   
49.   Barres,   B.A.   &   Raff,   M.C.   Proliferation   of   oligodendrocyte   precursor   cells   depends   on   electrical   activity   
in   axons.   Nature   361,   258-­‐260   (1993).   
50.   Elston,   G.N.   &   Fujita,   I.   Pyramidal   cell   development:   postnatal   spinogenesis,   dendritic   growth,   axon   
growth,   and   electrophysiology.   Front   Neuroanat   8,   78   (2014).   
51.   Turner,   R.   &   De   Haan,   D.   Bridging   the   gap   between   system   and   cell:   The   role   of   ultra-­‐high   field   MRI   in   
human   neuroscience.   Prog   Brain   Res   233,      179-­‐220   (2017)..   
52.   Fischl,   B.,   et   al.      Cortical   folding   patterns   and   predicting   cytoarchitecture.   Cereb   Cortex   18,   1973-­‐1980   
(2008).   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
20   
53.   Natu,   V.S.,   et   al.      Development   of   Neural   Sensitivity   to   Face   Identity   Correlates   with   Perceptual   
Discriminability.   J   Neurosci   36,   10893-­‐10907   (2016).   
54.   Gomez,   J.,   Natu,   V.,   Jeska,   B.,   Barnett,   M.   &   Grill-­‐Spector,   K.   Development   differentially   sculpts   
receptive   fields   across   early   and   high-­‐level   human   visual   cortex.   Nat   Commun   9,   788   (2018).   
55.   Ben-­‐Shachar,   M.,   Dougherty,   R.F.,   Deutsch,   G.K.   &   Wandell,   B.A.   The   development   of   cortical   
sensitivity   to   visual   word   forms.   J   Cogn   Neurosci   23,   2387-­‐2399   (2011).   
56.   Dehaene-­‐Lambertz,   G.,   Monzalvo,   K.   &   Dehaene,   S.   The   emergence   of   the   visual   word   form:   
Longitudinal   evolution   of   category-­‐specific   ventral   visual   areas   during   reading   acquisition.   PLoS   Biol   16,   
e2004103   (2018).   
57.   Fields,   R.D.   A   new   mechanism   of   nervous   system   plasticity:   activity-­‐dependent   myelination.   Nat   Rev   
16,   Neurosci      756-­‐767   (2015).   
58.   Casey,   B.J.,   et   al.      The   Adolescent   Brain   Cognitive   Development   (ABCD)   study:   Imaging   acquisition   
across   21   sites.   Dev   Cogn   Neurosci,   32,   43-­‐54   (2018).   
59.   Van   Essen,   D.C.,   et   al.      The   WU-­‐Minn   Human   Connectome   Project:   an   overview.   Neuroimage   80,   62-­‐79   
(2013).   
60.   Deen,   B.,   et   al.      Organization   of   high-­‐level   visual   cortex   in   human   infants.   Nat   Commun   8,   13995   
(2017).   
61.   Raznahan,   A.,   et   al.      Cortical   anatomy   in   autism   spectrum   disorder:   an   in   vivo   MRI   study   on   the   effect   
of   age.   Cereb   Cortex   20,   1332-­‐1340   (2010).   
62.   Ma,   Y.,   et   al.      Cortical   thickness   abnormalities   associated   with   dyslexia,   independent   of   remediation   
status.   Neuroimage   Clin   7,   177-­‐186   (2015).   
63.   Sailer,   M.,   et   al.      Focal   thinning   of   the   cerebral   cortex   in   multiple   sclerosis.   Brain   126,   1734-­‐1744   
(2003).   
64.   Fischl,   B.,   Sereno,   M.I.,   Tootell,   R.B.   &   Dale,   A.M.   High-­‐resolution   intersubject   averaging   and   a   
coordinate   system   for   the   cortical   surface.   Hum   Brain   Mapp   8,   272-­‐284   (1999).   
65.   Pistorio,   A.L.,   Hendry,   S.H.   &   Wang,   X.   A   modified   technique   for   high-­‐resolution   staining   of   myelin.   J   
Neurosci   Methods   153,   135-­‐146   (2006).   
   
   
   
Online   Methods   
Participants   
27   children   (14   females,   ages   5-­‐12)   and   30   adults   (11   females,   ages   22-­‐28)   participated   in   our   study.   
Children   were   recruited   from   the   Palo   Alto   school   district,   through   flyers   and   online   advertisements.   All   
children   attended   public   schools   at   the   time   of   recruitment.   Adult   subjects   are   Stanford   University   
affiliates.   MRI   data   was   collected   using   a   3T   scanner   in   the   Center   for   Cognitive   and   Neurobiological   
Imaging   (CNI)   at   Stanford   University.   All   subjects   had   normal   or   corrected-­‐to-­‐normal   vision   and   provided   
written,   informed   consent.   Protocols   were   approved   by   the   Stanford   Internal   Review   Board   on   Human   
Subjects.      
   
General   training   and   scanning   procedures   
Multiple   sessions.   Adults   and   children   participated   in   several   scanning   sessions   on   different   days,   to   
obtain   quantitative   MRI   (qMRI),   diffusion   MRI   (dMRI),   and   functional   MRI   (fMRI)   data.      
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
21   
Training.   Children   underwent   a   separate   training   session,   prior   to   scanning,   inside   an   MRI   scanner   
simulator.   Children   were   trained   to   remain   still   by   monitoring   their   motion,   using   a   motion   sensor   
attached   to   their   forehead   and   providing   them   with   feedback   regarding   the   amount   of   head   movement   
they   made.   Children   who   stayed   still   during   the   mock   session   were   invited   back   for   MRI   scans.      
   
Acquisition.   In   vivo   anatomical   and   functional   data   were   acquired   in   each   subject   using   a   3T   GE   Signa   MRI   
scanner,   using   a   custom-­‐built   phase   array   32-­‐channel,   head   coil   using   methods   as   in   prior   studies18,   26.   
During   MRI   scanning,   participants   lay   supine   inside   the   magnet.   Visual   stimuli   were   projected   onto   a   
monitor   and   were   viewed   through   an   angled   mirror   mounted   above   the   participant’s   head.   
   
qMRI   data      
Acquisition.   Subjects   were   scanned   using   spin-­‐echo   inversion   recovery   with   an   echo-­‐planar   imaging   (EPI),   
read-­‐out   (SEIR-­‐EPI).   This   scan   was   done   with   a   slab-­‐inversion   pulse   and   spatial-­‐spectral   fat   suppression.   
We   used   2mm2   in-­‐plane   resolution   with   a   slice   thickness   of   4   mm   and   the   EPI   readout   was   performed   
using   2X   acceleration.   QMRI   parameters   were   measured   from   spoiled-­‐gradient   echo   images   acquired   with   
different   flip   angles   (α   =   4°,   10°,   20°   and   30°,   TR   =   14   ms,   TE   =   2.4   ms)   and   a   voxel   resolution   of   0.8x0.8x1   
mm3,   which   was   resampled   to   1   mm3   isotropic.   For   SEIR-­‐EPI,   the   TR   was   3   s.   The   echo   time   was   set   to   
minimum   full;   inversion   times   were   50,   400,   1200   and   2400   ms.   Anatomical   data   were   aligned   to   the   AC-­‐
PC   plane.   From   the   qMRI,   we   generated   whole-­‐brain   T1-­‐weighted   anatomy18,   26.   
   
Quality   assurance.   Subjects   whose   anatomical   data   appeared   blurry   or   showed   ringing   due   to   motion   
were   asked   to   return   for   a   second   scan   on   a   different   day   (N   subjects   =   4,   mean   age   =   6.75   years).   The   
second   scan   was   of   sufficient   quality   and   was   used   for   subsequent   visualization   and   cortical   surface   
reconstruction.      
   
General   preprocessing   and   analyses.   The   spoiled-­‐GE   and   the   SEIR   scans   were   processed   using   the   mrQ   
software   package   in   MATLAB   to   produce   the   T1   and   MTV   maps.   The   mrQ   analysis   pipeline   corrects   for   RF   
coil   bias   using   SEIR-­‐EPI   scans,   producing   accurate   proton   density   (PD)   and   T1   fits   across   the   brain.   MTV   
maps   were   produced   by   calculating   the   fraction   of   a   voxel   that   is   not   MR   visible   -­‐water   (CSF   voxels   are   
taken   
to   
be   
nearly   
100%   
water).   
The   
full   
analysis   
pipeline   
can   
be   
found   
at   
(https://github.com/mezera/mrQ)18.      
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
22   
Reconstruction   of   cortical   surfaces.   T1   images   underwent   automated   cortical   surface   reconstruction   using   
FreeSurfer   (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/).   The   anatomical   images   were   segmented   into   white   and   
gray   matter.   White   matter   surfaces   were   inspected   and   manually   fixed   for   missing   or   mislabeled   white   
matter   voxels   using   ITK-­‐SNAP   (http://www.itksnap.org/).   A   mesh   of   each   participant's   cortical   surface   was   
generated   from   the   boundary   of   the   white   and   gray   matter.   This   mesh   was   inflated   for   visualization   of   
activations   inside   the   sulci.      
   
Generation   of   cortical   thickness,   curvature   maps,   and   surface   area.   For   each   subject,   we   used   FreeSurfer’s   
automated   algorithm   to   define   the   gray-­‐white   matter   boundary,   pial   surface,   and   cortical   thickness   (CT)   
maps.   CT   (in   mm)   is   measured   as   the   distance   between   the   gray-­‐white   boundary   and   pial   surface39.   
FreeSurfer’s   algorithm   also   generates   curvature   files,   which   contain   information   about   the   amount   of   
curvature   at   each   vertex   (i.e.,   sharper   the   curve,   higher   the   value)   and   information   whether   the   vertex   is   
on   a   sulcus   or   gyrus   (indicated   by   a   sign:   a   positive   sign   indicates   a   sulcus,   or   concave   fold,   while   a   
negative   sign   indicates   a   gyrus,   or   convex   fold).   Mean   curvature   is   made   up   of   the   average   of   principal   
curvatures   derived   from   the   inverse   of   the   radius   of   the   osculating   circles   at   each   point   on   the   surface   on   
the   gray-­‐white   matter   junction.   Surface   area   in   mm2   of   the   collateral   sulcus   was   calculated   from   
FreeSurfer’s   anatomical   parcellation   of   the   collateral   sulcus   for   each   participant   and   both   hemispheres   
using   FreeSurfer’s   mris_anatomical_stats   and   aparcstats2table   functions.      
      
Analysis   of   CT   in   FreeSurfer’s   anatomical   parcellations.   To   replicate   previous   results   of   cortical   thinning   in   
large   anatomical   expanses   of   the   brain1,   2,   we   measured   CT   in   nine   anatomical   parcellations   of   the   left   and   
right   VTC   obtained   from   FreeSurfer’s   algorithm   for   each   subject   (see   Fig.   S3b).   These   include:   occipital   
pole,   calcarine   sulcus,   inferior   temporal   gyrus,   occipital   temporal   sulcus,   inferior   temporal   sulcus   and   
gyrus,   collateral   sulcus,   fusiform   gyrus,   parahippocampal   gyrus,   and   temporal   pole.   We   generated   an   
“average   brain”   from   our   27   adults   and   26   children   using   FreeSurfer’s   make_average_subject   algorithm.   
Next,   each   subject’s   brain   and   their   corresponding   CT   maps   were   transformed   into   this   average   brain   
space   using   FreeSurfer’s   mris_preproc   and   mri_surf2surf   algorithms.   We   then   measured   average   CT   per   
anatomical   region,   across   all   subjects   in   an   age   group,   and   conducted   a   3-­‐way   ANOVA   with   age   of   subject,   
hemisphere,   and   parcellation   as   factors.      
   
dMRI   data      
Acquisition.   Consistent   with   methods   in   our   prior   study41,   in   each   subject,   we   obtained   two   whole-­‐brain,   
diffusion-­‐weighted,   dual-­‐spin   echo-­‐sequence   (60   slices,   TE   =   96.8   ms,   TR   =   8000   ms,   96   diffusion   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
23   
directions,   b0   =   2000s/mm2,   voxel   size   2x2x2   mm3).   Ten   non-­‐diffusion-­‐weighted   images   were   collected   at   
the   beginning   of   each   scan.   
   
Quality   assurance.   We   assessed   motion   during   dMRI   from   tensor   images.   Two   5-­‐9   year   olds,   four   10-­‐12   
year   olds,   and   three   22-­‐28   year   olds   moved   during   dMRI   excessively   (motion   >   2   voxels,   1   voxel   =   2   x   2   x   2   
mm3).   Data   from   these   participants   was   excluded   from   subsequent   dMRI   analyses.   MD   data   is   
consequently   reported   for   20   children   (ages   5-­‐9,   N   =   9,   ages   10-­‐12,   N=11)   and   24   adults   (ages   22-­‐28).      
   
General   preprocessing   and   analyses.   Diffusion   data   analyses   were   done   using   mrDiffusion   
(http://white.stanford.edu/software).   Non-­‐diffusion-­‐weighted   images   were   averaged,   and   diffusion-­‐
weighted   (DW)   images   were   registered   to   this   mean   image   using   a   two-­‐stage   model   with   a   coarse-­‐to-­‐fine   
approach   that   maximized   mutual   information.   DWIs   were   motion   and   eddy-­‐current   corrected   and   aligned   
to   each   subject’s   whole   brain   anatomy   using   SPM8   (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/).   
Tensors   were   fit   to   each   voxel   using   a   least-­‐squares   algorithm   that   removes   outliers.   For   each   subject,   we   
obtained   mean   diffusivity   (MD)   maps   from   the   tensors   files.   
   
fMRI   data   
Acquisition.   Data   were   acquired   using   a   T2*-­‐sensitive   gradient   echo   spiral   pulse   sequence   with   a   
resolution   of   2.4   x   2.4   x   2.4   mm3,   TR   =   1000   ms,   TE   =   30   ms,   flip   angle   =   76°,   and   FOV   =   192   mm.   We   
collected   48   oblique   slices,   oriented   parallel   to   the   superior   temporal   sulcus,   using   a   multiplexing   
technique   allowing   whole-­‐brain   coverage   of   functional   data.   The   same   prescription   was   used   to   obtain   
anatomical   T1-­‐weighted   images,   which   were   used   to   align   functional   data   with   the   whole   brain   high-­‐
resolution   anatomical   volume   of   each   participant.      
   
Functional   localizer.   In   order   to   localize   face-­‐,   character-­‐,   and   place-­‐selective   regions   of   interest   (ROIs),   
subjects   participated   in   a   localizer   experiment   based   on   our   prior   methods26,   37,   53.   Subjects   participated   in   
3   runs   of   a   functional   localizer   experiment   (5.24   min/run)   with   78,   4s   blocks   in   each   run.   Subjects   viewed   
gray-­‐scale   stimuli   which   were   blocked   by   category.   Images   consisted   of   two   subtypes   from   each   of   five   
categories:   characters   (numbers   and   pseudo-­‐words),   bodies   (limbs   and   headless   bodies),   human   faces   
(child   faces   and   adult   faces),   places   (houses   and   indoor   scenes),   and   objects   (guitars   and   cars)   (see   Fig.   
S1a   for   example   images   per   category).   Each   image   was   shown   only   once   during   the   experiment.   In   each   4   
s   block,   different   stimuli   from   one   of   the   above   categories   were   shown   at   a   rate   of   2   images   per   second.   
Blocks   were   counterbalanced   across   categories   and   also   with   baseline   blocks   consisting   of   a   blank,   gray   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
24   
background.   During   the   scan,   subjects   fixated   on   a   central   dot   and   pressed   a   button   when   a   phase-­‐
scrambled,   “oddball”   image   appeared   randomly   in   a   block   (~33%   of   the   blocks).      
   
Quality   assurance.   (1)   Motion.   Data   of   each   subject   were   corrected   for   within-­‐run   and   between-­‐run   
motion.   Only   runs   with   motion   of   less   than   two   voxels   were   included   in   the   study   (as   in   our   prior   
studies26,53).   To   test   for   development,   we   performed   a   2-­‐way   ANOVA   with   factors,   age   of   subject   and   
motion   type.   (2)   Time   series   signal   to   noise   ratio   (tSNR).   As   a   control   to   test   if   developmental   changes   
were   driven   by   smaller   signal   to   noise   ratio   in   children   than   adults,   we   measured   tSNR   across   children’s   
and   adults’   left   and   right   VTC   ROIs.   For   each   subject,   we   defined   left/right   VTC   as   the   boundary   between   
the   posterior   transverse   collateral   sulcus   (ptCoS)   to   the   anterior   tip   of   the   MFS,   including   the   extreme   
edges   of   the   CoS   and   OTS.   tSNR   was   computed   for   each   voxel   as   follows:   tSNR   =   mean(time   
series)/standard   deviation   (time   series)   and   then   averaged   across   all   voxels   of   the   VTC,   across   runs   and   
across   subjects   in   an   age   group.   We   performed   a   2-­‐way   ANOVA   with   factors,   age   of   subject   and   
hemisphere   to   test   development   in   tSNR.      
   
General   processing   and   analyses.   Localizer   data   were   analyzed   using   code   written   in   a   MATLAB   based   
mrVista   toolbox   (http://github.com/vistalab)   as   in   our   prior   publications26,   37,   53,   54.   Data   were   not   spatially   
smoothed   and   were   analyzed   in   each   subject’s   native   brain   space.   The   time   courses   of   each   voxel   were   
converted   from   arbitrary   scanner   units   into   units   of   %   signal   change.      
   
General   Linear   Model   (GLM).   For   each   subject’s   data,   we   ran   a   GLM   to   model   each   voxel’s   time   course.   
The   experimental   design   matrix   was   convolved   with   the   SPM   hemodynamic   response   function   (HRF)   
(http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm)   to   generate   predictors.   Using   a   GLM   to   fit   the   predictors   to   the   data,   
we   estimated   the   response   amplitudes   for   each   condition   (betas)   and   residual   variance   of   each   voxel’s   
time   course.   We   used   beta   values   and   residual   variance   from   the   GLM   to   generate   contrast   maps   
comparing   responses   in   different   conditions.   
   
Definition   of   functional   regions   of   interest   (fROIs).   Functionally   selective   voxels   were   defined   as   voxels   that   
responded   more   to   images   of   a   selected   category   than   to   images   of   other   categories   (t>3,   voxel   level)   
during   the   localizer   scan.   Thus,   in   each   subject,   we   defined   the   following   regions   in   the   ventral   stream.   
Spatially   contiguous   clusters   of   face-­‐selective   voxels   that   responded   more   strongly   to   faces   (child   faces   
and   adult   faces)   than   other   stimuli   and   were   located   in   the   posterior   lateral   fusiform   gyrus   were   defined   
as   pFus-­‐faces.   Face-­‐selective   voxels   near   or   overlapping   the   anterior   tip   of   the   mid-­‐fusiform   sulcus   (MFS)   
were   defined   as   mFus-­‐faces   (pFus-­‐   and   mFus-­‐faces   are   collectively   referred   to   as   the   fusiform   face   area,   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
25   
FFA34).   Clusters   of   voxels   that   responded   more   strongly   to   places   (house   and   corridors)   than   other   stimuli   
and   were   located   in   the   collateral   sulcus   (CoS)   were   defined   as   place-­‐selective   CoS-­‐places   also   referred   to   
as   the   parahippocampal   place   area   (PPA)38.   Clusters   of   voxels   that   responded   more   strongly   to   characters   
(numbers   and   pseudo-­‐words)   than   other   stimuli   and   were   located   in   the   posterior   OTS   were   defined   as   
pOTS-­‐characters,   also   referred   to   as   visual   word   form   area   1{Stigliani,   2015).   More   anterior   character-­‐
selective   voxels   in   the   occipital   temporal   sulcus   were   defined   as   mOTS-­‐characters   also   referred   to   as   
visual   word   form   area   237   (mOTS-­‐   and   pOTS-­‐words   are   collectively   referred   to   as   the   visual   word   form   
area,   VWFA36).   
   
Behavior   
We   collected   behavioral   data   during   the   scan   in   an   odd-­‐ball   task,   in   which   participants   were   asked   to   
press   a   button   when   they   viewed   a   scrambled   image   on   the   screen,   which   appeared   in   33%   of   the   trials.   
Due   to   equipment   malfunction,   however,   we   were   able   to   collect   data   from   10   children   (ages   5-­‐12,   2   
females)   and   17   adults   (ages   22-­‐26,   8   females).   Performance   accuracy   in   the   oddball   task   during   fMRI   was   
not   significantly   different   (t(24)=0.42,   p=n.s.,   two-­‐tailed)   across   children   (78.0±7.78%)   and   adults   
(81.43±4.51%).   
   
In   vivo   analyses   examining   anatomical   features   of   functional   regions      
Analysis   of   CT   in   functional   ROIs   of   VTC.   Data   were   analyzed   using   a   MATLAB-­‐based,   mrVista   toolbox.   In   
brief,   each   subject’s   CT   surface   maps   from   FreeSurfer’s   algorithm   were   transformed   to   volume   nifti   files   
using   FreeSurfer’s   mri_surf2vol   algorithm.   For   each   subject,   we   averaged   CT   per   fROI   and   hemisphere,   
across   all   subjects   within   an   age   group.   We   performed   a   3-­‐way   ANOVA   with   factors,   age   of   subject,   fROIs,   
and   hemisphere.      
   
Analysis   of   T1,   MTV,   and   MD   in   functionally-­‐defined   white   matter   (FDWM).   Each   individual   subject’s   fROI   
was   dilated   into   its   neighboring   white   and   gray   matter   by   5mm,   to   obtain   T1,   MTV,   and   MD   measures   of   
its   functionally-­‐defined   white   matter.   Average   T1,   MTV,   and   MD   were   calculated   for   these   FDWM   voxels,   
and   averaged   across   subjects   within   an   age   group.   We   performed   a   3-­‐way   ANOVA   with   age   of   subject,   
hemisphere,   and   fROIs   as   factors   per   measure.      
   
Analysis   of   T1   /MD   by   intra-­‐cortical   depth.   Using   FreeSurfer’s   mri_surf2vol   algorithm,   each   subject’s   
FreeSurfer-­‐based   white   matter   surface   was   converted   to   volume   niftis.   The   volume   was   projected   into   
gray   matter   at   increasing   20%   steps,   starting   from   two   locations   below   the   gray-­‐white   boundary   (to   
include   some   white   matter   just   below   the   boundary)   to   two   locations   above   the   pial   surface   (to   include   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
26   
the   entire   pial   surface).   As   thickness   of   the   cortical   ribbon   varies   between   2mm   to   4mm   in   the   VTC,   each   
increasing   depth   is   between   0.4   mm   -­‐   0.8   mm   from   the   gray-­‐white   surface   normal.   For   each   subject’s   
dilated   fROI,   we   averaged   T1   values   of   those   voxels   that   intersected   with   each   cortical   layer,   and   obtained   
T1   values   per   cortical   depth.   We   performed   4-­‐way   ANOVAs   with   age   of   subject,   fROI,   hemisphere,   and   
cortical   depth   as   factors.   Similar   analysis   was   conducted   for   MD,   with   the   exception   that   the   cortex   was   
divided   into   8   steps   rather   than   10   steps   as   MD   maps   were   2mm   voxel   resolution.   For   the   statistical   
analysis   of   variance   using   depth   as   a   factor,   we   used   every   other   step   instead   of   all   steps   to   ensure   that   
they   reflect   data   from   non-­‐overlapping   voxels   (5   out   of   10   steps   for   T1   and   4   out   of   8   steps   for   MD).   For   
each   fROI,   we   correlated   each   subjects’   CT   with   T1   (or   MD)   at   each   cortical   depth   (Pearson’s   correlation   
coefficient).      
   
Correlation   between   anatomical   curvature   and   CT.   Each   subject’s   curvature   maps   from   FreeSurfer’s   
autosegmentation   algorithm   were   transformed   into   volume   nifti   files   using   the   FreeSurfer-­‐based   
mri_surf2vol   algorithm.   Data   were   analyzed   using   MATLAB-­‐based   mrVista   toolbox.   Per   participant,   we   
calculated   average   curvature   in   each   fROI   and   examined   if   there   was   a   significant   correlation   (using   
Pearson’s   correlation   coefficient)   between   CT   and   curvature   per   fROI.   
   
Post   mortem   tissue   data   
Histology   (post   mortem   tissue   blocks).   Blocks   of   five   post   mortem   human   brains   were   provided   by   the   
Brain   Banking   Centre   Leipzig   of   the   German   Brain-­‐Net   (GZ   01GI9999-­‐01GI0299),   operated   by   the   Paul   
Flechsig   Institute   of   Brain   Research   (University   of   Leipzig).   Information   on   sex,   age   of   death,   cause   of   
death   and   post   mortem   interval   before   fixation   (PMI)   is   provided   in   Supplementary   Table   2.   The   entire   
procedure   of   1)   case   recruitment,   2)   acquisition   of   the   patient's   personal   data,   including   protocols   and   
informed   consent   forms,   4)   the   performance   of   the   autopsy,   and   5)   the   handling   of   the   autopsy   material   
have   been   approved   by   the   responsible   authorities.   Following   the   standard   Brain   Bank   procedures,   tissue   
blocks   from   occipital   cortex   were   extracted,   immersion-­‐fixed   in   4%   paraformaldehyde   in   phosphate   
buffered   saline   (PBS)   pH   7.4   for   at   least   6   weeks.   Prior   to   MR   scanning,   blocks   were   washed   in   PBS   with   
0.1%   sodium   azide   for   at   least   24   h   in   order   to   avoid   biasing   the   effects   of   paraformaldehyde   on   MR   
relaxation   rate.   All   tissue   blocks   contained   a   part   of   the   calcarine   fissure,   collateral   sulcus,   and   fusiform   
gyrus.   
   
MR   Scanning.   MR   scanning   of   post   mortem   tissue   samples   was   performed   on   a   7T   Siemens   scanner   
(Magnetom,   Siemens,   Erlangen,   Germany)   equipped   with   a   custom   made   2-­‐channel   transmit-­‐receive   coil   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
27   
with   an   inner   diameter   of   6   cm.   Samples   were   placed   in   a   spherical   container   filled   with   Fomblin   (Sigma   
Aldrich).      
   
Tissue   sectioning.   For   histological   processing,   tissue   blocks   were   cryoprotected   in   30%   sucrose/PBS   with   
0.1%   sodium   azide.   Sections   of   30   microns   thickness   were   made   on   a   cryomicrotome   (Leica   SM2000R   with   
freezing   unit   Zeiss   KS34)   and   collected   in   PBS   with   0.1%   sodium   azide.      
   
Semi-­‐quantitative   myelin   mapping   in   histological   sections.   For   myelin   staining,   every   20th   section   was   
taken   out   of   the   series   (in   total:   6   to   9   sections   per   case),   mounted   on   glass   slides,   and   air   dried.   Sections   
were   rehydrated   in   distilled   water   and   stained   following   the   classical   protocol   of   the   Gallyas   method43   
with   slight   adaptions65.   In   order   to   assure   the   complete   visualisation   of   all   myelin   fibers,   including   those   
that   are   very   thin,   the   developing   step   was   extended   to   40   min.   After   the   procedure,   slides   were   
thoroughly   washed   in   distilled   water,   dehydrated   and   cover   slipped   with   Entellan/Toluene   (Merck).   
Imaging   was   performed   with   a   Zeiss   Axio   Scan,   Z1   slide   scanner   with   a   10x   objective.   All   images   were   
obtained   under   equal   conditions   to   ensure   comparable   data   for   the   optometric   processing.   Obtained   RGB   
maps   were   logarithm   transformed   using   the   Lambert-­‐Beer   transformation   and   averaged   across   three   
color   channels   with   corresponding   weights   to   calculate   optical   density   (OD)   of   the   sections   (i.e.,   OD   
=0.8*R   +   1.2*G+   1.5*B,   where   R,   G,   B   are   the   red,   green,   and   blue   channels   in   a   .tiff   image   file).   Thus,   OD   
is   proportional   to   the   density   of   staining   chromophore   and   therefore,   reflects   local   myelin   density   in   the   
tissue.      
   
Adult   histology   data   vs.   adult   in-­‐vivo   T1   data   in   face-­‐   and   place-­‐selective   cortex   
General   processing   and   analyses.   Our   strategy   was   to   compare   adult   histology   data   to   adult   in   vivo   T1   data   
in   face-­‐   and   place-­‐selective   cortex.   Thus,   for   each   individual   stained   slice,   we   divided   the   cortex   into   
equidistant   depths   from   the   pial   surface   to   white   matter.   We   achieved   this   by   drawing   a   mid-­‐line   in   
MFS/FG   and   CoS   (along   its   thickness)   and   projecting   equidistant   depths   along   the   mid-­‐line   normals   in   two   
steps:   1)   from   mid-­‐line   to   pial-­‐surface   and   2)   mid-­‐line   to   white   matter.   We   then   evaluated   average   OD   at   
each   depth   (OD   at   each   point   was   normalized   with   respect   to   OD   in   white   matter),   which   in   turn,   reflects   
the   measure   of   the   amount   of   myelin   per   region.   
   
Data   availability.   All   code   relevant   to   data   analysis   as   well   as   the   source   data   for   the   main   findings   
(Figs.   1-­‐6)   will   be   made   available   upon   request.   Majority   of   the   code   used   in   this   study   was   derived   
from   functions   available   through   the   open-­‐source   code   library:   https://github.com/vistalab/vistasoft.   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
28   
Supplementary   Materials   
   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
29   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
30   
   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
31   
   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
32   
   
   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
33   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
34   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
35   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
36   
   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
37   
   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
    
38   
   
   
   
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/368274
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jul. 13, 2018; 
