  
  1
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
Open Access 
Safeguarding the future of independent, 
academic clinical cancer research in 
Europe for the benefit of patients
Anastassia Negrouk,1 Denis Lacombe,2 Fatima Cardoso,3 Franck Morin,4 
Eva Carrasco,5 Joan Maurel,6 Rudolf Maibach,7 Enrique Aranda,8 Richard Marais,9 
Rolf A Stahel10 
Original Research
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
esmoopen- 
2017- 
000187).
To cite: Negrouk A, Lacombe D, 
Cardoso F, et al. Safeguarding 
the future of independent, 
academic clinical cancer 
research in Europe for the 
benefit of patients. ESMO Open 
2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/
esmoopen-2017-000187
Received 29 May 2017
Revised 27 June 2017
Accepted 27 June 2017
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Anastassia Negrouk, 
International Policy Office, 
European Organisation for 
Research andTreatment of 
Cancer (EORTC) at av. Mounier 
83/11, 1200 Bruxelles, Belgium;  
anastassia. 
negrouk@ 
eortc. 
be
AbstrAct
Cancer is a complex disease that is constantly evolving. It 
is now the most common cause of death in Europe after 
cardiovascular diseases. There are inequalities among 
European countries, potentially unsustainable healthcare 
systems impacting quality of cancer care and increasing 
number of patients with cancer with rare conditions. 
Clinical and translational research are the backbone in 
establishing scientific advances as novel treatments 
and advancing progress to the benefit of patients. 
Commercially sponsored clinical trials are responsible 
for developing new medicines that can treat various 
disease areas, including cancer. It is important to note, 
however, that these clinical trials only assess the viability 
of compounds that are chosen by a commercial entity 
that funds the entire process. By their design and focus, 
these trials need to fulfil commercial interests and market 
expectations, which do not always coincide with patients’ 
needs. 
As soon or even before novel treatments and compounds 
obtain formal market authorisation, academia will take 
these existing and new medicines to further conduct 
research in order to optimise their use, develop new 
combinations and with a strong focus on the patients and 
their needs. Established standard of care most commonly 
relies on clinical cancer research stemming from non-
commercial entities, cooperative groups or academic 
clinical research.
This article provides a consensus on the definition of 
academic research, illustrates its added value and 
suggests and calls to European Union institutions to 
support this type of research for the benefit of patients.
IntroductIon
The cancer clinical research landscape 
is rapidly changing, and all European 
Union (EU) stakeholders need to urgently 
adapt in order to offer patients effec-
tive and affordable cancer care.1–3 The 
Clinical Academic Cancer Research Forum 
(CAREFOR, http://www. 
eortc. 
org/ 
carefor/) 
believes the EU needs to urgently increase its 
capacity for INDEPENDENT international 
academic clinical cancer research.
CAREFOR is a new, visionary multistake-
holder platform that sets out to address 
the various funding and regulatory chal-
lenges faced by academic researchers and 
also to foster the advancement of collabo-
rative cancer research by developing novel 
approaches to doing clinical trials, thus 
helping to keep Europe at the forefront of 
academic cancer research.
To achieve this, INDEPENDENT academic 
clinical cancer researchers need:
 
► an efficient and harmonised legal frame-
work that meets the real needs of patients 
and researchers;
 
► appropriate independent funding mecha-
nisms for international efforts.
The contribution of academic researchers to 
improvements of cancer care is largely docu-
mented in fields such as childhood cancers 
and/or 
haematology.4 
5 
More 
recently, 
the use of imatinib in soft tissue and bone 
sarcomas is a very good illustration of the 
capacity of academic research to expand the 
use of a novel agent to a new, rare indication 
that would not be necessarily explored by 
the drug manufacturers otherwise.6–10 Many 
therapeutic breakthroughs and standards of 
treatments have been established by academic 
researchers who validate complex therapeutic 
strategies, not necessarily limited to drugs but 
in combination with other treatment modali-
ties. With its main role to optimise therapeutic 
strategies, academic research drives Europe’s 
therapeutic progress and knowledge develop-
ment. It has been documented that many gaps 
in evidence-based recommendations remain 
as of yet since many of the unanswered ques-
tions are of no interest for pharma companies 
and need to be addressed by the academia. 
Indeed, an analysis of 1023 recommendations 
found in 10 Clinical Practice Guidelines in 
Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) across several 
cancer types shows that proportions of level 
I category of evidence were as low as 20% for 
kidney, 19% for breast, 6% for lung, 9% for 
pancreatic, 6% for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
2
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
6% for melanoma, 4% for prostate and 1% for colorectal 
cancer.11
With personalised medicine and the arrival of multiple 
new technologies, we have entered an era of clinical 
research transformation where the role of academic 
research is going to be even more critical to help prior-
itise the appropriate treatments in an INDEPENDENT 
manner based on sound evidence. Many missions of 
importance for public health are not appropriate for 
the commercial sector. Therefore, CAREFOR believes 
academic researchers shall:
 
► support and accelerate the development of precision 
medicine by:
 
► ensuring INDEPENDENT research and knowl-
edge development in Europe
 
► enhancing knowledge through collaborative plat-
forms
 
► offering patients the most useful tests and the best 
information necessary to maximise their chances 
of gaining timely access to new clinical trials
 
► support other stakeholders such as drug developers, 
regulators and health technology assessment bodies 
with specialised expertise, strategic vision on the un-
met needs, but also through the development of new 
methodologies and meeting the challenge of using 
big data
 
► help the society and patients to embrace new ap-
proaches such as adaptive licensing and effective im-
plementation of new treatments, including off-label 
use in clinical situations of unmet need, optimising 
the administration of currently approved therapies, 
supporting outcomes research, reducing side effects, 
addressing surgery and radiotherapy, all by means of 
academic, fully independent, well-designed clinical 
trials.
 
► support initiatives aiming to:
 
► reduce side effects
 
► explore surgery and radiotherapy as adjunctive 
treatments
 
► explore population-based research and coopera-
tion with registries.
Indeed, millions of patients with cancer and their families 
around the world have benefited from practice-changing 
discoveries made by basic and clinical cancer researchers 
over the last decades. Over the past 40 years, survival rates 
in the EU have increased significantly for many cancers.12 
For example, in the 1970s, only one in four people diag-
nosed with cancer in the UK could expect to survive 
for 10 years or more, whereas currently half of patients 
survive their cancer for at least 10 years.13 This progress is 
attributable to advances in cancer research and its transla-
tion into novel treatment options and strategies through 
successful clinical trials, as well as to continuous efforts in 
the fields of cancer prevention, screening and early detec-
tion.14 15
However, there is still much to be done. The prognosis 
for patients with cancer has not improved equally for all 
cancer types, and there are still marked differences in 
cancer mortality across European countries. Cancer is 
more prevalent in the elderly so the annual number of new 
cases of cancer in the EU alone is expected to continue 
to rise from 2.6 million in 2012 to over 3.2 million by 
2030.16 This is due to the increased life expectancy but 
also because of better detection and diagnosis. It has 
been forecasted that within approximately 10–15 years, 
in developed countries, one out of two people will have 
one cancer throughout their lifetime. On a global scale, 
the increase is even bigger with the estimated overall 
economic impact of cancer in 2008 already amounting 
to $895 billion or 1.5% of the total global gross domestic 
product.17
This growing burden of cancer is particularly chal-
lenging when financial constraints are being placed on 
the provision of quality cancer care services as well as the 
funding of academic cancer research. To address these 
and other challenges (specified further below), the 
Clinical Academic Cancer Research Forum (CAREFOR, 
http://www. 
eortc. 
org/ 
carefor/) 
works 
to 
improve 
the situation for academic clinical trials in the field 
and has been established to help improve the situation 
for academic clinical trials in the field of oncology in 
Europe.
CAREFOR achieves this by reaching out to other 
stakeholders and by publicising the role and benefits of 
independent clinical research, with the ultimate goal to 
anchor academic cancer clinical research in the Euro-
pean landscape.
Affordability of cancer care and benefit of academic clinical 
research
The goal of commercially driven clinical cancer research 
is to bring profitable new drugs to market as quickly as 
possible, though the clinical trials undertaken may not 
necessarily lead to substantial increases in survival and 
may not always fully reflect the needs and concerns of 
patients. It is also clear that innovative drugs are often 
introduced to the market at a cost that is seldom afford-
able even for high-income countries, forcing healthcare 
systems and regulators to make particularly difficult 
choices. Academic cancer research, on the other hand, 
goes to extraordinary efforts to optimise novel thera-
peutic multidisciplinary strategies as well as investigating 
important but less commercially attractive research areas 
and health issues. Some examples include rare cancers, 
drug combinations and multimodal treatment regimens, 
the impact of cancer and its treatment on the human 
body and long-term patient follow-up.
In the new era of molecular genetics and immuno-
therapy, basic and translational research plays a crucial 
role in identifying and developing new anticancer treat-
ments and strategies.18
Our increasing understanding of cancer biology over 
the last decade is leading to new forms of clinical research, 
such that bridging laboratory researchers to clinicians 
(bench to bedside) is more critical than ever. This can be 
achieved by maximising access to biological material in 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
3
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
a regulatory framework that is simple and efficient and 
applies across the whole of Europe.
Many treatments are administered without knowing 
their true benefits for individual patients and often carry 
the risk of undue toxicity. Therefore, if personalised or 
precision medicine is to be achieved, it is imperative to 
determine the clinical relevance of treatments, whether 
in development or in practice, for specific groups of 
patients. This would have an obvious impact on health-
care budgets and can be better achieved by independent 
researchers, rather than industry as this is seldom its 
primary interest.
In fact, the knowledge on the real efficacy and ulti-
mate potential of recently approved drugs is very limited. 
There is a usual need of further optimisation of the new 
approved drugs, with testing of different schedules and 
in different niches, head-to-head comparisons with other 
alternative therapies and other studies that may not be 
interesting for the owner of the drug; these trials should 
be accomplished by the academia.19
Non-commercial, 
independent 
cancer 
research, 
whether funded publicly or through other means, 
including collaboration with industries, that is, modern 
academic research, yields substantial economic returns in 
terms of improved health outcomes and has otherwise a 
major impact on public health.  Case studies in  Supple-
mentary files 1-7 provide examples of academic research 
that has led to dramatic improvements in terms of quality 
of life and survival rates for different types of cancers; 
case studies also show the scale of academic research and 
potential impact on public health.
Independent research is endangered in Europe
CAREFOR participants agree on the definition of 
academic or non-commercial research as illustrated in 
the figure (figure 1) below.
The general public knows that basic laboratory research 
is done by universities and other academic organisations, 
but it is not well known that an important part of clin-
ical research in oncology has always been, and still is, 
performed by the academic sector. Critically, academic 
clinical research currently suffers from several unintended 
effects of legislation that is drafted for a specific purpose, 
but has a negative impact on academic research often due 
to a failure to recognise the key role that academic clin-
ical research plays in supporting innovation and delivery 
of the high quality of the healthcare in Europe.
Data from the European Clinical Trials Database 
(EudraCT) actually shows that non-commercial spon-
sors conduct an important proportion of clinical trials 
(figure 2).
This figure does not provide a full overview of clinical 
research run by academia. Indeed, in oncology, drugs 
alone do not always provide the solution, as many cancers 
are managed with surgery and radiotherapy. Progress 
in these areas can only be achieved through clinical 
research conducted almost exclusively by academia. 
Hence, it could be argued that the overall contribution 
of academia to clinical research would be much higher. 
No global statistics exist in Europe, but based on the clin-
ical trials register ‘ 
ClinicalTrials. 
gov’, only 35% of cancer 
projects registered are funded by industry, with 65% 
being supported by health systems, government funds, 
universities and other research organisations.
A glance at the European Medicine Agency (EMA) 
public reports on clinical trial statistics shows that the 
proportion of non-commercial trials has recently dropped 
to just 20%–21% of trials.20 This is clearly a major cause 
for concern and may have several different explana-
tions, including, at least for oncology, a late effect of the 
EU Clinical Trials Directive. However, it clearly shows a 
Figure 1 Definition of non-commercial research 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
4
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
dangerous trend that will ultimately prove detrimental to 
cancer care.
Many of the academic clinical trials carried out in 
Europe have had a major positive impact on the way 
cancer is treated.
Funding of international efforts
Yearly investments in research of Horizon 2020, aiming 
to support collaborative international research initiatives, 
barely represent about 4% of overall investments by all 
EU member states. National funding mechanisms, on the 
other hand, prioritise national initiatives and are not fairly 
distributed, making international initiatives cumbersome 
or even impossible to fund.
There is a need to put in place an efficient mechanism 
of communication with National and EU funders in order 
to objectively evaluate needs of national versus interna-
tional funding in cancer clinical research and to adapt 
existing mechanisms consequently.
collaboration for patient-centred innovation
With the steadily growing number of cancer subtypes, 
each with its own specific molecular and genetic signa-
ture, academic clinical cancer research has an increasing 
role to play in developing tailored treatment options 
(precision medicine) on the one hand and addressing 
real-life implementation of therapeutic strategies on the 
other. New approaches and methodologies are being 
developed to address these two major poles through new 
clinical cancer research partnerships that must be facili-
tated and supported by policy-makers.
Independent collaborative research platforms are 
much better suited than commercial clinical research 
silos for identifying the right patients for access to new 
drug trials and for optimising knowledge development. 
These platforms can serve as a point for cancer patient 
access, based on molecular characteristics to enter clinical 
trials for ‘adaptive licensing’, a staggered drug approval 
process that allows a defined subgroup of patients with 
high medical need to access novel treatments sooner.
These platforms would form a precompetitive scheme 
for matching of the right tumour type with the right 
investigational drug before competitive drug develop-
ment, while maximising knowledge about patients whose 
tumours may not exhibit the relevant features. This 
means a company would not have to screen thousands of 
patients to find the few hundred needed for their drug 
development, thus saving time and money and increasing 
chances for patients with rarer cancer subtypes to partici-
pate in clinical trials.
For this to happen, it is important that biological 
materials required for research are stored by indepen-
dent collaborative platforms in non-proprietary quality 
controlled biobanks with transparent governance and 
biomaterial sharing policies, committed to the principle 
of partnership for drug development, rather than by 
commercial entities. This would help facilitate and accel-
erate regulatory acceptance with regard to the validation 
Figure 2 Clinical trials run by non-commercial sponsors 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
5
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
of relevant research targets and biomarkers. An example 
of such a collaborative platform is the EORTC SPEC-
TAcolor (http:// 
spectacolor. 
eortc. 
org/), a prospective, 
fully annotated tumour sample bank and biomarker 
analysis platform for the genetic profiling of patients 
with advanced colorectal cancer. Other groups also have 
examples of similar platforms (ie, AURORA project, h 
ttp: 
//www. 
bigagainstbreastcancer. 
org/ 
projects/ 
metastatic- 
 
brea 
st- 
 
cancer- 
gps/).
High-quality collaborative research platforms will likely 
become the new research model (currently referred 
to as benchmarking studies) as they offer an effective 
approach when multiple (randomised) clinical trials 
addressing a variety of possible drug combinations are no 
longer feasible. These platforms will help regulators and 
industry as academia will function as an active partner in 
the drug registration process, switching from a traditional 
drug-centred research and approval process to a truly 
patient-centred approach. The aim is to find the trial fit 
for the patient, rather than finding the patient fit for the 
trial.
new methodologies for evidence generation and evaluation
Even though collectively rare cancers account for about 
one-fifth of new cancer cases, they pose a particular chal-
lenge to clinical cancer research. Given that low patient 
numbers often limit the industry’s capacity to develop 
drugs alone for most rare cancers, in principle, any piece 
of new evidence would need to be exploited to help opti-
mise the low number of patients liable to be enrolled in 
clinical studies on rare cancers.21
This patient population is typically willing to accept 
higher levels of uncertainty, so regulatory agencies and 
local health systems should allow methodologies to be 
refined. This includes using Bayesian logic, preclinical 
evidence, uncontrolled studies, observational evidence 
and analysis of retrospective cases and even anecdotal 
cases as well as the results of large and small randomised 
clinical trials.
Adaptive clinical trials in general, with their inherent 
potential of flexibility when properly applied, should be 
considered, and surrogate end points could replace clin-
ical end points (eg, progression-free survival or tumour 
response) without affecting patient safety. New treatments 
could be explored temporarily, under the assumption 
that the surrogate end point is valid, while awaiting the 
final results. The compassionate and off-label use of 
drugs should be exploited as well as flexible regulatory 
innovations such as adaptive licensing to offer new agents 
early on to patients with rare cancers, while, at the same 
time, generating evidence.
In addition, electronic patient records for measuring the 
effectiveness of treatments via patient-reported outcomes 
and also innovative partnerships with cancer registries 
could be used to acquire evidence and create external 
controls for future studies (when internal controls are 
impractical) to study the effectiveness of new treatments 
in the real world as distinct from the artificial world of 
classical clinical trials. While the commercial sector will 
not have access to cancer registry data, academia can both 
help generate such information, establish collaborations 
and provide independent evaluation to regulators of the 
medical and economical added value of novel treatments 
in real life.
barriers to academic clinical cancer research
A recent survey confirmed that lack of funding continues to 
be the most significant barrier to academic clinical cancer 
research around the world, irrespective of the economic 
circumstances of the country.22 There are many examples 
of projects addressing key public health questions that 
could not be done or that have been significantly delayed 
because of lack of funding. In addition, academic cancer 
clinical researchers in Europe are confronted by a myriad 
of rules and regulations that hamper successful research 
in practice, without any evidence that they achieve their 
stated goal of improving patient safety. The case studies of 
trials that could not be done because of regulations and/
or lack of funding are presented in the Supplementary 
file 7. The new EU Clinical Trials Regulation (CTR)23 is 
likely to come into effect in 2018 having had the laud-
able goal of reducing the burden of bureaucracy that has 
been imposed by the former EU Clinical Trials Directive 
2001/20/EC stifling clinical research in Europe for many 
years resulting in a 25% decline in the number of clinical 
trials conducted in the EU between 2007 and 2011.24
Several CTR-related measures suggest that conducting 
clinical trials may become easier in the future, such as the 
upgrading of the centralised EU clinical trials portal for 
increased data transparency and communication, fewer 
regulatory requirements for ‘low‐intervention clinical 
trials’ and ‘one-time consent’ from patients for the use 
of their data and biomaterial for research outside the 
clinical trial. However, the CTR still has to be fully imple-
mented at the national level in a harmonised fashion 
across Europe, and stakeholders still have to be properly 
informed and educated.
CAREFOR welcomes more recent finalisation of the 
General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR). It is of crucial importance for academic 
clinical cancer research that data protection rules in 
Europe enable healthcare researchers and their part-
ners to optimally use certain types of personal data. 
This data can support, improve and preserve the quality 
of healthcare and also foster innovation within the EU 
without jeopardising patient confidentiality. CAREFOR 
specifically welcomes research being acknowledged as a 
lawful purpose for data processing and for allowing infor-
mation on future research to be less specific provided 
patient consent is unambiguous. This principle is also 
embedded in the CTR and repeated throughout as an 
absolute prerequisite for fostering clinical research in the 
EU by academia.25 26 New regulations also recognise the 
importance of registries and that new consents may not 
always be required for the secondary use of data. Further-
more, it recognises the value of pseudonymisation as 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
6
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
being a potentially valid means of safeguarding patient 
anonymity, and it enables each union or member state to 
further specify additional derogations.
As stated earlier, both CTR and GDPR still need to be 
implemented in the EU as a whole and, despite both 
being regulations, elements of both need to be incorpo-
rated into national law, thus maintaining heterogeneity 
of legal frameworks in EU. Moreover, they are a very 
good example of the piling up of regulations developed 
without any in-depth analysis of the full impact they might 
have on a single research project. The complexity of the 
current legal framework, as illustrated in the figure below, 
renders the EU less attractive for industry investment and 
limits the amount and type of research academics are 
able to do. This further weakens research and inhibits 
innovation in the EU to such an extent that it presents 
a challenge to the fundamental right of EU citizens to 
undertake research (figure 3).
conclusIon
In conclusion, CAREFOR believes EU institutions shall 
urgently work on ways to clinical research in the fourfold 
way, as illustrated below (figure 4).
CAREFOR is committed to work closely with the EU 
parliament, the European Commission and Member 
States to ensure EU is equipped with efficient legal 
framework and visionary that make EU the best place 
for fostering research and innovation in general and 
more specifically in the field of cancer clinical academic 
research.
CAREFOR will specifically ensure that the framework 
for pan-EU clinical research whether interventional 
or non-interventional is pragmatic and sound to allow 
biobanks to function and permit the full use of data 
and samples collected. It should also avoid unneces-
sary administrative obstacles and unwarranted costs, be 
in tune with the rapidly changing research landscape 
and meet the need for collaboration, partnership, data 
sharing and transparency.
CAREFOR will carefully monitor and document the 
need for efficient independent clinical cancer research 
in order to provide EU regulators and policy-makers with 
strong expert opinion and constructive suggestions.
cArEFor: joining efforts to foster academic clinical cancer 
research 
To address the lack of awareness on the importance 
of academic clinical research, three leading European 
organisations—the European Association for Cancer 
Research, the European Organisation for the Research 
Figure 3 EU clinical research framework 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
7
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), and the European 
Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO)—have estab-
lished the Clinical Academic Cancer Research Forum 
(CAREFOR, http://www. 
eortc. 
org/ 
carefor/) in 2014. 
The annual forum brings together cancer groups and 
networks as well as individual experts, patients and 
other relevant stakeholders to encourage and support 
innovative academic clinical research in oncology. 
CAREFOR seeks to address the aforementioned and 
additional challenges faced by all those involved in 
conducting academic research and to find suitable 
solutions.
Topics that will be addressed at this forum include 
securing funding for academic clinical trials, establishing 
rules of collaboration with industry, identifying the impli-
cations of cross-border collaboration, involving patients 
in clinical trials, guaranteeing data protection and trans-
parency and fostering the freedom of research while 
implementing the CTR.
CAREFOR therefore reflects the willingness of academia 
to work together towards supporting the EU mission 
of bringing the constantly evolving group of diseases 
that comprise cancer under control and in providing 
patients with a better quality of life and the hope for a 
cure. Academic clinical trials form the cornerstone of 
such research and, as such, deserve safeguarding and 
fostering. CAREFOR welcomes an open and construc-
tive dialogue with European policy-makers to facilitate 
academic clinical trials in Europe and to keep Europe at 
the cutting edge of cancer research.
About thE EuropEAn AssocIAtIon For cAncEr 
rEsEArch
The EACR is Europe’s largest professional member 
society for cancer researchers with over 9500 members 
worldwide. We provide a wide range of services to 
members, facilitate communication and collaboration 
and organise a series of cancer research conferences 
where the latest research topics and interaction are the 
highest priorities.
About thE EuropEAn orgAnIsAtIon For thE rEsEArch 
And trEAtmEnt oF cAncEr
Created in 1962, the EORTC is a non-profit interna-
tional cancer research organisation under Belgian Law. 
The EORTC is conducting multidisciplinary interna-
tional cancer clinical research in a network of over 300 
university hospitals located in 32 countries in which some 
2900 clinicians and scientists collaborate on a voluntary 
basis. Over 40 EORTC clinical trials are open to patient 
recruitment at any given time. The EORTC operates on 
an independent basis, and in this capacity is able to work 
in partnership with the pharmaceutical industry in eval-
uating innovative molecules. EORTC has contributed 
to several success stories of new anti-cancer drug devel-
opment including registrations by the Food and Drug 
Administration and the EMA. The EORTC has proven 
track records in establishing new standards, for example, 
Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST), 
Quality of Life, and so on. The EORTC is involved in 
Figure 4 How can the EU institutions support the academic clinical research? 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
8
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
various EU-funded projects. See www. 
eortc. 
org for more 
information.
About thE EuropEAn socIEty For mEdIcAl oncology
The ESMO is the leading European professional organisa-
tion for medical oncology. Comprising more than 16 000 
oncology professionals from over 130 countries, we are 
the society of reference for oncology education and infor-
mation. We are committed to supporting our members to 
develop and advance in a fast-evolving professional envi-
ronment.
About the supporting organisations
The CAREFOR initiative is supported by numerous Euro-
pean and international organisations, patient advocacy 
groups, umbrella organisations, societies, cooperative 
groups and numerous cancer centres that have greatly 
contributed to healthcare improvement and management 
of patients in the field of oncology (in the alphabetical 
order):
ABCSG, ACR-ITR, AGO, ANOCEF, ARCAGY GINECO, 
ASST, BIG, CML Advocates Network, EACR, EORTC, 
ESMO, ETOP, FFCD, FICOG, GCO, GEICAM, GEIS, 
GEMCAD, GERCOR, GOIRC, GORTEC, Hospital 
General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, IBCSG, IFCT, 
IOCN, IRCCS, JCOG, Jules Bordet Institute, LACOG, 
LMU, LYSA & LYSARC, MELAMONA Patient Network 
Europe, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
Netherlands Cancer Institute, SAKK, SOCUG, TTD, 
UNICANCER, Vall d’Hebron Institut of Oncology.
See http://www. 
eortc. 
org/ 
carefor/ for further infor-
mation and list of participants.
Author affiliations
1International Policy Office, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of 
Cancer (EORTC),Headquarters, Brussels, Belgium
2Director General, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer 
(EORTC), Brussels, Belgium
3Champalimaud Cancer Center, Lisboa, Portugal
4French Cooperative Thoracic Intergroup (IFCT) – Groupes Cooperateurs en 
Oncologie (GCO), Paris, France
5Grupo Español de Investigación en Cáncer de Mama (GEICAM), Scientific Director 
and CEO, Madrid, Spain
6Grupo Espanol Multidisciplinar en Cancer Digestivo (GEMCAD), Medical 
OncologyDepartment, Hospital Clínic, Translational Genomics and Targeted 
Therapeuticsin Solid Tumors Group, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain
7International Breast Cancer Study Group (IBCSG) Coordinating Center, Bern, 
Switzerland
8Spanish Cooperative Group for the Treatment of Digestive Tumors (TTD), Centro 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), InstitutoSanitario 
de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), Medical OncologyDepartment, 
Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain
9European Association for Cancer Research (EACR), Department of Molecular 
Oncology at the University of Manchester and Directorof the Cancer Research UK 
Manchester Institute, Manchester, UK
10European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO), Clinic of Oncology,University 
Hospital, Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland
Contributors All authors contributed equally.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© European Society for Medical Oncology (unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1. Lacombe D, Tejpar S, Salgado R, et al. European perspective 
for effective cancer drug development. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 
2014;11:492–8.
 2. Lacombe D, Burock S, Meunier F
. Academia–industry partnerships: 
are we ready for new models of partnership? Eur J Cancer 
2013;49:1–7.
 3. Denis Lacombe quietly orchestrating the clinical research revolution. 
Cancer World 2015;68:4–10.
 4. 50 years of haematology: Research that revolutionized patient care.
 5. Salles G, Seymour JF
, Offner F
, et al. Rituximab maintenance for 
2 years in patients with high tumour burden follicular lymphoma 
responding to rituximab plus chemotherapy (PRIMA): a phase 3, 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2011;377:42–51 .
 6. Blanke CD, Demetri GD, von Mehren M, et al. Long-term results from 
a randomized phase II trial of standard- versus higher-dose imatinib 
mesylate for patients with unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors expressing KIT. J Clin Oncol 2008;26(4):620–5.
 7. Verweij J, van Oosterom A, Blay JY, et al. Imatinib mesylate (STI-
571 Glivec, Gleevec) is an active agent for gastrointestinal stromal 
tumours, but does not yield responses in other soft-tissue sarcomas 
that are unselected for a molecular target. Results from an EORTC 
Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group phase II study. Eur J Cancer 
2003;39:2006–11.
 8. Blanke CD, Rankin C, Demetri GD, et al. Phase III randomized, 
intergroup trial assessing imatinib mesylate at two dose levels in 
patients with unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors expressing the kit receptor tyrosine kinase: S0033. J Clin 
Oncol 2008;26:626–32.
 9. Verweij J, Casali PG, Zalcberg J, et al. Progression-free survival in 
gastrointestinal stromal tumours with high-dose imatinib: randomised 
trial. The Lancet 2004;364(9440):1127–34.
 
10. Blay JY, Le Cesne A, Ray-Coquard I, et al. Prospective multicentric 
randomized phase III study of imatinib in patients with advanced 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors comparing interruption versus 
continuation of treatment beyond 1 year: the French Sarcoma Group. 
J Clin Oncol 2007;25(9):1107–13.
 
11. Poonacha TK, Go RS. Level of scientific evidence underlying 
recommendations arising from the National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network clinical practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:186–91.
 
12. Malvezzi M, Bertuccio P
, Rosso T, et al. European cancer mortality 
predictions for the year 2015: does lung cancer have the highest 
death rate in EU women? Ann Oncol 2015;26:779–86 http:// 
annonc. 
oxfordjournals. 
org/ 
content/ 
26/ 
4/ 
779. 
full. 
pdf+ 
html? 
sid= 
45252ba7- 
f147- 
46dc- 
8e1bc7d796750f69.
 
13. Cancer Research UK. Cancer Statistics for the UK. Cancer survival 
for all cancers combined. 2015 http://www. 
cancerresearchuk. 
org/ 
health- 
professional/ 
cancer- 
statistics/ 
survival# 
heading- 
Zero.
 
14. Sun E, Jena AB, Lakdawalle D, et al. The contributions of improved 
therapy and earlier detection to cancer survival gains, 1988–2000. 
Forum Health Econ Policy;1. 13(2)Article http:// 
works. 
bepress. 
com/ 
cgi/ 
viewcontent. 
cgi? 
article= 
1077& 
context= 
dana_ 
goldman.
 
15. Glover M, Buxton M, Guthrie S, et al. Estimating the returns to UK 
publicly funded cancer-related research in terms of the net value 
of improved health outcomes. BMC Med 2014;12 http://www. 
biomedcentral. 
com/ 
content/ 
pdf/ 
1741- 
7015- 
12- 
99. 
pdf.
 
16. http:// 
globocan. 
iarc. 
fr/ 
Pages/ 
burden_ 
sel. 
aspx Page 13 of 20.
 
17. Society AC. The global economic cost of cancer. American 
Cancer Society 2010 http://www. 
cancer. 
org/ 
acs/ 
groups/ 
content/@ 
internationalaffairs/ 
documents/ 
document/ 
acspc- 
026203. 
pdf.
 
18. Yarden Y, Caldes C. Basic cancer research: why it is essential for the 
future of cancer therapy. Eur J Cancer 2013;49:2619 http:// 
eacr. 
org/ 
news/ 
2014/ 
editorial/ 
22% 
2023% 
20Position% 
20Paper. 
pdf.
 
19. Díaz-Rubio E, Gómez-España A, Massutí B, et al. First-line XELOX 
plus bevacizumab followed by XELOX plus bevacizumab or 
single-agent bevacizumab as maintenance therapy in patients with 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
 Open Access
9
Negrouk A, et al. ESMO Open 2017;2:e000187. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187
metastatic colorectal cancer: the phase III MACRO TTD study. 
Oncologist 2012;17:15–25.
 
20. EudraCT Public Web Report for July 2015. (https:// 
eudract. 
ema. 
europa. 
eu/ 
docs/ 
statistics/ 
EudraCT_ 
Statistics_ 
2015/ 
EudraCT_ 
Public_ 
Report_ 
July_ 
201 5.pdf)
 
21. Casali PG, Bruzzi P
, Bogaerts J, et al. Rare Cancers Europe (RCE) 
Consensus Panel. Rare Cancers Europe (RCE) methodological 
recommendations for clinical studies in rare cancers: a European 
consensus position paper. Ann Oncol 2015;26:300–6 http:// 
annonc. 
oxfordjournals. 
org/ 
content/ 
26/ 
2/ 
300. 
full. 
pdf+ 
html.
 
22. Seruga B, Sadikov A, Cazap EL, et al. Barriers and challenges to 
global clinical cancer research. Oncologist 2014;19:61–7 http:// 
theoncologist. 
alphamedpress. 
org/ 
content/ 
19/ 
1/ 
61. 
full. 
pdf+ 
html.
 
23. (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
16 April 2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, 
and repealing Directive 2001/20/EC. http:// 
eurlex. 
europa. 
eu/ 
legal- 
content/ 
EN/ 
TXT/? 
uri= 
uriserv: 
OJ. 
L_. 
2014. 
158. 
01. 
0001. 
01. 
ENG.
 
24. Fostering EU’s attractiveness in clinical research: Commission 
proposes to revamp rules on trials with medicines. Press release 
2012;17 http:// 
ec. 
europa. 
eu/ 
health/ 
files/ 
clinicaltrials/ 
2012_ 
07/ 
pressreleases/ 
ip- 
12- 
795_ 
en. 
pdf.
 
25. Dittrich C, Negrouk A, Casali PG. European Society for Medical 
Oncology (ESMO) Switzerland, and the European Organisation for 
Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), Belgium. An ESMO-
EORTC position paper on the EU clinical trials regulation and EMA's 
transparency policy: making European research more competitive 
again. Ann Oncol 2015;26:829–32 http:// 
annonc. 
oxfordjournals. 
org/ 
content/ 
26/ 
5/ 
829. 
full. 
pdf+ 
html.
 
26. Casali PG. European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) 
Switzerland. Risks of the New EU Data Protection regulation: 
an ESMO position paper endorsed by the European Oncology 
community. Ann Oncol 2014;25:1458–61 http:// 
annonc. 
oxfordjournals. 
org/ 
content/ 
25/ 
8/ 
1458. 
full. 
pdf+ 
html.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://esmoopen.bmj.com/
ESMO Open: first published as 10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000187 on 3 August 2017. Downloaded from 
