 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
1/31 
The Secretary of the Expert Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential Medicines 
Policy, Access and Rational Use 
Department of Medicines Policy and Standards 
World Health Organization 
20 Avenue Appia 
CH-1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland 
email: emlsecretariat@who.int 
 
 
APPLICATION FOR INCLUSION OF RIBAVIRIN IN THE WHO MODEL LIST OF ESSENTIAL 
MEDICINES 
 
 
1. SUMMARY STATEMENT 
 
This is a proposal to include ribavirin for treatment of viral haemorrhagic fevers (VHF), particularly 
Lassa fever, Argentine haemorrhagic fever (AHF), Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) 
and haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS), in the WHO Model List of Essential 
Medicines (1-5). 
 
In 1972, Sidwell et al. (1) first reported that ribavirin, a broad-spectrum antiviral drug, was active 
against a variety of RNA and DNA viruses in culture and in animals, without undue toxicity. Since 
then, ribavirin has been found effective for the treatment of 1) respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) 
infection in immunosuppressed and high-risk children and adults, 2) viral haemorrhagic fevers 
(VHFs) caused by Arenaviridae and Bunyaviridae (Lassa, Junin, Crimean-Congo and Hantaan, a 
hanta virus) (1-5), and 3) hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Ribavirin has not been found effective 
for the treatment for hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (6), Rift Valley fever, or Filoviruses (7). 
While the exact mechanism of action is unknown, the drug appears to interfere with intracellular 
RNA- and DNA synthesis and subsequently inhibits protein synthesis and viral replication of 
ribavirin-sensitive RNA- or DNA viruses (8). 
 
The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the use of ribavirin for 
treatment of respiratory syncytial virus and hepatitis C virus infection. There are no antiviral drugs 
approved by FDA for treatment of viral haemorrhagic fevers. 
 
 
2. NAME OF THE FOCAL POINT IN WHO SUBMITTING THE APPLICATION 
 
• 
Dr Cathy Roth, Coordinator, Biorisk Reduction for Dangerous Pathogens Team (BDP), 
Department of Epidemic and Pandemic Alert and Response (CDS/EPR) 
• 
Dr Pierre Formenty, Project Leader for Dangerous Pathogens, CDS/EPR/BDP 
 
 
3. ORGANIZATIONS CONSULTED FOR THE APPLICATION 
 
• 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, GA, USA 
• 
Médecins sans Frontières (MSF), Paris, France, and Geneva, Switzerland 
• 
Medical Emergency Relief International (Merlin), London, UK 
• 
National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), Johannesburg, South Africa 
• 
Tulane School of Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA 
• 
United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), 
Frederick, MD, USA 
 
 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
2/31 
4. INTERNATIONAL NONPROPRIETARY NAME (INN, GENERIC NAME) OF THE MEDICINE 
 
Ribavirin, chemically denoted as 1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl-1H-1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide. 
 
 
5. FORMULATION PROPOSED FOR INCLUSION (INCLUDING ADULT AND PAEDIATRIC) 
 
In the United States, ribavirin is FDA-approved and marketed 1) as inhalation solution (Virazole®, 
ICN / Valeant) for treatment of RSV infection, and 2) as oral capsule (Rebetol®, Essex-Schering-
Plough) and tablet (Copegus®, Roche; Ribasphere 200 mg / Ribapak 400 mg, 600 mg, Three 
Rivers Pharmaceutical Industries / Par Pharmaceuticals) for treatment of hepatitis C virus 
infection. Ribavirin for intravenous administration (Virazole®) is of limited availability, produced by 
ICN / Valeant for compassionate use under an investigational new drug (IND) application (7). 
Ribavirin for intravenous administration is supplied in vials containing 1000 mg and 800 mg of 
ribavirin dissolved in 10mL phosphate buffer solution. Ribavirin for oral administration is supplied 
in capsules or film-coated tablets containing 200 mg. The only present FDA-approved indication 
for these products is in conjunction with interferon against chronic hepatitis C with hepatic 
damage and inhalation solution for treatment of RSV.  
 
The patent for ribavirin in the United States expired in September 2001. Production and sale of 
generic ribavirin started in 2005 (Three Rivers Pharmaceutical Industries / Par Pharmaceuticals, 
Sandoz, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, and Warrick Pharmaceuticals (generic arm of Schering-
Plough). 
 
 
6. INTERNATIONAL AVAILABILITY - MANUFACTURERS 
 
• 
Chengdu Diao Group Jiuhong Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Chengdu, Sichuang, People’s 
Republic of China 
• 
China National Medicines Guorui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Beijing, People’s Republic of 
China 
• 
Essex-Schering-Plough Pharmaceuticals, Kenilworth, NJ, USA. 
• 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland. 
• 
ICN Pharmaceuticals / Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, Costa Mesa, CA, USA 
• 
Jiangsu Lianshui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Lianshui, Jiangsu, People’s Republic of China 
• 
Kunming Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Kunming, Yunnan, People’s Republic of China 
• 
Lokis Pharmaceutical (Jilin) Co., Ltd, Meihekou, Jilin, People’s Republic of China 
• 
Qianjiang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Qianjiang, Hubei, People’s Republic of China 
• 
Shandong Xinhua Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Zibo, Shandong, People’s Republic of China 
• 
Siping Juneng Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Siping, Jilin, People’s Republic of China 
• 
Szyy Group Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Jiangyan, Jiangsu, People’s Republic of China 
• 
Three Rivers Pharmaceuticals, Cranberry Township, PA, USA 
• 
Yanzhou Yijian Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Yanzhou, Shandong, People’s Republic of 
China 
• 
Zhejiang Zhebei Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Deqing Xinshi, Zhejiang, People’s Republic of 
China 
 
 
7. LISTING REQUESTED 
 
Listing requested as individual medicine. 
 
 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
3/31 
8. INFORMATION SUPPORTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH RELEVANCE (epidemiological 
information on disease burden, assessment of current use, target population) 
 
Lassa fever ("Old World" Arenaviridae) 
 
Lassa virus haemorrhagic fever is an acute illness that occurs in West Africa (7). The virus is a 
single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the virus family Arenaviridae. Lassa fever is known to be 
endemic in Guinea (Conakry), Liberia, Sierra Leone and parts of Nigeria, but probably exists in 
other West African countries as well. Some studies indicate that 300 000 to 500 000 cases of 
Lassa fever and 5000 deaths occur yearly across West Africa (7, 9). The overall case-fatality rate 
is 1%-2% in the community, up to 15%-25% among hospitalized patients, and up to 50%-60% 
during outbreaks (9). Deafness has been documented in more than 25%-30% of the patients that 
have recovered. Death usually occurs within 14 days of onset in fatal cases. The disease is 
especially severe late in pregnancy, with maternal death or fetal loss occurring in over  80% of 
cases during the third trimester (10, 11). 
 
 
Argentine haemorrhagic fever ("New World" Arenaviridae) 
 
Argentine haemorrhagic fever (AHF) is transmitted by rodents and caused by Junin virus, a 
member of the Arenaviridae family. Since the disease was first recognized in 1955, annual 
outbreaks have been notified without interruption, with more than 24.000 cases reported in 1993 
(7, 12-14). The endemo-epidemic area of the disease is located in the humid pampa, the most 
fertile farm land of Argentina (15). AHF is a serious acute viral disease characterized by a febrile 
syndrome with haematological, neurological, renal and cardiovascular alterations. Without 
treatment, case-fatality ratio is 15-30% (15).  
 
Since 1992, an attenuated live vaccine against AHF has been available. The vaccine has been 
used in high-risk adult populations with a significant reduction in the incidence of the disease. 
However, even with an effective vaccine, sporadic cases and outbreaks continue to occur. The 
early treatment with AHF convalescent plasma is extremely effective and reduces mortality to 1%.  
However, this treatment is only effective if given during the first 8 day-period after onset of 
symptoms. In addition plasma therapy entails risk of transfusion-borne diseases and the 
presentation of a late neurologic syndrome (LNS) that has been occurred in 10% of treated 
survivors (7, 12-14). 
 
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (Bunyaviridae) 
 
The Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus belongs to the Bunyaviridae family of 
viruses (7, 16). CCHF is a zoonosis transmitted by ticks that results in severe outbreaks in 
humans but which is not pathogenic for ruminants, their amplificator host. Although CCHF virus is 
not pathogenic in animals, the disease is known as one of the most important VHFs because of 
its high case fatality ratio (10-40%) and its potential for nosocomial transmission. CCHF is 
endemic throughout Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and Asia south of 50° latitude north, the 
limit of its tick reservoir, the genus Hyalomma (16). 
  
Reports of sporadic human cases and limited outbreaks are increasing every year. Recently 
outbreaks of CCHF in Afghanistan (2001-2006), Iran (2001), Kazakhstan (2005), Kosovo (2001), 
Mauritania (2002-2003), Pakistan (2001-2006), Russia (2006), Senegal (2004 with one human 
case imported to France), South Africa (2006), Sudan (2004), Tajikistan (2002-2004), and Turkey 
(2003-2006) have drawn international attention to this emerging problem. In these endemic areas, 
ecological changes, poverty and social instability, insufficient medical equipment together with 
absence of infection control standard precautions have all contributed to the increased  
transmission of the CCHF virus in its natural environment, in the community or in hospital settings. 
Absence of available and affordable therapy still limits outbreak control activities. 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
4/31 
Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (Bunyaviridae) 
 
Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) is a group of clinically similar illnesses caused 
by hantaviruses from the Bunyaviridae family of viruses(7, 17). HFRS includes diseases such as 
Korean haemorrhagic fever, epidemic haemorrhagic fever, and nephropathis epidemica. The 
viruses that cause HFRS include Hantaan, Dobrava-Belgrade, Seoul, and Puumala. HFRS is 
found throughout the world. Haantan virus is widely distributed in eastern Asia, particularly in 
China, Russia, and on the Korean peninsular. Puumala virus is found in Scandinavia, western 
Europe, and Russia. Dobrava virus is found primarily in the Balkans, and Seoul virus is found 
worldwide.  
 
 
9. TREATMENT DETAILS (dosage regimen, duration; reference to existing WHO and other 
clinical guidelines; need for special diagnostic or treatment facilities and skills) 
 
Lassa fever, Argentine- and Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fevers: adults (including 
pregnant women- see also "contraindications" (application #11 and 16, appendices 2 and 3) 
 
Administration 
Loading dose  
d1 
d1-4 
d5-10 
IV (6) 
17 mg/kg          
(max 1000 mg per 
dose) 1x * 
17 mg/kg         
(max 1000 mg per 
dose) q 6h 
8 mg/kg           
(max 500 mg per 
dose) q 8h 
PO (4) 
2000 mg 1x 
1000 mg q 6h 
500 mg q 6h 
 
* The loading dose for intravenous ribavirin has been suggested in other reports to be 30 mg/kg 
(max 2000 mg per dose) for Lassa fever (6, 7), and 34 mg/kg for AHF (13). 
 
Lassa fever, Argentine- and Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fevers: children 
 
Administration 
Loading dose  
d1 
d1-4 
d5-10 
IV (6) 
17 mg/kg 1x 
17 mg/kg q 6h 
8 mg/kg q 8h  
PO (4) 
30 mg/kg 1x 
15 mg/kg q 6h 
7 mg/kg q 6h  
 
Oral ribavirin treatment of CCHF reported by Fisher-Hoch et al. (18): 4000 mg/d d1-4, 2400 mg/d 
d5-10. 
 
Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS): adults 
 
Administration 
Loading dose  
d1 
d1-4 
d5-10 
IV (19) 
33 mg/kg 1x 
16 mg/kg q 6h 
8 mg/kg q 8h  
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
5/31 
 
 
10. SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE EFFECTIVENESS IN A VARIETY OF CLINICAL 
SETTINGS 
 
Identification of clinical evidence (search strategy, systematic reviews identified, reasons 
for selection/exclusion of particular data) 
 
Search of Medline and Cochrane Library as of 16 October 2006 (Keywords: ribavirin, injections, 
Lassa fever/complications/*drug therapy, Ribavirin/*adverse effects, Crimean-Congo 
haemorrhagic fever, haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, viral haemorrhagic fevers). 
  
Summary of available data (appraisal of quality, outcome measures, summary of results) 
Summary of available estimates of comparative effectiveness 
 
Lassa fever 
 
In a prospective study of Lassa fever in Sierra Leone, McCormick et al. (4) identified variables 
associated with high risk of death and evaluated the efficacy of ribavirin (intravenous and oral 
administration) and Lassa virus-convalescent plasma for the treatment of Lassa fever. The 
authors concluded that ribavirin was effective in the treatment of Lassa fever and should be used 
at any point in the illness, though preferably during the first six days after onset (4, 20). 
 
Argentine haemorrhagic fever ("New World" Arenaviridae) 
 
There are only few animal and human studies on the clinical effectiveness of ribavirin in the 
treatment of New World Arenaviridae (7, 12-14). These limited clinical data indicate a clear 
benefit of ribavirin treatment, with good tolerability and safety of the drug (7, 12-14).  
 
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever 
 
There is currently no specific antiviral therapy for CCHF. However, ribavirin has been shown to 
inhibit in-vitro viral replication in Vero cells (24) and reduced the mean time to death in a suckling 
mouse model of CCHF (25). Additionally, several case reports have been published that suggest 
oral or intravenous ribavirin is effective for treating CCHF infections (18, 26-28). All published 
reports showed a clear benefit in patients with confirmed CCHF treated with ribavirin (intravenous 
and oral administration). There were no major side effects or mortality associated with ribavirin 
treatment (18, 24, 25, 27, 29, 30). The results of all these studies are limited by their design and 
sample size. 
 
Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome 
 
Ribavirin was demonstrated to have anti-hantaviral effect both in vitro and in vivo. Ribavirin is 
often used in treatment of HFRS in China and clinical trials have shown that ribavirin therapy can 
significantly reduce HFRS-associated mortality.  
 
Huggins et al. (19) carried out a prospective, randomized, double-blind, concurrent, placebo-
controlled clinical trial of intravenous ribavirin in 242 patients with serologically confirmed 
haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) in the People's Republic of China. Mortality was 
significantly reduced (sevenfold decrease in risk) among ribavirin-treated patients. Ribavirin 
therapy resulted in a significant risk reduction of entering the oliguric phase and experiencing 
haemorrhage. The only ribavirin-related side effect was a fully reversible anaemia after 
completion of therapy. The effectiveness of ribavirin therapy for HFRS was also demonstrated by 
different Chinese investigators (Luo et al. (31) and Liu et al. (32)).  
 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
6/31 
11. SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE EVIDENCE ON SAFETY 
 
Estimate of total patient exposure to date 
 
The safety of oral ribavirin has been examined in approximately 5000-10 000 patients with VHFs 
in controlled and uncontrolled clinical trials. Ribavirin was generally well tolerated (20). 
 
Description of adverse effects/reactions 
 
Intravenous ribavirin 
 
Haemolytic anaemia has been the most frequently reported side effect. Ribavirin administered as 
an intravenous bolus has been reported to induce rigors; consequently, it is recommended that 
the drug be administered as an infusion over 10-15 minutes. There have been reports of 
pancytopenia and pancreatitis associated with use of intravenous ribavirin. As these patients had 
multiple health problems and were receiving other medications, there were other potential causes 
for those events. 
 
Oral ribavirin 
 
The most common side effect of ribavirin is a mild to moderate but fully reversible haemolytic 
anaemia. In clinical trials the mean haemoglobin level of patients treated with ribavirin fell by 
approximately 2 g/dL over the first 4 weeks of treatment. The fall in haemoglobin was 
accompanied by elevation of bilirubin level and a compensatory reticulocytosis. After 4 weeks the 
parameters remained at approximately the same levels for the remainder of the treatment period. 
Following completion of the course of treatment, these laboratory values returned to pre-
treatment levels. Anaemia associated with ribavirin therapy is often asymptomatic and can be 
managed by monitoring blood count and serum biochemistry. 
 
The list of adverse effects described in the eModel formulary is sufficient. 
 
Contra-indications and precautions 
 
Ribavirin is contraindicated for treatment of hepatitis c virus infection in women or girls who are or 
may become pregnant during treatment. However, for treatment of VHF, the benefit of ribavirin 
therapy appears to outweigh any fetal risk. Given the high risk of Lassa-related mortality, AHF- 
and CCHF-related mortality both for pregnant women and foetuses, ribavirin still is recommended 
(7). Ribavirin is contraindicated for pregnant or nursing mothers given the low disease mortality of 
HFRS and the known teratogenic potential of ribavirin. 
 
Ribavirin has demonstrated significant teratogenic and embryocidal potential in all animal species 
in which adequate studies have been conducted (rodents and rabbits). Therefore, although 
clinical studies have not been performed, it should be assumed that ribavirin may cause fetal 
harm in humans. Due to the long terminal half–life of elimination of the drug, the minimum interval 
following treatment with ribavirin before pregnancy can be safely initiated is estimated to be 7 
months. 
 
Ribavirin is contraindicated in patients with chronic anaemia and haemoglobin levels below 8 g/dl, 
and in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 ml/min). The 
pharmacokinetics of ribavirin in subjects with decompensated liver disease appears to be similar 
to that of healthy volunteers. However, the drug may accumulate in patients with impaired renal 
function. These patients should be carefully monitored during therapy with ribavirin for signs and 
symptoms of toxicity, such as anaemia. 
 
Ribavirin is also contraindicated in individuals who show hypersensitivity to the drug or its 
components. 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
7/31 
 
Identification of variation in safety due to health systems and patient factors 
 
Ribavirin should not be administered in anaemia with haemoglobin levels <8 g/dl. 
 
Summary of comparative safety against comparators 
 
None known. 
 
12. SUMMARY OF AVAILABLE DATA ON COMPARATIVE COST AND COST-
EFFECTIVENESS WITHIN THE PHARMACOLOGICAL CLASS OR THERAPEUTIC GROUP 
 
Range of costs of ribavirin, USA and China, October 2006 
 
Oral ribavirin administration 
 
Manufacturer 
Strength  
[mg] 
Number of  
tablets /  
package 
Price / 
package 
Price for 10-
day PO 
treatment 
Rebetol®,  
Schering-Plough 
200 
30 
$553.99
$2,769.95 
Ribasphere®,  
Three Rivers / Par 
200 
30 
$280.00
$1,400.00 
Copegus®,  
Hoffmann-La Roche 
200 
168 
$1'424.02
$1,271.45 
Generic, USA 
200 
56 
$318.42
$852.91 
Zhejiang Zhebei 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd 
100 
24 
$1.33
$16.63 
China National 
Medicines Guorui 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd 
100 
24 
$1.33
$16.63 
Szyy Group 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd 
50 
24 
$1.03
$25.75 
Chengdu Diao Group 
Jiuhong 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd 
50 
24 
$0.59
$14.75 
Shandong Xinhua 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd 
20 
100 
$0.91
$13.65 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
8/31 
Intravenous ribavirin administration 
 
Manufacturer 
Strength  
[mg / ml] 
Number of 
vials / 
package 
Price / 
package 
Price /  
100 mg 
Price for 10-
day IV 
treatment α 
Virazole® 
(Valeant) IV β 
100 
10
$134.00
$13.40 
$3,886.00
Shandong 
Xinhua 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd 
100 
10
$0.76
$0.08 
$22.04
Jiansu Lianshui  
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd 
100 
10
$0.76
$0.08 
$22.04
Kunming  
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd 
100 
10
$0.76
$0.08 
$22.04
Qianjiang  
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd 
100 
10
$0.76
$0.08 
$22.04
Shandong 
Tianfu 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd 
100 
10
$0.70
$0.07 
$20.30
Yanyhou Yijian 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd 
100 
5
$0.24
$0.05 
$13.92
Lokis  
Pharmaceutical 
(Jilin) Co., Ltd 
100 
1
$0.04
$0.04 
$12.47
 
α For calculating the treatment costs resulting from IV administration of ribavirin, we have 
assumed a male adult person of 70kg weight.  
 
β IV-formulation is not commercially available, and can only be purchased in bulk for 
investigational new drug (IND) use, or self-prepared from commercially available inhalation 
solution. 
 
 
13. COMPARATIVE COST-EFFECTIVENESS PRESENTED AS RANGE OF COST PER 
ROUTINE OUTCOME (e.g. , cost per case, cost per cure, cost per month of treatment, cost 
per case prevented, cost per clinical event prevented, or, if possible and relevant, cost per 
quality-adjusted life year gained) 
 
Please refer to #12, tables, last column, price of 10-day oral- vs. IV-treatment. 
 
 
14. SUMMARY OF REGULATORY STATUS OF THE MEDICINE (in country of origin, and 
preferably in other countries as well) 
 
• 
USA−Phase IV 
• 
People’s Republic of China−Phase IV 
• 
Switzerland−Phase IV 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
9/31 
 
 
15. AVAILABILITY OF PHARMACOPOEIAL STANDARDS (British Pharmacopoeia, 
International Pharmacopoeia, United States Pharmacopoeia) 
 
Ribavirin is listed in all major pharmacopoeias. 
 
 
16. PROPOSED NEW TEXT FOR THE WHO MODEL FORMULARY 
 
The optimal route of administration of ribavirin is by mouth. However, given the potential need for 
parenteral drug administration, an IV formulation is also available. 
 
For adults (including pregnant women - see also "contraindications") with Lassa fever, AHF, or 
CCHF, administration by PO is given in decreasing interval dosings over ten days. The loading 
dose on Day 1 is a one time oral dose of 2000 mg, followed on Days 1-4 with 1000 mg every 6 
hours orally, and then followed on Days 5-10 with 500 mg every 6 hours orally. For adults 
(including pregnant women - see also "contraindications") with Lassa fever, AHF or CCHF that 
require IV administration, the following is given in decreasing interval dosings. The loading dose 
on Day 1 is a one time IV dose of 17 mg/kg (max 1000 mg per dose), followed on Days 1-4 with 
17 mg/kg (max 1000 mg per dose, every 6 hours IV, and then followed on Days 5-10 with 8 
mg/kg (max 500 mg per dose) every 8 hours IV.  
 
For children with Lassa fever, AHF, or CCHF, administration by PO is given in decreasing interval 
dosings over ten days. The loading dose on Day 1 is a one time oral dose of 30 mg/kg, followed 
on Days 1-4 with 15 mg/kg every 6 hours orally, and then followed on Days 5-10 with 7 mg/kg 
every 6 hours orally. For children with Lassa fever, AHF or CCHF that require IV administration, 
the following is given in decreasing interval dosings. The loading dose on Day 1 is a one time IV 
dose of 17 mg/kg, followed on Days 1-4 with 17 mg/kg every 6 hours IV, and then followed on 
Days 5-10 with 7 mg/kg every 8 hours IV.  
 
For adults with haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS), the following is given in 
decreasing interval dosings. The loading dose on Day 1 is a one time IV dose of 33 mg/kg (max 
1000 mg per dose), followed on Days 1-4 with 16 mg/kg (max 1000 mg per dose, every 6 hours 
IV, and then followed on Days 5-10 with 8 mg/kg (max 500 mg per dose) every 8 hours IV.  
Ribavirin is contraindicated for pregnant or nursing mothers given the low disease mortality of 
HFRS and the known teratogenicity potential of ribavirin.  
 
Information: Take the oral preparation with food. Monitor CBC at least weekly. 
 
Ribavirin is contraindicated in patients who have a hypersensitivity to this drug, class, or 
components. 
Ribavirin is contraindicated in patients with a haemoglobin level less than 8 g/dl. 
Ribavirin is contraindicated in patients with renal insufficiency that has a creatinine clearance 
(CrCl) less than 30 ml/min. 
Ribavirin is contraindicated in patients with autoimmune hepatitis or decompensated liver disease. 
Ribavirin is contraindicated in patients with significant or unstable cardiac disease, with 
haemoglobinopathies. 
Ribavirin is contraindicated in pregnancy for the treatment of Hepatitis C and HFRS (low mortality)  
as there is positive evidence of serious fetal abnormalities in animals, humans, or both. Maternal 
benefit will need to be considered given the severe fetal risks when using ribavirin for 
haemorrhagic fevers. Lassa fever is especially severe late in pregnancy, with maternal death 
and/or fetal loss occurring in greater than 80% of cases during the third trimester. There is 
available animal and human data that demonstrates potential or actual adverse effects to infant 
and breast milk. 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
10/31 
Serious Reactions can include haemolytic anaemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, aplastic 
anaemia, teratogenicity, embryocide, severe infection, severe depression, suicidal ideation, 
autoimmune disorders, pulmonary toxicity, pancreatitis, diabetes, hypothyroidism, 
hyperthyroidism, myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, colitis, retinal haemorrhage, retinal 
thrombosis, or rarely, hypersensitivity reactions. 
 
Common Reactions can include fatigue, headache, fever, rigors, myalgias, arthalgias, anxiety, 
irritability, insomnia, alopecia, neutropenia, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, depression, pruitis, 
dizziness, dyspnoea, anaemia, diarrhea, impaired concentration, cough, rash, or 
thrombocytopenia. 
 
Metabolism is via the CYUP450 system. Excretion is 61% urine and 12% feces. The half-life is 
120-170 hours. While the exact mechanism of action is unknown, the drug appears to interfere 
with intracellular RNA and DNA synthesis and subsequently inhibit protein synthesis and viral 
replication of ribavirin-sensitive RNA or DNA viruses. 
 
Ribavirin requires a prescription. It is not a controlled substance. 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
11/31 
REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Sidwell RW, Huffman JH, Khare GP. Broad-spectrum antiviral activity of virazole: 1-
beta-D-ribofuranosyl-1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide. Science. 1972;177:705-6. 
2. 
Snell NJ. Ribavirin--current status of a broad spectrum antiviral agent. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother. 2001;2(8):1317-24. 
3. 
Fernandez H, Banks G, Smith R. Ribavirin: a clinical overview. Eur J Epidemiol. 
1986;2(1):1-14. 
4. 
McCormick JB, King IJ, Webb PA, et al. Lassa fever. Effective therapy with ribavirin. N 
Engl J Med. 1986;314(1):20-6. 
5. 
Huggins JW. Prospects for treatment of viral hemorrhagic fevers with ribavirin, a broad-
spectrum antiviral drug. Rev Infect Dis. 1989;11 Suppl 4:S750-61. 
6. 
Chapman LE, Mertz GJ, Peters CJ, et al. Intravenous ribavirin for hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome: safety and tolerance during 1 year of open-label experience. Ribavirin Study 
Group. Antivir Ther. 1999;4(4):211-9. 
7. 
Borio L, Inglesby T, Peters CJ, et al. Hemorrhagic fever viruses as biological weapons: 
medical and public health management. Jama. 2002;287(18):2391-405. 
8. 
Parker WB. Metabolism and antiviral activity of ribavirin. Virus Res. 2005;107(2):165-71. 
9. 
McCormick JB, Webb PA, Krebs JW, Johnson KM, Smith ES. A prospective study of 
the epidemiology and ecology of Lassa fever. J Infect Dis. 1987;155(3):437-44. 
10. 
Frame JD. Clinical features of Lassa fever in Liberia. Rev Infect Dis. 1989;11 Suppl 
4:S783-9. 
11. 
Price ME, Fisher-Hoch SP, Craven RB, McCormick JB. A prospective study of 
maternal and fetal outcome in acute Lassa fever infection during pregnancy. Bmj. 
1988;297(6648):584-7. 
12. 
Enria D, Franco SG, Ambrosio A, Vallejos D, Levis S, Maiztegui J. Current status of 
the treatment of Argentine Hemorrhagic Fever. Med Microbiol Immunol (Berl). 
1986;175(2-3):173-6. 
13. 
Enria DA, Briggiler AM, Levis S, Vallejos D, Maiztegui JI, Canonico PG. Tolerance 
and antiviral effect of ribavirin in patients with Argentine hemorrhagic fever. Antiviral Res. 
1987;7(6):353-9. 
14. 
Enria DA, Maiztegui JI. Antiviral treatment of Argentine hemorrhagic fever. Antiviral Res. 
1994;23(1):23-31. 
15. 
Maiztegui JI. Clinical and epidemiological patterns of Argentine haemorrhagic fever. Bull 
World Health Organ. 1975;52(4-6):567-75. 
16. 
Ergonul O. Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever. Lancet Infect Dis. 2006;6(4):203-14. 
17. 
Zhang Q, Tang R, Yuan G. [The treatment effect of ribavirin to hemorrhagic fever with 
renal syndrome on the kinetics of serum creatine phosphate kinase isoenzyme]. 
Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 1999;13(3):266-8. 
18. 
Fisher-Hoch SP, Khan JA, Rehman S, Mirza S, Khurshid M, McCormick JB. Crimean 
Congo-haemorrhagic fever treated with oral ribavirin. Lancet. 1995;346(8973):472-5. 
19. 
Huggins JW, Hsiang CM, Cosgriff TM, et al. Prospective, double-blind, concurrent, 
placebo-controlled clinical trial of intravenous ribavirin therapy of hemorrhagic fever with 
renal syndrome. J Infect Dis. 1991;164(6):1119-27. 
20. 
Fisher-Hoch SP, Gborie S, Parker L, Huggins J. Unexpected adverse reactions during 
a clinical trial in rural west Africa. Antiviral Res. 1992;19(2):139-47. 
21. 
Kenyon RH, Canonico PG, Green DE, Peters CJ. Effect of ribavirin and tributylribavirin 
on argentine hemorrhagic fever (Junin virus) in guinea pigs. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 1986;29(3):521-3. 
22. 
McKee KT, Jr., Huggins JW, Trahan CJ, Mahlandt BG. Ribavirin prophylaxis and 
therapy for experimental argentine hemorrhagic fever. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
1988;32(9):1304-9. 
23. 
Remesar MC, Blejer JL, Weissenbacher MC, Nejamkis MR. Ribavirin effect on 
experimental Junin virus-induced encephalitis. J Med Virol. 1988;26(1):79-84. 
24. 
Watts DM, Ussery MA, Nash D, Peters CJ. Inhibition of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic 
fever viral infectivity yields in vitro by ribavirin. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1989;41(5):581-5. 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
12/31 
25. 
Tignor GH, Hanham CA. Ribavirin efficacy in an in vivo model of Crimean-Congo 
hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHF) infection. Antiviral Res. 1993;22(4):309-25. 
26. 
Papa A, Bozovi B, Pavlidou V, Papadimitriou E, Pelemis M, Antoniadis A. Genetic 
detection and isolation of crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever virus, Kosovo, Yugoslavia. 
Emerg Infect Dis. 2002;8(8):852-4. 
27. 
Mardani M, Jahromi MK, Naieni KH, Zeinali M. The efficacy of oral ribavirin in the 
treatment of crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever in Iran. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;36(12):1613-
8. 
28. 
Tang Q, Saijo M, Zhang Y, et al. A patient with Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever 
serologically diagnosed by recombinant nucleoprotein-based antibody detection systems. 
Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2003;10(3):489-91. 
29. 
Ergonul O, Celikbas A, Dokuzoguz B, Eren S, Baykam N, Esener H. Characteristics 
of patients with Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever in a recent outbreak in Turkey and 
impact of oral ribavirin therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39(2):284-7. 
30. 
Ozkurt Z, Kiki I, Erol S, et al. Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever in Eastern Turkey: 
clinical features, risk factors and efficacy of ribavirin therapy. J Infect. 2006;52(3):207-15. 
31. 
Luo D, Wang X, Cai S, Liu S, Wei K, JS X. [Efficacy of ribavirin in epidemic hemorrhagic 
fever]. Chinese Journal of Infectious Diseases. 1986;4:139-141. 
32. 
Liu H, Lu J, Tan B, et al. [Preliminary observation of efficacy for ribavirin treatment of 
epidemic hemorrhagic fever]. Chinese Journal of Infectious Diseases. 1987;5:49-50. 
33. 
Yang ZQ, Zhang TM, Zhang MV, et al. Interruption study of viremia of patients with 
hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in the febrile phase. Chin Med J (Engl). 
1991;104(2):149-53. 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
13/31 
ABBREVIATIONS USED 
 
AHF 
 
Argentine haemorrhagic fever 
ALT 
 
Serum alanine aminotransferase 
AST 
 
Serum aspartate aminotransferase 
AST/ALT ratio  Ratio of serum aspartate aminotransferase to serum alanine aminotransferase 
 
CCHF  
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever 
d 
 
day 
FDA 
 
US Food and Drug Administration 
HFRS  
Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome 
h 
 
hour 
H(C)PS  
Hanta (cardio-)pulmonary syndrome 
IC 
 
Intracerebral 
IND 
 
Investigational new drug 
IP 
 
Intraperitonaeal 
IU 
 
International Unit 
IUPAC  
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry 
IV 
 
Intravenous administration 
LLC 
 
Limited liability company 
MTD 
 
Mean time to death 
OD 
 
Optical density 
PEP 
 
Post-exposure prophylaxis 
PO 
 
Per os, oral administration 
q 
 
Quaque, Latin abbreviation for interval at which medication is administered (e.g., 
 
q 6h�every 6 hours) 
q.d. 
 
Quaque die, Latin abbreviation for "given every day," or "daily" 
TCID50  
Tissue Culture Infecting Dose 
VHF 
 
Viral haemorrhagic fever 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
14/31 
APPENDIX 1. PARTIAL LIST OF COUNTRIES WITH REGULATORY PROCESSES FOR 
RIBAVIRIN 
 
Australia 
Brazil 
Canada 
Federal Republic of Germany 
India 
People's Republic of China 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
United States of America 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
15/31 
Please note : Appendices 2 and 3 are for reference only and have been published by the 
manufacturers for different indications (RSV-, HCV-infections). We have elaborated for this 
application specific recommendations on indication and dosage for VHFs, along with 
corresponding contraindications. 
 
 
APPENDIX 2. PRESCRIBING INFORMATION: VIRAZOLE® (VALEANT), (RIBAVIRIN FOR 
INHALATION SOLUTION), RX ONLY 
PDR PDR-DOC PDR Monograph Drug 84270800 5972 English En 5972 ANTI-INFECTIVE 
AGENTS, SYSTEMIC ANTIVIRALS NUCLEOSIDE ANALOGUES ANTIVIRALS(ANTI-
INFECTIVE AGENTS, SYSTEMIC) ANTIVIRALS -- see under ANTIVIRALS(ANTI-INFECTIVE 
AGENTS, SYSTEMIC) HERPES TREATMENT -- see under ANTIVIRALS(ANTI-INFECTIVE 
AGENTS, SYSTEMIC) NUCLEOSIDE ANALOGUES Prescribed 8427 VALEANT 
PHARMACEUTICALS INTERNATIONAL Valeant PDR Virazole for Inhalation Solution Infections, 
lower respiratory tract, RSV-induced Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections Pregnancy 
Retinal vascular disorder Hypogonadism Digitalis toxicity Cyanosis Fetal harm Muscle atrophy 
Convulsions Bigeminy Conjunctivitis Bradycardia Brain syndrome, acute Tachycardia Weakness 
Asthenia Rash Hypotension Blood pressure, reduction Anemia Anemia, hemolytic 
Underventilation Hypoventilation Apnea Atelectasis Death, infants Respiratory distress 
Pulmonary function, changes Reticulocytosis Carcinoma, skin, benign Bronchospasm Pain, chest 
Cardiac arrest Ventilator dependence Pneumothorax Pneumonia Edema, pulmonary Pulmonary 
edema Breathing, difficult Dyspnea Breathing, labored RIBAVIRIN Virazole for Inhalation Solution 
PDR® entry for  
 
WARNINGS:  
USE OF AEROSOLIZED VIRAZOLE IN PATIENTS REQUIRING 
MECHANICAL VENTILATOR ASSISTANCE SHOULD BE 
UNDERTAKEN ONLY BY PHYSICIANS AND SUPPORT STAFF 
FAMILIAR WITH THE SPECIFIC VENTILATOR BEING USED AND 
THIS MODE OF ADMINISTRATION OF THE DRUG. STRICT 
ATTENTION MUST BE PAID TO PROCEDURES THAT HAVE 
BEEN SHOWN TO MINIMIZE THE ACCUMULATION OF DRUG 
PRECIPITATE, WHICH CAN RESULT IN MECHANICAL 
VENTILATOR DYSFUNCTION AND ASSOCIATED INCREASED 
PULMONARY PRESSURES (SEE WARNINGS ).  
SUDDEN DETERIORATION OF RESPIRATORY FUNCTION HAS 
BEEN ASSOCIATED WITH INITIATION OF AEROSOLIZED 
VIRAZOLE USE IN INFANTS. RESPIRATORY FUNCTION 
SHOULD BE CAREFULLY MONITORED DURING TREATMENT. 
IF INITIATION OF AEROSOLIZED VIRAZOLE TREATMENT 
APPEARS TO PRODUCE SUDDEN DETERIORATION OF 
RESPIRATORY FUNCTION, TREATMENT SHOULD BE 
STOPPED AND REINSTITUTED ONLY WITH EXTREME 
CAUTION, CONTINUOUS MONITORING AND CONSIDERATION 
OF CONCOMITANT ADMINISTRATION OF BRONCHODILATORS 
(SEE WARNINGS ).  
VIRAZOLE IS NOT INDICATED FOR USE IN ADULTS. 
PHYSICIANS AND PATIENTS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT 
RIBAVIRIN HAS BEEN SHOWN TO PRODUCE TESTICULAR 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
16/31 
LESIONS IN RODENTS AND TO BE TERATOGENIC IN ALL 
ANIMAL SPECIES IN WHICH ADEQUATE STUDIES HAVE BEEN 
CONDUCTED (RODENTS AND RABBITS); (SEE 
CONTRAINDICATIONS ).  
 
DESCRIPTION  
Virazole® is a brand name for ribavirin, a synthetic nucleoside with antiviral activity. VIRAZOLE 
for inhalation solution is a sterile, lyophilized powder to be reconstituted for aerosol administration. 
Each 100 mL glass vial contains 6 grams of ribavirin, and when reconstituted to the 
recommended volume of 300 mL with sterile water for injection or sterile water for inhalation (no 
preservatives added), will contain 20 mg of ribavirin per mL, pH approximately 5.5. Aerosolization 
is to be carried out in a Small Particle Aerosol Generator (SPAG-2) nebulizer only.  
Ribavirin is 1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl-1H-1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide, with the following structural 
formula:  
Chemical Structure  
 
Ribavirin is a stable, white crystalline compound with a maximum solubility in water of 142 mg/mL 
at 25°C and with only a slight solubility in ethanol. The empirical formula is C 8 H 12 N 4 O 5 and the 
molecular weight is 244.21.  
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY  
Mechanism of Action  
In cell cultures the inhibitory activity of ribavirin for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is selective. 
The mechanism of action is unknown. Reversal of the in vitro antiviral activity by guanosine or 
xanthosine suggests ribavirin may act as an analogue of these cellular metabolites.  
Microbiology  
Ribavirin has demonstrated antiviral activity against RSV in vitro 1 and in experimentally infected 
cotton rats. 2 Several clinical isolates of RSV were evaluated for ribavirin susceptibility by plaque 
reduction in tissue culture. Plaques were reduced 85-98% by 16 µg/mL; however, results may 
vary with the test system. The development of resistance has not been evaluated in vitro or in 
clinical trials.  
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
17/31 
In addition to the above, ribavirin has been shown to have in vitro activity against influenza A and 
B viruses and herpes simplex virus, but the clinical significance of these data is unknown.  
Immunologic Effects  
Neutralizing antibody responses to RSV were decreased in aerosolized VIRAZOLE treated 
infants compared to placebo treated infants. 3 One study also showed that RSV-specific IgE 
antibody in bronchial secretions was decreased in patients treated with aerosolized VIRAZOLE. 
In rats, ribavirin administration resulted in lymphoid atrophy of the thymus, spleen, and lymph 
nodes. Humoral immunity was reduced in guinea pigs and ferrets. Cellular immunity was also 
mildly depressed in animal studies. The clinical significance of these observations is unknown.  
Pharmacokinetics  
Assay for VIRAZOLE in human materials is by a radioimmunoassay which detects ribavirin and at 
least one metabolite.  
VIRAZOLE brand of ribavirin, when administered by aerosol, is absorbed systemically. Four 
pediatric patients inhaling VIRAZOLE aerosol administered by face mask for 2.5 hours each day 
for 3 days had plasma concentrations ranging from 0.44 to 1.55 µM, with a mean concentration of 
0.76 µM. The plasma half-life was reported to be 9.5 hours. Three pediatric patients inhaling 
aerosolized VIRAZOLE administered by face mask or mist tent for 20 hours each day for 5 days 
had plasma concentrations ranging from 1.5 to 14.3 µM, with a mean concentration of 6.8 µM.  
The bioavailability of aerosolized VIRAZOLE is unknown and may depend on the mode of aerosol 
delivery. After aerosol treatment, peak plasma concentrations of ribavirin are 85% to 98% less 
than the concentration that reduced RSV plaque formation in tissue culture. After aerosol 
treatment, respiratory tract secretions are likely to contain ribavirin in concentrations many fold 
higher than those required to reduce plaque formation. However, RSV is an intracellular virus and 
it is unknown whether plasma concentrations or respiratory secretion concentrations of the drug 
better reflect intracellular concentrations in the respiratory tract.  
In man, rats, and rhesus monkeys, accumulation of ribavirin and/or metabolites in the red blood 
cells has been noted, plateauing in red cells in man in about 4 days and gradually declining with 
an apparent half-life of 40 days (the half-life of erythrocytes). The extent of accumulation of 
ribavirin following inhalation therapy is not well defined.  
Animal Toxicology  
Ribavirin, when administered orally or as an aerosol, produced cardiac lesions in mice, rats, and 
monkeys, when given at doses of 30, 36 and 120 mg/kg or greater for 4 weeks or more 
(estimated human equivalent doses of 4.8, 12.3 and 111.4 mg/kg for a 5 kg child, or 2.5, 5.1 and 
40 mg/kg for a 60 kg adult, based on body surface area adjustment). Aerosolized ribavirin 
administered to developing ferrets at 60 mg/kg for 10 or 30 days resulted in inflammatory and 
possibly emphysematous changes in the lungs. Proliferative changes were seen in the lungs 
following exposure at 131 mg/kg for 30 days. The significance of these findings to human 
administration is unknown.  
INDICATIONS AND USAGE  
VIRAZOLE is indicated for the treatment of hospitalized infants and young children with severe 
lower respiratory tract infections due to respiratory syncytial virus. Treatment early in the course 
of severe lower respiratory tract infection may be necessary to achieve efficacy.  
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
18/31 
Only severe RSV lower respiratory tract infection should be treated with VIRAZOLE. The vast 
majority of infants and children with RSV infection have disease that is mild, self-limited, and does 
not require hospitalization or antiviral treatment. Many children with mild lower respiratory tract 
involvement will require shorter hospitalization than would be required for a full course of 
VIRAZOLE aerosol (3 to 7 days) and should not be treated with the drug. Thus the decision to 
treat with VIRAZOLE should be based on the severity of the RSV infection.  
The presence of an underlying condition such as prematurity, immunosuppression or 
cardiopulmonary disease may increase the severity of clinical manifestations and complications 
of RSV infection.  
Use of aerosolized VIRAZOLE in patients requiring mechanical ventilator assistance should be 
undertaken only by physicians and support staff familiar with this mode of administration and the 
specific ventilator being used (see WARNINGS , and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ).  
Diagnosis  
RSV infection should be documented by a rapid diagnostic method such as demonstration of viral 
antigen in respiratory tract secretions by immunofluorescence 3,4 or ELISA 5 before or during the 
first 24 hours of treatment. Treatment may be initiated while awaiting rapid diagnostic test results. 
However, treatment should not be continued without documentation of RSV infection.  
Non-culture antigen detection techniques may have false positive or false negative results. 
Assessment of the clinical situation, the time of year and other parameters may warrant 
reevaluation of the laboratory diagnosis.  
Description of Studies  
Non-Mechanically-Ventilated Infants : In two placebo controlled trials in infants hospitalized 
with RSV lower respiratory tract infection, aerosolized VIRAZOLE treatment had a therapeutic 
effect, as judged by the reduction in severity of clinical manifestations of disease by treatment day 
3. 3,4 Treatment was most effective when instituted within the first 3 days of clinical illness. Virus 
titers in respiratory secretions were also significantly reduced with VIRAZOLE in one of these 
original studies. 4 Additional controlled studies conducted since these initial trials of aerosolized 
VIRAZOLE in the treatment of RSV infection have supported these data.  
Mechanically-Ventilated Infants : A randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled evaluation of 
aerosolized VIRAZOLE at the recommended dose was conducted in 28 infants requiring 
mechanical ventilation for respiratory failure caused by documented RSV infection. 6 Mean age 
was 1.4 months (SD, 1.7 months). Seven patients had underlying diseases predisposing them to 
severe infection and 21 were previously normal. Aerosolized VIRAZOLE treatment significantly 
decreased the duration of mechanical ventilation required (4.9 vs. 9.9 days, p=0.01) and duration 
of required supplemental oxygen (8.7 vs 13.5 days, p=0.01). Intensive patient management and 
monitoring techniques were employed in this study. These included endotracheal tube suctioning 
every 1 to 2 hours; recording of proximal airway pressure, ventilatory rate, and F 1 O 2 every hour; 
and arterial blood gas monitoring every 2 to 6 hours. To reduce the risk of VIRAZOLE 
precipitation and ventilator malfunction, heated wire tubing, two bacterial filters connected in 
series in the expiratory limb of the ventilator (with filter changes every 4 hours), and water column 
pressure release valves to monitor internal ventilator pressures were used in connecting 
ventilator circuits to the SPAG-2.  
Employing these techniques, no technical difficulties with VIRAZOLE administration were 
encountered during the study. Adverse events consisted of bacterial pneumonia in one case, 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
19/31 
staphyloccus bacteremia in one case and two cases of post-extubation stridor. None were felt to 
be related to VIRAZOLE administration.  
CONTRAINDICATIONS  
VIRAZOLE is contraindicated in individuals who have shown hypersensitivity to the drug or its 
components, and in women who are or may become pregnant during exposure to the drug. 
Ribavirin has demonstrated significant teratogenic and/or embryocidal potential in all animal 
species in which adequate studies have been conducted (rodents and rabbits). Therefore, 
although clinical studies have not been performed, it should be assumed that VIRAZOLE may 
cause fetal harm in humans. Studies in which the drug has been administered systemically 
demonstrate that ribavirin is concentrated in the red blood cells and persists for the life of the 
erythrocyte.  
WARNINGS  
SUDDEN DETERIORATION OF RESPIRATORY FUNCTION HAS BEEN ASSOCIATED WITH 
INITIATION OF AEROSOLIZED VIRAZOLE USE IN INFANTS. Respiratory function should be 
carefully monitored during treatment. If initiation of aerosolized VIRAZOLE treatment appears to 
produce sudden deterioration of respiratory function, treatment should be stopped and 
reinstituted only with extreme caution, continuous monitoring, and consideration of concomitant 
administration of bronchodilators.  
Use with Mechanical Ventilators  
USE OF AEROSOLIZED VIRAZOLE IN PATIENTS REQUIRING MECHANICAL VENTILATOR 
ASSISTANCE SHOULD BE UNDERTAKEN ONLY BY PHYSICIANS AND SUPPORT STAFF 
FAMILIAR WITH THIS MODE OF ADMINISTRATION AND THE SPECIFIC VENTILATOR 
BEING USED. Strict attention must be paid to procedures that have been shown to minimize the 
accumulation of drug precipitate, which can result in mechanical ventilator dysfunction and 
associated increased pulmonary pressures. These procedures include the use of bacteria filters 
in series in the expiratory limb of the ventilator circuit with frequent changes (every 4 hours), 
water column pressure release valves to indicate elevated ventilator pressures, frequent 
monitoring of these devices and verification that ribavirin crystals have not accumulated within the 
ventilator circuitry, and frequent suctioning and monitoring of the patient (see Clinical Studies).  
Those administering aerosolized VIRAZOLE in conjunction with mechanical ventilator use should 
be thoroughly familiar with detailed descriptions of these procedures as outlined in the SPAG-2 
manual.  
PRECAUTIONS  
General: Patients with severe lower respiratory tract infection due to respiratory syncytial virus 
require optimum monitoring and attention to respiratory and fluid status (see SPAG-2 manual).  
Drug Interactions  
Drug Interactions  
Clinical studies of interactions of VIRAZOLE with other drugs commonly used to treat infants with 
RSV infections, such as digoxin, bronchodilators, other antiviral agents, antibiotics, or anti-
metabolites have not been conducted. Interference by VIRAZOLE with laboratory tests has not 
been evaluated.  
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
20/31 
Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis  
Ribavirin increased the incidence of cell transformations and mutations in mouse Balb/c 3T3 
(fibroblasts) and L5178Y (lymphoma) cells at concentrations of 0.015 and 0.03-5.0 mg/mL, 
respectively (without metabolic activation.) Modest increases in mutation rates (3-4x) were 
observed at concentrations between 3.75-10.0 mg/mL in L5178Y cells in vitro with the addition of 
a metabolic activation fraction. In the mouse micronucleus assay, ribavirin was clastogenic at 
intravenous doses of 20-200 mg/kg, (estimated human equivalent of 1.67-16.7 mg/kg, based on 
body surface area adjustment for a 60 kg adult). Ribavirin was not mutagenic in a dominant lethal 
assay in rats at intraperitoneal doses between 50-200 mg/kg when administered for 5 days 
(estimated human equivalent of 7.14-28.6 mg/kg, based on body surface area adjustment; see 
Pharmacokinetics ).  
In vivo carcinogenicity studies with ribavirin are incomplete. However, results of a chronic feeding 
study with ribavirin in rats, at doses of 16-100 mg/kg/day (estimated human equivalent of 2.3-14.3 
mg/kg/day, based on body surface area adjustment for the adult), suggest that ribavirin may 
induce benign mammary, pancreatic, pituitary and adrenal tumors. Preliminary results of 2 oral 
gavage oncogenicity studies in the mouse and rat (18-24 months; doses of 20-75 and 10-40 
mg/kg/day, respectively [estimated human equivalent of 1.67-6.25 and 1.43-5.71 mg/kg/day, 
respectively, based on body surface area adjustment for the adult]) are inconclusive as to the 
carcinogenic potential of ribavirin (see Pharmacokinetics ). However, these studies have 
demonstrated a relationship between chronic ribavirin exposure and increased incidences of 
vascular lesions (microscopic hemorrhages in mice) and retinal degeneration (in rats).  
Impairment of Fertility  
The fertility of ribavirin-treated animals (male or female) has not been fully investigated. However, 
in the mouse, administration of ribavirin at doses between 35-150 mg/kg/day (estimated human 
equivalent of 2.92-12.5 mg/kg/day, based on body surface area adjustment for the adult) resulted 
in significant seminiferous tubule atrophy, decreased sperm concentrations, and increased 
numbers of sperm with abnormal morphology. Partial recovery of sperm production was apparent 
3-6 months following dose cessation. In several additional toxicology studies, ribavirin has been 
shown to cause testicular lesions (tubular atrophy), in adult rats at oral dose levels as low as 16 
mg/kg/day (estimated human equivalent of 2.29 mg/kg/day, based on body surface area 
adjustment; see Pharmacokinetics ). Lower doses were not tested. The reproductive capacity of 
treated male animals has not been studied.  
Pregnancy: Category X  
Ribavirin has demonstrated significant teratogenic and/or embryocidal potential in all animal 
species in which adequate studies have been conducted. Teratogenic effects were evident after 
single oral doses of 2.5 mg/kg or greater in the hamster, and after daily oral doses of 0.3 and 1.0 
mg/kg in the rabbit and rat, respectively (estimated human equivalent doses of 0.12 and 0.14 
mg/kg, based on body surface area adjustment for the adult). Malformations of the skull, palate, 
eye, jaw, limbs, skeleton, and gastrointestinal tract were noted. The incidence and severity of 
teratogenic effects increased with escalation of the drug dose. Survival of fetuses and offspring 
was reduced. Ribavirin caused embryolethality in the rabbit at daily oral dose levels as low as 1 
mg/kg. No teratogenic effects were evident in the rabbit and rat administered daily oral doses of 
0.1 and 0.3 mg/kg, respectively with estimated human equivalent doses of 0.01 and 0.04 mg/kg, 
based on body surface area adjustment (see Pharmacokinetics ). These doses are considered to 
define the "No Observable Teratogenic Effects Level" (NOTEL) for ribavirin in the rabbit and rat.  
Following oral administration of ribavirin in the pregnant rat (1.0 mg/kg) and rabbit (0.3 mg/kg), 
mean plasma levels of drug ranged from 0.10-0.20 µM [0.024-0.049 µg/mL] at 1 hour after dosing, 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
21/31 
to undetectable levels at 24 hours. At 1 hour following the administration of 0.3 or 0.1 mg/kg in 
the rat and rabbit (NOTEL), respectively, mean plasma levels of drug in both species were near 
or below the limit of detection (0.05 µM; see Pharmacokinetics ),  
Although clinical studies have not been performed, VIRAZOLE may cause fetal harm in humans. 
As noted previously, ribavirin is concentrated in red blood cells and persists for the life of the cell. 
Thus the terminal half-life for the systemic elimination of ribavirin is essentially that of the half-life 
of circulating erythrocytes. The minimum interval following exposure to VIRAZOLE before 
pregnancy may be safely initiated is unknown (see CONTRAINDICATIONS , WARNINGS , and 
Information for Health Care Personnel ).  
Nursing Mothers  
VIRAZOLE has been shown to be toxic to lactating animals and their offspring. It is not known if 
VIRAZOLE is excreted in human milk.  
Information for Health Care Personnel  
Health care workers directly providing care to patients receiving aerosolized VIRAZOLE should 
be aware that ribavirin has been shown to be teratogenic in all animal species in which adequate 
studies have been conducted (rodents and rabbits). Although no reports of teratogenesis in 
offspring of mothers who were exposed to aerosolized VIRAZOLE during pregnancy have been 
confirmed, no controlled studies have been conducted in pregnant women. Studies of 
environmental exposure in treatment settings have shown that the drug can disperse into the 
immediate bedside area during routine patient care activities with highest ambient levels closest 
to the patient and extremely low levels outside of the immediate bedside area. Adverse reactions 
resulting from actual occupational exposure in adults are described below (see Adverse Events in 
Health Care Workers ). Some studies have documented ambient drug concentrations at the 
bedside that could potentially lead to systemic exposures above those considered safe for 
exposure during pregnancy (1/1000 of the NOTEL dose in the most sensitive animal species). 7,8,9  
A 1992 study conducted by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 
demonstrated measurable urine levels of ribavirin in health care workers exposed to aerosol in 
the course of direct patient care. 7 Levels were lowest in workers caring for infants receiving 
aerosolized VIRAZOLE with mechanical ventilation and highest in those caring for patients being 
administered the drug via an oxygen tent or hood. This study employed a more sensitive assay to 
evaluate ribavirin levels in urine than was available for several previous studies of environmental 
exposure that failed to detect measurable ribavirin levels in exposed workers. Creatinine adjusted 
urine levels in the NIOSH study ranged from less than 0.001 to 0.140 µM of ribavirin per gram of 
creatinine in exposed workers. However, the relationship between urinary ribavirin levels in 
exposed workers, plasma levels in animal studies, and the specific risk of teratogenesis in 
exposed pregnant women is unknown.  
It is good practice to avoid unnecessary occupational exposure to chemicals wherever possible. 
Hospitals are encouraged to conduct training programs to minimize potential occupational 
exposure to VIRAZOLE. Health care workers who are pregnant should consider avoiding direct 
care of patients receiving aerosolized VIRAZOLE. If close patient contact cannot be avoided, 
precautions to limit exposure should be taken. These include administration of VIRAZOLE in 
negative pressure rooms; adequate room ventilation (at least six air exchanges per hour); the use 
of VIRAZOLE aerosol scavenging devices; turning off the SPAG-2 device for 5 to 10 minutes 
prior to prolonged patient contact, and wearing appropriately fitted respirator masks. Surgical 
masks do not provide adequate filtration of VIRAZOLE particles. Further information is available 
from NIOSH's Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance Branch and additional 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
22/31 
recommendations have been published in an Aerosol Consensus Statement by the American 
Respiratory Care Foundation and the American Association for Respiratory Care. 10  
ADVERSE REACTIONS  
The description of adverse reactions is based on events from clinical studies (approximately 200 
patients) conducted prior to 1986, and the controlled trial of aerosolized VIRAZOLE conducted in 
1989-1990. Additional data from spontaneous post-marketing reports of adverse events in 
individual patients have been available since 1986.  
Deaths  
Deaths during or shortly after treatment with aerosolized VIRAZOLE have been reported in 20 
cases of patients treated with VIRAZOLE (12 of these patients were being treated for RSV 
infections). Several cases have been characterized as "possibly related" to VIRAZOLE by the 
treating physician; these were in infants who experienced worsening respiratory status related to 
bronchospasm while being treated with the drug. Several other cases have been attributed to 
mechanical ventilator malfunction in which VIRAZOLE precipitation within the ventilator apparatus 
led to excessively high pulmonary pressures and diminished oxygenation. In these cases the 
monitoring procedures described in the current package insert were not employed (see 
Description of Studies, WARNINGS, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).  
Pulmonary and Cardiovascular  
Pulmonary function significantly deteriorated during aerosolized VIRAZOLE treatment in six of six 
adults with chronic obstructive lung disease and in four of six asthmatic adults. Dyspnea and 
chest soreness were also reported in the latter group. Minor abnormalities in pulmonary function 
were also seen in healthy adult volunteers.  
In the original study population of approximately 200 infants who received aerosolized VIRAZOLE, 
several serious adverse events occurred in severely ill infants with life-threatening underlying 
diseases, many of whom required assisted ventilation. The role of VIRAZOLE in these events is 
indeterminate. Since the drug's approval in 1986, additional reports of similar serious, though 
non-fatal, events have been filed infrequently. Events associated with aerosolized VIRAZOLE use 
have included the following:  
Pulmonary: Worsening of respiratory status, bronchospasm, pulmonary edema, hypoventilation, 
cyanosis, dyspnea, bacterial pneumonia, pneumothorax, apnea, atelectasis and ventilator 
dependence.  
Cardiovascular: Cardiac arrest, hypotension, bradycardia and digitalis toxicity. Bigeminy, 
bradycardia and tachycardia have been described in patients with underlying congenital heart 
disease.  
Some subjects requiring assisted ventilation experienced serious difficulties, due to inadequate 
ventilation and gas exchange. Precipitation of drug within the ventilatory apparatus, including the 
endotracheal tube, has resulted in increased positive end expiratory pressure and increased 
positive inspiratory pressure. Accumulation of fluid in tubing ("rain out") has also been noted. 
Measures to avoid these complications should be followed carefully (see DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION ).  
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
23/31 
Hematologic  
Although anemia was not reported with use of aerosolized VIRAZOLE in controlled clinical trials, 
most infants treated with the aerosol have not been evaluated 1 to 2 weeks post-treatment when 
anemia is likely to occur. Anemia has been shown to occur frequently with experimental oral and 
intravenous VIRAZOLE in humans. Also, cases of anemia (type unspecified), reticulocytosis and 
hemolytic anemia associated with aerosolized VIRAZOLE use have been reported through post-
marketing reporting systems. All have been reversible with discontinuation of the drug.  
Other  
Rash and conjunctivitis have been associated with the use of aerosolized VIRAZOLE. These 
usually resolve within hours of discontinuing therapy. Seizures and asthenia associated with 
experimental intravenous VIRAZOLE therapy have also been reported.  
Adverse Events in Health Care Workers  
Studies of environmental exposure to aerosolized VIRAZOLE in health care workers 
administering care to patients receiving the drug have not detected adverse signs or symptoms 
related to exposure. However, 152 health care workers have reported experiencing adverse 
events through post-marketing surveillance. Nearly all were in individuals providing direct care to 
infants receiving aerosolized VIRAZOLE. Of 358 events from these 152 individual health care 
worker reports, the most common signs and symptoms were headache (51% of reports), 
conjunctivitis (32%), and rhinitis, nausea, rash, dizziness, pharyngitis, or lacrimation (10-20% 
each). Several cases of bronchospasm and/or chest pain were also reported, usually in 
individuals with known underlying reactive airway disease. Several case reports of damage to 
contact lenses after prolonged close exposure to aerosolized VIRAZOLE have also been reported. 
Most signs and symptoms reported as having occurred in exposed health care workers resolved 
within minutes to hours of discontinuing close exposure to aerosolized VIRAZOLE (also see 
Information for Health Care Personnel ).  
The symptoms of RSV in adults can include headache, conjunctivitis, sore throat and/or cough, 
fever, hoarseness, nasal congestion and wheezing, although RSV infections in adults are 
typically mild and transient. Such infections represent a potential hazard to uninfected hospital 
patients. It is unknown whether certain symptoms cited in reports from health care workers were 
due to exposure to the drug or infection with RSV. Hospitals should implement appropriate 
infection control procedures.  
Overdosage  
No overdosage with VIRAZOLE by aerosol administration has been reported in humans. The LD 
50 in mice is 2000 mg orally and is associated with hypoactivity and gastrointestinal symptoms 
(estimated human equivalent dose of 0.17 g/kg, based on body surface area conversion). The 
mean plasma half-life after administration of aerosolized VIRAZOLE for pediatric patients is 9.5 
hours. VIRAZOLE is concentrated and persists in red blood cells for the life of the erythrocyte 
(see Pharmacokinetics ).  
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION  
BEFORE USE, READ THOROUGHLY THE ICN SMALL PARTICLE AEROSOL GENERATOR 
MODEL SPAG-2 OPERATOR'S MANUAL FOR SMALL PARTICLE AEROSOL GENERATOR 
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS. AEROSOLIZED VIRAZOLE SHOULD NOT BE ADMINISTERED 
WITH ANY OTHER AEROSOL GENERATING DEVICE.  
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
24/31 
The recommended treatment regimen is 20 mg/mL VIRAZOLE as the starting solution in the drug 
reservoir of the SPAG-2 unit, with continuous aerosol administration for 12-18 hours per day for 3 
to 7 days. Using the recommended drug concentration of 20 mg/mL the average aerosol 
concentration for a 12 hour delivery period would be 190 micrograms/liter of air. Aerosolized 
VIRAZOLE should not be administered in a mixture for combined aerosolization or 
simultaneously with other aerosolized medications.  
Non-mechanically ventilated infants  
VIRAZOLE should be delivered to an infant oxygen hood from the SPAG-2 aerosol generator. 
Administration by face mask or oxygen tent may be necessary if a hood cannot be employed (see 
SPAG-2 manual). However, the volume and condensation area are larger in a tent and this may 
alter delivery dynamics of the drug.  
Mechanically ventilated infants  
The recommended dose and administration schedule for infants who require mechanical 
ventilation is the same as for those who do not. Either a pressure or volume cycle ventilator may 
be used in conjunction with the SPAG-2. In either case, patients should have their endotracheal 
tubes suctioned every 1-2 hours, and their pulmonary pressures monitored frequently (every 2-4 
hours). For both pressure and volume ventilators, heated wire connective tubing and bacteria 
filters in series in the expiratory limb of the system (which must be changed frequently, i.e., every 
4 hours) must be used to minimize the risk of VIRAZOLE precipitation in the system and the 
subsequent risk of ventilator dysfunction. Water column pressure release valves should be used 
in the ventilator circuit for pressure cycled ventilators, and may be utilized with volume cycled 
ventilators (SEE SPAG-2 MANUAL FOR DETAILED INSTRUCTIONS).  
Method of Preparation  
VIRAZOLE brand of ribavirin is supplied as 6 grams of lyophilized powder per 100 mL vial for 
aerosol administration only. By sterile technique, reconstitute drug with a minimum of 75 mL of 
sterile USP water for injection or inhalation in the original 100 mL glass vial. Shake well. 
Transfer to the clean, sterilized 500 mL SPAG-2 reservoir and further dilute to a final volume of 
300 mL with Sterile Water for Injection, USP, or Inhalation. The final concentration should be 20 
mg/mL. Important: This water should NOT have had any antimicrobial agent or other substance 
added. The solution should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to 
administration. Solutions that have been placed in the SPAG-2 unit should be discarded at least 
every 24 hours and when the liquid level is low before adding newly reconstituted solution.  
HOW SUPPLIED  
VIRAZOLE (Ribavirin for Inhalation Solution, USP) is supplied in four packs containing 100 mL 
glass vials with 6 grams of Sterile, lyophilized drug (NDC 0187-0007-14) which is to be 
reconstituted with 300 mL Sterile Water for Injection or Sterile Water for Inhalation (no 
preservatives added) and administered only by a small particle aerosol generator (SPAG-2). Vials 
containing the lyophilized drug powder should be stored in a dry place at 25°C (77°F); excursions 
permitted to 15°C-30°C (59°F-86°F). Reconstituted solutions may be stored, under sterile 
conditions, at room temperature (20-30°C, 68-86°F) for 24 hours. Solutions which have been 
placed in the SPAG-2 unit should be discarded at least every 24 hours.  
REFERENCES  
1. Hruska JF, Bernstein JM, Douglas Jr., RG, and Hall CB. Effects of Virazole on respiratory 
syncytial virus in vitro. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 17:770-775, 1 1980.  
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
25/31 
2. Hruska JF, Morrow PE, Suffin SC, and Douglas Jr., RG. In vivo inhibition of respiratory 
syncytial virus by Virazole. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 21:125-130, 1982.  
3. Taber LH, Knight V, Gilbert BE, McClung HW et al. Virazole aerosol treatment of 
bronchiolitis associated with respiratory tract infection in infants. Pediatrics 72:613-618, 
1983.  
4. Hall CB, McBride JT, Walsh EE, Bell DM et al. Aerosolized Virazole treatment of infants 
with respiratory syncytial viral infection. N Engl J Med 308:1443-7, 1983.  
5. Hendry RM, McIntosh K, Fahnestock ML, and Pierik LT. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay for detection of respiratory syncytial virus infection. J Clin Microbiol 16:329-33, 
1982.  
6. Smith, David W., Frankel, Lorry R., Mather, Larry H., Tang, Allen T.S., Ariagno, Ronald L., 
Prober, Charles G. A Controlled Trial of Aerosolized Ribavirin in Infants Receiving 
Mechanical Ventilation for Severe Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection. The New 
England Journal of Medicine 1991; 325:24-29.  
7. Decker, John, Shultz, Ruth A., Health Hazard Evaluation Report: Florida Hospital, 
Orlando, Florida, Cincinnati OH: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public 
Health Service, Centers for NIOSH Report No. HETA 91-104-2229. *  
8. Barnes, D.J. and Doursew, M. Reference dose: Description and use in health risk 
assessments. Regul Tox. and Pharm. Vol. 8; p. 471-486, 1988.  
9. Federal Register Vol. 53 No. 126 Thurs. June 30, 1988 p. 24834-24847. 
10. American Association for Respirtory Care [1991]. Aerosol Consensus Statement-1991. 
Respiratory Care 36(9):916-921.  
 
*Copies of the Report may be purchased from National Technical Information Service, 5285 Port 
Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161; Ask for Publication PB 93119-345.  
1957-07 EL  
Rev. 4-02  
Manufactured for:  
VALEANT PHARMACEUTICALS INTERNATIONAL  
3300 Hyland Avenue  
Costa Mesa, California 92626  
714-545-0100  
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
26/31 
APPENDIX 3. PRESCRIBING INFORMATION: REBETOL® (RIBAVIRIN, USP) CAPSULES 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
27/31 
APPENDIX 4. DETAILS OF CLINICAL STUDIES AVAILABLE ON RIBAVIRIN THERAPY 
 
Lassa fever ("Old World" Arenaviridae) 
 
Study  
Methods 
Participants 
Interventions 
Outcomes 
Notes 
McCormick 
et al. 1986 
(4) 
Case-
control 
study, 
followed by 
prospective 
clinical trial. 
441 patients 
with confirmed 
Lassa virus 
infection,  
Sierra Leone 
IV ribavirin vs. IV 
ribavirin+convalescent 
plasma 
Mortality 55% (33/60, untreated) vs. 5% 
(1/20, treated within first 6 days, 
p=0.0002).  
Risk factors 
↑mortality:  
AST≥150IU, 
TCID50≥103.6, 
treatment 
after first 6d-  
 
 
 
Argentine haemorrhagic fever ("New World" Arenaviridae) 
 
Study  
Methods 
Participants 
Interventions 
Outcomes 
Notes 
McKee et 
al. (22) 
In vivo animal 
model study 
Monkeys infected 
with Junin virus 
Prophylactic schedule: 
Ribavirin 60 mg/kg 4d, 
30 mg/kg for 3.5d and 
11 mg/kg for 11d  
Treatment Schedule: 
d6 after inoculation,    
60 mg/kg 3.5d, then   
15 mg/kg for 11d. 
All sham-treated controls monkeys died; 
those given prophylactic treatment 
seroconverted, but failed to develop 
viraemia or clinical illness; those who 
received therapeutic treatment showed 
transient viraemia. 
 
 
Remesar 
et al. (23) 
In vivo animal 
model study 
10-day-old and 
2-day-old rats 
infected with 
Junin virus 
10-day-old rats i.c. 
single dose of ribavirin 
2h prior to virus 
inoculation i.c..; 2-day-
old rats i.p. max 5 
doses of ribavirin at 24h 
intervals, starting 2h 
prior to virus inoculation 
i.p. 
No survival in controls; 60 mg and 90 mg 
doses led to 40% survival among 10-day-
old rats at the end of observation period 
without delay in mean time to death 
(MTD); survival reached 73% in treated 
vs 22% in control groups, with 9.4-day 
delay in MTD 
 
Kenyon et 
In vivo animal 
Guinea pigs 
Ribavirin was injected 
Ribavirin treatment did not enhance 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
28/31 
al. (21) 
model study 
infected with 
Junin virus 
s.c. q.d. 45 mg/kg on 
the day before 
inoculation continued 
for 14d  
survival of animals, but significantly 
increased the mean time to death (25.9± 
0.6 and 15.7±1.4 respectively) 
Enria et 
al. (13) 
Prospective 
clinical stuy 
Six confirmed 
cases of AHF, 
Argentina 
Intravenous Ribavirin 
given at 34 mg/kg 
loading dose, followed 
by 17 mg/kg q 6h for 
4d, then 8 mg/kg q 8h 
for 6d 
Three patients survived; virus isolation 
became negative 3d after beginning 
treatment in all six patients 
Side effects: 
Drop of 
haematocrit 
and 
haemoglobin 
on d5-6. 
Limitations: 
Small 
sample size, 
without 
controls 
Enria et 
al. (14) 
Placebo-
controlled, 
prospective 
study 
18 confirmed 
cases of AHF, 
Argentina 
Intravenous Ribavirin 
given at 34 mg/kg 
loading dose, followed 
by 17 mg/kg q 6h for 
4d, then 8 mg/kg q 8h 
for 6d 
Mortality in the Ribavirin and placebo 
groups were 12.5%(1/8) and 40%(4/10) 
respectively; 
Clearance of viraemia with 4 days after 
beginning treatment 
Side effect: 
anaemia 
Limitations: 
Small 
sample size 
 
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (Bunyaviridae) 
 
Study  
Methods 
Participants 
Interventions 
Outcomes 
Notes 
Watts et al. 
(24) 
In vitro study 
African green 
monkey kidney 
Vero clone 76 
cells (ATCC-
CRL-1587) 
Vero cell 
monolayers 
inoculated with 
CCHF virus were 
incubated with 
ribavirin of different 
concentrations 
Ribavirin doses as low as 5 µg/ml 
caused a transient reduction of viral 
yields; A dose of 25 µg/ml induced 
further viral yields, and no evidence 
viral yields was demonstrated in cells 
treated with 50 or 250 5 µg/ml ribavirin  
 
Tignor et al. 
(25) 
In vivo 
animal 
model study 
Infant mice 
Infant mice 
intraperitoneally 
infected with CCHF 
Ribavirin treatment significantly reduced 
infant mouse mortality, decreased 
viraemia, and prolonged mean time to 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
29/31 
virus were treated 
with ribavirin 
death  
Fisher-Hoch et 
al. (18) 
Case study 
3 health 
workers with 
severe, 
serologically 
confirmed 
CCHF, 
Pakistan 
Ribavirin orally 
administered at 
doses of 4 g/day 
for 4d and then 2.4 
g/day for 6 days 
All the three patients fully recovered 
Limitations: 
Small sample 
size, without 
controls 
Mardani et al. 
(27) 
Historical 
cohort study  
187 suspected 
CCHF cases, 
139 treated 
with ribavirin 
and 48 as 
historical 
controls, of 
which 81 cases 
were 
serologically 
confirmed,  
Iran 
Ribavirin orally 
administered within 
a mean of 4d of on 
set at the doses of 
30 mg/kg as a 
loading dose ,      
15 mg/kg q 6h for 
4d and 7.5 mg/kg q 
8h for 6 days 
The fatalities among ribavirin recipients 
and historical controls for suspected 
patients were 30.2% and 45.8%, 
respectively; and those for confirmed 
patients were 11.6% and 58.3%, 
respectively 
Limitations: 
Study design 
was neither 
randomized, 
nor placebo-
controlled  
Ergonul et al. 
(29)  
Observation-
al study  
35 serologically 
confirmed 
CCHF cases, 
with 8 cases 
ribavirin 
treated,  
Turkey 
Ribavirin orally 
administered within 
a mean of 5.5d of 
on set at the doses 
of 4g q.d. for 4 
days, and 2.4 g  
q.d. for 6 days 
All the 8 severe cases treated with 
ribavirin survived, while 1of 22 severe 
cases who did not receive ribavirin 
treatment died with a case-fatality of 
4.5% 
Limitations: 
Small sample 
size and non-
randomized, 
non-placebo 
controlled  
Ozkurt et al. 
(30) 
Observation-
al study  
60 CCHF 
cases of which 
22 were treated 
with ribavirin 
and 38 were as 
historical 
controls, 
Ribavirin orally 
administered 
immediately after 
admission at an 
initial loading dose 
of 2 g, then 1 g q 
4h for 4 days, and 
Case-fatality rate was 9.0%(1/22) in the 
ribavirin group vs. 10.5% (4/38) in the 
control group (P=0.85);  
The mean hospitalization time was 7.7d 
in the ribavirin group and 10.3d in 
control group (P=0.06) 
Limitations: 
Small sample 
size and non-
randomized, 
non-placebo 
controlled; 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
30/31 
Turkey 
then   500 mg q 6h 
for 6 days 
One mild case 
of haemolytic 
anaemia 
recorded 
 
Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) 
 
Study  
Methods 
Participants 
Interventions 
Outcomes 
Notes 
Luo et al. 
(31) 
Placebo 
controlled 
study 
72 cases of 
serologically 
confirmed 
HFRS patients 
within 5d of 
onset,  
PR China 
Intravenous 
ribavirin: 
10-15 mg/kg 
ribavirin in 200 ml 
of 10% glucose 
solution, once per 
day for 3 days. 
All patients survived in ribavirin (38) and 
placebo (34) groups;  
3.05±1.16 and 4.48±2.93d of fever 
duration; 
3.73±1.26 and 5.0±2.14dto clearance of 
urine proteins in ribavirin and control 
groups respectively. 
No apparent 
side effects 
recorded.  
 
Article in 
Chinese 
Liu et al. 
(32) 
Placebo 
controlled 
study 
64 cases of 
serologically 
confirmed 
HFRS patients 
within 5d of 
onset,  
PR China 
Intravenous 
ribavirin: 
500 mg ribavirin in 
250-500 ml of 10% 
glucose solution, 
once per day for 3 
days. 
No death in ribavirin recipients (33 
cases), while 2 deaths in placebo 
recipients (2/31); 
Severe complications in 9.1% and 
32.3% of ribavirin recipients and 
placebo recipients respectively; 
4.41 and 7.3dto the clearance of urine 
proteins in ribavirin recipients and 
placebo recipients respectively.  
No apparent 
side effects 
recorded. 
 
Article in 
Chinese 
Huggins et 
al. (19) 
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-
controlled 
study 
242 cases of 
HTNV IgM- 
confirmed 
HFRS patients 
within 4-6d of 
onset,  
PR China 
Intravenous 
ribavirin: 
Loading dose of 33 
mg/kg, 16 mg/kg q 
6h for 4 days, and 
8 mg/kg q 8h for 3d 
2.4% and 8.5% fatality rates in ribavirin 
recipients and placebo recipients 
respectively(P=0.01); 
Significant reduction in risk of entering 
the oliguric phase and experiencing 
haemorrhage in ribavirin group. 
Reversible 
anaemia 
was the only 
observed 
side effect. 
Yang et al. 
(33) 
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-
controlled 
52 cases of 
HTNV IgM- and 
virus positive 
HFRS patients 
Intravenous 
ribavirin: 
Loading dose of 33 
mg/kg, 16 mg/kg q 
3.6±0.2 and 6.9±0.6d of viraemia 
duration in ribavirin and placebo 
groups, respectively; 
Viral antigen OD value and virus 
 
 07 Nov. 06  
 ribavirin.doc 
31/31 
study 
within 4-6d of 
onset,  
PR China 
6h for 4 days, and 
8 mg/kg q 8h for 3 
days 
infectivity titre of ribavirin group lower 
than that of placebo group.  
 
 
