 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Appetite
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/appet
Systematic review and meta-analysis of strategies to increase vegetable
consumption in preschool children aged 2–5 years
Chandani Nekitsinga,∗, Pam Blundell-Birtilla, Jennie E. Cockroftb, Marion M. Hetheringtona
a School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK
b Purely Nutrition Ltd, Harrogate, HG1 1DL, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Vegetable intake
Healthy eating intervention
Preschool children
Educational intervention
Taste exposure
A B S T R A C T
Background: Most children do not meet daily recommendations for fruit and vegetable intake, and consumption
of vegetables remains especially low. Eating habits track from childhood to adulthood hence establishing liking
and intake of vegetables is important.
Objective: To identify the most successful strategies to enhance vegetable intake in preschool children aged 2–5
years.
Design: The research was a systematic review and a meta-analysis of published studies. A comprehensive search
strategy was performed using key databases such as Medline, Embase, PsychINFO, EBSCO and CENTRAL.
Articles published between 2005–January 2016, specifically with measured vegetable consumption were in-
cluded.
Results: 30 articles and 44 intervention arms were identified for inclusion (n = 4017). Nine dominant inter-
vention strategies emerged to promote vegetable intake in preschool children. These included; choice, pairing
(stealth), education, food service, modelling, reward, taste exposure, variety and visual presentation. The meta-
analysis revealed that interventions implementing repeated taste exposure had better pooled effects than those
which did not. Intake increased with number of taste exposures and intake was greater when vegetables offered
were in their plain form rather than paired with a flavor, dip or added energy (e.g. oil). Moreover, intake of
vegetables which were unfamiliar/disliked increased more than those which were familiar/liked.
Conclusions: Repeated taste exposure is a simple technique that could be implemented in childcare settings and
at home by parents. Health policy could specifically target the use of novel and disliked vegetables in childcare
settings with emphasis on a minimum 8–10 exposures.
The systematic review protocol was registered on the PROSPERO (number: CRD42016033984).
1. Introduction
The World Health Organization suggests consuming 400 g or more
of fruit and vegetables per day to improve overall health; current re-
commendations for adults vary between countries from 400 g to 800 g
(Aune et al., 2017; WHO, April 2011). In the UK preschool children are
recommended to eat a variety and minimum of five 40 g portions
(200 g) of fruit and vegetable a day (First Steps Nutrition Trust, 2016;
National Health Service. NHS, 2015). Eating recommended amount of
fruits and vegetables can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, some cancers and obesity, yet most consumers across different
countries do not meet dietary recommendations for daily fruits and
vegetable intake (Aune et al., 2017; Hall, Moore, Harper, & Lynch,
2009; WHO, April 2011). For example Health Survey England reported
a decrease in 5–15 year old children's ‘5 a day’ fruit and vegetable in-
take from 20% in 2011 to 17% in 2013 (Roberts, 2013). In comparison,
the Vital Signs report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
showed that while US children aged 2–18 years were eating more fruits
in 2010 than they did in 2003, vegetable intake remained low and
unchanged as 93% of the children did not meet the daily recommended
intake (Kim et al., 2014). Evidence from large cohort studies strongly
suggests
that
preschoolers'
intake
of
vegetables
is
insufficient
(Angelopoulos, Kourlaba, Kondaki, Fragiadakis, & Manios, 2009;
Huybrechts et al., 2008; Manios et al., 2009). Increasing vegetable
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2018.04.019
Received 27 September 2017; Received in revised form 18 April 2018; Accepted 23 April 2018
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: c.nekitsing@leeds.ac.uk (C. Nekitsing).
Abbreviation: CENTRAL, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials; CI, Confidence Interval; CINAHL, Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature; EPHPP, Effective
Public Health Practice Project; ERIC, Educational Resource Information Center Database; FFL, Flavor-Flavor Learning; FFQ, Food Frequency Questionnaire; FNL, Flavor Nutrient
Learning; g, Hedges g; I2, Inconsistency; PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses; RCT, randomized control trial; RE, Repeated Exposure; SE,
Standard Error
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
Available online 25 April 2018
0195-6663/ Crown Copyright © 2018 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
T
 intake is more important than increasing fruit intake because fruits are
high in natural occurring sugars and according to Oyebode, Gordon-
Dseagu, Walker, and Mindell (2014) vegetables have a greater protec-
tive effect than fruit (reducing death by 16% per each daily portion
compared to 4% for fruit).
One explanation for low vegetable intake is that vegetables are
disliked due to their strong or bitter taste, unfamiliar texture, low en-
ergy density and lack of availability/accessibility (Bell & Tepper, 2006;
Blanchette & Brug, 2005; Cooke et al., 2004; Di Noia & Byrd-
Bredbenner, 2014; Johnson, McPhee, & Birch, 1991; Rasmussen et al.,
2006). In addition, low consumption may be attributed to child eating
behavior traits such as food fussiness; generally defined as eating more
selectively, being picky and likely to refuse foods which are unfamiliar
as well as those which are familiar and food neophobia which is
avoidance of new foods (Cooke, Haworth, & Wardle, 2007; Dovey,
Staples, Gibson, & Halford, 2008; Holley, Haycraft, & Farrow, 2017b).
Fussiness peaks in children aged 2–5 years, yet this is also a time when
children acquire novel food preferences since eating habits are still
developing (Addessi, Galloway, Visalberghi, & Birch, 2005; Cooke
et al., 2007; Cooke & Wardle, 2005). Vegetable intake may be doubly
disadvantaged by liking and child fussiness, however, strategies such as
repeated taste exposure, modelling, flavor enhancement, stealth, tan-
gible rewards (non-food) or social praise have been shown to promote
vegetable intake (Anzman-Frasca, Savage, Marini, Fisher, & Birch,
2012; Caton et al., 2013; Cooke, Chambers, Añez, & Wardle, 2011). It is
important to understand which strategies are most successful in early
years to promote liking and intake of vegetables, as eating habits de-
veloped during childhood track into adulthood (Harris, 2008; Ventura
& Worobey, 2013).
Evidence from previous reviews suggests that interventions to en-
courage fruit and vegetable intake are selectively beneficial for fruits
(Evans, Christian, Cleghorn, Greenwood, & Cade, 2012; French &
Stables, 2003). For example, the meta-analysis by Evans et al. (2012) in
children aged 5–12 years revealed only a small effect of intervention on
daily fruit intake (+0.24 portion) and no effect on daily vegetable
consumption (+0.07 portion). These selective effects suggest that
changing vegetable intake might require different strategies to promote
intake. Most reviews of fruit and vegetable intake tend to focus on
children aged 5 and over, reporting intakes of both food groups (e.g.
Blanchette & Brug, 2005; Delgado-Noguera, Tort, Martinez-Zapata, &
Bonfill, 2011; Diep, Chen, Davies, Baranowski, & Baranowski, 2014;
Evans et al., 2012; French & Stables, 2003; Krolner et al., 2011;
Rasmussen et al., 2006). A systematic research review by Appleton
et al. (2016) described vegetable promoting interventions across the
lifespan. From their search, 77 studies detailing 140 interventions were
found, most (81%) of these were conducted in children. This may be
attributable to a greater opportunity to intervene in school settings or to
a greater adaptability of children to interventions compared to adults.
However, it may also be more important to intervene early to change
eating habits since health benefits can only be accrued over time. To
date two Cochrane reviews with meta-analysis have been published
concerning vegetable intake in children aged 5 and under (Hodder
et al., 2018; Wolfenden et al., 2012). The review by Wolfenden et al.
(2012) revealed that pairing repeated exposure with a tangible non-
food or social reward was effective in increasing intake of targeted
vegetables. However only randomized controlled trials were included
in their review and only two studies were included in their meta-ana-
lysis. Similarly the recent meta-analysis by Hodder et al. (2018) in-
cluded 11 studies in their meta-analysis. Hence, there may be other
effective strategies missed by these reviews. Moreover they also in-
cluded studies with children younger than two who may be more
willing to eat vegetables compared to children who are experiencing
the peak food fussy period (2–5 years) (Cashdan, 1994; Caton et al.,
2014). Finally a systematic review by Holley, Farrow, and Haycraft
(2017a) qualitatively summarized various strategies used for encoura-
ging vegetable intake in 2–5 year olds, however their search returned
limited number of studies looking at educational strategies. Therefore
the present systematic review and meta-analysis aims to bridge the gap
in existing reviews by reporting evidence from education interventions
and detailing important aspects of taste exposure strategy using a
quantitative approach. The present review aimed to investigate the
effectiveness of interventions to increase vegetable intake in children
aged between 2 and 5 years by performing a comprehensive search and
including a variety of study designs and settings.
2. Methods
The review is reported in accordance with Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines
(Liberati et al., 2009). The protocol for the present review was regis-
tered on PROSPERO; International Prospective Register for Systematic
Reviews (registration number: CRD42016033984).
2.1. Search strategy
The databases searched to identify published articles were OVID
(Medline, Embase, PsycINFO, Global Health and CAB Abstracts),
EBSCO (Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature;
CINAHL and Educational Resource Information Center Database; ERIC),
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), ProQuest,
PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science. Moreover, grey literature data-
base e.g. SIGLE, Open Grey, Copac, World Cat and the reference lists of
relevant previous reviews and retrieved articles were also hand sear-
ched. As the food environment and food habits have changed over time
and the International Health Regulation (IHR) framework was in-
troduced in 2005 (WHO, 2007), contemporary evidence of studies
published since the year 2005 (to January 2016) were sought. The
language was limited to English. The key terms highlighted in Table 1
were used and adapted according to the requirements of individual
databases for subject field (for example, for some search engines only a
few keywords were used to retrieve maximum papers whereas for
others most keyword groups were combined using “or” and “and” to
maximize retrieval of mainly relevant papers).
2.2. Selection of studies
The screening process was done by a single reviewer (CN). Studies
which aimed to increase children's vegetable intake were considered for
Table 1
Search terms used to identify relevant articles for present systematic research review.
Subject
Related keywords
Topic
Vegetable OR vegetables OR veg OR F&V OR FV
Intervention/Outcome
Intervention OR strategy Or strategies OR facilitators OR campaign OR promote OR program OR initiative OR factor OR trial OR liking OR preference OR
intake OR consumption OR uptake OR attitude OR behavior OR behavior
Participant
Child OR Children OR infant OR toddler OR pre-schooler OR preschooler OR girl OR girls OR boy OR boys OR mother OR maternal OR father OR parent
OR caregiver OR 2 year Or 3 year Or 4 year Or 5 year OR age 2 OR age 3 OR age 4 OR age 5
Setting
School OR nursery OR Nurseries OR daycare OR day-care OR early year OR early years OR preschool OR playschool OR playgroup OR kindergarten OR
classroom OR home
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
139
 inclusion. Articles were included if vegetables were the only target food
group or were part of a health intervention (e.g. promoting healthy
eating or/and physical activity). Studies in which vegetable intake data
could not be extracted were excluded; for example studies measuring
fruit and vegetables combined or secondary outcomes such as liking,
willingness to try or proxy measures of intake such as vegetables ob-
served in lunch boxes. Likewise to focus on findings from the age group
which was most likely to experience food fussiness, studies were also
excluded where data on children of the desired age range (2–5 years)
could not be extracted. Only full articles were included. No restrictions
were applied for study designs (e.g. randomized controlled trial; RCT,
experiment or pre-post format), type of interventions, settings or
comparison groups. A total of 30 studies were identified for inclusion,
see Fig. 1 for PRISMA flow diagram of the study selection process.
2.3. Data extraction
The details of each study were extracted by the author CN and were
verified by a second reviewer (MH or PB). An extended summary table
of each study including: the type of intervention, aim, design, partici-
pant age, study setting, details of intervention, comparison and main
outcomes for vegetable intake is presented in Table 2. The vegetable
intake data extracted was based on direct measurements, observations
or from parental self-reported questionnaires. For the meta-analysis
vegetable outcome data immediately post-intervention were used (not
the follow-ups) and if necessary the study authors were contacted for
further information.
2.4. Quality assessment
The quality of each study was assessed by at least two authors in-
dependently, using the Effective Public Health Practice Project (EPHPP)
quality assessment tool for quantitative studies (EPHPP, 1998; Thomas,
Ciliska, Dobbins, & Micucci, 2004). Any disagreement in scores were
resolved by discussion between two authors (CN & MH). Five compo-
nents were scored (selection bias, study design, confounders, blinding,
data collection methods and withdraw and drop-out); from which
overall global quality ratings were calculated. As the effect size did not
vary by the quality of the studies, no studies were excluded from the
analysis based on these ratings. See Fig. 2 for summary of the quality
ratings.
2.5. Statistical analysis
Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (CMA, Biostat, Englewood, NJ, USA)
software was used to conduct the meta-analyses. Means, standard de-
viation (sometimes calculated from the reported standard error) and the
sample size (adjusted to the lower value if pre and post n varied) were
generally extracted from appropriate time-points (pre and post inter-
vention). If raw data were not reported then t-test values, F-ratio and
statistically significant p values were sought. If the significant value was
statistically significant but not precisely reported then these were round
to the significant value (e.g. < 0.05 entered as 0.05 and < 0.01 en-
tered as 0.01). To calculate effect size for paired group studies, pre-post
correlation is required. However none of the studies have reported
Fig. 1. PRISMA diagram of the study screening process and article selection.
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
140
 Table 2
Summary of studies included in the review that assesses vegetable intake in preschool aged children.
Study/intervention
Aim
Design
Samplea,setting, location
Intervention
Control/comparison
Vegetable related conclusions for primary and
secondary outcome
Bell et al. (2015)
- Educational
- Food-service
Assess the impact of “Start Right
– Eat Right” nutrition award
scheme (SRER) on food and
nutrient intakes.
Pre-post
2-4 years
n = 216–221
Day-care centers
(Adelaide, South
Australia)
Center directors and cooks received 9 h of
nutrition training (including improving
provision of fruit and vegetable). SRER
dietitians supported the staff and reviewed
the progress of the program.
Pre-intervention measures.
Post intervention (2–6 months later) intakes of
all core food groups increased except for
vegetable intake (estimated using observed
plate wastage method).
Future research to investigate nutrition
strategy to reduce food wastage, i.e. change
intake, in particular vegetables to maximize
cost effectiveness of food-service interventions.
Bouhlal et al. (2014)
- Taste exposure
- Pairing
Compare effect of repeated-
exposure and flavor-flavor
learning on acceptance of a non-
familiar vegetable (salsify
puree).
Between-
subjects
24-36 (27.13 ± 7.37)
months
n = 151
Nurseries
(Dijon, France)
8 exposures to salsify (weeks 2–5)
1) repeated exposure (RE) - salsify in
standard form
2) flavor-flavor learning (FFL salt - salsify
with added salt
3) FFL spice - salsify with added nutmeg
spice.
Pre-intervention measures
(week 1)
Control vegetable: carrot
intake measured at pre and
post intervention, no
exposure.
Increase in the amount consumed (g) of the
unfamiliar vegetable at post-intervention
(week 6) and at follow-up week 10, 19 and 32.
No group effects on liking or intake however,
greater change in RE compared to both FFL
groups.
RE is an effective and simplest method to
increase vegetable intake in the short and long
term.
Brouwer and Neelon
(2013)
- Educational
Assess the feasibility of “Watch
Me Grow”; a gardening
intervention to promote fruit
and vegetable intake.
Cluster RCT
3-5 years
n = 12
Childcare centers
(North Carolina, USA)
The 4 month intervention included a fruit and
vegetable garden, monthly “crop-a-month”
curriculum, gardening support, and technical
assistance from health educator.
Pre-intervention measures
(not same individuals
observed at baseline and post
intervention).
Control centers
Vegetable intake (servings) was greater for
intervention children compared to control
children.
Four centers were involved, but intake of only
3 children was randomly observed from each
center.
Caton et al. (2013)
- Taste exposure
- Pairing
Compare effectiveness of FFL
and FNL with RE on increasing
intake of a novel vegetable
(artichoke puree).
Randomly
assigned
between-
subjects
24-38 (31.05 ± 3.50)
months (full study
sample 9–38;
23.6 ± 5.09 months)
n = 32 (data extracted
from n = 72)
Nurseries
(West and South
Yorkshire, England, UK)
10 exposures to artichoke puree (over 3
weeks)
1) RE: basic form
2) FFL: paired with sucrose
3) FNL: paired with sunflower oil
Pre-intervention measures
Control vegetable: carrot
intake measured at pre and
post intervention, no
exposure
Intake (g) of both vegetables increased over
time however, changes in artichoke intake was
greater than carrots. Artichoke intake
increased to the same extent in all conditions
and effect was persistent up to 5 weeks post-
intervention. Therefore regardless of the
familiar taste or energy density, repetition is
imperative for increasing intake.
Five exposures were sufficient to increase
vegetable intake.
Correia, O'Connell,
Irwin, and
Henderson (2014)
- Pairing
- Visual exposure
Investigate pairing of a
vegetable (broccoli) with a
familiar, well-liked food and
enhancing the visual appearance
of a vegetable (cucumber) on
increasing vegetable intake.
Cluster
randomized
crossover
4-5 (4.4 ± 0.6) years
n = 43 (Lunch)
n = 42 (Snack)
Child-care center
(New Haven
Connecticut, USA)
Lunch (paired with a familiar food): steamed
broccoli served on top of cheese pizza.
Snack (visually appealing): raw cucumber
served with chive and olive arranged in a
shape of a caterpillar.
Comparison lunch: steamed
broccoli was served on the
side of cheese pizza.
Comparison snack: raw
cucumber was served as
semicircles with chive and
olive garnish.
No increases in vegetable (g) consumption.
Pairing increased willingness to try
(consumption of 3 g or more) the vegetable.
Greater consumption at snack time indicated
that snack times in preschools are opportune
moments for increasing vegetable intake.
Cravener et al. (2015)
- Reward
Effects of pairing positive
stimuli (stickers and cartoon
packaging) with vegetables and
presenting them as a default
snack in “low-vegetable
consumers” at risk of obesity.
RCT
3-5 (3.9 ± 0.8) years
n = 24
Home-based
(State College,
Pennsylvania, USA)
4 weeks parent-led intervention.
Week 1 (baseline) and week 4 (follow-up):
generic packaged raw vegetables (celery,
broccoli, carrots, red peppers, cauliflower,
and sweet snap peas) offered as a free choice
with an alternative snack (granola bar).
Weeks 2 and 3: vegetables packaged in
containers with favorite cartoon characters
and stickers inside, presented as the default
choice (children were allowed to opt out and
request the granola bar after a 5-minute
wait).
Pre-intervention measures
Week 1–4: control group
received generic packaged
vegetables, presented as a
free choice with an
alternative snack (granola
bar).
Treatment group increased vegetable intake (g
per day) from baseline to week 2, however the
effects were not sustained by week 4 when the
treatment was removed.
Parents were able to administer the
intervention in home settings therefore future
studies to test long-term sustainability of these
practices.
(continued on next page)
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
141
 Table 2 (continued)
Study/intervention
Aim
Design
Samplea,setting, location
Intervention
Control/comparison
Vegetable related conclusions for primary and
secondary outcome
de Wild et al. (2013)
- Taste exposure
- Pairing
Investigate FNL as a strategy to
increase acceptance of novel
vegetable (endive).
Crossover
24-48 (35.0 ± 8.3)
months
n = 28
Day-care centers
(Wageningen,
Netherlands)
7 weeks crossover intervention.
Vegetable soups (endive and spinach) were
offered twice per week (7 exposures to each
vegetable). FNL: vegetable soup paired with
high energy (endive or spinach)
1) High energy variant of one soup (endive)
and low energy variant of the other (spinach)
2) Low energy variant (RE) of one soup
(endive) and high energy variant of the other
(spinach)
Pre-intervention measures
RE: no flavor-nutrient paring:
low energy version of each
vegetable soups
(maltodextrin and sunflower
oil was not added)
There was an increase in intake (g) for both
variant of vegetable soups irrespective of the
energy content, this indicated effect of mere
exposure on intake, but not FNL.
Results showed a significant liking for the
vegetable soup paired with high energy and
this supports FNL. Effects were significant at 2
and 6 months follow-up.
de Wild, de Graaf,
Boshuizen, and
Jager (2015)
- Taste exposure
- Choice
Investigate if choice-offering is
an effective strategy to increase
children's vegetable intake in
home situation.
Randomly
assigned
between-
subjects
2-5 (3.7 ± 1.0) years
n = 70
Home-based
(Wageningen,
Netherlands)
Exposed 12 times (12 days) to six familiar
target vegetables (broccoli, carrots, peas,
cauliflower, French beans, and string beans)
at home during dinner.
Choice group were offered two selected
vegetables each time (4 exposures to each
vegetables over the 12 days).
Comparison: no-choice group
only received one of six target
vegetables on each day (2
exposures to each vegetable
over the 12 days)
Results suggested that choice-offering has
some, but not robust effect on increasing
vegetable intake (g) in children. Age and liking
of the vegetables mediated the effect of
offering a choice.
Fildes et al. (2014)
- Taste exposure
- Reward
Test the efficacy and
acceptability of mailed materials
giving parents instructions on
taste exposure as a means of
increasing vegetables (disliked)
acceptance.
RCT
3-4 (3.9 ± 0.3) years
n = 442
Home-based
(Gemini cohort,
2011–2012, England and
Wales, UK)
Parent-administered intervention. Parents
were mailed instructions to provide taste
exposures.
The intervention involved offering each child
14 daily tastes of a disliked (target) vegetable
with a small reward (a sticker) if the child
complied.
Pre-intervention measures
Control group: no treatment
Increased intake (number of pieces eaten) of
an initially disliked vegetable.
Study highlighted value of parent-
administered exposure and how such strategy
can be implemented without direct contact
with a health professional.
Fisher et al. (2012)
- Taste exposure
- Pairing
Determine if repeated exposure
to a moderately-liked raw
vegetable with a familiar dip
influenced liking and intake
among bitter-sensitive and
bitter-insensitive children.
Between
–subjects
3-5 (4.0 ± 1.0) years
n = 147
Head Start centers
(Houston, Texas, USA)
Intake of six vegetables including the
moderately liked target vegetable (broccoli)
was measured at baseline and post
intervention. Broccoli was offered in four
conditions twice a week for 7 weeks (13
exposure trials).
1) with regular salad dressing as a dip,
2) with a light (reduced energy/fat) version
of the dressing as a dip,
3) mixed with the regular dressing as a sauce
Pre-intervention measures
Control group: broccoli
without dressing
Providing a dip in any form (regular, light, or
as a sauce) increased intake of raw broccoli (g)
among bitter-sensitive preschoolers (70% in
current study but not those who were not
bitter-sensitive). Light-dip decreased intake in
children who were not sensitive to bitter taste.
Liking increased following exposure but did
not vary by bitter sensitivity or dip-condition.
Gripshover and
Markman (2013)
- Educational
Assess the impact of teaching
young children a new theory;
‘food as a source of nutrition’.
Cluster RCT
4-5 (experiment 1:
4.9 ± 0.35, experiment
2: 4.7 ± 0.28) years
n = 59 (experiment 1)
n = 103(experiment 2)
Preschool (Stanford
University)
(Stanford, California
USA)
10-12 week intervention: conceptual
framework for understanding nutrition
included food-body relationship, food as a
source of nutrition and diverse nutrients were
presented in five child-friendly storybooks
(included language, color photographs of
food and people and interactive questions).
The intervention group read 0-2 books each
week.
Pre-intervention measures
Experiment 1: control group:
no treatment, children's un-
tutored nutrition knowledge
was recorded for comparison.
Experiment 2: alternative
condition, 5 child-friendly
story books (e.g. enjoyment
of healthy eating, exercise
etc.)
Learning led children to eat more pieces of
vegetables at snack time in both experiments,
although the children were not instructed to
eat more vegetables as part of the intervention.
Young children can benefit from an
intervention that teaches theories about
nutrition.
Harnack et al. (2012)
- Food-service
Evaluate the effects of two meal
service strategies on intake of
fruits and vegetables (serving
fruits and vegetable first and
serving meals portioned by
providers).
Randomized
crossover
2-5 years
n = 53
Head Start center
(Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA)
Crossover trial over 6 week period during
usual lunch time.
1) Provider portioned condition (week 1 & 6)
- portioning a specific quantity of all menu
items on plate rather than allowing the child
to self-serve food items.
2) Fruits and vegetables first condition (week
3 & 5) - minor adjustment to traditional
family style meal where fruits and vegetables
served first before other meal items.
Control condition: (week 2 &
4) usual traditional family
style meal service
The observed intake of fruit but not vegetable
servings increased during serving fruits and
vegetables first condition. Intake of both fruits
and vegetables was lower for provider
portioned condition. Results supports the
current recommendations for traditional
family style meal service.
(continued on next page)
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
142
 Table 2 (continued)
Study/intervention
Aim
Design
Samplea,setting, location
Intervention
Control/comparison
Vegetable related conclusions for primary and
secondary outcome
Hausner et al. (2012)
- Taste exposure
- Pairing
Investigate mere exposure, FFL
and FNL strategies to increase a
novel vegetable (artichoke).
Between-
subjects
22-38 (28.7 ± 3.71)
n = 104
Nurseries
(Copenhagen, Denmark)
10 exposure to respective artichoke puree
(over 4 weeks)
1) RE: mere exposure
2) FFL: sweetened puree
3) FNL: energy dense puree with added oil.
Pre-intervention measures
Control vegetable; carrot
intake measured at pre and
post intervention
The mere exposure and FFL strategies
increased acceptance of vegetable intake (g).
Five to six exposures were sufficient to
increase intake of the novel vegetable.
Repeated exposure is a simple and effective
technique that can be used in home and day
care settings.
(Holley et al., 2015)
- Taste exposure
- Reward
- Modelling
Evaluate effectiveness of home-
based intervention of rewards,
modelling and repeated
exposure to increase children's
liking and consumption of a
previously disliked vegetable.
Between-
subjects
25-55 (38.0 ± 7.75)
months
n = 115
Home-based
(East Midlands, England,
UK)
Parents were instructed to offer small piece of
the target disliked vegetable (selection from
baby corn, celery, red pepper, cherry tomato,
cucumber, and sugar snap peas) for 14
consecutive days.
Four experimental conditions:
1) Repeated exposure
2) Modelling (parent) and repeated exposure
3) Rewards (sticker and praise) and repeated
exposure or
4) Modelling, rewards and repeated exposure.
Pre-intervention measures
Control centers: no treatment
In comparison to the control group increases in
liking and consumption (g) were seen in the
rewards and repeated exposure and the
modeling, rewards and repeated exposure
condition.
Parent-led, home-based intervention
incorporating rewards and modelling are cost
efficient strategies to increase children's
vegetable intake.
Horne et al. (2011)
- Taste exposure
- Reward
- Modelling
Determine whether modelling
(animated character) and
rewards intervention produce
large and lasting increases in
fruit and vegetable
consumption.
Within-
subjects
24-52 (34.0) months
n = 20
Nursery (Bangor
University)
(Bangor, Wales, UK)
Children were exposed to 8 fruit and 8
vegetables (presented as 4 different food sets,
each comprising 2 fruit and 2 vegetables).
Taste exposure: during baselines 1–4,
children received different food set daily
(snack time and again at lunch time). Intake
was not rewarded during 4 baselines and
during lunch. At least 24 exposures of the
target vegetables offered.
Reward: 3 types of rewards were offered
during the target fruit/vegetable intervention
phases based on how many pieces consumed
(sticker; lead to group prize, badge or brick
from construction toy).
Modelling: animated TV characters modelled
eating the target foods and urged children to
eat ‘to be big & strong’.
Baseline measures at different
points (for four different food
sets)
The interventions produced significant
increases in percentage of fruits and target
vegetables (baby sweetcorn, courgette, yam
and mange-tout) pieces eaten. Effects were
maintained 6 months after removal of rewards.
Intake at lunchtime, in absence of rewards
indicated that once liking is established in one
context, the behavior extended to other meal
times.
Martinez-Andrade
et al. (2014)
- Educational
Evaluate feasibility and impact
of “Creciendo Sanos” - a clinic-
based pilot intervention to
prevent obesity.
Cluster RCT
24-60 (40.6 ± 10.0)
months
n = 201
Primary care clinics
Home-based
Mexico City, Mexico)
6 weekly educational sessions promoted
healthy nutrition and physical activity
(included counselling, motivational
enhancement, obesity awareness and
prevention).
Parents and children engaged in activities
(e.g. playing active games, cooking healthy
snacks and creating shopping list).
Counselling involved improving self-efficacy
and enhancing motivation for change.
Pre-intervention measures
Control: usual care – no
intervention
Intervention effects were found for vegetable
servings (FFQ) at 3 months but no other
behaviors. At 6 months, no effect of
intervention was detected.
Parents reported high satisfaction but barriers
for participation and retention included
transportation cost and time. Future
interventions need to investigate how to
improve participation and adherence.
(continued on next page)
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
143
 Table 2 (continued)
Study/intervention
Aim
Design
Samplea,setting, location
Intervention
Control/comparison
Vegetable related conclusions for primary and
secondary outcome
Reinaerts, Nooijer,
Candel, and Vries
(2007)
- Educational
- Food service
Measure the effects of two
school-based interventions on
children's intake of fruits and
vegetables.
Cluster
matched and
randomized
4-5 years (4–12 years full
study sample)
n = 122–183
(data extracted from
n = 939)
Primary schools, Home-
based
(Limburg, Netherlands)
Interventions components matched for age
group (over 8 months).
1) Distribution condition - free fruit &
vegetable supply at school and a daily routine
integrating a periodic moment for children to
eat the distributed fruit & vegetable together
(peer modelling).
2) multicomponent condition - classroom
curriculum and parental involvement
(children provided with lunchbox, to bring
fruit and vegetables to school, homework,
newsletters and poster reminders at local
supermarkets)
Pre-intervention measures
Control group received
program after the study
period (no intervention
during the study).
Interventions were effective in increasing fruit
and vegetable intake (FFQ) for the overall
study population (4–12 years). However, for
the age group I (4–5 years) both interventions
did not indicate a significant positive result.
The study did not comment on the result of
different age groups. However the differences
in findings for different age group indicated
the importance of age appropriate
intervention.
Remington et al.
(2012)
- Taste exposure
- Reward
Evaluate whether parental
delivery of an established
intervention consisting of
exposure to "tiny tastes of an
initially disliked vegetable,
combined with reward, would
be effective in the home setting.
RCT
3-4 (3.95 ± 0.5) years
n = 140
Home-based
(North London, UK)
12 days Intervention: parents asked to offer
target disliked vegetable (selection from
carrot, cucumber, white cabbage, red pepper,
celery, or sugar snap peas) every day for 12
weekdays.
1) Parent-administered taste exposure
sessions with tangible rewards (stickers)
2) Parent-administered taste
exposure sessions with social rewards (praise)
Pre-intervention measures
Control group: no treatment
Parental use of tangible rewards with repeated
taste exposures improved children's liking and
intake (g) of initially disliked vegetables.
Differences were maintained at 1 and 3 month
follow-up.
Findings for social reward condition was not
significantly different from the control
condition.
Roe, Meengs, Birch,
and Rolls (2013)
- Variety
Determine whether providing a
variety of familiar vegetables or
fruit as a snack would lead to
increased selection and intake.
Crossover
3-5 (4.4 ± 0.1) years
n = 58–60
Family center (The
Pennsylvania State
University)
(State College,
Pennsylvania, USA)
8 afternoon snack times (4 for fruits; apple
peach and pineapple and 4 for vegetables;
cucumber, sweet pepper and tomato).
Children were offered variety of all 3
vegetables together. Similar offerings were
also made for fruits.
Comparison: children were
offered 3 different vegetables
as a single type (one at a
time).
Providing a variety increased intake of fruits
and vegetables (pieces eaten).
Savage, Fisher, Marini,
and Birch (2012)
- Food servuce
Assess the effect of serving a
range of entree portions on
children's ad libitum intake and
energy density consumed at the
meal.
Within-
subjects
3-5 (4.3 ± 0.5) years
n = 17
Childcare center (The
Pennsylvania State
University)
(State College,
Pennsylvania, USA)
Participants received different size entrée
portion (i.e. 100 g, 160 g, 220 g, 340 g and
400 g) to measure the effect of varying size
portion entrée on ad libitum energy intake of
macaroni and cheese, and fixed portions of
unsweetened applesauce, green beans, and
whole-wheat roll.
No pre-intervention measures
or control comparison
Increasing portion size of the entrée, reduced
the energy intake (kcal) of foods served with
the entrée, including fruit (unsweetened
applesauce) and vegetable (green beans).
Serving smaller age-appropriate entree
portions may help to improve children's
nutritional intake including the intake of fruit
and vegetables served with the entrée while
decreasing plate waste.
Savage et al. (2013)
- Pairing
Compare the effects of offering
dips (with and without familiar
herb and spice) with vegetables
and vegetable alone (without
dip) on children's willingness to
taste, liking, and intake of
vegetables.
Within-
subjects
3-5 years
n = 34 (experiment 1)
n = 26–27 (experiment
2)
Childcare center
(Central Pennsylvania,
USA)
Experiment 1 was conducted to determine
which vegetable was familiar, disliked or
refused and which flavor dip the children
preferred.
Experiment 2: children rated liking of celery
and yellow squash with and without their
favorite reduced-fat dip and intake was also
measured.
Comparison: intake of
vegetable without dip
Herb dip was preferred (pizza or ranch)
compared to plain dip. Children were more
likely to reject vegetable alone than when
served with herb dips. Offering vegetables with
reduced-fat dips (familiar herb and spice
flavors) can increase tasting and thereby
promote liking and intake of vegetables (g),
including those which were previously rejected
or disliked (celery and yellow squash).
(continued on next page)
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
144
 Table 2 (continued)
Study/intervention
Aim
Design
Samplea,setting, location
Intervention
Control/comparison
Vegetable related conclusions for primary and
secondary outcome
Sharma, Chuang, and
Hedberg (2011)
- Educational
Pilot test CATCH (Coordinated
Approach to Child Health) Early
Childhood program at
promoting healthy nutrition and
increasing physical activity.
Pre-post
3-5 years
n = 61
Head Start centers
(Harris County Texas,
USA)
The intervention program was delivered by
trained teachers over a 6 week period. The
program included nutrition education,
physical activity and a family component.
Nutrition-based lessons in classrooms aimed
at promoting healthy eating habits such as
increasing fruits and vegetables intake.
Parent were sent education tip-sheets which
were designed to modify the home nutrition.
Pre-intervention measures
Children's observed vegetable servings did not
increase significantly.
Results indicated good feasibility and
acceptability of the program.
Sirikulchayanonta,
Iedsee, Shuaytong,
and Srisorrachatr
(2010)
- Educational
Evaluate the use of food
experience, multimedia and role
models for promoting fruit and
vegetable consumption.
Pre-post
4-5 years
n = 26
Kindergarten
(Bangkok, Thailand)
The 8 week intervention consisted of eleven
30–40 min interactive activities (e.g. games,
cartoon, gardening and cooking).
Classroom curriculum: introduced health
benefits of fruit and vegetables to improve
familiarity and acceptance.
Letter were sent to parents to guide them to
motivate and encourage their children to eat
variety and quantity of fruit and vegetables.
While eating together teachers, peers, and
parents were used as role models.
Pre-intervention measures
The intervention was effective in increasing
fruit and vegetable consumption (g).
Study recommend nutrition education in the
course curriculum in combination with social
support from the teachers and the family can
improve and sustain fruit and vegetable intake.
Spill et al. (2010)
- Food service
Investigate whether increasing
the portion size of vegetables
served at the start of a meal
leads to increased vegetable
consumption and decreased
meal energy intake.
Crossover
3-5 (4.4 ± 0.71) years
n = 51
Day-care center (The
Pennsylvania State
University)
(State College,
Pennsylvania, USA)
Test lunch served once a week for 4 weeks.
In 3 experimental meals, a first course of raw
carrots was served varying in portion sizes
(30 g, 60 g and 90 g).
Control comparison: no first
course served in control meal
Increasing the portion size of a vegetable
(carrot) served as a first course was found to be
an effective strategy for increasing vegetable
intake (g).
Spill, Birch, Roe, and
Rolls (2011a)
- Food service
- Stealth
Investigate whether
incorporating pureed vegetables
(hiding) into entrees to reduce
the energy density affected
vegetable and energy intake.
Crossover
3-5 (4.7 ± 0.62) years
n = 39
Day-care center (The
Pennsylvania State
University)
(State College,
Pennsylvania, USA)
1 day a week for 3 weeks Breakfast, lunch and
dinner entrée energy density was
manipulated by increasing the proportion of
pureed vegetables. Entrees were served with
un-manipulated side dishes and snacks.
1) 85% ED (tripled vegetable content),
2) 75% ED (quadrupled vegetable content).
Control comparison: standard
100% energy density entrée.
The incorporation of considerable amounts of
pureed vegetables to reduce the energy density
of meal (breakfast; zucchini, lunch; broccoli,
cauliflower and tomato and dinner;
cauliflower and squash) was effective to
increase the daily vegetable intake (g) and
decrease the overall energy intake.
The consumption of more vegetables in entrees
did not affect the intake of the vegetable side
dishes i.e. at lunch (broccoli) or at dinner
(green beans).
Spill, Birch, Roe, and
Rolls (2011b)
- Food service
Determine the effects of serving
varying portion sizes of a low
energy dense, vegetable soup on
children's energy and vegetable
intake within a meal and over
the next eating episode.
Crossover
3-5 (4.7 ± 0.85) years
n = 72
Day-care centers (The
Pennsylvania State
University)
(State College,
Pennsylvania, USA)
Intervention took place 1 day a week for 4
weeks. 3 varying the portion size of tomato
soup served as a lunch first course (150 g,
225 g and 300 g)
Standard breakfast, lunch, and afternoon
snacks were provided during the test days.
Control comparison: no first
course was provided.
Serving a low energy dense, vegetable soup
(tomato) as a first course is an effective
strategy to reduce children's intake of an
energy dense main entree and increase
vegetable consumption (g) at the meal.
Total vegetable consumption across lunch
(broccoli) and afternoon snack (cucumber,
cherry tomatoes and carrot) increased as size
of the soup portion increased.
(continued on next page)
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
145
 Table 2 (continued)
Study/intervention
Aim
Design
Samplea,setting, location
Intervention
Control/comparison
Vegetable related conclusions for primary and
secondary outcome
Tabak, Tate, Stevens,
Siega-Riz, and
Ward (2012)
- Educational
Evaluate a home-based
intervention targeted to parents
to improve vegetable intake in
preschool-aged children.
RCT
2-5 (3.6 ± 0.8) years
n = 43
Home-based
(Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA)
4 month feasibility study of home-based
intervention of:
2 motivational phone calls (parent were
asked to choose 1 of the 4 topics for
improvement. Options were vegetable
availability, picky eating, modelling and,
family meals
4 tailored newsletters were sent which
covered all 4 topics.
Pre-intervention measures
Control group: were sent 4
children's books (not health/
nutrition related)
Intervention did not increase intake of
vegetables (FFQ). However increase were
reported for availability, vegetable types and
number of fruits and vegetables offered for
snacks.
Home-based intervention altering parents'
behavior such as feeding practices and
improving the home environment may aid to
increase vegetable intake in children.
Vereecken et al. (2009)
- Educational
Evaluate the impact of the
“Beastly Healthy at School”
intervention in children's food
consumption.
Cluster RCT
3-5 years
n = 476
Schools
(East Flanders, Belgium)
6 month intervention (2 days training for
staff).
An educational package, including an
educational map for the teachers, an
educative story and educational material for
the children and newsletters for the parents.
Pre-intervention measures
Control group
No significant effect of intervention was
evident for parental reported vegetable intake
(g; FFQ).
Williams et al. (2014)
- Educational
Evaluate the effects of nutrition-
education program in child-care
centers on children's at-home
daily consumption of fruit and
vegetable and other at-home
dietary behaviors.
Matched
settings,
Cluster RCT
2-5 (4.4 ± 0.3) years
n = 1143–902
Childcare centers/Home-
based
(New York City, New
York, USA)
Registered dietician provided nutrition
education to the parents and children
separately over a 6–10 week period.
Children received nutritional education e.g.
eating variety of fruits and vegetables (“Vary
your Veggies”). Staff were educated on
nutrition and physical activity policy.
Parents were sent weekly newsletters
(activities and recipes)
Pre-intervention measures
Control centers
The program improved children's at-home
daily consumption of vegetables (reported by
parents using pictures of filled cup
measurement), no effect on fruit intake. The
study also found a significant increase in the
frequency of child-initiated vegetable snacking
(which contributed to the significant increase
in daily vegetable intake).
Future research needs to understand the
process by which nutrition-education in
childcare setting can translate into changes at
home consumption.
Witt and Dunn (2012)
- Educational
Determine whether an
interactive nutrition and
physical activity program “Color
me Healthy” increases fruit and
vegetable consumption.
Cluster RCT
4-5 years
n = 122
Childcare centers
(Boise, Idaho, USA)
“Color Me Healthy” program was delivered
for 6 weeks. The program used color, music,
and exploration of the senses to teach
children about healthy eating and physical
activity.
The intervention was teacher-led and
included 12 circle-time lessons (2 each week,
focused on fruit and vegetables of different
colors) and 6 imaginary trip (1 each week,
fun imaginary classroom activity).
Control centers did not
receive the curriculum
Significant increase in the percentage of fruit
and vegetable snack consumed (g) among the
intervention group. Results were also
significant at the 3 month follow-up.
G: grams, RE: repeated exposure, FFL: flavour-flavour learning, FNL: flavour-nutrient learning, g: grams, FFQ: Food Frequency Questionnaire.
a Age range and mean age (SD) reported where appropriate, sample size at baseline and immediately post intervention (if different to baseline).
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
146
 these values in their results. Therefore based on the authors’ knowledge
and using existing data from a previous early years health intervention
project; HabEat (Caton et al., 2013; Hausner, Olsen, & Moller, 2012),
we identified and entered a pre-post correlation thought to be reason-
able, r = 0.6 (for unfamiliar/disliked) and r = 0.7 (for familiar vege-
tables, moderately liked and usual vegetable intake). Studies with more
than one intervention group were entered separately as intervention
arms.
For each meta-analysis/subgroup analysis (e.g. grouping by type of
design) the heterogeneity was assessed using I2 (inconsistency) statis-
tics. Higgins, Thompson, Deeks, and Altman (2003) described I2 “as the
percentage of total variation across the studies that is due to hetero-
geneity rather than chance”; values < 0.25 were considered low, <
0.50 were considered moderate and > 0.75 were considered high
(Higgins et al., 2003). As studies did not use identical or even similar
procedures a random-effects model was used for all meta-analyses to
pool estimated differences in vegetable intake between intervention
and comparison groups. This model is more appropriate as there are
various small size studies and the model will give relative weight based
on the study population. The random-effects model accounts for within
study variance (included in the fixed effect model) and between study
variance. Effect sizes are reported using Hedges g (adjusted standar-
dized mean differences), as this measure accounts for differences in
measurements of the intake data (e.g. weight in grams, observations,
FFQ score). The effect size from each study with confidence intervals
and cumulative effect sizes are presented using forest plots. Study was
used as the unit for analysis, except for analysis of intervention stra-
tegies. For studies with more than one intervention group, the inter-
vention arm (condition) was used as the unit of analysis.
Sensitivity analysis was performed by excluding three studies, one
which reported median data (Bell, Hendrie, Hartley, & Golley, 2015),
another with various experimental conditions but none were defined as
standard or control condition (Spill, Birch, Roe, & Rolls, 2010) and a
third study by Harnack et al. (2012) who found non-significant effects
for one of their intervention arm but did not report the precise p value
(p value of > 0.05 was entered as 0.06). Subgroup analysis was con-
ducted based on study methodology (study design, location, study
setting and quality assessment ratings) and intervention factors
(intervention strategies, type of vegetable, outcome measurements,
delivered by and the intervention recipient). A meta-regression using
the random effect model (methods of moments) was performed on the
number of taste exposures used in the intervention. Finally, a funnel
plot and Egger's regression test were conducted to check for publication
bias.
3. Results
3.1. Participants and design
There were 4017 participants included in the review. The sample
size varied in each study from 12 to 1154 (902 post intervention) and
all studies included boys and girls. The mean age was 3.8 years (based
on studies which reported the mean age, n = 19). The children were
generally from mid-high socioeconomic status, except for Savage,
Peterson, Marini, Bordi, and Birch (2013) and Williams et al. (2014)
study which assessed vegetable intake in children of low income par-
ents. The design of the studies included 4 RCT, 8 cluster RCT, 6
crossover, 6 between-subjects, 3 within-subjects, and 3 pre-post format
(see Table 2 for individual study design).
3.2. Interventions
The duration of the interventions varied from two single sessions of
pairing a vegetable with or without liked food (e.g. broccoli on top of
pizza vs broccoli on side of pizza) to an 8 month educational program.
They targeted vegetable only (n = 13), fruit and vegetables (n = 6),
vegetable as part of healthy nutrition (n = 6), healthy lifestyle (n = 4)
or, to prevent obesity (n = 1). To promote vegetable intake in pre-
school-aged children nine dominant strategies emerged from the in-
cluded studies. These were educational interventions, repeated taste
exposure, pairing, changed food-services, explicit reward, modelling,
choice, variety, and visual presentation. Most of the studies included
more than one of these approaches; see Table 2 for strategies included
in each study and see Table 3 for description of each strategy and the
number of studies using them. There were no specific strategies iden-
tified for children going through the fussy eating phase or food
Fig. 2. Summary of study quality assessment using the Effective Public Health Practice Project (EPHPP) quality assessment tool for quantitative studies.
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
147
 neophobia. The comparison groups were reported to receive no treat-
ment (or baseline consumption), usual care or received treatment after
the intervention phase.
3.3. Types of vegetables used: familiar/liked and unfamiliar/disliked
The type of vegetables included in the studies were classified as
either: familiar/liked or unfamiliar/disliked. The familiar vegetables
were usual everyday vegetables, those which were commonly con-
sumed and generally accepted by the study children, for example red
pepper, cauliflower, celery, snap peas (mange-tout), broccoli, carrots,
tomatoes, cucumbers, green beans and swede. Unfamiliar/disliked ve-
getables were those which were novel (e.g. salsify, artichoke, endive) or
disliked by the study children that is not favored or frequently tasted
within that sample in the period leading up to the study. The disliked
vegetables were typical everyday vegetables; but were targeted selec-
tively as they were not preferred or consumed by the specific child (e.g.
white cabbage, snap peas, baby corn, tomatoes, celery and yellow
squash). The reasons why a particular vegetable is disliked, varies be-
tween children (for example a child may simply refuse to eat a parti-
cular vegetable due to its colour or texture (without prior taste ex-
perience) or it could be that the child has tasted or eaten the vegetable
before but they no longer like this vegetable. Studies which categorized
a vegetable as disliked generally asked parents to identify a target ve-
getable for their child from a selection of the study vegetables (See,
Fildes, van Jaarsveld, Wardle, & Cooke, 2014; Holley, Haycraft, &
Farrow, 2015; Remington, Aññez, Croker, Wardle, & Cooke, 2012). The
categorization of the vegetable as familiar/liked or unfamiliar/disliked
was mainly based on the study's description or imputed by the authors
if missing (for example vegetables which feature within the FFQ mea-
sures were considered as familiar vegetables since scores reflected re-
ported intakes).
3.4. Synthesis of results: meta-analysis
With all 30 studies included, overall a small-moderate effect
(g = 0.40) of intervention was observed (Fig. 3). When 44 intervention
arms within studies were used as the unit of analysis, a slightly higher
effect size was observed g = 0.42, CI: 0.33–0.51, Z = 8.79, p < 0.001.
The sensitivity analyses performed by excluding three studies (Bell
et al., 2015; Harnack et al., 2012; Spill et al., 2010) indicated effect size
of g = 0.43, CI: 0.33–0.53, Z = 8.27, p < 0.001 and Tau2 = 0.04,
Chi2 = 85.13, df = 26, p < 0.001, I2 = 69.54%. Considerable hetero-
geneity was observed for 30 studies (I2 = 73%), therefore further sub-
group analyses were performed to investigate inconsistency between
studies.
3.5. Subgroup analyses
The subgroup analyses (grouping studies according to moderators
e.g. the study design and intervention strategy) showed a reduction in
dispersion, but generally the heterogeneity remained high, see Table 4.
The effect size significantly varied by study design, outcome measures,
intervention recipient, intervention strategy and the type of vegetable
used. Studies which used RCT, within-subjects, between-subjects or
crossover design had better outcome than studies which used cluster
RCT or pre-post designs. This may be because some of the studies
within these design categories did not always include the same parti-
cipants at baseline and post-intervention. The effect size also varied by
how vegetable intake was measured, for example the pooled effect was
higher when the pieces eaten were counted than when intake was
measured in grams or by FFQ. Also when children were the only re-
cipient the effect size was higher than when parents or teachers were
involved. However, it should be noted that the number of studies in
each category were uneven, this makes comparison less precise. There
were no other significant overall group differences identified. Some
interesting findings were observed when pairwise comparisons were
performed for the category of “who delivered” the intervention and the
location of the studies. For example, vegetable intake was higher when
the intervention was administered by the parents compared to the re-
search team alone (excluding teachers); Q = 5.46, df = 1, p = 0.019;
and for location when comparing UK studies (n = 5) to the US studies
(n = 16), a significantly higher effect size was observed Q = 4.87 with
df = 1, p = 0.027 for UK based studies.
3.6. Vegetable familiarity
The pooled effect size varied by the type of vegetable investigated in
the studies, see Fig. 4. The analysis indicated that intake of unfamiliar/
disliked vegetables improved more than that of familiar/liked vege-
tables. Of the 9 studies investigating unfamiliar/disliked vegetables 8
used a taste exposure strategy (high multi-collinearity) therefore, it was
not possible to assess whether intervention strategy or the type of ve-
getable was a stronger predictor for the intake. However, 8 of the 10
taste exposures studies using unfamiliar/disliked vegetables had a
better combined effect (g = 0.60, CI: 0.46–0.74) compared to the 2
studies
which
used
familiar/liked
vegetables
(g = 0.35,
CI:
−0.00–0.70). Here the pairwise comparison was not statistically sig-
nificant, possibly due to lack of power.
Table 3
Description of each intervention strategy and number of studies using them.
Intervention
Brief description
n
Educational
• Teaching about the nutritional value to children, parents or/and staff (e.g. Williams et al., 2014)
10
• Children engage in fun activities such as gardening, games play, cooking classes and tasting (e.g. Sharma et al., 2011; Witt & Dunn, 2012)
Taste exposure
• Opportunity to repeatedly taste the same vegetable/s (e.g. Fildes et al., 2014; Hausner et al., 2012); in present studies the number of exposures
varied from 2 to 24.
10
Pairing or stealth
• Presenting vegetables with a liked food or flavor for example herb dip (e.g. Fisher et al., 2012)
8
• Providing additional nutrients for example sunflower oil or maltodextrin (e.g. Caton et al., 2013; de Wild et al., 2013)
• Vegetables by stealth, such as incorporating pureed vegetable into an entrée (e.g. Spill et al., 2011a)
Food services
• Provision of target foods e.g. increasing availability and accessibility (e.g. Bell et al., 2015)
7
• Changed the way food was provided (e.g. served vegetables first e.g. Spill et al. (2010))
• Modification to the portion size (e.g. Savage et al., 2012)
Reward interventions
• Social; praise (e.g. Remington et al., 2012)
5
• Tangible non-food rewards e.g. sticker or toy (e.g. Horne et al., 2011)
Modelling
• Learning through observation; for example. Holley et al. (2015) required the parents to model vegetable intake to encourage their children to eat
the vegetables whereas Horne et al. (2011) used animated video characters to model eating of the target foods.
2
Choice
• Provided vegetables singly or offered children a choice of two vegetables (de Wild et al., 2015)
1
Variety
• Offered vegetables individually or together (Roe et al., 2013).
1
Visual presentation
• Provided vegetables in a visually appealing manner – for example presenting slices of cucumber decorated with olives and chives in the shape of
a caterpillar (Correia et al., 2014).
1
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
148
 3.7. Intervention strategies
Many studies used more than one strategy to promote vegetable
intake, for primary analysis studies were grouped by the main inter-
vention strategy; education, taste exposure or others. When grouped by
main strategy the studies using taste exposure had a significantly higher
impact on intake than education or other strategies (Table 4). To ex-
plore this further, the intervention arms (n = 44) were clustered by the
combinations of strategies used (Fig. 5). Analysis with 14 subgroups
showed that the effect size was significantly higher for taste exposure
strategy when coupled with reward and modelling. However this sub-
group only consisted of two studies, which had very different effect
sizes for Horne et al. (2011); hedges g = 1.30, CI 0.72–1.80, p < 0.001
and intervention arm within the study by Holley et al. (2015); hedges
g = 0.50, CI: −0.54–1.54, p = 0.35). The study by Horne and collea-
gues which included 20 children and offered sixteen different fruits and
vegetables with a minimum of 24 repeated taste exposures to target
food pulled the effect size considerably. When assessing these strategies
further, main effect of taste exposure appeared to be most important
because repeated taste exposure intervention alone had a higher effect
than taste exposure and reward, reward alone or taste exposure and
modelling (Fig. 5). Moreover taste exposure to the vegetable on its own
(plain form) produced a bigger impact on intake than pairing with other
flavors, dips or energy. Some interventions such as offering choice,
pairing with dips or making vegetables visually appealing did not im-
prove vegetable intake; this may due to lack of power as only one or
two studies were from these categories.
3.8. Number of taste exposures
A meta-regression analysis was performed to examine if the number
of exposures offered in the ten repeated taste exposure studies has an
effect on vegetable intake (Fig. 6). The analysis indicated that the
number of taste exposures was positively associated with effect size
(B = 0.035 (SE 0.01, CI 0.00–0.06, p = 0.01). The model was statisti-
cally significant (Q = 6.21, df = 1, p = 0.013) and the goodness of fit
indicated that the effect size does not vary significantly between these
studies when the number of taste exposures are controlled for
(R2 = 74%, Tau2 = 0.02, Q = 10.21, df = 8, p = 0.250, I2 = 21.67%).
For a significant improvement in intake (a moderate effect of g = 0. 5)
children would require approximately 8–10 exposures.
Fig. 3. Forest plot of overall intervention effect versus comparison on vegetable intake by study (n = 30).
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
149
 Table 4
Subgroup analysis to highlight effect size and heterogeneity by methodology and intervention factors (study as unit of analysis).
Variables
No. of studies
Effect size
(95% CI)
I2%
Heterogeneity within (Q/P values)
Heterogeneity between (Q/P values)
Main strategy
10.52a
Educational
10
0.26 (0.13–0.39)
54
19.39a
Taste Exposure
10
0.57 (0.43–0.70)
52
18.69a
Other
10
0.36 (0.22–0.50)
61
22.53a
Design
11.84a
Between-subjects
6
0.48 (0.31–0.66)
26
6.77
Cluster RCT
8
0.25 (0.10–0.40)
44
12.61a
Crossover
6
0.43 (0.26–0.61)
68
15.55a
Pre-post intervention1
3
0.22 (0.01–0.44)
72
7.26
RCT
4
0.59 (0.34–0.84)
30
4.30
Within-subjects
3
0.64 (0.32–0.97)
71
6.88a
Measurement
18.83a
Cup serving (image)
1
0.14 (−0.18–0.47)
0
0.00
FFQ
4
0.38 (0.14–0.62)
0
2.32
Weight (Grams)
15
0.43 (0.32–0.54)
62
36.97a
Weight (Grams/day)
1
0.71 (−0.14–1.56)
0
0.00
Energy (Kcal)
1
0.49 (−0.08–1.06)
0
0.00
Observed
4
0.08 (−0.12–0.28)
0
2.29
Pieces (count)
4
0.67 (−0.46–0.89)
65
8.48a
Settings
1.01
Early years
22
0.39 (0.28–0.50)
76
88.18a
Home
6
0.51 (0.26–0.75)
27
6.92
Multi
2
0.30 (−0.07–0.67)
0
0.12
Location
13.97
Australia
1
0.12 (−0.25–0.48)
0
0.00
Belgium
1
0.07 (−0.32–0.46)
0
0.00
Denmark
1
0.72 (0.32–1.12)
0
0.00
France
1
0.44 (0.07–0.81)
0
0.00
Mexico
1
0.34 (−0.10–0.78)
0
0.00
Netherlands
3
0.39 (0.10–0.69)
0
1.98
Thailand
1
0.71 (0.17–1.25)
0
0.00
UK
5
0.63 (0.41–0.85)
61
10.22a
USA
16
0.34 (0.22–0.46)
59
36.25a
Quality
0.31
Strong
5
0.42 (0.20–0.65)
84
24.76a
Moderate
15
0.43 (0.28–0.57)
16
16.61
Weak
10
0.36 (0.18–0.54)
85
60.48a
Delivered by
3.84
Parent
6
0.51 (0.26–0.75)
28
6.92
Research Team
6
0.24 (0.05–0.43)
67
15.02a
Teacher
8
0.43 (0.23–0.64)
70
23.67a
Teacher, Researcher
10
0.45 (0.29–0.60)
78
41.55a
Recipient
9.95a
Child
22
0.48 (0.38–0.58)
61
53.22a
Child, Parent
3
0.29 (0.00–0.58)
0
0.17
Child, Parent, Teacher
4
0.19 (−0.01–0.39)
61
7.71
Staff
1
0.12 (−0.23–0.47)
0
0.00
a p < 0.005; bold font indicates the group differences to be statistically significant; 1 pre-post format studies did not always include the same children.
Fig. 4. Forest plot of subgroup analysis by vegetable familiarity/liking on vegetable intake (study as unit of analysis, n = 30).
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
150
 3.9. Publication bias
A funnel plot indicated significant asymmetry (Fig. 7), which sug-
gests the presence of publication bias in the present selection of the
studies. This is supported by Egger's regression test, indicating that the
unpublished studies were likely to have an effect on the overall change
in vegetable intake (intercept (B0) is 1.74, 95% CI: 0.17–3.31, df = 28,
t = 2.27, p = 0.015). Duval and Tweedie's trim and fill method in-
dicated that under the random effects model, 8 studies are missing and
if these studies are added to the analysis then the imputed combined
effect is adjusted to g = 0.31 (95% CI, 0.208–0.41) from g = 0.40. The
overall effect is slightly reduced, however the effect of the intervention
on vegetable intake remained favorable compared to the comparison.
4. Discussion
4.1. Main findings
The present review identified interventions designed to promote
vegetable intake in young children that were successful and determined
whether some strategies were more effective than others. Overall, evi-
dence from the studies pooled in the meta-analysis indicated that a
range of interventions were moderately successful in increasing vege-
table intake. The most successful strategies were those which included
taste exposures and reward and the less successful, but effective stra-
tegies were those which included food services and nutrition education.
This was the first systematic review which attempted to investigate
Fig. 5. Effect by intervention strategies on vegetable intake by intervention arms (n = 44 arranged by the effect size).
Fig. 6. Meta-regression of effect size (hedges g) according to the number of taste exposures in repeated taste exposure studies (with line of best fit, 95% confidence
interval and each study's weight in the meta-analysis, n = 10).
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
151
 pooled effects based on vegetable familiarity/liking in order to assess
whether the type of vegetable offered to the children influenced out-
comes. Evidence showed that the effect size was greater when the ve-
getable used in the studies were unfamiliar/disliked compared to stu-
dies using familiar/liked vegetables. Thus intervention effectiveness
may also depend on vegetable familiarity and liking. The magnitude of
change for familiar/liked vegetable may be influenced by ceiling ef-
fects, however interventions promoting intake of familiar/liked vege-
tables were also successful.
A previous review by Wolfenden et al. (2012) concluded that the
taste exposure strategy was not beneficial in the short-term (at 3
months follow-up), but that using reward with taste exposure was an
effective strategy for increasing vegetable consumption. These conclu-
sions should be interpreted with caution as this meta-analysis only in-
cluded two studies and the findings were mainly driven by one study
(Cooke et al., 2011). Cooke et al. (2011) found that the repeated taste
exposure strategy was successful immediately after the intervention and
at 1 month follow-up but exposure alone had no sustained effects at 3
months, although liking increased as expected. The authors further
added that due to a compliance problem (e.g. in home), the children in
the exposure alone condition may have received fewer exposures than
the children in the tangible reward condition. Although the number of
exposures were controlled in their analysis, the present review has
identified that the number of taste exposures children received was an
important factor for increased intake. Interventions with repeated taste
exposures were most effective, therefore, in contrast to Wolfenden et al.
(2012) this review stresses the importance of repeated taste exposures,
independent of reward. This is further supported by the Horne et al.
(2011) study which found that once the liking was established during
snack time, the intake generalized to lunch time in the absence of re-
wards.
A pairwise comparison indicated that the children had improved
intake when vegetables were offered at home by a parent compared to
when offered by the researcher alone. This may be because parents
participating in studies may be highly motived and closeness to the
children is likely to yield stronger effects than interventions delivered
by unfamiliar others. This is confirmed by finding no differences in
intake when teachers delivered the intervention. This review comple-
ments and extends the previous review by Holley et al. (2017a) as the
present review is based on quantitative synthesis and provided evidence
from educational strategies which were missing in the previous reviews.
The present meta-analysis included nineteen of the twenty-two studies
from the previous review (Holley et al., 2017a). Present findings sup-
ported previous suggestions of successful strategies in 2–5 year olds
(taste exposure, modelling and non-food reward), however it has fur-
ther demonstrated the success of these strategies based on effect sizes
and more importantly it highlights small effects of educational inter-
ventions on vegetable intake.
A previous review by Diep et al. (2014) found that the quality of the
study determined the success of the intervention. This was not apparent
in the present review. The majority of the studies were scored as weak
or moderate and this raises concerns about quality of research in this
area. Typically there are problems around lack of representativeness of
the sample, the researcher or participants not being blind to the in-
tervention and issues of accuracy when recording intake. However,
these are common methodological constraints in this field. Therefore as
suggested by Hodder et al. (2018) future research should adopt more
rigorous methods to minimize risk of bias and advance the field of re-
search concerning promotion of fruit and vegetable intakes.
Significant heterogeneity was observed in pooling 30 studies,
however, additional subgroup analyses indicated that the moderators
were possible sources of inconsistency (e.g. the type of vegetable used
and intervention strategies). Furthermore, due to the problem of multi-
collinearity, it was difficult to determine whether taste exposure
strategy or the use of an unfamiliar vegetable was more important in
predicting intake. This needs to be explored in future research. Meta-
analysis is a powerful tool to summarize data from many studies,
however there is also the potential to over interpret results, for example
small studies tend to report larger treatment benefit than larger studies
(Sterne, Gavaghan, & Egger, 2000), affecting the overall effect size.
Thus findings should be interpreted with some caution. A major lim-
itation of using standardized effect size (Hedges g) is the clinical in-
terpretation of the findings. To counter this issue to some extent find-
ings from taste exposure only in four studies which provided at least a
full portion of the vegetable to the children and measured intake in
grams indicated that on average children increased intake by 67 g of the
target vegetable (Bouhlal, Issanchou, Chabanet, & Nicklaus, 2014;
Caton et al., 2013; de Wild, de Graaf, & Jager, 2013; Hausner et al.,
Fig. 7. An asymmetry Funnel plot of standard error by Hedges g of included (n = 30) and missing studies (n = 8).
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
152
 2012). Given that an adult portion of vegetables is 80 g and for a child is
40 g, this increase of 67 g is at least one and a half portions and is
therefore important.
Some novel findings have emerged from this review including the
effect of vegetable familiarity/liking on intake of vegetables and the
most effective intervention strategies in children aged 2–5 years. The
findings in relation to vegetable familiarity on intake is novel and in-
teresting but there are some limitations. While the authors of the pre-
sent paper categorized the type of vegetables based on vegetables used
in the primary research and author's descriptions there are potential
overlaps between the vegetable categories, for example a vegetable
which is familiar can be disliked and unfamiliar foods are not ne-
cessarily disliked. Therefore, the outcome from this subgroup analysis
should be interpreted with caution. Repeated exposure in early years is
perceived to be important in the formation of taste preference (Ventura
& Worobey, 2013). According to the meta-regression the more exposure
a child receives to a particular vegetable the more likely they are to
increase their intake of that vegetable. To achieve an increase in intake
at least 8–10 exposures are recommended, especially for unfamiliar/
disliked vegetables. Moreover, the evidence suggests that offering ve-
getables alone is better than pairing with flavors or energy as this can
result in a negative contrast effect when subsequently presented alone
(Dwyer, 2012).
A comprehensive search for the present review did not retrieve any
papers which specifically addressed fussy eaters, but the age range for
the search included the peak period for fussy eating. Future studies
might investigate what specific strategies are effective in children who
score high for neophobia or fussy eating. Also, longer term studies are
needed to investigate if taste exposure strategies are sustainable over
time (12 + months) and whether they are feasible and cost effective at
a large scale. Some strategies may work better with younger than older
children. For example, preschool children may be more amenable to
these interventions than older children who have established food
preferences, therefore early intervention is key. In addition, some
strategies may need to be tailored to the needs of particular children,
for example those with genetic taste sensitivity to bitter tastes (see
Keller, 2014 for a review).
A previous systematic review by Mikkelsen, Husby, Skov, and Perez-
Cueto (2014) reported that including an education component to chil-
dren's vegetable intervention was important. In the present meta-ana-
lysis, all educational interventions were successful but the effect sizes
were smaller than the taste exposure strategies. A more recent sys-
tematic review by Hendrie, Lease, Bowen, Baird, and Cox (2016) in-
vestigating child's ‘usual intake’ rather than specific target vegetable
(e.g. disliked) in 2–15 year olds stated that the taste exposure studies
were promising for the target vegetables but no evidence was reported
beyond this on the habitual intake (Corsini, Slater, Harrison, Cooke, &
Cox, 2013). Therefore the authors suggested that future interventions
should combine the taste exposure strategies with those which influ-
ence the usual intake. To our knowledge repeated taste exposure
(usually for target vegetables) in combination with education (gen-
erally for improving the usual intake) has not been investigated on the
intake of vegetables in children aged 2–5 years. Therefore, these stra-
tegies should be combined to assess if intake of both the target vege-
table and child's usual vegetable intake can be improved simulta-
neously.
5. Conclusions
In conclusion repeated taste exposure is a simple technique that
could be considered suitable for broader translation to childcare set-
tings and the home. Health policy could specifically target the use of
novel and disliked vegetables in addition to the usual vegetables con-
sumed in day care settings with emphasis on offering a minimum of
8–10 exposures. Further research is needed to understand which stra-
tegies works best for the food fussy children. Improving liking and
encouraging intake of vegetables will lead to long term health benefits
only if the intake is sustained. Therefore lasting strategies which en-
courage vegetable intake in the early years is essential and can influ-
ence later health outcomes.
Funding
This research is funded by WRDTP ESRC Collaborative Award.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to all study authors who provided required data for the
meta-analysis.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2018.04.019.
References
Addessi, E., Galloway, A. T., Visalberghi, E., & Birch, L. L. (2005). Specific social influ-
ences on the acceptance of novel foods in 2–5-year-old children. Appetite, 45,
264–271.
Angelopoulos, P., Kourlaba, G., Kondaki, K., Fragiadakis, G. A., & Manios, Y. (2009).
Assessing children's diet quality in crete based on healthy eating Index: The children
study. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 63, 964–969.
Anzman-Frasca, S., Savage, J. S., Marini, M. E., Fisher, J. O., & Birch, L. L. (2012).
Repeated exposure and associative conditioning promote preschool children's liking
of vegetables. Appetite, 58, 543–553.
Appleton, K. M., Hemingway, A., Saulais, L., Dinnella, C., Monteleone, E., Depezay, L., ...
Hartwell, H. (2016). Increasing vegetable intakes: Rationale and systematic review of
published interventions. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 55, 869–896.
Aune, D., Giovannucci, E., Boffetta, P., Fadnes, L. T., Keum, N., Norat, T., et al. (2017).
Fruit and vegetable intake and the risk of cardiovascular disease, total cancer and all-
cause mortality-a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective
studies. International Journal of Epidemiology, 46, 1029–1056.
Bell, L. K., Hendrie, G. A., Hartley, J., & Golley, R. K. (2015). Impact of a nutrition award
scheme on the food and nutrient intakes of 2- to 4-year-olds attending long day care.
Public Health Nutrition, 18, 2634–2642.
Bell, K. I., & Tepper, B. J. (2006). Short-term vegetable intake by young children classified
by 6-n-propylthoiuracil bitter-taste phenotype. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
84, 245–251.
Blanchette, L., & Brug, J. (2005). Determinants of fruit and vegetable consumption among
6-12-year-old children and effective interventions to increase consumption. Journal of
Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 18, 431–443.
Bouhlal, S., Issanchou, S., Chabanet, C., & Nicklaus, S. (2014). 'Just a pinch of salt'. An
experimental comparison of the effect of repeated exposure and flavor-flavor learning
with salt or spice on vegetable acceptance in toddlers. Appetite, 83, 209–217.
Brouwer, N. R. J., & Neelon, B. S. E. (2013). Watch me grow: A garden-based pilot in-
tervention to increase vegetable and fruit intake in preschoolers. BMC Public Health,
13, 363.
Cashdan, E. (1994). A sensitive period for learning about food. Human Nature, 5,
279–291.
Caton, S. J., Ahern, S. M., Remy, E., Nicklaus, S., Blundell, P., & Hetherington, M. M.
(2013). Repetition counts: Repeated exposure increases intake of a novel vegetable in
UK pre-school children compared to flavour-flavour and flavour-nutrient learning.
British Journal of Nutrition, 109, 2089–2097.
Caton, S. J., Blundell, P., Ahern, S. M., Nekitsing, C., Olsen, A., Møller, P., et al. (2014).
Learning to eat vegetables in early Life: The role of timing, age and individual eating
traits. PLoS One, 9, e97609.
Cooke, L. J., Chambers, L. C., Añez, E. V., & Wardle, J. (2011). Facilitating or under-
mining? The effect of reward on food acceptance. A narrative review. Appetite, 57,
493–497.
Cooke, L. J., Haworth, C. M., & Wardle, J. (2007). Genetic and environmental influences
on children's food neophobia. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 86, 428–433.
Cooke, L. J., & Wardle, J. (2005). Age and gender differences in children's food pre-
ferences. British Journal of Nutrition, 93, 741–746.
Cooke, L. J., Wardle, J., Gibson, E. L., Sapochnik, M., Sheiham, A., & Lawson, M. (2004).
Demographic, familial and trait predictors of fruit and vegetable consumption by pre-
school children. Public Health Nutrition, 7, 295–302.
Correia, D. C. S., O'Connell, M., Irwin, M. L., & Henderson, K. E. (2014). Pairing vege-
tables with a liked food and visually appealing presentation: Promising strategies for
increasing vegetable consumption among preschoolers. Childhood Obesity, 10, 72–76.
Corsini, N., Slater, A., Harrison, A., Cooke, L., & Cox, D. N. (2013). Rewards can be used
effectively with repeated exposure to increase liking of vegetables in 4-6-year-old
children. Public Health Nutrition, 16, 942–951.
Cravener, T. L., Schlechter, H., Loeb, K. L., Radnitz, C., Schwartz, M., Zucker, N., et al.
(2015). Feeding strategies derived from behavioral economics and psychology can
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
153
 increase vegetable intake in children as part of a home-based intervention: Results of
a pilot study. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 115, 1798–1807.
Delgado-Noguera, M., Tort, S., Martinez-Zapata, M. J., & Bonfill, X. (2011). Primary
school interventions to promote fruit and vegetable consumption: A systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Preventive Medicine, 53, 3–9.
Di Noia, J., & Byrd-Bredbenner, C. (2014). Determinants of fruit and vegetable intake in
low-income children and adolescents. Nutrition Reviews, 72, 575–590.
Diep, C. S., Chen, T. A., Davies, V. F., Baranowski, J. C., & Baranowski, T. (2014).
Influence of behavioral theory on fruit and vegetable intervention effectiveness
among children: A meta-analysis. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 46,
506–546.
Dovey, T. M., Staples, P. A., Gibson, E. L., & Halford, J. C. G. (2008). Food neophobia and
‘picky/fussy’ eating in children: A review. Appetite, 50, 181–193.
Dwyer, D. M. (2012). Licking and liking: The assessment of hedonic responses in rodents.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65, 371–394.
Effective Public Health Practice Project. EPHPP (1998). Quality assessment tool for
quantitative studies. http://www.ephpp.ca/tools.html, Accessed date: 21 June 2017.
Evans, C. E., Christian, M. S., Cleghorn, C. L., Greenwood, D. C., & Cade, J. E. (2012).
Systematic review and meta-analysis of school-based interventions to improve daily
fruit and vegetable intake in children aged 5 to 12 y. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 96, 889–901.
Fildes, A., van Jaarsveld, C. H. M., Wardle, J., & Cooke, L. (2014). Parent-administered
exposure to increase Children's vegetable acceptance: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 114, 881–888.
First Steps Nutrition Trust (2016). Good food choices and portion sizes for 1-4 year olds.
http://www.firststepsnutrition.org, Accessed date: 7 March 2017.
Fisher, J. O., Mennella, J. A., Hughes, S. O., Liu, Y., Mendoza, P. M., & Patrick, H. (2012).
Offering “dip” promotes intake of a moderately-liked raw vegetable among pre-
schoolers with genetic sensitivity to bitterness. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and
Dietetics, 112, 235–245.
French, S. A., & Stables, G. (2003). Environmental interventions to promote vegetable and
fruit consumption among youth in school settings. Preventive Medicine, 37, 593–610.
Gripshover, S. J., & Markman, E. M. (2013). Teaching young children a theory of
Nutrition: Conceptual change and the potential for increased vegetable consumption.
Psychological Science, 24, 1541–1553.
Hall, J. N., Moore, S., Harper, S. B., & Lynch, J. W. (2009). Global variability in fruit and
vegetable consumption. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 36, 402–409 e405.
Harnack, L. J., Oakes, J. M., French, S. A., Rydell, S. A., Farah, F. M., & Taylor, G. L.
(2012). Results from an experimental trial at a Head Start center to evaluate two meal
service approaches to increase fruit and vegetable intake of preschool aged children.
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 9, 51.
Harris, G. (2008). Development of taste and food preferences in children. Current Opinion
in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care, 11, 315–319.
Hausner, H., Olsen, A., & Moller, P. (2012). Mere exposure and flavour-flavour learning
increase 2-3 year-old children's acceptance of a novel vegetable. Appetite, 58,
1152–1159.
Hendrie, G. A., Lease, H. J., Bowen, J., Baird, D. L., & Cox, D. N. (2016). Strategies to
increase children's vegetable intake in home and community settings: A systematic
review of literature. Maternal and Child Nutrition, 13, e12276.
Higgins, J. P. T., Thompson, S. G., Deeks, J. J., & Altman, D. G. (2003). Measuring in-
consistency in meta-analyses. BMJ, 327, 557–560.
Hodder, R. K., Stacey, F. G., O'Brien, K. M., Wyse, R. J., Clinton-McHarg, T., Tzelepis, F.,
et al. (2018). Interventions for increasing fruit and vegetable consumption in children
aged five years and under. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 1, Cd008552.
Holley, C. E., Farrow, C., & Haycraft, E. (2017a). A systematic review of methods for
increasing vegetable consumption in early childhood. Current Nutrition Reports, 6,
157–170.
Holley, C. E., Haycraft, E., & Farrow, C. (2015). 'Why don't you try it again?' A comparison
of parent led, home based interventions aimed at increasing children's consumption
of a disliked vegetable. Appetite, 87, 215–222.
Holley, C. E., Haycraft, E., & Farrow, C. (2017b). Predicting children's fussiness with
vegetables: The role of feeding practices. Maternal and Child Nutrition, 14, e12442.
Horne, P. J., Greenhalgh, J., Erjavec, M., Lowe, C., Viktor, S., & Whitaker, C. J. (2011).
Increasing pre-school children's consumption of fruit and vegetables. A modelling and
rewards intervention. Appetite, 56, 375–385.
Huybrechts, I., Matthys, C., Vereecken, C., Maes, L., Temme, E. H., Van Oyen, H., et al.
(2008). Food intakes by preschool children in Flanders compared with dietary
guidelines. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 5,
243–257.
Johnson, S. L., McPhee, L., & Birch, L. L. (1991). Conditioned preferences: Young children
prefer flavors associated with high dietary fat. Physiology & Behavior, 50, 1245–1251.
Keller, K. L. (2014). The use of repeated exposure and associative conditioning to increase
vegetable acceptance in children: Explaining the variability across studies. Journal of
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 114, 1169–1173.
Kim, S. A., Moore, L. V., Galuska, D., Wright, A. P., Harris, D., Grummer-Strawn, L. M.,
et al. (2014). Vital Signs: Fruit and vegetable intake among children - United States,
2003-2010. Centers for disease control and prevention. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, 63, 671–676.
Krolner, R., Rasmussen, M., Brug, J., Klepp, K. I., Wind, M., & Due, P. (2011).
Determinants of fruit and vegetable consumption among children and adolescents: A
review of the literature. Part II: Qualitative studies. International Journal of Behavioral
Nutrition and Physical Activity, 8, 112.
Liberati, A., Altman, D. G., Tetzlaff, J., Mulrow, C., Gotzsche, P. C., Ioannidis, J. P., et al.
(2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of
studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: Explanation and elaboration. BMJ,
339, b2700.
Manios, Y., Kourlaba, G., Kondaki, K., Grammatikaki, E., Birbilis, M., Oikonomou, E.,
et al. (2009). Diet quality of preschoolers in Greece based on the healthy eating
Index: The GENESIS study. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 109, 616–623.
Martinez-Andrade, G. O., Cespedes, E. M., Rifas-Shiman, S. L., Romero-Quechol, G.,
Gonzalez-Unzaga, M. A., Benitez-Trejo, M. A., et al. (2014). Feasibility and impact of
Creciendo Sanos, a clinic-based pilot intervention to prevent obesity among preschool
children in Mexico City. BMC Pediatrics, 14, 77.
Mikkelsen, M. V., Husby, S., Skov, L. R., & Perez-Cueto, F. J. (2014). A systematic review
of types of healthy eating interventions in preschools. Nutrition Journal, 13, 56.
National Health Service. NHS (2015). 5 a day: What counts? http://www.nhs.uk/
Livewell/5ADAY/Pages/Whatcounts.aspx, Accessed date: 7 March 2017.
Oyebode, O., Gordon-Dseagu, V., Walker, A., & Mindell, J. S. (2014). Fruit and vegetable
consumption and all-cause, cancer and CVD mortality: Analysis of health Survey for
England data. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 68, 856–862.
Rasmussen, M., Krolner, R., Klepp, K. I., Lytle, L., Brug, J., Bere, E., et al. (2006).
Determinants of fruit and vegetable consumption among children and adolescents: A
review of the literature. Part I: Quantitative studies. International Journal of Behavioral
Nutrition and Physical Activity, 3, 22.
Reinaerts, E., Nooijer, J.d, Candel, M., & Vries, N.d. (2007). Increasing children's fruit and
vegetable consumption: Distribution or a multicomponent programme? Public Health
Nutrition, 10, 939–947.
Remington, A., Aññez, E., Croker, H., Wardle, J., & Cooke, L. (2012). Increasing food
acceptance in the home setting: A randomized controlled trial of parent-administered
taste exposure with incentives. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 95, 72–77.
Roberts, C. (Ed.). (2013). Health Survey for England 2013, fruit and vegetable consumption,
Chapter 7. London: The Health and Social Care Information Center.
Roe, L. S., Meengs, J. S., Birch, L. L., & Rolls, B. J. (2013). Serving a variety of vegetables
and fruit as a snack increased intake in preschool children. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 98, 693–699.
Savage, J. S., Fisher, J. O., Marini, M., & Birch, L. L. (2012). Serving smaller age-ap-
propriate entree portions to children aged 3-5 y increases fruit and vegetable intake
and reduces energy density and energy intake at lunch. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 95, 335–341.
Savage, J. S., Peterson, J., Marini, M., Bordi, P. L., Jr., & Birch, L. L. (2013). The addition
of a plain or herb-flavored reduced-fat dip is associated with improved preschoolers'
intake of vegetables. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 113,
1090–1095.
Sharma, S., Chuang, R.-J., & Hedberg, A. M. (2011). Pilot-testing CATCH early childhood:
A preschool-based healthy nutrition and physical activity program. American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition, 42, 12–23.
Sirikulchayanonta, C., Iedsee, K., Shuaytong, P., & Srisorrachatr, S. (2010). Using food
experience, multimedia and role models for promoting fruit and vegetable con-
sumption in Bangkok kindergarten children. Nutrition and Dietetics, 67, 97–101.
Spill, M. K., Birch, L. L., Roe, L. S., & Rolls, B. J. (2010). Eating vegetables first: The use of
portion size to increase vegetable intake in preschool children. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 91, 1237–1243.
Spill, M. K., Birch, L. L., Roe, L. S., & Rolls, B. J. (2011a). Hiding vegetables to reduce
energy density: An effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and re-
duce energy intake. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 94, 735–741.
Spill, M. K., Birch, L. L., Roe, L. S., & Rolls, B. J. (2011b). Serving large portions of
vegetable soup at the start of a meal affected children's energy and vegetable intake.
Appetite, 57, 213–219.
Sterne, J. A., Gavaghan, D., & Egger, M. (2000). Publication and related bias in meta-
analysis: Power of statistical tests and prevalence in the literature. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, 53, 1119–1129.
Tabak, R. G., Tate, D. F., Stevens, J., Siega-Riz, A. M., & Ward, D. S. (2012). Family ties to
health program: A randomized intervention to improve vegetable intake in children.
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 44, 166–171.
Thomas, B. H., Ciliska, D., Dobbins, M., & Micucci, S. (2004). A process for systematically
reviewing the literature: Providing the research evidence for public health nursing
interventions. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 1, 176–184.
Ventura, A. K., & Worobey, J. (2013). Early influences on the development of food pre-
ferences. Current Biology, 23, R401–R408.
Vereecken, C., Huybrechts, I., Houte, H., Martens, V., Wittebroodt, I., & Maes, L. (2009).
Results from a dietary intervention study in preschools "Beastly Healthy at School".
International Journal of Public Health, 54, 142–149.
de Wild, V. W., de Graaf, C., Boshuizen, H. C., & Jager, G. (2015). Influence of choice on
vegetable intake in children: An in-home study. Appetite, 91, 1–6.
de Wild, V. W. T., de Graaf, C., & Jager, G. (2013). Effectiveness of flavour nutrient
learning and mere exposure as mechanisms to increase toddler's intake and pre-
ference for green vegetables. Appetite, 64, 89–96.
Williams, P. A., Cates, S. C., Blitstein, J. L., Hersey, J., Gabor, V., Ball, M., et al. (2014).
Nutrition-education program improves preschoolers' at-home diet: A group rando-
mized trial. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 114, 1001–1008.
Witt, K. E., & Dunn, C. (2012). Increasing fruit and vegetable consumption among
Preschoolers: Evaluation of "color me healthy". Journal of Nutrition Education and
Behavior, 44, 107–113.
Wolfenden, L., Wyse, R. J., Britton, B. I., Campbell, K. J., Hodder, R. K., Stacey, F. G., et al.
(2012). Interventions for increasing fruit and vegetable consumption in children aged
5 years and under. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 11, CD008552.
World Health Organisation. WHO (2007). International health regulations (2005) areas of
work for implementation. http://www.who.int/ihr/publications/areas_of_work/en/,
Accessed date: 7 March 2017.
World Health Organisation. WHO (Ed.). (April 2011). Global status report on non com-
municable diseases 2010Geneva: World Health Organisationhttp://www.who.int/
nmh/publications/ncd_report2010/en/, Accessed date: 20 March 2017.
C. Nekitsing et al.
Appetite 127 (2018) 138–154
154
