 6  
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
Guidelines on the management of abnormal liver 
blood tests
Philip N Newsome,1,2 Rob Cramb,1 Suzanne M Davison,3 John F Dillon,4 
Mark Foulerton,5 Edmund M Godfrey,6 Richard Hall,7 Ulrike Harrower,8 
Mark Hudson,9,10 Andrew Langford,11 Anne Mackie,8 Robert Mitchell-Thain,12 
Karen Sennett,13,14 Nicholas C Sheron,15 Julia Verne,8 Martine Walmsley,16 
Andrew Yeoman17
AbstrAct
These updated guidelines on the management of 
abnormal liver blood tests have been commissioned 
by the Clinical Services and Standards Committee 
(CSSC) of the British Society of Gastroenterology (BSG) 
under the auspices of the liver section of the BSG. The 
original guidelines, which this document supersedes, 
were written in 2000 and have undergone extensive 
revision by members of the Guidelines Development 
Group (GDG). The GDG comprises representatives from 
patient/carer groups (British Liver Trust, Liver4life, PBC 
Foundation and PSC Support), elected members of 
the BSG liver section (including representatives from 
Scotland and Wales), British Association for the Study of 
the Liver (BASL), Specialist Advisory Committee in Clinical 
Biochemistry/Royal College of Pathology and Association 
for Clinical Biochemistry, British Society of Paediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (BSPGHAN), 
Public Health England (implementation and screening), 
Royal College of General Practice, British Society of 
Gastrointestinal and Abdominal Radiologists (BSGAR) 
and Society of Acute Medicine. The quality of evidence 
and grading of recommendations was appraised using 
the AGREE II tool. These guidelines deal specifically with 
the management of abnormal liver blood tests in children 
and adults in both primary and secondary care under the 
following subheadings: (1) What constitutes an abnormal 
liver blood test? (2) What constitutes a standard liver 
blood test panel? (3) When should liver blood tests be 
checked? (4) Does the extent and duration of abnormal 
liver blood tests determine subsequent investigation? 
(5) Response to abnormal liver blood tests. They are not 
designed to deal with the management of the underlying 
liver disease.
recommendAtions list
 
►
Recommendation 1: Initial investigation for 
potential liver disease should include bilirubin, 
albumin, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alka-
line phosphatase (ALP) and γ-glutamyltrans-
ferase (GGT), together with a full blood count 
if not already performed within the previous 12 
months. (level 2b, grade B)
 
►
Research Recommendation 1: Further evidence 
is required to establish the cost-effectiveness 
of case finding for non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) in high-risk groups before it 
can be recommended. (level 5, grade D)
 
►
Recommendation 2: Abnormal liver blood 
test results should only be interpreted after 
review of the previous results, past medical 
history and current medical condition. (level 5, 
 
grade D)
 
►
Recommendation 3: The extent of liver blood 
test abnormality is not necessarily a guide to 
clinical significance. This is determined by the 
specific analyte which is abnormal (outside the 
reference range) and the clinical context. (level 
5, grade D)
 
►
Recommendation 4: Patients with abnormal 
liver blood tests should be considered for 
investigation with a liver aetiology screen irre-
spective of level and duration of abnormality. 
Abnormal refers to an analyte which is outside 
the laboratory reference range (level 2b, 
 
grade B)
 
►
Recommendation 5: In adults a standard liver 
aetiology screen should include abdominal 
ultrasound scan (USS), hepatitis B surface 
antigen, hepatitis C antibody (with follow-on 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) if positive), 
anti-mitochondrial 
antibody, 
anti-smooth 
muscle antibody, antinuclear antibody, serum 
immunoglobulins, 
simultaneous 
serum 
ferritin and transferrin saturation. (level 2b, 
 
grade C)
 
►
Recommendation 6: In children, ferritin and 
transferrin saturation may not be indicated, 
but autoantibody panel should include anti-
liver kidney microsomal antibody and coeliac 
antibodies. Alpha-1-antitrypsin level and caer-
uloplasmin (age >3 years) should be included, 
and abnormalities discussed with an appro-
priate inherited metabolic disease specialist. 
(level 2b, grade C)
 
►
Recommendation 7: Adults with NAFLD 
should undergo risk stratification to determine 
the extent of their liver fibrosis (figures 1 and 2). 
 
–
First-line testing should use either fibrosis-4 
(FIB-4) or NAFLD Fibrosis Score (NFS) 
– see table 3 (level 2b, grade B). Calcula-
tion facilities for FIB-4 and NFS should be 
incorporated in all primary care computer 
systems. (level 5, grade D)
 
–
Second-line testing requires a quantita-
tive assessment of fibrosis with tests such 
as serum enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) 
to cite: Newsome PN, 
Cramb R, Davison SM, et al. 
Gut 2018;67:6–19.
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
correspondence to
Professor Philip N Newsome, 
NIHR Birmingham Biomedical 
Research Centre and Centre 
for Liver Research, Institute of 
Biomedical Research, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham 
B15 2TT, UK;  
p. 
n. 
newsome@ 
bham. 
ac. 
uk
Received 26 July 2017
Revised 6 October 2017
Accepted 15 October 2017
Published Online First 
9 November 2017
 7
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
measurements or Fibroscan/acoustic radiation force 
impulse (ARFI) elastography. (level 2b, grade B)
 
–
We recommend that hepatologists at a local level cham-
pion this idea and discuss it with commissioners of health 
to deal with the burden of liver disease in their area.
 
►
Recommendation 8: Consider referral to alcohol services 
for all adults with alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD) with 
evidence of alcohol dependency as defined by an AUDIT 
score of >19. (level 3b, grade C)
 
►
Recommendation 9: Harmful drinkers should undergo risk 
stratification with clinical assessment and Fibroscan/ARFI 
elastography. Adults should be referred to secondary care 
if there is evidence of advanced liver disease (features of 
cirrhosis or portal hypertension on imaging or from blood 
tests) and/or Fibroscan reading is >16 
kPa (if available). 
(level 2b, grade B)
 
►
Research Recommendation 2: Further evidence is required 
to establish the most cost-effective approach to identify 
patients with ARLD and NAFLD at risk of having advanced 
liver fibrosis.
 
►
Recommendation 10: Adults with abnormal liver blood 
tests, even with a negative extended liver aetiology screen 
and no risk factors for NAFLD, should be referred/discussed 
to a gastroenterologist with an interest in liver disease/hepa-
tologist for further evaluation (figure 1). (level 4, grade C)
introduction
While the number of deaths from other common conditions is 
falling in the UK, those due to liver disease have been increasing 
dramatically, with a 400% increase in the standardised mortality 
rate over the period 1970–2010.1 Notably, for those patients 
younger than 65, the rise in standardised mortality rate for liver 
disease is >500%, such that it now constitutes the fifth biggest 
cause of premature mortality2 with 64 
000 years of working life 
lost every year.3 For morbidity, in England and Wales, 57 
682 
hospital admissions and 10 
948 deaths were due to liver disease 
in 20 
12.1 This rising burden of liver disease is mainly a reflec-
tion of the three the most common causes: alcohol-related liver 
disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and viral hepatitis, 
although autoimmune liver disease is also a significant contrib-
utor.4 The burden of liver disease in children differs from that 
in adults, as although non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 
is seen in all ages, reflecting the rise in childhood obesity, 
disease associated with injecting drug use and alcohol are rarely 
encountered.5 However, viral hepatitis is seen as a consequence 
Figure 1 Response to abnormal liver blood tests. This figure details the initial response to abnormal liver blood tests. Boxes in yellow indicate 
the initial evaluation of the clinical presentation. Patients with marked derangement of liver blood tests, synthetic failure and/or suspicious clinical 
symptoms/signs should be considered for urgent referral to secondary care (red box). For the remainder, a clinical history alongside evaluation of 
the pattern of liver blood test derangement will determine choice of pathway and is shown in the grey boxes. A grey box indicates all the tests 
that should be requested at that stage rather than a hierarchy within it. The presence of metabolic syndrome criteria should be sought to support a 
diagnosis of NAFLD. For children, the text should be consulted for modification of recommendation. Areas of diagnostic uncertainty are indicated in 
orange boxes and the decision for repeat testing or referral to secondary care will be influenced by the magnitude of enzyme elevation and clinical 
context. Green boxes indicate final/definitive outcomes for users of the pathway. *Abnormal USS may well include extrahepatic biliary obstruction 
due to malignancy, which should result in urgent referral. ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; ARLD, alcohol-related liver 
disease; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BMI, body mass index; FBC, full blood count; GGT, γ-glutamyltransferase; INR, international normalised ratio; 
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; USS, ultrasound scan.
 8
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
of perinatal transmission, and its chronicity contributes to the 
disease burden seen in adults. Other causes of liver disease, 
such as biliary atresia or metabolic disorders,6 present almost 
exclusively in infancy or childhood, but progressive liver disease 
continues to evolve throughout childhood and into adulthood. 
There are concerted efforts to deal with this rising tide of liver 
disease such as the Lancet Commission on Liver Disease,7 the 
Alcohol Health Alliance and the Obesity Health Alliance.
Liver disease develops silently; there may be no signs or symp-
toms until the complications of liver failure or portal hyper-
tension develop. At this late, often pre-terminal stage, the tests 
of liver function—bilirubin, albumin, international normalised 
ratio (INR) and platelet count—may be abnormal. In necro-in-
flammatory hepatitic diseases liver enzymes are frequently 
elevated,8 9 whereas in apoptotic diseases including fatty liver 
disease (alcohol and non-alcohol related), liver enzymes may be 
normal or elevated, but the degree of abnormality is not related 
to the stage of progression from simple fatty liver, through 
progressive fibrosis to cirrhosis.1 Since the current liver blood 
tests were developed in the 1950s, they have been the mainstay 
of liver disease identification, with the result that many patients 
with liver disease are not identified until they have developed 
significant liver fibrosis.1
Liver blood or function tests (LFTs), which are perceived to be 
inexpensive, are checked ever more frequently in both primary10 
and secondary care in an attempt to exclude liver disease, for 
the monitoring of potential adverse effects of drugs on the liver 
such as statins, and for the investigation of the generally unwell 
patient. These tests often produce an abnormal result, the clin-
ical significance of which is unclear. In many cases though they 
are requested in response to non-specific symptoms where there 
is little potential link between symptoms and likelihood of liver 
disease, or the blood tests are performed for unrelated reasons 
such as chronic disease monitoring.11 This commonly presages 
a cycle of additional liver blood test testing in an otherwise 
asymptomatic individual, and notably, most patients referred 
to hospital with abnormal liver tests do not have any evidence 
of significant liver disease.12 For example, University Hospital 
Birmingham Foundation Trust received 130 
849 requests for 
liver blood tests in 2016, from 82 general practices and of these, 
38 
636 (30%) contained at least one abnormal result, defined 
as being outside the stated reference range. The Abnormal Liver 
Function Investigations Evaluation (ALFIE) study from Tayside in 
Scotland showed that over a 10-year period 25% of the commu-
nity population aged over 16 had liver blood tests, with about a 
third having at least one abnormal value. Although an abnormal 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) level was predictive of liver disease (HR=4.2), the rate 
of detection was remarkably low, with only 3.9% of those with 
an abnormal value being diagnosed with significant liver disease 
Figure 2 Non-alcoholic fatty liver fibrosis algorithm. For those patients with NAFLD or liver disease of unknown aetiology, the next step 
is to determine the likelihood of liver fibrosis. Initial assessment includes calculation of a FIB4 or NAFLD fibrosis score with values <1.3 and 
≤1.455, respectively, signifying a low risk of advanced fibrosis. Higher cut-off points, <2.0 and <0.12, should be used for patients aged over 65 years. 
Second-line tests that should be considered include serum markers such as ELF and imaging modalities such as ARFI elastography/FibroScan. For 
children, the text should be consulted for modification of recommendation. Cut-off points for ARFI vary according to manufacturer and thus should be 
tailored to the device used. ARFI, acoustic radiation force impulse; ELF, enhanced liver fibrosis; FIB-4, fibrosis-4; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; NAFLD, 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; NFS, NAFLD Fibrosis Score.
 9
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
within 5 years of the test.12 Thus, used in isolation, liver blood 
tests are neither specific diagnostic tools nor specific exclusion 
tools,13 whereas they can be more effectively used to assess the 
extent of liver fibrosis if incorporated into algorithms14 or used 
in conjunction with other modalities.15–18
Guideline development
These guidelines were drafted after discussions within the liver 
section of the British Society of Gastroenterology (BSG) and 
acceptance of the proposal by the Clinical Services and Stan-
dards Committee (CSSC). There followed division of sections to 
be researched by designated authors and a literature review. The 
NICE guidelines were closely followed and guideline quality was 
assessed using the AGREE tool19 (section ‘Assessing the quality of 
guidelines: the AGREE II instrument’). A preliminary guideline 
document was drafted by the authors following discussion and, 
where necessary, voting by members of the Guidelines Develop-
ment Group. The draft guidelines were submitted for review by 
the CSSC, then BSG council members. Finally, full peer review 
was undertaken by reviewers selected by the editor of Gut.
Assessing the quality of guidelines: the AGREE II instrument 
is an accepted method for appraising clinical guidelines.19 Six 
domains are listed:
scope and purpose
These guidelines are intended to be of use for all healthcare 
professionals, although with a major focus on the asymptomatic 
patient with abnormal liver blood tests. Nonetheless, the guide-
line will review the role/utility of liver blood tests in both symp-
tomatic and asymptomatic patients and explore their possible 
role in case finding in high-risk groups or following a clinical 
concern. They include recommendations for both adults and 
children, although the evidence for children is often lacking.
No meta-analyses or randomised controlled trials concerning 
the management of abnormal LFTs in asymptomatic people have 
been carried out and therefore no grade A evidence exists in 
these guidelines to support the recommendations made. These 
guidelines are not intended to serve as rigid protocols or to 
replace clinical judgement.
Guideline development group membership and stakeholder 
involvement
Membership of the group includes patient/patient group repre-
sentation, adult and paediatric hepatologists, clinical biochem-
ists, general practitioners, internal medicine specialists, public 
health specialists and radiologists.
rigour of development
The published literature was searched using PubMed, Medline, 
Web of Knowledge and the Cochrane database between October 
2014 and February 2016. The Guidelines Development Group 
met through a series of meetings and teleconferences during that 
time. The level of supporting evidence (graded levels 1 to 5) 
is assessed by the Oxford Centre For Evidence Based Medicine 
(Table 1).20 The recommendation grade is determined on the 
level of evidence as follows:
A. consistent level 1 studies;
B. consistent level 2 or 3 studies or extrapolations from level 
1 studies;
C. level 4 studies or extrapolations from level 2 or 3 studies;
D. level 5 evidence or troublingly inconsistent or inconclusive 
studies of any level.
Areas of disagreement about the recommendation grade were 
subjected to discussion and, if necessary, voting by members 
of the guidelines group. Where possible, the health benefits, 
side effects and risks of recommendations were discussed. The 
guidelines were subject to peer review after submission for 
consideration for publication in Gut.
clarity and presentation
Recommendations are intended to be specific to particular situ-
ations and patient groups; where necessary, different options are 
listed. Where the evidence and recommendation is restricted to 
adults, this will be stated. The term ‘patients’ implies all ages. 
Key recommendations are linked to discussion threads on a 
discussion forum hosted on the BSG website.
Applicability
We have discussed organisational changes that may be needed 
in order to implement these recommendations with the British 
Liver Trust, the British Association for the Study of the Liver, 
the British Society of Gastroenterology, the Royal College of 
General Practice, the Specialist Advisory Committee in Clinical 
Biochemistry/Royal College of Pathology and Association for 
Clinical Biochemistry, the British Society of Paediatric Gastroen-
terology, Hepatology and Nutrition (BSPGHAN), Public Health 
England, the British Society of Gastrointestinal and Abdominal 
Radiologists (BSGAR) and the Society of Acute Medicine. We 
have attempted to identify key criteria for monitoring and audit 
purposes.
editorial independence and conflict of interest
Guideline group members have declared any conflicts of 
interest. There is full editorial independence from the BSG, 
which commissioned the guideline. The guideline was subse-
quently peer reviewed by the CSSC, who provided comments 
and suggestions.
scheduled review oF Guidelines
The proposed time for review of the guidelines is 5 years to take 
into account new developments. To ensure that there is a facility 
for feedback after publication, links to the BSG discussion 
forums corresponding to the particular section of these guide-
lines are included with this document. Feedback from general 
practitioners will also be incorporated—for example, via the 
newly established British Liver Trust/Royal College of General 
Practitioners (RCGP) clinical priority programme. In accordance 
with the AGREE II tool the BSG forum will provide feedback.
whAt constitutes A liver blood test?
Liver blood tests are readily available biochemical laboratory 
tests, with the standard panel varying from hospital to hospital.21 
They have historically been referred to as LFTs, yet the predom-
inant abnormality relates not to liver dysfunction, but to eleva-
tions of hepatobiliary liver enzymes. For this reason this guideline 
will refer to liver blood tests and not LFTs as it more accurately 
captures their usage in clinical practice. Hepatobiliary enzymes, 
when interpreted in isolation convey information on the level 
of ongoing injury, whereas bilirubin, albumin and INR convey 
information on liver function, with platelets conveying informa-
tion on the level of fibrosis. In this guideline an abnormal liver 
blood test is defined as being a value outside the standard refer-
ence interval, although there is an emerging literature suggesting 
that the current reference intervals for ALT may be too high.22 23
 10
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
table 1 Evidence grading20
level
therapy/prevention, aetiology/harm
prognosis
diagnosis
differential diagnosis/
symptom prevalence study
economic and decision analyses
1a
SR (with homogeneity*) of RCTs
SR (with homogeneity*) of inception 
cohort studies; CDR# validated in different 
populations
SR (with homogeneity*) of level 1 diagnostic 
studies; CDR# with 1b studies from different 
clinical centres
SR (with homogeneity*) of prospective 
cohort studies
SR (with homogeneity*) of level 1 economic 
studies
1b
Individual RCT (with narrow CI)
Individual inception cohort study 
with >80% follow-up; CDR† validated in a 
single population
Validating‡ cohort study with good§ 
reference standards; or CDR† tested within 
one clinical centre
Prospective cohort study with good follow-
up¶
Analysis based on clinically sensible costs 
or alternatives; systematic review(s) of the 
evidence; and including multi-way sensitivity 
analyses
1c
All or none**
All  case series or none
Absolute SpPins and SnNouts††
All or none case series
Absolute better-value or worse-value 
analyses
2a
SR (with homogeneity*) of cohort studies
SR (with homogeneity*) of either 
retrospective cohort studies or untreated 
control groups in RCTs
SR (with homogeneity*) of 
level >2 diagnostic studies
SR (with homogeneity*) of 2b and better 
studies
SR (with homogeneity*) of 
level >2 economic studies
2b
Individual cohort study (including low-
quality RCT; for example, <80% follow-up)
Retrospective cohort study or follow-
up of untreated control patients in an 
RCT; derivation of CDR†or validated on 
split sample‡‡ only
Exploratory‡ cohort study with good§ 
reference standards; CDR† after derivation, 
or validated only on split-sample‡‡ or 
databases
Retrospective cohort study, or poor follow-
up
Analysis based on clinically sensible costs 
or alternatives; limited review(s) of the 
evidence, or single studies; and including 
multi-way sensitivity analyses
2c
‘Outcomes’ research; ecological studies
‘Outcomes’ research
Ecological studies
Audit or outcomes research
3a
SR (with homogeneity*) of case–control 
studies
SR (with homogeneity*) of 3b and better 
studies
SR (with homogeneity*) of 3b and better 
studies
SR (with homogeneity*) of 3b and better 
studies
3b
Individual case–control study
Non-consecutive study; or without 
consistently applied reference standards
Non-consecutive cohort study, or very 
limited population
Analysis based on limited alternatives or 
costs, poor-quality estimates of data, but 
including sensitivity analyses incorporating 
clinically sensible variations
4
Case series (and poor-quality cohort 
and case–control studies§§)
Case series (and poor-quality prognostic 
cohort studies¶¶)
Case–control study, poor or non-
independent reference standard
Case series or superseded reference 
standards
Analysis with no sensitivity analysis
5
Expert opinion without explicit critical 
appraisal, or based on physiology, bench 
research or ‘first principles’
Expert opinion without explicit critical 
appraisal, or based on physiology, bench 
research or ‘first principles’
Expert opinion without explicit critical 
appraisal, or based on physiology, bench 
research or ‘first principles’
Expert opinion without explicit critical 
appraisal, or based on physiology, bench 
research or ‘first principles’
Expert opinion without explicit critical 
appraisal, or based on economic theory or 
‘first principles’
*Homogeneity means a systematic review (SR) that is free from worrisome variations (heterogeneity) in the directions and degrees of results between individual studies. Not all SRs with statistically significant heterogeneity need be worrisome, 
and not all worrisome heterogeneity need be statistically significant.
†CDR, clinical decision rule (algorithms or scoring systems which lead to a prognostic estimation or a diagnostic category).
‡Validating studies test the quality of a specific diagnostic test based on prior evidence. An exploratory study collects information and trawls the data (eg, using a regression analysis) to find which factors are ‘significant’.
§Good reference standards are independent of the test, and applied blindly or objectively to all patients. Poor reference standards are haphazardly applied, but still independent of the test. Use of a non-independent reference standard (where the 
‘test’ is included in the ‘reference’, or where the ‘testing’ affects the ‘reference’) implies a level 4 study.
¶Good follow-up in a differential diagnosis study is >80%, with adequate time for alternative diagnoses to emerge (eg, 1–6 months acute, 1–5 years chronic).
**Met when all patients died before the treatment became available but some now survive while receiving it; or when some patients died before the treatment became available but none now die while receiving it.
††An ‘absolute SpPin’: a diagnostic finding whose Specificity is so high that a Positive result rules in the diagnosis. An ‘absolute SnNout’: a diagnostic finding whose Sensitivity is so high that a Negative result rules out the diagnosis.
‡‡Split-sample validation is achieved by collecting all the information in a single tranche, then artificially dividing this into ‘derivation’ and ‘validation’ samples.
§§Poor-quality cohort study: one that failed to clearly define comparison groups and/or failed to measure exposures and outcomes in the same (preferably blinded) objective way in both exposed and non-exposed individuals and/or failed to 
identify or appropriately control known confounders and/or failed to carry out a sufficiently long and complete follow-up of patients. Poor-quality case–control study: one that failed to clearly define comparison groups and/or failed to measure 
exposures and outcomes in the same (preferably blinded) objective way in both cases and controls and/or failed to identify or appropriately control known confounders.
¶¶Poor-quality prognostic cohort study: one in which sampling was biased in favour of patients who already had the target outcome, or the measurement of outcomes was accomplished in <80% of study patients, or outcomes were determined 
in an unblinded non-objective way, or there was no correction for confounding factors.
 11
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
Bilirubin is predominantly the by-product of the breakdown 
of the haem component of haemoglobin by the reticuloen-
dothelial system.24 It exists in two forms, unconjugated and 
conjugated. Bilirubin is transported to the liver in its insoluble 
unconjugated form, where it is converted into soluble conju-
gated bilirubin in order to be excreted. Unconjugated hyperbili-
rubinaemia is usually due to haemolysis or impaired conjugation 
whereas conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia is typically due to 
parenchymal liver disease or obstruction of the biliary system.
Most laboratories will routinely report total bilirubin, which 
comprises unconjugated and conjugated fractions. Elevations 
of either fraction will therefore lead to a rise in the measured 
bilirubin concentration. The most common cause of an isolated 
elevated bilirubin concentration is Gilbert’s syndrome, which is 
an inherited disorder of metabolism and leads to impaired conju-
gation via reduced activity of the enzyme glucuronyltransferase.25
Except in the neonatal period, the majority of measurable 
bilirubin should be conjugated, even in individuals with signif-
icant liver disease. Hence if the majority of the elevated bili-
rubin comprises the unconjugated fraction then the cause, in the 
absence of haemolysis, is virtually always Gilbert’s syndrome. 
As Gilbert’s syndrome is not associated with liver disease or 
ill health, any such individuals should be fully reassured.26 In 
the neonatal period, there may be a physiological increase in 
total bilirubin, which is unconjugated. This may be patholog-
ical if high or prolonged.27 In neonates and infants in whom the 
conjugated bilirubin is >25 μmol/L, referral to a paediatrician 
for urgent assessment of possible liver disease is essential.28 29
Albumin is a protein that is produced only in the liver and 
has multiple biological actions, including maintenance of oncotic 
pressure, binding of other substances (such as fatty acids, bili-
rubin, thyroid hormone and drugs), metabolism of compounds, 
including lipids, and antioxidant properties. As albumin is only 
produced by the liver, the serum albumin concentration is often 
considered as a marker of the synthetic function of the liver. 
However, overinterpretation of the measured concentrations of 
albumin as a marker of the severity of liver disease is not always 
merited. Albumin concentrations are reduced in many clinical 
situations, including sepsis, systemic inflammatory disorders, 
nephrotic syndrome, malabsorption and gastrointestinal protein 
loss.
Prothrombin time (PT) and INR are assessments of blood clot-
ting, which are used to measure liver function, as the underlying 
protein clotting factors (II, V
, VII, IX and X) are made in the 
liver. If there is significant liver injury (usually loss of >70% of 
synthetic function), this results in a reduction in clotting factor 
production and subsequent coagulopathy, as confirmed by a 
prolonged PT or INR. While a prolonged PT/INR can indicate 
either acute or chronic liver dysfunction it can also be caused by 
vitamin K deficiency as seen in fat malabsorption and chronic 
cholestasis.
A reduction in platelets, termed thrombocytopenia, is the 
most common haematological abnormality found in patients 
with chronic liver disease and is an indicator of advanced disease. 
Multiple factors culminate in a low platelet count: decreased 
production, splenic sequestration and increased destruction. 
Decreased production is a consequence of bone marrow suppres-
sion, as caused by alcohol, iron overload, drugs and viridae, and 
also by a reduction in thrombopoietin levels in chronic liver 
injury. Splenic sequestration results from hypersplenism, which 
is a consequence of portal hypertension seen in advanced liver 
fibrosis. Platelet destruction is also increased non-specifically 
in liver cirrhosis owing to shear stress, fibrinolysis and bacte-
rial translocation, whereas in specific causes of autoimmune 
liver disease, immunologically mediated destruction of platelets 
occurs owing to antiplatelet immunoglobulin.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is produced mainly in the liver 
(from the biliary epithelium) but is also found in abundance 
in bone and in smaller quantities in the intestines, kidneys and 
white blood cells. Levels are physiologically higher in child-
hood, associated with bone growth, and in pregnancy due to 
placental production. Pathologically increased levels occur 
mainly in bone disease (eg, metastatic bone disease and bone 
fractures) and cholestatic liver disease—for example, primary 
biliary cholangitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, common bile 
duct obstruction, intrahepatic duct obstruction (metastases) 
and drug-induced cholestasis. Furthermore, hepatic congestion 
secondary to right-sided heart failure can also lead to cholestasis 
(elevated ALP levels and/or bilirubin).
When ALP is elevated in isolation, the measurement of γ-glu-
tamyltransferase can indicate whether the ALP is of hepatic or 
non-hepatic origin.30 While there are no data on the most likely 
causes of an isolated raised ALP in an asymptomatic population, 
the the most common cause is likely to be vitamin D deficiency, 
or normal increase seen in childhood due to rapid growth. Other 
causes include Paget’s disease and bony metastases. If doubt still 
exists, the use of electrophoresis to separate the isoenzymes 
of ALP can differentiate hepatic from non-hepatic causes of 
increased ALP
.
AST and ALT are enzymes present in hepatocytes and are 
released into the blood stream in response to hepatocyte injury 
or death (hepatitis). Elevations in either of these enzymes are the 
the most common abnormality seen on liver blood test profiles. 
Both enzymes are present in many differing types of tissue, but 
ALT is considered more liver-specific since it is present in low 
concentrations in non-hepatic tissue, and non-liver related eleva-
tions are uncommon. However, AST is abundantly present in 
skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscle and so may be elevated in 
patients with myocardial infarction or myositis. Although ALT is 
considered a more specific indicator of liver disease, the concen-
tration of AST may be a more sensitive indicator of liver injury in 
conditions such as alcohol-related liver disease and in some cases 
of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH).31 32 In children, creatine kinase 
measurement may help to determine whether an isolated rise 
in ALT or AST is due to an underlying skeletal muscle disorder, 
such as muscular dystrophy.
γ-Glutamyltransferase (GGT) is abundant in the liver and also 
present in the kidney, intestine, prostate and pancreas but not in 
bone; therefore it can be useful in confirming that an elevated 
ALP is of liver and not bony origin.33 GGT is most commonly 
elevated as a result of obesity, excess alcohol consumption or 
may be induced by drugs. Although an elevated GGT has a low 
specificity for liver disease, it is one of the best predictors of liver 
mortality.12 It is particularly useful in children to establish the 
likelihood of biliary disease when ALP is not a reliable indicator. 
Predominant causes of cholestasis in children include congenital 
abnormalities of the biliary tract and genetic disorders affecting 
bile synthesis and excretion.
whAt constitutes A stAndArd liver blood test 
pAnel?
There are remarkably few data to determine what an optimal 
liver blood test panel should include, although this would be 
influenced by the clinical setting.34 The Health Technology 
Assessment commissioned Birmingham and Lambeth Liver 
Evaluation Testing Strategies (BALLETS) study reported 
that ALT and ALP identified the vast majority of adults with 
 12
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
necro-inflammatory liver disease. The routine addition of GGT 
led to a marginal increase in sensitivity but at the cost of a loss 
of specificity and a higher false-positive rate.11 But the analysis 
did not include adults with NAFLD or alcohol-related liver 
disease (ARLD), which account for 90% of liver mortality,1 in 
whom liver blood tests and the follow-on liver aetiology screen 
are seldom diagnostic. In this setting GGT and AST would aid 
the sensitivity of detecting such patients. Addition of GGT to a 
liver blood test panel increases the likelihood of an adult having 
abnormal liver blood tests from around 15% to 30%35 and, 
notably, a raised GGT is associated with increased liver as well 
as all-cause (including cancer) mortality, with the greatest risk 
being observed in those with the most significant elevations of 
GGT.12 36 37 In addition, the routine addition of AST to the initial 
panel did not improve the detection of specific disease.11
The analysis from the BALLETS study was predicated on the 
identification of adults with established causes of liver disease 
such as autoimmune liver disease, viral hepatitis or metal storage 
disorders, which were found in just 5% of those with abnormal 
liver blood tests.11 Thus, these data would support a strategy 
of a streamlined panel with high sensitivity without generating 
large numbers of false positives, which have the potential to lead 
to greater patient anxiety, overinvestigation and considerably 
increased costs.
Recommendation 1: Initial investigation for potential liver 
disease should include bilirubin, albumin, ALT, ALP and GGT, 
together with a full blood count if not already performed within 
the previous 12 months. (level 2b, grade B)
If there is clear indication of a specific clinical risk—for 
example, in high-risk groups such as injecting drug users, 
migrants from high prevalence areas or prisoners, then some 
aspects of second-line testing can be undertaken simultaneously. 
In many patients with liver damage an assessment of liver fibrosis 
is critical in making decisions about referral and management. In 
adults, clues to the level of liver fibrosis can be gleaned from the 
use of non-invasive algorithms such as the AST to ALT ratio.12 
An AST:ALT ratio of >1 indicates advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis,38 
hence the inclusion of this ratio in algorithms has the potential 
to assess the risk of significant fibrosis in adults with abnormal 
liver blood tests. However, non-invasive markers have not been 
sufficiently validated in children to be routinely applied in clin-
ical practice.
An important consideration when evaluating the risk of 
hepatic fibrosis is that both AST and ALT can be normal even in 
the setting of cirrhosis, and the utility of the AST:ALT ratio in 
adults persists even if both values are within the normal refer-
ence interval.39 While it is hard to justify the routine analysis of 
both AST and ALT together on every liver blood test request, 
a strategy not supported by the data from the BALLETS study, 
subsequent testing of AST (or ALT depending which one is 
undertaken first) to calculate the AST:ALT ratio is clearly 
desirable. From a patient and cost perspective this is likely to 
be more cost-effective if performed by ‘reflex’ on the same sera 
following the detection of an abnormal ALT or GGT. To date 
there is no firm evidence that this is a cost-effective approach, 
although the results of a pilot study of such ‘reflex’ testing and 
additional up-front aetiology screen testing from Wales and 
Scotland are awaited.
when should liver blood tests be checked?
There are a range of settings where requesting liver blood tests 
should be considered to determine the presence, or severity, of 
liver disease: 
non-specific symptoms
Liver disease tends to develop silently with no signs or symp-
toms, and there is evidence that the majority of people with 
late-stage liver disease are undiagnosed.6 However, inflamma-
tory liver diseases including autoimmune liver disease and viral 
hepatitis can be associated with symptoms. For example, 75% 
of patients with AIH have one or more non-specific symptoms, 
such as fatigue, nausea or anorexia.7 These diseases can be effec-
tively treated, and are often diagnosed late, so the presence of 
these non-specific symptoms would be an indication to check 
routine liver blood tests, accepting that there are many other 
causes for these symptoms.
evidence of chronic liver disease
Patients with symptoms or signs of cirrhosis, portal hyperten-
sion or liver failure, including ascites, peripheral oedema, spider 
naevi and hepatosplenomegaly, need liver blood tests to monitor 
their function. In that regard the inclusion of INR is important 
to fully define their synthetic function.
conditions which are associated with a high risk of 
developing liver disease
Autoimmune liver disease is more common in patients with 
pre-existing autoimmune diseases, and liver blood tests may be 
appropriate if clinical symptoms change to suggest development 
of liver disease—for example, pruritus in primary biliary chol-
angitis. Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (including 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease) have a particular notable 
risk of developing the autoimmune cholestatic liver disease, 
primary sclerosing cholangitis; disease prevalence is estimated 
at just under 10%.40 Primary sclerosing cholangitis-inflamma-
tory bowel disease is associated with increased complications 
relating to liver disease, as well as increased colorectal cancer 
risk.41 Periodic monitoring of liver blood tests is therefore 
common practice, with a low clinical threshold for investiga-
tion of cholestatic liver blood tests by MRI. In the absence of 
currently approved medical therapy ongoing efforts clinically 
table 2 Liver aetiology table for patients with non-acute abnormal liver blood tests
standard liver aetiology panel
extended liver aetiology panel
Viral hepatitis
Hepatitis B surface antigen AND hepatitis C antibody (with follow-on 
PCR if positive)
Anti-HBc and anti-HBs hepatitis B DNA quantification of hepatitis delta in 
high-prevalence areas
Iron overload
Ferritin AND transferrin saturation
Haemochromatosis gene testing
Autoimmune liver disease
(excluding PSC)
Anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, 
antinuclear antibody, serum immunoglobulins
Anti-LKM antibody and coeliac antibodies
(consider ANCA in the presence of cholestatic liver blood tests)
Metabolic liver disease
Alpha-1-antitrypsin level; thyroid function tests; caeruloplasmin (age >3 and 
<40 years)±urinary copper collection
ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; LKM, liver kidney miscrosome; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PSC, primary sclerosing cholangitis.
 13
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
focus on early recognition of disease with subsequent risk strati-
fication, in order to facilitate timely consideration of trial-based 
intervention.
use of hepatotoxic drugs
A wide variety of drugs are associated with liver disease, and a 
requirement for the monitoring of liver functions may be docu-
mented.8 In this systematic review the drugs most commonly 
implicated included: carbamazepine, methyldopa, minocycline, 
macrolide antibiotics, nitrofurantoin, statins, sulfonamides, 
terbinafine, chlorpromazine and methotrexate. In addition, 
drugs can cause fatty liver and steatohepatitis and vascular 
injury. Methotrexate treatment requires special care, to prevent 
dose-dependent liver fibrosis, and non-invasive markers of 
fibrosis should be monitored.9–11 Although statins can lead to 
drug-induced liver injury, this is very rare, with studies demon-
strating they are safe in patients with pre-existing abnormal liver 
enzymes.42
On occasions it can be difficult to establish the relative contri-
bution of a drug or drugs alongside possible concomitant liver 
disease. In this situation clinical judgement needs to be exercised 
to determine what is the major contributor and the need to 
discontinue medication. This will be influenced by the pattern 
of liver blood tests, the timing of medication use with respect to 
the liver blood abnormality developing and the clinical setting.
Family history of liver diseases
Investigating the relatives of patients with familial diseases, 
including haemochromatosis or Wilson’s disease, would be an 
indication for the specific relevant tests: ferritin and transferrin 
saturation, haemochromatosis genotype, caeruloplasmin and 
urinary copper.
Liver enzymes are a poor guide to the development of progres-
sive liver fibrosis in alcohol-related liver disease, but elevated 
enzymes, of which GGT is the best predictor of mortality,12 can 
be useful aids to behaviour change.13 The current NICE recom-
mendation is to screen for advanced liver disease using Fibro-
scan in patients drinking at harmful levels (50 units/week in men 
and 35 units/week in women), and there is emerging evidence 
that a diagnosis of liver fibrosis can be an effective stimulus for 
behaviour change.14
viral hepatitis
Viral hepatitis may be associated with non-specific symptoms, 
including fatigue, which may be severe,15 but the majority of 
patients are symptom free and identified as a result of risk 
factors, including country of origin or parental exposure. While 
liver blood tests can give an indication of necro-inflammation or 
of advanced fibrosis, a key early test is serology for viral hepatitis 
in high-risk groups, such as people who inject drugs, migrants 
from high-prevalence areas, prisoners, as liver blood tests can be 
normal in this setting (Table 2).
presence of lifestyle risk factors associated with the 
development of nAFld: obesity/type 2 diabetes
Commonly, the question about non-alcoholic fatty liver arises 
in response to the incidental observation of abnormal liver 
blood tests or an echobright liver on an ultrasound scan (USS). 
Case finding or screening to identify patients with NAFLD 
remains controversial, with conflicting advice from Amer-
ican43 and European44 guidelines. Indeed recent NICE guidance 
does not advocate this at present, although the advent of new 
diagnostics and treatments allied with cost-effectiveness analyses 
may affect this in the future.
Research Recommendation 1: Further evidence is required 
to establish the cost-effectiveness of case finding for NAFLD 
in high-risk groups before it can be recommended. (level 5, 
 
grade D)
does the extent And durAtion oF AbnormAl liver 
blood tests determine subsequent investiGAtion?
Many previous guidelines have stipulated minimum criteria 
for the extent and duration of any liver blood test abnormality 
before further investigation is considered, which in the main 
has been influenced by workload considerations given the large 
numbers of liver blood tests outside the standard reference inter-
vals. However, over 50% of patients presenting with end-stage 
liver disease, without a previous diagnosis of chronic liver 
disease, were previously noted to have abnormal liver blood tests 
in their health records, indicating inadequate investigation.12 
The Epidemiology of Liver Disease in Tayside (ELDIT) project 
used electronic case record linkage to diagnose liver disease and 
demonstrated that 20% of all liver blood tests measured were 
found to be abnormal, with <10% of these explained by existing 
liver disease. Thus, GPs and practice nurses who request liver 
blood tests have the problem of managing the 20% patients who 
have test results reported as ‘abnormal’ and outside the labo-
ratory reference intervals. GP management strategies can vary 
from ignoring some results (potentially unsafe), repeating them 
(inconvenient to the patient), requesting more tests (expensive) 
or referring patients to a gastroenterologist (incurring NHS 
costs). The NHS faces the potential for a significant rise in the 
costs and consequences of the uncertainty GPs have in managing 
liver blood test results, necessitating clear guidance on how to 
respond to these tests.
importAnce oF context
Interpretation of abnormal liver blood tests requires an under-
standing of the context in which they arise. This can be illus-
trated in the extreme by a patient receiving statin therapy who 
has an ALT of 80 
U/L, who is well and requires continued treat-
ment with the statin compared with a patient with end-stage 
alcohol-related liver disease with an ALT in the normal reference 
interval at 30 
U/L and who may have a life expectancy of weeks. A 
common assumption is that the detected abnormality represents 
the first presentation of abnormal LFTs, when it should be stan-
dard practice to review previous blood test records and past/
current medical history before requesting additional investiga-
tions and referrals.
Another setting in which liver bloods are commonly abnormal 
but not necessarily of clinical concern is pregnancy where the 
alkaline phosphatase and serum albumin are often elevated 
and reduced, respectively. Other changes in liver bloods in this 
setting may indicate worsening of pre-existing disease or the 
development of pregnancy-related disease, which would warrant 
prompt investigation.45
Recommendation 2: Abnormal liver blood test results should 
only be interpreted after review of the previous results, past 
medical history and current medical condition. (level 5, grade D)
extent oF AbnormAlity
It is assumed that the magnitude of derangement of a liver 
blood test panel correlates with prognosis, and for this reason 
threshold values above the upper limit of the reference interval 
are commonly used when directing the need for further 
 14
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
investigation. However, this assumption is not supported by the 
literature, and prognosis is more clearly determined by diagnosis 
and context within which the tests are requested. To illustrate 
this consider two patients; a patient with an acute hepatitis A 
infection can have ALT values >1000 U/L, whereas a patient 
with hepatitis C can have an ALT within the normal reference 
interval, yet 10 years later the patient with hepatitis A is likely to 
be alive and well irrespective of how they are managed, whereas 
the patient with hepatitis C if not investigated and diagnosed 
is at substantial risk of progressing to end-stage liver disease. 
Indeed, the the most common causes of abnormal liver blood 
tests leading to chronic liver disease—namely non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease, alcohol-related liver disease and hepatitis 
C, are frequently associated with only mild or moderate liver 
blood test abnormalities. Therefore, despite the increasing use of 
liver blood tests, patients continue to present with undiagnosed 
end-stage liver disease, which might have been preventable by 
earlier diagnosis.
Moreover, the current upper limit of normal for many of 
the liver enzymes (for example ALT) may be too high, which is 
probably a consequence of patients with occult NAFLD being 
included in the generation of normal serum ALT ranges.22 This 
is perhaps best appreciated in patients with chronic hepatitis B, 
where treatment guidelines recommend an ALT of >30 
U/L as 
being significant in males and >19 
U/L significant for females. 
Further, indirect evidence for this comes from the recognition 
that in some patients with autoimmune hepatitis their fibrosis 
stage progresses despite apparent control of their inflammatory 
process via perceived normal aminotransferase levels. This is 
compounded by the knowledge that many patients with signifi-
cant liver fibrosis may have liver enzymes in the normal reference 
range and normal synthetic function, increasing the difficulty of 
their early identification. Thus, the clinical assessment of such 
individuals is critical in determining what the question is (do 
they have fibrosis?), which tests should be ordered and how 
should they be interpreted.
Recommendation 3: The extent of liver blood test abnor-
mality is not necessarily a guide to clinical significance. This is 
determined by the specific analyte which is abnormal (outside 
the reference range) and the clinical context. (level 5, grade D)
durAtion oF AbnormAlity And retestinG
As with extent of liver blood test derangement, there are also 
assumptions that the duration is a reflection of clinical signifi-
cance, thus necessitating routine repeat testing for patients with 
mildly abnormal liver blood tests. This is predicated on the belief 
that many liver blood test abnormalities may be transient and 
incidental and will normalise thus precluding any significant 
liver disease. While this may be true of some acute liver diseases, 
it is manifestly not the case for many chronic liver diseases such 
as HCV and NAFLD where even normalised liver blood tests do 
not necessarily imply absence or resolution of disease.
Moreover, as demonstrated by the BALLETS study, 84% of 
adults still had abnormal tests when repeated 1 
month later.11 
When repeating blood tests (to see if they have normalised) the 
whole cost of the investigation must be borne in mind, which 
includes recalling the patient as well as obtaining and transporting 
the blood sample to the laboratory and the cost of the laboratory 
analysis. Therefore, a strategy of simply repeating abnormal tests 
can only be justified where there is a high degree of certainty that 
the abnormality will resolve in response to an identified acute 
insult. In other cases, detection of the first abnormality should 
trigger investigation of the aetiology, or repeat testing to assess 
progression or disease severity where there is a suspicion that the 
underlying cause may require urgent referral/admission.
The Health Technology Assessment-commissioned ALFIE 
study, which was a retrospective study of outcomes following 
abnormal liver blood tests in patients over 16 years of age seen 
in primary care, demonstrated that just 50% of abnormal liver 
blood tests were ever followed up.12 This highlights the chal-
lenges in identifying/capturing significant liver disease early and 
emphasises the importance of assessing such patients expediently 
without adding unnecessary delays.
Recommendation 4: Patients with abnormal liver blood 
tests should be considered for investigation with a liver aeti-
ology screen irrespective of level and duration of abnormality. 
Abnormal refers to an analyte which is outside the laboratory 
reference range. (level 2b, grade B)
clinicAl pAttern recoGnition For liver blood tests
There are three common patterns of abnormal liver test results 
whose recognition can aid diagnosis:
1. Isolated raised bilirubin—most commonly caused by Gilbert’s 
syndrome (affects 5–8% of the population).46 Consider 
haemolysis in patients with anaemia. Repeat liver blood 
tests on a fasting sample with a full blood count and a direct 
and indirect bilirubin; the total bilirubin should rise further, 
owing to the indirect component, and there should be no 
evidence of anaemia. If the patient is anaemic, haemolysis 
needs to be excluded by requesting reticulocyte count/lactate 
dehydrogenase/haptoglobin. If the unconjugated bilirubin 
is more markedly elevated (>40 μmol/L) then rarer causes 
such as Crigler-Najjar syndrome46 should be considered and 
genetic testing undertaken.
2. Cholestatic—predominantly raised ALP and GGT indicate 
cholestasis. Common causes include primary biliary cholan-
gitis, PSC, biliary obstruction (stones, strictures, neoplasia, 
etc), hepatic congestion and drug-induced liver injury. In chil-
dren, additional disorders that may present with cholestasis 
include biliary tract abnormalities and genetic disorders of 
bile synthesis and excretion. However, an isolated raised 
ALP may be caused by vitamin D deficiency and not be 
liver related, or it may relate to raised values during periods 
of rapid growth in childhood, and thus the presence of a 
concomitantly elevated GGT can help confirm the cause of 
liver disease. In children with specific inherited disorders of 
bile acid synthesis and transport, however, GGT is character-
istically low or normal. In these disorders, cholestasis occurs 
without GGT elevation.
3. Hepatitic—predominantly raised ALT and AST indicate 
hepatocellular liver injury (hepatitis). Common causes 
include viral hepatitis, NAFLD, ARLD, AIH and drug-
induced liver injury. Details of the approach to these liver 
blood test abnormalities are given in the subsequent section 
on outcomes and pathways.
response to AbnormAl liver blood tests: outcomes 
And pAthwAys
As indicated in figure 1 the presence of unexplained clinical jaun-
dice or suspicion of possible hepatic or biliary malignancy should 
lead to an immediate referral. In all other adults with inciden-
tally raised liver enzymes it is important to take a careful history 
and perform a targeted clinical examination to look for the 
cause. Liver enzymes can occasionally be raised owing to inter-
current illness, although when liver blood tests were repeated, 
84% of tests remained abnormal on retesting after 1 
month, and 
 15
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
even at 2 years 75% remained abnormal.11 Thus, in a patient 
with abnormal liver blood tests it is not recommended to simply 
repeat the same panel of tests but to determine the cause unless 
there is a high index of clinical suspicion that it is a transient 
finding. In children, there should be a low threshold for referral 
to a paediatrician for further investigation, as the most common 
causes of liver dysfunction in adults are less common in children, 
and there is a wider differential diagnosis.
Therefore, the response to the finding of abnormal liver blood 
tests should be to obtain a thorough clinical history, including 
age; ethnicity/country of birth (to explore possible risk of hepa-
titis B or C); specific symptoms (jaundice, abdominal pain, 
weight loss, pruritus, etc); comorbidity; drug history (prescribed, 
over the counter, herbal, injecting drug use, illicit); travel history; 
occupational exposure; tick bites; muscle injury; alcohol history 
(current and past intake in average units per week, consider 
AUDIT C); features of the metabolic syndrome (central obesity, 
hypertension, diabetes/insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia); 
family history; other symptoms, and, additionally, in children 
a maternal, neonatal, nutritional and developmental history. 
For patients with more marked elevations in ALT (>1000 U/L) 
other possible causes of viral hepatitis should be considered, 
including hepatitis A and E and cytomegalovirus. Examinations 
should include: body mass index and an abdominal examina-
tion looking for hepatosplenomegaly, ascites and other signs 
of chronic liver disease. PSC should be considered for patients 
with raised cholestatic liver enzymes and a personal or family 
history of autoimmune disease or personal history of inflamma-
tory bowel disease. No diagnostic or serological markers exist 
for PSC and 
MRI may be required at the outset.
Investigations should include a standard liver aetiology 
screen or core panel (table 2) to identify the cause of damage 
and exclude additional pathologies. There is uncertainty as to 
whether the entire extended liver aetiology screen should be 
undertaken in response to abnormal liver blood tests, but in 
most situations only the core panel should be performed with 
the extended panel (table 2) reserved for patients with no clear 
cause. The choice of blood tests in the core panel is influenced 
by prevalence (BALLETS) in the UK and the identification of 
treatable causes of liver disease.
Patients with evidence of hepatitis B (HBsAg positive), HCV 
(antibody positive then PCR positive), autoimmune hepatitis 
(raised IgG ± positive autoantibodies), primary biliary chol-
angitis (cholestatic liver enzymes+positive anti-mitochondrial 
antibody), PSC (cholestatic liver enzymes ± history of inflam-
matory bowel disease) or haemochromatosis (raised ferritin and 
transferrin saturation >45%) should be referred to a specialist 
clinic in accordance with locally agreed guidance. An isolated 
elevated serum ferritin result is commonly seen in dysmetabolic 
iron overload syndrome as found in the setting of alcohol excess, 
NAFLD and other chronic liver diseases and does not reflect 
haemochromatosis. The presence of dilated bile ducts requires 
further assessment and consideration of urgent hospital referral 
depending on the clinical setting. In the BALLETS study,11 in 
a cohort of 1290 adults in primary care, fully characterised 
and followed up for 2 years, <5% of people with abnormal 
liver blood test results had a specific disease affecting the liver. 
In only 1.3% was a specific liver disease identified requiring 
immediate treatment (13 with viral hepatitis and four genetic 
haemochromatosis). Notably, the country of origin (not ethnic 
group) was the strongest predictor of viral hepatitis.47 The 
condition of infants with neonatal cholestasis (conjugated bili-
rubin >25 μmol/L) should be discussed urgently with the local 
paediatrician.
Recommendation 5: In adults a standard liver aetiology screen 
should include abdominal USS, hepatitis B surface antigen, 
hepatitis C antibody (with follow-on polymerase chain reaction 
if positive), anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-smooth muscle 
antibody, antinuclear antibody, serum immunoglobulins, simul-
taneous serum ferritin and transferrin saturation. (level 2b, 
 
grade C)
Recommendation 6: In children, ferritin and transferrin satu-
ration may not be indicated, but autoantibody panel should 
include anti-liver kidney microsomal antibody and coeliac anti-
bodies. Alpha-1-antitrypsin level and caeruloplasmin (age >3 
years) should be included, and abnormalities discussed with 
an appropriate inherited metabolic disease specialist. (level 2b, 
grade C)
Nearly 4 in 10 adults had a ‘fatty liver’ on ultrasound in the 
BALLETS study, and an abnormal ALT concentration was the 
strongest laboratory predictor of this finding.11 Obesity was 
more strongly associated with ‘fatty liver’ than with alcohol 
excess, but one-quarter of adults with ‘fatty liver’ were neither 
overweight nor excessive alcohol drinkers. The majority of 
adults with abnormal liver blood tests will be identified as having 
NAFLD or ARLD and most will not need referral to a specialist, 
but will require reinforcement of lifestyle advice and ongoing 
assessment in primary care. For such patients, together with 
those with other aetiologies, it is important to establish if there 
is significant liver fibrosis and risk of progression of cirrhosis,48 
as early recognition of liver disease and appropriate treatment 
can prevent progression to end-stage liver disease. As illus-
trated in figures 1 and 2, this can be achieved in adults by use of 
algorithms and non-invasive fibrosis markers, with recourse to 
specialist clinics and liver biopsy as needed. A range of non-in-
vasive algorithms has been examined in NAFLD14 and ARLD 
but in this guideline we will focus on those with the greatest 
evidence base.
ApproAch to common conditions
nAFld
NAFLD is diagnosed by the presence of an echobright liver on 
ultrasound in the absence of excessive alcohol consumption. 
For adults with NAFLD it is recommended that a first-line, 
non-invasive assessment, such as Fibrosis-4 (FIB-4)49 or NAFLD 
Fibrosis Score (NFS),50 is undertaken to identify patients with 
advanced fibrosis (table 3). Patients with a low FIB-4 (<1.3 for 
those aged <65 years or <2.0 for those >65 years) or low NFS 
(<−1.455 for those aged <65 years or <0.12 for those >65 
years) can be managed in primary care.51 Presently, the mainstay 
of treatment for NAFLD is to reduce calorie intake and increase 
physical activity with the aim of inducing gradual and long-term 
weight loss (see figures 1 and 2).
Those patients with indeterminate FIB-4 (1.3–3.25) or NFS 
scores (−1.455 to 0.675) should undergo further testing with a 
second-line test such as serum enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF)15 16 52 
table 3 Non-invasive algorithms for gauging liver fibrosis in patients 
with NAFLD
NAFLD fibrosis score
−1.675 + 0.037 ×  age (years) + 0.094 ×  BMI (kg/
m2) + 1.13 ×  IFG/diabetes (yes=1, no=0) + 0.99 ×  
AST/
ALT ratio – 0.013 × platelet (×109/L) – 0.66 × albumin 
(g/dL) www.nafldscore.com
Fibrosis-4 (Fib-4)
(age × AST)/(platelets × (√ALT)) https://gps.camdenccg.
nhs.uk/fib-4-calculator
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BMI, body mass 
index; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
 16
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
or Fibroscan/acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) elastog-
raphy.18 53–56 The decision to use Fibroscan or ARFI should be 
based on local expertise and availability of respective devices. 
Consider referral to a specialist clinic for patients with serum 
ELF measurements >9.5 
or Fibroscan >7.8 
kPa. Cut-off points 
for ARFI vary according to the manufacturer57–61 and thus 
should be tailored to the device used.56
Finally, those patients with elevated FIB-4 (>3.25) or NFS 
(>0.675) should be considered for referral to a specialist clinic 
irrespective of second-line tests. Non-invasive markers of fibrosis 
have not been sufficiently validated in children to recommend 
routine use in clinical practice.
Of note, recent guidance by NICE on NAFLD proposed 
single testing with serum ELF measurements without recourse 
to algorithms or other diagnostic modalities,62 on the basis of 
cost-effectiveness analyses. This recommendation was noted and 
carefully considered during the drafting of this guideline. On 
balance, however, it was felt that the evidence for diagnostic 
tests, and their use in combination in NAFLD, was still evolving 
and thus this guidance took a broader view setting out a pathway 
structure with a range of options. This view is endorsed by the 
EASL-ALEH guidelines for the non-invasive assessment of liver 
disease.63
Recommendation 7: Adults with NAFLD should undergo risk 
stratification to determine their extent of liver fibrosis.
 
►
First-line testing should use either FIB-4 or NAFLD Fibrosis 
Score – see table 3  (level 2b, grade B). Calculation facilities 
for FIB-4 and NFS should be incorporated in all primary 
care computer systems. (level 5, grade D)
 
►
Second-line testing requires a quantitative assessment of 
fibrosis with tests such as serum ELF measurements or Fibro-
scan/ARFI elastography. (level 2b, grade B)
 
►
We recommend that hepatologists at a local level champion 
this idea and discuss it with commissioners of health to deal 
with the burden of liver disease in their area figures 1 and 2.
Arld
Alcohol-related cirrhosis is the the most common cause of 
liver-related mortality in Western populations. The majority 
Figure 3 Alcohol-related liver disease algorithm. In patients in whom alcohol is suspected to be the main injurious factor, the extent of 
consumption influences early decision-making. For those drinking at harmful levels, ≥35 units/week women and ≥50 units/week men, an assessment 
of liver fibrosis is the critical next step. For other patients, administration of the AUDIT C questionnaire alongside brief intervention is recommended 
initially. For patients who continue to drink at hazardous levels consideration should be given to assessment as for the higher-risk category according 
to liver fibrosis evaluation. This is particularly important for those with a GGT of >100 U/L. Cut-off points for ARFI vary according to manufacturer 
and thus should be tailored to the device used. ARFI, acoustic radiation force impulse; ELF, enhanced liver fibrosis; GGT, γ-glutamyltransferase; HCC, 
hepatocellular carcinoma.
 17
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
of patients with this condition are heavy daily drinkers, with 
a median alcohol consumption of around 120 units/week.2 
Notably, 25% of the population drink more than recommended 
guidelines (≤14 units/week), with 10% drinking twice as much 
and 1.4% drinking more than 75 units/week.3 The relationship 
between alcohol consumption and liver cirrhosis is exponential; 
at 20 units/week the relative risk is approximately 3, whereas at 
80 units/week it is 30.1 There is also a synergy between alcohol 
intake and obesity; when body mass index (BMI) is >35, the 
risk of liver disease doubles for any given alcohol intake (see 
figures 1 and 3).
The aim of treatment in ARLD is for the patient to stop 
drinking harmfully, and this usually means complete abstinence.8 
Referral to alcohol services should be undertaken for those 
patients with alcohol dependency as defined by an AUDIT score 
of >19, and kept in mind for those patients with an AUDIT score 
of ≥8. Importantly, a liver diagnosis in itself can be a highly 
effective intervention to change behaviour, and may be all that 
is required in many cases.9 However, current provision of such 
brief interventions in primary care is inconsistent and should be 
given greater priority.64
Recommendation 8: Consider referral to alcohol services for 
all adults with ARLD with evidence of alcohol dependency as 
defined by an AUDIT score of >19. (level 3b, grade C)
Normal liver blood tests do not rule out advanced liver fibrosis 
and cirrhosis, and so different approaches have been adopted/
recommended for the identification of the at-risk patient. The 
Lancet Commission recommended the use of AUDIT-C as a 
first-line screening tool in high-risk groups followed by the full 
10-item AUDIT to determine when to look for liver disease.1 
The recent NICE guideline (NG50)65 on cirrhosis recommended 
a cut-off point of 50 units/week for men and 35 units/week for 
women, above which Fibroscan/ARFI elastography is recom-
mended to detect cirrhosis and advanced fibrosis.66 67 Patients 
with cirrhosis require screening for oesophageal varices and 
hepatocellular carcinoma.
Recommendation 9: Harmful drinkers should undergo risk 
stratification with clinical assessment and Fibroscan/ARFI elas-
tography. Adults should be referred to secondary care if there is 
evidence of advanced liver disease (features of cirrhosis or portal 
hypertension on imaging or from blood tests) and/or Fibroscan 
reading is >16 
kPa (if available). (level 2b, grade B)
Patients flagged up with the AUDIT-C but drinking <35 units/
week (women) and <50 units/week (men), respectively, should 
proceed to the full AUDIT questionnaire as detailed in figure 3. If 
GGT is elevated (>100 
U/L) then consideration should be given 
to an assessment of liver fibrosis, as for the higher-risk group.
Research Recommendation 2: Further evidence is required to 
establish the most cost-effective approach to identify patients 
with ARLD and NAFLD at risk of having advanced liver fibrosis.
Approach to a patient with abnormal liver blood tests and a 
negative extended liver aetiology screen
When the extended liver aetiology screen is negative (table 2), 
including an abdominal USS, it is important to re-examine the 
history to exclude potential drug-induced aetiologies, including 
over-the-counter preparations and any potential recreational/
herbal drug use.68 69 In a UK primary care study of 1118 adults 
no cause was found in 45%, although many of these adults 
had metabolic risk factors and were likely to have NAFLD,4 
and it is important to recognise that ultrasound is only sensi-
tive for steatosis when hepatocytes are more than 30% steatotic 
so patients with milder steatosis might have a normal USS.70 
Therefore patients with raised ALT and/or GGT levels who are 
obese and/or have metabolic risk factors may still have NAFLD 
despite a normal USS. Such patients should be assessed in accor-
dance with the NAFLD fibrosis algorithm. To further risk stratify 
this group of patients offer a second- line test for fibrosis such as 
Fibroscan/ARFI elastography or ELF test as shown in figures 1 
and 2. Those patients with no NAFLD risk factors (eg, type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM), BMI >25, dyslipidaemia and hyper-
tension) and with persistently elevated liver enzymes should be 
considered for referral to a local specialist for further evaluation. 
For example, in autoimmune liver disease there may be no auto-
antibodies detected, and in some cases immunoglobulins may 
also be normal—as a result, some entirely treatable conditions 
may be overlooked. For children, assessment of fibrosis will be 
performed after referral to secondary care, and may include 
Fibroscan/ARFI elastography or biopsy depending on local prac-
tice and guidelines.
Recommendation 10: Adults with abnormal liver blood tests, 
even with a negative extended liver aetiology screen and no risk 
factors for NAFLD, should be referred/discussed to a gastroen-
terologist with an interest in liver disease/hepatologist for further 
evaluation (figure 1). (level 4, grade C)
ApplicAbility
This guideline has provided advice on the pathways and tools to 
be used to best manage patients with abnormal liver blood tests. 
The pathways will be freely disseminated and incorporated into 
primary care IT systems to allow automatic calculation of risk 
scores when appropriate, to ensure recommendations can be put 
into practice.
Facilitators of the guideline will include specialist societies—
in particular, the Royal College of General Practitioners, the 
British Liver Trust and the British Society of Gastroenterology. 
Barriers to use include access to the guideline and its potential 
complexity. This has been addressed by inclusion of all relevant 
stakeholders, a simplified set of pathway figures and a compre-
hensive dissemination plan.
The potential resource implications of applying the recom-
mendations have been considered, and will be formally eval-
uated after adoption. At present, investigation and referral of 
patients with abnormal liver blood tests is variable, resulting 
in both unnecessary referral of patients and missing of signifi-
cant liver disease. This pathway may rationalise the approach 
to abnormal liver blood tests and reduce healthcare expenses. 
An example of this is in Lambeth, where such a pathway has 
been successfully introduced, reducing referral of patients with 
NAFLD and minimal fibrosis.
monitorinG And/or AuditinG criteriA
1. Formal adoption of this referral pathway for abnormal liver 
blood tests within each Clinical Commissioning Group 
(CCG) and updated annually. Data to be expressed as number 
of CCGs having adopted the pathway as a percentage of all 
CCGs.
2. Review number of referrals for abnormal liver blood tests 
from each CCG per year and audit the number that had 
followed the pathway. Data to be expressed as a percentage 
of referrals.
3. Proportion of patients with NAFLD or ARLD who have an 
assessment of liver fibrosis, as evaluated by FIB-4, NFS, ELF, 
Fibroscan and/or ARFI, in their records. Data to be expressed 
as a percentage of patients coded with NAFLD or ARLD on 
GP list.
 18
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
Author affiliations
1National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), Birmingham Biomedical Research 
Centre and Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
2Centre for Liver Research, Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
3Leeds Children’s Hospital, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK
4Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, University of 
Dundee, Dundee, UK
5The Pool Medical Centre, Studley, UK
6Department of Radiology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Cambridge, UK
7Liver4Life, Dorset, UK
8Public Health England, South West, UK
9Regional Liver and Transplant Unit, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
10Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
11British Liver Trust, Bournemouth, UK
12PBC Foundation, Edinburgh, UK
13Killick Street Health Centre, London, UK
14NHS Islington Clinical Commissioning Group, London, UK
15Clinical and Experimental Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK
16Chair of Trustees PSC Support, Didcot, UK
17Gwent Liver Unit, Royal Gwent Hospital, Newport, UK
contributors PNN: consultant hepatologist, University of Birmingham/University 
Hospitals Birmingham; chair of BSG liver section; chair of Guideline Development 
Group and lead author. RC: consultant chemical pathologist, University Hospitals 
Birmingham; co-author of sections ’What constitutes an abnormal liver blood 
test? and Does the extent and duration of abnormal liver blood tests determine 
subsequent investigation?’; review of entire guideline. SD: consultant paediatric 
hepatologist and British Society of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology 
and Nutrition representative, Leeds Children’s Hospital, Leeds General infirmary; 
co-author of sections on paediatric hepatology; Review of entire guideline. 
JD: consultant hepatologist, University of Dundee/Ninewells Hospital, Dundee; 
co-author of section ’Does the extent and duration of abnormal liver blood tests 
determine subsequent investigation?’; review of entire guideline. MF/KS: general 
practioners, co-authors of section ’When should liver blood tests be checked’; 
Review of entire guideline. EMG: consultant radiologist, Cambridge University 
Hospitals; co-author of section related to imaging; review of entire guideline. UH/
AM/JV: public health England; co-authors of sections related to case-finding; review 
of entire guideline. RH/AL/RM-T/MW: patient/carer representatives; co-authors of 
section ’What constitutes an abnormal liver blood test?’, ’Response to abnormal 
liver blood tests’; review of entire guideline. MH: BASL/BSG representative; 
co-author of section ’Response to abnormal liver blood tests’; review of entire 
guideline. CR: Society of Acute Medicine representative; review of entire guideline. 
NCS: BSG representative; co-author of following sections: introduction, when tests 
checked and alcohol; review of entire guideline. AY: BSG representative; co-author 
of section ’What constitutes an abnormal liver blood test?’; review of entire 
guideline.
Funding This work was funded by support from the British Society of 
Gastroenterology. PNN is supported by the National Institute of Health Research 
(NIHR) Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre. The views expressed are those of 
the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of 
Health.
competing interests PNN: chief investigator for Echosens diagnostic study.
provenance and peer review Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, 
provided the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Williams R, Aspinall R, Bellis M, et al. Addressing liver disease in the UK: a blueprint 
for attaining excellence in health care and reducing premature mortality from 
lifestyle issues of excess consumption of alcohol, obesity, and viral hepatitis. Lancet 
2014;384:1953–97.
 2 Murray CJ, Richards MA, Newton JN, et al. UK health performance: findings of the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2013;381:997–1020.
 3 Office for National Statistics. Deaths registered in England and Wales (series DR). 
https://www.ons.gov.u 
k/peopl 
epopulati 
onan 
dcom 
muni 
ty/b 
irt 
h 
s 
dea 
thsa 
ndm 
a 
rr 
ia 
g 
es/ 
deat 
hs/d 
atasets/ 
deathsregister 
edin 
engl 
anda 
ndwa 
lesserie 
sdrreferencetables.
 4 Armstrong MJ, Houlihan DD, Bentham L, et al. Presence and severity of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease in a large prospective primary care cohort. J Hepatol 
2012;56:234–40.
 5 Armstrong MJ, Hazlehurst JM, Parker R, et al. Severe asymptomatic non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease in routine diabetes care; a multi-disciplinary team approach to diagnosis 
and management. QJM 2014;107:33–41.
 6 Della Corte C, Mosca A, Vania A, et al. Pediatric liver diseases: current challenges and 
future perspectives. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;10:255–65.
 7 Williams R, Ashton K, Aspinall R, et al. Implementation of the Lancet Standing 
Commission on Liver Disease in the UK. Lancet 2015;386:2098–111.
 8 Dufour DR, Lott JA, Nolte FS, et al. Diagnosis and monitoring of hepatic injury. II. 
Recommendations for use of laboratory tests in screening, diagnosis, and monitoring. 
Clin Chem 2000;46:2050–68.
 9 Dufour DR, Lott JA, Nolte FS, et al. Diagnosis and monitoring of hepatic injury. I. 
Performance characteristics of laboratory tests. Clin Chem 2000;46:2027–49.
 
10 Sherwood P, Lyburn I, Brown S, et al. How are abnormal results for liver function tests 
dealt with in primary care? Audit of yield and impact. BMJ 2001;322:276–8.
 
11 Lilford RJ, Bentham L, Girling A, et al. Birmingham and Lambeth Liver Evaluation 
Testing Strategies (BALLETS): a prospective cohort study. Health Technol Assess 
2013;17:1–307.
 
12 Donnan PT, McLernon D, Dillon JF, et al. Development of a decision support tool for 
primary care management of patients with abnormal liver function tests without 
clinically apparent liver disease: a record-linkage population cohort study and decision 
analysis (ALFIE). Health Technol Assess 2009;13:1–134.
 
13 Chatwin T. Diagnosing liver disease in asymptomatic patients. JAAPA 2001;14:39–47.
 
14 McPherson S, Stewart SF, Henderson E, et al. Simple non-invasive fibrosis scoring 
systems can reliably exclude advanced fibrosis in patients with non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Gut 2010;59:1265–9.
 
15 Parkes J, Roderick P, Harris S, et al. Enhanced liver fibrosis test can predict clinical 
outcomes in patients with chronic liver disease. Gut 2010;59:1245–51.
 
16 Rosenberg WM, Voelker M, Thiel R, et al. Serum markers detect the presence of liver 
fibrosis: a cohort study. Gastroenterology 2004;127:1704–13.
 
17 de Lédinghen V, Vergniol J, Foucher J, et al. Feasibility of liver transient elastography 
with FibroScan using a new probe for obese patients. Liver Int 2010;30:1043–8.
 
18 Wong VW, Vergniol J, Wong GL, et al. Diagnosis of fibrosis and cirrhosis using 
liver stiffness measurement in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology 
2010;51:454–62.
 
19 Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, et al. AGREE II: advancing guideline 
development, reporting and evaluation in health care. CMAJ 2010;182:E839–E842.
 
20 University of Oxford. medicine Cfe-b. Oxford, UK: University of Oxford, 2009.
 
21 Green RM, Flamm S. AGA technical review on the evaluation of liver chemistry tests. 
Gastroenterology 2002;123:1367–84.
 
22 Prati D, Colli A, Conte D, et al. Spectrum of NAFLD and diagnostic implications 
of the proposed new normal range for serum ALT in obese women. Hepatology 
2005;42:1460–1.
 
23 Kwo PY, Cohen SM, Lim JK. ACG Clinical Guideline: Evaluation of Abnormal Liver 
Chemistries. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:18–35.
 
24 Gazzin S, Vitek L, Watchko J, et al. A novel perspective on the biology of bilirubin in 
health and disease. Trends Mol Med 2016;22:758–68.
 
25 Monaghan G, Ryan M, Seddon R, et al. Genetic variation in bilirubin UPD-
glucuronosyltransferase gene promoter and Gilbert’s syndrome. Lancet 
1996;347:578–81.
 
26 Kundur AR, Singh I, Bulmer AC. Bilirubin, platelet activation and heart disease: a 
missing link to cardiovascular protection in Gilbert’s syndrome? Atherosclerosis 
2015;239:73–84.
 
27 Götze T, Blessing H, Grillhösl C, et al. Neonatal cholestasis - differential diagnoses, 
current diagnostic procedures, and treatment. Front Pediatr 2015;3:43.
 
28 Maisels MJ. Managing the jaundiced newborn: a persistent challenge. CMAJ 
2015;187:335–43.
 
29 Excellence NIfHaC. Jaundice in newborn babies under 28 days CG98. London 2010.
 
30 Posen S, Doherty E. The measurement of serum alkaline phosphatase in clinical 
medicine. Adv Clin Chem 1981;22:163–245.
 
31 Whitehead MW, Hawkes ND, Hainsworth I, et al. A prospective study of the causes of 
notably raised aspartate aminotransferase of liver origin. Gut 1999;45:129–33.
 
32 Daniel S, Ben-Menachem T, Vasudevan G, et al. Prospective evaluation of unexplained 
chronic liver transaminase abnormalities in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients. 
Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:3010–4.
 
33 Whitfield JB, Pounder RE, Neale G, et al. Serum -glytamyl transpeptidase activity in 
liver disease. Gut 1972;13:702–8.
 
34 Pratt DS, Kaplan MM. Evaluation of abnormal liver-enzyme results in asymptomatic 
patients. N Engl J Med 2000;342:1266–71.
 
35 Paredes AH, Torres DM, Harrison SA. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Liver Dis 
2012;16:397–419.
 
36 Duh MS, Walker AM, Kronlund KH. Descriptive epidemiology of acute liver enzyme 
abnormalities in the general population of central Massachusetts. Pharmacoepidemiol 
Drug Saf 1999;8:275–83.
 
37 Kim HC, Nam CM, Jee SH, et al. Normal serum aminotransferase concentration and 
risk of mortality from liver diseases: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2004;328:983.
 19
Newsome PN, et al. Gut 2018;67:6–19. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314924
Guidelines
 
38 McLernon DJ, Donnan PT, Sullivan FM, et al. Prediction of liver disease in patients 
whose liver function tests have been checked in primary care: model development and 
validation using population-based observational cohorts. BMJ Open 2014;4:e004837.
 
39 Verma S, Jensen D, Hart J, et al. Predictive value of ALT levels for non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis (NASH) and advanced fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD). Liver Int 2013;33:1398–405.
 
40 Lunder AK, Hov JR, Borthne A, et al. Prevalence of sclerosing cholangitis detected by 
magnetic resonance cholangiography in patients with long-term inflammatory bowel 
disease. Gastroenterology 2016;151:660–9.
 
41 Weismüller TJ, Trivedi PJ, Bergquist A, et al. Patient age, sex, and inflammatory 
bowel disease phenotype associated with course of primary sclerosing cholangitis. 
Gastroenterology 2017;152:1975–84.
 
42 Chalasani N, Aljadhey H, Kesterson J, et al. Patients with elevated liver enzymes are 
not at higher risk for statin hepatotoxicity. Gastroenterology 2004;126:1287–92.
 
43 Chalasani N, Younossi Z, Lavine JE, et al. The diagnosis and management of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease: practice guideline by the American Gastroenterological 
Association, American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, and American 
College of Gastroenterology. Gastroenterology 2012;142:1592–609.
 
44 European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL); European Association for the 
Study of Diabetes (EASD); European Association for the Study of Obesity (EASO). 
EASL-EASD-EASO Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease. J Hepatol 2016;64:1388–402.
 
45 Than NN, Neuberger J. Liver abnormalities in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin 
Gastroenterol 2013;27:565–75.
 
46 Erlinger S, Arias IM, Dhumeaux D. Inherited disorders of bilirubin transport 
and conjugation: new insights into molecular mechanisms and consequences. 
Gastroenterology 2014;146:1625–38.
 
47 Arnold DT, Bentham LM, Jacob RP, et al. Should patients with abnormal 
liver function tests in primary care be tested for chronic viral hepatitis: cost 
minimisation analysis based on a comprehensively tested cohort. BMC Fam Pract 
2011;12:9.
 
48 Mathiesen UL, Franzén LE, Aselius H, et al. Increased liver echogenicity at ultrasound 
examination reflects degree of steatosis but not of fibrosis in asymptomatic 
patients with mild/moderate abnormalities of liver transaminases. Dig Liver Dis 
2002;34:516–22.
 
49 Adler M, Gulbis B, Moreno C, et al. The predictive value of FIB-4 versus FibroTest, 
APRI, FibroIndex and Forns index to noninvasively estimate fibrosis in hepatitis C and 
nonhepatitis C liver diseases. Hepatology 2008;47:762–3.
 
50 Angulo P, Hui JM, Marchesini G, et al. The NAFLD fibrosis score: a noninvasive system 
that identifies liver fibrosis in patients with NAFLD. Hepatology 2007;45:846–54.
 
51 McPherson S, Hardy T, Dufour JF, et al. Age as a confounding factor for the 
accurate non-invasive diagnosis of advanced NAFLD fibrosis. Am J Gastroenterol 
2017;112:740–51.
 
52 Parkes J, Guha IN, Roderick P, et al. Performance of serum marker panels for liver 
fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol 2006;44:462–74.
 
53 Basma H, Soto-Gutiérrez A, Yannam GR, et al. Differentiation and transplantation of 
human embryonic stem cell-derived hepatocytes. Gastroenterology 2009;136:990–9.
 
54 Wong VW, Chu WC, Wong GL, et al. Prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
and advanced fibrosis in Hong Kong Chinese: a population study using proton-
magnetic resonance spectroscopy and transient elastography. Gut 2012;61:409–15.
 
55 Boursier J, Vergniol J, Guillet A, et al. Diagnostic accuracy and prognostic significance 
of blood fibrosis tests and liver stiffness measurement by FibroScan in non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease. J Hepatol 2016;65:570–8.
 
56 Barr RG, Ferraioli G, Palmeri ML, et al. Elastography assessment of liver fibrosis: 
Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound Consensus Conference Statement. Ultrasound Q 
2016;32:94–107.
 
57 Bota S, Herkner H, Sporea I, et al. Meta-analysis: ARFI elastography versus transient 
elastography for the evaluation of liver fibrosis. Liver Int 2013;33:1138–47.
 
58 Cassinotto C, Boursier J, de Lédinghen V, et al. Liver stiffness in nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease: A comparison of supersonic shear imaging, FibroScan, and ARFI with liver 
biopsy. Hepatology 2016;63:1817–27.
 
59 Cassinotto C, Lapuyade B, Mouries A, et al. Non-invasive assessment of liver fibrosis 
with impulse elastography: comparison of Supersonic Shear Imaging with ARFI and 
FibroScan®. J Hepatol 2014;61:550–7.
 
60 Cassinotto C, Lapuyade B, Aït-Ali A, et al. Liver fibrosis: noninvasive assessment 
with acoustic radiation force impulse elastography – comparison with FibroScan 
M and XL probes and FibroTest in patients with chronic liver disease. Radiology 
2013;269:283–92.
 
61 Crespo G, Fernández-Varo G, Mariño Z, et al. ARFI, FibroScan, ELF, and their 
combinations in the assessment of liver fibrosis: a prospective study. J Hepatol 
2012;57:281–7.
 
62 Excellence NIfHaC. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD): assessment and 
management NG49. London: NICE, 2016.
 
63 European Association for Study of Liver, Asociacion Latinoamericana para el Estudio 
del Higado. EASL-ALEH Clinical Practice Guidelines: non-invasive tests for evaluation 
of liver disease severity and prognosis. J Hepatol 2015;63:237–64.
 
64 Excellence NIfHaC. Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis, assessment and management of 
harmful drinking and alcohol dependence  CG115. London: NICE, 2011.
 
65 Excellence NIfHaC. Cirrhosis in over 16s: assessment and management NG50. 
London: NICE, 2016.
 
66 Pavlov CS, Casazza G, Nikolova D, et al. Transient elastography for diagnosis of stages 
of hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis in people with alcoholic liver disease. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2015;1:CD010542.
 
67 Pavlov CS, Casazza G, Nikolova D, et al. Systematic review with meta-analysis: 
diagnostic accuracy of transient elastography for staging of fibrosis in people with 
alcoholic liver disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2016;43:575–85.
 
68 Hultcrantz R, Glaumann H, Lindberg G, et al. Liver investigation in 149 asymptomatic 
patients with moderately elevated activities of serum aminotransferases. Scand J 
Gastroenterol 1986;21:109–13.
 
69 Mathiesen UL, Franzén LE, Frydén A, et al. The clinical significance of slightly to 
moderately increased liver transaminase values in asymptomatic patients. Scand J 
Gastroenterol 1999;34:466–91.
 
70 Saadeh S, Younossi ZM, Remer EM, et al. The utility of radiological imaging in 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2002;123:745–50.
