  
 
Supplementary Materials for 
 
A digital microfluidic system for serological immunoassays in remote 
settings 
 
Alphonsus H. C. Ng, Ryan Fobel, Christian Fobel, Julian Lamanna, Darius G. Rackus, 
Aimee Summers, Christopher Dixon, Michael D. M. Dryden, Charis Lam, Man Ho, 
Nooman S. Mufti, Victor Lee, Mohd Afiq Mohd Asri, Edward A. Sykes, 
M. Dean Chamberlain, Rachael Joseph, Maurice Ope, Heather M. Scobie, Alaine Knipes, 
Paul A. Rota, Nina Marano, Paul M. Chege, Mary Njuguna, Rosemary Nzunza, 
Ngina Kisangau, John Kiogora, Michael Karuingi, John Wagacha Burton, Peter Borus, 
Eugene Lam, Aaron R. Wheeler* 
 
 
*Corresponding author. Email: aaron.wheeler@utoronto.ca 
 
Published 25 April 2018, Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar6076 (2018) 
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aar6076 
 
This PDF file includes: 
 
Fig. S1. Quality control procedure 1. 
Fig. S2. Quality control procedure 2. 
Fig. S3. Integrated control system. 
Fig. S4. Magnetic separation. 
Fig. S5. PMT control. 
Fig. S6. Detection. 
Fig. S7. Droplet programming. 
Fig. S8. Assay metadata. 
Fig. S9. Device alignment. 
Fig. S10. Program interface. 
Fig. S11. MR Box connectivity diagram. 
Fig. S12. Temperature and humidity. 
Table S1. MR Box bill of materials. 
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/10/438/eaar6076/DC1 
  
 
 
Fig. S1. Quality control procedure 1. (A) Portions of maps of capacitance measured for two 
devices (i and ii), with heat map ranging from ≤ 80 fF (dark red) to ≥ 400 fF (white). (B) 
Distribution of capacitance (median ± 1.5 interquartile range) for the electrodes in devices i and 
ii. Broad distributions with outliers below the cutoff (for example, Device i) indicate potential 
failure points; such devices were discarded. Note that in previous systems (ref. 33-34), device 
failure was a common occurrence; the combination of QC-1/QC-2 reported here eliminates it 
entirely. 
  
 
 
Fig. S2. Quality control procedure 2. (A) Quick response (QR) code on the back of the DMF 
cartridge is scanned (represented by green dashed lines) into the laptop webcam and the device 
ID is entered into the cartridge metadata. (B) Schematic of droplet paths for QC-2. Two droplets 
(4-6 µL ea.) of PBS buffer are loaded into reservoirs and moved across the driving electrodes in 
a counter-clockwise fashion in the assay region (pink arrows). Cartridges with inoperable 
electrodes were discarded. Note that in previous systems (ref. 33-34), device failure was a 
common occurrence; the combination of QC-1/QC-2 reported here eliminates it entirely. 
 
  
 
 
Fig. S3. Integrated control system. Diagram of the integrated amplifier with AC signal 
generation embedded in the open-source DropBot 3.0 control system 
(http://microfluidics.utoronto.ca/dropbot/). DC voltage is supplied to the MR Box from a 12 V 
laptop power supply. A (step-up) boost converter amplifies the +12 V input to +60-240 V and 
then a square wave generator creates a unipolar square wave using two n-channel power 
MOSFETs in totem-pole configuration. Filtering through a high-pass filter with a cutoff 
frequency of 0.8 Hz generates a bipolar AC signal, which is used to bias driving electrodes 
during droplet movement.  
 
 
  
 
 
Fig. S4. Magnetic separation. Cartoon of the magnetic lens system illustrating the inactivated 
(left) and activated (right) states. The magnet and magnetic lens are mounted in a 3D-printed 
PLA housing and affixed to a tilt bracket. The servo motor controls the orientation of the magnet 
and lens with respect to the DMF cartridge (comprising a DMF top plate and DMF bottom 
plate). Magnetic particles within the droplet align with the magnetic field, such that they can be 
separated from droplets when the system is activated. Note that this mechanism is smaller, 
lighter, and consumes less power than the original vertical/step-motor system (ref. 33-34). 
Cartoon not to scale. 
 
 
  
 
 
Fig. S5. PMT control. (A) Schematic and picture illustrating how the open-source DStat 
potentiostat (http://microfluidics.utoronto.ca/dstat) is used to control the PMT for 
chemiluminescent measurements. The DStat supplies +5 V DC and ground (GND) to the PMT. 
PMT control voltage (VCTL) is set by the counter electrode (CE) and the output current IOUT is 
measured by the working electrode (WE). (B) PMT current response from the DStat measuring a 
droplet containing a proxy-mix of immunoassay reagents (luminol, H2O2, and horseradish 
peroxidase, HRP). DMF systems with integrated PMTs described previously (ref. 33-34) relied 
on third-party counter-timers and software that were not easily integrated with the MicroDrop 
control software, making portable operation nearly impossible. 
 
 
  
 
 
Fig. S6. Detection. (A) Photograph of the PMT coupled to the 3D-printed lens housing showing 
the collector lens. (B) Cartoon of a cross section of the PMT, lenses, and DMF device. The 
collector and condenser lens project light emitted from the chemiluminescent reaction into the 
aperture of the PMT. DMF systems with integrated PMTs described previously (ref. 33-34) 
relied on direct contact between a moveable PMT and the device, a source of common 
mechanical failure.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig. S7. Droplet programming. Cartoon illustrating three types of droplet-movement 
programming in the open-source MicroDrop 2.0 software platform 
(http://microfluidics.utoronto.ca/dropbot/). Manual programming (left) was the only mechanism 
reported for the previous versions of this system (ref. 64). In this mode, the user must provide the 
electrode-state of each electrode (on=white; off=blue) in each step. MicroDrop 2.0 provides two 
new mechanisms – Click-and-drag (middle) and Auto-routing (right). In click-and-drag mode the 
user defines the path the droplet will take as a single step. In auto-routing mode, the user defines 
the source and the destination and the software generates a path, avoiding the paths of other 
droplets. By using path routing, the time and attention required to generate an immunoassay 
protocol decreases by an order of magnitude compared to manual programming (from 1746 to 
123 steps). Programming required much more time on the older systems, making “on the fly” 
protocol-modifications nearly impossible. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig. S8. Assay metadata. (A) Cartoon illustrating the layout of the assays for a 4-plex 
immunoassay. Droplets are measured in order from bottom to top. (B) Screenshot of user-
editable metadata. Metadata collected for each cartridge included device ID, sample ID, and 
labels for the PMT measurements. Fields are filled by scanning a unique QR code associated 
with each cartridge with a webcam during QC-2 (see fig. S2). The previous version of 
MicroDrop, described in ref. (64), did not store user-defined metadata, making it impossible to 
connect device performance metrics with assay performance. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig. S9. Device alignment. Click-and-drag webcam-device alignment in the open-source 
MicroDrop 2.0 software platform (http://microfluidics.utoronto.ca/dropbot). Screenshots of the 
distorted, raw feed collected from the web cam (left), and after translation and transformation to 
match the device map (right). A video alignment frame (red outline) defines four points on the 
raw feed. By clicking and dragging, the user matches a video-element on the video (yellow 
circle) to its corresponding point on the device map (blue circle). Display options for turning on 
various layers, including background, video, and device map shapes, are available to the user. 
Note that these features are new to MicroDrop 2.0. A previous version of this system (ref. 33-34, 
64), did not allow real-time image manipulation, resulting in substantial rates of device load-
failure. 
  
 
 
Fig. S10. Program interface. Screenshot of open-source MicroDrop 2.0 software platform 
(http://microfluidics. utoronto.ca/dropbot) interface, highlighting protocol management features. 
Left: user-defined step labels identify the step in the protocol and are reported on the display to 
communicate each upcoming step. The duration of any repetitive step can be defined by the step 
timing (in seconds). A message can be set to appear in a dialogue box that prevents the protocol 
from proceeding without user intervention. Right: Web-cam view of device, illustrating droplet 
routes generated in the graphical interface, defining the movement of droplets in each step. The 
previous version of the software, as described in ref. (64), only allowed for user-control of only 
the duration of each electrode-actuation step, with no connection to higher order procedures (for 
example, mixing and incubating). Programming required much more time on these older 
systems, making “on the fly” protocol-modifications nearly impossible.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig. S11. MR Box connectivity diagram. An Arduino microcontroller is used to regulate the 
high voltage (HV) signal generator and switching boards for moving droplets on the DMF 
cartridge. The microcontroller measures feedback and adjusts output voltages accordingly. The 
microcontroller also controls the states of the LED lights, motorized magnet, and temperature 
and humidity sensors. Power is supplied by a 12 V DC laptop power regulator. A USB hub 
connects a laptop computer to the micro a webcam the DStat, which controls the PMT and 
interfaces with a light sensor lock. Elements that comprise the open-source DropBot 3.0 
(http://microfluidics.utoronto.ca/dropbot/) are enclosed in blue dashed lines. 
 
  
 
 
Fig. S12. Temperature and humidity. Boxplot summary of temperature (A) and relative 
humidity (B) readings collected during all of the experiments conducted in the field trial in 
Kakuma, Kenya. The box extends from the lower to upper quartile values, with the line 
indicating the median, and the whiskers representing the range of the data (n=2,030).  
 
 
  
 
 
Table S1. MR Box bill of materials. All prices USD. 
 
