 Solid stress and elastic energy as measures of tumour 
mechanopathology
Hadi T. Nia1, Hao Liu1,2, Giorgio Seano1, Meenal Datta1,3, Dennis Jones1, Nuh Rahbari1, 
Joao Incio1,4, Vikash P. Chauhan1, Keehoon Jung1, John D. Martin1, Vasileios 
Askoxylakis1, Timothy P. Padera1, Dai Fukumura1, Yves Boucher1, Francis J. Hornicek5, 
Alan J. Grodzinsky6, James W. Baish7, Lance L. Munn1, and Rakesh K. Jain1
1Edwin L. Steele Laboratories, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA
2Leder Human Biology and Translational Medicine, Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston MA 02115, USA
3Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA
4Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital S. Joao; I3S, Institute for Innovation and Research in 
Health; and Faculty of Medicine, Porto University; Porto, Portugal
5Orthopedic Oncology Service, Center for Sarcoma and Connective Tissue Oncology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA
6Center for Biomedical Engineering, Departments of Mechanical, Electrical and Biological 
Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
7Department of Biomedical Engineering, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA 17837, USA
Abstract
Solid stress and tissue stiffness affect tumour growth, invasion, metastasis and treatment. Unlike 
stiffness, which can be precisely mapped in tumours, the measurement of solid stresses is 
challenging. Here, we show that two-dimensional spatial mappings of solid stress and the resulting 
elastic energy in excised or in situ tumours with arbitrary shapes and wide size ranges can be 
obtained via three distinct and quantitative techniques that rely on the measurement of tissue 
displacement after disruption of the confining structures. Application of these methods in models 
of primary tumours and metastasis revealed that: (i) solid stress depends on both cancer cells and 
their microenvironment; (ii) solid stress increases with tumour size; and (iii) mechanical 
confinement by the surrounding tissue significantly contributes to intratumoural solid stress. 
Further study of the genesis and consequences of solid stress, facilitated by the engineering 
principles presented here, may lead to significant discoveries and new therapies.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and 
permissions information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints
Correspondence to: Rakesh K. Jain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Biomed Eng. 2016 ; 1: . doi:10.1038/s41551-016-0004.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Increased tissue stiffness is a widely accepted and actively studied biomechanical property 
of fibrotic tumours, and has been linked to several hallmarks of cancer, including growth, 
metabolism, invasion and metastasis [1–7]. The abnormal mechanics of tumours, however, 
are not limited to tissue stiffening. We recently demonstrated that solid stress represents a 
new mechanopathology that is consistently elevated in mouse and human tumours [8, 9]. 
This solid stress is distinct from interstitial fluid pressure, as the former is contained in – and 
transmitted by – solid and elastic elements of the extracellular matrix and cells, rather than 
fluids [10]. Therefore, tumours are not only more rigid than many normal tissues, but cancer 
cells also produce and are exposed to these physical forces. Composed of a combination of 
tension and compression, these forces are significant in tumours, but negligible in most 
normal tissues.
Early evidence for the existence of solid stress in tumours came from our discovery that 
blood and lymphatic vessels are mechanically compressed [11–13]; this can contribute to 
hypoxia [9, 14] and promote tumour progression, and lower the efficacy of chemo-, radio-, 
and immunotherapies [15]. In addition to these physiological consequences, forces can have 
direct effects on tumour biology; exogenous application of solid stress in vivo can 
mechanically stimulate tumourigenic pathways, increasing β-catenin signaling in colon 
epithelia [16], and controlled application of compressive forces in vitro affects their growth 
[8] and promotes the collective migration of cancer cells [17]. Strategies designed to reduce 
solid stress and decompress blood vessels by reducing the levels of collagen and hyaluronic 
acid (HA) [14, 18, 19], have led to therapeutic approaches for enhancing the efficiency of 
conventional anti-cancer treatments, and are currently being tested in clinical trials [20, 21].
Despite these important implications of solid stress and the immense potential for finding 
new mechanically-activated pathways and targets, there are currently no high-resolution 
methods for quantifying solid stress in experimental or human tumours. Unlike stiffness, 
which can be measured using widely-available, multiscale techniques, measuring solid stress 
in biological tissues has proven very challenging. Previous studies in our laboratory [8, 9], 
based on Fung’s observations that arterial wall tissue relaxes if the contained forces are 
surgically released [22, 23], demonstrated for the first time, the presence of residual tissue 
stresses in tumours. However, this approach is based on partial cut through a spherical model 
of the tumour, which makes the precise release of solid stress and measurement of the 
deformation challenging. This method is also limited to bulk estimation of solid stress and is 
not applicable in situ. Alternative imaging-based methods, such as fluorescent oil micro-
droplet injection [24] and single molecule fluorescent force sensors [25] have optical depth 
limitations, which restricts their use to cellular and subcellular scale force detection.
Here, we developed the experimental and mathematical frameworks to provide (i) two-
dimensional mapping of solid stress in tumours (planar cut method), (ii) sensitive estimation 
of solid stress in small tumours with small magnitudes of solid stress, as is the case for 
metastatic lesions (slicing method), and (iii) in situ quantification of solid stress in tumours, 
which retains the effects of the normal surrounding tissues (needle biopsy method). All three 
methods are based on the concept of releasing the solid stress in a controlled way with 
defined geometry, and then quantifying the stress-induced deformation by high-resolution 
ultrasonography or optical microscopy. Given the specific topography of the stress relaxation 
Nia et al.
Page 2
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and the geometric and material properties of the tumour, the solid stress and discharged 
elastic energy is estimated using mathematical modelling. Applying these methods to 
multiple mouse cancer models in primary and metastatic settings has led to the following 
findings: (i) solid stress and elastic energy may be different between primary vs. metastatic 
settings, as they depend on both cancer cells and their microenvironment; (ii) tumours with 
higher elastic energy are not necessarily stiffer, and the stiffer tumours do not necessarily 
have higher elastic energy; (iii) solid stress increases with tumour size; and (iv) the normal 
tissue surrounding a tumour significantly contributes to the intratumoural solid stress.
Two-dimensional (2-D) mapping of solid stress
To produce a two-dimensional map of solid stress, we made a clean cut through freshly 
excised tumours, which is embedded in 2% agarose (Fig. 1A). The planar cut removes the 
mechanical confinement at the cut surface, and allows this face of the tumour to deform 
accordingly, as predicted previously by our mathematical model [9]. The deformation is a 
measure of the stored elastic energy in the tissue caused by the solid stress (Fig. 1B). The 
deformation uz(x,y) in the z-direction, imaged over the x-y cross section of the tumour, is an 
indicator of the magnitude and direction of solid stress in the z-direction at the incision 
plane: regions with positive deformation (bulged) were under compression, and regions with 
negative deformation (depressed) were under tension (Fig. 1A, B). For tissues with 
negligible solid stress, such as normal kidney and liver, deformation was negligible and 
uniform across the incision surface (Fig. 1C). The deformation is spatially mapped in 3-D by 
high-resolution ultrasound system (resolution of 30 μm). By developing a mathematical 
model (3-D finite element model; Fig 1B), the 2-D map of deformation uz is converted to the 
strain tensor εij = 1/2(∂ui/∂xj+∂uj/∂xi), from which the stress tensor σij is estimated based on 
Hooke’s Law, written in index notation as [26]:
(1)
where E is the modulus of elasticity (stiffness), and ν is the Poisson’s ratio of the tissue 
based on linear isotropic assumption, and δij is the Kroenecker delta. We used the average 
Young’s modulus of the tumour, measured via unconfined compression test in macroscale or 
via atomic force microscopy measurement at multiple indentation sites. The developed finite 
element model, however, is capable of incorporating the 3-D stiffness heterogeneities of the 
tumour previously reported [27, 28]. Since the cut fully releases the stress component σzz at 
the cut plane, we report only this stress component at the cut surface throughout this study. 
The other stress components such as the stresses in x-y plane are also affected and accounted 
for in the 3-D model. However, since the planar cut method does not fully release these 
stresses, we do not report them in this study.
Similarly to a spring that is compressed (Fig. 1B), the solid stress field does mechanical 
work as it accumulates in the tumour, and this work is stored as elastic potential energy 
during tumour growth. The elastic energy density, W, released by the incision is calculated 
from the following equation for a tumour half with volume V [26]:
Nia et al.
Page 3
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (2)
Although the strain energy W is averaged over the volume of the tumour hemisphere, it is 
not equivalent to the total elastic energy of the tumour. The elastic energy W is only the 
energy that is released from the relaxation of solid stress at the desired cut plane; for the 
locations far from the cut plane, the elastic energy and solid stress are not fully released. In 
order to estimate the total elastic energy in a tumour, the tumour would need to be cut into 
infinitesimally small pieces so that all of the solid stress and elastic energy is released. The 
elastic energy is not an independent quantity from the solid stress; however, it describes the 
tensor-based stress field more sensitively and in the form of a single scalar quantity. Also, 
elastic energy rigorously differentiates between the forces emanating from solid vs. fluid 
phases [1] of the tumour based on the following considerations: (i) the interstitial fluid is 
incompressible, so the fluid pressure cannot do work on the fluid phase of the tumour; and 
(ii) the solid phase is porous and fluid can flow through it, so the fluid pressure cannot do 
work on the solid phase of the tumour in quasi-equilibrium events, such as tumour growth.
Using the planar cut method, we mapped the solid stress for three mouse models of 
orthotopically implanted primary tumours: breast (adenocarcinoma, MMTV-M3C), 
pancreatic (pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC); AK4.4) and brain (glioblastoma; 
U87) (Fig. 1D). For each model, a representative ultrasound image shows the stress-induced 
deformation, quantified with respect to the cut plane (dashed line in yellow). In the lower 
panel, the 2-D deformations, obtained by quantification of δz based on the reference incision 
plane, from ultrasound images are shown. The 2-D map of solid stress σzz, estimated from 
the finite element model, and the profile of σzz across the bisecting dashed lines are shown 
in the lower panels. The 2-D maps of σzz in breast and pancreatic tumours show a common 
pattern of compressive stresses in the central regions, and tensile stresses with higher 
magnitude, but in narrow peripheral regions. However, in our U87 model of glioblastoma, 
the tumour experiences compressive stresses over annular regions close to the periphery, 
rather than the center of the tumour. The maximum value of solid stress varies from 0.21 kPa 
(1.56 mmHg) in brain tumours to 7 kPa (52.5 mmHg) in pancreatic tumours, which are 
highly desmoplastic. The planar cut method is capable of estimating a large dynamic range 
of solid stress, in addition to the variation in the pattern of the compressive and tensile 
stresses stored in different tumour types. We also demonstrated the cut method on human 
chondrosarcoma tumours for which the 2-D deformation maps are shown in Fig. S1.
We hypothesized that structural elements, such as collagen fibers, are critical to transmitting 
solid stress [9, 14]. To test this hypothesis, we enzymatically depleted collagen in the 
MMTV-M3C model of breast cancer using collagenase treatment ex vivo. We showed that 
the average magnitude of solid stress <|σzz|> was reduced by a factor of more than two, 
while the elastic energy density W was reduced by a factor of more than six (Fig. 1E).
Nia et al.
Page 4
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Role of microenvironment in the evolution of solid stress
Little is known about how the biomechanical abnormalities vary between primary and 
metastatic lesions, or how these differences affect tumour biology. To address this gap, we 
used the planar cut method to estimate and compare solid stress, elastic energy, and 
mechanical stiffness in size-matched tumours formed from the same cell lines in primary vs. 
metastatic sites.
We found that primary PDAC AK4.4 tumours had much larger solid stress levels compared 
to PDAC liver metastases (Fig. 2A, B), even though both tumours were formed by the same 
cell line and were approximately size matched. Since these two tumours have similar elastic 
moduli (Fig. 2E), the higher deformation after incision results in higher stress values (Fig. 
2F) and higher elastic energy (Fig. 2G) in primary than liver metastasis. This comparison 
shows that AK4.4 tumours growing in the pancreas generate higher solid stress and store 
more elastic energy than AK4.4 liver metastases. Interestingly, for the case of colorectal 
carcinoma, this trend is reversed (Fig. 2C, D): the primary colorectal tumours have lower 
levels of solid stress and elastic energy compared to colorectal cancer liver metastases, 
despite having similar elastic moduli. Our data show that the growth in the liver 
microenvironment does not always result in lower stored elastic energy. An interesting 
comparison can also be made between metastases of different cancer cells in the same host 
organ (in this case, liver). Even though the elastic modulus of PDAC liver metastases is five-
fold larger than the colorectal cancer liver metastases, the elastic energy actually shows the 
opposite trend. This is due to significantly larger stress-induced deformation in colorectal 
cancer liver metastasis and the higher dependence of elastic energy on stress-induced 
deformation (Eq. 2). The solid stress shows a lower, but similar trend as the elastic modulus 
between the two metastases, since solid stress follows a linear relationship with the 
deformation (Eq. 1). From the above comparisons, we observe that: (i) solid stress and 
elastic energy are mechanical abnormalities that vary from tumour to the next; (ii) the solid 
stress and elastic energy depend on both the cancer cells and the microenvironment in which 
they reside, and (iii) tumours with higher elastic energy are not necessarily stiffer, and the 
stiffer tumours do not necessarily have higher elastic energy.
Area expansion of a slice is a sensitive index of solid stress
To measure solid stress and elastic energy in smaller tumours (e.g., in micro- and macro-
metastases), we developed a more sensitive method –also based on releasing elastic energy– 
by slicing the tissue into thin slices (Fig. 3A). Again, the freshly excised tumour is 
embedded in 2% agarose, which is then sliced via vibratome with a desired thickness in the 
range of 100–500 μm. The tumour slice, originally flat, undergoes expansion and contraction 
in area of the slice when the in-plane stresses and elastic energy are released (Fig. S2), as 
demonstrated in models of breast tumour (MMTV-M3C), PDAC (AK4.4), and lymph node 
metastasis of a breast cancer model (4T1) (Fig. 3B–D). Due to inhomogeneities of the in-
plane stresses (shown for partial release of these stress components in Fig. S3), the slice 
undergoes out-of-plane bending and buckling. This method is more sensitive than the planar 
cut method since a thin slice is exposed to more degrees of freedom to deform, and reacts 
even to small values of solid stress due to small thickness of the slice. The deformed slices 
Nia et al.
Page 5
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 are then imaged in 3D by high-resolution ultrasound (used here for AK4.4 and MMTV-M3C 
tumours) or optical frequency domain imaging (OFDI; used here for lymph node metastasis) 
[29] after stress relaxation. The compressive and tensile stresses (as mapped in Fig. 1D) 
release in different ways: the compressive forces are released by expansion in volume of the 
slice, which results in lateral bending and buckling, and the tensile forces are released by 
pulling the periphery of the tumours inwards. So, the complex geometry that is formed from 
an originally flat disk-shape slice is the result of non-uniformity and coexisting tension-
compression residual in-plane stresses that are released in the slice. We performed this 
method on tissues, such as the normal kidney and lymph node micro-metastasis, and 
observed negligible deformation after slicing (Fig. 3E–F), consistent with the results of the 
planar cut method (Fig. 1C).
The release of elastic energy via slicing results in surface area expansion of the slice. The 
overall area expansion after slicing represents the area strain, a quantitative index for in-
plane solid stresses and the stored elastic energy in the slice. We defined the area expansion 
ratio as:
(3)
where Atumour, is the surface area of the tumour slice after the elastic energy is released and 
obtained from the 3D image of the slice, and Ablank is the reference area of the tumour slice 
before slicing, obtained from the empty space left in the agarose gel (Fig. 3H, I). The 
expansion ratio has been quantified as 30.7±5.8% for breast tumour, 34.0±4.9% for PDAC, 
and 17.2±1.2% for lymph node with breast cancer macro-metastasis, which are significantly 
higher than the control tissues: 7.0±1.9% for kidney, and 5.0±1.2% for lymph node with 
micro-metastasis (Fig. 3J and Fig. S4). It should be mentioned that in this method, the 
tumour undergoes consecutive cuts prior to reaching the desired slice in the tumour. In doing 
so, the out-of-plane stresses (σzz) are fully released similar to the cut method. In addition, 
the in-plane stresses (σxx and σyy) are also partially released as shown in the example in Fig. 
S3. For the representative case of MMTV-M3C model of breast cancer, we showed that the 
slicing method releases the majority of the in-plane stresses compared to the relaxation of 
in-plane stresses that occurs before the slicing. The average area strain obtained via slicing 
method in the MMTV-M3C model is IER = 30.7%, which results in <σin-plane> = 0.27 kPa. 
(The Young’s modulus E = 0.87 kPa.) However, the average σxx and σyy that are released by 
the cuts prior to the desired slicing are 0.069 kPa and 0.078 kPa (Fig. S3), respectively, no 
larger than one-third of <σin-plane>, which shows that the majority of the in-plane stresses 
are relaxed via slice method, and are thus reported as area strain IER (Eq. 3).
Evolution of solid stress and stiffness during tumour growth
Investigating the accumulation of solid stress as a function of tumour growth provides 
invaluable information regarding both the genesis and implications of solid stress. We used 
the slice method to measure the expansion ratio IER (Eq. 3), induced by the relaxation of 
solid stress, in MMTV-M3C breast tumours for tumours ranging in size from 2 to 7 mm in 
Nia et al.
Page 6
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diameter (Fig. 4A). The elastic modulus of the tumours was also measured via atomic force 
microscopy (AFM)-based indentation for a similar range of tumour size. The expansion ratio 
(Eq. 3), induced by the relaxation of in-plane stresses in the slice, increased significantly 
with increasing tumour diameter (Fig. 4A, B). Tumours with small diameters (2–3 mm) did 
not show a significant increase in area after slicing while the larger tumours showed an area 
expansion of up to 30–40%. Notably, the AFM-based indentation modulus did not show any 
significant trend with tumour diameter (Fig. 4C). This confirms that solid stress and elastic 
energy can be considered as distinct mechanical abnormalities from stiffness, long known to 
be higher in many tumours compared to normal tissues.
The collagen I network becomes more organized and more localized at the periphery with 
increasing tumour size in MMTV-M3C breast tumour model, consistent with the increase in 
solid stress. As shown via immunofluorescence analysis, the collagen I network is uniformly 
and randomly distributed in smaller tumours (d ~ 2mm; Fig. 4D) and becomes more 
localized and organized at the periphery in larger tumours (d ~ 7 mm). To quantitatively 
describe this collagen I localization effect, we defined a collagen spread radius, Rc, as the 
radius of an area that contains 50% of the positively stained collagen I. This radius increases 
significantly with tumour diameter (Fig. 4D), consistent with a similar increase in area 
expansion ratio (Fig. 4B). The highly oriented collagen (Fig. S5) with increased density at 
the periphery implies that the periphery of the tumour is experiencing tensile stresses. This 
tensile stress in the periphery, consistent with the stress map in Fig. 1D, is hypothesized to 
originate from the direct contraction of carcinoma associated fibroblasts [30, 31] or to resist 
the compressive forces emanating from the volume increase from cell proliferation and 
ECM deposition.
While the solid stress increased with tumour size, the fraction of perfused vessels showed an 
opposite trend (Fig. 4E; see Fig. S6 for representative images), consistent with the 
hypothesis that solid stress can compress blood vessels and decrease tumour perfusion [9, 
14, 19]. These data also suggest that stiffness, showing no significant trend with tumour 
growth for the range of tumour diameters in this study, is not a major contributor to 
compression and collapse of intratumour blood vessels.
Physical role of surrounding tissue in solid stress in tumours
Until now, we estimated the solid stress and elastic energy of tumours ex vivo, independent 
of the surrounding normal tissue. Here, via in situ estimation of solid stress, we show that 
the resistance to the growth from the surrounding tissue also significantly contributes to the 
solid stress in the tumour – as predicted previously by our mathematical model [32, 33]. To 
measure the in situ solid stresses, we perform a core biopsy in the tumour to create a 
cylindrical void. The changes in diameter of the cylindrical void, measured by 
ultrasonography, represent a one-dimensional stress profile in the tumour. We first 
characterized this method ex vivo to release the solid stress in the MMTV-M3C model of 
breast tumours: the cylindrical void reduced in diameter in the center and increased in 
diameter at the periphery of the tumour (Fig. 5B). This deformation profile indicates 
compressive stresses in the center, and tensile stresses in the periphery of the tumour, 
consistent with the results obtained by the planar cut method described above (Fig. 1D). As 
Nia et al.
Page 7
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expected, the diameter profile of the biopsy void remained unchanged in control tissues such 
as kidney and liver, in which the solid stress is negligible (Fig. 5C, D).
In addition to the void left by the biopsy, the biopsy core also contains useful information 
about the state of solid stress in the probed tissue. The tip of the core shrinks due to the 
tensile contraction at the periphery, and the diameter in the middle region increases due to 
release of compressive stresses (Fig. 5B). The biopsy cores from the control tissues such as 
kidney and liver do not deform, again due to the negligible solid stress and elastic energy in 
these tissues (Fig. 5C, D).
Utilizing this method for in situ stress measurement, we showed that the solid stress in ex 
vivo brain tumours (glioblastoma, U87) is lower in magnitude and different in profile than in 
tumours surrounded by brain and cranium (in situ; Fig. 5E, F, G). We used the same 
glioblastoma model (U87) for which the 2D stress map was quantified in Fig. 1, and 
released the solid stress by biopsy punch while the tumour is still surrounded by brain and 
cranium. For in situ measurements, we first made a 2-mm diameter hole in the cranial 
window (Fig. 5H), through which we accessed the tumour with a 1.5-mm biopsy punch. The 
biopsy void reduced in diameter at regions close to the tumour rim, consistent with the 2-D 
map of deformation (Fig. 1D), but in contrast to the primary breast tumours where the 
maximum deformation occurs in the center (Fig. 5B). For ex vivo measurements, the tumour 
was surgically resected from the brain, embedded in 2% agarose, and the stress was released 
by the same biopsy technique (Fig. 5G). We observed an overall smaller deformation for the 
ex vivo compared with the in situ tissues, and these differences in deformation were 
significant in regions closer to the outer rim of the tumour (Fig. 5F). Using a mathematical 
model, the maximum radial stress for the in situ case was estimated as 0.1 kPa in 
compression, as compared to 0.02 kPa in the ex vivo case.
Discussion
Based on the fundamental concept that tissues containing solid stress undergo deformation 
after release of physical confinement, we developed three different experimental techniques 
and appropriate mathematical models to quantify solid stress and elastic potential energy in 
solid tumours. The first method, based on releasing solid stress at a plane created by 
bisecting the tumour, reveals the 2-D spatial distribution of solid stress. This method allows 
us to distinguish regions with tensile stresses, mostly at the periphery, from the central 
regions of the tumour that experience mainly compressive stresses. The second method, 
based on releasing solid stress by creating thin tumour slices, provides a sensitive method to 
quantify low levels of solid stress in small specimens, such as small metastatic lesions in 
mice. The third method, based on releasing solid stress by core biopsy, is capable of 
simultaneous in situ and ex vivo estimations of solid stress. The in situ feature of this 
method allowed determination of the contribution of the surrounding tissue to the 
intratumoural solid stress. Importantly, we found that biopsy cores also undergo ex vivo 
stress-induced deformation, and could potentially be used for measurement of solid stress in 
the clinic (See Table S1 for capabilities and limitations of each method). These methods 
overcome the previous technical challenges in measuring these biomechanical abnormalities.
Nia et al.
Page 8
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Reliable and precise quantification of solid stress and elastic energy has the potential to 
promote the discovery of new signalling pathways and therapeutic strategies. The 
repurposing of losartan [14], an angiotensin receptor inhibitor, and PEGPH20 [18], a 
recombinant hyaluronidase, in cancer therapies is partly based on releasing the mechanical 
forces exerted on blood vessels in tumours by targeting collagen I and HA. The 
administration of both drugs resulted in increased efficiency of chemotherapy in preclinical 
models, leading to two phase II clinical trials [20, 21]. Similar to our earlier method to 
estimate solid stress [9], the methods developed here could also be used to compare agents 
that can lower solid stress. Moreover, the interplay between obesity and the cancer immune 
microenvironment would also benefit from the characterization of solid stress. As we 
recently found in PDAC tumours [34, 35], synergies between adipocytes, immune cells and 
fibroblasts lead to an exacerbated desmoplastic microenvironment during obesity, further 
promoting blood-vessel compression. This is arguably the most important consequence of 
solid stress demonstrated to date.
Solid stress and elastic energy can also be used as prognostic and diagnostic markers. 
Factors such as tumour growth pattern and collagen architecture, both closely associated 
with solid stress, have been shown to have prognostic values. Growth pattern, histologically 
categorized as pushing vs. replacing phenotypes, has been linked to overall survival [36] and 
recurrence risk [37]. As shown in Fig. 2, colorectal cancer liver metastases with pushing 
growth pattern have higher elastic energy compared to pancreatic cancer liver metastases 
with replacing growth pattern (Fig. S7). Also, collagen orientation and alignment have been 
shown to correlate with prognosis in breast cancer patients [38]. As shown, the collagen 
network in our breast tumour model becomes more organized as solid stress increases with 
tumour growth. Quantification and association of solid stress with growth pattern and 
collagen architecture suggest that solid stress may reveal the mechanisms underlying these 
histological patterns, and lead to further prognostic biomarker discoveries.
The needle biopsy and planar cut methods both provide quantitative measurements of solid 
stress, and have the potential to be utilized in the clinic. Biopsy samples are obtained 
routinely during diagnosis and treatment of cancer; as we showed in Fig. 5A and B for the 
needle biopsy method, the biopsy core contains useful information about solid stress in 
tumours. This evaluation of biopsy core solid stress could be initially performed in clinical 
trials as a new biomarker, and also to investigate the mechanism underlying the link between 
solid stress and collagen orientation and growth pattern. The planar cut method currently 
requires the sample to be embedded in agarose and imaged via high-resolution ultrasound; 
clinically, this procedure may affect the routine processing of tumours by pathologists. To 
facilitate this procedure, we are working with pathologists to develop methods of generating 
3-D reconstruction of stress-induced deformation of patient specimens utilizing laser 
scanning technologies. This methodology will eliminate the agarose embedding step, 
shorten the imaging time, provide the strain field in a larger field of view in the tumour and 
its surrounding tissue, and could be coupled with the routine pathological processes on 
freshly excised tumours. Using fiducial markers, the solid stress maps would be matched and 
compared to histological images from the same cut plane. We expect that clinically 
accessible and quantitative measurement of solid stress and elastic energy will provide new 
Nia et al.
Page 9
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prognostic and diagnostic markers, similar to stiffness [39, 40] and interstitial fluid pressure 
[41–43], two mechanical abnormalities, which have been used as prognostic biomarkers.
Finally, we utilized the above methods to demonstrate that elevated solid stress and stiffness 
are two distinct biomechanical abnormalities. This important distinction implies that 
attempts to normalize the tumour’s mechanical environment should not be limited to 
decreasing stiffness. Two of our independent but consistent findings demonstrate that (i) 
primary and metastatic tumours can have significantly different levels of solid stress despite 
similar stiffness values (Fig. 2E, G), and (ii) solid stress increases with tumour growth, even 
though stiffness did not change in our tumour models (Fig. 4B, C). These findings clearly 
suggest that the external compressive or tensile solid stresses that tumour cells feel may be 
independent of the cellular focal adhesion forces that are generated in response to the 
stiffness of the matrix in their vicinity. With the methods and results shown here, we now 
have the tools to investigate how cancer and stromal cells sense and respond to tensile or 
compressive forces to complement our understanding of the effects of altered stiffness [44].
Methods
Planar cut method
Releasing stress—The 2% agarose is made from low gellation temperature agarose 
(Sigma-Aldrich) mixed with PBS. The agarose solution is in a liquid state at a temperature 
of 40 °C. The freshly excised tumour is first washed with PBS, then immersed in the liquid 
agarose inside a custom-made aluminum cast. The cast is then cooled down in ice-water. 
After solidification of the agarose gel, the tumour-agarose construct is removed from the 
cast, and is manually cut at the plane of interest with a razor blade. The solidified agarose 
that surrounds and holds the tumour allows the tumour to be cut with minimal displacement 
relative to the gel. One half of the tumour is removed from the gel and fixed in 4% 
formaldehyde for histological analysis, and the other half, still inside the agarose construct, 
is kept immersed in PBS for at least 10 minutes to allow the tissue to relax and deform due 
to the release of solid stress and elastic energy. The same method was used for control 
tissues.
Tissue imaging and post-processing—The tissue deformation map is imaged via 
high-resolution ultrasound, Vevo 2100 system (FUJIFILM Visual Sonics, Toronto, Canada), 
on the half of the tumour-agarose construct that is immersed and relaxed in PBS. We used 
the probe MS550S for large samples such as primary breast tumour (depth of view = 13 mm, 
frequency = 32–56 MHz), and the probe MS700 for smaller samples such as brain tumours 
(depth of view = 9 mm, frequency = 30–70 MHz). The high-resolution ultrasound provides a 
resolution of 20–30 μm. For higher resolution and smaller samples, optical systems such as 
the optical frequency domain imaging (OFDI) system [29] (resolution = 1 μm, depth of view 
= 2–3 mm) can be used. The 3-D images are exported from VisualSonics software to 
MATLAB (The MathWorks, Natick, MA) for post-processing. The post-processing includes 
smoothing, which is performed with moving averaging on the top (cut plane) and bottom 
surfaces of the tumour to remove any noise introduced by ultrasound imaging. The top and 
bottom surfaces are exported to SolidWorks (Waltham, MA) for 3-D reconstruction of the 
Nia et al.
Page 10
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 surfaces into a solid object. This solid object is then exported to the compatible finite 
element model, as described below.
Mathematical Modeling—In the incision method, to translate the stress-induced 
deformation to solid stress, we developed a mathematical model using the general purpose 
commercial finite element software ABAQUS (Version 6.9, SIMULIA, Providence, RI). The 
3-D geometry of the tumour is imported from the SolidWorks software as described above. 
We used the element type C3D10, a quadratic tetrahedral element with two elastic 
parameters: the Young’s modulus and the Poisson’s ratio, which are obtained as described 
below. The assumptions for the use of Eq. (1) are justified in Supplementary Note 1. We 
have shown that the viscoelastic time constant is on the order of 10 min (Fig. S8 and S9) for 
the length scales comparable to tumour diameter (this time constant is mainly determined by 
the Young’s modulus and hydraulic permeability in poroelastic materials [45, 46]). In 
contrast, the biological processes that give rise to solid stress in tumours, such as 
proliferation, ECM deposition and cell contraction, occur on a time scale ranging from 
several hours to days. Since this is much longer than the viscoelastic time constant, the 
equilibrium mechanical properties that we are measuring reflect the appropriate properties in 
the generation and application of solid stress.
The agarose gel is solidified from a liquid state under no external or internal residual stress. 
Thus, the cut surface in the agarose gel provides the reference plane that represents the 
original plane of the tumour tissue before stress relaxation in the tumour. A displacement 
profile is assigned to the top deformed surface of the tumour to translate it back to the 
original reference plane. This assigned deformation is only in the direction perpendicular to 
the surface of the tumour (z-direction), and the tumour top surface is free to move parallel to 
the surface direction (x-y plane). This displacement assignment translates the tumour 
geometry from the relaxed state (deformed surface) to the original stresses state prior to the 
cut (flat surface). The stress component σzz that is generated after the displacement 
assignment is reported as the solid stress in the intact tumour. For ex vivo applications of 
incision method, the boundary condition on the bottom surface of the tumour is defined as 
zero force. This assumption is justified for cases such as mouse models of breast tumours 
where the solid stress field is mainly generated internally, and the tumour is not experiencing 
any major external confinement or resistance. For in situ application of the incision method, 
a contact surface is defined between the tumour and the surrounding normal tissue. In these 
cases, such as with brain tumours, the normal tissue is also modeled as an elastic material 
with known Young’s modulus, obtained as described below. The solid stress component in 
the direction perpendicular to the cut surface (z-direction) σzz, is reported. The model also 
reports the elastic energy density, equivalent to the work done to displace the deformation 
back to the original coordinates, normalized by the tumour volume.
Slicing method
Releasing solid stress—The tumour is embedded in 2% agarose gel as described in the 
incision method, except that the solidification occurs in a stainless steel cast provided by the 
commercial compresstome, VF-300 (Precisionary Instruments Inc., San Jose, California). 
The tumour-agarose construct, fully immersed in PBS, is then sliced via the compresstome 
Nia et al.
Page 11
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with the desired thickness in the range of 100 to 500 μm. The tumour slice is detached from 
the agarose slice, and leaves an empty area in the agarose gel. This empty area, called the 
“blank” in the manuscript, represents the tumour area prior to stress relaxation by slicing. 
The detachment of the tumour slice from the surrounding agarose is done manually with a 
pair of sharp tweezers; in some cases, detachment occurs spontaneously. The slice is kept 
immersed in PBS for at least 10 minutes while the solid stress releases. As a result of stress 
relaxation, the sample slice undergoes expansion in area through different modes of bending 
and buckling.
Imaging and post-processing—The sample slice and the blank agarose gel are imaged 
in 3-D via high-resolution ultrasound (for larger tumours), or the optical system OFDI (for 
small samples such as lymph node). The surface area of both the sample slice and the blank 
are then calculated by custom in-house MATLAB codes. The change in the ratio of the 
surface area after stress relaxation to the surface area before stress relaxation (equal to the 
blank area) is defined as an index of solid stress and elastic energy.
Needle Biopsy Method
Releasing solid stress—Tumour solid stress is released by punching a hole with rotating 
biopsy punches (Integra-Miltex, Plainsboro, NJ) with diameters 1.5 – 3 mm. The rotating 
punch is made by detaching the stainless steel blade of the biopsy punch from the plastic 
holder, and rotating it with a Dremel rotary tool (Dremel, Racine, WI). The rotary punch 
reduces cutting artifacts by minimizing the mechanical disturbance caused otherwise by 
non-rotating punching. In ex vivo cases, the sample is either held gently by tweezers or 
embedded in 2% agarose to be secured during the punch. For in situ cases, such as brain 
tumours, we made a 2-mm diameter hole in the plastic coverslip of the cranial window 
without disturbing the underlying brain tissue. Through this hole in the cranial window, we 
then punched the brain tumour with a 1.5 mm punch. The samples are left submerged in 
PBS at least for 10 minutes, the time needed for stress relaxation. The biopsy core, which 
also changes in diameter due to solid stress, is preserved similarly in PBS.
Imaging and post-processing—The stress-induced deformation and the sample 
geometry are imaged by high-resolution ultrasound as described in the incision method. 
Using custom in-house, semi-automated MATLAB codes, we calculated the area of the 
biopsy hole along the punch axis, from which the mean hole diameter is calculated.
Mathematical modeling—In the needle biopsy method, an axisymmetric finite element 
code is developed in ABAQUS to translate the stress-induced deformation to solid stress. A 
deformation profile is assigned that transforms the deformed punch profile to the original 
profile before the stress relaxation. The original hole profile is a simply determined by the 
biopsy punch diameter, which is uniform along the hole axis (z-axis) and equal to 1.5 mm 
for small samples such as brain tumours, and 2–3 mm for larger samples. In the ex vivo 
cases, a zero force boundary condition is prescribed at the outer surface of the tumour to 
simulate the physiological conditions. For in situ cases, a contact surface is defined between 
the tumour and the normal tissue, such is brain, with known elastic properties. We used the 
four-node axisymmetric element CAX4R for both the tumour and surrounding tissue. The 
Nia et al.
Page 12
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 materials properties of both the tumour and the surrounding tissue are obtained via micro 
and macro measurements of stiffness, as described below. The stress σrr, the component of 
solid stress on the cut surface, in the direction perpendicular to the axis of the hole (z-
direction), is reported. The mathematical model also reports the elastic energy density, 
equivalent to the work done to displace the deformation back to the original coordinates, 
normalized by the volume of the tumour.
Micro and macro measurement of stiffness
The stiffness of the tumours was measured via atomic force microscopy (AFM) in 
microscale as indentation modulus, and in macroscale as unconfined compression modulus. 
For both cases the measurement has been done within 1 hr after excision of the tumours. The 
samples have been maintained in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with protease inhibitors 
(Complete Protease cocktail tablets, Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) at 4 °C before 
testing. All the measurements were performed in near-physiological PBS at ambient 
temperature (25 °C).
AFM-based measurement of indentation modulus—The indentation moduli of 
tumours were quantified using an Asylum MFP3D atomic force microscope (Asylum 
Research, Santa Barbara, CA). We used polystyrene colloidal probe tips with end radius R ~ 
12.5 μm (Polysciences, Warrington, PA) attached to tipless cantilevers with nominal spring 
constant k ~ 0.12 N/m (Bruker, Camarillo, CA). The colloidal probes were attached to the 
cantilever by the lift-off process: a dot of glue (M-Bond 610, Structure Probes/SPI Supplies, 
West Chester, PA) was placed on a tipless cantilever by making quick contact between the 
cantilever and a thin layer of glue (1 μl) spread over a 10 × 10-mm mica surface. We then 
made immediate contact between the tip of the cantilever and a colloid probe resting on a 
glass slide and waited for 1 min with the cantilever pushing against the colloid. This process 
was followed by heat curing for 2 h at 150°C. For each probe tip, the exact spring constants 
of the cantilevers were directly measured using the thermal calibration method [47]. The 
relationship between the detected voltage and the applied force was calibrated by bringing 
the cantilever in contact with a glass slide and calculating the slope of the voltage-
displacement curve. The displacement, d, was translated to force, F, using Hooke’s Law (F = 
kd). The indentation was performed under a force control scheme (max force ~20nN), 
limiting the indentation depths to 0.5–3 μm. The tip displacement was obtained by 
subtracting the cantilever deflection from vertical movement of the piezo. An indentation 
approach velocity of 2 μm/s ensured probing the elastic modulus at a lower rate, close to 
equilibrium condition.
The effective indentation modulus Eind was computed using Hertzian contact mechanics 
models via least-squares linear regression of the experimental loading force-displacement 
curves. For the spherical colloidal probe tip with end radius R on the sample with thickness 
h ≫ R (here, h~ 5 mm, R~ 12.5 μm),
Nia et al.
Page 13
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 where F is the indentation force, D is the indentation depth, and υ is the Poisson’s ratio (we 
assumed υ = 0.1, as measured in other soft tissues [48, 49]). A representative force-
displacement curve is shown in Fig. S10.
Macroscale unconfined compression test—The Young’s moduli of tumours were 
determined by unconfined compression tests [50]. Slices of freshly excised tissue, 3 mm in 
diameter and ~ 2-mm thick, were placed in an unconfined compression chamber, submerged 
in physiological saline. The chamber was mounted in an ultrasensitive servo-controlled 
materials tester (Dynastat Mechanical Spectrometer; IMASS, Hingham, MA). Each 
specimen was compressed by 5 percent of the original height in ramps of 20 s and allowed 
to relax for 20 min. Four successive measurements were performed on each tissue slice. The 
Young’s modulus was determined as the ratio of the linear fit to stress-strain data (Fig. S8)
Cell culture
Cells (MMTV-M3C, AK4.4, SL4, U87, 4T1) were cultured in DMEM (ATCC 30-2002) 
medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum. Cells were harvested at ~80% confluency, 
washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), counted and resuspended in DMEM 
prior to injection. All cell lines repeatedly tested negative for mycoplasma using the 
Mycoalert Plus Mycoplasma Detection Kit (Lonza, Allendale, NJ), authenticated before use 
by IDEXX laboratories (North Grafton, MA).
Tumour models
Primary tumour models—MMTV-M3C cells (Her2+) were kindly provided by Dr. 
Peigen Huang (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston), and were isolated from lung 
metastases of mammary adenocarcinomas in mice generating spontaneous mammary 
tumours (MMTV-PyVT). Orthotopic breast tumours were generated by implanting a small 
piece (1 mm3) of viable tumour tissue (from a source tumour in a separate animal) or by 
injection of 1×105 cells into the mammary fat pad of a 6–8 week-old female FVB (MMTV-
M3C). AK4.4 cells (KrasG12D and p53+/−) were kindly provided by Dr. Nabeel Bardeesy 
(Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston), and were isolated from mice generating 
spontaneous pancreatic tumours (Ptf1-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D/p53). Orthotopic pancreatic 
tumours were similarly generated by implanting a small piece (1 mm3) of viable tumour 
tissue into the pancreas of a 6–8 week-old male FVB mouse (AK4.4 model) mouse. The 
SL4 mouse colorectal cancer cells were a generous gift from Prof. Irimura [51]. For the 
orthotopic SL4 model, 5×105 cells in 10 μL of PBS/Matrigel complex were injected into the 
cecal wall between the serosa and mucosa from the serosal side using an insulin syringe with 
a 27G needle. For the glioblastoma model, cranial windows were implanted into nude mice 
as previously described [52], and the mice were allowed to recover one week before tumour 
implantation. U87 fragments (0.2 – 0.3 mm diameter; from a source tumour in a separate 
animal) were implanted into the left cerebral hemisphere 0.5 – 1 mm deep in a 6–8 week-old 
female nude mouse. All animal procedures were carried out following the Public Health 
Service Policy on Humane Care of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee of Massachusetts General Hospital.
Nia et al.
Page 14
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Liver metastasis model—mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of 
ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg). A left flank incision was made through the 
skin and abdominal wall layer, and the spleen was gently exteriorized. The middle of the 
spleen was ligated with a suture prior to transsection, with the goal of preserving the 
vascular pedicles to both hemispleens. 1×105 cells (AK4.4 or SL4) in 100μL DMEM were 
injected slowly into the distal lobe with a 30-gauge needle. After 10 minutes the hemispleen 
used for tumour cell injection was resected. The remaining spleen was placed back into the 
abdomen. The abdominal wall was closed with a continuous suture. The skin was closed 
with surgical staples.
Lymph node spontaneous metastasis—2×105 4T1 cells in DMEM were injected into 
the 2nd mammary fat pad of syngeneic BALB/c mice. On day 15 post-injection, the primary 
tumour was resected. Animals were sacrificed 2–3 weeks post-resection to evaluate 
metastatic lymph nodes.
Histology
Prior to sacrifice, mice were slowly (~2min) injected with 100 ml of 1 mg/ml FITC 
conjugated lectin (Vector Labs), administered via the tail vein 5 min before tumour removal, 
long enough for FITC-lectin to reach perfused vessels. The tumours were then excised, fixed 
in 4% formaldehyde in PBS overnight, and embedded in paraffin blocks. Transverse tumour 
sections, 5 μm thick, were immunostained with antibodies for endothelial marker CD31 
(DIA310, Dianova, 1:100 dilution) and counterstained with DAPI (Vector Labs). Collagen I 
and hyaluronan were, respectively, detected using the LF-68 antibody (1:500 dilution) 
provided by Dr Larry Fisher (NIDCR) and a biotinylated hyaluronan proteoglycan fragment 
(385911, Calbiochem). For the detection of collagen I, the paraffin-embedded sections were 
treated with a pH-9.0 trypsin antigen retrieval solution and counterstained with DAPI. 
Staining for aSMA (C6198 antibody, Sigma, 1:100 dilution) was also carried out. The entire 
tumour section at 10× magnification was taken from each slide using a confocal microscope 
(Olympus) or slide scanner (TissueFAXS). For vascular analysis, vessels were segmented 
using a custom, semi-automated tracing program developed in MATLAB, allowing the 
analysis of each vessel according to its size and staining intensity. Tumour perfusion was 
assessed by identifying the fraction of CD31+ vessels that were also positive for FITC-
lectin, indicating that those individual vessels were perfused prior to sacrifice, and therefore 
functional and uncompressed.
Collagenase treatment
Collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich) was prepared by dissolving 10 mg collagenase in 10 mL 
DMEM. After excision, the tumour was placed in the collagenase solution remaining at 
37 °C for 2 h before solid stress measurement.
Statistical analysis
The data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean. Groups were compared using 
an unpaired, two-sided Student’s t-test (due to independent sampling) with equal or unequal 
variance. The variance similarity was tested via F-test with p = 0.05. All the results are based 
on pilot studies (not reported) preceding the main experiments (reported). The sample size 
Nia et al.
Page 15
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for the main experiments were determined from the pilot studies. Mice were size matched as 
appropriate for each experiment; no additional blinding nor randomization was required for 
the animal studies.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sylvie Roberge, Carolyn Smith, Julia Kahn and Mark Duquette for technical assistance. We also thank 
Dr. Peigen Huang, Dr. Nabeel Bardeesy, and Prof. Irimura for providing MMTV-M3C, AK4.4 and SL4 cells, 
respectively. This work was supported in part from funding from the National Cancer Institute (P01-CA080124), 
NCI Outstanding Investigator Award (R35-CA197743) and DoD Breast Cancer Research Innovator award 
(W81XWH-10-1-0016) to RKJ, DP2 OD008780 to TPP and R01-HL128168 grant to LLM, TPP and JWB.
Appendix
Additional information
Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper
Author Contributions
H.T.N. and R.K.J. designed the study; H.T.N., H.L., G.S., M.D., D.J., N.R., J.I., K.J. 
performed research; H.T.N., H.L., G.S., M.D., D.J., N.R., J.I., V.P.C., K.J., J.D.M., V.A., 
T.P.P., D.F., Y.B., F.J.H., A.J.G., J.W.B., L.L.M. and R.K.J. analyzed data; H.T.N., M.D., 
G.S., V.P.C., L.L.M. and R.K.J. wrote the manuscript.
Data availability
Custom scripts for MATLAB (The MathWorks, Natick, MA) are available as Supplementary 
Information.
Competing Financial Interests
R.K.J. received consultant fees from Ophthotech, SPARC, SynDevRx and XTuit. RKJ owns 
equity in Enlight, Ophthotech, SynDevRx, and XTuit and serves on the Board of Directors 
of XTuit and the Boards of Trustees of Tekla Healthcare Investors, Tekla Life Sciences 
Investors, Tekla Healthcare Opportunities Fund and Tekla World Healthcare Fund. No 
reagents or funding from these companies was used in these studies.
References
1. Jain RK, Martin JD, Stylianopoulos T. The role of mechanical forces in tumour growth and therapy. 
Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering. 2014; 16:321.
2. Chaudhuri O, Koshy ST, da Cunha CB, Shin JW, Verbeke CS, Allison KH, Mooney DJ. 
Extracellular matrix stiffness and composition jointly regulate the induction of malignant 
phenotypes in mammary epithelium. Nature Materials. 2014; 13(10):970–978. [PubMed: 24930031] 
Nia et al.
Page 16
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. Mouw JK, Yui Y, Damiano L, Bainer RO, Lakins JN, Acerbi I, Ou G, Wijekoon AC, Levental KR, 
Gilbert PM. Tissue mechanics modulate microRNA-dependent PTEN expression to regulate 
malignant progression. Nature Medicine. 2014; 20(4):360.
4. Samuel MS, Lopez JI, McGhee EJ, Croft DR, Strachan D, Timpson P, Munro J, Schröder E, Zhou J, 
Brunton VG. Actomyosin-mediated cellular tension drives increased tissue stiffness and β-catenin 
activation to induce epidermal hyperplasia and tumour growth. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19(6):776–791. 
[PubMed: 21665151] 
5. Wirtz D, Konstantopoulos K, Searson PC. The physics of cancer: the role of physical interactions 
and mechanical forces in metastasis. Nature Reviews Cancer. 2011; 11(7):512–522. [PubMed: 
21701513] 
6. Goetz JG, Minguet S, Navarro-Lérida I, Lazcano JJ, Samaniego R, Calvo E, Tello M, Osteso-Ibáñez 
T, Pellinen T, Echarri A. Biomechanical remodeling of the microenvironment by stromal caveolin-1 
favors tumour invasion and metastasis. Cell. 2011; 146(1):148–163. [PubMed: 21729786] 
7. Tung JC, Barnes JM, Desai SR, Sistrunk C, Conklin MW, Schedin P, Eliceiri KW, Keely PJ, 
Seewaldt VL, Weaver VM. Tumour mechanics and metabolic dysfunction. Free Radical Biology 
and Medicine. 2015; 79:269–280. [PubMed: 25532934] 
8. Helmlinger G, Netti PA, Lichtenbeld HC, Melder RJ, Jain RK. Solid stress inhibits the growth of 
multicellular tumour spheroids. Nature Biotechnology. 1997; 15(8):778–783.
9. Stylianopoulos T, Martin JD, Chauhan VP, Jain SR, Diop-Frimpong B, Bardeesy N, Smith BL, 
Ferrone CR, Hornicek FJ, Boucher Y. Causes, consequences, and remedies for growth-induced solid 
stress in murine and human tumours. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2012; 
109(38):15101–15108.
10. Boucher Y, Jain RK. Microvascular pressure is the principal driving force for interstitial 
hypertension in solid tumours: implications for vascular collapse. Cancer Research. 1992; 52(18):
5110–5114. [PubMed: 1516068] 
11. Griffon-Etienne G, Boucher Y, Brekken C, Suit HD, Jain RK. Taxane-induced apoptosis 
decompresses blood vessels and lowers interstitial fluid pressure in solid tumours clinical 
implications. Cancer Research. 1999; 59(15):3776–3782. [PubMed: 10446995] 
12. Padera TP, Kadambi A, di Tomaso E, Carreira CM, Brown EB, Boucher Y, Choi NC, Mathisen D, 
Wain J, Mark EJ. Lymphatic metastasis in the absence of functional intratumour lymphatics. 
Science. 2002; 296(5574):1883–1886. [PubMed: 11976409] 
13. Padera TP, Stoll BR, Tooredman JB, Capen D, di Tomaso E, Jain RK. Pathology: cancer cells 
compress intratumour vessels. Nature. 2004; 427(6976):695–695. [PubMed: 14973470] 
14. Chauhan VP, Martin JD, Liu H, Lacorre DA, Jain SR, Kozin SV, Stylianopoulos T, Mousa AS, Han 
X, Adstamongkonkul P, Popovich Z, Huang P, Bawendi M, Boucher Y, Jain RK. Angiotensin 
inhibition enhances drug delivery and potentiates chemotherapy by decompressing tumour blood 
vessels. Nature Communications. 2013:4.
15. Jain RK. Antiangiogenesis strategies revisited: from starving tumours to alleviating hypoxia. 
Cancer Cell. 2014; 26(5):605–622. [PubMed: 25517747] 
16. Fernández-Sánchez ME, Barbier S, Whitehead J, Béalle G, Michel A, Latorre-Ossa H, Rey C, 
Fouassier L, Claperon A, Brullé L. Mechanical induction of the tumourigenic [bgr]-catenin 
pathway by tumour growth pressure. Nature. 2015; 523(7558):92–95. [PubMed: 25970250] 
17. Tse JM, Cheng G, Tyrrell JA, Wilcox-Adelman SA, Boucher Y, Jain RK, Munn LL. Mechanical 
compression drives cancer cells toward invasive phenotype. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences. 2012; 109(3):911–916.
18. Provenzano PP, Cuevas C, Chang AE, Goel VK, Von Hoff DD, Hingorani SR. Enzymatic targeting 
of the stroma ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer 
Cell. 2012; 21(3):418–429. [PubMed: 22439937] 
19. Chauhan VP, Boucher Y, Ferrone CR, Roberge S, Martin JD, Stylianopoulos T, Bardeesy N, 
DePinho RA, Padera TP, Munn LL, Jain RK. Compression of Pancreatic Tumour Blood Vessels by 
Hyaluronan Is Caused by Solid Stress and Not Interstitial Fluid Pressure. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26(1):
14–15. [PubMed: 25026209] 
20. ClinicalTrials.gov. Proton w/FOLFIRINOX-Losartan for Pancreatic Cancer. Available from: 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01821729
Nia et al.
Page 17
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21. ClinicalTrials.gov. PEGPH20 Plus Nab-Paclitaxel Plus Gemcitabine Compared With Nab-
Paclitaxel Plus Gemcitabine in Subjects With Stage IV Untreated Pancreatic Cancer 
(HALO-109-202). Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01839487
22. Chuong, C., Fung, Y. Frontiers in Biomechanics. Springer; 1986. Residual stress in arteries; p. 
117-129.
23. Taber LA, Humphrey JD. Stress-modulated growth, residual stress, and vascular heterogeneity. 
Journal of Biomechanical Engineering. 2001; 123(6):528–535. [PubMed: 11783722] 
24. Campas O, Mammoto T, Hasso S, Sperling RA, O’Connell D, Bischof AG, Maas R, Weitz DA, 
Mahadevan L, Ingber DE. Quantifying cell-generated mechanical forces within living embryonic 
tissues. Nature Methods. 2014; 11(2):183–189. [PubMed: 24317254] 
25. Grashoff C, Hoffman BD, Brenner MD, Zhou R, Parsons M, Yang MT, McLean MA, Sligar SG, 
Chen CS, Ha T. Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion 
dynamics. Nature. 2010; 466(7303):263–266. [PubMed: 20613844] 
26. Timoshenko, S., Goodier, J. Theory of elasticity. Vol. 412. New York: 1951. p. 108
27. Plodinec M, Loparic M, Monnier CA, Obermann EC, Zanetti-Dallenbach R, Oertle P, Hyotyla JT, 
Aebi U, Bentires-Alj M, Lim RY. The nanomechanical signature of breast cancer. Nature 
Nanotechnology. 2012; 7(11):757–765.
28. Lopez J, Kang I, You W, McDonald D, Weaver V. In situ force mapping of mammary gland 
transformation. Integr Biol (Camb). 2011; 3(9):910–21. Epub 2011/08/16. DOI: 10.1039/
c1ib00043h [PubMed: 21842067] 
29. Vakoc BJ, Lanning RM, Tyrrell JA, Padera TP, Bartlett LA, Stylianopoulos T, Munn LL, Tearney 
GJ, Fukumura D, Jain RK, Bouma B. Three-dimensional microscopy of the tumour 
microenvironment in vivo using optical frequency domain imaging. Nature Medicine. 2009; 
15(10):1219–1223.
30. Simon D, Horgan C, Humphrey J. Mechanical restrictions on biological responses by adherent 
cells within collagen gels. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials. 2012; 
14:216–226. [PubMed: 23022259] 
31. Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Delaunay T, Naeem R, Carey VJ, 
Richardson AL, Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas 
promote tumour growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF-1/CXCL12 secretion. Cell. 2005; 
121(3):335–348. [PubMed: 15882617] 
32. Stylianopoulos T, Martin JD, Snuderl M, Mpekris F, Jain SR, Jain RK. Coevolution of solid stress 
and interstitial fluid pressure in tumours during progression: implications for vascular collapse. 
Cancer research. 2013; 73(13):3833–3841. [PubMed: 23633490] 
33. Voutouri C, Mpekris F, Papageorgis P, Odysseos AD, Stylianopoulos T. Role of constitutive 
behavior and tumour-host mechanical interactions in the state of stress and growth of solid 
tumours. PloS one. 2014; 9(8):e104717. [PubMed: 25111061] 
34. Fukumura D, Incio J, Shankaraiah R, Jain RK. Obesity and cancer: an angiogenic and 
inflammatory link. Microcirculation. 2016
35. Incio J, Liu H, Suboj P, Chin SM, Chen IX, Pinter M, Ng MR, Nia HT, Grahovac J, Kao S, 
Babykutty S, Huang Y, Rahbari N, Han X, Chauhan VP, Martin JD, Kahn J, Huang P, Desphande 
V, Michaelson J, Michelakos TP, Ferrone CR, Soraes R, Boucher Y, Fukumara D, Jain RK. 
Obesity-induced inflammation and desmoplasia promote pancreatic cancer progression and 
resistance to chemotherapy. Cancer Discovery. 2016:CD-15–1177.
36. Van den Eynden GG, Bird NC, Majeed AW, Van Laere S, Dirix LY, Vermeulen PB. The 
histological growth pattern of colorectal cancer liver metastases has prognostic value. Clinical & 
Experimental Metastasis. 2012; 29(6):541–549. [PubMed: 22476470] 
37. Eefsen R, Vermeulen P, Christensen I, Laerum O, Mogensen MB, Rolff H, Van den Eynden G, 
Høyer-Hansen G, Osterlind K, Vainer B. Growth pattern of colorectal liver metastasis as a marker 
of recurrence risk. Clinical & Experimental Metastasis. 2015; 32(4):369–381. [PubMed: 
25822899] 
38. Conklin MW, Eickhoff JC, Riching KM, Pehlke CA, Eliceiri KW, Provenzano PP, Friedl A, Keely 
PJ. Aligned collagen is a prognostic signature for survival in human breast carcinoma. The 
American Journal of Pathology. 2011; 178(3):1221–1232. [PubMed: 21356373] 
Nia et al.
Page 18
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 39. Good DW, Stewart GD, Hammer S, Scanlan P, Shu W, Phipps S, Reuben R, McNeill AS. Elasticity 
as a biomarker for prostate cancer: a systematic review. BJU international. 2014; 113(4):523–534. 
[PubMed: 23905869] 
40. Choi WJ, Kim HH, Cha JH, Shin HJ, Kim H, Chae EY, Hong MJ. Predicting prognostic factors of 
breast cancer using shear wave elastography. Ultrasound in medicine & biology. 2014; 40(2):269–
274. [PubMed: 24268451] 
41. Milosevic MF, Pintilie M, Hedley DW, Bristow RG, Wouters BG, Oza AM, Laframboise S, Hill 
RP, Fyles AW. High tumour interstitial fluid pressure identifies cervical cancer patients with 
improved survival from radiotherapy plus cisplatin versus radiotherapy alone. International Journal 
of Cancer. 2014; 135(7):1692–1699. [PubMed: 23904154] 
42. Roh H, Boucher Y, Kalnicki S, Buchsbaum R, Bloomer W, Jain R. Interstitial hypertension in 
carcinoma of uterine cervix in patients: possible correlation with tumour oxygenation and radiation 
response. Cancer Research. 1991; 51(24):6695–6698. [PubMed: 1742744] 
43. Fyles A, Milosevic M, Pintilie M, Syed A, Levin W, Manchul L, Hill RP. Long-term performance 
of interstial fluid pressure and hypoxia as prognostic factors in cervix cancer. Radiotherapy and 
oncology. 2006; 80(2):132–137. [PubMed: 16920212] 
44. Discher DE, Janmey P, Wang YL. Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate. 
Science. 2005; 310(5751):1139–43. [PubMed: 16293750] 
45. Nia HT, Han L, Li Y, Ortiz C, Grodzinsky A. Poroelasticity of Cartilage at the Nanoscale. 
Biophysical Journal. 2011; 101(9):2304–2313. [PubMed: 22067171] 
46. Grodzinsky, AJ. Fields, Forces, and Flows in Biological Systems. Vol. Chapter 4. New York: 
Garland Science; 2011. p. 139-173.
47. Hutter JL, Bechhoefer J. Calibration of atomic-force microscope tips. Review of Scientific 
Instruments. 1993; 64(7):1868–1873.
48. Kiviranta P, Rieppo J, Korhonen RK, Julkunen P, Töyräs J, Jurvelin JS. Collagen network primarily 
controls Poisson’s ratio of bovine articular cartilage in compression. Journal of Orthopaedic 
Research. 2006; 24(4):690–699. [PubMed: 16514661] 
49. Buschmann MD, Kim YJ, Wong M, Frank E, Hunziker EB, Grodzinsky AJ. Stimulation of 
Aggrecan Synthesis in Cartilage Explants by Cyclic Loading Is Localized to Regions of High 
Interstitial Fluid Flow1. Archives of biochemistry and Biophysics. 1999; 366(1):1–7. [PubMed: 
10334856] 
50. Netti PA, Berk DA, Swartz MA, Grodzinsky AJ, Jain RK. Role of extracellular matrix assembly in 
interstitial transport in solid tumours. Cancer research. 2000; 60(9):2497–2503. [PubMed: 
10811131] 
51. Morimoto-Tomita M, Ohashi Y, Matsubara A, Tsuiji M, Irimura T. Mouse colon carcinoma cells 
established for high incidence of experimental hepatic metastasis exhibit accelerated and 
anchorage-independent growth. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2005; 22(6):513–21. [PubMed: 16320114] 
52. Yuan F, Salehi HA, Boucher Y, Vasthare US, Tuma RF, Jain RK. Vascular permeability and 
microcirculation of gliomas and mammary carcinomas transplanted in rat and mouse cranial 
windows. Cancer Research. 1994; 54(17):4564–4568. [PubMed: 8062241] 
Nia et al.
Page 19
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 2-D map of solid stress in tumours
(A) The fresh tumour is embedded in 2% agarose, liquid in 40° C, and gellated in ice-water. 
The tumour-agarose construct is incised at the plane of interest to release solid stress. The 
release of solid stress results in the deformation field δz(x,y) with respect to the agarose 
reference plane; δz and tumour geometry are quantified by high-resolution ultrasound 
(resolution of 20 μm). (B) Using a finite element model, σzz, the mechanical stress in the z 
direction, and W, the elastic energy stored by the solid stress, are estimated from the 
deformation δz and the Young’s modulus of the tissue based on the Hooke’s Law. (C) The 
stress-induced deformation δz is uniform and negligible in stress-free normal tissues (e.g., 
kidney at the top and liver at the bottom). (D) A representative ultrasound image showing 
the stress-induced deformation and agarose reference line (yellow dashed line), the 2-D 
deformation field δz, the 2-D stress field σzz, and a representative stress profile across the 
tumour diameter are shown for mouse models of breast tumour (MMTV-M3C), pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma tumour (AK4.4) and brain tumour (glioblastoma U87). (E) 
Enzymatic depletion of collagen in (MMTV-M3C) breast tumour results in significant 
reduction of solid stress and elastic energy density (control: n=5 mice; collagenase treated: 
n=4 mice; mean ± SEM; *: p < 0.05). The representative ultrasound image and solid stress 
maps are shown for control and collagenase treated tumours.
Nia et al.
Page 20
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Solid stress and elastic energy in primary vs. metastatic tumours
(A) Solid stress is mapped in size-matched primary pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
(PDAC, AK4.4 cells; n=4 mice), (B) liver metastasis of PDAC (AK4.4; n=3 mice) (C) 
primary colorectal carcinoma (SL4 cells; n=3 mice), and (D) liver metastasis of colorectal 
carcinoma (SL4; n=4 mice). Comparing (E) the Young’s modulus (unconfined 
compression), (F) average solid stress in the z-direction, σzz, and (G) elastic energy density 
in these four tumour models shows that cancer cells are not the only determinant of 
biomechanical abnormalities: the organ and microenvironment in which the cancer cells 
reside are equally important in generation of solid stress and elastic energy in tumours. The 
data shown are mean ± SEM; *: p < 0.05.
Nia et al.
Page 21
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Creating tumour slices provides a sensitive measure of solid stress applicable to a wide 
range of specimen sizes
(A) The fresh tumour is embedded in liquid 2% agarose, then sliced with a compresstome 
and left in PBS at room temperature, so the stress-induced deformation occurs in the tumour 
slice. The deformed slice and the surrounding agarose disk are imaged via high-resolution 
ultrasound (resolution, 30μm) or optical frequency domain imaging (OFDI; resolution, 1μm) 
for small samples (e.g., lymph node). The buckling and deformation of representative slices 
from (B) breast tumour (MMTV-M3C), (C) pancreatic tumour (AK4.4) and (D) lymph node 
with macro-metastasis of breast cancer (4T1) are shown. Tissues with negligible or low 
levels of stress, such as (E) lymph node with micro-metastasis and (F) kidney are shown. 
(G) The blank space in the agarose disk represents the area of the tumour slice before the 
stress relaxation. (H) The 3-D reconstruction of the slices in breast and pancreatic tumours, 
compared to kidney. (I) The expansion ratio, an index of solid stress and elastic energy, is 
defined as the ratio of the surface area of the slice after stress relaxation Atumour to the area 
of the blank in the agarose disk, Ablank (equivalent to the area of the slice before stress 
relaxation). (J) The expansion ratio in breast (n=3 slices) and pancreatic tumours (n=3 
slices) are significantly higher than the expansion in the kidney slice (n=3 slices). The 
expansion ratio of lymph node macro-metastasis (n=4 slices) is significantly higher than the 
one in micro-metastatic lymph node (n=4 slices)(mean ± SEM).
Nia et al.
Page 22
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Evolution of solid stress and stiffness as a function of tumour size
(A) Solid stress was estimated with the slicing method in breast tumours (MMTV-M3C) 
with mean diameters ranging from 2–7 mm. (B) The expansion ratio – an index of solid 
stress – increases significantly with increasing tumour size. (C) The AFM-based indentation 
modulus of the same tumour model does not vary significantly with tumour size (D) 
Representative images of collagen I staining (white) of the MMTV-M3C tumours. The 
collagen content (assessed by positively stained collagen I area fraction) becomes localized 
to the tumour periphery with increasing tumour size. The radius Rc, defined as the effective 
normalized radius of an area that contains 50% of the positively stained collagen, increases 
with tumour diameter (E) The fraction of perfused blood vessels shows a decreasing trend 
with increasing tumour size, consistent with the hypothesis that high solid stress (which 
increases with tumour size, as shown in panel B) compresses blood vessels [14]. The data 
shown in B, C, D are mean ± SEM. Each data point in B represents n=3 slices from each 
mouse; each tumour diameter associates to a different mouse. In C, each data point 
represents n=10 indentation sites from each mouse. In D, n=10 radial sectors have been 
quantified for each data point.
Nia et al.
Page 23
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. In situ measurement of solid stress – the normal tissue that surrounds the tumour 
significantly contributes to the state of stress inside the tumour
(A) The stress is released by punching a cylindrical void in the tumour. The stress relaxation 
results in deformation along the axis of the void: compressive and tensile stresses contract 
and enlarge the hole, respectively. The changes in the geometry of the biopsy core are also 
an indicator of solid stress. (B) This method is validated on breast tumour (MMTV-M3C). In 
liver (C) and kidney (D) – control tissues with negligible stored stress – the profile of the 
biopsy void and core remain constant. (E) The punching method is capable of in situ 
estimation of solid stress in tissues. The punch can release the solid stress in the axis of 
interest, without disturbing the boundary between tumour and surrounding tissue, as 
schematically shown for the case of brain tumour with intact normal brain and cranium. (F) 
The stress-induced deformation has been measured for brain tumour (glioblastoma, U87) in 
situ (by punching the tumour surrounded by brain, through a cranial window; n=5 mice) and 
ex vivo (by punching surgically excised tumour; n=4 mice). (G, H) The solid stress is 
estimated by an axisymmetric mathematical model that uses the stress-induced deformation 
and the elastic properties of the tumour and brain as inputs. The distribution of σrr, the stress 
Nia et al.
Page 24
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 at the surface of the punched hole in the r direction, is shown at the original state before the 
deformation occurs.
Nia et al.
Page 25
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
