 Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2016, 1967–1972
doi:10.1093/ntr/ntw091
Original investigation
Advance Access publication March 19, 2016
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. All rights reserved.  
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
1967
Original investigation
Is the E-Liquid Industry Regulating Itself? 
A Look at E-Liquid Internet Vendors in the 
United States
Dmitriy Nikitin BA1, David S. Timberlake PhD1,  
Rebecca S. Williams MHS, PhD2,3
1Department of Population Health and Disease Prevention, Program in Public Health, University of California, Irvine, 
CA; 2Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; 3Center for 
Health Promotion and Disease Prevention, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
Corresponding Author: Dmitriy Nikitin, BA, Department of Population Health and Disease Prevention, Program in Public 
Health, University of California, 653 East Peltason Dr., Irvine, CA 92612, USA. Telephone: 949-824-0570; E-mail: dnikitin@uci.edu
Abstract
Introduction: The objective of this study was to assess whether the nascent, but rapidly growing 
e-liquid industry prohibits Internet sales to minors and employs safety measures to prevent acci-
dental poisonings.
Methods: A stratified simple random sample (n = 120) was selected from the target population 
(N = 1107) of US online vendors of e-liquid in July 2015. The vendors were stratified and subse-
quently oversampled by trade association membership and vendor popularity. 
Three minors aged 
16 to 17
, who were supervised by adult research staff, attempted to purchase e-liquid from the 120 
online vendors using debit cards issued in their names. Measures included vendors’ use of age 
verification, warning labels on e-liquid bottles, and child-resistant packaging.
Results: Statistically significant differences were observed by vendor popularity, but not by mem-
bership in a trade association. 
The differences by vendor popularity, however, occurred for meas-
ures that were limited to an age warning and list of ingredients. 
The most striking finding was the 
scant vendors (n = 4) who successfully prevented the sale of e-liquid to the minors. In contrast, 
87
.5% and 53.9% of the bottles contained child-resistant packaging and a health warning label, 
respectively.
Conclusions: Irrespective of trade association membership or vendor popularity, online vendors 
of e-liquids are not taking the proper precautions in preventing sales to minors. 
The FDA’s upcom-
ing deeming rules on e-cigarette products should include explicit requirements for offline and 
online e-liquid vendors, particularly the use of effective age verification, warning labels, and child-
resistant packaging.
Implications: This study demonstrates that, in the absence of any current FDA regulation of 
e-liquid products, self-regulation among vendors is not effective in preventing product acquisi-
tion by minors. Lax oversight of the e-liquid industry may draw consumers to bypass current 
tobacco control restrictions implemented in face-to-face sales settings. As a consequence, there 
may be an increase in online sales to minors. Further regulation of the industry may increase 
the already prevalent use of child-resistant packaging, leading to fewer cases of accidental 
nicotine poisoning.
 1968
Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research, 2016, Vol. 18, No. 10
Introduction
The use of electronic cigarettes has tripled among middle and 
high school students between 2013 and 2014.1 These products are 
increasingly being equipped with refillable tanks of liquid nicotine 
(ie, “e-liquid”), a trend which raises concerns about potential nic-
otine poisoning through ingestion or contact with skin and eyes.2 
The amount of calls made to US poison centers about adverse 
e-cigarette/e-liquid exposures has steadily increased every year, grow-
ing from one call a month in September 2010 to 215 in February 
2014; 51.1% of these exposures were among children under 5.3
In July 1, 2015, the FDA issued an advance notice of pro-
posed rulemaking (ANPRM) in seeking comments, data, research 
results, or other information that may inform regulatory actions 
the FDA might take with respect to nicotine exposure warnings 
and child-resistant packaging for liquid nicotine.4 With respect to 
e-liquid acquisition by adolescents, the federal agency has not acted 
upon their previous 2011 ANPRM of Non-Face-to-Face Sale and 
Distribution of Tobacco Products and Advertising, Promotion, and 
Marketing of Tobacco Products despite strong support submitted 
to the agency by various public health experts and tobacco control 
organizations.5 There is uncertainty about the efficacy of age verifi-
cation over the Internet with some public health figures calling for a 
complete ban of online nicotine sales. Likewise, there is strong sup-
port for the inclusion of warning labels and child-resistant packag-
ing on bottles of liquid nicotine.6
To our knowledge, there is only one publication on the topic 
of e-liquid safety measures. Morris et al.7 surveyed a convenience 
sample of 21 US internet vendors and reviewed information about 
their use of child-resistant bottles and warning labels as reported on 
the vendors’ website. Results showed low utilization of both warn-
ing labels on vendor websites (29% of sample) and child-resistant 
packaging (14% of sample). However, this preliminary study did not 
utilize probability sampling and did not confirm the results via pur-
chase. The current study aims to assess the extent to which online 
e-liquid retailers are complying with the restrictions public health 
and consumer safety advocates have called for in forthcoming fed-
eral regulations. Furthermore, the study aims to quantify the indus-
try’s level of compliance as set out by various self-regulated e-liquid 
trade organizations. The selected e-liquid vendors were evaluated on 
their use of active age verification (AAV) in preventing online sales to 
minors as well as their inclusion of health warnings and child-resist-
ant packaging. The results of this study have the potential to inform 
the FDA and other policymakers about the regulatory environment 
of the e-liquid industry.
Methods
Sampling of Online Vendors
There is no existing sampling frame of US domestic online vendors 
who sell e-liquid. In lieu of conducting a Boolean search of vendors 
on the Web, we compiled a list of vendors from three notable sources: 
(1) JuiceDB.com, a popular website for reviewing e-liquid products 
and vendors, (2) Smoke-Free Alternatives Trade Association (http://
SFATA.org), and (3) American E-liquid Manufacturing Standards 
Association (http://AEMSA.org). SFATA and AEMSA are trade asso-
ciations that claim to be dedicated to providing e-liquid that is sold 
ostensibly to adult consumers. A search of the three sources in July 
2015 revealed 1128 unique vendors in the United States. SFATA esti-
mates that there are 1200 manufacturers of e-liquid in the United 
States,8 an estimate comparable to the number of vendors compiled 
from the three sources. We chose to limit the study’s sampling frame 
to the online vendors whose smallest bottle size was 30 
ml or less 
(N = 1107). The 30ml cutoff was created for two purposes: to main-
tain consistency as all vendors had a bottle either 30 
ml or less, and 
for cost containment. These 1107 domestic vendors were treated 
as the target population from which 120 vendors were randomly 
sampled.
Prior to the sample selection, the target population was stratified 
by membership in a trade association (SFATA/AEMSA) (222 mem-
bers vs. 885 nonmembers). The population was also stratified by a 
ranking of the most popular websites (top 250 [popular] vs. bottom 
857 [less popular]) based on Alexa.com’s estimates of the websites’ 
relative traffic ranking.9 Website ranking is an important considera-
tion for sampling because it has direct implications for sales and 
minors’ potential exposure to e-liquid. After stratifying the popula-
tion, 30 vendors were randomly selected without replacement from 
each of the four strata (Figure 1). The population was stratified on 
the two variables for ensuring representation of the trade association 
members and popular vendors, both of which were oversampled by 
design. The two groups were oversampled for increasing statistical 
power in comparing an equal number of members versus nonmem-
bers (60 vs. 60), and comparing an equal number of popular versus 
unpopular vendors (60 vs. 60). This sampling strategy is referred 
to as equal allocation and used when testing hypotheses among 
strata.10 A formal sample size calculation was not performed due 
to the lack of published data on trade association membership and 
vendor popularity, resulting in an undetermined variance and effect 
size. Thus, we chose a sample size of 120 vendors based on available 
resources.
Vendor Information
There are three categories of e-liquid vendors: direct (n = 74), reseller 
(n = 21), and hybrid (n = 25). A direct vendor manufactures their 
own line of e-liquid and sells it directly online. A hybrid vendor car-
ries their own line of e-liquid as well as stocks products from other 
manufacturers. A reseller vendor does not create their own line of 
e-liquid and instead stocks e-liquid from other online vendors and 
wholesalers. Among the sampled direct and hybrid vendors, the in-
house brand was selected for purchase. Among the sampled reseller 
vendors, a single brand was randomly selected into the sample for 
Figure 1. Diagram illustrating stratified simple random sample (n = 120) of 
domestic online vendors.
 1969
Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research, 2016, Vol. 18, No. 10
purchase. The vendors’ locations were determined based on the 
return address on package shipping labels.
Age Verification
Previous research on youth access to tobacco products over the 
Internet has revealed several strategies that vendors have taken to 
verify a consumer’s age, not all of which are valid.11 Some online 
vendors make the claim that submitting an order legally certifies the 
buyer as an adult. We define an age gate as a prompt on a ven-
dor’s website for a visitor to confirm that they are of legal smoking 
age. Another false claim is that using a debit/credit card at purchase 
ensures that only adults can make the purchase.12 However, the 
minors in our study were able to legally acquire debit cards in their 
name without falsifying their age. A vendor was classified as using 
AAV if it rejected a minor’s order due to the use of third party age 
verification software, request of photo identification, or request of 
an adult signature upon delivery of the order.13
Child-Resistant Packaging
A bottle of e-liquid was defined as being child-resistant if it contains 
a cap that requires a push down-and-turn movement to open, similar 
to that of an aspirin bottle. This mechanism satisfies the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission’s (CPSC) protocol for child-resistant 
packaging.14 Regardless of being child-resistant or not, each bot-
tle had one of two types of openings: (1) a sealed opening covered 
with a plastic needle tip that requires a user to squeeze the bottle to 
extract the liquid nicotine, or (2) an unsealed opening that allowed 
for pouring of liquid nicotine out of the container.
Ingredients and Warning Labels
Bottles of e-liquid were assessed on their inclusion of three factors: 
ingredients listings, age warnings, and health warnings. We defined 
health warnings as messages that reference: (1) Proposition 65, (2) 
any other text that referred to nicotine or e-liquid as being harm-
ful (or potentially harmful) to health, or (3) a disclaimer that the 
product has not been evaluated by the FDA. Proposition 65 states 
that nicotine, among others, is a “chemical known to the state of 
California to cause birth defects or other reproductive harm.”
E-liquid Purchases
Three minors ranging in age from 16 to 17 were recruited from a 
local high school to attempt to purchase the e-liquid products via the 
Internet. When queried on vendor websites, the minors provided cor-
rect names, addresses and Social Security numbers, but not correct 
birthdates; the provided birthdates corresponded to individuals in 
their mid-twenties. The minors made the purchases using debit cards 
that listed their names, but not ages. They were instructed to provide 
a valid photo ID or driver’s license in the case that vendors requested 
such identification upon delivery or via email. Falsified identification 
was not provided to the minors because the objective of the study 
was to determine whether vendors verified age, not whether minors 
could evade existing safeguards.
The e-liquid products were purchased by the minors under one-
on-one adult staff supervision using computers in our laboratory 
from July 2015 through September 2015. Given the wide range of 
available bottle sizes, the minors purchased the smallest bottle from 
any given vendor for reducing cost. This was based on the assump-
tion that child-proof caps do not vary as a function of bottle size. 
A similar assumption was made regarding e-liquid flavors. For the 
sake of consistency, fruit flavored e-liquid were purchased. If a minor 
was unsuccessful in purchasing a product due to age verification, 
then an adult research member purchased the product to complete 
the sample for inspecting child-resistant packaging and warning 
labels.
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of 
California, Irvine deemed that the research protocol did not entail 
the use of human subjects. In lieu of IRB approval, the Irvine Police 
Department, the UC Irvine Police Department, and the Orange 
County District Attorney provided signed letters stating that the 
minors and research staff would be immune to any criminal pros-
ecution arising from study participation. In addition, the minors’ 
parents provided verbal consent and agreed to intercept the shipped 
packages of e-liquid upon home delivery. The unopened packages 
were then sent to our laboratory for examination.
Statistical Analysis
Age-verification methods and child-proof caps/warning labels were 
examined by trade association membership and popularity ranking 
of vendor websites using survey-based statistics (ie, Rao and Scott 
second-order correction F Test).15 Estimates had to be weighted due 
to the oversampling of trade association members and popular ven-
dors. Two sets of sampling weights were used in adjusting estimates 
for age verification and child-proof caps/warning labels, correspond-
ing to vendors and e-liquid brands, respectively. The distinction was 
warranted because the probability of selecting a vendor was not nec-
essarily equal to the probability of selecting a brand. Multiple brands 
that are sold by a single vendor (ie, reseller) do not differ with respect 
to age verification, but do differ with respect to the presence of a 
child-proof cap or warning label.
The sampling weight for the vendor was calculated as the recip-
rocal of the sampling fraction (1/(n/N)) for each of the four strata. 
The probability of selecting a brand within a given stratum was not 
uniform because resellers sell multiple brands, some of which appear 
repeatedly throughout the target population. Thus, the sampling 
weight for a given brand was calculated as the inverse probability of 
the sum of the probabilities of selecting the brand from each vendor, 
including the resellers and manufacturers. The estimates for bottles 
that were not part of the original sample (ie, complementary bottles) 
were unweighted. Analyses were conducted using the software pack-
age STATA v12.1.16
Results
Vendor Information
Youth buyers made purchases from 120 vendors, but received a total 
of 183 bottles of liquid nicotine. The 63 additional bottles included 
sample packs of identical bottles and bottles received free of charge 
for promotional purposes. The primary analysis was restricted to the 
120 bottles that were purchased from the 120 vendors. The aver-
age cost per order was $13.16 with a standard deviation of 5.55; 
two vendors failed to charge the recipient despite fulfilling the order. 
Shipments were received from 34 different US states. The number of 
vendors per state was commensurate with overall population figures, 
with California (24.2% of total shipments), Texas (9.2%), Florida 
(9.2%) housing the largest share of vendors. Notably, the state of 
New York, while being the fourth most populous state, was home to 
only 1 (.83%) e-liquid vendor in our sample. Table 1 describes the 
safety measures used by the 120 vendors and the characteristics of the 
bottles that correspond with the original purchase. The percentages 
 1970
Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research, 2016, Vol. 18, No. 10
listed in Table 1 are not mutually exclusive and do not add to 100%. 
For example, a bottle may include multiple age warnings.
Age Verification
Of the 120 purchase attempts, only 4 were rejected due to the vendors’ 
use of AAV. Three vendors utilized 3rd party age verification software 
(IDology’s “ExpectID Age” and Veratad’s “AgeMatch”) and all three 
rejected the youth purchases using the provided names and addresses. 
A fourth vendor required the minor to upload an image of her ID to 
complete the order, and rejected the order after the buyer uploaded an 
underage ID. One vendor made the claim that the recipient’s photo 
identification would be checked upon delivery; however, the parcel 
was simply left in the youth’s mailbox by the US Postal Service.
The results show that a vendor’s membership in a trade associa-
tion is neither associated with having an age gate on their website 
nor utilizing AAV (third party check, photo identification request, 
check ID at delivery). Fifty-eight of the 60 sampled vendors who 
belonged to a trade organization fulfilled the order to a minor with-
out checking their age. Similar to trade association membership, ven-
dor popularity was not significantly correlated with AAV use.
Child-Resistant Packaging
87.5% of the bottles in our primary analysis (n = 120) had a child-
resistant cap. Among the complementary bottles received (n = 45), 
82.2% were child-resistant. A review of all 183 bottles confirms our 
suggestion that child-proof caps do not vary as a function of bottle 
size with the exception of 3ml bottles (n = 5), none of which carried 
child-resistant caps. Of the analyzed bottles (n = 120), 54.8% had 
a sealed needle-tip that required the user to squeeze the bottle to 
extract the liquid nicotine. The remaining bottles had glass pipette 
tops with an unsealed opening susceptible to spillage.
In addition to free samples of e-liquid, 15 of the orders arrived 
with promotional materials including playing cards, Mike and Ike 
candy, Laffy Taffy candy, Sweet Tarts candy, bracelets, B’loonies 
Plastic Balloons, and a collection of branded stickers.
Ingredients and Warning Labels
Given the small real estate of the bottle, there were few variations of 
warnings found on the packaging. Six vendors included additional 
health warnings in print form. However, the messages did not differ 
between labels found on the bottle or leaflets included with the order. 
The warnings, as seen in Table 1, include general health warnings 
of nicotine consumption, notice that the consumer must be above 
the age of 18/21, and listing of ingredients (nicotine, propylene gly-
col, vegetable glycerin, and flavorings). Both age warnings and list 
of ingredients appeared more frequently among popular versus less 
popular vendors. 86.5% of popular vendors versus 57.6% of the less 
popular vendors listed an age warning. Overall, 90.3% of bottles 
noted that they contained nicotine, but only 53.9% made any men-
tion of a health warning associated with nicotine use.
Discussion
Our study results show a mixed outlook on the e-liquid industry in 
regards to their ability to prevent online sales to minors and reduce 
the risk of accidental exposure to liquid nicotine. While 87.5% of 
T
able 1. Weighted Comparison of 
Youth Safety Measures by 
Trade Association Membership and Vendor Popularity (n = 120)
Safety measure
Overall
Trade association membershipa
Vendor popularitya
Member
Nonmember
F testb
Popular (top 250)c
Less popular
F testb
Sample size
120
60
60
60
60
Age verification
 Age gate
80.8%
85.8%
79.5%
0.7
88.4%
78.5%
1.9
 Active age verificationf
3.3%
3.3%
3.3%
0
3.3%
3.3%
0
Child-proof container
 Child-resistant cap
87.5%
93.8%
85.8%
0.9
92.5%
83.4%
1.3
 Sealed bottle openingd
54.8%
64.4%
52.1%
0.9
48.2%
60.2%
0.7
Bottle labels
 Health warning
  Proposition 65
26.3%
34.1%
24.2%
0.7
25.0%
27.4%
0e
  General health warning
39.1%
35.8%
40.1%
0.1
35.8%
41.9%
0.2
  Not FDA approved
7.1%
2.9%
8.3%
2.7
8.9%
5.7%
0.3
 Age warning
  Must be 18/21+
70.6%
71.9%
70.2%
0e
86.5%
57.6%
11.2**
  Keep out of reach of children
81.8%
67.9%
85.6%
2.7
87.6%
77.1%
1.1
 Ingredients listed
  Nicotine
90.3%
95.4%
89.0%
2.1
90.1%
90.5%
0e
  Flavorings
68.9%
79.3%
66.1%
1.8
82.1%
58.1%
5.3*
  PG/ VG
80.5%
88.6%
78.3%
1.3
90.8%
72.1%
4.0*
  Other ingredients
14.1%
19.6%
12.6%
1.1
7.3%
19.7%
4.6*
PG = propylene glycol; VG = vegetable glycerin.
aReported as percentage.
bRao and Scott second-order correction (F Test)15.
c250 most popular e-liquid websites based on Alexa rankings.
dAll bottles contain either a sealed (needle tip) or unsealed opening.
eValues rounded down to 0.
fFisher’s exact test (unweighted) yielded same results.
*P < .05; **P < .01.
 1971
Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research, 2016, Vol. 18, No. 10
the received bottles of liquid nicotine carried child-resistant caps, 
only four of our sampled 120 vendors rejected orders based on age 
verification. E-liquid trade organizations SFATA and AEMSA both 
make claims on their websites that their members do not sell nicotine 
products to minors. Despite these claims, 96.7% of sampled vendors 
who belonged to either trade association sold e-liquid products to 
minors. The use of 3rd party age checks, IDology’s “ExpectID Age” 
and Veratad’s “AgeMatch,” was effective in blocking the purchases 
made by the minors under study conditions, providing their real 
names and addresses at checkout. In a real world situation, however, 
it is unlikely that a teen would provide age verification information 
that would make it obvious that they were underage; thus it is likely 
that sales rates to minors in the real world are even higher.
The low uptake of third party age checks may be due to cost; 
IDology and Veratad’s solutions operate as a Software as a Service 
(SaaS) model that requires a vendor to pay a fee for each ID verifica-
tion performed. When not required by law, this solution may not be 
considered cost-effective or otherwise worthwhile by vendors. While 
requiring photo identification to confirm the age of a tobacco pur-
chase is the norm for face-to-face sales, this method is not widely 
used among online e-liquid vendors. The discrepancy of use of photo 
ID between brick-and-mortar stores and Internet vendors may be 
due to customer concerns about privacy and higher potential of for-
gery when sent over the Internet. Photo ID checks at delivery may 
reduce these risks but are still dependent on the delivery employee to 
carry out the check. This is evidenced by research on Internet alcohol 
sales to minors, which has shown that age verification delivery ser-
vices offered by UPS and FedEx are quite unreliable.17
The results of this study suggest that minors do not face any 
significant barriers in purchasing liquid nicotine over the Internet. 
The percentage of study participants who were able to successfully 
complete and receive their order was 96.7%. This study did not 
examine the purchase of prefilled cartridges of liquid nicotine or 
electronic cigarette devices. However, previous studies18 have shown 
similar rates among these related industries, with 93.7% of sampled 
e-cigarette vendors failing to reject orders made by minors.
Given the current fragmented set of state-level rules regarding elec-
tronic cigarette use, there is a strong need for a national set of guide-
lines. The FDA’s ANPRM in July of 2015 has requested information 
regarding liquid nicotine products and their inclusion of nicotine expo-
sure warnings and child-resistant packaging. Since the announcement 
of the 2011 ANPRM, the FDA has not enacted any regulations per-
taining to the non-face-to-face sale of tobacco products. On October 
19, 2015, the FDA submitted their final deeming regulations from the 
2014 ANPRM to the White House Office of Management & Budget 
that would require electronic cigarette manufacturers to register their 
facilities with the FDA, impose a minimum age of purchase, and 
require a health warning.19 On January 28, 2016, President Obama 
signed the Child Nicotine Poisoning Prevention Act of 2015, legislation 
that “requires the packaging of liquid nicotine containers for use in 
electronic cigarettes to be subject to existing child poisoning preven-
tion packaging standards.” 20 Our results show that most vendors are 
prepared for requirements to use child-resistant packaging, as 87.5% 
of sampled bottles did include a child-proof cap. The discrepancy 
between the percentage of child-proof caps found in this study as com-
pared to the Morris et al.7 study, 87.5% versus 14%, can be explained 
by the fact that the latter study reviewed information presented at the 
point of sale and did not confirm their results with actual purchases.
It is unclear as to what role the anticipation of upcoming FDA 
rules had on the vendors’ decisions to use child-resistant bottles, if any. 
There still may be a risk of harmful nicotine exposure with bottles not 
equipped with a plastic needle tip. Once opened, bottles with unsealed 
openings allow for oral or skin contact with liquid nicotine. A require-
ment of using child-resistant bottles with a needle-tip sealed opening 
may stymie the growing incidence of nicotine ingestion by children.
This study benefitted from actual purchases made by minors with 
debit cards issued under their own names and products delivered to 
their homes. With physical access to the material, our study team 
was able to confirm the safety characteristics of the e-liquid bottles. 
Furthermore, use of stratified random sampling allowed us to esti-
mate the practices of the larger population of online e-liquid vendors. 
We have chosen to identify our target population using an online 
directory of liquid nicotine vendors nationwide (http://JuiceDB.
com). The directory is maintained by site moderators and allows for 
vendor and product reviews by users. This list was supplemented 
with member lists of the two trade associations, SFATA and AEMSA. 
A majority of the trade association vendors were already included 
in the target population due to their listing on http://JuiceDB.com, 
suggesting that the online directory provides a comprehensive pool 
of vendors from which we could select a nationally representative 
sample. Furthermore, the total number of vendors from which we 
sampled (N = 1128) is close to SFATA’s estimate of 1200.
This study did not examine sellers of e-liquid who operate on social 
networking platforms such as Facebook, Reddit, and vaping-related 
forums. We are not aware of any studies or estimates of the number 
of sellers who operate their business through these channels. Thus, it is 
possible that there exists an even larger number of vendors from which 
minors can access liquid nicotine products without the barrier of AAV. 
This limitation should be considered in light of this study being the first 
to look at the e-liquid industry. The online tobacco retail environment 
is rapidly changing to accommodate changing consumer demands as 
well as regulatory parameters. Further studies should examine other 
available any trends in the e-liquid industry, particularly after the 
implementation of any federal guidelines concerning youth access.
Our study results show a mixed outlook on the e-liquid indus-
try in regards to their ability to prevent sales to minors as well as 
unintended exposure to liquid nicotine. The bottles used to store 
liquid nicotine largely use child-resistant packaging. However, very 
few vendors take the necessary precautions of checking a customer’s 
age during purchase. These results were consistent by trade associa-
tion membership, suggesting that efforts to protect consumer safety 
cannot be implemented voluntarily and require more comprehensive 
regulation and enforcement.
Funding
This work was supported in part by Intramural Council on Research Computing 
and Libraries funds from UCI and in part by grant 5R01CA169189-02 from 
the National Cancer Institute.
Declara 
tion of Interests
None declared.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the following students for assisting with data col-
lection: Jannie Guan, Margarita Savkina, Erica Zhong, Stephanie Sun, Lily 
Huang, and Samantha Cino. We would also like to thank Michael Lubinski, 
Mike Hamel, and Anthony Frisbee for their assistance with the study. DN 
conceptualized and designed the study, drafted the initial manuscript, and 
 1972
Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research, 2016, Vol. 18, No. 10
approved the final manuscript as submitted. DST conceptualized the sampling 
design of the study, drafted the methods portion of the initial manuscript, 
reviewed and revised the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript 
as submitted. RSW designed the data collection instruments, reviewed and 
revised the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted.
References
 
1. Nasr SZ, Sweet SC; Committee ATSHP. Electronic cigarette use in middle 
and high school students triples from 2013 to 2014. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2015;192(3):276–278. doi:10.1164/rccm.201505-0898ED.
 
2. England LJ, Bunnell RE, Pechacek TF, Tong VT, McAfee TA. Nicotine 
and the developing human: a neglected element in the electronic ciga-
rette debate. Am J Prev Med. 2015;49(2):286–293. doi:10.1016/j.
amepre.2015.01.015
 
3. Chatham-Stephens K, Law R, Taylor E, et al. Notes from the field: 
calls topoison centers for exposures to electronic cigarettes—United 
States, September 2010–February 2014. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2014;63(13):292–293
 
4. Kux L. Nicotine Exposure Warnings and Child-Resistant Packaging for 
Liquid Nicotine, Nicotine-Containing E-Liquid(s), and Other Tobacco 
Products. 
2015. 
www.fda.gov/downloads/TobaccoProducts/Labeling/
RulesRegulationsGuidance/UCM453226.pdf. Accessed October 12, 2015.
 
5. Glantz SA. FDA Ignored Information on Internet Sales Submitted in 
Response to 2011 ANPRM in Deeming Rule. 2014. https://tobacco.ucsf.
edu/fda-ignored-information-internet-sales-submitted-response-2011-an-
prm-deeming-rule. Accessed October 12, 2015.
 
6. AAFP News Staff. AAFP Tells FDA to Require Warnings on 
Liquid 
Nicotine. 
2015. 
www.aafp.org/news/health-of-the-
public/20150904nicotinewarning.html. Accessed October 13, 2015.
 
7. Morris DS, Fiala SC. Online electronic cigarette retailers can do more 
to prevent accidental poisonings. Tob Control. 2015;24(4):415–416. 
doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2014-051779.
 
8. About- Smoke Free Alternatives Trade Association. 2015. http://sfata.org/
about-sfata/. Accessed October 13, 2015.
 
9. Alexa-About Us. http://www.alexa.com/about: Alexa Internet Inc 1996-
2016; 2015.
 
10. Levy P, Lemeshow S. Sampling of Populations: Methods and Applications. 
3rd ed. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 1999.
 
11. Williams R, Ribisl K, Jo C. Response to Advance Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking on Non-Face to-Face Sale and Distribution of Tobacco 
Products and Advertising, Promotion, and Marketing of Tobacco 
Products. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; 
2011.
 
12. Vowell C. Credit Cards do not Provide Age Verification for Internet 
Transactions. Memphis, TN: Concord EFS Web Payment Services; 2002.
 
13. E-liquid Manufacturing Standards v2.3. 2015. www.aemsa.org/stand-
ards/. Accessed October 12, 2015.
 
14. MJS Packaging Creates Complete Line of E-Liquid Packaging. 2014. 
www.mjspackaging.com/mjs-packaging-creates-complete-line-of-e- 
liquid-packaging. Accessed October 12, 2015.
 
15. Sribney WM. Two-way contingency tables for survey or clustered data. 
Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints. 1998;8(45):297–322.
 
16. StataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 12.1. College Station, TX: 
StataCorp LP; 2015
 
17. Williams RS, Ribisl KM. Internet alcohol sales to minors. Arch 
Pediatr 
Adolesc 
Med. 
2012;166(9):808–813. 
doi:10.1001/
archpediatrics.2012.265.
 
18. Williams RS, Derrick J, Ribisl KM. Electronic cigarette sales to minors 
via the internet. JAMA Pediatr. 2015;169(3):e1563. doi:10.1001/
jamapediatrics.2015.63.
 
19. Vonder Haar M. FDA Sends OMB Tobacco Regs for Final Review. 2015. 
www.cspnet.com/category-news/tobacco/articles/fda-sends-omb-tobacco-
regs-final-review. Accessed October 28, 2015.
 
20. Vonder Haar M. Obama Signs E-Liquid Packaging Bill. 2016. www.csp-
net.com/category-news/tobacco/articles/obama-signs-e-liquid-packaging-
bill. Accessed January 29, 2016.
