 IFNγ-Dependent Tissue-Immune Homeostasis Is Co-opted in the 
Tumor Microenvironment
Christopher J. Nirschl1,25, Mayte Suárez-Fariñas2,3,4,25, Benjamin Izar5,6,7, Sanjay 
Prakadan5,8,9, Ruth Dannenfelser10,11, Itay Tirosh5, Yong Liu1, Qian Zhu10,11, K. Sanjana P. 
Devi1, Shaina L. Carroll5,8,9, David Chau1, Melika Rezaee12, Tae-Gyun Kim1, Ruiqi Huang3, 
Judilyn Fuentes-Duculan13, George X. Song-Zhao1, Nicholas Gulati13, Michelle A. Lowes13, 
Sandra L. King1, Francisco J. Quintana5,14, Young-suk Lee10,11, James G. Krueger13, 
Kavita Y. Sarin12, Charles H. Yoon15,16, Levi Garraway5,6,7,17,18, Aviv Regev5,18,19, Alex K. 
Shalek5,8,9,20,21, Olga Troyanskaya10,11,22, and Niroshana Anandasabapathy1,23,24,26
1Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA
2Department of Dermatology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, NY, NY 10029, USA
3Department of Genetics and Genomics Sciences Mount Sinai School of Medicine, NY, NY 10029 
USA
4Population Health Science and Policy, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, NY, NY 10029, USA
5Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
6Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA
7Center for Cancer Precision Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA
8Institute for Medical Engineering and Science and Department of Chemistry, MIT, Cambridge, 
MA 02139, USA
9Ragon Institute of MIT, Harvard, and MGH, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
10Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
11Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
12Department of Dermatology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
13Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, Rockefeller University. New York, NY 10065, USA
Correspondence to: Niroshana Anandasabapathy.
25These authors contributed equally
26Lead Contact
Supplemental Information: Supplemental Information includes seven figures, seven tables, and one data file and can be found with this 
article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.016.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: N.A., M.S.-F., O.T., I.T., A.K.S., M.A.L., K.Y.S., C.H.Y. Methodology: N.A., M.S.-F., 
C.J.N., A.R., O.T., Q.Z., I.T., A.K.S., B.I., R.D., S.P. Software: M.S.-F., R.D., S.P., Q.Z., R.H., D.C., M.R., K.S., I.T., Y.-s.L., A.R., 
A.K.S. Investigation: C.J.N., Y.L., M.S.-F., S.L.C., S.L.K., J.F.-D., N.G., B.I., S.P., R.D., D.C., T.-G.K., F.J.Q., K.S.P.D., G.X.S.-Z., 
K.Y.S., N.A. Resources: N.A., F.J.Q., J.G.K., L.G., C.H.Y., M.A.L., A.R. Supervision: N.A., M.S.-F., A.K.S., K.Y.S., O.T., J.G.K. 
Funding Acquisition: N.A., L.G., A.K.S., A.R., J.G.K., M.S.-F., O.T. Writing: N.A., C.J.N., A.K.S., M.S.-F., R.D.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 June 29; 170(1): 127–141.e15. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.016.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 14Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02458, USA
15Department of Surgical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA
16Department of Surgical Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
17Ludwig Center at Harvard, Boston, MA 02215, USA
18Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA
19Department of Biology and Koch Institute, MIT, Boston, MA 02142, USA
20Division of Health Science & Technology, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
21Department of Immunology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
22Simons Center for Data Analysis, Simons Foundation, New York, NY 10010, USA
23Cancer Immunology and Melanoma, Harvard Cancer Center, Dana Farber Cancer Center, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA
24Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Summary
Homeostatic programs balance immune protection and self-tolerance. Such mechanisms likely 
impact autoimmunity and tumor formation, respectively. How homeostasis is maintained and 
impacts tumor surveillance is unknown. Here, we find that different immune mononuclear 
phagocytes share a conserved steady-state program during differentiation and entry into healthy 
tissue. IFNγ is necessary and sufficient to induce this program, revealing a key instructive role. 
Remarkably, homeostatic and IFNγ-dependent programs enrich across primary human tumors, 
including melanoma, and stratify survival. Single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) reveals 
enrichment of homeostatic modules in monocytes and DCs from human metastatic melanoma. 
Suppressor-of-cytokine-2 (SOCS2) protein, a conserved program transcript, is expressed by 
mononuclear phagocytes infiltrating primary melanoma and is induced by IFNγ. SOCS2 limits 
adaptive anti-tumoral immunity and DC-based priming of T cells in vivo, indicating a critical 
regulatory role. These findings link immune homeostasis to key determinants of anti-tumoral 
immunity and escape, revealing co-opting of tissue-specific immune development in the tumor 
microenvironment.
Graphical abstract
Tumors exploit physiological mechanisms that are in place to keep tissue homeostasis in order to 
escape the surveillance of the immune system.
Nirschl et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
The lifetime risk of cancer is linked to the number of stem cell divisions of the 
corresponding healthy tissue, which physiologically maintain its homeostatic turnover 
(Tomasetti and Vogel-stein, 2015). Indeed, the majority of human cancers arise in peripheral 
tissues such as the skin, lung, and colon. Skin cancer prevalence outnumbers all cancers put 
together (Stern, 2010). However, it is unknown if in tissues with rapid self-antigen turnover 
such as skin, homeostatic immune programing for the prevention of auto-immunity may 
impact tumor-immune surveillance. Mechanisms enforcing tissue-specific immunity and 
those that govern tumor-immune escape remain largely undefined.
Peripheral tissues, blood, and central lymphoid organs (e.g., spleen, lymph nodes [LNs]) are 
patrolled by immune phagocytes that differentiate from common bone marrow progenitors. 
These mononuclear phagocytes include dendritic cells (DCs), monocytes, and macrophages. 
DCs specialize at antigen-presentation of self and foreign antigens. Steady-state DCs 
surveying tissue continuously migrate (migDC) to draining LNs. DCs present self-antigens 
released during apoptosis to T cells and direct self-tolerance. However, DCs also initiate 
immunity to foreign antigens when appropriately licensed by danger signals, such as by 
pattern recognition receptors (e.g., Toll-like-receptors [TLR]) (Steinman, 2012). In vivo, it is 
necessary to understand how some DCs maintain tolerance, while others conduct immune 
priming simultaneously. This is particularly critical at tissue barriers (e.g., skin, lung, and 
gut), where pathogen encounter is frequent, but where a high rate of self-antigen exposure 
during UV injury, hair follicle cycling, and epithelial turnover mandates rapid restoration of 
tissue equilibrium.
Skin migDCs maintain tolerance to self-antigens, despite individual populations having 
known specialization when licensed to prime during pathogen encounter (Baratin et al., 
2015; Waithman et al., 2007). Individual and collective populations of migDCs have also 
been observed to dampen ongoing immunity to foreign antigens, even in the presence of 
Nirschl et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TLR adjuvants in vivo (Ananda-sabapathy et al., 2014). Distinct subsets of tissue migDCs 
share greater transcriptome relatedness with each other than they share with functional 
counterparts that reside in central immune organs (e.g., LN cDCs) (Anandasabapathy et al., 
2014; Miller et al., 2012). These findings suggest that a common differentiation program is 
conferred in peripheral tissues, which regulates tissue DC function. It is important to 
understand how shared programming occurs in healthy tissue and impacts barrier 
surveillance to pathogens and detection of malignant self-transformation that occurs during 
early cancer progression.
We previously identified a 227 gene program shared by skin-derived DC subsets in the 
steady state and conserved across humans and mice. This program centers on NFκβ 
signaling and is enriched for many tolerance-related genes such as the receptor programmed 
death ligand 1 (PD-L1), immunosuppressive indo-leamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), and 
CD200 (Anandasabapathy et al., 2014). Mice with a DC-specific deficiency in the NFκβ 
sub-unit Iκκβ fail to accumulate tissue-derived migDCs in the draining LNs and develop 
spontaneous autoimmune lupus-like disease (Baratin et al., 2015). Collectively, these 
findings link NFκβ–dependent differentiation of migratory DCs to protection from 
autoimmunity and tissue homeostasis. These data support a regulatory role for these 
populations and this program in peripheral self-tolerance. It is unknown how this program is 
conferred, how homeostasis is mediated, and whether it can be used to identify key 
determinants of tumor-immune surveillance.
To address these questions, the present study interrogated if and how this program is 
enforced in peripheral tissue. We find that, despite functional specialization, differentiated 
subsets of DCs, monocytes, and macrophages share enrichment of these 227 transcripts at 
multiple stages of progenitor differentiation, tissue entry, and migration. This program is 
conserved in fetal and adult development and across species. IFNγ signaling impacts 
antigen processing and presentation pathways in DCs migrating from skin and conditions a 
majority of these transcripts, revealing a critical instructive role. Remarkably, we find that 
IFNγ-dependent programming and 227 transcripts enrich and correlate across multiple 
human cancers of tissue. 227 modules are expressed in DCs and monocytes isolated from 
human metastatic melanoma and relate to IFNγ-dependent programing on a per-cell and -
population basis. Both programs are strikingly induced in primary cutaneous human 
melanoma as compared to abnormal moles, common moles, or healthy skin and stratify 
metastatic melanoma survival. We use this program to identify a single highly enriched and 
developmentally conserved transcript within the 227 signature, suppressor-of-cytokine-
signaling 2 (SOCS2). SOCS2 is expressed in tissue migratory DCs, but not LN resident DCs 
in mouse, and in human CD11c+ mononuclear phagocytes infiltrating primary melanoma. 
SOCS2 loss enables robust immune-mediated tumor rejection, and SOCS2 has a key in vivo 
regulatory role in DCs. These findings link immune homeostasis in tissue to programing in 
tumor. IFNγ conditions a shared differentiation program among mononuclear phagocytes in 
peripheral tissue, which is coopted during tumor growth and which can be used to identify 
critical molecular determinants supporting adaptive immune resistance.
Nirschl et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Results
Shared Lineage, Species, and Developmental Conservation of a Homeostatic 
Differentiation Program across Mononuclear Phagocytes in Tissue
First, to assess if species-conserved transcripts favoring tissue homeostasis are shared by 
other tissue mononuclear phagocytes, as might be expected from micro-environmental 
conditioning, we compared expression analysis of the 227 gene homeostatic signature in 
different lineages of human mononuclear phagocytes in skin and blood (Figures 1A and 
S1A). We observed that human skin-resident DCs and monocyte-derived-macrophages 
(GEO: GSE35459 [Haniffa et al., 2012; McGovern et al., 2014]) share induction of 227 core 
signature genes when compared to blood counterparts, indicating conservation across 
monocyte and DC lineages in peripheral tissue (Figure 1A). To determine if such induction 
is specific for tissue entry, we simultaneously examined 227-signature expression at multiple 
developmental transitions in parallel. Second, we tested signature induction during 
mononuclear phagocyte egress from the skin to the LN by comparing expression of 
signature genes in DCs and monocytes directly isolated from skin to those that migrated 
from skin to draining LN (GEO: GSE49358) (Tamoutounour et al., 2013) (Figure 1B). 
Third, we included a comparison of the same signatures from LN-resident classical DCs 
(cDCs) derived from blood-born precursors against those migDC subsets in LN that have 
migrated from skin (and from which the original signature was defined [GEO: GSE53588]) 
(Anandasabapathy et al., 2014) (Figure 1C). Fourth, we compared blood-derived DC 
progenitor subsets (pre-DC) to differentiated classical cDC counterparts in spleen—a central 
lymphoid tissue (GEO: GSE60782) (Schlitzer et al., 2015) (Figure 1D). Fifth, we tested 
monocyte and macrophage progenitors, and their differentiated subsets isolated from adult 
blood or fetal liver, against those isolated directly from embryonic fetal skin (GEO: 
GSE66970) (Hoeffel et al., 2015) (Figure 1E). A statistically significant change in the major 
portion of signature genes (76%–93%) was observed at each defined transition (Figures 1A–
1E, gated groups [red versus blue]) in either progenitor differentiation or tissue entry 
(represented as triangles, Figures 1F and S1A–S1C and Tables S1A and S1B). Thus, 227 
homeostatic signature genes are species-conserved (mouse and human), lineage-conserved 
across individual subsets of mononuclear phagocytes (DC, monocytes, macrophages), and 
developmentally conserved (sharing fetal and adult differentiation in tissue). Conserved 
signatures enrich upon differentiation in central lymphoid or peripheral tissue and upon 
migration into or from peripheral tissue.
IFNγ Is a Sufficient Instructive Cue for Homeostatic Programming in Human Mononuclear 
Phagocytes and Tissue
To identify conditioning cues for this program, we conducted over-representation analysis 
and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (Table S2A and data not shown). The 
developmental signature we identified overlaps with genes related to early TLR activation by 
LPS-triggered NFκB activation (Dalod et al., 2014). We also noted high correlation to 
hallmark programs of TNFα signaling through NFkB, IL-2Stat5, and with IFNγ hallmark 
genes (MSigDB's hallmark collection). These programs share many points of convergence. 
LPS triggers transient early IFNγ release (Frucht et al., 2001), LPS and IFNγ synergistically 
act via Stat1, and TNF and IFNγ signaling share common targets (Schroder et al., 2004). 
Nirschl et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Prior work revealed that MyD88−/− X Trif−/− mice, germ-free mice, and 
TNFSFR1−/−TNFSFR2−/− mice have no defect in DC migration, as a measure of 
differentiation (Baratin et al., 2015) (Wilson et al., 2008). These data suggest that TNFα, 
IL-1, and LPS may be compensated by other cues. Therefore, we extended our analyses to a 
collection comprised of over 200 gene sets specifically related to human skin populations, 
human immune cells, and skin diseases (Table S2A).
Using this collection, we observed that 227 signature genes statistically associate with 
transcripts induced in monocyte-derived macrophages derived from human patient 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells 24 hr after culture with either low dose IFNγ (20 
ng/mL, adjusted p = 5.67×10−21) or with IFNγ + LPS (adjusted p = 9.67 × 10−25). 
Importantly, this signature was not associated with human monocyte-derived macrophages 
cultured with media alone or with other cytokine treatments at 24 hr, such as TNFα, LPS, 
IL-4, and IL-17 (Figure 2A and Tables S2A and S2B, GEO: GSE18686 [Fuentes-Duculan et 
al., 2010]). Induction of 227 genes was also identified in whole-skin biopsies taken from 10 
healthy or 10 psoriatic individuals 24 hr after IFNγ was injected into their skin, when 
compared against paired placebo or control biopsies from the same individual (adjusted p = 
2.16 × 10−15) (Figure 2B and Table S3A). These data indicate IFNγ is sufficient to condition 
a large fraction (68%– 75%) of 227 gene signatures in cultured human mononuclear 
phagocytes or when injected directly into the skin of human subjects.
We then examined relatedness of transcripts enriched during differentiation to those 
following IFNγ induction by cross-comparison of these seven datasets (Figure 2C). We 
performed analysis both within the 227 gene signature set and across all available transcripts 
for comparison across platforms. We noted higher Pearson correlation (r) within the 227 
signature genes (Figure 2C left versus right). Higher correlation was seen between 
transcripts changed (log2FCH) during skin migration (sets A, B, and C), skin entry (sets A 
and E), and progenitor differentiation (sets D and E). As expected, sets including treatment 
with IFNγ in vitro and in vivo were correlated within the 227 signatures (r = 0.38) and 
across all transcripts (r = 0.43). Intriguingly, we also observed that within the 227 program, 
genes differentially expressed between human skin and blood mononuclear phagocytes 
correlated with those induced in IFNγ-treated human mononuclear phagocytes (sets A and 
F, r = 0.49, Figure 2C). To further probe this association, we derived an IFNγ transcrip-tome 
signature. 1,217 IFNγ-dependent up and 1,210 IFNγ downregulated transcripts were 
identified by comparing human mononuclear phagocytes treated with IFNγ and IFNγ plus 
LPS against all non-IFNγ treatments (untreated controls, TNF-α, IL-4, LPS, and IL-17, 
GEO: GSE18686). As positive and negative control groups for validation, we applied these 
IFNγ-induced signatures (or an equal number of random probes) to the dataset from which 
it was derived (GEO: GSE18686, Figures S2A and S2B). For individual samples, the overall 
expression of each 227- or IFNγ-specific up and downregulated signature was summarized 
using Z scores and compared in parallel. We noted a marked positive and negative 
enrichment in IFNγ-dependent (IFNγ-signature) up (orange bars) and downregulated 
transcripts (purple bars), respectively, while comparing individual subsets of human skin 
mononuclear phagocytes against those in blood (Figure 2D). This trend was visible across 
all developmental transitions analyzed and when applied to IFNγ-injected patient skin 
Nirschl et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specimens (Figures S1C and S2C). These data suggest that IFNγ-induced transcripts and 
those induced during mononuclear phagocyte differentiation are largely shared.
IFNγR1 Signaling Is Necessary for Homeostatic Differentiation of migDC
To test if IFNγ is not only sufficient but also necessary to condition DC, we compared the 
transcriptome of migDC isolated from skin draining LNs of IFNγR1−/−, wild-type (WT), 
and IL27Rα−/− mice. IL-27Rα mice were included as a control for IFNγ receptor 
specificity. IL27Rα signals through Stat3 and Stat1 and has a known role in suppressing DC 
activity and autoimmune inflammation (Mascanfroni et al., 2013). Little difference was 
appreciated between the transcriptome of steady-state migDC isolated from IL27Rα−/− and 
C57BL/6 WT mice, suggesting little basal signaling through IL-27Rα. In contrast, migDC 
from IFNγR1−/− mice differed from WT migDC in 277 differentially expressed transcripts 
(S2D, Table S3B, FDR < .2, FC > 1.5, n = 3 individual mice). These included transcripts 
known to condition DC development such as Flt3, RelB, and Stat5b (Figure S2D), to relate 
to antigen processing and MHCI loading (e.g., TAPBP, TAP1), to regulate proteasome 
activity, and to associate with autoimmunity and inflammation (PSMB8, PSMB3) (Tables 
S3C and S3D). By ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA), significant pathways identified 
included death receptor signaling, DC-NK cross talk, interferon signaling, apoptosis, antigen 
processing, and GM-CSF signaling (Figure S2E), and top networks included antigen 
presentation (p < .01, Figures S2E and S2F). We then tested if IFNGR1−/− migDC were 
deficient in the 227 differentiation or IFNγ-dependent programs. To do this, we used GSEA 
to test if a given signature tends to cluster at the top of the most (up or down) regulated 
genes (Table S3E). 227 and IFNγ signatures were among the most significant 
downregulated genes in IFNGR1−/− versus WT comparisons. We also tested loss of IFNγ 
and 227 signatures in IFNGR1−/− migDC by using gene set variation analysis (GSVA). We 
observed concordant loss of 227 (Figure 2E) and IFNγ-dependent upregulated signatures 
(Figure 2F GSVA, IFNγR1−/− versus WT, 227 up FDR adjusted p value < .01; IFNγR1−/− 
versus WT, IFNγ up, FDR adjusted p value = 0.09), leading to an overall significant 
difference in total IFNγ and 227 signatures (GSVA, IFNγR1−/− versus WT: total IFNγ, 
FDR adjusted p value < .05; IFNγR1−/− versus WT: total 227 FDR adjusted p value < .01, 
Table S3F). Correlated GSVA scores were observed across samples in the upregulated 
portion of both signatures (e.g., r = 0.91, CI = [0.63-0.98]), but not the downregulated 
transcripts (r = 0.74, CI = [0.15-0.94]). Collectively, these data indicate that IFNγ is both 
necessary and sufficient to induce 227 upregulated signature transcripts.
IFNγ-Dependent and 227 Homeostatic Signatures Enrich and Correlate across Multiple 
Human Primary Cancers and Stratify Metastatic Melanoma Survival
To test the relevance of these findings in clinical disease sets, we conducted a search-based 
exploration of expression compendia analysis (SEEK) of human datasets across the Gene 
Expression Omnibus and Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (Zhu et al., 2015) (Figure 3A). The 
227 signature had markedly higher co-expression scores (i.e., dataset weight) across the 
SEEK compendia as compared to random queries of matched size, with such scores highly 
significant (at p ≤ 0.001) in over 87% of the datasets. Surprisingly, when the top 200 sets 
were examined, a large number of top sets were associated with cancer (57/200 top datasets, 
Nirschl et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 p = 7.99e-13, Figure 3A and Table S4), in addition to expected sets of DCs and mononuclear 
phagocytes (8/200 top datasets, p = 4.37e-3, Table S5).
In cancer, IFNγ drives immunosuppressive IDO and PD-L1 expression (Harden et al., 2011; 
Taube et al., 2015), two transcripts within the 227 signature. To further interrogate if IFNγ 
and 227 signatures were enriched in primary human cancers and correlate, we compared the 
top 150 IFNγ transcripts (sorted by false discovery rate), the top 200 homeostatic signatures, 
or 200 random probes and tested expression across a range of cancers. Both IFNγ signatures 
and homeostatic programming genes were observed to enrich across a range of primary 
human tumors almost exclusively of peripheral tissues, including melanoma skin cancer 
(Figures 3B and S3A). Within these primary specimens, a strong correlation was noted 
between those tumors bearing the 227 signatures and IFNγ signature expression (Pearson 
correlation:0.5-1; Figure 3B bar). In contrast, primary tumor samples with high or low 
expression of IFNγ, or of 227 signatures, did not overtly relate to total somatic gene level 
mutations or copy number variance (Figures S3B– S3G). These data suggest that tissue 
programing is closely associated to IFNγ in the tumor microenvironment. Also, in patients 
with metastatic melanoma, expression of high, medium, or low levels of either the 227- or 
the IFNγ-induced signatures is associated with high, medium, and low survival (Figures 3C 
and 3D). A low somatic mutation rate portends poor long-term survival, whereas those with 
a medium or high somatic mutation rate portend high and intermediate long-term survival, 
respectively, using the same data (Figure 3E). Samples stratified as having high, medium, or 
low 150 IFNγ signatures largely co-correlated with those having high, medium, or low 227 
signatures but were distinct from those bearing a high, medium, or low somatic mutation 
rate (total non-silent missense and nonsense mutations [Figures 3F and S3B–S3G]). These 
findings indicate that in patients with metastatic melanoma, increased expression of IFNγ-
related inflammation and mononuclear phagocyte immune signatures is associated with 
improved long-term clinical outcomes.
Single-Cell Transcriptome Profiling of Human Melanoma Metastases Suggests Enrichment 
of the Homeostatic Differentiation Signature in DCs
To further investigate the relationship between the IFNγ- and 227-gene signatures and to test 
enrichment in tumor-associated mononuclear phagocytes, we performed single-cell 
transcriptome analysis of 333 individual DCs and monocytes sorted from a single LN 
melanoma metastasis (Table S6, comparison of this study to prior studies by Tirosh et al., 
2016; Patel et al., 2014). To isolate these cells, we used an enrichment strategy for lineage 
negative (lineage: CD3/CD20/CD56/ CD66b) CD45+CD11c+HLA+ cells, distinguishing 
CD14+ cells as enriched for monocytes from BDCA1+ and BDCA3+ expressing populations 
by flow cytometry. Transcriptional analysis of BDCA3+ enriched cells revealed two distinct 
subpopulations (Figures 4A and S4A): one closely related to BDCA3+ classical, myeloid 
DCs, and the other to published reports of plasmacytoid DCs (PDCs) that express high levels 
of CD123 transcripts (Figure S4B and Table S7A). We compared sequences from these 
BDCA1 cDC, BDCA3+ cDC, BDCA3+ CD123+ cells, and monocytes to those previously 
described across other cell types (cancer associated fibroblasts [CAFS]; melanoma cells, T, 
B, and natural killer (NK) cells; endothelial cells; and macrophages) (Tirosh et al., 2016). A 
subset of genes from both of the 227 up and downregulated modules (Figure 4B) was 
Nirschl et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regulated among mononuclear phagocytes. We also observed that the 227 genes normally 
downregulated in tissue DCs (227 down) were enriched in tumor-resident DCs. This list of 
genes includes transcripts related to DC activation and cross-presentation of dying cells by 
DCs, which include Clec9A, Batf3, and WAS, as well as cellular processes such as 
autophagy (e.g., RAB32).
To look for evidence suggesting that IFNγ could enforce the 227-gene program in the tumor 
microenvironment, we next tested if IFNγ- and 227-gene signatures correlated with each 
other (Spearman correlation). We found that, within an individual cell in a given population, 
a single cell's 227 and IFNγ signatures were significantly positively correlated (r > 0.3 and 
0.44; up and down respectively; p value < 0.001, paired t test; Figures 4C and S4C; 
calculation described in STAR Methods). To test the correlation of the 227 and IFNγ 
signatures between populations, we generated 100 in silico bulk signatures from 40 random 
subsets of cells from each population and calculated the correlation between the 227 and 
IFNγ signatures (Figure 4D and S4D). This analysis revealed that intra-population 
correlation was always higher than inter-population correlation for every population in both 
the up and down components of each signature (p value < 0.003 and 0.00005;up and down 
respectively; Welch's t test, Tables S7B–S7E).
IFNγ-Programming and Tissue Mononuclear Phagocyte Signatures, Including SOCS2, Are 
Associated with Primary Cutaneous Melanoma
One pathway by which melanoma skin cancer is thought to arise is from the increased 
malignant transformation potential of nevi or moles (Elder, 2016) and from UV injury of 
healthy skin. To compare levels of 227- and IFNγ-signature induction in cancer against 
normal skin and nevi, we tested the relative level of IFNγ signatures and 227 homeostatic 
transcripts present in microarray analysis of normal human skin, common nevi (low 
malignant potential), dysplastic nevi (high malignant potential), and primary cutaneous 
melanomas taken by diagnostic patient biopsy. We observed a graded increased enrichment 
in both the IFNγ- and 227-gene signatures (Z score), with marked enrichment in primary 
cutaneous melanoma (Figures 5A and S5A). Positive enrichment of both 227- and IFNγ-
signature up and downregulated transcripts was observed in melanoma (Figures 5A, 5B, and 
S5A) and occurred irrespective of directionality (Figures S5B and S5C). These data indicate 
that IFNγ and 227 signatures closely associate with human primary cutaneous melanoma.
We reasoned that this program might help us identify key determinants of tumor-immune 
surveillance. Developmental genes likely to encode critical regulators of the adaptive 
immune response to cancer would be (1) highly expressed during mononuclear phagocyte 
differentiation in tissues, (2) induced by IFNγ in human skin and in monocytes, and (3) 
present in melanoma when compared to normal skin. Within the 227 genes, we identified 37 
transcripts that intersect those present across all 5 developmental sets (n = 97) that are 
induced during IFNγ conditioning in vitro (n = 154) and in vivo in human subjects (n = 131) 
(Figure 5C, left). Half of all 227 transcripts (n = 113) were enriched in primary cutaneous 
melanoma relative to normal skin (FDR < 0.05). Among the 20 transcripts converging in 
development, induced by IFNγ in vitro and in vivo, and enriched in primary melanoma 
(Figure 5C, right), SOCS2 was notable as one of the most highly differentially expressed 
Nirschl et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transcripts (> 30-fold enriched) across tissue DCs in both human and mouse species when 
compared to LN resident or blood counterparts (Anandasabapathy et al., 2014).
SOCS2 is a member of the SOCS family of cytokine-induced Jak-Stat regulators and is 
uniquely able to degrade all other family members (Greenhalgh et al., 2005; Rico-Bautista et 
al., 2006). SOCS2 transcripts were enriched in all developmental transitions into or from 
tissue (Figure 5D), and SOCS2 protein is expressed in skin-derived migDC, but not in LN-
resident CD8a cDC (Figure 5E). In IFNγR1−/− as compared against IFNγR1+/+ migDC, 
SOCS2 transcripts were ∼4 times lower expressed (FC = 3.92, p = 0.0062, FDR = 0.28, 
Table S3D), suggesting possible IFNγ dependence under steady-state conditioning. We also 
noted that SOCS2 protein was expressed after IFNγ conditioning of Flt3L-dependent 
classical DC, derived by bone marrow culture (Figure 5F).
To test if SOCS2 is expressed in mononuclear phagocytes in the tumor microenvironment, 
we co-stained SOCS2 and CD11c in frozen sections from common nevi, dysplastic nevi, and 
primary cutaneous melanoma of the same skin biopsy specimens we previously analyzed by 
microarray (n = 5–7 patients specimens per condition). Strikingly we observed an increasing 
infiltrate of CD11c+ cells of a mononuclear phagocytic morphology bearing numerous 
dendrites, located within involved regions of dysplastic nevi and primary cutaneous 
melanoma specimens, which co-stained for SOCS2 (Figure 5G). SOCS2 expression was 
detected in cells bearing a dendritic morphology across multiple primary cutaneous 
melanoma patient specimens (Data S1). Enrichment of SOCS2 transcripts also correlated 
with basal cell skin cancer subtypes ranked by aggressiveness (Figure S5D). These data 
indicate that SOCS2 is induced by IFNγ and is present on mononuclear phagocytes 
infiltrating the tumor microenvironment of early primary human cutaneous melanoma as 
part of a tissue signature induced during early human melanoma formation.
SOCS2 Inhibits Tumor-Immune Rejection
To investigate if SOCS2 contributes to peripheral immune surveillance to cancer, we 
compared intradermal tumor growth in SOCS2−/− and control mice. SOCS2−/− mice had no 
overt defects in immune cell numbers consistent with prior reports (Figures S6A–S6D). 
EL4-OVA thymoma is an immunogenic model of cancer growth in which antigen-specific 
immunity can be assayed. SOCS2−/−, but not SOCS2+/+, mice had a 70%–90% reduction in 
intradermal EL4-OVA growth, with regression starting around day 8–12. We noted higher 
levels of IFNγ production by antigen-specific CD8 T cells isolated from the LNs and spleen 
of SOCS2−/− animals upon peptide re-challenge, suggesting that immune-mediated 
mechanisms support tumor rejection (Figure 6A). Testing B16-OVA melanoma, we also 
observed a roughly 40% reduction of intradermal tumor growth in SOCS2−/− animals 
(Figure S6E). To test DC-specific acute SOCS2 loss, we used mixed-bone-marrow 
chimerization and diphtheria toxin ablation. Mice with a transient restriction to SOCS2−/− 
ZBTB46-dependent DC at the time of tumor implantation (Figure 6B and 6C) showed a 
significant reduction in B16-OVA melanoma growth. Higher CD8/Treg ratios were observed 
in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), suggesting that tumor rejection was immune 
mediated (Figure 6C). Upon further therapeutic anti-tumor priming by vaccinia-OVA 
scarification after B16-OVA implantation, mice with uncompensated loss of SOCS2 in 
Nirschl et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ZBTB46-dependent DC demonstrated smaller viral lesion diameter and also demonstrated 
higher IFNγ production when polyclonal CD8+ T cells were isolated directly from TILs and 
recalled with OVA-specific peptides (Figure 6D). Likely due to the efficiency by which 
vaccinia-OVA immunization is protective, no significant further improvement in tumor 
protection was noted overall. Thus, SOCS2, as part of a highly enriched core homeostatic 
signature, suppresses peripheral tumor immune surveillance by DCs.
SOCS2 Dampens In Vivo Adaptive Immune Priming by DC-Autonomous Mechanisms
To further interrogate DC-specific SOCS2 activity during T cell priming, we tested SOCS2 
activity using a DC-dependent protein-immunization model. Anti-CD205 antibodies deliver 
the HIV gagp24 antigen to the C-type lectin CD205 on the surface of DCs (αCD205-
gagp24), allowing efficient endosomal targeting and antigen presentation. Protein 
immunization was administered with a TLR adjuvant to direct DCs to priming (Bonifaz et 
al., 2004). In this model, immune priming directly depends on classical DC, whereas migDC 
have known suppressive activity (Anandasabapathy et al., 2014). SOCS2−/− mice had higher 
ex vivo antigen-specific CD4 effector responses to immunization as measured by CD4 p24-
specific IFNγ production (Figures 7A– 7C). These data indicate that SOCS2 limits immune 
priming of T effectors during DC-based immunization. We observed expanded immunity 
without a loss of CD4+ T regulatory cell (Treg) numbers in the spleen or dLN (Figures S7A 
and S7B). In addition to constitutive loss during DC-dependent priming, we tested acute 
uncompensated loss of SOCS2 in the DC compartment at the time of immune priming by 
mixed bone marrow chimerization. In the presence (but not absence) of diphtheria toxin 
(DT), restricted SOCS2 loss to DCs just prior to prime and boost recapitulated the 
phenotype of global SOCS2 loss and expanded T effector activity (Figures 7D and 7E) and 
proliferation (Figure S7C). This suggests that intrinsic SOCS2 activity in DCs is sufficient to 
mediate immune dampening of T cells. Higher polyfunctional T cell activity was also 
observed (Figure 7F). T cell intrinsic SOCS2 activity did not contribute to dampening 
adaptive T cell immunity, as adoptive transfer of SOCS2−/− or WT T cells to Rag2−/− 
recipients did not impact priming (Figures 7G and S7D). Taken together, these data reveal 
that SOCS2 activity in DC is sufficient to significantly limit adaptive T cell immunity in 
vivo. To further confirm that SOCS2 activity in DC-based adaptive immune priming was not 
model specific, we also tested SOCS2 activity during contact sensitization (delayed type 
hypersensitivity response), which, unlike DC-targeted protein immunization, depends on 
CCR7+ skin migDC to transport antigens (Ohl et al., 2004). CCR7-restricted loss of SOCS2 
led to significantly higher contact sensitization as measured by ear swelling (Figure 7H). 
Thus, SOCS2, a highly enriched species-conserved factor specified during homeostatic 
programming, directs adaptive immune tolerance during DC-based priming.
Discussion
Immune homeostasis requires rapid initiation and control of an immune response. We find 
that all tissue mononuclear phagocytes share core regulatory genes associated with tissue 
homeostasis and differentiation, across species, and across development. Such a program 
may provide an evolutionary conserved mechanism to balance protection to pathogen 
challenge with immune regulation. Induction of a conserved differentiation gradient across 
Nirschl et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 blood, tissue, and lymphoid organs may help to spatiotemporally segregate activity of DCs 
in compartments (e.g., LN derived and skin migratory) and contribute to coordinated 
priming and tolerance during an ongoing immune response in vivo. As an example, an 
increase in signature genes like Fas might promote apoptosis, which prevents autoimmunity 
by limiting available antigen to T cells (Kushwah and Hu, 2010). Defects in DC apoptosis 
are linked to autoimmune disease (Chen et al., 2006). The uptake and antigen transfer of 
apoptotic cell fragments by rapidly dying migratory cells has been suggested to induce 
peripheral T cell tolerance (Inaba et al., 1998).
We find IFNγ to be sufficient to induce 227 transcripts and observe an uncompensated loss 
of IFNγ signatures normally up-regulated during differentiation in IFNγR1−/− migDC. 
These data reveal that IFNγ is an instructive cue in steady-state mononuclear phagocyte 
differentiation. In the absence of IFNGR1, migDCs have changes in death receptor 
signaling, apoptotic pathways, and antigen processing (FigS2E). Interrogating these 
processes in the presence and absence of IFNGR1 signaling in vivo is needed. During early 
skin cancer formation, the immune system must distinguish abnormally transformed pre-
cancerous cells from the turnover of healthy cells in tissue. Lifetime risk of cancer in a 
particular tissue is linked to the number of divisions of normal self-renewing cells that 
maintain its homeostatic turnover (Tomasetti and Vogelstein, 2015). This might be extended 
to consider the impact of homeostatic turnover on immune programming and development. 
A transcriptional program coupling tissue-immune surveillance to regulation by apoptotic 
death may be appropriate in healthy tissue but could leave a blind spot to tumors of 
peripheral tissues with a high mitotic rate. Therefore, relating these signatures to the 
proliferation of surrounding cells and the uptake of dying cells would be an important future 
direction.
IFNγ-signature scores change during multiple developmental transitions. These include 
tissue entry and progenitor differentiation, suggesting a pervasive role (FigS2C). Further 
study will test if and how IFNγ functions as a local conditioning cue. As an alternative to 
tissue-based conditioning, mononuclear phagocytes could be pre-emptively differentiated by 
IFNγ during bone marrow development, which is differentially halted or enforced in a 
tissue-specific manner. In line with this, during acute toxoplasma infection, bone marrow 
NK-based production of IFNγ conditions monocytes toward tolerogenic function through 
CD200 (Askenase et al., 2015), a hallmark gene present within the 227 signature. Because 
we detect an uncompensated loss of IFNγ up signatures in IFNGR1−/− mice, the role of 
STAT1 and IRF1 tonic transcriptional regulation will be considered independently from 
other cues, which may independently regulate the downregulated module. Indeed, while 
genes related to DC cross-presentation, licensing by death receptors, and activation (e.g., 
BATF3, XCR1, CLEC9A, WAS, and CD36) are downregulated during homeostatic 
differentiation in tissue, we find that 227 and IFNγ modules that are downregulated in DCs 
in tissue are increased instead in primary melanoma, as compared to skin and nevi. This 
suggests that there is potential for an uncoupled regulation of the up and down modules, 
which could be exploited for therapeutic benefit. Also, although we did not identify a 
correlation between IFNγ signature induction and non-silent gene mutations in metastatic 
melanoma, key antigenic mutations and epitopes, rather than the overall mutational burden, 
Nirschl et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 might be more relevant to directing the level of T-cell-specific immunity, as was suggested in 
the response to immune checkpoint blockade (Snyder et al., 2014), and will be tested.
When comparing healthy tissue to primary cancer, levels of IFNγ and 227-gene signature 
modules are strikingly higher in primary cutaneous melanoma than in skin or nevi. IFNγ-
dependent and 227-gene signatures closely co-correlate to each other and positively stratify 
melanoma survival, likely as indicative of an anti-tumoral immune response. Therefore, 
these signatures may have utility as biomarkers. Future studies testing programmatic change 
during tissue development and acute versus chronic inflammation in the tumor setting will 
likely reveal a dynamic modulation of myeloid differentiation and activity. Such immune 
modulation in DCs may confer greater CD40 and IL-12 dependence, altered DC-NK cross 
talk (such as by IL15R), or mediate differences in early and late activity such as by delayed 
induction of immunosuppressive IDO (Harden et al., 2011). Homeostasis encompasses not 
only immunosuppressive, tolerogenic molecules CD200, IDO, PDL1, and SOCS2, but also 
those that are immunostimulatory (CD40). CD40 regulates DC activation, cytokine 
production, and non-canonical NF-κB signaling (Ma and Clark, 2009). Hence, further work 
is needed to understand the overall balanced regulation of mononuclear phagocyte activity 
by this program and the functional outcomes from such a balance, for example, testing 
antigen presentation function in the setting of tumor. IFNγ-dependent DC differentiation 
may tune type I IFN signaling, and IFNGR1−/− migDCs were observed to have differences 
in IFN signaling transcripts (Figure S2E).
While adaptive immune editing and anti-tumoral immunity are IFNγ dependent (Dunn et al., 
2006) (Kaplan et al., 1998), IFNγ is not singularly beneficial in clinical use, which may 
speak to cell-type-specific differences. In melanoma patients, despite the predicted success 
of IFNγ, and in contrast to Type 1 IFNs (IFNα/β), IFNγ treatment was associated with T 
cell suppression and worsened clinical outcomes (Mellor and Munn, 2008; Zaidi and 
Merlino, 2011). Production of IFNγ by T and NK cells infiltrating tumors is necessary for 
cytotoxic activity but may provide micro-environmental conditioning that recapitulates 
homeostatic differentiation in the myeloid compartment, promoting self-tolerance. In line 
with this, T cell production of IFNγ induces local PD-L1 and IDO expression in tumors.
IFNγ-dependent and 227-gene programming co-enrich not only in melanoma, but also 
across multiple human cancers. These findings suggest that IFNγ instructs anti-tumor 
immunity by recall of this differentiation program broadly. Developmental co-opting in the 
tumor microenvironment might direct adaptive immune resistance by inducing key 
immunosuppressive transcripts that are permissive to tumor-immune evasion. Hence, loss of 
SOCS2, a species-conserved transcript highly expressed by tissue migratory DC that was 
recently linked to suppression of autoimmunity (Rothhammer et al., 2016; Yeste et al., 
2016), enables robust tumor-immune rejection. SOCS2 loss liberates anti-tumoral immunity 
by expanding DC-based T cell priming and antigen-specific adaptive immunity. These data 
link adaptive immune resistance to immune development in tissues and suggest that failed 
immune rejection of tumors may occur as a consequence of highly conserved programmatic 
mechanisms preserving tissue immune homeostasis.
Nirschl et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Contact For Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Niroshana Anandasabapathy 
(nanandasabapathy@partners.org).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Mice
6-8 week old female mice were bred and/or housed in a specific pathogen free facility at 
Harvard University. For biochemistry analyses alone, both female and male mice were 
chosen. All experiments involving laboratory animals were performed under protocols 
approved by the Harvard Medical Area Standing Committee on Animals (Boston, MA) and 
the Harvard University Animal Care and Use Committee approved all protocols. C57BL/6N 
mice (WT), CD45.1+, and CCR7−/− mice were purchased from Taconic or Jackson Labs to 
pair to the genotype of the experimental strain in use. Zbtb46-DTR mice were originally 
provided by Michel Nussenzweig and bred for an additional 6 generations or more within 
our facility. SOCS2−/− mice were originally created on a C57/Bl6 background and 
generously provided by Drs. Doug Hilton and Warren Alexander. All mice were used at 6-10 
weeks of age and were age and gender matched for each experiment.
T cell Reconstitution
For T cell reconstitution experiments, CD3+ T cells were isolated by magnetic bead 
depletion using a biotinylated cocktail of antibodies against CD11b, Ter119, B220, Gr1, 
DX5, and IAIE, followed by negative selection with anti-biotin microbeads (Miltenyi). 
Rag2−/− mice received 1.5-2×106 WT or SOCS2−/− T cells, and were allowed to reconstitute 
for 12 weeks prior to use.
Mixed Bone Marrow Chimeras
For BM chimeras, 8-week-old recipients were irradiated (500 cGy plus 550 cGy with 3h rest 
between irradiation sessions) prior to intravenous reconstitution with 1.5×106 WTor 
SOCS2−/− BM cells mixed with 1.5×106 ZBTB46-DTR or CCR7−/− BM cells by 
intravenous injection. Mice were maintained after radiation on antibiotic supplemented 
water (Sulfatrim) for 12 weeks prior to use.
Murine Tumor Implantation
B16-OVA were obtained from the laboratory of Arlene Sharpe and EL4-OVA cells were 
obtained from the laboratory of Charles Drake. 2×105 cells were implanted intradermally in 
C57BL/6J or SOCS2−/− host mice (Day 0), and tumor growth was monitored over time 
using digital calipers and the modified tumor growth formula, or 0.5(L×W2). For 
experiments utilizing BM chimeric mice, 1×106 B16-OVA was implanted intradermally, and 
1 μg DT was administered on day 0 and Day 1, while 0.5 μg DT was administered on Day 3, 
5, and 7.
Nirschl et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TILs Isolation
For isolation of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), tumors were carefully excised. 
Tumors were mechanically disrupted, washed in 40mL of 1× PBS, 2-4 times and filtered 
through a 70 μM filter prior to enrichment of lymphocytes using density gradient 
centrifugation with Percoll (GE Healthcare). Stock solutions were prepared by combining 
90% Percoll and 10% HBSS (10×) to produce a working solution. Using the working 
solution, 40% and 80% solutions were produced. Tumor pellets were washed in a volume of 
50 mL PBS, resuspended in the 80% Percoll solution, and layered beneath the 40% Percoll 
solution. This gradient was spun at 2,000 RPM for 20 min, with no brake, at room 
temperature. A cell layer at the density interface was collected and thoroughly rinsed in 50 
mL PBS, and then stained. For calculation of the CD8/Treg ratio, total numbers of CD8+ and 
CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ were calculated by multiplying the counted totals of TILs by the 
frequency of the individual cell types.
Vaccination Protocol
Protein vaccinations and recall assays were performed as previously described 
(Anandasabapathy et al., 2014). Briefly, age and gender-matched control and experimental 
mice were injected subcutaneously in the footpad with 0.5 μg αCD205-gag p24 with 20 μg 
of GLA-SE (Immune Design Research Institute). Identical boost vaccination was 
administered exactly 4 weeks later. One week following boost vaccination, spleen and 
peripheral LN cells were analyzed for effector cytokine production by 6 hr intracellular 
staining as well as CFSE 4 day cultures. In experiments utilizing mixed bone marrow 
chimeras and diphtheria toxin (DT), 0.5 μg DT was administered on day-3 and day-1 prior to 
both the prime and boost doses.
Contact Hypersensitivity
Contact hypersensitivity experiments were performed as previously described (Martin, 
2013). Briefly, mice were anesthetized by i.p. injection of ketamine, and a patch of dorsal 
hair was removed using an electric shaver. For sensitization, 20 μL of 0.5% 
dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB; Sigma D1529) in acetone/olive oil (AOO) at 4:1 ratio was 
painted on the shaved dorsal skin on day 0 and day 1. For elicitation, 10 μL of 0.2% DNFB 
in AOO was painted on each side of one ear on day 5, while 10 μL of AOO only was painted 
on each side of the other ear as a control. Measurement of ear thickness was performed right 
before elicitation and every 24h afterward using a thickness gauge.
Methods Details
Cell Lines
B16-OVA and EL-4 OVA cells were provided by Drs. Charles Drake and Arlene Sharpe. All 
cell lines were grown in DMEM (GIBCO) with 10% FCS (GIBCO and Gemini) and 
Penicillin/Streptomycin (GIBCO)for no more than 3 passages prior to implantation and 
tested free of mycoplasma using the MycoScope PCR Mycoplasma Detection kit (Genlantis, 
San Diego, CA), according to the manufacture's instructions.
Nirschl et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Virus Preparation and Vaccinia scarification
VACV-OVA was provided from Jonathon Yewdell, and was expanded and titered according 
to standard protocols (Earl et al., 2001). For experiments using VACV-OVA, skin 
scarification was performed as previously described (Liu et al., 2010). Briefly, three days 
after intradermal implantation of 1×106 B16-OVA cells (Day 3), 2×106 viral p.f.u. were 
applied to the tail in 5uL which was then scarified with 15 scratches from right to left and an 
additional 15 scratches from left to right.
Tissue Digestion of skin draining LNs and Spleens
In experiments isolating DCs from either skin draining LNs or spleens, tissues were 
ballooned and/or teased apart, and incubated for 25 min at 37°C in Collagenase D (400 
U/ml, Roche) in Hanks' Balanced Salt Buffer containing Ca2+ (Invitrogen). After incubation, 
EDTA was added to a final concentration of 10 mM EDTA for 5 min at 37°C for disruption 
of DC–T cell complexes. For microarray sample preparation migDCs were flow sorted from 
n = 3 individual IFNγR1−/−, IL27Rα−/−, and C57BL/6J control mice after collagenase D 
digestion of pooled skin draining LNs on IAIEhi CD11cint selection following size and live/
dead exclusion. RNA was prepared by standard methods using Trizol (Invitrogen), and 
further purified using RNeasy MinElute clean up (QIAGEN). Purity analysis was done using 
the Eukaryote Total RNA Pico Series II (Agilent). RNA was amplified and hybridized on the 
Affymetrix Mouse ST chips version 2.0.
Flow Cytometry Staining and Antibodies
All flow cytometric staining was performed on ice as described (Anandasabapathy et al., 
2011). Cells were stained with Aqua Live/ Dead dye in PBS (Molecular Probes, Life 
Technologies), followed by extracellular staining in PBS containing 2% FCS (FACS Buffer) 
on ice, with subsequent fixation/permeabilization prior to staining for intracellular proteins. 
For intracellular cytokine analysis, cells were stimulated with cognate peptide for 1 hr prior 
to the addition of 10 μM Brefeldin A for five additional hours. The following murine and 
human antibodies were obtained from BD, eBioscience, or BioLegend: Anti: murine CD3 
(eBio500A2), CD4 (RM4-5), CD8 (53-6.7), IFNγ (XMG1.2), TNFα (MP6-XT22), IL-2 
(JES6-5H4), CD45 (30-F11), CD11b (M1/70), B220 (RA3-6B2), CD19 (eBio1D3), NK1.1 
(PK136), FoxP3 (FJK-16S), IAIE (M5/114.15.2); anti human: BDCA1 (L161), BDCA3 
(AD5), CD20 (2H7), CD66b (G10F5), CD56 (HCD56), CD11c (Bly6), CD14 (RM052), 
CD45 (HI30), HLA (L243). In murine experiments examining FoxP3 expression, fixation 
was performed using fixative and the manufacturers protocol from eBioscience, all other 
experiments utilized Fix/Perm from BD Biosciences.
Western Blot analysis
Western blot analysis of skin draining LN migDC and cDC. Mice were treated every other 
day by intraperitonial injection of 10ng recombinant human Flt3L for twelve days prior to 
LN digestion and FACS sorting. For western blot analysis of protein levels in DCs following 
in vitro culture, Flt3L derived BMDCs were generated by culture of total bone marrow cells 
supplemented with 100ng/ml Flt3L for 7 days. Cultures were harvested at 0 hr or treated 
with 200ng/mL of IFNγ for 24 hr or 48 hr. Western blotting was conducted with the follow 
Nirschl et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 antibodies: SOCS2, Abcam; β–actin (AC-15), Sigma. Cells were lysed in modified RIPA 
buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 1% NP-40,150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM 
Na3VO4, and protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Life Technologies). Protein 
lysates were quantified using protein assay dye reagent (Bio-Rad). Equal amounts of 
proteins were separated by precast Tris-HCl SDS-polyacrylamide gel (Lonza), transferred to 
nitrocellulose membrane (Amersham), and incubated with primary antibodies in 1× TBS-T 
containing 5% non-fat dry milk overnight at 4°C. After washing the membranes in 1× TBS-
T, membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary 
antibodies for 1 hr at RT, binding of the primary antibodies were detected using an enhanced 
chemiluminescence substrate (Life Technologies).
Immunofluorescence
For immunofluorescence, frozen sections from biopsies of patients with common nevi, 
dysplastic nevi and primary malignant melanomas were fixed with acetone and blocked in 
10% normal goat serum (Vector Laboratories) for 30 min. The tissue sections were 
incubated with mouse anti-human CD11c (clone Bly6, BD PharMingen) and rabbit anti-
human SOCS2 (clone EPR2588(2), LifeSpan Biosciences), overnight at 4°C. The tissues 
were then amplified with goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA) 
and goat anti-rabbit Rhodamine Red X (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA), for 30 min the next 
day. Images were acquired using the appropriate filters of a Zeiss Axioplan 2 widefield 
fluorescence microscope with a Plan Neofluar 20 9 0.7 numerical aperture lens and a 
Hamamatsu Orca ER cooled charge-coupled device camera, controlled by METAVUE 
software (MDS Analytical Technologies, Downington, PA, USA). Images in each figure are 
presented both as single color stains (green and red) located above the merged image, so that 
localization of two markers on similar or different cells can be appreciated. Cells that co-
express the two markers in a similar location are yellow in color. A white line denotes the 
junction between epidermis and the dermis.
Genomics
Microarray analysis
Microarray analysis was carried out using the statistical language R and available Gene 
Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets: 35459, 49358, 53588, 60782, 66970, 18686, and 
32407. All work on pigmented lesion specimens (nevi and melanoma) was IRB approved at 
Rockefeller University and obtained by informed consent and includes previously published 
data sets GEO: GSE53223 for common and dysplastic nevi and new data set GEO: 
GSE100050 for normal skin and melanoma. Analysis was carried out using the statistical 
language R (www.R-project.org) and its available packages. Normalized expression data 
from the GEO datasets was accessed directly from R package GEOquery. Statistical analysis 
of each dataset was carried out anew using linear models in the limma framework and when 
samples in a given experiment were paired, a mixed model approach was used. In general 
once the model was fitted, the differences between groups was assessed using contrasts with 
A moderated t test. Resultant p values were adjusted for multiple comparisons across 
markers using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach, which controls the False Discovery Rate. 
Gene Annotation: each dataset was annotated using the respective R annotation packages. 
Nirschl et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was carried out using the euclidean with the average 
agglomeration algorithm. Expression of the clustered genes is represented as heatmaps with 
a scaling by gene. Correlation between the log2 FCHs across experiments was carried out 
using Pearson pairwise correlation, follow by unsupervised clustering based on euclidean 
distance.
Over-representation analysis
We identified gene-sets that overlap with the 227 list by using a hypergeometric test using 
hallmark, C2, and C7 collections from Molsigdb (https://www.broadinstitute.org/msigdb) 
and Krueger skin collection sets. p values representing the significance of the overlap were 
adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach to control for false discovery rate.
Z-scoring/Gene Set Variation analysis
The activity of entire signaling pathways for each sample was quantified by using a per-
sample GSEA-like method. GSVA (Gene Set Variation Analysis) is an unsupervised sample-
wise enrichment method (Hänzelmann et al., 2013). Enrichment scores were obtained using 
the z-score method previously described (Lee et al., 2008) and available in the GSVA R 
package. This method computes a linear combination of normalized expressions with 
weights in the combination being defined as 1/√k for k being the number of genes in the 
pathway. The per-sample enrichment scores are then compared across different groups for 
each of the relevant experiments. The null distribution of the Z-scores was obtained by 
conduction of a simulation study. For each gene set of a give size k, we randomly selected a 
set of k genes and its calculated z-score.
SEEK analysis
We entered the 227-gene signature as query into SEEK to compute the co-expression score 
of 227 genes and its significance for each dataset in the large SEEK compendia composed of 
thousands of datasets. Default settings were used. For our purpose, we excluded small 
datasets containing less than 10 samples which may give unreliable scores. Cutoff of p = 
0.001 was used to define co-expressed datasets for the 227-gene query. To identify the 
MeSH terms (such as neoplasms, ulcerative colitis) which may be overrepresented among 
top SEEK-prioritized datasets, we computed the hypergeometric overlap p value:
where N is the total datasets with any MeSH annotations, K is the datasets annotated to a 
given MeSH term, n is the depth in the dataset list, and k is the datasets within the list at 
depth n annotated to a given MeSH term.
Nirschl et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pan Cancer TCGA analysis
TCGA RNaseq level 3 processed data and the corresponding clinical annotations were 
obtained from the UCSC cancer genome browser (https://genome-cancer.ucsc.edu/proj/site/
hgHeatmap/). Gene level expression estimates are reported using RSEM normalized counts 
and were restricted to only include those sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq platform from the 
same center, UNC. For each sample the average expression of a signature was calculated by 
taking the geometric mean of the expression values for all genes in the signature. Using 
these per sample scores the Pearson correlation between 227 and IFNγ was calculated for 
each tumor type. For SKCM, patients were stratified into high, medium, and low groups 
using quantiles, with the high group corresponding to the upper quartile, the low group the 
lower quartile, and medium the remaining two quartiles. All statistical tests for these data 
were run using R version 3.1.1.
Whole transcriptome amplification, library preparation, and scRNA-Seq
Whole transcriptome amplification (WTA) from single-cell lysates was performed using 
Smart-Seq2 as previously described (Trombetta et al., 2014) (Tirosh et al., 2016) except 
Maxima Reverse Transcriptase was used in place of SuperScript II (both from Life 
Technologies). Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 (30 base pair paired-
end reads) to an average depth of 1.1M ± 0.06M reads.
Processing of RNA-Seq data
Following sequencing, BAM files were converted to merged, demultiplexed FASTQ files, 
and mapped to the UCSC hg19 human transcriptome, as previously described (Tirosh et al., 
2016) We included cells in our analysis: 1. with greater than 2,000 genes detected; 2. whose 
average expression of a curated list of housekeeping genes was greater than log2(TPM) = 4; 
and, 3. which had greater than 20% alignment to the h19 transcriptome. We chose genes, 
meanwhile, that were expressed in at least 15% of all selected cells for downstream analysis.
Importantly, here, TPM values were not divided by 10. When evaluating the average 
expression of populations of single cells from Tirosh et al., the expression level for each 
gene in each cell was multiplied by 10 to enable direct comparison.
t-SNE analysis
A matrix of genes (rows) by cells (columns) was loaded into the Seurat R package version 
1.2 in R version 3.1.1 (Satija et al., 2015) and for all genes, the arithmetic mean and pairwise 
dispersion (mean-normalized standard deviation) were calculated. Genes with a mean 
log2(TPM) greater than 4 and z-scored dispersion higher than 1 were marked as “variable.” 
A principal components analysis was then run on all cells over variable genes. We selected 
principal components for downstream analysis by inspecting the fraction of total variance 
explained by each component and its significance as calculated using the Jackstraw 
algorithm implemented through Seurat (Chung and Storey, 2015). Principal components 1 
through 4 were chosen as inputs for t-SNE based on cutoffs of greater than 1.5% variance 
explained and p values less than 10−10 (FDR <0.01). Component 6 was also included, as 
inspection of the top genes correlated with this component revealed separation of PDCs and 
Nirschl et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mDCs (Table S7A) t-SNE was performed over 2,400 iterations with a perplexity of 15 and 
visualized in R with Seurat.
Heatmaps for 227 signature
Differential expression across the genes in the 227 signature was calculated using the 
“find.markers” function in Seurat, running a likelihood ratio test over a parameterized 
bimodal distribution(McDavid et al., 2013). Heatmaps were then generated as previously 
described (Tirosh et al., 2016). Briefly, expression fold changes were calculated for each 
population and used to generate a heatmap of relative expression across each of two gene 
sets (“227 Up,” and “227 Down.” The rows (populations) were ordered by hierarchical 
clustering. Genes, meanwhile, were first assigned to the population to which they had the 
highest fold difference. Then a modified silhouette score was tasked to rank the genes within 
each population. Silhouette scoring (Sx,i) was performed by calculating, for each gene i:
where x is the population assigned to gene i and j includes all other genes in population x. 
Next, Sy,i, the sum of the differences in expression between xi and yj, was determined:
where j are all genes belonging to all other populations y. The magnitude of Sx,i/Sy,i was 
calculated for all genes, and used to rank the genes in terms of similarity within a 
population. When ordered by population, the resulting heatmap displays genes most closely 
associated with each population ranked in succession.
Intra-population correlation analysis
Composite scores for the upregulated and downregulated genes for the 227 and IFNγ gene 
sets were constructed by averaging the weighted gene expression for each single cell as 
previously described (Shalek et al., 2014). The Spearman correlation between the 227-gene 
signature for a cell and the IFNγ gene signature in the same cell was calculated for both the 
upregulated and downregulated scores. Then, the cells were permuted in each population so 
the correlation was calculated between the 227-gene score and IFNγ score of different cells. 
This was repeated 100 times, and the average correlation was plotted.
Inter-population correlation analysis
To account for differences in the number of cells across various populations, 100 random 
permutations of 40 cells were selected from each and averaged to create 100 40-cell in silico 
“bulk” scores for both the 227-gene and IFNγ signatures. The Spearman correlation 
between the 227-gene and IFNγ score of each in silico “bulk” with itself and with other in 
Nirschl et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 silico “bulks” was calculated. A heatmap was generated in R using heatmap.2 to visualize 
these correlations.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis
Analysis of ex vivo T cell responses for vaccine, contact sensitization and tumor analyses 
was conducted using Prism software and depicts mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). 
Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean, or mean ± standard deviation. 
Group sizes were determined based on the results of preliminary experiments without pre-
determination of sample size. Preliminary experiments were performed to determine 
requirements for sample size, taking into account resources available and ethical, 
reductionist animal use. Mice were randomly assigned to groups. Mouse studies were not 
performed in a blinded fashion. Generally, each mouse of the different experimental groups 
is reported. Statistical analysis using the two-tailed unpaired Student's t test, under the 
untested assumption of normality, was calculated using Prism software (GraphPad), with 
significance reported for p < .05.
227 t tests and Venn diagram
Processed expression data and the corresponding clinical annotations were obtained from the 
Gene Expression Omnibus Repository (GEO, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). All data 
were normalized and logged transformed (base 2). The 227-gene signature was extracted 
from each of the dataset for further analysis. Genes that were differentially expressed across 
the control and experimental groups were identified using t tests with cutoff of p < 0.05 
(MeV_4_8 Version 10.2). Expression data from GEO: GSE35459, GEO: GSE49358, GEO: 
GSE53588, GEO: GSE60782, and GEO: GSE66970 were analyzed using an unpaired t test. 
GEO: GSE18686 and GEO: GSE32704 data were analyzed using a paired t test. Please see 
Table S4 for comparison sets.
Data and Software Availability
The accession number for murine IFNGR1-/- migratory DCs, IL-27Ra-/- migratory DCs, 
and wildtype migratory DCs newly reported in this paper is GEO: GSE98994. Data sets 
dysplastic nevi and common melanocytic nevi previously reported are located in GEO: 
GSE53223. New data sets for primary human melanoma and normal skin are reported in 
GEO: GSE100050. Raw and processed single-cell RNA-seq data is available at GEO: 
GSE72056. The dbGAP accession number for the single-cell sequencing data from 
BDCA3+, BDCA1+, and monocyte populations newly reported in this paper is still pending 
and will be updated in the online version of the paper once it is available. Until then, 
requests can be made directly to the authors. Processed single-cell and bulk RNA-seq data is 
available at GEO: GSE######.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Nirschl et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
Doug Hilton and Warren Alexander generously provided SOCS2−/− mice. The laboratories of Arlene Sharpe and 
Charles Drake provided B16-OVA and EL4-OVA tumor lines. We are grateful to Celldex for recombinant Flt3L, 
Steve Reed and Infectious Disease Research Institute for GLA, and Dev Manoli for critical reading of the 
manuscript. C.N. was supported by a 5T32AR007098 Dermatology Training Grant. B.I. was supported by the DFCI 
Wong Family Award for Translational Cancer Research. N.G. was supported by a T32GM07739 MSTP Grant. 
A.K.S. was supported by the Searle Scholars Program, the Beck-man Young Investigator Program, and the NIH 
New Innovator Award DP2OD020839. N.A., Y.L., and C.N. were supported by the Melanoma Research Alliance-
BWH Department of Dermatology combined grant, the Cancer Research Institute, the Klarman Family Foundation, 
and the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease R01AR070234 and K23 AR063461 (to 
N.A). A.R. is on the scientific advisory board for ThermoFisher Scientific, Syros Pharmaceuticals, and Driver 
Group. J.G.K. is a consultant for Biogen. L.G. was a consultant for Foundation Medicine, No-vartis, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, an equity holder in Foundation Medicine, and a member of the scientific advisory board at 
Warp Drive. L.G. also received grant support from Novartis. L.G. is now an employee of Eli Lilly and Company.
References
Anandasabapathy N, Victora GD, Meredith M, Feder R, Dong B, Kluger C, Yao K, Dustin ML, 
Nussenzweig MC, Steinman RM, Liu K. Flt3L controls the development of radiosensitive dendritic 
cells in the meninges and choroid plexus of the steady-state mouse brain. J Exp Med. 2011; 
208:1695–1705. [PubMed: 21788405] 
Anandasabapathy N, Feder R, Mollah S, Tse SW, Longhi MP, Mehandru S, Matos I, Cheong C, Ruane 
D, Brane L, et al. Classical Flt3L-dependent dendritic cells control immunity to protein vaccine. J 
Exp Med. 2014; 211:1875–1891. [PubMed: 25135299] 
Askenase MH, Han SJ, Byrd AL, Morais da Fonseca D, Bouladoux N, Wilhelm C, Konkel JE, Hand 
TW, Lacerda-Queiroz N, Su XZ, et al. Bone-Marrow-Resident NK Cells Prime Monocytes for 
Regulatory Function during Infection. Immunity. 2015; 42:1130–1142. [PubMed: 26070484] 
Baratin M, Foray C, Demaria O, Habbeddine M, Pollet E, Maurizio J, Verthuy C, Davanture S, 
Azukizawa H, Flores-Langarica A, et al. Homeostatic NF-κB Signaling in Steady-State Migratory 
Dendritic Cells Regulates Immune Homeostasis and Tolerance. Immunity. 2015; 42:627–639. 
[PubMed: 25862089] 
Bonifaz LC, Bonnyay DP, Charalambous A, Darguste DI, Fujii S, Soares H, Brimnes MK, Moltedo B, 
Moran TM, Steinman RM. In vivo targeting of antigens to maturing dendritic cells via the DEC-205 
receptor improves T cell vaccination. J Exp Med. 2004; 199:815–824. [PubMed: 15024047] 
Chen M, Wang YH, Wang Y, Huang L, Sandoval H, Liu YJ, Wang J. Dendritic cell apoptosis in the 
maintenance of immune tolerance. Science. 2006; 311:1160–1164. [PubMed: 16497935] 
Chung NC, Storey JD. Statistical significance of variables driving systematic variation in high-
dimensional data. Bioinformatics. 2015; 31:545–554. [PubMed: 25336500] 
Dalod M, Chelbi R, Malissen B, Lawrence T. Dendritic cell maturation: functional specialization 
through signaling specificity and transcriptional programming. EMBO J. 2014; 33:1104–1116. 
[PubMed: 24737868] 
Dunn GP, Koebel CM, Schreiber RD. Interferons, immunity and cancer immunoediting. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2006; 6:836–848. [PubMed: 17063185] 
Earl PL, Cooper N, Wyatt LS, Moss B, Carroll MW. Preparation of cell cultures and vaccinia virus 
stocks. Curr Protoc Protein Sci. 2001; Chapter 5
Elder DE. Melanoma progression. Pathology. 2016; 48:147–154. [PubMed: 27020387] 
Frucht DM, Fukao T, Bogdan C, Schindler H, O'Shea JJ, Koyasu S. IFN-gamma production by 
antigen-presenting cells: mechanisms emerge. Trends Immunol. 2001; 22:556–560. [PubMed: 
11574279] 
Fuentes-Duculan J, Suárez-Fariñas M, Zaba LC, Nograles KE, Pierson KC, Mitsui H, Pensabene CA, 
Kzhyshkowska J, Krueger JG, Lowes MA. A subpopulation of CD163-positive macrophages is 
classically activated in psoriasis. J Invest Dermatol. 2010; 130:2412–2422. [PubMed: 20555352] 
Greenhalgh CJ, Rico-Bautista E, Lorentzon M, Thaus AL, Morgan PO, Willson TA, Zervoudakis P, 
Metcalf D, Street I, Nicola NA, et al. SOCS2 negatively regulates growth hormone action in vitro 
and in vivo. J Clin Invest. 2005; 115:397–406. [PubMed: 15690087] 
Nirschl et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Haniffa M, Shin A, Bigley V, McGovern N, Teo P, See P, Wasan PS, Wang XN, Malinarich F, Malleret 
B, et al. Human tissues contain CD141hi cross-presenting dendritic cells with functional homology 
to mouse CD103+ nonlymphoid dendritic cells. Immunity. 2012; 37:60–73. [PubMed: 22795876] 
Hänzelmann S, Castelo R, Guinney J. GSVA: gene set variation analysis for microarray and RNA-seq 
data. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013; 14:7. [PubMed: 23323831] 
Harden JL, Gu T, Kilinc MO, Rowswell-Turner RB, Virtuoso LP, Egilmez NK. Dichotomous effects of 
IFN-γ on dendritic cell function determine the extent of IL-12-driven antitumor T cell immunity. J 
Immunol. 2011; 187:126–132. [PubMed: 21632715] 
Hoeffel G, Chen J, Lavin Y, Low D, Almeida FF, See P, Beaudin AE, Lum J, Low I, Forsberg EC, et 
al. C-Myb(+) erythro-myeloid progenitor-derived fetal monocytes give rise to adult tissue-resident 
macrophages. Immunity. 2015; 42:665–678. [PubMed: 25902481] 
Iborra S, Martínez-López M, Khouili SC, Enamorado M, Cueto FJ, Conde-Garrosa R, Del Fresno C, 
Sancho D. Optimal Generation of Tissue-Resident but Not Circulating Memory T Cells during 
Viral Infection Requires Crosspriming by DNGR-1(+) Dendritic Cells. Immunity. 2016; 45:847–
860. [PubMed: 27692611] 
Inaba K, Turley S, Yamaide F, Iyoda T, Mahnke K, Inaba M, Pack M, Subklewe M, Sauter B, Sheff D, 
et al. Efficient presentation of phagocytosed cellular fragments on the major histocompatibility 
complex class II products of dendritic cells. J Exp Med. 1998; 188:2163–2173. [PubMed: 
9841929] 
Kaplan DH, Shankaran V, Dighe AS, Stockert E, Aguet M, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. Demonstration of an 
interferon gamma-dependent tumor surveillance system in immunocompetent mice. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:7556–7561. [PubMed: 9636188] 
Kushwah R, Hu J. Dendritic cell apoptosis: regulation of tolerance versus immunity. J Immunol. 2010; 
185:795–802. [PubMed: 20601611] 
Lee E, Chuang HY, Kim JW, Ideker T, Lee D. Inferring pathway activity toward precise disease 
classification. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008; 4:e1000217. [PubMed: 18989396] 
Liu L, Zhong Q, Tian T, Dubin K, Athale SK, Kupper TS. Epidermal injury and infection during 
poxvirus immunization is crucial for the generation of highly protective T cell-mediated immunity. 
Nat Med. 2010; 16:224–227. [PubMed: 20081864] 
Ma DY, Clark EA. The role of CD40 and CD154/CD40L in dendritic cells. Semin Immunol. 2009; 
21:265–272. [PubMed: 19524453] 
Martin SF. Induction of contact hypersensitivity in the mouse model. Methods Mol Biol. 2013; 
961:325–335. [PubMed: 23325654] 
Mascanfroni ID, Yeste A, Vieira SM, Burns EJ, Patel B, Sloma I, Wu Y, Mayo L, Ben-Hamo R, Efroni 
S, et al. IL-27 acts on DCs to suppress the T cell response and autoimmunity by inducing 
expression of the immunoregulatory molecule CD39. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:1054–1063. 
[PubMed: 23995234] 
McDavid A, Finak G, Chattopadyay PK, Dominguez M, Lamoreaux L, Ma SS, Roederer M, Gottardo 
R. Data exploration, quality control and testing in single-cell qPCR-based gene expression 
experiments. Bio-informatics. 2013; 29:461–467.
McGovern N, Schlitzer A, Gunawan M, Jardine L, Shin A, Poyner E, Green K, Dickinson R, Wang 
XN, Low D, et al. Human dermal CD14+ cells are atransient populationof monocyte-derived 
macrophages. Immunity. 2014; 41:465–477. [PubMed: 25200712] 
Mellor AL, Munn DH. Creating immune privilege: active local suppression that benefits friends, but 
protects foes. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:74–80. [PubMed: 18064049] 
Miller JC, Brown BD, Shay T, Gautier EL, Jojic V, Cohain A, Pandey G, Leboeuf M, Elpek KG, Helft 
J, et al. Deciphering the transcriptional network of the dendritic cell lineage. Nat Immunol. 2012; 
13:888–899. [PubMed: 22797772] 
Ohl L, Mohaupt M, Czeloth N, Hintzen G, Kiafard Z, Zwirner J, Blankenstein T, Henning G, Förster 
R. CCR7 governs skin dendritic cell migration under inflammatory and steady-state conditions. 
Immunity. 2004; 21:279–288. [PubMed: 15308107] 
Patel AP, Tirosh I, Trombetta JJ, Shalek AK, Gillespie SM, Wakimoto H, Cahill DP, Nahed BV, Curry 
WT, Martuza RL, et al. Single-cell RNA-seq highlights intratumoral heterogeneity in primary 
glioblastoma. Science. 2014; 344:1396–1401. [PubMed: 24925914] 
Nirschl et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Rico-Bautista E, Flores-Morales A, Fernández-Pérez L. Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) 2, a 
protein with multiple functions. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2006; 17:431–439. [PubMed: 
17070092] 
Rothhammer V, Mascanfroni ID, Bunse L, Takenaka MC, Kenison JE, Mayo L, Chao CC, Patel B, Yan 
R, Blain M, et al. Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan modulate astrocyte 
activity and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Nat Med. 
2016; 22:586–597. [PubMed: 27158906] 
Satija R, Farrell JA, Gennert D, Schier AF, Regev A. Spatial reconstruction of single-cell gene 
expression data. Nat Biotechnol. 2015; 33:495–502. [PubMed: 25867923] 
Schlitzer A, Sivakamasundari V, Chen J, Sumatoh HR, Schreuder J, Lum J, Malleret B, Zhang S, Larbi 
A, Zolezzi F, et al. Identification of cDC1- and cDC2-committed DC progenitors reveals early 
lineage priming at the common DC progenitor stage in the bone marrow. Nat Immunol. 2015; 
16:718–728. [PubMed: 26054720] 
Schroder K, Hertzog PJ, Ravasi T, Hume DA. Interferon-gamma: an overview of signals, mechanisms 
and functions. J Leukoc Biol. 2004; 75:163–189. [PubMed: 14525967] 
Shalek AK, Satija R, Shuga J, Trombetta JJ, Gennert D, Lu D, Chen P, Gertner RS, Gaublomme JT, 
Yosef N, et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals dynamic paracrine control of cellular variation. Nature. 
2014; 510:363–369. [PubMed: 24919153] 
Snyder A, Makarov V, Merghoub T, Yuan J, Zaretsky JM, Desrichard A, Walsh LA, Postow MA, 
Wong P, Ho TS, et al. Genetic basis for clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade in melanoma. N 
Engl J Med. 2014; 371:2189–2199. [PubMed: 25409260] 
Steinman RM. Decisions about dendritic cells: past, present, and future. Annu Rev Immunol. 2012; 
30:1–22. [PubMed: 22136168] 
Stern RS. Prevalence of a history of skin cancer in 2007: results of an incidence-based model. Arch 
Dermatol. 2010; 146:279–282. [PubMed: 20231498] 
Tamoutounour S, Guilliams M, Montanana Sanchis F, Liu H, Terhorst D, Malosse C, Pollet E, Ardouin 
L, Luche H, Sanchez C, et al. Origins and functional specialization of macrophages and of 
conventional and monocyte-derived dendritic cells in mouse skin. Immunity. 2013; 39:925–938. 
[PubMed: 24184057] 
Taube JM, Young GD, McMiller TL, Chen S, Salas JT, Pritchard TS, Xu H, Meeker AK, Fan J, 
Cheadle C, et al. Differential Expression of Immune-Regulatory Genes Associated with PD-L1 
Display in Melanoma: Implications for PD-1 Pathway Blockade. Clin Cancer Res. 2015
Tirosh I, Izar B, Prakadan SM, Wadsworth MH 2nd, Treacy D, Trom-betta JJ, Rotem A, Rodman C, 
Lian C, Murphy G, et al. Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-
cell RNA-seq. Science. 2016; 352:189–196. [PubMed: 27124452] 
Tomasetti C, Vogelstein B. Cancer etiology. Variation in cancer risk among tissues can be explained by 
the number of stem cell divisions. Science. 2015; 347:78–81. [PubMed: 25554788] 
Trombetta JJ, Gennert D, Lu D, Satija R, Shalek AK, Regev A. Preparation of Single-Cell RNA-Seq 
Libraries for Next Generation Sequencing. Current protocols in molecular biology. 2014; 107:4.22 
21–17. [PubMed: 24984854] 
Waithman J, Allan RS, Kosaka H, Azukizawa H, Shortman K, Lutz MB, Heath WR, Carbone FR, Belz 
GT. Skin-derived dendritic cells can mediate deletional tolerance of class I-restricted self-reactive 
T cells. J Immunol. 2007; 179:4535–4541. [PubMed: 17878350] 
Wilson NS, Young LJ, Kupresanin F, Naik SH, Vremec D, Heath WR, Akira S, Shortman K, Boyle J, 
Maraskovsky E, et al. Normal proportion and expression of maturation markers in migratory 
dendritic cells in the absence of germs or Toll-like receptor signaling. Immunol Cell Biol. 2008; 
86:200–205. [PubMed: 18026177] 
Yeste A, Takenaka MC, Mascanfroni ID, Nadeau M, Kenison JE, Patel B, Tukpah AM, Babon JA, 
DeNicola M, Kent SC, et al. Tolerogenic nanoparticles inhibit T cell-mediated autoimmunity 
through SOCS2. Sci Signal. 2016; 9:ra61. [PubMed: 27330188] 
Zaidi MR, Merlino G. The two faces of interferon-γ in cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:6118–6124. 
[PubMed: 21705455] 
Nirschl et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Zhu Q, Wong AK, Krishnan A, Aure MR, Tadych A, Zhang R, Corney DC, Greene CS, Bongo LA, 
Kristensen VN, et al. Targeted exploration and analysis of large cross-platform human 
transcriptomic compendia. Nat Methods. 2015; 12:211–214. 3–214. [PubMed: 25581801] 
Nirschl et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Immune phagocytes share a conserved program during differentiation and 
tissue entry
•
IFNγ is a critical instructive cue in the steady state
•
IFNγ and tissue programming are co-opted across cancers and include 
SOCS2
•
SOCS2 is a critical determinant of tumor-immune surveillance in dendritic 
cells
Nirschl et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Enriched Expression of a Species-Conserved 227 Homeostatic Signature at Tissue 
Entry across Mononuclear Phagocyte Lineages and at Multiple Stages of Differentiation and 
Development
(A–E) 227-gene signatures were derived from classical DCs in datasets GEO: GSE35459 
and GEO: GSE53588. Gene expression analysis was mapped across individual samples of 
mononuclear phagocytes in the following datasets: (A) GEO: GSE35459, comparing human 
blood DCs and monocytes to skin DCs and monocyte-derived macrophages; (B) GEO: 
GSE49358, comparing murine dermal DCs and monocytes to those that have migrated to the 
LN, with and without DNFB—a contact sensitizing agent; (C) GEO: GSE53588, comparing 
murine skin derived migDCs in LN to LN-resident cDCs from Flt3L treated mice; (D) GEO: 
GSE60782, comparing murine cDC progenitors (pre-DC subtypes) in bone marrow to 
differentiated spleen-resident cDCs; and (E) GEO: GSE66970, comparing embryonic liver 
and adult bone marrow mononuclear phagocyte progenitors to differentiated embryonic skin 
monocytes and macrophages.
(F) Schematic mapping of each analyzed set to the selected developmental transition or 
tissue-based comparison. Triangles indicate a defined transition in either progenitor 
differentiation or tissue entry as detailed in Table S1A.
See also Figure S1.
Nirschl et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. IFNγ Is Sufficient and Necessary to Induce 227-Gene Transcripts in Human 
Mononuclear Phagocytes and Human Skin
(A) 227-signature expression analysis of transcripts derived from paired PBMC specimens 
from six individuals. Human PBMCs were selected for monocytes by adherence, cultured 
for 7 days with M-CSF, and treated for 24 hr with (A) IFNγ, IL-17, IL-4, LPS, LPS + IFNγ, 
or TNFα (paired conditions per patient, GEO: GSE18686).
(B) 227-signature expression analysis in paired skin biopsy specimens obtained from 3 
different sites of the same individual: normal healthy skin and skin taken 24 hr after either 
injection of IFNγ or injection of placebo (vehicle control) from 10 healthy individuals or 
psoriasis patients (GEO: GSE32407).
(C) Unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on the Pearson correlation of log2(FCH) for 
each defined comparison within each of the 7 datasets, testing genes within the 227 
signatures (left) or all possible overlapping transcripts (right). Values in each cell represent 
the Pearson correlation and significance levels are represented as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, 
***p < 0.001. Comparison sets are listed as follows: A. Blood versus skin (human), GEO: 
GSE35459. B. Dermal versus migrated, GEO: GSE49358. C. Draining LN skin migratory 
DC (migDC) versus LN resident CD8α cDC, GEO: GSE53588. D. Pre-DC from bone 
marrow versus cDC from spleen, GEO: GSE60782. E. Adult bone marrow and fetal liver 
embryonic progenitors versus macrophages and monocytes in fetal skin, GEO: GSE66970 F. 
Nirschl et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IFNγ and IFNγ + LPS versus all other treatments from human monocyte-derived 
macrophages in vitro, GEO: GSE18686. G. IFNγ injected skin versus placebo/ control from 
healthy human volunteers and psoriasis patients ex vivo, GEO: GSE32407.
(D) Distribution of the Z scores for GEO: GSE35459 samples comparing human blood DC 
and monocyte subsets to human skin DC or monocyte-derived macrophage subsets for 227 
signature up (red) or down (blue) genes or an equivalent number of random probes (gray). 
Parallel comparison of human blood versus skin (left) of 1,217 IFNγ upregulated (orange) 
and 1210 IFNγ downregulated (purple) signature correlations (right) or an equivalent 
number of random probes (gray) (GEO: GSE18686, IFNγ and IFNγ + LPS specimens 
versus all other conditions).
(E) Gene expression of the 227 upregulated signature module in migDC isolated from 
IFNγR1−/−, WT, and IL27Rα−/− mice. Each column represents migDC sorted from one 
mouse and processed as three distinct technical replicates.
(F) GSVA. Association between Z score of IFNγ and 227 upregulated signatures (r = 0.9, CI 
=0.63-0.98) in individual IFNγR1−/− (blue), WT (black), and IL27Rα−/− (red) mice. Oval 
grouping of samples of migDC by condition, depicting n = 3 individual mice. Significance 
in loss of the 227 upregulated signature as compare to WT mice is noted **p < .01.
See also Figure S2.
Nirschl et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. IFNγ-Directed Transcripts Co-enriched and Correlate with 227 Signature Genes 
across Multiple Human Cancers and Stratify Human Melanoma Survival
(A) SEEK analysis was performed comparing average 25th and 75th quartile random queries 
to 227-signature genes across the Gene Expression Omnibus and Cancer Genome Atlas 
datasets. Per dataset co-expression p values are plotted for 227 signatures demonstrating 
high levels of significance across thousands of datasets in the SEEK compendia. Among top 
200 datasets prioritized, a significant portion of sets are associated with cancer, auto 
inflammatory disease (e.g., ulcerative colitis), and DCs.
(B) Top 150 transcripts taken from IFNγ signatures (irrespective of direction of change), 
200 of 227 homeostatic signature genes, or 200 random probes were compared across 
primary human cancers (TCGA). Correlation scores between individual tumor specimens 
expressing the IFNγ signature and homeostatic 227 signature are color coded and depicted 
below the plots (0.5–1) per cancer subtype. Kaplan-Meier Survival analysis of TCGA level 4 
skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) from 280 metastatic melanoma patients.
(C–E) High, medium, and low expression of either the (C) 227 signature, (D) IFNγ-
dependent top 150 transcripts, or (E) non-silent somatic mutations were used to stratify 
patient survival.
(F) Comparison of patient samples classified by high, medium, or low average expression 
for the IFNγ signature, 227 signature, or non-silent somatic mutations.
Nirschl et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 See also Figure S3.
Nirschl et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Single-Cell RNA-Seq Reveals 227 Programming in Mononuclear Phagocytes and Close 
Per-Cell and Population-Based Correlation between 227 Homeostatic Programming and IFNγ
(A) Transcriptomes of 333 BDCA1+ DC, BDCA3+DC, and monocytes from a patient with 
melanoma visualized by tSNE. Differential gene expression between two annotated 
BDCA3+ dendritic cell clusters (Table S7A) shows that they are PDC-like and cDCs.
(B) Heatmaps representing relative single-cell expression of the up (left) and downregulated 
(right) genes that comprise the 227 signature annotated by single-cell populations previously 
assayed (Tirosh et al., 2016), along with additional populations of monocytes and DC 
examined here. Genes with expression fold change greater than 1.5 in at least two of four 
populations are annotated below the heatmaps: monocyte, BDCA1+ DC, BDCA3+ PDC, and 
BDCA3+ cDC.
(C) Correlation of the upregulated gene score in the 227-signature of a single cell and the 
IFNγ gene signature of the same cell (matched) or the average of the other single cells from 
within the same population (unmatched). The matched correlation is higher than the 
unmatched correlation for every population (p value < 0.001, paired t test).
(D) Correlation of the upregulated gene score in the 227-gene signature and IFNγ gene 
signatures between in silico “bulk” averages of each population. The upregulated gene score 
of the 227-gene signature and IFNγ signature of each population is most correlated with its 
own IFNγ signature and 227-gene signature, respectively (p value < 0.003; Welch's t test).
Nirschl et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 See also Figure S4.
Nirschl et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 227-Gene Signatures, IFNγ-Specific Signatures, and SOCS2 Are Closely Associated 
with Early Human Primary Cutaneous Melanoma
(A) Z score comparing overall expression levels for IFNγ- and 227-gene signatures in skin 
biopsies taken from normal skin (n = 6 patients), common nevi (n = 5 patients), dysplastic 
nevi (n = 7 patients), or primary cutaneous melanoma (n = 6 patients).
(B) Corresponding 227-signature heatmap analysis.
(C) Venn diagram overlapping 227 signature genes with a statistically significant 
intersection (n = 37) across all 5 mononuclear phagocyte transitions (n= 97), with IFNγ in 
vitro (n = 154) and in vivo (n = 131) treatments (left). Venn diagram of 227 genes in 
melanoma (n = 113) overlapping the 37 genes intersecting all developmental transitions and 
those induced by IFNγ in vitro and in vivo (right). The list of 37 genes includes those 
overlapping the 113 of 227 signatures induced in melanoma (blue).
(D) Log2 expression of SOCS2 transcripts in human (GEO: GSE35459) and murine (GEO: 
GSE49358, GEO: GSE53588, GEO: GSE60782, GEO: GSE66970) DC ormonocyte/
macrophage subsets defined by groups.
(E) Expression of SOCS2 protein in migDCs and cDCs isolated from skin draining LNs 
from Flt3L treated mice (n = one of two representative experiments).
Nirschl et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F) SOCS2 and β–actin expression in cellular lysates of Flt3L-cultured murine BMDCs 
derived from WT or SOCS2−/− mice prepared prior to or 24 or 48 hr after IFNγ treatment. 
Data are representative of three technical replicates.
(G) Staining of CD11c (Alexa488, green) and SOCS2 (rhodamine, red) in patient specimens 
(n = 5-7 patients assayed per group with representative immunofluorescence depicted).
See also Figure S5 and Data S1.
Nirschl et al.
Page 35
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Global and DC-Specific SOCS2 Expression Inhibits Antitumor Immunity
(A) Intradermal growth of EL4-OVA thymoma (left). OVA-peptide-specific CD8+ T cell 
recall assay. Intracellular cytokine staining of IFNγ in T cells isolated from the spleen and 
tumor draining LNs of SOCS2−/− and WT mice.
(B) Table depicting the breakdown of the immune cells present during use of ZBTB46 
(ZDTR) mixed bone marrow chimeras for uncompensated DC-specific loss.
(C) Therapeutic model of acute restriction to SOCS2−/− DCs using DT administration 
surrounding tumor implantation, and concurrent B16-OVA growth with the intratumoral 
CD8/Treg ratio.
(D) Schema for therapeutic tumor vaccine model. VACV-OVA was administered 3 days after 
B16-OVA implantation in bone marrow chimera mice and given DT to generate a DC-
specific loss of SOCS2 surrounding implantation. Vaccinia tail lesion diameter (left), 
frequency of OVA-specific IFNγ + CD8+ TILs assayed by peptide recall and intracellular 
cytokine staining (middle), and intradermal B16-OVA tumor growth (right). Tumor growth 
curves were pooled from three independent experiments of four to five mice per group. For 
antigen recall and TILS analysis, open and closed shapes represent each pooled independent 
experiment, with individual animals from replicate experiments depicted.
Error bars show mean ± SEM. *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001. See also Figure S6.
Nirschl et al.
Page 36
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. SOCS2 Inhibits Adaptive Immune Priming by DC
(A) Schematic for aCD205-gagp24 protein immunization.
(B and C) (B) Intracellular cytokine staining. HIV gag p24 antigen-specific or control p17 
recall IFNγ production by CD4+T cells in WT and SOCS2−/− mice1 week after αCD205-
gagp24 prime-boost immunization, with (C) representative flow.
(D) Schematic of αCD205-gagp24 protein immunization with diphtheria toxin (DT) 
administered 1 and 3 days prior to prime and boost. Table depicting the breakdown of the 
immune cells present during use of ZBTB46 (ZDTR) mixed bone marrow chimeras, +/− 
diphtheria toxin administration for acute DC-specific loss.
(E and F) (E) Individual or (F) combinatorial expression of IFNγ, TNFα, and IL-2 in HIV 
gag-p24 specific splenic CD4+ T cells.
(G) SOCS2−/− T cells or WT T cells were adoptively transferred into Rag2−/− recipients. 
One week following boost, intracellular cytokine staining of T cells was performed with 
HIV gagp24 peptide re-challenge.
(H) Contact sensitivity schema (left) and murine ear thickness (right) following induction of 
contact hypersensitivity in mice with loss of SOCS2 restricted to CCR7-dependent cells. 
Open and closed shapes represent individual animals pooled from each of two independent 
experiments. All experiments were performed at least twice, with three to six mice per 
group.
Nirschl et al.
Page 37
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Error bars show mean ± SEM. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001. See also Figure S7.
Nirschl et al.
Page 38
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nirschl et al.
Page 39
Key Resources Table
Reagent or Resource
Source
Identifier
Antibodies
anti CD3
Thermo Fisher Scientific
eBio500A2
anti CD4
Thermo Fisher Scientific
RM4-5
anti CD8
Thermo Fisher Scientific
53-6.7
anti IFNγ
Biolegend
XMG1.2
anti TNFα
Biolegend
MP6-XT22
anti IL-2
Biolegend
JES6-5H4
anti CD45
Biolegend
30-F11
anti CD11b
Biolegend
M1/70
anti B220
Biolegend
RA3-6B2
anti CD19
Thermo Fisher Scientific
eBio1D3
anti NK1.1
Thermo Fisher Scientific
PK136
anti FoxP3
Ebiosciences (kit)
FJK-16S
anti IAIE
Biolegend
M5/114.15.2
Live/dead AQUA
Molecular Probes, Life Technologies
Cat #: L34966
Anti SOCS2
Abcam (western blot)
Cat #: ab3692
Anti- beta actin
Sigma (western blot)
AC-15
anti BDCA1
Thermo Fisher Scientific
L161
anti BDCA3
Miltenyibiotec
AD5-14H12
anti CD20
Biolegend
2H7
anti CD66b
Biolegend
G10F5
anti CD56
BD Biosciences
NCAM16.2
anti CD11c
Biolegend
B-ly6
anti CD14
Beckman Coulter
RM052
anti CD45
Biolegend
HI30
anti HLA
BD Biosciences
L243
anti-SOCS2
LifeSpan Biosciences- immunofluorescence use
EPR2588(2)
Bacterial and Virus Strains
Vaccinia-OVA
Jonathon Yewdell laboratory
N/A
Biological Samples
Human primary melanoma, dysplastic 
nevi, common nevi, healthy skin
Krueger Laboratory
N/A
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
dinitrofluorobenzene
Sigma
Cat#: D1529-10ML
Diphtheria toxin
Sigma
Cat #: D0564-1MG
Deposited Data
IFNGR1−/−, C57BL6/J WT, IL27Ra−/− 
skin migratory DCs
Sorted migratory DCs from the skin draining LN; 
sorted IAIE high CD11c intermediate from all strains
GEO: GSE98994
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nirschl et al.
Page 40
Reagent or Resource
Source
Identifier
Normal human skin and primary human 
melanoma
Human skin biopsy specimens
GEO: GSE100050
Single-cell sequencing data human 
melanoma
BDCA1+ BDCA3+ and CD14+ monocyte populations 
isolated from a single LN melanoma metastasis
Newly deposited dbGAP, accession 
pending. Processed single-cell and 
bulk RNA-seq data is available at 
GEO: GSE######.
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
B16-OVA
Arlene Sharpe Laboratory- mycoplasm testing done in 
Anandasabapathy lab
N/A
EL-4 OVA
Charles Drake Laboratory- mycoplasm testing done in 
Anandasabapathy lab
N/A
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
C57Bl6/J
Jackson Labs
Stock No: 000664
IFNGR1−/−
Jackson Labs
Stock No: 003288
IL-27Ra−/−
Quintana Laboratory; available Jackson Labs
Stock No: 018078
SOCS2−/− mice
Doug Hilton and Warren Alexander Laboratory
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 
Medical Research
CCR7−/−
Bred locally and available Jackson Labs
Stock No: 006621 Martin Lipp, Max-
Delbrueck-Center
ZBTB46-DTR
Bred locally and available Jackson Labs
Nussenzweig Lab source; Stock No: 
019506
Software and Algorithms
R v 3.3.2, R code available upon request
Mayte Suarez-Farinas
N/A
Other code available upon request
Shalek, Regev, and Troyanskaya Labs
N/A
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 29.
