 REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Impact of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes: an
updated meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Benjamin Noah1,2, Michelle S. Keller1,2,3, Sasan Mosadeghi4, Libby Stein1,2, Sunny Johl1,2, Sean Delshad1,2, Vartan C. Tashjian1,2,5,
Daniel Lew1,2,5, James T. Kwan1,2, Alma Jusufagic1,2,3 and Brennan M. R. Spiegel1,2,3,5,6
Despite growing interest in remote patient monitoring, limited evidence exists to substantiate claims of its ability to improve
outcomes. Our aim was to evaluate randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that assess the effects of using wearable biosensors (e.g.
activity trackers) for remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes. We expanded upon prior reviews by assessing effectiveness
across indications and presenting quantitative summary data. We searched for articles from January 2000 to October 2016 in
PubMed, reviewed 4,348 titles, selected 777 for abstract review, and 64 for full text review. A total of 27 RCTs from 13 different
countries focused on a range of clinical outcomes and were retained for final analysis; of these, we identified 16 high-quality
studies. We estimated a difference-in-differences random effects meta-analysis on select outcomes. We weighted the studies by
sample size and used 95% confidence intervals (CI) around point estimates. Difference-in-difference point estimation revealed no
statistically significant impact of remote patient monitoring on any of six reported clinical outcomes, including body mass index
(−0.73; 95% CI: −1.84, 0.38), weight (−1.29; −3.06, 0.48), waist circumference (−2.41; −5.16, 0.34), body fat percentage (0.11; −1.56,
1.34), systolic blood pressure (−2.62; −5.31, 0.06), and diastolic blood pressure (−0.99; −2.73, 0.74). Studies were highly
heterogeneous in their design, device type, and outcomes. Interventions based on health behavior models and personalized
coaching were most successful. We found substantial gaps in the evidence base that should be considered before implementation
of remote patient monitoring in the clinical setting.
npj Digital Medicine  (2018) 1:20172 ; doi:10.1038/s41746-017-0002-4
INTRODUCTION
Wearable biosensors are non-invasive devices used to acquire,
transmit,
process,
store,
and
retrieve
health-related
data.1
Biosensors have been integrated into a variety of platforms,
including watches, wristbands, skin patches, shoes, belts, textiles,
and smartphones.2,3 Patients have the option to share data
obtained by biosensors with their providers or social networks to
support
clinical
treatment
decisions
and
disease
self-
management.4
The ability of wearable biosensors to passively capture and track
continuous health data gives promise to the field of health
informatics, which has recently become an area of interest for its
potential to
advance
precision
medicine.1 The concept
of
leveraging technological innovations to enhance care delivery
has many names in the healthcare lexicon. The terms digital
health, mobile health, mHealth, wireless health, Health 2.0,
eHealth, quantified self, self-tracking, telehealth, telemedicine,
precision medicine, personalized medicine, and connected health
are
among
those
that
are
often
used
synonymously.5
A
2005 systematic review uncovered over 50 unique and disparate
definitions for the term e-health in the literature.6 A similar
2007 study found 104 individual definitions for the term
telemedicine.7 For the purpose of this study, we employ the term
remote patient monitoring (RPM) and define it as the use of a non-
invasive, wearable device that automatically transmits data to a
web portal or mobile app for patient self-monitoring and/or health
provider assessment and clinical decision-making.
The literature on RPM reveals enthusiasm over its promises to
improve patient outcomes, reduce healthcare utilization, decrease
costs, provide abundant data for research, and increase physician
satisfaction.2,3,8 Non-invasive biosensors that allow for RPM offer
patients and clinicians real-time data that has the potential to
improve the timeliness of care, boost treatment adherence, and
drive improved health outcomes.4,9 The passive gathering of data
may also permit clinicians to focus their efforts on diagnosing,
educating, and treating patients, theoretically improving produc-
tivity and efficiency of the care provided.8 However, despite
anecdotal reports of RPM efficacy and growing interest in these
new health technologies by researchers, providers, and patients
alike, little empirical evidence exists to substantiate claims of its
ability to improve clinical outcomes, and our research indicates
many patients are not yet interested in or willing to share RPM
data with their physicians.4 A recently published systematic review
by Vegesna et al. summarized the state of RPM but provided only
a qualitative overview of the literature.10 In this review, we provide
a quantitative analysis of RPM studies to provide clinicians,
patients, and health system leaders with a clear view of the
effectiveness of RPM on clinical outcomes. Specifically, our study
questions were as follows: How effective are RPM devices and
associated interventions in changing important clinical outcomes
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-018-0027-3
Corrected: Author correction
Received: 11 May 2017 Revised: 28 August 2017 Accepted: 31 August 2017
1Division of Health Services Research, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 2Cedars-Sinai Center for Outcomes Research and Education (CS-CORE), Los Angeles, CA,
USA; 3Department of Health Policy and Management, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 4Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, College of
Medicine Tucson, Tucson, AZ, USA; 5Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA and 6American Journal of Gastroenterology, Bethesda, USA
Correspondence: Brennan M. R. Spiegel (Brennan.Spiegel@cshs.org)
www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
 of interest to patients and their clinicians? Which elements of RPM
interventions lead to a higher likelihood of success in affecting
clinically meaningful outcomes?
We sought to identify randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that
assess the effects of using non-invasive, wearable biosensors for
RPM on clinical outcomes. Understanding precisely in which
contexts biosensors can improve health outcomes is important in
guiding research pathways and increasing the effectiveness and
quality of care.
RESULTS
Study selection and data collection
We identified 4348 titles for review (Fig. 1). Of these, we selected
777 for abstract review and 64 for full-text review. A total of
27 studies were retained for final analysis.11–35 All studies were
RCTs published in peer-reviewed journals.
Quantitative identifiers
Study details.
The 27 studies analyzed had an average study
duration of 7.8 months. The study periods ranged from 7 days to
29 months (Table 1). The average sample size was 239 patients
and ranged from 40 to 1437 patients. Sixteen studies were
determined to be of high quality, with a Jadad score equal to 3.
Eleven studies were determined to be of low quality. The mean
Jadad score for all 27 studies identified in this review was 2.44
(Table 1). Since it is often not feasible to double-blind interven-
tions with wearable devices, the maximum Jadad score in these
trials was 3.
Study outcomes.
Eleven studies examined patient populations
with cardiovascular disease, including heart failure, arrhythmias,
and hypertension. Six studies evaluated patients with pulmonary
diseases, including emphysema, asthma, and sleep apnea. Six
trials examined overweight or obese patients or tested interven-
tions aimed at increasing physical activity to prevent weight gain.
The remaining studies focused on chronic pain, stroke, and
Parkinson’s disease (Table 2).
Devices and interventions.
RPM devices employed in these
studies included blood pressure monitors, ambulatory electro-
cardiograms, cardiac event recorders, positive airway pressure
machines, electronic weight scales, physical activity trackers and
accelerometers, spirometers, and pulse oximeters. The control
arms of most studies offered education along with standard care
but without RPM; however, eight studies used other, similar
devices. One study included various types of behavioral econom-
ics incentives (either donations to charity or cash incentives) in
addition to the biosensors.36
Twenty-two study interventions contained a feedback loop with
a care provider, such as a physician or nurse, who analyzed patient
data and communicated back with the patient to modify
treatment regimens, improve adherence, or consult. Only five
study interventions contained a feedback loop where a care
provider was not involved. In those instances, patients logged
onto a web portal or mobile app to self-monitor their measure-
ments and view a synthesis of their personal health data.
Qualitative review of high-quality studies.
We examined the
interventions, theoretical frameworks, and outcomes of the 16
high-quality studies by outcome or disease focus to determine if
there were common intervention elements that resulted in greater
effects on health and resource outcomes.
Remote
patient
monitoring
for
high-acuity
patients:
chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and heart failure.
Five high-
quality studies compared RPM with usual care for high-acuity
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or
heart failure.11,16,25,31,35 In Chau et al., 40 participants with a
previous hospitalization and diagnosed with moderate or severe
COPD were randomized to usual care or a telecare device kit that
provided patient feedback and was monitored by a community
nurse.11 Although several participants experienced technical
problems using the device kit, participants expressed greater
engagement in self-management of their COPD overall. None-
theless, the study found no positive effects in any of the primary
outcomes when compared to usual care. As the authors note, the
study was underpowered and had a short follow-up period of
Fig. 1
PRISMA flow diagram of the process used in study selection
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
1234567890():,;
 2 months. In De San Miguel et al., the intervention was similar: 80
participants received telehealth equipment that monitored vital
signs daily and was observed by a telehealth nurse.25 Patients in
the intervention group experienced reductions in hospitalizations,
emergency department visits, and length of stay, but none of the
reductions were statistically significant when compared to the
control group. Even so, the costs savings were $2931 per person,
suggesting that a study with more power could potentially see
significant cost and utilization savings. Dinesen et al. used a similar
study design: 111 participants with COPD were randomized to
receive telecare kits or usual care.31 The study found reductions in
hospital admissions and lower costs of admissions in the
intervention group, but only the mean hospital admission rate
was statistically significant. Likewise, Pedone et al. followed 99
participants with COPD randomized to RPM or usual care, and
found that the number of exacerbations and exacerbation-related
hospitalizations dropped in the intervention group, but neither
result was significant.35 The BEAT-HF trial by Ong et al. followed
1437 participants hospitalized with heart failure who were
randomized to RPM or usual care.16 Centralized nurses actively
monitored the RPM data. The researchers found no differences in
180-day all-cause readmissions between the two groups. Four
studies demonstrate the promise of RPM for COPD-related
hospitalizations and costs; longer follow-up periods and larger
sample sizes are needed to determine the full effect of RPM on
COPD outcomes. The use of measures such as the Patient
Activation Measure37 in future studies could identify whether
factors such as engagement and self-efficacy are important
moderators of healthcare outcomes. More evidence is needed to
determine whether heart failure is amenable to RPM; these
patients may require more intensive follow-up care and may not
be the ideal target population for RPM.
Remote patient monitoring for chronic disease: hypertension.
Two
high-quality studies focused on hypertension.15,23 Kim et al.
examined 374 patients randomized to (1) home blood pressure
monitoring, (2) remote monitoring using a wireless blood pressure
cuff with clinician follow-up, or (3) remote monitoring without
clinician follow-up.23 There were no differences observed in the
primary endpoint, sitting systolic blood pressure, in the three
groups. However, subjects over 55 years old with remote
monitoring (with or without clinician follow-up) experienced
significant decreases in the adjusted mean sitting systolic blood
pressure when compared to the control group. These results
indicate that for a select group of patients, RPM could be effective
in hypertension treatment. Logan et al. provided home blood
pressure telemonitoring with self-care messages on a smartphone
after each reading for patients in the intervention group.15
Messages were tailored based on care pathways defined by
running averages of blood pressure measurements. Physicians
were alerted if patients’ blood pressure crossed specific pre-set
thresholds and regular feedback was provided to patients and
clinicians. Systolic blood pressure decreased in the intervention
group;
however,
self-care
smartphone-based
support
also
appeared to worsen depression scores. These studies illustrate
that tailored RPM interventions based on care pathways can
Table 1.
Remote patient monitoring systematic review study
First author, year
Study duration
Sample size
Percent male (%)
Mean age
High quality study?a
Scalvini, 2005
7 days
310
24
52.5
No
Dansky, 2008
4 months
284
N/A
77
No
Woodend, 2008
15 months
249
75.1
63.6
No
Tan, 2010
2 weeks
120
40.6
48
No
Shuger, 2011
9 months
197
18.3
46.9
Yes
Chau, 2012
2 months
40
97.5
72.9
Yes
Dinesen, 2012
4 months
105
N/A
68
Yes
Fox, 2012
3 months
75
80
53.5
No
Logan, 2012
12 months
105
55.7
49
Yes
Ryan, 2012
6 months
288
37.4
49
No
De San Miguel, 2013
6 months
80
48.5
72.5
Yes
Greene, 2013
6 months
349
21.1
N/A
No
Lee, 2013
3 months
55
80.2
56.1
No
Pedone, 2013
9 months
99
67.5
74.7
Yes
Wijsman, 2013
3 months
226
59.2
64.8
Yes
Luley, 2014
12 months
178
58.7
50.3
No
Piga, 2014
3 months
40
2.5
56.9
Yes
Dorsch, 2015
15 months
135
59.3
62.3
Yes
Kent, 2015
14.5 months
112
40.8
43.3
Yes
Kim, 2015
29 months
374
58
57.1
Yes
Pedone, 2015
6 months
90
38.9
79.8
No
Wang, 2015
1.5 months
67
8.9
48.2
Yes
Bloss, 2016
6 months
130
44
55.5
No
Ginis, 2016
2.5 months
38
N/A
N/A
Yes
Ong, 2016
3 months
1437
53.1
73.5
Yes
Finkelstein, 2016
12 months
800
46.3
35.5
Yes
Jakicic, 2016
24 months
470
22.8
N/A
Yes
a A high-quality study is a study with a Jadad score ≥ 3 (5-point scale) (15)
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
 Table 2.
RPM study categories and device types
First author,
year
Country
Disease state
Device
Control
Primary
outcomes
(− / NS /+)
Care
provider
involved?
Meta-analysis measures
Population type
Lee, 2013
Korea
Acute
coronary
syndrome
Wireless electrocardiography device to
check heart rate during exercise
Ordinary medical
therapy, diet control,
and exercise
Exercise capacity
(+)
Yes
None
Adults with acute coronary
syndrome who recently
underwent a successful
percutaneous coronary
intervention
Tan, 2010
Singapore
Cardiac
arrhythmia
Internet-based ambulatory ECG
monitoring device
Transtelephonic
event recorder
Diagnostic yield
(NS)
Yes
None
Patients from the National
Heart Centre, Singapore
Chau, 2012
China
COPD
Pulse oximeter, respiratory rate sensor
No devices,
education only
Pulmonary
function (NS),
hospital
readmissions (NS),
ER usage (NS),
HRQL (NS)
Yes
None
Adults 60 years or older
with moderate-to-severe
COPD
Dinesen,
2012
Denmark
COPD
Telehealth monitor that collected blood
pressure, pulse, weight, and lung
function
Instructions on
home exercises only
Admission rates
(+) and mean cost
of admissions
costs (NS)
Yes
None
Adults 18 years or older
with severe-to-very severe
COPD
De San
Miguel,
2013
Australia
COPD
Device that measures blood pressure,
weight, temperature, pulse, and oxygen
saturation
Education only
Healthcare
utilization (NS)
Yes
None
Adults with COPD
receiving domiciliary
oxygen
Pedone,
2013
Italy
COPD
Pulse oximeter; wristband that measured
heart rate, physical activity, and
temperature
Standard care
Number of
exacerbations and
hospitalizations
(+)
Yes
None
Adults 65 or older with
COPD in GOLD stages II
and III
Dansky,
2008
USA
Heart failure
Blood pressure, pulse, and weight
monitoring system; digital stethoscope
Routine home visits
only
Hospitalizations
and ED visits (NS)
Yes
None
Patients with a primary or
secondary diagnosis of
heart failure
Pedone,
2015
Italy
Heart failure
Telemonitoring system measuring blood
pressure, heart rate, weight, and oxygen
saturation
Education only
Hospital
admissions and
mortality (+)
Yes
None
Adults 65 years or older
with heart failure
Ong, 2016
USA
Heart failure
Telemonitoring system measuring blood
pressure, heart rate, and weight
Education only
Readmission
within 180 days
after discharge
(NS)
Yes
None
Adults 50 years or older
with active treatment for
heart failure
Woodend,
2008
Canada
Heart failure
and angina
Electronic weight scale, blood pressure
monitor, and electrocardiogram
Usual care for
patients discharged
with HF or angina
Hospital
readmissions (+),
days spent in
hospital (+)
Yes
None
Adults with symptomatic
heart failure or agina
Luley, 2014
Germany
Metabolic
syndrome
Accelerometer tracking physical activity
Education only
Weight Loss (+)
Yes
Body mass index, weight,
waist circumference, systolic
blood pressure, diastolic
blood pressure
Adults aged 30–60 with a
diagnosis of metabolic
syndrome
Scalvini,
2005
Italy
Palpitations,
cardiac
arrhythmias
At home trans-telephonic event recorder At home Holter
monitoring
Number of total
diagnoses (+) and
total costs (+)
Yes
None
Adults with intermittent
palpitations
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
4
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
 Table 2. continued
First author,
year
Country
Disease state
Device
Control
Primary
outcomes
(− / NS /+)
Care
provider
involved?
Meta-analysis measures
Population type
Dorsch,
2015
USA
Stroke
Accelerometer with feedback from data
Accelerometer
without feedback
Total daily walking
time (NS) and
timed 15 m walk
(NS)
Yes
None
Patients with chronic
hemiparetic stroke
Logan,
2012
Canada
Hypertension
Blood pressure with smartphone
application
Home blood
pressure monitor
without transmission
of data
Daytime
ambulatory
systolic blood
pressure (+)
Yes
Systolic blood pressure,
diastolic blood pressure
Adults older than 30 years
with diabetes mellitus
Kim, 2015
Korea
Hypertension
Blood pressure monitor with remote
monitoring
Blood Pressure
measurement
without remote
monitoring
Sitting systolic
blood pressure
(NS)
Yes
Systolic blood pressure,
diastolic blood pressure
Patients 20 years or older
with hypertension
Bloss, 2016
USA
Hypertension,
diabetes,
cardiac
arrhythmias
Blood pressure monitor and mobile ECG Education and
website for disease
management
Total health
insurance claims
and visits to the
hospital (NS)
Yes
None
Adults with hypertension,
diabetes, and/or cardiac
arrhythmia
Greene,
2013
USA
Obesity
Accelerometer and weight scale
connected to an online social network
Education on diet
and physical activity
Weight (+)
Yes
Weight
Persons aged 17–79 who
expressed concern about
weight or health
Wang, 2015 USA
Obesity
Accelerometer with text messaging
reminders
Self-monitoring with
accelerometer only
Physical Activity
(NS)
No
None
Non-smoking adults aged
18–69 who are overweight
or obese (BMI ≥ 25)
Jakicic,
2016
USA
Obesity
Multi-sensor device worn on the upper
arm provided feedback to the participant
on energy expenditure and physical
activity through a small display or
through website
Diet, telephone
counseling, group
sessions, text
message prompts,
educational website
Weight (–)
No
Body mass index, weight,
body fat percentage
Adults aged 18–35 with a
body mass index between
25 and 40
Shuger,
2011
USA
Obesity
Physical activity monitor
Self-directed weight
loss program
Body weight (+)
and waist
circumference (+)
No
Body mass index, weight,
waist circumference, body
fat percentage, systolic
blood pressure
Underactive adults who
are overweight or obese
Wijsman,
2013
Netherlands Overweight
Accelerometer with personal website
Usual daily activity
Physical activity
counts (+)
Yes
Body mass index, weight,
waist circumference, body
fat percentage, systolic
blood pressure, diastolic
blood pressure
Adults aged 60–70 years
without diabetes
Kent, 2015
Australia
Sub-acute or
chronic low
back pain
Motion-sensor movement device with
biofeedback
Motion-sensor
without biofeedback
Self-reported pain
intensity (+) and
activity limitation
(+)
Yes
None
Adults aged 18–65
presenting with a primary
complaint of low back pain
Piga, 2014
Italy
Systemic
sclerosis and
rheumatoid
arthritis
Telemonitoring system with hand
exercises results transmitted to
physicians
Standard at home
kinesiotherapy
exercises
Dreiser’s Index
(NS), HAQ (NS),
HAMIS hand (NS)
Yes
None
Adults diagnosed with
systemic sclerosis or
rheumatoid arthritis
Ryan, 2012
United
Kingdom
Asthma
Spirometer with mobile application
Paper recording of
peak flow and
symptoms
Asthma control
(NS), self efficacy
(NS)
Yes
None
Adolescents and adults
with poorly controlled
asthma
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
 effectively reduce blood pressure for select groups of patients, but
researchers should examine adverse consequences such as
depression and other patient-reported outcomes when designing
interventions that include continuous monitoring.
Remote patient monitoring for rehabilitation: stroke, Parkinson’s
disease, low back pain, and hand function.
Four high-quality
studies focused on providing feedback regarding various aspects
of mobility rehabilitation, including stroke or Parkinson’s disease
rehabilitation, low back pain physiotherapy, or hand function
physical therapy.20,24,27,28 Dorsch et al. recruited 135 participants
with stroke of any type from 16 rehabilitation centers in 11
countries.24 All participants wore wireless ankle tri-axial acceler-
ometers while performing conventional rehabilitation exercises;
intervention participants received and reviewed augmented
feedback with therapists who used the wireless device data,
while the control group received standardized verbal feedback
from therapists. The researchers found no significant difference in
the average daily time spent walking between groups throughout
the duration of the trial. The researchers theorized that because
participants walked such short amounts of time per day (a mean
daily time of eight minutes in the severe group and 12 minutes in
the moderate group), there was insufficient time to use the data
provided by the wireless devices.
In Ginis et al., 40 participants with Parkinson’s disease
undergoing gait training were randomized to home visits from
the researcher who provided training on using a smartphone
application and ankle-based wireless devices that offered positive
and corrective feedback on gait, or an active control, in which
they
received
personalized
gait
feedback
from
the
same
researcher during home visits.20 Both groups improved on the
primary outcomes (single- and dual-task gait speed), but patients
using the app and wireless devices improved significantly more
on balance and experienced less deterioration over the six-week
period.
Kent et al. randomized 112 participants in eight clinics
between wearing active wireless motion sensors placed along
the spine, and placebo sensors while receiving physical therapy
and guideline-based care.28 Participants received six to eight
physical therapy treatment sessions over 10 weeks and were
followed
for
a
year.
Patients
in
the
intervention
group
experienced significantly less pain and improved function
compared to the control group. Designed as a pilot study, Piga
et al. assigned 20 patients with systemic sclerosis or rheumatoid
arthritis to use a self-managed hand kinesiotherapy protocol
assisted by an RPM device.27 The device provides both visual
and audio feedback on strength-, mobility-, and dexterity-based
therapy. The control group received the kinesiotherapy protocol
alone. Both groups improved over time, but there was no
statistically significant difference in primary outcomes between
the two groups. The researchers found, however, that measured
adherence to the home-based RPM therapy was very high (90%).
These four studies demonstrate mixed results on the use of RPM
in rehabilitation but suggest potential insights. First, RPM is
most
useful
in
settings
where
there
are
clearly
defined
opportunities to use the data to change clinical care. For
example, in the study examining stroke rehabilitation, partici-
pants did not walk enough throughout the day to effectively use
the feedback. The study examining Parkinson’s disease rehabi-
litation, however, provided ample opportunities for participants
to use the feedback over a six-week period, and participants saw
important changes in clinical outcomes. Second, adherence to
home-based rehabilitation therapy might be an important
process outcome that could be included in future studies.
Finally, using placebo sensors such as those used in Kent et al. is
an important way to increase the validity and reliability of these
studies.
Table 2. continued
First author,
year
Country
Disease state
Device
Control
Primary
outcomes
(− / NS /+)
Care
provider
involved?
Meta-analysis measures
Population type
Ginis, 2016
Belgium/
Israel
Parkinson’s
disease
Inertial measurement unit with
smartphone application feedback
Weekly researcher
visits without use of
devices
Gait speed under
usual and dual
task conditions
(NS)
No
None
Adults with Parkinson’s
disease
Fox, 2012
Canada
Sleep apnea
PAP machine with transmission of
physiologic information
Standard PAP
machine
PAP adherence (+) Yes
None
Adult patients with
moderate-to-severe sleep
apnea
Finkelstein,
2016
Singapore
No specific
disease state
Sealed ActiGraph triaxial GT-3x +
accelerometer and Fitbit Zip with
website feedback
Education, cash
incentives for
participation
Moderate-to-
vigorous physical
activity per week
(−)
No
Weight, systolic blood
pressure
Full-time workers aged
21–65
NS not statistically significant, COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, HAQ health assessment questionnaire, HAMIS hand mobility in scleroderma, ECG electrocardiogram, GOLD global initiative for chronic
obstructive lung disease, HRQL health-related quality of life, ED emergency department, PAP positive airways pressure
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
6
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
 Remote patient monitoring for increasing physical activity: over-
weightness and obesity.
Five studies examined whether RPM
could increase physical activity and combined activity monitors
with a variety of behavioral interventions, including text messa-
ging, personalized coaching, group-based behavior therapy, or
cash- or charity-based incentives. In Wang et al., 67 participants
who were overweight or obese were randomly assigned to wear a
Fitbit One activity tracker alone or to wear the activity tracker
combined with receiving physical activity prompts three times a
day via text messages.32 The researchers found that both groups
wearing the Fitbit devices saw a small increase in moderate-to-
vigorous physical activity. Participants receiving the automatic text
message prompts saw a small additional increase in activity that
lasted only one week. Shuger et al. randomized 197 overweight or
obese participants between four groups: (1) a control group that
received a self-directed weight loss program via a manual, (2) a
group that participated in a group-based behavioral weight loss
program, (3) a group that received an armband (the SenseWear
Armband) that monitored energy balance, daily energy expendi-
ture, and energy intake, and (4) a group that received the
armband and the group-based behavioral program.19 The group
receiving the armband and group-based behavioral health
intervention was the only one that achieved significant weight
loss at nine months compared to the control group. Finkelstein
et al. employed a behavioral economics study design, randomiz-
ing 800 participants from 13 companies in Singapore to one of
four groups: (1) the control group, (2) Fitbit Zip activity tracker
alone, (3) Fitbit Zip plus charity incentives, or (4) Fitbit Zip plus
cash incentives.36 At 12 months, the Fitbit-only group and the
Fitbit plus charity incentives group outperformed the control
group and the Fitbit plus cash incentive group. The group
receiving cash incentives saw a reduction in moderate-to-vigorous
physical activity when compared to the control group.
Four hundred and seventy-one overweight and obese partici-
pants in Jakicic et al. received a low-calorie diet, prescription for
physical
activity,
text
message
prompts,
group
counseling
sessions, telephone counseling sessions, and access to materials
on a website; the enhanced intervention group also received an
activity tracker (FIT Core) that displayed data via the device
interface or a website.38 The group that used the activity tracker
experienced a lower amount of weight loss compared to the non-
tracker group. Finally, in Wijsman et al., 235 participants aged 60–
70 years without diabetes were randomized to the intervention
group or a waitlist control group.17 Participants in the intervention
group received a commercially available physical activity program
(Philips DirectLife) based on the stages of change and I-change
health behavior change models. The program includes an
accelerometer-based activity tracker, a personal website, and a
personal e-coach who provides support via email. After 13 weeks,
daily physical activity increased significantly, and weight, waist
circumference, and fat mass decreased significantly more in the
intervention group compared to the control group. The results
from these four different physical activity studies propose
plausible directions into how and whether activity trackers can
motivate behavior change. Cash incentives proved to be less
effective
than
charity
incentives,
and
automated,
non-
personalized text messages were also unproductive. Successful
interventions combined RPM with several evidence-based com-
ponents, including personalized coaching or group-based pro-
grams, or were grounded in validated behavior change models.
Data analysis
For the meta-analysis, we created six groups of outcomes that had
three or more studies, including: body mass index (BMI), weight,
waist circumference, body fat percentage, systolic blood pressure,
and diastolic blood pressure. There were no groupings found
among the binary variables, so they were not included in the
meta-analysis. In total, the meta-analysis included eight of the
27 studies.
Body mass index (BMI)
Four studies17,19,33,38 reported baseline and final outcome data for
both
intervention
and
control
groups
for
BMI.
The
total
aggregated calculation included 455 control patients and 616
intervention patients (Fig. 2). The meta-analysis yielded a mean
difference point estimate of −0.73 (95% confidence interval:
[−1.84, 0.38]), indicating no statistically significant difference
between
the
experimental
and
control
arms
at
the
95%
confidence level with respect to whether RPM-based interventions
resulted in a change in BMI. The I2 statistic was 92% (95%
Confidence Interval: [83%, 96%]), illustrating a high degree of
heterogeneity.
Weight
Six studies17,19,30,33,36,38 reported data for both intervention and
control groups for weight. The meta-analysis calculation was
based on 824 control patients and 1392 intervention patients (Fig. 3).
The meta-analysis yielded a mean difference point estimate of
−1.29 (95% Confidence Interval: [−3.06, 0.48]), indicating no
statistically significant difference. The I2 statistic was 92% (95%
Confidence Interval: [85%, 96%]), illustrating a high degree of
heterogeneity.
Waist circumference
Three studies17,19,33 reported data for both intervention and
control groups for waist circumference, with a total of 222 control
patients and 379 intervention patients (Fig. 4). The meta-analysis
yielded a mean difference point estimate
of −2.41 (95%
Confidence Interval: [−5.16, 0.34]), indicating no statistically
significant difference. The I2 statistic was 84% (95% [51%, 95%]),
illustrating a moderate to high degree of heterogeneity.
Body fat percentage
Three studies17,19,38 reported data for both intervention and
control groups for body fat percentage. There were a total of 395
Fig. 2
Point estimates of the mean difference for each study (green squares) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (horizontal
black lines) are shown, with the size of the green square representing the relative weight of the study. The black diamond represents the
overall pooled estimate, with the tips of the diamond representing the 95% Confidence Intervals
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
 control patients and 498 intervention patients (Fig. 5). The meta-
analysis yielded a mean difference point estimate of 0.11 (95%
Confidence Interval: [−1.56, 1.34]), indicating no statistically
significant difference. The I2 statistic was 86% (95% [59%, 95%]),
illustrating a moderate to high degree of heterogeneity.
Systolic blood pressure
Five studies15,17,19,23,33,36 reported data for both intervention and
control groups for systolic blood pressure, with a total of 548
control patients and 1135 intervention patients (Fig. 6). The meta-
analysis yielded a mean difference point estimate of −0.99 (95%
Confidence Interval: [−2.73, 0.74]), indicating no statistically
significant difference. The I2 statistic was 44% (95% [0%, 81%]),
illustrating an unknown degree of heterogeneity.
Diastolic blood pressure
Four studies15,17,23,33 reported data for both intervention and
control groups for diastolic blood pressure, with a total of 347
control patients and 536 intervention patients (Fig. 7). The meta-
analysis yielded a mean difference point estimate of −0.74 (95%
Confidence Interval: [−2.34, 0.86]), indicating no statistically
significant difference. The I2 statistic was 28% (95% [0%, 73%]),
illustrating an unknown degree of heterogeneity.
DISCUSSION
Based on our systematic review and examination of high-quality
studies on RPM, we found that remote patient monitoring showed
early promise in improving outcomes for patients with select
conditions, including obstructive pulmonary disease, Parkinson’s
disease, hypertension, and low back pain. Interventions aimed at
increasing physical activity and weight loss using various activity
trackers showed mixed results: cash incentives and automated
text messages were ineffective, whereas interventions based on
validated health behavior models, care pathways, and tailored
coaching were the most successful. However, even within these
interventions, certain populations appeared to benefit more from
RPM than others. For example, only adults over 55 years of age
saw benefits from RPM in one hypertension study. Future studies
should be powered to analyze sub-populations to better under-
stand when and for whom RPM is most effective.
For the meta-analyses, we examined six different outcomes
(BMI, weight, waist circumference, body fat percentage, systolic
blood pressure, and diastolic blood pressure), and found no
statistically significant differences between the use of RPM devices
and controls with regard to any of these outcomes. However, we
were limited by high heterogeneity and scarcity of high-quality
studies. The high degree of heterogeneity is likely due to
differences in the types of devices used, follow-up periods, and
Fig. 3
Point estimates of the mean difference for each study (green squares) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (horizontal
lines) are shown, with the size of the green square representing the relative weight of the study. The black diamond represents the overall
pooled estimate, with the tips of the diamond representing the 95% Confidence Intervals
Fig. 4
Point estimates of the mean difference for each study (green squares) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (horizontal
lines) are shown, with the size of the green square representing the relative weight of the study. The black diamond represents the overall
pooled estimate, with the tips of the diamond representing the 95% Confidence Intervals
Fig. 5
Point estimates of the mean difference for each study (green squares) and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (horizontal
lines) are shown, with the size of the green square representing the relative weight of the study. The black diamond represents the overall
pooled estimate, with the tips of the diamond representing the 95% Confidence Intervals
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
8
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
 the types of controls in each study. In summary, our results
indicate that while some RPM interventions may prove to be
promising in changing clinical outcomes in the future, there are
still large gaps in the evidence base. Of note, we found that many
currently available consumer products have not yet been tested in
RCTs
with
clinically
meaningful
outcomes.
Although
some
consumer-facing digital health products may be effective for
promoting behavior change, there is currently a dearth of
evidence that these devices achieve health benefits; more
research is needed in this field. Patients, clinicians, and health
system leaders should proceed with caution before implementing
and using RPM to reliably change clinical outcomes.
Future research should identify and remedy potential barriers to
RPM effectiveness on clinical outcomes. For example, factorial
design trials should evaluate variants of an RPM intervention in
terms of frequency, duration, intensity, and timing. We also found
that there are few large-scale clinical trials demonstrating a
clinically meaningful impact on patient outcomes. Only one study
identified in this review had a sample size of more than 1000
patients;
most
studies
included
fewer
than
200
patients.
Additionally, most studies had relatively short follow-up periods.
Given that many of these studies were described as pilot studies, it
is clear that the field of RPM is relatively new and evolving. Larger
studies with multiple intervention groups will be able to better
distinguish which components are most effective and whether
behavior change can be sustained over time using RPM.
Future studies would also highly benefit from a mixed-methods
approach in which both patients and clinicians are interviewed.
Adding a qualitative component would give researchers insight
into which RPM elements best engage and motivate patients,
nurses, allied health workers, and physicians. Behavior change is
complex; understanding how and if specific devices and device-
related interventions and incentives motivate health behavior
change is an important area that is still not well understood. For
example, previous studies have found that most devices result in
only short-term changes in behavior and motivation.39 Activity
trackers have been found to change behavior for only approxi-
mately three to six months.40 Studies in this review found that
cash incentives performed worse than charity incentives, illustrat-
ing that incentivizing individuals is complex and nuanced. Gaining
a better understanding of how individuals interface with these
health-related technologies will assist in developing evidence-
based devices that have the potential to change behavior over
longer periods of time.
One of the challenges of this review was the relatively broad
survey into the effectiveness of RPM on clinical outcomes. This
broad approach allowed us to examine the similarities among
interventions targeted at different conditions, but also made it
difficult to combine results among studies using different devices
and associated interventions. Additional limitations of this study
include the use of one primary database, PubMed, to identify
articles.
However, we examined review articles
to identify
potential
studies
that
may
be
listed
in
other
databases.
Additionally, the study question focused solely on non-invasive
wearable devices and excluded invasive devices such as glucose
sensors, on which there have been many studies. The scope of this
study included only RCTs with clinically meaningful outcomes.
These rigorous search criteria excluded studies without controls or
randomization. While non-randomized studies may nonetheless
inform the field of RPM, given the risk of selection bias inherent in
non-randomized trials, we determined it was optimal to restrict
the inclusion criteria to RCTs in this meta-analysis of controlled
trials.
An inherent shortcoming of most wearable device studies is
difficulty in following double-blind procedures; the intervention
arms necessarily include patient engagement or, at minimum,
placement of the device on the patient’s body, which can be
difficult to blind. Some studies have used devices that were turned
off or were non-functional to reduce a potential placebo or
Hawthorne effect,41 but given the data feedback loop integrated
into many of these devices, it is extremely difficult to blind the
provider receiving the data, which may impact results. None-
theless, this shortcoming would tend to benefit the active
intervention, making it more likely to show a difference in an
unblinded study.
Fig. 6
Point estimates of the mean difference for each study (green squares) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (horizontal
lines) are shown, with the size of the green square representing the relative weight of the study. The black diamond represents the overall
pooled estimate, with the tips of the diamond representing the 95% Confidence Intervals
Fig. 7
Point estimates of the mean difference for each study (green squares) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (horizontal
lines) are shown, with the size of the green square representing the relative weight of the study. The black diamond represents the overall
pooled estimate, with the tips of the diamond representing the 95% Confidence Intervals
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
 For RPM interventions to impact healthcare, they will need to
impact outcomes that matter to patients. Examples include
patient-reported health related quality of life (HRQOL), symptom
severity, satisfaction with care, resource utilization, hospitaliza-
tions, readmissions, and survival. There is little data investigating
the impact of RPM on these outcome measures. It may strengthen
the interventions if they are developed directly in partnership with
end-users—i.e. patients themselves. Further research might also
emphasize how to personalize RPM interventions, as described by
Joseph Kvedar and others.42–44 This approach seeks to optimize
applications and sensors within a biopsychosocial framework.44 By
using validated behavior-based models from the psychological
and public health literature that integrate a variety of data from
time of day to step counts, to the local weather, to levels of
depression or anxiety, these tailored applications aim to generate
contextually appropriate, highly tailored messages to patients at
the right time and right place.42–45 This approach might combine
the most successful elements of the effective interventions in this
review, including personalized coaching and feedback, in a more
cost-effective manner. Additionally, given the pronounced chal-
lenges in changing health-related behaviors, incorporating well-
researched theoretical frameworks into interventions, such as the
Health Belief Model,46 the Stages of Change Model,47 or Theory of
Reasoned Action/Planned Behavior,48 may be ultimately more
successful than merely improving the technical aspects of RPM.
METHODS
Study identification
We performed a systematic review of PubMed from January 2000
to October 2016 to identify RCTs that assessed clinical outcomes
related to the use of non-invasive wearable biosensors versus a
control condition. The subject headings and key words incorpo-
rated into the search strategy included:
(“biosensing techniques”[MeSH Terms] OR “Remote sensing
technology”[MeSH] OR “remote sensing”[text word] OR “On
body sensor”[text word] OR Biosensor*[text word] OR “Wear-
able device”[text word] OR “Constant health monitoring”[text
word] OR “Wireless technology”[text word] OR “wearable
sensor”[text word] OR “wearable”[text word] OR “medical
sensor”[text word] OR “Body Sensor”[text word] OR “Passive
monitor”[text word] OR “wireless monitor”[text word] OR
“monitoring device”[text word] OR “wireless sensor”[text word])
AND (hasabstract[text] OR English[lang]) AND (“Clinical Trial
“[Publication Type] OR “Randomized Controlled Trial “[Publica-
tion Type] OR “randomized”[tiab] OR “placebo”[tiab] OR
“therapy”[sh] OR randomly[tiab] OR trial[tiab] OR groups[tiab])
NOT (“animals”[MeSH] NOT “humans”[MeSH]).
After an initial review of our search yield, we added the
following subject headings and key words:
(“Remote monitoring”[text word] OR “Remote patient monitor-
ing”[text word] OR “self-monitoring”[text word] OR “self-
tracking”[text word] OR “remote tracking”[text word] OR “home
monitoring”[text word] OR “wireless monitoring”[text word] OR
“online monitoring”[text word] OR “online tracking”[text word]
OR “telemonitoring”[text word] OR “ambulatory monitoring”[-
text word]) AND (“e-health”[text word] OR “m-health”[text
word] OR “mobile”[text word] OR “mobile health”[text word]
OR “telehealth”[text word] OR “telemedicine”[text word] OR
“digital health”[text word] OR “digital medicine”[text word] OR
((“smartphone”[MeSH Terms] OR “smartphone”[All Fields]) AND
text[All Fields] AND word[All Fields]) OR “social network”[text
word] OR “Web based”[text word] OR “online portal”[text word]
OR “internet based”[text word] OR “cell phone”[text word] OR
“mobile phone”[text word]).
Additionally, we consulted references from a previous systema-
tic review.10
Study selection and data extraction
We assessed all titles for relevance and rejected titles if they
fulfilled pre-specified exclusion criteria (Table 3). Eight trained
investigators independently screened titles in pairs of two. We
calculated Fleiss’ Kappa, a measure of the degree of consistency
between two or more raters to ensure high inter-rater reliability,
and aimed for a kappa higher than 0.85.49 For studies identified in
the second review process, a second independent review was
performed. Differences regarding inclusion and exclusion criteria
were resolved through consensus. We followed a similar method
to review abstracts for all studies that passed the title screening
stage, and included any study that met all of the abstract inclusion
criteria (Table 3).
Data abstraction and data management
Each study was jointly abstracted for data by two reviewers and
the results were entered into a standardized abstraction form. For
each study, the reviewers extracted data about the targeted
disease state, device type, control intervention, clinically relevant
outcomes, type of feedback loop, descriptive information of
subjects, and study design. For the analysis, we examined only
continuous variables.
For continuous variables, we used a difference-in-differences
model to assess relative change between the baseline measure
and final measure for control and treatment groups. If a study did
not provide baseline data, we emailed the respective authors and
requested the data. If we did not receive a reply or the authors did
not have baseline data, we excluded the study from this analysis.
We standardized all studies to provide the change from
baseline mean and standard deviation for both the experimental
and control arms. If a study reported only standard errors, p-
values, or confidence intervals, we converted these to standard
deviations (see Appendix). If a study did not provide a standard
deviation or any of the three statistics mentioned above, we
contacted the primary author, as explained above, and excluded
the study from this analysis if they could not provide that
information. Many of the identified studies used more than one
experimental arm; we followed methods from Cochrane to
combine the two groups into one larger group (see Appendix).50
Table 3.
Study Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Inclusion Criteria
Exclusion Criteria
[1] the study included a device on or touching the human body that [2] sensed a
biometric measure related to the body itself; [3] the study contained a relevant
control group; [4] the device automatically transmitted data to a web portal or app
that could be accessed by the patient and/or care provider; [5] if a care provider had
access to patient device data, they communicated back to the patient in regards to
those data; and [6] the study measured a meaningful, clinically relevant health
outcome.
[1] Studies in languages other than English, [2] studies
not concerned with human subjects, [3] studies
conducted with regards to implantable or invasive or
ingestible or injectable devices, [4] studies on the
cellular, biochemical or microscale and [5] studies
primarily focused on the theory, design or proof of
concept of the device.
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
10
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
 We directionally corrected all signs and adjusted any differences in
units of calculation (i.e. lbs vs. kg).
Given the heterogeneity of the interventions and outcomes, we
grouped the outcome variables into separate groups for analysis
(e.g.
cholesterol,
blood
pressure).
This
process
was
jointly
completed by two reviewers, with any disagreements discussed
with a third-party arbiter.
Statistical analyses
We used Review Manager (Review Manager [RevMan] Version 5.3.
Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Colla-
boration, 2014) to conduct a difference-in-differences random
effects analysis. We used a difference-in-differences random
effects analysis to help control for the many differences in the
studies and to limit heterogeneity. We weighted the studies by
sample size and used 95% confidence intervals around our point
estimates. We also assessed for heterogeneity using the I2 statistic
and calculated the 95% confidence intervals using the standard
methods described by Higgins et al.51 We did not perform tests for
funnel plot asymmetry to examine publication bias given that this
type of analysis is not recommended for meta-analyses with fewer
than 10 studies.52
Strength of the body of evidence
We assigned a score for methodological quality by applying the
Jadad scale,53 a commonly used instrument for measuring the
quality of randomized controlled trials. The score awards points
for appropriate randomization, presence of concealed allocation,
adequacy
of
double
blinding,
appropriateness
of
blinding
technique, and documentation of withdrawals and dropouts.
The score ranges from 0 to 5, where a score of ≥3 denotes “high
quality” based on the original validation studies. We measured
inter-rater agreement for each step with a k statistic, and adopted
a threshold of ≥0.7 as the definition for acceptable agreement.
Disagreements were adjudicated by discussion and consensus
between the two primary reviewers and a third-party arbiter.
Data availability
The data used in this study was manually abstracted from the
27 studies identified in the systematic review. The meta-analysis
used data from 8 of those 27 studies, which are referenced at the
relevant points in the paper.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
B.N. abstracted the data, ran the analysis, and wrote the results. M.S.K. summarized
the high-quality studies in the results section. M.S.K., A.J., and B.M.S. assisted in
writing and editing the manuscript. M.S.K., S.M., L.S., S.J., S.D., V.C.T., D.L., and J.T.K.
conducted the literature search, and systematic review. All authors contributed to
and have approved the final manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Change history: The original version of this Article had an incorrect Article number
of 2 and an incorrect Publication year of 2017. These errors have now been corrected
in the PDF and HTML versions of the Article.
REFERENCES
1. Andreu-Perez, J., Leff, D. R., Ip, H. M. & Yang, G. Z. From wearable sensors to smart
implants—toward pervasive and personalized healthcare. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 62, 2750–2762 (2015).
2. Ajami, S. & Teimouri, F. Features and application of wearable biosensors in
medical care. J. Res. Med. Sci. 20, 1208–1215 (2015).
3. Steinhubl, S. R., Muse, E. D. & Topol, E. J. The emerging field of mobile health. Sci.
Transl. Med. 7, 283rv283 (2015).
4. Pevnick, J. M., Fuller, G., Duncan, R. & Spiegel, B. M. R. A large-scale initiative
inviting patients to share personal fitness tracker data with their providers: initial
results. PLoS ONE 11, e0165908 (2016).
5. Atallah, L., Lo, B. & Yang, G. Z. Can pervasive sensing address current challenges
in global healthcare? J. Epidemiol. Glob. Health 2, 1–13 (2012).
6. Banaee, H., Ahmed, M. U. & Loutfi, A. Data mining for wearable sensors in health
monitoring systems: a review of recent trends and challenges. Sens. 13, 17472–
17500 (2013).
7. Dobkin, B. H. & Dorsch, A. The promise of mHealth: daily activity monitoring and
outcome assessments by wearable sensors. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair. 25, 788–
798 (2011).
8. Oh, H., Rizo, C., Enkin, M. & Jadad, A. What is eHealth (3): a systematic review of
published definitions. J. Med. Internet Res. 7, e1 (2005).
9. Sood, S. et al. What is telemedicine? A collection of 104 peer-reviewed per-
spectives and theoretical underpinnings. Telemed. J. E. Health 13, 573–590 (2007).
10. Vegesna, A., Tran, M., Angelaccio, M. & Arcona, S. Remote patient monitoring via
non-invasive digital technologies: a systematic review. Telemed. J. E. Health 23, 3–
17 (2017).
11. Chau, J. P. et al. A feasibility study to investigate the acceptability and potential
effectiveness of a telecare service for older people with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Int. J. Med. Inform. 81, 674–682 (2012).
12. Bloss, C. S. et al. A prospective randomized trial examining health care utilization
in individuals using multiple smartphone-enabled biosensors. PeerJ. 4, e1554
(2016).
13. Scalvini, S. et al. Cardiac event recording yields more diagnoses than 24-hour
Holter monitoring in patients with palpitations. J. Telemed. Telecare. 11, 14–16
(2005).
14. Ryan, D. et al. Clinical and cost effectiveness of mobile phone supported self
monitoring of asthma: multicentre randomised controlled trial. BMJ 344, e1756
(2012).
15. Logan, A. G. et al. Effect of home blood pressure telemonitoring with self-care
support on uncontrolled systolic hypertension in diabetics. Hypertension 60, 51–
57 (2012).
16. Ong, M. K. et al. Effectiveness of remote patient monitoring after discharge of
hospitalized patients with heart failure: the better effectiveness after transition-
heart failure (BEAT-HF) randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 176, 310–318
(2016).
17. Wijsman, C. A. et al. Effects of a web-based intervention on physical activity and
metabolism in older adults: randomized controlled trial. J. Med. Internet Res. 15,
e233 (2013).
18. Pedone, C., Rossi, F. F., Cecere, A., Costanzo, L. & Antonelli Incalzi, R. Efficacy of a
physician-led multiparametric telemonitoring system in very old adults with
heart failure. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 63, 1175–1180 (2015).
19. Shuger, S. L. et al. Electronic feedback in a diet- and physical activity-based
lifestyle intervention for weight loss: a randomized controlled trial. Int. J. Behav.
Nutr. Phys. Act. 8, 41 (2011).
20. Ginis, P. et al. Feasibility and effects of home-based smartphone-delivered
automated feedback training for gait in people with Parkinson’s disease: a pilot
randomized controlled trial. Park. Relat. Disord. 22, 28–34 (2016).
21. Lee, Y. H. et al. Impact of home-based exercise training with wireless monitoring
on patients with acute coronary syndrome undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention. J. Korean Med. Sci. 28, 564–568 (2013).
22. Tan, B. Y., Ho, K. L., Ching, C. K. & Teo, W. S. Novel electrogram device with web-
based service centre for ambulatory ECG monitoring. Singap. Med. J. 51, 565–569
(2010).
23. Kim, Y. N., Shin, D. G., Park, S. & Lee, C. H. Randomized clinical trial to assess the
effectiveness of remote patient monitoring and physician care in reducing office
blood pressure. Hypertens. Res. 38, 491–497 (2015).
24. Dorsch, A. K., Thomas, S., Xu, X., Kaiser, W. & Dobkin, B. H. SIRRACT: an interna-
tional randomized clinical trial of activity feedback during inpatient stroke
rehabilitation enabled by wireless sensing. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair. 29, 407–
415 (2015).
25. De San Miguel, K., Smith, J. & Lewin, G. Telehealth remote monitoring for
community-dwelling older adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Telemed. J. E. Health 19, 652–657 (2013).
26. Woodend, A. K. et al. Telehome monitoring in patients with cardiac disease who
are at high risk of readmission. Heart Lung. 37, 36–45 (2008).
27. Piga, M. et al. Telemedicine applied to kinesiotherapy for hand dysfunction in
patients with systemic sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis: recovery of movement
and telemonitoring technology. J. Rheumatol. 41, 1324–1333 (2014).
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
11
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
 28. Kent, P., Laird, R. & Haines, T. The effect of changing movement and posture
using motion-sensor biofeedback, versus guidelines-based care, on the clinical
outcomes of people with sub-acute or chronic low back pain-a multicentre,
cluster-randomised, placebo-controlled, pilot trial. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 16,
131 (2015).
29. Fox, N. et al. The impact of a telemedicine monitoring system on positive airway
pressure adherence in patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a randomized
controlled trial. Sleep 35, 477–481 (2012).
30. Greene, J., Sacks, R., Piniewski, B., Kil, D. & Hahn, J. S. The impact of an online
social network with wireless monitoring devices on physical activity and weight
loss. J. Prim. Care Community Health 4, 189–194 (2013).
31. Dinesen, B. et al. Using preventive home monitoring to reduce hospital admis-
sion rates and reduce costs: a case study of telehealth among chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients. J. Telemed. Telecare. 18, 221–225 (2012).
32. Wang, J. B. et al. Wearable sensor/device (Fitbit One) and SMS text-messaging
prompts to increase physical activity in overweight and obese adults: a rando-
mized controlled trial. Telemed. J. E. Health 21, 782–792 (2015).
33. Luley, C. et al. Weight loss by telemonitoring of nutrition and physical activity in
patients with metabolic syndrome for 1 year. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 33, 363–374 (2014).
34. Dansky, K. H., Vasey, J. & Bowles, K. Impact of telehealth on clinical outcomes in
patients with heart failure. Clin. Nurs. Res. 17, 182–199 (2008).
35. Pedone, C., Chiurco, D., Scarlata, S. & Incalzi, R. A. Efficacy of multiparametric
telemonitoring on respiratory outcomes in elderly people with COPD: a rando-
mized controlled trial. BMC Health Serv. Res. 13, 82 (2013).
36. Finkelstein, E. A. et al. Effectiveness of activity trackers with and without incen-
tives to increase physical activity (TRIPPA): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30284-4 (2016).
37. Hibbard, J. H., Stockard, J., Mahoney, E. R. & Tusler, M. Development of the patient
activation measure (PAM): conceptualizing and measuring activation in patients
and consumers. Health Serv. Res. 39, 1005–1026 (2004).
38. Jakicic, J. M. et al. Effect of wearable technology combined with a lifestyle
intervention on long-term weight loss: the IDEA randomized clinical trial. JAMA
316, 1161–1171 (2016).
39. Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S. & Pratt, W. In Proc. SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
Computing Systems. 3063–3072 (ACM, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2011).
40. Shih, P. C., Han, K., Poole, E. S., Rosson, M. B. & Carroll, J. M. Use and adoption
challenges of wearable activity trackers. In iConf. Proc. (iSchools, Newport Beach,
California, 2015).
41. McCambridge, J., Witton, J. & Elbourne, D. R. Systematic review of the Hawthorne
effect: new concepts are needed to study research participation effects. J. Clin.
Epidemiol. 67, 267–277 (2014).
42. Agboola, S. et al. Pain management in cancer patients using a mobile app: study
design of a randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res. Protoc. 3, e76 (2014).
43. Agboola, S. et al. Improving outcomes in cancer patients on oral anti-cancer
medications using a novel mobile phone-based intervention: study design of a
randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res. Protoc. 3, e79 (2014).
44. Kvedar, J., Coye, M. J. & Everett, W. Connected health: a review of technologies
and strategies to improve patient care with telemedicine and telehealth. Health
Aff. 33, 194–199 (2014).
45. Agboola, S., Palacholla, R. S., Centi, A., Kvedar, J. & Jethwani, K. A multimodal
mHealth intervention (FeatForward) to improve physical activity behavior in
patients with high cardiometabolic risk factors: rationale and protocol for a
randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res. Protoc. 5 (2016).
46. Rosenstock, I. M. The health belief model and preventive health behavior. Health
Educ. Monogr. 2, 354–386 (1974).
47. Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C. & Norcross, J. C. In search of how people
change. Appl. Addict. Behav. Am. Psychol. 47, 1102–1114 (1992).
48. Ajzen, I. The theory of planned behavior. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 50,
179–211 (1991).
49. McHugh, M. L. Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochem. Med. 22, 276–282
(2012).
50. Higgins, J. P. & Green, S. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Inter-
ventions. (The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011).
51. Higgins, J. P. & Thompson, S. G. Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis.
Stat. Med. 21, 1539–1558 (2002).
52. Sterne, J. A. C. et al. Recommendations for examining and interpreting funnel plot
asymmetry in meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 343 (2011).
53. Jadad, A. R. et al. Assessing the quality of reports of randomized clinical trials: is
blinding necessary? Control. Clin. Trials 17, 1–12 (1996).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
Effects of remote patient monitoring on clinical outcomes
B Noah et al.
12
npj Digital Medicine (2018)  20172 
Published in partnership with the Scripps Translational Science Institute
