 1278
E
mergency Medical Services (EMS) field triage to stroke 
centers has gained considerable complexity because the 
demonstration of clinical benefit of endovascular treatment 
(ET) in recent randomized clinical trials.1 As a result, it has 
become critical to develop objective prehospital triage crite-
ria that appropriately identify patients who are most likely 
to benefit from services only available at Comprehensive 
Stroke Centers (CSCs) and therefore require direct transporta-
tion, while also facilitating the proper triage of less complex 
or lower acuity patients to the nearest stroke center (CSCs, 
Primary Stroke Centers [PSCs], or Acute Stroke Ready 
Hospitals [ASRHs]). Proper selection of the destination stroke 
center will enhance appropriate resource use to meet the needs 
of individual patients to optimize time to reperfusion and the 
broader communities by minimizing the time an ambulance is 
unnecessarily out of service, and will more homogenously dis-
tribute patients with stroke to minimize the effects of crowd-
ing on a single healthcare system. Although field identification 
of potential candidates for mechanical thrombectomy is pos-
sible using stroke scales designed to recognize large vessel 
occlusion strokes (LVOS),2–6 the decision tree is substantially 
more complex because many of these patients are also candi-
dates for intravenous thrombolysis (IVT), which could often 
be more promptly provided at a closer location. Therefore, an 
optimal destination triage algorithm should not only include 
the probability of LVOS but also include information about 
Background and Purpose—The Emergency Medical Services field triage to stroke centers has gained considerable 
complexity with the recent demonstration of clinical benefit of endovascular treatment for acute ischemic stroke. We 
sought to describe a new smartphone freeware application designed to assist Emergency Medical Services professionals 
with the field assessment and destination triage of patients with acute ischemic stroke.
Methods—Review of the application’s platform and its development as well as the different variables, assessments, 
algorithms, and assumptions involved.
Results—The FAST-ED (Field Assessment Stroke Triage for Emergency Destination) application is based on a built-in 
automated decision-making algorithm that relies on (1) a brief series of questions assessing patient’s age, anticoagulant 
usage, time last known normal, motor weakness, gaze deviation, aphasia, and hemineglect; (2) a database of all regional 
stroke centers according to their capability to provide endovascular treatment; and (3) Global Positioning System 
technology with real-time traffic information to compute the patient’s eligibility for intravenous tissue-type plasminogen 
activator or endovascular treatment as well as the distances/transportation times to the different neighboring stroke centers 
in order to assist Emergency Medical Services professionals with the decision about the most suitable destination for any 
given patient with acute ischemic stroke.
Conclusions—The FAST-ED smartphone application has great potential to improve the triage of patients with acute 
ischemic stroke, as it seems capable to optimize resources, reduce hospital arrivals times, and maximize the use of both 
intravenous tissue-type plasminogen activator and endovascular treatment ultimately leading to better clinical outcomes. 
Future field studies are needed to properly evaluate the impact of this tool in stroke outcomes and resource utilization.  
 
(Stroke. 2017;48:1278-1284. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016026.)
Key Words: algorithms ◼ aphasia ◼ emergency medicine ◼ stroke ◼ triage
The FAST-ED App: A Smartphone Platform for the Field 
Triage of Patients With Stroke
Raul G. Nogueira, MD*; Gisele S. Silva, MD, MPH, PhD*;  
Fabricio O. Lima, MD, MPH, PhD; Yu-Chih Yeh, PharmD; Carol Fleming, RN;  
Daniel Branco, MD, PhD; Arthur H. Yancey, MD, MPH; Jonathan J. Ratcliff, MD, MPH;  
Robert Keith Wages, BS; Earnest Doss; Mehdi Bouslama, MD; Jonathan A. Grossberg, MD;  
Diogo C. Haussen, MD; Teppei Sakano, BCS; Michael R. Frankel, MD
Received December 24, 2016; final revision received February 16, 2017; accepted February 27, 2017.
Marcus Stroke and Neuroscience Center (R.G.N., C.F., J.J.R., M.B., J.A.G., D.C.H., M.R.F.) and Department of Emergency Medicine (A.H.Y., J.J.R.), 
Grady Memorial Hospital, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA; Department of Neurology, Federal University of São Paulo/UNIFESP and 
Programa Integrado de Neurologia, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Brazil (G.S.S.); Ciências da Saúde, Curso de Medicina, Universidade de Fortaleza, 
Brazil (F.O.L.); Allm Group, Tokyo, Japan (Y.-C.Y., T.S.); Medicinia, Sao Paulo, Brazil (D.B.); and Georgia Office of EMS and Trauma, Brookhaven 
(R.K.W., E.D.).
*Drs Nogueira and Silva contributed equally.
Correspondence to Raul G. Nogueira, MD, 49 Jesse Hill Jr Drive SE, Room 333, Atlanta, GA 30303. E-mail raul.g.nogueira@emory.edu
© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org 
DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016026
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nogueira et al  FAST-ED: A Smartphone Triage Platform   1279
the eligibility for IVT and real-time transportation time differ-
ences between the closest CSC versus PSC/ASRH.
An ideal platform should permit customization for the needs 
a particular region, be cost free to the end user, and be broadly 
and easily available with great portability while offering a 
user-friendly interface and decision algorithm that decreases 
cognitive load. Applications designed for smartphones fulfill 
most of those characteristics. In fact, the use of smartphones 
has grown substantially among healthcare professionals and 
already has many different purposes in the area of stroke. Our 
objective is to report on a new smartphone freeware applica-
tion designed to assist emergency medical professionals with 
the field assessment and destination triage of patients with 
acute stroke. Herein we provide a detailed description of the 
application and its decision trees as well as the processes 
around its development and maintenance.
Materials and Methods
Review of the application’s platform and its development as well as 
the different variables, assessments, algorithms, and assumptions 
involved.
Results
Application Platform and Development
The concept was to formulate a short series of critical clini-
cal questions that in combination with automated data gener-
ated by the system would estimate the likelihood of the patient 
being a candidate for IVT or ET upon arrival at surround-
ing hospitals (Figures 1 and 2) The application uses Global 
Positioning System technology to compute the different trans-
portation times between the patient location in the field and 
all neighboring stroke centers according to PSC/ASRH versus 
CSC categories. Depending on individual patient characteris-
tics including stroke severity, age, use of anticoagulation, and 
time last known well (TLKW) as well as transportation times 
(considering distances and traffic information) and specific 
center capabilities (PSC/ASRH versus CSC), the application 
will then direct EMS to the most suitable stroke center for any 
given case (Figure 2).
The application was developed for iPhone and Android 
smartphones using commercially available software devel-
opment toolkits (SDK 3.0, Apple Inc and Android SDK 
7.1.1 (API 25), respectively). A server was developed to 
register the qualifying regional hospitals (ASRH, PSCs, 
and CSCs) and the questions. The application connects to 
the server to bring up the clinical questions, compute the 
answers, and to generate a decision based on stroke sever-
ity, treatment eligibility, ambulance location, and real-time 
traffic information. Academic stroke neurologists led the 
algorithm development with critical input from community 
stroke experts, emergency physicians, and EMS personnel. 
The application development included the probono collabo-
ration with two medical software companies: Allm Group, 
Tokyo, Japan (App final programming and maintenance) and 
Medicinia, São Paulo, Brazil (initial prototyping for proof 
of concept). An agreement was executed with all parties 
involved to provide the App to EMS and other users free 
of charge. (https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/fast-ed-triage/
id1099779970?mt=8; 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=net.allm.fasted).
Variables, Assessments, Algorithm, 
and Assumptions
The algorithms for the destination guidelines were based 
on IVT eligibility, likelihood of LVOS/ET eligibility, and 
distance/transportation times to PSC/ASRH versus CSC. 
Variables that define acceptable transportation times, age 
thresholds for treatment, and regional door-to-needle times 
may be left in the default settings detailed below or adapted 
by regional stroke, emergency, and EMS leadership such that 
it represents their community needs and goals.
IVT Eligibility: Anticoagulation Variable
Ischemic strokes remain significantly more common than hem-
orrhagic strokes in anticoagulated patients.7 Nevertheless, most 
of the anticoagulated patients are not eligible for IVT. Current 
guidelines exclude patients on warfarin and international nor-
malized ratio >1.7 who present within 3 hours of stroke onset 
and those who present between 3 and 4.5 hours regardless 
their international normalized ratio values. The use of intra-
venous tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) in patients on 
direct thrombin inhibitors or direct factor Xa inhibitors is not 
recommended unless laboratory tests, such as aPTT, interna-
tional normalized ratio, platelet count, ecarin clotting time, 
thrombin time, or appropriate direct factor Xa activity assays 
are normal or the patient has not received these agents for >48 
hours (assuming normal renal function).8 As the aforemen-
tioned tests are not typically available in the field and given the 
overall low likelihood for IVT eligibility in the anticoagulated 
population, the algorithm reasonably assumes that patients on 
anticoagulation will be less likely to receive IVT. Therefore, 
as long as the transportation time difference between the clos-
est CSC and the closest PSC/ASRH is less than the “variable 
X” (preset at 10 minutes in the default algorithm, but adjust-
able; Figure 3), patients with moderate to high chance of LVOS 
(≥30%) are preferentially referred to a CSC. We believe that 
transportation time differences longer than 10 minutes are not 
justifiable because these patients are also at higher risk of intra-
cranial hemorrhage potentially requiring emergent reversal of 
the anticoagulation. However, a small time delay to get to the 
nearest CSC seems reasonable given that the greater likelihood 
these patients will have endovascular therapy as their only pos-
sible reperfusion strategy. Moreover, in case the patient needs 
emergent intervention for a hemorrhagic event, neurosurgical 
back up is, in general, more promptly available at a CSC. This 
default approach may be modified to suit the needs of a particu-
lar region. The “variable X” can be easily set for 0 minutes in 
which case the anticoagulation issue would then be disregarded.
IVT Eligibility: Age Variable
On the basis of the results of the National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke and ECASS-III trials, 
and in agreement with the current guidelines, the default 
algorithm for guiding intravenous tPA treatment uses time 
windows of 0 to 3 and 0 to 4.5 hours for patients ≤80 and 
>80 years, respectively.8,9 However, considering that the 
IST-3 trial has demonstrated that the overall reduction in 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1280  Stroke  May 2017
disability benefit of IVT does not seem to be diminished in 
elderly patients treated within 6 hours, many experts defend 
 
the extension of the intravenous tPA time window to 4.5 
hours regardless of age.10 If any given region decides to 
extend the IVT window to 4.5 hours for patients older than 
80 years, the “variable A” (IVT window in >80 years) can be 
Figure 1. FAST-ED (Field Assessment Stroke Triage for Emergency Destination) App Display: questions. CSC indicates Comprehensive 
Stroke Centers; IV, intravenous; PSC, Primary Stroke Centers; and tPA, tissue-type plasminogen activator.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nogueira et al  FAST-ED: A Smartphone Triage Platform   1281
easily set for 270 minutes in which case the influence of age 
would then be nullified (Figure 4).
Time Variables
The user enters information about the time of stroke onset (or 
TLKW if stroke onset is unknown). On the basis of location 
and traffic information, the App calculates the travel time to 
the closest stroke center (“variable B”; Figure 3). The average 
door-to-needle time for the region (“variable C”, adjustable) 
is then used to define whether the patient would be a likely 
candidate for IVT upon arrival at the closest stroke center by 
applying the following formula: TLKW to Needle=Current 
Time−TLKW+B+C≤intravenous tPA Window.
Figure 2. FAST-ED (Field Assessment Stroke Triage for Emergency Destination) App Display: automated output and configurable vari-
ables. CSC indicates Comprehensive Stroke Centers; LKWT, last known well time; and PSC, Primary Stroke Centers.
Figure 3. FAST-ED (Field Assessment Stroke Triage for Emergency Destination) decision-making algorithm. *for practical purposes the 
“PSC” category also includes Acute Stroke Ready Hospitals (ASRHs).MTTD=maximal transportation time difference between the clos-
est Comprehensive Stroke Centers (CSC) and the closest Primary Stroke Centers (PSC)/ASRH; X=MTTD for anticoagulated patients with 
scores ≥2 to be preferentially referred to a CSC; A=intravenous tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) window in patients aged >80 
years; B=travel time from site to the CSC; C=average regional door-to-needle time; D=MTTD for intravenous tPA eligible patients with 
scores ≥4 to be preferentially referred to a CSC; E=MTTD for intravenous tPA ineligible patients with scores 2 to 3 to be preferentially 
referred to a CSC; F=MTTD for intravenous tPA ineligible patients with scores ≥4 to be preferentially referred to a CSC. *Configurable vari-
ables: X is preset at 10 minutes; A is preset at 180 minutes; B is preset at 60 minutes; D and E are preset at 30 minutes, and F is preset at 
60 minutes.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1282  Stroke  May 2017
LVOS Likelihood Assessment
The FAST-ED (Field Assessment Stroke Triage for Emergency 
Destination) scale has similar accuracy in the prediction of LVOS 
as the NIHSS (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale) but is 
significantly less time consuming and easier to use (Figure 1).2 
The scale has a ternary distribution for the overall likelihood of 
LVOS (0–1, <15%; 2–3, 30%; and ≥4–6, 0%–85%). This should 
theoretically result in better conformability to different patient 
scenarios when compared with binary distribution scales.
Assessment, Decision-Making 
Algorithm, and Default Times
There are 2 essential questions in the destination triage of 
patients with stroke (Figure 3): (1) by the time the patient 
arrives to the hospital, what will be his/her treatment options: 
IVT only, ET only, both IVT and ET, or neither one? (2) 
Considering these treatment possibilities, how much longer it 
would take to transport the patient to the closest CSC versus 
PSC/ASRH? The answer to these questions can be quickly pro-
vided by a combination of manually entered and system-gen-
erated data. The user answers the questions about: (1) the use 
of anticoagulation (yes versus no versus unknown; if unknown 
system assumes no), (2) age (≤80 years versus >80 years ver-
sus unknown; if unknown system assumes >80 years), (3) time 
of stroke onset or TLKW (if unknown system assumes >4.5 
hours), and (4) FAST-ED scale (Figures 1 and 2). The App auto-
matically assesses the transportation time to the closest PSCs/
ASRHs and CSCs. If the patient is not a likely candidate for 
either IVT or ET, he/she is preferentially referred to the closest 
stroke center, which will be more likely a PSC/ASRH. If the 
patient is likely a candidate for IVT only, he/she is also pref-
erentially referred to the closest stroke center. If the patient is 
likely a candidate for ET only, he/she is preferentially referred 
to the closest CSC. If the patient is likely a candidate for both 
IVT and ET, the algorithm takes in consideration the likelihood 
of LVOS (≈30% versus ≈60% to 85%) and the additional trans-
portation time from the closest center to CSC. Figure 3 depict 
the FAST-ED decision tree algorithm. Recommended (default) 
values for the maximal acceptable transportation delay depend 
on whether patients are within the intravenous tPA time win-
dow and on their FAST ED score, and can be manually adjusted 
by the regional administrator for the App (eg, Regional EMS 
Office, Figure 2). The default value is 30 minutes for patients 
with onset within the intravenous tPA window and FAST ED 
score of ≥4. This 30-minute transportation delay window is sup-
ported by a recent analysis modeling different “Drip and Ship” 
scenarios across PSCs and CSCs in Canada and California.11 
For patients with onset outside the intravenous tPA window and 
FAST ED score of 2 to 3, the acceptable delay is also set at 30 
minutes. Finally, for patients with onset outside the intravenous 
tPA window and FAST ED score of ≥4, the acceptable delay 
is set at 60 minutes. If the delay is more than 60 minutes, the 
algorithm will suggest to consider calling air transport to CSC 
and will offer an option to contact the closest medical flight ser-
vice or will indicate transport to the closest PSC offering Global 
Positioning System guidance.
Regional Adjustments and Future Improvements
To allow for better conformability to the needs and particu-
larities of different geographic locations, the App allows for 
many of the time variables to be adjusted by the App regional 
administrator (Figure 2). As regional leaderships continually 
refine and improve their stroke destination triage capabilities 
and options, additional optimization of the system choices will 
evolve, based on the feedback from regional hospitals about 
imaging results (LVOS) and the types of treatment received. 
For instance, the optimal FAST-ED scale cut offs might differ 
across rural and urban settings. Another possibility is the use 
of the average door-to-needle time for each individual center 
as opposed to the regional average time. This would lead to 
greater precision given differences in performance but will 
require greater data coordination by the regional stroke and 
EMS leaderships. Future versions of the App will integrate 
the FAST-ED platform with a videoconferencing tool that 
will allow for direct EMS videoconsultation with the receiv-
ing hospital stroke team and real-time ambulance location 
tracking.
Discussion
We describe the decision-making models included in the 
development of the first smartphone freeware application cre-
ated to optimize the triage of patients with acute stroke to a 
CSC or to a PSC/ASRH. This decision can be made on-scene, 
at point-of-patient contact in the field based upon objective 
criteria, including a regional database of stroke centers, a 
small series of simple questions, and geo-positioning infor-
mation available on most smartphones.
The hard criteria used to create the algorithms in this appli-
cation were derived from pivotal clinical studies in acute 
stroke. The criteria related to maximum difference in trans-
portation times to a CSC versus a PSC/ASRH were defined 
in conjunction with the regional stroke and EMS leadership 
and can be easily adjusted for different regions. Using simple 
questions that can be rapidly answered, the application aims 
to objectively guide the triage of patients with acute stroke, a 
decision that often involves a complex balance between offer-
ing care not only in the most expeditious manner but also at a 
stroke center capable of delivering the appropriate treatment 
for the patient in question. This decision is typically carried 
out under a lot of pressure, at a time when the clinical con-
dition of the patient is critical, and when every minute lost 
might lower the patient’s chances of improved functional 
recovery.12,13 However, arriving fast at a stroke center might 
not be enough for some patients, especially those with LVOS 
who are most likely to benefit from advanced care and, in par-
ticular, from mechanical thrombectomy. Conversely, taking 
most patients to a CSC would be equally detrimental given 
the implications of delaying IVT, which is faster and cheaper 
than ET, and is the only accepted treatment for distal occlu-
sion and lacunar strokes.14–16 Such a practice would not only 
have direct untoward consequences to the outcomes of these 
patients, but it would also adversely affect the long-term via-
bility of the more geographically well-distributed PSCs and 
ASRHs ultimately leading to greater delays in stroke care. 
Moreover, the CSCs’ bed capacities would become increas-
ingly saturated by patients who did not need advanced stroke 
care and could have been well cared for much closer to their 
communities, resulting in the escalation of more appropriate 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Nogueira et al  FAST-ED: A Smartphone Triage Platform   1283
patients being turned away (triage mismatches). Overtriage 
to CSCs may also unnecessarily prolong the period of time 
that a community has an ambulance out of service potentially 
delaying transportation and care for other patients requiring 
time-dependent interventions (ie, trauma, STEMI, sepsis etc.).
Unfortunately, clinical severity scales cannot unmistak-
ably identify LVOS.17 In fact, a recent study demonstrated that 
the use of the published cutoffs for most triage scales would 
result in the improper referral of more than 20% of patients 
with LVOS to a center lacking neuroendovascular capability 
while applying cutoffs reducing the false-negative rate to 10% 
would result in transporting almost every patient to a CSC.18 
However, the objective of these scales is not to replace ves-
sel imaging but rather to use the best available information 
in the field to triage the destination of patients with stroke. 
Therefore, it is essential to highlight that the simple presence 
of an LVOS does not necessarily equate to a need for emergent 
thrombectomy. Indeed, whether patients with LVOS present-
ing with low NIHSS benefit from ET remains controversial.1,19 
Moreover, LVOS patients with lower clinical severities theo-
retically have better collateral flow, which is associated with 
better natural history, higher chances of response to IVT, and 
potentially a longer treatment window for ET.20 As such, it is 
reasonable if not more logical that most patients with LVOS 
and low NIHSS would be first evaluated at a closer PSC/
ASRH to be assessed for IVT and undergo neurovascular 
imaging before the transportation to a more distant CSC.
The likelihood of LVOS can be estimated with a high 
degree of accuracy by utilizing the FAST-ED scale. In the 
STOPStroke (Screening Technology and Outcomes Project in 
Stroke) cohort (n=727, 33% LVOS), in which patients under-
went CT angiography within the first 24 hours of stroke onset, 
FAST-ED had comparable accuracy in predicting LVOS 
to the full NIHSS and higher accuracy than Rapid Arterial 
Occlusion Evaluation (RACE) and Cincinnati Prehospital 
Stroke Scale (CPSS) (area under the receiver operating char-
acteristic curve: FAST-ED=0.81 as reference; NIHSS=0.80, 
P=0.28; RACE=0.77, P=0.02; and CPSS=0.75, P=0.002).2 
Similar findings were seen in the Bernese Stroke cohort which 
comprises 1085 patients (60.5% LVOS) who underwent CTA 
or MRA within 6 hours of stroke onset. In this population, 
FAST-ED had again the best performance among several other 
clinical scales (area under the receiver operating characteris-
tic curve: FAST-ED=0.847; NIHSS=0.846; RACE=0.831; 
CPSS=0.802).17,21 These results may reflect potential advan-
tages of FAST-ED. FAST-ED scores 1 point for facial weak-
ness while RACE scores up to 2 points. FAST-ED does not 
score any points for leg weakness while RACE scores up to 2 
points. Adding the additional 3 points for motor weakness does 
not increase the ability to discriminate cortical versus subcor-
tical lesions but may increase the chances of misdiagnosing a 
pure motor syndrome as an LVOS. This is particularly impor-
tant because pure motor strokes represent ≈13% of all strokes 
and as many as 85% of them are lacunar in pathogenesis.22 
FAST-ED scores up to 2 points for gaze deviation while RACE 
scores only 1 point. This is theoretically disadvantageous for 
RACE because gaze deviation has been identified as the high-
est predictor of LVOS in at least 2 previous studies.4,17 Finally, 
RACE computes 2 points for receptive aphasia (versus one 
point in FAST-ED) and no points for expressive aphasia (ver-
sus 1 point in FAST-ED). This brings redundancy for one cor-
tical territory while providing no representation to an equally 
important one. CPSS only computes aphasia if it is global and 
as such provides no points for isolated expressive or receptive 
aphasia. Moreover, CPSS does not assess for neglect, mak-
ing the evaluation of nondominant hemispheric strokes more 
limited. Despite the theoretical advantages of some scales 
they likely perform within a relatively similar range with only 
small differences in terms of ease to use and accuracy. As such, 
we believe that the main innovation brought by the FAST-ED 
App is related to its elaborate decision-making algorithm 
allowing for a quick assessment of different treatment options 
based on each patient’s characteristics and field transportation 
times from point-of-patient contact. However, it is important 
to acknowledge that the decision algorithm heavily relies on 
the probability of LVOS as estimated by the FAST-ED scale, 
which has been primarily studied in hospital cohorts. Whether 
these estimates are similar for the hospital and prehospital set-
tings is currently unknown. Future efforts should, therefore, 
concentrate on regional organization of stroke and EMS lead-
erships for the proper categorization of their local hospitals, 
the field validation of the FAST-ED scale, and the quantifica-
tion of the effects of this App technology on transfer times, 
intravenous tPA and thrombectomy treatment rates, and the 
long-term outcomes of patients with acute stroke.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the FAST-ED smartphone application has a 
great potential to improve the triage of patients with acute 
ischemic stroke, as it seems capable to optimize resources, 
reduce hospital arrivals times, and maximize the use of both 
intravenous tPA and ET ultimately leading to better clinical 
outcomes. Future field studies are needed to properly evaluate 
the impact of this tool in stroke outcomes and resource use.
Disclosures
RGN: Stryker Neurovascular (Trevo-2 Trial Principal Investigator–
modest; DAWN Trial Principal Investigator–no compensation, 
TREVO Registry Steering Committee–no compensation), Medtronic 
(SWIFT Trial Steering Committee–modest; SWIFT-Prime Trial 
Steering Committee–no compensation; STAR Trial Angiographic 
Core Laboratory–significant), Penumbra (3D Separator Trial 
Executive Committee–no compensation), Neuravi (ARISE-2 Steering 
Committee–no compensation), Genentech (Physician Advisory 
Board–modest), Allm Inc (Physician Advisory Board–no compensa-
tion). The other authors report no conflicts
References
 1. Goyal M, Menon BK, van Zwam WH, Dippel DW, Mitchell PJ, Demchuk 
AM, et al; HERMES collaborators. Endovascular thrombectomy after 
large-vessel ischaemic stroke: a meta-analysis of individual patient data 
from five randomised trials. Lancet. 2016;387:1723–1731. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(16)00163-X.
 2. Lima FO, Silva GS, Furie KL, Frankel MR, Lev MH, Camargo ÉC, et 
al. Field assessment stroke triage for emergency destination: A Simple 
and Accurate Prehospital Scale to detect large vessel occlusion strokes. 
Stroke. 2016;47:1997–2002. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.013301.
 3. Perez de la Ossa N, Carrera D, Gorchs M, Querol M, Millan M, Gomis 
M, et al. Design and validation of a prehospital stroke scale to predict 
large arterial occlusion: The rapid arterial occlusion evaluation scale. 
Stroke. 2014;45:87–91.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 1284  Stroke  May 2017
 4. Katz BS, McMullan JT, Sucharew H, Adeoye O, Broderick JP. Design 
and validation of a prehospital scale to predict stroke severity: Cincinnati 
Prehospital Stroke Severity Scale. Stroke. 2015;46:1508–1512. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.008804.
 5. Teleb MS, Ver Hage A, Carter J, Jayaraman MV, McTaggart RA. Stroke 
vision, aphasia, neglect (VAN) assessment-a novel emergent large vessel 
occlusion screening tool: pilot study and comparison with current clini-
cal severity indices. J Neurointerv Surg. 2017;9:122–126. doi: 10.1136/
neurintsurg-2015-012131.
 6. Llanes JN, Kidwell CS, Starkman S, Leary MC, Eckstein M, Saver JL. 
The Los Angeles Motor Scale (LAMS): a new measure to characterize 
stroke severity in the field. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2004;8:46–50.
 7. Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, Eikelboom J, Oldgren J, Parekh 
A, et al; RE-LY Steering Committee and Investigators. Dabigatran 
versus warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 
2009;361:1139–1151. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0905561.
 8. Demaerschalk BM, Kleindorfer DO, Adeoye OM, Demchuk AM, 
Fugate JE, Grotta JC, et al; American Heart Association Stroke Council 
and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Scientific Rationale for 
the Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Intravenous Alteplase in Acute 
Ischemic Stroke: A Statement for Healthcare Professionals From the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2016;47:581–641. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000086.
 9. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP Jr, Bruno A, Connors JJ, Demaerschalk 
BM, et al; American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; 
Council on Clinical Cardiology. Guidelines for the early management of 
patients with acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare profession-
als from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke. 2013;44:870–947. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318284056a.
 10. Sandercock P, Wardlaw JM, Lindley RI, Dennis M, Cohen G, et al; 
Group ISTc The benefits and harms of intravenous thrombolysis with 
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator within 6 h of acute ischaemic 
stroke (the third international stroke trial [ist-3]): A randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2012;379:2352–2363.
 11. Milne MS, Holodinsky JK, Hill MD, Nygren A, Qiu C, Goyal M, et 
al. Drip ‘n Ship Versus Mothership for Endovascular Treatment: mod-
eling the best transportation options for optimal outcomes. Stroke. 
2017;48:791–794. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.015321.
 12. Lees KR, Bluhmki E, von Kummer R, Brott TG, Toni D, Grotta 
JC, et al; ECASS, ATLANTIS, NINDS and EPITHET rt-PA Study 
Group. Time to treatment with intravenous alteplase and outcome in 
stroke: an updated pooled analysis of ECASS, ATLANTIS, NINDS, 
and EPITHET trials. Lancet. 2010;375:1695–1703. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(10)60491-6.
 13. Saver JL, Goyal M, van der Lugt A, Menon BK, Majoie CB, Dippel 
DW, et al; HERMES Collaborators. Time to treatment with endovascu-
lar thrombectomy and outcomes from ischemic stroke: a meta-analysis. 
JAMA. 2016;316:1279–1288. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.13647.
 14. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. The national 
institute of neurological disorders and stroke rt-PA stroke study group. N 
Engl J Med. 1995;333:1581–1587.
 15. Shobha N, Fang J, Hill MD. Do lacunar strokes benefit from thrombolysis? 
Evidence from the Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network. Int J Stroke. 
2013;8(Suppl A100):45–49. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2012.00932.x.
 16. Pantoni L, Fierini F, Poggesi A. Thrombolysis in acute stroke patients 
with cerebral small vessel disease. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2014;37:5–13. doi: 
10.1159/000356796.
 17. Heldner MR, Hsieh K, Broeg-Morvay A, Mordasini P, Bühlmann M, 
Jung S, et al. Clinical prediction of large vessel occlusion in anterior 
circulation stroke: mission impossible? J Neurol. 2016;263:1633–1640. 
doi: 10.1007/s00415-016-8180-6.
 18. Turc G, Maïer B, Naggara O, Seners P, Isabel C, Tisserand M, et al. 
Clinical Scales do not reliably identify acute ischemic stroke patients 
with large-artery occlusion. Stroke. 2016;47:1466–1472. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.116.013144.
 19. Haussen DC, Bouslama M, Grossberg JA, Anderson A, Belagage S, 
Frankel M, et al. Too good to intervene? Thrombectomy for large vessel 
occlusion strokes with minimal symptoms: An intention-to-treat analy-
sis. [published online ahead of print September 2, 2016]. J Neurointerv 
Surg. 2016. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/neurintsurg-2016–012633. 
Accessed February 13, 2017.
 20. Lima FO, Furie KL, Silva GS, Lev MH, Camargo EC, Singhal AB, et 
al. Prognosis of untreated strokes due to anterior circulation proximal 
intracranial arterial occlusions detected by use of computed tomog-
raphy angiography. JAMA Neurol. 2014;71:151–157. doi: 10.1001/
jamaneurol.2013.5007.
 21. Heldner MR, Mattle HP, Fischer U. Letter by Heldner et al Regarding 
Article, “Field assessment stroke triage for emergency destination: a sim-
ple and accurate prehospital scale to detect large vessel occlusion strokes”. 
Stroke. 2016;47:e274. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.015219.
 22. Arboix A, Padilla I, Massons J, García-Eroles L, Comes E, Targa C. 
Clinical study of 222 patients with pure motor stroke. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2001;71:239–242.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
