 Piezo2 senses airway stretch and mediates lung inflation-
induced apnoea
Keiko Nonomura1,*, Seung-Hyun Woo1,*, Rui B. Chang2,*, Astrid Gillich3, Zhaozhu Qiu1,4,†, 
Allain G. Francisco1, Sanjeev S. Ranade1,†, Stephen D. Liberles2, and Ardem Patapoutian1
1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Dorris Neuroscience 
Center, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA
2Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA
4Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, San Diego, California 92121, USA
Abstract
Respiratory dysfunction is a notorious cause of perinatal mortality in infants and sleep apnoea in 
adults, but the mechanisms of respiratory control are not clearly understood. Mechanical signals 
transduced by airway-innervating sensory neurons control respiration; however, the physiological 
significance and molecular mechanisms of these signals remain obscured. Here we show that 
global and sensory neuron-specific ablation of the mechanically activated ion channel Piezo2 
causes respiratory distress and death in newborn mice. Optogenetic activation of Piezo2+ vagal 
sensory neurons causes apnoea in adult mice. Moreover, induced ablation of Piezo2 in sensory 
neurons of adult mice causes decreased neuronal responses to lung inflation, an impaired Hering–
Breuer mechanoreflex, and increased tidal volume under normal conditions. These phenotypes are 
reproduced in mice lacking Piezo2 in the nodose ganglion. Our data suggest that Piezo2 is an 
airway stretch sensor and that Piezo2-mediated mechanotransduction within various airway-
innervating sensory neurons is critical for establishing efficient respiration at birth and maintaining 
normal breathing in adults.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.P. (ardem@scripps.edu) or S.D.L 
(Stephen_Liberles@hms.harvard.edu).
†Present address: Department of Physiology and Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA (Z.Q.); The Gladstone Institute, San Francisco, California 94158, USA (S.S.R.).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version 
of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions A.G. characterized embryonic lungs in the laboratory of M. Krasnow. Z.Q. performed the initial 
characterization of Piezo2−/− mice. A.G.F. performed plethysmograph recordings and behavioural experiments to confirm Piezo2 
knockdown. S.S.R. generated Piezo2fl/fl and Piezo2+/− mice. R.B.C. performed optogenetic experiments, whole vagus nerve 
electrophysiology recordings, and transducer-based Hering–Breuer reflex assessment in the S.D.L. laboratory. K.N. and S.-H.W. 
contributed equally to all other experiments. K.N., S.-H.W. and A.P. wrote the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 January 12; 541(7636): 176–181. doi:10.1038/nature20793.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Respiratory organs experience repetitive and wide-ranging mechanical forces during 
breathing. On average, an adult man ventilates 0.5 l of air per breath and can inhale up to 3.5 
l of air1. These mechanical forces within the airways are thought to serve as cues to trigger 
physiological responses2,3. However, the respiratory function of mechanotransduction is not 
well understood, partly owing to our inability to selectively modulate mechanotransduction. 
A potential respiratory role of mechanotransduction is illustrated by the Hering–Breuer 
inspiratory reflex: artificial inflation of lungs in anaesthetized animals induces immediate 
cessation of respiration (apnoea), which subsequently terminates further inspiration, 
presumably to prevent over-expansion of the lungs2–4.
The airways are innervated by both vagal and spinal sensory neurons, whose cell bodies are 
located in the jugular (superior)–nodose (inferior) ganglia complex and thoracic dorsal root 
ganglia (DRG), respectively5–7. Although little is known about the function of somatic 
primary afferent neurons during respiration7, the role of vagal innervation to the airway has 
been predominantly explored by denervation experiments and electrophysiological 
recordings of vagal nerves3,5. These studies have shown that vagal sensory neurons convey 
essential sensory information (for example, measurements of lung inflation, arterial oxygen 
pressure, and arterial pH) to the respiratory centre of the brainstem2,3,5,6. Vagotomized rats, 
for example, show dysregulated breathing characteristics such as a 1.7-fold increase in tidal 
volume (volume per breath) and a 2.4-fold decrease in breathing frequency in the absence of 
proper vagal sensory feedback6,8. Importantly, the Hering–Breuer reflex is mediated by 
vagal sensory neurons, although the underlying molecular mechanism of 
mechanotransduction by these neurons is unknown2,3,5,6. A recent study identified two 
distinct vagal sensory neuron subtypes that innervate the lung and have unique functions: 
activation of neurons expressing the purinergic receptor P2ry1 induces apnoea, whereas 
activation of neurons expressing the neuropeptide receptor Npy2r causes rapid, shallow 
breathing9. However, the stimulus (mechanical and/or chemical) that drives the firing of 
these neurons remains unknown.
At birth, our respiratory system undergoes striking structural changes as liquid-filled fetal 
lungs are inflated with air to allow efficient gas exchange10. This mechanical transformation 
is a critical and challenging process for newborns, and defects in this process are a notorious 
cause of perinatal mortality10. However, even less is known about the role of 
mechanotransduction in newborn respiration than in adult breathing11. Previous studies have 
suggested that vagal inner-vation is also critical for establishing newborn respiration, as 
vagotomized newborn lambs have unexpanded lungs and compromised breathing12,13. 
Whether these phenotypes are associated with impaired mechanotransduction in the airway 
is not clear, as vagal sensory neurons also detect a variety of chemicals3.
Piezo2, a mechanically activated cation channel, is the principal mechanotransducer in low-
threshold cutaneous mechanoreceptors and skeletal-muscle-innervating proprioceptors in 
mice14–17. On the basis of the function of Piezo2 as a mechanotransducer and its abundance 
in various populations of sensory neurons9,15,18, we used Piezo2-deficient mouse models to 
investigate whether Piezo2-mediated mechanotransduction is involved in respiratory 
function.
Nonomura et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Respiratory defects in Piezo2−/− mice
When Piezo2 was constitutively and globally ablated in mice, Piezo2-deficient (Piezo2−/−) 
mice were born in the expected Mendelian ratio, but died within 24 h of birth19 (Fig. 1a). 
Newborn Piezo2−/− pups showed signs of respiratory distress, such as cyanosis and gasping 
(Supplementary Information Video 1) and also failed to suckle (Fig. 1b). Piezo2−/− pups 
showed significantly decreased oxygen saturation levels (% SpO2) in blood compared to 
their wild-type littermates (Fig. 1c). We examined the breathing activities of Piezo2−/− 
newborn mice by whole-body plethysmography and detected that respiratory frequency 
(breaths per minute) was significantly lower in Piezo2−/− pups than in their wild-type 
littermates (Fig. 1d, e). Moreover, in wild-type pups, each inspiration was immediately 
followed by the expiratory peak, but this breathing pattern was disrupted in Piezo2−/− pups 
(Fig. 1f, g). As these data suggest that respiration is compromised in Piezo2−/− mice, we 
performed histological characterization of the lungs of these mice. Haematoxylin and eosin 
staining of lung sections from Piezo2−/− mice revealed substantially reduced airspaces 
throughout all lobes compared to wild-type lungs (Fig. 1h, i). This phenotype was 
consistently observed in all Piezo2−/− pups from independent litters. We investigated 
whether respiratory complications in Piezo2−/− newborn mice were caused by Piezo2 
ablation during prenatal lung development10,20, but found no defects in embryonic lung 
anatomy, pneumocyte differentiation, or clearance of the fetal pulmonary fluid in Piezo2−/− 
embryos or newborn mice (Fig. 1j, Extended Data Fig. 1). Collectively, these results suggest 
that Piezo2−/− mice develop normally but show signs of respiratory failure after birth.
Piezo2 expression in the respiratory system
The respiratory system involves various tissues, such as the brainstem, airway tract and 
lungs, sensory and autonomic nervous systems, motor neurons, and respiratory muscles. To 
investigate how ablation of Piezo2 disrupts respiration, we first assessed Piezo2 expression 
in the respiratory system using the previously described Piezo2–GFP-IRES-Cre (Piezo2GFP) 
reporter line21 (Extended Data Fig. 2). Piezo2GFP reporter mice express the Piezo2–GFP 
(green fluorescent protein) fusion protein as well as Cre recombinase through an internal 
ribosome entry site (IRES) under the Piezo2 promoter. Within the airway tract of these mice, 
we detected GFP expression in pulmonary neuroepithelial cell bodies (NEBs) but not in 
other cell types of the lung (Extended Data Fig. 2a). NEBs have been proposed to function 
as oxygen sensors, mechanosensors, and chemosensors of the airway, but their exact role 
remains unclear3,22,23. We also detected GFP expression in neuronal cells of the jugular–
nodose ganglia complex, trigeminal ganglia and thoracic DRG9,15,16 (Extended Data Fig. 
2b–e). However, we did not detect GFP expression in respiratory control centres of the 
brainstem, the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve, motor neurons in the spinal cord, 
sympathetic ganglia, diaphragm or intercostal muscles6,10,24 (Extended Data Fig. 2f–k). In 
addition to the respiratory system, we also examined GFP expression in other major organs 
that might indirectly affect respiration, including the heart, liver and kidneys. However, we 
did not detect GFP expression in these organs (data not shown). We also crossed the 
Piezo2GFP mouse line with the tdTomato reporter line (Ai9) and generated Piezo2GFP;Ai9 
mice because tdTomato, which is highly expressed after Cre-mediated recombination can 
serve as a more sensitive detection method than GFP immunostaining. It is important to note 
Nonomura et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that this is a lineage tracing method; therefore, even cells that transiently expressed Piezo2 
during development would be permanently labelled with tdTomato. In Piezo2GFP;Ai9 mice, 
tdTomato was present in pulmonary NEBs, vagal and spinal sensory neurons, and 
endothelial cells in various tissues (Extended Data Fig. 3). Collectively, our two reporter 
studies suggest that Piezo2 is expressed in pulmonary NEBs, vagal and spinal sensory 
neurons, and possibly all endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 2l).
Tissue-specific Piezo2 cKO mouse lines
To investigate which Piezo2-expressing cell types contribute to Piezo2−/− lethality and 
respiratory distress, we generated Piezo2 conditional knockout (cKO) mice using various 
tissue-specific Cre mouse lines (Table 1). To eliminate Piezo2 in all endothelial cells, we 
crossed Tie2Cre (Tie2 is also known as Tek) mice with Piezo2fl/fl mice to generate 
Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO mice21,25 (Extended Data Figs 4a–e, 5a). Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO mice 
survived to adulthood without displaying any health complications (Table 1). 
Characterization of newborn mice showed that Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO and wild-type pups had 
comparable % SpO2 and lung morphology (Fig. 2a, b). These results suggest that ablation of 
Piezo2 in endothelial cells is not sufficient to cause the respiratory complications and 
lethality seen in Piezo2−/− mice.
Next, we ablated Piezo2 in vagal and spinal sensory neurons by using two independent Cre 
lines: Phox2bCre and Wnt1Cre26,27. The Phox2bCre line targets Piezo2 in nodose ganglia, 
which are derived from epibranchial placodes, whereas the Wnt1Cre line targets Piezo2 in 
jugular, trigeminal and dorsal root ganglia, all of which are derived from the neural 
crest5,28,29 (Table 1, Extended Data Figs 4f–m, 5b, c). Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice also 
survived to adulthood (Table 1), and Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO and wild-type newborn mice 
showed comparable % SpO2 and lung structure (Fig. 2c, d). These results indicate that 
Piezo2 in nodose ganglia is not, by itself, required to establish adequate respiration at birth 
and that its absence does not lead to the lethality seen in Piezo2−/− mice. By contrast, 
Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO newborn mice died within 24 h of birth (Table 1). Like newborn 
Piezo2−/− mice, Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO pups showed signs of respiratory distress, such as 
cyanosis and gasping, and also failed to suckle (Supplementary Information Video 2), and 
their % SpO2 was lower than that of wild-type littermates (Fig. 2e). Histological 
examination of the lungs of Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO mice also revealed smaller airspaces than in 
wild-type lungs (Fig. 2f). On the basis of their phenotypes, we performed whole-body 
plethysmograph recordings in Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO mice. In parallel to the respiratory 
patterns observed in Piezo2−/− mice, Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO mice also showed reduced 
respiratory frequency and a significantly lower percentage of inspirations followed by the 
expiratory peak compared to wild-type littermates (Fig. 2g–j).
Airway-innervating Piezo2+ neurons
To elucidate the role of Piezo2+ sensory neurons in respiration, we investigated whether 
Piezo2+ sensory neurons innervate the airway organs in adult mice. The presence of 
tdTomato+ nerve fibres innervating NEBs in the lungs of Piezo2GFP;Ai9 mice indicated that 
Piezo2 is expressed in airway-innervating sensory neurons at least during development 
Nonomura et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Extended Data Fig. 3b). To test whether Piezo2 is expressed in respiratory sensory neurons 
of adult mice, we performed retrograde labelling of airway-innervating sensory neurons by 
injecting octadecyl (C18)-oxycarbocyanine (DiO) into the bottom of the trachea of adult 
Piezo2GFP mice to label sensory terminals innervating the trachea and/or the lungs28. GFP+ 
DiO+ neurons were detected in both the jugular–nodose ganglia complex and the thoracic 
DRG, suggesting that Piezo2 is indeed expressed in adult vagal and spinal sensory neurons 
that innervate the airway (Fig. 3a, b).
We next characterized the physiological function of airway-innervating Piezo2+ sensory 
neurons. We crossed Piezo2GFP mice with Cre-dependent channelrhodopsin-2 (lox-ChR2) 
reporter mice to generate Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice, and tested the consequences of 
activating Piezo2+ vagal sensory neurons using optogenetics9. Airway-innervating vagal 
sensory neurons contain a mixed population of fast-conducting myelinated A fibres and 
slow-conducting unmyelinated C fibres5. Brief optogenetic stimulation (0.8 ms) of the vagal 
nerve trunk of Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice caused a compound action potential firing, 
consisting primarily of A-fibre responses (11.6 ± 4.7 m s−1) and some C-fibre responses 
(0.68 ± 0.11 m s−1) (Extended Data Fig. 6a, b). The current generated by selective 
stimulation of Piezo2+ vagal fibres was predominantly, but not exclusively, fast-conducting. 
In this experiment we potentially activated sensory neurons that transiently expressed Piezo2 
during development as well as those that express Piezo2 in adult mice. We also characterized 
Piezo2+ vagal sensory neurons by isolating the jugular–nodose ganglia complex from adult 
Piezo2GFP reporter mice and immunostaining it with the A- and C-fibre markers Nefh and 
IB4, respectively30,31. Consistent with Piezo2 expression in both A- and C-fibres, 
subpopulations of GFP+ neurons co-localized with either Nefh or IB4 (Extended Data Fig 
6c, d).
Strikingly, longer optogenetic stimulation (10 s, 50 Hz) of the vagal nerve trunk caused 
immediate apnoea that lasted through the entire stimulation period and resulted in a decrease 
in the average breathing rate of about 75% when compared to the unstimulated rate (Fig. 3c, 
d). During optogenetic stimulation, the respiration of Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice was trapped 
in a state of exhalation based on their lung volume at apnoea (Extended Data Fig. 6e–g). 
Breathing activities returned to normal after optogenetic stimulation was removed (Fig. 3c). 
These data show that Piezo2+ vagal sensory neurons innervate the airway organs and 
modulate respiration by inducing a respiratory block in a similar manner as previously 
described for P2ry1+ vagal neurons9. This is not surprising, as a large number of P2ry1+ 
neurons also express Piezo2 (ref. 9).
We also investigated how inputs from Piezo2+ vagal sensory neurons are organized centrally. 
Infection of the jugular–nodose ganglia complex with AAV-flex-tdTomato in adult 
Piezo2GFP mice yielded tdTomato+ neuronal fibres in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), 
the respiratory centre that is innervated by vagal sensory neurons9 (Extended Data Fig. 6h).
Piezo2 is an airway stretch receptor
To test whether Piezo2 functions as a mechanotransducer in airway-innervating sensory 
neurons directly, we performed in vivo vagal sensory nerve recordings in adult sensory 
Nonomura et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neuron-specific Piezo2 conditional knockout mice. We used the previously described 
AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice to ablate Piezo2 in the majority of vagal and spinal 
sensory neurons in adult mice15 (Extended Data Fig. 7a–d and Table 1). We inflated the 
lungs of the mice by injecting air through their tracheae and simultaneously measured vagal 
sensory nerve responses. AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice showed greatly reduced vagal 
nerve firing in response to lung inflation when compared to wild-type mice (Fig. 4a). These 
data provide direct evidence that Piezo2 functions as a key stretch transducer of airway-
innervating vagal neurons.
We next tested whether ablation of Piezo2 in sensory neurons would affect normal breathing 
in adult mice. We compared respiratory parameters measured by whole-body 
plethysmograph recordings in AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO and wild-type mice (Fig. 4b–d, 
Extended Data Table 1). AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice showed a 1.3-fold increase in 
tidal volume compared to wild-type littermates (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Table 1), which 
is similar to the tidal volume change observed in vagotomized adult mammals6,8. The 
increased tidal volume in AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice suggests that lung volume 
changes are not precisely detected, and that AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice are likely to 
breathe in excess air compared to wild-type littermates. By contrast, breathing frequency 
was normal in AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice (Fig. 4b), whereas vagotomized adult mice 
and other mammals show reduced breathing frequency6,8,32. This difference suggests that 
other sensory inputs besides Piezo2-mediated mechanotransduction might be responsible for 
controlling breathing frequency. Moreover, there was a strong trend towards decreased 
duration of pause before inspiration in AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice, resulting in a 
prolonged duration of expiratory air flow (P = 0.08; Fig. 4d upper peak traces, Extended 
Data Table 1). Our data show that Piezo2-mediated mechanotransduction is required for 
normal breathing in adult mice.
Previous studies have suggested that vagal sensory neurons in the nodose ganglia are the 
main source of low-threshold mechanosensors innervating the lower airway organs5,28,33. 
On the basis of our observations in AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice, we investigated 
whether Piezo2 serves as the low-threshold mechanotransducer in nodose sensory neurons 
by assaying inflation-dependent vagal neuronal activity and normal respiratory activity in 
adult Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice. The vagal nerve response to lung inflation was abolished 
in Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice (Fig. 5a, b), indicating that Piezo2 functions as the major 
stretch sensor to detect lung inflation in the vagus nerve. AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice 
showed a slightly milder effect on inflation-induced vagal activity than did 
Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice, and this might be due to incomplete ablation of Piezo2 from 
inducible Cre activity15. We also monitored basal respiratory activities in 
Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice and, as expected, these mice showed increased tidal volume and 
normal breathing frequency compared to wild-type littermates (Extended Data Fig. 8a, b).
To further characterize Piezo2 as the airway mechanotransducer, we assayed Hering–Breuer 
mechanoreflex responses in both Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO 
mice. Although wild-type littermate mice showed a clear halt of respiration as their lungs 
were inflated, both Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice continued 
their normal respiration, indicating that this mechanoreflex was impaired in both strains of 
Nonomura et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Piezo2-deficient mice (Fig. 5c, d, Extended Data Fig. 8c). We also performed a control 
experiment to test the respiratory reflex to a non-mechanical stimulus in Piezo2-deficient 
mice. Intravenous injection of the C-fibre activator phenylbiguanide (PBG) resulted in acute 
apnoea in both wild-type and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice (Extended Data Fig. 8d, e), 
indicating that the chemoreflex response is normal in Piezo2-deficient mice. We also 
considered the possible involvement of Piezo2-mediated proprioception in respiratory 
control, as proprioceptors might provide feedback on respiratory muscle activities34. 
PvalbCre;Piezo2cKO mice, in which proprioception is impaired17, showed an intact Hering–
Breuer reflex and normal breathing parameters, suggesting that Piezo2 in proprioceptive 
neurons is not essential for the airway mechanoreflex and basal respiration (Extended Data 
Figs 7e, f, 8f–h). Our data suggest that Piezo2 expressed in the nodose ganglia is the major 
mechanotransducer required for the Hering–Breuer reflex and respiratory volume control in 
adult mice.
Discussion
Our analyses, via selective activation of Piezo2+ sensory neurons and conditional ablation of 
Piezo2 channels, have uncovered roles for airway mechanotransduction in respiratory 
physiology. Piezo2 in nodose sensory neurons is a stretch sensor that is required for lung 
volume regulation and the Hering–Breuer reflex in adult mice, whereas Piezo2 in sensory 
neurons of neural crest origin is required for proper lung expansion and the onset of efficient 
respiration in newborn mice (Extended Data Fig. 9). Our mouse genetics data demonstrate 
that Piezo2 is a versatile mechanotransducer, functioning as a sensor of lung inflation in 
addition to touch and proprioception15,17. Recently, humans carrying compound inactivating 
variants of PIEZO2 were reported to have selective loss of discriminative touch perception 
and profoundly decreased proprioception; these individuals also exhibited shallow breathing 
during infancy35,36. Thus, the general role of Piezo2 in somatosensory mechanotransduction 
is conserved between mice and humans.
Beyond the regulation of normal respiration, airway mechanotransduction might contribute 
to respiratory diseases. We previously reported that a subtype of distal arthrogryposis type 5 
(DA5) is caused by autosomal dominant mutations of PIEZO2 with slower inactivation 
kinetics than the wild-type channel37. Most patients with DA5 suffer from joint contractures 
and develop restrictive lung diseases37,38. Our data raise the possibility that overactivation of 
PIEZO2+ vagal neurons might overtly increase lung stretch responses in these patients and 
lead to respiratory complications. Moreover, compromised mechanotransduction in the 
respiratory system (possibly via PIEZO2) could play a more substantial role in the clinic. 
For example, an attenuated Hering–Breuer reflex is reported in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)39. Sleep apnoea in adults and/or sudden infant death 
syndrome has also been suggested to be associated with dysfunctions in sensory neurons 
innervating the upper airway, including the oral and nasal cavities and larynx3,40–42.
As shown in the respiratory system, mechanical forces serve as cues to trigger subsequent 
biological responses in many visceral organs, but the mechanisms or physiological 
importance of mechanotransduction in other visceral organs has not been fully elucidated14. 
Our study suggests that genetic manipulations of Piezo2 in mice could be used to explore the 
Nonomura et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 role of mechanotransduction in other biological processes within the viscera, such as heart 
rate control, satiety, and bladder function35,36,43–45.
Methods
All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees 
of The Scripps Research Institute and Harvard Medical School.
Mouse lines
Piezo2−/− mice were generated by breeding Piezo2fl/fl and EIIaCre mice21 (The Jackson 
Laboratory, stock# 3724). The Piezo2GFP-IRES-Cre (Piezo2GFP) mouse line has been 
previously described21. Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO(fl/−), Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO(fl/−), 
Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO(fl/−), PvalbCre;Piezo2 cKO(fl/−) and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2fl/− (before 
Tam induction) mice were generated by breeding Tie2Cre (stock# 4128), Phox2bCre (stock# 
16223), Wnt1Cre (stock# 3829), PvalbCre (stock# 8069) or AdvillinCreERT2 lines15 with 
Piezo2fl/fl and Piezo2+/− mice. Each of these Cre mouse lines was also crossed to Ai9 
reporters (stock# 7909). Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice were generated by breeding Piezo2GFP 
mice with lox-ChR2 mice (stock# 12569).
Histology
Haematoxylin and eosin staining—Lungs were removed from either embryonic day 
(E)18.5 mouse embryos or newborn mice and processed for paraffin embedding. Paraffin 
sections were deparaffinized before haematoxylin and eosin staining.
Immunofluorescence
For Extended Data Figs 2, 3, lungs, trigeminal ganglion, diaphragm and intercostal muscles 
were removed from newborn mouse pups. The jugular–nodose complex and brainstem were 
removed from both newborn mouse pups and adult mice. Tracheal parasympathetic ganglia 
were removed from adult mice. DRG and sympathetic ganglia were isolated from the upper 
thoracic region (Th1–3) of adult mice. Spinal cord from the lumbar region was isolated from 
postnatal mice. All tissues were briefly fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)/phosphate 
buffered saline (PBS) and then incubated in 30% sucrose/PBS overnight at 4 °C. Fixed 
tissues were cryo-embedded in OCT compound (Sakura) and cryo-sectioned for 
immunofluorescence as previously described21.
Analysis of lung branching, vessel pattern and alveolar epithelial differentiation by whole-
mount immunostaining
Lungs were removed from E16.5 and E18.5 mouse embryos and fixed in 80% 
methanol/20% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) overnight at 4 °C. Whole lobes from E16.5 and 
E18.5 mice were stained for αSMA to visualize conducting airways, arteries and veins. 
Whole lobes from E18.5 mice were stained for E-cadherin, Muc1, T1α, and SpC to assess 
distal epithelial morphology and to visualize alveolar progenitors and nascent type I and II 
pneumocytes. Whole-mount immunostaining was performed as previously described46 with 
the following modifications: lobes were incubated with primary antibodies diluted in 
blocking solution (PBS with 5% donkey serum, 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.5% 
Nonomura et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Triton-X-100) for three nights at 4 °C and with secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa 
fluorophores (488, 568, 647) for two nights at 4 °C. Stained specimens were dehydrated in 
methanol and cleared in benzyl alcohol:benzyl benzoate (1:2). Samples were imaged on 
chambered coverslips with an inverted laser scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM780).
Antibodies
The following antibodies were used: GFP (1:500, Life Technologies, A10262 or A11122); 
Nefh (1:1,000, Aves laboratory, NFH or 1:1,000, Abcam, ab8135); CGRP (1:500, Abcam, 
ab43873); NeuN (1:500, Millipore, MAB377); PECAM1 (1:100, Abcam, ab28364); PV 
(1:500, Swant, PV 2); α-bungarotoxin (1:500, Life Technologies, B13423); advillin (1:500, 
Abcam, ab72210); Tuj1 (1:500, Covance, MMS-435P-250); αSMA–Cy3 (1:200, Sigma, 
C6198); E-cadherin (1:500, Life Technologies, 13–1900); MUC-1 (1:500, Fisher Scientific, 
HM1630P0); T1α (1:50, DSHB, 8.1.1); proSP-C (1:300, Millipore, AB3786); ChAT (1:300, 
Millipore, AB143); Piezo2 (1:1,000)21; IB4-Alexa Fluor568 conjugate (1:200, Life 
Technologies, I21412).
Pulse oximetry
Newborn mouse pups were subjected to pulse oximetry and heart rate recordings 
(MouseSTAT, Kent Scientific Corporation). The heads of newborn mice were placed in a 
ring-shaped oxygen sensor and the mice were allowed to acclimatize for 1 min, and then O2 
saturation levels (% SpO2) and heart rates were recorded every 15 s for 5 min. O2 saturation 
levels associated with heart rates greater than 200 b.p.m. were used for data analyses for 
reliability and accuracy.
Whole-body plethysmography
Freely behaving newborn and anaesthetized adult mice were subjected to whole-body 
plethysmography (Buxco system, DSI)47. Data were analysed with FinePointe software 
(Buxco system, DSI). For data from newborn mice, respiratory frequency was manually 
analysed by counting the number of inspiratory peaks with peak flow more than 0.3 ml/s and 
these were distinguished from background levels monitored when the chamber was empty. 
Values for air flow of newborn mice are possibly imprecise owing to technical limitations of 
monitoring respiration in newborn mice, while measurements of respiratory frequencies are 
precise48. Adult (10–14 weeks old) mice were anaesthetized with 1% isoflurane in 0.4 l/min 
oxygen supply during recording and data were collected for 10 min after a 15 min 
acclimation period in the recording chamber.
Wet-to-dry weight ratio
E18.5 embryos were delivered by caesarean section and were induced to breathe. Lungs 
were removed 6 h after delivery. After removing excess liquid by blotting, lung samples 
were weighed (wet weight). Next, the samples were dried overnight at 80 °C, and re-
weighed the next day (dry weight). Water content of lungs was determined by the difference 
between the wet and dry weights49.
Nonomura et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Electron microscopy
Lungs from newborn mice were placed in ice cold fixative consisting of 1% PFA + 3% 
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer + 5 mM CaCl2 pH 7.3 overnight. Following a 
wash in cacodylate buffer, the tissues were further fixed in 1% OsO4 with 0.75% potassium 
ferricyanide in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer for 2 h, again washed in cacodylate buffer and then 
dehydrated in a graded ethanol series followed by transitioning in propylene oxide. The lung 
tissue pieces were embedded in Embed 812/Araldite (Electron Microscopy Sciences). Thick 
sections (2 µm) were cut, mounted on glass slides and stained in toluidine blue for general 
assessment of the tissues in the light microscope. Subsequently, 70 nm thin sections were 
cut, mounted on copper slot grids coated with parlodion and stained with uranyl acetate and 
lead citrate for examination on a Philips CM100 electron microscope (FEI) at 80 kV. Images 
were documented using a Megaview III ccd camera (Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions 
GmbH).
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) infections of the J–N complex
AAV infection of the J–N complex was performed as previously described9. Briefly, after 
the left J–N complex of adult mice was surgically exposed under anaesthesia by making an 
incision along the ventral surface of the neck and blunt dissection, a micropipette containing 
AAV-flex-tdTomato (Penn Vector Core, AV-9-ALL867, titre 1.3 × 1013 genome copies per 
ml) was inserted into the J–N complex. Virus solution was injected (140 nl) using a Nanoject 
II. Animals recovered from surgery and were killed 4–8 weeks later for tissue removal.
Retrograde tracing of neurons innervating the lung
Surgery was carried out on 8–10-week-old Piezo2GFP mice. After mice were anaesthetized 
using isoflurane, the trachea was exposed by a midline cervical incision. 1 µl of the 
fluorescent tracer (1% DiO in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)) was injected into the 
tracheal lumen between two cartilage rings close to the bronchus using a microsyringe50,51. 
The animals were sutured and were allowed to recover for 7 days for sufficient labelling of 
cell bodies. On the eighth day after surgery, all animals were killed and ganglia were 
removed. The J–N complex, upper thoracic (Th1–3) DRG, and lumbar DRG were collected 
from each animal for cryo-sectioning and immunofluorescence. The lumbar DRG served as 
a control: animals with DiO labelling in their lumbar DRG were removed from the 
experimental cohort as this indicated leakage of DiO during injection.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT–PCR)
For Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO and control mice, lungs were removed from adult mice (n = 4) and 
were processed into a single-cell suspension. Cells were then stained with PE-conjugated 
CD31 antibody (BD Pharmingen) for 30 min to 1 h on ice and were subjected to 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). DAPI+ cells were excluded, and DAPI− CD31+ 
and DAPI− CD31− cells were sorted into separate tubes containing TRIzol. Total RNA was 
isolated for qRT–PCR. For Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO and control pups, DRG were removed from 
newborn pups (n = 5) and placed into TRIzol. Total RNA was isolated and subjected to 
qRT–PCR as previously described4.
Nonomura et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In situ hybridization
The jugular–nodose complex was isolated from adult mice and fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 4 h 
on ice. They were then incubated in 30% sucrose/PBS overnight at 4 °C. On the next day, 
fixed tissues were cryo-embedded in OCT compound and cryo-sectioned at 8 µm. Sections 
were subjected to in situ hybridization according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Advanced 
Cell Diagnostics).
Optogenetic stimulations and analyses
Optogenetic stimulation of the vagus nerve was performed as previously described9. Mice 
were deeply anaesthetized (isoflurane, 1.5–2%, Abbott Laboratory), freely breathing, and 
maintained at normal body temperature. Briefly, in order to measure the conduction velocity 
of vagal sensory neurons, a short light pulse (0.8 ms) was delivered via an optic fibre 
positioned on the left vagus nerve trunk 1 mm beneath the recording electrodes and coupled 
to a laser light source (473 nm, 150 mW, Ultralaser). Light-induced compound action 
potentials were recorded by whole-nerve electrophysiology (50 kHz sampling rate), 
amplified (CP511, Grass), and acquired with a data acquisition system (MP150, Biopac). 
Fibre conduction velocity was determined by varying the distance between the optic fibre 
and recording electrode (travel distance); the resulting time lags in peak maxima (Δt) were 
plotted as a function of travel distance, revealing characteristic A and C fibre types. The total 
currents carried by A or C fibres were calculated by integrating the corresponding peak area 
in the compound action potential. The A–C ratio reported here may underrepresent fold 
enrichment as the A and C peaks were not completely separated in most recordings. In order 
to investigate the effect of Piezo2+ vagal sensory neuron activation on respiration, light 
stimulations (5 ms pulses at 50 Hz, 75–125 mW/mm2 intensity) were delivered to the base 
of the left nodose ganglion. Respiration rate was measured using an amplifier-coupled 
pressure transducer (Cwe) cannulated into the trachea. A breath was scored if the lung 
volume increased to at least 10% of mean tidal volume. Total lung volume was calculated by 
integrating lung volume across 10-s periods during baseline and stimulation with or without 
light. High volume state was defined as greater than mean volume during tidal breathing.
Tamoxifen treatment
Tamoxifen (Sigma) dissolved in corn oil was injected as previously described15. Briefly, in 
adult AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2fl/− (test) and Piezo2fl/+ (control) mice, tamoxifen was injected 
at 150 mg/kg (body weight) for 5 consecutive days. The mice were allowed to recover for 1 
week, and they were subjected to a static force von Frey test to confirm Piezo2 
knockdown15. Mice with efficient Piezo2 knockdown (mice displaying reduced sensitivity to 
low threshold mechanical stimuli) were subjected to plethysmography recordings, the 
Hering–Breuer reflex test or whole vagus nerve electrophysiology recording the following 
week. AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice refer to AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2fl/− (+ Tam), and 
WT mice refer to Piezo2fl/+ (+ Tam).
Whole vagus nerve electrophysiology recording
Whole vagus nerve electrophysiology recording was performed as previously described9. 
Briefly, in deeply anaesthetized mice (isoflurane, 1.5–2%, Abbott Laboratory), the left vagus 
Nonomura et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 nerve was cervically transected, and the peripheral transected end was desheathed and 
placed onto a pair of platinum-iridium electrodes. In the case of nerve recording with 
artificial airway inflation, air was introduced into the airway at a flow rate of 200, 400, 600 
or 800 cc/min via a tracheal cannula (PE-50, Braintree Scientific), while the mice were kept 
anaesthetized with 1.5–2% isoflurane gas supplied through another tracheal cannula. 
Multiunit neural activity was amplified (CP511, Grass Technologies), digitized (MP150, 
Biopac), recorded with AcqKnowledge data acquisition program (Biopac), and integrated 
with a time constant of 1 s. Lung-inflation-induced responses were calculated by subtracting 
baseline neural activity from activity recorded during stimulus. The response to serotonin 
(10 mM, 400 µl, intraperitoneal injection) over a 100-s period after administration was used 
for normalization.
The Hering–Breuer reflex test
Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO and wild-type littermate mice (10–14 weeks old) were deeply 
anesthetized (isoflurane, 1.5–2%, Abbott Laboratory), freely breathing, and maintained at 
normal body temperature. Airway pressure was measured using an amplifier-coupled 
pressure transducer (Cwe) cannulated into the trachea and recorded with a M150 data 
acquisition system (Biopac). A breath was scored if lung volume was increased to at least 
10% of mean tidal volume. Air was introduced into the airway at flow rate of 200, 400, 600 
or 800 cc/min via a tracheal cannula (PE-50, Braintree Scientific). 
AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO, PvalbCre;Piezo2cKO mice and their wild-type littermates (10–
14 weeks old) were anaesthetized with 200 mg/kg (body weight) ketamine HCl (Henry 
Schein) injected intraperitoneally. The depth of anaesthesia was assessed in terms of 
movement reactions to tactile stimulation. The trachea was exposed by a midline cervical 
incision. The trachea was then cut horizontally between two cartilage rings, and an 18 G 
needle attached to a three-way stopcock was inserted into the trachea lumen. One end of the 
three-way stopcock was attached to a syringe (through which air was injected), and the other 
end could be ‘open’ or ‘closed’. Shortly after the needle was placed in the trachea, mice 
were left to vent freely through the open end to obtain a baseline breathing pattern. After the 
baseline was obtained, the open end was switched to the closed position so that air from 
outside was blocked, and then 0.3 ml air was injected through the syringe into the trachea4. 
After air was injected, the three-way stopcock was kept closed for 8–10 s, and then was 
opened so that mice could resume their autonomous breathing. Respiratory activities 
throughout the experiment were videotaped and were quantified by movement of the 
abdomen. The number of respiratory activities observed between 2 and 6 s after air injection 
was normalized to the baseline and was compared between Piezo2-deficient and wild-type 
mice.
Phenylbiguanide (PBG) induced C-fibre-mediated pulmonary reflex
AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO and wild-type mice (10–14 weeks old) were anaesthetized with 
1.5 g/kg (body weight) urethane (SPEX CertiPrep) injected intraperitoneally. The depth of 
anaesthesia was assessed in terms of movement reactions to tactile stimulation. The 
experiment was performed as previously described4. Briefly, PBG (Sigma-Aldrich, 100 
µg/ml, 20 µl) was administrated intravenously after the left femoral vein was cannulated 
Nonomura et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with polyethylene tubing. Respiratory pattern was monitored by an air flow sensor (Buxco 
system, DSI).
Statistics
All data analysed by statistical analyses are detailed in the figure legends. All statistical 
analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism6. When unpaired Student’s t-test was 
applied, similarity of variance between groups was confirmed by F test. Data from qPCR 
experiments of isolated DRG or endothelial cells were analysed by unpaired Welch’s t-test. 
Oxygen saturation levels in blood were analysed by Mann–Whitney test. Wet to dry lung 
ratio data were analysed by unpaired Student’s t-test. Weight of lung or liver was analysed 
by Kruskal–Wallis nonparametric test. Weight of heart was analysed by one-way ANOVA. 
Respiratory parameters were analysed by Student’s or Welch’s t-test. Data of whole vagus 
nerve electrophysiology recording and Hering-Breuer reflex with air flow of multiple steps 
were analysed by repeated measures two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s post-hoc. All statistical 
analyses were two-sided.
Sample size choice
The specific number of independent experiments or animal numbers used for all experiments 
is outlined in the corresponding figures or their legends. For qRT–PCR analysis, sample 
sizes were chosen on the basis of our previous studies, in which we performed at least three 
separate experiments per sample to ensure statistical significance. For oxygen saturation 
levels in blood, data were obtained from between 4 and 40 animals per genotype. All 
respiratory parameters or whole vagus nerve electrophysiology recording data represent 
results from 2–4 independent rounds of testing with multiple mice of both genotypes per 
cohort. All mice tested were littermate controls. Both male and female mice were used for 
all experiments. AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice were subjected to static force von Frey 
test based on our previous studies to confirm Piezo2 knockdown before experiments. All 
experimental procedures were performed in a blinded manner. No randomization was 
applied. No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size.
Data availability
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from 
the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Nonomura et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Characterization of lung development in Piezo2−/− mice
a, b, Whole-mount staining for αSMA in the left lobe of lungs from E16.5 (a) and E18.5 (b) 
wild-type and Piezo2−/− mice. L1–L6, lateral branches of the left lobe. E16.5: wild-type n = 
4, Piezo2−/− n = 3; E18.5: wild-type n = 4, Piezo2−/− n = 5. A normal conducting airway and 
vessel pattern was observed in Piezo2−/− lungs at late embryonic stages. c, d, Whole-mount 
immunostaining for E-cadherin and Muc-1 (c) or E-cadherin, T1α, and SpC (d) in left lobes 
Nonomura et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from E18.5 wild-type and Piezo2−/− mice. Arrows indicate proximal (P) to distal (D) 
direction. Left panels, lower magnification; right panels, higher magnification of the distal 
region. Solid circles in right panels indicate alveolar progenitors in the distal region. Solid 
hexagons in left panels indicate nascent type I pneumocytes. Yellow dashed circles in left 
panels indicate nascent type II pneumocytes. A normal epithelial morphology and no defects 
in alveolar epithelial patterning and differentiation were observed Piezo2−/− lungs. e, 
Representative ultrastructures of wild-type and Piezo2−/− newborn lungs. Black arrows mark 
type I pneumocyte extensions. White dotted circles mark type II pneumocytes. White 
arrowheads within white dotted circles mark lamellar bodies. RBC, red blood cells. Samples 
from four mice per genotype were analysed. Normal morphology and similar abundances of 
type I and II pneumocytes, endothelial cells, red blood cells and surfactant proteins were 
observed in Piezo2−/− lungs compared to wild-type lungs. f, Wet-to-dry lung ratio 6 h after 
delivery at E18.5 to assess clearance of fetal pulmonary fluid. NS, statistically not 
significant. Unpaired Student’s t-test. Bars represent mean ± s.d. g, Per cent weight of 
postnatal day (P)0 lung, heart, and liver normalized to whole body weight. Bars represent 
mean ± s.e.m. NS, statistically not significant. Kruskal–Wallis nonparametric test (lung and 
liver) or one-way ANOVA (heart). Scale bars, 500 µm (a, b); 33 µm (c, d, left); 22 µm (c, d, 
right); 5 µm (e).
Nonomura et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Piezo2 expression in the respiratory system
a, Co-immunostaining for GFP and Nefh in P0 Piezo2GFP reporter lung. Arrow, NEB. 
Smaller panels on right show a magnified view of NEB stained for GFP and CGRP (a 
marker of NEBs). b, c, GFP immunostaining in the jugular–nodose complex from P0 (b) 
and adult (c) Piezo2GFP reporter mice. Dotted line demarcates the boundary of the jugular– 
nodose complex. d, e, GFP immunostaining in P0 trigeminal ganglion (d) or adult thoracic 
DRG (e) from Piezo2GFP reporter mice. Dotted line in (d) demarcates the boundary of the 
trigeminal ganglion. f, Co-immunostaining for GFP and NeuN in a sagittal section of P0 
Piezo2GFP brainstem. g, h, GFP and αBTX (a marker of neuromuscular junction) co-
staining in P0 Piezo2GFP diaphragm (g) and intercostal muscles (h). i, Co-immunostaining 
for GFP and NeuN in adult Piezo2GFP lumbar spinal cord. Dotted circle indicates motor 
neuron localization. j, Co-immunostaining for GFP and NeuN in adult Piezo2GFP brainstem. 
Dotted circle marks dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve, X. k, Co-immunostaining for GFP 
and Tuj1 in thoracic sympathetic ganglia from adult Piezo2GFP reporter mice. l, Schematic 
summary of Piezo2–GFP expression in the respiratory system. VII, facial nucleus; BötC, the 
Nonomura et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bötzinger complex; VRG, ventral respiratory group; RB, rib bone; Vt, ventricle. Scale bars, 
20 µm (smaller panels on right in a), 100 µm (all other panels).
Extended Data Figure 3. Characterization of tdTomato expression in the respiratory system of 
Piezo2-GFP-IRES-Cre (Piezo2GFP);Ai9 reporter mice
a, b, Immunostaining for PECAM1 (a) and CGRP (b) with tdTomato epifluorescence in 
postnatal lungs. Arrow in (b) indicates tdTomato+ nerve fibre innervating NEB. Dotted line 
in (b) demarcates the lung epithelium. c, tdTomato epifluorescence in P0 jugular–nodose 
complex. Dotted line in (c) demarcates the boundary of the jugular– nodose complex. d, 
Nonomura et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tdTomato epifluorescence in adult thoracic DRG. e, f, tdTomato epifluorescence in adult 
nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) (e) and in adult spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5) (f), where 
axons of nodose and jugular/trigeminal sensory neurons project, respectively52,53. Smaller 
panels on right in f show a magnified view of Sp5 with Nefh staining. g–i, PECAM1 
immunostaining with tdTomato epifluorescence in P0 brainstem (g), adult diaphragm (h), 
and P0 intercostal muscle (i). j, PV immunostaining with tdTomato epifluorescence in 
postnatal lumbar spinal cord. Dotted circle marks motor neuron localization. k, Tuj1 
immunostaining with tdTomato epifluorescence in adult thoracic sympathetic ganglia. l, 
ChAT immunostaining and tdTomato epifluorescence in tracheal parasympathetic ganglia 
from adult reporter mice. Scale bars, 25 µm (a, l, smaller panels on right in f), 20 µm (b), 
100 µm (c–k).
Nonomura et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Characterization of tissue-specific Cre activities via Ai9 reporters
a, b, tdTomato epifluorescence in P0 Tie2Cre;Ai9 lung with PECAM1 staining (a) or CGRP 
staining (b). c, tdTomato epifluorescence in P0 Tie2Cre;Ai9 jugular–nodose complex with 
PECAM1 staining. Dotted line demarcates the boundary of the jugular–nodose complex. d, 
tdTomato epifluorescence in adult Tie2Cre;Ai9 thoracic DRG. Dotted line demarcates the 
boundary of the DRG. e, tdTomato epifluorescence in P0 Tie2Cre;Ai9 trigeminal ganglion 
with Advillin staining. TdTomato signal co-localizes with PECAM1+ endothelial cells in a 
and c. f–i, tdTomato epifluorescence in P0 Phox2bCre;Ai9 lung with CGRP staining (f), P0 
Nonomura et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 jugular–nodose complex with Advillin staining (g), adult thoracic DRG (h), and P0 
trigeminal ganglion with Advillin staining (i). TdTomato signal is present in nodose ganglia 
(g), but absent in lung cells and NEBs (f), jugular ganglia (g), DRG (h), and trigeminal 
ganglia (i). Arrows in f indicate tdTomato+ vagal nerve fibre innervating the lung epithelium. 
Dotted line in h demarcates the boundary of DRG. j–m, tdTomato epifluorescence in P0 
Wnt1Cre;Ai9 lung with CGRP staining (j), P0 jugular–nodose complex (k), adult thoracic 
DRG (l), and adult jugular–nodose complex with Piezo2 staining (m). m′, m″, Higher 
magnification images of m. Arrows show tdTomato expression in both jugular neuronal cell 
bodies and satellite cells. Arrowheads show tdTomato expression only in satellite cells. 
TdTomato signal is present in neuronal cell bodies of jugular ganglia (k, m) and DRG (l), 
and satellite cells in the jugular–nodose complex and DRG (k–m), but absent in lung cells 
and NEBs (j) and neuronal cell bodies of nodose ganglia (k, m). TdTomato+ nerve fibres 
innervate the lung (j). Dotted lines indicate boundaries of the ganglia. VII + VIII, facial-
acoustic complex. Scale bars, 50 µm (b), 12.5 µm (m′, m″), 100 µm (all other panels).
Nonomura et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Characterization of Piezo2 knockdown in Piezo2 conditional knockout 
mice
a, Characterization of Piezo2 knockdown by qRT–PCR using FACS-sorted CD31+ (or 
PECAM1+) lung cells from adult wild-type and Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO mice. b, Piezo2 in situ 
hybridization in the jugular–nodose complex of adult wild-type and Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO 
mice. Dotted circles mark nodose ganglia (N). c, qRT–PCR using DRG isolated from P0 
wild-type and Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO pups. * P < 0.05, *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001, 
unpaired Welch’s t-test for a, c. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. Scale bar, 100 µm.
Nonomura et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Optogenetic activation of Piezo2+ vagal sensory neurons in 
Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice
a, A compound action potential response following brief optogenetic stimulation (blue 
lightning sign) of vagus nerve in Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice. b, A and C currents classified 
on the basis of corresponding peak area in the compound action potential. Dashed line: A–C 
ratio of 1. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. c, GFP, Nefh and IB4 co-staining in adult 
Piezo2GFP jugular–nodose complex. Red arrows indicate GPF+ Nefh+ IB4− cells; blue 
arrows indicate GFP+ Nefh− IB4+ cells. d, Percentage of Nefh or IB4 positive cells among 
Nonomura et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GFP+ cells in adult Piezo2GFP jugular–nodose complex. e–g, State of respiratory trapping 
following optogenetic stimulation (50 Hz, 10 s) of vagus nerve in Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 
mice. Representative trace showing changes in lung volume following optogenetic activation 
in Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice (e). Per cent change in total lung volume in Piezo2GFP;lox-
ChR2 mice without and with light (f). The percentage of time in a high lung volume state 
(greater than mean volume during tidal breathing) in Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice without and 
with light (g). *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001, paired t-test, mean ± s.e.m. h, Brainstem of 
Piezo2GFP mice with AAV-flex-tdTomato injection to the jugular–nodose complex. Sol, 
solitary tract; CC, central canal; AP, area postrema; L-NTS; ventral, lateral, ventrolateral, 
interstitial, and intermediate NTS subnuclei; M-NTS; dorsolateral, dorsomedial, medial, and 
commissural NTS subnuclei. Scale bars, 100 µm.
Nonomura et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Characterization of AdvillinCreERT2 and PvalbCre activity via Ai9 
reporter
a, tdTomato epifluorescence and DAPI staining in the lung from adult AdvillinCreERT2;Ai9
+Tam reporter mice. TdTomato is not expressed in lung cells. Instead, tdTomato+ nerve fibres 
innervate the lung. b, tdTomato epifluorescence, CGRP and DAPI staining in lungs from 
adult AdvillinCreERT2;Ai9 +Tam reporter mice. TdTomato is not expressed in NEBs. Dotted 
line demarcates the lung epithelium. Bronch, bronchioles. c, d, tdTomato epifluorescence in 
adult jugular–nodose complex (c) and tdTomato epifluorescence and DAPI staining in adult 
Nonomura et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 thoracic DRG (d) from AdvillinCreERT2;Ai9 +Tam reporter mice. TdTomato is expressed in 
both the jugular–nodose complex (c) and the DRG (d). e, f, tdTomato epifluorescence and 
DAPI staining in the lung (e) and jugular–nodose complex (f) of adult PvalbCre;Ai9 reporter 
mice. TdTomato is not expressed in lung cells and neuronal cell bodies in the jugular–
nodose complex. Scale bars, 100 µm.
Extended Data Figure 8. Respiratory properties of various Piezo2-deficient mouse lines
Nonomura et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, b, Average frequency (a) and average tidal volume (b) of adult wild-type and 
Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice under anaesthesia. * P < 0.05, unpaired Student’s t-test, mean ± 
s.e.m. c, Respiration activity during lung inflation (0.3 ml air) normalized to baseline in 
adult wild-type and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice. * P < 0.05, unpaired Welch’s t-test, 
mean ± s.e.m. d, e, Phenylbiguanide (PBG)-induced chemoreflex in adult 
AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice. Representative traces of respiratory air flow from wild-
type and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice with 2.0 µg PBG intravenous injection (d). 
Baseline and longest breath interval after PBG injection. Bars represent mean ± s.e.m. (e). f, 
g, Average frequency (f) and average tidal volume (g) of adult wild-type and 
PvalbCre;Piezo2cKO mice under anaesthesia. Unpaired Student’s t-test, mean ± s.e.m. h, 
Respiration activity during lung inflation (0.3 ml air) normalized to baseline in adult wild-
type and PvalbCre;Piezo2cKO mice. Unpaired Welch’s t-test, mean ± s.e.m. NS, statistically 
not significant.
Nonomura et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Roles of Piezo2 in respiratory system
a, Piezo2 in nodose sensory neurons. It has been widely reported that nodose sensory 
neurons contain low-threshold mechanosensors innervating the lower airway tract including 
the lungs, while jugular sensory neurons contain high-threshold mechanosensors that 
innervate the upper airway tract, such as the larynx and the trachea. In addition, nodose 
sensory neurons project to the NTS6,53, a synaptic station required for the Hering–Breuer 
reflex in the brainstem54. Consistent with these findings, Piezo2 expression is detected in the 
jugular–nodose ganglia complex, and Piezo2+ nerve fibres project to the NTS. Moreover, 
Nonomura et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adult mice lacking Piezo2 in the nodose ganglion show abolished vagal nerve responses to 
lung inflation, increased tidal volume, and an impaired Hering–Breuer inspiratory reflex. In 
addition to the nodose ganglia, Piezo2 is also expressed in the jugular, trigeminal, and dorsal 
root ganglia. We observed similar phenotypes in mice with Piezo2 depletion induced in 
virtually all sensory neurons in the adult. These data suggest that Piezo2 in nodose sensory 
neurons is the major stretch sensor required for lung volume regulation and the Hering–
Breuer reflex response in adult mice. b, Piezo2 in jugular, trigeminal and/or spinal sensory 
neurons. In newborn mice, Piezo2 in sensory neurons of the neural crest origin is required 
for proper lung expansion and establishing efficient respiration as both global Piezo2 
knockout and neural crest-derived sensory neuron-specific Piezo2 conditional knockout 
newborn mice showed hypoventilation, decreased inspiratory activity, altered expiratory 
pattern and unexpanded lungs. Our genetic studies also suggest that Piezo2 is not required in 
nodose ganglia for newborn lung expansion and respiration; however, this lack of 
requirement does not imply lack of involvement, and could be due to functional redundancy 
(that is, Piezo2 in jugular, trigeminal and/or dorsal root ganglia can compensate for Piezo2 
deficiency in nodose ganglia). Although sensory neuronal control of respiration in newborn 
animals remains largely unknown, the newborn airway experiences a large pressure change 
in the course of lung expansion55. Piezo2-mediated mechanosensory feedback of the airway 
might be crucial for subsequent motor output (for example, control of diaphragm discharge 
or prevention of upper airway narrowing) to establish proper breathing patterns in newborn 
animals. The data presented here do not identify the exact cause of lethality in Piezo2-
deficient newborn animals; however, we speculate that lethality in pups might be due to a 
combined effect of hypoventilation and lack of nutrients owing to inability to suckle. c, 
Piezo2 in NEBs. In addition to airway-innervating sensory neurons, Piezo2 is also expressed 
in pulmonary NEB cells, which are likely to be innervated by Piezo2+ afferents (Extended 
Data Fig. 3b, arrow). NEBs are enigmatic pulmonary cells whose physiological function is 
unclear3,22,23. Previous studies have suggested that the inflation-induced vagal nerve 
responses that are responsible for the Hering–Breuer reflex are slowly adapting2,4,5,7. While 
Piezo2 channels are generally rapidly adapting when assayed in cultured cells16, Piezo2 
channels in Merkel cell–neurite complexes in the skin give rise to slowly adapting firing 
responses21,56 that are proposed to be caused by dual Piezo2 expression in both epidermal 
Merkel cells and associated afferents21,56. Therefore, it is possible that NEBs also contribute 
to sensing lung inflation in concert with Piezo2+ mechanosensory afferents. Future efforts 
will explore whether pulmonary NEBs function as mechanosensory cells, similar to Merkel 
cells.
Extended Data Table 1
Respiratory properties of anaesthetized wild-type and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice
Parameter
Abbreviation
Unit
Definition
p value
WT average ± 
SEM
cKO average ± 
SEM
Frequency
f
breaths/min
Number of 
breaths per 
minute
0.5939 (W)
144.5 ± 3.167
149.8 ± 8.894
Tidal Volume per 
breath
TVb
ml
Volume of air per 
breath
0.0143 (S)
0.1002 ± 0.006839
0.1310 ± 0.008891
Nonomura et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Parameter
Abbreviation
Unit
Definition
p value
WT average ± 
SEM
cKO average ± 
SEM
Minute Volume
MVb
ml/min
f × TVb
0.0727 (W)
14.38 ± 0.9114
19.84 ± 2.460
InspiratoryTime
Ti
sec
Actual time of 
inspiration
0.4727 (S)
0.1506 ± 0.006858
0.1588 ± 0.008984
Expiratory Time
Te
sec
Actual time of 
expiration
0.4135 (S)
0.2694 ± 0.008343
0.2550 ± 0.01618
Rpef
Rpef
-
Rate to achieve 
peak expiratory 
flow
  Rpef=(time to 
PEF)/Te
0.0221 (S)
0.1131 ± 0.00687
0.1461 ± 0.01160
Peak Inspiratory Flow
PIFb
ml/sec
Peak airflow 
velocity during 
inspiration
0.2112 (S)
1.173 ± 0.1251
1.471 ± 0.2021
Peak Expiratory Flow
PEFb
ml/sec
Peak airflow 
velocity during 
expiration
0.6118 (S)
1.519 ± 0.1381
1.635 ± 0.1824
Expiratory Flow
at 50% Volume
EF50
ml/sec
Airflow at when 
50% of tidal 
volume is expired
0.3153 (S)
0.1002 ± 0.01059
0.1182 ± 0.01407
Relaxation Time58
Tr
sec
Time for the 
volume signal to 
reach
36% of the peak 
amplitude during 
expiration
0.1363 (S)
0.06248 ± 0.004801
0.07562 ± 0.007158
Pause58
PAU
-
(Te-Tr)/Tr
0.1755 (S)
3.660 ± 0.3798
2.790 ± 0.4899
Enhanced Pause57
Penh
-
PEFb/PIFb × PAU
0.4161 (S)
5.392 ± 0.5581
4.339 ± 1.241
Duration of Breaking57
TB
%
The percentage of 
time occupied by 
the top
of the breath (at 
or near tidal 
volume)
0.1526 (S)
3.579 ± 0.5614
4.782 ± 0.5386
Duration of Pause
before Inspiration57
TP
%
The percentage of 
time occupied by 
the bottom
of the breath (at 
or near functional 
residual capacity).
0.0800 (S)
45.65 ± 2.297
37.86 ± 3.651
Respiratory properties measured in wild-type (n = 9) and AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO(n = 7) mice during 
plethysmograph recordings under anaesthesia (unpaired Student's (S) or Welch's (W) t-test)57,58.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank D. Trajkovic for assistance with histology; M. Wood for assistance with electron microscopy; J. Yu for 
suggesting that we test the Hering–Breuer reflex; S. M. Cahalan, M. Petrus, J. Mathur, K. Marshall, S. Lee, T. 
Kawamura, J. Chen and P. Paolo Sanna for technical assistance; and M. Krasnow for discussions. This research was 
supported by NIH grants R01DE022358 to A.P. and R01HL132255, and a Giovanni Armenise-Harvard Foundation 
Grant to S.D.L. A.P. is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
Nonomura et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Rhoades, RA., Bell, DR. Medical Physiology: Principles for Clinical Medicine. 3rd. Vol. 328. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009. 
2. Schelegle ES, Green JF. An overview of the anatomy and physiology of slowly adapting pulmonary 
stretch receptors. Respir. Physiol. 2001; 125:17–31. [PubMed: 11240150] 
3. Lee LY, Yu J. Sensory nerves in lung and airways. Compr. Physiol. 2014; 4:287–324. [PubMed: 
24692141] 
4. Zhang JW, Walker JF, Guardiola J, Yu J. Pulmonary sensory and reflex responses in the mouse. J. 
Appl. Physiol. 2006; 101:986–992. [PubMed: 16675617] 
5. Carr MJ, Undem BJ. Bronchopulmonary afferent nerves. Respirology. 2003; 8:291–301. [PubMed: 
14528878] 
6. Kaczyńska K, Szereda-Przestaszewska M. Nodose ganglia-modulatory effects on respiration. 
Physiol. Res. 2013; 62:227–235. [PubMed: 23489183] 
7. Belvisi MG. Overview of the innervation of the lung. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2002; 2:211–215. 
[PubMed: 12020459] 
8. Alexandrova NP, Donina ZA, Danilova GA. Effect of central hypervolemia on respiratory function. 
J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2007; 58(Suppl.5):9–15.
9. Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Williams EK, Umans BD, Liberles SD. Vagal sensory neuron subtypes 
that differentially control breathing. Cell. 2015; 161:622–633. [PubMed: 25892222] 
10. Turgeon B, Meloche S. Interpreting neonatal lethal phenotypes in mouse mutants: insights into 
gene function and human diseases. Physiol. Rev. 2009; 89:1–26. [PubMed: 19126753] 
11. Rabbette PS, Stocks J. Influence of volume dependency and timing of airway occlusions on the 
Hering-Breuer reflex in infants. J. Appl. Physiol. 1998; 85:2033–2039. [PubMed: 9843523] 
12. Wong KA, et al. Pulmonary vagal innervation is required to establish adequate alveolar ventilation 
in the newborn lamb. J. Appl. Physiol. 1998; 85:849–859. [PubMed: 9729557] 
13. Hasan SU, Lalani S, Remmers JE. Significance of vagal innervation in perinatal breathing and gas 
exchange. Respir. Physiol. 2000; 119:133–141. [PubMed: 10722856] 
14. Ranade SS, Syeda R, Patapoutian A. Mechanically activated ion channels. Neuron. 2015; 87:1162–
1179. [PubMed: 26402601] 
15. Ranade SS, et al. Piezo2 is the major transducer of mechanical forces for touch sensation in mice. 
Nature. 2014; 516:121–125. [PubMed: 25471886] 
16. Coste B, et al. Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically activated 
cation channels. Science. 2010; 330:55–60. [PubMed: 20813920] 
17. Woo SH, et al. Piezo2 is the principal mechanotransduction channel for proprioception. Nat. 
Neurosci. 2015; 18:1756–1762. [PubMed: 26551544] 
18. Schrenk-Siemens K, et al. PIEZO2 is required for mechanotransduction in human stem cell-
derived touch receptors. Nat. Neurosci. 2015; 18:10–16. [PubMed: 25469543] 
19. Dubin AE, et al. Inflammatory signals enhance piezo2-mediated mechanosensitive currents. Cell 
Reports. 2012; 2:511–517. [PubMed: 22921401] 
20. Pei L, et al. Thyroid hormone receptor repression is linked to type I pneumocyte-associated 
respiratory distress syndrome. Nat. Med. 2011; 17:1466–1472. [PubMed: 22001906] 
21. Woo SH, et al. Piezo2 is required for Merkel-cell mechanotransduction. Nature. 2014; 509:622–
626. [PubMed: 24717433] 
22. Pan J, Copland I, Post M, Yeger H, Cutz E. Mechanical stretch-induced serotonin release from 
pulmonary neuroendocrine cells: implications for lung development. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. 
Mol. Physiol. 2006; 290:L185–L193. [PubMed: 16100287] 
23. Cutz E, Pan J, Yeger H, Domnik NJ, Fisher JT. Recent advances and contraversies on the role of 
pulmonary neuroepithelial bodies as airway sensors. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2013; 24:40–50. 
[PubMed: 23022441] 
24. Smith JC, Abdala AP, Rybak IA, Paton JF. Structural and functional architecture of respiratory 
networks in the mammalian brainstem. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. 2009; 364:2577–2587. 
[PubMed: 19651658] 
Nonomura et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 25. Koni PA, et al. Conditional vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 deletion in mice: impaired 
lymphocyte migration to bone marrow. J. Exp. Med. 2001; 193:741–754. [PubMed: 11257140] 
26. Danielian PS, Muccino D, Rowitch DH, Michael SK, McMahon AP. Modification of gene activity 
in mouse embryos in utero by a tamoxifen-inducible form of Cre recombinase. Curr. Biol. 1998; 
8:1323–1326. [PubMed: 9843687] 
27. Scott MM, Williams KW, Rossi J, Lee CE, Elmquist JK. Leptin receptor expression in hindbrain 
Glp-1 neurons regulates food intake and energy balance in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 2011; 121:2413–
2421. [PubMed: 21606595] 
28. Nassenstein C, et al. Phenotypic distinctions between neural crest and placodal derived vagal C-
fibres in mouse lungs. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 2010; 588:4769–4783. [PubMed: 20937710] 
29. Chai Y, et al. Fate of the mammalian cranial neural crest during tooth and mandibular 
morphogenesis. Development. 2000; 127:1671–1679. [PubMed: 10725243] 
30. Li BY, Glazebrook P, Kunze DL, Schild JH. KCa1.1 channel contributes to cell excitability in 
unmyelinated but not myelinated rat vagal afferents. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2011; 
300:C1393–C1403. [PubMed: 21325638] 
31. Ruan HZ, Burnstock G. Localisation of P2Y1 and P2Y4 receptors in dorsal root, nodose and 
trigeminal ganglia of the rat. Histochem. Cell Biol. 2003; 120:415–426. [PubMed: 14564529] 
32. Lee KZ, et al. Hypoglossal neuropathology and respiratory activity in pompe mice. Front. Physiol. 
2011; 2:31. [PubMed: 21747768] 
33. McGovern AE, et al. Evidence for multiple sensory circuits in the brain arising from the respiratory 
system: an anterograde viral tract tracing study in rodents. Brain Struct. Funct. 2015; 220:3683–
3699. [PubMed: 25158901] 
34. Parkes MJ. Breath-holding and its breakpoint. Exp. Physiol. 2006; 91:1–15. [PubMed: 16272264] 
35. Chesler AT, et al. The role of PIEZO2 in human mechanosensation. N. Engl. J. Med. 2016; 
375:1355–1364. [PubMed: 27653382] 
36. Delle Vedove A, et al. Biallelic loss of proprioception-related PIEZO2 causes muscular atrophy 
with perinatal respiratory distress, arthrogryposis, and scoliosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2016; 
99:1206–1216. [PubMed: 27843126] 
37. Coste B, et al. Gain-of-function mutations in the mechanically activated ion channel PIEZO2 cause 
a subtype of distal arthrogryposis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2013; 110:4667–4672. [PubMed: 
23487782] 
38. Okubo M, et al. A family of distal arthrogryposis type 5 due to a novel PIEZO2 mutation. Am. J. 
Med. Genet. A. 2015; 167A:1100–1106. [PubMed: 25712306] 
39. Tryfon S, Kontakiotis T, Mavrofridis E, Patakas D. Hering–Breuer reflex in normal adults and in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and interstitial fibrosis. Respiration. 2001; 
68:140–144. [PubMed: 11287827] 
40. Nishino T. Physiological and pathophysiological implications of upper airway reflexes in humans. 
Jpn J. Physiol. 2000; 50:3–14. [PubMed: 10866692] 
41. Thach BT. The role of respiratory control disorders in SIDS. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 2005; 
149:343–353. [PubMed: 16122993] 
42. Ramirez JM, et al. Central and peripheral factors contributing to obstructive sleep apneas. Respir. 
Physiol. Neurobiol. 2013; 189:344–353. [PubMed: 23770311] 
43. Fox EA, et al. Neurotrophin-4 deficient mice have a loss of vagal intraganglionic 
mechanoreceptors from the small intestine and a disruption of short-term satiety. J. Neurosci. 
2001; 21:8602–8615. [PubMed: 11606648] 
44. Lu Y, et al. The ion channel ASIC2 is required for baroreceptor and autonomic control of the 
circulation. Neuron. 2009; 64:885–897. [PubMed: 20064394] 
45. Sun B, Li Q, Dong L, Rong W. Ion channel and receptor mechanisms of bladder afferent nerve 
sensitivity. Auton. Neurosci. 2010; 153:26–32. [PubMed: 19632906] 
Nonomura et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
46. Metzger RJ, Klein OD, Martin GR, Krasnow MA. The branching programme of mouse lung 
development. Nature. 2008; 453:745–750. [PubMed: 18463632] 
47. Massey CA, et al. Isoflurane abolishes spontaneous firing of serotonin neurons and masks their 
pH/CO2 chemosensitivity. J. Neurophysiol. 2015; 113:2879–2888. [PubMed: 25695656] 
48. Ramanantsoa N, et al. Ventilatory response to hyperoxia in newborn mice heterozygous for the 
transcription factor Phox2b. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2006; 290:R1691–
R1696. [PubMed: 16410396] 
49. Barker PM, Gatzy JT. Effect of gas composition on liquid secretion by explants of distal lung of 
fetal rat in submersion culture. Am. J. Physiol. 1993; 265:L512–L517. [PubMed: 8238540] 
50. Kwong K, et al. Voltage-gated sodium channels in nociceptive versus non-nociceptive nodose 
vagal sensory neurons innervating guinea pig lungs. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 2008; 586:1321–1336. 
[PubMed: 18187475] 
51. Dinh QT, et al. Substance P expression in TRPV1 and trkA-positive dorsal root ganglion neurons 
innervating the mouse lung. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 2004; 144:15–24. [PubMed: 15522699] 
52. Chamberlin NL. Functional organization of the parabrachial complex and intertrigeminal region in 
the control of breathing. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 2004; 143:115–125. [PubMed: 15519549] 
53. Driessen AK, Farrell MJ, Mazzone SB, McGovern AE. The role of the paratrigeminal nucleus in 
vagal afferent evoked respiratory reflexes: a neuroanatomical and functional study in guinea pigs. 
Front. Physiol. 2015; 6:378. [PubMed: 26733874] 
54. Bonham AC, McCrimmon DR. Neurones in a discrete region of the nucleus tractus solitarius are 
required for the Breuer-Hering reflex in rat. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 1990; 427:261–280. [PubMed: 
2213599] 
55. Mortola, JP. Respiratory Physiology of Newborn Mammals. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press; 2001. p. 
24-37.
56. Woo SH, Lumpkin EA, Patapoutian A. Merkel cells and neurons keep in touch. Trends Cell Biol. 
2015; 25:74–81. [PubMed: 25480024] 
57. Vijayaraghavan R, et al. Computer assisted recognition and quantitation of the effects of airborne 
chemicals acting at different areas of the respiratory tract in mice. Arch. Toxicol. 1994; 68:490–
499. [PubMed: 7802589] 
58. Hamelmann E, et al. Noninvasive measurement of airway responsiveness in allergic mice using 
barometric plethysmography. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 1997; 156:766–775. [PubMed: 
9309991] 
Nonomura et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Respiratory distress and lethality observed in Piezo2−/− newborn mice
a, Survival curve. WT, wild-type. b, A representative picture of newborn mice. Arrow 
indicates milk in the stomach. c, % SpO2 in wild-type and Piezo2−/− newborn mice. *** P < 
0.001, Mann–Whitney test. Bars represent mean ± s.e.m. d–g, Respiratory patterns. d, f, 
Representative traces of respiratory air flow (ml s−1). E, expiration; I, inspiration. e, Breaths 
per min; g, per cent of inspirations followed by expiratory peak; * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, 
unpaired Student’s t-test, mean ± s.e.m. h–j, Haematoxylin and eosin staining of sections of 
Nonomura et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the left lung. Lungs were isolated immediately after birth (h), about 6 h after birth (i), or at 
embryonic day (E)18.5 (j). Scale bars, 100 µm. Number of animals shown in parentheses.
Nonomura et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Characterization of tissue-specific Piezo2 conditional knockout (cKO) mice
a, b, Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO newborn mice. c, d, Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO newborn mice. e–j 
Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO newborn mice. a, c, e, % SpO2. ** P < 0.01, Mann–Whitney test. NS, 
statistically not significant. Bars represent mean ± s.e.m. b, d, f, Haematoxylin and eosin 
staining of sections of the left lung. Right panels in d and f show Piezo2-depleted tissues in 
red. J, jugular ganglion. N, no-dose ganglion. g, i, Representative traces of respiratory air 
flow (ml s−1). h, Breaths per minute. j, Per cent of inspirations followed by expiratory peak. 
Nonomura et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 * P < 0.05, unpaired Student’s (h) or Welch’s (j) t-test, mean ± s.e.m. All scale bars, 100 
µm. Number of animals shown in parentheses.
Nonomura et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Characterization of Piezo2+ vagal sensory neurons
a, b, GFP immunostaining in the jugular–nodose (J–N) ganglia complex (a) and thoracic 
DRG (b) of Piezo2GFP reporter mice injected with DiO retrograde tracer into the lower 
tracheal lumen. Yellow arrowheads mark GFP+ DiO+ cells. Samples from four mice were 
analysed. Scale bars, 100 µm. c, Respiratory responses to focal illumination (blue shading) 
of the vagus nerve in Piezo2GFP;lox-ChR2 mice. Respiratory rhythms (representative traces, 
bottom) were measured by recording tracheal pressure. d, Light-induced changes in 
breathing rate over 10-s trial. **** P < 0.0001, unpaired Student’s t-test, mean ± s.e.m.
Nonomura et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Respiratory characteristics in adult
AdvillinCreERT2;Piezo2cKO mice. a, Left, whole vagus nerve recording during lung 
inflation. Repeated measures two-way ANOVA: genotype F(1,18) = 8.077, P = 0.0108; air 
flow F(3,54) = 28.62, P < 0.0001; interaction F(3,54) = 6.372, P = 0.0009. * P < 0.05, *** P < 
0.001, Sidak’s post-hoc test; mean ± s.e.m. Right, Piezo2-depleted tissues shown in red. b–
d, Whole-body plethysmograph recordings under anaesthesia. Average frequency (b) and 
average tidal volume (c); * P < 0.05, unpaired Welch’s (b) or Student’s (c) t-test, mean ± 
s.e.m. d, Representative traces of respiratory air flow. E, expiration; I, inspiration. Number 
of animals shown in parentheses.
Nonomura et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Impaired detection of lung inflation in adult Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice.
a, b, Whole vagus nerve recordings. a, Representative traces; b, Normalized nerve activity 
(mean ± s.e.m.). Repeated measures two-way ANOVA: genotype F(1,10) = 18.93, P = 
0.0014; air flow F(3,30) = 10.75, P < 0.0001; interaction F(3,30) = 13.94, P < 0.0001. * P < 
0.05, *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001, Sidak’s post-hoc test. Piezo2-depleted tissues shown 
in red (b, right). c, d, Respiratory patterns during lung inflation. c, Representative traces of 
tracheal pressure. Steps indicate induced pressure increases and each deflection is a breath. 
d, Normalized respiration rate (mean ± s.e.m.). Repeated measures two-way ANOVA: 
genotype F(1,10) = 188.7, P < 0.0001; air flow F(3,30) = 97.48, P < 0.0001; interaction F(3,30) 
= 126.4, P < 0.0001, **** P < 0.0001, Sidak’s post-hoc test. Number of animals shown in 
parentheses.
Nonomura et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nonomura et al.
Page 40
Table 1
Summary of tissue-specific Piezo2 conditional knockout mouse characterization
Cre expression
Tissue-specific Cre mouse
Survival of Piezo2 cKO at birth
ECs
NEB
Nodose
Jugular
Trigeminal
DRG
Tie2Cre
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Phox2bCre
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Wnt1Cre
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
AdvillinCreERT2+Tam
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
KD induced in adults
ECs, endothelial cells. KD, knockdown. Ratios of Piezo2 cKO mice derived from crosses between various Cre;Piezo2+/− and Piezo2fl/fl mice: Tie2Cre;Piezo2cKO mice, 15/59 (25.4%); 
Phox2bCre;Piezo2cKO mice, 17/51 (33.3%) at 3 weeks after birth; Wnt1Cre;Piezo2cKO mice, 9/34 (26.4%) at postnatal day 0, 0/25 (0%) at postnatal day 1.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
