 BRIEF DEFINITIVE REPORT
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1789
J. Exp. Med. 2018 Vol. 215 No. 7 1789–1801
Rockefeller University Press
Phagocytosis of synaptic material by microglia is critical for central nervous system development. Less well understood 
is this microglial function in the injured adult brain. Assay of microglial phagocytosis is challenging, because peripheral 
myeloid cells engraft the site of injury, which could obscure interpretation of microglial roles. The model used here, optic 
nerve crush injury, results in degeneration of synapses in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN), which stimulates rapid 
activation and engulfment of synaptic material by resident microglia without myeloid cell engraftment. Pharmacological 
depletion of microglia causes postinjury accumulation of synaptic debris, suggesting that microglia are the dominant 
postinjury phagocytes. Genetic or pharmacological manipulations revealed that neuronal activity does not trigger microglia 
phagocytosis after injury. RNA sequencing reveals C1q and CD11b/CR3 involvement in clearance of debris by dLGN-
resident microglia. Indeed, C1qa−/− and Itgam−/− mice exhibit impaired postinjury debris clearance. Our results show how 
neurodegenerative debris is cleared by microglia and offers a model for studying its mechanisms and physiological roles.
Neuronal integrity and complement control synaptic 
material clearance by microglia after CNS injury
Geoffrey T. Norris1,2,3, Igor Smirnov1,2, Anthony J. Filiano1,2, Hannah M. Shadowen1,2, Kris R. Cody1,2, Jeremy A. Thompson1,2,3, Tajie H. Harris1,2,3, 
Alban Gaultier1,2,3, Christopher C. Overall1,2, and Jonathan Kipnis1,2,3
Rockefeller University Press
Introduction
Professional phagocytes clear apoptotic cells and cellular debris 
both at baseline and during pathology, maintaining tissue 
homeostasis and preventing inflammation (Steinman, 2006; 
Arandjelovic and Ravichandran, 2015). The professional phago-
cytes in the central nervous system (CNS) are microglia, which 
are capable of responding rapidly to tissue damage by extend-
ing cell processes, engulfing debris, and undergoing prolifera-
tion (Davalos et al., 2005; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005; Aguzzi et al., 
2013; Roth et al., 2014; Ulland et al., 2015; Colonna and Butovsky, 
2017). Microglia were also shown to play a major role in CNS 
development through their engulfment of superfluous neuronal 
(presynaptic) material (Stevens et al., 2007; Schafer et al., 2012; 
Bialas and Stevens, 2013; Chung et al., 2013). Specifically, neuro-
nal activity and the complement system were shown to regulate 
microglial engulfment of presynaptic terminals, thus ensuring 
optimal architecture of the visual system. Despite those import-
ant findings, our understanding of microglial phagocytic activity 
in adulthood is still limited. Up to now, researchers have studied 
microglial phagocytosis in adulthood mainly by using exogenous 
phagocytic targets, such as cells killed ex vivo or various types of 
beads. Such targets are usually delivered by their direct injection 
into the CNS, disrupting the blood–brain barrier, which results 
in parenchymal injury, peripheral monocyte engraftment (Ling, 
1979), complement and IgG deposition, and activation of microg-
lia (Obermeier et al., 2013). Documentation of microglial clear-
ance of neuronal and myelin debris has been well characterized 
previously, with a heavy emphasis placed on cuprizone models of 
demyelination and spinal cord injury (Smith, 1999; Greenhalgh 
and David, 2014; Gudi et al., 2014). Further, the phagocytic 
receptor TREM2 was shown to be critical for efficient removal of 
myelin debris after cuprizone-mediated demyelination (Poliani 
et al., 2015). Although these models show robust roles for microg-
lial clearance of debris, they are limited as a result of the poten-
tial contribution of peripheral myeloid cells in these models 
(Greenhalgh and David, 2014; Lampron et al., 2015).
Our laboratory and others have used crush injury of the 
optic nerve as a model to study neurodegeneration and neuro-
protection, in both of which the immune system is a key player 
(Moalem et al., 1999; Schwartz and Cohen, 2000; Schwartz, 2004; 
London et al., 2011; Walsh et al., 2014, 2015; Gadani et al., 2015; 
Benhar et al., 2016). Over several weeks after the injury, there 
is a gradual decline in the population of retinal ganglion cells 
(RGCs) that innervate the superior colliculus, the suprachias-
matic nucleus of the hypothalamus, and the lateral geniculate 
nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus. Concurrently, the distal stump 
of the nerve and projections from the RGCs succumb to Wallerian 
Correspondence to Jonathan Kipnis: kipnis@ 
virginia 
.edu; A.J. Filiano’s present address is Dept. of Neurosurgery, Duke University, Durham, NC; G.T. Norris's present 
address is Dept. of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
© 2018 Norris et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the 
publication date (see http:/
/ 
www 
.rupress 
.org/ 
terms/ 
). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 
International license, as described at https:/
/ 
creativecommons 
.org/ 
licenses/ 
by 
-nc 
-sa/ 
4 
.0/ 
).
1Center for Brain Immunology, and Glia (BIG), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA; 2Department of Neuroscience, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
VA; 3Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
on June 4, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
Published Online: 25 June, 2018 | Supp Info: 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1790
degeneration (Levkovitch-Verbin et al., 2000; Vargas and Barres, 
2007). Within the LGN, experiments using transmission electron 
microscopy have shown that optic nerve injury is followed by 
rapid degeneration of retinogeniculate terminals, where presyn-
aptic debris is observed within activated glial cells (Vaccarezza 
et al., 1970; Ghetti et al., 1972; Wong-Riley, 1972). Accordingly, 
we postulated that after an optic nerve crush injury in the adult 
mouse, LGN microglia become activated and engulf synaptic 
material, a process similar to that seen in the developing animal 
during refinement of the binocular architecture of the dorsal 
lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN; Schafer et al., 2012). With this 
system established, we could then proceed to assess microglial 
engulfment of endogenous debris, without introduction of exog-
enous material or breach of the blood–brain barrier.
Here, we show that after optic nerve crush injury, during 
Wallerian degeneration of retinogeniculate inputs, microg-
lia serve as key players in clearance of the resulting presyn-
aptic debris. We found that resident dLGN microglia exhibit a 
dynamic transcriptional signature after injury (up-regulating 
C1q and CD11b, both shown to be necessary for debris clearance 
in development; Stevens et al., 2007; Schafer et al., 2012) and that 
microglial depletion causes neuronal debris to accumulate. We 
also observed that postinjury activation of microglia and phago-
cytosis are regulated by synaptic integrity rather than by neuro-
nal activity, a finding that distinguishes microglial function in 
neurodegeneration from that seen in development.
Results and discussion
Microglia are activated after optic nerve crush injury and 
phagocytose neuronal debris
We first assessed the function and kinetics of dLGN microglia in 
response to neurodegeneration. To this end, we injected the right 
eyes of WT mice with cholera toxin subunit B (CTB) conjugated 
to Alexa Fluor 647, 24 h before subjecting the mice to crush injury 
(Schwartz, 2004; Fig. 1 A). After the injury, mice were killed at 
various time points (days 1–5, 7, and 28 after crush). Measure-
ment of CTB-tagged retinogeniculate inputs into the dLGN, 
contralateral to the injected eye, revealed their progressive loss 
with substantial loss observed on day 3 and an even greater loss 
(∼70%) on day 7 after the crush injury (Fig. 1, B and C). By day 28, 
no CTB-647 signal could be detected (Fig. 1, B and C). We observed 
an increase in the numbers of Iba1+ cells in the dLGN, starting on 
day 2 after the crush injury and peaking on day 7 (Fig. 1, B and D), 
similar to what has been previously seen in nerve injury models 
(Bartel, 2012; Tay et al., 2017). Ki67+ (proliferating) microglia 
were detectable by postinjury day 2, with a significant increase 
in their numbers on days 3 and 4, followed by a marked reduction 
on day 5 (Fig. 1, B and E).
To demonstrate that the gradual disappearance of CTB label-
ing actually corresponded to the loss of presynaptic terminals, 
we quantified retinogeniculate synapses in areas of CTB loss 
within the dLGN contralateral to the crushed eye on day 3 after 
optic nerve crush injury. Using a method previously used to count 
synapses of the mouse visual system (Ippolito and Eroglu, 2010), 
we observed a significant decrease in retinogeniculate (VGlut2/
PSD95 double-positive) synapses (Fig. 1, F and G), suggesting that 
the disappearance of CTB observed after the injury was indeed 
related to the loss of retinogeniculate terminals.
The optic nerve crush injury model is unique in that it 
allows for the study of cellular responses to neurodegeneration 
that occur far from the actual site of injury. This is particularly 
important when attempting to isolate the role of microglia, as 
the injury site is heavily populated by peripheral cells (Walsh 
et al., 2014) that may compete and even interfere with microg-
lial function and complicate microglial identification. We first 
needed to confirm that, in the context of neurodegeneration, 
the microglia in our system could indeed be studied in isolation 
from contamination by peripheral macrophages. We did this by 
fate labeling microglia, using Cx3cr1ERT2Cre/+:Ai6 mice. Using 
a previously published protocol (Goldmann et al., 2013), mice 
were fed tamoxifen-containing chow for 1 wk and then waited 
1 mo for peripheral myeloid cell turnover before we analyzed 
the brain and peripheral organs for macrophage expression of 
ZsGreen (Fig. S1 A). We observed that nearly 100% of microglia 
retained ZsGreen labeling in the uninjured cerebral cortex and 
cerebellum (Fig. S1, B–D). This contrasted with peripheral mac-
rophage populations, which exhibited decreasing percentage of 
ZsGreen+ myeloid populations in the spleen, liver, and blood, 
respectively (Fig. S1, B–D). We then performed unilateral optic 
nerve crush and sacrificed the injured mice 3 d later (Fig. 1 H). 
Both before and after crush injury, the vast majority of myeloid 
cells (Iba1+) in the dLGN were ZsGreen+ (Fig. 1, I and J). Unlike 
in the dLGN, the injury site in the optic nerve had numerous 
Iba1+/ZsGreen– cells, indicative of peripheral myeloid engraft-
ment there (Fig. S1 E), as has been previously reported (Walsh 
et al., 2014). Furthermore, there was no difference in the per-
centages of Iba1+ or Iba1+/ZsGreen+ cells expressing Ki67 in 
dLGN after injury (Fig. 1, I and K), implying that the Iba1+ cells 
were derived from endogenous microglial populations. Despite 
retention of ZsGreen labeling after nerve crush injury, a marked 
reduction in the microglia-specific marker TMEM119 (Bennett 
et al., 2016) was seen on microglia 3 d postinjury (Fig. S2, A and 
B). This shows that activation leads to loss of TMEM119 expres-
sion by endogenous microglia as has been previously shown in 
a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017). 
Therefore, caution should be used when interpreting TMEM119 
labeling of microglia, as loss of this marker may be indicative of 
microglial activation in general.
The unique model we describe here incorporates crush 
injury of the optic nerve and the consequent neurodegeneration 
in the dLGN, distal to the injury site itself. Thus, this allows a 
“closed system” to study phagocytic uptake of neuronal mate-
rial with no prior priming of microglia or peripheral myeloid 
“contamination.”
Because microglia have been shown to be prolific phagocytes 
of synaptic material (Schafer et al., 2012), we examined whether 
the observed phagocytosis and clearance of presynaptic termi-
nals were attributable to dLGN microglia. Using a previously 
described method (Schafer et al., 2014), we observed that neuro-
nal debris (presented as the percentage of microglial volume) was 
indeed present within the microglial soma (Fig. 1, L and M). In 
Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice, costaining for engulfed neuronal debris along-
side the phagolysosomal marker CD68 revealed a high degree of 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1791
Figure 1. Optic nerve crush induces proliferation of microglia and phagocytic clearance of neuronal debris. (A) Scheme of CTB-labeling and optic nerve 
crush paradigm. (B–E) Representative images (B) and quantification (C) of the degenerating dLGN presynaptic field, Iba1+ (D), and Iba1/Ki67+ cells (E) (n = 4–7 
mice per group; one-way ANO 
VA, Dunnett’s post hoc, representative of two independently performed experiments). (F and G) Representative images (F) and 
quantification (G) of VGlut2/PSD95+ retinogeniculate synapse loss 3 d after optic nerve crush (n = 3 mice per group; Student’s t test, representative of two 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1792
internalized CTB colocalized with the microglial phagolysosome 
(Fig. S2 C), indicative of microglial phagocytosis.
Although microglia are known to play a role in the pruning 
of synapses during the developmental period of eye-specific 
segregation at postnatal day 5, it was suggested that, given the 
amount of consumed neuronal material, the dominant phago-
cytes at that stage were astrocytes (Chung et al., 2013). To assess 
the possibility that astrocytes could be phagocytic of neuronal 
debris after optic nerve crush injury, we quantified the number 
of cells positive for the astrocyte marker, glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP), after injury (Fig. S2, D and E). Neither a change 
in GFAP+ cell number nor CTB+ debris within GFAP+ cells was 
observed (Fig. S2, F and G).
As a result of the limitations of GFAP as a gray matter astro-
cyte marker (Lundgaard et al., 2014), we further assessed the 
phagocytic capabilities of LGN astrocytes and microglia during 
acute Wallerian degeneration using flow cytometry. Bilateral 
CTB-A647 injection and crush injury were performed, followed 
by LGN microdissection 3 d later (Fig. S2, H and I). Although a 
significant increase in the amount of CTB was only seen in the 
microglial population, we did see a small, yet not significant, 
increase in CTB+ astrocyte populations with CTB injected eyes 
in both uninjured and postcrush conditions (Fig. S2, J and K). To 
distinguish whether this positivity was a result of internalization 
of CTB or extracellular attachment, we used a CTB conjugated to 
the pH-sensitive dye CypHer 5E. This compound is maximally 
fluorescent at low pH with minimal fluorescence at neutral pH 
(Cooper et al., 2002). Thus, only cells with engulfed CTB should 
exhibit CypHer positivity. After bilateral eye injection with 
CTB-CypHer followed by optic crush, only CypHer+ microglia, 
and not astrocytes, were observed (Fig. S2, L and M).
To assess the necessity of microglia in the clearance of neu-
ronal debris after injury in adult mice, we eliminated microg-
lia in our system by using the CSF 1 receptor (CSF1R) inhibitor 
PLX5622, a compound previously shown to efficiently deplete 
microglia in the CNS (Elmore et al., 2014). After 3 wk of treat-
ment with PLX5622 chow, mice received bilateral injections of 
CTB intravitreally and were subjected 24 h later to unilateral 
optic nerve crush injury. As previously shown (Hilla et al., 2017), 
PLX5622 treatment also had no effect on RGC survival 3 (Fig. S2, 
N and O) and 7 d after optic nerve crush injury (Fig. S2, P and 
Q). As expected, PLX5622 also resulted in a marked reduction 
in microglial counts (Fig. 1, N and O). Subsequently, CTB+ dLGN 
fields contralateral to crushed optic nerves were significantly 
larger 3 d after optic nerve crush injury in PLX5622-fed mice 
than in mice fed control chow, suggesting that after optic nerve 
crush injury, microglia are necessary for the optimal clearance 
of neuronal debris (Fig. 1, N and P). In fact, microglial depletion 
and debris presence persisted in PLX5622-fed mice up to 7 d after 
optic nerve crush injury (Fig. S2, R–T). No changes were seen in 
CTB-labeled presynaptic inputs into the dLGN contralateral to 
uninjured optic nerves (Fig. 1, N and P; and Fig. S2, R and T). 
These results suggest that microglia are the key phagocytes of 
dLGN presynaptic debris during Wallerian degeneration in our 
system. This is in contrast to the situation during developmental 
pruning, where astrocytes are the dominant phagocyte (Chung et 
al., 2013). A recent study has also shown that microglia are capa-
ble of modulating astrocyte function through soluble factors, 
allowing for their reactivity and enhanced function (Liddelow 
et al., 2017). Although microglial depletion may alter astrocyte 
function and thus removal of neuronal debris, it appears that 
microglia are the key cell responsible for debris engulfment after 
Wallerian degeneration of the optic nerve.
Neuronal activity is not the trigger for microglia activation 
after optic nerve crush injury
The rapid response of dLGN microglia observed after optic nerve 
crush prompted us to investigate whether neuronal activity from 
the retina, shown to be crucial for engulfment of neuronal mate-
rial in development (Schafer et al., 2012), might regulate microg-
lial activation in response to this injury, especially because all 
neuronal activity from the retina is known to be rapidly disrupted 
after optic nerve crush in the mouse. To address this question, 
we used WldS mice (Coleman et al., 1998), which demonstrate 
delayed axonal and synaptic degeneration after acute injury to 
the peripheral and central nervous systems (Gillingwater et al., 
2006; Vargas and Barres, 2007; Wright et al., 2010). Thus, by 
studying the microglia in the acutely injured WldS dLGN, we 
were able to examine a system in which neuronal activity had 
ceased (as in the injured WT), but presynaptic degeneration was 
markedly delayed (Fig. 2, A and B). Before examining the dLGN 
we counted the RGCs in WldS mice 3 d after optic nerve crush 
and observed no changes in their numbers (Fig. S3, A and B). We 
then examined the dLGN and found significantly less microg-
lia in the dLGN contralateral to the crushed eye of WldS mice 
than in their WT counterparts, indicating that little or no dLGN 
microglial proliferation had occurred in the WldS mice by day 3 
after the optic nerve crush (Fig. 2, C and D). The CTB+ field of the 
dLGN contralateral to the crushed optic nerve was also signifi-
cantly larger in the WldS mice, indicating a reduced microglial 
clearance of the CTB+ presynaptic field in WldS mice (Fig. 2, C 
and E). CTB+ field size in the dLGN of WldS mice contralateral 
to the uninjured optic nerve were unchanged (Fig. 2, C and E), 
indicating that, as shown previously (Hoopfer et al., 2006), there 
were no developmental changes in retinogeniculate projections 
in WldS mice. Coinciding with the reduction in microglia num-
ber was a decrease in Ki67+ microglia, implying that microglial 
proliferation is greatly diminished when neurodegeneration is 
independently performed experiments). (H–K) Scheme (H), representative images (I), and quantification of the number (J) and proliferation (K) of Iba1+ and 
Iba1/ZsGreen+ cells in Cx3cr1ERT2Cre/+:Ai6 mice prior and 3 d after optic nerve crush (n = 4 mice per group; two-way ANO 
VA with Holm-Sidak post hoc test [J], 
Student’s t test [K], representative of three independently performed experiments). (L and M) Z projections, orthogonal slices, Imaris three-dimensional recon-
structions (L) and quantification (M) of microglial phagocytosis of crushed retinogeniculate inputs (n = 4–6 mice per group; one-way ANO 
VA, Dunnett’s post hoc 
test, representative of two independently performed experiments). (N–P) Representative images (N) and quantification of Iba1+ cells (O) and CTB+ fields (P) 
in uninjured and 3 d postinjury PLX5622 and control chow-fed mice (n = 7–8 mice per group; Student’s t test, representative of three independently performed 
experiments). Error bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant. Bars: 100 µm (B, I, and N); 25 µm (F); 10 µm (L).
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1793
delayed (Fig. 2, F and G). Our analysis of microglial activation 
and phagocytosis of crushed neuronal inputs in the WldS mice 
also revealed a less activated morphology and significantly less 
engulfed neuronal debris than in WT microglia at 3 d after injury 
(Fig. 2, H and I).
To further determine whether presynaptic terminals lacking 
neuronal activity from the retina could be engulfed by injury-ac-
tivated microglia, we took advantage of the dLGN architecture 
(consisting of a small ipsilateral patch within the large contralat-
eral projection area). Using pharmacological attenuation of neu-
ronal activity in the ipsilateral eye concurrently with optic nerve 
crush in the contralateral eye, we tested whether injury-activated 
microglia would engulf weakened inputs (from the ipsilateral 
patch, Fig. 2 J). To this end, we labeled retinogeniculate inputs 
with CTB conjugated to Alexa Fluor dyes, and 24 h later applied 
tetrodotoxin (TTX) or its carrier (citrate buffer) to one eye, effec-
tively blocking action potential–mediated activity from the eye, 
while crush injuring the contralateral optic nerve. To confirm 
that TTX had an effect on dampening neuronal activity from the 
eye, we examined the pupillary constriction response (Su et al., 
2011; Shanks et al., 2016) in our mice 24 and 48 h after the above 
procedures. Significant effects of both the optic nerve crush 
and the TTX application on pupillary constriction reflexes were 
observed both at 24 and at 48 h after the injury, with no detect-
able effect on naive eyes or on citrate buffer–treated controls 
(Fig. S3, C–F). The mice were killed 3 d after crush, during peak 
phagocytosis of crushed neuronal inputs. Examination at that 
time (3 d after crush injury) showed that there were no effects of 
TTX on RGC survival (Fig. S3, G and H). dLGN microglia counts 
were also unchanged contralateral to eyes treated with TTX, with 
only dLGN microglia contralateral to the crushed eye showing an 
increase in number (Fig. S3, I and J). We also found that the CTB+ 
presynaptic field sizes contralateral to TTX-treated eyes were 
unchanged compared with either naive or citrate buffer–treated 
eyes, with only dLGN CTB fields contralateral to crushed eyes 
decreasing in size (Fig. S3, I and K). Next, we examined whether 
injury-activated microglia would phagocytose TTX-treated unin-
jured presynaptic terminals. We found that microglia engulfed 
neuronal material from the crushed eye but did not engulf TTX-
treated inputs (Fig. 2, K and L), which were deficient in action 
potential–mediated activity from the eye.
Although TTX application did serve to block activity emanat-
ing from the eye, spontaneous release of neurotransmitter from 
presynaptic terminals would not be affected by TTX treatment 
(Chesselet, 1984). Still, this lack of microglia dependence on ret-
inal activity distinguishes the dLGN microglial phagocytosis seen 
in development (Schafer et al., 2012) from that observed during 
CNS Wallerian degeneration. Reasons for this may include, for 
example, differences between the effect of neuronal activity on 
the membrane properties of presynaptic terminals of retino-
geniculate inputs during adulthood and during a critical period 
in development. Another possibility is that there are physiolog-
ical differences in postnatal day 5 dLGN microglia versus those 
seen in adult microglia during Wallerian degeneration. Finally, 
an actively degenerating presynaptic terminal seen after nerve 
crush might be more salient to activated microglia than a presyn-
aptic terminal treated with TTX, allowing microglia to interact 
more robustly with degenerating terminals than with those hav-
ing less neuronal activity. These results demonstrate that in the 
adult mouse, microglia become activated in response to synap-
tic degeneration, whereas cessation of neuronal activity has no 
effect on microglial phagocytic activity.
Transcriptional profiling of dLGN microglia after 
optic nerve crush
Because microglia are the main phagocytes in response to neu-
rodegeneration in the dLGN, these findings provide an amenable 
system for studying molecular mechanisms governing microglial 
engulfment of endogenous material. Thus, to identify the genetic 
programs necessary for removal of neuronal debris by dLGN 
microglia, we isolated CD11b+ cells (using AutoMACS) from an 
uninjured state and at 1 and 3 d after bilateral optic nerve crush 
(Fig. 3 A). RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on our 
samples after flow cytometry confirmed that each sample was 
at least 90% CD11b+CD45+ (Fig. S3, L–N). Principal component 
analysis of all statistically significant transcripts revealed three 
discretely clustered populations, indicating a unique transcrip-
tional signature for postinjury microglia at both time points 
tested (Fig. 3 B). Notably, day 1 and 3 microglial subsets did not 
cluster together more closely than in the uninjured condition, 
indicating a dynamic transcriptional profile of microglia in the 
acute phase of Wallerian degeneration. To assess the differences 
between genes expressed on days 1 and 3 after crush injury, we 
compared the uniquely enriched genes of each condition to unin-
jured controls (Fig. 3 C). We found 132 common genes enriched 
in microglia on both days 1 and 3 after crush injury (adjusted 
p-value < 0.05), with the 3-d postinjury microglia expressing 
the higher amount of uniquely enriched genes after the injury 
(1,216 unique genes on day 3 compared with 697 unique genes 
on day 1 after crush). To illustrate the functional differences 
between dLGN microglia at 1 and 3 d after crush injury, we iden-
tified gene sets enriched on days 1 and 3 by performing a gene set 
enrichment analysis. This revealed that several gene sets were 
down-regulated in microglia on day 1 after crush injury, includ-
ing those associated with the extracellular matrix and biological 
adhesion (Fig. 3 D). Up-regulated gene sets on day 1 after injury 
included those associated with sensing molecular “danger,” such 
as complement (Fig. 3 E) and NOD-like receptor and Toll-like 
receptor signaling pathways (Fig. 3 F), indicating that microglia 
at 1 d after crush injury indeed sense and respond to the ongoing 
accumulation of neuronal debris. Gene sets down-regulated on 
day 3 after the injury included regulation of hydrolase, GTPase, 
and catalytic activity, as well as regulation of immune system 
processes. Up-regulated gene sets included genes necessary 
for ribosome and proteasome production, cell cycle processes, 
oxidative phosphorylation, phagocytosis (Fig. 3 G), and Alzhei-
mer’s disease (Fig. 3 H). This diverse array of gene sets would 
be expected for microglial cells that are surrounded by neuro-
nal debris, actively engaged in phagocytosis, and undergoing 
cell division. Interestingly, the transcriptional signature 3 d 
after injury is distinct from that of 1 d after injury, with just 132 
genes enriched on both postinjury days compared with nonin-
jured condition. That such a unique transcriptional signature of 
microglia could be displayed only 2 d apart is unique, as most 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1794
Figure 2. Microglial activation and phagocytosis after optic nerve crush injury is triggered by synaptic degeneration and not cessation of neuronal 
activity. (A and B) Scheme of conceptual (A) and experimental (B) setup of optic nerve injury in WT and WldS mice. (C–E) Representative images (C) and quan-
tification of Iba1+ cells (D) and dLGN CTB fields (E) 3 d after optic nerve crush in WT and WldS mice (n = 5–8 mice per group; Student’s t test, representative of 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1795
transcriptional studies to date have examined microglial acti-
vation on a longer time scale (Chiu et al., 2013; Hickman et al., 
2013; Butovsky et al., 2015; Keren-Shaul et al., 2017). This speed 
of change is likely indicative of the responsive and plastic nature 
of microglia. Further studies examining microglial transcrip-
tomes on a more acute basis after insult or during chronic disease 
may yield even more insights into microglial biology in health 
and disease. Recently, microglial activation genes associated with 
neurodegeneration have been characterized (Keren-Shaul et al., 
2017; Krasemann et al., 2017). After crush, several of these genes 
were also up-regulated in LGN microglia 3 d after injury (Fig. 
S3 O), indicating that there may be a core program of microglial 
activation central to both acute and chronic neurodegenerative 
processes. Despite this finding, key genes shown previously to be 
necessary for the chronic neurodegenerative signature (Trem2 
and Apoe) were not up-regulated, indicating that there may still 
be differences in the activation profiles of microglia in acute and 
chronic neurodegenerative settings.
Because the complement gene set was up-regulated on day 
1 after crush injury, we examined specific complement genes 
associated with the microglial engulfment of neuronal material 
during development (Fig. 3 I). The results showed that Itgam 
(CD11b or C3R) was highly up-regulated in microglia on day 1 
after optic nerve crush. We also observed a slight (not statisti-
cally significant) increase in transcription of C1qb and C1qc. To 
determine whether the complement system plays a role in the 
microglial clearance of neuronal debris after optic nerve crush, 
we repeated optic nerve crush injury experiments using C1qa−/− 
and Itgam−/− mice. On day 3 after optic nerve crush, we observed 
no change in the number of microglia in C1qa−/− mice (Fig. 3, J 
and K), whereas significantly more residual neuronal debris was 
seen compared with WT mice (Fig. 3, J and L). Similarly, Itgam−/− 
mice showed no change in the number of microglia after injury 
(Fig. 3, M and N), and exhibited more neuronal debris in the 
dLGN contralateral to the crushed eye as compared with their 
WT counterparts (Fig. 3, M and O). Importantly, RGC survival 
was not affected by deficiency of C1q (Fig. S3, P and Q) or CD11b 
(Fig. S3, R and S). Altogether, these experiments indicated an 
active role for complement in the microglial clearance of neu-
ronal debris pursuant to Wallerian degeneration, implicating 
complement as a key driver of neuronal material clearance by 
microglia in Wallerian degeneration, shown previously in devel-
opment (Stephan et al., 2012), Alzheimer’s disease (Hong et al., 
2016), schizophrenia (Sekar et al., 2016), and viral infection 
(Vasek et al., 2016).
In this study, we provide a novel platform for the study of 
physiological microglial phagocytosis pursuant to Wallerian 
degeneration. We further show that microglia are the key players 
in the clearance of neuronal debris, that their depletion results 
in failed debris clearance, and that neuronal activity is irrelevant 
for the activation and initiation of phagocytosis by microglia.
Notable in our transcriptional findings were microglial 
profiles characterized by up-regulation of TLR, NLR, and Alz-
heimer’s disease gene sets. An up-regulation of such programs 
could very well be a result of the release or exposure of dam-
age-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) by degenerating 
nerve terminals. Future studies attempting to identify microg-
lial-activating DAMPs in the context of acute injury may yield 
important insights into microglial responses to neurodegener-
ation in a larger context. The importance of neurodegeneration 
and exposure of DAMPs was seen with crush in WldS mice, where 
the lack of neurodegeneration was accompanied by no induction 
of microglial proliferation. A possible mediator could be phos-
phatidyl serine exposure on presynaptic terminals, which could 
be diminished in the WldS LGN after crush. Phosphatidyl serine 
exposure has been shown previously to be essential to induce 
microglial proliferation in response to neurodegeneration in the 
context of CNS viral injection (Tufail et al., 2017).
Future research may yield further insights into the sensors 
that allow for microglial activation in response to neurodegen-
eration, as well as into the array of receptors needed to facilitate 
debris removal. Knowledge of these tools might aid in the tun-
ing of microglial function by limiting the spread of secondary 
neurodegeneration or by boosting the microglial clearance of 
potentially toxic debris. Consequences of failed debris clear-
ance in the periphery have been well characterized, and lead to 
inflammation and subsequent autoimmune disease (Elliott and 
Ravichandran, 2010). We suggest that the same may hold true in 
the CNS, where absence or dysfunction of microglial phagocyto-
sis may ultimately lead to neuronal dysfunction and disruption 
of CNS homeostasis.
Materials and methods
Mice
C57/Bl6 and Cx3cr1-eGFP mice were obtained from Jackson Lab-
oratory, stocks 000664 and 005582, respectively. B6.Cg-Gt(RO-
SA)26Sortm6(CAG-ZsGreen1)Hze/J (Ai6) mice were generously pro-
vided by the Harris Lab (University of Virginia) and originally 
obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Stock 007906). WldS mice 
were provided by the Deppmann Lab (University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA) and originally obtained from Jackson Labo-
ratories (008820) and bred with congenic FVB/N mice to obtain 
heterozygous WldS mice and WT controls. Itgam−/− mice and 
their congenic C57/Bl6J controls were purchased from Jackson 
Laboratories (stock 003991 and 000664, respectively). Hetero-
zygous C1qa+/− mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories 
(stock 022307) and bred to obtain C1qa−/− and C1qa+/+ control 
three independent experiments). (F and G) Representative images (F) and quantification (G) of Ki67+ dLGN microglia 3 d after optic nerve crush in WT and WldS 
mice (n = 5–8 mice per group; Student’s t test, representative of three independent experiments). (H and I) Z projections, orthogonal slices, Imaris three-di-
mensional reconstructions (H), and quantification (I) of microglial phagocytosis of crushed retinogeniculate inputs in WT and WldS mice 3 d after optic nerve 
crush (n = 5–8 mice per group; Student’s t test, representative of three independent experiments). (J) Scheme of TTX application and crush injury. (K and L) Z 
projections, orthogonal slices, Imaris three-dimensional reconstructions (K), and quantification (L) of microglial phagocytosis after TTX application and crush 
injury (n = 7–13 mice per group, pooled from two independent experiments; two-way ANO 
VA for effect of optic nerve crush, Holm-Sidak post hoc test). Error 
bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. n.s., not significant. Bars: 100 µm (C and F); 20 µm (H and K).
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1796
Figure 3. dLGN microglia after optic nerve crush exhibit a dynamic transcriptional profile using C1q and CD11b for optimal clearance of neuronal 
debris. (A) Scheme of dLGN microglia isolation. (B) PCA analysis of microglia after injury. (C) UpSet plot detailing enriched genes after crush. (D) Gene 
sets enriched in dLGN microglia after crush. (E–H) Heat maps of complement (E), TLR signaling (F), phagocytosis (G), and Alzheimer’s disease (H) gene sets 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1797
mice. All strains were kept in identical housing conditions. All 
animals were housed in temperature and humidity-controlled 
rooms, maintained on a 12-h light/dark cycle (lights on 7 a.m.); 
mice were used from 2 to 4 mo old with mice age-matched in 
each experiment described. For survival surgeries, mice were 
anesthetized with either 200 µl of Ketamine/Xylazine (1 ml Ket-
amine HCl [1 mg/ml], 1 ml of 2% Xylazine, and 8 ml saline), or 
inhaled isoflurane. All procedures complied with regulations of 
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the Univer-
sity of Virginia.
Fate mapping of microglia
B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm6(CAG-ZsGreen1)Hze/J mice (Ai6) were crossed 
to the Cx3cr1ERT2cre/ERT2cre mice to obtain Cx3cr1ERT2/+:Ai6 hetero-
zygotes. Mice were placed on a tamoxifen-supplemented (250 
mg/kg) diet for 1 wk (TD.130856 Envigo). After return to nor-
mal chow, a period of 1 mo was allowed to ensure turnover of 
the peripheral immune system, allowing only microglia to retain 
the ZsGreen label (Goldmann et al., 2013). Mice were then sub-
jected to analysis or optic nerve crush injury and sacrificed 3 
d after injury.
PLX5622 administration
PLX5622 was provided by Plexxikon Inc. and formulated in 
AIN-76A standard chow by Research Diets Inc. at 1,200 mg/kg. 
Mice were kept on PLX5622 or AIN-76A control diets for 3 wk 
before experimentation and maintained on their respective diets 
until sacrifice.
CTB-CypHer preparation
Cholera toxin β subunit (C9903; Sigma-Aldrich) was resus-
pended at 10 mg/ml in PBS and labeled with CypHer5 (10 µM; 
GE Healthcare) for 1 h at 20°C. Free dye was removed by gel fil-
tration using Zeba desalting column (89890; Thermo Scientific) 
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Reagent preparations 
were performed by the Gaultier Lab (University of Virginia).
CTB injection and optic nerve injury
After anesthesia, mice received intravitreal injections of CTB 
conjugated to Alexa Fluor 555 dye into the left eye and CTB con-
jugated to Alexa Fluor 647 (Invitrogen) dye into the right eye (1 µl 
per eye at a concentration of 1 µg/µl in sterile saline). Optic nerve 
crush was performed 24 h after CTB injection. In brief, mice were 
anesthetized and the tissue around the nerve was carefully dis-
sected and the optic nerve exposed. N5 self-closing forceps were 
closed around the optic nerve 5 mm behind the globe and held for 
3 s. The mice were then allowed to recover at 37°C on a warming 
pad before returning to their cages and sacrificed at time points 
indicated in the text. (Mice that did not receive sufficient dLGN 
dye fills were omitted from analysis.)
TTX administration and measurement of pupil response
Once anesthetized, 1 µl TTX (5 µM) or its carrier solution (20 mM 
citrate buffer) was injected intravitreally with a Hamilton syringe 
contralateral to the eye used for optic nerve crush. Pupil response 
was measured as described previously (Shanks et al., 2016). In 
brief, at time points 24 and 48 h after optic nerve crush injury and 
TTX administration, mice were acclimated to a dark room for 30 
min before testing. While under a red light (Black Diamond Cos-
mos), the pupil size was obtained using a Leica IC80HD camera 
fixed to a Leica M220 dissecting microscope. The mouse was then 
subjected to a 15-s exposure of bright white light and the pupil 
size was imaged instantly after return to red light conditions. The 
percentage pupil constriction was calculated as the difference in 
pupil size between red and bright white light conditions.
Tissue preparation and immunofluorescence
The brain and eyes were harvested from animals after perfusion 
with heparinized (5 U/ml) PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). 
After 24 h postfixation in 4% PFA, the eye was dissected by cut-
ting through the sclera just posterior to the ciliary body. The lens 
was removed, and four cuts were made toward the optic disc to 
allow the retina to lay flat. The retina was then separated from 
the sclera and pigmented epithelium and placed in to 96-well 
plates for staining. Brain tissue was postfixed for 48 h in 4% PFA, 
followed by cryoprotection in 30% sucrose for 48 h. Brains were 
then frozen in optimal cutting temperature compound (Tis-
sue-Tek) on the freezing element of a Leica CM3050 S cryostat. 
40-µm sections were sliced into 24-well plates containing PBS 
with 0.05% sodium azide. Slices were permeabilized with 0.5% 
Triton X-100 for 15 min then washed two times for 5 min in PBS 
and blocked for 1 h at room temperature in blocking buffer (5% 
serum of the secondary's species) followed by overnight incuba-
tion in 0.5% BSA with primary antibody at 4° C. The following 
antibodies were used for immunofluorescence staining: rabbit 
anti-Iba1 (1:300; CP-290; Biocare Medical), goat anti-BRN3a 
(1:300; sc-31984; Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-Ki67 (1:300; ab15580; 
Abcam), Goat anti-Iba1(1:300; Abcam; ab5076), rat anti-CD68 
(FA-11; Biolegend), rabbit anti-TMEM119 (ab209064; Abcam) 
guinea pig anti-Vglut2 (AB2251; EMD Millipore) rabbit anti–PSD-
95 (51-6900; Invitrogen). Slices were washed three times for 5 
min, incubated for 2 h at room temperature with the appropri-
ate secondary antibodies (all from Life Technologies; 1:1,000), 
washed again three times for 5 min and mounted with Aqua-
mount (Thermo Scientific) and DAPI.
RGC image acquisition and quantification
For assessing RGC survival, images of Brn3a+ RGCs from four 
quadrants of the retina were taken at equal distances from the 
optic disc using an Olympus IX-71 microscope with 40× objective. 
The pictures were counted in a blinded fashion to determine the 
up-regulated in dLGN microglia after crush. (I) Normalized read counts of selected complement genes in microglia after crush (n = 2 samples for uninjured 
microglia and n = 3 samples for one and 3 d after crush, Fisher’s test, performed once). (J–L) Representative images (J) and quantification of microglia (K) and 
dLGN CTB fields (L) 3 d after optic nerve crush in C1qa+/+ and C1qa−/− mice (n = 8–9 mice per group; Student’s t test, representative of two independent exper-
iments). (M–O) Representative images (M) and quantification of microglia (N) and dLGN CTB fields (O) 3 d after optic nerve crush in WT and Itgam−/− mice (n 
= 5 mice per group; Student’s t test, representative of two independent experiments). Error bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not 
significant. Bars, 100 µm.
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1798
number of RGCs per field. RGC counts were established from each 
image using a modified method described previously (Danias et 
al., 2002). In brief, each image was inverted with the contrast 
enhanced (1%) and background subtracted (rolling ball 55). Each 
image was then set to a threshold to encompass all Brn3a+ cells. 
Once binary, the Watershed feature was applied and the Analyze 
Particle function used to count all RGCs. All images were acquired 
and quantified by a user blinded to the experiment.
dLGN image quantification and analysis
For each animal, three to four sections of medial dLGN were cho-
sen for imaging and quantification of RGC inputs to the dLGN, 
Iba1+ cell counts and microglial engulfment analysis. Images were 
acquired on a Leica SP8 microscope at 20× magnification with 
1-µm z steps for CTB field size measurements and Iba1+ cell counts 
and at 60× magnification using 0.2-µm z steps for engulfment 
analyses. For each animal, four to seven dLGN fields were imaged. 
Obtained images were processed and quantified using ImageJ 
(National Institutes of Health) for CTB field size and Iba1+ cell 
number and Imaris software (Bitplane) for engulfment analyses. 
For CTB field size and Iba1+ cell number, ImageJ was used to obtain 
regions of interest (ROIs) of contralateral dLGN fields for crushed 
and uninjured inputs. Each ROI was then thresholded to include all 
CTB+ inputs, and the area was measured. Iba1+ counts were made 
using the Cell Counter plugin (ImageJ). In vivo microglia phagocy-
tosis assays and analyses were performed as previously described 
in detail (Schafer et al., 2012, 2014). Imaris software (Bitplane) was 
used to create three-dimensional volume surface renderings for 
microglia and engulf debris. To visualize and measure debris vol-
ume, any fluorescence that was not within the microglia volume 
was subtracted from the image using the mask function of Imaris. 
The remaining engulfed fluorescence was surface rendered and 
total volume of engulfed debris was calculated. To determine per-
centage engulfment the following calculation was used: volume of 
internalized debris /volume of microglial cell × 100. Image acqui-
sition, quantification, and analyses were performed blind.
Retinogeniculate synapse quantification
Quantification of retinogeniculate synapses was performed as 
described previously (Ippolito and Eroglu, 2010). In brief, dLGN 
brain sections from uninjured and 3-d postcrush mice were 
stained with pre (VGlut2) and postsynaptic (PSD95) markers. 
5-µm-thick confocal z stacks (optical section depth, 0.33 µm; 15 
sections per z stack) within the outer shell were imaged at 60× 
magnification on a Leica SP8 confocal laser-scanning micro-
scope. Maximum projections of three consecutive sections (cor-
responding to 1 µm total depth) were generated from the original 
z stack. The Puncta Analyzer plugin that was developed by Barry 
Wark for ImageJ (available at https:// 
github 
.com/ 
physion/ 
puncta 
-analyzer) was used to count the number of colocalized puncta.
Flow cytometry of LGN astrocytes and microglia to assess 
engulfment of neuronal material
After anesthesia, mice received intravitreal injections of CTB con-
jugated to Alexa Fluor 647 dye or CypHer in to both eyes (1 µl per 
eye at a concentration of 1 µg/µl in sterile saline). Optic nerve crush 
was performed 24 h after CTB injection. 3 d after bilateral optic 
nerve crush, mice were perfused with PBS containing heparin (5 
U/ml) until livers and tongues were exsanguinated to minimize 
peripheral immune cell contamination. The entire brain was then 
removed, and meninges and choroid plexus were carefully sepa-
rated and discarded from the rest of the brain tissue. The brain was 
then placed in a coronal brain matrix (SA-2165; Roboz), and a razor 
blade was used to isolate a brain slice containing the dLGN. The 
dLGN was dissected from surrounding brain regions and placed 
in 1.5 ml Accutase (A1110501; Stempro) in a 1.5-ml Eppendorf tube. 
Samples were then incubated at 37°C for 15 min, followed by gen-
tle trituration five times up and down with a 1,000-µl Eppendorf 
pipette. Samples were again incubated at 37°C for 10 min, followed 
by a second gentle trituration five times up and down with a 1,000-
µl Eppendorf pipette. At this point, cells were well dissociated. The 
1.5-ml suspension was then filtered gently through a 70-µm cell 
strainer and placed in 15-ml tubes containing 14 ml DMEM/F12/ 
with 10% FBS. Cells were then pelleted at 300 relative centrifugal 
force (RCF) for 10 min. Cells were then stained for 15 min at 4°C 
using antibodies against CD11b (PercpCy5.5), CD45 (FITC; both 
from R&D Systems), GLA 
ST (PE, Miltenyi) as well as the viability 
dye ZombieNIR (Biolegend) and Hoechst dye (Molecular Probes) to 
label all nucleated cells. Cells were then washed and spun at 300 
RCF for 10 min at 4°C and resuspended in FACS buffer (2 mM EDTA 
and 0.5% BSA in PBS) and ran on a Gallios flow cytometer (Becton 
Dickinson). Positive fraction cells gated on Hoechst positivity, sin-
glet events, and live cells before their respective gates. CTB posi-
tivity was set on naive populations.
dLGN dissection, MACS isolation of microglia, 
and RNA extraction
3 d after bilateral optic nerve crush, mice were perfused with PBS 
containing heparin (5 U/ml) until livers and tongues were exsan-
guinated to minimize peripheral immune cell contamination. The 
entire brain was then removed and meninges and choroid plexus 
carefully separated and discarded from the rest of the brain tis-
sue. The brain was then placed in a coronal brain matrix (Roboz 
SA-2165) and a razor blade used to isolate a brain slice contain-
ing the dLGN. The dLGN was dissected from surrounding brain 
regions and placed in 1 ml HBSS (containing Mg and Ca), 4 U/ml 
papain, and 50 U/ml DNA 
SE-I (Sigma-Aldrich) in a 1.5-ml Eppen-
dorf tube. Bilateral dLGNs were pooled from four mice to serve 
as one biological sample (three samples per condition). Samples 
were then incubated at 37°C for 15 m, followed by gentle tritura-
tion five times up and down with a 1,000-µl Eppendorf pipette. 
Samples were again incubated at 37°C for 15 min, followed by a 
second gentle trituration five times up and down with a 1,000-µl 
Eppendorf pipette. At this point, cells were well dissociated. The 
1-ml suspension was then filtered gently through a 70-µm cell 
strainer and placed in 15-ml tubes containing 14 ml DMEM/F12 
with 10% FBS. Cells were then pelleted at 300 RCF for 10 min. The 
top of the gradient was then removed. Cells were then labeled 
with microglia CD11b+ magnetic selection beads (Miltenyi). Cells 
were positively selected by AutoMACS twice using the Possel set-
ting. All 15-ml tubes before use were coated with sterile BSA in 
diethyl pyrocarbonate–treated PBS to ensure optimal recovery 
of microglia. Flow cytometry was used to ensure purity of the 
positive and negative fraction of AutoMACS sorted cells. 5% of 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1799
each fraction was isolated and stained for 15 min at 4°C using 
antibodies against CD11b (PE-Cy7) CD45 (BB515; both from R&D 
Systems), as well as the viability dye ZombieNIR (Biolegend) and 
Hoechst dye (Molecular Probes) to label all nucleated cells. Cells 
were then washed and spun at 300 RCF for 10 min at 4°C and 
resuspended in 1% PFA in PBS, and samples were run on a Gallios 
flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson). Positive fraction cells gated 
on Hoechst positivity, singlet events, and live cells were >90% 
pure CD45/CD11b+ microglia with the negative fraction <1%. RNA 
was collected using the RNAqueous micro kit (Ambion) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s protocol and stored at −80°C until use.
RNA-seq
RNA integrity was verified using the Qubit RNA assay kit (Life 
Technologies) and the Agilent RNA Pico kit (Agilent). Amplifi-
cation and cDNA construction was performed using Nugen Ova-
tion RNA-seq V2 kit with manufacturer's recommended protocol. 
Sample clean-up after amplification was performed using Qiagen 
PCR purification kit (Qiagen). Paired-end (50-bp reads) RNA-
seq was performed using an Illumina HiSeq (Illumina) yielding 
50–70 million reads per sample. All procedures were performed 
by HudsonAlpha.
RNA-seq analysis
The raw sequencing reads (FAS 
TQ files) went through two stages 
of preprocessing to remove low-quality reads and bases. First, 
they were chastity filtered, which removes any clusters that 
have a higher than expected intensity of the called base com-
pared with other bases. Then they were trimmed with Trimmo-
matic (Bolger et al., 2014) to remove low-quality bases (mini-
mum read length after trimming = 36). After preprocessing, 
the quality of the reads was evaluated using FastQC (Andrews, 
2010), and after passing quality control, were aligned to the UCSC 
mm9 genome (Harrow et al., 2012) using the splice-aware read 
aligner STAR (Dobin et al., 2013). The quality of the alignments 
was next assessed by SAMStat (Lassmann et al., 2011), and any 
low-quality alignments were removed with samtools (Li et al., 
2009; mapping quality <10). Next, the number of reads aligning 
to each gene was quantified with HTSeq (Anders et al., 2015), and 
then the Bioconductor package DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014) was 
used to normalize the raw counts, perform exploratory analysis 
(e.g., principal component analysis), and differential expression 
analysis. The Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate proce-
dure was used to correct the p-values for multiple testing. Heat 
maps of the differentially expressed genes generated with the R 
package pheatmap (Kolde, 2015). UpSet plots were created with 
the R package UpSetR (Conway et al., 2017), and the R imple-
mentation of Fisher’s exact test, fisher.test, was used to identify 
enriched gene sets in the differentially expressed genes using the 
gene set collections from MSigDB (Subramanian et al., 2005)and 
the gene families from the Hugo Gene Nomenclature Committee 
(Gray et al., 2015).
Statistical analyses
Statistical tests were performed using Prism (GraphPad) as 
described in the text and figure legends. In all figures, error bars 
represent mean ± SEM; *, P ≤ 0.05; **, P ≤ 0.01; ***, P ≤ 0.001.
Accession number
All sequencing data has been uploaded to the GEO repository 
under accession no. GSE107635.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows labeling of macrophage populations with ZsGreen 
label 1 mo after tamoxifen induction in Cx3cr1ERT2/+:Ai6 mice at 
baseline and at the optic nerve crush site 3 d after optic nerve 
crush injury. Fig. S2 details loss of TMEM119 positivity in dLGN 
microglia postoptic nerve crush injury and localization of 
ingested CTB to the CD68+ phagolysosome. Quantification of 
GFAP+ cell number and engulfment as well as astrocyte phago-
cytosis measure by flow cytometry is also provided. Finally, RGC 
counts 3 d after optic nerve crush injury and RGCs counts and 
CTB field measurements 7 d after injury are also provided. Fig. 
S3 shows RGC counts in WldS mice 3 d after optic nerve crush 
injury as well as pupil responses, RGC counts, and CTB field 
measurements in TTX-treated animals with optic nerve crush. 
Representative gating strategy, flow plots, and quantification of 
MACS efficiency for RNaseq of dLGN microglia are also shown 
along with changes in canonical microglial activation genes. 
Finally, RGC counts of C1qa−/− and Itgam−/− mice 3 d after injury 
are also provided.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Shirley Smith for editing the manuscript. 
We also thank all the members of the Kipnis laboratory and the 
members of the Center for Brain Immunology and Glia (BIG) 
for their valuable comments during multiple discussions of this 
work. Special thanks to Dr. Christopher Deppmann for providing 
us with WldS mice. 
This work was supported by grants from the National Insti-
tutes of Health (MH096484 and NS096967) to J. Kipnis.
Authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: G.T. Norris, A.J. Filiano, and J. Kipnis 
designed the study. J.A. Thompson and T.H. Harris designed the 
experiments of microglia fate labeling using Cx3cr1ERT2Cre/+:Ai6 
mice. G.T. Norris, I. Smirnov, H.M. Shadowen, and K.R. Cody per-
formed the experiments. A. Gaultier provided the CTB-CypHer 
5E reagent and designed the experiments associated with it. G.T. 
Norris, C.C. Overall, and J. Kipnis analyzed the data. G.T. Norris 
and J. Kipnis wrote the manuscript with input from the other 
authors. J. Kipnis oversaw the project.
Submitted: 7 December 2017
Revised: 20 March 2018
Accepted: 9 May 2018
References
Aguzzi, A., B.A. Barres, and M.L. Bennett. 2013. Microglia: scapegoat, sab-
oteur, or something else? Science. 339:156–161. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.1227901
Anders, S., P.T. Pyl, and W. Huber. 2015. HTSeq--a Python framework to work 
with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 31:166–169. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
bioinformatics/ 
btu638
Andrews, S. (2010). FastQC A Quality Control tool for High Throughput 
Sequence Data http:// 
www 
.bioinformatics 
.babraham 
.ac 
.uk/ 
projects/ 
fastqc/ 
 by S. Andrews.
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1800
Arandjelovic, S., and K.S. Ravichandran. 2015. Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells 
in homeostasis. Nat. Immunol. 16:907–917. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ni 
.3253
Bartel, D.L. 2012. Glial responses after chorda tympani nerve injury. J. Comp. 
Neurol. 520:2712–2729. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
cne 
.23069
Benhar, I., K. Reemst, V. Kalchenko, and M. Schwartz. 2016. The retinal pig-
ment epithelium as a gateway for monocyte trafficking into the eye. 
EMBO J. 35:1219–1235. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.15252/ 
embj 
.201694202
Bennett, M.L., F.C. Bennett, S.A. Liddelow, B. Ajami, J.L. Zamanian, N.B. Fern-
hoff, S.B. Mulinyawe, C.J. Bohlen, A. Adil, A. Tucker, et al. 2016. New 
tools for studying microglia in the mouse and human CNS. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA. 113:E1738–E1746. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.1525528113
Bialas, A.R., and B. Stevens. 2013. TGF-β signaling regulates neuronal C1q 
expression and developmental synaptic refinement. Nat. Neurosci. 
16:1773–1782. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nn 
.3560
Bolger, A.M., M. Lohse, and B. Usadel. 2014. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer 
for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics. 30:2114–2120. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
bioinformatics/ 
btu170
Butovsky, O., M.P. Jedrychowski, R. Cialic, S. Krasemann, G. Murugaiyan, Z. 
Fanek, D.J. Greco, P.M. Wu, C.E. Doykan, O. Kiner, et al. 2015. Targeting 
miR-155 restores abnormal microglia and attenuates disease in SOD1 
mice. Ann. Neurol. 77:75–99. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
ana 
.24304
Chesselet, M.F. 1984. Presynaptic regulation of neurotransmitter release in 
the brain: facts and hypothesis. Neuroscience. 12:347–375. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
0306 
-4522(84)90058 
-7
Chiu, I.M., E.T.A. Morimoto, H. Goodarzi, J.T. Liao, S. O’Keeffe, H.P. Phatnani, 
M. Muratet, M.C. Carroll, S. Levy, S. Tavazoie, et al. 2013. A neurodegen-
eration-specific gene-expression signature of acutely isolated microglia 
from an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse model. Cell Reports. 4:385–
401. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.celrep 
.2013 
.06 
.018
Chung, W.-S., L.E. Clarke, G.X. Wang, B.K. Stafford, A. Sher, C. Chakraborty, 
J. Joung, L.C. Foo, A. Thompson, C. Chen, et al. 2013. Astrocytes mediate 
synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MER 
TK pathways. Nature. 
504:394–400. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature12776
Coleman, M.P., L. Conforti, E.A. Buckmaster, A. Tarlton, R.M. Ewing, M.C. 
Brown, M.F. Lyon, and V.H. Perry. 1998. An 85-kb tandem triplication in 
the slow Wallerian degeneration (Wlds) mouse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
95:9985–9990. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.95 
.17 
.9985
Colonna, M., and O. Butovsky. 2017. Microglia Function in the Central Nervous 
System During Health and Neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 
35:441–468. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1146/ 
annurev 
-immunol 
-051116 
-052358
Conway, J.R., A. Lex, and N. Gehlenborg. 2017. UpSetR: an R package for the 
visualization of intersecting sets and their properties. Bioinformatics. 
33:2938–2940. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
bioinformatics/ 
btx364
Cooper, M.E., S. Gregory, E. Adie, and S. Kalinka. 2002. pH-Sensitive Cyanine 
Dyes for Biological Applications. J. Fluoresc. 12:425–429. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1023/ 
A: 
1021366010681
Danias, J., F. Shen, D. Goldblum, B. Chen, J. Ramos-Esteban, S.M. Podos, and T. 
Mittag. 2002. Cytoarchitecture of the retinal ganglion cells in the rat. 
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 43:587–594.
Davalos, D., J. Grutzendler, G. Yang, J.V. Kim, Y. Zuo, S. Jung, D.R. Littman, M.L. 
Dustin, and W.-B. Gan. 2005. ATP mediates rapid microglial response 
to local brain injury in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 8:752–758. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nn1472
Dobin, A., C.A. Davis, F. Schlesinger, J. Drenkow, C. Zaleski, S. Jha, P. Batut, 
M. Chaisson, and T.R. Gingeras. 2013. STAR: ultrafast universal 
RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 29:15–21. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
bioinformatics/ 
bts635
Elliott, M.R., and K.S. Ravichandran. 2010. Clearance of apoptotic cells: impli-
cations in health and disease. J. Cell Biol. 189:1059–1070. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1083/ 
jcb 
.201004096
Elmore, M.R.P., A.R. Najafi, M.A. Koike, N.N. Dagher, E.E. Spangenberg, R.A. 
Rice, M. Kitazawa, B. Matusow, H. Nguyen, B.L. West, and K.N. Green. 
2014. Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signaling is necessary for 
microglia viability, unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult 
brain. Neuron. 82:380–397. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.neuron 
.2014 
.02 
.040
Gadani, S.P., J.T. Walsh, I. Smirnov, J. Zheng, and J. Kipnis. 2015. The glia-de-
rived alarmin IL-33 orchestrates the immune response and promotes 
recovery following CNS injury. Neuron. 85:703–709. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.neuron 
.2015 
.01 
.013
Ghetti, B., D.S. Horoupian, and H.M. Wiśniewski. 1972. Transsynaptic 
response of the lateral geniculate nucleus and the pattern of degenera-
tion of the nerve terminals in the rhesus monkey after eye enucleation. 
Brain Res. 45:31–48. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
0006 
-8993(72)90214 
-4
Gillingwater, T.H., C.A. Ingham, K.E. Parry, A.K. Wright, J.E. Haley, T.M. 
Wishart, G.W. Arbuthnott, and R.R. Ribchester. 2006. Delayed synap-
tic degeneration in the CNS of Wlds mice after cortical lesion. Brain. 
129:1546–1556. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
brain/ 
awl101
Goldmann, T., P. Wieghofer, P.F. Müller, Y. Wolf, D. Varol, S. Yona, S.M. Bren-
decke, K. Kierdorf, O. Staszewski, M. Datta, et al. 2013. A new type of 
microglia gene targeting shows TAK1 to be pivotal in CNS autoimmune 
inflammation. Nat. Neurosci. 16:1618–1626. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nn 
.3531
Gray, K.A., B. Yates, R.L. Seal, M.W. Wright, and E.A. Bruford. 2015. Genenames.
org: the HGNC resources in 2015. Nucleic Acids Res. 43(Database issue, 
D1):D1079–D1085. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
nar/ 
gku1071
Greenhalgh, A.D., and S. David. 2014. Differences in the phagocytic response 
of microglia and peripheral macrophages after spinal cord injury and its 
effects on cell death. J. Neurosci. 34:6316–6322. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1523/ 
JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.4912 
-13 
.2014
Gudi, V., S. Gingele, T. Skripuletz, and M. Stangel. 2014. Glial response during 
cuprizone-induced de- and remyelination in the CNS: lessons learned. 
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8:73. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.3389/ 
fncel 
.2014 
.00073
Harrow, J., A. Frankish, J.M. Gonzalez, E. Tapanari, M. Diekhans, F. Koko-
cinski, B.L. Aken, D. Barrell, A. Zadissa, S. Searle, et al. 2012. GEN 
CODE: 
the reference human genome annotation for The ENC 
ODE Project. 
Genome Res. 22:1760–1774. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1101/ 
gr 
.135350 
.111
Hickman, S.E., N.D. Kingery, T.K. Ohsumi, M.L. Borowsky, L.C. Wang, T.K. 
Means, and J. El Khoury. 2013. The microglial sensome revealed by direct 
RNA sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 16:1896–1905. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nn 
.355424162652
Hilla, A.M., H. Diekmann, and D. Fischer. 2017. Microglia Are Irrelevant for 
Neuronal Degeneration and Axon Regeneration after Acute Injury. J. 
Neurosci. 37:6113–6124. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1523/ 
JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0584 
-17 
.2017
Hong, S., V.F. Beja-Glasser, B.M. Nfonoyim, A. Frouin, S. Li, S. Ramakrishnan, 
K.M. Merry, Q. Shi, A. Rosenthal, B.A. Barres, et al. 2016. Complement 
and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. 
Science. 352:712–716. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.aad8373
Hoopfer, E.D., T. McLaughlin, R.J. Watts, O. Schuldiner, D.D.M. O’Leary, and 
L. Luo. 2006. Wlds protection distinguishes axon degeneration follow-
ing injury from naturally occurring developmental pruning. Neuron. 
50:883–895. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.neuron 
.2006 
.05 
.013
Ippolito, D.M., and C. Eroglu. 2010. Quantifying synapses: an immunocyto-
chemistry-based assay to quantify synapse number. J. Vis. Exp. 45:e2270.
Keren-Shaul, H., A. Spinrad, A. Weiner, O. Matcovitch-Natan, R. Dvir-Sztern-
feld, T.K. Ulland, E. David, K. Baruch, D. Lara-Astaiso, B. Toth, et al. 2017. 
A Unique Microglia Type Associated with Restricting Development of 
Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell. 169:1276–1290.e17. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2017 
.05 
.018
Kolde, R. (2015). pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps. Implementation of heatmaps 
that offers more control over dimensions and appearance. https:// 
CRAN 
.R 
-project 
.org/ 
package 
= 
pheatmap.
Krasemann, S., C. Madore, R. Cialic, C. Baufeld, N. Calcagno, R. El Fatimy, L. 
Beckers, E. O’Loughlin, Y. Xu, Z. Fanek, et al. 2017. The TREM2-APOE 
Pathway Drives the Transcriptional Phenotype of Dysfunctional Microg-
lia in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Immunity. 47:566–581.e9. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2017 
.08 
.008
Lampron, A., A. Larochelle, N. Laflamme, P. Préfontaine, M.-M. Plante, M.G. 
Sánchez, V.W. Yong, P.K. Stys, M.-È. Tremblay, and S. Rivest. 2015. 
Inefficient clearance of myelin debris by microglia impairs remyelin-
ating processes. J. Exp. Med. 212:481–495. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1084/ 
jem 
.20141656
Lassmann, T., Y. Hayashizaki, and C.O. Daub. 2011. SAMStat: monitoring 
biases in next generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 27:130–131. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
bioinformatics/ 
btq614
Levkovitch-Verbin, H., C. Harris-Cerruti, Y. Groner, L.A. Wheeler, M. 
Schwartz, and E. Yoles. 2000. RGC death in mice after optic nerve crush 
injury: oxidative stress and neuroprotection. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 
41:4169–4174.
Li, H., B. Handsaker, A. Wysoker, T. Fennell, J. Ruan, N. Homer, G. Marth, G. 
Abecasis, and R. Durbin. 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Sub-
group. 2009. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. 
Bioinformatics. 25:2078–2079. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
bioinformatics/ 
btp352
Liddelow, S.A., K.A. Guttenplan, L.E. Clarke, F.C. Bennett, C.J. Bohlen, L. 
Schirmer, M.L. Bennett, A.E. Münch, W.-S. Chung, T.C. Peterson, et al. 
 Norris et al. 
Mechanisms of synaptic debris clearance after CNS injury
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172244
1801
2017. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia. 
Nature. 541:481–487. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature21029
Ling, E.A. 1979. Electron microscopic study of macrophages appearing in 
a stab wound of the brain of rats following intravenous injection of 
carbon particles. Arch. Histol. Jpn. 42:41–50. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1679/ 
aohc1950 
.42 
.41
London, A., E. Itskovich, I. Benhar, V. Kalchenko, M. Mack, S. Jung, and M. 
Schwartz. 2011. Neuroprotection and progenitor cell renewal in the 
injured adult murine retina requires healing monocyte-derived mac-
rophages. J. Exp. Med. 208:23–39. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1084/ 
jem 
.20101202
Love, M.I., W. Huber, and S. Anders. 2014. Moderated estimation of fold 
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 
15:550. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1186/ 
s13059 
-014 
-0550 
-8
Lundgaard, I., M.J. Osório, B.T. Kress, S. Sanggaard, and M. Nedergaard. 2014. 
White matter astrocytes in health and disease. Neuroscience. 276:161–173. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.neuroscience 
.2013 
.10 
.050
Moalem, G., A. Monsonego, Y. Shani, I.R. Cohen, and M. Schwartz. 1999. Dif-
ferential T cell response in central and peripheral nerve injury: con-
nection with immune privilege. FAS 
EB J. 13:1207–1217. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1096/ 
fasebj 
.13 
.10 
.1207
Nimmerjahn, A., F. Kirchhoff, and F. Helmchen. 2005. Resting microglial cells 
are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science. 
308:1314–1318. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.1110647
Obermeier, B., R. Daneman, and R.M. Ransohoff. 2013. Development, mainte-
nance and disruption of the blood-brain barrier. Nat. Med. 19:1584–1596. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nm 
.3407
Poliani, P.L., Y. Wang, E. Fontana, M.L. Robinette, Y. Yamanishi, S. Gilfillan, 
and M. Colonna. 2015. TREM2 sustains microglial expansion during 
aging and response to demyelination. J. Clin. Invest. 125:2161–2170. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1172/ 
JCI77983
Roth, T.L., D. Nayak, T. Atanasijevic, A.P. Koretsky, L.L. Latour, and D.B. 
McGavern. 2014. Transcranial amelioration of inflammation and cell 
death after brain injury. Nature. 505:223–228. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature12808
Schafer, D.P., E.K. Lehrman, A.G. Kautzman, R. Koyama, A.R. Mardinly, R. 
Yamasaki, R.M. Ransohoff, M.E. Greenberg, B.A. Barres, and B. Ste-
vens. 2012. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and 
complement-dependent manner. Neuron. 74:691–705. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.neuron 
.2012 
.03 
.026
Schafer, D.P., E.K. Lehrman, C.T. Heller, and B. Stevens. 2014. An engulfment 
assay: a protocol to assess interactions between CNS phagocytes and 
neurons. J. Vis. Exp. 88:e51482.
Schwartz, M. 2004. Optic nerve crush: protection and regeneration. Brain Res. 
Bull. 62:467–471. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S0361 
-9230(03)00076 
-5
Schwartz, M., and I.R. Cohen. 2000. Autoimmunity can benefit self-main-
tenance. Immunol. Today. 21:265–268. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S0167 
-5699(00)01633 
-9
Sekar, A., A.R. Bialas, H. de Rivera, A. Davis, T.R. Hammond, N. Kamitaki, K. 
Tooley, J. Presumey, M. Baum, V. Van Doren, et al. Schizophrenia Work-
ing Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. 2016. Schizophre-
nia risk from complex variation of complement component 4. Nature. 
530:177–183. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature16549
Shanks, J.A., S. Ito, L. Schaevitz, J. Yamada, B. Chen, A. Litke, and D.A. Feldheim. 
2016. Corticothalamic Axons Are Essential for Retinal Ganglion Cell Axon 
Targeting to the Mouse Dorsal Lateral Geniculate Nucleus. J. Neurosci. 
36:5252–5263. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1523/ 
JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.4599 
-15 
.2016
Smith, M.E. 1999. Phagocytosis of myelin in demyelinative disease: a review. 
Neurochem. Res. 24:261–268. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1023/ 
A: 
1022566121967
Steinman, L. 2006. State of the art. Four easy pieces: interconnections 
between tissue injury, intermediary metabolism, autoimmunity, and 
chronic degeneration. Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 3:484–486. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1513/ 
pats 
.200603 
-061MS
Stephan, A.H., B.A. Barres, and B. Stevens. 2012. The complement system: an 
unexpected role in synaptic pruning during development and disease. 
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35:369–389. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1146/ 
annurev 
-neuro 
-061010 
-113810
Stevens, B., N.J. Allen, L.E. Vazquez, G.R. Howell, K.S. Christopherson, N. 
Nouri, K.D. Micheva, A.K. Mehalow, A.D. Huberman, B. Stafford, et al. 
2007. The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimina-
tion. Cell. 131:1164–1178. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2007 
.10 
.036
Su, J., C.V. Haner, T.E. Imbery, J.M. Brooks, D.R. Morhardt, K. Gorse, W. Guido, 
and M.A. Fox. 2011. Reelin is required for class-specific retinogenicu-
late targeting. J. Neurosci. 31:575–586. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1523/ 
JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.4227 
-10 
.2011
Subramanian, A., P. Tamayo, V.K. Mootha, S. Mukherjee, B.L. Ebert, M.A. Gil-
lette, A. Paulovich, S.L. Pomeroy, T.R. Golub, E.S. Lander, and J.P. Mesirov. 
2005. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for 
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
102:15545–15550. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.0506580102
Tay, T.L., D. Mai, J. Dautzenberg, F. Fernández-Klett, G. Lin, M. Sagar, M. Datta, 
A. Drougard, T. Stempfl, A. Ardura-Fabregat, et al. 2017. A new fate map-
ping system reveals context-dependent random or clonal expansion of 
microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 20:793–803. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nn 
.4547
Tufail, Y., D. Cook, L. Fourgeaud, C.J. Powers, K. Merten, C.L. Clark, E. Hoff-
man, A. Ngo, K.J. Sekiguchi, C.C. O’Shea, et al. 2017. Phosphatidylserine 
Exposure Controls Viral Innate Immune Responses by Microglia. Neu-
ron. 93:574–586.e8. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.neuron 
.2016 
.12 
.021
Ulland, T.K., Y. Wang, and M. Colonna. 2015. Regulation of microglial survival 
and proliferation in health and diseases. Semin. Immunol. 27:410–415. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.smim 
.2016 
.03 
.011
Vaccarezza, O.L., T.A. Reader, E. Pasqualini, and J. Pecci-Saavedra. 1970. Tem-
poral course of synaptic degeneration in the lateral geniculate nucleus. 
Its dependence on axonal stump length. Exp. Neurol. 28:277–285. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
0014 
-4886(70)90236 
-0
Vargas, M.E., and B.A. Barres. 2007. Why is Wallerian degeneration in the CNS 
so slow? Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30:153–179. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1146/ 
annurev 
.neuro 
.30 
.051606 
.094354
Vasek, M.J., C. Garber, D. Dorsey, D.M. Durrant, B. Bollman, A. Soung, J. Yu, C. 
Perez-Torres, A. Frouin, D.K. Wilton, et al. 2016. A complement-microg-
lial axis drives synapse loss during virus-induced memory impairment. 
Nature. 534:538–543. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature18283
Walsh, J.T., J. Zheng, I. Smirnov, U. Lorenz, K. Tung, and J. Kipnis. 2014. Reg-
ulatory T cells in central nervous system injury: a double-edged sword. 
J. Immunol. 193:5013–5022. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.1302401
Walsh, J.T., S. Hendrix, F. Boato, I. Smirnov, J. Zheng, J.R. Lukens, S. Gadani, D. 
Hechler, G. Gölz, K. Rosenberger, et al. 2015. MHC 
II-independent CD4+ 
T cells protect injured CNS neurons via IL-4. J. Clin. Invest. 125:699–714. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1172/ 
JCI76210
Wong-Riley, M.T.T. 1972. Terminal degeneration and glial reactions in the 
lateral geniculate nucleus of the squirrel monkey after eye removal. J. 
Comp. Neurol. 144:61–91. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
cne 
.901440104
Wright, A.K., T.M. Wishart, C.A. Ingham, and T.H. Gillingwater. 2010. Syn-
aptic protection in the brain of WldS mice occurs independently of age 
but is sensitive to gene-dose. PLoS One. 5:e15108. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1371/ 
journal 
.pone 
.0015108
