 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
COPYRIGHT © 2016 THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF NEUROLOGICAL SCIENCES INC.
Electroencephalographic Recordings
During Withdrawal of Life-Sustaining
Therapy Until 30 Minutes After
Declaration of Death
Loretta Norton, Raechelle M. Gibson, Teneille Gofton, Carolyn Benson,
Sonny Dhanani, Sam D. Shemie, Laura Hornby, Roxanne Ward, G. Bryan Young
ABSTRACT: Background: The timing of the circulatory determination of death for organ donation presents a medical and ethical
challenge. Concerns have been raised about the timing of electrocerebral inactivity in relation to the cessation of circulatory function in organ
donation after cardio-circulatory death. Nonprocessed electroencephalographic (EEG) measures have not been characterized and may provide
insight into neurological function during this process. Methods: We assessed electrocortical data in relation to cardiac function after
withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy and in the postmortem period after cardiac arrest for four patients in a Canadian intensive care unit.
Subhairline EEG and cardio-circulatory monitoring including electrocardiogram, arterial blood pressure (ABP), and oxygen saturation were
captured. Results: Electrocerebral inactivity preceded the cessation of the cardiac rhythm and ABP in three patients. In one patient, single delta
wave bursts persisted following the cessation of both the cardiac rhythm and ABP. There was a significant difference in EEG amplitude
between the 30-minute period before and the 5-minute period following ABP cessation for the group, but we did not observe any well-defined
EEG states following the early cardiac arrest period. Conclusions: In a case series of four patients, EEG inactivity preceded electrocardiogram
and ABP inactivity during the dying process in three patients. Further study of the electroencephalogram during the withdrawal of life
sustaining therapies will add clarity to medical, ethical, and legal concerns for donation after circulatory determined death.
RÉSUMÉ: Enregistrements électroencéphalographiques pendant le retrait du maintien des fonctions vitales et jusqu’à 30 minutes après la
constatation du décès. Contexte: Le moment de la détermination circulatoire de la mort à des fins de don d’organes présente un défi médical et éthique.
Des préoccupations ont été soulevées concernant le moment de l’inactivité électrocérébrale en relation à l’arrêt de la fonction circulatoire dans le contexte
de don d’organes après la mort cardio-circulatoire. Les mesures électroencéphalographiques (EEG) brutes n’ont pas été caractérisées et pourraient fournir
des indices sur la fonction neurologique pendant ce processus. Méthodologie: Nous avons analysé des données électrocorticales en relation à la fonction
cardiaque après le retrait du maintien des fonctions vitales et dans la période postmortem, après l’arrêt cardiaque, chez 4 patients hospitalisés dans une unité
canadienne de soins intensifs. Nous avons recueilli le tracé EEG sous la lisière des cheveux et la surveillance cardio-circulatoire incluant
l’électrocardiogramme, la tension artérielle (TA) et la saturation en oxygène. Résultats: L’inactivité électrocérébrale a précédé la cessation du rythme
cardiaque et de la TA chez 3 patients. Nous avons observé une différence significative de l’amplitude de l’EEG entre la période de 30 minutes avant et la
période de 5 minutes après l’arrêt de la TA dans ce groupe de patients, mais nous n’avons pas observé d’état bien défini à l’EEG immédiatement après
l’arrêt cardiaque. Conclusions: Chez une série de 4 patients, l’inactivité à l’EEG a précédé l’inactivité électrocardiographique et l’arrêt de la TA pendant le
processus de la mort chez 3 patients. Des études ultérieures sur l’électroencéphalogramme pendant le retrait du maintien des fonctions vitales aideront à
clarifier les préoccupations médicales, éthiques et légales concernant le don d’organes après la détermination circulatoire de la mort.
Keywords: Critical care, Electrocerebral inactivity, Determination of death, Donation after circulatory death, EEG, Intensive care,
Neurocritical care, Palliative care, Vital signs, withdrawal of life sustaining therapies
doi:10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Can J Neurol Sci. 2017; 44: 139-145
From the Program in Neurocritical Care, University of Western Ontario, London Health Sciences Centre, London, Ontario, Canada (LN, TG, GBY); Graduate Program in Neuroscience,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (LN); Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (RMG); Department of Clinical
Neurological Sciences, London Health Sciences Centre, London, Ontario, Canada (TG, CB, GBY); Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON,
Canada (SD, RW); Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada (SD, RW); Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada (SD);
Montreal Children’s Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada (SDS, LH); Pediatric Critical Care, Montreal Children’s Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada (SDS);
Faculty of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada (SDS); McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada (LH).
Correspondence to: Loretta Norton, The Brain and Mind Institute, Room 120K, Natural Sciences Building, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 5B7
Email: lnorton4@uwo.ca.
RECEIVED AUGUST 21, 2015. FINAL REVISIONS SUBMITTED MARCH 16, 2016. DATE OF ACCEPTANCE APRIL 15, 2016.
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF NEUROLOGICAL SCIENCES
139
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 85.203.44.48, on 01 Jun 2019 at 18:20:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 The cessation of brain activity during the dying process before
and after cardiac arrest is understudied, physiologically important,
and even ethically charged when it precedes organ donation.
Physicians have expressed concerns regarding the state of cerebral
activity during the dying process. Surveys of pediatric physicians, for
example, show that 11% are concerned that patients may be able to
experience pain during this period.1 Cerebral function is particularly
important in the context of organ donation after cardio-circulatory
death (DCD), where death is declared 2 to 10 minutes following the
cessation of circulatory function.2-5 DCD most commonly involves
patients with catastrophic brain injury who do not fulfill brain death
criteria and where there has been a consensual agreement for the
withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy (WLST). Because the time
between withdrawing support, pronouncing death, and procuring
organs is relatively short, there has been some uncertainty about
possible cerebral or cognitive function during this process.
The goal of the present study was to quantify nonprocessed
electroencephalographic (EEG) in humans at the time of WLST.
EEG can be used to determine when the loss of electrocerebral
activity occurs. In fact, processed EEG through the use of
bispectral index (BIS) monitoring has described a spike in EEG
activity at the time of death6 and during donation after circulatory
death.7 Borjigin et al (2013) described a similar finding of increased
EEG coherence and connectivity in the rat brain following cardiac
arrest. Nonprocessed EEG at the time of WLST has not yet been
prospectively studied in humans and may provide insight into
neurological function during the dying process. In the present work,
we assess subhairline EEG in relation to cardiac function after
WLST and in the immediate postmortem period after cardiac arrest.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This substudy, specifically examining EEG activity during
WLST, was part of a larger prospective observational pilot study to
monitor the physiological changes that occur after death from
cardiac arrest at five Canadian intensive care units.9 The study was
approved by our local institutional Research Ethics Board for
Health Sciences Research Involving Human Subjects, and written
informed consent was obtained according to the Declaration of
Helsinki from the legally authorized representative of each patient.
Participants
We report four patients who were hospitalized in the medical-
surgical intensive care unit at the London Heath Sciences Centre -
University Hospital, London, Ontario, Canada (Table 1). All
patients had continuous EEG in addition to cardio-circulatory
monitoring including: electrocardiogram (ECG), arterial blood
pressure (ABP), and oxygen saturation during WLST. None of the
patients met the criteria for brain death at the time of WLST nor did
any of the patients undergo DCD. Patients 1, 2, and 4 were eligible
for DCD but their families declined donation because of the
previously expressed wishes of the patient. Patient 3 was medically
unsuitable for organ donation because of multiorgan failure and a
previous history of invasive breast cancer; however, this patient
was an eligible tissue donor and a bilateral donor enucleation
procedure was performed. In accordance with standard local pro-
tocols, all patients were receiving analgesics/sedatives, including
fentanyl, morphine, and midazolam, at the time of WLST (Table 1).
In all patients, death was declared by the attending team based on
the absence of heart sounds by auscultation, absent palpable pulse,
absent breath sounds by auscultation, unresponsiveness to painful
stimulus, and unreactive pupils. Other than continuous monitoring
of circulatory and neurological variables collected remotely, there
was no change in patient care during WLST.
Signal Acquisition
We used a four-channel bipolar EEG monitor (Datex-Ohmeda
S/5 M-EEG Module; model #898683-00) with a Datex-Ohmeda
Critical Care monitor (GE Healthcare, Helsinki, Finland). This
system has been validated for use in the intensive care unit.10 The
subhairline bipolar montage uses one ground and eight anterior
surface electrodes (3M Red Dot 2670-5). The EEG module has a
sampling frequency of 100 Hz per channel featuring an online
bandpass filter of 0.5 to 30 Hz, and the module offers an amplitude
Table 1: Demographic data
At WLST
At isoelectric EEG
Patient
Age
Gender
Admitting
diagnosis
GCS
ABP
HR
EEG
Sedation after WLST
ABP
HR
1
72
F
Subarachnoid
hemorrhage
5T
118/42
93
Burst suppression patterns with
bursts of delta activity;
possible drug spindles
Morphine infusion 10mg/
hour, midazolam
infusion 10mg/hour
59/34
52
2
70
M
Cardiac arrest
3T
116/59
85
Generalized suppression with
slow wave delta
Morphine infusion 8-
20mg/hour + 2 boluses
4mg/mcg/.
Midazolam 6-10mg/hour
+4 boluses of 4mg/
mcg
123/59
82
3
58
F
Radiation
pneumonitis
6T
105/55
152
Burst suppression patterns
with bursts of delta activity
Fentanyl boluses (3)
100 µg
40/22
73
4
67
M
Cardiac arrest
3T
129/52
113
Delta and theta activity
Fentanyl infusion 100-
300 mcg/hour/
Midazolam boluses (3)
1 mg/mcg
—
—
ABP, arterial blood pressure; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; HR, heart rate.
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF NEUROLOGICAL SCIENCES
140
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 85.203.44.48, on 01 Jun 2019 at 18:20:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 range of ± 400 mV with a resolution of 60 µV. Electrode impe-
dances were below 5 kΩ.
Signal Analyses
Signal analysis included the calculation of EEG power spectra
and trending of EEG amplitude and 95% spectral edge frequency
(the power, or square of the amplitude, as a function of frequency
where 95% of the EEG activity is below this frequency) over time.
The absence of electrocerebral activity was defined as amplitude of
less than 2 µV following the recommended guidelines for EEG
testing in brain death.11 ABP cessation was defined a priori as absent
ABP waveform tracing for a period of 1 minute. Physiological data
including the mean EEG amplitude and the 95% spectral edge
frequency were averaged across channels in 30-second epochs.
To assess the cessation of brain activity in relation to other
physiological measures during the dying process, we collected
heart rate, ABP through an intra-arterial catheter, pulse oximetry,
and EEG signals continuously beginning 30 minutes before WLST
until 30 minutes following the declaration of death. We were
particularly interested in the EEG activity during the 5-minute
observation period after ABP cessation, in keeping with current
Canadian guidelines for procuring organs in DCD patients that state
that organs should not be procured until the 5-minute period has
elapsed to confirm irreversibility of cardio-circulatory arrest.4 We
also investigated EEG activity at the time of final ECG cessation to
determine if there were any well-defined EEG states following the
early cardiac arrest period as previously observed in rats.8
Power Analyses
EEG spectrograms were calculated using a discrete Fourier
transform with a 2-second segment size and 1-second overlap for
each frequency bin (0.5-30 Hz with 0.5 Hz bin size) using Fieldtrip12
implemented via custom MATLAB script (MathWorks, Inc.,
Natick, MA). Each segment was windowed with a Hanning win-
dow, and the absolute power was expressed in a log scale averaged
over all four bipolar channels. The mean and standard error of
absolute power was calculated for eight frequency bands defined as
follows: delta (0-4 Hz), theta (4-8Hz), alpha (8-12Hz), and beta
(12-30 Hz). No artefact correction procedure was performed.
RESULTS
Physiology and EEG Before and after Cessation of ABP
Figure 1 shows the physiological measures for all four patients
before and following cardio-circulatory death.
For patient 1, electrocerebral inactivity preceded the cessation of
ABP and ECG by 4 minutes. Of note, ECG and ABP restarted
1 minute and 20 seconds after the initial stop for 40 seconds.
Throughout this period, the EEG did not demonstrate evidence of
electrocerebral activity as EEG amplitude remained less than 2 µV.
Figure 1: Change in all physiological measurements at or before cessation of ABP. (A) Physiological data for each patient over a 1-hour period
that shows 30 minutes before and 30 minutes following cessation of ABP (time zero with hashed line). From top to bottom: mean arterial pressure
(MAP), heart rate (HR), plethysmography (SpO2), mean EEG amplitude, mean EEG spectral edge frequency (95%), and EEG absolute power
averaged across all four EEG channels. The z axis of the spectrogram uses a log scale from ±17.0 to indicate power (low log power values in blue
and high log power values in red).
LE JOURNAL CANADIEN DES SCIENCES NEUROLOGIQUES
Volume 44, No. 2 – March 2017
141
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 85.203.44.48, on 01 Jun 2019 at 18:20:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 For patient 2, electrocerebral inactivity preceded the cessation
of ABP and ECG by 10 minutes and 10 seconds.
Patient 3 had a burst in power in higher frequency ranges
8 minutes before ABP cessation for a period of 4 minutes and
electrocerebral inactivity occurred 1 minute and 30 seconds before
the cessation of ABP.
In patient 4, initial high-frequency EEG activity was seen at two
time points: 11 minutes and 5 minutes before ABP cessation for a
period of 2 minutes each time. ECG continued for an additional
15 minutes and 30 seconds following ABP cessation. The EEG
showed increasing suppression with infrequent single delta wave
bursts following ECG and ABP cessation. These delta bursts con-
tinued for 10 minutes and 38 seconds following ECG cessation with a
mean amplitude of 4.52µV in the last burst of delta activity (Figure 2).
A significant difference in EEG mean amplitude was found for
the group between the 30 minutes before ABP cessation and the
5 minutes following ABP cessation, (t(3) = 8.473, p = .003).
Mean amplitude before ABP cessation was significantly greater
than mean amplitude following ABP cessation (Mpre = 5.785 µV,
SE = 0.983; Mpost = 1.2188 µV, SE = 0.539).
We also compared mean spectral power for the group across
the four frequency bands of interest for the 30 minutes before and
5 minutes following ABP cessation. There were no significant
effects (p > 0.10) (Figure 1).
EEG at ECG Cessation
A spectrogram of EEG power comparing 1 minute before ECG
cessation to 1 minute following ECG cessation shows no change in
patients 2 and 4 and a dramatic change in patients 1 and 3 (Figure 3).
However, the raw EEG waveforms suggest that the change in EEG
power for patients 1 and 3 is related to ECG artefact just before ECG
cessation (Figure 3). The EEG and ECG signals are significantly
correlated in these cases (R=−0.051 to 0.093; p<0.0001).
DISCUSSION
Through the use of EEG, we assessed the brain activity of four
patients during the WLST and through the immediate postmortem
period after cardiac arrest. Prior reports of human brain activity in
this period have relied upon a proprietary integer-based measure
known as BIS. BIS monitoring is typically used in clinical practice
to monitor the depth of anesthesia. Although BIS seems to be an
effective measure of neural activity in paralyzed patients, its
effects in nonparalyzed patients are not well-understood, and it is
sensitive to artefacts.13-16
Surface EEG activity was used to infer brain function as it is
known to reflect the net contribution of postsynaptic potentials from
cortical pyramidal cells.17 Using direct, simultaneous recordings in
animals and through modelling studies, researchers have recently
found evidence that EEG is strongly correlated with the multiunit
activity of large cortical neuronal populations.18-20 Additionally,
EEG correlates with brain metabolism. There is evidence from both
experimental and clinical studies that EEG reflects the oxidative
metabolism of brain tissue and cerebral blood flow (CBF).21 For
example, coma and general anesthesia give rise to a slow-wave EEG
and reduced cerebral oxygen uptake and blood flow.22,23 Changes in
regional CBF coincide with a flattening of the EEG when CBF falls
below a critical level (16-22ml/100g/minute; internal carotid
pressure to 29-50mmHg).24 Interestingly, during hypoxia, EEG
frequency and CBF are often not correlated.24 This is aligned with our
findings of a statistically significant change in EEG amplitude
between the 30-minute period before and the 5-minute period
following ABP cessation but no difference in spectral frequency.
Thus, amplitude analyses may be more sensitive than examination
of frequency in detecting changes in the EEG during the dying
process because of diminished CBF.
Cerebral inactivity preceded the cessation of ECG and ABP in
three of four patients. An unexpected finding in the current work
was that single bursts of delta wave activity persisted following
ECG and ABP cessation for one patient. It is difficult to posit a
physiological basis for this EEG activity given that it occurs after
a prolonged loss of circulation. These waveform bursts could,
therefore, be artefactual in nature, although an artefactual source
could not be identified.
We also examined brain activity around the time of ECG
cessation. A high amplitude slow wave or “delta blip” has been
reported within 1 minute of decapitation in rats thought to be
indicative of synchronous neuronal death.25 We did not observe a
Figure 2: Raw EEG tracing in patient 4 following declaration of death. Representative tracing of large infrequent single delta wave bursts
observed for 10 minutes and 38 seconds (EEG bottom four tracings) following the loss of ECG tracing (top tracing).
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF NEUROLOGICAL SCIENCES
142
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 85.203.44.48, on 01 Jun 2019 at 18:20:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 delta wave within 1 minute following cardiac arrest in any of our
four patients. We also did not observe any well-defined EEG
states following the early cardiac arrest period as previously
reported in rats.8 In fact, EEG activity declined dramatically well
before the last heartbeat for two patients, and we noted ECG
artefact in EEG channels for two patients within 1 minute before
ECG cessation.
In line with previous work using BIS,6,7 two patients showed some
power in higher frequency ranges before ABP cessation alongside an
increase in 95% spectral edge frequency immediately before death.
These previous reports from patients with no sedation are consistent
with our findings from patients receiving sedation and suggest that
the common finding of high-frequency activity before death might
be a common feature of the dying process regardless of sedation.
High-frequency synchronous gamma oscillations (25-100Hz) have
also been reported in the rat brain for up to 30 seconds following
cardiac arrest.8 Moreover, it has been proposed that this apparent
increase in neuronal activity around the time of death may reflect
near-death experiences.6 In the current work, visual inspection of the
raw EEG tracing by an experienced electroencephalographer revealed
that the increased activity before ABP cessation could be an
electromyelogram (EMG) artefact. Thus, one must be careful about
false positive EEG signals from muscular and/or cardiac sources.
Limitations
Because we report a case series of four patients, it is not possible
to make generalizable inferences about our findings. Furthermore,
physiological artefacts, including those generated by EMG, ECG,
and sweat, and nonphysiological artefacts, including line noise from
medical equipment and movement of staff and family members at the
bedside, are common in the intensive care unit and very difficult to
avoid in a study of this nature. Moreover, our subhairline EEG
montage only captured frequencies up to 30Hz at anterior sites on
the forehead. The subhairline EEG was used rather than a full 10-20
EEG montage because the device was already in place before WLST
to monitor EEG activity. In our intensive care unit, we often use the
subhairline EEG for continuous EEG monitoring as a standard of
care in our patients. The presented four cases were a subset of a larger
study,9 which was a noninterventional, observational study to
describe the physiology from waveform data collected from the
critical care monitors during the dying process. The larger study
design required no deviations from the standard practice for WLST
other than leaving current monitoring devices in place for 30 minutes
post clinical determination of death. As a result of participating in the
study, no other intervention or changes in care of the patient were
permitted, thus precluding the application of a complete 10-20 EEG
recording. As such, some of the guidelines for cerebral death
recording suggested by the American Clinical Neurophysiology
Society11 could not be met. Electrode pairs were unable to be placed
10cm apart, and this may have prevented detection of some cerebral
potentials that could be observed with longer interelectrode
distances. Additionally, only anterior portions of the brain were
covered with the subhairline EEG; this limited scalp coverage
reduces our ability to determine whether the observed absence of
EEG activity occurred across the entire cerebrum.
Clinical Significance
This is the first study, to our knowledge, that depicts cessation of
anterograde blood flow and neurological function through simulta-
neous measurement of ABP and EEG. Results of this small patient
Figure 3: EEG power spectrograms at the early cardiac arrest period. Spectrograms depict 1 minute before and 1 minute following cessation
of the ECG rhythm. The x axis is time relative to the cessation of ECG with time 0 (denoted with a hatched line) as the last heartbeat. The z axis
of the spectrogram uses a log scale from ±17.0 to indicate power (low log power values in blue and high log power values in red).
LE JOURNAL CANADIEN DES SCIENCES NEUROLOGIQUES
Volume 44, No. 2 – March 2017
143
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 85.203.44.48, on 01 Jun 2019 at 18:20:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 sample indicate that it is ethically and logistically feasible to collect
EEG recordings concurrently with other physiological measurements
during the dying process. The most clinically significant finding was a
substantial decline in neurological activity before cardiac inactivity
in the majority of patients. As in prior studies of humans and rats,
high-frequency EEG activity increased just before the time of death in
two patients, indicating that this might be a common feature of the
neurological dying process. Another intriguing clinical finding
included one incident of a very brief resumption of cardiac
activity after a period of absence without concurrent resumption of
neurological activity. Finally, we also encountered one case where
EEG activity persisted beyond the cessation of ABP. Given that this
was only observed in one case and it persisted well beyond the loss of
circulation, we speculate that this activity could reflect a nonneuronal
artefact. Although our case series provides a proof of concept for the
feasibility for the assessment of neurological function at the time of
death, we have several recommendations for future research to better
inform clinical practice around the determination of death, especially
in the context of DCD.
Future EEG studies of the dying brain should be designed to
have a higher sampling rate to study gamma oscillations and the
use of the full 10-20 montage for complete scalp coverage and
standardized reproducibility. EMG should also be independently
evaluated as it occurs in high frequency ranges and can con-
taminate EEG signals. It would also be advantageous to study
brainstem function during the dying process through the use of
evoked potentials to determine when brainstem function ceases
relative to heart function.
CONCLUSION
For the first time, we prospectively studied subhairline EEG
activity compared with ECG and ABP waveforms at the time of
death in a small sample of patients undergoing the WLST. In our
case series, we found a significant difference in EEG amplitude
between the 30-minute period before the cessation of ABP to the
5-minute period following ABP cessation. Larger prospective
studies involving the use of EEG and evoked potentials should be
conducted to describe when cerebral and brainstem activity ceases
in relation to other physiological variables in the dying patient to
better inform the process of DCD.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This study was conducted at the medical-surgical intensive care
unit at the London Health Sciences Centre - University Hospital,
London, Ontario, Canada. The work was conducted for the Deter-
mination of Death Practices in Intensive Care (DDePICt) DDEPICT
Investigator Group, the Canadian Critical Care Trials Group, and the
Loeb Chair and Research Consortium in Organ and Tissue Donation.
The work was supported, in part, by grants from the Children’s
Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Physician’s Services
Incorporated, and Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR).
LN was supported by a Canada Graduate Scholarship from CIHR,
and RMG was supported by a Vanier Canada Graduate scholarship.
DISCLOSURES
LN is a doctoral student and receives a scholarship from CIHR.
RG: Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship, doctoral student and
scholarship. SD is chief medical officer and receives a salary stipend
from Trillium, Gift of Life Network; is a principal investigator and
received a grant from Children’s Hospital Eastern Ontario; is a
principal investigator and received a grant from Physician Services,
Ontario; is a principal investigator for and received a CIHR Meeting
Grant. BY has provided consultation in developing a bedside EEG
monitor for ICU recordings (no compensation) from GE Healthcare.
SS is an advisor and received a consulting fee from Canadian Blood
Services (government agency). TG is an examining neurologist for
the SURTAVI trial and received an honorarium from Medtronic.
CB, LH, and RW do not have anything to disclose.
REFERENCES
1. Sarnaik AA, Clark JA, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP. Views of pediatric
intensive care physicians on the ethics of organ donation after
cardiac death. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:1733-44.
2. University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Policy and Procedure
Manual. Kennedy Institute of Ethics, 1993. Available from: http://
hosped.umc.edu/education/documents/CL.P9PCAPump.pdf.
3. Reich DJ, Mulligan DC, Abt PL, et al. ASTS recommended practice
guidelines for controlled donation after cardiac death organ procure-
ment and transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2009;9:2004-11.
4. Shemie SD, Baker AJ, Knoll G, et al. Donation after cardiocircula-
tory death in Canada. CMAJ. 2006;175:S1-24.
5. Dhanani S, Hornby L, Ward R, Shemie S. Variability in the deter-
mination of death after cardiac arrest: a review of guidelines and
statements. J Intensive Care Med. 2012;27:238-52.
6. Chawla LS, Akst S, Junker C, Jacobs B, Seneff MG. Surges of
electroencephalogram activity at the time of death: a case series.
J Palliat Med. 2009;12:1095-100.
7. Auyong DB, Klein SM, Gan TJ, Roche AM, Olson D, Habib AS.
Processed
electroencephalogram
during
donation
after
cardiac death. Anesth Analg. 2010;110:1428-32.
8. Borjigin J, Lee U, Liu T, et al. Surge of neurophysiological coherence and
connectivity in the dying brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2013;110:1-6.
9. Dhanani S, Hornby L, Ward R, et al. Vital signs after cardiac arrest
following withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy: a multicenter
prospective observational study. Crit Care Med. 2014;42:2358-69.
10. Young GB, Sharpe MD, Savard M, Al Thenayan E, Norton L,
Davies-Schinkel C. Seizure detection with a commercially avail-
able bedside EEG monitor and the subhairline montage. Neurocrit
Care. 2009;11:411-6.
11. American Clinical Neurophysiology Society. Guideline 3: minimum
technical standards for EEG recording in suspected cerebral death.
J Clin Neurophysiol. 2006;23:97-104.
12. Oostenveld R, Fries P, Maris E, Schoffelen J-M. FieldTrip:
open source software for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and
invasive electrophysiological data. Comput Intell Neurosci.
2011;2011:156869.
13. Bruhn J, Bouillon TW, Shafer SL. Electromyographic activity falsely
elevates the bispectral index. Anesthesiology. 2000;92:1485-7.
14. Renna M, Wigmore T, Mofeez A, Gillbe C. Biasing effect of the
electromyogram on BIS: a controlled study during high-dose
fentanyl induction. J Clin Monit Comput. 2002;17:377-81.
15. Vivien B, Di Maria S, Ouattara A, Langeron O, Coriat P, Riou B.
Overestimation of Bispectral Index in sedated intensive care
unit patients revealed by administration of muscle relaxant.
Anesthesiology. 2003;99:9-17.
16. Wennervirta J, Salmi T, Hynynen M, et al. Entropy is more resistant
to artifacts than bispectral index in brain-dead organ donors.
Intensive Care Med. 2007;33:133-6.
17. Eccles JC. Interpretation of action potenials evoked in the
cerebral cortex. EEG Clin Neurophysiol. 1951;3:449-64.
18. Murakami S, Okada Y. Contributions of principal neocortical
neurons to magnetoencephalography and electroencephalography
signals. J Physiol. 2006;575:925-36.
19. Mazzoni A, Whittingstall K, Brunel N, Logothetis NK, Panzeri S.
Understanding the relationships between spike rate and delta/
gamma frequency bands of LFPs and EEGs using a local cortical
network model. Neuroimage. 2010;52:956-72.
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF NEUROLOGICAL SCIENCES
144
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 85.203.44.48, on 01 Jun 2019 at 18:20:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 20. Whittingstall K, Logothetis NK. Frequency-band coupling in surface
EEG reflects spiking activity in monkey visual cortex. Neuron.
2009;64:281-9.
21. Ingvar DH, Sjolund B, Ardo A. Correlation between dominant EEG
frequency, cerebral oxygen uptake and blood flow. Electro-
enchphalgr Clin Neurophysiol. 1976;41:268-76.
22. Ingvar DH. Cerebral blood flow and metabolism related to EEG and
cerebral functions. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1970;15:110-4.
23. Brown EN, Lydic R, Schiff ND. General anesthesia, sleep, and coma.
N Engl J Med. 2011;363:2638-50.
24. Trojaborg W, Boysen G. Relation between EEG, regional berebral blood
flow and internal carotid artery pressure during carotid endarter-
ectomy. Electroencephalogr Clin Nurophysiol. 1973;69:61-9.
25. van Rijn CM, Krijnen H, Menting-Hermeling S, Coenen AML.
Decapitation in rats: latency to unconsciousness and the “wave of
death.” PLoS One. 2011;6:e16514.
LE JOURNAL CANADIEN DES SCIENCES NEUROLOGIQUES
Volume 44, No. 2 – March 2017
145
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2016.309
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 85.203.44.48, on 01 Jun 2019 at 18:20:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
