 Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention
in Cerebral Palsy
Advances in Diagnosis and Treatment
Iona Novak, PhD; Cathy Morgan, PhD; Lars Adde, PhD; James Blackman, PhD; Roslyn N. Boyd, PhD; Janice Brunstrom-Hernandez, MD;
Giovanni Cioni, MD; Diane Damiano, PhD; Johanna Darrah, PhD; Ann-Christin Eliasson, PhD; Linda S. de Vries, PhD; Christa Einspieler, PhD;
Michael Fahey, PhD; Darcy Fehlings, PhD; Donna M. Ferriero, MD; Linda Fetters, PhD; Simona Fiori, PhD; Hans Forssberg, PhD; Andrew M. Gordon, PhD;
Susan Greaves, PhD; Andrea Guzzetta, PhD; Mijna Hadders-Algra, PhD; Regina Harbourne, PhD; Angelina Kakooza-Mwesige, PhD; Petra Karlsson, PhD;
Lena Krumlinde-Sundholm, PhD; Beatrice Latal, MD; Alison Loughran-Fowlds, PhD; Nathalie Maitre, PhD; Sarah McIntyre, PhD; Garey Noritz, MD;
Lindsay Pennington, PhD; Domenico M. Romeo, PhD; Roberta Shepherd, PhD; Alicia J. Spittle, PhD; Marelle Thornton, DipEd; Jane Valentine, MRCP;
Karen Walker, PhD; Robert White, MBA; Nadia Badawi, PhD
IMPORTANCE Cerebral palsy describes the most common physical disability in childhood and
occurs in 1 in 500 live births. Historically, the diagnosis has been made between age 12 and 24
months but now can be made before 6 months’corrected age.
OBJECTIVES To systematically review best available evidence for early, accurate diagnosis of
cerebral palsy and to summarize best available evidence about cerebral palsy–specific early
intervention that should follow early diagnosis to optimize neuroplasticity and function.
EVIDENCE REVIEW This study systematically searched the literature about early diagnosis of
cerebral palsy in MEDLINE (1956-2016), EMBASE (1980-2016), CINAHL (1983-2016), and the
Cochrane Library (1988-2016) and by hand searching. Search terms included cerebral palsy,
diagnosis, detection, prediction, identification, predictive validity, accuracy, sensitivity, and
specificity. The study included systematic reviews with or without meta-analyses, criteria of
diagnostic accuracy, and evidence-based clinical guidelines. Findings are reported according
to the PRISMA statement, and recommendations are reported according to the Appraisal of
Guidelines, Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II instrument.
FINDINGS Six systematic reviews and 2 evidence-based clinical guidelines met inclusion
criteria. All included articles had high methodological Quality Assessment of Diagnostic
Accuracy Studies (QUADAS) ratings. In infants, clinical signs and symptoms of cerebral palsy
emerge and evolve before age 2 years; therefore, a combination of standardized tools should
be used to predict risk in conjunction with clinical history. Before 5 months’corrected age, the
most predictive tools for detecting risk are term-age magnetic resonance imaging (86%-89%
sensitivity), the Prechtl Qualitative Assessment of General Movements (98% sensitivity), and
the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination (90% sensitivity). After 5 months’
corrected age, the most predictive tools for detecting risk are magnetic resonance imaging
(86%-89% sensitivity) (where safe and feasible), the Hammersmith Infant Neurological
Examination (90% sensitivity), and the Developmental Assessment of Young Children (83%
C index). Topography and severity of cerebral palsy are more difficult to ascertain in infancy,
and magnetic resonance imaging and the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination may
be helpful in assisting clinical decisions. In high-income countries, 2 in 3 individuals with
cerebral palsy will walk, 3 in 4 will talk, and 1 in 2 will have normal intelligence.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Early diagnosis begins with a medical history and involves
using neuroimaging, standardized neurological, and standardized motor assessments that
indicate congruent abnormal findings indicative of cerebral palsy. Clinicians should
understand the importance of prompt referral to diagnostic-specific early intervention to
optimize infant motor and cognitive plasticity, prevent secondary complications, and enhance
caregiver well-being.
JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(9):897-907. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1689
Published online July 17, 2017. Corrected on September 5, 2017.
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Iona Novak,
PhD, Cerebral Palsy Alliance, The
University of Sydney, PO Box 187,
Frenchs Forest, New South Wales,
Australia 2086 (inovak
@cerebralpalsy.org.au).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA Pediatrics | Review
(Reprinted)
897
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 A
ccordingtoa2007report,“
Cerebralpalsyisagroupofper-
manent disorders of the development of movement and
posture, causing activity limitation, that are attributed to
non-progressive disturbances that occurred in the developing fe-
talorinfantbrain.”
1(p9)Cerebralpalsyisaclinicaldiagnosisbasedon
a combination of clinical and neurological signs. Diagnosis typically
occurs between age 12 and 24 months.2-4 The following 4 motor
types exist but may emerge and change during the first 2 years of
life:(1)spasticity(85%-91%);(2)dyskinesia(4%-7%),includingdys-
tonia and athetosis; (3) ataxia (4%-6%); and (4) hypotonia (2%),
which is not classified in all countries.2 Dyskinesia, ataxia, and hy-
potonia usually affect all 4 limbs, whereas spasticity is categorized
topographically as (1) unilateral (hemiplegia) (38%) and (2) bilat-
eral,includingdiplegia(lowerlimbsaffectedmorethanupperlimbs)
(37%) and quadriplegia (all 4 limbs and trunk affected) (24%).2 Co-
morbiditiesandfunctionallimitationsarecommonanddisabling,in-
cluding chronic pain (75%), epilepsy (35%), intellectual disability
(49%),musculoskeletalproblems(eg,hipdisplacement)(28%),be-
havioral disorders (26%), sleep disorders (23%), functional blind-
ness (11%), and hearing impairment (4%).5
Cerebral palsy is the most common physical disability in child-
hood, with a prevalence of 2.1 cases per 1000 in high-income
countries.6 The prevalence is declining in Australia and Europe.7,8
Exactratesincountriesoflowtomiddleincomearelesscertain9but
appeartobehigher,withworsephysicaldisability,becauseofgreater
infectious disease burden and prenatal and perinatal care
differences.10 The complete causal path to cerebral palsy is unclear
in approximately 80% of cases, but risk factors are often identifi-
ablefromhistorytakingaboutconception,pregnancy,birth,andthe
postneonatalperiod.11Thefullcausalpathisacomplexinterplaybe-
tween several risk factors across multiple epochs,11 including new
evidence suggesting that 14% of cases have a genetic
component.12-14 Early diagnosis does not preclude further specific
etiologicalinvestigation,andidentifyingaspecificetiologydoesnot
then preclude individuals from also having cerebral palsy. Genetic
advances are likely to soon amend the diagnostic process.
Our primary objective was to systematically review best avail-
ableevidenceforearly,accuratediagnosisofcerebralpalsy.Oursec-
ondary objective was to summarize best available evidence about
cerebralpalsy–specificearlyinterventionthatshouldfollowearlydi-
agnosis to optimize neuroplasticity and function.
Methods
Weconductedasystematicreviewtodevelopaninternationalclini-
cal practice guideline in accord with the World Health Organiza-
tion’
s Handbook for Guideline Development15 and the Institute of
Medicine’
s standards.16 We followed the Equator Network report-
ing recommendations outlined in the Appraisal of Guidelines, Re-
searchandEvaluation(AGREE)IIinstrument17andthePreferredRe-
portingItemsforSystematicReviewsandMeta-analyses(PRISMA)
statement.18 We systematically searched MEDLINE (1956-2016),
EMBASE (1980-2016), CINAHL (1983-2016), and the Cochrane Li-
brary(1988-2016)andhandsearchedusingthefollowingterms:ce-
rebral palsy, diagnosis, detection, prediction, identification, predic-
tive validity, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. We included
systematic reviews with or without meta-analyses, criteria of diag-
nosticaccuracy,andevidence-basedclinicalguidelines.Qualitywas
appraisedusingtheQualityAssessmentofDiagnosticAccuracyStud-
ies (QUADAS) methodological rating checklist for systematic re-
views of diagnostic accuracy.19
The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Develop-
ment,andEvaluation(GRADE)frameworkwasusedtoassessqual-
ity and formulate recommendations along a 4-part continuum, in-
cluding strong for, conditional for, conditional against, and strong
against.20 As per the GRADE method, we weighed (1) the balance
betweendesirableandundesirableconsequencesofdifferentman-
agement strategies or not acting; (2) family preferences, including
benefits vs risks and inconvenience; and (3) cost. Recommenda-
tionswerediscussedface-to-faceamongallauthors,andthemanu-
script was reviewed, edited, and agreed on by all coauthors. Au-
thors were clinicians involved in the diagnosis of cerebral palsy,
including neurologists, pediatricians, neonatologists, rehabilita-
tion specialists, general practitioners, neuroradiologists, psychia-
trists, physical therapists, psychologists, occupational therapists,
speech pathologists, nurses, and early educators. Individuals with
cerebral palsy and parents also contributed as equal authors, en-
suring that recommendations addressed their views and prefer-
ences.
Results
Six systematic reviews21-26 and 2 evidence-based clinical
guidelines27,28metinclusioncriteria.Themethodologicalqualityof
the evidence was very high (eTable in the Supplement), enabling
strong GRADE recommendations.20 Many standardized tools exist
that predict risk of cerebral palsy early. Best available evidence was
summarized(eTableintheSupplement),andaPRISMAdiagramsum-
marized study flow (eFigure in the Supplement).
Advances in Diagnosis: Early Clinical Diagnosis
Is Now Possible
Before age 12 to 24 months was historically regarded as the latent
or silent period where cerebral palsy could not be identified accu-
rately. Experts now consider the silent period as outdated because
Key Points
Question What are the most accurate evaluations for diagnosing
cerebral palsy early?
Findings In this systematic review of the literature, we found
diagnosis can be accurately made before 6 months’corrected age.
Before 5 months’corrected age, magnetic resonance imaging plus
the General Movements Assessment or the Hammersmith Infant
Neurological Examination are recommended; after 5 months’
corrected age, magnetic resonance imaging (where safe and
feasible), the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination, and
the Developmental Assessment of Young Children are
recommended.
Meaning Early diagnosis should be the standard of care because
contemporary early interventions optimize neuroplasticity and
functional outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education Review
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
898
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 cerebral palsy or “high risk of cerebral palsy”can be accurately pre-
dicted before age 6 months’corrected age.
The 3 tools with best predictive validity for detecting cerebral
palsybefore5months’
correctedageare(1)neonatalmagneticreso-
nance imaging (MRI) (86%-89% sensitivity),21,27 (2) the Prechtl
Qualitative Assessment of General Movements (GMs) (98%
sensitivity),21and(3)theHammersmithInfantNeurologicalExami-
nation (HINE) (90% sensitivity)25 (eTable in the Supplement). Af-
ter 5 months’corrected age, the most predictive tools for detect-
ing risk are MRI (86%-89% sensitivity) (where safe and feasible),
theHINE(90%sensitivity),andtheDevelopmentalAssessmentof
Young Children (83% C index). High-quality evidence also indi-
cates that a trajectory of abnormal GMs or HINE scores, in combi-
nation with abnormal MRI, producing congruent findings, is even
more accurate than individual clinical assessments in isolation.21,25
To make an early clinical diagnosis before 6 months’corrected
age, a combination of assessments with strong predictive validity
coupled with clinical reasoning is recommended. We have made 12
recommendations from best available evidence (Table 1). A highly
experienced clinical team should ideally conduct and interpret the
standardized assessments and then communicate the news com-
passionately.
Interim High Risk of Cerebral Palsy Clinical Diagnosis
When the clinical diagnosis is suspected but cannot be made with
certainty, we recommend using the interim clinical diagnosis of
high risk of cerebral palsy until a diagnosis is confirmed. We rec-
ommend specifying cerebral palsy because infants with cerebral
palsy require and benefit from different early interventions than
infants “
at risk of developmental delay,”“
at risk of autism,”“
at risk
of harm,”or with “
social risk.”When the infant is perceived to be at
risk of cerebral palsy, he or she should be referred for cerebral
palsy–specific early intervention (see the Advances in Treatment
section), with regular medical, neurological, and developmental
monitoring from the infant’
s pediatrician or neurologist to assist
with forming a diagnostic picture. To assign the interim clinical
diagnosis of high risk of cerebral palsy, the infant must have motor
dysfunction (essential criterion) and at least one of the other 2
additional criteria.
Essential Criterion (Required)
Motor Dysfunction
In motor dysfunction, the infant’
s quality of movement is reduced
(eg,absentfidgetyGMs)29orneurologicallyabnormal(eg,earlyob-
servable hand asymmetry or suboptimal HINE scores).30 In addi-
tion, the infant’
s motor activities may be substantially below those
expected for chronological age (eg, abnormal score on a standard-
ized motor assessment or parent and caregiver or clinical observa-
tions of head lag, not sitting, inability to grasp, or not reaching for a
toy when appropriate).
As a caveat, in milder presentations, especially unilateral cere-
bralpalsy,itispossibleforaninfanttoscorewithinthenormalrange
on a standardized motor assessment, while still displaying abnor-
mal movements. For example, an infant with hemiplegia might ob-
tain a normal fine-motor score but complete the assessment one-
handed. Similarly, an infant with diplegia may achieve normal upper
limb scores and abnormal lower limb scores, producing a combined
total motor score within the normal range. Therefore, it is essential
that assessments be carried out by a professional skilled at deter-
mining atypical movement from variation in typical movement.
Additional Criteria (at Least One Required)
Abnormal Neuroimaging
Abnormal MRI21,27 with or without serial cranial ultrasound in pre-
term infants21,28 may identify neuroanatomical abnormalities pre-
dictive of cerebral palsy. The most predictive patterns are (1) white
matter injury (cystic periventricular leukomalacia or periventricu-
lar hemorrhagic infarctions) (56%), (2) cortical and deep gray mat-
terlesions(basalgangliaorthalamuslesions,watershedinjury[para-
sagittalinjury],multicysticencephalomalacia,orstroke)(18%),and
(3)brainmaldevelopments(lissencephaly,pachygyria,corticaldys-
plasia, polymicrogyria, or schizencephaly) (9%).
Clinical History Indicating Risk for Cerebral Palsy
Preconception risks include history of stillbirths, miscarriages, low
socioeconomic status, assisted reproduction, and abnormal ge-
netic copy number variations.
Pregnancyrisksincludegenetics,birthdefects,multiples,males,
maternal thyroid disease or preeclampsia, infection, intrauterine
growth restriction, prematurity, and substance abuse.
Perinatal birth risks include acute intrapartum hypoxia-
ischemia, seizures, hypoglycemia, jaundice, and infection.
Postneonatal risks include stroke, infection, surgical complica-
tions,andaccidentalandnonaccidentalbraininjury31occurringbe-
fore age 24 months, as per the Surveillance of Cerebral Palsy Eu-
rope and Australian Cerebral Palsy Register inclusion criteria.
Two Early Detection Pathways Based on Different Risks
Half of all infants with cerebral palsy have high-risk indicators iden-
tifiable in the newborn period, enabling early screening31 (eg, pre-
maturity,atypicalintrauterinegrowth,encephalopathy,geneticab-
normalities, and seizures). We have described this population as
having“newborn-detectablerisksforcerebralpalsy,”andthispath-
way occurs before 5 months’corrected age. For the other half of all
infants with cerebral palsy, the pregnancy and labor may have ap-
peared to be uneventful,31 and parents, caregivers, or community-
based professionals first notice delayed motor milestones (eg, not
sitting at 9 months or hand asymmetry). This finding may be espe-
cially true for infants with unilateral cerebral palsy, who often mas-
ter early rudimentary motor skills, such as smiling, swallowing, and
head control, and it is not until they attempt more complex motor
skills,suchasgrasp,thatasymmetriesbecomeobservable.Wehave
described this population as having “infant detectable risks for ce-
rebralpalsy,”andthispathwayoccursafter5months’
correctedage.
Wedevelopedaconceptualframeworkforearlydiagnosisbasedon
these2pathwaystoensurethatthemostsensitiveandspecifictools
areusedtoreducefalse-positiveandfalse-negativeresults.Theclini-
cal diagnostic pathway algorithm for these 2 groups varies because
thetoolshavedifferentpsychometricpropertiesdependingonthe
infant’
s age (Figure).
Determining Severity
Parents or caregivers will want to learn about the severity of their
infant’
sphysicaldisabilitytounderstandhisorhercapabilitiestoplan
their future. In infants younger than 2 years, motor severity is diffi-
cult to accurately predict for the following reasons: (1) almost half
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
Review Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
899
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 Table 1. Early Detection and Diagnosis Recommendations From Best Available Evidence
Recommendations
Strength of Recommendations and Quality of Evidence
1.0 The clinical diagnosis of CP can and should be made as early as possible so that:
• The infant can receive diagnostic-specific early intervention and surveillance to optimize
neuroplasticity and prevent complications
• The parents can receive psychological and financial support (when available)
Strong recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence for infant and parent outcomes
1.1 When the clinical diagnosis is suspected but cannot be made with certainty, the interim clinical
diagnosis of high risk of CP should be given so that:
• The infant can receive diagnostic-specific early intervention and surveillance to optimize
neuroplasticity and prevent complications
• The parents can receive psychological and financial support (when available)
• Ongoing diagnostic monitoring can be provided until a diagnosis is reached
Strong recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence for infant and parent outcomes
2.0 Early standardized assessments and investigations for early detection of CP should always be
conducted in populations with newborn-detectable risks (ie, infants born preterm, infants with
neonatal encephalopathy, infants with birth defects, and infants admitted to the NICU)
Strong recommendation based on high-quality evidence
of test psychometrics
Early Detection of CP Before 5 mo CA
3.0 Option A: The most accurate method for early detection of CP in infants with newborn-detectable
risks and younger than 5 mo (CA) is to use a combination of a standardized motor assessment and
neuroimaging and history taking about risk factors
Strong recommendation based on high-quality evidence
of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable risk
populations
Standardized motor assessment
3.1 Test: GMs to identify motor dysfunction (95%-98% predictive of CP), combined with neuroimaging
Strong recommendation based on high-quality evidence
of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable risk
populations
Neuroimaging
3.2 Test: MRI (before sedation is required for neuroimaging) to detect abnormal neuroanatomy in
the motor areas of the brain (80%-90% predictive of CP). Note that normal neuroimaging does not
automatically preclude the diagnosis of risk of CP
Strong recommendation based on high-quality evidence
of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable risk
populations
4.0 Option B: In contexts where the GMs assessment is not available or MRI is not safe or affordable
(eg, in countries of low to middle income), early detection of CP in infants with newborn-detectable
risks and younger than 5 mo (CA) is still possible and should be carried out to enable access to early
intervention
Strong recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable
risk populations
Standardized neurological assessment
4.1 Test: HINE (scores <57 at 3 mo are 96% predictive of CP)
Strong recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable
risk populations
Standardized motor assessment
4.2 Test: TIMP
Conditional recommendation based on low-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in at-risk populations
Early Detection of CP After 5 mo CA
Accurate early detection of CP in those with infant-discernible risks and age 5-24 mo can and should still occur as soon as possible, but different diagnostic tools
are required
5.0 Any infant with:
(a) Inability to sit independently by age 9 mo, or
(b) Hand function asymmetry, or
(c) Inability to take weight through the plantar surface (heel and forefoot) of the feet should receive
standardized investigations for CP
Strong recommendation based on high-quality evidence
of motor norms
6.0 Option A: The most accurate method for early detection of CP in those with infant detectable
risks older than 5 mo (corrected for prematurity) but younger than 2 y is to use a combination of a
standardized neurological assessment, neuroimaging, and a standardized motor assessment with a
history taking about risk factors
Conditional recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable
risk populations
Standardized neurological assessment
6.1 Test: HINE (90% predictive of CP). Those with HINE scores <73 (at 6, 9, or 12 mo) should be
considered at high risk of CP. HINE scores <40 (at 6, 9, or 12 mo) almost always indicate CP,
combined with neuroimaging and standardized motor assessments
Conditional recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable
risk populations
Neuroimaging
6.2 Test: MRI to detect abnormal neuroanatomy in the motor areas of the brain (sedation may be
required from >6 wk up to age 2 y). Well-defined lesions can be seen early, but subtle white matter
lesions may be difficult to detect owing to rapid growth, myelination, and activity-dependent
plasticity. Repeated MRI scans are recommended at age 2 y for infants with initially normal findings on
MRI (at 12-18 mo) but persistent motor or neurological abnormality, combined with standardized
motor assessments
Conditional recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable
risk populations
Standardized motor assessment
6.3 Test: DAYC for parents to self-report and quantify motor delay (89% predictive of CP)
Additional assessments can improve triangulation of findings
6.4 Tests: AIMS (86% predictive of an abnormal motor outcome) and NSMDA (82% predictive of an
abnormal motor outcome)
Conditional recommendation based on low- to
moderate-quality evidence of test psychometrics in
newborn-detectable risk populations
7.0 Option B: In contexts where MRI is not safe or affordable, early detection of CP is still possible in
those with infant detectable risks between 5 and 24 mo CA and should be carried out to enable
access to early intervention
Strong recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable
risk populations
Standardized neurological assessment
7.1 Test: HINE (90% predictive of CP at age 2-24 mo)
HINE scores at 6, 9, or 12 mo:
<73 Indicates high risk of CP
<40 Indicates abnormal outcome, usually CP
Strong recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence of test psychometrics in newborn-detectable
risk populations
Standardized motor assessment
7.2 Test: DAYC to quantify motor delay (89% predictive of CP)
7.3 Test: MAI to quantify motor delay (73% predictive of CP)
Conditional recommendation based on low- to
moderate-quality evidence of test psychometrics in
newborn-detectable risk populations
(continued)
Clinical Review & Education Review
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
900
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 of all infants younger than 2 years have their Gross Motor Function
Classification System (GMFCS) reclassified, (2) little natural history
data exist about infants with cerebral palsy (eg, the onset of spas-
ticity, dyskinesia, or contractures), (3) motor skills are developing,
(4)thepresenceorabsenceofhypertoniachangesandevolves,and
(5) there is rapid brain growth and use-dependent reorganization
in response to caregiving and therapy. In children 2 years or older,
severity is reliably classified using the 5-level GMFCS Extended &
Revised.32 In infants younger than 2 years, prediction of motor se-
verity should be made cautiously using standardized tools, includ-
ing the cutoff scores on the HINE, combined with neuroimaging
data.25 Parents or caregivers may mistakenly assume that the diag-
nosis means their child will need a wheelchair and have an intellec-
tual disability. However, in high-income countries, population data
indicate that 2 in 3 individuals with cerebral palsy will walk, 3 in 4
will talk, and 1 in 2 will have normal intelligence.5
Determining Motor Type and Topography
Themotortypesandtopographyofcerebralpalsymayemergeand
change during the first 2 years of life. Cerebral palsy can be difficult
to accurately classify early, but clinical signs exist33-37 (Table 2). For
example, the onset of spasticity may occur after age 1 year; there-
fore, the absence of early detectable spasticity does not mean that
the infant does not have spastic cerebral palsy. In addition, infants
mayhavemorethanonemotordisorderbecausespasticityanddys-
tonia often coexist. As the infant’
s voluntary activity levels in-
crease, some symptoms may resolve (eg, nonuse of a limb), while
other symptoms may worsen (eg, increased involuntary dystonic
Table 1. Early Detection and Diagnosis Recommendations From Best Available Evidence (continued)
Recommendations
Strength of Recommendations and Quality of Evidence
Early Detection of Motor Severity of CP
Prognosis of long-term motor severity is most accurate in children older than 2 y using the GMFCS
8.0 In infants younger than 2 y, prognosis of motor severity predictions should be made cautiously
and always involve the use of standardized tools because incomplete development of voluntary motor
skills or abnormal tone might confound clinical observations. Motor severity of CP in those younger
than 2 y is most accurately predicted using the following:
Conditional recommendation based on low-quality
evidence
Standardized neurological assessment
8.1 Test: HINE. Cutoff scores predict the probable severity
HINE scores at 3, 6, 9, or 12 mo:
• 50-73 Indicates likely unilateral CP (ie, 95%-99% will walk)
• <50 Indicates likely bilateral CP
HINE scores at 3-6 mo:
• 40-60 Indicates likely GMFCS I-II
• <40 Indicates likely GMFCS III-V
Conditional recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence in newborn-detectable risk populations
Neuroimaging
8.2 Test: MRI
Nonambulant CP is more likely after:
• Bilateral parenchymal hemorrhages (grade IV)
• Bilateral cystic periventricular leukomalacia (grade III)
• Brain maldevelopment
• Basal ganglia injury
Ambulant CP is more likely after:
• Unilateral lesions (grade IV hemorrhage or perinatal arterial ischemic stroke)
• Periventricular leukomalacia (noncystic)
• Moderate to severe white matter injury
Normal imaging does not preclude CP, and abnormal findings on MRI imaging does not automatically
precede CP
Conditional recommendation based on moderate-quality
evidence in newborn-detectable risk populations
Early Detection of Motor Subtype and Topography of CP
9.0 Early detection of motor subtype and topography can be difficult in those younger than 2 y,
but wherever possible it is important to identify unilateral vs bilateral CP early because the early
interventions (eg, constraint-induced movement therapy) and long-term musculoskeletal outcomes
and surveillance needs differ (eg, hip surveillance)
Conditional recommendation based on low- to
high-quality evidence
Early Intervention
10.0 The clinical diagnosis of CP or the interim diagnosis of high risk of CP should always be followed
by a referral to CP-specific early intervention (eg, constraint-induced movement therapy and hip
surveillance). Parent concern is a valid reason to trigger formal diagnostic investigations and referral
to early intervention
Strong recommendation based on low- to high-quality
evidence
Early Detection of Associated Impairments
11.0 The clinical diagnosis of CP or the interim diagnosis of high risk of CP should always include
standard medical investigations for associated impairments and functional limitations (eg, vision
impairment, hearing impairment, and epilepsy)
Strong recommendation based on high-quality
population register evidence of rates of associated
impairments
Communicating the Diagnosis Well to Parents
12.0 Parents experience grief and loss at the time of diagnosis or high-risk notification; therefore,
communication with a family should be a series of well-planned and compassionate conversations.
Communication should be face-to-face, with both parents or caregivers present (where appropriate),
private, honest, jargon free, and with empathic communication tailored to the family, followed by
written information, identification of strengths, invitation to ask questions, discussion of feelings,
recommendations to use parent-to-parent support, and arrangement of early intervention
Strong recommendation based on high-quality
qualitative parent interviews
Abbreviations: AIMS, Alberta Infant Motor Scale; CA, corrected age; CP, cerebral
palsy; DAYC, Developmental Assessment of Young Children; GMFCS, Gross
Motor Function Classification System; GMs, Prechtl Qualitative Assessment of
General Movements; HINE, Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination;
MAI, Motor Assessment of Infants; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging;
NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; NSMDA, Neuro Sensory Motor Development
Assessment; TIMP, Test of Infant Motor Performance.
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
Review Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
901
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 posturing in response to voluntary movement). Wherever pos-
sible,differentiatebetweenunilateralvsbilateralcerebralpalsyearly
because treatments differ.5,38
False Positives and False Negatives
Withoutalaboratorybiomarker,anearlydiagnosisisnotalwaysclini-
cally clear-cut because of the possibility of false positives and false
Figure. Algorithm for Early Diagnosis of Cerebral Palsy or High Risk of Cerebral Palsy
Conduct a medical history and clinical examination
with or without investigations for etiology and
differential diagnoses (as indicated)
Newborn detectable risks
Infant detectable risks
Encephalopathy
History or neurological risk
factors (eg, birth defect, IUGR)
Parent identified concern
Unable to sit at 9 mo or hand
asymmetry
Preterm
Risks or concerns warrant an investigation for CP
Clinical neurological examination
Neurological imaging
Motor tests
Combined assessment data indicates
<5 mo CA
3.1 GMs
4.2 TIMP
4.1 HINE
+
+
3.2 MRI
>5 mo CA
A
B
A
B
6.3 AIMS
6.3 NSM DA
7.2 DAYC
7.3 MAI
7.1 HINE
+
+
6.3 DAYC
6.1 HINE
+
6.2 MRI
8.0 Determine preliminary severity of CP
9.0 Determine preliminary topography
1.1 High risk of CP
11.0 Assess for associated impairments
1.1 Definitely CP
8.1 HINE ≥40
Likely ambulant
8.1 MRI WMI
Likely nonambulant
8.1 HINE <40
8.1 MRI GMI
12.0 Communicate findings to parents compassionately
10.0 Arrange early intervention and parent support
Confirm diagnosis
1.1 Definitely NOT CP
As indicated, continue testing
for differential diagnoses and
relevant associated impairments
1.1 Unclear
Monitor
A indicates the best available evidence pathway. B indicates the next best
available evidence pathway when some pathway A tools are not available. The
numerals correspond to the numbering in Table 1. AIMS indicates Alberta Infant
Motor Scale; CA, corrected age; CP, cerebral palsy; DAYC, Developmental
Assessment of Young Children; GMs, Prechtl Qualitative Assessment of General
Movements; HINE, Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination;
IUGR, interuterine growth restriction; MAI, Motor Assessment of Infants;
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NSMDA, Neuro Sensory Motor Development
Assessment; TIMP, Test of Infant Motor Performance; and WMI, white matter
injury.
Clinical Review & Education Review
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
902
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 negatives.22 Experienced clinicians acknowledge that, because all
infants have an expanding and changing voluntary motor reper-
toire, determining whether their current motor dysfunction is per-
manent and causing long-term activity limitations, as per the inter-
national definition,1 is difficult. False negatives can occur for the
following reasons: (1) there is a latency between the initial brain le-
sion and the later onset of clinical neurological signs (eg, exagger-
ated spasticity or dystonia from voluntary movement25), (2) ap-
proximately 10% have normal neuroimaging,27 (3) half have a
seeminglyuneventfulpregnancyandbirth,31and(4)one-thirdhave
the mildest form (GMFCS I)2,32 and may initially achieve all of their
motormilestonesontime,offeringfalsereassuranceabouttheirmo-
tor development. False positives can also occur because prematu-
rity, stroke, and encephalopathy do not always result in long-term
motor disabilities.25,31 Australian cerebral palsy population register
data indicate that less than 5% of registrations are false-positive
diagnoses.2 In almost all of these instances, the infant was rediag-
nosedashavinganotherneurologicaldisability(eg,intellectualdis-
ability or autism), not a normal developmental outcome.11
Eighty-six percent of parents of a child with cerebral palsy sus-
pect it before the clinical diagnosis is made.39 Population data indi-
cate that seeking to avoid false-positive results by delaying diagno-
sis is harmful to parent and caregiver well-being.39 Parents and
caregiversdissatisfiedwithaprolongeddiagnosticprocessaremore
likely to experience depression39 and lasting anger.40 Parents and
caregivers acknowledge that, while receiving the diagnosis is al-
ways difficult, they prefer to know earlier rather than later so that
theycanassistintheirinfant’
sdevelopment.39Earlydetectionisim-
portantforthewholefamilyunitbecauseithelpsfosteracceptance41
and leads to increased confidence in the infant’
s medical team.39
Earlydetectionallowsimprovedaccesstoearlyinterventionandef-
ficient use of resources.
Advances in Treatment: Cerebral Palsy–Specific
Early Intervention Improves Outcomes
Neuroscienceevidenceindicatesthatbraindevelopmentandrefine-
mentofthemotorsystemcontinuepostnatally,drivenbymotorcor-
texactivity.42,43Earlyactivemovementandinterventionareessential
because infants who do not actively use their motor cortex risk los-
ing cortical connections and dedicated function.42,43 Furthermore,
there is increasing evidence that the infant’
s motor behavior, via dis-
covery and interaction with the environment, controls and gener-
ates the growth and development of muscle, ligament, and bone, as
wellasdrivingongoingdevelopmentoftheneuromotorsystem.44-48
Table 2. Clinical Signs Indicating Motor Type and Topography in Infants
Unilateral Spastic Hemiplegia
Bilateral Spastic Diplegia
Bilateral Spastic Quadriplegia
Dyskinesia
Ataxia
GMs34
• Poor repertoire or cramped
synchronized GMs, followed by
absent fidgety movements plus an
asymmetry in segmental
movements (eg, wrist or hand).
Note that some cases of hemiplegic
CP may be missed by GMs
• Cramped synchronized
GMs, followed by absent
fidgety movements
• Early onset and long duration
of cramped synchronized GMs,
followed by absent fidgety
movements
• Poor repertoire GMs,
followed by absent fidgety
movements with circular
arm movements and
finger spreading
• Unknown
MRI35,36
• Focal vascular insults (24%)
• Malformations (13%)
• Unilateral hemorrhage (grade IV)
with porencephaly
• Lesions in the parietal white
matter involving the trigone
• Middle cerebral artery stroke with
asymmetry of myelination of the
PLIC
• Bilateral white matter
injury (31%-60%)
• Cystic PVL (grade II-III)
with sparse or absent
myelination of the PLIC
• Moderate to severe white
matter injury (also known
as PVE)
• Gray matter injury (34%)
• Malformations (16%)
• Cystic PVL (grade III) with
absent myelination of the PLIC
• Severe white matter injury
with or without deep nuclear
gray matter
• Gray matter injury
(21%) with thalamic and
lentiform nuclear injury
• Malformations (18%)
• Normal imaging (24%-57%)
• Cerebellar injury
HINE Scores37
50-73
<50
<50
<40 GMFCS level IV-V
<50
Unknown
Motor Tests
• Asymmetrical hand preference
• Stuck in floor sitting (ie, unable to
transition out of sitting)
• Cruises or steps consistently in
one direction or with the same leg
always leading
• Reduced variation in motor
behavior
• Good hand function
compared with lower limb
function
• Dislike or avoidance of
floor sitting
• Weight bears on toes
• Reduced variation in
motor behavior
• Head lag
• Persistent rounded back in
supported sitting
• Bilateral fisted hands
• Slow to reach and grasp with
either hand
• Reduced variation in motor
behavior
• Twisting arm or neck
postures on voluntary
movement (may be
painful)
• Finds midline play
difficult, prefers toys
positioned at shoulder
width
• Switches hands during
reaching task
• Requires a lot of extra
time to initiate movement
• Voluntary movement
and emotion worsens
postures
• Reduced variation in
motor behavior
• Nonspecific
Abbreviations: CP, cerebral palsy; GMFCS, Gross Motor Function Classification
System; GMs, Prechtl Qualitative Assessment of General Movements; HINE,
Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; PLIC, posterior limb internal capsule; PVE, periventricular
echogenicity; PVL, periventricular leukomalacia.
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
Review Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
903
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 Therefore, the clinical diagnosis of cerebral palsy or high risk of
cerebralpalsyshouldalwaysbefollowedbyareferralfortheinfantto
receivecerebralpalsy–specificinterventionandfortheparentsorcare-
giverstoreceiveemotionalsupport.Familyconcernisavalidreason
totriggerformaldiagnosticinvestigationsandinterventionreferrals.
Cerebral palsy–specific early intervention maximizes neuro-
plasticity42,43andminimizesdeleteriousmodificationstomuscleand
bone growth and development.44 Before commencing interven-
tion, unilateral vs bilateral cerebral palsy should be identified be-
causetreatmentsandlong-termmusculoskeletaloutcomesdiffer.46-48
Randomized clinical trial data are beginning to indicate the follow-
ing: (1) that infants with hemiplegic cerebral palsy who receive early
constraint-inducedmovementtherapy(CIMT)havebetterhandfunc-
tion than controls in the short term and probably substantially bet-
terhandfunctioninthelongterm45;(2)thatinfantswithbilateralce-
rebral palsy who receive regular surveillance and intervention have
lowerratesofhipdisplacement,contracture,andscoliosis46-48(based
on population register data); (3) that infants with any type and to-
pographyofcerebralpalsywhoreceiveGoals–Activity–MotorEnrich-
ment (GAME), which is an early, intense, enriched, task-specific,
training-basedinterventionathome,havebettermotorandcognitive
skills at 1 year than those who receive usual care49; and (4) that im-
provements are even better when intervention occurs at home50,51
becausechildrenlearnbestinsupportednaturalsettingswheretrain-
ingispersonalizedtotheirenjoyment.Task-specific,motortraining–
basedearlyintervention(eg,GAME49andCIMT45)arerecommended
as the new paradigm of care for cerebral palsy because they induce
neuroplasticityandproducefunctionalgains.52Largerreplicationran-
domizedclinicaltrialsareunderway,includingthefollowing:(1)Ran-
domised Trial of Rehabilitation Very Early in Congenital Hemiplegia
(REACH)(ACTRN12615000180516)(n = 150)CIMTvsbimanual53and
(2) GAME (ACTRN12617000006347) (n = 300) GAME vs usual
care.54 In addition, regenerative agents to induce brain repair are
beingstudied,including(1)PreventingAdverseOutcomesofNeonatal
Hypoxic Ischaemic Encephalopathy With Erythropoietin: A
Randomised Controlled Multicentre Australian Trial (PAEAN)
(ACTRN12614000669695) (n = 300) erythropoietin plus
hypothermiavshypothermiaalone55and(2)NCT02612155(n = 160)
umbilical cord blood plus hypothermia vs hypothermia alone.56
The aim of early intervention for children with cerebral palsy
shouldbeto(1)optimizemotor,cognition,andcommunicationout-
comesusinginterventionsthatpromotelearningandneuroplastic-
ity(allhavemotorimpairments,1in2haveintellectualdisability,and
1in4arenonverbal5);(2)preventsecondaryimpairmentsandmini-
mize the influence of complications that worsen function or inter-
fere with learning (3 in 4 have chronic pain, 1 in 3 have hip displace-
ment, 1 in 4 have epilepsy, 1 in 4 have bladder control problems, 1 in
5 have a sleep disorder, 1 in 5 have sialorrhea, 1 in 10 are blind, 1 in 15
require tube feeding, and 1 in 25 are deaf5); and (3) promote parent
orcaregivercopingandmentalhealthtoreducestress,anxiety,and
depression,whicharecompoundedwhenabehaviordisorderispres-
ent (1 in 4 have behavior disorders). Recommendations from best
available evidence are listed below.
Early Interventions to Optimize Motor, Cognition,
and Communication Skills
For motor and cognition, physical and occupational therapy inter-
ventions should use child-initiated movement, task-specific prac-
tice, and environmental adaptations that stimulate independent
task performance.52 These include Learning Games Curriculum
(diplegia),57 CIMT or bimanual (hemiplegia),45 and GAME (all
subtypes).49
For communication, speech language pathology interven-
tions should foster parent-infant transactions and provide
compensation when speech is not possible or is inadequate.
Examples include the Hanen It Takes Two to Talk and More Than
Words programs, as well as alternative and augmentative
communication.58
Interventions to Prevent Secondary Impairments
and Minimize Complications
Regarding pain, procedural pain should be avoided where possible
because untreated pain elevates the risk for long-term neuro-
pathic pain.59 Recommendations include pharmacological therapy
and environmental interventions for ongoing pain and preemptive
analgesia for procedural pain.59
Orthopedics
For hips, anteroposterior pelvic radiographs every 6 to 12 months
arerecommendedcommencingatage12months.Thisrecommen-
dation is in accord with hip surveillance guidelines.60
Neurologic
For epilepsy, standard antiepileptic pharmacological management
is recommended.5
Urinary Tract
For the bladder, medical investigations should be conducted be-
cause abnormal anatomical findings are common.5 Standard toilet
training should be provided over a longer duration because control
may take longer.5
Sleep
For sleep, specialist assessments and early treatment are recom-
mendedbeforesecondaryacademicandbehavioralproblemsemerge.
Examplesincludesleephygiene,parentaleducation,spasticityman-
agement, melatonin (2.5-10 mg), and gabapentin (5 mg/kg).5
Oral Care
For sialorrhea, botulinum toxin A, benztropine mesylate, or glyco-
pyrrolate should be considered.61
Ophthalmologic Issues
Visioncanbeassessedinthefirst48hoursoflifeusingtheearlyas-
sessment of visual function in full-term newborns by Ricci et al.62
Any infant with abnormal vision at term-equivalent age should re-
ceive vision intervention and be reassessed at 3 months.63 Vision
intervention is recommended.
Feedings
For nonoral feeding, swallowing safety should be comprehensively
assessed if concerns or clinical history of pneumonia exists be-
cause it is the leading cause of death in individuals with cerebral
palsy64 and is mitigated by tube feeding.65 Weight should be mea-
sured regularly because severe physical disability elevates the risk
for malnutrition.5
Clinical Review & Education Review
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
904
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 Aural
For hearing, standard early hearing accommodations are
recommended.5
Interventions to Promote Parent or Caregiver Coping
and Mental Health
Parental education in behavior management is recommended. An
example is the Positive Parenting Program (Triple P).66
Parent-child attachment interventions are also helpful. Kanga-
roo Mother Care67 and music therapy68 are examples.
Finally,parentorcaregivermentalhealthinterventions69,70are
suggested. One such intervention is Acceptance and Commitment
Therapy (ACT).66
Discussion
Clinical Bottom Line
•Infantswithcerebralpalsyrequireanearlydiagnosisbecausemo-
tor and cognitive gains are greater from diagnostic-specific early
intervention.
•An interim diagnosis of high risk of cerebral palsy should be used
if a diagnosis of cerebral palsy cannot yet be used with certainty.
•Clinical signs emerge and evolve before age 2 years. Therefore, a
combination of standardized tools should be used to predict risk.
•Before 5 months’corrected age, MRI, GMs, or the HINE are most
predictive of risk for cerebral palsy.
•After5months’correctedage,MRIandtheHINEaremostpredic-
tive of risk for cerebral palsy.
•In countries of low to middle income where MRI is not available,
the HINE is recommended.
•Topographyandseverityofcerebralpalsyareimportanttoestab-
lishforclinicalpurposes.MagneticresonanceimagingandtheHINE
provide guidance.
•Falsepositivesoccurlessthan5%ofthetimewithstandardizedtools.
•Falsenegativesresultinginlatediagnosesandlateinterventionare
detrimental to parents, caregivers, and infants.
Limitations
This review article has some limitations. First, our literature search
revealed that almost all studies focus on identifying cerebral palsy
in infants with newborn discernible risks (eg, prematurity and en-
cephalopathy)becausetheseinfantsaremoreofteninnewbornfol-
low-up. Little has been published about early diagnosis in the 50%
of all cerebral palsy cases that are discernible later in infancy after a
seemingly uneventful pregnancy and birth because these samples
are difficult to assemble. Advances in genetics and understanding
ofcongenitalanomaliesmayprovidemorecluesabouthowtoiden-
tify these children earlier. Second, no study to date has investi-
gatedthecombinedpredictivepowerof3ormoreoftheindividual
tools identified in this review article and represents a gap in the lit-
erature.Third,wehavenotreviewedordiscussedtheliteratureabout
evidence-based testing for other childhood disabilities on the dif-
ferential diagnosis list. Fourth, we have not provided a systematic
descriptionoftheearlyinterventionevidence.Moreinformationon
assessmenttoolsandearlyinterventioniscontainedinarelatedbut
separate clinical guideline that is being developed from systematic
review data.
Conclusions
Cerebral palsy or high risk of cerebral palsy can be diagnosed
accurately and early using clinical reasoning and a combination of
standardized tools. High-quality evidence indicates that, for
infants with newborn-detectable risks before 5 months’corrected
age, the GMs assessment plus neonatal MRI is more than 95%
accurate and is thus recommended. For infants with infant
detectable risks after 5 months’corrected age, the HINE plus neo-
natal MRI is more than 90% accurate and is therefore recom-
mended. The accuracy of these diagnostic methods in infants
with later infancy discernible risks for cerebral palsy is not yet
known, but they are conditionally recommended. Accurate early
diagnosis is possible even when assessments of GMs are not avail-
able or MRI is not safe or affordable (eg, in countries of low to
middle income) by using the HINE, which detects cerebral palsy
with more than 90% accuracy and provides objective informa-
tion about severity. Early detection of high risk of cerebral palsy,
followed by cerebral palsy–specific early intervention, is recom-
mended and should be the standard of care to optimize infant
neuroplasticity, prevent complications, and enhance parent and
caregiver well-being.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: April 19, 2017.
Correction: This article was corrected on
September 5, 2017, to fix an error in Table 1.
Published Online: July 17, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1689
Author Affiliations: Cerebral Palsy Alliance, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia (Novak,
Morgan, Karlsson, McIntyre, Thornton, Walker,
White, Badawi); Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, St Olavs University Hospital,
Trondheim (Adde); Cerebral Palsy Alliance Research
Foundation, New York, New York (Blackman); The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
(Boyd); Children’
s Medical Center Dallas, Plano,
Texas (Brunstrom-Hernandez); Stella Maris
Scientific Institute, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
(Cioni, Fiori, Guzzetta); National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland (Damiano); Faculty of
Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada (Darrah); Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden (Eliasson, Forssberg,
Krumlinde-Sundholm); University Medical Centre
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands (de Vries);
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria
(Einspieler); Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia (Fahey); Holland Bloorview Kids
Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada (Fehlings); University of
California, San Francisco (Ferriero); University of
Southern California, Los Angeles (Fetters); Teachers
College, Columbia University, New York, New York
(Gordon); The Royal Children’
s Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia (Greaves); Department of
Pediatrics, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands (Hadders-Algra); Duquesne University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (Harbourne); Makerere
University, Kampala, Uganda (Kakooza-Mwesige);
University Children’
s Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland (Latal); Children’
s Hospital Westmead,
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
(Loughran-Fowlds, Walker, Badawi); Nationwide
Children’
s Hospital, The Ohio State University,
Columbus (Maitre, Noritz); Newcastle University,
Newcastle Upon Tyne, England (Pennington);
Pediatric Neurology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli, Università Cattolica del
Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy (Romeo); The University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia (Shepherd); Murdoch
Childrens Research Institute, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia (Spittle); Princess
Margaret Hospital, University of Western Australia,
Perth (Valentine).
Author Contributions: Drs Novak and Morgan had
full access to all of the data in the study and take
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
Review Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
905
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Novak, Morgan, Adde,
Blackman, Boyd, Brunstrom-Hernandez, Cioni,
Darrah, Eliasson, Ferriero, Forssberg, Gordon,
Greaves, Guzzetta, Krumlinde-Sundholm,
Loughran-Fowlds, Maitre, Noritz, Romeo,
Shepherd, Spittle, Valentine, Walker, Badawi.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Novak, Morgan, Adde, Blackman, Boyd, Cioni,
Damiano, de Vries, Einspieler, Fahey, Fehlings,
Fetters, Fiori, Forssberg, Hadders-Algra, Harbourne,
Kakooza-Mwesige, Karlsson, Latal, Maitre,
McIntyre, Pennington, Romeo, Spittle, Thornton,
Valentine, White.
Drafting of the manuscript: Novak, Morgan, Darrah,
Fahey, Guzzetta, Maitre, Noritz, Shepherd, Spittle,
Walker, Badawi.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Novak, Morgan, Adde,
Blackman, Boyd, Brunstrom-Hernandez, Cioni,
Damiano, Darrah, Eliasson, de Vries, Einspieler,
Fahey, Fehlings, Ferriero, Fetters, Fiori, Forssberg,
Gordon, Greaves, Guzzetta, Hadders-Algra,
Harbourne, Kakooza-Mwesige, Karlsson,
Krumlinde-Sundholm, Latal, Loughran-Fowlds,
Maitre, McIntyre, Noritz, Pennington, Romeo,
Spittle, Thornton, Valentine, Walker, White, Badawi.
Statistical analysis: Novak.
Obtained funding: Novak.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Novak, Morgan, Adde, Boyd, Einspieler, Fetters,
Harbourne, McIntyre, Shepherd, Spittle, Thornton,
Valentine, Walker, White, Badawi.
Study supervision: Novak, Adde, Cioni, Eliasson,
Ferriero, Fiori, Gordon, Guzzetta, Hadders-Algra,
Latal, Maitre, Romeo, Badawi.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: The Cerebral Palsy Alliance
Research Foundation funded the face-to-face
meeting that enabled the authors to jointly make
recommendations from evidence. Dr Guzzetta was
supported by grant R 15-96 from the Mariani
Foundation of Milan.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Additional Contributions: Koa Whittingham, PhD,
and Olena Chorna, MM, MT-BC, CCRP, assisted in
retrieving the early intervention evidence. No
compensation was received.
REFERENCES
1. Rosenbaum P, Paneth N, Leviton A, et al. A
report: the definition and classification of cerebral
palsy April 2006 [published correction appears in
Dev Med Child Neurol. 2007;49(6):480]. Dev Med
Child Neurol Suppl. 2007;109:8-14.
2. Report of the Australian Cerebral Palsy Register,
Birth Years 1993-2009, September 2016. https:
//www.cpregister.com/pubs/pdf/ACPR
-Report_Web_2016.pdf. Accessed 2016.
3. Granild-Jensen JB, Rackauskaite G, Flachs EM,
Uldall P. Predictors for early diagnosis of cerebral
palsy from national registry data. Dev Med Child
Neurol. 2015;57(10):931-935.
4. Hubermann L, Boychuck Z, Shevell M, Majnemer
A. Age at referral of children for initial diagnosis of
cerebral palsy and rehabilitation: current practices.
J Child Neurol. 2016;31(3):364-369.
5. Novak I, Hines M, Goldsmith S, Barclay R. Clinical
prognostic messages from a systematic review on
cerebral palsy. Pediatrics. 2012;130(5):e1285-e1312.
6. Oskoui M, Coutinho F, Dykeman J, Jetté N,
Pringsheim T. An update on the prevalence of
cerebral palsy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2013;55(6):
509-519.
7. Reid SM, Meehan E, McIntyre S, Goldsmith S,
Badawi N, Reddihough DS; Australian Cerebral
Palsy Register Group. Temporal trends in cerebral
palsy by impairment severity and birth gestation.
Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016;58(suppl 2):25-35.
8. Sellier E, Platt MJ, Andersen GL, Krägeloh-Mann
I, De La Cruz J, Cans C; Surveillance of Cerebral
Palsy Network. Decreasing prevalence in cerebral
palsy: a multi-site European population-based
study, 1980 to 2003. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016;
58(1):85-92.
9. Blair E, Watson L. Epidemiology of cerebral
palsy. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2006;11(2):117-125.
10. Khandaker G, Smithers-Sheedy H, Islam J, et al.
Bangladesh Cerebral Palsy Register (BCPR): a pilot
study to develop a national cerebral palsy (CP)
register with surveillance of children for CP. BMC
Neurol. 2015;15:173.
11. Nelson KB. Causative factors in cerebral palsy.
Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2008;51(4):749-762.
12. McMichael G, Bainbridge MN, Haan E, et al.
Whole-exome sequencing points to considerable
genetic heterogeneity of cerebral palsy. Mol
Psychiatry. 2015;20(2):176-182.
13. Oskoui M, Gazzellone MJ, Thiruvahindrapuram
B, et al. Clinically relevant copy number variations
detected in cerebral palsy. Nat Commun. 2015;6:
7949.
14. Schaefer GB. Genetics considerations in
cerebral palsy. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2008;15(1):21-
26.
15. World Health Organization. WHO Handbook for
Guideline Development. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization; 2012. http://apps.who.int/iris
/bitstream/10665/75146/1/9789241548441_eng
.pdf. Accessed July 2015.
16. Graham R, Mancher M, Wolman DM, Greenfield
S, Steinberg E, eds. Clinical Practice Guidelines We
Can Trust. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press; July 16, 2011.
17. Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, et al;
AGREE Next Steps Consortium. AGREE II:
advancing guideline development, reporting and
evaluation in health care. CMAJ. 2010;182(18):
E839-E842.
18. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG;
PRISMA Group. Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses: the
PRISMA statement. PLoS Med. 2009;6(7):e1000097.
19. Whiting P, Rutjes AW, Reitsma JB, Bossuyt PM,
Kleijnen J. The development of QUADAS: a tool for
the quality assessment of studies of diagnostic
accuracy included in systematic reviews. BMC Med
Res Methodol. 2003;3:25.
20. Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE
guidelines, 14: going from evidence to
recommendations: the significance and
presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol.
2013;66(7):719-725.
21. Bosanquet M, Copeland L, Ware R, Boyd R. A
systematic review of tests to predict cerebral palsy
in young children. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2013;55
(5):418-426.
22. Burger M, Louw QA. The predictive validity of
general movements: a systematic review. Eur J
Paediatr Neurol. 2009;13(5):408-420.
23. Darsaklis V, Snider LM, Majnemer A, Mazer B.
Predictive validity of Prechtl’
s method on the
qualitative assessment of general movements:
a systematic review of the evidence. Dev Med Child
Neurol. 2011;53(10):896-906.
24. Heineman KR, Hadders-Algra M. Evaluation of
neuromotor function in infancy: a systematic
review of available methods. J Dev Behav Pediatr.
2008;29(4):315-323.
25. Romeo DM, Ricci D, Brogna C, Mecuri E. Use of
the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination
in infants with cerebral palsy: a critical review of the
literature. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016;58(3):240-245.
26. Spittle AJ, Doyle LW, Boyd RN. A systematic
review of the clinimetric properties of neuromotor
assessments for preterm infants during the first
year of life. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2008;50(4):254-
266.
27. Ashwal S, Russman BS, Blasco PA, et al; Quality
Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy
of Neurology; Practice Committee of the Child
Neurology Society. Practice parameter: diagnostic
assessment of the child with cerebral palsy: report
of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology and the Practice
Committee of the Child Neurology Society. Neurology.
2004;62(6):851-863.
28. Ment LR, Bada HS, Barnes P, et al. Practice
parameter: neuroimaging of the neonate: report of
the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology and the Practice
Committee of the Child Neurology Society. Neurology.
2002;58(12):1726-1738.
29. Einspieler C, Prechtl HF. Prechtl’
s assessment
of general movements: a diagnostic tool for the
functional assessment of the young nervous
system. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2005;11
(1):61-67.
30. Haataja L, Mercuri E, Regev R, et al. Optimality
score for the neurologic examination of the infant
at 12 and 18 months of age. J Pediatr. 1999;135(2, pt
1):153-161.
31. McIntyre S, Morgan C, Walker K, Novak I.
Cerebral palsy: don’
t delay. Dev Disabil Res Rev.
2011;17(2):114-129.
32. Palisano R, Rosenbaum P, Walter S, et al.
Development and validation of a Gross Motor
Function Classification System for children with
cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1997;39:214-
223.
33. Maitre NL, Slaughter JC, Aschner JL. Early
prediction of cerebral palsy after neonatal intensive
care using motor development trajectories in
infancy. Early Hum Dev. 2013;89(10):781-786.
34. Einspieler C, Marschik PB, Bos AF, Ferrari F,
Cioni G, Prechtl HF. Early markers for cerebral palsy:
insights from the assessment of general
movements. Future Neurol. 2012;7:709-717.
Clinical Review & Education Review
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
906
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
 35. de Vries LS, van Haastert IC, Benders MJ,
Groenendaal F. Myth: cerebral palsy cannot be
predicted by neonatal brain imaging. Semin Fetal
Neonatal Med. 2011;16(5):279-287.
36. Reid SM, Dagia CD, Ditchfield MR, Carlin JB,
Reddihough DS. Population-based studies of brain
imaging patterns in cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child
Neurol. 2014;56(3):222-232.
37. Romeo DM, Cioni M, Scoto M, Mazzone L,
Palermo F, Romeo MG. Neuromotor development
in infants with cerebral palsy investigated by the
Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination
during the first year of age. Eur J Paediatr Neurol.
2008;12(1):24-31.
38. Hägglund G, Alriksson-Schmidt A,
Lauge-Pedersen H, Rodby-Bousquet E, Wagner P,
Westbom L. Prevention of dislocation of the hip in
children with cerebral palsy: 20-year results of a
population-based prevention programme. Bone
Joint J. 2014;96-B(11):1546-1552.
39. Baird G, McConachie H, Scrutton D. Parents’
perceptions of disclosure of the diagnosis of
cerebral palsy. Arch Dis Child. 2000;83(6):475-480.
40. Miller J, Colligan J, Colver A. A qualitative
study, using focused interviews, of the information
needs of families whose children’
s names are on a
cerebral palsy register. Child Care Health Dev. 2003;
29(6):465-471.
41. Rentinck IC, Ketelaar M, Schuengel C, et al.
Short-term changes in parents’resolution regarding
their young child’
s diagnosis of cerebral palsy. Child
Care Health Dev. 2010;36(5):703-708.
42. Eyre J. Corticospinal tract development and
activity dependent plasticity. In: Shepherd R, ed.
Cerebral Palsy in Infancy. Oxford, England: Elsevier;
2014:53-66.
43. Martin JH, Chakrabarty S, Friel KM. Harnessing
activity-dependent plasticity to repair the damaged
corticospinal tract in an animal model of cerebral
palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011;53(suppl 4):9-13.
44. Shepherd RB, ed. Cerebral Palsy in Infancy:
Targeted Activity to Optimize Early Growth and
Development. Oxford, England: Elsevier Health
Sciences; 2014.
45. Eliasson AC, Holmefur M. The influence of early
modified constraint-induced movement therapy
training on the longitudinal development of hand
function in children with unilateral cerebral palsy.
Dev Med Child Neurol. 2015;57(1):89-94.
46. Elkamil AI, Andersen GL, Hägglund G, Lamvik
T, Skranes J, Vik T. Prevalence of hip dislocation
among children with cerebral palsy in regions with
and without a surveillance programme: a cross
sectional study in Sweden and Norway. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord. 2011;12:284.
47. Hägglund G, Andersson S, Düppe H,
Lauge-Pedersen H, Nordmark E, Westbom L.
Prevention of dislocation of the hip in children with
cerebral palsy: the first ten years of a
population-based prevention programme. J Bone
Joint Surg Br. 2005;87(1):95-101.
48. Scrutton D, Baird G, Smeeton N. Hip dysplasia
in bilateral cerebral palsy: incidence and natural
history in children aged 18 months to 5 years. Dev
Med Child Neurol. 2001;43(9):586-600.
49. Morgan C, Novak I, Dale RC, Guzzetta A,
Badawi N. Single blind randomised controlled trial
of GAME (Goals–Activity–Motor Enrichment) in
infants at high risk of cerebral palsy. Res Dev Disabil.
2016;55:256-267.
50. Rostami HR, Malamiri RA. Effect of treatment
environment on modified constraint-induced
movement therapy results in children with spastic
hemiplegic cerebral palsy: a randomized controlled
trial. Disabil Rehabil. 2012;34(1):40-44.
51. Novak I, Cusick A, Lannin N. Occupational
therapy home programs for cerebral palsy:
double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics.
2009;124(4):e606-e614.
52. Morgan C, Darrah J, Gordon AM, et al.
Effectiveness of motor interventions in infants with
cerebral palsy: a systematic review. Dev Med Child
Neurol. 2016;58(9):900-909.
53. ANZCTR.org.au. Multisite randomised trial
comparing infant-friendly modified constraint
induced movement therapy and infant-friendly
bimanual therapy to improve development of reach
and grasp, fine motor skills and cognition for infants
with asymmetric brain injuries.
ACTRN12615000180516. http://www.anzctr.org.au
/TrialSearch.aspx?searchTxt=12615000180516&
isBasic=True. Accessed June 3, 2017.
54. ANZCTR.org.au. Harnessing Neuroplasticity to
Improve Motor Performance in Infants With
Cerebral Palsy: a pragmatic randomized controlled
trial. ACTRN12617000006347. http://www
.anzctr.org.au/TrialSearch.aspx?searchTxt
=12617000006347&isBasic=True. Accessed June 3,
2017.
55. ANZCTR.org.au. Preventing Adverse Outcomes
of Neonatal Hypoxic Ischaemic Encephalopathy
With Erythropoietin: a Phase III randomised
placebo controlled multicentre clinical trial.
ACTRN12614000669695. http://www.anzctr.org
.au/TrialSearch.aspx?searchTxt
=12614000669695&isBasic=True. Accessed June 3,
2017.
56. clinicaltrials.gov. A multi-site study of
autologous cord blood cells for hypoxic ischemic
encephalopathy. NCT02612155. https://clinicaltrials
.gov/ct2/results?term=02612155&Search=Search.
Accessed June 3, 2017.
57. Palmer FB, Shapiro BK, Wachtel RC, et al. The
effects of physical therapy on cerebral palsy:
a controlled trial in infants with spastic diplegia.
N Engl J Med. 1988;318(13):803-808.
58. Chorna O, Hamm E, Cummings C, Fetters A,
Maitre NL. Speech and language interventions for
infants aged 0 to 2 years at high risk for cerebral
palsy: a systematic review. Dev Med Child Neurol.
2017;59(4):355-360.
59. Anand KJ; International Evidence-Based Group
for Neonatal Pain. Consensus statement for the
prevention and management of pain in the
newborn. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2001;155(2):
173-180.
60. Wynter M, Gibson N, Willoughby KL, et al;
National Hip Surveillance Working Group.
Australian hip surveillance guidelines for children
with cerebral palsy: 5-year review. Dev Med Child
Neurol. 2015;57(9):808-820.
61. Walshe M, Smith M, Pennington L.
Interventions for drooling in children with cerebral
palsy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;11:
CD008624.
62. Ricci D, Cesarini L, Groppo M, et al. Early
assessment of visual function in full term
newborns. Early Hum Dev. 2008;84(2):107-113.
63. Ricci D, Romeo DM, Gallini F, et al. Early visual
assessment in preterm infants with and without
brain lesions: correlation with visual and
neurodevelopmental outcome at 12 months. Early
Hum Dev. 2011;87(3):177-182.
64. Blair E, Watson L, Badawi N, Stanley FJ. Life
expectancy among people with cerebral palsy in
Western Australia. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2001;43
(8):508-515.
65. Sullivan PB, Juszczak E, Bachlet AM, et al.
Gastrostomy tube feeding in children with cerebral
palsy: a prospective, longitudinal study. Dev Med
Child Neurol. 2005;47(2):77-85.
66. Whittingham K, Sanders MR, McKinlay L, Boyd
RN. Parenting intervention combined with
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: a trial with
families of children with cerebral palsy. J Pediatr
Psychol. 2016;41(5):531-542.
67. Athanasopoulou E, Fox JR. Effects of Kangaroo
Mother Care on maternal mood and interaction
patterns between parents and their preterm, low
birth weight infants: a systematic review. Infant
Ment Health J. 2014;35(3):245-262.
68. Bieleninik Ł, Ghetti C, Gold C. Music therapy for
preterm infants and their parents: a meta-analysis.
Pediatrics. 2016;138(3)pii:e20160971.
69. Brecht C, Shaw RJ, Horwitz SM, John NH.
Effectiveness of therapeutic behavioral
interventions for parents of low birth weight
premature infants: a review. Infant Ment Health J.
2012;33(6):651-665.
70. Kraljevic M, Warnock FF. Early educational and
behavioral RCT interventions to reduce maternal
symptoms of psychological trauma following
preterm birth: a systematic review. J Perinat
Neonatal Nurs. 2013;27(4):311-327.
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy
Review Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
907
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Tufts Univ. Hirsh Health Sciences Library User  on 07/04/2018
