 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 27 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fevo.2018.00109
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
Edited by:
Martin Daniel Ezcurra,
Museo Argentino de Ciencias
Naturales Bernardino Rivadavia,
Argentina
Reviewed by:
Torsten M. Scheyer,
Universität Zürich, Switzerland
Juan Carlos Cisneros,
Federal University of Piauí, Brazil
*Correspondence:
Pablo Nuñez Demarco
pnunez@fcien.edu.uy
Graciela Piñeiro
fossil@fcien.edu.uy
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Paleontology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution
Received: 19 April 2018
Accepted: 04 July 2018
Published: 27 July 2018
Citation:
Nuñez Demarco P
, Meneghel M,
Laurin M and Piñeiro G (2018) Was
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?.
Front. Ecol. Evol. 6:109.
doi: 10.3389/fevo.2018.00109
Was Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic
Reptile?
Pablo Nuñez Demarco 1,2*, Melitta Meneghel 3, Michel Laurin 4 and Graciela Piñeiro 5*
1 Facultad de Ciencias, Instituto de Ciencias Geológicas, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay, 2 Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, InGeBa, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3 Laboratorio de Sistemática e
Historia Natural de Vertebrados, Facultad de Ciencias, IECA, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay, 4 CR2P
,
UMR 7207, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/MNHN/UPMC, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France,
5 Departamento de Paleontología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay
Mesosaurs have been considered strictly aquatic animals. Their adaptations to the
aquatic environment are well known and include putative viviparity, along with the
presence of several skeletal characters such as a long, laterally compressed tail, long
limbs, the foot larger than the manus, and presence of pachyosteosclerotic bones. They
were also described as possessing non-coossified girdle bones and incompletely ossified
epiphyses, although there could be an early fusion of the front girdle bones to form the
scapulocoracoid in some specimens. Some of these features, however, are shared by
most basal tetrapods that are considered semiaquatic and even some terrestrial ones.
The study of vertebral columns and limbs provides essential clues about the locomotor
system and the lifestyle of early amniotes. In this study, we have found that the variation of
the vertebral centrum length along the axial skeleton of Mesosaurus tenuidens fits better
with a semi-aquatic morphometric pattern, as shown by comparisons with other extinct
and extant taxa. The present study allows us to suggest that whereas well-preserved
mesosaur skeletons are mostly represented by juveniles and young adults that inhabited
aquatic environments, more mature individuals might hypothetically have spent time on
land. This is also supported, to an extent, by taphonomic factors such as the scarce
representation and poor preservation of remains of mature individuals in the fossiliferous
levels, and also by anatomy of the appendicular bones, and particularly the strongly
ossified epiphyses and tarsus.
Keywords: Mesosaurus tenuidens, morphometrics, lifestyle, semiaquatic, early permian, gondwanan pangaea,
paleoecology
INTRODUCTION
Mesosaurs are widely thought to represent the earliest fully aquatic amniotes (MacGregor,
1908; Romer, 1966; Araújo, 1976; Oelofsen, 1981; Carroll, 1982; Laurin and Reisz, 1995;
Modesto, 1996, 2006, 2010; Mazin, 2001; Canoville and Laurin, 2010; Villamil et al., 2015).
They possessed a laterally compressed long tail, webbed limbs, long digits, a large foot
(much larger than the manus), and nares placed far posteriorly from the tip of the snout,
close to the eyes and fairly dorsal (MacGregor, 1908; von Huene, 1941; Piñeiro et al.,
2016). All these characters can plausibly be considered adaptations to an aquatic lifestyle
(Modesto, 1996; Piñeiro, 2004, 2008; Piñeiro et al., 2012a,c, 2016). Mesosaurs also developed
pachyostosis (sensu stricto, Nopcsa, 1923; Houssaye, 2009) in the ribs and osteosclerosis in
the humerus and presumably in other skeletal elements (Canoville and Laurin, 2010). They
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
also have poorly ossified epiphyses of appendicular bones, at
least in juvenile and early adult stages, suggesting that they
were inhabitants of water bodies (de Ricqlès and de Buffrénil,
2001), most likely of shallow water because pachyostosis
and osteosclerosis are passive buoyancy control adaptations
to shallow water environments (de Ricqlès and de Buffrénil,
2001; Houssaye, 2009). Inferred viviparity or ovoviviparity in
mesosaurs (Piñeiro et al., 2012a) is a typical reproductive strategy
of aquatic amniotes as well (Angelini and Ghiara, 1984), though
it could have originated in their terrestrial ancestors (Motani
et al., 2014). Nevertheless, mesosaurs did not possess certain
morphological adaptations present in ichthyosaurs, mosasaurs
and plesiosaurs, such as reduction of the limbs, polydactyly, and
polyphalangy, which are clear adaptations to live in open marine
environments (Massare, 1988).
Mesosaurs may occupy a basalmost position in sauropsids,
according to some recent phylogenetic (e.g., Laurin and de
Buffrénil, 2016; Laurin and Piñeiro, 2017) and anatomical (e.g.
Villamil et al., 2015; Piñeiro et al., 2016) studies. Others (Piñeiro
et al., 2012a,b; Tsuji et al., 2012; Modesto et al., 2015) placed them
as the basalmost parareptiles, but either way, the mesosaurid
lifestyle is relevant to understand the evolutionary history of early
amniotes.
Several studies have compared vertebral profiles of extant
and extinct species and have shown patterns and convergences
in this morphological trait as a result of similar locomotory
behaviors (Fish, 1984, 1994; McShea, 1993; Buchholtz, 1998,
2001a,b, 2007; Buchholtz and Schur, 2004; Lindgren et al., 2007;
Pierce et al., 2011; Felice and Angielczyk, 2014). In this paper, we
test the supposed aquatic adaptations of Mesosaurus tenuidens by
applying the vertebral centrum length methodology of Buchholtz
(1998, 2001a,b) and by studying limb morphometrics of several
extant and extinct taxa and various swimming styles that
we compare in order to discriminate between semi-aquatic,
aquatic and terrestrial lifestyles for mesosaurs. We also discuss
mesosaurid ontogeny and the taphonomic factors (resulting in
completeness and preservation quality of the specimens) that
could have altered our results.
MATERIALS
We examined a total of 50 skeletons: 40 of Mesosaurus tenuidens,
four Hovasaurus boulei, two Thadeosaurus colcanapi, and four
Claudiosaurus germaini (Figure 1). The other data were collected
from the literature (see below).
The mesosaur specimens studied were all assigned to
the species Mesosaurus tenuidens given that the observed
phenotypic variability can be considered to reflect normal
infraspecific variations. The specimens consist of well-preserved
articulated individuals and partial skeletons, mostly featuring
the axial skeleton (Figures 1A,D), belonging to the following
paleontological collections: Fossil Vertebrates of the Facultad
de Ciencias (FC-DPV), Montevideo, Uruguay; Instituto de
Geociências (section Paleontology) of the São Paulo University
(GP/2E), São Paulo, Brazil; Senckenberg Institute (SMF-R),
Frankfurt, Germany; Institute of Paleobiology, Polish Academy
of Science (ZPAL); Paleontological Institute and Museum,
University of Zurich (PIMUZ), Suitzerland; Departamento
Nacional de Produção Mineral, Museu de Ciências da Terra
(DNPM), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Muséum national d’Histoire
naturelle,
Madagascan
Permian
(MNHN-MAP),
and
the
American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), New York,
USA.
Hovasaurus, Thadeosaurus, and Claudiosaurus were studied
through direct examination and from photographs of the
specimens housed at the Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle
of Paris, France (Figures 1B,C,E) and from drawings provided
by Currie (1981b), Carroll (1981) and Currie and Carroll
(1984). Profiles of basal synapsids and of extant diapsids
were taken from Felice and Angielczyk (2014) for comparative
purposes. Taxa used to construct Table S1 in Supplementary
Material and perform the study on hind limb proportions
were measured from the following sources: Stem Tetrapoda,
and other stegocephalians of debated affinities (Marjanovi
and Laurin, 2013), including temnospondyls and embolomeres
(Romer, 1956; Carroll, 1970; Holmes, 1984, 2003; Godfrey,
1989; Panchen and Smithson, 1990; Sequeira and Milner, 1993;
Smithson, 1993; Smithson et al., 1994; Lebedev and Coates,
1995; Coates, 1996; Clack, 1998; Ruta and Clack, 2006; Fröbisch
et al., 2007); lepospondyls (Carroll, 1968; Carroll and Baird,
1968); Varanidae (Christian and Garland, 1996); phrynosomatid
squamates (Herrel et al., 2002); Lacertidae Timon lepidus
(Rewcastle, 1980); the earliest diapsid Petrolacosaurus (Peabody,
1952); the possible tangasaurid Kenyasaurus mariakaniensis
(Harris and Carroll, 1977); Synapsids (Williston, 1910; Eaton,
1962; Reisz and Dilkes, 2003; Reisz and Fröbisch, 2014);
various Permo-Carboniferous amniotes (Carroll, 1964, 1969; Fox
and Bowman, 1966); Sauropterygians (Sues and Carroll, 1985;
Rieppel, 1989; Caldwell, 1997a, 2002; Klein, 2012); Ichthyosauria
(Carroll and Dong, 1991; Caldwell, 1997b); Mosasauridae
(Caldwell, 1996).
METHODS
We measured the centrum length for each available vertebra in
the mesosaur skeletons. All measurements were taken on digital
images (with a precision of less than 0.1 mm), all of the selected
specimens have multiple centra articulated in sequence, or they
are semi-articulated individuals where the position of each
vertebra along the column was known, or could be determined.
Variations in vertebral length produce changes in the waves
that are propagated through the column (Figure 2). When a
wave passes through the body, each vertebra transmits the
movement to the next one. If one vertebra is longer than the
precedent, a bigger lateral displacement occurs, generating waves
of higher amplitude and shorter wavelength (Figure 2E). On
the contrary, if one vertebra is shorter than the precedent, a
reduction in the amplitude is produced, as well as an increase
in the wavelength (Figure 2D; Buchholtz, 2001b). Relative short
centrum lengths are associated with column rigidity and stability
through centrum shape changes and reduced joint mobility
(Figures 2A–C) (Buchholtz, 1998, 2001a), while relatively long
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 1 | Taxa studied by direct specimen examination. (A) Mesosaurus tenuidens (PIMUZ A-III 591). (B) Hovasaurus boulei (MAP 1908-21-7). (C) Claudiosaurus
germaini (MAP 1978-6-1a). (D) Mesosaurus tenuidens (GP/2E 669A). (E) Thadeosaurus colcanapi (MAP 1908-11-5a). All scales represent 10 mm.
centrum lengths are related to column flexibility and enhanced
mobility.
Of course, other non-osteological factors contribute to the
flexibility of the spine such as the width of intervertebral disks,
the interspinous ligaments, muscle architecture and size of the
animal (De Smet, 1977; Long et al., 1997; Molnar et al., 2014,
2015).
In terrestrial locomotion, squamate trunks produce a standing
or lateral traveling wave that bends the spine. The transmission
of this wave is reflected with a localized increment in centrum
length between the girdles, corresponding to the peak of the
standing wave, where flexion and wave amplitude are higher
(Ritter, 1992; Buchholtz, 1998; Felice and Angielczyk, 2014).
In aquatic locomotion, reptiles such as the marine iguana
(Amblyrhynchus cristatus), as well as members of Crocodylia
typically move with a carangiform undulation where lateral waves
travel along the tail. In these taxa an increase in the caudal
vertebral length is seen (Buchholtz, 1998; Felice and Angielczyk,
2014).
Fusion
and
reduction
of
cervical
count
and
also
reduction of vertebral length is frequently observed in the
neck
of
aquatic
and
semi-aquatic
mammals
(Buchholtz,
2001a,b), and this feature increases in those species that
developed a more aquatic adaptation. Some extinct taxa
(like
ichthyosaurs)
share
that
characteristic
(Buchholtz,
2001a),
although
plesiosaurs
and
their
relatives
do
not,
possibly because their propulsion mechanism is not axial, but
appendicular.
It is expected that aquatic and semi-aquatic animals exhibit
increments, peaks in caudal vertebral length, or plateau of
constant vertebral lengths, corresponding to adaptations for
generating or maintaining undulations of large amplitude, which
are not found in terrestrial tetrapods (Buchholtz, 1998, 2001a;
Felice and Angielczyk, 2014).
Measurement of Vertebral Centrum Length
As in previous works (Buchholtz, 1998, 2001a,b; Felice and
Angielczyk, 2014), we plotted centrum length against vertebral
position to obtain a vertebral profile for each specimen
(Figures 3–6; see also Tables S2, S3 in Supplementary Material).
Due to the variable number of vertebrae that can occur in the
different sections of the column and due to the incompleteness of
the mesosaurid specimens, all patterns were adjusted so that the
sacral vertebrae are fixed in positions 35 and 36 in the plots. Thus,
the longest complete mesosaurid has its first vertebra (atlas) in
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 2 | Vertebral column studied section. Models of different vertebral column sections (at the left) and the resulting vertebral amplitude after bending all the
articulations five degrees (red line, right side). (A–C) vertebral amplitude of vertebral sections with homogeneous sized elements. Note that the bending amplitude
depends directly of vertebral length. (D) vertebral section with progressive reduction in vertebral length. (E) vertebral section with progressive increment in vertebral
length. The increment and reduction in bending amplitude is directly correlated with the vertebral length, increasing and decreasing respectively.
position 1, but some specimens can show different vertebral
counts, particularly in the neck and possibly in the tail.
We compared our mesosaurid vertebral profiles with data
of other extant and extinct diapsids and extinct synapsids
provided
by
Felice
and
Angielczyk
(2014):
Alligatoridae
(Caiman crocodylus - spectacled caiman, Melanosuchus niger
- black caiman), Crocodylidae (Crocodylus rhombifer - Cuban
crocodile), Gavialidae (Gavialis gangeticus - gharial), Iguanidae
(Amblyrhynchus cristatus - marine iguana, Iguana iguana - green
iguana), Varanidae (we sampled the same species as Felice and
Angielczyk, 2014), Varanus bengalensis - Bengal monitor, V.
dumerilii - Dumeril’s monitor, V. exanthematicus -savannah
monitor, V. komodoensis - Komodo dragon, V. rudicollis -
roughneck monitor, for characterization of the terrestrial pattern
and V. salvator - water monitor for the semiaquatic one), the
basal diapsids Hovasaurus boulei, Thadeosaurus colcanapi and
Claudiosaurus germaini basically from the Late Permian, but
recently also found in Early Triassic deposits of Madagascar
(cf. Ketchum and Barrett, 2004), and Caseidae (Casea broilii,
Cotylorhynchus hancocki), Varanopidae (Varanops brevirostris),
Ophiacodontidae (Ophiacodon retroversus). The selection of
the extinct taxa was based on their grade of completeness to
obtain the most robust and accurate profiles. Moreover, the
selection of the extant taxa for comparison with mesosaurids
was based on comparable skeletal anatomy, size, and on their
observed locomotory specializations, covering species with
aquatic, semi-aquatic and terrestrial life styles.
We measured the parameters developed by McShea (1992).
The metric range (R), polarization (C), irregularity (Cm),
concentration (E1), and smoothness (E2), were calculated for
each specimen. However they could not be compared with more
recent data (e.g., McShea, 1993; Buchholtz, 2001a; Felice and
Angielczyk, 2014) because the original metric was modified,
customizing the equations and thus making the comparisons
operose, impractical and meaningless. The range R represents
the logarithm of the difference between the maximum and
minimum vertebral length in each specimen. The parameter
C reflects the polarization of the data. The concentration
E1 is the difference between R and C. As this parameter is
the subtraction of two logarithmic operations, it results in
normalization independent of the size. Cm is the mean of the
distances between adjacent elements. The smoothness E2 is
the subtraction of two logarithmic operations, resulting in a
normalized parameter independent of size. E2 is the difference
between C and Cm. The mathematical significance of applying
these vertebral parameters to different species should be taken
with caution because they are interrelated and are size- and
noise-sensitive. Logarithmic size corrections (before or after
calculations) may distort the statistical patterns to be analyzed,
alter relationships among parameters, and consequently their
interpretation. Thus, our parametric analysis was performed
only within one species (the Mesosaurus specimens) in order to
observe intraspecific variations.
The mean vertebral length was obtained for each specimen.
Using this mean, the total length of the observed vertebral
sections was calculated (mean value × number of vertebrae in
the section) and compared with the real measurements. The
comparison has a mean of zero with a three sigma deviation of
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 3 | Centrum length profiles for Mesosaurus. Plots showing centrum length profiles for the Mesosaurus specimens sorted according their mean vertebral
length. All patterns were adjusted so that the sacral vertebrae are fixed in position 35 and 36 in the plots. All graphs display the same scale in their y-axis (a 6 cm span
of values). The dashed lines mark the approximate placement of the last cervical (12 or 13), the relative placement of the first thoracic vertebra (position 13 or 14), and
of the two sacral vertebrae (positions 35 and 36), the end of the caudal lateral processes (position 44) and the assumed end of the tail (position 101). See the scaled
mesosaurid representation of these limits in Figure 5. Raw data can be found in Table S2 (Supplementary Material).
4 mm for Mesosaurus; in other words, the theoretical length of a
Mesosaurus section, based on the mean vertebral length, almost
does not differ from the real one. Calculations of the total section
lengths using only ten vertebrae lead to a mean three sigma
deviation of 60 mm. Meanwhile, increasing the vertebrae to 20
(when available) reduces the deviation to 6 mm. Considering
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 4 | Centrum length profiles for Mesosaurus. Plots showing centrum length profiles for the Mesosaurus specimens sorted according their mean vertebral
length (Figure 3). All patterns were adjusted so that the sacral vertebrae are fixed in position 35 and 36 in the plots. All graphs display the same scale in their y-axis as
in Figure 3. The dashed lines mark the approximate placement of the last cervical (12 or 13), the relative placement of the first thoracic vertebra (position 13 or 14),
and of the two sacral vertebrae (positions 35 and 36), the end of the caudal lateral processes (position 44) and the assumed end of the tail (position 101). See the
scaled mesosaurid representation of these breaks is shown in graph 23. Raw data can be found in Table S2 (Supplementary Material).
the result obtained with mesosaurs sections, we extrapolated
the theoretical total length for each specimen, using the mean
vertebral length and assuming a total count of 101 vertebrae, as a
first approximation to the real size of each specimen. As a simple
observation reveals that calculation using only or mostly cervical
and caudal vertebrae tend to underestimate mesosaurid length,
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 5 | Centrum length profiles for Mesosaurus. Plots showing centrum length profiles for the Mesosaurus specimens sorted according their mean vertebral
length (Figure 4). Specimens 36, 37, and 38 are not placed according its mean vertebral length, but considering the relative mean of the neck vertebrae. All patterns
were adjusted so that the sacral vertebrae are fixed in position 35 and 36 in the plots. Contrary to the previous graphs (Figures 3, 4) these ones do not display the
same scale in the y-axis. Dashed lines mark the approximate placement of the last cervical (12 or 13), the relative placement of the first thoracic vertebra (position 13
or 14), and of the two sacral vertebrae (positions 35 and 36), the end of the caudal lateral processes (position 44) and the assumed end of the tail (position 101). A
scaled mesosaurid representation of these breaks is shown in graph 40.
and using only dorsal vertebrae tends to overestimate this length.
Results using only 10 vertebrae can lead errors of up to 30 cm,
whereas if more than 20 vertebrae are used, including more than
one region of vertebral column, the total length errors can be
reduced approximately to 6 cm.
As the mean length can be biased by the number of
vertebrae present in each specimen and also by the body region
which these vertebrae represent, we also tested the possibility
of using the length of the sacral vertebrae to estimate the
Mesosaurus body length. However, the section length estimation
using the sacral vertebrae differs from real measurements by
a range between 30 and 120 mm (N = 20) and the expected
error in the estimation of the total body length is up to
25 cm. Consequently, we realized that the most reliable unit
to estimate the size of incomplete skeletons in morphometric
analyses is the mean centrum length, rather than the sacral
vertebral length, on the condition that 20 or more vertebrae
are used to estimate the mean. Comparing that measure to
femur length, when available, provide a more reliable estimation
of the body length for the 40 mesosaurid specimens studied
herein.
The plots were normalized, using the mean vertebral length, in
order to eliminate size effects and a mean pattern was calculated
in order to observe the general pattern in Mesosaurus’ vertebral
column. Also, normalized patterns were used to provide a more
trustworthy basis for interspecific comparisons and to overcome
size differences.
As in almost all paleontological studies, it is very likely that
some of the data obtained contain noise and errors introduced by
differences in completeness, ontogeny and taphonomic artifacts
such as rotation and deformation (McShea, 1993; Buchholtz,
2001a; Felice and Angielczyk, 2014).
Taphonomic Constraints for Mesosaurus
Vertebral Measurements
The specimens were preserved as impressions, molds, casts or
permineralized, half-buried bones embedded in a calcareous
matrix. Due to this kind of preservation, and the difficulties
in preparing the specimens, 3D measurements could not be
taken accurately. However, vertebral rotation and superposition
is an intriguing frequent preservation condition observed in the
trunk column section of even perfectly articulated specimens.
The vertebral distortion, which involves also the disarticulation
of their corresponding ribs, is found particularly at the level of
the chest and the abdominal cavity, being thus possibly related
to carcass explosion after the decay of viscera (Keller, 1976 apud
Reisdorf et al., 2012, 2014). Whether the specimen is preserved
in dorsal or ventral view, when a segment of two, three or four
vertebrae are preserved in different positions including dorso-
lateral to lateral and ventro-lateral views, that displacement
always implies the distortion of the ribs in the affected segment
(Figure 7). This taphonomic condition can be misinterpreted
as a pathological trait rather than a taphonomical feature, as
was recently described in a well-preserved and almost complete
skeleton assigned to Stereosternum tumidum (Szczygielski et al.,
2017) without any rigorous anatomical and taxonomic analyses.
In consequence, we did not measure widths and heights since
these measures are difficult or in some cases impossible to obtain
on disturbed centra. Some dorsal measurements have to be
considered as estimated, because they were taken over the neural
arch rather than on the centrum.
Morphometric Study of Limb Proportions
We also studied the hindlimb proportions of Mesosaurus,
Claudiosaurus and Hovasaurus, and several other extinct and
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 6 | Centrum length profiles for Madagascar taxa. Plots showing centrum length profiles for Thadeosaurus, Claudiosaurus, and Hovasaurus. All the plots have
the same vertical scale as in Figures 3, 4. The patterns were adjusted according to the vertebral descriptions of each species. Dashed lines mark the relative
placement of the last cervical, the two sacral vertebrae, and the end of the tail as approximately shown by the species representation in the graphs 2, 5, and 9. Raw
data are provided in Table S3 (Supplementary Material).
extant species (Table S1 in Supplementary Material). According
to some workers, there is a well-established relationship
between morphology of hindlimbs and forelimbs and the
locomotion style, which may implies a terrestrial, semi-
terrestrial or aquatic lifestyle (e.g., Herrel et al., 2002; Joyce
and Gauthier, 2004). We chose the hind limb because it is
better preserved in mesosaurids and the other studied taxa.
Locomotor changes have been observed in many evolutionary
transitions, and, for example, a strong correlation has been
observed between the hindlimb morphology and the lifestyle
during phrynosomatid squamate evolution (Herrel et al., 2002).
We measured femur and tibia length, and length of the
longest toe of the hind foot, equivalent to the sum of phalanx
length and metatarsal length. Many lengths were measured
directly on specimens (e.g., mesosaurids and the Madagascan
diapsids); the others were obtained from photographic material
or from already published reliable reconstructions. Only
specimens preserving all the segments that we measured were
included into the analysis. Hindlimb proportions were then
computed to find the rate values of tibia length over femur
length and longest toe length over femur length for each
taxon.
The diagrams that we produced allow comparing leg
proportions, but some caution is necessary. Each species is
represented by a point in the plot, which represents a mean value.
For a precise analysis, the average proportions for each species
should be calculated carefully taking into account ontogeny
and sexual dimorphism. However, these features are difficult
to infer from extinct species as they are typically represented
by just one or few, often incompletely preserved specimens.
As an example, of more than 40 studied mesosaurid specimens
belonging to collections from around the world, only 4 specimens
have the entire series of phalanges on their longest digit.
Despite this, dispersion in the Mesosaurus, Hovasaurus, and
Claudiosaurus hind limb ratios was found to be less than
0.2. Thus, we believe that despite the mentioned difficulties,
this study, as a first approximation, has produced useful
results.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 7 | Taphonomic constraints to vertebral measurements (see text for
additional information on this issue). (A) GP/2E 644, photograph of a well
preserved incomplete mesosaurid specimen showing rotation of vertebral
(Continued)
FIGURE 7 | centra from lateroventral to ventral position (red arrow). (B)
Schematic drawing of the vertebral dorsal segment of A where the vertebral
rotation was gradually produced. (C) GP/2E 661, photograph of an
incomplete, partially articulated individual showing vertebral overlap (red
arrows). (D) Schematic drawing of C, remarking the involved overlapped
dorsal vertebrae and the corresponding two pairs of ribs (in red). (E)
Schematic drawing of partial trunk segment of the specimen ZPAL R VII/1
thought by Szczygielski et al. (2017) to possess the pathology known as
hemivertebra. The supposed pathology seems to be an overlapping of
vertebrae here numbered as 6 and 7 to show the correspondence between
vertebrae and ribs from the right and left sides.
RESULTS
Mesosaurid Vertebral Column
The main difficulty in getting trustworthy total vertebral counts
in mesosaurid vertebral columns lies in establishing the number
of cervical and caudal vertebrae. This is becacuse the neck or the
tail are not always completely preserved, and when they are, the
first cervical vertebrae can be hidden under the skull and some
cervical vertebrae are usually hidden by the pectoral girdle; the
tail is completely preserved only in exceptional cases (Figure 1).
Some individuals gave abnormal profiles. This includes
partially disarticulated specimens (the order of their vertebrae
may have been misinterpreted) or for instance, specimen 5
(Figure 3), which has shorter vertebrae in the middle of the neck.
However, we could not verify statistical evidence supporting
two populations among the plotted mesosaurids, regarding the
vertebral length pattern.
The vertebral length profiles of Mesosaurus are shown in
Figures 3–5, ordered by their mean vertebral length; while those
for the Madagascan diapsids are shown in Figure 6. All the
patterns have the same scale (a 5 cm span of values, except
Figure 5), facilitating the comparison between individuals and
making it possible to distinguish them by size and completeness.
The data show that in the cervical region, vertebrae of almost
all the measured specimens, including juveniles and adults, are
longest at the center of the neck. The trunk vertebrae increase
their length progressively, forming a peak or a plateau toward
the middle of the dorsal section (Figure 3, specimens 1 and 16;
Figure 5, specimens 26 and 32) or in the posterior half of the
trunk (Figure 3, specimens 5, 12; Figure 5, specimen 38). Two
specimens instead show a peak in the anterior half of the trunk
(Figure 3, specimen 15; Figure 4, specimen 26). Caudal vertebrae
of some individuals show an increment in length posteriorly with
a peak either around vertebrae 50–55 (Figure 3, specimens 3 and
5), or near the tail tip (Figure 3, specimen 18), and in others a
plateau is seen (Figure 3, specimens 2, 6, and 11), maintaining
the vertebral length along the first two thirds of the tail. The tail
tip remains almost unknown because few specimens preserve it
completely (Figures 3–6). Nevertheless, the distal portion of the
tail shows a smoothly continuous decrease in vertebral length to
the tip.
Mean Vertebral Length and Mesosaurus
Size
The comparison between the total length of the observed
vertebral sections and the one calculated using the mean
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
centrum length for each specimen is shown in Figure 8A,
while
the
estimated
total
length
of
each
Mesosaurus
specimen, with a total vertebral count of 101, is provided in
Figure 8B.
The Parameters and Their Relation With
the Specimen Size
The study performed on the vertebral parameters R, C, Cm,
E1, E2 for Mesosaurus tenuidens is shown in Figure 9. The
range R slightly increases with the size of the specimen. The
parameter C reflects the polarization of the data, the closer
C is to the value of R, the more polarized are the data, or
in other words, they are less concentrated over the media.
The formula of this parameter (C) is linked with the standard
deviation and both exhibit the same pattern, except for a
slight increment proportional to the size of the specimens
that affect the parameter C. The concentration E1 results in
normalization independent of size; thus, as expected, E1 shows
no correlation with size increment, but features an oscillatory
lifestyle with values close to 1. This can reflect a link to a real
pattern behind size and distortion effects. The irregularity of Cm
reflects how much variation is observed through the vertebral
column. Cm is strongly related to the size of the specimens,
meaning that longitudinal variation increases with the size of
the mesosaurid body. E2 is inversely related to E1 as reflected
in the graphics. We suggest that E1 and E2 reflect the random
distortion that occurred in the bones; their proximity in values
is a consequence of the real bone relations subjacent to the
distortions.
The study of the vertebral parameters R, C, Cm, E1, E2, reflects
and confirm what we have noted through direct observation
of the specimens: the smallest individuals present less noise
and smoother patterns and the completeness of the specimens
decrease with the increment of size.
Vertebral profiles obtained from Mesosaurus are fairly
constant among all individuals studied and normalization
seems
to
reveal
a
general
pattern.
Nevertheless,
larger
specimens appear to show more extreme length values,
even
though
the
preservation
quality
is
poor
in
these
samples. As mentioned above, although some mesosaurids
display
abnormal
profiles,
visual
examination
of
the
data shows plainly that only one species is statistically
supported.
A Comparative Profile of the Analyzed
Vertebral Column in Extinct and Extant
Species
The comparison between extant and extinct taxa is shown in
Figures 10, 11. All patterns were re-scaled in their x-axis, so
that the trunk of all individuals has the same length. Patterns
of some species were averaged with the same method as for
Mesosaurus, when more than one specimen was available. All
patterns, including those obtained from data of Felice and
Angielczyk (2014), were normalized with their mean centrum
lengths so the y-axis reflects the variation in length with respect
to their mean vertebral lengths.
The Madagascan Late Permian and Early
Triassic Taxa
Centrum length profiles of stem diapsids Claudiosaurus,
Thadeosaurus, and Hovasaurus are shown in Figure 6. The
patterns were adjusted following previous vertebral descriptions
of each species.
The pattern of Thadeosaurus (Figure 6, specimen 1) resembles
that of Iguana iguana, because the vertebral length increases
distally in the proximal caudal region.
In our vertebral profiles, Claudiosaurus shows one of the
noisiest patterns and it is difficult to interpret from the graphs,
but there is a peak in the cervical region derived from a
progressive enlargement of the neck vertebrae, possibly toward
the middle section (Figure 6, specimens 3,4,6) or near the
head (Figure 6, specimen 5). Its mean vertebral length is
approximately twice that of Hovasaurus, and is similar to the
largest Mesosaurus. However, contrary to the largest Mesosaurus,
the thoracic and caudal vertebrae of Claudiosaurus appear to
maintain their relative size across the column, and become
shorter toward the end of the tail.
Unfortunately, the analyzed specimens of Hovasaurus do not
show a very clear pattern due to their incompleteness, but it
seems that at least one peak is present in the middle of the
thoracic region (Figure 6, specimens 7-10) and the proximal
segment of the tail shows a clear continuous increment in
vertebral length.
Earliest Basal Synapsids
The plots for the Permo-Carboniferous synapsids included in this
study for comparative purposes are shown in Figures 11E–H.
Cotylorhynchus, Varanops and Casea present a maximum in
their vertebral profiles in the trunk, from which the vertebral
length decreases toward both ends of the spine. Varanops also
shows a maximum in the cervical region comparable to the
trunk one and Cotylorhynchus displays two distinct peaks, in the
anterior and posterior trunk. All these taxa show a continuous
decrease toward the tail tip. In Cotylorhynchus this reduction is
more abrupt, while in Varanops and Casea the vertebral length
remains almost constant in the proximal portion of the tail.
Ophiacodon has a very noisy pattern, with irregular values; it has
its maximum vertebral length in the cervical region; however
a general posteriorly decreasing trend is clear until the end of
the tail. In all the sampled Permo-Carboniferous synapsids, the
caudal vertebrae are shorter than the dorsal ones.
Extant Taxa
In the six sampled Varanus species, the presacral vertebrae are
longer than the caudal vertebrae. Vertebral length also shows
a steady decline in length toward the tail tip. Their caudal
vertebrae are not longer than the shortest trunk vertebrae; even
their cervical vertebrae are longer than the caudal ones. Also, all
the species present a vertebral length increment in the middle
portion of the neck.
The vertebral length profiles of the Varanus species examined
display a continuum between extremes represented by V. salvator
and V. exanthematicus. V. salvator displays its longest vertebrae
forming a pronounced peak in the neck and a plateau in the
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 8 | (A) Theoretical and estimated total length of studied specimens. Difference between the real length measured in the section preserved and the theoretical
length calculated using the mean centrum length, for each specimen. (B) Theoretical total length estimated for each specimen of Mesosaurus. All the specimens were
ordered by their mean vertebral length except for the specimens 36, 37, and 38; see also Figure 5.
FIGURE 9 | Statistical parameters related to each Mesosaurus tenuidens specimen according to the equations of McShea (1992). (A) Mean. (B) Standard deviation.
(C) Range (R). (D) Polarization (C). (E) Irregularity (Cm). (F) Concentration (E1) and smoothness (E2).
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 10 | Semiaquatic and terrestrial profiles for extant taxa. Plots showing centrum length profiles for different semi-aquatic (A–F) and terrestrial (G–L) extant
species. All patterns were normalized with their mean centrum length so the y-axis reflects the variation in length with respect to its mean vertebral length. The x-axis
was re-scaled, so that the trunk-length of all individuals is represented by the same length in the plot. Black arrows mark the beginning of the chest and the first sacral
vertebra. The pattern for Caiman crocodilius, Varanus bengalensis, and Varanus salvator are normalized average curves of the 3, 2, and 4 available specimen data.
Data adapted from Felice and Angielczyk (2014).
trunk. V. rudicollis shows a very similar pattern. On the other
end of the cline, V. exanthematicus shows a peak in maximum
vertebral length between the girdles; all the other vertebrae
decrease continuously in size toward both extremes of the spine.
The other Varanus species present intermediate patterns in their
dorsal regions.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 11 | Semiaquatic and terrestrial profiles for extinct taxa. (A–D), taxa regarded to have developed a semiaquatic lifestyle. (E–H), taxa that represent the
terrestrial type, although note that Ophiacodon’s lifestyle is discused (see text). Plots showing centrum length profiles for different semi-aquatic (to the left) and
terrestrial (to the right) extinct species. All patterns were normalized with their mean centrum length so the y-axis reflects the variation in length with respect to its mean
vertebral length. All patterns are re-scaled, so that the trunk of all individuals has the same length. Black arrows mark the beginning of the chest and the first sacral
vertebra. The patterns of Mesosaurus tenuidens, Hovasaurus boulei, Thadeosaurus colcanapi, Claudiosaurus germaini, and Cotylorhynchus hancocki, are normalized
average curves obtained with data of the number of specimens available, respectively 40, 4, 2, 4, and 2. Data on synapsids were adapted from Felice and Angielczyk
(2014).
The profiles of some of the analyzed taxa, such as
Amblyrhynchus,
Caiman,
Melanosuchus,
Crocodylus,
and
Gavialis show weaker gradients in the vertebral mean length
throughout the column. Amblyrhynchus displays a peak among
the dorsal vertebrae; its cervical vertebrae are shorter than the
mean, even shorter than the dorsal ones. In contrast to Varanus,
the neck of these taxa tends to present a minimum in vertebral
length in its middle section. All these taxa show a maximum
in vertebral centrum length in the dorsal series (slightly closer
to the hip) (Figures 10A–F). Additionally, their pattern differs
from that observed in Varanus in the sacral region where a local
minimum is registered; pre- and post-sacral vertebrae are longer
than the sacral ones. The caudal vertebral length exhibits two
main patterns, one characterized by Caiman, Melanosuchus
(Alligatoridae), and Amblyrhynchus, in which the vertebral
length is homogeneous along the tail, and equal to the mean
length, and the other characterized by Crocodylus (Crocodylidae)
and Gavialis (Gavialidae), which show a vertebral length
increment in the proximal part of the tail, with a maximum at
the central region, and progressive decrease toward the end. The
caudal vertebral length is only shorter than the mean vertebral
length at the very end of the tail, in contrast with the terrestrial
species in which all the caudal vertebrae are shorter than the
mean length.
Among the extant taxa studied, the six Varanus species are
all basically terrestrial (Thompson and Withers, 1997); although
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
13
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 12 | Hind limbs proportions; tibia/femur ratio vs. pes/femur ratio of different extant and extinct species. Selected mammals are plotted in pink as reference.
Pes measurement is the sum of the length of phalanges and metatarsal of the longest toe. (A) Graph distinguishing species group. (B) Graph distinguishing observed
or inferred species ecology. (C). Detail of the inset from (A,B). Axis display ratio values as decimals and fractions. Oblique dashed lines represents tibia/pes ratio, from
(Continued)
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
14
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 12 | left to right: 1:1, 1:2, 1:4. All the species are represented by the measurement of one individual except the varanids that represent the mean of several
individuals; (see sources in main text). Mesosaurus, Hovasaurus, Claudiosaurs, Captorhinus, and Stenopterygius have more than one individual plotted. Stem
Tetrapoda & Temnospondyli: [As], Acanthostega; [Apt], Apateon; [Gre], Greererpeton burkemorani; [Is], Ichthyostega; [Tul], Tulerpeton curtum; [Euc], Eucritta
melanolimnetes; [Cra], Crassigyrinus scotic. Paleozoic tetrapods, embolomeres and other taxa that are often associated with the amniote stem: [Ara], Archeria; [Eld],
Eldeceeon rolfei; [Gep], Gephyrostegus; [Pro], Proterogyrinus scheelei; [Sil], Silvanerpeton miripedes, [Wes], Westlothiana lizziae. Lepospondyli: [Tud], Tuditanus
punctulatus; [Pan], Pantylus cordatus; Reptiles: [Vk], Varanus komodoensis; [Lac], Timon lepidus; [Ks], Kenyasaurus mariakaniensis; Sauropterygians: [Ah],
Anarosaurus heterodontus; [Ds], Dactylosaurus schroederi; [Np], Neusticosaurus pusillus; [Pt], Psilotrachelosaurus toeplitschi; [Sg], Serpianosaurus germanicus; [Sm],
Serpianosaurus mirigiolensis; early eureptiles: [Cr], Captorhinus; [Hyl], Hylonomus lyelli; [Pal], Paleothyris acadiana; [Pet], Petrolacosaurus kansensis; Synapsids: [Arc],
Archaeovenator hamiltonensis; [Cas], Casea broilii; [Eoc], Eocasea martini; [Oph], Ophiacodon; Ichthyosaurs: [Hs], Hupehsuchus; [St], Stenopterygius; Taxa were
measured from the following sources: Stem Tetrapoda, and other stegocephalians of debated affinities (Marjanovi and Laurin, 2013), including temnospondyls and
embolomeres (Romer, 1956; Carroll, 1970; Holmes, 1984, 2003; Godfrey, 1989; Panchen and Smithson, 1990; Sequeira and Milner, 1993; Smithson, 1993;
Smithson et al., 1994; Lebedev and Coates, 1995; Coates, 1996; Clack, 1998; Ruta and Clack, 2006; Fröbisch et al., 2007); Varanidae (Christian and Garland, 1996);
lepospondyls (Carroll, 1968; Carroll and Baird, 1968); phrynosomatid lizards (Herrel et al., 2002); Lacertidae Timon lepidus (Rewcastle, 1980); the earliest diapsid
Petrolacosaurus (Peabody, 1952); the possible tangasaurid Kenyasaurus mariakaniensis (Harris and Carroll, 1977); Synapsids (Williston, 1910; Eaton, 1962; Reisz
and Dilkes, 2003; Reisz and Fröbisch, 2014); various Permo-Carboniferous amniotes (Carroll, 1964, 1969; Fox and Bowman, 1966); Sauropterygians; (Sues and
Carroll, 1985; Rieppel, 1989; Caldwell, 1997a, 2002; Klein, 2012); Ichthyosauria (Carroll and Dong, 1991; Caldwell, 1997b); Mosasauridae (Caldwell, 1996). See
Table S1 (Supplementary Material) as reference.
FIGURE 13 | Profile normalization. (A) Number of vertebral samples available for each vertebra. (B) Normalized centrum length profiles for the 40 specimens
represented individually in Figures 3–5). Normalization was performed with the mean vertebral length. Mean values for each vertebra position are indicated by black
dots.
V. salvator seems to have more preferences for remain more time
into the water (De Lisle, 2007), all varanid species can indeed
swim, as they also develop arboreal specializations. V. rudicollis
inhabits rainforests as an arboreal species (Horn, 2004), they
spend almost all their life on land. Both species display their
longest vertebrae in the neck and a plateau in the trunk, but none
of the Varanus species show enlarged caudal vertebrae. They
spend almost all their life on land and they even display a little
dorsal skin-fold along their tail.
Some of the extant taxa analyzed, such as Amblyrhynchus,
Caiman, Melanosuchus, Crocodylus, and Gavialis show profiles
opposed to those of Varanus, particularly among the cervical
vertebrae. This length reduction is possibly associated to
their adaptation to aquatic environments (Buchholtz, 2001b).
Nevertheless, they display a maximum in dorsal vertebral
length toward the hip, which Buchholtz (1998) and Felice and
Angielczyk (2014) suggest corresponds to the area of lateral
undulation during terrestrial locomotion. The enlarged vertebrae
in the tail represent the region where traveling undulatory waves
pass along the tail during swimming (Buchholtz, 1998), and
the differences between a plateau (Alligatoridae) and a peak
(Crocodylidae and Amblyrhynchus) reflect the places where the
transmitted waves may be amplified (Buchholtz, 1998; Felice and
Angielczyk, 2014). It also reflects their behavior: although all
extant crocodilians are semiaquatic and all have fixed vertebrae
numbers, Crocodylidae are more aggressive and better predators
(mainly on big prey), while Alligatoridae are not aggressive and
prey on smaller preys.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
15
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
FIGURE 14 | Gondwana during the Early and Middle Permian; (A) Sakmarian; (B) Wordian. The red line delimitates the sea where Mesosaurus is known to occur.
Africa, Madagascar and North portion of South America contours are drawn with a black line. Modified after Faure and Cole (1999); Gibbs et al. (2002); Schlüter
(2008); Stephenson (2018).
The vertebral profile of Iguana iguana appears to differ
strongly from the other extant taxa with smaller presacrals,
cervicals that are not shorter than sacrals, and a tail pattern
that resembles that of Crocodylus and Gavialis proximally, even
though it maintains its length distally. It is also known that
Iguana iguana possesses swimming capabilities as most other
squamates and even though it is a terrestrial animal, it never
moves far away the water sources (Morales-Mávil et al., 2007;
Escobar et al., 2010). In its profile, Iguana resembles more the
marine iguana than the tree dwelling Varanus rudicollis, and this
reflects both taxonomy (Iguanidae vs. Varanidae) and differences
in vertebral counts.
Iguana iguana and Varanus salvator, like many other
squamate species, are known to use the tail as a whip-like
weapon (Murphy and Mitchell, 1974); considering the differences
observed in patterns of both species, we can infer that this lifestyle
does not leave a clear signal in vertebral length profiles.
As pointed out in almost all the species studied, either extinct
or extant, there is a length peak among the trunk vertebrae.
As it appears in species of very different lifestyles, it may be a
common attribute which obviously responds to the need these
animals have to perform lateral undulation both during terrestrial
and aquatic locomotion. Considering the plots for extant species,
for which life habits are known (see Table S1 in Supplementary
Material), we suggest that two patterns can be used to infer
terrestrial and aquatic or semi-aquatic habits in extinct taxa:
A- In terrestrial animals: cervical vertebrae are longer
than caudal vertebrae, and generally they are some of the
longest in the spine. The longest cervical vertebrae are
placed at the middle of the neck. Dorsal vertebrae either
display a maximum or maintain the length almost constant.
Caudal vertebrae are the smallest and decrease their length
continuously toward the tail tip. Extant examples are most
Varanus species; even V. salvator has cervical vertebrae longer
than caudals.
B - In semi-aquatic species: cervical vertebrae are among
the shortest ones, but the longest of this series are placed
either at both ends of the neck or toward the head. Dorsal
vertebrae display at least one peak, with values closest to the
mean vertebral length. A local minimum is present in the
sacral region. Caudal vertebrae either maintain their length
almost constant over the tail, or may present at least one
length peak. This pattern is represented by the crocodilians
and Amblyrhynchus among extant taxa.
Femur/Tibia and Femur/Pes Ratios Plots
(Figure 12)
The extant Varanus species and the phrynosomatid squamates
fall at the same region in the graph. Most of these species have
a tibia/femur ratio between 1:1 and 3:4 (0.75), while all had
pes/femur ratio ranging between 1:1 and 2:1. That means that
their tibia is not longer than the femur, and their pes is at
least as long as their femur. Also, their pes is larger than their
tibia but never more than twice the size of the latter. Some
plotted species are characterized by their terrestrial lifestyle, like
the selected varanids (Christian and Garland, 1996) and other
squamates, which are represented by tree- and rock-climbers or
ground-dwelling species (Herrel et al., 2002).
Stem-tetrapods like Acanthostega, Ichthyostega, Crassigyrinus,
Tulerpeton and Grereerpeton and the temnospondyl Apateon
have a tibia/femur ratio 1:2, and possess pes/femur ratios ranging
between 1:2 and 1:1. This means that their tibia is approximately
half as long as their femur, and their pes is equal to, or shorter
than their femur. However the plotted Temnospondyli show
more disparity, with a pes slightly shorter or larger than those
of stem tetrapods.
The 13 sauropterygian species plotted show much variation
in their pes/femur ratios; their pes can be longer or shorter than
their femur. However, all the plotted taxa have a femur similar in
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
16
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
length to more than twice as long as their tibiae. The ichthyosaur
Stenopterygius (St) falls in the same region as sauropterygians.
However, the early sauropterygian Dactylosaurus schroederi and
the basal ichthyosaur Hupehsuchus appear in the squamate zone.
This fact would be interpreted as preservation of more terrestrial
characters derived from their ancestors (Storrs, 1993).
The five plotted mosasaurid taxa display the most extreme
pes/femur ratio, larger than 3:1. Their tibia/femur ratio is similar
to that of other reptiles, between 1:2 and 1:1. Thus, the mosasaur
tibia is shorter than the femur but longer than half of the femur,
and their pes is more than 3 times longer than their femur
(Caldwell, 1996).
Synapsids are distributed next to the squamates, but have a
slightly lower tibia/femur ratio.
Early tetrapods that are often interpreted as part of the
amniote stem (e.g., Proterogyrinus, Gephyrostegus, and possibly
Westlothiana) (Ruta et al., 2003; Piñeiro et al., 2016) are a
very heterogeneous group. They are often considered aquatic
or semiaquatic (except for Westlothiana), and appear close
to mesosaurids in the plot, as well as to the purposed
semiaquatic stem Tetrapoda Greererpeton (Gre) and Tulerpeton
(Tul) (after Ruta et al., 2003) and to the captorhinid Captorhinus
aguti, which is usually interpreted as terrestrial. They all
possess a similar tibia/femur ratio lower than 3:4 (except
Petrolacosaurus with a ratio larger than 1:1) and a pes/femur
ratio ranging between 1:2 and 2:1 (Godfrey, 1989; Lebedev
and Coates, 1995). Stem Tetrapoda & Temnospondyli, and
part of the Permo-Carboniferous taxa (including anthracosaurs,
lepospondyls, and early amniotes) appear to share the same
region. Gephyrostegus displays a ratio that is similar to squamates
and synapsids. Eldeceeon [Eld], Silvanerpeton [Sil], Westlothiana
[Wes], Hylonomus [Hyl] Paleothyris [Pal], and Pantylus cordatus
[Pan] share pes/femur ratios analogous to the extant reptiles.
However, their tibia/femur ratio is lower than the ratio of the
plotted reptiles with the same pes/femur ratio. These last taxa
are characterized by the lowest tibia/pes ratios for terrestrial taxa
(oblique dashed lines in the plot; triangles in Figure 12). In other
words, while almost all plotted terrestrial species have tibia/pes
ratios larger than 1:2, the mentioned six species had ratios lower
than 1:2.
Mesosaurus has tibia/femur and pes/femur ratios lower than
those seen in squamates and basal synapsids. Its pes/femur
ratio is lower than the majority of the presumed stem Amniota
although Mesosaurus has a tibia/femur ratio near to 1:2 and the
pes/femur ratio is larger than in the majority of the stem tetrapods
studied herein. It has also a slightly higher tibia/femur ratio.
Curiously, Mesosaurus, Captorhinus (Cr), Proterogyrinus (Pro),
and Tulerpeton (Tul) have similar ratios, in a region shared by
both terrestrial and semiaquatic taxa. Even though Proterogyrinus
was considered probably aquatic based on the presence of lateral-
line canals (although poorly developed) (Holmes, 1984), many
temnospondyls thought to be semiaquatic, also possess these
sensory sulci (see Schoch and Milner, 2000; Yates and Warren,
2000; Damiani, 2001). Nevertheless, the absence of sulci does not
necessarily imply terrestriality (Vallin and Laurin, 2004, p. 68;
Danto et al., 2012). The hypothesis that any stegocephalian with
lateral-line sulci was amphibious rather than aquatic contradicts
what we know of extant taxa (because the neuromasts of this
organ do not support dehydration), unless we postulate that the
sulci persisted in the adult even though the organ regressed and
was lost, presumably at metamorphosis.
Contrary to reptiles that mainly have tibia/pes ratios between
1:1 and 1:2, most mammals have tibia/pes ratios larger than 1:1
and thus, they fall in a separated area of the plot, which may
reflect their parasagittal gait and other mammalian attributes
(Kelly and Sears, 2011; Figure 12).
Claudiosarus and Hovasaurus occupy the same regions as the
squamates, probably reflecting the retention of some terrestrial
locomotion, as was previously suggested by other workers (e.g.,
Carroll, 1981, but see also Smith, 2000) and in agreement with
our results on vertebral morphometrics.
DISCUSSION
The Lifestyle of Basalmost Amniotes
Romer (1974) hypothesized that the earliest amniotes might
have been aquatic or semi-aquatic. More efforts were recently
done by applying different methodologies to investigate deeper
into the lifestyle of basalmost amniotes (Germain and Laurin,
2005; Canoville and Laurin, 2010; Huttenlocker and Rega, 2012),
including that of the basal synapsid Ophiacodon. Most of the
previous studies have considered Ophiacodon as a semi-aquatic
animal (Romer and Price, 1940; Kemp, 1982; Germain and
Laurin, 2005; Canoville and Laurin, 2010). For example, Felice
and Angielczyk (2014) applied morphometric studies including
vertebral length profiles to several extinct and extant taxa and
Ophiacodon and other early synapsids fell in the semi-aquatic
category as they display a morphometric profile similar to
most extant semi-aquatic reptiles and mammals. Nevertheless,
a fairly terrestrial pattern can be observed in the plots that
these authors provided for Ophiacodon, regarding the smooth
decline in vertebral length toward the tip of the tail, which
is present (although much more evident) in all the Varanus
species included in our study. Because the lines of evidence are
ambiguous, Felice and Angielczyk (2014) did not consider the
length metrics of Ophiacodon useful to explore lifestyles for this
taxon. Similarly, another work that inquired into the lifestyle of
Ophiacodon through a study of bone microanatomy (Germain
and Laurin, 2005) found evidence supporting a semi-aquatic to
terrestrial pattern. However, a more recent study (Laurin and
de Buffrénil, 2016) concluded (based on another bone section)
that this basal synapsid may have been terrestrial and that
this may reflect the early amniote condition because an older
basal synapsid (Clepsydrops collettii) exhibited a microanatomical
signature typical of terrestrial tetrapods. However, this could also
reflect the condition in early synapsids.
Our results show that all the studied basal synapsids develop
an intermediate pattern between the purposely semi-aquatic
diapsids from the Late Permian of Madagascar (Thadeosaurus,
Hovasaurus, and Claudiosaurus) and the extant terrestrial
Varanus species.
Lambertz et al. (2016) regard the Caseidae as aquatic mainly
for their osteoporotic-like limb bones and even suggest that they
had a respiratory mechanism to cope with the oxygen needs
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
17
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
while swimming. From our results, early synapsids display a
terrestrial-like pattern with Cotylorhynchus as the most notable
example (Figure 11E). Casea and Varanops resemble the patterns
of Varanus rudicollis or V. dumerilii. Despite the limited data
about the early synapsid neck, it can be said that, contrary to
mesosaurids, Cotylorhynchus, Varanops and Ophiacodon have
cervical vertebrae longer than the caudal ones, and in the
case of Varanops and Ophiacodon, also longer than most of
the dorsal ones (although some mesosaurids display a segment
of long vertebrae at the middle of the neck). Cotylorhynchus,
Casea, and Varanops have at least one peak of length in the
dorsal region, whereas Ophiacodon appears to maintain a more
constant value. Early synapsids exhibit a caudal pattern similar
to that of Varanus: a progressive decrease along the tail, not
developing a relative maximum. However, contrary to Varanus,
early synapsids appear to maintain the vertebral length along the
first portion of the tail (see Figures 10G–L, 11E–H).
Ophiacodon also resembles the terrestrial type (like Varanus
salvator or V. rudicollis) in having the cervical vertebrae longer
than the dorsals and the caudals, and the dorsals are also
longer than the caudals. This is congruent with the latest bone
microanatomical study (Laurin and de Buffrénil, 2016). However,
this interpretation should be treated with caution because we
did not study the specimens directly and there could be some
distortion due to incompleteness of the available specimens
plotted, a condition that is reflected in their noisy profile
(Figure 11H).
The Madagascan taxa Thadeosaurus and Claudiosaurus were
restored as having 25 and 24 presacral vertebrae respectively,
and the former shows at least 47 caudal vertebrae (Carroll,
1981). According to (Carroll (1981), pp. 322–323) and Currie
and Carroll (1984), the column and limb proportions of
Thadeosaurus are similar to those of basal terrestrial squamates
and, along with Claudiosaurus, Thadeosaurus lacked any aquatic
specialization. Also, according to (Carroll, 1981, p. 357) the
terminal phalanges of Thadeosaurus “are the typically trenchant,
recurved and laterally compressed claws, associated with
terrestrial carnivores”. However, it is sometimes considered as a
semi-aquatic or swimmer species by its anatomical similarities
with Claudiosaurus and Hovasaurus, though there was no
morphological evidence in the skeleton to suggest swimming
habits (Carroll, 1981; Currie, 1981a; Currie and Carroll, 1984).
However, according to the patterns established by Buchholtz
(1998), Thadeosaurus, with vertebral length increasing in the
caudal region, resembles that of aquatic taxa.
Our results suggest that among the Madagascan taxa,
Claudiosaurus may be the most terrestrial taxon (maybe semi-
aquatic); it is intriguingly similar to Mesosaurus because of a
smooth decrease in vertebral length toward the tip of the tail.
Nevertheless, Claudiosaurus shows almost no length increase in
dorsal or caudal vertebrae. Considering the cartilaginous nature
of carpus and tarsus in young individuals of Claudiosaurus
(Carroll, 1981), just as is the case in Mesosaurus (Piñeiro et al.,
2016), this feature could be seen as useful for improving flexibility
and thus adaptive to semiaquatic animals. Thadeosaurus, on the
contrary, displays a more ossified carpus and tarsus, a feature
putatively related to a more terrestrial habit. Carroll (1981) states
that all the osteological features shown by Claudiosaurus do
not forcibly make it aquatic, despite the poor ossification of
carpus and tarsus and lateralized zygapophyses in the caudal
vertebrae. Nevertheless, most extant terrestrial squamates have
an outstanding capacity for aquatic locomotion despite the lack of
skeletal and clear physiological specializations; intriguingly, the
marine iguana displays very few of such specializations. It should
be therefore kept in mind that even subtle skeletal modifications
may reflect a notable difference in habitat preferences.
Hovasaurus, a stem diapsid up to 900 mm long, with
pachyostotic ribs, strong caudal epiphyses and gastroliths, and
a possible tail “fin” impression above the neural spines of the
caudal vertebrae, is interpreted to have been adapted to a fully
aquatic lifestyle (Carroll, 1981; Currie, 1981a; de Buffrénil and
Mazin, 1989; Smith, 2000; Ketchum and Barrett, 2004; Reisz et al.,
2011). Hovasarus possesses 25 presacral vertebrae, 5 of which
are cervicals, and at least 70 caudal vertebrae (Currie, 1981b).
Unfortunately, the analyzed specimens are incomplete, but the
clear continuous increment in vertebral length in the proximal
segment of the tail represents a feature seen in the semi-aquatic
Crocodylia or Amblyrhynchus (Figures 10A, 11C).
Mesosaurus’ vertebral column is composed of 12 (13 in some
individuals) cervical, 21 dorsal, two sacrals and more than 64
caudal vertebrae, making a total count of around 100 elements
(Villamil et al., 2015; Piñeiro et al., 2016). As occurs with other
basal amniotes, the lifestyle of mesosaurids is not as easy to
determine as previously believed. Mesosaurids probably spent
most of the time swimming in shallow waters, but capabilities
for land incursion cannot be totally ruled out. Mesosaurus has
cervical vertebrae shorter than the dorsals, just as observed in
semi-aquatic extinct and extant species. However, intriguingly,
some Mesosaurus have the longest cervical vertebrae placed at
the middle of the neck, as in terrestrial Varanus species. Also,
in Mesosaurus, the longest vertebrae are located in the dorsal
region, as in Amblyrhynchus, some basal synapsids and also
some Varanus species. Mesosaurus seems to maintain the caudal
vertebral length along the first portion of the tail, in a peak or a
plateau, from which it decreases distally.
According
to
limb
morphometrics,
mesosaurids
fall
consistently in a region occupied by taxa that are usually
considered both terrestrials and semiaquatic; they are positioned
close to Gephyrostegus, Proterogyrinus, and Tulerpeton, as well
as to the basal eureptile Captorhinus aguti, but intriguingly, they
are not as close as expected to the oldest amniotes Hylonomus
and Paleothyris (see Figure 12). However, the lifestyle of the
two taxa that are often considered terrestrial (Gephyrostegus
and Captorhinus aguti) is not well-established. Captorhinus is
typically considered terrestrial because of faunal associations
(MacDougall et al., 2017), but its thick long bone cortex suggests
an amphibious lifestyle (Canoville and Laurin, 2010). Therefore,
this result would suggest affinities of Captorhinus with aquatic
or semiaquatic taxa. As for Gephyrostegus, the absence of
lateral-line canals led Carroll (1970) to suggest a terrestrial
lifestyle, but the lack of fusion between neural arches and centra
of an embolomerous configuration in specimens that (Carroll
(1970), p. 269) considered mature, suggests a fairly aquatic or a
semiaquatic lifestyle.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
18
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
Morphometrics of Mesosaurid Ontogenetic
Stages
Mesosaurus’ vertebral profiles seem to have a constant pattern
through ontogeny as they are similarly independent of the size
of the individuals (Figure 3, specimens 1-3; Figure 4, specimens
34, 35; Figure 5, specimen 39, Figure 8B). However, patterns
are more marked in the very mature individuals, with larger
differences between minimum and maximum lengths. Moreover,
as the preservation quality of fossil samples decreases in the
largest individuals, noise and disarticulation increase. The larger
the specimen, the more difficult it is to find a complete skeleton.
Although
some
individuals
exhibit
abnormal
profiles,
normalization methods using the mean vertebral length of
a population allow comparing individuals. Normalization
(dividing the patterns by the mean vertebral length) does not
modify the patterns; it simply rescales them so that they are
comparable to each other (Figure 13).
Previous studies have characterized the pattern of the species
by studying only a few isolated individuals. However, this results
in substantial uncertainty about the representative pattern of the
species because some intraspecific variation is always present.
Moreover, how can we know that the selected pattern was not
distorted by fossil preservation? Once normalized, the profiles
allow calculating a mean profile, which better reflects the genuine
pattern shared by the whole population. Normalized patterns can
be compared with this mean pattern (and between them) in order
to identify intraspecific variations.
In our study, all 40 Mesosaurus tenuidens specimens plotted
show profiles that follow a clear general pattern consistent with
semi-aquatic adaptations (Figure 8B) in all sampled ontogenetic
stages. Nevertheless, each individual has characteristics and
noticeable deviations, which might represent intraspecific
variation or may reflect differences in age, sex or preservation.
Paleobiological, Paleoecological and
Taphonomic Evidence Supports the
Transitional Semi-Aquatic Habits for
Mesosaurids
Taking into account the 40 profiles obtained, Mesosaurus
would fall into the semi-aquatic pattern seen in some extant
crocodylians and also in the analyzed Madagascan taxa
(Figures 10, 11). The graphs show that juvenile individuals,
which are represented by more complete, articulated and less
variable skeletons, have a clear semiaquatic profile, while the less
complete and badly preserved adult individuals show a noisier
pattern. This might imply a transitional lifestyle, where juvenile
individuals are fairly aquatic, but adults spend more time on
land. The caudal profile obtained for Mesosaurus tenuidens is
peculiar because it appears to be more constant than in typically
terrestrial forms, but there is generally no clear increment in
caudal vertebral length or a clear plateau as in other semi-aquatic
species (exceptions are noted; Figure 3, specimen 18; Figure 6,
specimens 5 and 8), only a slight decreasing curve. The neck
of Mesosaurus is long, and vertebrae are saddle-shaped, strongly
linked to each other through a cervical rib contact, spanning two
successive vertebrae, resembling those of some terrestrial species,
which need to raise the head in subaerial conditions and move it
differently than in the semi-aquatic forms studied herein.
The completeness degree of some specimens, as well as
the number of available individuals to be plotted (better if
different identifiable ontogenetic stages are represented), play an
important role in the validity of this methodology. Mesosaurids
are a good example to apply this method because an important
number of well-preserved specimens are available, counting
juvenile (including hatchlings) and adult stages.
Mesosaurids have been considered mainly aquatic, but derived
from a terrestrial form that had subsequently become aquatic
(Laurin and de Buffrénil, 2016) or to have derived directly
from semi-aquatic ancestors (Romer, 1957). Mesosaurids fed on
aquatic prey items and defecated in a transitional environment
(possibly a lagoon or a hypersaline sea) in shallow water (Piñeiro
et al., 2012a,c; Silva et al., 2017). Nares have migrated farther away
from the tip of the rostrum and are located dorsally, eyes are large
and the snout is long. These features, along with the presence of
pachyosteosclerotic ribs and webbed manus and pes, are obvious
aquatic adaptations. However, some of these features (though
not pachyosteosclerosis) are also present in amphibious taxa. The
presence of coprolites in close proximity to mesosaurid skeletons
such as those we have recently described (Silva et al., 2017),
which mostly appear not to have been expelled post mortem (see
Hone et al., 2015), is rather uncommon because normally, it is
difficult to identify the coprolite producer. Possible explanations
for the numerous excrements associated to mesosaurid body
remains include: (a), mesosaurids spent much time in confined
areas in a transitional coastal environment and (b), they lived
in dense populations (Dentzien-Dias et al., 2012). Common
associations of adult skeletons with newborns suggest that some
kind of parental care existed in Mesosaurus (Piñeiro et al., 2012a).
Mesosaurus often scavenged on mesosaurid carrion; this lifestyle
is compatible with the hypothesis that dense populations of
mesosaurids lived in an environment with limited food resources
(Silva et al., 2017). Some gastric contents found associated to
mesosaurid skeletons include plant and insect remains that might
have been scavenged on the water pool bottom (Silva et al., 2017)
but alternatively, plants and insects could have been ingested
on land. Exceptionally, mesosaurid coprolites show possible
desiccation fractures (see Silva et al., 2017, Figure 3C).
Direct
evidence
that
Mesosaurus
spent
a
significant
proportion of time on land is missing. Its environment was
an inland sea, comparable to a shallow saline lake. At the time
that mesosaurids colonized the basin, the sea may have been
partially cut off from the ocean, which may have resulted in
moderate evaporation and hypersalinity (see Piñeiro et al., 2012c;
Callefo et al., 2018). In the Uruguayan part of the Paraná Basin,
the shore was close, as biogeographic reconstructions suggest
(Wopfner, 1999; Milani and De Wit, 2008; Figure 14); this is
also suggested by the presence of well-preserved insects and
plants as common components of the “mesosaur community”
(Piñeiro et al., 2012c). Moreover, pygocephalomorph crustaceans
are associated to shallow environments (Brooks, 1962; Hotton,
2002; Piñeiro, 2008) and that is probably why mesosaurids were
not found in the deepest basin sections. Mesosaurus would have
fed on algae as well as on mesosaurid carrion deposited in the
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
19
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
shallow coastal plains and it is worth to note that mesosaurid
skeletons from the deepest areas are in general not only well
preserved, but also more articulated, perhaps due to the absence
of pygocephalomorph reworking. Sedimentological analyses
do not suggest that the basin was affected by tides, and the
studied levels from Uruguay show no evidence of heavy storms,
which allowed the delicate, exceptional preservation of the fossils
(Piñeiro et al., 2012b,c). Subaerial preservation is more unlikely
to have produced well-preserved specimens; this taphonomic
bias is illustrated by the quality of the fossilized specimens. Large,
mature mesosaurids are poorly preserved and less abundant
than young adults and juveniles that were rapidly buried by
volcanic ash that periodically affected the basin (see Santos
et al., 2006; Piñeiro et al., 2012c). Alternatively, the difference in
numbers of preserved specimens might simply reflect population
structure in which few individuals are expected to reach a
large body size. Remarkably, Silva et al. (2017) suggested that
Mesosaurus from the Mangrullo and Iratí Formations lived
under environmental stress. It is thus also possible that adult
Mesosaurus were more terrestrial than younger ones, which
would provide a simple taphonomic explanation of the relative
rarity and poor preservation quality of mature individuals.
Intriguingly, the largest mesosaurids known so far (Piñeiro,
2002, 2006) come from crystalline levels (gypsum), and are
associated with desiccation marks and a thin bentonitic layer.
The alternative hypothesis suggesting a more fully aquatic
mesosaurid taxon (Modesto, 1996) or simply that the very
mature individuals lived in deeper waters is not supported by the
existent evidence: the largest individuals are solely preserved in
the marginal (shore line) area of the basin (e.g., those from the
Mangrullo Formation); the suggested presence of parental care
in Mesosaurus supports the hypothesis that mature and juvenile
individuals lived very close to each other at least seasonally,
and the main food item of mesosaurids (see Silva et al., 2017)
should have been most abundant in coastal areas, because of the
unfavorable environmental conditions for bentonic biota such
as the high salinity and anoxia of the deepest basin bottoms
(Goldberg and Humayun, 2016).
Additional Anatomical Features Studied for
Evaluation of mesosaurid Lifestyle
Although the rigid structure of the appendicular joints was
considered as a constraint for mesosaurids to walk on land, it
could not have been restrictive for making terrestrial incursions
(Modesto, 1996; Piñeiro et al., 2012a). Nevertheless, the anatomy
of the girdles and appendicular elements does not differ much
from those present in supposedly terrestrial basal amniotes such
as Hylonomus, the captorhinids and basal synapsids, or even
the basal diapsid Petrolacosaurus (see Romer and Price, 1940;
Peabody, 1952; Romer, 1956; Carroll, 1964, 1982; Reisz, 1977).
These features include the fusion of coracoid and scapula to
form the scapulocoracoid in adults, and co-ossification of the
pelvic elements which abut weakly to the two sacral ribs through
the iliac dorsal lamina, a joint that appears as co-ossified in the
mature specimens (Piñeiro et al., 2012a).
The somewhat rigid axial skeleton of mesosaurids forms a
deep chest where vertebrae lack intercentra but display poorly
developed accessory articular structures (e.g., hyposphene and
hypantrum) to stabilize the trunk (Seeley, 1892; von Huene,
1941; Sumida and Modesto, 2001), probably acting in association
with the ribs and gastralia. Still allowing some flexibility, these
apophyses restrain extreme torsion of the axial skeleton and
helped mesosaurids to avoid injuries from vertebral twisting
during rapid movements. The gastralia also increases the body
stiffness, giving protection to the ventral body wall (Buchholtz,
2001a), but it could be plesiomorphic for tetrapods (Gegenbaur,
1898; Romer, 1956) and thus, it is not exclusive of aquatic forms.
Another noteworthy condition for evaluating the lifestyle
of Mesosaurus is the different development of manus and
pes. While Romer and Price (1940) considered that the
substantially reduced size of fore limb compared to the hind
limb was an adaptation for an aquatic lifestyle of mesosaurids,
this inference is questionable. Many of the basal amniotes
considered to be terrestrial forms have limb proportions
between manus and pes similar to those of mesosaurids (e.g.,
Petrolacosaurus and other basal diapsids, most basal synapsids,
captorhinomorphs, diadectomorphs) (see Romer and Price,
1940; Fox and Bowman, 1966; Carroll, 1969; Heaton and
Reisz, 1980, 1986; Reisz, 1981; Reisz et al., 1984; Berman and
Henrici, 2003; Berman et al., 2004, 2010). The manus is less
developed than the foot in Paleothyris, Hylonomus, Hovasaurus,
Claudiosaurus, and Mesosaurus, but also in anthracosaurs,
such as Gephyrostegus, Greererpeton, Proterogyrinus and the
microsaurs Tuditanus and possibly Pantylus (Carroll, 1964, 1968;
Carroll and Baird, 1968; Holmes, 1984; Godfrey, 1989). However,
most of these taxa with the exception of Paleothyris, Hylonomus,
Tuditanus, and Pantylus, which are thought to be terrestrial
(e.g., Falcon-Lang et al., 2007), have been considered as semi-
aquatic forms. Interestingly, most extant squamates exhibit an
important size difference between manus and pes, despite being
terrestrial, but most swim well if necessary (e.g., escaping a
predator).
Recently, it has been found that Mesosaurus possesses a
navicular or navicular-like bone (Piñeiro et al., 2016). This bone,
which is apparently formed by the fusion of centralia 1 and
2, is part of a tarsal innovation, including the origin of the
astragalus and the calcaneum, which is shared by all the oldest
amniotes. Thus, while it is not necessarily a direct evidence of
a terrestrial lifestyle (O’Keefe et al., 2006), the earliest amniotic
tarsus includes this bone, which is possibly an adaptation to
a more terrestrial lifestyle. It could have originated in the
semi-aquatic precursors of basal amniotes, in taxa resembling
Westlothiana, Gephyrostegus and the microsaurs, which also
possess an amniotic-like tarsus (see Piñeiro et al., 2016 and
references therein).
Optimizations of the inferred aquatic habit in amniote
phylogenies suggest that colonization of shallow environments
is plesiomorphic with respect to a pelagic adaptation, which,
according to some authors, could have been attained by
Mesosaurus tenuidens, which thus would be the most aquatic
mesosaurid species (Modesto, 1996, 1999). However, this
interpretation
may
have
been
influenced
by
adaptations
developed by Mesosaurus at different ontogenetic stages, as
suggested in the present study and also observed in other aquatic
and semi-aquatic reptiles (see Currie and Carroll, 1984; Caldwell,
1995, 2002).
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
20
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
The identification of Mesosaurus as one of the basalmost
amniotes (Laurin and Reisz, 1995; Piñeiro et al., 2012b, 2016;
Laurin and Piñeiro, 2017) or as the basalmost parareptile (e.g.,
Piñeiro et al., 2012a,b; Tsuji et al., 2012; Modesto et al., 2015)
raises the possibility that they did not derive from terrestrial
forms. According to Romer (1957), mesosaurids’ ancestors
were amphibious rather than terrestrial. The argument that
supported Romer’s hypothesis was that the temporal gap (from
early Late Carboniferous to Early Permian) appears to be very
short (Romer, 1974, but see also von Huene, 1940; Mazin, 2001;
Piñeiro, 2006) for the development of such anatomically complex
evolutionary transformations (from axial aquatic to paraxial
terrestrial and again to axial aquatic locomotion). Mesosaurids
represented one of the basalmost clades in the phylogenetic tree
of amniotes (Laurin and Piñeiro, 2017) which is, interestingly, in
accordance with Romer’s idea that the earliest amniotes retained
an amphibious lifestyle, as suggested for mesosaurids in this
study.
CONCLUSIONS
Vertebral profiles seem to be a simple and useful method to
discriminate locomotor habits. Profiles of terrestrial taxa exhibit
clear differences from those of aquatic and semi-aquatic taxa in
the studied species. Extinct species roughly match their expected
patterns and are in general consistent with other adaptive
anatomical features observed in the taxa. Basal synapsids fit
well in the terrestrial pattern as expected, and the Madagascan
taxa analyzed seem to fit the semi-aquatic and aquatic patterns
identified here. The obtained results should be taken with caution
due to the low number of specimens and taxa involved.
The quality of preservation appears to be more important to
establish reliable vertebral length profiles than the completeness
degree of fossils. Well-preserved specimens, even if they are
incomplete (e.g., Hovasaurus), can provide discernible patterns,
but complete and poorly preserved fossils generate noisy patterns
whose interpretation may be misleading (e.g., Ophiacodon). As
was previously suggested, ontogenetic changes in the proportions
of the axial skeleton, sexual dimorphism or osteo-pathologies
and other sources of variation in extinct species would make
this study very defective if only a few specimens were used. The
normalization method using the mean vertebral length resulted
in a reliable tool in order to overcome intraspecific variations in
specific ontogenetic stages, allowing calculating a mean profile
that reflects the general pattern of the species.
The evidence suggests that Mesosaurus may have been slightly
amphibious rather than strictly aquatic, at least when it attained
a large size and an advanced ontogenetic age, though it is
impossible to determine how much time was spent on land and
what kind of activity was performed there. Thus, it is impossible
to know if mesosaurids came onto land only to bask, like seals
or crocodiles, or if they were a bit more agile. Their rather
extensive pachyosteosclerosis implies limited terrestrial agility,
which would have severely restricted terrestrial foraging abilities.
Therefore, we suggest a more amphibious for Mesosaurus
rather a fully aquatic lifestyle as previously suggested. Studies
on limb proportions also support the resulting semiaquatic
pattern suggested by the vertebral profiles. This interpretation
is compatible with a hypothesis of semi-aquatic or amphibious
direct ancestors of mesosaurids (Piñeiro et al., 2016), though this
is not what an optimization of lifestyle on tetrapod phylogeny
suggests (Laurin and de Buffrénil, 2016).
As suggested in previous works (e.g., Felice and Angielczyk,
2014), we also encourage further studies of vertebral profiles
in extant and extinct species, in order to better understand
how ontogeny, sexual dimorphism, osteo-pathologies, and
preservation modify vertebral column patterns.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PND and GP conceived the study, wrote the manuscript with
input of all the authors; PND and GP produced the figures; PND
is responsible for all the measurements and he performed all
the morphometric analyses; and MM and ML contributed to the
writing and interpretation of the results, and to the edition of the
text.
FUNDING
This is a contribution to the Project ANII, Movilidad and
Cooperación Internacional N◦ 1, 2014-2015 (Uruguay-France)
to GP.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the Academic Editor Martín Ezcurra and
reviewers Torsten Scheyer and Juan Carlos Cisneros for their
constructive contribution to this paper, and to Ivone Cardozo and
Marcelha Páez Landim (USP, São Paulo, Brazil), Rainer Brocke
and Gunnar Riedel (Curators of the Paleontological Collection
at the Natur Museum Senckenberg, Frankfurt, Germany), for
kindly help us during the revision of several of the specimens
used in this study. We are also grateful to the curator Heinz
Furrer and collection managers of the Paläontologisches Institut
und Museum der Universität Zürich (Switzerland) (PIMUZ)
for provide good quality photographs of mesosaur specimens
housed in that institution. We thank Pablo Velozo for taking
the photographs of the Madagascan taxa deposited in the fossil
collection of Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle of Paris,
and to Piotr Bajdek for helpful comments and suggestions on
mesosaur cololites taphonomy.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.
2018.00109/full#supplementary-material
Table S1 | Forelimbs ratios. Species acronyms, colors and source of data as used
in Figure 12 are provided. S, semiaquatic; A, aquatic; T, terrestrial.
Table S2 | Centrum measurements for the studied Mesosaurus specimens. Code
and collection number are provided.
Table S3 | Centrum measurements for the studied Madagascan taxa
Thadeosaurus, Claudiosaurus and Hovasaurus.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
21
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
REFERENCES
Angelini, F., and Ghiara, G. (1984). Reproductive modes and strategies in
vertebrate evolution. Boll. Zool. 51, 121–203. doi: 10.1080/112500084094
39459
Araújo, D. C. (1976). Taxonomia e relações dos Proganosauria da Bacia do Paraná.
An. Acad. Bras. Cien. 48, 91–116.
Berman, D. S., and Henrici, A. C. (2003). Homology of the astragalus and structure
and function of the tarsus of Diadectidae. J. Paleontol. 77, 172–188. doi: 10.
1666/0022-3360(2003)077<0172:HOTAAS>2.0.CO;2
Berman, D. S., Henrici, A. C., Kissel, R. A., Sumida, S. S., and Martens, T. (2004).
A new diadectid (Diadectomorpha), Orobates pabsti, from the Early Permian of
central Germany. Bull. Carn. Mus. Nat. Hist. 35, 1–36.
Berman, D. S., Reisz, R. R., and Scott, D. (2010). Redescription of the skull
of Limnoscelis paludis Williston (Diadectomorpha: Limnoscelidae) from the
Pennsylvanian of Caño del Cobre, northern New Mexico. Bull. N. M. Mus. Nat.
Hist. Sci. 49, 185–210. doi: 10.2992/0145-9058(2004)35[1:ANDDOP]2.0.CO;2
Brooks, H. K., (1962). The Paleozoic Eumalacostraca of North America. Bull.
Amer. Paleont. 44, 163–338.
Buchholtz, E. A. (1998). “Implications of vertebral morphology for locomotor
evolution in early Cetacea,” in The Emergence of Whales: The Evolutionary
Patterns in the Origin of Cetacea, Ed J. G. M. Thewissen (New York, NY: Plenum
Press). 325–352.
Buchholtz, E. A. (2001a). Swimming styles in Jurassic ichthyosaurs. J. Vert. Paleont.
21, 61–73. doi: 10.1671/0272-4634(2001)021[0061:SSIJI]2.0.CO;2
Buchholtz,
E.
A.
(2001b).
Vertebral
osteology
and
swimming
style
in
living
and
fossil
whales
(Order:
Cetacea).
J.
Zool.
253,
175–190.
doi: 10.1017/S0952836901000164
Buchholtz, E. A. (2007). Modular evolution of the cetacean vertebral column. Evol.
Dev. 9, 278–289. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2007.00160.x
Buchholtz,
E.
A.,
and
Schur,
S.
A.
(2004).
Vertebral
osteology
in
Delphinidae
(Cetacea).
Zool.
J.
Linn.
Soc.
140,
383–401.
doi: 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2003.00105.x
Caldwell, M. (1995). Developmental constraints and limb evolution in Permian
and modern lepidosauromorph diapsids. J. Vert. Paleontol. 14, 459–471.
Caldwell, M. W. (1996). Ontogeny and phylogeny of the mesopodial skeleton in
mosasauroid reptiles. Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 116, 407–436.
Caldwell, M. W. (1997a). Limb osteology and ossification patterns in Cryptoclidus
(Reptilia: Plesiosauroidea) with a review of sauropterygian limbs. J. Vert.
Paleontol. 17, 295–307.
Caldwell, M. W. (1997b). Limb ossification patterns of the ichthyosaur
Stenopterygius, and a discussion of the proximal tarsal row of ichthyosaurs and
other neodiapsid reptiles. Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 120, 1–25.
Caldwell, M. W. (2002). From fins to limbs to fins: limb evolution in fossil marine
reptiles. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112, 236–249. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10773
Callefo, F., Arduim, D. H., Ricardi-Branco, F., Galante, D., Rodrigues, F.,
and Branco, F. C. (2018). The giant stromatolite field at Santa Rosa de
Viterbo, Brazil (Paraná Basin) – A new paleoenvironmental overview and the
consequences of the Irati Sea closure in the Permian. J. South. Am. Earth. Sci.
84, 299–314. doi: 10.1016/j.jsames.2018.04.008
Canoville, A., and Laurin, M. (2010). Evolution of humeral microanatomy and
lifestyle in amniotes, and some comments on paleobiological inferences. Biol.
J. Linn. Soc. 100, 384–406. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8312.2010.01431.x
Carroll, R. L. (1964). The earliest reptiles. Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 45, 61–83.
doi: 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1964.tb00488.x
Carroll, R. L. (1968). The postcranial skeleton of the Permian microsaur Pantylus.
Can. J. Zool. 46, 1175–1192. doi: 10.1139/z68–168
Carroll, R. L. (1969). A Middle Pennsylvanian captorhinomorph, and the
interrelationships of primitive reptiles. J. Paleontol. 43, 151–170.
Carroll, R. L. (1970). The ancestry of reptiles. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci.
257, 267–308.
Carroll, R. L. (1981). Plesiosaur ancestors from the Upper Permian of Madagascar.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 293, 315–383.
Carroll, R. L. (1982). Early evolution of reptiles. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 13,
87–109.
Carroll, R. L., and Baird, D. (1968). The Carboniferous amphibian Tuditanus
(Eosauravus) and the distinction between microsaurs and reptiles. Am. Mus.
Novit. no. 2337, 1–50.
Carroll, R. L., and Dong, Z. M. (1991). Hupehsuchus, an enigmatic aquatic reptile
from the Triassic of China, and the problem of establishing relationships.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 331, 131–153.
Christian, A., and Garland, Jr., T. (1996). Scaling of limb proportions in monitor
lizards (Squamata: Varanidae). J. Herpetol. 30, 219–230.
Clack, J. A. (1998). A new Early Carboniferous tetrapod with a mélange of
crown-group characters. Nature. 394, 66.
Coates, M. I. (1996). The Devonian tetrapod Acanthostega gunnari Jarvik:
postcranial anatomy, basal tetrapod interrelationships and patterns of skeletal
evolution. Trans. R. Soc. Edinb. 87, 363–421.
Currie, P. J. (1981a). The Osteology and Relationships of Aquatic Eosuchians From
the Upper Permian of Africa and Madagascar. Unpublished Ph.D.Thesis, McGill
University, Montreal, QC.
Currie, P. J. (1981b). Hovasaurus boulei, an aquatic eosuchian from the Upper
Permian of Madagascar. Palaeontol. Afric. 21, 99–168.
Currie, P. J., and Carroll, R. L. (1984). Ontogenetic changes in the eosuchian reptile
Thadeosaurus. J. Vert. Paleontol. 4, 68–84.
Damiani, R. J. (2001). A systematic revision and phylogenetic analysis of Triassic
mastodonsauroids (Temnospondyli: Stereospondyli): Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 133,
379–482. doi: 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2001.tb00635.x
Danto, M., Witzmann, F., and Müller, J. (2012). Redescription and phylogenetic
relationships of Solenodontosaurus janenschi Broili, 1924 from the Late
Carboniferous
of
Nýrany, Czech Republic. Fossil
Record. 15, 45–59.
doi: 10.1002/mmng.201200003
de Buffrénil, V., and Mazin,. J. M. (1989). Bone histology of Claudiosaurus
germaini (Reptilia, Claudiosauridae) and the problem of pachyostosis in aquatic
tetrapods. Hist. Biol. 2, 311–322.
De Lisle, H. F. (2007). Observations on Varanus salvator in North Sulawesi.
Biawak. 1, 59–66.
Dentzien-Dias, P. C., de Figueiredo, A. E. Q., Horn, B., Cisneros, J. C., and Schultz,
C. L. (2012). Paleobiology of a unique vertebrate coprolites concentration from
Rio do Rasto Formation (Middle/Upper Permian), Paraná Basin, Brazil. J. S.
Am. Earth Sci. 40, 53–62. doi: 10.1016/j.jsames.2012.09.008
de Ricqlès, A., and de Buffrénil, V. (2001). “Bone histology, heterochronies and the
return of Tetrapods to life in water: where are we?” in Secondary Adaptation
of Tetrapods to Life in Water, eds J.-M. Mazin and V. de Buffrénil (Munich:
Friedrich Pfeil), 289–310.
De Smet, W. M. A. (1977). “The regions of the cetacean vertebral column,” in
Functional Anatomy of Marine Mammals, Vol. 3. ed J. Harrison (New York,
NY: Academic Press), 58–80.
Eaton, T. H. (1962). Adaptive features of the fore limb in primitive tetrapods and
mammals. Am. Zool. 2, 157–160.
Escobar, R. A., Besier, E., and Hayes, W. K. (2010). Evaluating head starting as
a management tool: post release success of green iguanas (Iguana iguana) in
Costa Rica. Int. J. Biodivers. Conserv. 2, 204–214.
Falcon-Lang, H. J., Benton, M. J., and Stimson, M. (2007). Ecology of earliest
reptiles inferred from basal Pennsylvanian trackways. J. Geol. Soc. 164,
1113–1118. doi: 10.1144/0016-76492007-015
Faure, K., and Cole, D. (1999). Geochemical evidence for lacustrine microbial
blooms in the vast Permian Main Karoo, Paraná, Falkland Islands and Huab
basins of southwestern Gondwana. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol.
152, 189–213.
Felice, R. N., and Angielczyk, K. D. (2014). “Was Ophiacodon (Synapsida,
Eupelycosauria)
a
Swimmer?
A
test
using
vertebral
dimensions,”
in
Early Evolutionary History of the Synapsida, Vertebrate Paleobiology and
Paleoanthropology, eds C. F. Kammerer, K. D. Angielczyk, and J. Fröbisch
(Dordrecht: Springer), 25–50.
Fish, F. E. (1984). Kinematics of undulatory swimming in the American Alligator.
Copeia 1984, 839–843.
Fish, F. E. (1994). Association of propulsive swimming mode with behavior in river
otters (Lutra canadensis). J. Mammal. 75, 989–997.
Fox, R. C., and Bowman, M. C. (1966). Osteology and relationships of Captorhinus
aguti (Cope) (Reptilia: Captorhinomorpha). Univ. Kans. Paleontol. Cont.
Vertebrata. 11, 1–179.
Fröbisch, N. B., Carroll, R. L., and Schoch, R. R. (2007). Limb ossification in the
Paleozoic branchiosaurid Apateon (Temnospondyli) and the early evolution
of preaxial dominance in tetrapod limb development. Evol. Dev. 9, 69–75.
doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2006.00138.x
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
22
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
Gegenbaur,
C.
(1898).
Vergleichende
Anatomie
der
Wirbelthiere
mit
Berücksichtigung der Wirbellosen, Vol 1. Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann.
Germain, D., and Laurin, M. (2005). Microanatomy of the radius and
lifestyle in amniotes (Vertebrata, Tetrapoda). Zool. Scripta. 34, 335–350.
doi: 10.1111/j.1463-6409.2005.00198.x
Gibbs, M. T., Rees, P. M., Kutzbach, J. E., Ziegler, A. M., Behling, P. J., and
Rowley, D. B. (2002). Simulations of Permian climate and comparisons with
climate-sensitive sediments. J. Geol. 110, 33–55. doi: 10.1086/324204
Godfrey, S. J. (1989). The postcranial skeletal anatomy of the Carboniferous
tetrapod Greererpeton burkemorani Romer, 1969. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B. Biol. Sci. 323, 75–133. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1989.0002
Goldberg,
K.,
and
Humayun,
M.
(2016).
Geochemical
paleoredox
indicators
in
organic-rich
shales
of
the
Irati
Formation,
Permian
of
the
Paraná
Basin,
southern
Brazil.
Braz.
J.
Geol.
46,
377–393.
doi: 10.1590/2317-4889201620160001
Harris, J. M., and Carroll, R. L. (1977). Kenyasaurus, a new eosuchian reptile from
the Early Triassic of Kenya. J. Paleontol. 51, 139–149.
Heaton, M. J., and Reisz, R. R. (1980). A skeletal reconstruction of the Early
Permian captorhinid reptile Eocaptorhinus laticeps (Williston). J. Paleontol. 54,
136–143.
Heaton,
M.
J.,
and
Reisz,
R.
R.
(1986).
Phylogenetic
relationships
of
captothinomorph reptiles. Can. J. Earth. Sci. 23, 402–418.
Herrel, A., Meyers, J. J., and Vanhooydonck, B. (2002). Relations between
microhabitat use and limb shape in phrynosomatid lizards. Zool. J. Linn. Soc.
77, 149–163. doi: 10.1046/j.1095-8312.2002.00101.x
Holmes, R. B. (1984). The Carboniferous amphibian Proterogyrinus scheelei
Romer, and the early evolution of tetrapods. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol.
Sci. 306, 431–524. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1984.0103
Holmes, R. B. (2003). The hind limb of Captorhinus aguti and the step
cycle of basal amniotes. Can. J. Earth. Sci. 40, 515–526. doi: 10.1139/e0
2-039
Hone, D., Henderson, D. H., Therrien, F., and Habib, M. B. (2015). A specimen
of Rhamphorhynchus with soft tissue preservation, stomach contents and a
putative coprolite. PeerJ. 3:e1191. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1191
Horn, H.-G. (2004). “Varanus salvadorii,” in Varanoid Lizards of the World, eds E.
R. Pianka, D. King, and R. A. King (Bloomington: Indiana University Press),
234–244.
Hotton, N., Feldmann, R. M., Hook, R.W., and Dimichele, W.A., (2002).
Crustacean-bearing continental deposits in the Petrolia Formation (Leonardian
Series, Lower Permian) of North-Central Texas. J. Paleontol. 76, 486–494.
doi: 10.1017/S002233600003732X
Houssaye, A. (2009). “Pachyostosis” in aquatic amniotes: a review. Integr. Zool. 4,
325–340. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-4877.2009.00146.x
Huttenlocker, A. K., and Rega, E. (2012). “The paleobiology and bone
microstructure of pelycosaurian-grade synapsids, in Forerunners of Mammals:
Radiation, Histology, Biology, ed A. Chinsamy-Turan (Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press), 90–119.
Joyce, W.G., and Gauthier, J.A. (2004). Palaeoecology of Triassic stem turtles
shed new light on turtle origins. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. 271, 1–5.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2003.2523
Keller, T. (1976). Magen-und Darminhalte von Ichthyosauriern des süddeutschen
Posidonienschiefers. N. Jb. Geol. Paläont. Mh. 5, 266–283.
Kelly, M. E., and Sears, K. E. (2011). Limb specialization in living marsupial and
eutherian mammals: constraints on mammalian limb evolution. J. Mammal.
92, 1038–1049. doi: 10.1644/10-MAMM-A-425.1
Kemp, T. S. (1982). Mammal-like reptiles and the Origin of Mammals. London:
Academic Press.
Ketchum, H. F., and Barrett, P. M. (2004). New reptile material from the Lower
Triassic of Madagascar: implications for the Permian Triassic extinction event.
Can. J. Earth. Sci. 41, 1–8. doi: 10.1139/e03-084
Klein, N. (2012). Postcranial morphology and growth of the pachypleurosaur
Anarosaurus heterodontus (Sauropterygia) from the Lower Muschelkalk of
Winterswijk, The Netherlands. Paläontologische Zeitschrift. 86, 389–408.
doi: 10.1007/s12542-012-0137-1
Lambertz, M., Shelton, C. D., Spindler, F., and Perry, S. F. (2016). A caseian point
for the evolution of a diaphragm homologue among the earliest synapsids. Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 40, 1–18. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13264.
Laurin,
M.,
and
de
Buffrénil,
V.
(2016).
Microstructural
features
of
the femur in early ophiacodontids: a reappraisal of ancestral habitat
use and lifestyle of amniotes. Comptes Rendus Palevol. 15, 115–127.
doi: 10.1016/j.crpv.2015.01.001
Laurin, M., and Piñeiro, G. (2017). A reassessment of the taxonomic position of
mesosaurs, and a surprising phylogeny of early amniotes. Front. Earth Sci. Topic
Res. 13:88. doi: 10.3389/feart.2017.00088
Laurin, M., and Reisz, R. R. (1995). A reevaluation of early amniote phylogeny.
Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 113, 165–223. doi: 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1995.tb00932.x
Lebedev, O. A., and Coates, M. I. (1995). The postcranial skeleton of the Devonian
tetrapod Tulerpeton curtum Lebedev. Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 114, 307–348.
Lindgren, J., Jagt, J. W., and Caldwell, M. W. (2007). A fishy mosasaur: the axial
skeleton of Plotosaurus (Reptilia, Squamata) reassessed. Lethaia 40, 153–160.
doi: 10.1111/j.1502-3931.2007.00009.x
Long, J. H., Pabst, D. A., Shepherd, W. R., and McLellan, W. A. (1997). Locomotor
design of dolphin vertebral columns: bending mechanics and morphology of
Delphinus delphis. J. Exp. Biol. 200, 65–81.
MacDougall, M. J., Scott, D., Modesto, S. P., Williams, S. A., and Reisz, R.
R. (2017). New material of the reptile Colobomycter pholeter (Parareptilia:
Lanthanosuchoidea) and the diversity of reptiles during the Early Permian
(Cisuralian). Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 180, 661–671. doi: 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlw012
MacGregor, J. H. (1908). “On Mesosaurus brasiliensis nov. sp. from the Permian
of Brasil,” in ed. I.C. White IC Commissão dos Estudos das Minas de Carvão de
Pedra do Brasil, Parte II (Rio de Janeiro: National Press), 301–336.
Marjanovi,´
c, D., and Laurin, M. (2013). The origin(s) of extant amphibians:
a review with emphasis on the “lepospondyl hypothesis”. Geodiversitas 35,
207–272. doi: 10.5252/g2013n1a8
Massare, J. A. (1988). Swimming capabilities of Mesozoic marine reptiles:
implications for method of predation. Paleobiology 14, 187–205.
Mazin, J. M. (2001). “Mesozoic marine reptiles: an overview,” in Secondary
Adaptation of Tetrapods to Life in Water, eds J.-M. Mazin and V. de Buffrénil
(Munich: Friedrich Pfeil), 95–117.
McShea, D. W. (1992). A metric for the study of evolutionary trends in the
complexity of serial structures. Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 45, 39–55.
McShea, D. W. (1993). Evolutionary change in the morphological complexity of
the mammalian vertebral column. Evolution 47, 730–740.
Milani, E. J., and De Wit, M. J. (2008). Correlations between the classic Paraná and
Cape–Karoo sequences of South America and southern Africa and their basin
infill flanking the Gondwanides: du Toit revisited. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Public.
294, 319–342. doi: 10.1144/sp294.17
Modesto, S. P. (1996). The Anatomy, Relationships, and Palaeoecology of
Mesosaurus tenuidens and Stereosternum tumidum (Amniota: Mesosauridae)
From the Lower Permian of Gondwana. PhD Thesis, University of Toronto,
Toronto.
Modesto, S. P. (1999). Observations on the structure of the Early Permian reptile
Stereosternum tumidum. Palaeontol. Afric. 35, 7–19.
Modesto, S. P. (2006). The cranial skeleton of the Early Permian aquatic reptile
Mesosaurus tenuidens: implications for relationships and palaeobiology. Zool.
J. Linn. Soc. 146, 345–368. doi: 10.1111/j.1096-3642.(2006)0.00205.x
Modesto, S. P. (2010). The postcranial skeleton of the aquatic parareptile
Mesosaurus tenuidens from the Gondwanan Permian. J. Vert. Paleontol. 30,
1378–1395. doi: 10.1080/02724634.2010.501443
Modesto, S. P., Scott, D. M., MacDougall, M. J., Sues, H-D., Evans, D. C., and Reisz,
R. R. (2015). The oldest parareptile and the early diversification of reptiles. Proc.
R. Soc. B 282: 20141912. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2014.1912
Molnar, J. L., Pierce, S. E., Bhullar, B. A. S., Turner, A. H., and Hutchinson, J. R.
(2015). Morphological and functional changes in the vertebral column with
increasing aquatic adaptation in crocodylomorphs. Royal Soc. Open. Sci. 2,
150–439. doi: 10.1098/rsos.150439
Molnar, J. L., Pierce, S. E., and Hutchinson, J. R. (2014). An experimental and
morphometric test of the relationship between vertebral morphology and joint
stiffness in Nile crocodiles (Crocodylus niloticus). J. Exp. Biol. 217, 758–768.
doi: 10.1242/jeb.089904
Morales-Mávil,
J.
E.,
Vogt,
R.
C.,
and
Gadsden-Esparza,
H.
(2007).
Desplazamientos de la iguana verde, Iguana iguana (Squamata: Iguanidae)
durante la estación seca en La Palma, Veracruz, México. Rev. Biol. Trop. 55,
709–715. doi: 10.15517/rbt.v55i2.6047
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
23
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
Motani, R., Jiang, D. Y., Tintori, A., Rieppel, O., and Chen, G. B. (2014). Terrestrial
origin of viviparity in Mesozoic marine reptiles indicated by Early Triassic
embryonic fossils. PLoS ONE 9:e88640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088640
Murphy, J. B., and Mitchell, L.A. (1974). Ritualized combat behavior of the pygmy
mulga monitor lizard, Varanus gilleni (Sauria: Varanidae). Herpetologica 30,
90–97.
Nopcsa, F. B. (1923). Vorläufige Notiz über die Pachyostose und Osteosklerose
einiger mariner Wirbeltiere. Anatomischer Anzeiger. 56, 353–359.
Oelofsen, B. W. (1981). An Anatomical and Systematic Study of the Family
Mesosauridae (Reptilia, Proganosauria) With Special Reference to its Associated
Fauna and Palaeoecological Environment in the Whitehill Sea. Unpublished
PhD thesis, University of Stellenbosch.
O’Keefe, F. R., Sidor, C. A., Larsson, H. C. E., Maga, A., and Ide, O.
(2006). Evolution and homology of the astragalus in early amniotes: new
fossils, new perspectives. J. Morphol. 267, 415–425. doi: 10.1002/jmor.
10413
Panchen, A. L., and Smithson, T. R. (1990). The pelvic girdle and hind
limb of Crassigyrinus scoticus (Lydekker) from the Scottish Carboniferous
and the origin of the tetrapod pelvic skeleton. Trans. R. Soc. Edinb. 81,
31–44.
Peabody, F. E. (1952). Petrolacosaurus kansensis Lane, a Pennsylvanian reptile from
Kansas. Univ. Kans. Paleontol. Cont. Vertebrata 1, 1–41.
Pierce, S. E., Clack, J. A., and Hutchinson, J. R. (2011). Comparative axial
morphology in pinnipeds and its correlation with aquatic locomotory
behaviour. J. Anat. 219, 502–514. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01406.x
Piñeiro, G. (2002). Paleofaunas del Pérmico-Eotriásico de Uruguay. Unpublished
MSc. Thesis, Universidad de la República, PEDECIBA, Montevideo.
Piñeiro, G. (2004). Paleofaunas del Pérmico y Permo-Triásico de Uruguay.
Bioestratigrafía, Paleobiogeografía y Sistemática. Unpublished PhD Thesis,
Universidad de la República, Montevideo.
Piñeiro, G. (2006). “Nuevos aportes a la paleontología del Pérmico de Uruguay,”
in Cuencas Sedimentarias de Uruguay– Paleozoico, eds G. Veroslavsky, S.
Martínez, and M. Ubilla (Montevideo: DIRAC Facultad de Ciencias), 257–279.
Piñeiro, G. (2008). “Los mesosaurios y otros fósiles de fines del Paleozoico,” in
Fósiles de Uruguay, ed D. Perea (Montevideo: DIRAC; Facultad de Ciencias),
179–205.
Piñeiro, G., Ferigolo, J., Meneghel, M., and Laurin, M. (2012a). The oldest known
amniotic embryos suggest viviparity in mesosaurs. Hist. Biol. 24, 630–640.
doi: 10.1080/08912963.2012.662230
Piñeiro, G., Ferigolo, J., Ramos, A., and Laurin, M. (2012b). Cranial morphology of
the Early Permian mesosaurid Mesosaurus tenuidens and the evolution of the
lower temporal fenestration reassessed. Comptes Rendus Palevol. 11, 379–391.
doi: 10.1016/j.crpv.2012.02.001
Piñeiro, G., Núñez-Demarco, P., and Meneghel, M. (2016). The ontogenetic
transformation of the mesosaurid tarsus: a contribution to the origin of the
amniotic astragalus. PeerJ. 4:e2036. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2036
Piñeiro, G., Ramos, A., Goso, C., Scarabino, F., and Laurin, M. (2012c).
Unusual environmental conditions preserve a Permian mesosaur-bearing
Konservat-Lagerstätte from Uruguay. Acta Palaeontol. Pol. 57, 299–318.
doi: 10.4202/app.2010.0113
Reisdorf, A. G., Anderson, G. S., Bell, L. S., Klug, C., Schmid-Röhl, A., Röhl, H. J.,
et al. (2014). Reply to “Ichthyosaur embryos outside the mother body: not due
to carcass explosion but to carcass implosion” by van Loon (2013). Paleobiodiv.
Paleoenviron. 94, 487–494. doi: 10.1007/s12549-014-0162-z
Reisdorf, A. G., Bux, R., Wyler, D., Benecke, M., Klug, C., Maisch, M.
W., et al. (2012). Float, explode or sink: post-mortem fate of lung-
breathing
marine
vertebrates.
Paleobiodivers.
Paleoenviron.
92,
67–81.
doi: 10.1007/s12549-011-0067-z
Reisz, R. R. (1977). The oldest known diapsid reptile. Science 196, 1091–1093.
Reisz, R. R. (1981). A diapsid reptile from the Pennsylvanian of Kansas. Univ. Kans.
publ. Mus. Nat. Hist. 7, 1–74.
Reisz, R. R., Berman, D. S., and Scott, D. (1984). The anatomy and
relationships of the Lower Permian reptile Araeoscelis. J. Vert. Paleontol. 4,
57–67.
Reisz,
R.
R.,
and
Dilkes,
D.
W.
(2003).
Archaeovenator
hamiltonensis,
a
new
varanopid
(Synapsida:
Eupelycosauria)
from
the
Upper
Carboniferous of Kansas. Can. J. Earth. Sci. 40, 667–678. doi: 10.1139/e0
2-063
Reisz, R. R., and Fröbisch, J. (2014). The oldest caseid synapsid from
the Late Pennsylvanian of Kansas, and the evolution of herbivory in
terrestrial
vertebrates.
PLoS
ONE
9:e94518.
doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.
0094518
Reisz, R. R., Modesto, S. P., and Scott, D. M. (2011). A new Early Permian reptile
and its significance in early diapsid evolution. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. B.
278, 3731–3737. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2011.0439
Rewcastle, S. C. (1980). Form and function in lacertilian knee and mesotarsal
joints; a contribution to the analysis of sprawling locomotion. J. Zool. 191,
147–170.
Rieppel, O. (1989). A new pachypleurosaur (Reptilia: Sauropterygia) from the
Middle Triassic of Monte San Giorgio, Switzerland. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B, 323, 1–73.
Ritter, D. (1992). Lateral bending during lizard locomotion. J. Exp. Biol. 173, 1–9.
Romer, A. S. (1956). The Osteology of the Reptiles. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Romer, A. S. (1957). Origin of the amniote egg. Sci. Month. 85, 57–63.
Romer, A. S. (1966). Vertebrate Paleontology, 3rd Edn. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Romer, A. S. (1974). Aquatic adaptation in reptiles - primary or secondary? Ann.
S. Afr. Mus. 64, 221–230.
Romer, A. S., and Price, I. L. (1940). Review of the Pelycosauria. Geol. Soc. Spec.
Pub. 28, 1–538. doi: 10.1130/SPE28-p1
Ruta, M., Coates, M. I., and and Quicke, D. L. J. (2003). Early tetrapod relationships
revisited. Biol. Rev. 78, 251–345. doi: 10.1017/S1464793102006103
Ruta, M., and Clack, J.A. (2006). A review of Silvanerpeton miripedes,
a
stem
amniote
from
the
Lower
Carboniferous
of
East
Kirkton,
West Lothian, Scotland. Trans. R. Soc. Edinb. Earth Sci. 97, 31–63.
doi: 10.1017/S0263593300001395
Santos, R. V., Souza, P. A., Alvarenga, C. J. S., Dantas, E. L., Pimentel, E. L.,
Oliveira, C. G., et al. (2006). Shrimp U–Pb zircon dating and palynology
of bentonitic layers from the Permian Irati Formation Paraná Basin, Brazil.
Gondwana Res. 9, 456–463. doi: 10.1016/j.gr.2005.12.001
Schlüter, T. (2008). Geological Atlas of Africa. Heidelberg; Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Schoch, R. R., and Milner, A. R. (2000). Handbuch der Paläoherpetologie:
Stereospondyli, Teil 3, Verlag Dr. München: Friedrich Pfeil.
Seeley, H. (1892). The Mesosauria of Southern Africa. Quarterly J. Geol. Soc. Lond.
48, 586–604.
Sequeira, S. E. K., and Milner, A. R. (1993). The temnospondyl amphibian
Capetus from the Upper Carboniferous of the Czech Republic. Palaeontology
36, 657–680.
Silva, R. R., Ferigolo, J., Bajdek, P., and Piñeiro, G. (2017). The feeding habits of
Mesosauridae. Topic Res. Front. Earth Sci. 5:23. doi: 10.3389/feart.2017.00023
Smith, R. M. H. (2000). Sedimentology and taphonomy of Late Permian vertebrate
fossil localities in Qsouthwestern Madagascar. Palaeontol. Afric. 36, 25–41.
Smithson, T. R. (1993). Eldeceeon rolfei, a new reptiliomorph from the Viséan
of East Kirkton,West Lothian, Scotland. Trans. R. Soc. Edinb. Earth Sci. 84,
377–382. doi: 10.1017/S0263593300006180
Smithson, R. T., Carroll, R. L., Panchen, A. L., and Andrews, S. M. (1994).
Westlothiana lizziae from the Viséan of East Kirkton, West Lothian, Scotland,
and the amniote stem. Trans. R. Soc. Edinburgh. Earth Sci. 84, 383–412.
doi: 10.1017/S0263593300006192
Stephenson, M. H. (2018). Permian palynostratigraphy: a global overview. Geol.
Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 450, 321–347. doi: 10.1144/SP450.2
Storrs, G. W. (1993). Function and phylogeny in sauropterygian (Diapsida)
evolution. Am. J. Sci. 293: 63.
Sues, H. D., and Carroll, R. L. (1985). The pachypleurosaurid Dactylosaurus
schroederi (Diapsida: Sauropterygia). Can. J. Earth. Sci. 22, 1602–1608.
Sumida, S. S., and Modesto, S. P. (2001). A phylogenetic perspective on locomotory
strategies in early amniotes. Am. Zool. 41, 586–597. doi: 10.1093/icb/41.3.586
Szczygielski, T., Surmik, D., Kapu´
scinska, A., and Rothschild, B. M. (2017). The
oldest record of aquatic amniote congenital scoliosis. PLoS ONE 12:e0185338.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185338
Thompson, G. G., and Withers, P. C. (1997). Comparative morphology of western
Australian varanid lizards (Squamata: Varanidae). J. Morphol. 233, 127–152.
Tsuji, L. A., Müller, J., and Reisz, R. R. (2012). Anatomy of Emeroleter levis and
the phylogeny of the nycteroleter parareptiles. J.Vert. Paleontol. 32, 45–67.
doi: 10.1080/02724634.2012.626004
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
24
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
 Nuñez Demarco et al.
Mesosaurus a Fully Aquatic Reptile?
Vallin, G., and Laurin, M. (2004). Cranial Morphology and Affinities of
Microbrachis, and a Reappraisal of the Phylogeny and Lifestyle of the First
Amphibians. J. Vertebr. Paleontol. 24, 56–72. doi: 10.1671/5.1
Villamil, J., Núñez Demarco, P., Meneghel, M., Blanco, R. E., Jones, W.,
Rinderknecht, A., et al. (2015). Optimal swimming speed estimates in the Early
Permian mesosaurid Mesosaurus tenuidens Gervais, 1865 from Uruguay. Hist.
Biol. 28, 963–971. doi: 10.1080/08912963.2015.1075018
von Huene, F. (1940). A idade Permiana Inferior de todas as camadas contendo
messosáurios. Trad. G. Faria Alvin. Div. Min. Metal. Rio Janeiro 6, 64–68.
von Huene, F. (1941). Osteologie und systematische Stellung von Mesosaurus.
Palaeontogr. Abt. A. 92, 45–58.
Williston, S. W. (1910). New Permian reptiles: rhachitomous vertebrae. J. Geol. 18,
585–600.
Wopfner,
H.
(1999).
The
early
Permian
deglaciation
event
between
East
Africa
and
northwestern
Australia.
J.
Afr.
Earth
Sci.
29,
77–90.
Yates, A. M., and Warren, A. A. (2000). The phylogeny of the ‘higher’
temnospondyls (Vertebrata: Choanata) and its implications for the monophyly
and origins of the Stereospondyli. Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 128, 77–121.
doi: 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2000.tb00650.x
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Nuñez Demarco, Meneghel, Laurin and Piñeiro. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution | www.frontiersin.org
25
July 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 109
