 A guide to immunometabolism for immunologists
Luke A. J. O’Neill1, Rigel J. Kishton2, and Jeff Rathmell2
1School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College 
Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland 2Vanderbilt Centre for Immunobiology, Department of Pathology, 
Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 
37232, USA
Abstract
In recent years a substantial number of findings have been made in the area of 
immunometabolism, by which we mean the changes in intracellular metabolic pathways in 
immune cells that alter their function. Here, we provide a brief refresher course on six of the major 
metabolic pathways involved (specifically, glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, the 
pentose phosphate pathway, fatty acid oxidation, fatty acid synthesis and amino acid metabolism), 
giving specific examples of how precise changes in the metabolites of these pathways shape the 
immune cell response. What is emerging is a complex interplay between metabolic 
reprogramming and immunity, which is providing an extra dimension to our understanding of the 
immune system in health and disease.
Most immunologists have a distant memory of learning metabolic pathways as 
undergraduates. Many of these proto-immunologists saw these pathways as scientifically 
interesting but unlikely to impinge on their own growing research interests into the 
complexity of the immune response. Equally, those scientists who became immunologists 
later were largely unaware of how metabolic pathways might be of direct relevance to their 
research, unless they had a particular interest in the role of immune cells in obesity or in 
metabolic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes. Of course there was a minority of 
immunologists who were considering metabolic processes in the functioning of immune 
cells, with early studies from more than 30 years ago describing the requirement of certain 
metabolites for macrophage, neutrophil and T cell function1–4. These studies largely focused 
on energy production and biosynthesis, as activated macrophages or rapidly dividing T cells 
have huge metabolic demands. There was also a major interest in mechanistic target of 
rapamycin (mTOR), which is a central metabolic regulator of immunity5, and AMP kinase. 
mTOR is the catalytic subunit of two distinct complexes — mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) 
and (mTORC2) — that can sense amino acids and growth factors and promote mRNA 
translation and lipid synthesis to support cell growth; beyond this, mTOR signalling 
regulates numerous events that are crucial for T cell and monocyte differentiation6. AMP 
Correspondence to L.A.J.O. and J.R. laoneill@tcd.ie; Jeff.Rathmell@duke.edu. 
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Immunol. 2016 September ; 16(9): 553–565. doi:10.1038/nri.2016.70.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 kinase (which is activated during nutrient deprivation) promotes catabolism (for example, of 
fatty acids) and also inhibits mTOR activity, thereby limiting immune cell activation7.
What we have seen in the past five years or so is something of a rediscovery of metabolism 
by immunologists and the emergence of what is now termed the field of 
immunometabolism. Why did this happen? Technological advances have helped 
tremendously; highly sensitive metabolomic approaches allow us to define the alterations in 
metabolites that occur during immune cell activation and show how metabolites are directly 
linked to immune cell effector functions. Immunology itself as a science has advanced 
hugely in the past 30 years. Notable advances include the discovery of whole new immune 
receptor systems (most notably the pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)), the description of 
many cytokines and immune cell types, and a deeper understanding of the development and 
molecular regulation of these immune cells. Furthermore, we now have elaborate tools that 
facilitate the study of the immune system in a bewildering range of states, including in 
models of infection, autoimmunity and autoinflammation. More recently we have seen the 
application of newer tools (including small molecule agonists or antagonists) and 
approaches (such as techniques that measure the flux though metabolic pathways) to the 
study of the immune system, which is providing us with exciting new insights into the core 
of what is happening during an immune response. That core involves complex and specific 
metabolic changes that directly connect to those aspects of immunity and host defence so 
beloved by immunologists: a detailed account of the molecular regulation of events 
occurring in immune cells in health and disease. In this Review, we provide a refresher 
course of six main metabolic pathways that occur in cells and discuss their possible roles in 
immunity. We will focus mainly on specific examples in T cells, macrophages and dendritic 
cells (DCs), since most of the recent new insights have been made in these cell types. We 
will also provide a list of tools (shown in TABLE 1) and a glossary of key terms to 
encourage immunologists to bring the extra dimension of immunometabolism to their own 
research programmes, as we are confident this will allow them to advance their 
understanding of the immune processes they are interested in. We hope the readers find our 
account understandable, interesting and thought-provoking for their own research.
An overview of metabolic pathways
Cell intrinsic and extrinsic signals regulate the activity of metabolic pathways to couple the 
growth and survival needs of the cell to the metabolic machinery that regulates the 
generation of key products to fulfil these needs. In the context of immunity, however, 
specific alterations in metabolic pathways couple to immune effector functions, most 
notably in the production of distinct sets of cytokines. FIGURE 1 illustrates how immune 
molecules such as interleukin-4 (IL-4), or PRRs, can promote different metabolic pathways 
in cells, events previously shown to be regulated by oxygen levels. Immune cells with 
different functions use several different metabolic pathways to generate adequate levels of 
energy stores to support survival and to produce numerous biosynthetic intermediates to 
allow for cellular growth and proliferation. These metabolic pathways, although diverse in 
terms of their end products, are closely linked as a consequence of shared fuel inputs, and a 
reliance on products from one pathway to feed into alternative pathways as key synthetic 
precursors. As one example of the complex interplay of metabolic pathways, the process of 
O’Neill et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fatty acid synthesis — which allows for the production of cell membranes and other key 
lipid-based structures that are necessary for proliferation — is dependent on the availability 
of intermediate products from the glycolytic pathway and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle 
metabolism. With the interconnected nature of cellular metabolic pathways in mind, here we 
discuss six key metabolic pathways that have an important role in the generation of key 
products to promote cell survival or growth. The glycolytic, TCA cycle, pentose phosphate, 
fatty acid oxidation, fatty acid synthesis and amino acid pathways each have a unique 
purpose in the cell and are regulated by cellular signalling pathways to link their activity to 
cellular needs (FIG. 2).
The glycolytic metabolic pathway
The glycolytic metabolic pathway (also termed glycolysis) begins with the uptake of 
extracellular glucose from the environment surrounding the cell and subsequent intracellular 
processing of glucose in the cytosol to eventually yield pyruvate along with numerous other 
products. Glycolytic metabolism is a relatively inefficient pathway for the generation of 
cellular ATP, netting only two molecules of ATP per unit of glucose. However, glycolytic 
metabolism provides key benefits to cells because it also allows for the reduction of NAD+ 
to NADH, which is used by numerous enzymes as a cofactor, as well as enabling the 
diversion of intermediate products to biosynthetic growth pathways to support anabolic 
growth. To maintain glycolytic flux, cells often reduce pyruvate to lactate to recycle NADH 
and maintain NAD+ levels. Glycolytic metabolism has a key role in providing biosynthetic 
intermediates for the synthesis of ribose for nucleotides (glucose-6-phosphate into pentose 
phosphase), amino acids (3-phosphoglycerate into the serine biosynthetic pathway) and fatty 
acids (pyruvate into the TCA cycle for citrate). Indeed, many pro-growth signalling 
pathways, including the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) pathways, promote cellular use of glycolytic metabolism. For these reasons, 
glycolysis is frequently observed as having a dominant and essential role in the metabolism 
of rapidly proliferating cells.
The TCA cycle
The TCA cycle (also known as the citric acid cycle or Krebs cycle) occurs in the matrix of 
the mitochondrion and is a major metabolic pathway that is thought to be used in most 
quiescent or non-proliferative cell settings. Although some quiescent stem cells primarily 
use glycolysis, the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation are a highly efficient mode of 
ATP generation used by cells whose primary requirements are energy and longevity. The 
TCA cycle is a nexus for multiple nutrient inputs. Most notably, glucose-derived pyruvate or 
fatty acids are converted into acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) that joins the TCA cycle by 
aldol condensation with oxaloacetate to form citrate. Glutamate is also a critical fuel for the 
TCA cycle through its direct conversion into the TCA intermediate α-ketoglutarate. Two 
major products of the TCA cycle are NADH and FADH2, which can transfer electrons to the 
electron transport chain to support oxidative phosphorylation and highly efficient ATP 
generation. This process provides for basal subsistence in most cell types. Similarly to what 
is seen in glycolysis, growth signals can promote the diversion of TCA intermediates for 
production of amino acids and lipids (termed cataplerosis), although this requires increased 
nutrient diversion to the TCA cycle (termed anaplerosis).
O’Neill et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The pentose phosphate pathway
The pentose phosphate pathway takes place in the cytosol and serves several key purposes 
that support cell proliferation and survival. First, and most well-known, the pentose 
phosphate pathway allows the diversion of intermediates from the glycolytic pathway 
towards the production of nucleotide and amino acid precursors that are necessary for cell 
growth and proliferation. This involves the non-oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate 
pathway. A second key function of the pentose phosphate pathway is the generation of 
reducing equivalents of NADPH, which has an important role in the maintenance of a 
favourable cellular redox environment and is also required for fatty acid synthesis. This 
involves the oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate branch.
Fatty acid oxidation
The fatty acid oxidation pathway allows for the mitochondrial conversion of fatty acids into 
numerous products that the cell can further use to generate energy, including acetyl-CoA, 
NADH and FADH2. The initial step of fatty acid oxidation is the ‘activation’ of the fatty acid 
in the cytosol via an enzyme-mediated reaction with ATP to eventually generate a fatty acid 
acyl-CoA. The subsequent mechanism of fatty acid oxidation is dependent on the length of 
the aliphatic tail in the fatty acid. Short-chain fatty acids, which are defined as having fewer 
than six carbons in the aliphatic tail, are simply able to diffuse into mitochondria passively. 
Medium-chain and long-chain fatty acids must first be conjugated to carnitine via carnitine 
palmitoyl transferase I (CPT1). After this, the carnitine conjugated long-chain fatty acid is 
then shuttled into the mitochondria where it is converted back to a fatty acid acyl-CoA 
through the removal of carnitine by carnitine palmitoyl transferase II (CPT2). At this stage, 
β-oxidation of the fatty acid acyl-CoA commences, yielding large amounts of acetyl-CoA, 
NADH and FADH2 that are further used in the TCA cycle and the electron transport chain to 
generate ATP. CPT1A acts as a key regulatory step in fatty acid oxidation, as it is rate 
limiting and inhibited by the lipid synthesis intermediate malonyl-CoA, thus preventing lipid 
oxidation when cells are actively synthesizing lipids. Overall, fatty acid oxidation can allow 
the production of tremendous amounts of ATP, with the complete β-oxidation of a single 
palmitate molecule (a major fatty acid in mammalian cells) eventually having the potential 
to yield over 100 ATP molecules.
Fatty acid synthesis
The fatty acid synthesis pathway allows cells to generate lipids that are necessary for cellular 
growth and proliferation from precursors derived from other cell intrinsic metabolic 
pathways. The activity of the fatty acid synthesis pathway is closely coupled to mTOR 
signalling, which has been shown to promote fatty acid synthesis through regulation of many 
of the key enzymes responsible for de novo lipid synthesis, including SREBP (sterol 
regulatory element binding protein), FASN (fatty acid synthase) and ACC (acetyl CoA 
carboxylase), both of which are induced by SREBP. Fatty acid synthesis uses products 
derived from several other metabolic pathways, notably glycolysis, the TCA cycle and 
pentose phosphate pathway. For the synthesis of straight-chain fatty acids, TCA cycle-
derived citrate may be exported from the mitochondria into the cytosol via the citrate carrier, 
where ATP citrate lyase converts it into acetyl-coA, along with oxaloacetate. The acetyl-
O’Neill et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CoA derived from this process may then be carboxylated by ACC to yield malonyl-CoA. 
Subsequently, FASN acts in an NADPH-dependent manner to elongate the nascent fatty acid 
chain until products such as palmitic acid are synthesized. Fatty acids with alternative chain 
lengths may be synthesized using palmitic acid as a substrate for elongation, while 
desaturation reactions may be performed to yield unsaturated fatty acids. Unlike straight-
chain fatty acids, branched-chain fatty acid synthesis requires branched-chain amino acids 
such as valine and leucine as substrates for elongation. Furthermore, fatty acids may be 
condensed with glycolysis-derived glycerol to yield many possible combinations of 
triacylglycerols and phospholipids, which are key components of many cellular structures.
Amino acid metabolic pathways
The metabolism of various amino acids has several important roles in multiple aspects of 
cell biology. As can be expected with the large number of individual amino acids, there are 
diverse metabolic pathways that make use of amino acids as substrates. Amino acids, as a 
consequence of their utilization as substrates for protein synthesis, are intimately linked to 
important anabolic cellular signalling pathways, most notably the mTOR pathway and 
nucleotide synthesis. Many studies have shown a role for mTOR-containing complexes in 
sensing amino acid levels and adequate availability of amino acids is known to be required 
for mTOR-driven anabolic growth. As discussed above, aside from their well-known role as 
building blocks in protein synthesis, amino acids can act as precursors for the de novo 
synthesis of branched-chain fatty acids. Individual amino acids may play more specific roles 
in metabolic pathways. For instance, glutamine and aspartate are required for de novo purine 
and pyrimidine synthesis. Also, glutamine may be used in actively proliferating cells as an 
alternative input for the TCA cycle where it can be used to support ATP production or, 
alternatively, as a source of citrate for fatty acid synthesis. Additional amino acids, including 
arginine and tryptophan, are metabolized through various metabolic pathways to support 
cellular proliferation and anabolic growth.
Glycolysis in immunity
We now give key examples of how changes in the metabolic pathways described above 
directly impact on immune cell function. Firstly glycolysis has been shown to be involved in 
a number of immune processes (FIG. 3). Early work indicated that both activated 
macrophages and T cells have a voracious appetite for glucose1,2. In addition, 2-
deoxyglucose was applied in various contexts and was shown to inhibit macrophage 
activation in vitro and to suppress inflammation in in vivo models8,9. All of these studies and 
indeed others pointed to glycolysis as being crucial for immune cell function. This was 
initially somewhat surprising as glycolysis is not the most effective way to generate ATP. As 
stated above, glycolysis generates 2 molecules of ATP from 1 molecule of glucose, whereas 
oxidative phosphorylation is much more effective, generating 36 ATP molecules from a 
single molecule of glucose. However, it was also realized that glycolysis could be rapidly 
activated via the induction of enzymes that are involved in this pathway. By contrast, 
boosting oxidative phosphorylation requires mitochondrial biogenesis, which is a more 
complex and probably slower process. As such, cells that need to make ATP swiftly will 
switch to glycolysis. Potentially more important than rapid ATP generation, however, is the 
O’Neill et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 capacity of high rates of glycolysis to provide biosynthetic intermediates to support rapid 
cell growth. Activating signals such as growth factors strongly promote increased glucose 
uptake and glycolysis, which supplies ATP, supports the TCA cycle, and donates 
intermediates for the PPP, glycosylation reactions and synthesis of key biomass constituents, 
including serine, glycine, alanine, and acetyl-CoA for lipid synthesis.
Enhanced glycolysis occurs in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated macrophages and 
DCs10,11, in activated natural killer (NK) cells12, in activated effector T cells13 and in 
activated B cells14. Effector T cell subsets all show an increase in glycolysis following 
activation, most notably T helper 17 (TH17) cells15, TH1 and TH2 cells13 and activated 
effector CD8+ T cells16. Increased mTOR pathway activity that is correlated with enhanced 
glycolysis seems to be associated with the initial generation of peripherally induced 
regulatory T (pTreg) cells, but may be detrimental to their long-term survival and lineage 
stability17–19. Increased glycolysis can therefore be considered a hallmark metabolic change 
in most immune cells undergoing rapid activation, for instance, in response to stimulation of 
PRRs, cytokine receptors or antigen receptors. Enhanced glycolysis enables the immune cell 
to generate sufficient ATP and biosynthetic intermediates to carry out its particular effector 
functions. For macrophages this includes phagocytosis and inflammatory cytokine 
production, for DCs this includes antigen presentation20 and for T cells this includes the 
production of effector cytokines (such as IL-17 in the case of TH17 cells15).
We have some molecular insights into the signalling pathways that trigger glycolysis during 
immune cell activation. For example, LPS induces activation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1α 
(HIF1α), a transcription factor that is crucial for the induction of several enzymes involved 
in glycolysis21. It also probably involves nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation, as the 
ubiquitous isoform of phosphofructokinase-2 (uPFK2) — which is crucial for the regulation 
of glycolysis — is still induced by LPS in HIF1α-deficient cells10. LPS can also rapidly 
induce glycolysis in DCs via the activation of TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and/or 
inhibitor of NF-κB kinase ε (IKKε) and hexokinase 2, in a HIF1α-independent manner18.
A key mechanism for the enhanced glycolysis in LPS-activated macrophages is induction of 
pyruvate kinase isoenzyme M2 (PKM2)22. This form of PKM (which is an enzyme that 
generates pyruvate and ATP from phospho-enolpyruvate and ADP during glycolysis) is 
regulated to slow glycolytic flux and allow diversion of glycolytic intermediates to 
biosynthetic pathways. PKM2 also has a separate function outside its role in glycolysis. It 
translocates to the nucleus where it interacts with HIF1α and promotes the expression of 
HIF1α-dependent genes22,23, including those that encode the aforementioned glycolytic 
enzymes and also inflammatory factors, such as IL-1β. What is also of interest is the 
observation that a small molecule that forces PKM2 into a tetrameric state (in which it is 
unable to enter the nucleus and is more active in glycolysis than dimeric PKM2) 
reprogrammes macrophages to become more M2-like in their gene-expression profiles22. 
This indicates that inhibition of HIF1α (as will occur in this situation since PKM2 is no 
longer nuclear) will change the phenotype of the macrophage from a pro-inflammatory M1 
phenotype to a pro-reparatory (or alternatively activated) M2 phenotype. A pro-
inflammatory role for PKM2 in inflammatory monocytes and macrophages has also been 
O’Neill et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 demonstrated in human atherosclerotic coronary artery disease, further emphasizing the 
contribution of this glycolytic enzyme to inflammation24.
A similar role for glycolysis in immune cell reprogramming has been reported in TH17 cells, 
in which inhibition of glycolysis with 2-deoxyglucose converted TH17 cells into Treg cells15. 
In contrast, as discussed earlier, hyperactivation of mTOR pathway signalling resulting in 
increased glycolysis in peripheral Treg cells, but may impair their survival and lineage-
commitment17–19. These studies emphasize again the link between metabolism and the 
phenotype of an immune cell, with glycolysis and HIF1α induction leading to the 
acquisition of a more inflammatory phenotype. Oxidative phosphorylation has been 
associated with a more anti-inflammatory cell phenotype25–27, although recent studies have 
shown that human Treg cells can utilize glycolysis28,29, suggesting that glycolysis may not 
only be associated with inflammatory cell functions. The glycolytic enzyme enolase has in 
fact been shown to ‘moonlight’, promoting Foxp3 splicing and the generation of pTreg 
cells29.
Another interesting aspect of glycolysis induction in activated immune cells is the role of the 
glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). In TH1 cells it has 
been shown that GAPDH binds to mRNA that encodes interferon-γ (IFNγ)30,31, repressing 
its translation. Once glycolysis is triggered, however, GAPDH dissociates from IFNG 
mRNA, allowing it to be translated. Moreover, GAPDH can now enter the glycolytic 
pathway to promote further ATP production. This finding highlights another aspect of why 
immunometabolism is so central to immunity — the glycolytic enzyme GAPDH is 
controlling production of the crucial TH1-type effector cytokine IFNγ and must be recruited 
to the glycolytic pathway for this cytokine to be made.
In macrophages, another glycolytic enzyme, hexokinase 1, has been shown to moonlight, in 
this case as an NLRP3 (NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing 3) regulator32. The 
NLRP3 inflammasome is a crucial regulator of caspase 1, which generates mature IL-1β, as 
well as active IL-18, and induces a type of cell death called pyroptosis. Evidence has been 
presented that hexokinase interacts with NLRP3 in the outer mitochondrial membrane, 
enabling NLRP3 activation32. There are likely to be more examples of glycolytic enzymes 
having additional functions in immune cells.
As stated above, in addition to its role in ATP synthesis, glycolysis is also able to generate 
intermediates for biosynthesis of macromolecules. The most important example is 
glucose-6-phosphate, which enters the pentose phosphate pathway, which we will consider 
next.
The pentose phosphate pathway in immunity
As discussed above, there are two important outcomes of the pentose phosphate pathway — 
namely, nucleotide production (which happens during cell proliferation) and NADPH 
production. NADPH has multiple functions in immune cells. It is used by the NADPH 
oxidase to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) during the respiratory burst, but as a 
counter-balance it is also used to generate glutathione and other antioxidants. During an 
O’Neill et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 infection, macrophages and neutrophils probably require both of these NADPH-dependent 
functions —rapid ROS production to clear the infectious agent followed by induction of 
antioxidants to prevent excessive tissue damage. DCs also use NADPH and lipid synthesis to 
support endoplasmic reticulum synthesis, which is necessary for DC activation and cytokine 
secretion20.
The pentose phosphate pathway has been shown to be elevated in LPS-activated 
macrophages21. A key control point is the enzyme carbohydrate kinase-like protein 
(CARKL; also known as SHK), which is a sedoheptulose kinase33 (FIG. 3). This enzyme 
limits the flux through the pentose phosphate pathway, and it has been shown to be highly 
expressed in M2 macrophages33. If CARKL is suppressed, macrophages become M1-like, 
indicating the importance of the pentose phosphate pathway for M1 macrophage function. 
Why nucleotide generation by the pentose phosphate pathway is elevated in M1 
macrophages21 is a mystery, as these cells show low proliferative capacity. It is possible that 
the nucleotides are being generated for the production of different RNA populations (for 
example, microRNAs and the long non-coding RNAs that are important for regulating 
cellular function).
The TCA cycle in immunity
The TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation have been studied extensively in immune 
cells. Both are fully functional in most T cell subsets13, although, as stated above, there is a 
shift towards glycolysis and away from the TCA cycle in effector T cells. Furthermore, the 
TCA cycle is very prominent in memory CD8+ T cells34.
Of particular note, there have been observations concerning the TCA cycle in distinct 
macrophage subtypes (FIG. 4). In M2 macrophages, there is an intact TCA cycle that is 
coupled to oxidative phosphorylation25. This allows the generation of UDP-GlcNAc 
intermediates that are necessary for the glycosylation of M2-associated receptors, such as 
the mannose receptor25. However, in M1 macrophages the situation is rather different. In 
these cells, the TCA cycle has been shown to be broken in two places — after citrate (owing 
to a decrease in expression of isocitrate lyase) and after succinate21,25.
The citrate that accumulates in M1 macrophages has been shown to be exported from the 
mitochondria via the citrate transporter. It is then utilized for the production of fatty acids, 
which in turn are used for membrane biogenesis. This broken TCA cycle is also seen in 
activated DCs and seems to be especially important for their function, as these cells require 
substantial membrane production to support antigen presentation20. Excess citrate can also 
feed into pathways that generate nitric oxide and prostaglandins, which are key effector 
molecules made by macrophages35. A third metabolite generated from citrate is itaconic 
acid, which has been shown to have direct bactericidal effects on species such as Salmonella 
enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium and Mycobacterium tuberculosis36. This 
particular example shows how a metabolic rewiring event can generate metabolites with 
direct antimicrobial activity.
O’Neill et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Succcinate that accumulates in M1 macrophages as a consequence of a broken TCA cycle 
has a direct impact on macrophage cytokine production21. One mechanism involved is 
inhibition of prolyl hydroxylases by succinate, leading to the stabilization of HIF1α and the 
sustained production of IL-1β21. This pathway will operate under normoxia as well as in 
hypoxia, and is therefore a mechanism for HIF1α activation under aerobic conditions. Taken 
together, these studies show that the alterations in the TCA cycle that occur in M1 
macrophages lead to the mitochondrial accumulation of metabolites that can promote their 
immune functions. These events may also link to nitric oxide production, which has been 
shown to inactivate the electron transport chain in macrophages37.
Fatty acid oxidation and immune function
Fatty acid oxidation has key roles in the regulation of adaptive and innate immune responses 
(FIG. 5). In contrast to aerobic glycolysis that is often observed in inflammatory and rapidly 
proliferating immune cells, a reliance on fatty acid oxidation has been observed in many 
immune cells that are not inflammatory in nature and exhibit increased cellular lifespans, 
including M2 macrophages, Treg cells and memory T cells.
Fatty acid oxidation and macrophage function
Fatty acid oxidation has been found to modulate the inflammatory functions of 
macrophages. The aberrant accumulation of fatty acids and their derivative lipoproteins in 
macrophages has been correlated with the generation of foam cells and the development of 
inflammatory pathologies, including atherosclerotic lesions38–40. Recent work showed that 
increased intracellular levels of unsaturated fatty acids (including oleic acid, linoleic acid 
and arachidonic acid), but not saturated fatty acids, stimulates the production of IL-1α in 
foam cells, leading to increased inflammation in vivo41. Intriguingly, enforced expression of 
constitutively active CPT1A (which as discussed above, transports long-chain fatty acids 
into the mitochondria) in macrophage cell-lines increased fatty acid oxidation, reduced lipid 
accumulation and reduced the production of inflammatory cytokines42. Therefore, 
promoting fatty acid oxidation in inflammatory macrophages may be one approach to 
reducing their inflammatory potential.
Fatty acid oxidation has also been found to have a key role in macrophage differentiation. 
Whereas M1 macrophages (induced by stimulation with IFNγ and LPS) use glycolytic 
metabolism, M2 macrophages (as defined by activation with IL-4) rely on a programme of 
fatty acid oxidation that is promoted by signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 
(STAT6) and PPARγ-co-activator 1β (PGC1β) and works to inhibit inflammatory 
signals43,44. Added complexity has emerged, however, in a recent report showing that Cpt2 
deletion did not affect M2 macrophage polarization, despite impaired fatty acid oxidation45. 
CPT1 may therefore have some additional role for M2 polarization other than fatty acid 
transport.
Fatty acid oxidation and T cell responses
Fatty acid oxidation also has an important role in regulating T cell responses. To date, fatty 
acid oxidation has been observed to regulate the balance between inflammatory effector T 
O’Neill et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells and suppressive Treg cells, and to promote long-lived memory T cells that are necessary 
for sustained immune function. In the context of regulating the balance between effector T 
cells and Treg cells, it has been shown that Treg cells exhibit increased fatty acid oxidation 
relative to TH1, TH2 and TH17 cells and that fatty acid oxidation promotes the generation of 
Treg cells while inhibiting effector T cell polarization13. Subsequent work showed that Treg 
cells have increased expression of genes involved in fatty acid oxidation, including Cpt1a, 
when compared to TH17 cells26. Interestingly, effector T cells have been shown to 
downregulate fatty acid oxidation during the activation process46. Consistent with fatty acid 
oxidation inhibiting effector T cell function and promoting tolerance, ligation of the 
inhibitory programmed death 1 (PD1) receptor on T cells resulted in increased expression of 
CPT1A and elevated fatty acid oxidation47.
Fatty acid oxidation also plays an important role in the generation and maintenance of long-
lived memory CD8+ T cells. Memory CD8+ T cells, which slowly proliferate under steady 
state conditions48 but allow for a rapid innate immune response to previously encountered 
antigens, appear to require fatty acid oxidation to respond to antigen stimulation in a timely 
manner49. Stimulation of memory CD8+ T cells with IL-15 increases their expression of 
CPT1A and promotes fatty acid oxidation, resulting in increased cell survival50. 
Interestingly, although memory CD8+ T cells seem to extensively use fatty acid oxidation, 
they have been found to synthesize fatty acids de novo to support this process and 
subsequently oxidize these products in a cell intrinsic futile cycle, the reason for which is 
not known34. Taken together, these studies indicate key roles for fatty acid oxidation both in 
the generation of tolerogenic Treg cells as well as in the maintenance of long-lived memory 
CD8+ T cells.
Fatty acid synthesis and immune function
In contrast to fatty acid oxidation, which seems to promote the development and activity of 
non-inflammatory immune cells, fatty acid synthesis seems to positively regulate the 
generation and function of pro-inflammatory immune cells of both the innate and adaptive 
immune systems (FIG. 5).
Several studies indicated that inflammatory stimuli such as LPS and cytokines trigger an 
increase in fatty acid synthesis in macrophages51,52. Mechanistically, sterol regulatory 
element-binding transcription factor 1c (SREBP1c) was found to be upregulated during the 
differentiation of monocytes into macrophages following treatment with macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), leading to increased expression of fatty acid synthesis-
related target genes such as FASN and a functional increase in lipid synthesis. Importantly, 
the observed increase in fatty acid synthesis was crucial to the differentiation and 
inflammatory function of macrophages in this setting53. Further work on this subject 
indicated that mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) stimulates fatty acid synthesis 
through regulation of FASN to promote NLRP3 inflammasome activation, which leads to a 
harmful inflammatory response during polymicrobial sepsis54. Taken together, this work 
suggests that fatty acid synthesis promotes and is required for inflammatory macrophage 
responses.
O’Neill et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Interestingly, fatty acid synthesis provides a link between innate and adaptive immunity 
through regulation of DC function. Fatty acid synthesis was found to be upregulated during 
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated DC activation, and this increased fatty acid synthesis was 
necessary for DC activation and their stimulation of CD8+ T cell responses20. Fatty acid 
synthesis is also key to the cell intrinsic function of T cells and B cells; synthesis of fatty 
acids and sterols has been shown to be necessary for cell proliferation after the activation of 
these cells through their antigen receptors55,56. Recent work demonstrated that T cell-
specific deletion of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1) — the rate-limiting enzyme in fatty 
acid synthesis — results in reduced blasting efficacy and lower accumulation of antigen-
specific CD8+ T cells. Importantly, these defects could be overcome by supplementing 
ACC1-deficient T cells with exogenous fatty acids57.
As seen with fatty acid oxidation, the balance of effector and regulatory T cells is also 
influenced by fatty acid synthesis. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of ACC1 in CD4+ 
T cell subsets showed that fatty acid synthesis is required for proper TH17 cell 
differentiation but not for Treg cell generation and function58. More recently, an intriguing 
observation was made concerning fatty acid synthesis and TH17 cells. Wang and 
colleagues59 showed that a protein termed CD5 antigen-like (CD5L) is expressed in so-
called ‘non-pathogenic’ TH17 cells. These cells produce low levels of IL-17 but also 
produce the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. In mice they have a homeostatic role in the 
gut, preventing invasion by the gut microbiota and promoting epithelial barrier function60, 
whereas in humans they may have a role in host defence against Staphylococcus aureus61. 
CD5L binds fatty acid synthase and is thought to promote the production of polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (PUFAs). The authors demonstrate that PUFAs are likely to modulate production 
of cholesterol-derived ligands for RORγt, the key transcription factor for TH17 cells, such 
that modified ligands for RORγt promote IL-10 production while limiting IL-23 and IL-17 
(which are pro-inflammatory). In pathogenic TH17 cells, CD5L expression is low and this 
may favour the production of saturated fatty acids by fatty acid synthase; this in turn 
promotes the generation of ligands for RORγt that enhance its IL-23 and IL-17 promoting 
activity while limiting its ability to drive IL-10 production. What this means is that the type 
of fatty acid being synthesized governs the type of cytokines being made by TH17 cells — 
PUFAs drive production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, while saturated fatty acids 
limit IL-10 production and promote the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines. This study 
in many ways illustrates the exciting prospect of analysing immunometabolism in fine detail 
to provide new insights into immune cell effector function.
Overall, it seems that fatty acid oxidation and fatty acid synthesis have opposing roles in the 
immune system, with fatty acid oxidation being preferentially used by non-inflammatory 
and tolerogenic immune cells, whereas fatty acid synthesis is characteristic of inflammatory 
responses in the innate and adaptive immune systems. It is unclear how this distinction in 
fatty acid metabolism may lead to these opposing immunological functions, but the 
efficiency of lipid oxidation for energy generation and the necessity of lipid synthesis for 
biosynthesis and cell growth suggest that pro-inflammatory and regulatory immune cells 
show fundamental differences in their reliance on ATP generation or growth. It may be that 
effector immune cells upregulate nutrient uptake sufficiently so that metabolic intermediates 
are abundant and can be diverted to biosynthesis, whereas M2 macrophages or Treg cells are 
O’Neill et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adapted to function in tissue environments where nutrients are more limiting and efficiency 
is crucial. It is also possible that effector cells might require fatty acid synthesis during their 
rapid growth to allow membrane biogenesis, while the slow growth of memory cells will 
occur because of fatty acid oxidation. It is also worth mentioning that there is substantial 
information concerning the metabolism of other lipid species in immune cell function, 
notably of cholesterol and sphingolipids, but space does not allow us to cover these further 
and interested readers are referred to recent reviews62,63.
Amino acid metabolism and immune function
In this final section, we focus on how amino acid metabolism can modulate immune cell 
activity. As discussed previously, the mTOR pathway has important roles in cellular 
metabolism, including in the sensing of amino acid levels to couple nutrient availability to 
cellular growth and proliferation. It is not surprising, then, that the availability and 
metabolism of various amino acids has been found to play a role in immune function (FIG. 
6). Here, we will describe how the metabolism of three of the most well-studied amino acids 
— namely glutamine, arginine and tryptophan — affects the immune system.
Glutamine metabolism
Glutamine catabolism regulates numerous aspects of immune cell function and has been 
hypothesized to play an important role in immune function in the context of serious 
illnesses, such as sepsis or burns64,65. Adequate supplies of glutamine have been found to be 
required for the induction of IL-1 by macrophages in response to LPS stimulation66. 
Glutamine metabolism is also important for the generation of nitric oxide through feeding 
into arginine synthesis67, demonstrating a role for glutamine in the cytotoxic and 
antimicrobial functions of macrophages. Indeed, pharmacological inhibition of glutaminase 
activity or glutamine withdrawal from culture medium resulted in decreased nitric oxide 
production by bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG)-activated macrophages in vitro67,68. 
Interestingly, recent work has shown that glutamine is extensively fluxed into the TCA cycle 
and the hexosamine pathway and promotes M2 macrophage polarization in response to IL-4 
stimulation, whereas LPS-stimulated M1 macrophages do not require glutamine for their 
development25.
T cell and B cell responses are also regulated by glutamine metabolism. Glutamine usage 
increases markedly upon both T cell and B cell activation, and both populations require 
glutamine to respond to antigen receptor stimulation46,69,70. In the T cell setting, 
heterozygous knockout of glutaminase resulted in increased ROS levels that were increased 
by hypoxia, indicating a role for glutamine metabolism in controlling ROS stress71. 
Glutamine metabolism also appears to regulate the balance between effector T cells and Treg 
cells, as the genetic loss of the transporter protein ASCT2 (which is responsible for the 
uptake of neutral amino acids such as glutamine and leucine) in T cells resulted in impaired 
generation and function of TH1 and TH17 cells, whereas Treg cell generation was not 
altered72. Illustrating the key connection between amino acid levels and mTOR pathway 
activity in the immune system, this same study found that ASCT2 loss or reduction of 
O’Neill et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glutamine levels in culture media brought about a reduction in mTORC1 activity that 
coincided with the observed effector T cell defects.
Arginine metabolism
Arginine metabolism has been found to have a key role in the inflammatory function of 
macrophages73. Macrophages use arginine in two distinct metabolic pathways, the nitric 
oxide synthesis pathway and the arginase pathway. The pathway used for arginine 
metabolism in macrophages has profound effects on the immune function of the cell. 
Macrophage flux of arginine into the nitric oxide synthesis pathway is associated with an 
inflammatory M1 phenotype. When macrophages direct arginine into this pathway, arginine 
(via citrulline) is converted into nitric oxide, a process mediated by inducible nitric oxide 
synthase (iNOS)74. It has been known for some time that iNOS expression is itself required 
for inflammatory macrophage function, as macrophages derived from iNOS-deficient mice 
show defective killing of bacteria and tumour cells in vitro. Further pointing to an in vivo 
role for iNOS in mediating inflammatory activity, toxicity from LPS-induced septic shock 
was reduced in iNOS-deficient mice75. In contrast to the inflammatory involvement of 
arginine metabolism in the nitric oxide synthesis pathway, arginine flux through the arginase 
pathway is associated with a more tolerant immune response, often associated with wound 
healing76. Interestingly, arginase expression in macrophages limits the inflammatory 
potential of effector T cells77 and is positively correlated with the disease severity of both 
visceral leishmaniasis and HIV infection78. Indicating a probable immunoregulatory role for 
arginine metabolism beyond macrophages, arginine has been found to regulate the 
expression of components of the T cell receptor79 and to promote proliferation of human T 
cells80. Similarly to what has been observed in glutamine deficiency, mTORC1 activity in T 
cells is suppressed in arginine-depleted in vitro cultures81.
Tryptophan metabolism
Tryptophan is another amino acid that has been observed to play a key role in modulating 
immune function. Pioneering studies showed that treating animals with high doses of 
exogenous tryptophan resulted in the development of an autoimmune phenotype 
characterized by aberrant eosinophil function82,83. A great deal of research on the 
immunoregulatory role of tryptophan metabolism in the immune system has focused on the 
role of an enzyme called indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), which is responsible for the 
rate-limiting step of tryptophan catabolism. IDO expression has long been known to be 
stimulated by LPS exposure84 and, intriguingly, numerous studies have shown that one of 
many cellular responses to IFNγ is to increase the catabolic metabolism of tryptophan by 
driving the expression of IDO85,86. Interestingly, it has been found that tryptophan 
catabolism in host cells may prevent the growth of bacterial and parasitic pathogens by 
denying them a necessary substrate for anabolic growth87,88, suggesting that tryptophan 
metabolism may play an important role as a component of the immune response to 
pathogens. In a more direct analysis of the role of tryptophan metabolism in the immune 
system, it was shown that T cells require tryptophan to proliferate in vitro89, and driving 
IDO expression and tryptophan catabolism in antigen-presenting cells blunts T cell 
stimulation90. Indeed, tryptophan insufficiency can lead to an accumulation of charged 
tRNAs and activation of the unfolded protein response protein GCN2 (REF. 91). Taken 
O’Neill et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 together, these studies point to a model in which tryptophan availability is necessary for 
immune cell function and suggest that there may be competition for the use of tryptophan in 
the immune cell microenvironment. However, numerous other aspects of tryptophan 
metabolism, including metabolites generated from tryptophan catabolism, such as 
kynurenine, may play important roles in modulating immune cell function through activation 
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which is a ligand-activated transcription factor92.
The role of tryptophan metabolism in immune function has recently become an area of 
intense study as it relates to the propensity of tumour cells to evade immune cell responses. 
In many types of tumours, IDO expression is seen in both tumour cells and in tumour-
associated stromal cells93,94 and increased IDO expression levels have been correlated with 
a poor prognosis in some cancer types95,96. Recent work has shown that enforced expression 
of IDO in tumour cells impaired the antitumour immune responses of T cells, but this could 
be overcome by pharmacological inhibition of IDO with 1-methyltryptophan97. It is 
important to keep in mind, however, that as discussed in the non-cancer immune setting, 
there are likely to be numerous mechanisms through which tryptophan metabolism acts to 
modulate the immune system. Future work on amino acid metabolism in immune cells, 
particularly for amino acids other than those explored to date, could yield important new 
insights into immune cell function.
Concluding remarks
This Review is designed to inform immunologists and stimulate their interest in the field of 
immunometabolism and metabolic reprogramming. The substantial and growing literature 
on immunometabolism continues to provide us with new insights into the role of 
intracellular metabolites in the complex regulation of immune cells (FIG. 7). The six 
pathways described above can be considered in isolation, but as we discussed, they are 
interlinked and can be co-regulated (for example, MYC will affect glucose and glutamine 
metabolism, and mTOR will coordinate both glycolysis and fatty acid synthesis) adding to 
the complexity. We can expect further findings in this burgeoning field. BOX 1 describes key 
outstanding questions in the field which might serve as a ‘call to arms’ for immunologists. 
Recent work demonstrating profound effects of inhibiting metabolic pathways in models of 
systemic lupus erythematosus98 and transplantation99, without any apparent toxicity, means 
we can also anticipate therapeutic interventions which could provide new and badly needed 
approaches to treat immune and infectious diseases.
Box 1
Current questions in the field of immunometabolism
•
In addition to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), 
hexokinase 1, pyruvate kinase isoenzyme M2 (PKM2) and enolase, do 
other metabolic enzymes have ‘moonlighting’ roles that influence 
immune cell function?
•
Can changes in cellular metabolites other than lactate and succinate 
also regulate non-metabolic functions in immune cells?
O’Neill et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
What is the purpose of the futile cycle from fatty acid synthesis to 
oxidation in dendritic cells and T cells?
•
What functions aside from the generation of NADPH and nucleotides 
might there be for the pentose phosphate pathway in immune cell 
activation?
•
Will new metabolic processes (such as shunts or metabolic regulators 
such as CD5 antigen-like (CD5L)) be identified that are crucial for 
immune cells functions?
•
How does immunometabolism regulate epigenetic changes during 
immune cell activation and innate immune memory?
•
Will new functions be found for other metabolites that are generated 
during immune cell activation?
•
How do pathogens (and the microbiota) manipulate 
immunometabolism for their own ends?
•
What are the similarities and differences between the immunometabolic 
processes seen in T cells and macrophages, and those that operate in 
other key immune cell populations, such as plasma cells, innate 
lymphoid cells, natural killer cells and granulocytes?
•
Will it be possible to target specific events in immunometabolism to 
achieve a therapeutic effect in immune and inflammatory diseases (or 
in the setting of transplantation) without causing toxicity?
Acknowledgments
L.A.J.O. acknowledges Science Foundation Ireland, The European Research Council and The Wellcome Trust for 
research funding.
Glossary
Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)
An atypical serine/threonine kinase that is present in two distinct complexes. mTOR 
complex 1 (mTORC1), is composed of mTOR, Raptor, MLST8 (also known as GβL), 
PRAS40 and DEPTOR; it is inhibited by rapamycin
Electron transport chain
The series of proteins in the inner mitochondrial membrane that transfer electrons in a series 
of redox reactions, leading to proton pumping across the membrane
2-deoxyglucose
A derivative of glucose that inhibit hexokinase, thereby blocking the first step in glycolysis
Aerobic glycolysis
Glycolysis occurring when oxygen is present
O’Neill et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Foam cells
Fat-laden macrophages commonly seen in the plaques occurring in atherosclerosis
Futile cycle
Two metabolic pathways running in opposite directions that seem to cancel each other out 
metabolically
Metabolic enzymes
Enzymes in metabolic pathways that convert substrates into products. Major classes are 
dehydrogenases (which remove hydrogen from a substrate in an oxidation–reduction 
reaction), isomerases (which convert a molecule from one isomer to another), synthases 
(which link two molecules together without using ATP as an energy source), carboxylases 
(which add a carboxyl group to a substrate) and kinases (which add a phosphate group to a 
molecule)
References
1. Newsholme P, Curi R, Gordon S, Newsholme EA. Metabolism of glucose, glutamine, long-chain 
fatty acids and ketone bodies by murine macrophages. Biochem J. 1986; 239:121–125. One of the 
key pioneering studies on macrophage metabolism. [PubMed: 3800971] 
2. Alonso D, Nungester WJ. Comparative study of host resistance of guinea pigs and rats V. The effect 
of pneumococcal products on glycolysis and oxygen uptake by polymorphonuclear leucocytes. J 
Infect Dis. 1956; 99:174–181. [PubMed: 13376911] 
3. Oren R, Farnham AE, Saito K, Milofsky E, Karnovsky ML. Metabolic patterns in three types of 
phagocytizing cells. J Cell Biol. 1963; 17:487–501. An important early study on metabolism in 
different types of macrophages. [PubMed: 13940299] 
4. Fukuzumi M, Shinomiya H, Shimizu Y, Ohishi K, Utsumi S. Endotoxin-induced enhancement of 
glucose influx into murine peritoneal macrophages via GLUT1. Infect Immun. 1996; 64:108–112. 
[PubMed: 8557327] 
5. Liu Y, Zhang DT, Liu X. G mTOR signaling in T cell immunity and autoimmunity. Int Rev 
Immunol. 2015; 34:50–66. [PubMed: 25019278] 
6. Weichhart T, Hengstschlager M, Linke M. Regulation of innate immune cell function by mTOR. Nat 
Rev Immunol. 2015; 15:599–614. [PubMed: 26403194] 
7. O’Neill LA, Hardie DG. Metabolism of inflammation limited by AMPK and pseudo-starvation. 
Nature. 2013; 493:346–355. [PubMed: 23325217] 
8. Michl J, Ohlbaum DJ, Silverstein SC. 2-Deoxyglucose selectively inhibits Fc and complement 
receptor-mediated phagocytosis in mouse peritoneal macrophages. I Description of the inhibitory 
effect. J Exp Med. 1976; 144:1465–1483. [PubMed: 1032901] 
9. Hamilton JA, Vairo G, Lingelbach SR. CSF-1 stimulates glucose uptake in murine bone marrow-
derived macrophages. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1986; 138:445–454. [PubMed: 3488736] 
10. Rodriguez-Prados JC, et al. Substrate fate in activated macrophages: a comparison between innate, 
classic, and alternative activation. J Immunol. 2010; 185:605–614. [PubMed: 20498354] 
11. Krawczyk CM, et al. Toll-like receptor-induced changes in glycolytic metabolism regulate 
dendritic cell activation. Blood. 2010; 115:4742–4749. This was one of the first papers to analyse 
the Warburg effect in DCs activated by TLR4. [PubMed: 20351312] 
12. Donnelly RP, et al. mTORC1-dependent metabolic reprogramming is a prerequisite for NK cell 
effector function. J Immunol. 2014; 193:4477–4484. [PubMed: 25261477] 
13. Michalek RD, et al. Cutting edge: distinct glycolytic and lipid oxidative metabolic programs are 
essential for effector and regulatory CD4+ T cell subsets. J Immunol. 2011; 186:3299–3303. In 
this paper, we see one of the first reports of different metabolic processes occurring in T cell 
subsets, with glycolysis and fatty acid synthesis being a feature of TH1 cells, and fatty acid 
oxidation being more prominent in Treg cells. [PubMed: 21317389] 
O’Neill et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 14. Doughty CA, et al. Antigen receptor-mediated changes in glucose metabolism in B lymphocytes: 
role of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling in the glycolytic control of growth. Blood. 2006; 
107:4458–4465. [PubMed: 16449529] 
15. Shi LZ, et al. HIF1α-dependent glycolytic pathway orchestrates a metabolic checkpoint for the 
differentiation of TH17 and Treg cells. J Exp Med. 2011; 208:1367–1376. This paper is notable for 
demonstrating that the phenotype of the T cell can change when glycolysis is inhibited, effectively 
turning from a TH17 cell into a Treg cell. This study ushered in the concept of metabolic 
reprogramming. [PubMed: 21708926] 
16. Gubser PM, et al. Rapid effector function of memory CD8+ T cells requires an immediate-early 
glycolytic switch. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:1064–1072. [PubMed: 23955661] 
17. Shrestha S, et al. Treg cells require the phosphatase PTEN to restrain TH1 and TFH cell responses. 
Nat Immunol. 2015; 16:178–187. [PubMed: 25559258] 
18. Huynh A, et al. Control of PI(3) kinase in Treg cells maintains homeostasis and lineage stability. 
Nat Immunol. 2015; 16:188–196. [PubMed: 25559257] 
19. Wei J, et al. Autophagy enforces functional integrity of regulatory T cells by coupling 
environmental cues and metabolic homeostasis. Nat Immunol. 2016; 17:277–285. [PubMed: 
26808230] 
20. Everts B, et al. TLR-driven early glycolytic reprogramming via the kinases TBK1-IKKε supports 
the anabolic demands of dendritic cell activation. Nat Immunol. 2014; 15:323–332. [PubMed: 
24562310] 
21. Tannahill GM, et al. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1β through HIF-1α. 
Nature. 2013; 496:238–242. This is the first report to show that a TCA cycle intermediate, 
succinate, can serve as an activation signal in macrophages and promote IL-1β production by 
activating HIF1α. [PubMed: 23535595] 
22. Palsson-McDermott EM, et al. Pyruvate kinase M2 regulates Hif-1α activity and IL-1β induction 
and is a critical determinant of the warburg effect in LPS-activated macrophages. Cell Metab. 
2015; 21:65–80. [PubMed: 25565206] 
23. Luo W, et al. Pyruvate kinase M2 is a PHD3-stimulated coactivator for hypoxia-inducible factor 1. 
Cell. 2011; 145:732–744. [PubMed: 21620138] 
24. Shirai T, et al. The glycolytic enzyme PKM2 bridges metabolic and inflammatory dysfunction in 
coronary artery disease. J Exp Med. 2016; 213:337–354. [PubMed: 26926996] 
25. Jha AK, et al. Network integration of parallel metabolic and transcriptional data reveals metabolic 
modules that regulate macrophage polarization. Immunity. 2015; 42:419–430. [PubMed: 
25786174] 
26. Gerriets VA, et al. Metabolic programming and PDHK1 control CD4+ T cell subsets and 
inflammation. J Clin Invest. 2015; 125:194–207. [PubMed: 25437876] 
27. Beier UH, et al. Essential role of mitochondrial energy metabolism in Foxp3+ T-regulatory cell 
function and allograft survival. FASEB J. 2015; 29:2315–2326. [PubMed: 25681462] 
28. Procaccini C, et al. The proteomic landscape of human ex vivo regulatory and conventional T cells 
reveals specific metabolic requirements. Immunity. 2016; 44:406–421. [PubMed: 26885861] 
29. De Rosa V, et al. Glycolysis controls the induction of human regulatory T cells by modulating the 
expression of FOXP3 exon 2 splicing variants. Nat Immunol. 2015; 16:1174–1184. [PubMed: 
26414764] 
30. Mukhopadhyay R, Jia J, Arif A, Ray PS, Fox PL. The GAIT system: a gatekeeper of inflammatory 
gene expression. Trends Biochem Sci. 2009; 34:324–331. [PubMed: 19535251] 
31. Chang CH, et al. Posttranscriptional control of T cell effector function by aerobic glycolysis. Cell. 
2013; 153:1239–1251. An important paper that demonstrates that GAPDH ‘moonlights’ — its 
other role being to repress expression of IFNγ in TH1 cells. [PubMed: 23746840] 
32. Moon JS, et al. mTORC1-induced HK1-dependent glycolysis regulates NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation. Cell Rep. 2015; 12:102–115. [PubMed: 26119735] 
33. Haschemi A, et al. The sedoheptulose kinase CARKL directs macrophage polarization through 
control of glucose metabolism. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:813–826. The pentose phosphate pathway is 
shown in this study to be crucial for macrophage polarization. [PubMed: 22682222] 
O’Neill et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 34. O’Sullivan D, et al. Memory CD8+ T cells use cell-intrinsic lipolysis to support the metabolic 
programming necessary for development. Immunity. 2014; 41:75–88. [PubMed: 25001241] 
35. Infantino V, et al. The mitochondrial citrate carrier: a new player in inflammation. Biochem J. 
2011; 438:433–436. [PubMed: 21787310] 
36. Michelucci A, et al. Immune-responsive gene 1 protein links metabolism to immunity by 
catalyzing itaconic acid production. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:7820–7825. [PubMed: 
23610393] 
37. Clementi E, Brown GC, Feelisch M, Moncada S. Persistent inhibition of cell respiration by nitric 
oxide: crucial role of S-nitrosylation of mitochondrial complex I and protective action of 
glutathione. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:7631–7636. [PubMed: 9636201] 
38. Carpenter KL, et al. Macrophages, lipid oxidation, ceroid accumulation and alpha-tocopherol 
depletion in human atherosclerotic lesions. Gerontology. 1995; 41:53–67. [PubMed: 8821321] 
39. Lusis AJ. Atherosclerosis. Nature. 2000; 407:233–241. [PubMed: 11001066] 
40. Shoelson SE, Lee J, Goldfine AB. Inflammation and insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 2006; 
116:1793–1801. [PubMed: 16823477] 
41. Freigang S, et al. Fatty acid-induced mitochondrial uncoupling elicits inflammasome-independent 
IL-1α and sterile vascular inflammation in atherosclerosis. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:1045–1053. 
[PubMed: 23995233] 
42. Malandrino MI, et al. Enhanced fatty acid oxidation in adipocytes and macrophages reduces lipid-
induced triglyceride accumulation and inflammation. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2015; 
308:E756–E769. [PubMed: 25714670] 
43. Vats D, et al. Oxidative metabolism and PGC-1β attenuate macrophage-mediated inflammation. 
Cell Metab. 2006; 4:13–24. [PubMed: 16814729] 
44. Huang SC, et al. Cell-intrinsic lysosomal lipolysis is essential for alternative activation of 
macrophages. Nat Immunol. 2014; 15:846–855. [PubMed: 25086775] 
45. Nomura M, et al. Fatty acid oxidation in macrophage polarization. Nat Immunol. 2016; 17:216–
217. [PubMed: 26882249] 
46. Wang R, et al. The transcription factor Myc controls metabolic reprogramming upon T lymphocyte 
activation. Immunity. 2011; 35:871–882. [PubMed: 22195744] 
47. Patsoukis N, et al. PD-1 alters T-cell metabolic reprogramming by inhibiting glycolysis and 
promoting lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6692. [PubMed: 25809635] 
48. Bruno L, von Boehmer H, Kirberg J. Cell division in the compartment of naive and memory T 
lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol. 1996; 26:3179–3184. [PubMed: 8977320] 
49. van der Windt GJ, et al. CD8 memory T cells have a bioenergetic advantage that underlies their 
rapid recall ability. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:14336–14341. [PubMed: 23940348] 
50. van der Windt GJ, et al. Mitochondrial respiratory capacity is a critical regulator of CD8+ T cell 
memory development. Immunity. 2012; 36:68–78. [PubMed: 22206904] 
51. Posokhova EN, Khoshchenko OM, Chasovskikh MI, Pivovarova EN, Dushkin MI. Lipid synthesis 
in macrophages during inflammation in vivo: effect of agonists of peroxisome proliferator 
activated receptors α and γ and of retinoid X receptors. Biochem (Mosc). 2008; 73:296–304.
52. Feingold KR, et al. Mechanisms of triglyceride accumulation in activated macrophages. J Leukoc 
Biol. 2012; 92:829–839. [PubMed: 22753953] 
53. Ecker J, et al. Induction of fatty acid synthesis is a key requirement for phagocytic differentiation 
of human monocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:7817–7822. [PubMed: 20385828] 
54. Moon JS, et al. UCP2-induced fatty acid synthase promotes NLRP3 inflammasome activation 
during sepsis. J Clin Invest. 2015; 125:665–680. [PubMed: 25574840] 
55. Chen HW, Heiniger HJ, Kandutsch AA. Relationship between sterol synthesis and DNA-synthesis 
in phytohemagglutinin-stimulated mouse lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1975; 72:1950–
1954. [PubMed: 1057774] 
56. Dufort FJ, et al. Glucose-dependent de novo lipogenesis in B lymphocytes: a requirement for atp-
citrate lyase in lipopolysaccharide-induced differentiation. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:7011–7024. 
[PubMed: 24469453] 
O’Neill et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 57. Lee J, et al. Regulator of fatty acid metabolism, acetyl coenzyme a carboxylase 1, controls T cell 
immunity. J Immunol. 2014; 192:3190–3199. [PubMed: 24567531] 
58. Berod L, et al. De novo fatty acid synthesis controls the fate between regulatory T and T helper 17 
cells. Nat Med. 2014; 20:1327–1333. In this study, fatty acid metabolism is shown to govern the 
fate of TH cell subtypes. [PubMed: 25282359] 
59. Wang C, et al. CD5L/AIM regulates lipid biosynthesis and restrains Th17 cell pathogenicity. Cell. 
2015; 163:1413–1427. [PubMed: 26607793] 
60. Guglani L, Khader SA. Th17 cytokines in mucosal immunity and inflammation. Curr Opin HIV 
AIDS. 2010; 5:120–127. [PubMed: 20543588] 
61. Zielinski CE, et al. Pathogen-induced human TH17 cells produce IFN-γ or IL-10 and are regulated 
by IL-1β. Nature. 2012; 484:514–518. [PubMed: 22466287] 
62. Fessler MB. Regulation of adaptive immunity in health and disease by cholesterol metabolism. 
Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2015; 15:48. [PubMed: 26149587] 
63. Maceyka M, Spiegel S. Sphingolipid metabolites in inflammatory disease. Nature. 2014; 510:58–
67. [PubMed: 24899305] 
64. Kelly D, Wischmeyer PE. Role of L-glutamine in critical illness: new insights. Curr Opin Clin Nutr 
Metab Care. 2003; 6:217–222. [PubMed: 12589192] 
65. Parry-Billings M, Evans J, Calder PC, Newsholme EA. Does glutamine contribute to 
immunosuppression after major burns? Lancet. 1990; 336:523–525. [PubMed: 1975037] 
66. Wallace C, Keast D. Glutamine and macrophage function. Metabolism. 1992; 41:1016–1020. 
[PubMed: 1381459] 
67. Murphy C, Newsholme P. Importance of glutamine metabolism in murine macrophages and human 
monocytes to L-arginine biosynthesis and rates of nitrite or urea production. Clin Sci (Lond). 
1998; 95:397–407. [PubMed: 9748415] 
68. Bellows CF, Jaffe BM. Glutamine is essential for nitric oxide synthesis by murine macrophages. J 
Surg Res. 1999; 86:213–219. [PubMed: 10534426] 
69. Carr EL, et al. Glutamine uptake and metabolism are coordinately regulated by ERK/MAPK 
during T lymphocyte activation. J Immunol. 2010; 185:1037–1044. [PubMed: 20554958] 
70. Crawford J, Cohen HJ. The essential role of L-glutamine in lymphocyte differentiation in vitro. J 
Cell Physiol. 1985; 124:275–282. [PubMed: 4044655] 
71. Le A, et al. Glucose-independent glutamine metabolism via TCA cycling for proliferation and 
survival in B cells. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:110–121. [PubMed: 22225880] 
72. Nakaya M, et al. Inflammatory T cell responses rely on amino acid transporter ASCT2 facilitation 
of glutamine uptake and mTORC1 kinase activation. Immunity. 2014; 40:692–705. [PubMed: 
24792914] 
73. Rath M, Muller I, Kropf P, Closs EI, Munder M. Metabolism via arginase or nitric oxide synthase: 
two competing arginine pathways in macrophages. Front Immunol. 2014; 5:532. [PubMed: 
25386178] 
74. MacMicking J, Xie QW, Nathan C. Nitric oxide and macrophage function. Annu Rev Immunol. 
1997; 15:323–350. [PubMed: 9143691] 
75. MacMicking JD, et al. Altered responses to bacterial infection and endotoxic shock in mice lacking 
inducible nitric oxide synthase. Cell. 1995; 81:641–650. [PubMed: 7538909] 
76. Albina JE, et al. Arginine metabolism in wounds. Am J Physiol. 1988; 254:E459–E467. [PubMed: 
3354662] 
77. Pesce JT, et al. Arginase-1-expressing macrophages suppress Th2 cytokine-driven inflammation 
and fibrosis. PLoS Pathog. 2009; 5:e1000371. [PubMed: 19360123] 
78. Takele Y, et al. Arginase activity in the blood of patients with visceral leishmaniasis and HIV 
infection. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013; 7:e1977. [PubMed: 23349999] 
79. Rodriguez PC, et al. Regulation of T cell receptor CD3ζ chain expression by L-arginine. J Biol 
Chem. 2002; 277:21123–21129. [PubMed: 11950832] 
80. Rodriguez PC, Quiceno DG, Ochoa AC. L-arginine availability regulates T-lymphocyte cell-cycle 
progression. Blood. 2007; 109:1568–1573. [PubMed: 17023580] 
O’Neill et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 81. Cobbold SP, et al. Infectious tolerance via the consumption of essential amino acids and mTOR 
signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:12055–12060. [PubMed: 19567830] 
82. Silver RM, et al. Scleroderma, fasciitis, and eosinophilia associated with the ingestion of 
tryptophan. N Engl J Med. 1990; 322:874–881. [PubMed: 1690352] 
83. Stahl JL, Cook EB, Pariza MA, Cook ME, Graziano FM. Effect of L-tryptophan supplementation 
on eosinophils and eotaxin in guinea pigs. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2001; 226:177–184. 
[PubMed: 11361035] 
84. Yoshida R, Hayaishi O. Induction of pulmonary indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase by intraperitoneal 
injection of bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1978; 75:3998–4000. 
[PubMed: 279015] 
85. Yoshida R, Imanishi J, Oku T, Kishida T, Hayaishi O. Induction of pulmonary indoleamine 2,3-
dioxygenase by interferon. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1981; 78:129–132. [PubMed: 6165986] 
86. Werner ER, et al. Parallel induction of tetrahydrobiopterin biosynthesis and indoleamine 2,3-
dioxygenase activity in human cells and cell lines by interferon-γ. Biochem J. 1989; 262:861–866. 
[PubMed: 2511835] 
87. Pfefferkorn ER. Interferon γ blocks the growth of Toxoplasma gondii in human fibroblasts by 
inducing the host cells to degrade tryptophan. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1984; 81:908–912. 
[PubMed: 6422465] 
88. Schroten H, et al. Potential role of human brain microvascular endothelial cells in the pathogenesis 
of brain abscess: inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus by activation of indoleamine 2,3-
dioxygenase. Neuropediatrics. 2001; 32:206–210. [PubMed: 11571701] 
89. Lee GK, et al. Tryptophan deprivation sensitizes activated T cells to apoptosis prior to cell division. 
Immunology. 2002; 107:452–460. [PubMed: 12460190] 
90. Munn DH, et al. Inhibition of T cell proliferation by macrophage tryptophan catabolism. J Exp 
Med. 1999; 189:1363–1372. [PubMed: 10224276] 
91. Liu H, et al. GCN2-dependent metabolic stress is essential for endotoxemic cytokine induction and 
pathology. Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 34:428–438. [PubMed: 24248597] 
92. Bessede A, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor control of a disease tolerance defence pathway. 
Nature. 2014; 511:184–190. [PubMed: 24930766] 
93. Uyttenhove C, et al. Evidence for a tumoral immune resistance mechanism based on tryptophan 
degradation by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. Nat Med. 2003; 9:1269–1274. Tryptophan 
metabolism by the enzyme IDO is shown here to be crucial for antitumour immunity. [PubMed: 
14502282] 
94. Okamoto A, et al. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase serves as a marker of poor prognosis in gene 
expression profiles of serous ovarian cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:6030–6039. 
[PubMed: 16115948] 
95. Munn DH, et al. Expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase by plasmacytoid dendritic cells in 
tumor-draining lymph nodes. J Clin Invest. 2004; 114:280–290. [PubMed: 15254595] 
96. Weinlich G, Murr C, Richardsen L, Winkler C, Fuchs D. Decreased serum tryptophan 
concentration predicts poor prognosis in malignant melanoma patients. Dermatology. 2007; 214:8–
14. [PubMed: 17191041] 
97. Holmgaard RB, Zamarin D, Munn DH, Wolchok JD, Allison JP. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase is a 
critical resistance mechanism in antitumor T cell immunotherapy targeting CTLA-4. J Exp Med. 
2013; 210:1389–1402. [PubMed: 23752227] 
98. Yin Y, et al. Normalization of CD4+ T cell metabolism reverses lupus. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 
7:274ra18.
99. Lee CF, et al. Preventing allograft rejection by targeting immune metabolism. Cell Rep. 2015; 
13:760–770. [PubMed: 26489460] 
O’Neill et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Metabolic reprogramming by the immune system
Historically, oxygen levels and nutrient supply were seen as the key drivers of metabolic 
pathways. Normoxia supports the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and oxidative 
phosphorylation, whereas hypoxia leads to the activation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1α 
(HIF1α) and the expression of glycolytic enzymes. More recently, it has become apparent 
that immune stimuli can also cause metabolic reprogramming in cells. For example, 
stimulation of cells with interleukin-4 (IL-4) can induce oxidative phosphorylation, whereas 
the activation of cells through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), such as Toll-like 
receptor 4 (TLR4), induces HIF1α expression to promote glycolysis. Glycolysis also 
predominates in tumours under normoxia in the form of aerobic glycolysis, presumably 
giving tumours a growth advantage in oxygen-replete tissues.
O’Neill et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Six major metabolic pathways
Glycolysis converts glucose into pyruvate, which can then either be converted into lactate, 
and secreted, or can enter the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in which it will generate 
NADH and FADH2 for the electron transport chain, leading to ATP production. Glycolysis 
also feeds the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), which generates ribose for nucleotides, 
amino acids and NADPH. NADPH is used for fatty acid synthesis, which uses citrate 
withdrawn from the TCA cycle. Fatty acids can also be oxidized, generating NADH and 
FADH2, which again drive ATP production from the electron transport chain. Finally amino 
acid metabolism can feed the TCA cycle and is also important for cell growth and protein 
biosynthesis. In this figure, the pathways that require oxygen are indicated in green boxes, 
and pathways that are not oxygen dependent are indicated in blue boxes. In addition, 
inhibitors of metabolic pathways are indicated in grey boxes. BPTES, bis-2-(5-
phenylacetamido-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl sulphide.
O’Neill et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway in immunity
Glycolysis occurs in M1-like macrophages in response to hypoxia-inducible factor 1α 
(HIF1α) activation. HIF1α not only promotes glycolysis but also induces the expression of 
genes that encode inflammatory cytokines, notably interleukin-1β (IL-1β). The glycolytic 
enzyme hexokinase 1 has also been shown to directly interact with and activate the NLRP3 
inflammasome, leading to caspase 1 activation and the processing of pro-IL-1 β. In T cells, 
the glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) binds to 
mRNA encoding interferon-γ (IFNγ) and represses its translation; the switch to glycolysis 
that occurs in response to T cell activation leads to the dissociation of GAPDH allowing for 
translation of IFNγ. Glycolysis is also crucial for the functioning of natural killer (NK), T 
helper 1 (TH1), TH2, TH17 and peripherally induced regulatory T (pTreg) cells. The pentose 
phosphate pathway branches off glycolysis and generates ribose for nucleotides for DNA 
and RNA synthesis, but also NADPH, for NADPH oxidase or for glutathione biosynthesis, 
promoting an antioxidant response. In human pTreg cells, the glycolytic enzyme enolase has 
been shown to promote their suppressive functions by regulating the expression of FOXP3 
splicing variants containing exon 2 (FOXP3-E2). CARKL, carbohydrate kinase-like protein; 
NLRP3, NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing 3; PKM2, pyruvate kinase isoenzyme 
M2.
O’Neill et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. The TCA cycle in macrophages
In M2-like macrophages (that is, interleukin-4 (IL-4)-activated macrophages) the 
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle is intact and participates in oxidative phosphorylation, 
providing ATP for energy. In M1-like macrophages (that is, cells that have been activated by 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interferon-γ), the TCA cycle is broken in two places — after 
citrate and after succinate. Citrate is used to generate fatty acids for membrane biogenesis 
and also for prostaglandin production. It also generates itaconic acid via the enzyme 
immune-responsive gene 1 (IRG1). Itaconic acid has direct antimicrobial activity against 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Salmonella sp. HIF1α, hypoxia-inducible factor 1α.
O’Neill et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Fatty acid synthesis and oxidation in immunity
Inflammatory signals drive fatty acid synthesis, which is important for immune cell 
proliferation and inflammatory cytokine production. By contrast, tolerogenic stimuli from 
the immune system drive fatty acid oxidation, which is required for the production of 
suppressive cytokines leading to immune tolerance and the inhibition of inflammation. 
Effector T cells show enhanced fatty acid synthesis and this is needed for their growth. 
Memory T cells show fatty acid oxidation, which limits their growth and allows them to 
persist.
O’Neill et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Amino acid metabolism in immunity
Amino acid metabolism plays an important role in mediating functionality of the innate and 
adaptive immune systems. In macrophages, the amino acids glutamine and arginine are 
crucial for immune functions including cytokine and nitric oxide production. The fate of 
arginine in macrophages is a key distinction between inflammatory and tolerant cell 
phenotypes. Tryptophan metabolism by macrophages may suppress the activity of the 
adaptive immune system. In T cells, glutamine and arginine promote robust responses to T 
cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, including proliferation and cytokine production. Sufficient 
availability is necessary for proper mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway 
signalling. Tryptophan has an important role in promoting T cell proliferation, and lack of 
availability may mediate failure to respond to infections or tumours. TCA, tricarboxylic 
acid; Treg, regulatory T.
O’Neill et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Metabolism of immune cell subtypes
The various immune cell subsets exhibit a reliance on distinct metabolic pathways to 
promote cell survival, lineage generation and function. Inflammatory macrophages use 
glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, the pentose phosphate pathway, fatty acid 
synthesis and amino acid metabolism to proliferate and to support the production of 
inflammatory cytokines. M2 macrophages, which exhibit a more tolerant phenotype, use the 
TCA cycle, fatty acid oxidation and arginine flux into the arginase pathway. Rapidly 
proliferating effector T cells, including T helper 1 (TH1), TH17 and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, 
use glycolysis, fatty acid synthesis and amino acid metabolism to promote proliferation and 
cytokine production. Immunosuppressive regulatory T (Treg) cells use the TCA cycle and 
fatty acid oxidation. Similarly, memory CD8+ T cells also require the use of the TCA cycle 
and fatty acid oxidation to promote increased cell lifespan. ROS, reactive oxygen species.
O’Neill et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
O’Neill et al.
Page 28
Table 1
Small molecule agents that manipulate immunometabolism*
Name
Target
Consequence
2-deoxyglucose
Hexokinase
Inhibition of glycolysis
3-bromopyruvate
Hexokinase
Inhibition of glycolysis
Ritonavir
Glucose transporter 1
Inhibition of glycolysis
Dichloroacetate
Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
Inhibition of glycolysis
FX11
Lactate dehydrogenase
Inhibition of glycolysis
4-CIN
Monocarboxylate transporters
Inhibition of glycolysis
DASA and TEPP46
Pyruvate kinase M2
Inhibition of HIF1α
C75
Fatty acid synthase
Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis
Etomoxir
Carnitine palmitoyl transferase I
Inhibition of fatty acid oxidation
AICAR
AMP kinase
Increased fatty acid oxidation
Metformin
AMP kinase
Increased fatty acid oxidation; inhibition of Complex I; decreased mitochondrial 
reactive oxygen species.
Cerulenin
Fatty acid synthase
Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis
Rotenone
Complex I
Inhibition of OXPHOS
BPTES
Glutaminase
Inhibition of glutaminolysis
Oligomycin
ATP synthase
Inhibition of OXPHOS
TOFA
Acetyl CoA carboxylase
Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis
UK5099
Pyruvate transporter
Inhibition of the TCA cycle
4-CIN, α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnate; AICAR, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide; BPTES, bis-2-(5-phenylacetamido-1,3,4-
thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl sulfide; DASA, diarylsulfonamide; HIF1α, hypoxia-inducible factor 1α; OXPHOS, oxidative phosphorylation; TCA, 
tricarboxylic acid; TOFA, tall oil fatty acid.
*A number of small molecules can be used by immunologists to probe the role of metabolic reprogramming in the systems in which they are 
particularly interested.
Nat Rev Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
