 Gates Open Research
 
Open Peer Review
Any reports and responses or comments on the
article can be found at the end of the article.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Scaled deployment of 
 to protect the community from 
Wolbachia
 
 transmitted arboviruses
Aedes
[version 1; peer review: 1
approved, 1 approved with reservations]
Scott L. O'Neill
, 
 
 
 
 
Peter A. Ryan , Andrew P. Turley , Geoff Wilson , Kate Retzki ,
 
 
 
 
Inaki Iturbe-Ormaetxe , Yi Dong , Nichola Kenny , Christopher J. Paton ,
 
 
 
 
Scott A. Ritchie , Jack Brown-Kenyon , Darren Stanford , Natalie Wittmeier ,
 
Katherine L. Anders
, Cameron P. Simmons1
Institute of Vector-Borne Disease, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia
College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Sciences, James Cook University, Cairns, QLD, 4878, Australia
Abstract
: A number of new technologies are under development for
Background
the control of mosquito transmitted viruses, such as dengue, chikungunya
and Zika that all require the release of modified mosquitoes into the
environment. None of these technologies has been able to demonstrate
evidence that they can be implemented at a scale beyond small pilots. Here
we report the first successful citywide scaled deployment of 
 in
Wolbachia
the northern Australian city of Townsville.
: The Mel strain of 
 was backcrossed into a local 
Methods
w
Wolbachia
 genotype and mass reared mosquitoes were deployed as
Aedes aegypti
eggs using mosquito release containers (MRCs). In initial stages these
releases were undertaken by program staff but in later stages this was
replaced by direct community release including the development of a
school program that saw children undertake releases. Mosquito monitoring
was undertaken with Biogents Sentinel (BGS) traps and individual
mosquitoes were screened for the presence of 
 with a Taqman
Wolbachia
qPCR assay. Dengue case notifications from Queensland Health
Communicable Disease Branch were used to track dengue cases in the city
before and after release.
: 
 was successfully established into local 
Results Wolbachia
Ae. aegypti
mosquitoes across 66 km  in four stages over 28 months with full
community support.  A feature of the program was the development of a
scaled approach to community engagement. 
 frequencies have
Wolbachia
remained stable since deployment and to date no local dengue
transmission has been confirmed in any area of Townsville after Wolbachia
has established, despite local transmission events every year for the prior
13 years and an epidemiological context of increasing imported cases.
: Deployment of 
 into 
 populations can be
Conclusion
Wolbachia
Ae. aegypti
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
 
 
Reviewer Status
 
Invited Reviewers
 
  
version 2
published
01 Nov 2018
version 1
published
01 Aug 2018
 
1
2
report
report
report
, QIMR Berghofer Medical
Gregor J. Devine
Research Institute, Herston, Australia
1
, Boston University,
Horacio M. Frydman
Boston, USA
,
Heverton Leandro Carneiro Dutra
Boston University, Boston, USA
2
 01 Aug 2018, :36 (
First published:
2
)
https://doi.org/10.12688/gatesopenres.12844.1
 01 Nov 2018, :36 (
Latest published:
2
)
https://doi.org/10.12688/gatesopenres.12844.2
v1
2
Page 1 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
: Deployment of 
 into 
 populations can be
Conclusion
Wolbachia
Ae. aegypti
readily scaled to areas of ~60km  quickly and cost effectively and appears
in this context to be effective at stopping local dengue transmission
Keywords
Dengue, World Mosquito Program, Eliminate Dengue, Aedes aegypti,
mosquito release, community engagement
 Scott L. O'Neill (
)
Corresponding author:
scott.oneill@monash.edu
 
: Conceptualization, Funding Acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project Administration, Supervision, Writing –
Author roles: O'Neill SL
Original Draft Preparation, Writing – Review & Editing; 
: Methodology, Writing – Review & Editing; 
: Investigation, Methodology,
Ryan PA
Turley AP
Supervision; 
: Investigation, Methodology, Supervision; 
: Investigation, Methodology, Supervision; 
:
Wilson G
Retzki K
Iturbe-Ormaetxe I
Investigation, Methodology; 
: Investigation, Methodology; 
: Investigation, Methodology; 
: Investigation, Methodology; 
Dong Y
Kenny N
Paton CJ
: Investigation, Methodology; 
: Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Methodology; 
: Investigation, Supervision;
Ritchie SA
Brown-Kenyon J
Stanford D
: Investigation, Supervision; 
: Formal Analysis, Writing – Review & Editing; 
: Formal Analysis, Supervision,
Wittmeier N
Anders KL
Simmons CP
Writing – Review & Editing
 No competing interests were disclosed.
Competing interests:
 This work was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation through a grant as part the Vector-Based Transmission of
Grant information:
Control: Discovery Research (VCTR) program of the Grand Challenges in Global Health initiative [OPP1153619] managed by the Foundation for
the National Institutes of Health. This work was also supported by the Wellcome Trust [102591], the Queensland Government [Project ID 70134],
and the Gillespie Family Foundation. SAR was funded from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia through a Senior
Research Fellowship award [1044698].
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
 © 2018 O'Neill SL 
. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the 
, which
Copyright:
et al
Creative Commons Attribution Licence
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
 O'Neill SL, Ryan PA, Turley AP 
 
How to cite this article:
et al. Scaled deployment of 
 to protect the community from 
Wolbachia
Aedes
 Gates Open Research 2018, :36 (
transmitted arboviruses [version 1; peer review: 1 approved, 1 approved with reservations]
2
)
https://doi.org/10.12688/gatesopenres.12844.1
 01 Aug 2018, :36 (
) 
First published:
2
https://doi.org/10.12688/gatesopenres.12844.1
2
Page 2 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Introduction
A growing body of evidence shows that the wMel strain of 
 
Wolbachia, when introduced into Aedes aegypti, reduces the 
mosquito’s ability to transmit key human viruses such as 
 
dengue1, Zika2,3 and chikungunya4,5, and this reduction is esti-
mated to have the potential to significantly reduce disease 
transmission in affected communities6. The World Mosquito 
 
Program (formerly known as the Eliminate Dengue Program), 
a not-for-profit consortium, has demonstrated previously that, 
after small-scale releases, the wMel strain of Wolbachia can be 
 
established and maintain itself within isolated Ae. aegypti 
populations around the city of Cairns in Australia7,8. Subsequent 
pilot releases have also shown that Wolbachia can be estab-
lished in contiguous urban habitats9. In this report, we present 
the results of the first large-scale deployment of Wolbachia 
across Townsville, a medium-sized city in northern Australia 
 
with a population of ∼187,000 residents.
Our goals for this work were to demonstrate that large scale 
deployment of Wolbachia was possible10, that it could be done 
quickly and efficiently at low cost, and that it was acceptable 
to communities. In addition, while not designed as a clinical 
trial, it also provided an opportunity to examine a time series of 
observational data on dengue transmission, for 13 years before 
 
deployment and four consecutive dengue transmission seasons 
since deployment began.
Methods
Community engagement
One of the key objectives of the Townsville project was 
 
establishing a community engagement framework that could be 
suitably scaled for a citywide deployment and could be used 
 
cross-culturally for future deployments. Previous deployments 
in Cairns had relied on obtaining individual consent from 
 
community members for the release activities, an approach that 
was unsuitable for the required scaling. Instead we developed 
a Public Acceptance Model (PAM) for our engagement that 
 
formed the basis for obtaining community support for the research 
activities. The PAM was based on a set of Public Participation 
 
Principles described in Table 1.
The PAM consisted of four key components
1.    
Raising awareness by providing information to residents 
and key stakeholders about the program. These activities 
included face to face meetings, media events, stalls at 
community markets, community presentations utilising 
existing community networks such as community asso-
ciations, information kiosks in public spaces, traditional 
and electronic mail outs of information letters and 
deployment coverage updates, a public billboard and 
newspaper advertising, a school outreach program and 
 
social media incentive program.
2.    
Quantitative surveys that measured community aware-
ness and acceptance conducted by an external market 
research company, Compass Research. Each telephone 
survey was undertaken at roughly six monthly intervals, 
the first survey being undertaken in March 2014 prior 
to our community engagement activities starting in the 
 
city and each involved 200–600 participants (Table 2).
3.    
An issues management system that allowed com-
munity members to easily contact the program with 
 
questions or concerns and have them addressed by 
 
program staff typically within 24 hours of receipt. This 
Table 1. Public participation principles of the World Mosquito community engagement approach.
Principle
Measure of Success
Respectful  
Caring for and heeding the interests and concerns 
of others
 
1. Issues raised by people are treated as valid and properly 
considered
Inclusive  
Making an effort to include everyone within its scope
 
2. Efforts are made to include all people with a potential interest in 
the project in project communications
3. People are able to nominate their interest in being included in the 
project communications
Transparent  
Being clear, open, and not hiding anything
 
4. Project information relevant to community understanding and 
interest is readily available and kept up to date
Responsive  
Showing that requests or concerns have been heard 
and trying hard to accommodate them
 
5. Commitments made by project personnel are met 
6. Public requests for information are responded to promptly 
7. Concerns raised are listened to and efforts taken to resolve them
Honest  
Telling the truth, not trying to deceive or allowing 
untruths to prevail
 
8. All communications about the project are factual and cover the 
information of potential interest to people
9. Information is presented in appropriate forms and languages so 
that all interested people can understand
Page 3 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 also allowed residents to opt out of direct participation if 
 
they had concerns.
4.    
A community reference group that consisted of 
respected community members from key stakeholder 
groups and included representation from Townsville 
City Council, Queensland Health, the local indigenous 
community, the Defence Force, local business, commu-
nity development and environmental groups, the tourism 
sector and the education sector. The reference group’s 
 
primary function was to independently review our 
 
activities to ensure that we had carried out our engage-
ment in accordance with our commitments and stated 
Public Participation Principles (Table 1). The reference 
group was tasked to evaluate our activities and make 
a recommendation to the program management that 
 
community engagement had been sufficient for releases 
of mosquitoes to commence. Before releases began 
this group met monthly; after releases started they 
 
continued to meet every 6–8 weeks. The secondary func-
tions of this group were to test and comment on the 
 
suitability of engagement materials and approaches, and to 
 
provide the program with feedback on community senti-
ment towards the program and identify potential issues 
that might require a proactive response. The reference 
 
group was also kept regularly updated on the latest results 
of the program.
Rearing
In order to establish the colony for release, wild mosquito eggs 
were collected from ovitraps set at 49 sites across Townsville 
and used to produce a wildtype colony. Material from this col-
ony was stored as dried eggs and amplified only as required. 
 
Amplification of material from this colony was limited to F3 for 
use in outcrossing during colony maintenance. For stage 1 of 
the Townsville releases, eggs were produced from insectaries at 
 
Monash University, Melbourne or James Cook University, Cairns 
and shipped to the Townsville field office. For stages 2–4 all 
 
mosquito material was produced at Monash University.
The wildtype colony was backcrossed for three generations to a 
laboratory line infected with the wMel strain of Wolbachia11. 
This new colony, TSV wMel.f was continuously maintained 
in order to produce ∼800,000 eggs per week. To maintain the 
 
material during mass production, the TSV wMel.f line was 
divided into two distinct colonies: ‘broodstock’ and ‘release mate-
rial’. The ‘broodstock’ colony was reared under the more relaxed 
 
conditions described in 12 but kept at 26°C. Its purpose was 
to produce eggs for amplification and production of the ‘release 
material colony’. In order to prevent inbreeding, 10% wildtype 
males were added to each generation of the ‘broodstock’. The 
purpose of the ‘release material’ colony was to produce eggs 
 
for release; it did not provide any material for the next genera-
tion in the laboratory. In order to facilitate mass production, the 
‘release material’ colony was maintained as described for the 
broodstock with the following modifications. No wild material 
was added to the ‘release material’ colony. Once eggs were 
hatched, first instar larvae were aliquoted into 500 ml plastic cups 
at a ratio of 150–180 larvae/400 ml of water. The larvae were 
fed once with half a fish food tablet (Tetramin Tropical Tablet, 
Tetra Holding (US) Inc., Germany) until pupation. Larval rearing 
cups were transferred to adult cages for emergence once 60% of 
 
larvae had pupated. Cages were stocked at a rate of ∼600 adults 
 
per (30 X 30 X 30cm) cage.
For both colonies, females (5–7 days old) were fed with human 
blood (Monash University Human Ethics approval CF11/0766 
– 2011000387). They were provided the bloodmeal by introduc-
ing the arm of a volunteer into the selected cage. Females were 
fed until repletion (usually 10–15 minutes). Females were fed 
Table 2. Results of telephone surveys seeking to understand community awareness and support for 
the program.
Jul 2013 
(stage 1 area) 
n=300
Jan 2014 
(stage 1 area) 
n=300
Sept 2014 
(stage 1 area) 
n=600
Dec 2014 
(stage 1 area) 
n=300
Oct 2015 
(stages 2, 3, 4 area) 
n=600
Awareness 
(unprompted)
17%
29%
49%
51%
62%
Awareness 
(prompted)
52%
59%
69%
80%
62%
Awareness via 
media (TV, radio, 
paper)
N/A
69%
66%
65%
78%
Very Comfortable 
or Comfortable 
with the research
91%
85%
89%
95%
92%
Very Comfortable 
or Comfortable 
with community 
mosquito releases
N/A
N/A
N/A
95%
87%
Page 4 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 once per week, for one or two weeks depending on requirements. 
For safety, only one bloodfeeder was used per cage and 
 
bloodfeeders who showed any signs of fever or who were taking 
antibiotics were excluded.
Three 22 cm oviposition strips of red cotton duck cloth were 
placed in each cage three to five days after bloodfeeding. Ovi-
position strips were removed from cages four days later, and 
 
sandwiched between two double layers of 3mm thick kitchen 
sponge that had been covered with a single layer of paper towel, 
covered with a 3mm thick Perspex sheet and placed on a rack. 
Eggs were allowed to dry this way in an 80%RH controlled- 
temperature room for up to 24 hours before being placed in 
humidified containers. The humidity in these containers was 
 
maintained at ∼80%RH by providing a saturated KCl solution 
inside the containers.
After the oviposition strips had been dried, the density of 
eggs/cm on each strip was estimated to determine the length 
of egg strip to be cut for subsequent use in Mosquito Release 
 
Containers (MRCs). Eggs were then shipped to the Townsville 
 
field lab.
Hatch rate was tested for every batch of eggs produced. Matched 
sets of eggs were taken from a number of strips and photo-
graphed to assess desiccation and overall quality of the eggs. One 
 
portion of each matched set was shipped to the release site, and 
one set kept at the rearing facility. Once the eggs reached the 
release site, both sets of eggs were counted, hatched, and hatch 
rate determined by counting larvae. Hatch rate of 70% or above 
was considered acceptable. If hatch rate fell below 70%, the 
cause of this drop was investigated. In most cases, the cause was 
determined to be due to fluctuating environmental conditions 
or to slight changes made to the drying procedure, which was 
 
altered slightly throughout releases.
Wolbachia infection frequency was also tested each week of 
production. 80 females and 80 males were screened from each 
broodstock cohort using diagnostic qPCR as described below. 
If Wolbachia frequency fell below 97% in any broodstock 
cohort, the eggs from their resultant ‘release material colony’ 
 
would not be used for release, however this issue never arose.
The James Cook University rearing strategy differed slightly 
from the Monash rearing strategy. A single colony of ∼10,000 
Townsville wMel-infected Ae. aegypti sourced from Monash 
was created in a semi-field flight cages13 in the Tropical 
 
Medicine Mosquito Research Facility located at James Cook Uni-
versity in Cairns. Based upon experience with earlier releases, 
 
we assumed that there is a loss of ∼50% of the colony per week. 
The colony was therefore refreshed with 2500 males and 2500 
females each week. We also conducted backcrossing to maintain 
genetic diversity by adding males (10% of cage male popula-
tion) sourced from an uninfected wildtype Townsville colony 
 
(< F4). To prevent introduction of wild females and potential 
loss of Wolbachia infection into the colony, we only added 
males. This was achieved by placing suspected male pupae based 
 
on size into cups of 10; any cups containing emerged females 
 
were discarded.
Females (5–7 days old) were fed with human blood on vol-
unteers (JCU Human Ethics H4907). They were provided the 
 
bloodmeal by introducing 5 volunteer blood feeders into the field 
cage 3–5 times/week who let mosquitoes feed for 10 minutes. 
For safety bloodfeeders were screened at every feed for possible 
exposure to dengue infected mosquitoes using a questionnaire to 
access travel history, and their temperature was taken to detect 
fever. Any volunteers with fever, a possible exposure to dengue 
infected mosquitoes or who were taking antibiotics were excluded 
 
for a minimum of 2 weeks.
Eggs were harvested from partially flooded 10 L buckets con-
taining 26 × 30 cm strips of red felt cloth placed in the semi-field 
cage. A perspex template 31cm in length with 12 1-cm holes 
drilled into it was placed over the cloth to limit oviposition to the 
exposed 1 cm area of the ovistrip. The ovistrips were collected 
 
3 times/week, embryonated and dried three days later. Once 
removed from the cages, oviposition strips were placed on moist 
paper towel in a sealed plastic container, after 3 days the lid 
of the sealed container was removed and the eggs were allowed 
to dry this way in an 80%RH controlled temperature room for 
up to 24 hours before being placed in humidified containers. 
The humidity in these containers was maintained at ∼80%RH 
by providing a saturated KCl solution inside the containers. 
The cloth was then cut into individual eggstrips containing a 
 
single egg clump that could be deployed into egg release con-
tainers in the field. The number of eggs on each eggstrip was 
estimated by using reference photographs of eggstrips with 
 
known egg numbers as visual guides for fast estimation.
Mosquito releases
The municipal area of Townsville is ∼190km2. However, within 
this area there were many areas where releases did not take 
place due to the lack of suitable Ae. aegypti habitat. Releases 
were restricted to residential and business areas within the city 
where Ae. aegypti breeding was likely to occur. This resulted 
in the actual area for release being reduced to approximately 
66km2 to effectively cover the city. The release program was 
 
divided into four stages (Figure 1).
Stage 1 covered a release area of 20km2 and included the sub-
urbs with known highest dengue transmission risk: South 
 
Townsville, Railway Estate, North Ward, Townsville City, Belgian 
 
Gardens, Castle Hill, West End, Garbutt, Currajong, Vincent, 
 
Gulliver, Aitkenvale, Mundingburra, Rosslea, Hyde Park, 
 
Pimlico, Mysterton and Hermit Park. In this stage, all releases 
were undertaken using bucket mosquito release containers 
(MRCs). These were 2.3L white polypropylene pails with lid 
 
(Peopleinplastic, Australia), with top 164mm diameter, base 
 
145mm diameter, and height 147mm. Each bucket had four 
 
6mm holes drilled 20mm apart in a square pattern in the side 
 
(Figure 2A). The inside of each bucket was roughened with sand-
paper to allow mosquitoes to rest upon emergence. Into each 
 
bucket MRC was placed an egg strip containing approximately 
 
100 viable eggs (estimated from hatch rate QA), 5 (summer) 
 
or 6 (winter) wafers of Aqua One vege wafer fish food (Aqua 
 
Pacific, UK) and 1L water. More food was provided in winter 
and the servicing cycle for these buckets was extended from 2 
 
to 3 weeks to allow for longer emergence times.
Page 5 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Figure 1. Release site. Map of Townsville city showing the boundaries of the four release stages.
Page 6 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Figure 2. Release containers. Photos illustrating different mosquito release containers used in the deployment. (A) Bucket mosquito release 
containers (MRCs) used in stage 1 releases (B) Clear bucket MRC used in Wolbachia Warriors school program in stage 1 (C) Mozzie Box 
MRC that was used in stages 2–4 (D) Material given to school children as part of the Wolbachia Warriors program.
Bucket MRCs for stage 1 were placed by program staff in outdoor 
shaded areas at approximately 20% of all residential proper-
ties in a roughly evenly spaced arrangement in each suburb. 
They were serviced every two weeks by tipping out the water, 
cleaning the bucket and adding new food, water and eggs. An 
average of 88 adult mosquitoes were released from each bucket 
MRC in stage 1. Releases continued in each suburb until the 
frequency of Wolbachia in samples of field-caught mosquitoes 
 
from that suburb was above 50% for two consecutive weeks. 
For stage 1, it required between 7 and 19 weeks of releases for 
 
each suburb to reach that target
Stages 2, 3 & 4 covered release areas of 18, 18 and 10 km2 
respectively, and included the following suburbs. Stage 2: 
Cranbrook, Heatley, Kirwan/Thuringowa Central and Mount 
 
Louisa; stage 3: Condon, Pallarenda, Rowes Bay, Rasmussen and 
Kelso; stage 4: Idalia, Oonoonba, Wulguru/Stuart, Annandale 
and Douglas. Releases for these later stages did not rely on 
 
program team members to place all release containers. Instead, 
they utilised strategies that directly involved the community, 
such as the use of school students, direct community release, or 
 
through collaboration with local businesses. Releases for these 
stages also used Mozzie Box MRCs (Figure 2C) which con-
sisted of a 775ml Food Pail (Detpak, Australia) without handle, 
and with measurements top 104×92mm, base 79×61mm, height 
104mm. Four 5mm holes were punched into each MRC – one 
hole approximately 1cm from the top right and top left corners of 
each long-side face of the box. Each Mozzie Box MRC received 
100 viable eggs (estimated from hatch rate QA), 4 (summer) 
or 5 (winter) wafers of Aqua One vege waters, and 400ml tap 
 
water. Mozzie Box MRCs were not re-used.
In stages 2–4 the goal was again to place MRCs at 20% of resi-
dences in the release area. This was done by using community 
engagement activities to identify participants who would agree 
to host an MRC. In areas where there were large spatial gaps 
in participation, the program team would then supplement 
 
coverage by visiting additional houses in these areas and obtain-
ing consent to leave MRCs with residents at these locations. 
Finally, in the last two suburbs of stage 3 (Kelso & Rasmussen) 
and across stage 4, releases of adult mosquitoes7 were used to 
 
fill in gaps in MRC coverage.
During the 28 months of the release phase (stages 1–4), a total 
of approximately 4 million mosquitoes were released. Releases 
were undertaken with regulatory approval from the Australian 
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA permit 
 
numbers PER14797 and PER82947).
Page 7 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 School releases
The Wolbachia Warriors Program was developed both as a tool 
to engage children and their parents and make them aware of the 
program, and as an alternative channel to release mosquitoes. 
Five different primary schools were selected to run the pro-
gram over the duration of the Townsville project. One school 
 
participated in each stage except for stage 2 where two schools 
 
participated. In total 943 students aged 6–12 participated in these 
programs.
School children were provided with a bucket MRC in stage 1 
 
as used in operational releases in stage 1 but made of clear 
 
plastic to encourage student observation (Figure 2B) and Mozzie 
Box MRCs in stages 2–4 (Figure 2C), complete with mosquito 
eggs, food, instructions, a calendar to track progress, a mag-
nifying glass, a badge for participation, and an educational 
booklet tailored for either lower (grade P-2) or upper primary 
 
(grade 3–6) students (Figure 2D). Each student was expected 
to undertake three consecutive releases with their MRC over 
 
a six-week period.
Materials were distributed at the schools by program com-
munication and engagement staff, who gave presentations 
 
encouraging participation prior to each of the three mosquito 
release cycles. Students were asked to use their calendar to record 
the progress of the mosquito life cycle in their MRC, and to 
 
return it to program staff at the end of the release.
Direct community release
In these releases, a Mozzie Box MRC was provided directly 
to residents who set it up and reared the mosquitoes them-
selves at their place of residence. In stages 2-4, more than 6,000 
households directly participated in establishing Wolbachia by 
 
managing their own release container. Almost half of these 
 
participants contacted the program team to receive an MRC, 
which was subsequently delivered to their house. The remain-
ing participants were recruited through doorknocking, or through 
other recruitment methods such as community groups. Additional 
Mozzie Box MRCs were distributed through large local 
employers including the City Council, Telstra, The Townsville 
 
Hospital, James Cook University and Queensland Nickel. More 
than 200 people participated in these programs.
Quality assurance procedures
In stage 1, program staff checked 5–10% of all bucket MRCs 
to determine whether the bucket had failed or not, and if not to 
count pupal skins to obtain an estimate of adult emergence 
 
from which they could estimate release rates. In stage 2 – 4, a ran-
dom selection of 5–15% of all MRCs were checked to determine 
if they were set correctly. Larvae, pupae and pupal skins were 
counted to estimate emergence rates in these stages (account-
ing for potential delayed development of mosquitoes at time 
of QA due to community members setting up MRCs later than 
day of delivery). This approach was supplemented in stage 
 
3 with additional sentinel buckets that were set and checked by 
staff to determine average emergence rates. These data were then 
 
used to adjust numbers of eggs placed in MRCs.
Monitoring
Up to 172 Biogents Sentinal (BGS) traps were progressively rolled 
out across stage 1 during releases at a density of approximately 
8 BGS traps per km2. For stages 2–4 the BGS trap density was 
reduced to 4 per km2 , resulting in 74 – 115 traps being deployed 
per stage. Exact trap numbers fluctuated due to operational 
 
considerations (i.e. trap location no longer suitable, trap broken 
 
or missing, community request for trap to be removed or resident 
moved etc.).
Samples from BGS traps were collected weekly and returned 
to the field office for morphological identification. Ae. aegypti 
samples were stored in 70% ethanol and shipped to Monash 
 
University for diagnostic determination of Wolbachia infection 
status. After Feb 2016, samples were collected fortnightly 
instead of weekly as occurred in stage 1 until traps were finally 
 
removed from each suburb (Figure 3)
Diagnostics
Adult Ae. aegypti samples collected from BGS traps in the 
field were screened for Wolbachia using Taqman qPCR on a 
Roche LightCycler 480 using a qualitative assay for presence 
or absence of Wolbachia as previously described14 but with the 
replacement of the Cy5-BHQ3 fluorophore-quencher pair in the 
wMel probe with the fluorophore-quencher LC640-IowaBlack 
 
(Integrated DNA technologies) to remove some of the Cy5 
 
probe instability observed under varying light and ozone levels15.
Dengue case notification data
Dengue is a notifiable disease in Australia, which mandates 
 
clinicians and laboratories to report confirmed and suspected 
cases to local health authorities (See Queensland Dengue 
 
Management plan). Non-identifiable data was provided by 
Queensland Health Communicable Diseases Branch for all 
 
laboratory-confirmed and clinically diagnosed (probable) den-
gue cases with illness onset between 1 January 2000 and 30 June 
2018, extracted from the Notifiable Conditions System (NOCS) 
on 3 July 2018. Case notifications within the Townsville local 
 
government authority were tabulated by month of illness onset 
and history of recent overseas travel during the 3 – 12 days 
prior to illness onset; a variable that is routinely captured in case 
 
notifications based on interview by public health teams (see 16 
for interview protocol). The suburb of residence of four locally-
acquired dengue cases notified in Townsville since Wolbachia 
deployments commenced in October 2014 was determined 
 
from situation reports published by the local public health unit.
Ethical considerations and consent
Ethics approval for human blood feeding mosquito colonies 
in Melbourne was issued from Monash University CF11/0766 
a 2011000387 (Rearing mosquitoes using blood from human 
 
volunteers). All volunteers (no children involved) provided written 
consent.
In Cairns, Human Ethics approval for bloodfeeding (H6286) 
was provided by Human Research Ethics Committee, James 
Cook University. All adult subjects provided informed oral 
 
Page 8 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Page 9 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Page 10 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Figure 3. Wolbachia establishment by suburb. For each stage (A–D) and suburb Wolbachia frequency is plotted against time. Yellow 
shading indicates periods when releases were undertaken. Bars show the number of mosquitos captured in Biogents Sentinel (BGS) traps 
and tested for Wolbachia.
consent (no children were involved). Names of subjects providing 
 
oral consent were recorded in writing.
Townsville community mosquito releases were covered under 
Monash University ethics: MUHREC Approval CF16/763 - 
2016000370 - Eliminate Dengue - Community based field releases 
of Wolbachia infected mosquitoes in Townsville, Queensland.
Surveys were undertaken under Monash ethics: MUHREC 
 
Approval CF13/2805 - 2013001515 - Eliminate Dengue - 
 
Community knowledge of dengue and Wolbachia based dengue 
control in Townsville, Queensland
Verbal and/or written consent from participants was obtained by 
phone, online or face-to-face to set BG traps, set MRCs (phase 1), 
or participate in Community Mosquito Releases.
Ethical approval was not required to access non-identifiable 
 
dengue case notification data collected as part of routine disease 
 
surveillance.
Results and discussion
Prior deployments of Wolbachia in Australia by the World 
 
Mosquito Program utilised a traditional individual informed-
consent approach to obtaining community authorisation for 
 
the releases7. While this approach was adequate for small 
 
deployments, it was not considered scalable for an entire city. 
We therefore developed a Public Acceptance Model (PAM) that 
proved highly effective in ensuring community awareness and 
acceptance of the mosquito deployment program in Townsville. 
 
We believe this model will be suitable for other settings with 
 
appropriate local adaptation, and provides a framework for scaled 
deployment of this type of intervention globally.
Releases of mosquitoes in Townsville began in Oct 2014 with 
strong community support (Table 2) and lasted for 28 months. 
The release program was divided into 4 sequential stages. The 
approach used in Townsville relied on the use of Mosquito 
Release Containers (MRC) as the preferred method of deploy-
ment (Figure 2). In each suburb of the city MRCs were set at 
approximately 20% of residences and then refreshed with new 
 
food, water and eggs every 2–3 weeks. MRC release cycles con-
tinued until 2 consecutive samples of adult mosquitoes taken 
from the suburb showed a Wolbachia frequency above 50%; 
Wolbachia frequency in these areas was then monitored with-
out additional releases. While the city occupies a municipal area 
of 190km2, releases were undertaken over a reduced area of 
∼66km2 as not all areas of the greater municipal area were inhab-
ited or provided suitable Ae. aegypti habitat (Figure 1). The tar-
geted release areas covered all of the suburbs where local dengue 
transmission had occurred during the prior 10 years and known 
 
high-risk suburbs for dengue transmission were targeted in 
 
stage 1.
Page 11 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Wolbachia establishment across the different suburbs of 
 
Townsville for the four stages is shown in Figure 3. In gen-
eral, establishment of Wolbachia occurred reliably after releases 
stopped once the 50% threshold was met. In some suburbs, Wol-
bachia frequencies fluctuated for a number of months before even-
tually rising to above 80%. In five suburbs, a small number of 
 
supplementary releases were undertaken to ensure establishment. 
 
In all suburbs, the infection frequency has remained stable 
without any signs of Wolbachia being lost from the mosquito 
 
population (Figure 3).
Laboratory experiments have suggested that maternal trans-
mission of wMel can become unstable in Ae. aegypti at high 
 
temperatures and plausibly might limit the field usefulness of 
the wMel strain17. The temperatures used in these incubator 
experiments were meant to mimic larval rearing tempera-
tures in north Queensland. However, our field data shows 
long-term stability of wMel, presumably because temperatures 
used in this study were not truly representative of those expe-
rienced by mosquitoes in the field. We assume that mosquitoes 
 
predictably seek out non-stressful microhabitat when it exists18 
and larval rearing temperatures do not mirror measured ambi-
ent temperatures. Empirical data from this study and other 
 
sites9 suggests that wMel is much more robust to deployment 
 
than predicted by17.
A key feature of using MRCs for mosquito releases is the 
 
possibility of mobilising the community to undertake the deploy-
ment instead of employed program staff. In stage 1 of the release 
 
program staff undertook the deployment by setting and maintain-
ing MRC buckets themselves. In stages 2–4 we used a blended 
approach of community members setting their own MRCs and 
then program staff members supplementing these deployments 
by distributing additional MRCs to meet the target of 20% of 
residences, to ensure adequate coverage without major spatial 
gaps. Community-based releases were undertaken in three ways; 
school programs where students were given MRC kits to take 
home, direct community releases where MRC kits were given to 
householders who had signed up to participate through commu-
nity engagement activities, and finally by having large employers 
within the city distribute MRCs to staff who were willing to 
 
participate. Of the three methods, providing MRCs directly 
to the community was the most cost effective. It also allowed 
for more targeted deployment and better coordination with 
field staff, ensuring adequate coverage across a suburb. This 
blended approach of community-based deployment supple-
mented with programmatic targeted deployment is considered the 
most appropriate for future large-scale operations. The schools 
 
program – while being less efficient and costlier – proved to be 
an excellent community engagement vehicle, with the release 
 
outcome of secondary importance. Its success was highly 
dependent on working with an actively engaged teacher who 
 
could serve as a champion for the program.
Episodic outbreaks of locally transmitted dengue have occurred 
annually in Townsville since 2001. Outbreaks occur against a 
background of regular importations of dengue into Townsville 
 
by international travellers (Figure 4). In the period since 
 
Wolbachia deployments began in Townsville in 2014, dengue 
case importations have continued to occur, increasing to 51 in 
the 44 months from November 2014 – June 2018 compared to 
32 in the preceding 44-month period. Notably, only four locally-
acquired dengue cases have been identified in the post-release 
 
period, compared to 54 in the equivalent preceding period and 
a median of 98 (IQR 78–130) in all 44-month moving win-
dows since 2001. In none of the previous 44-month moving 
windows since 2001 were there fewer than 54 locally-acquired 
cases notified. Importantly, only one of the four local cases 
since November 2014 was resident in an area where Wolbachia 
had been established. However, public health investigation 
found that this case was highly mobile and therefore the likely 
place of acquisition was uncertain. These observations, coupled 
with continuous validation of the impaired vector competence 
of wMel-infected Ae. aegypti in release areas19, represent 
 
empirical epidemiological evidence consistent with modelling 
projections of wMel-mediated elimination of dengue transmission 
 
in most settings6.
The cost of undertaking the program per person, and per km2, 
varied between stages, and when time to complete each stage 
was also considered stage 2 was most efficient (Table 3). 
 
Considering the low population density of this city we expect the 
cost per person, for the same deployment methodology, would be 
 
dramatically reduced in many tropical cities with much higher 
population densities. Furthermore, the costs for the deployment 
in Townsville were inflated as the work was undertaken as 
a research activity, with much more monitoring than would 
be expected in an operational public health intervention. The 
 
breakdown of costs by major activity are shown in Table 4. 
Community engagement activities accounted for a significant 
part of the cost of deployment, which shows the prioritization 
of and importance given to these activities by the World Mos-
quito Program. This, together with the cost of deployment (staff, 
 
vehicles etc.), accounted for more than half the cost of the 
implementation, and represents the areas where significant 
cost reductions might occur in future operational deployments. 
Given the costs for this study, and considering that future deploy-
ments should utilize less monitoring and occur in settings 
of higher population density, we estimate that deployment 
 
cost should be able to be reduced to less than US$1 per person. 
Additionally, in contrast to most other interventions, this cost 
should not be ongoing since once Wolbachia is introduced it is 
expected to maintain itself in populations. This suggests that the 
use of Wolbachia for arbovirus control as described in this study 
has the potential to be an extremely cost effective intervention 
compared with existing methods and many other proposed 
 
interventions that feature the release of modified mosquitoes10.
This study demonstrates that: the wMel strain of Wolbachia 
can be deployed effectively across large geographic areas at 
low cost; that once the intervention is deployed it is stable 
 
and self-sustaining; and that communities are accepting of the 
release of mosquitoes and are willing to participate in deploy-
ments when effectively engaged. Finally, a time series analysis 
Page 12 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Figure 4. Dengue case notifications. Dengue case notifications per month in Townsville, Australia, January 2001 – June 2018, before and after Wolbachia mosquito deployments. 
Notifications include laboratory-confirmed and probable dengue cases, classified as locally-acquired (A) or imported (B) based on a history of overseas travel to a dengue-affected 
country during the period 3 – 12 days prior to illness onset. Data was extracted from the Queensland Health Notifiable Conditions System (NOCS) on 3 July 2018. Green shading 
shows the four stages of Wolbachia deployment conducted in Townsville since October 2014.
Page 13 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 of notified dengue cases within the city over a 17-year period 
is consistent with modelling predictions of a large impact on 
 
dengue transmission6 – and indeed in this city the observational 
 
data is consistent with elimination of local transmission.
Data availability
The data underlying Figure 3 is available from Figshare. 
 
Dataset 1: Data underlying Figure 3 of O’Neill et al. 2018 
 
Gates 
Open 
Research. 
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare. 
6830945.v120 
This dataset is available under a CCO license.
Human dengue case notification data was provided to us by 
Queensland Health. The conditions of release of the raw den-
gue case notifications data to us by the Communicable Disease 
 
Branch of Queensland Health do not permit further sharing to a 
third party. This data (local and acquired dengue case notifications 
from Townsville local government area, Jan 2001 - June 2018) 
 
can be acquired by application to Queensland Health:
https://www.health.qld.gov.au/clinical-practice/guidelines-procedures/
diseases-infection/surveillance/reports/notifiable/data-request 
Competing interests
No competing interests were disclosed.
Grant information
This work was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foun-
dation through a grant as part the Vector-Based Transmission 
of Control: Discovery Research (VCTR) program of the Grand 
Challenges in Global Health initiative [OPP1153619] managed 
by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health. This 
work was also supported by the Wellcome Trust [102591], the 
 
Queensland Government [Project ID 70134], and the Gillespie 
Family Foundation. SAR was funded from the National Health 
and Medical Research Council of Australia through a Senior 
 
Research Fellowship award [1044698]. 
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and 
 
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We would also like to acknowledge Tim Offor, Barbara Sharp 
and Pax Populus for their contributions toward development of 
the PAM model; the residents of Townsville for their willing 
participation, especially members of the Townsville community 
reference group; Queensland Health and especially Steven 
 
Donohue for his support and comments on the manuscript. We 
would especially like to acknowledge the many dedicated past 
and present members of The Eliminate Dengue Program (now the 
 
World Mosquito Program) who worked on this project, espe-
cially Jo Hart for her work on early stages, and all members of 
 
the Townsville field office and various volunteers that assisted 
 
with bloodfeeding mosquito colonies.
Table 3. Cost per person and cost per km2 for each of the four release 
stages in Townsville.
Stage
Release 
area 
km2
Months 
required to 
deploy
Average 
FTE1
Cost per 
person 
AUD$
Cost per 
km2 
AUD$
Stage 1
20.3
14
10
29
69,762
Stage 2
18.2
6
12
16
37,268
Stage 3
17.6
4
11
19
23,231
Stage 4
9.7
5
8
13
37,313
1Average number of full-time equivalent (FTE) staff used to undertake deployment. It 
excludes staff required to produce mosquitoes for release or undertake diagnostics.
Table 4. Costs by major activity class for entire deployment.
Expense category
% of total costs Major cost components
Community Engagement
23
Staff, surveys, advertising & media, events, catering, 
overheads
Field Deployment
41
Staff, transport, equipment, MRCs, overheads
Monitoring
24
Staff, transport, BGS traps, GIS, supplies, overheads
Diagnostics
9
Staff, reagents
Production
2
Staff, consumables
MRC - mosquito release containers, BGS- Biogents Sentinel, GIS- Geographic Information Systems
Page 14 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 References
1. 
Moreira LA, Iturbe-Ormaetxe I, Jeffery JA, et al.: A Wolbachia symbiont in Aedes 
aegypti limits infection with dengue, Chikungunya, and Plasmodium. Cell. 
2009; 139(7): 1268–1278.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text 
2. 
Dutra HL, Rocha MN, Dias FB, et al.: Wolbachia Blocks Currently Circulating 
Zika Virus Isolates in Brazilian Aedes aegypti Mosquitoes. Cell Host Microbe. 
2016; 19(6): 771–4.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
3. 
Aliota MT, Peinado SA, Velez ID, et al.: The wMel strain of Wolbachia reduces 
transmission of Zika virus by Aedes aegypti. Sci Rep. 2016; 6: 28792.  
Publisher Full Text 
4. 
van den Hurk AF, Hall-Mendelin S, Pyke AT, et al.: Impact of Wolbachia on 
infection with chikungunya and yellow fever viruses in the mosquito vector 
Aedes aegypti. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012; 6(11): e1892.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
5. 
Aliota MT, Walker EC, Uribe Yepes A, et al.: The wMel Strain of Wolbachia 
Reduces Transmission of Chikungunya Virus in Aedes aegypti. PLoS Negl Trop 
Dis. 2016; 10(4): e0004677.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
6. 
Ferguson NM, Kien DT, Clapham H, et al.: Modeling the impact on virus 
transmission of Wolbachia-mediated blocking of dengue virus infection of 
Aedes aegypti. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7(279): 279ra237.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
7. 
Hoffmann AA, Montgomery BL, Popovici J, et al.: Successful establishment of 
Wolbachia in Aedes populations to suppress dengue transmission. Nature. 
2011; 476(7361): 454–457.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text 
8. 
Hoffmann AA, Iturbe-Ormaetxe I, Callahan AG, et al.: Stability of the wMel 
Wolbachia Infection following invasion into Aedes aegypti populations. PLoS 
Negl Trop Dis. 2014; 8(9): e3115.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
9. 
Schmidt TL, Barton NH, Rašić G, et al.: Local introduction and heterogeneous 
spatial spread of dengue-suppressing Wolbachia through an urban population 
of Aedes aegypti. PLoS Biol. 2017; 15(5): e2001894.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
10. 
Flores HA, O'Neill SL: Controlling vector-borne diseases by releasing modified 
mosquitoes. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2018; 16(8): 508–518.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text 
11. 
Walker T, Johnson PH, Moreira LA, et al.: The wMel Wolbachia strain blocks 
dengue and invades caged Aedes aegypti populations. Nature. 2011; 476(7361): 
450–453.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text 
12. 
McMeniman CJ, O'Neill SL: A virulent Wolbachia infection decreases the 
viability of the dengue vector Aedes aegypti during periods of embryonic 
quiescence. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2010; 4(7): e748.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
13. 
Ritchie SA, Johnson PH, Freeman AJ, et al.: A secure semi-field system for the 
study of Aedes aegypti. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011; 5(3): e988.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
14. 
Yeap HL, Axford JK, Popovici J, et al.: Assessing quality of life-shortening 
Wolbachia-infected Aedes aegypti mosquitoes in the field based on capture 
rates and morphometric assessments. Parasit Vectors. 2014; 7: 58.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
15. 
Dar M, Giesler T, Richardson R, et al.: Development of a novel ozone- and 
photo-stable HyPer5 red fluorescent dye for array CGH and microarray 
gene expression analysis with consistent performance irrespective of 
environmental conditions. BMC Biotechnol. 2008; 8: 86.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
16. 
Vazquez-Prokopec GM, Montgomery BL, Horne P, et al.: Combining contact 
tracing with targeted indoor residual spraying significantly reduces dengue 
transmission. Sci Adv. 2017; 3(2): e1602024.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
17. 
Ross PA, Wiwatanaratanabutr I, Axford JK, et al.: Wolbachia Infections in Aedes 
aegypti Differ Markedly in Their Response to Cyclical Heat Stress. PLoS 
Pathog. 2017; 13(1): e1006006.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
18. 
Ritchie SA: Dengue vector bionomics: why Aedes aegypti is such a good vector. 
In Dengue and Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever: CAB International. (eds D. Gubler,  
J. Farrar, E. E. Ooi, & S. Vasudeban) Ch. 24, (CAb International) 2014; 455–480.  
Publisher Full Text 
19. 
Frentiu FD, Zakir T, Walker T, et al.: Limited dengue virus replication in field-
collected Aedes aegypti mosquitoes infected with Wolbachia. PLoS Negl Trop 
Dis. 2014; 8(2): e2688.  
PubMed Abstract | Publisher Full Text | Free Full Text 
20. 
O'Neill S, Ryan P, Turley A, et al.: GraphData_Figure 3.docx. 2018.  
http://www.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.6830945.v1
Page 15 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
1.  
Open Peer Review
 
 
Current Peer Review Status:
Version 1
 28 August 2018
Reviewer Report
https://doi.org/10.21956/gatesopenres.13925.r26600
© 2018 Frydman H et al. This is an open access peer review report distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
Attribution Licence
work is properly cited.
 
 
Horacio M. Frydman
Department of Biology, National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories (NEIDL), Boston University ,
Boston, MA, USA
 
 
Heverton Leandro Carneiro Dutra
Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
Overall comments:
The manuscript “Scaled deployment of 
to protect the community from 
transmitted
Wolbachia 
Aedes 
arboviruses” reports a successful strategy for the long-term establishment of 
on a citywide
Wolbachia 
scale. Previous pioneer work from this group have shown that 
Mel 
strain can establish
Aedes w
Wolbachia 
itself in the field after surpassing a certain unstable equilibrium threshold (Hoffmann et al., Nature 2011).
However, in the current study, the establishment of 
 is done at a larger scale, across 66 km of
Wolbachia
Townsville, a city in northern Australia with a population of approximately 187,000 residents. Interestingly
enough, the authors also report details on a community engagement approach used to achieve 
establishment in a cost-effective manner. 
Wolbachia 
 
Remarkably, the results presented here provide the first field-based evidence that the self-sustainable 
 deployment strategy works against dengue. That being said, this study was not designed as a
Wolbachia
clinical trial experiment, as pointed out by the authors. Although extremely promising and exciting, the
results presented here should not be taken, at least at this point, as a definitive evidence that Wolbachia 
will block dengue transmission in endemic areas. Townsville, has a relatively low number of dengue
cases a year, compared to a great number of cities in tropical and sub-tropical areas of the globe. On that
regard, this non-profitable consortium has ongoing field-trials in places like South America and Asia,
serious contenders to the 
-based strategy.
Wolbachia
 
Major comments: 
The reader is left wondering if non-
factors in Townsville (e.g. climate) are contributing to
Wolbachia 
the remarkable decrease of reported locally acquired dengue cases after 
release
Wolbachia 
(2016-2018). This work would greatly benefit from providing additional epidemiological data.
Showing the dengue cases for other cities in Northern Australia with no 
release over the
Wolbachia 
same period as shown in Figure 4 (2002-2018). This data could be incorporated in Figure 4 as an
2 
Page 16 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
1.  
2.  
same period as shown in Figure 4 (2002-2018). This data could be incorporated in Figure 4 as an
additional histogram. Ideally this histogram should show an average of locally acquired dengue
case notifications from 2002 to 2018 from several cities with epidemiology similar to Townsville
from 2002 to 20014 (prior to 
release). Although not a rigorous control, this data would at
Wolbachia 
least give some indication if non-
factors in that region (may be climate?) could be
Wolbachia 
playing a role for the dengue decrease. 
(note added in proof: the other reviewer also had a somewhat similar comment). 
 
A small discussion of the challenges faced by their approach as well as lessons learned from
Townsville that should be considered in areas were 
deployment is imminent would be
Wolbachia 
valuable to the field. 
 
Minor comments and suggestions by page 
 
Original text in 
Main Text: 
italics
 
: Title: 
P.1
Scaled deployment of Wolbachia to protect the community from Aedes transmitted arboviruses
 
Although there are several studies demonstrating efficient pathogen blocking effect of 
against
Wolbachia 
several arboviruses transmitted by 
, including many from this research group, this specific
Aedes aegypti
manuscript only shows epidemiological data on dengue. Therefore, the title would be more precise if
changed to reflect the specific arbovirus evaluated. 
 
: Rearing (2
paragraph): “
…”
P.4
The wildtype colony was backcrossed for three generations
 
Although there is data pointing towards the inexistence of 
mutations in the local 
population
kdr 
Ae. aegypti 
present in Queensland, indicating susceptibility to pyrethroid insecticides, there are several recent reports
indicating the sporadic detection of non-native 
mosquitoes carrying insecticide resistance
Ae. aegypti 
alleles not found in Australia. Areas with intense international flux like seaports and airports are a
point-of-entry for these alleles into the local population (Endersby-Harshman 
., 2017 ). How is the
et al
WMP taking the potential risk of insecticide resistance into consideration when rearing their mosquitoes
for field releases? Few sentences regarding this aspect would be helpful, given that insecticide resistance
alleles could highjacks 
 establishment in areas heavily treated with insecticides by indoor
Wolbachia
residual spraying (IRS). Are the mosquitoes selected for backcrossing checked for chemical compounds
resistance? What is the level of synchrony between the WMP approach and the guidelines established by
the Queensland dengue management plan 2015-2020 which indicates the use of IRS as an approach
against disease vectors?
 
: Rearing (2
paragraph): “
P.4
In order to prevent inbreeding, 10% wildtype males were added to each
.”
generation of the ‘broodstock’
 
To avoid inbreeding is of great relevance. That being said, is this value of 10% resulted from a pool of
males collected across all the same 49 sites in Townsville, the same used to establish the original
wildtype colony? Additionally, it is to be expected that at a certain point, given the establishment of 
 in the field, that the males collected would harbor the bacterium. Did the authors screened a
Wolbachia
portion of the males added to the cages after the copulation period?
 
nd
1
nd
Page 17 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
1.  
2.  
 
: Rearing (7 paragraph): “
P.5
Wolbachia infection was also tested each week of production, 80 females
…” 
and 80 males were screened from each broodstock cohort
These numbers of female and males tested represents what percentage of the total population? 
Given the potential for maternal transmission leakage of 
when considering the
Wolbachia 
transmission dynamics of this bacterium, something speculated to be one of the factors
contributing to the difficult establishment of 
in Cairns, another area where releases by
Wolbachia 
the WMP took place (Schmidt 
., 2018 ), it is somewhat unexpected that the field colony was
et al
not screened prior to release, only the broodstock. What would be the reason for that? May be the
consistency by which the mosquitoes were reared under laboratory conditions?
 
: Rearing (8 paragraph): “
P.5
The colony was therefore refreshed with 2500 males and 2500 females
.”
each week
 
The same question previously asked (
: Rearing (2
paragraph). Are these mosquitoes obtained from
P.4
a pool across all collection sites or derived from a single site? 
 
: Rearing (8 paragraph): “
P.5
This was achieved by placing suspected male pupae based on size into
…”
cups of 10;
 
Given the difficulty of visually sexing each pupae cup without the aid of software and hardware-based
engineering, what was the overall confidence level in this sex by size strategy? Although there is no risk
for the community, as the CI and female-based deployment deals with the issues associated with
accidental female release in this case, it would be interesting to address this aspect of the method used
by the research team. 
 
: Mosquito releases (3 paragraph): “
P.7
For stage 1, it required between 7 and 19 weeks of releases for
.”    
each suburb to reach that target
 
It is known that the rate of dispersion of 
correlates with the human density in a given area. As
Ae. aegypti 
such, how long did the authors wait to start screening field collected mosquitoes, as a way to avoid
screening the same mosquitoes that were released in a particular area? It is not clear how far the BG
traps were set apart from the MRC’s. 
 
: Mosquito releases (2
and 4 paragraphs): In summary, MRC’s had 100 eggs / 1L of water and 5
P.7
(summer) / 6 (winter) wafers of Aqua One vege wafer fish food, while Mozzie boxes had 100 eggs/ 400mL
of water and 4 (summer) / 5 (winter) wafers of Aqua One vege wafer fish food. In terms of quality
assessment of the fitness of the mosquitoes being released, how was the comparison between the
MRC’s and the Mozzie boxes?
 
: Mosquito releases (5 paragraph): “
P.7
Finally, in the last two suburbs of stage 3 (Kelso & Rasmussen)
”.
and across stage 4, releases of adult mosquitoes were used to fill in gaps in MRC coverage
 
Here two distinct deployment strategies were combined. As such, the release procedures used were the
same as established in Hoffmann 
., 2011 (citation #7), in terms of number of females and release
et al
period (in weeks)? How this combined approach compares to the deployment of 
through a
Wolbachia 
single release method in terms of establishment efficiency? 
 
: School releases (2
paragraph): “
P.8
…but made of clear plastic to encourage student observation
”.
(Figure 2B)
th
2
th
nd
th
rd
nd
th
th
nd
Page 18 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
1.  
2.  
3.  
”.
(Figure 2B)
 
No suggestion here. Just a praise to the attention to the details contributing to the community
engagement. WMP is not only deploying their method, but also educating the community. 
 
: School releases (3 paragraph): “
P.8
…who gave presentations encouraging participation prior to each
.”
of the three mosquito release cycles
 
How was the level of engagement along the three cycles? Given the author’s interesting approach, this
information could be helpful as a proxy for the predicted efficacy of this strategy in release areas
worldwide.
 
: Results and discussion (3 paragraph): “
P.12
In general, establishment of Wolbachia  occurred reliably
”
after releases stopped once the 50% threshold was met.
 
To date, does the WMP continues to screen these areas where 
 was released roughly 2-3
Wolbachia
years ago? If the answer is yes, does the infection frequency still high in these areas? I am particularly
interested in the Condo area, where the last data point shows an infection frequency of 51.79%.
 
Final thoughts and suggestions:
 
The following questions are not within the scope of what is proposed for this manuscript, just a couple
suggestions.  
Have the authors considered screening areas where 
deployment did not occur but were
Wolbachia 
adjacent to release zones? For instance, given the low human density in Townsville, a key factor
associated to mosquito dispersal, as previously stated, and recent data showing challenges in 
establishment in Cairns, having long-range dispersal as one potential reason, would be
Wolbachia 
interesting to see how contained 
 deployment is, in my opinion this information would be
Wolbachia
particularly relevant in areas where 
is soon to be deployed, as it can avoid legal
Wolbachia 
conflicts within the context of community acceptance in neighborhoods where the use of the
bacterium has not been yet approved or assessed. 
 
Would be interesting to see data based on mitochondrial DNA screening in 
-harboring
Wolbachia
mosquitoes. The fine-tune of such approach using Townsville as a model would benefit the
program as a whole, providing information related to mosquito immigration events and potential
imperfect transmission of the bacterium. 
 
A future genomic analysis of the mosquito population pre- and post- release of 
would
Wolbachia 
provide a unique opportunity to evaluate the intrinsic impact of the bacterium on the mosquito
population structure as a whole.
 
Finally, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the authors and the team personnel for the massive
work necessary to obtain the results described here.
References
1. Endersby-Harshman NM, Wuliandari JR, Harshman LG, Frohn V, Johnson BJ, Ritchie SA, Hoffmann
AA: Pyrethroid Susceptibility Has Been Maintained in the Dengue Vector, Aedes aegypti (Diptera:
Culicidae), in Queensland, Australia.
. 2017; 
 (6): 1649-1658 
 | 
J Med Entomol
54
PubMed Abstract
 
Publisher Full Text
rd
rd
Page 19 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
 
Publisher Full Text
2. Schmidt TL, Filipović I, Hoffmann AA, Rašić G: Fine-scale landscape genomics helps explain the slow
spatial spread of Wolbachia through the Aedes aegypti population in Cairns, Australia.
.
Heredity (Edinb)
2018; 
 (5): 386-395 
 | 
 
120
PubMed Abstract Publisher Full Text
Is the work clearly and accurately presented and does it cite the current literature?
Yes
Is the study design appropriate and is the work technically sound?
Yes
Are sufficient details of methods and analysis provided to allow replication by others?
Yes
If applicable, is the statistical analysis and its interpretation appropriate?
Not applicable
Are all the source data underlying the results available to ensure full reproducibility?
No source data required
Are the conclusions drawn adequately supported by the results?
Yes
 No competing interests were disclosed.
Competing Interests:
We have read this submission. We believe that we have an appropriate level of expertise to
confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard, however we have significant reservations,
as outlined above.
 10 August 2018
Reviewer Report
https://doi.org/10.21956/gatesopenres.13925.r26599
© 2018 Devine G. This is an open access peer review report distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
Attribution Licence
work is properly cited.
 
Gregor J. Devine
Mosquito Control Laboratory (MCL), QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Qld, Australia
Summary:
 
Wolbachia-mediated control is one of the most exciting recent developments in the struggle against
dengue and other mosquito borne diseases. We already know from this group’s previous work in Cairns
that the replacement of wild-type 
 populations with Wolbachia-infected forms is both
Aedes aegypti
feasible and sustainable in towns of around 150,000 people.
 
Epidemiologically, it would have been more interesting to see a summary of impacts on dengue
transmission in Cairns as, historically, that town experiences far more dengue transmission and more
Page 20 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
transmission in Cairns as, historically, that town experiences far more dengue transmission and more
dengue imports than Townsville.
 
The novelty in the current report is that this is the first “citywide scaled deployment”. This scaling refers to
the direct involvement of the community and local school children in executing the releases.
 
Comments:
 
I would have liked a little more background and explanation on the following: 
What is the rationale for backcrossing the wMel strain with a local wildtype for three generations
prior to release? Is there any underlying empirical basis for this in terms of fitness and/or genetic
homogeneity?
 
It appears from Fig 3 that, by the end of the monitoring period (mid 2016), very few mosquitoes
were being captured and that almost all were Wolbachia-infected. Was that very low density a
result of a hostile climate? Is it possible that mosquito suppression as well as replacement is
having an impact on transmission here? Is declining mosquito density a feature of wMel
establishment? Were any Aedes endemic, non-release areas monitored for comparison? 
 
The authors state that the outcomes of releases by schools-based programs were of secondary
importance to their value as instruments of engagement. In this paper, it is flagged as a major
component of “scaled deployment” so it would have been interesting to report on the operational
success of the schools-based program. Was there any evaluation of compliance (observation of
the releases made by children) or of the rates of Wolbachia replacement in areas specifically
targeted by schools?
 
It seems likely that Wolbachia is reducing transmission risks in Townsville, but other contributing
factors may be being ignored. My understanding is that releases of Wolbachia in Townsville have
coincided with some of the hottest and driest years on record. Climate has a direct impact on
mosquito survival and is strongly correlated with transmission. 
 
There’s no real discussion of limitations or challenges here. The authors state that economies of
scale, in regions of high population density, will result in successful deployments costing less than
$1 per capita. The assumption is that population replacement and dengue-blocking across
hyperendemic urban sprawls will be cheap and simple.   
Townsville has very limited dengue transmission and adult indices appear lower than for many
tropical cities. Does the WMP not see some issues with extrapolating successes in Townsville to
the rest of the world?
 
The authors dismiss work on Wolbachia loss and heat stress (Ulrich et al PLoS NTDs, Ross et al
PLoS Pathogens) but Aedes do demonstrate fast and successful development in the field at water
temperatures ≥ 30 C and the truth is that we don’t know much about the operational impacts of
those conditions on Wolbachia stability. 
This paper certainly suggests that, in Townsville, Wolbachia-infection is stable. But in Townsville
monthly average high temperatures range between 31.5 and 25.1 C. In Bangkok, they range from
35.4 to 31.7 C. A global Wolbachia operation will at least need to consider the potential impacts of
o
o
o
Page 21 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
6.  
7.  
35.4 to 31.7 C. A global Wolbachia operation will at least need to consider the potential impacts of
high water temperatures in aquatic habitats.
 
What are the factors that result in a minority of sites hovering around 70% Wolbachia coverage? Is
it immigration, or the presence of some protected, wild-type reservoir. Or is it related to mosquito
density and a relatively small number of dispersal events? 
Overall, this paper represents a keenly awaited progress report on the stability and feasibility of
Wolbachia releases in Australia and the ways in which those releases might be made more cost effective.
Is the work clearly and accurately presented and does it cite the current literature?
Yes
Is the study design appropriate and is the work technically sound?
Yes
Are sufficient details of methods and analysis provided to allow replication by others?
Yes
If applicable, is the statistical analysis and its interpretation appropriate?
Not applicable
Are all the source data underlying the results available to ensure full reproducibility?
Yes
Are the conclusions drawn adequately supported by the results?
Partly
 No competing interests were disclosed.
Competing Interests:
Reviewer Expertise: Vector ecology, vector control, vector competence, dengue interventions,
characterisation of Wolbachia impacts
I have read this submission. I believe that I have an appropriate level of expertise to confirm that
it is of an acceptable scientific standard.
Author Response 16 Aug 2018
, Monash University, Clayton, Australia
Scott O'Neill
Response to reviewer 1
 
The reviewer’s statements around novelty are incorrect in stating that we already know that we can
deploy in cities of 150,000 by referring to deployments around Cairns, Australia. The only studies
published from Cairns relate to small pilot deployments. Many small pilots have been undertaken in
Cairns and surrounding areas since 2011 that have focused on obtaining data on the best ways to
deploy mosquitoes. In the last 2 years, we have “filled in” around these pilot areas to provide broad
coverage to all of North Queesnland’s major dengue risk areas. This study is actually the first
published study of a citywide deployment being undertaken as a single project which shows that a
“greenfield” city can be engaged and the intervention deployed at scale, cost effectively and
o
Page 22 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
“greenfield” city can be engaged and the intervention deployed at scale, cost effectively and
quickly. The use of the community to deploy is an additional component of the paper but not the
primary aim.
 
We have a companion paper in preparation that will report the results from deployments in the city
of Cairns that will reinforce the findings of this study.
 
Specific Comments
 
1. We undertook three generations of backcrossing to make sure our release strain closely
approximated the genetic background of the Townsville target population. This was done as a
precautionary measure and was not based on specific empirical data that aimed to characterise
any differences between the Cairns and Townsville genetic backgrounds of the resident
mosquitoes.
 
2. Figure 3 shows total counts of mosquitoes that were run through diagnostics in a given sampling
period. This is presented to help provide an estimate of sample size that underpins a given
frequency estimate. There is a correlation between this number and actual mosquitoes caught but
it cannot be used to estimate population size because the number of traps contributing the sample
was variable. We reduced BG traps in a given area after Wolbachia was considered established
(often by more than 60%) and these traps were moved to areas where active releases were being
undertaken. As a result, the impression that mosquito populations declined after release is not
accurate. Modelling predicts that mosquito populations should reduce slightly after the introduction
of Wolbachia but we did not attempt to measure that in this study
 
3. Because the schools program used volunteer students to undertake the releases and these
children were scattered geographically they were supplemented with programmatic releases in
adjoining areas which made it impossible to compare their effectiveness from an entomological
perspective with purely programmatic releases. We did undertake QA procedures on a sample of
student release containers to evaluate the program. The major consideration for us was that this
form of release was quite expensive compared to other forms so from a purely economic
perspective it was inefficient. However, its value to us was more from a community engagement
perspective as Schools are fundamentally trusted in the community and it was an indirect method
to engage parents of school children through undertaking the releases and increase community
awareness of the program.
 
4. Temperatures between 2015-18 in Townsville have been above average and rainfall below
average but certainly not the hottest or driest years on record. Indeed, if you examine the
meteorological data for the period in which we analysed dengue cases you can see that similar
climatic conditions were experienced in Townsville between 2001 -2006 and during these years
significant local dengue transmission events occurred, indicating no obvious correlation between
temperature/rainfall variability in Townsville and dengue transmission. See figure below for data
 
 
Yearly rainfall (A), maximum temperature (B) and minimum temperature (C) anomalies,
 Yearly rainfall
and locally acquired dengue cases (D) for Townsville from 2001-2018.
anomaly values were calculated by comparing yearly, northern wet season rainfall totals
(cumulative rainfall totals from October to April each year) to the long-term, 30-year wet season
yearly average (October 1961 to April 1991; Standard Reference Period as defined by World
Page 23 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
yearly average (October 1961 to April 1991; Standard Reference Period as defined by World
Meteorological Organisation) (Bureau of Meteorology, Retrieved  15 August 2018 from
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/how/newproducts/map-periods.shtml); yearly maximum
temperature anomaly values were calculated by comparing yearly, northern wet season maximum
temperature mean values (daily maximum temperatures from October to April) to the long-term,
30-year wet season average (October 1961 to April 1991); yearly minimum temperature anomaly
values were calculated by comparing yearly, northern wet season minimum temperature mean
values (daily minimum temperatures from October to April) to the long-term, 30-year wet season
average (October 1961 to April 1991); yearly cumulative dengue cases from October in the
previous year through to September in the current year (Note: 2001 cumulative cases from January
to September 2001; 2018 cumulative cases from October 2017 to June 2018). Weather/climate
data obtained from Bureau of Meteorology (Station: TOWNSVILLE AERO, 032040). Green
shading represents period of 
 mosquito release and establishment (commenced
Wolbachia
October 2014).
 
5. The main assumption underlying reduction in costing in based on the fact that major urban
tropical cities have much higher population densities than Australian cities but many of the costs in
deployment relate to the area of deployment. This means that costs will automatically decline in
areas of higher population density and that is what we have seen in other work of the WMP where
deployments have already been undertaken successfully as part of clinical trials that are underway
in other countries.
 
6. Our criticism is that the heat stress experiments have been undertaken either in incubators or in
semi-field settings and then the results extrapolated to infer a potential problem in stability of Mel
w
in the field. However, the field is much more complex than an incubator and many breeding sites
are cryptic and difficult to assay, so the true water temperature experienced by a population of
mosquitoes in the field cannot be accurately measured. What we do know from this and
unpublished work in other cities is that Mel appears unaffected in locations with ambient
w
temperatures that might indicate problems for 
 transmission based on these studies. We
Wolbachia
can only assume from this that the studies predicting breakdown of wMel are not actually predictive
of field settings.
 
7. Our current hypothesis is that 
 can often have a relatively large number of eggs in
Aedes aegypti
a dried state in a given area and over time these eggs will hatch depending of factors such as
rainfall events or human assisted wetting. This mimics the effect of 
 uninfected
Wolbachia
individuals immigrating into an area. Over time this egg bank becomes depleted and frequencies
then move to stable rates closer to 90% or above.
 No competing interests were disclosed.
Competing Interests:
Author Response 17 Aug 2018
, Monash University, Clayton, Australia
Scott O'Neill
For access to temp and rainfall data in Townsville see
https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/gatesopenresearch/linked/180566.0%27NeillFigure.docx
 No competing interests were disclosed.
Competing Interests:
Page 24 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
 No competing interests were disclosed.
Competing Interests:
Author Response 25 Oct 2018
, Monash University, Clayton, Australia
Scott O'Neill
Response to reviewer 2
Response to General comments
 
1. Unfortunately similar work as reported here was being undertaken in other population centres in
Australia at the same time and as a result there is no suitable site to use as an external control that
is of equivalent size and not having Wolbachia mosquitoes released. We provided a detailed
response to the other reviewer indicating that weather conditions across the monitoring period
before and after releases did not correlate with the observed reduction in dengue cases.
 
2. Discussion addressing this point has been added to the revision.
 
Detailed points
P1. Title changed to explicitly reference dengue
 
P4. In releases in Australia our approach was just to backcross to local populations in order to
attempt to match the local population in various traits including insecticide resistance. We did not
do more than this in Australia since early pilot studies (eg Hoffmann et al 2011) showed that this
strategy was adequate. As shown by the results in this setting this was a sufficient approach to
obtain success. In other countries, we have had to develop different strategies to deal with high
levels of insecticide resistance. These approaches and results will be presented in future papers
describing results from those study sites. We feel that it would be better to address those topics in
those papers rather than in this paper that did not examine insecticide resistance deeply.
 
P4. Our collections of wild type material were made from pooling across many ovitraps placed in
areas where Wolbachia had not been released as we did for the initial backcrossing. Our goal was
to generate genetically diverse material so it was pooled. Given that we could store the eggs we
were able to maintain material for outcrossing during the release period as described in methods.
As a result, we did not monitor for Wolbachia in the males. In future studies, there is no reason to
exclude already treated areas or for the included males not to be Wolbachia infected. We have
added text to the revised paper to improve clarity.
 
P5. Wolbachia infection testing – 1. We tested 160 individuals from each cohort. A cohort was on
average around 7500 individuals so around 2% of individuals. The sample size of 160 individuals
was determined from a prior power analysis.  2. We have seen no evidence for reduced maternal
transmission in our mass production.
 
P5 – Yes these mosquitoes were derived from the same material used to outcross the colony in our
Melbourne labs as well as backcross.
 
P7 – Screening started prior to releases starting and was undertaken weekly. MRCs had variable
placement due to the dependence f volunteers to host MRCs. It was not possible with that system
to designate fixed differences between MRC’s and BGs. However, if you examine the shape of the
establishment curves you can see that in most suburbs catching back of release material was not a
Page 25 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
 Gates Open Research
 
establishment curves you can see that in most suburbs catching back of release material was not a
big issue. If it was then you would expect to see Wolbachia frequencies climb quickly and then
potentially decay after releases stopped. We only see those patterns in areas where adult releases
took place.
 
 
P7 – No fitness comparisons were made between the two but regular QA procedures indicated that
emergence rates were similar between the two.
 
P7 – The mixed approach used in the final experiments was undertaken due to operational issues
with the completion of the projects and staff contracts completing. This was done to complete the
study in time to coincide with staffing contracts finishing and was not set up as a comparison – it
can’t really be analysed that way as a result. Comparisons between deployment methods are
being undertaken in other sites in a more rigorous manner and these will be able to report on this
comparison.
 
P8 – Generally we found difficulty in sustaining interest in repeating the releases by the third round
and our engagement officers needed to work harder to maintain interest levels in students for later
round releases. As indicated in the paper we felt that school releases were better primarily as an
engagement tool and direct public releases more effective from an establishment and cost
perspective.
 
P12 we have updated the figures with the latest monitoring data across the city to provide a more
recent view of establishment success and dengue cases. Later monitoring has involved LAMP
diagnostics and this protocol has also been included in the methods description. We have also
updated the epidemiological figure with the latest data showing an extension of post release
monitoring till Oct 2018 and continued impact on locally acquired dengue cases.
 
Final thoughts
1. Work on dispersal is underway in our Indonesian RCT site which will provide detailed
information on Wolbachia dispersal between adjacent geographic areas. In generally natural
dispersal rates are low as described already in Cairns.
 
2. mtDNA as a marker for imperfect transmission or immigration cannot be done in Australia as the
release strain carries the same mtDNA genotype as the wild population. It can be done however in
other countries and is being done in different sites.
 
3. Agreed and something for future work.
 No competing interests were disclosed.
Competing Interests:
Page 26 of 26
Gates Open Research 2018, 2:36 Last updated: 15 MAY 2019
