  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
 
DOI:
10.1038/sj.bdj.2018.127
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
O'Toole, S., & Mullan, F. (2018). The role of the diet in tooth wear. British Dental Journal.
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bdj.2018.127
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jun. 2019
  
1
The role of the diet in tooth wear 
Saoirse O’Toole (corresponding author) 
Clinical Lecturer in Prosthodontics 
Department of Tissue Engineering and Biophotonics 
King’s College London Dental Institute 
Floor 17 Tower Wing, 
Guy’s Hospital, 
London 
SE1 9RT 
Saoirse.otoole@kcl.ac.uk 
 
Francesca Mullan 
PhD Student 
Department of Prosthodontics 
King’s College London Dental Institute 
Floor 17 Tower Wing, 
Guy’s Hospital, 
London 
SE1 9RT 
Francesca.mullan@kcl.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
An acidic diet has been associated with erosive tooth wear. However, some people who 
consume dietary acids develop erosive tooth wear and some do not. This review paper 
provides an overview of the risk factors of dietary acid consumption which increase the 
likelihood of developing severe erosive tooth wear. Increased frequency of dietary acid 
consumption, particularly between meals appears to be the predominant risk factor. 
However, habitually drinking acidic drinks by sipping them slowly or swishing, rinsing 
or holding acidic drinks in the mouth prior to swallowing will also increase risk of 
progression. Consuming fruit over long time periods at a single sitting and dietary acids 
being served at increased temperatures have also been implicated. Additions of fruit or 
fruit flavourings to drinks and regular consumption of vinegars, pickles, acidic 
medications or acidic sugar-free sweets are potential hidden risk factors which should 
  
2
be discussed with patients at risk of erosive tooth wear progression. Behaviour change 
is difficult to achieve but specific, targeted behavioural interventions and offering 
alternatives may increase success.  
Introduction 
The relationship between intake of dietary acids and erosive tooth wear is not 
straightforward. We know that the prevalence of erosive tooth wear is increasing 
through epidemiological studies and increased presentation of erosive tooth wear in 
general practice and specialist referrals [1,2]. At the same time, we are also changing 
our patterns of eating. Fruits are available to us outside of season and both children and 
adults are increasing the number of snacks we have per day [3,4]. In 2015, 13.3 billion 
litres of soft drinks were consumed in the UK with an average intake of 203.6 litres per 
capita [5]. There is suggestion that the change in dietary habits and the increased 
prevalence of erosive tooth wear may be linked. However, we all consume dietary acids 
daily and not everyone develops pathological tooth wear. This will be strongly 
influenced by biological factors such as salivary flow rates, buffering capacity and 
salivary composition, which are outside the scope of this paper. However, it will also be 
influenced by the way that people consume the dietary acids. The aim of this paper is to 
provide an overview of patterns and influencing factors of dietary acid consumption 
which increase the likelihood of developing severe erosive tooth wear. 
To understand what may or may not influence the erosive potential of the diet, a basic 
knowledge of chemistry is required. During chemical erosion the hydrogen ions (H+) 
present in acids become dissociated and interact with the hydroxyapatite crystals in 
enamel leaving the structure weakened. The chemical erosive potential of a dietary acid 
depends on the pH value (the H+ ion concentration), titratable acidity (the total 
  
3
available H+ ions as the pH value changes), calcium chelation properties, buffering 
capacity (the ability to maintain a pH at the current value) and the mineral content, 
(specifically calcium and phosphate levels) [6]. The pH value is the most widely used 
predictor of erosive potential, particularly at the start of an erosive challenge [7]. Some, 
authors have argued that a high  titratable acidity is a better indicator of erosive 
potential during longer exposure [8–10] as  clinically the pH remains low for a relatively 
short time period. The calcium, phosphate and mineral content of the food/beverage 
also has a direct impact on its erosive potential. An example of this is yoghurt, which can 
have a pH < 4 but has no erosive potential [11]. The high mineral content maintains the 
supersaturation of minerals with respect to tooth structure.  Following cessation of the 
acid intake, acid clearance and normalisation of the intraoral pH has been reported to 
occur rapidly over 2-13 minutes [12–14]. Fruit and citric acid flavourings have both low 
pH and high titratable acidity. As the H+ ions are released from citric acid, the citrate ion 
has an ability to bind with calcium known as calcium chelation, rendering it inactive for 
remineralisation [15]. Citric acid releases H+ ions at pH 3.13, 4.74 and 6.42. This results 
in the majority of calcium chelation occurring as the pH rises above pH 4. At this pH, up 
to 32% of the calcium in saliva can be complexed to citrate [15]. This becomes more 
relevant as we discuss patterns of dietary acid intake.  
Identifying acids in the diet 
It is important to be able to identify the range of food, drinks and medications which 
have erosive potential. We are aware that most fruits are acidic with perhaps fruits such 
as bananas and peaches being on the lower end of the acid spectrum [16]. Citrus fruits 
have been implicated in multiple epidemiological studies with Jarvinen and co-workers 
observing that study participants who consumed citrus fruits twice a day were 37 times 
  
4
more likely to have erosive tooth wear although the confidence intervals were very 
large[17]. Both chilies and tomatoes are classified as fruits and have erosive potential. 
One study investigated the erosive potential of the two combined, observing a low pH in 
a basic north Indian masala sauce[18]. 
The addition of fruit or fruit flavourings to drinks has also increased [5] which can have 
equivalent erosive potential to that of cola drinks [11]. It is important to specifically ask 
about additions to their drinks and food. A patient may simply record water without 
realising the alteration in erosive potential through adding a simple slice of lemon or 
dash of fruit cordial. Some patients may believe that the addition of small fruit slices to 
water will dilute the erosive potential. However, it has been shown that fresh lemon or 
lime has citric acid concentration greater than 6 times the amount of lemonade 
formulations or lemon dilutables [19]. It is reasonably safe to assume that any dietary 
food or drink with added fruit or fruit flavouring will be acidic. Fruit flavoured teas such 
as ginger and lemon tea, berry tea or rosehip tea are also acidic [11]. Fruit flavoured 
sweets, lozenges or medications have also large erosive potential when consumed 
regularly.  
It may be safer to advise patients to assume that most drinks that are not water, plain 
sparkling water or milk are acidic. An American study investigated the erosive potential 
of 379 commercially available soft drinks. They identified 39% were extremely erosive 
(pH < 3), 54 % were considered erosive (pH = 3-3.99) and only 7 % were identified as 
minimally erosive (pH ≥ 4,). Lemon juice was found to have the lowest pH (pH 2.25), 
followed by coca-cola drinks (2.32-2.39)[20]. Importantly, sugar-free drinks are as 
erosive as their sugar-sweetened counterparts [20]. Plain sparkling mineral water has a 
  
5
low erosive potential even though it has a low pH from the carbonation because it has a 
low titratable acidity [20]. 
A final area to be aware of is the acidic potential of vinegars and pickles. There are diets 
which advise frequent consumption of vinegars. Jarvenin et al. observed those who 
consumed apple cider vinegar weekly were 10 times more likely to have severe erosive 
wear [17]. The erosive effects from the consumption of vinegars and pickled products 
should not be underestimated. The consumption may vary amongst different 
international diets, for example Korean kimchi or German sauerkraut. One study on 
over 2,000 children in the North West of England suggested that excessive consumption 
of pickles, vinegar and salt & vinegar crisps could result in high rates of tooth erosion 
[21]. Erosive tooth wear is a progressive disease, therefore prevention led intervention 
in young people is essential. It has been shown taste preferences for both sweet and 
sour/acidic tasting foods are related to childhood exposure [22]. As having a taste 
preference for both fruits [23] and soft drinks [24] has been associated with increased 
consumption, questioning about  taste preferences in young patients may identify those 
at a future risk of developing erosive tooth wear.  
Frequency of dietary acid intake 
While the erosive potential of specific dietary acids is important, it is important to look 
at the overall pattern of consumption. The frequency of dietary acid intake has been 
recognised as one of the primary risk factors for erosive tooth wear progression [25]. A 
longitudinal study on 55 adults over 6 years observed that consumption of 4 + dietary 
acids per day to be associated with tooth wear progression [26]. However, this was 
recently observed to be influenced by whether they were consumed with meals or 
between meals, particularly for acidic drinks [25]. Those who consumed acidic drinks 
  
6
twice a day between meals were over 11 times more likely to have moderate or severe 
erosive tooth wear. This was halved when drinks were consumed with meals (OR 6.8). 
Increased consumption of acidic drinks is a risk for erosive tooth wear whether they are 
consumed between or with meals. In contrast, fruit consumption with meals was not 
associated with erosive tooth wear and fruit consumption between meals did represent 
increased risk [25]. It was also observed that one or less dietary acid intakes a day was 
not associated with erosive tooth wear [25]. If a patient must go above one dietary acid 
intake per day, it would be prudent to advise them to consume the acids with meals. 
Habits 
Some people have habits which increase both the duration and force that acids are in 
contact with the teeth. A well-known example is observed in wine tasters who swish 
and hold wine in their mouths for prolonged periods and for multiple times a day. 
Lesser known examples may be long distance drivers who may sip acidic drinks on long 
drives or video gamers who sip acidic drinks while playing games for long periods. 
There is a case report of a 9-year-old boy who was allowed a single glass of soft drink a 
day while he was playing computer games. Unfortunately he held the drink in his mouth 
for long periods of time prior to swallowing and presented to his dentist with severe 
wear to the pulp requiring extractions [27]. Although few people will present with these 
extreme habits, there are patients who will spend long times nibbling on fruits or tend 
to sip drinks slowly. Those who regularly spent greater than 10 minutes eating fruit at a 
single sitting were over 12 times more likely to have severe erosive tooth wear in one 
study [25]. In the same study, participants who spent greater than 10 minutes drinking 
acidic drinks were 2.9 times more likely to have severe erosive tooth wear. This finding 
may be attributed to the increased titratable acidity of fruit. Tahmassabi et al. observed 
  
7
fruit based smoothies to have a titratable acidity 3.5–4 times greater than both coca-
cola light and citric acid [28]. However, it may also be attributed to the combined insult 
of erosion and mechanical forces as the fruit is chewed on the occluding surfaces. The 
increased pressure and abrasive force applied may accelerate the tooth wear process.  
The importance of the dynamic interaction between the acid and the dental surface is 
observed in those with aggressive drinking habits such as sipping, swishing, holding or 
rinsing drinks in the mouth prior to swallowing. One clinical study investigated 
different forms of drinking coca-cola light (long-sipping, short sipping, holding and 
gulping) by placing electrodes on dental surfaces. The authors observed larger drops in 
pH when drinks were held in the mouth, but a sustained lower pH when long-sipping 
was performed [29]. Figure 1 shows a person who had a habit of swishing drinks in the 
mouth. Movement of the buccal mucosa can increase the force at which the acid is 
directed at the buccal surfaces. Excessive erosive wear was combined with tooth brush 
abrasion wear in this case. 
These habits are more common than one would expect. From experience of questioning 
over 700 participants about whether they sip, swish, swallow or rinse drinks in their 
mouth prior to swallowing, the most common response is a return question of why 
anyone would do such a thing? However, those with a habit will be surprised that 
everybody doesn’t do something similar in order to “taste the drink properly”. A few 
will be unsure and then come back a few weeks later having noticed that they do 
actually tend to sip, swish, rinse or hold drinks in their mouths prior to swallowing. If 
severe erosive tooth wear is observed in a patient with limited dietary acid intake, the 
presence of a habit which increases the duration and/or force of the contact between 
the dietary acid and dental surface should be considered.  
  
8
Quantity of dietary acid intake and specific diets 
Most epidemiological studies have focused on the frequency of acid intake, with limited 
assessment of quantity of acid intake. Quantity of dietary acid intake is relatively 
difficult to assess as portion size is often subjective and difficult to measure [30]. 
Perhaps the most sophisticated method to-date has been performed by Sovik et al. when 
the quantity was assessed via a self-administered questionnaire after participants were 
asked to report the quantity of each drink in litres. Acidic beverage consumption was 
categorised into low (0-0.24 L/day) moderate (0.25-0.74 L/day) and high (0-.75-5 
L/day) consumption [31]. A higher prevalence of erosion was observed in those with 
increased quantity consumption. Another cross-sectional study performed on young 
Icelandic adults dichotomised quantity data into > 1 L and < 1 daily. A relationship with 
erosive tooth wear was observed when greater than 1 litre of carbonated drinks were 
consumed [32], although limited information is given on the method of data collection 
in this study. Studies have also measured quantity in litres consumed per year [33,34]. 
The interpretation of this as a meaningful guideline to patients is difficult and gives no 
indication as to frequency. The only study, to the authors’ knowledge, investigating 
quantity of fruit intake and erosive wear was performed in an investigation of 
prevalence of erosion in those consuming a raw food diet [35]. The quantity of fruit 
intake, via a self-administered questionnaire, was assessed with picture 
accompaniments providing guidance as to portion size. An increased prevalence in 
those with a median fruit intake of 9.5 kg (Range 1.5-23.7 kg) per week was observed 
[35]. Those on a raw food diet demonstrated a prevalence of erosion close to 98% and 
were twice as likely to have severe erosion than control participants [35]. Vegetarians 
have been reported to consume an increased quantity of fresh fruit on a daily basis 
[35,36]. A case-control study on twenty-six age and sex matched lactovegetarians by 
  
9
Linkosalo & Markkanen 1985 reported that 30% of vegetarian subjects had “grave” 
erosive defects whereas age and sex matched controls exhibited no “grave” erosive 
defects. However, we do not know if this is due to increased frequency or increased 
quantity of dietary acid consumption. Unlike frequency, the evidence for an association 
between quantity of acidic foods and drinks and erosive tooth wear is not as conclusive.  
 
 
  
10
Temperature 
A further item which should be considered is the temperature at which the dietary acid 
is being consumed. Barbour et al. 2006 reported a linear relationship between 
increasing temperature and softening followed by erosive wear in vitro [37]. Airoldi et 
al used temperature sensors to investigate the intraoral temperature changes when 
drinking hot tea and observed that the highest temperatures reached when drinking hot 
tea were present on the buccal surfaces of the upper incisor surfaces [38]. These are 
surfaces which some studies have reported to be strongly associated with dietary 
erosive tooth wear [26,39]. A randomised controlled in situ clinical trial also observed 
increased erosive tooth wear when the temperature of a fruit drink was increased [40]. 
Few studies have investigated this epidemiologically, however, Correr et al. 2009 
reported a significant association with temperature of fruits ingested and presence of 
erosive tooth wear in 12 year olds [41]. These studies are of clinical relevance as hot 
lemon with water, hot fruit teas and fruit flavoured hot medications may all have 
increased erosive potential. Figure 2. demonstrates an example of a patient who drank 
hot tea with lemon flavouring multiple times throughout the day. It may be prudent 
when giving dietary advice to patients to discuss the influence of temperature. 
Limiting the damage of dietary acids 
As foods high in calcium or phosphate have low erosive potential irrespective of their 
pH [11], it has been suggested that consuming foods high in calcium or phosphate 
alongside a dietary acid can limit the damage caused [42]. This buffering effect may 
explain the observation that regular consumption of acids with meals almost halved the 
risk associated with that frequency of acid intake [25]. A recent meta-analysis on the 
impact of the diet on tooth wear in children did observe an association between yoghurt 
  
11
and milk consumption and less tooth wear [43]. However, we do not know if this is a 
result of the children having the high calcium foods alongside dietary acids or having 
high calcium foods instead of dietary acids. Researchers have also attempted to modify 
erosive drinks by adding calcium or fluoride which does reduce their erosive potential 
although does not completely eliminate it [44]. In addition, consuming milk, fluoride 
products and even antacids following an acid challenge has been shown to reduce 
erosive tooth wear in vitro and in situ [45]. Other suggestions for neutralising the acid 
exposure include following the exposure with eating cheese or chewing sugar free gum. 
Chewing sugar free gum stimulates salivary flow (which enhances oral clearance) and 
has been shown in the laboratory to reduce wear from erosion [46]. However it is 
unknown if the physiological impact of chewing on eroded surfaces could potentially 
increase wear from abrasion [47]. All of these measures limit rather than prevent 
damage and the authors would argue that decreasing frequency of dietary acid intake 
should be the primary focus of advice. 
Dentine hypersensitivity 
There are indications that the presence of dentine hypersensitivity may also be related 
to acids in the diet. There is a relationship between erosive tooth wear and the presence 
of dentine hypersensitivity [25,48,49]. In one of the largest epidemiological studies 
investigating erosive tooth wear and dentine hypersensitivity on over 3,000 adults in 9 
European countries, a relationship between dentine hypersensitivity and intraoral acids 
was observed [49]. A further clinical study questioned 350 participants on time passed 
since their last dietary acid consumption and performed clinical dentine 
hypersensitivity testing. They observed a relationship between clinical dentine 
hypersensitivity and dietary acid consumption in the previous hour [50]. Laboratory 
  
12
studies have also confirmed the presence of increased tubule patency with dietary acids 
[51]. The similar aetiologies underlying both conditions indicate that if a patient 
presents with either dentine hypersensitivity or erosive tooth wear, similar dietary risk 
factors should be addressed. 
Is giving dietary advice effective? 
Giving dietary advice in general practice can be challenging. Advice may not always be 
welcomed and some patients may feel it as an intrusion. Furthermore, there is a gap in 
receiving advice and adherence to advice across all health disciplines with actual 
behaviour change being notoriously difficult to achieve [52]. One longitudinal study 
investigating tooth wear progression over 6 years observed that dietary behaviour had 
not changed despite being provided with “extensive dietary counselling” [26]. A 
Cochrane review investigating dietary advice provision in dental practice suggested 
there is evidence, albeit limited, that one-to-one dietary advice interventions can change 
behaviour [53]. Motivational interviewing has also been attempted in dental practice 
and there is evidence demonstrating success [54]. However, motivational interviewing 
techniques require intensive training and are reliant upon a good repertoire between 
the patient and the clinician and are time consuming for a general practice setting. 
However, key techniques for giving effective dietary advice in both general practice and 
hospital settings have been identified. Evidence suggests that, setting a clear goal (i.e 
reduction of cola drinks between meals), planning how you are going to achieve this 
goal (i.e If I want a coca cola then I will have a sparkling water instead) and self-
monitoring (i.e keeping a record of each day you successfully did not have cola drinks 
between meals and trying to beat this the next week) has been observed to be effective 
across health interventions [55]. This type of goal setting, planning and monitoring 
  
13
behaviour has already been reported to be effective in improving periodontal outcomes 
[56].   
Conclusion 
There is an established role between dietary acids and erosive tooth wear. Addressing 
this preventable aspect of erosive tooth wear may help to delay progression from other 
less preventable tooth wear factors such as gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, vomiting 
eating disorders and parafunctional habits. Reducing dietary acid intake may also help 
to reduce dentine hypersensitivity symptoms. However, the relationship between 
provision of advice and behaviour change is not straightforward. Individualised help to 
set a goal and incorporate planning and self-monitoring may make the behaviour 
change more effective.  
 
 
  
14
References 
[1] 
Jaeggi T, Lussi A. Prevalence, Incidence and Distribution of Erosion. In: Lussi A, 
Ganss C, editors. Erosive Tooth Wear - From Diagnosis to Ther. 2nd ed., Basel 
Swizerland: Karger; 2014, p. 55–74. 
[2] 
Ahmed KE, Murray CA, Whitters CJ. A prospective survey of secondary care tooth 
wear referrals: demographics, reasons for concern and referral outcomes. Br Dent 
J 2014;216:E9.  
[3] 
Dunford EK, Popkin BM. 37 year snacking trends for US children 1977-2014. 
Pediatr Obes 2017. 
[4] 
Dunford E, Popkin B. Disparities in Snacking Trends in US Adults over a 35 Year 
Period from 1977 to 2012. Nutrients 2017;9:809. 
[5] 
British Soft Drinks Association. Leading the way: Annual Report 2016:1–13. 
[6] 
Barbour ME, Lussi A, Shellis RP. Screening and prediction of erosive potential. 
Caries Res 2011;45 Suppl 1:24–32. 
[7] 
Shellis RP, Featherstone JDB, Lussi A. Understanding the Chemistry of Dental 
Erosion. In: Lussi A, Ganss C, editors. Erosive Tooth Wear - From Diagnosis to 
Ther. 2nd ed., Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 2014, p. 175–6. 
[8] 
Hannig C, Hamkens A, Becker K, Attin R, Attin T. Erosive effects of different acids 
on bovine enamel: Release of calcium and phosphate in vitro. Arch Oral Biol 
2005;50:541–52.  
[9] 
Jensdottir T, Holbrook P, Nauntofte B, Buchwald C, Bardow A. Immediate Erosive 
Potential of Cola Drinks and Orange Juices. J Dent Res 2006;85:226–30. 
  
15
[10] Young  a, Tenuta LM a. Initial erosion models. Caries Res 2011;45 Suppl 1:33–42.  
[11] Lussi A, Megert B, Shellis RP, Wang X. Analysis of the erosive effect of different 
dietary substances and medications. Br J Nutr 2012;107:252–62.  
[12] Millward A, Shaw L, Harrington E, Smith A. Continuous Monitoring of Salivary 
Flow Rate and pH at the Surface of the Dentition following Consumption of Acidic 
Beverages. Caries Res 1997;31:44–9. 
[13] Hans R, Thomas S, Garla B, Dagli RJ, Hans MK. Effect of Various Sugary Beverages 
on Salivary pH, Flow Rate, and Oral Clearance Rate amongst Adults. Scientifica 
(Cairo) 2016:1–6.  
[14] Bartlett DW, Bureau GP, Anggiansah A. Evaluation of the pH of a new carbonated 
soft drink beverage: an in vivo investigation. J Prosthodont 2003;12:21–5.  
[15] Meurman JH, ten Cate JM. Pathogenesis and modifying factors of dental erosion. 
Eur J Oral Sci 1996;104:199–206. 
[16] Szeto YT, Tomlinson B, Benzie IFF. Total antioxidant and ascorbic acid content of 
fresh fruits and vegetables: implications for dietary planning and food 
preservation. Br J Nutr 2002;87:55–9. 
[17] Järvinen VK, Rytömaa II, Heinonen OP. Risk factors in dental erosion. J Dent Res 
1991;70:942–7. 
[18] Ghai N, Burke FJ. Mouthwatering but erosive? A preliminary assessment of the 
acidity of a basic sauce used in many Indian dishes. Dent Updat 2012;39:721–
724,726.  
[19] Monga M. Quantitative assessment of citric acid in lemon juice, lime juice, and 
  
16
commercially-available fruit juice products. Int Braz J Urol 2008;34:235.  
[20] Reddy A, Norris DF, Momeni SS, Waldo B, Ruby JD. The pH of beverages in the 
United States. J Am Dent Assoc 2015:1–9. 
[21] Milosevic A, Bardsley PF, Taylor S. Epidemiological studies of tooth wear and 
dental erosion in 14-year old children in North West England. Part 2: The 
association of diet and habits. Br Dent J 2004;197:479–83.  
[22] Liem DG, Mennella JA. Sweet and sour preferences during childhood: Role of early 
experiences. Dev Psychobiol 2002;41:388–95. 
[23] Brug J, Tak NI, te Velde SJ, Bere E, de Bourdeaudhuij I. Taste preferences, liking 
and other factors related to fruit and vegetable intakes among schoolchildren: 
results from observational studies. Br J Nutr 2008;99 Suppl 1:S7–14.  
[24] Grimm GC, Harnack L, Story M. Factors associated with soft drink consumption in 
school-aged children. J Am Diet Assoc 2004;104:1244–9.  
[25] O’Toole S, Bernabé E, Moazzez R, Bartlett D. Timing of dietary acid intake and 
erosive tooth wear: A case-control study. J Dent 2017;56:96–104.  
[26] Lussi A, Schaffner M. Progression of and risk factors for dental erosion and 
wedge-shaped defects over a 6-year period. Caries Res 2000;34:182–7.  
[27] Gambon DL, Brand HS, Nieuw Amerongen  a V. Soft drink, software and softening 
of teeth - a case report of tooth wear in the mixed dentition due to a combination 
of dental erosion and attrition. Open Dent J 2010;4:198–200.  
[28] Ali H, Tahmassebi JF. The effects of smoothies on enamel erosion: an in situ study. 
Int J Paediatr Dent 2014;24:184–91. 
  
17
[29] Johansson A-K, Lingström P, Imfeld T, Birkhed D. Influence of drinking method on 
tooth-surface pH in relation to dental erosion. Eur J Oral Sci 2004;112:484–9.  
[30] Andersen LF, Bere E, Kolbjornsen N, Klepp K-I. Validity and reproducibility of self-
reported intake of fruit and vegetable among 6th graders. Eur J Clin Nutr 
2004;58:771–7.  
[31] Sovik JB, Skudutyte-Rysstad R, Tveit AB, Sandvik L, Mulic A. Sour Sweets and 
Acidic Beverage Consumption Are Risk Indicators for Dental Erosion. Caries Res 
2015;49:243–50. 
[32] Jensdottir T, Arnadottir IB, Thorsdottir I, Bardow A, Gudmundsson K, Theodors A, 
et al. Relationship between dental erosion, soft drink consumption, and 
gastroesophageal reflux among Icelanders. Clin Oral Investig 2004;8:91–6.  
[33] Hasselkvist A, Johansson A, Johansson A-K. Association between soft drink 
consumption, oral health and some lifestyle factors in Swedish adolescents. Acta 
Odontol Scand 2014;72:1039–46. 
[34] Johansson A-K, Lingström P, Birkhed D. Comparison of factors potentially related 
to the occurrence of dental erosion in high- and low-erosion groups. Eur J Oral Sci 
2002;110:204–11. 
[35] Ganss C, Schlechtriemen M, Klimek J. Dental Erosions in Subjects Living on a Raw 
Food Diet. Caries Res 1999;33:74–80. 
[36] Staufenbiel I, Adam K, Deac  a, Geurtsen W, Günay H. Influence of fruit 
consumption and fluoride application on the prevalence of caries and erosion in 
vegetarians—a controlled clinical trial. Eur J Clin Nutr 2015:1–5.  
[37] Barbour ME, Finke M, Parker DM, Hughes JA, Allen GC, Addy M. The relationship 
  
18
between enamel softening and erosion caused by soft drinks at a range of 
temperatures. J Dent 2006;34:207–13.  
[38] Airoldi G, Riva G, Vanelli M, Filippi d V, Garattini G. Oral environment temperature 
changes induced by cold/hot liquid intake. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 
1997;112:58–63.  
[39] Bartlett DW, Fares J, Shirodaria S, Chiu K, Ahmad N, Sherriff M. The association of 
tooth wear, diet and dietary habits in adults aged 18–30 years old. J Dent 
2011;39:811–6.  
[40] Hooper SM, Macdonald EL, Addy M, Antognozzi M, Davies M, West NX. A 
Randomised trial to investigate the erosive effect of hot drinks. J Oral Rehabil 
2015;42:537–43.  
[41] Correr GM, Alonso RCB, Correa MA, Campos EA, Baratto-Filho F, Puppin-Rontani 
RM. Influence of diet and salivary characteristics on the prevalence of dental 
erosion among 12-year-old schoolchildren. J Dent Child 2009;76:181–7. 
[42] Amaechi BTT, Higham SMM. Dental erosion: possible approaches to prevention 
and control. J Dent 2005;33:243–52. 
[43] Salas MMS, Nascimento GG, Vargas-Ferreira F, Tarquinio SBC, Huysmans 
MCDNJM, Demarco FF. Diet influenced tooth erosion prevalence in children and 
adolescents: Results of a meta-analysis and meta-regression. J Dent 2015;43:865–
75.  
[44] West NX, Hughes J., Parker DM, Moohan M, Addy M. Development of low erosive 
carbonated fruit drinks 2. Evaluation of an experimental carbonated blackcurrant 
drink compared to a conventional carbonated drink. J Dent 2003;31:361–5.  
  
19
[45] Lindquist B, Lingström P, Fändriks L, Birkhed D. Influence of five neutralizing 
products on intra-oral pH after rinsing with simulated gastric acid. Eur J Oral Sci 
2011;119:301–4.  
[46] Rios D, Honório HM, Magalhães AC, Delbem ACB, Machado MAAM, Silva SMB, et al. 
Effect of Salivary Stimulation on Erosion of Human and Bovine Enamel Subjected 
or Not to Subsequent Abrasion: An in situ/ex vivo Study. Caries Res 
2006;40:218–23.  
[47] Amaechi BT, Higham SM, Edgar WM. Influence of abrasion in clinical 
manifestation of human dental erosion. J Oral Rehabil 2003;30:407–13.  
[48] Bartlett DW, Lussi A, West NX, Bouchard P, Sanz M, Bourgeois D. Prevalence of 
tooth wear on buccal and lingual surfaces and possible risk factors in young 
European adults. J Dent 2013;41:1007–13.  
[49] West NX, Sanz M, Lussi A, Bartlett DW, Bouchard P, Bourgeois D. Prevalence of 
dentine hypersensitivity and study of associated factors: A European population-
based cross-sectional study. J Dent 2013;41:841–51.  
[50] Olley RC, Moazzez R, Bartlett DW. The relationship between incisal/occlusal wear, 
dentine hypersensitivity and time after the last acid exposure in vivo. J Dent 
2015;43:248–52.  
[51] Mullen F, Paraskar S, Bartlett DW, Olley RC. Effects of tooth-brushing force with a 
desensitising dentifrice on dentine tubule patency and surface roughness. J Dent 
2017. doi:10.1016/j.jdent.2017.02.015. 
[52] Gollwitzer P, Sheeran P. Implementation intentions and goal achievement: A 
meta-analysis of effects and processes. Adv Exp Soc Psych 2006;38:69–119.  
  
20
[53] Harris R, Gamboa A, Dailey Y, Ashcroft A. One-to-one dietary interventions 
undertaken in a dental setting to change dietary behaviour. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2012;3:CD006540. 
[54] Kay E, Vascott D, Hocking A, Nield H. Motivational interviewing in general dental 
practice: A review of the evidence. Br Dent J 2016;221:785–91. 
[55] Newton T, Asimakopoulou K. Managing oral hygiene as a risk factor for 
periodontal disease:A systematic review of psychological approaches to 
behaviour change for improved plaque control in periodontal management. J Clin 
Periodontol 2015;42:S36–46. 
[56] Suresh R, Jones KC, Newton JT, Asimakopoulou K. An exploratory study into 
whether self-monitoring improves adherence to daily flossing among dental 
patients. J Public Health Dent 2012;72:1–7.  
 
  
Figure 1: This patient rinsed acidic drinks around their mouth. This wear is primarily erosive with a small abrasive 
component. Image courtesy of Prof. David Bartlett. 
 
  
Figure 1. This patient sipped hot tea with lemon flavouring several times a day. Image courtesy of Prof. David Bartlett. 
 
  
 
Questions to ask patients when you suspect dietary erosive tooth wear 
1. How many dietary acids are being consumed on a daily basis including fruits, 
anything with a fruit flavouring, acidic drinks, acidic sweets and medications? 
2. How many of these are between meals? 
3. Is greater than 10 minutes being spent consuming any dietary acid at a single 
sitting? 
4. Do they sip, swish, hold or rinse the dietary acid in their mouths prior to 
swallowing? 
5. Do they consume dietary acids at an increased temperature eg hot water with 
lemon, stewed fruits, fruit teas? 
Table 1. Summary of questions to ask patients to identify risk factors associated with erosive tooth wear. 
