 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29 
781
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Update: Interim Guidance for Health Care Providers Caring for Pregnant 
Women with Possible Zika Virus Exposure — United States 
(Including U.S. Territories), July 2017
Titilope Oduyebo, MD1; Kara D. Polen, MPH1; Henry T. Walke, MD1; Sarah Reagan-Steiner, MD1; Eva Lathrop, MD1; Ingrid B. Rabe, MBChB1; 
Wendi L. Kuhnert-Tallman, PhD1; Stacey W. Martin, MSc1; Allison T. Walker, PhD1; Christopher J. Gregory, MD1; Edwin W. Ades, PhD1; Darin S. 
Carroll, PhD1; Maria Rivera, MPH1; Janice Perez-Padilla, MPH1; Carolyn Gould, MD1; Jeffrey B. Nemhauser, MD1; C. Ben Beard, PhD1; Jennifer L. 
Harcourt, PhD1; Laura Viens, MD1; Michael Johansson, PhD1; Sascha R. Ellington, MSPH1; Emily Petersen, MD1; Laura A. Smith, MA1; Jessica 
Reichard, MPA1; Jorge Munoz-Jordan, PhD1; Michael J. Beach, PhD1; Dale A. Rose, PhD1; Ezra Barzilay, MD1; Michelle Noonan-Smith1; Denise J. 
Jamieson, MD1; Sherif R. Zaki, MD1; Lyle R. Petersen, MD1; Margaret A. Honein, PhD1; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD1
On July 24, 2017, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
CDC has updated the interim guidance for U.S. health care 
providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure in response to 1) declining prevalence of Zika virus dis-
ease in the World Health Organization’s Region of the Americas 
(Americas) and 2) emerging evidence indicating prolonged detec-
tion of Zika virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies. Zika 
virus cases were first reported in the Americas during 2015–2016; 
however, the incidence of Zika virus disease has since declined. 
As the prevalence of Zika virus disease declines, the likelihood of 
false-positive test results increases. In addition, emerging epide-
miologic and laboratory data indicate that, as is the case with other 
flaviviruses, Zika virus IgM antibodies can persist beyond 12 weeks 
after infection. Therefore, IgM test results cannot always reliably 
distinguish between an infection that occurred during the current 
pregnancy and one that occurred before the current pregnancy, 
particularly for women with possible Zika virus exposure before 
the current pregnancy. These limitations should be considered 
when counseling pregnant women about the risks and benefits 
of testing for Zika virus infection during pregnancy. This updated 
guidance emphasizes a shared decision-making model for testing 
and screening pregnant women, one in which patients and provid-
ers work together to make decisions about testing and care plans 
based on patient preferences and values, clinical judgment, and a 
balanced assessment of risks and expected outcomes.
For these recommendations, the definition of possible Zika 
virus exposure has not changed and includes travel to, or 
residence in an area with risk for mosquito-borne Zika virus 
transmission or sex with a partner who has traveled to or 
resides in an area with risk for mosquito-borne Zika virus 
transmission. These areas can be found on the CDC “Zika 
Travel Information” webpage.*
Key recommendations include the following:
1) All pregnant women in the United States and U.S. ter-
ritories should be asked about possible Zika virus exposure 
before and during the current pregnancy, at every prenatal care 
visit. CDC recommends that pregnant women not travel to any 
area with risk for Zika virus transmission. It is also recommended 
that pregnant women with a sex partner who has traveled to or 
lives in an area with risk for Zika virus transmission use condoms 
or abstain from sex for the duration of the pregnancy.
2) Pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure and 
symptoms† of Zika virus disease should be tested to diagnose 
the cause of their symptoms. The updated recommendations 
include concurrent Zika virus nucleic acid test (NAT) and serologic 
testing as soon as possible through 12 weeks after symptom onset.
3) Asymptomatic pregnant women with ongoing possible 
Zika virus exposure§ should be offered Zika virus NAT testing 
three times during pregnancy. IgM antibody testing is no lon-
ger routinely recommended because IgM can persist for months 
after infection; therefore, IgM results cannot reliably determine 
whether an infection occurred during the current pregnancy. The 
optimal timing and frequency of testing of asymptomatic preg-
nant women with NAT alone is unknown. For pregnant women 
who have received a diagnosis of laboratory-confirmed Zika 
virus infection (by either NAT or serology [positive/equivocal 
Zika virus or dengue virus IgM and Zika virus plaque reduc-
tion neutralization test (PRNT) ≥10 and dengue virus PRNT 
<10 results]) any time before or during the current pregnancy, 
additional Zika virus testing is not recommended. For pregnant 
women without a prior laboratory-confirmed diagnosis of Zika 
virus, NAT testing should be offered at the initiation of prenatal 
care, and if Zika virus RNA is not detected on clinical specimens, 
two additional tests should be offered during the course of the 
pregnancy coinciding with prenatal visits.
4) Asymptomatic pregnant women who have recent¶ possi-
ble Zika virus exposure (i.e., through travel or sexual exposure) 
* https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/world-map-areas-with-zika.
† Symptoms of Zika virus disease include acute onset of fever, maculopapular 
rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis.
§ Persons with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure include those who reside 
in or frequently travel (e.g., daily or weekly) to an area with risk for Zika 
virus transmission.
¶ For the purposes of this guidance, recent possible Zika virus exposure or Zika 
virus/flavivirus infection is defined as a possible exposure or infection during 
the current pregnancy or periconceptional period (i.e., 8 weeks before 
conception or 6 weeks before the last menstrual period).
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
782 
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
but without ongoing possible exposure are not routinely 
recommended to have Zika virus testing. Testing should be 
considered using a shared patient-provider decision-making 
model, one in which patients and providers work together 
to make decisions about testing and care plans based on 
patient preferences and values, clinical judgment, a balanced 
assessment of risks and expected outcomes, and the jurisdic-
tion’s recommendations. Based on the epidemiology of Zika 
virus transmission and other epidemiologic considerations 
(e.g., seasonality), jurisdictions might recommend testing 
of asymptomatic pregnant women, either for clinical care 
or as part of Zika virus surveillance. With the decline in the 
prevalence of Zika virus disease, the updated recommenda-
tions for the evaluation and testing of pregnant women with 
recent possible Zika virus exposure but without ongoing pos-
sible exposure are now the same for all areas with any risk 
for Zika virus transmission.
5) Pregnant women who have recent possible Zika virus 
exposure and who have a fetus with prenatal ultrasound 
findings consistent with congenital Zika virus syndrome 
should receive Zika virus testing to assist in establishing 
the etiology of the birth defects. Testing should include both 
NAT and IgM tests.
6) The comprehensive approach to testing placental and 
fetal tissues has been updated. Testing placental and fetal 
tissue specimens can be performed for diagnostic purposes 
in certain scenarios (e.g., women without a diagnosis of 
laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection and who have a fetus 
or infant with possible Zika virus-associated birth defects**). 
However, testing of placental tissues for Zika virus infection 
is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic pregnant 
women who have recent possible Zika virus exposure but 
without ongoing possible exposure and who have a live born 
infant without evidence of possible Zika virus–associated 
birth defects.
7) Zika virus IgM testing as part of preconception coun-
seling to establish baseline IgM results for nonpregnant 
women with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure is not 
warranted because Zika virus IgM testing is no longer rou-
tinely recommended for asymptomatic pregnant women with 
ongoing possible Zika virus exposure.
CDC continues to evaluate all available evidence and will 
update recommendations as new information becomes available.
 
** Possible Zika virus–associated birth defects that meet the CDC surveillance case 
definition include the following: brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly, 
intracranial calcifications, ventriculomegaly, neural tube defects and other early 
brain malformations, eye abnormalities, or other consequences of central nervous 
system dysfunction including arthrogryposis (joint contractures), congenital hip 
dysplasia, and congenital deafness) (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/pregnancy-
outcomes.html). In all cases, infants or fetuses with possible Zika virus–associated 
birth defects should also be evaluated for other etiologies of congenital anomalies.
Zika Virus Infection
Zika virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that is closely related 
to dengue, West Nile, Japanese encephalitis, and yellow fever 
viruses (1). During 2015–2016, Zika virus spread rapidly and 
caused outbreaks across the Americas; 47 countries and territo-
ries in the Americas reported Zika virus outbreaks. However, 
since early 2017, the reported incidence of Zika virus disease 
in the region has declined (2).
The World Health Organization uses a country classifica-
tion scheme that describes the epidemiology of Zika virus 
transmission to aid in geographic risk assessment. Some areas 
(e.g., American Samoa) have been reclassified to indicate that 
Zika virus transmission has been interrupted (3,4), which is 
reflective of the declining trends in the prevalence of Zika virus 
disease. As of July 23, 2017, 95 countries and territories have 
been designated by CDC as areas with any possible risk for 
Zika virus transmission.
Although the understanding of the consequences of 
Zika virus infection is improving, diagnosing Zika virus 
infection accurately continues to present challenges. First, 
Zika virus is present in body fluids only transiently, which 
makes confirming the presence of the virus difficult. Second, 
serologic testing, based on the immunologic response, 
cannot always reliably determine when infection occurred. 
Finally, serologic tests are prone to false-positive results and 
cross-reactivity with other flaviviruses (5). With declin-
ing prevalence of Zika virus disease (2), the probability 
of false-positive test results increases (6). The changing 
epidemiology further limits the diagnostic capability of 
currently available Zika virus tests. In this context, CDC 
has updated the interim guidance for health care provid-
ers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure to provide new information and highlight current 
testing limitations.
Persistence of Zika Virus Nucleic Acid and 
Immune Response
Data from outbreaks before 2015 indicated that Zika virus 
RNA was detected in serum for up to 7 days after symptom 
onset (1,7). However, in some persons, Zika virus RNA can 
be detected in body fluids longer than has been documented 
previously. The Zika Virus Persistence (ZiPer) Study of 
persons with NAT-confirmed Zika virus disease, recently 
reported detection of viral RNA in serum 8–15 days after 
symptom onset in 36% (10 of 28) of participants, 16–30 days 
after symptom onset in 21% (27 of 129), and >60 days after 
symptom onset in 4% (three of 79) (8). Prolonged detection 
of Zika virus RNA in serum obtained from pregnant women 
was also reported; three of the five pregnant women included 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29 
783
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in the ZiPer study had detectable RNA 46 days after symptom 
onset, and one had detectable RNA 80 days after symptom 
onset. This finding is consistent with other small case series 
(<20 pregnant women in total) that have demonstrated detec-
tion of Zika virus RNA for longer than had been previously 
reported, up to 107 days after symptom onset and 53 days 
after last exposure (9–15).
Zika virus IgM antibodies typically become detectable within 
the first 2 weeks after symptom onset (1,8,16). Published data on 
the duration of detection of IgM antibodies following Zika virus 
infection are limited. In the ongoing ZiPer study, IgM antibodies 
were detected in 34% (17 of 50) of participants at 0–7 days after 
symptom onset, 100% (28 of 28) at 8–15 days after symptom 
onset, and 87% (52 of 60) >60 days after symptom onset (8). In 
addition, consistent with what is known about other flaviviruses 
(17), unpublished preliminary data from this study indicate a 
median of 4 months (122 days, [range = 8–210 days]) to the 
first negative Zika virus IgM result (18). Thus, detection of IgM 
antibodies might not indicate an infection that occurred dur-
ing the current pregnancy. Inability to determine the timing of 
infection through IgM testing is a major challenge for pregnant 
women and their health care providers, making it difficult for 
health care providers to counsel pregnant women about the risk 
for congenital Zika virus infection.
Neutralizing antibodies develop shortly after IgM antibod-
ies and likely persist for many years (19). Based on experience 
with other flaviviruses, previous Zika virus infection is likely to 
confer prolonged, possibly lifelong, immunity (20). Testing is 
not routinely recommended for pregnant women with a previ-
ous diagnosis of laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection by 
either NAT or serology (positive/equivocal Zika virus or dengue 
virus IgM and Zika virus PRNT ≥10 and dengue virus PRNT 
<10 results). However, in light of the limitations of serologic 
testing (e.g., cross-reactivity and false-positive test results), for 
pregnant women without a previous diagnosis of laboratory-
confirmed Zika virus infection, including those with laboratory 
evidence of flavivirus infection or laboratory evidence of pre-
sumptive Zika virus or flavivirus infection (Table 1), decisions 
about testing during a subsequent pregnancy should be made 
using a shared patient-provider decision-making model. If the 
decision is made to test, only NAT testing is recommended, 
because IgM antibody testing might not be able to determine 
the timing of infection among pregnant women who have had 
exposure to Zika virus before the current pregnancy.
Zika Virus Diagnostic Testing
Diagnostic testing for Zika virus infection can be accom-
plished using molecular and serologic methods; several NAT 
and serology assays have received Emergency Use Authorization 
(EUA) from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use 
on nontissue clinical specimens.††,§§ Zika virus NAT is used 
to identify viral RNA in clinical or pathologic specimens, and 
for most persons with suspected Zika virus disease, a positive 
NAT result confirms acute Zika virus infection. However, 
despite the high specificity of NAT, false-positive results can 
occur (1,8,16). In addition, because Zika virus RNA is cleared 
from blood and other body fluids and tissues, a negative NAT 
result does not exclude acute Zika virus infection.
Several assays can be used to detect Zika virus IgM antibod-
ies in serum or cerebrospinal fluid. Zika virus IgM tests can 
be difficult to interpret because of false-positives and cross-
reactivity with other flaviviruses, especially in persons who 
were previously infected with or vaccinated against a related 
flavivirus (5,21). Additionally, a negative IgM test result does 
not rule out Zika virus infection when an IgM test is performed 
before the development of IgM antibodies or after the antibod-
ies have waned.
PRNT measures virus-specific neutralizing antibody titers 
and should be performed for Zika and dengue viruses in NAT-
negative, IgM-nonnegative (i.e., positive, equivocal, presumptive 
positive, or possible¶¶) specimens (21). In primary flavivirus 
infections (i.e., a person’s first flavivirus infection), PRNT can 
often identify the infecting virus (21). PRNT can also assist in 
identifying false-positive IgM. However, PRNT might not dis-
criminate between anti-Zika virus antibodies and cross-reacting 
antibodies in persons who have been previously infected with or 
vaccinated against a related flavivirus (i.e., secondary flavivirus 
infection) (22,23). In addition, if areas with risk for Zika virus 
transmission experience increasing levels of dengue virus trans-
mission, the difficulty in differentiating between cross-reactive 
Zika virus and dengue virus antibodies will further complicate 
interpretation of test results and diagnosis of Zika virus infec-
tion. This is especially concerning at this time, as epidemiologic 
trends suggest a reduced likelihood of Zika virus transmission 
in the Americas, compared with 2016 (2,24).
Efforts to develop and validate Zika virus serologic assays 
with improved specificity for Zika virus infection and the 
ability to distinguish a recent infection from a previous 
infection are ongoing. CDC is currently working with mul-
tiple manufacturers to validate tests in development and 
will update testing recommendations as new information 
becomes available.
 
†† https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/
ucm161496.htm#zika.
 
§§ https://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/lab-guidance.html.
 
¶¶ Terms listed here are only examples of assay interpretation terminology because 
nonnegative serology terminology varies by assay. For explanation of a specific 
interpretation, refer to the instructions for use for the specific assay performed. 
Information on each assay can be found at https://www.fda.gov/
MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/ucm161496.htm#zika under 
the “Labeling” tab for the specific assay.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
784 
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Interpretation*,† of results of nucleic acid and antibody testing§,¶ for suspected Zika virus infection — United States 
(including U.S. territories), July 2017
Zika virus NAT 
(serum)**
Zika virus NAT 
(urine) **
Zika virus IgM††
Zika virus 
PRNT
Dengue virus 
PRNT
Interpretation and recommendations
Positive
Positive
Any result 
Not indicated
Not indicated
Acute Zika virus infection
Negative
Positive
Positive 
Not indicated
Not indicated
Acute Zika virus infection
Negative
Positive
Negative 
Not indicated
Not indicated
Suggests acute Zika virus infection
• Repeat testing on original urine specimen
• If repeat NAT result is positive, interpret as evidence of acute 
Zika virus infection
• If repeat NAT result is negative, repeat Zika virus IgM testing 
on a serum specimen collected ≥2 weeks after symptom onset 
or possible exposure or specimen collection date
 
–
If repeat IgM result is positive,§§ interpret as evidence of 
acute Zika virus infection
 
–
If repeat IgM result is not positive, interpret as no evidence 
of Zika virus infection
Positive
Negative or not 
performed
Positive 
Not indicated
Not indicated
Acute Zika virus infection
Positive
Negative or not 
performed
Negative 
Not indicated
Not indicated
Suggests acute Zika virus infection
• Repeat testing on original serum specimen
• If repeat NAT result is positive, interpret as evidence of acute 
Zika virus infection
• If repeat NAT result is negative, repeat Zika virus IgM testing 
on a serum specimen collected ≥2 weeks after symptom onset 
or possible exposure or specimen collection date
 
–
If repeat IgM result is positive, interpret as evidence of acute 
Zika virus infection
 
–
If repeat IgM antibody result is not positive,§§ interpret as 
no evidence of Zika virus infection
Negative
Negative or not 
performed
Any nonnegative result¶¶ 
≥10
<10
Zika virus infection; timing of infection cannot be 
determined
• For persons without prior Zika virus exposure, a positive IgM 
result represents recent Zika virus infection
Negative
Negative or not 
performed
Any nonnegative result¶¶ 
<10
Any result
No evidence of Zika virus infection
Negative
Negative or not 
performed
Any nonnegative result¶¶ 
≥10
≥10
Flavivirus infection; specific virus cannot be identified; 
timing of infection cannot be determined
• For persons without prior Zika virus exposure, a positive IgM 
result represents recent unspecified flavivirus infection.
For areas where PRNT is not recommended¶
Negative
Negative or not 
performed
Positive for Zika virus AND 
negative for dengue virus
Not performed because PRNT 
is not recommended 
Presumptive Zika virus infection; timing of infection cannot 
be determined***
Negative
Negative or not 
performed
Positive for Zika virus AND 
positive for dengue virus
Not performed because PRNT 
is not recommended 
Presumptive flavivirus infection; specific virus cannot be 
identified; timing of infection cannot be determined***
Negative
Negative or not 
performed
Equivocal  
(either or both assays)
Not performed because PRNT 
is not recommended 
Insufficient information for interpretation
• Consider repeat testing
Negative
Negative or not 
performed
Negative on both assays
Not performed because PRNT 
is not recommended 
No laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection
Abbreviations: IgM = immunoglobulin M; NAT = nucleic acid test; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test.
 * Final interpretations of results of Zika virus tests should be performed after all testing is completed.
 
† Serology test results that indicate flavivirus infection should be interpreted in the context of circulating flaviviruses.
 
§ Dengue virus IgM testing is recommended for symptomatic pregnant women as well as for asymptomatic pregnant women residing in areas where PRNT is not recommended.
 
¶ Currently, PRNT confirmation is not routinely recommended for persons living in Puerto Rico.
 ** Serum must be submitted for all persons tested for Zika virus infection; a urine specimen for Zika virus NAT testing should always be submitted concurrently with 
a serum specimen.
 †† For laboratory interpretation in the presence of dengue virus IgM results refer to https://www.cdc.gov/dengue/clinicallab/laboratory.html. 
 §§ Positive results include “positive,” “presumptive Zika virus positive,” or “possible Zika virus positive.” These are examples of assay interpretations that might accompany test 
results; positive serology terminology varies by assay. For explanation of a specific interpretation, refer to the instructions for use for the specific assay performed. Information 
on each assay can be found at https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/ucm161496.htm#zika under the “Labeling” for the specific assay.
 ¶¶ Nonnegative results include “positive,” “equivocal,” “presumptive positive,” or “possible positive.” These are examples of assay interpretations that might accompany test results; 
nonnegative serology terminology varies by assay. For explanation of a specific interpretation, refer to the instructions for use for the specific assay performed. Information 
on each assay can be found at https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/ucm161496.htm#zika under “Labeling” for the specific assay.
 
*** Zika virus IgM positive result is reported as “presumptive positive or flavivirus infection” to denote the need to perform confirmatory PRNT titers against Zika virus, 
dengue virus, and other flaviviruses to which the person might have been exposed to resolve potential false-positive results that might have been caused by cross-
reactivity or nonspecific reactivity. In addition, ambiguous test results (e.g., inconclusive, equivocal, and indeterminate) that are not resolved by retesting also should 
have PRNT titers performed to rule out a false-positive result. However, PRNT confirmation is currently not routinely recommended for persons living in Puerto Rico.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29 
785
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Updated Interim Guidance for Laboratory Testing 
of Pregnant Women with Exposure to Areas with 
Risk for Zika Virus Transmission
As many areas in the Americas move into a subsequent (e.g., 
a second or third) mosquito season after introduction of Zika 
virus, testing becomes more complex. Given the evolving 
situation and the many uncertainties, the updated testing algo-
rithms for symptomatic and asymptomatic pregnant women 
(Figure 1) (Figure 2) emphasize a shared patient-provider 
decision-making model. Counseling is recommended before 
and after testing, and Zika virus test results should be inter-
preted in the context of several limitations (Box). To address 
new and emerging data, the laboratory interpretations of Zika 
virus testing (Table 1) have also been updated.
Health care providers should continue to ask pregnant 
women at each prenatal visit about possible Zika virus exposure 
(e.g., travel to, or residence in an area with risk for mosquito-
borne Zika virus transmission or sex with a partner who has 
traveled to or resides in an area with risk for mosquito-borne 
Zika virus transmission), specifically before and during the 
current pregnancy. Health care providers should ask about 
presence of symptoms of Zika virus disease (e.g., fever, rash, 
arthralgia, and conjunctivitis) and place, duration, and type 
of travel to assess a woman’s potential for Zika virus exposure. 
Data from other mosquito-borne illnesses indicate that inten-
sity of transmission, duration of travel, and type of travel influ-
ence the likelihood of infection (25,26); these factors might 
also affect the likelihood of Zika virus acquisition. Knowledge 
of a pregnant woman’s possible exposure to Zika virus before 
and during pregnancy is critical contextual information that 
should be used to tailor pretest and posttest counseling and 
interpretation of test results (Box). Zika virus IgM test results 
might be difficult to interpret for pregnant women who have 
had exposure to any area with risk for Zika virus transmission 
before the current pregnancy, and this difficulty underscores 
the importance of shared patient-provider decision-making.
Pregnant women with recent possible Zika virus expo-
sure and symptoms of Zika virus disease. Testing for Zika 
virus infection is still recommended for pregnant women 
with symptoms of Zika virus disease and possible Zika virus 
exposure, with the main goal of establishing a diagnosis that 
accounts for their symptoms, or ruling out Zika virus infection 
so that an alternative diagnosis can be considered. Negative test 
results should prompt evaluation for other causes, which might 
include dengue virus or chikungunya virus infection, depend-
ing on the symptoms and epidemiology of circulating viruses.
Concurrent NAT (serum and urine) and serologic testing 
(serum) is recommended for pregnant women as soon as 
possible, through 12 weeks after symptom onset (Figure 1). 
Reports of prolonged detection of Zika virus RNA in symp-
tomatic pregnant women support longer time frames for the 
performance of molecular diagnostic testing (8–11,13–15). 
However, the proportion of pregnant women with this find-
ing is unknown. Expanding the time frame for NAT testing 
through 12 weeks after symptom onset allows for a longer 
period in which to make a NAT-confirmed diagnosis of Zika 
virus infection in some pregnant women. However, because of 
the potential for false-positive NAT results (6,27),*** updated 
recommendations include NAT testing of both serum and 
urine and concurrent Zika virus IgM antibody testing to 
confirm the diagnosis of acute Zika virus infection with more 
than one test (Table 1).
For women who seek care >12 weeks after symptom onset, 
Zika virus IgM testing might be considered; however, a nega-
tive result does not rule out an infection during pregnancy 
because IgM levels decline over time. A positive result should 
be interpreted within the context of the known limitations of 
serologic testing.
Asymptomatic pregnant women with ongoing possible 
Zika virus exposure. For asymptomatic pregnant women with 
ongoing exposure to Zika virus, testing for Zika virus infection 
should be offered as part of routine obstetric care because it 
might identify acute infection during pregnancy (Figure 2). 
Previous guidance recommended IgM testing with reflex NAT 
once during the first and second trimester of pregnancy for 
women with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure (28). IgM 
testing is no longer routinely recommended because of the limi-
tations of IgM tests and the difficulty in interpreting results.
The optimal timing and frequency for testing asymptom-
atic pregnant women with NAT alone is unknown; NAT 
for asymptomatic pregnant women should be informed by 
jurisdictional trends in Zika virus transmission, the duration 
of ongoing possible exposure during pregnancy, and data on 
the duration of Zika virus RNA detection in body fluids. For 
pregnant women who have received a diagnosis of laboratory-
confirmed Zika virus infection any time before or during the 
current pregnancy, additional Zika virus testing is not recom-
mended. For women without a prior laboratory-confirmed 
diagnosis of Zika virus, NAT should be offered at the initia-
tion of prenatal care, and if Zika virus RNA is not detected 
on clinical specimens, two additional NAT tests should be 
offered during the course of the pregnancy coinciding with 
prenatal visits. The proportion of fetuses and infants with Zika 
virus–associated birth defects is highest among women with 
first and early second trimester infections (29); therefore, con-
ducting all NAT during the first and second trimesters might 
 *** Page 52 at https://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/Safety/
EmergencySituations/UCM491592.pdf.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
786 
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE 1. Updated interim testing recommendations*,†,§,¶,**,††,§§ and interpretation of results¶¶ for symptomatic pregnant women with 
possible Zika virus exposure***,††† — United States (including U.S. territories), July 2017
ASK pregnant 
women about 
Travel to or residence in areas with risk for Zika virus transmission before and during current pregnancy
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/zika-travel-information 
Possible sexual exposure before and during current pregnancy  
A diagnosis of laboratory-confrmed Zika virus infection before current pregnancy 
Symptoms of Zika virus disease during current pregnancy (e.g., fever, rash, conjunctivitis, and arthralgia) 
If no symptoms reported, refer to asymptomatic algorithm
Pregnant women reporting possible exposure during current pregnancy and symptoms of Zika virus disease
WHOM to test?
Before testing, discuss testing limitations and potential risks for misinterpretation of test results
WHEN to test?
WHICH tests?
Negative Zika virus NAT AND 
negative Zika virus IgM
Negative Zika virus NAT AND 
nonnegative Zika virus IgM
Plaque reduction 
neutralization test (PRNT)
RESULTS and 
ADDITIONAL tests
Zika virus PRNT≥10 AND
dengue virus PRNT<10
Zika virus PRNT ≥10 AND
dengue virus PRNT ≥10
Zika virus PRNT <10
No evidence 
of Zika virus infection
INTERPRETATION
Acute Zika virus 
infection
As soon as possible, through 12 weeks after symptom onset
Zika virus NAT (serum and urine)
AND Zika virus IgM serology (serum)
Flavivirus infection;
specifc virus and timing 
of infection cannot 
be determined
For pregnant women without 
Zika virus exposure before the 
current pregnancy, positive 
IgM represents recent 
unspecifed favivirus 
infection 
Zika virus infection; 
timing of infection cannot 
be determined
For pregnant women without 
Zika virus exposure before the 
current pregnancy, positive 
IgM represents recent 
Zika virus infection
Positive Zika virus NAT
If Zika virus IgM result 
negative, further testing may 
be warranted  
https://www.cdc.gov/zika/
pdfs/lab-table.pdf
Abbreviations: IgM = immunoglobulin M; NAT = nucleic acid test; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test.
 
* Ask about type and duration of Zika virus exposure before and during current pregnancy. Exposure before the current pregnancy might limit interpretation of Zika virus IgM results; 
pretest counseling can help inform testing decisions. Some patients may choose not to receive Zika virus IgM testing.
 
† Zika virus testing is not routinely recommended for pregnant women with a previous diagnosis of laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection by either NAT or serology (positive/equivocal 
Zika virus or dengue virus IgM and Zika virus PRNT ≥10 and dengue virus PRNT <10 results).
 
§ This algorithm also applies to pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure who have a fetus with prenatal ultrasound findings consistent with congenital Zika virus syndrome.
 
¶ The duration of detectable Zika virus RNA in pregnant women following infection is not known. Preliminary data suggest that NAT might remain positive for several weeks after symptom 
onset in some pregnant women. Zika virus IgM antibodies are most likely to be detected within 12 weeks after infection; however, IgM antibodies might be detected for months after 
infection, limiting the ability to determine whether infection occurred before or during the current pregnancy.
 ** Dengue virus IgM antibody testing is recommended for symptomatic pregnant women. For laboratory interpretation in the presence of dengue virus IgM results, refer to https://www.
cdc.gov/dengue/clinicallab/laboratory.html. 
 †† Nonnegative results include “positive,” “equivocal,” “presumptive positive,” or “possible positive.” These are examples of assay interpretation that might accompany test results; nonnegative 
serology terminology varies by assay. For explanation of a specific interpretation, refer to the instructions for use for the specific assay performed. Information on each assay can be 
found at https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/ucm161496.htm#zika under the “Labeling” tab for the specific assay.
 §§ Currently, PRNT confirmation is not routinely recommended for persons living in Puerto Rico. For laboratory interpretation in the absence of PRNT testing, refer to https://www.cdc.gov/
zika/pdfs/lab-table.pdf.
 ¶¶ Despite the high specificity of NAT, false-positive NAT results have been reported. If both serum and urine specimens are NAT-positive, regardless of IgM antibody results, results 
should be interpreted as evidence of acute Zika virus infection. If either serum or urine specimen is NAT-positive in conjunction with a positive Zika virus IgM, results should be 
interpreted as evidence of acute Zika virus infection. If NAT is only positive on serum or urine and IgM testing is negative, repeat testing on the original NAT-positive specimen. If repeat 
NAT is positive, results should be interpreted as evidence of acute Zika virus infection. If repeat NAT testing is negative, results are indeterminate and health care providers should 
repeat Zika virus IgM antibody testing on a serum specimen collected ≥2 weeks after symptom onset. If subsequent IgM antibody test is positive, interpret as evidence of acute Zika 
virus infection, but if negative, interpret as no evidence of Zika virus infection.
 *** Possible Zika virus exposure includes travel to or residence in an area with risk for Zika virus transmission (https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/zika-travel-information) during pregnancy 
or the periconceptional period (8 weeks before conception [6 weeks before the last menstrual period]), or sex without a condom during pregnancy or the periconceptional period, with 
a partner who traveled to, or resides in an area with risk for Zika virus transmission.
 ††† For the purposes of this guidance, recent possible Zika virus exposure or Zika virus/flavivirus infection is defined as a possible exposure or infection during the current pregnancy or 
periconceptional period.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29 
787
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE 2. Updated interim testing recommendations*,†,§ and interpretation of results¶,** for asymptomatic pregnant women with possible 
Zika virus exposure††,§§,¶¶ — United States (including U.S. territories), July 2017
WHICH tests?
WHEN to test?
RESULTS
INTERPRETATION
WHOM to test?
ASK pregnant
women about 
Before testing, discuss testing limitations and potential risks for misinterpretation of test results
Asymptomatic pregnant women 
with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure 
Zika virus NAT (serum and urine)
Positive Zika virus NAT
Acute Zika virus 
Infection
Negative Zika virus NAT
Three times during pregnancy
First test at initiation of prenatal care
Asymptomatic pregnant women with recent possible Zika virus 
exposure, but without ongoing possible exposure: 
Testing not routinely recommended, but should be considered
If considering testing, base decisions on patient preferences and 
values, clinical judgment, a balanced assessment of risks and 
expected outcomes, and jurisdiction’s recommendations
If testing is conducted, follow algorithm for symptomatic pregnant 
women using time frame from last possible exposure
No Zika virus 
RNA detected
(Zika virus infection 
during pregnancy 
cannot be ruled out)
Travel to or residence in areas with risk for Zika virus transmission before and during pregnancy 
(https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/zika-travel-information) 
Possible sexual exposure before and during current pregnancy  
A diagnosis of laboratory-confrmed Zika virus infection before current pregnancy 
Symptoms of Zika virus disease during current pregnancy (e.g., fever, rash, conjunctivitis, and arthralgia) 
If symptoms are reported, refer to symptomatic algorithm
Abbreviations: IgM = immunoglobulin M; NAT = nucleic acid test; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test.
 * Ask about type and duration of Zika virus exposure before and during the current pregnancy. Exposure before the current pregnancy might limit interpretation 
of Zika virus IgM results; pretest counseling can help inform testing decisions.
 † Zika virus testing is not routinely recommended for pregnant women with a previous diagnosis of laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection by either NAT or 
serology (positive/equivocal Zika virus or dengue virus IgM and Zika virus PRNT ≥10 and dengue virus PRNT <10 results).
 § The interval for Zika virus NAT testing during pregnancy is unknown. Preliminary data suggest that NAT might remain positive for several weeks after infection in 
some pregnant women. For women without a prior laboratory-confirmed diagnosis of Zika virus, NAT testing should be offered at the initiation of prenatal care, 
and if Zika virus RNA is not detected on clinical specimens, two additional tests should be offered during the course of the pregnancy coinciding with prenatal 
visits. The proportion of fetuses and infants with Zika virus–associated birth defects is highest among women with first and early second trimester infections; 
therefore, conducting all NAT testing during the first and second trimesters might be considered to help identify infections early in pregnancy. However, adverse 
outcomes have been associated with infection diagnosed in the third trimester; therefore, testing every trimester might be considered.
 ¶ Despite the high specificity of NAT, false-positive NAT results have been reported. If both serum and urine specimens are NAT-positive, interpretation should be 
acute Zika virus infection. If NAT is only positive on serum or urine, testing should be repeated on the original NAT-positive specimen. If repeat NAT is positive, 
results should be interpreted as evidence of acute Zika virus infection. If repeat NAT testing is negative, results are indeterminate and health care providers 
should perform IgM testing on a specimen collected ≥2 weeks after initial specimen collection. For laboratory interpretation, refer to https://www.cdc.gov/zika/
pdfs/lab-table.pdf.
 ** A negative Zika virus NAT result does not exclude infection during pregnancy because it represents a single point in time. Zika virus RNA levels decline over time, 
and the duration of the presence of Zika virus RNA in serum and urine following infection varies among pregnant women. Despite Zika virus IgM antibody test 
limitations (e.g., cross-reactivity with other flaviviruses and prolonged detection for months, presenting challenges in determining the timing of infection), which 
should be discussed as part of pretest counseling, patients may still choose to receive Zika virus IgM testing.
 †† Possible Zika virus exposure includes travel to or residence in an area with risk for Zika virus transmission (https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/zika-travel-information) 
during pregnancy or the periconceptional period (8 weeks before conception [6 weeks before the last menstrual period]), or sex without a condom, during pregnancy 
or the periconceptional period, with a partner who traveled to, or resides in an area with risk for Zika virus transmission.
 
§§ Persons with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure include those who reside in or frequently travel (e.g., daily or weekly) to an area with risk for Zika virus transmission.
 
¶¶ For the purposes of this guidance, recent possible Zika virus exposure or Zika virus/flavivirus infection is defined as a possible exposure or infection during the 
current pregnancy or periconceptional period.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
788 
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BOX. Key information needed for deciding whether to test and how to 
interpret serology results
• Pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure 
should be asked about their risk for exposure both before 
and during the current pregnancy. Health care providers 
should ask about the presence of symptoms of Zika virus 
disease (e.g., fever, rash, arthralgia, and conjunctivitis), 
and place, duration, and type of travel to assess a woman’s 
potential for exposure to Zika virus and other flaviviruses 
(e.g., dengue or West Nile viruses).
• It is important to ascertain whether a woman had 
exposure to Zika virus before the current pregnancy 
because Zika virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies 
can be detected for months after an infection. A positive 
Zika virus IgM result could indicate antibodies from 
infection before the current pregnancy, thus limiting the 
ability to distinguish between an infection that occurred 
before the current pregnancy and one that occurred 
during the current pregnancy.
• It is important to ascertain whether a woman had 
exposure to flaviviruses other than Zika virus before the 
current pregnancy because a positive IgM result might 
have been caused by cross-reactivity from a previous 
flavivirus exposure.
• Health care providers and counselors should provide 
appropriate pretest counseling to inform decisions on 
whether to test; Zika virus test results should be 
interpreted within the context of known limitations.
• A negative Zika virus IgM test result, if performed during 
the recommended time frame, in the setting of a negative 
Zika virus nucleic acid test (NAT) result, provides some 
reassurance of absence of Zika virus infection during the 
current pregnancy. However, a negative Zika virus IgM 
test result should be interpreted within the context of 
the limitations of the assay.
• When plaque reduction neutralization testing (PRNT) 
is indicated and performed during the recommended 
time frame, a negative PRNT result in the setting of a 
negative NAT result indicates that there is no laboratory 
evidence of Zika virus infection.
be considered to help identify infections early in pregnancy. 
However, adverse outcomes have been associated with infection 
diagnosed in the third trimester (28); therefore testing every 
trimester might also be considered.
Serologic testing is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic 
pregnant women with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure because 
of the potential for prolonged detection of Zika virus IgM, which 
poses challenges in determining whether the infection and therefore 
the risk of congenital Zika virus infection, occurred during the 
current pregnancy. In addition, in areas with ongoing dengue virus 
transmission, a positive Zika virus IgM result might occur because 
of serologic cross-reactivity. Despite these limitations, which should 
be discussed as part of pretest counseling, patients may still choose 
to receive Zika virus IgM testing (Table 1).
Although a recommendation to consider Zika virus IgM 
testing as part of preconception counseling to establish 
baseline IgM results for nonpregnant women with ongoing 
possible Zika virus exposure was previously issued, Zika virus 
IgM is no longer routinely recommended for asymptomatic 
pregnant women with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure, 
and therefore baseline preconception testing is not warranted. 
Zika virus testing is not recommended to determine timing 
of conception or pregnancy for couples in which one or both 
partners has had possible Zika virus exposure. Zika virus testing 
for this purpose is of uncertain value because: 1) IgM testing 
has diagnostic limitations; 2) Zika virus NAT testing of serum 
does not reflect persistence in other body fluids (e.g., semen). 
The current understanding of Zika virus shedding in genital 
secretions is limited (30); testing semen and vaginal fluids for 
Zika virus is not currently available outside research settings.
Asymptomatic pregnant women with recent possible 
Zika virus exposure (i.e., through travel or sex) but with-
out ongoing possible exposure. For asymptomatic pregnant 
women with recent possible Zika virus exposure (i.e., through 
travel or sex), but without ongoing possible exposure, testing for 
Zika virus infection is not routinely recommended. However, 
testing should be considered using a shared decision-making 
model, one in which patients and providers work together to 
make decisions about testing and care plans based on patient 
preferences and values, clinical judgment, a balanced assess-
ment of risks and expected outcomes, and the jurisdiction’s 
recommendations. Health care providers should consider 
potential exposure risk factors when deciding whether to advise 
testing. These include symptoms, type and length of possible 
exposure, Zika virus transmission trends at location of possible 
exposure and the use of prevention measures (e.g., insect repel-
lent, appropriate clothing, and condom use). Jurisdictional 
recommendations may take into account the epidemiology of 
Zika virus transmission and other epidemiologic considerations 
(e.g., seasonality and mosquito surveillance and control factors) 
in areas with risk for Zika virus transmission and, therefore, 
might include a routine recommendation to test asymptomatic 
pregnant women either for clinical care or as part of Zika virus 
infection surveillance.
Although preliminary data indicate that the risk for Zika virus–
associated birth defects does not differ by maternal symptom 
status, testing is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic 
pregnant women with recent possible Zika virus exposure but 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29 
789
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
without ongoing possible exposure to address the increased prob-
ability of false positive results in the setting of the declining preva-
lence of Zika virus disease (28,29). The limitations of currently 
available tests and the lack of a vaccine or an effective therapy to 
prevent congenital infection or mitigate sequelae of Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy, or in the neonate, underscore the 
importance of shared patient-provider decision-making. The 
decision about Zika virus testing should take into account the 
patient’s unique circumstances and should allow pregnant women 
to make an informed decision about the utility of testing. If test-
ing is conducted for asymptomatic pregnant women with recent 
possible Zika virus exposure, but without ongoing possible exposure, 
the testing algorithm for symptomatic pregnant women with 
possible Zika virus exposure (Figure 1) should be used, applying 
time frames from last possible Zika virus exposure.
Pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure who 
have a fetus with prenatal ultrasound findings consistent 
with congenital Zika virus syndrome. Maternal Zika virus 
NAT and IgM testing should be performed. Consideration 
of amniocentesis should be individualized because data about 
its usefulness in diagnosing congenital Zika virus infection are 
limited. If amniocentesis is performed as part of clinical care, 
NAT testing should be performed on amniocentesis specimens. 
A recent study reported that detection of Zika virus RNA in 
amniocentesis specimens from pregnancies with a fetus with Zika 
virus–associated birth defects indicate fetal infection. However, 
data also suggested that detection of Zika virus RNA in amniotic 
fluid could be transient and that Zika virus RNA might not 
always be detectable in amniotic fluid after fetal infection (13).
Updated Interim Guidance for Prenatal 
Management of Pregnant Women with Laboratory 
Evidence of Possible Zika Virus Infection†††
For pregnant women with laboratory evidence of possible 
Zika virus infection, serial fetal ultrasounds (every 3–4 weeks) 
should be considered to assess fetal anatomy, particularly fetal 
neuroanatomy, and to monitor growth. A study of 17 pregnan-
cies in symptomatic women with laboratory-confirmed Zika 
virus infection and adverse fetal outcomes in Colombia and a 
summary of eight published studies of 37 pregnancies reported a 
median of 18 weeks from symptom onset to prenatal diagnosis of 
microcephaly (31). This finding is consistent with other reports 
about prenatal diagnosis of microcephaly. Among 37 pregnancies 
with confirmed or suspected Zika virus infection, a median of 
21 weeks (range = 3–29 weeks) from maternal symptom onset 
to prenatal diagnosis of microcephaly was observed (31). Given 
the length of time for the detection of prenatal microcephaly, 
prenatal ultrasounds should carefully evaluate the fetal anatomy, 
particularly the neuroanatomy, to identify brain or structural 
abnormalities that might occur before microcephaly.
Decisions about performing amniocentesis should be indi-
vidualized because there is a paucity of data regarding the 
usefulness of amniocentesis in diagnosing congenital Zika virus 
infection. The presence of Zika virus RNA in the amniotic fluid 
might indicate fetal infection; however, a negative result does 
not exclude congenital Zika virus infection. The optimal time 
to perform amniocentesis to diagnose congenital Zika virus 
infection is not known; health care providers should discuss 
the risks and benefits of amniocentesis with their patients.
This guidance also applies to pregnant women with labora-
tory evidence of presumptive Zika virus or flavivirus infection; 
timing of infection cannot be determined (Table 1).
Updated Interim Guidance for the Evaluation of 
Placental and Fetal Tissue Specimens for Zika 
Virus Infection
Detection of Zika virus RNA has been reported in placen-
tal tissues and in fetal and infant brain tissue 15–210 days 
(mean = 81 days) and 119–238 days (mean = 163 days), 
respectively, from maternal symptom onset (32). Among 546 
live births with travel-associated possible maternal Zika virus 
exposure in the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia 
in 2016 for which placental specimens were submitted to 
CDC, 60 (11%) were positive for Zika virus RNA (33). 
When restricted to live births without a laboratory-confirmed 
Zika virus infection based on maternal or infant Zika virus 
testing of serum or urine, 47 of 482 (10%) were positive for 
Zika virus RNA (33). Although, the proportion of live births 
with positive placental reverse-transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) results was relatively low, these results 
provided definitive evidence of maternal Zika virus infection 
during that pregnancy. As with serologic and NAT testing of 
serum and urine, the proportion of pregnancies with a posi-
tive Zika virus RT-PCR on tissue specimens is expected to 
decrease in the setting of declining prevalence of Zika virus 
disease in the Americas.
 ††† Laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy is 
defined as 1) Zika virus infection detected by a Zika virus RNA nucleic acid 
test (NAT) on any maternal, placental, or fetal specimen (referred to as 
NAT-confirmed) or 2) diagnosis of Zika virus infection, timing of infection 
cannot be determined or unspecified flavivirus infection, timing of infection 
cannot be determined by serologic tests on a maternal specimen (i.e., positive/
equivocal Zika virus immunoglobulin M [IgM] and Zika virus plaque 
reduction neutralization test [PRNT] titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus 
PRNT value; or negative Zika virus IgM, and positive or equivocal dengue 
virus IgM, and Zika virus PRNT titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT 
titer). The use of PRNT for confirmation of Zika virus infection, including 
in pregnant women and infants, is not routinely recommended in Puerto 
Rico (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/lab-guidance.html).
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
790 
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Testing placental tissue specimens from pregnancies with 
possible Zika virus exposure that result in live births can be 
considered for diagnostic purposes in certain scenarios. It may 
be considered for symptomatic pregnant women and women 
with infants with possible Zika virus–associated birth defects, 
without a definitive diagnosis of laboratory-confirmed Zika 
virus infection during pregnancy (Table 2). Similar to the 
updated testing recommendations for asymptomatic pregnant 
women who have recent possible Zika virus exposure but 
without ongoing possible exposure, testing of placental tissues 
is not routinely recommended; however, it should be consid-
ered for women who have a fetus or infant with possible Zika 
virus–associated birth defects.
Finally, testing of placental and fetal tissues may be con-
sidered in selected scenarios for pregnancies resulting in a 
miscarriage or fetal loss/stillbirth (and testing of autopsy 
tissues in the event of an infant death) to provide insight 
into the potential etiology of the fetal loss or infant death 
(Table 2), which could inform a woman’s future pregnancy 
planning. Additional information is available at https://
www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/test-specimens-tissues.html.
Implications of Updated Interim Guidance for 
Laboratory Testing of Pregnant Women with 
Possible Zika Virus Exposure for the Evaluation 
and Care of Infants with Possible Congenital Zika 
Virus Exposure
Interim guidance for the evaluation of infants with con-
genital Zika virus exposure has been previously published; 
infants who meet one or more of the published criteria for 
testing for congenital Zika virus infection should be tested 
and evaluated in accordance with the updated CDC interim 
guidance for the evaluation and management of infants with 
possible Zika virus infection (34). However, in light of the 
updated recommendations that will likely reduce routine 
Zika virus testing of asymptomatic pregnant women with 
recent possible Zika virus exposure but without ongoing pos-
sible exposure, it is critical that pediatric health care providers 
inquire about possible maternal and congenital Zika virus 
exposure for every newborn. Infants born to mothers with 
possible Zika virus exposure during pregnancy but who did 
not receive testing, including asymptomatic pregnant women 
with recent possible Zika virus exposure but without ongoing 
possible exposure, should receive a comprehensive physical 
examination, including standardized measurement of head 
circumference and newborn hearing screen, as part of routine 
pediatric care. In addition, based on the level of possible Zika 
virus exposure (e.g., duration and type of exposure, use of 
prevention measures, intensity of Zika virus transmission at 
the location of travel), the provider should consider whether 
further evaluation of the newborn for possible congenital Zika 
virus infection is warranted, in which case, a head ultrasound, 
and ophthalmologic assessment should be considered. Based 
on results of the evaluation, testing of the infant for Zika virus 
infection could be considered.
This guidance also applies to infants born to mothers 
with negative maternal testing in the setting of ongoing pos-
sible Zika virus exposure or a possible Zika virus exposure 
that occurred more than 12 weeks before maternal testing 
(https://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/infants-children/
evaluation-testing.html). Recommendations for outpatient 
management during the first 12 months of life include 
monitoring of head circumference and development and 
are provided in the updated CDC interim guidance for the 
evaluation and management of infants with possible Zika 
virus infection (34).
Prevention of Zika Virus Infection
CDC recommends that pregnant women avoid travel to 
any area with risk for Zika virus transmission. To prevent 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy, all pregnant women 
and their partners should receive counseling on prevention 
measures including strategies to prevent mosquito bites and 
sexual transmission of Zika virus (35). If pregnant women 
must travel, CDC recommends strict adherence to strategies 
to prevent mosquito bites and sexual transmission. Pregnant 
women living in areas with risk for Zika virus transmission 
should also follow these strategies. Couples wishing to conceive 
should receive preconception counseling about how to minimize 
risks for Zika virus infection (30). Other persons at risk for Zika 
virus exposure should receive information on travel and strategies 
to prevent mosquito bites and sexual transmission.§§§
 
§§§ https://www.cdc.gov/zika/prevention/index.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29 
791
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Interim guidance for Zika virus testing* of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded placental, fetal, or infant autopsy tissues† for completed 
pregnancies with possible Zika virus exposure§ during pregnancy¶ — United States (including U.S. territories), July 2017
Pregnancy outcome
Maternal Zika virus test results on nontissue clinical specimens (e.g., serum, urine)
Acute Zika virus 
infection**
Zika virus infection; 
timing of infection 
cannot be 
determined††
Flavivirus infection; 
timing of infection 
cannot be determined
>12 weeks after symptom onset or 
exposure,§§ with either negative 
maternal Zika virus IgM, or no 
maternal testing conducted
No evidence of 
Zika virus 
infection¶¶
Testing of placental tissues
Live birth, possible Zika 
virus–associated birth 
defects***
Not indicated†††
Should be considered to aid in maternal diagnosis
Not indicated†††
Live birth, no obvious Zika 
virus–associated birth 
defects at birth
Not indicated
May be considered to aid in maternal diagnosis on a case-by-case and 
jurisdictional basis. Not routinely recommended for asymptomatic women 
with possible Zika virus exposure but without ongoing possible exposure
Not indicated
Testing of placental and fetal tissues
Pregnancy loss, possible Zika 
virus–associated birth 
defects
May be considered to 
aid in fetal diagnosis
May be considered to aid in fetal and maternal diagnosis
Not indicated†††
Pregnancy loss, no obvious 
Zika virus–associated birth 
defects
May be considered to 
aid in fetal diagnosis
May be considered to aid in fetal and maternal diagnosis
Not indicated†††
Testing of placental and infant autopsy tissues
Infant death following live 
birth
Should be considered 
to aid in infant 
diagnosis
Should be considered to aid in infant and maternal diagnosis
Not indicated†††
Abbreviations: IHC = immunohistochemistry; NAT = nucleic acid test; RT-PCR = reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction.
 
* Zika virus testing on formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissue specimens is conducted at CDC’s Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch (IDPB) and includes Zika 
virus RT-PCR on placental and fetal/infant tissues. Zika virus IHC may be performed on placental tissues into the second trimester, fetal tissues from any gestational 
age, and infant autopsy tissues.
 
† Placental tissues include placental disc, umbilical cord, and fetal membranes. Zika virus RNA can be focal within placental tissues, and testing of three sections 
of placenta, one section of umbilical cord, and one section of fetal membrane is recommended (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/test-specimens-tissues.
html). For pregnancy losses and infant deaths, submission of placental tissues in addition to fetal or infant autopsy tissues, if available, is preferred, but if not 
available will not preclude placental testing.
 
§ Possible Zika virus exposure includes travel to or residence in an area with risk for Zika virus transmission (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/index.html) during 
pregnancy or the periconceptional period (8 weeks before conception [6 weeks before the last menstrual period]), or sex without a condom, during pregnancy 
or the periconceptional period, with a partner who traveled to, or resides in an area with risk for Zika virus transmission.
 
¶ Zika virus testing is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic pregnant women with recent possible Zika virus exposure but without ongoing exposure and 
who have a fetus or infant without Zika virus–associated birth defects.
 ** In the event of a confirmed maternal acute Zika virus infection or confirmed congenital Zika virus infection in the infant (e.g., a positive NAT), placental testing 
from live births is not indicated. Currently, placental testing does not routinely provide additional diagnostic information in the setting of a maternal or infant 
diagnosis of acute or congenital Zika virus infection, respectively.
 
†† For women with no possible Zika virus exposure before the current pregnancy, a positive IgM result likely represents acute Zika virus infection, and placental 
testing is not indicated.
 
§§ All or part of possible maternal Zika virus exposure, or symptom onset occurred >12 weeks before maternal serum specimen was collected.
 
¶¶ Includes pregnant women with negative Zika virus NAT and negative Zika virus IgM ≤12 weeks after symptom onset or exposure.
 *** Possible Zika virus–associated birth defects that meet the CDC surveillance case definition include the following: brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly, intracranial 
calcifications, ventriculomegaly, neural tube defects and other early brain malformations, eye abnormalities, or other consequences of central nervous system 
dysfunction including arthrogryposis (joint contractures), congenital hip dysplasia, and congenital deafness (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/pregnancy-outcomes.
html). In all cases, infants or fetuses with possible Zika virus–associated birth defects should also be evaluated for other etiologies of congenital anomalies.
 ††† Testing may be considered on a case-by-case basis, consult CDC for case-specific questions at https://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/test-specimens-tissues.html.
Acknowledgments
Abbey M. Jones, MPH, Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; Alexis Burakoff, MD, Epidemic Intelligence 
Service, CDC; Alys Adamski, PhD, Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Amanda Burrage, MD, 
Division of Global HIV And TB, National Center for Global 
Health, CDC; Anna C. Fulton, MPH, Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Brooke Miers, MS, Division of 
High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for 
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; Cathy E. Young, 
Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, CDC; Elizabeth L. Simon, MPH, Division of 
Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth 
Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Jasmine Jacobs-
Wingo, MPH, Division of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public 
Health Preparedness and Response, CDC; Jazmyn Moore, MPH, 
Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National 
Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 
Julu Bhatnagar, PhD, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases, CDC; Karnesha Slaughter, MPH, Division of Congenital 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
792 
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
And Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Kelley VanMaldeghem, 
MPH, Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, 
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, 
CDC; Kimberly Newsome, MPH, Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Konrad E. Hayashi, MD, 
Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
Laura Adams, DVM, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
Marion E. Rice, MPH, Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; Madelyn Baez-Santiago, PhD, Division of 
Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth 
Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Meghan Raycraft, 
MPH, Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, 
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, 
CDC; Megan R. Reynolds, MPH, Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Melissa A. Morrison, MPH, 
Division of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public Health 
Preparedness and Response, CDC; Myles Johnson, MPH, Division 
of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National Center on 
Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Rebecca Free, 
MD, Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health 
Preparedness and Response, CDC; Regina M. Simeone, MPH, 
Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National 
Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 
Shannon Fleck-Derderian, MPH, Office of the Director, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
Sumaiya Khan, MPH, Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; Tonya R. Williams, PhD, Division of Human 
Development and Disability, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Zika Virus Response Team, CDC.
Corresponding author: Titilope Oduyebo, Zikamch@cdc.gov; 770-488-7100.
References
 1. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Genetic and serologic properties 
of Zika virus associated with an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 
2007. Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14:1232–9. https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid1408.080287
 2. Pan American Health Organization. Regional Zika epidemiological 
update (Americas) May 25, 2017. Washington, DC: Pan American Health 
Organization. http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_conten
t&view=article&id=11599&Itemid=41691&lang=en
 3. Hancock WT, Soeters HM, Hills SL, et al. Establishing a timeline 
to discontinue routine testing of asymptomatic pregnant women for 
Zika virus infection—American Samoa, 2016–2017. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:299–301. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6611a5
 4. World Health Organization. Zika virus country classification scheme: 
interim guidance. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2017. 
http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/zika/classification/en/
 5. Rabe IB, Staples JE, Villanueva J, et al.; MTS. MTS. Interim guidance 
for interpretation of Zika virus antibody test results. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:543–6. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6521e1
 6. Woods CR. False-positive results for immunoglobulin M serologic results: 
explanations and examples. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 2013;2:87–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/pis133
 7. Musso D, Nhan T, Robin E, et al. Potential for Zika virus 
transmission through blood transfusion demonstrated during an 
outbreak in French Polynesia, November 2013 to February 2014. 
Euro Surveill 2014;19:20761. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.
ES2014.19.14.20761
 8. Paz-Bailey G, Rosenberg ES, Doyle K, et al. Persistence of Zika virus in 
body fluids —preliminary report. N Engl J Med 2017;NEJMoa1613108. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1613108
 9. Bocanegra C, Sulleiro E, Soriano-Arandes A, et al. Zika virus infection 
in pregnant women in Barcelona, Spain. Clin Microbiol Infect 
2016;22:648–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2016.03.025
 
10. Driggers RW, Ho CY, Korhonen EM, et al. Zika virus infection with 
prolonged maternal viremia and fetal brain abnormalities. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:2142–51. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1601824
 
11. Meaney-Delman D, Oduyebo T, Polen KN, et al.; U.S. Zika Pregnancy 
Registry Prolonged Viremia Working Group. Prolonged detection of 
Zika virus RNA in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 2016;128:724–30. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000001625
 
12. Pacheco O, Beltrán M, Nelson CA, et al. Zika Virus disease in 
Colombia—preliminary report. N Engl J Med 2016;NEJMoa1604037. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1604037
 
13. Schaub B, Vouga M, Najioullah F, et al. Analysis of blood from Zika 
virus-infected fetuses: a prospective case series. Lancet Infect Dis 
2017;17:520–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30102-0
 
14. St George K, Sohi IS, Dufort EM, et al. Zika virus testing considerations: 
lessons learned from the first 80 real-time reverse transcription-
PCR-positive cases diagnosed in New York State. J Clin Microbiol 
2017;55:535–44. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01232-16
 
15. Suy A, Sulleiro E, Rodó C, et al. Prolonged Zika virus viremia during 
pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2016;375:2611–3. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMc1607580
 
16. Bingham AM, Cone M, Mock V, et al. Comparison of test results for 
Zika virus RNA in urine, serum, and saliva specimens from persons 
with travel-associated Zika virus disease—Florida, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:475–8. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6518e2
 
17. Roehrig JT, Nash D, Maldin B, et al. Persistence of virus-reactive serum 
immunoglobulin m antibody in confirmed West Nile virus encephalitis 
cases. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:376–9. https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid0903.020531
 
18. CDC. Prolonged IgM antibody response in people infected with Zika 
virus: implications for interpreting serologic testing results for pregnant 
women. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2017.
 
19. Poland JD, Calisher CH, Monath TP, Downs WG, Murphy K. 
Persistence of neutralizing antibody 30-35 years after immunization with 
17D yellow fever vaccine. Bull World Health Organ 1981;59:895–900.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 28, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 29 
793
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
20. Okuno Y, Fukunaga T, Tadano M, et al. Serological studies on volunteers 
inoculated experimentally with a dengue virus strain in 1943. Biken J 
1983;26:161–3.
 
21. Calisher CH, Karabatsos N, Dalrymple JM, et al. Antigenic relationships 
between flaviviruses as determined by cross-neutralization tests 
with polyclonal antisera. J Gen Virol 1989;70:37–43. https://doi.
org/10.1099/0022-1317-70-1-37
 
22. Halstead SB, Rojanasuphot S, Sangkawibha N. Original antigenic sin in 
dengue. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1983;32:154–6. https://doi.org/10.4269/
ajtmh.1983.32.154
 
23. Johnson BW, Kosoy O, Martin DA, et al. West Nile virus infection and 
serologic response among persons previously vaccinated against yellow 
fever and Japanese encephalitis viruses. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 
2005;5:137–45. https://doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2005.5.137
 
24. Ikejezie J, Shapiro CN, Kim J, et al. Zika virus transmission—Region 
of the Americas, May 15, 2015–December 15, 2016.. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:329–34. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6612a4
 
25. Massad E, Behrens BC, Coutinho FA, Behrens RH. Cost risk 
benefit analysis to support chemoprophylaxis policy for travellers 
to malaria endemic countries. Malar J 2011;10:130. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1475-2875-10-130
 
26. Pinsent A, Read JM, Griffin JT, et al. Risk factors for UK 
Plasmodium falciparum cases. Malar J 2014;13:298. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1475-2875-13-298
 
27. Williamson PC, Linnen JM, Kessler DA, et al. First cases of Zika virus-
infected US blood donors outside states with areas of active transmission. 
Transfusion 2017;57:770–8. https://doi.org/10.1111/trf.14041
 
28. Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Rice ME, Galang RR, et al.; Zika Pregnancy 
and Infant Registries Working Group. Pregnancy outcomes after 
maternal Zika virus infection during pregnancy—U.S. territories, 
January 1, 2016–April 25, 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2017;66:615–21. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6623e1
 
29. Reynolds MR, Jones AM, Petersen EE, et al.; U.S. Zika Pregnancy 
Registry Collaboration. Vital signs: update on Zika virus-associated 
birth defects and evaluation of all U.S. infants with congenital Zika 
virus exposure—U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:366–73. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6613e1
 
30. Petersen EE, Meaney-Delman D, Neblett-Fanfair R, et al. Update: 
interim guidance for preconception counseling and prevention of 
sexual transmission of Zika virus for persons with possible Zika virus 
exposure—United States, September 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2016;65:1077–81. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6539e1
 
31. Parra-Saavedra M, Reefhuis J, Piraquive JP
, et al. Serial head and 
brain imaging of 17 fetuses with confirmed Zika virus infection in 
Colombia, South America. Obstet Gynecol 2017;130:207–12. https://
doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002105
 
32. Bhatnagar J, Rabeneck DB, Martines RB, et al. Zika virus RNA 
replication and persistence in brain and placental tissue. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2017;23:405–14. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2303.161499
 
33. Reagan-Steiner S, Simeone R, Simon E, et al.; Zika Virus Response 
Epidemiology and Surveillance Task Force Pathology Team. Evaluation 
of placental and fetal tissue specimens for Zika virus infection—50 states 
and District of Columbia, January–December, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:636–43. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6624a3
 
34. Russell K, Oliver SE, Lewis L, et al.; Contributors. Contributors. 
Update: interim guidance for the evaluation and management of infants 
with possible congenital Zika virus infection—United States, August 
2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:870–8. https://doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6533e2
 
35. Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: interim guidance 
for health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika 
virus exposure—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2016;65:739–44. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1
