 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29 
739
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On July 25, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
CDC has updated its interim guidance for U.S. health care 
providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure, to include the emerging data indicating that Zika virus 
RNA can be detected for prolonged periods in some pregnant 
women. To increase the proportion of pregnant women with 
Zika virus infection who receive a definitive diagnosis, CDC rec-
ommends expanding real-time reverse transcription–polymerase 
chain reaction (rRT-PCR) testing. Possible exposures to Zika 
virus include travel to or residence in an area with active Zika 
virus transmission, or sex* with a partner who has traveled to 
or resides in an area with active Zika virus transmission without 
using condoms or other barrier methods to prevent infection.† 
Testing recommendations for pregnant women with possible 
Zika virus exposure who report clinical illness consistent with 
Zika virus disease§ (symptomatic pregnant women) are the 
same, regardless of their level of exposure (i.e., women with 
ongoing risk for possible exposure, including residence in or 
frequent travel to an area with active Zika virus transmission, as 
well as women living in areas without Zika virus transmission 
who travel to an area with active Zika virus transmission, or 
have unprotected sex with a partner who traveled to or resides 
in an area with active Zika virus transmission). Symptomatic 
pregnant women who are evaluated <2 weeks after symptom 
onset should receive serum and urine Zika virus rRT-PCR 
testing. Symptomatic pregnant women who are evaluated 
2–12 weeks after symptom onset should first receive a Zika virus 
immunoglobulin (IgM) antibody test; if the IgM antibody test 
result is positive or equivocal, serum and urine rRT-PCR testing 
should be performed. Testing recommendations for pregnant 
women with possible Zika virus exposure who do not report 
clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease (asymptomatic 
pregnant women) differ based on the circumstances of possible 
exposure. For asymptomatic pregnant women who live in areas 
without active Zika virus transmission and who are evaluated 
<2 weeks after last possible exposure, rRT-PCR testing should 
be performed. If the rRT-PCR result is negative, a Zika virus 
IgM antibody test should be performed 2–12 weeks after the 
exposure. Asymptomatic pregnant women who do not live in 
an area with active Zika virus transmission, who are first evalu-
ated 2–12 weeks after their last possible exposure should first 
receive a Zika virus IgM antibody test; if the IgM antibody test 
result is positive or equivocal, serum and urine rRT-PCR should 
be performed. Asymptomatic pregnant women with ongoing 
risk for exposure to Zika virus should receive Zika virus IgM 
antibody testing as part of routine obstetric care during the first 
and second trimesters; immediate rRT-PCR testing should be 
performed when IgM antibody test results are positive or equivo-
cal. This guidance also provides updated recommendations for 
the clinical management of pregnant women with confirmed 
or possible Zika virus infection. These recommendations will 
be updated when additional data become available.
Introduction
Zika virus continues to spread worldwide, and as of July 21, 
2016, 50 countries and territories reported active Zika virus 
transmission (locations with mosquitoes transmitting Zika 
virus to persons in the area).¶ Although most persons with Zika 
virus infection are asymptomatic or have mild clinical disease, 
infection during pregnancy can cause congenital microcephaly 
and other brain defects (1). Zika virus has also been linked to 
other adverse pregnancy outcomes, including miscarriage and 
stillbirth (1,2). The U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry (USZPR)** 
and the Puerto Rico Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System 
(ZAPPS)†† were established in collaboration with state, tribal, 
local, and territorial health departments to monitor pregnant 
women with confirmed or possible Zika virus infection to deter-
mine the risk for Zika virus infection during pregnancy and the 
spectrum of conditions associated with congenital Zika virus 
infection (3). As of July 14, 2016, a total of 400 women in the 
50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, and 378 women in 
Update: Interim Guidance for Health Care Providers Caring for Pregnant 
Women with Possible Zika Virus Exposure — United States, July 2016
Titilope Oduyebo, MD1; Irogue Igbinosa, MD2; Emily E. Petersen, MD1; Kara N.D. Polen, MPH2; Satish K. Pillai, MD3; Elizabeth C. Ailes, PhD2;  
Julie M. Villanueva, PhD3; Kim Newsome, MPH2; Marc Fischer, MD4; Priya M. Gupta, MPH5; Ann M. Powers, PhD4; Margaret Lampe, MPH6;  
Susan Hills, MBBS4; Kathryn E. Arnold, MD2; Laura E. Rose, MTS3; Carrie K. Shapiro-Mendoza, PhD1; Charles B. Beard, PhD4;  
Jorge L. Muñoz, PhD4; Carol Y. Rao, ScD7; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD8; Denise J. Jamieson, MD1; Margaret A. Honein, PhD2
* Sex is specifically defined as vaginal sex (penis-to-vagina sex), anal sex (penis-
to-anus sex), oral sex (mouth-to-penis sex or mouth-to-vagina sex), and the 
sharing of sex toys.
† Barrier methods include male or female condoms for vaginal or anal sex, male 
condoms for oral sex (mouth-to-penis), and male condoms cut to create a flat 
barrier or dental dams for oral sex (mouth-to-vagina).
§ Zika virus disease is defined as having at least one of the following signs or 
symptoms: acute onset of fever, rash, arthralgia, conjunctivitis, and laboratory 
confirmation of Zika virus infection.
 ¶ http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/active-countries.html.
 
** http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/registry.html.
 
†† http://www.cdc.gov/zika/public-health-partners/zapss.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
740 
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
all U.S. territories (aggregated territories’ data from the USZPR 
and ZAPSS) were determined to have laboratory evidence of 
confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy.§§
Data from the USZPR and published case reports indicate 
that Zika virus RNA can persist in serum of some pregnant 
women longer than had been previously reported; the longest 
documented duration of Zika virus RNA detection in serum 
is 10 weeks after symptom onset (4–7). In addition, recent 
data indicate that Zika virus RNA might be detected in the 
serum or urine of some asymptomatic pregnant women (7). 
The frequency of this finding is unknown, but the detection 
of Zika virus RNA in serum or urine provides a definitive 
diagnosis of Zika virus infection. Preliminary data suggest 
that plaque reduction neutralization testing (PRNT) might 
not discriminate between Zika virus and other flavivirus infec-
tions, particularly in persons with previous flavivirus exposure 
(8), which complicates interpretation of serologic testing (IgM 
antibody test and PRNT). Given these challenges, expanded 
rRT-PCR testing might provide a definitive diagnosis for more 
pregnant women who are infected with Zika virus.
CDC has revised its interim guidance for U.S. health care 
providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure. The revised testing recommendations extend the 
timeframe for rRT-PCR testing of serum and include rRT-PCR 
testing for some asymptomatic pregnant women. CDC con-
tinues to evaluate all available evidence and will update recom-
mendations as new information becomes available.
Updated Recommendations for Evaluating and 
Testing of Pregnant Women with Possible Zika 
Virus Exposure
All pregnant women in the United States and U.S. territories 
should be assessed for possible Zika virus exposure at each 
prenatal care visit. CDC recommends that pregnant women 
not travel to an area with active Zika virus transmission (9,10). 
Pregnant women who must travel to one of these areas should 
strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during the trip.¶¶ 
In addition, it is recommended that pregnant women with a 
sex partner who has traveled to or lives in an area with active 
Zika virus transmission use condoms or other barrier methods 
to prevent infection or abstain from sex for the duration of 
the pregnancy (11).
Symptomatic pregnant women. Pregnant women who 
report signs or symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease 
(acute onset of fever, rash, arthralgia, conjunctivitis) should 
be tested for Zika virus infection (Figure). The testing recom-
mendations for symptomatic pregnant women are the same 
regardless of the circumstances of possible exposure; however, 
the type of testing recommended varies depending on the time 
of evaluation relative to symptom onset. Testing of serum and 
urine by rRT-PCR is recommended for pregnant women who 
seek care <2 weeks after symptom onset. This recommendation 
extends the previous recommendation for testing of serum 
from <1 week after symptom onset to <2 weeks (Figure). 
A positive rRT-PCR result confirms the diagnosis of recent 
maternal Zika virus infection. Symptomatic pregnant women 
with negative rRT-PCR results should receive both Zika virus 
IgM and dengue virus IgM antibody testing. If Zika virus 
rRT-PCR testing is requested from laboratories that do not 
have IgM antibody testing capacity or a process to forward 
specimens to another testing laboratory, storing of additional 
serum samples is recommended for IgM antibody testing 
in the event of a negative rRT-PCR result (12). If either the 
Zika virus or dengue virus IgM antibody test yields positive 
or equivocal results, PRNT should be performed on the same 
IgM-tested sample or a subsequently collected sample to rule 
out false-positive results (8).
Symptomatic pregnant women who seek care 2–12 weeks 
after symptom onset should first receive Zika virus and dengue 
virus IgM antibody testing (Figure). If the Zika virus IgM 
antibody testing yields positive or equivocal results, reflex rRT-
PCR testing should be automatically performed on the same 
serum sample to determine whether Zika virus RNA is present. 
A positive rRT-PCR result confirms the diagnosis of recent 
maternal Zika virus infection. However, if the rRT-PCR result 
is negative, a positive or equivocal Zika virus IgM antibody 
test result should be followed by PRNT. Positive or equivocal 
dengue IgM antibody test results with a negative Zika virus 
IgM antibody test result should also be confirmed by PRNT. 
Interpretation of serologic results has been described (8).
Asymptomatic pregnant women. Testing recommenda-
tions for asymptomatic pregnant women with possible Zika 
virus exposure differ based on the circumstances of possible 
exposure (i.e., ongoing versus limited exposure) and the elapsed 
interval since the last possible Zika virus exposure (Figure). 
Asymptomatic pregnant women living in areas without active 
Zika virus transmission who are evaluated <2 weeks after pos-
sible Zika virus exposure should be offered serum and urine 
rRT-PCR testing (Figure). A positive rRT-PCR result confirms 
the diagnosis of recent maternal Zika virus infection. However, 
because viral RNA in serum and urine declines over time and 
depends on multiple factors, asymptomatic pregnant women 
with a negative rRT-PCR result require additional testing to 
exclude infection. These women should return 2–12 weeks 
after possible Zika virus exposure for Zika virus IgM antibody 
testing. A positive or equivocal IgM antibody test result should 
be confirmed by PRNT.
 
§§ https://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/pregwomen-uscases.html.
 
¶¶ http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/avoid-bug-bites. 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29 
741
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE. Updated interim guidance: testing and interpretation recommendations*,†,§,¶  for a pregnant woman with possible exposure to Zika 
virus** — United States (including U.S. territories)  
A
B
Pregnant woman
Assess for possible Zika virus exposure 
Evaluate for signs and symptoms of Zika virus disease
• Symptomatic : <2 weeks after symptom onset, or
• Asymptomatic and NOT living in an area with active 
  Zika virus transmission: <2 weeks after possible exposure
• Symptomatic: 2–12 weeks after symptom onset, or
• Asymptomatic and NOT living in an area with active Zika virus 
  transmission: 2–12 weeks after possible exposure, or
• Asymptomatic and living in an area with active Zika virus 
  transmission: frst and second trimester
Zika virus IgM and dengue 
virus IgM (serum)
Zika virus IgM 
and dengue virus 
IgM negative: 
No recent Zika 
virus infection
Zika virus IgM positive or 
equivocal and  any result 
on dengue virus IgM: 
Presumptive recent Zika 
virus or favivirus infection
Dengue virus IgM 
positive or equivocal 
and Zika virus IgM 
negative: Presumptive 
dengue virus infection
Refex Zika virus rRT-PCR 
(serum and urine)
Negative Zika 
virus rRT-PCR 
(serum)
Positive Zika virus 
rRT-PCR on serum: 
Recent Zika virus 
infection
Zika virus PRNT <10: 
No recent evidence of 
Zika virus infection
Zika virus PRNT ≥10 and dengue virus 
PRNT ≥10: Recent favivirus infection, 
specifc virus cannot be identifed
PRNT
Zika virus IgM or dengue virus IgM 
positive or equivocal: Presumptive 
recent Zika virus or dengue virus or  
favivirus infection
Zika virus PRNT ≥10 and 
dengue virus PRNT <10: 
Recent Zika virus infection
Zika virus IgM and dengue 
virus IgM negative: No recent 
Zika virus infection
• Symptomatic: Zika virus IgM and 
  dengue virus IgM
• Asymptomatic and NOT living in an
  area with active Zika virus 
  transmission: Zika virus IgM 
  2–12 weeks after possible exposure 
Negative Zika virus rRT-PCR 
(serum and urine)
Positive Zika virus rRT-PCR 
(serum or urine): Recent 
Zika virus infection
Zika virus rRT-PCR 
(serum and urine)
Abbreviations: IgM = immunoglobulin M; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test; rRT-PCR = real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction.
 * A pregnant woman is considered symptomatic if one or more signs or symptoms (acute onset of fever, rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis) consistent with Zika virus 
disease is reported. A pregnant woman is considered asymptomatic if these symptoms are not reported.
 † Testing includes Zika virus rRT-PCR on serum and urine samples, Zika virus and dengue virus IgM, and PRNT on serum samples. PRNT results that indicate recent 
flavivirus infection should be interpreted in the context of the currently circulating flaviviruses. Refer to the laboratory guidance for updated testing recommendations 
(http://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/lab-guidance.html). Because of the overlap of symptoms in areas where other viral illness are endemic, evaluate for possible 
dengue or chikungunya virus infection.
 § Dengue virus IgM antibody testing is recommended only for symptomatic pregnant women.
 ¶ If Zika virus rRT-PCR testing is requested from laboratories without IgM antibody testing capacity or a process to forward specimens to another testing laboratory, 
storing of additional serum samples is recommended for IgM antibody testing in the event of an rRT-PCR negative result.
 ** Possible exposure to Zika virus includes travel to or residence in an area with active Zika virus transmission (http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/), or sex (vaginal 
sex (penis-to-vagina sex), anal sex (penis-to-anus sex), oral sex (mouth-to-penis sex or mouth-to-vagina sex), and the sharing of sex toys) without a barrier method 
to prevent infection (male or female condoms for vaginal or anal sex, male condoms for oral sex (mouth-to-penis), and male condoms cut to create a flat barrier 
or dental dams for oral sex (mouth-to-vagina) with a partner who traveled to, or lives in an area with active Zika virus transmission.  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
742 
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Asymptomatic pregnant women living in an area without 
active Zika virus transmission, who seek care 2–12 weeks after 
possible Zika virus exposure, should be offered Zika virus IgM 
antibody testing (Figure). If the Zika virus IgM antibody test 
yields positive or equivocal results, reflex rRT-PCR testing 
should be performed on the same sample. If the rRT-PCR 
result is negative, PRNT should be performed.
As recommended in previous guidance (9,13), IgM antibody 
testing is recommended as part of routine obstetric care dur-
ing the first and second trimesters for asymptomatic pregnant 
women who have an ongoing risk for Zika virus exposure 
(i.e., residence in or frequent travel to an area with active Zika 
virus transmission) (Figure). Reflex rRT-PCR testing is recom-
mended for women who have a positive or equivocal Zika virus 
IgM antibody test results because rRT-PCR testing provides 
the potential for a definitive diagnosis of Zika virus infection. 
Negative rRT-PCR results after a positive or equivocal Zika 
virus IgM antibody test result should be followed by PRNT. 
The decision to implement testing of asymptomatic pregnant 
women with ongoing risk for Zika virus exposure should be 
made by local health officials based on information about levels 
of Zika virus transmission and laboratory capacity.
Symptomatic and asymptomatic pregnant women who 
seek care >12 weeks after symptom onset or possible Zika 
virus exposure. For symptomatic and asymptomatic preg-
nant women with possible Zika virus exposure who seek care 
>12 weeks after symptom onset or possible exposure, IgM 
antibody testing might be considered. If fetal abnormalities 
are present, rRT-PCR testing should also be performed on 
maternal serum and urine. However, a negative IgM antibody 
test or rRT-PCR result >12 weeks after symptom onset or 
possible exposure does not rule out recent Zika virus infec-
tion because IgM antibody and viral RNA levels decline over 
time. Given the limitations of testing beyond 12 weeks after 
symptom onset or possible exposure, serial fetal ultrasounds 
should be considered.
Updated Recommendations for Prenatal 
Management of Pregnant Women with 
Laboratory Evidence of Confirmed or Possible 
Zika Virus Infection
Laboratory evidence of a confirmed recent Zika virus infec-
tion includes 1) detection of Zika virus or Zika virus RNA or 
antigen in any body fluid or tissue specimen or 2) positive or 
equivocal Zika virus or dengue virus IgM antibody test results 
on serum or cerebrospinal fluid with a positive (≥10) PRNT 
titer for Zika virus together with a negative (<10) PRNT titer 
for dengue virus (8). However, given that serology test results 
can be difficult to interpret, particularly in persons who were 
previously infected with or vaccinated against flaviviruses, and 
because the adverse outcomes caused by Zika virus infection 
during pregnancy are not fully described, pregnant women with 
laboratory evidence of recent flavivirus infection are considered 
to have possible Zika virus infection and should be monitored 
frequently (Table).
Pregnant women with confirmed or possible Zika virus 
infection should be managed in accordance with the updated 
CDC Interim Guidance (Table). In addition, pregnant women 
with presumptive recent Zika virus or flavivirus infection (i.e., 
positive or equivocal Zika virus or dengue virus IgM antibody 
test result that needs to be confirmed by PRNT) should also 
be managed in accordance with this updated guidance (Table) 
until final results are available. Serial fetal ultrasounds (every 
3–4 weeks) should be considered to assess fetal anatomy, par-
ticularly neuroanatomy, and to monitor growth. Ultrasound 
findings that have been associated with congenital Zika virus 
syndrome include microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, 
ventriculomegaly, arthrogryposis, and abnormalities of the 
corpus callosum, cerebrum, cerebellum, and eyes (1,14). 
Consideration of amniocentesis should be individualized, 
because data about its usefulness in diagnosing congenital Zika 
virus infection are limited (13). The presence of Zika virus 
RNA in the amniotic fluid might indicate fetal infection (5,15); 
however, a negative result does not exclude congenital Zika 
virus infection (13). In addition, persistent detection of Zika 
virus RNA in serum has been reported during pregnancy (7). 
The clinical implications of prolonged detection of Zika virus 
RNA in serum are not known; however, repeat rRT-PCR test-
ing has been performed in some cases (5,7).
Updated Recommendations for Postnatal 
Management of Pregnant Women with 
Laboratory Evidence of Confirmed or Possible 
Zika Virus Infection
Infants born to women with laboratory evidence of con-
firmed or possible Zika virus infection should be evaluated 
for congenital Zika virus infection in accordance with CDC 
interim guidance for health care providers caring for infants 
with possible Zika virus infection. (16). Zika virus testing is 
recommended for these infants regardless of the presence or 
absence of phenotypic abnormalities (14). Previous published 
guidance recommended that testing be performed on cord 
blood or infant serum; however, the use of cord blood to diag-
nose other congenital viral infections, such as HIV and syphilis, 
has sometimes yielded inaccurate results (17–20). Maternal 
blood can contaminate cord blood specimens leading to false-
positive results, whereas Wharton’s jelly in the umbilical cord 
can yield false-negative results (19,20). Cord blood samples 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29 
743
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
can also become clotted, which does not allow for appropriate 
serologic testing. Therefore, although collection and testing of 
cord blood for Zika virus testing can be performed, these results 
should be interpreted in conjunction with infant serum results. 
Pathology evaluation of fetal tissue specimens (e.g., placenta 
and umbilical cord)*** is another important diagnostic tool to 
establish the presence of maternal Zika virus infection and can 
provide a definitive diagnosis for pregnant women with Zika 
virus infection whose serology results indicate recent unspeci-
fied flavivirus infection. In addition, pathology findings might 
also be helpful in evaluating pregnant women who seek care 
>12 weeks after symptom onset or possible exposure; Zika 
virus RNA has been reported to persist in tissue specimens 
including placenta and fetal brain (21). A positive rRT-PCR 
or immunohistochemical staining on the placenta indicates 
the presence of maternal infection (21).
Pregnant women with laboratory evidence of confirmed or pos-
sible Zika virus infection who experience a fetal loss or stillbirth 
should be offered pathology testing for Zika virus infection; testing 
includes rRT-PCR and immunohistochemical staining of fixed tis-
sue (21). This testing might provide insight into the etiology of the 
fetal loss, which could inform a woman’s future pregnancy planning. 
Additional information is available at http://www.cdc.gov/zika.
Acknowledgments
Aron J. Hall, Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for 
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; Amy J. Lambert, 
Ronald M. Rosenberg, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
Diane Morof, Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for 
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; Evelyn M. 
Rodriguez, Division of Global HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis, Center 
for Global Health, CDC; Gail Thompson, Toby L. Merlin, 
Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
Heather J. Menzies, Division Of Global Health Protection, Center 
for Global Health, CDC; John R. Sims, Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Angela D. Aina, Karen R. Broder, 
Division Of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for 
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; Rita M. Traxler, 
Division Of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC. 
TABLE. Clinical management of a pregnant woman with suspected Zika virus infection
Interpretation of  
laboratory results*
Prenatal management
Postnatal management
Recent Zika virus infection
Consider serial ultrasounds every 3–4 weeks to assess fetal 
anatomy and growth.† Decisions regarding amniocentesis 
should be individualized for each clinical circumstance.§  
Live births: Cord blood and infant serum should be tested for 
Zika virus by rRT-PCR, and for Zika IgM and dengue virus IgM 
antibodies. If CSF is obtained for other reasons, it can also be 
tested. Zika virus rRT-PCR and IHC staining of umbilical cord 
and placenta are recommended.¶ Fetal losses: Zika virus 
rRT-PCR and IHC staining of fetal tissues is recommended.¶
Recent flavivirus infection; 
specific virus cannot be 
identified
Presumptive recent Zika virus 
infection**
Consider serial ultrasounds every 3–4 weeks to assess fetal 
anatomy and growth.† Amniocentesis might be considered; 
decisions should be individualized for each clinical 
circumstance.  
Live births: Cord blood and infant serum should be tested for 
Zika virus by rRT-PCR, and for Zika virus IgM and dengue 
virus IgM antibodies. If CSF is obtained for other reasons, it 
can also be tested. Zika virus rRT-PCR and IHC staining of 
umbilical cord and placenta should be considered.¶ Fetal 
losses: Zika virus rRT-PCR and IHC staining of fetal tissues 
should be considered.¶
Presumptive recent flavivirus 
infection**
Recent dengue virus infection Clinical management in accordance with existing guidelines.††
No evidence of Zika virus or 
dengue virus infection
Prenatal ultrasound to evaluate for fetal abnormalities consistent with congenital Zika virus syndrome.† Fetal abnormalities present: 
repeat Zika virus rRT-PCR and IgM test; base clinical management on corresponding laboratory results. Fetal abnormalities absent: 
base obstetric care on the ongoing risk for Zika virus exposure risk to the pregnant woman.
Abbreviations: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; IgM = immunoglobulin M; IHC = immunohistochemical; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test; rRT-PCR = real-time 
reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction.
 * Refer to the previously published guidance for testing interpretation (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6521e1.htm).
 † Fetal abnormalities consistent with congenital Zika virus syndrome include microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, and brain and eye abnormalities.
 § Health care providers should discuss risks and benefits of amniocentesis with their patients. It is not known how sensitive or specific rRT-PCR testing of amniotic 
fluid is for congenital Zika virus infection, whether a positive result is predictive of a subsequent fetal abnormality, and if it is predictive, what proportion of infants 
born after infection will have abnormalities.
 ¶ Refer to pathology guidance for collection and submission of fetal tissues for Zika virus testing for detailed information on recommended specimen types (http://
www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/test-specimens-tissues.html).
 ** rRT-PCR or PRNT should be performed for positive or equivocal IgM results as indicated. PRNT results that indicate recent flavivirus infection should be interpreted in 
the context of the currently circulating flaviviruses. Refer to the laboratory guidance for updated testing recommendations (http://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/
lab-guidance.html). Because of the overlap of symptoms and areas where other viral illnesses are endemic, evaluate for possible dengue or chikungunya virus infection.
 †† http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44188/1/9789241547871_eng.pdf.  
 *** http://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/test-specimens-tissues.html. 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
744 
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 1Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 2Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; 3Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 4Division of 
Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases, CDC; 5Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity, National 
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 6Division 
of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, 
STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; 7Division Of Global Health Protection, Center 
for Global Health, CDC; 8Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging 
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC.
Corresponding author: Titilope Oduyebo, 770-488-7100, ZikaMCH@cdc.gov.
References
1. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus and 
birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338
2. Meaney-Delman D, Rasmussen SA, Staples JE, et al. Zika virus and pregnancy: 
what obstetric health care providers need to know. Obstet Gynecol 
2016;127:642–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000001378
3. Simeone RM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Meaney-Delman D, et al.; Zika and 
Pregnancy Working Group. Possible Zika virus infection among pregnant 
women—United States and Territories, May 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:514–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6520e1
4. Bocanegra C, Sulleiro E, Soriano-Arandes A, et al. Zika virus infection in 
pregnant women in Barcelona, Spain. Clin Microbiol Infect. In press 2016.
5. Driggers RW, Ho CY, Korhonen EM, et al. Zika virus infection with 
prolonged maternal viremia and fetal brain abnormalities. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:2142–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1601824
6. Pacheco O, Beltrán M, Nelson CA, et al. Zika virus disease in Colombia—
preliminary report. N Engl J Med 2016;NEJMoa1604037. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa1604037
7. Meaney-Delman D, Oduyebo T, Polen KND, et al. Prolonged detection 
of Zika virus RNA in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol In press 2016.
8. Rabe IB, Staples JE, Villanueva J, et al. Interim guidance for interpretation 
of Zika virus antibody test results. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:543–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6521e1
9. Oduyebo T, Petersen EE, Rasmussen SA, et al. Update: interim guidelines 
for health care providers caring for pregnant women and women of 
reproductive age with possible Zika virus exposure—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:122–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6505e2
 
10. Petersen EE, Staples JE, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Interim guidelines for pregnant 
women during a Zika virus outbreak—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:30–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6502e1
 
11. Oster AM, Russell K, Stryker JE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:323–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6512e3
 
12. CDC. CDC Recommendations for subsequent Zika IgM antibody 
testing. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2016. http://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00392.asp
 
13. Petersen EE, Polen KN, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Update: interim guidance 
for health care providers caring for women of reproductive age with possible 
Zika virus exposure—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2016;65:315–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6512e2
 
14. Franca GV, Schuler-Faccini L, Oliveira WK, et al. Congenital Zika virus 
syndrome in Brazil: a case series of the first 1501 livebirths with complete 
investigation. Lancet 2016. Epub June 29, 2016. http://www.thelancet.
com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(16)30902-3.pdf
 
15. Meaney-Delman D, Hills SL, Williams C, et al. Zika Virus infection among 
U.S. pregnant travelers—August 2015–February 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:211–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6508e1
 
16. Fleming-Dutra KE, Nelson JM, Fischer M, et al. Update: interim guidelines 
for health care providers caring for infants and children with possible Zika 
virus infection—United States, February 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:182–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6507e1
 
17. Lo YM, Lo ES, Watson N, et al. Two-way cell traffic between mother 
and fetus: biologic and clinical implications. Blood 1996;88:4390–5.
 
18. Masuzaki H, Miura K, Miura S, et al. Labor increases maternal DNA 
contamination in cord blood. Clin Chem 2004;50:1709–11. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2004.036517
 
19. Chhabra RS, Brion LP
, Castro M, Freundlich L, Glaser JH. Comparison of 
maternal sera, cord blood, and neonatal sera for detecting presumptive congenital 
syphilis: relationship with maternal treatment. Pediatrics 1993;91:88–91.
 
20. Workowski KA, Bolan GA. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment 
guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep 2015;64(RR-03).
 
21. Martines RB, Bhatnagar J, de Oliveira Ramos AM, et al. Pathology of congenital 
Zika syndrome in Brazil: a case series. Lancet 2016. Epub June 29, 2016. http://
thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(16)30883-2.pdf   
