 Difficult People: Who Is Perceived to Be Demanding in Personal 
Networks and Why Are They There?
Shira Offer and
Bar-Ilan University
Claude S. Fischer
University of California, Berkeley
Abstract
Why do people maintain ties with individuals whom they find difficult? Standard network theories 
imply that such alters are avoided or dropped. Drawing on a survey of over 1,100 diverse 
respondents who described over 12,000 relationships, we examined which among those ties 
respondents nominated as a person whom they “sometimes find demanding or difficult.” Those so 
listed composed about 15 percent of all alters in the network. After holding ego and alter traits 
constant, close kin, especially women relatives and aging parents, were especially likely to be 
named as difficult alters. Non-kin described as friends were less, and those described as co-
workers more, likely to be listed only as difficult alters. These results suggest that normative and 
institutional constraints may force people to retain difficult and demanding alters in their 
networks. We also found that providing support to alters, but not receiving support from those 
alters, was a major source of difficulty in these relationships. Furthermore, the felt burden of 
providing support was not attenuated by receiving assistance, suggesting that alters involved in 
reciprocated exchanges were not less often labeled difficult than were those in unreciprocated 
ones. This study underlines the importance of constraints in personal networks.
Keywords
difficult ties; egocentric networks; personal networks; social demands; social exchange
In the development of social network analysis since the 1950s, researchers and popularizers 
have stressed the importance to individuals of egocentric networks as sources of emotional 
support, information, and material assistance in both mundane situations and emergencies. 
Also recognized, but trailing far behind in attention, is the importance of egocentric 
networks as sources of demands and difficulties. Scholars have noted that sometimes l’enfer, 
c’est les autres by showing that individuals are also connected to people who burden and 
stress them (Bertera 2005; Durden, Hill, and Angel 2007; Lee and Szinovacz 2016; Rook 
1984, 1989; Thomas 2010), but they have paid far less attention to difficult ties than to 
supportive or even weak ties (for an overview, see Kadushin 2012). The modest literature on 
difficult ties within networks, although alerting us to the complexities of relationships, 
Corresponding Author: Shira Offer, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, 52900, Israel, 
shira.offer@biu.ac.il. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Am Sociol Rev. 2018 February ; 83(1): 111–142. doi:10.1177/0003122417737951.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 insufficiently identifies who tends to be felt as difficult by whom and, more generally, 
insufficiently explains why individuals maintain such burdensome relationships. Studies of 
network formation, from either an agentic or a structural perspective, typically assume that 
difficult ties will be avoided and eventually dissolved (Harrigan and Yap 2017), thus making 
their presence and persistence in networks a puzzle.
In this article, we use data from the first wave of the University of California Social Network 
Study (UCNets) to learn about the prevalence, attributes, and correlates of difficult ties. 
UCNets is an extensive egocentric network survey of some 1,150 adults in the greater San 
Francisco Bay Area. Respondents described their relationships with over 11,000 alters 
drawn from their answers to six name-eliciting questions asking about the people with 
whom they were involved in different spheres of activity. A major advantage of UCNets is 
that, in addition to these questions, the survey also asked respondents to name the people 
whom they found “demanding or difficult,” thus allowing us to learn about the sources of 
burdens and difficulties in personal networks. We argue that individuals experience 
constraints that press them to continue engaging with others whom they would have 
preferred to avoid or to disengage from. Our study focuses on two types of constraints, role- 
and interaction-based, and examines their association with the likelihood that different alters 
will be named as participants in difficult ties in a network.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON DIFFICULT TIES
The observation that individuals may have ties that are partly or even predominantly costly 
to them would not be striking to scholars who analyze whole networks, such as classrooms 
or work settings, where dislike, competition, and conflict are expected (e.g., Everett and 
Borgatti 2014; Lyons and Scott 2012). The bulk of theory and research on personal, or 
egocentric, networks, however, focuses on the supportive function of personal relationships 
(Cohen and Janicki-Deverts 2009; Fischer 1982a; House, Umberson, and Landis 1988; 
Thoits 2011; Wellman and Wortley 1990). These studies typically stress how family, friends, 
and even acquaintances assist respondents, connect them to various resources, and contribute 
to their physical and mental health. (For a representative overview of a vast literature, see 
Kawachi and Berkman 2001.) Considerably less attention, however, has been given to the 
role and implications of difficult relationships.
Karen Rook is one of the few scholars to have addressed this issue. In her study of elderly 
women, Rook (1984, 1989) found that the number of relationship burdens they reported 
affected the women psychologically more than did the number of supportive relationships 
they described (see also Lincoln 2000). Importantly, she found that the number of difficult 
and helpful ties the women reported were uncorrelated; indeed, specific friends and relatives 
could be sources of both help and strain. More recently, several surveys have asked 
respondents to report support or strain from specific types of alters, such as their spouses or 
daughters (e.g., Bertera 2005; Birditt and Antonucci 2007), or from general categories of 
ties, such as family and friends (e.g., Chen and Feeley 2014; Durden et al. 2007; Shaw et al. 
2007; Walen and Lachman 2000). Other researchers have estimated how many people 
provide support versus problems or how often they do so (e.g., how many of the people you 
listed “get on your nerves?” [Thomas 2010]).
Offer and Fischer
Page 2
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Additionally, studies of “psychological ambivalence” in the family literature emphasize that 
relationships with kin often involve simultaneously positive and negative content (e.g., 
Birditt and Fingerman 2013; Connidis and McMullin 2002; Fingerman, Hay, and Birditt 
2004). In a recent example, Lee and Szinovacz (2016), using the 2008 Health Retirement 
Study, found that respondents reported the greatest mix of positive and negative evaluations 
for their spouses and children, then next greatest for other relatives, and least for friends. In 
addition, they found that negative reports about spouses and children, but not about relatives 
or friends, correlated with various psychological well-being measures.
Overall, these studies commonly find that respondents who give more negative reports also 
tend to report higher levels of stress and loneliness and lower levels of physical health and 
psychological well-being (see Ailshire and Burgard 2012; Lee and Szinovacz 2016; Lund et 
al. 2014; Rook 2003, 2015; for some complexity, see Antonucci et al. 2010). Although the 
association between difficult ties and health and well-being appears to be robust, the causal 
paths linking them have not been sufficiently studied. Difficult ties may impair well-being 
by increasing a person’s sense of stress and burden; or, psychologically distressed people 
and those with a negative outlook on life may tend to perceive others in an unpleasant way 
(see Vinokur, Schul, and Caplan 1987).
Despite the consensus on the correlates of difficult ties, the existing literature barely 
addresses the question of which types of people and what kinds of ties are felt to be difficult 
That is, it is important to understand not just whether individuals can identify stressful ties in 
their networks, but also to understand which specific alters and which specific ties—defined 
by relationship type and other features, such as alters’ interactions with the individual—
seem to provoke stress and feelings of burden. To our knowledge, the only approximate 
precedent to our analysis is Leffler, Krannich, and Gillespie (1986), which asked residents of 
four Utah villages to name people with whom they had various positive interactions and to 
name those who were overly demanding, would let them down, and made them angry. Our 
study uses a larger and more diverse sample and expands what we know about these 
relationships, allowing us to address the issue of who is viewed as creating stress and 
burden, and then permitting us to infer answers to the broader question of why individuals 
would maintain such relationships. Is it, as an exchange model would suggest, because 
people gain more than they lose in these ties, or is it because people cannot avoid these ties?
THEORIES OF TIE FORMATION AND THE QUESTION OF DIFFICULT TIES
The question of why individuals sustain connections to people whom they consider difficult 
and demanding directs us to the broader, and relatively unexplored, issue of how people 
build and maintain personal networks. The social science literature has proposed two main 
complementary approaches. The first emphasizes individuals’ agentic nature and treats them 
as active and purposive builders of their social worlds. The second approach focuses on the 
structural locations in which individuals are embedded and how these locations provide 
opportunities for social connections. These two approaches, however, have not been applied 
to explain the existence and persistence of difficult ties in people’s networks. We begin by 
briefly reviewing the two main approaches to tie formation, address their limitations, and 
then discuss the idea of constraints to help resolve the puzzle of lasting difficult ties.
Offer and Fischer
Page 3
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tie Formation as a Purposive Process
The approach that treats tie formation as a purposive and deliberate process rests on the 
assumption that individuals are agentic actors who make strategic decisions regarding whom 
to include and whom to exclude from their networks. This approach highlights the mental 
process individuals engage in as they evaluate and screen potential network members. 
Explanations typically focus on the gains obtained from the connections or the utility of 
potential associates for fulfilling individual needs and interests.
The idea that people form and invest in relationships with an eye to the benefits, both 
extrinsic and intrinsic, they can accrue from them is most explicit in early exchange theory 
approaches (e.g., Blau 1986; Homans 1958; Thibaut and Kelly 1959) and more recently in 
the investment model put forward by theorists of social capital. As Bourdieu (1986:249) 
explains, “the network of relationships is the product of investment strategies, individual or 
collective, consciously or unconsciously aimed at establishing or reproducing social 
relationships that are directly usable in the short or long term” (see also Coleman 1990; Lin 
2001). Tie formation and activation is thus treated as an instrumental process whose main 
motivation is driven by the utility of the tie. Consequently, ties based on unreciprocated 
exchanges, or those in which costs outweigh benefits, are likely to be discontinued (Ikkink 
and van Tilburg 1999).
In research on social support, this approach resonates with models of “targeted 
mobilization” (Small 2013) and “functional specificity” (Perry and Pescosolido 2010), 
which contend that individuals assess their own needs and then selectively turn to specific 
people to access their resources based on evaluations of how useful these people are. 
Consistent with this idea, research points to specialization in the provision of support by 
showing that different types of ties are mobilized for different types of support (e.g., Fischer 
1982a; Pescosolido 1992; Wellman and Wortley 1990).
Other studies, mostly ethnographies of family and community relationships, use language 
that is not explicitly actor-based but that also assumes people build networks in a deliberate 
and purposive manner. Nelson (2005), for example, shows how the low-income single 
mothers she interviewed in Vermont carefully select network members by evaluating who in 
their social environments is most suited to fulfill their needs. Nelson refers to this screening 
process as “the work of sociability.” Similarly, Hansen (2005) describes a process of sifting 
and sorting network members, referred to as “staging networks,” that parents continuously 
go through in their attempt to build networks of care for their children. Hansen (2004) shows 
how parents assess network candidates based on their past behaviors, values, and 
childrearing philosophy and how they follow relatively strict rules regarding what to ask 
from whom, when, and under what circumstances. These studies nicely demonstrate how 
individuals meticulously seek to gain information about potential network members and 
weigh the benefits and costs of drawing someone into or excluding someone from the 
network (see also Domínguez and Watkins 2003; Menjívar 2000).
Offer and Fischer
Page 4
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tie Formation and the Context of Opportunity
The second approach focuses on the more contingent and idiosyncratic character of tie 
formation. It stresses that individuals often create connections with the people in their social 
surroundings who are accessible and available to them. Social contexts (or foci, see Feld 
1981) matter much more for network inclusion than agentic search models suggest. Simple 
inaccessibility, for example, rules out all but a small sliver of hypothetical relationships. 
Consistent with recent developments in network research, this approach assumes that 
circumstances play a crucial role in shaping the compositional and structural features of 
social networks (e.g., Doreian and Conti 2012; Entwisle et al. 2007; Mollenhorst, Völker, 
and Flap 2014; Small 2013; Small, Pamphile, and McMahan 2015). For example, studies 
show how people often form quite intimate and supportive ties with others whom they barely 
know and have recently met, sometimes unexpectedly, in different places, such as childcare 
centers (Small 2009), food pantries, neighborhood clinics, homeless shelters (Desmond 
2012), college classrooms (Kossinets and Watts 2009; Small 2013), beauty salons (Furman 
1997), and diners (Torres forthcoming).
The broader social and institutional context is thus conceptualized as an opportunity 
structure for social meetings and the formation of new ties mainly because it determines the 
pool of potential associates and allows for the emergence of interactions (Blau and Schwartz 
1984; Feld 1982; Fischer 1982a; Lazarsfeld and Merton 1954). This idea is key to research 
on homophily, which shows that the degree of similarity between associates is affected by 
the characteristics of the social contexts in which they meet and interact (e.g., Marsden 
1990; McPherson and Smith-Lovin 1987; McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001). In 
support of this view, Small (2013) finds that students discuss important matters not just with 
others they feel close to, but also with acquaintances whom they meet in various groups and 
associations. Mollenhorst and colleagues (2014), using longitudinal personal network data in 
the Netherlands, find that many social ties are discontinued over time due of a lack of 
meeting opportunities.
The opportunity approach does not discredit the idea that within specific contexts 
individuals may select ties purposively, but its focus is elsewhere. It assumes that access, 
physical or social proximity, is key to the process of tie formation and maintenance.1 
Experimental studies provide evidence showing how proximity contributes to the endurance 
of ties by facilitating regular interactions and the development of positive sentiments and 
trust between individuals (Lawler 2001). Further support is provided by survey research 
suggesting that even in today’s digital world, propinquity is important for social interaction 
and the receipt of support (Mok, Wellman, and Carrasco 2010).
TOWARD UNDERSTANDING DIFFICULT TIES IN EGOCENTRIC NETWORKS
People form ties in many different ways: some are purposeful, others incidental, or even 
spontaneous (Small and Sukhu 2016). The two approaches outlined in the previous section 
1A debate, beyond the scope of this article, exists in the literature regarding how to conceptualize accessibility: as an attribute of the 
potential alter that individuals take into account when making deliberate decisions about whom to include in their network, or as a 
condition of the situation (see review in Small and Sukhu 2016).
Offer and Fischer
Page 5
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 help distinguish analytically between the different mechanisms but, and most importantly for 
the present study, neither has been used to explain the maintenance of difficult ties in 
networks. Both approaches implicitly assume that difficult and demanding individuals will 
be avoided, dropped from the network, or not recruited into it in the first place. Nelson 
(2005), for example, reports that mothers tend to socially disengage from people who make 
burdensome demands, fail to reciprocate their gestures, or are judgmental. Similarly, 
Desmond (2012) finds that the “disposable ties” evicted tenants create with new 
acquaintances, and from whom they obtain important support needed for their daily survival, 
are typically short-lived and frequently dissolve following unexpected crises, emergencies, 
and mounting relational tension (for other examples, see review in Offer 2012).
The prediction that difficult ties will be avoided or dropped is based on the idea that people 
can freely choose with whom they want, or do not want, to associate. The focus on 
individual choice is explicit in the agentic model, but it is also part of the structure of 
opportunity approach, which specifies that people can freely choose their associates from the 
pool of available candidates. Little account, however, is given to how the social environment 
can restrict individual freedom and constrain behavior (Emirbayer and Goodwin 1994; 
Granovetter 1985, 2002).2 Yet people often feel pressure to continue engaging socially with 
others whom they would prefer to avoid or disengage from, thus further souring the 
relationship. Scholars often overlook this aspect of personal relationships. For example, in 
his study of childcare centers in New York City, Small (2009) describes how the centers 
serve an important brokerage function by giving mothers the opportunity to connect with 
each other and with other organizations through routines and activities, such as drop-off and 
pick-up times, parties, and fieldtrips, but he only briefly mentions instances when parents 
feel coerced by the centers to cooperate with parents whom they find annoying.
Seeking to understand which ties are perceived as difficult and why they are part of a 
network, we elaborate on the agentic and structure of opportunity approaches of tie 
formation by articulating two distinct types of constraints on individual choice and behavior. 
Consistent with the structural approach, the first type is role-based and refers to the source or 
context (“focus” in Feld’s terms) of the relationship between the individual and the alter, and 
the normative, institutional, and material limitations imposed by this relationship. Consistent 
with the agentic model, the second type is interaction-based and refers to the patterns of 
social exchange between the individual and the alter and the potential utility derived from 
their relationship.
STUDY HYPOTHESES
Role-Based Constraints
Individuals’ roles in a network emerge from the contexts in which they participate, and these 
contexts vary in their level of constraint. According to Feld (1981), highly constraining 
contexts produce highly interconnected networks, which are likely to engender not only 
2Homophily scholars describe how structural constraints, by delimiting the pool of potential associates, determine not only who is 
available but also who is not available, thus leading to induced homophily (Blau and Schwartz 1984; Kossinets and Watts 2009; 
McPherson and Smith-Lovin 1987; Mollenhorst, Völker, and Flap 2008). Our concept of constraint is different. We refer to the ways 
social and institutional contexts can coerce people to interact with others they would rather avoid.
Offer and Fischer
Page 6
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 positive but also negative sentiments because they tend to force people to interact with other 
members. Hence, and consistent with the structural model, the contexts in which individuals 
are embedded determine not only the pool of potential associates whom individuals can 
choose, but also people whom individuals have no choice but to engage with, even if they 
would rather not. As Brashears and Brashears (2016:23) explain, in the absence of 
mechanisms to “eliminate” them, such ties are likely to endure: “[N]egative ties are more 
likely to be found in a persistent form when interaction is unavoidable. By extension this 
suggests that stable negative ties will rarely exist outside of some overarching framework 
(e.g. a larger family grouping, a workplace).”3
Contexts can be bounding for different reasons. For example, normative pressures exist in 
the context of the family, which Feld identifies as one of the most constraining foci. Most 
family-of-origin ties are inherited and typically characterized by high emotional closeness, 
strong commitment, and norms of care (Bengtson 2001; Silverstein, Gans, and Yang 2006; 
Swartz 2009; Wellman and Wortley 1990). The high level of interconnectedness among 
family members also constitutes an important mechanism of norm reinforcement and social 
control. Families often pressure their members to comply, cooperate, and share resources 
and sanction those who do not abide (Coleman 1988; Portes and Sensenbrenner 1993; Stack 
1974). Hence, strong normative pressures within families may force people to retain ties to 
relatives, especially close ones, who are viewed as difficult and burdensome (see Brashears 
and Brashears 2016).
Other contexts likely impose practical and material constraints that force people to preserve 
difficult ties. This is most evident in hierarchical contexts that create power asymmetries and 
where people occupy subordinate positions that make them highly dependent on others (Burt 
2000; Emerson 1962). The workplace provides an excellent example of such a context: 
people cannot easily disengage from their supervisor or manager nor limit interactions with 
difficult workmates unless they quit their jobs (Levine 2013). Similarly, the complexities of 
moving may make it difficult for people to avoid annoying and disturbing neighbors 
(Goering and Feins 2003; Lee, Oropesa, and Kanan 1994).
Greater freedom, however, exists in ties originating in voluntary associations, including 
religious congregations. In these contexts, people can turn away relatively easily from 
bothersome fellow-members, or leave the church or even the denomination (Fischer and 
Hout 2006; Wuthnow 1988). Similarly, friendship ties are less constraining (Blieszner and 
Roberto 2004), particularly those that are “just” friendships and are not tangled in other role 
relationships (Fischer 1982b). Friendship ties may therefore be more easily disbanded if they 
are distressful or burdensome. Nevertheless, even though they are more voluntary in nature 
than kinship ties, friendships may also be subject to normative constraints. What will people 
say if a person drops his friend when she needs him? Here, too, normative pressures may be 
heightened if the friendship is part of a larger web of relationships (Feld and Carter 1998), as 
3Brashears and Brashears (2016) use the term “negative tie” in their discussion of imbalanced structures when referring to the negative 
affect that individuals feel toward one another. In this article, we examine ties that tend to be complex and ambivalent—for example, 
ties that involve positive sentiments but also constitute a source of hardship—and therefore we use the term “difficult.”
Offer and Fischer
Page 7
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 people care for their self-image and reputation and seek approval from others in their 
surroundings (Blau 1986; Podolny 1993).
In summary, the structural model predicts that for normative, institutional, material, and 
other reasons, people may feel pressure to retain difficult ties. We thus predict that the 
probability of being perceived as difficult will be greater for alters in contexts that most 
constrain an individual’s ability to dissolve the tie:
Hypothesis 1: Ties to kin are more likely to be perceived as difficult than ties to non-
kin.
Hypothesis 2: Ties to non-kin in more constraining contexts are more likely to be 
perceived as difficult than ties to non-kin in less constraining contexts.
Interaction-Based Constraints
A second type of constraint arises from social exchanges between the individual and the 
alter, with some exchanges being more constraining than others. Based on the agentic 
model, individuals consider the utility derived from interactions with the alter—in our data, 
various forms of social support—and what would be lost by terminating the tie. Moreover, 
the receipt of support engenders a sense of obligation, commitment, and indebtedness to the 
alter, which pressures her to reciprocate and sustain the tie (Blau 1986; Mauss [1923] 1990; 
Simmel [1950] 1978). These pressures can constitute a source of constraint that further 
bounds the receiving individual to giving alters and restricts her ability to disengage from the 
difficult ones. In Emerson’s (1962) terms, obtaining support from an alter creates power-
dependence relations that do not allow individuals to “overcome resistance” by simply 
severing ties to alters perceived to be difficult. Dependence on a tie for unequal exchanges 
may thus generate tension, rivalry, and conflict and lead to what Blau (1986) calls a process 
of “differentiation,” in which failure to reciprocate establishes a status hierarchy and claims 
of superiority (see also Mauss [1923] 1990).
We expect these interaction-based constraints to be stronger if the utility of the good or 
service rendered is high, such as in emergency situations. By contrast, the constraint will be 
of lower magnitude in cases that involve a lower sense of obligation, such as engaging in 
leisure activities. This leads to the following prediction:
Hypothesis 3: Ties to alters who provide critical types of support are more likely to 
be perceived as difficult than ties to alters who provide less critical types of support.
Nevertheless, the constraining effect associated with the sense of commitment and 
obligation that the receipt of support creates may be attenuated if an individual also provides 
support to the alter. Research shows that for normative and practical reasons, people strive to 
maintain reciprocal relationships with others by returning favors and avoiding social debts 
(Blau 1986; Gouldner 1960; Plickert, Côté, and Wellman 2007; Roberto and Scott 1986; van 
Tilburg 1992), and failing to do so can lead to feelings of distress and guilt (Menjívar 2000; 
Nelson 2005; Offer 2012) and tie dissolution (Blau 1986; Ikkink and van Tilburg 1999).4 
That is, when a person reciprocates an alter’s support, or provides more than the alter does, 
she is less dependent on the alter and may more easily disengage if that alter is viewed as 
difficult. Hence, we hypothesize the following:
Offer and Fischer
Page 8
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hypothesis 4: Non-reciprocal exchange ties providing unilateral benefits to ego are 
more likely to be perceived as difficult than reciprocal exchange ties.
DATA AND MEASURES
UCNets Data
We use the University of California Social Networks Study (UCNets), a longitudinal 
egocentric network survey on personal relationships, life events, and well-being,5 to 
examine who is considered difficult and why they are part of personal networks. UCNets 
participants were drawn from two distinct age groups in the greater six-county San 
Francisco Bay Area: 50- to 70-year-olds and 21- to 30-year-olds. The study focused on these 
two age groups to maximize the number of key transitions and life events respondents would 
likely experience between survey waves. Using address-based sampling, people in the 
eligible age range were solicited to participate (for pay) in the three-wave survey of personal 
networks. This procedure sufficed with the older cohort, but it fell short with the 21- to 30-
year-olds. To increase their number, we added about 300 complete surveys of respondents in 
that age group largely by recruiting through Facebook. As part of a mode experiment, 
respondents were randomly assigned to either an in-person or a web version of the survey at 
a 3:1 ratio. All Facebook-recruited respondents did the survey online. The two instruments 
were substantively identical and we control for mode effects in all analyses.
The data we use in this study are based on the first wave of UCNets, which includes 666 
respondents age 50 to 70 who completed the survey and named 6,689 alters, and 480 
respondents age 21 to 30 who completed the survey and named 5,064 alters 6 (see Appendix 
Table A1 for a full description of respondents’ demographic and socioeconomic 
characteristics). All analyses use weights that adjust for combinations of gender, age, race, 
Hispanic ethnicity, marital status, and education to match the corresponding age-specific 
population of the region.7
Methods: The Extended Egocentric Survey
UCNets used an extended egocentric name-eliciting method to draw a detailed map of 
respondents’ personal networks and collect information about their social connections. The 
first stage in this procedure, name-eliciting, asked respondents to name the people to whom 
they were connected. A major advantage of the present study is that unlike most other 
egocentric network studies, which are mainly based on the General Social Survey “discuss 
important matters” question (e.g., Brashears 2014; Marsden 1987; Small 2013), the UCNets 
survey generated names using seven distinct name-eliciting questions. Research shows this 
4Research suggests that the importance people attribute to the norm of reciprocity varies by context and role relationship. Specifically, 
relationships to close kin and longtime friends have relatively flexible terms of return, and thus they tolerate more unilateral 
exchanges, compared to relationships to more distant associates (Antonucci, Fuhrer, and Jackson 1990; Ikkink and van Tilburg 1999; 
Nelson 2005; Plickert et al. 2007).
5UCNets wave 1 data will be made available to researchers. Consult its website, http://ucnets.berkeley.edu/researcher-resources/, or 
the second author.
6We excluded 10 respondents who failed to follow instructions and gave unusable names, such as “family” and “sports” rather than 
real names.
7We then trimmed weights above the 95th percentile and below the 5th percentile so no case would count more than the 95th 
percentile or less than the 5th percentile and thereby carry undue influence in the results.
Offer and Fischer
Page 9
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 extended procedure yields greater reliability than do methods that use a single or restricted 
number of name-eliciting questions (Killworth, Shelley, and Robinson 1990; Marin 2004; 
Marin and Hampton 2007; McCallister and Fischer 1978).
The first six name-eliciting questions asked respondents to name the people with whom they 
engaged in various spheres of social activity (see details below). The last name-eliciting 
question asked respondents to name the people whom they “sometimes find demanding or 
difficult.” This question, which has rarely been used in previous egocentric network 
research, is the major focus of our study: it allowed us to examine the prevalence and role of 
difficult ties in personal networks.
The second stage in the procedure applied several name-interpreting questions to obtain 
descriptions of the named alters and of the ties respondents had with them, including role 
relationship categories, felt closeness, geographic proximity, and homophily in gender, age, 
religion, and race and ethnicity. In addition, the UCNets survey collected detailed 
information about participants’ demographic, socioeconomic, and health characteristics.
Variables
Difficult tiess—Based on respondents’ responses to the “difficult” name-eliciting question 
and to the six name-eliciting questions tapping engagement in various social activities, we 
created two distinct measures of difficult ties that serve as our dependent variables. (1) 
Difficult-only ties: names respondents mentioned only in response to the difficult name-
eliciting question and which did not appear on any of the other six name-eliciting questions 
tapping social exchanges. (2) Difficult engaged-in-exchange ties: names respondents 
mentioned in response to both the difficult question and at least one of the other six social 
exchange name-eliciting questions.
Role-based constraints—We use role-relationship categories as proxies for role-based 
constraints. Using prefixed categories, respondents were asked to specify how they were 
connected to each alter whom they named. We distinguish between kin and non-kin. The kin 
category includes wife, husband, female romantic partner, male romantic partner, mother, 
father, adult daughter, adult son, sister, and brother, (other relative is the reference category). 
The non-kin variables include a series of dummies referring to different role relationships 
specifying whether the alter is a housemate, neighbor, workmate, schoolmate, churchmate, 
friend, or acquaintance. Note that the non-kin variables are not mutually exclusive. A person 
could, for example, be mentioned as both a workmate and a friend or as a brother, 
housemate, and friend.
Interaction-based constraints—The first six name-generating questions compiled a list 
of the people with whom respondents engaged in different types of social exchanges. We use 
these six types of exchanges as proxies for interaction-based constraints: (1) socializing—
the people with whom respondents usually get together and do social activities such as 
visiting for meals, going to cultural events, or just hanging out; (2) confiding in—the people 
in whom respondents confide about relationships, important things in life, or difficult 
experiences; (3) advice—the people respondents turn to when seeking advice for making 
important decisions; (4) practical help—the people who, in the previous few months, had 
Offer and Fischer
Page 10
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 given respondents practical help such as doing repairs, looking after a child, or providing a 
ride; (5) emergency help—the people whom respondents would ask if they were seriously 
injured or sick and needed help for a couple of weeks with things such as preparing meals 
and getting around; and (6) providing support—the people whom respondents help out in 
different ways. Respondents could mention up to nine names in answering the socializing 
question and up to six names for all other questions.
Table 1 shows the distribution of all alters named in a network by role relationship and type 
of social exchange. Overall, respondents’ networks were quite varied. Most notably, the 
majority of alters (close to 60 percent) were labeled as friends. More than half of alters 
mentioned in a network were people with whom respondents socialized. This may be due, 
however, to allowing respondents to name up to nine names in this item, compared to only 
six names in the other name-eliciting items. About a third of alters were named as 
confidants, advisors, and sources of emergency help for respondents. Forty percent of alters 
were named as people to whom respondents provided support. Finally, we see expected age 
differences, for example, in the presence of spouses, parents, housemates, and schoolmates.
Controls—At the tie level, we include controls for alters’ sociodemographic 
characteristics, most of which are measured in terms of homophily with the respondent. 
These include gender (for non-kin alters), age, religion, race and ethnicity, and political 
orientation. Other controls refer to relationship characteristics between the respondent and 
the alter, such as whether the respondent had met the alter in the previous year, feels 
emotionally close to alter, lives with alter in the same household, lives within five minutes 
from alter, or lives more than one hour away from alter. Descriptive statistics for all tie-level 
controls are presented in Appendix Table A2. Finally, we control at the individual-level for 
respondents’ sociodemographic background and health.
PLAN OF ANALYSIS
The major objective of this study is to reveal which ties are perceived as difficult and why 
they are part of the network. To examine these questions, we use two distinct dependent 
variables: (1) difficult-only ties and (2) difficult engaged-in-exchange ties. We begin with 
basic descriptive statistics by calculating the prevalence of the two types of difficult ties and 
examining their distribution by role relationship and types of exchange.
In the next stage, we estimate a series of multilevel models to test the study hypotheses, 
positing that difficult ties are maintained in networks because of role- and interaction-based 
constraints (we use HLM 7.01 [Raudenbush, Bryk, and Congdon 2013]). The advantage of 
multilevel modeling is that, rather than using aggregated measures at the individual level or 
simply examining all ties together as if they were independent of each other, this method 
accounts for the nested structure of the data (i.e., alters or ties nested within individual 
networks) and the non-independence of observations within individuals, which allows us to 
simultaneously estimate variables at different levels (Raudenbush and Bryk 2002; van Duijn, 
van Busschbach, and Snijder 1999; Wellman and Frank 2001).8 Because our outcome is a 
binary variable (i.e., whether the alter is named as difficult or not), we use the binomial 
sampling distribution with the logit link function.
Offer and Fischer
Page 11
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We estimate separate sets of models to predict the log-odds of the two outcomes using the 
role-relationship variables as proxies for role-based constraints, and the types of exchange 
variables as proxies for interaction-based constraints. All models control for 
sociodemographic characteristics of both the tie and the respondent.9 The first set of models 
predicts the log-odds that an alter would be named as a difficult-only tie as opposed to all 
other ties (i.e., ties that are either not difficult or difficult but otherwise engaged in the 
network). The latter set of models excludes the difficult-only ties and estimates the log-odds 
that an alter would be named as a difficult engaged-in-exchange tie as opposed to a tie that is 
not difficult. We estimate these two outcomes separately not only for practical reasons (i.e., 
the second set of models includes additional variables, measures of social exchanges), but 
also because we believe they are conceptually distinct. The difficult-only ties are more 
similar to what the literature calls “negative” ties, that is, ties characterized by antagonism 
and dislike that typically lead to disconnected networks (Everett and Borgatti 2014), whereas 
difficult engaged-in-exchange ties are more ambivalent in nature and constitute a source of 
both positive affect and hardship (Connidis and McMullin 2002).
THE PREVALENCE AND DISTRIBUTION OF DIFFICULT TIES
How many difficult ties do respondents have in their networks? The upper panel in Table 2 
shows the overall proportion of difficult ties and then distinguishes between difficult-only 
and difficult engaged-in-exchange ties. These estimates are calculated at the aggregated 
individual-level out of the total number of ties in a respondent’s network. The vast majority 
of participants, about three-quarters in the young cohort and two-thirds in the older cohort, 
nominated at least one person in their network as difficult or demanding. The proportion of 
difficult ties in each network, however, is relatively small. About 16 percent of ties in young 
respondents’ networks, and 13 percent in older respondents’ networks, were labeled as 
difficult. Additionally, relatively few alters appeared only in answer to the “difficult” name-
eliciting question—only 5 percent for both cohorts. Nearly 70 percent of respondents did not 
report any such tie. Hence, most alters named as difficult were reported as engaged in the 
network in some other way. Overall, these alters account for 12 and 8 percent of all ties 
among the younger and older cohorts, respectively.
The middle panel in Table 2 shows, at the tie-level, the proportion of alters who were named 
difficult by role relationship. The first column in each cohort refers to difficult-only ties. 
Within the family, among 21- to 30-year-olds, brothers were the most likely to be labeled 
solely as difficult (13 percent). Among 50- to 70-year-olds, mothers and sisters were most 
likely to be labeled solely as difficult (13 and 10 percent, respectively). Interestingly, no 
8The fact that some respondents in the young cohort were eventually recruited through Facebook and personal reference may violate 
the assumption that individual observations are independent, because some respondents may be connected to each other through 
shared ties. To address this issue, we estimated separate models for respondents recruited through Facebook and personal references 
and compared them to results obtained for the full sample. Overall, the models yield similar results. The main difference was in the 
model predicting difficult engaged-in-exchange ties: among Facebook and personal reference recruits, husbands, and not just wives as 
in the full sample, had higher log-odds of being named as difficult ties, whereas the effect for brothers was no longer significant (see 
results in the online supplement). Note, too, that all our multivariate analyses control for whether a respondent was recruited through 
Facebook or personal reference.
9Consistent with previous longitudinal studies showing that most of the variance in ambivalent relationships over time is within rather 
than between individuals (Birditt, Jackey, and Antonucci 2009), our multilevel models reveal that the likelihood of having difficult-
only and difficult engaged-in-exchange ties is little affected by individual-level variables.
Offer and Fischer
Page 12
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 spouses or romantic partners were mentioned in the network solely in response to the 
difficult name-eliciting question. This may be due to selection bias—intimate relationships 
that become highly strained are often terminated. Unlike other close kin relations, most 
notably parents and adult children, ties to spouses and intimate partners are more voluntary 
in nature and, despite the stress involved, may be easier to dissolve. Another possible 
explanation is that in a culture emphasizing marital satisfaction, people may be less inclined 
to report that their relationship with their intimate partner is stressful and burdensome 
(Hackstaff 1999). Among non-kin, workmates and acquaintances were the most likely to be 
named as difficult.
The second column in each cohort refers to the difficult engaged-in-exchange ties. By and 
large, the percentage of difficult ties among alters who engaged in social exchanges was 
much higher for kin, and especially close female kin, than for non-kin. This finding points to 
the complex and perhaps ambivalent role these alters play in personal networks. The 
percentage of difficult engaged-in-exchange ties was particularly high among wives (27 
percent), mothers (24 percent), and sisters (30 percent) for respondents in the young cohort, 
and among parents (29 and 24 percent for mothers and fathers, respectively) and female 
romantic partners (28 percent) for respondents in the older cohort.
Finally, the lower panel in Table 2 indicates how the difficult engaged-in-exchange ties are 
involved in the networks. We calculated these numbers at the name-level, and they refer to 
the proportion of all alters mentioned in answer to each social exchange question who were 
also named as difficult. Overall, we find similar patterns for the two age groups. About 10 
percent of alters whom respondents named as socializing partners, confidants, and providers 
of practical help were subsequently named as difficult. Alters who provided emergency 
support were slightly more likely than those who did not provide such assistance to be 
viewed as difficult (15 and 11 percent of alters in the young and older cohorts, respectively). 
This finding may reflect the type of alters who typically provide help in emergency 
situations (i.e., close kin). The percentage of alters considered difficult among those who 
provided advice was also relatively high (nearly 15 percent), but only in the young cohort. 
Ties in which respondents provided support to an alter were the most likely to be considered 
difficult: nearly 17 percent of alters to whom respondents provided support in the young 
cohort, and 15 percent in the older cohort, were considered difficult.
WHO ARE THE DIFFICULT TIES AND WHY DO THEY APPEAR IN 
NETWORKS?
Testing for Role-Based Constraints
Our first two hypotheses predict that difficult ties are more likely to be present in contexts 
where individuals have limited ability to exercise choice in selecting their associates or they 
are pressured to socially engage with them. Table 3 presents the models testing these 
hypotheses and shows, for each cohort, results of the two sets of multilevel regressions. The 
first two columns show the models predicting the log-odds that a tie would be named as 
difficult-only (Analyses 1 and 2 for the young and old cohorts, respectively); the last two 
Offer and Fischer
Page 13
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 columns show the analyses predicting the log-odds that a tie would be named as difficult 
engaged-in-exchange (Analyses 3 and 4 for the young and old cohorts, respectively).
Hypothesis 1 postulates that within a family, close kin are more likely to be perceived as 
difficult than are more distant relatives. Overall, our results support this prediction. Analysis 
2 shows that among 50- to 70-year-olds, the log-odds of close relatives, and especially of 
female relatives, being named only in response to the “difficult” name-eliciting question 
were significantly higher than for more distant relatives. Mothers, adult daughters, and 
sisters were over twice as likely as more distant relatives to be named as difficult-only ties. 
To better illustrate this effect, for each kin category we calculated the predicted probability 
of being named a difficult-only tie while holding all other alter- and individual-level 
variables constant at their mean levels. Figure 1 presents these probabilities and shows that 
mother, daughters, and sisters have an approximately 10 percent probability of being 
perceived as a difficult-only tie. We found no such effect for respondents in the young cohort 
(see Analysis 1). This important age-group difference may reflect the higher demands 
imposed by elderly relatives on advanced middle-aged respondents, and these respondents’ 
lower ability to respond to them. The older cohort may thus view relatives as exclusively 
difficult and burdensome. Or perhaps among young respondents, close kin are more often a 
source of support.
The results in Table 3 further indicate that close relatives were substantially more likely to 
be named as both difficult and otherwise engaged in social exchange than were more distant 
relatives. In the young cohort, wives, male romantic partners, mothers, brothers, and sisters 
had higher log-odds of being named as difficult engaged-in-exchange alters than did other 
relatives (Analysis 3). In the older cohort, female romantic partners, mothers, fathers, 
daughters, sons, and sisters had higher log-odds of being named as difficult engaged-in-
exchange alters (Analysis 4). To ease interpretation, for each kin category we calculated the 
predicted probability of the alter being named as a difficult engaged-in-exchange tie. Figure 
2 presents the results. The probability of being named a difficult engaged-in-exchange tie 
was highest in the young cohort for sisters (14 percent) and wives (12 percent), and in the 
old cohort for aging parents (approximately 12 percent for both mothers and fathers).
Taken together, and consistent with Hypothesis 1, these findings suggest that relationships to 
close kin, perhaps due to the familial obligations these relationships entail and their level of 
intensity and embeddedness, are more likely to be viewed as difficult or ambivalent (i.e., 
involve both supportive and burdensome experiences). The results also highlight the 
particular role of female kin as a source of difficulty in networks.
Hypothesis 2 makes a similar prediction with respect to ties outside the family: ties in more 
constraining and less voluntary contexts are more likely to be named difficult. The results in 
Table 3 provide some support for our prediction. As expected, in both the young and old 
cohorts, workmates had higher, and friends lower, log-odds of being labeled as difficult-only 
ties (Analyses 1 and 2, respectively). Figure 3 presents the predicted probabilities we 
calculated for each non-kin role relationship category. Among 21- to 30-year-olds (panel A), 
workmates had a 15 percent probability of being named as difficult-only ties, whereas the 
probability for non-workmates was reduced by more than half. We find a similar trend, but 
Offer and Fischer
Page 14
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of smaller magnitude, among the 50- to 70-year-olds (panel B). By contrast, the probability 
of friends being named as difficult-only ties was as low as 4 percent in the young cohort and 
2 percent in the old cohort. The probability of alters who were not considered friends being 
named difficult-only was substantially higher (16 and over 10 percent in the young and old 
cohorts, respectively). Contrary to our expectation, neighbors were rather less likely to be 
named as difficult-only ties (and only in the young cohort, see Analysis 1). Furthermore, we 
found no effect for any of the other non-kin role relationships.
Testing for Interaction-Based Constraints
Hypothesis 3 tests the interaction-based constraints. It posits that alters providing more 
critical forms of support are more likely to be named difficult than are alters who provide 
less critical forms of support. Overall, however, the results do not support this expectation. 
As Analyses 3 and 4 in Table 3 indicate, none of the types of support received from alters 
was significantly associated with the log-odds of an alter being labeled difficult, except for 
giving advice to the respondent in the old cohort (Analysis 4). By contrast, alters who were 
recipients of respondents’ help were important sources of difficulty in networks. Alters 
whom respondents helped had substantially higher log-odds of being named difficult ties 
compared to alters whom respondents did not name as recipients of their help. Figure 4 
displays the calculated probabilities for these effects: they suggest that much of the burden 
in networks is driven by helping others.
In additional analyses, we examined which other types of social exchange are associated 
with alters being perceived as difficult by excluding alters to whom respondents provided 
support. Because of the overall low percentages of difficult ties in these categories, we 
estimated a logistic regression model at the alter-level rather than a multilevel model. Figure 
5 presents the results and shows the predicted probabilities that an alter would be named 
difficult by type of social exchange (for full results see the online supplement). In line with 
Hypothesis 3, the results indicate that in the older cohort (panel A), providing emergency 
help is significantly associated with being labeled as difficult. This finding suggests that 
individuals may keep critical helpers in their network even if they are difficult because of the 
support they may receive from them in times of need. In the younger cohort (panel B), 
confiding is associated with lower, and advice with higher, log-odds that an alter will be 
named difficult.
According to Hypothesis 4, reciprocated relationships (i.e., those in which the respondent 
both receives support from and provides support to the alter) should be less likely to be 
considered difficult than non-reciprocated relationships (i.e., those in which the respondent 
only receives support from the alter). Although none of the types of support received from 
alters were statistically significant, we were able to test this hypothesis about reciprocation 
because we found that providing support to an alter is associated with an increased 
likelihood of the alter being named a difficult tie. Thus, in the next stage, we examined 
whether the effect of providing support to an alter was counterbalanced by help received 
from the alter. We tested this by adding to the model interaction terms between the variable 
providing support to the alter and the five exchange variables tapping support received from 
the alter (see Table 4). By and large, the results do not support Hypothesis 4. For the 
Offer and Fischer
Page 15
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 younger cohort, receiving support from an alter did not matter much—none of the 
interaction terms were statistically significant. In the older cohort, only the interaction effect 
with receiving advice from an alter was significant. Alters to whom respondents provided 
support who also gave advice had lower log-odds of being labeled difficult than did alters 
who did not give advice but received support from respondents. None of the other interaction 
effects were significant.
Considering the strong effect of providing support to alters, in a post-hoc analysis we 
examined whether this effect varies by who the alter is. That is, we examined whether 
providing support to certain kinds of alters was considered especially burdensome and 
difficult. We tested this possibility by adding interaction terms between providing support to 
alter and role relationship. The results, presented in Table 5, reveal several interesting 
results. Among the younger cohort, providing support to wives and sisters, compared to 
others, was associated with higher log-odds of that woman being seen as difficult. Providing 
support to acquaintances was also associated with higher log-odds that the alter would be 
viewed as difficult, perhaps due to the low social expectations involved in relationships with 
acquaintances. In the older cohort, we found significant effects for parents and sons. To 
better illustrate these effects, we calculated their predicted probabilities (see Figure 6). 
Among the 50- to 70-year-olds, both mothers and fathers to whom respondents provided 
support had a 25 percent probability of being viewed as difficult, compared to only 8 percent 
for other relatives whom respondents helped. The predicted probability for female romantic 
partners was also 25 percent, but the effect was not statistically significant. We found similar 
probabilities for providing support to wives and sisters in the younger cohort. We thus 
conclude that the perception of difficulty associated with providing support varies by who 
the person is who receives that support.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Previous research points to the detrimental effect of difficult ties for individuals’ health and 
well-being (Ailshire and Burgard 2012; Bertera 2005; Durden et al. 2007; Lee and 
Szinovacz 2016; Lund et al. 2014; Rook 2003, 2015), yet little is known about who people 
find to be difficult and burdensome, what makes relationships with these individuals 
difficult, and why these relationships are present in networks. The extensive multifaceted 
egocentric method used in UCNets allowed us to address these issues and expand on 
previous studies by shedding new light on the sources and mechanisms of difficulty in 
personal networks.
Our findings show that the vast majority of participants (about three-quarters in the younger 
cohort and two-thirds in the older cohort) nominated at least one person in their network as 
difficult or demanding. The proportion of difficult alters in a network, however, was 
relatively small, and even a smaller fraction were named solely as difficult alters who did not 
take part in any type of exchange with respondents. This finding, that most alters were not 
considered difficult, can be explained by people’s tendency to avoid or exclude relationships 
that weigh on them (Harrigan and Yap 2017; Ikking and van Tillburg 1999; Nelson 2005; 
Offer 2012). However, even though they constituted a minority, difficult ties did exist in 
networks. Theories of tie formation, in either the agentic or the structure of opportunity 
Offer and Fischer
Page 16
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 approach, have not been applied to explain the existence and persistence of difficult ties in 
personal networks. The major contribution of this study is our examination of the different 
types of constraints that may pressure people to interact with others whom they would 
otherwise prefer to avoid or disengage from.
With respect to role-based constraints, the results support Hypothesis 2: difficult alters are 
likely to be found in contexts where individuals have relatively low levels of freedom and 
where associations are less voluntary. Friends were substantially less likely, and workmates 
more likely, to be mentioned in networks as solely difficult. Contrary to Hypothesis 2, 
however, neighbors were not more likely to be seen as difficult. This result may seem 
surprising, given the popular view that depicts neighbors as noisy and nosy. In fact, 
respondents in the younger cohort viewed their neighbors as less difficult than other alters. 
This result may reflect younger participants’ greater physical mobility or their greater 
selectivity in dealing with neighbors.
As Hypothesis 1 postulates, close family appear to be a particularly constraining context. 
Close kin were substantially more likely to be considered difficult yet also engaged in 
exchange, compared to more distant kin and non-kin. Many ties with close kin include 
negative elements, perhaps because close family ties may, due to their nature and long 
duration, generate more multifaceted and intensive interactions, or because such ties are hard 
for individuals to drop due to strong normative constraints, or both (see the ambivalence 
literature, e.g., Birditt and Fingerman 2013; Connidis and McMullin 2002; Fingerman et al. 
2004; Lee and Szinovacz 2016). This finding suggests that despite demographic and cultural 
changes of the past four decades and the prevalent discourse about the weakening of the 
family, expectations from kin and a sense of familial responsibility remain strong (Bengtson 
2001; Connidis 2015; Johnson 2000; Silverstein et al. 2006; Swartz 2009). Analyses we 
conducted with a subsample from the UCNets10 support this interpretation by showing that 
respondents felt substantially more obligated to close kin than to more distant kin and non-
kin (see results in the online supplement).
Another possible explanation is related to the level of embeddedness in networks. People 
may find it difficult to avoid or disengage from burdensome ties in highly interconnected 
contexts because, as Feld (1981) explains, the amount of constraint in such contexts makes 
each tie highly dependent on the entire set of relationships (for empirical support, see Burt 
2000). This is most typical of close family. We found some preliminary support for this view 
using a subsample of names: alters named as difficult were more likely to know well most of 
the other alters in the subsample (i.e., they were more highly embedded) than alters who 
were not named as difficult. This effect was especially prevalent among close kin (see results 
in the online supplement).11 Future research will benefit from a more comprehensive 
10Respondents went through more intensive questioning about a subsample of up to five alters. For these names, respondents were 
asked, among other questions, about the extent to which they felt obligated to the alter if the alter needed a big favor. Alters in the 
subsample were drawn from the six name-eliciting questions and excluded members of the household who were kin. Of the names 
offered in answer to each of the six questions, the procedure took the first name that qualified. Exploratory analyses showed that alters 
in the subsample tended to be more intimate than alters in the overall sample, but otherwise we saw no differences between the 
subsample and the overall sample of alters.
Offer and Fischer
Page 17
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 investigation of the role of network structure, including embeddedness, in the maintenance 
of difficult ties.
We also found that older respondents were more likely than the younger cohort to name 
close kin as difficult. This finding may reflect the particular status of 50- to 70-year-olds, 
who, sandwiched between two generations, face competing demands for their time and 
resources from adult children and aging parents. Studies show that today middle-aged 
parents continue to support their adult children for long periods of time (Furstenberg 2010; 
Settersten and Ray 2010; Swartz 2009). Simultaneously, because of the increase in 
longevity, these mature adults may also need to provide care for their elderly and often frail 
parents (Birditt and Fingerman 2013; Grundy and Henretta 2006). Such dual obligations to 
the generations above and below can be a major source of stress, conflict, and strain for 50- 
to 70-year-olds, especially considering that at this age they themselves may start 
experiencing health, economic, and other challenges that make it harder to support others.
Additionally, respondents in the older cohort were almost two times more likely to label as 
difficult their aging parents than their adult children, suggesting that dealing with aging 
parents is more burdensome than dealing with adult children. This interpretation is 
consistent with the intergenerational stake hypothesis, that parents are more emotionally 
invested in their children and report better quality relationships with them than with their 
parents (Giarrusso, Feng, and Bengtson 2004). The finding from the model with interaction 
effects in the older cohort, showing that the association between difficulty and providing 
assistance to aging parents is stronger than the association with providing assistance to adult 
children, further supports this interpretation.
Another important family-related finding indicates that female relatives were generally more 
likely than male relatives to be named as either difficult-only ties or as difficult engaged-in-
exchange ties. This gendered pattern may be explained by women’s greater involvement in 
kinship networks (Fischer 1982a; Roschelle 1997; Sarkisian and Gerstel 2004; Wellman and 
Wortley 1990). Women typically assume the role of household managers and kin-keepers 
who bear the major responsibility for maintaining relationships with relatives (Gerstel and 
Gallagher 1993) and planning and organizing family activities and events (Daly 2002; Shaw 
2008). Women’s more intensive contact and interaction with kin, and greater sense of 
obligation to kin, may make them more vulnerable to criticism and stress and provide fodder 
for tension and conflict (Connidis and McMullin 2002; Gerstel and Gallagher 1993; Offer 
2014).
This study also examined interaction-based constraints for alters who were engaged in a 
network. The results do not support Hypothesis 3, that alters providing more critical types of 
support are more likely to be perceived as difficult than alters providing less critical support. 
Almost none of the variables tapping support received from an alter were a significant 
11In the subsample, respondents were asked how well each pair of names knew each other (“know well,” “know a little,” or “do not 
know each other at all”). Answers to this question allowed us to calculate a measure of centrality, or embeddedness, for each alter in 
the subsample. At the descriptive preliminary level, we found that alters named as difficult had, on average and other traits held 
constant, higher centrality scores than alters who were not named as difficult (see results in the online supplement). Most of these ties 
were close kin (the relatively small size of the subsample did not allow us to estimate multilevel models).
Offer and Fischer
Page 18
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 predictor of being named in the “difficult” question. By contrast, providing support to an 
alter was a major source of difficulty in relationships (for similar results, see Durden et al. 
2007; Lincoln 2000; Rook 2015). Furthermore, we did not find evidence to support 
Hypothesis 4, that reciprocated exchanges would be related to reduced difficulty compared 
to unreciprocated exchanges. Receiving support from alters did not attenuate the effect of 
just providing support to them. These results seem to deviate from previous studies, which, 
based on the norm of reciprocity approach, find that people generally feel more distressed by 
ties from which they overbenefit (i.e., gave less than they received) than by ties from which 
they underbenefit (i.e., gave more than they received) (see review in Uehara 1995). Rather, 
our findings seem to suggest that underbenefiting is a more negative experience.
This interpretation, however, should be taken with much caution because our data reflect 
only the respondent’s perspective and not that of the alter. Considering people’s tendency to 
report that they give more help than they receive (Phan, Blumer, and Demaiter 2009; Uehara 
1995), self-reported data can lead to biased results. Additionally, assessing the effect of 
reciprocity in a relationship based on self-reported information and cross-sectional data is 
problematic because it does not account for generalized forms of reciprocity12 and the 
sometimes long time lag that takes place between receiving and returning support (Ekeh 
1974; Yamagishi and Cook 1993; Sahlins 1972; Stack 1974). These two considerations are 
especially important when dealing with familial relationships (Hansen 2004; Nelson 2005; 
Plickert et al. 2007; Uehara 1990).
Several other study limitations are noteworthy. The question asking respondents to name the 
people they find difficult appeared last in the name-eliciting battery and was preceded by 
questions about positive exchanges. This may have led to the underestimation of the number 
of alters perceived to be difficult in a network. Additionally, although UCNets used an 
extensive name-eliciting methodology tapping a variety of exchanges, several social 
domains were not addressed. Thus, an alter named as a difficult-only tie might have, had we 
asked more name-eliciting questions, been named elsewhere, for example, as someone 
consulted about work issues. This, in turn, may have led to overestimating the number of 
difficult-only ties. Finally, the cross-sectional nature of the data did not allow us to examine 
issues of causality and track difficult ties over time. Longitudinal data, which will be 
available in the next waves of the UCNets, will allow us to examine which difficult ties tend 
to persist in networks over time and which eventually disappear.
Nevertheless, despite these limitations, our study makes an important contribution to the 
literature on personal networks. By focusing on role- and interaction-based constraints, an 
insufficiently addressed issue in previous research, we help identify who is viewed as 
difficult in personal networks and better understand why they are there. As such, this study 
provides a more comprehensive and complex view of personal networks, which is important 
for understanding the functioning of networks and their enduring role in the lives of 
individuals.
12The conditions and forms of return under generalized reciprocity are highly flexible and not stipulated in advance. Unlike restricted 
or balanced reciprocity, to use Sahlins’s (1972) typology, generalized reciprocity does not require immediate return, return in the same 
domain, or even return from the same party (see examples in Stack 1974; Uehara 1990).
Offer and Fischer
Page 19
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Ori Schwartz, the University of California Social Network Study’s (UCNets) Executive Director, 
Leora Lawton, and participants, and the four ASR anonymous reviewers for their excellent comments and 
suggestions. We also thank the Center for Economic and Social Research at the University of South California for 
development and data management, especially programmer Bart Orriens, and UCNets fieldwork managers, Kenric 
Erickson and Cat Conti.
Funding
This research is supported by National Institute of Aging Grant R01 AG041955-01, Claude S. Fischer, principal 
investigator.
APPENDIX
Table A1
Percentages for Respondent-Level Variables, by Cohort (Unweighted)
21- to 30-Year-Olds
(n = 480)
50- to 70-Year-Olds
(n = 666)
Male
31.3
35.7
Age 50 to 60
44.6
Race/ethnicity
 White
50.0
75.2***
 Asian
29.0
10.0***
 Latino
14.8
6.0***
 Black and other
6.3
8.7
Married
11.3
46.6***
Partnered
51. 7
16.7***
Foreign-born
19.0
13.1**
New resident in towna
59.8
5.9***
Education
 Less than bachelor’s degree
23.5
29.9**
 Bachelor’s degree
54.2
24.8***
 More than bachelor’s degree
22.3
35.3***
Incomeb
 Low (up to $35,000)
49.0
18.3***
 Medium ($35,000 to $75,000)
27.1
26.9
 High ($75,000 and higher)
24.0
54.8***
Self-reported health
 Excellent
64.8
58.3*
 Good
24.4
24.9
 Fair or bad
10.8
16.8**
No health problemc
78.0
67.0***
Network sized
11.24
(4.25)
10.33***
(4.47)
Offer and Fischer
Page 20
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21- to 30-Year-Olds
(n = 480)
50- to 70-Year-Olds
(n = 666)
Prop kin in networkd
35.62
(19.43)
40.25***
(24.02)
Web
71.0
24.0***
Facebook
59.4
Personal reference
7.3
aLiving in current town for two or fewer years.
bTotal household income (before taxes) for married or partnered respondents; individual income for respondent living alone 
or with otherwise unrelated roommates.
cHealth problem refers to serious illness, recent hospitalization, and disability.
dMean and standard deviation (in parentheses) calculated at the aggregated person-level.
*p < .05;
**p < .01;
***p < .001 (two-tailed tests) for differences between cohorts.
Table A2
Alter Descriptors, Percentages by Cohort (Weighted)
21- to 30-Year-Olds
(n = 5,022 alters)
50- to 70-Year-Olds
(n = 6,613 alters)
Alter Descriptors
 Female (for non-kin)
32.6
35.9***
 Same age
62.5
44.4***
 Older
33.0
13.3***
 Met in past year
15.5
5.4***
 Emotionally close
45.0
46.3
 Share household
13.0
9.9***
 Live within five min.
20.8
22.3*
 Live over one hour away
30.3
21.9***
 Same religion
49.2
45.9***
 Same race
65.9
71.7***
 Different political opinion
22.9
18.1***
*p < .05;
**p < .01;
***p < .001 (two-tailed tests) for differences between cohorts.
Biographies
Shira Offer is an Associate Professor at the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at 
Bar-Ilan University, Israel. She received her Ph.D. in Sociology from the University of 
Chicago. Her research focuses on personal networks, social support and reciprocity, time use 
and family dynamics, and work and family. Her work appears in various journals, including 
the American Sociological Review, Journal of Marriage and Family, Social Forces, Social 
Science Research, and Gender & Society. For more information and downloads visit https://
biu.academia.edu/ShiraOffer
Offer and Fischer
Page 21
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Claude S. Fischer is Professor of the Graduate School in Sociology at the University of 
California, Berkeley. His recent books deal with social change over the 20th century (Fischer 
and Hout, Century of Difference, 2006), the social history of American culture (Made in 
America, 2010), and developments in Americans’ personal ties (Still Connected: Family and 
Friends in America Since 1970 Still Connected: Family and Friends in America Since 
2011). A collection of his columns for the Boston Review appeared in 2014 as Lurching 
Toward Happiness in America. His major current project, funded by the National Institute of 
Aging, is a panel study of how personal ties change.
References
Ailshire, Jennifer A., Burgard, Sarah A. Family Relationships and Troubled Sleep among U.S. Adults: 
Examining the Influences of Contact Frequency and Relationship Quality. Journal of Health and 
Social Behavior. 2012; 53(2):248–62. [PubMed: 22653715] 
Antonucci, Toni C., Fiori, Katherine L., Birditt, Kira, Jackey, Lisa MH. Convoys of Social Relations: 
Integrating Life-Span and Life-Course Perspectives. In: Lerner, RM.Lamb, ME., Freund, AM., 
editors. The Handbook of Life-Span Development, Vol. 2 Social and Emotional Development. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2010. p. 434-73.
Antonucci, Toni C., Fuhrer, Rebecca, Jackson, James S. Social Support and Reciprocity: A Cross-
Ethnic and Cross-National Perspective. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. 1990; 7(4):
519–30.
Bengtson, Vern L. Beyond the Nuclear Family: The Increasing Importance of Multigenerational 
Bonds. Journal of Marriage and Family. 2001; 63(1):1–16.
Bertera, Elizabeth M. Mental Health in U.S. Adults: The Role of Positive Social Support and Social 
Negativity in Personal Relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. 2005; 22(1):33–
48.
Birditt, Kira S., Antonucci, Toni C. Relationship Quality Profiles and Well-Being among Married 
Adults. Journal of Family Psychology. 2007; 21(4):595–604. [PubMed: 18179331] 
Birditt, Kira S., Fingerman, Karen L. Parent-Child and Intergenerational Relationships in Adulthood. 
In: Fine, MA., Finchman, FD., editors. Handbook of Family Theories: A Content-Based Approach. 
New York: Taylor & Francis; 2013. p. 71-87.
Birditt, Kira S., Jackey, Lisa MH., Antonucci, Toni C. Longitudinal Patterns of Negative Relationship 
Quality across Adulthood. Journal of Gerontology Series B: Psychological and Social Sciences. 
2009; 64B(1):55–64.
Blau, Peter M. Exchange and Power in Social Life New Brunswick. NJ: Transaction Publishers; 1986. 
Blau, Peter M., Schwartz, Joseph E. Crosscutting Social Circles. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction 
Publishers; 1984. 
Blieszner, Rosemary, Roberto, Karen A. Friendship across the Life Span: Reciprocity in Individual and 
Relationship Development. In: Lang, F., L, K., editors. Growing Together: Personal Relationships 
across the Life Span. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2004. p. 159-82.
Bourdieu, Pierre. The Forms of Capital. In: Richardson, JG., editor. Handbook of Theory and Research 
for the Sociology of Education. New York: Greenwood; 1986. p. 241-58.
Brashears, Matthew E. ‘Trivial’ Topics and Rich Ties: The Relationship between Discussion Topic, 
Alter Role, and Resource Availability Using the ‘Important Matters’ Name Generator. Sociological 
Science. 2014; 1:493–511.
Brashears, Matthew E., Brashears, Laura A. The Enemy of My Friend Is Easy to Remember: Balance 
as a Compression Heuristic. Advances in Group Processes. 2016; 33:1–31.
Burt, Ronald S. Decay Functions. Social Networks. 2000; 22:1–28.
Chen, Yixin, Feeley, Thomas H. Social Support, Social Strain, Loneliness, and Well-Being among 
Older Adults: An Analysis of the Health and Retirement Study. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships. 2014; 31(2):141–61.
Offer and Fischer
Page 22
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cohen, Sheldon, Janicki-Deverts, Denise. Can We Improve Our Physical Health by Altering Our 
Social Networks? Perspectives on Psychological Science. 2009; 4(4):375–78. [PubMed: 
20161087] 
Coleman, James. Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. American Journal of Sociology. 
1988; 94:S95–S120.
Coleman, James. Foundations of Social Theory Cambridge. MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press; 1990. 
Connidis, Ingrid A. Exploring Ambivalence in Family Ties: Progress and Prospects. Journal of 
Marriage and Family. 2015; 77(1):77–95.
Connidis, Ingrid A., McMullin, Julie A. Sociological Ambivalence and Family Ties: A Critical 
Perspective. Journal of Marriage and Family. 2002; 64(3):558–67.
Kerry Daly J. Time, Gender, and the Negotiation of Family Schedules. Symbolic Interaction. 2002; 
25(3):323–42.
Desmond, Matthew. Disposable Ties and the Urban Poor. American Journal of Sociology. 2012; 
117(5):1295–1335.
Domínguez, Sylvia, Watkins, Celeste. Creating Networks for Survival and Mobility: Social Capital 
among African American and Latin American Low-Income Mothers. Social Problems. 2003; 
50(1):111–35.
Doreian, Patrick, Conti, Norman. Social Context, Spatial Structure, and Network Structure. Social 
Networks. 2012; 34(1):111–35.
Durden, Emily D., Hill, Terrence D., Angel, Ronald J. Social Demands, Social Supports, and 
Psychological Distress among Low-Income Women. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. 
2007; 24(3):343–61.
Ekeh, Peter. Social Exchange Theory: The Two Traditions. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 
1974. 
Emerson, Richard M. Power-Dependence Relations. American Sociological Review. 1962; 27(1):31–
41.
Emirbayer, Mustafa, Goodwin, Jeff. Network Analysis, Culture, and the Problem of Agency. American 
Journal of Sociology. 1994; 99(6):1411–54.
Entwisle, Barbara, Faust, Katherine, Rindfuss, Ronal R., Kaneda, Toshiko. Networks and Contexts: 
Variation in the Structure of Social Ties. American Journal of Sociology. 2007; 112(5):1495–1533.
Everett, Martin G., Borgatti, Stephen P. Networks Containing Negative Ties. Social Networks. 2014; 
38:111–20.
Feld, Scott L. The Focused Organization of Social Ties. American Journal of Sociology. 1981; 86(5):
1015–35.
Feld, Scott L. Social Structural Determinants of Similarity among Associates. American Sociological 
Review. 1982; 47(6):797–801.
Feld, Scott L., Carter, William C. Foci of Activity as Changing Contexts for Friendship. In: Adams, 
RG., Allan, G., editors. Placing Friendship in Context. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press; 1998. p. 136-52.
Fingerman, Karen L., Hay, Elizabeth L., Birditt, Kira S. The Best of Ties, the Worst of Ties: Close, 
Problematic, and Ambivalent Social Relationships. Journal of Marriage and Family. 2004; 66(3):
792–808.
Fischer, Claude S. To Dwell among Friends: Personal Networks in Town and City. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press; 1982a. 
Fischer, Claude S. What Do We Mean by ‘Friend’? Social Networks. 1982b; 3(4):287–306.
Fischer, Claude S., Hout, Michael. Century of Difference: How America Changed in the Last One 
Hundred Years. New York: Russell Sage Foundation; 2006. 
Furstenberg, Frank F, Jr. On a New Schedule: Transitions to Adulthood and Family Change. The 
Future of Children. 2010; 20(1):67–87. [PubMed: 20364622] 
Furman, Frida K. Facing the Mirror: Older Women and Beauty Shop Culture. New York: Routledge; 
1997. 
Offer and Fischer
Page 23
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gerstel, Naomi, Gallagher, Sally K. Caring for Kith and Kin: Gender, Employment, and the 
Privatization of Care. Social Problems. 1993; 41(4):519–39.
Giarrusso, Roseann, Feng, Due, Bengtson, Vern L. The Intergenerational Stake Phenomenon over 20 
Years. Annual Review of Gerontology and Geriatrics. 2004; 24:55–76.
Goering, John, Feins, Judith D. Choosing a Better Life: Evaluating the Moving to Opportunity Social 
Experiment. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press; 2003. 
Gouldner, Alwin W. The Norm of Reciprocity. American Sociological Review. 1960; 25(2):161–78.
Granovetter, Mark. Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness. American 
Journal of Sociology. 1985; 91(3):481–510.
Granovetter, Mark. A Theoretical Agenda for Economic Sociology. In: Guillén, MF.Collins, 
R.England, P., Meyer, M., editors. The New Economic Sociology: Developments in an Emerging 
Field. New York: Russell Sage Foundation; 2002. p. 35-60.
Grundy, Emily, Henretta, John C. Between Elderly Parents and Adult Children: A New Look at the 
Intergenerational Care Provided by the ‘Sandwich Generation’. Ageing & Society. 2006; 26:702–
722.
Hackstaff, Karla B. Marriage in a Culture of Divorce Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 1999
Hansen, Karen V. The Asking Rules of Reciprocity in Networks of Care for Children. Qualitative 
Sociology. 2004; 2(4):421–37.
Hansen, Karen V. Not-So-Nuclear Families: Class, Gender, and Networks of Care New Brunswick. NJ: 
Rutgers University Press; 2005. 
Harrigan, Nicholas, Yap, Janice. Avoidance in Negative Ties: Inhibiting Closure, Reciprocity and 
Homophily. Social Networks. 2017; 28(1):126–41.
Homans, George. Social Behavior as Exchange. American Journal of Sociology. 1958; 63(6):597–606.
House, James S., Umberson, Debra, Landis, Karl R. Structures and Processes of Social Support. 
Annual Review of Sociology. 1988; 14:293–318.
Ikkink, Karen, van Tilburg, Theo. Broken Ties: Reciprocity and Other Factors Affecting the 
Termination of Older Adults’ Relationships. Social Networks. 1999; 21(2):131–46.
Johnson, Colleen L. Perspectives on American Kinship in the Later 1990s. Journal of Marriage and the 
Family. 2000; 62(3):623–39.
Kadushin, Charles. Understanding Social Networks. New York: Oxford University Press; 2012. 
Kawachi, Ichiro, Berkman, Lisa F. Social Ties and Mental Health. Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of 
the New York Academy of Medicine. 2001; 78(3):458–67. [PubMed: 11564849] 
Killworth, Christopher McCarty, Shelley, Gene A., Robinson, Scott. Comparing Four Different 
Methods for Measuring Personal Social Networks. Social Networks. 1990; 12(3):179–215.
Kossinets, Gueorgi, Watts, Duncan J. Origins of Homophily in an Evolving Social Network. American 
Journal of Sociology. 2009; 115(2):405–450.
Lawler, Edward J. An Affect Theory of Social Exchange. American Journal of Sociology. 2001; 
107(2):321–52.
Lazarsfeld, Paul F., Merton, Robert K. Friendship as a Social Process: A Substantive and 
Methodological Analysis. In: Berger, M.Abel, T., Page, C., editors. Freedom and Control in 
Modern Society. New York: Van Nostrand; 1954. p. 18-66.
Lee, Barret A., Oropesa, RS., Kanan, James W. Neighborhood Context and Residential Mobility. 
Demography. 1994; 31(2):249–70. [PubMed: 7926188] 
Lee, Hyo Jung, Szinovacz, Maximiliane E. Positive, Negative, and Ambivalent Interactions with 
Family and Friends: Associations with Well-Being. Journal of Marriage and Family. 2016; 78(3):
660–79.
Leffler, Ann, Krannich, Richard S., Gillespie, Dair L. Contact, Support, and Friction: Three Faces of 
Networks in Community Life. Sociological Perspectives. 1986; 29(3):337–55.
Levine, Judith. Ain’t No Trust: How Bosses, Boyfriends, and Bureaucrats Fail Low-Income Mothers 
and Why It Matters Berkeley. University of California Press; 2013. 
Lin, Nan. Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action Cambridge. UK: Cambridge 
University Press; 2001. 
Offer and Fischer
Page 24
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lincoln, Karen D. Social Support, Negative Social Interactions, and Psychological Well-Being. Social 
Service Review. 2000; 74(2):231–52. [PubMed: 26594064] 
Lund, Rikke, Christensen, Ulla, Nilsson, Charlotte Juul, Kriegbaum, Margit, Rod, Naja Hulvej. 
Stressful Social Relations and Mortality: A Prospective Cohort Study. Journal of Epidemiology 
and Community Health. 2014; 68:720–27. [PubMed: 24811775] 
Lyons, Brent J., Scott, Brent A. Integrating Social Exchange and Affective Explanations for the 
Receipt of Help and Harm: A Social Network Approach. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes. 2012; 117(1):66–79.
Marin, Alexandra. Are Respondents More Likely to List Alters with Certain Characteristics? 
Implications for Name Generator Data. Social Networks. 2004; 26(4):289–307.
Marin, Alexandra, Hampton, Keith N. Simplifying the Personal Network Name Generator: Alternative 
to Traditional Multiple and Single Name Generator. Field Methods. 2007; 9(2):163–93.
Marsden, Peter V. Core Discussion Networks of Americans. American Sociological Review. 1987; 
52(1):122–31.
Marsden, Peter V. Network Diversity, Subcultures, and Opportunities for Contact. In: Calhoun, 
C.Meyer, MW., Scott, RW., editors. Structures of Power and Constraint, Papers in Honor of Peter 
M Blau. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 1990. p. 397-410.
Mauss, Marcel. The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies. New York: 
Norton; 1990. [1923]
McCallister, Lynne, Fischer, Claude S. A Procedure for Surveying Personal Networks. Sociological 
Methods and Research. 1978; 7(2):131–48.
McPherson, Miller J., Smith-Lovin, Lynn. Homophily in Voluntary Organizations: Status Distance and 
the Composition of Face-to-Face Groups. American Sociological Review. 1987; 52(3):370–79.
McPherson, Miller J., Smith-Lovin, Lynn, Cook, James M. Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social 
Networks. Annual Review of Sociology. 2001; 27:415–44.
Menjívar, Cecilia. Fragmented Ties: Salvadoran Immigrant Networks in America. Berkeley: University 
of California Press; 2000. 
Mok, Diana, Wellman, Barry, Carrasco, Juan. Does Distance Matter in the Age of the Internet? Urban 
Studies. 2010; 47(13):2747–83.
Mollenhorst, Gerald, Völker, Beate, Flap, Henk. Social Contexts and Personal Relationships: The 
Effect of Meeting Opportunities on Similarity of Relationships of Different Strength. Social 
Networks. 2008; 30(1):60–68.
Mollenhorst, Gerald, Völker, Beate, Flap, Henk. Changes in Personal Relationships: How Social 
Contexts Affect the Emergence and Discontinuation of Relationships. Social Networks. 2014; 
37:65–80.
Tourangeau, R., Plewes, TJ., editors. National Research Council. Nonresponse in Social Science 
Surveys: A Research Agenda. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2013. 
Nelson, Margaret K. The Social Economy of Single Motherhood: Raising Children in Rural America. 
New York: Routledge; 2005. 
Offer, Shira. The Burden of Reciprocity: Processes of Exclusion and Withdrawal from Personal 
Networks among Low-Income Families. Current Sociology. 2012; 60(6):788–805.
Offer, Shira. The Costs of Thinking about Work and Family: Mental Labor, Work-Family Spillover, 
and Gender Equality among Parents in Dual-Earner Families. Sociological Forum. 2014; 29(4):
916–36.
Perry, Brea L., Pescosolido, Bernice A. Functional Specificity in Discussion Networks: The Influence 
of General and Problem-Specific Networks on Health Outcomes. Social Networks. 2010; 32(4):
345–57.
Pescosolido, Bernice A. Beyond Rational Choice: The Social Dynamics of How People Seek Help. 
American Journal of Sociology. 1992; 97(4):1096–1138.
Phan, Mai B., Blumer, Nadine, Demaiter, Erin I. Helping Hands: Neighborhood Diversity, Deprivation, 
and Reciprocity of Support in Non-Kin Networks. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. 
2009; 27(6–7):899–918.
Offer and Fischer
Page 25
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Plickert, Gabrielle, Côté, Rochelle R., Wellman, Barry. It’s Not Who You Know, It’s How You Know 
Them: Who Exchanges What with Whom. Social Networks. 2007; 29(3):405–429.
Podolny, Joel M. Status-Based Model of Market Competition. American Journal of Sociology. 1993; 
98(4):829–72.
Portes, Alejandro, Sensenbrenner, Julia. Embeddedness and Immigration: Notes on the Social 
Determinants of Economic Action. American Journal of Sociology. 1992; 98(6):1320–50.
Raudenbush, Stephen W., Bryk, Anthony S. Hierarchical Linear Models. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications; 2002. 
Raudenbush, Stephen W., Bryk, Anthony S., Congdon, Richard. HLM 7.01 for Windows [Computer 
software]. Skokie, IL: Scientific Software International, Inc; 2013. 
Roberto, Karen A., Scott, Jean P. Equity Considerations in the Friendships of Older Adults. Journal of 
Gerontology. 1986; 41(2):241–47. [PubMed: 3950352] 
Rook, Karen S. The Negative Side of Social Interaction: Impact on Psychological Well-Being. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology. 1984; 46(5):1097–1108. [PubMed: 6737206] 
Rook, Karen S. Stressful Aspects of Older Adults’ Social Relationships: Current Theory and Research. 
In: Parris Stephens, MA.Crowther, JN.Hobfoll, SE., Tennenbaum, DL., editors. Stress and Coping 
in Later-Life Families. New York: Hemisphere Publishing Corporation; 1989. p. 173-92.
Rook, Karen S. Exposure and Reactivity to Negative Social Exchanges: A Preliminary Investigation 
Using Daily Time Diaries. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences. 2003; 58B:P100–
P111.
Rook, Karen S. Social Networks in Later Life: Weighing Positive and Negative Effects on Health and 
Well-Being. Current Directions in Psychological Research. 2015; 24(1):45–51.
Roschelle, Anne R. No More Kin: Exploring Race, Class, and Gender in Family Networks. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1997. 
Sahlins, David M. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine and Atherton; 1972. 
Sarkisian, Natalia, Gerstel, Naomi. Kin Supports among Black and Whites: Race and Family 
Organization. American Sociological Review. 2004; 69(6):812–37.
Settersten, Richard A., Ray, Barbara E. Not Quite Adults: Why 20-Somethings Are Choosing a Slower 
Path to Adulthood, and Why It’s Good for Everyone. New York: Bantam Books; 2010. 
Shaw, Benjamin, Krause, Neal, Liang, Jersey, Bennett, Joan. Tracking Changes in Social Relations 
throughout Late Life. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences. 2007; 62B:S90–S99.
Shaw, Susan M. Family Leisure and Changing Ideologies of Parenthood. Sociology Compass. 2008; 
2(2):688–703.
Silverstein, Merrill, Gans, Daphna, Yang, Frances. Intergenerational Support to Aging Parents: The 
Role of Norms and Needs. Journal of Family Issues. 2006; 27(8):1068–84.
Simmel, Georg. Faithfulness and Gratitude. In: Wolff, KH., editor. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. 
New York: Free Press; 1978. p. 379-95.[1950]
Small, Mario L. Unanticipated Gains: Origins of Network Inequality in Everyday Life. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 2009. 
Small, Mario L. Weak Ties and the Core Discussion Network: Why People Regularly Discuss 
Important Matters with Unimportant Alters. Social Networks. 2013; 35(3):470–85.
Small, Mario L., Pamphile, Vontrese Deeds, McMahan, Peter. How Stable Is the Core Discussion 
Network? Social Network. 2015; 40(1):90–102.
Small, Mario L., Sukhu, Christopher. Because They Were There: Access, Deliberation, and the 
Mobilization of Networks for Support. Social Networks. 2016; 47:73–84.
Stack, Carol B. All Our Kin: Strategies for Survival in a Black Community. New York: Harper & Row; 
1974. 
Swartz, Teresa T. Intergenerational Family Relations in Adulthood: Patterns, Variations, and 
Implications in the Contemporary United States. Annual Review of Sociology. 2009; 35:191–
212.
Thibaut, John W., Kelly, Harold H. The Social Psychology of Groups. New York: Wiley; 1959. 
Thoits, Peggy A. Mechanisms Linking Social Ties and Support to Physical and Mental Health. Journal 
of Health and Social Behavior. 2011; 52(2):145–61. [PubMed: 21673143] 
Offer and Fischer
Page 26
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Thomas, Patricia A. Is It Better to Give or to Receive? Social Support and the Well-being of Older 
Adults. Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2010; 
65B:351–57.
Torres, Stacey. Old New York: Late Life in the City. Berkeley: University of California Press; 
Forthcoming
Uehara, Edwina. Dual Exchange Theory, Social Networks, and Informal Social Support. American 
Journal of Sociology. 1990; 96(3):521–57.
Uehara, Edwina. Reciprocity Reconsidered: Gouldner’s ‘Moral Norm of Reciprocity’ and Social 
Support. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. 1995; 12(4):483–502.
van Duijn, Marijtje, van Busschbach, Jooske, Snijder, Tom. Multilevel Analysis of Personal Networks 
as Dependent Variables. Social Networks. 1999; 21(2):187–209.
van Tilburg, Theo. Support Networks Before and After Retirement. Journal of Social and Personality 
Relationships, Special Issue: Social Networks. 1992; 9:433–45.
Vinokur, Amiram D., Schul, Yaacov, Caplan, Robert D. Determinants of Perceived Social Support: 
Interpersonal Transactions, Personal Outlook, and Transient Affective States. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology. 1987; 53(6):1137–45. [PubMed: 3694453] 
Walen, Heather, Lachman, Margie E. Social Support and Strain from Partner, Family, and Friends: 
Costs and Benefits for Men and Women in Adulthood. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships. 2000; 17(1):5–30.
Wellman, Barry, Frank, Kenneth A. Network Capital in a Multilevel World: Getting Support from 
Personal Communities. In: Lin, N.Cook, K., Burt, RS., editors. Social Capital: Theory and 
Research. New York: Aldine de Gruyter; 2001. p. 133-273.
Wellman, Barry, Wortley, Scot. Different Strokes from Different Folks: Community Ties and Social 
Support. American Journal of Sociology. 1990; 96(3):558–88.
Wuthnow, Robert. The Restructuring of American Religion: Society and Faith since World War II. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1988. 
Yamagishi, Toshio, Cook, Karen S. Generalized Exchange and Social Dilemmas. Social Psychology 
Quarterly. 1993; 56(4):235–48.
Offer and Fischer
Page 27
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Predicted Probabilities of Kin Being Named as Difficult-Only Ties (50- to 70-Year-Olds)
Note: All alter- and individual-level variables are held constant at their mean levels.
*p < .05 (two-tailed test) for difference from “other relative.”
Offer and Fischer
Page 28
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Predicted Probabilities of Kin Being Named as Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Ties, by 
Cohort
Note: All alter- and individual-level variables are held constant at their mean levels. In 
younger cohort: effects for mother and sister significant at p < .001; wives significant at p < .
01; male romantic partner and brother significant at p < .05 (compared to other relative). In 
older cohort: effects for mother, father, daughter, son, and sister significant at p < .001; 
female romantic partner significant at p < .01 (compared to other relative).
Offer and Fischer
Page 29
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Predicted Probabilities of Non-Kin Being Named as Difficult-Only Ties
Note: All alter- and individual-level variables are held constant at their mean levels.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001 (two-tailed test).
Offer and Fischer
Page 30
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Predicted Probabilities of Alter Being Named a Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie by Type 
of Social Exchange
Note: All alter- and individual-level variables are held constant at their mean levels.
***p < .001 (two-tailed test).
Offer and Fischer
Page 31
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Predicted Probabilities of Alter Being Named a Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie by Type 
of Social Exchange for Restricted Sample (Excluding Alters Who Provided Support to the 
Respondent)
Note: All alter- and individual-level variables are held constant at their mean levels.
**p < .01; ***p < .001 (two-tailed test).
Offer and Fischer
Page 32
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Predicted Probabilities of Alter Being Named a Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie for 
Providing Support by Kin Categories
Note: All alter- and individual-level variables are held constant at their mean levels. In the 
younger cohort: effects for wife and sister significant at p < .001. In the older cohort: effects 
for mother and son significant at p < .01; father significant at p < .05 (compared to other 
relative).
Offer and Fischer
Page 33
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 34
Table 1
Percentages of Alters in the Network, by Cohort (Weighted)
21- to 30-Year-Olds
(n = 5,022 alters)
50- to 70-Year-Olds
(n = 6,613 alters)
Role Relationship
Kin
 Wife
1.2
3.1***
 Husband
1.3
3.1***
 Female romantic partner
1.7
.8***
 Male romantic partner
3.1
.6***
 Mother
8.0
2.7***
 Father
5.2
1.5***
 Daughter
5.2
 Son
4.5
 Sister
5.1
5.4
 Brother
3.7
3.0*
 Other female relative
4.6
7.2***
 Other male relative
3.7
4.9**
Non-kin
 Housemate
8.7
3.3***
 Neighbor
3.1
7.3***
 Workmate
9.0
8.9
 Schoolmate
12.0
1.7***
 Churchmate
4.9
5.7
 Friend
58.9
53.9***
 Acquaintance
4.1
3.5
Type of Social Exchange
 Socialize
55.8
56.3
 Confide
30.5
29.4
 Advice
30.0
25.3***
 Practical help
22.8
16.5***
 Emergency help
31.5
29.3**
 Provide support to alter
42.0
38.8***
*p < .05;
**p < .01;
***p < .001 (two-tailed tests) for differences between cohorts.
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 35
Table 2
Mean Proportion of Difficult Ties in the Network, by Cohort (Weighted)
21- to 30-Year-Olds
(n = 480 respondents)
50- to 70-Year-Olds
(n = 666 respondents)
Mean Proportion
% Reporting No Difficult 
Alters
Mean Proportion
% Reporting No Difficult 
Alters
Difficult Tiesa
.162
(.149)
25.3
.131***
(.129)
33.0
 Difficult-only ties
.046
(.077)
69.1
.052
(.092)
67.1
 Difficult engaged-in-exchange ties
.117
(.141)
42.0
.079***
(.112)
54.3
Difficult Ties by Role 
Relationshipb
% Difficult-Only
% Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange
% Difficult-Only
% Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange
Kin
 Wife
.0
27.0
.0
13.0*
 Husband
.0
20.0
.0
15.0
 Female romantic partner
.0
14.0
.0
28.0
 Male romantic partner
.0
19.0
.0
14.0
 Mother
4.5
24.0
12.7**
29.0*
 Father
5.6
13.0
2.1
24.0
 Daughter
.0
.0
6.0
16.0
 Son
.0
.0
5.2
19.0
 Sister
5.6
30.0
10.2*
8.0***
 Brother
13.1
13.0
5.7*
5.0*
 Other female relative
11.0
6.0
6.5
8.0
 Other male relative
5.1
7.0
5.8
5.0
Non-kin
 Housemate
3.3
18.0
.7*
24.0
 Neighbor
.7
5.0
2.7
3.0
 Workmate
11.6
6.0
11.7
5.0
 Schoolmate
2.5
9.0
3.6
4.0*
 Churchmate
3.5
5.0
2.9
5.0
 Friend
2.3
7.0
1.9
6.0
 Acquaintance
11.7
9.0
15.5
6.0
Difficult Ties by Type of 
Exchangeb
 Socialize
9.5
8.0**
 Confide
11.8
9.0**
 Advice
14.8
8.0***
 Practical help
9.9
7.0*
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 36
Difficult Ties by Role 
Relationshipb
% Difficult-Only
% Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange
% Difficult-Only
% Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange
 Emergency help
15.2
11.2***
 Provide support to alter
17.1
14.9**
aAggregated person-level measures.
bName-level measures.
*p < .05;
**p < .01;
***p < .001 (two-tailed tests) for differences between cohorts.
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 37
Table 3
Multilevel Results Predicting the Log-Odds an Alter Would Be Named a Difficult Tie: Coefficients (Odds 
Ratios in Parentheses), by Cohort (Weighted)
Difficult-Only Tie
Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
Analysis 1
Analysis 2
Analysis 3
Analysis 4
Intercept
–2.265**
(.104)
–2.599***
(.074)
–4.214***
(.015)
–3.728***
(.024)
Alter-Level Variables
Role Relationship
Kin
 Wife
1.937**
(6.935)
.658
(1.932)
 Husband
1.273
(3.573)
.498
(1.645)
 Female romantic partner
1.036
(2.819)
1.736**
(5.676)
 Male romantic partner
.856*
(2.353)
.964
(2.623)
 Mother
–.703
(.495)
.963*
(2.620)
1.541***
(4.669)
1.848***
(6.350)
 Father
–.724
(.482)
–.190
(.304)
.827
(2.287)
1.716***
(5.563)
 Daughter
.914*
(2.493)
1.036***
(2.819)
 Son
.404
(1.497)
1.231***
(3.424)
 Sister
–.120
(.887)
.820*
(2.271)
2.025***
(7.576)
.691***
(1.995)
 Brother
.899
(2.458)
.083
(1.087)
.875*
(2.400)
.062
(1.064)
  [other relative]
Non-kin
 Housemate
–.587
(.556)
–1.488
(.226)
.278
(1.321)
.547
(1.727)
 Neighbor
–2.265**
(.104)
–.398
(.672)
–.210
(.811)
–.701
(.496)
 Workmate
.844**
(2.327)
.620*
(1.858)
–.251
(.778)
–.149
(.862)
 Schoolmate
–.403
(.668)
–.412
(.662)
.170
(1.185)
–.214
(.807)
 Churchmate
–.355
(.701)
–.359
(.698)
–.182
(.834)
–.030
(.971)
 Friend
–1.392***
(.249)
–1.756***
(.173)
–.244
(.784)
–.090
(.914)
 Acquaintance
.453
(1.574)
.316
(1.372)
.515
(1.673)
.317
(1.373)
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 38
Difficult-Only Tie
Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
Analysis 1
Analysis 2
Analysis 3
Analysis 4
Type of Social Exchange
 Socialize
.041
(1.042)
–.109
(.897)
 Confide
–.403
(.668)
.038
(1.039)
 Advice
.324
(1.383)
–.625***
(.535)
 Practical help
–.001
(.993)
–.131
(.877)
 Emergency help
.057
(1.058)
.198
(1.219)
 Provide support to alter
1.476***
(4.376)
1.421***
(4.143)
Alter Descriptors
Female (for non-kin)
.290
(1.337)
.333
(1.395)
.519
(1.681)
–.164
(.849)
Same age
–.685
(.509)
.238
(1.268)
.563
(1.756)
.479**
(1.615)
Older
–.246
(.782)
.471
(1.602)
.896
(2.449)
.387
(1.472)
Met in last year
–.173
(.841)
–.043
(.958)
–.421
(.656)
–.628
(.534)
Emotionally close
–2.242***
(.106)
–1.576***
(.207)
–.531*
(.588)
–.434**
(.648)
Share household
.768
(2.156)
–.115
(.891)
.276
(1.318)
.732**
(2.080)
Live within five min.
–.100
(.904)
–.738**
(.478)
–.068
(.934)
–.125
(.822)
Live over one hour away
.636*
(1.889)
.417*
(1.516)
–.129
(.879)
–.309
(.734)
Same religion
.048
(1.049)
–.311
(.733)
.110
(1.117)
.213
(1.238)
Same race
–.091
(.913)
.158
(1.171)
–.168
(.846)
–.815
(.831)
Different political opinion
.910***
(2.485)
.521**
(1.683)
.602***
(1.826)
.262
(1.299)
Respondent-Level Variables
Male
–.206
(.813)
–.168
(.845)
–.377
(.686)
–.283
(.754)
Age 50 to 60
.061
(1.063)
–.205
(.815)
Asian
.279
(1.322)
–.660*
(.517)
–.244
(.783)
–.282
(.754)
Latino
.248
(1.281)
.374
(1.453)
–.168
(.845)
.031
(1.031)
Black and other
.549
(1.731)
.701*
(2.016)
–.201
(.818)
–.307
(.736)
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 39
Difficult-Only Tie
Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
Analysis 1
Analysis 2
Analysis 3
Analysis 4
Married
.329
(1.390)
.066
(1.068)
–.696*
(.499)
.018
(1.018)
Partnered
.054
(1.056)
.258
(1.294)
–.278
(.758)
–.242
(.785)
Foreign-born
.473
(1.604)
.550*
(1.775)
–.007
(.993)
.272
(1.312)
New town
–.191
(.826)
.086
(1.09)
–.050
(.952)
–.392
(.676)
Educ. less than BA
–.300
(.741)
–.429*
(.651)
.437
(1.547)
.498**
(1.646)
Educ. BA
–.115
(.891)
.055
(1.057)
.251
(1.285)
.034
(1.034)
Income low
.466
(1.594)
.315
(1.370)
.118
(1.125)
.258
(1.295)
Income med.
–.096
(.908)
.161
(1.175)
.428
(1.535)
.117
(1.124)
Health good
.215
(1.239)
–.004
(.996)
.062
(1.064)
.482**
(1.619)
Health fair/bad
1.129
(.138)
.372
(1.451)
–.109
(.897)
.160
(1.173)
No health problem
–.267
(.766)
–.067
(.936)
–.147
(.863)
–.126
(.882)
Network size
.075**
(1.078)
.036
(1.037)
–.065**
(.937)
.007
(1.007)
Prop. of kin in network
.098
(1.103)
–.722
(.486)
–.207
(.813)
.038
(1.039)
Web
.547
(1.728)
.154
(1.166)
.453
(1.573)
.152
(1.164)
Facebook
–.366
(.693)
–.120
(.896)
Personal reference
–.284
(.752)
.156
(1.168)
N alters
5,022
6,602
4,772
6,238
N respondents
480
666
480
666
Variance component
 Between-person variance
.515
.363
.208
.517
Chi-square (intercept)
596.63***
745.524**
560.077***
745.344**
*p < .05;
**p < .01;
***p < .001 (two-tailed tests).
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 40
Table 4
Multilevel Results Predicting the Log-Odds an Alter Would Be Named a Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie 
with Interactions between Providing Support to Alter and Support Received from Alter: Coefficients (Odds 
Ratios in Parentheses), by Cohort (Weighted)
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
Providing support to alter
1.426***
(4.164)
1.732***
(5.652)
 x socialize
.242
(1.273)
.033
(1.034)
 x confide
–.140
(.869)
–.051
(.950)
 x advice
–.171
(.843)
–.869***
(.420)
 x practical help
–.001
(.999)
–.035
(.966)
 x emergency help
–.008
(.992)
–.075
(.928)
Note: Controlling for alter descriptors and social exchange variables at the name-level and for sociodemographic variables, network size, and 
proportion of kin in network at the person-level.
*p < .05;
**p < .01;
***p < .001 (two-tailed tests).
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Offer and Fischer
Page 41
Table 5
Multilevel Results Predicting the Log-Odds an Alter Would Be Named a Difficult Engaged-in-Exchange Tie 
with Interactions between Providing Support to Alter and Role Relationship: Coefficients (Odds Ratios in 
Parentheses), by Cohort (Weighted)
21- to 30-Year-Olds
50- to 70-Year-Olds
Providing support to alter
1.120***
(3.034)
1.414***
(4.111)
Kin
 x wife
1.836***
(6.274)
–.437
(.646)
 x husband
.727
(2.069)
–.438
(.645)
 x female romantic partner
.483
(2.198)
1.283
(3.607)
 x male romantic partner
.788
(1.621)
–.713
(.490)
 x mother
.688
(1.989)
1.243**
(3.465)
 x father
–.444
(.641)
1.313*
(3.717)
 x daughter
.535
(1.708)
 x son
.788**
(2.199)
 x sister
1.708***
(5.520)
–.089
(.915)
 x brother
.378
(1.460)
–.539
(.583)
Non-kin
 x housemate
–.399
(.712)
.274
(1.315)
 x neighbor
–.055
(.946)
–.408
(.665)
 x workmate
–.072
(.931)
.009
(1.009)
 x schoolmate
.364
(1.439)
–1.048
(.351)
 x churchmate
–.856
(.425)
.601
(1.824)
 x friend
.020
(1.021)
–.257
(.773)
 x acquaintance
1.250*
(3.492)
–.025
(.976)
Note: Controlling for alter descriptors and social exchange variables at the alter-level and for sociodemographic variables, network size, and 
proportion of kin in network at the person-level.
*p < .05;
**p < .01;
***p < .001 (two-tailed tests).
Am Sociol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 01.
