 T I S S UE T H E R A P E U T I C S
Distilling complexity to advance cardiac
tissue engineering
Brenda M. Ogle,1 Nenad Bursac,2 Ibrahim Domian,3 Ngan F. Huang,4,5
Philippe Menasché,6 Charles E. Murry,7 Beth Pruitt,8 Milica Radisic,9
Joseph C. Wu,10 Sean M. Wu,11 Jianyi Zhang,12
Wolfram-Hubertus Zimmermann,13 Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic14*
The promise of cardiac tissue engineering is in the ability to recapitulate in vitro the
functional aspects of a healthy heart and disease pathology as well as to design replace-
ment muscle for clinical therapy. Parts of this promise have been realized; others have
not. In a meeting of scientists in this field, five central challenges or “big questions” were
articulated that, if addressed, could substantially advance the current state of the art in
modeling heart disease and realizing heart repair.
INTRODUCTION
Heart is the first functional organ that forms
in the human body. Only a few weeks into
gestation, the heart starts to beat and pump
blood and continues to do so throughout a
lifetime. As soon as its development is com-
plete, the capacity of the heart to regenerate
after damage or disease becomes only min-
imal. As a result, cardiovascular disease re-
mains the main cause of death worldwide,
prompting the need for new effective approaches
to heart repair. In contrast to all other options—
cell cycle reentry, administration of therapeu-
tic cells, and recruitment of endogenous car-
diac and vascular progenitors—cardiac tissue
engineering is focused on providing a defini-
tive solution by growing or regenerating heart
muscle and vasculature.
Both the in vitro and in vivo methods tend
to recapitulate cell-cell and cell-matrix inter-
actions and the original physical structure
and physiological signaling in the heart. Al-
though the field is in its infancy, the ultimate
goal of tissue engineering is to build function-
al tissues or whole organs for transplantation.
Current efforts focus on the creation of indi-
vidual tissues (the vasculature, valves, and
myocardium) in sizes that are limited by the
existing tissue-engineering technologies. Our
meeting focused on the challenges and oppor-
tunities for growing functional myocardium,
with two major translational goals: in vitro
modeling of disease and designing of cardiac
grafts for transplantation.
To efficiently pump blood through the
body, the myocardium provides the necessary
contractile force regulated by a highly special-
ized electrical conduction system that responds
to external stimuli. To support these functions,
the tissue draws a high metabolic demand and
requires comprehensive vascular support. To
minimize complexity, myocardial tissue engi-
neering has sought to develop minimally func-
tional tissue units that are three-dimensional
(3D) from the cellular perspective but thin
enough to benefit from simplified methods for
exchange of nutrients—most critically, oxygen—
and metabolites. Recent advances in cardiac
tissue engineering include the generation of
microtissues capable of force generation and
predictable responses to cardiac drugs (1) on
one end of the spectrum, and the clinical im-
plementation of cardiac tissues engineered
from progenitor cells and encapsulated in hy-
drogel for heart failure patients (2) on the
other end of the spectrum.
Here, we delineate our collective perspec-
tive on the challenges facing the in vitro mod-
eling of myocardial disease and the generation
and delivery of transplantable cardiac grafts.
Our goal was to envision strategies that would
most effectively advance our understanding of
cardiac disease and lead to effective and safe
repair of the failing heart.
TACKLING TISSUE-ENGINEERED
HEART REPAIR
Question 1: What kinds of
microphysiological platforms have
clinical impact?
For decades, cardiac tissue engineering has
been driven by the need to repair damaged
myocardium. Clinical translation in this area
is becoming plausible but remains far from
being a routine practice, with scale-up, vascu-
larization, and electromechanical integration
still posing major challenges. An emerging
paradigm poised to accelerate therapeutic dis-
covery centers on microphysiological tissue plat-
forms for predictive drug testing and modeling
of disease (3). These platforms range in scale
from single-cell functional assays to micro-
sized human tissues connected by microfluidic
vascular conduits designed to model human
physiology in vitro. Although it is not possible
(or even necessary) to recapitulate the entire
complexity of the human myocardium, these
models provide a minimal set of physiological
functions that are necessary to study drug ef-
ficacy, safety, and mode of action (4, 5). For
example, cardiomyocytes (CMs) derived from
human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs)
and matured on engineered substrates can re-
capitulate adult-like sarcomere structure and
contractility and responses to mechanical stim-
ulation and agonists of sarcomere function (6).
The simplest systems—that is, minimally func-
tional tissue units—are the most well charac-
terized and most easily manipulated. But it
remains to be determined “how simple is com-
plex enough” depending on the drug type,
cell phenotype, and disease pathology being
studied (Fig. 1).
With recent advances in gene editing, it is
possible to generate isogenic hiPSC lines for
the in vitro modeling of human cardiovascular
disease. Such cell lines can be generated by
inducing disease-causing mutations in wild-
type iPSCs or by correcting such mutations
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stem Cell Insti-
tute, Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. 2Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.
3Harvard Medical School and Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. 4Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
5Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
CA 94304, USA. 6Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
INSERM U 970, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou and
University Paris Descartes, 75006 Paris, France. 7Center for
Cardiovascular Biology, Institute for Stem Cell and Regen-
erative Medicine, Departments of Pathology, Bioengineer-
ing, and Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98109, USA. 8Departments of Mechanical Engineering
and, by courtesy, Molecular and Cellular Physiology and
Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA. 9Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineer-
ing, Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied
Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S
3G9, Canada. 10Stanford Cardiovascular Institute and De-
partments of Medicine and Radiology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 11Depart-
ments of Medicine and Pediatrics, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 12Department of Bio-
medical Engineering, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. 13Institute of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, University Medical Center, Georg-August
University Göttingen and DZHK (German Center for
Cardiovascular Research), partner site Göttingen, 37075
Göttingen, Germany. 14Departments of Biomedical Engi-
neering and Medicine, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10032, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: gv2131@columbia.edu
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ps13
1
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 in patient- and disease-specific iPSCs. These
approaches allow linking of genetic mutations
with clinical phenotypes (7–9). Success in re-
capitulating disease phenotypes depends on
implementation of mechanical loading, a
key factor associated with both heart develop-
ment and adult function. The initial strategy
for mechanical stimulation—isometric loading
of the tissues on static holders—was later
extended to the more physiological auxotonic
loading.
Despite advances, the effects of mechan-
ical stimulation on cardiac tissue maturation
have been inconsistent. An alternative mat-
uration strategy is electrical stimulation, which
improves calcium handling and electrophysio-
logical properties of iPSC-derived CMs (10)
and regulates their beating rate (11). However,
evidence that mechanical or electrical stimu-
lation can lead to ultrastructural and function-
al hallmarks of adult heart muscle is yet to be
published. Ongoing work designed to help
researchers better understand the role of envi-
ronmental factors in the engineering of adult-
likehumanhearttissueshouldenablepredictive
physiological studies of drugs and disease.
Question 2: Which cells should be used
for cardiac regeneration?
Both the in vitro microphysiological systems
and the in vivo repair of contractile myocar-
dium are based on the availability of func-
tional CMs derived from human stem cells.
Myocardial repair will likely require restora-
tion of all of the muscle, vascular, and stromal
components of the heart tissue. In the context
of cardiovascular tissue engineering, this
will necessitate careful optimization of the
initial cellular makeup of cardiac implants.
Although CMs are responsible for electrical
conduction and generation of contractile
force, fibroblasts, stromal cells, and endothe-
lial cells all play important roles in matrix
deposition, vascularization, and paracrine
signaling.
An advantage of cardiac tissue engineering
is in its ability to systematically vary the starting
cellular composition and biomaterial scaffolds
toward optimizing the function of engineered
myocardium. In human tissue constructs, the
velocity of action-potential propagation im-
proves with increasing amounts of virtually
pureCMsintheinitialcellcomposition,whereas
contractileforceoutputisoptimalforCMpopu-
lations with purities of 60 to 80% (12). Overall,
the presence of fibroblasts or other stromal cells
in iPSC-derived cardiac tissues is beneficial to
CM maturation via engagement of extra-
cellularmatrix proteins(13) and establishment
ofintercellularcontacts,whereasanexcessofnon-
myocytes might compromise conduction and
integration. The presence of endothelial cells
in engineered cardiac tissues promotes CM
maturation in vitro and survival and integra-
tion in vivo (14). A better understanding of the
optimal cellular makeup along with computer-
assistedfabrication methodologies should enable
generation of tissues with sophisticated architec-
tures and functional properties approaching
those of native myocardium.
Cardiac tissue function involves multiple
CM phenotypes (for example, ventricular, atrial,
nodal, and Purkinje). The current protocols
predominantly give rise to ventricular CMs,
whereas control of retinoic acid signaling can
enhance atrial specification. Going forward,
the field needs to develop precise, directed
protocols for CM subtype specification and
functional maturation. Removal of spontane-
ously active nodal cells along with enhanced
functional maturation of CMs should permit
engineering of electrically quiescent, working
myocardium suitable for safe repair of in-
farcted heart. Purification of mature sinoatrial
nodal cells might, in turn, permit engineering
of biological pacemaker tissues (15).
The heart also contains epicardial and
endocardial cells, which, although critically
important for myocardial development and
homeostasis, have received little attention.
Of particular interest is that postnatalepicardi-
al cells can migrate into the myocardium after
injury to give rise to new coronary vessels (16).
Epicardial cells recently derived from human
iPSCs (17) could be used in engineered cardiac
tissuesto support CMproliferationandmatura-
tioninvitroandvascularintegrationinvivo.Bio-
chemical or genetic (18) manipulation of host
or transplanted epicardial cells might be an im-
portant strategy for facilitating electrical inte-
gration of cardiac tissue patches with the host
myocardium (19). Furthermore, endocardial-
like cells derived from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) (20) might provide a progenitor
population capable of both lining a chamber
and robust de novo vascular assembly.
Fig. 1. Microtissue platforms: Achieving complexity on a small scale. Microtissue platforms, also
called organs-on-a-chip, are likely to be transformative to drug testing, modeling of cardiac disease,
and implementation of personalized medicine. The impact of these technologies will likely be trans-
lated sooner than clinical applications because of the simpler tissue engineering and regulatory
requirements.
CREDIT: H. MCDONALD/SCIENCE TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ps13
2
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Question 3: Is vascularization of tissue
grafts a necessary complexity?
Prolonged survival and functionality of 3D
tissue-engineered products require an effi-
cient supply of oxygen and nutrients along
with the removal of metabolites. Perfusion
bioreactors can transport nutrients across large
tissue thicknesses and maintain CM viability
in the absence of a vascular network, but a pre-
formed vascular structure in vitro can marked-
ly enhance CM function and viability by
accelerating anastomosis to the host circula-
tion, in contrast to nonvascularized engineered
cardiac tissues (14). Vascular cell coculture can
be used in conjunction with mechanical
loading to control CM proliferation and the
hypertrophy and architecture of engineered
human myocardium (21). Endothelial cells
release paracrine factors, such as neuregulin
(22) and nitric oxide, which improve cell sur-
vival after myocardial ischemia and thus are
a favorable component of engineeredmyocar-
dium for therapeutic applications.
The importance of preformed vascular net-
works in microtissue platforms for drug screen-
ing and modeling of disease is now being
actively investigated. In general, engineered
tissues for in vitro application should be de-
signed as minimally functional tissue units that
enable quantitative physiological studies under
normal and pathological conditions (4). Many
groups have shown that the presence of endo-
thelial cells in engineered cardiac tissues pro-
motes CM survival and function. Beyond
paracrine signaling, engineered vasculature
provides a route for the exchange of nutrients
and metabolites and delivery of drugs to the
target tissue.
Current studies are focused on the estab-
lishment of functional microvasculature for
connecting components of multiorgan micro-
devices, such as the vascular-liver-heart platform
to examine cardiotoxicity of a drug metabo-
lized by the liver (23). Looking forward, we
envision that such platforms will use micro-
vasculature both to support the metabolic
needs of cultured tissues and to deliver drugs
in disease-modeling settings.
Question 4: What are reasonable
expectations for preclinical trials?
Experiments in small and large animal mod-
els have shown that tissue-engineered cardiac
patches can improve recovery from myocar-
dial injury (24–26). The contractile activity of
engineered tissue is expected to contribute di-
rectly to myocardial performance, but im-
provements can also evolve through the release
of cytokines that promote angiogenesis, ac-
tivate endogenous progenitor cells (26, 27), or
stimulate paracrine pathways (Fig. 2).
The damage induced by acute infarct is
exacerbated by chronic volume overload as
the left ventricular (LV) chamber dilates, over-
stretches the peri-infarct myocytes, and acti-
vates detrimental apoptotic signaling pathways.
LV dilatation usually is accompanied by hy-
pertrophy and metabolic abnormalities, both
of which could be alleviated, at least in part, by
Fig. 2. Tissue-engineered heart repair. Major progress is being made in translational studies of various types of engineered cardiac patches for
implantation. An insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)–loaded fibrin patch markedly enhances the effects of iPSC-derived cells in a swine model of
ischemia reperfusion. SMC, smooth muscle cell; EC, endothelial cell. Adapted from (33), with permission.
CREDIT: H. MCDONALD/SCIENCE TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ps13
3
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cardiac cell and cardiac patch therapy. Cells
and cytokines that mediate CM–non-CM
communication are critical for the beneficial
paracrine activity induced by implanted car-
diac tissue patches.
One of the most prominent safety con-
cerns associated with tissue-based myocardial
therapies is the risk of arrhythmia. Studies
with injected cells suggest that this risk is
related to the size of the remuscularized region
of treated hearts. Injected CMs derived from
hESCs have not been associated with arrhyth-
mia in rodents, but when the same dose of cells
(cells/kg body weight) was scaled up for deliv-
ery to macaques, all four of the cell-treated
animals experienced periods of premature ven-
tricular contractions or tachycardia (24, 28).
This discrepancy between observations in small
and large animals might have occurred because
of the physically larger grafts in the nonhuman
primatemodel; these graftscontain millimeters
to centimeters of new myocardium, which
could alter electrical propagation. Converse-
ly, the arrhythmias might have been un-
masked by the slower heart rates in this model
(~120 beats/min) compared to guinea pigs,
rats, and mice (250, 400, and 600 beats/min,
respectively). Notably, human heart tissue
patches do not electrically integrate with the
underlying rodent myocardium after trans-
plantation and beat at an independent, typ-
ically slower, rate (19). This means that the
current epicardial patches are unlikely to cause
arrhythmias or to contribute to coordinated
systolic function. Clinical trials of engineered
cardiac tissuepatchesshouldaddresswaysthat
the remuscularized regions of treated hearts
can be synchronized to contract in concert
with the native myocardium after transplanta-
tion so that the mechanical support is provided
without inducing arrhythmias. We have yet to
understand how to establish a functional host-
graft interface in xenograft models through
experiments in large animal models.
Question 5: How will cardiac
regeneration be implemented clinically?
Given the recent entry of tissue engineering
into the cardiovascular sciences, there has
been little therapeutic application of engi-
neered cardiac tissues. The most recent trial
involves epicardial delivery of a fibrin patch
loaded with cardiac progenitor cells derived
from hESCs in heart failure patients (2). A key
challenge for translating engineered tissues
to the clinic is the need for a prefabricated
vascularized network that can be directly con-
nected to the circulatory system of the host
to protect the survival of cells subjected to
ischemia. An alternate option, possibly
easier to implement, could be to functional-
ize the construct with peptides that mobi-
lize circulating angiogenic cells and thereby
contribute to the vascularization of em-
bedded cells.
After vascularization, the electromechan-
ical integration of graft and host is critically
important, and efforts to reduce isolation of
the graft by scar tissue would be highly benefi-
cial. Additional concerns include the regulatory
hurdles, high costs of developing autologous
products, and the risks of immunogenic re-
jection when transplanting allogeneic products.
Finally, the kinetics of degradation of im-
planted materials and the possible toxicity
of degradation products must be addressed.
To this end, a number of laboratories are
beginning to use innovative tools such as syn-
thetic biodegradable scaffolds and 3D bio-
printing. Until microvascularization can be
achieved, a number of acellular tissue-engineered
products, such as epicardial patches (29) or in-
jectable biomatrix, have shown promise as de-
livery vehicles for drugs or as biomechanical
support to modulate cardiac remodeling, re-
spectively. The unsuccessful AUGMENT-HF
trial, in which intramyocardial injections of
an alginate gel in heart failure patients failed
to improve LV function (30), raised doubts
as to whether such materials can be used for
stand-alone treatment.
An attractive option could be the use of an
acellular scaffold functionalized with biologics
that foster endogenous repair by activating
appropriate signaling pathways in a time-
controlled fashion. The development of acel-
lular, rather than cellular, heart repair products
could have a faster path to clinical use, given
the long history of synthetic vascular grafts,
such as acellular porcine and cadaveric heart
valves, and the recent introduction of bio-
degradable coronary stents (31). The implemen-
tation of cell-based products will take more time
to develop because of the need for vasculariza-
tion and the lack of a well-forged regulatory
pathway. Recent clinical trials to inject hESC-
and hiPSC-derived retinal epithelial cells into
patients for the treatment of age-related mac-
ular degeneration and Stargardt’s disease
might provide some early regulatory guidance
for pluripotent stem cell–derived products (32).
In addition, researchers must consider the
specific disease indications that might benefit
from an engineered product and the mode of
implementation for each indication. Most re-
search to date has focused on the treatment
of heart failure resulting from myocardial
infarction—the main driver of morbidity and
mortality in Western society. The creation of
perfusable human tissue that can survive trans-
plantation will also enable researchers to ad-
dress more chronic myocardial diseases such
as postinfarct and nonischemic heart failure.
THE FUTURE OF HEART REPAIR
New ideas for how and under which exact
conditions we might effectively model heart
disease in vitro and provide heart repair in vivo
are emerging at the boundaries of stem cell
science, bioengineering, and clinical disciplines.
It is now clear that CM health is intimately
connected with the health of other cardiac
cell types. Most prominent is the interaction
between CMs and cardiac fibroblasts, which
appear to provide the extracellular matrix
necessary for proper mechanical anchorage
and support of cell-cell interactions. Identi-
fication of links between focal adhesions,
costameres, and intercalated discs with the
signaling pathways involved in CM maturation
could reduce our dependence on coculture
if the appropriate cues could be supplied
exogenously.
Endothelial cells in coculture with CMs
have shown benefits in the context of para-
crine signaling but also as functional lining
of newly formed blood vessels. Vasculariza-
tion is not essential for in vitro model systems
or even for a thin cardiac patch for implanta-
tion. Still, vascularizing even these small
tissue constructs might have advantages for
maturation of CMs and physiological delivery
of nutrients and drugs. The transition to
thick tissues and ultimately an intact heart
graft will, however, require vasculature, ei-
ther by tissue-engineered design or by facili-
tated ingrowth from the host. This is an area
in which tissue engineers excel. Any advance
in vascularization, either by controlled delivery
of angiogenic agents or by 3D printing or
microfabrication of vessel structures, will
aid not only the cardiac field but also nearly
every other effort to engineer tissues (Fig. 3).
An unforeseen issue with studies in large
animals is the level of similarity between the
engineered and the recipient tissues. The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration prefers the
testing of tissue-engineered products as xeno-
graft, whereas European regulatory agencies
prefer testing in homologous (auto- or allo-
graft) large animal models. Clearly, both
approaches have their pros and cons, and on-
ly continued testing will show which of them
is more predictive of clinical function.
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ps13
4
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 How will clinical implementation take
shape? The clinical experience will continue
to evolve as far as possible using cell-free ap-
proaches. Should these approaches come up
short in providing functional advantages,
cell-based products will be implemented.
Impediments to their success will certainly
include not only costs but also clinical indica-
tions. To date, tremendous emphasis has
been placed on postinfarction repair, but
other indications could present additional
starting points. For example, nonischemic
dilated cardiomyopathy is a devastating and
prevalent failure of the heart but avoids the
complexities of scar formation and intricacies
of the timing of tissue replacement. Last, con-
sideration should be given to the route of de-
livery of engineered cardiac tissues. The majority
of the field is developing a patch to be placed
on the epicardial surface of the heart, which
requires open-heart surgery. A future challenge
will be to adapt the application of tissue-
engineered products for endocardial delivery.
This will, in turn, necessitate interactions
among cardiovascular interventionalists, sur-
geons, stem cell scientists, and tissue engineers
to inform each other about the needs, require-
ments, and actionable opportunities.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. K. L. K. Coulombe, V. K. Bajpai, S. T. Andreadis, C. E. Murry,
Heart regeneration with engineered myocardial tissue.
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 16, 1–28 (2014).
2. P. Menasché, V. Vanneaux, A. Hagège, A. Bel, B. Cholley,
I. Cacciapuoti, A. Parouchev, N. Benhamouda, G. Tachdjian,
L. Tosca, J.-H. Trouvin, J.-R. Fabreguettes, V. Bellamy,
R. Guillemain, C. Suberbielle Boissel, E. Tartour, M. Desnos,
J. Larghero, Human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac
progenitors for severe heart failure treatment: First clinical
case report. Eur. Heart J. 36, 2011–2017 (2015).
3. S. N. Bhatia, D. E. Ingber, Microfluidic organs-on-chips.
Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 760–772 (2014).
4. E. Cimetta, A. Godier-Furnémont, G. Vunjak-Novakovic,
Bioengineering heart tissue for in vitro testing. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 24, 926–932 (2013).
5. A. Mathur, P. Loskill, K. Shao, N. Huebsch, S. Hong, S. G. Marcus,
N. Marks, M. Mandegar, B. R. Conklin, L. P. Lee, K. E. Healy,
Human iPSC-based cardiac microphysiological system for
drug screening applications. Sci. Rep. 5, 8883 (2015).
6. A. J. S. Ribeiro, Y.-S. Ang, J.-D. Fu, R. N. Rivas, T. M. A. Mohamed,
G. C. Higgs, D. Srivastava, B. L. Pruitt, Contractility of single
cardiomyocytes differentiated from pluripotent stem cells
depends on physiological shape and substrate stiffness.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 12705–12710 (2015).
7. N. Sun, M. Yazawa, J. Liu, L. Han, V. Sanchez-Freire, O. J. Abilez,
E. G. Navarrete, S. Hu, L. Wang, A. Lee, A. Pavlovic, S. Lin,
R. Chen, R. J. Hajjar, M. P. Snyder, R. E. Dolmetsch, M. J. Butte,
E. A. Ashley, M. T. Longaker, R. C. Robbins, J. C. Wu, Patient-
specific induced pluripotent stem cells asa model for familial
dilated cardiomyopathy. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 130ra47 (2012).
8. G. Wang, M. L. McCain, L. Yang, A. He, F. S. Pasqualini,
A. Agarwal, H. Yuan, D. Jiang, D. Zhang, L. Zangi, J. Geva,
A. E. Roberts, Q. Ma, J. Ding, J. Chen, D.-Z. Wang, K. Li,
J. Wang, R. J. A. Wanders, W. Kulik, F. M. Vaz, M. A. Laflamme,
C. E. Murry, K. R. Chien, R. I. Kelley, G. M. Church, K. K. Parker,
W. T. Pu, Modeling the mitochondrial cardiomyopathy
of Barth syndrome with induced pluripotent stem cell
and heart-on-chip technologies. Nat. Med. 20, 616–623
(2014).
9. J. T. Hinson, A. Chopra, N. Nafissi, W. J. Polacheck, C. C. Benson,
S. Swist, J. Gorham, L. Yang, S. Schafer, C. C. Sheng, A. Haghighi,
J. Homsy, N. Hubner, G. Church, S. A. Cook, W. A. Linke,
C. S. Chen, J. G. Seidman, C. E. Seidman, Titin mutations in
iPS cells define sarcomere insufficiency as a cause of dilated
cardiomyopathy. Science 349, 982–986 (2015).
10. S. S. Nunes, J. W. Miklas, J. Liu, R. Aschar-Sobbi, Y. Xiao, B. Zhang,
J. Jiang, S. Massé, M. Gagliardi, A. Hsieh, N. Thavandiran,
M. A. Laflamme, K. Nanthakumar, G. J. Gross, P. H. Backx,
G. Keller, M. Radisic, Biowire: A platform for maturation of
human pluripotent stem cell–derived cardiomyocytes.
Nat. Methods 10, 781–787 (2013).
11. G. Eng, B. W. Lee, L. Protas, M. Gagliardi, K. Brown, R. S. Kass,
G. Keller, R. B. Robinson, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Autonomous
beating rate adaptation in human stem cell-derived cardio-
myocytes. Nat. Commun. 7, 10312 (2016).
12. D. Zhang, I. Y. Shadrin, J. Lam, H.-Q. Xian, H. R. Snodgrass,
N. Bursac, Tissue-engineered cardiac patch for advanced
functional maturation of human ESC-derived cardiomyocytes.
Biomaterials 34, 5813–5820 (2013).
13. J. P. Jung, D. Hu, I. J. Domian, B. M. Ogle, An integrated
statistical model for enhanced murine cardiomyocyte differ-
entiation via optimized engagement of 3D extracellular
matrices. Sci. Rep. 5, 18705 (2015).
14. K. R. Stevens, K. L. Kreutziger, S. K. Dupras, F. S. Korte, M. Regnier,
V. Muskheli, M. B. Nourse, K. Bendixen, H. Reinecke, C. E. Murry,
Physiological function and transplantation of scaffold-free
and vascularized human cardiac muscle tissue. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 16568–16573 (2009).
15. M. R. Rosen, R. B. Robinson, P. R. Brink, I. S. Cohen, The road
to biological pacing. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 8, 656–666 (2011).
16. N. Smart, C. A. Risebro, A. A. D. Melville, K. Moses, R. J. Schwartz,
K. R. Chien, P. R. Riley, Thymosin b4 induces adult epicardial
progenitor mobilization and neovascularization. Nature
445, 177–182 (2007).
17. A. D. Witty, A. Mihic, R. Y. Tam, S. A. Fisher, A. Mikryukov,
M. S. Shoichet, R.-K. Li, S. J. Kattman, G. Keller, Generation
of the epicardial lineage from human pluripotent stem
cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 1026–1035 (2014).
18. R. D. Kirkton, N. Bursac, Engineering biosynthetic excitable
tissues from unexcitable cells for electrophysiological and
cell therapy studies. Nat. Commun. 2, 300 (2011).
Fig. 3. A map of heart repair. Among the variety of tissue-engineering systems currently under investigation, the best options for clinical translation
are found in a “Venn diagram” between the biological complexity, feasibility, and safety and efficacy for the patient.
CREDIT: H. MCDONALD/SCIENCE TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ps13
5
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 19. K. A. Gerbin, X. Yang, C. E. Murry, K. L. K. Coulombe,
Enhanced electrical integration of engineered human
myocardium via intramyocardial versus epicardial deliv-
ery in infarcted rat hearts. PLOS One 10, e0131446 (2015).
20. N. J. Palpant, L. Pabon, M. Roberts, B. Hadland, D. Jones,
C. Jones, R. T. Moon, W. L. Ruzzo, I. Bernstein, Y. Zheng,
C. E. Murry, Inhibition of b-catenin signaling respecifies
anterior-like endothelium into beating human cardio-
myocytes. Development 142, 3198–3209 (2015).
21. N. L. Tulloch, V. Muskheli, M. V. Razumova, F. S. Korte,
M. Regnier, K. D. Hauch, L. Pabon, H. Reinecke, C. E. Murry,
Growth of engineered human myocardium with mechan-
ical loading and vascular coculture. Circ. Res. 109, 47–59
(2011).
22. N. Hedhli, Q. Huang, A. Kalinowski, M. Palmeri, X. Hu,
R. R. Russell, K. S. Russell, Endothelium-derived neuregulin
protects the heart against ischemic injury. Circulation 123,
2254–2262 (2011).
23. D. Huh, Y.-s. Torisawa, G. A. Hamilton, H. J. Kim, D. E. Ingber,
Microengineered physiological biomimicry: Organs-
on-chips. Lab Chip 12, 2156–2164 (2012).
24. Y. Shiba, S. Fernandes, W.-Z. Zhu, D. Filice, V. Muskheli,
J. Kim, N. J. Palpant, J. Gantz, K. W. Moyes, H. Reinecke,
B. Van Biber, T. Dardas, J. L. Mignone, A. Izawa, R. Hanna,
M. Viswanathan, J. D. Gold, M. I. Kotlikoff, N. Sarvazyan,
M. W. Kay, C. E. Murry, M. A. Laflamme, Human ES-cell-
derived cardiomyocytes electrically couple and suppress ar-
rhythmias in injured hearts. Nature 489, 322–325 (2012).
25. M. Kawamura, S. Miyagawa, K. Miki, A. Saito, S. Fukushima,
T. Higuchi, T. Kawamura, T. Kuratani, T. Daimon, T. Shimizu,
T. Okano, Y. Sawa, Feasibility, safety, and therapeutic effica-
cy of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardio-
myocyte sheets in a porcine ischemic cardiomyopathy
model. Circulation 126 (suppl. 1), S29–S37 (2012).
26. Q. Xiong, L. Ye, P. Zhang, M. Lepley, C. Swingen, L. Zhang,
D. S. Kaufman, J. Zhang, Bioenergetic and functional con-
sequences of cellular therapy: Activation of endogenous
cardiovascular progenitor cells. Circ. Res. 111, 455–468
(2012).
27. H. Masumoto, T. Matsuo, K. Yamamizu, H. Uosaki, G. Narazaki,
S. Katayama, A. Marui, T. Shimizu, T. Ikeda, T. Okano, R. Sakata,
J. K. Yamashita, Pluripotent stem cell-engineered cell sheets
reassembled with defined cardiovascular populations
ameliorate reduction in infarct heart function through
cardiomyocyte-mediated neovascularization. Stem Cells 30,
1196–1205 (2012).
28. J. J. H. Chong, X. Yang, C. W. Don, E. Minami, Y.-W. Liu,
J. J. Weyers, W. M. Mahoney, B. Van Biber, S. M. Cook,
N. J. Palpant, J. A. Gantz, J. A. Fugate, V. Muskheli, G. M. Gough,
K. W. Vogel, C. A. Astley, C. E. Hotchkiss, A. Baldessari, L. Pabon,
H. Reinecke, E. A. Gill, V. Nelson, H.-P. Kiem, M. A. Laflamme,
C. E. Murry, Human embryonic-stem-cell-derived cardio-
myocytes regenerate non-human primate hearts. Nature
510, 273–277 (2014).
29. L. Ye, Y.-H. Chang, Q. Xiong, P. Zhang, L. Zhang, P. Somasundaram,
M. Lepley, C. Swingen, L. Su, J. S. Wendel, J. Guo, A. Jang,
D. Rosenbush, L. Greder, J. R. Dutton, J. Zhang, T. J. Kamp,
D. S. Kaufman, Y. Ge, J. Zhang, Cardiac repair in a porcine
model of acute myocardial infarction with human induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiovascular cells. Cell Stem
Cell 15, 750–761 (2014).
30. S. D. Anker, A. J. S. Coats, G. Cristian, D. Dragomir, E. Pusineri,
M. Piredda, L. Bettari, R. Dowling, M. Volterrani, B.-A. Kirwan,
G. Filippatos, J.-L. Mas, N. Danchin, S. D. Solomon, R. J. Lee,
F. Ahmann, A. Hinson, H. N. Sabbah, D. L. Mann, A pro-
spective comparison of alginate-hydrogel with standard
medical therapy to determine impact on functional capac-
ity and clinical outcomes in patients with advanced heart
failure (AUGMENT-HF trial). Eur. Heart J. 36, 2297–2309
(2015).
31. T. Pilgrim, D. Heg, M. Roffi, D. Tüller, O. Muller, A. Vuilliomenet,
S. Cook, D. Weilenmann, C. Kaiser, P. Jamshidi, T. Fahrni,
A. Moschovitis, S. Noble, F. R. Eberli, P. Wenaweser, P. Jüni,
S. Windecker, Ultrathin strut biodegradable polymer sirolimus-
eluting stent versus durable polymer everolimus-eluting stent
for percutaneous coronary revascularisation (BIOSCIENCE): A
randomised, single-blind, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 384,
2111–2122 (2014).
32. E. Neofytou, C. G. O’Brien, L. A. Couture, J. C. Wu, Hurdles
to clinical translation of human induced pluripotent stem
cells. J. Clin. Invest. 125, 2551–2557 (2015).
33. V. Serpooshan, S. M. Wu, Patching up broken hearts: Cardiac
cell therapy gets a bioengineered boost. Cell Stem Cell 15,
671–673 (2014).
Acknowledgments: This Perspective is a product of discus-
sions at the Cardiovascular Tissue Engineering Workshop, held
at Stanford Cardiovascular Institute in May 2015. Special thanks
go to D. Buxton and M. Lundberg (both from NIH) and M. Terrin
(University of Maryland) for their leadership in organizing the
workshop and to F. Yang (Stanford University), S. Palecek (Uni-
versity of Wisconsin), L. Niklason (Yale University), N. Melosh
(Stanford University), M. Tiburcy (University Medical Center
Göttingen), and O. Abilez (Stanford University) for their contri-
butions to the discussion. Funding: We gratefully acknowledge
support of the symposium by the NIH Progenitor Cell Biology
Consortium (grant HL099997). Competing interests: The authors
declare that they have no competing interests related to the
contents of this article.
10.1126/scitranslmed.aad2304
Citation: B. M. Ogle, N. Bursac, I. Domian, N. F. Huang,
P. Menasché, C. E. Murry, B. Pruitt, M. Radisic, J. C. Wu,
S. M. Wu, J. Zhang, W.-H. Zimmermann, G. Vunjak-Novakovic,
Distilling complexity to advance cardiac tissue engineering.
Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 342ps13 (2016).
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ps13
6
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Distilling complexity to advance cardiac tissue engineering
Vunjak-Novakovic
Milica Radisic, Joseph C. Wu, Sean M. Wu, Jianyi Zhang, Wolfram-Hubertus Zimmermann and Gordana 
Brenda M. Ogle, Nenad Bursac, Ibrahim Domian, Ngan F. Huang, Philippe Menasché, Charles E. Murry, Beth Pruitt,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad2304
, 342ps13342ps13.
8
Sci Transl Med 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/342/342ps13
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/364/6438/321.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/440/eaan4587.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/435/eaah5457.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/356/6342/1035.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/400/eaam5607.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/363/363ra148.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/218/218ra6.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/160/160cm14.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/239/239fs24.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/160/160rv12.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/239/239ps6.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/309/309rv6.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/239/239rv1.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/130/130ra47.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/342/342ps13#BIBL
This article cites 33 articles, 9 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
