 Article
The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Exp. Med. 2018 Vol. 215 No. 1 91–113
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171163
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
91
IntroductIon
Food allergy is a growing public health concern as it affects 
5–8% of the U.S. population, has no effective cure, and can 
be associated with life-threatening anaphylaxis (Sicherer and 
Sampson, 2014). The disease is associated with CD4+ T cells 
that secrete Th2 cytokines, and allergen-specific IgE anti-
bodies that activate mast cells (Metcalfe et al., 2009). Allergic 
reactions to foods often occur on the first known ingestion 
(Sicherer et al., 1998), suggesting that exposure of offspring 
to food allergens may occur in utero and/or through breast 
milk. However, how maternal factors influence food allergy 
in offspring remains largely unknown. For example, effects of 
maternal allergen exposure on development of allergies in off-
spring have been controversial. Past studies have identified an 
increased risk (Sicherer et al., 2010) or no association (Lack et 
al., 2003) of maternal peanut consumption with peanut sen-
sitization in offspring. In contrast, maternal exposure and/or 
sensitization to food allergens could be beneficial for protec-
tion of offspring from allergic diseases in humans and in mice 
(Fusaro et al., 2007; López-Expósito et al., 2009; Mosconi et 
al., 2010; Verhasselt, 2010b; Bunyavanich et al., 2014; Frazier 
et al., 2014). Nevertheless, whether active tolerance is induced 
in offspring has not been reported in these studies.
Forkhead box protein 3 (Foxp3)+ regulatory T (T reg) 
cells regulate Th2 responses and food allergy in humans and 
in mice (Chatila, 2005; van Wijk et al., 2007; Littman and 
Rudensky, 2010; Ohkura et al., 2013; Noval Rivas et al., 
2015). However, whether maternal factors modulate T reg 
cell–mediated tolerance in offspring remains elusive. Both 
naturally occurring thymic-derived T reg cells and inducible 
T reg cells derived from conventional CD4+ T cells in the 
presence of TGF-β and specialized dendritic cells (DCs) such 
as CD11c+CD103+ DCs suppress Th2 responses (Chatila, 
2005; van Wijk et al., 2007; Curotto de Lafaille et al., 2008; 
Gri et al., 2008; Akdis and Akdis, 2011). Successful immuno-
therapy is associated with increased T reg cells (Karlsson et 
al., 2004; Shreffler et al., 2009; Akdis and Akdis, 2011; Mou-
sallem and Burks, 2012) and allergen-specific IgG antibodies 
(Scadding et al., 2010; Syed et al., 2014). Although protective 
effects of allergen-specific IgG through competition with IgE 
(Schroeder and Cavacini, 2010) and binding to inhibitory Fc 
receptor FcγRIIB (Jarrett and Hall, 1979; Fusaro et al., 2002; 
Uthoff et al., 2003; Till et al., 2004; Wachholz and Durham, 
2004; Mosconi et al., 2010; Verhasselt, 2010a; Burton et al., 
2014a) in food allergy have been proposed, the role of IgG in 
protective immune regulation requires further studies.
Neonatal crystallizable fragment receptor (FcRn) is ex-
pressed in intestinal epithelial cells until weaning in mice, and 
throughout life in humans (Simister and Mostov, 1989; Dick-
inson et al., 1999). FcRn mediates the transfer of maternal 
IgG to rodent offspring in early life, and thus plays a key role 
the role of maternal immune responses in tolerance induction is poorly understood. to study whether maternal allergen sen-
sitization affects offspring susceptibility to food allergy, we epicutaneously sensitized female mice with ovalbumin (oVA) 
followed by epicutaneous sensitization and oral challenge of their offspring with oVA. Maternal oVA sensitization prevented 
food anaphylaxis, oVA-specific IgE production, and intestinal mast cell expansion in offspring. this protection was mediated 
by neonatal crystallizable fragment receptor (Fcrn)–dependent transfer of maternal IgG and oVA immune complexes (IgG-Ic) 
via breast milk and induction of allergen-specific regulatory t (t reg) cells in offspring. Breastfeeding by oVA-sensitized moth-
ers or maternal supplementation with IgG-Ic was sufficient to induce neonatal tolerance. Fcrn-dependent antigen presenta-
tion by cd11c+ dendritic cells (dcs) in offspring was required for oral tolerance. Human breast milk containing oVA-IgG-Ic 
induced tolerance in humanized Fcrn mice. collectively, we demonstrate that interactions of maternal IgG-Ic and offspring 
Fcrn are critical for induction of t reg cell responses and control of food-specific tolerance in neonates.
Maternal IgG immune complexes induce food allergen–
specific tolerance in offspring
Asa Ohsaki,1 Nicholas Venturelli,1 T
ess M. Buccigrosso,2 Stavroula K. Osganian,2 John Lee,1,5 
Richard S. Blumberg,3,4,6* and Michiko K. Oyoshi1,5*
1Division of Immunology and 2Clinical Research Center, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA
3Gastroenterology Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA
4Department of Medicine and 5Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
6Harvard Digestive Diseases Center, Boston, MA
© 2018 Ohsaki et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
*R.S. Blumberg and M.K. Oyoshi contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Michiko K. Oyoshi: michiko.oyoshi@childrens.harvard.edu
on June 2, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171163
Published Online: 20 November, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
92
in neonatal passive immunity (Brambell, 1969; Simister and 
Mostov, 1989; Leach et al., 1996; Simister et al., 1996). Recent 
studies identified a much broader function of FcRn beyond 
the neonatal period in humans and mice, including protec-
tion of IgG and albumin from catabolism (Chaudhury et al., 
2003; Roopenian et al., 2003; Pyzik et al., 2015), bidirectional 
transport of IgG (but not IgA or IgM) between the lumen and 
lamina propria (LP; Antohe et al., 2001; Claypool et al., 2002; 
Spiekermann et al., 2002; Akilesh et al., 2008; Dickinson et al., 
2008; Bai et al., 2011; Li et al., 2011), and retrieval of antigen 
as IgG and antigen immune complexes (IgG-IC) from lumen 
to APCs such as DCs and macrophages in LP (Y
oshida et al., 
2004, 2006). It has been proposed that after internalization 
of IgG-IC into APCs by Fcγ receptors (FcγRs) on the cell 
surface, FcRn binds to IgG-IC in acidic endosomes and con-
trols routing of IgG-IC to late endosomes, where antigen is 
processed into peptide compatible with loading onto MHC 
molecules, facilitating antigen presentation to 
T cells (Y
oshida 
et al., 2004, 2006; Qiao et al., 2008; Baker et al., 2011, 2013, 
2014; Liu et al., 2011; Pyzik et al., 2015). Fc-fusion proteins 
that bind to FcRn induce T reg cells and have been devel-
oped as therapeutic reagents (Lei and Scott, 2005; De Groot 
et al., 2008; De Groot and Martin, 2009; Scott and De Groot, 
2010; Rath et al., 2015). However, the role of FcRn in pro-
moting allergen-specific T reg cell response in early life is 
currently underinvestigated.
Food allergy often coexists with atopic dermatitis (AD; 
Eigenmann et al., 1998; Sicherer and Sampson, 1999; Hill et 
al., 2007). AD is often the initial step in the so-called atopic 
march, suggesting AD as a causal risk factor for subsequent 
food allergy. Epidemiological data have shown that peanut 
oil contaminants in baby lotions predispose to peanut allergy 
(Lack et al., 2003) and that loss of function mutations in 
the Filaggrin gene that encodes the epithelial barrier pro-
tein Filaggrin associated with AD also increase risk for food 
allergy (Brown et al., 2011; Brough et al., 2014), implying 
that increased allergen penetration through the damaged skin 
barrier causes systemic allergen sensitization that may lead to 
food allergy. Given the potential role of allergen sensitization 
through the skin, we have previously established that epicuta-
neous allergen sensitization of mice through tape-stripped skin 
over 7 wk results in food anaphylaxis (Bartnikas et al., 2013), 
providing experimental support for this epidemiological hy-
pothesis linking skin allergen sensitization and food allergy.
Little is known about the role of maternally transferred 
allergen and allergen-specific IgG in the development of al-
lergic diseases in offspring. T
o study the effects of maternal 
allergen-specific immune responses on the susceptibility of 
offspring to food allergy, we have further refined the epicuta-
neous sensitization model to develop an adjuvant-free, short 
(9-d) protocol that retains key features of the previous model. 
We hypothesized that maternal allergen sensitization induces 
allergen-specific tolerance in offspring and protects against 
food allergy. Female mice were epicutaneously sensitized 
with allergen followed by epicutaneous sensitization and oral 
challenge of their offspring with the same allergen. We have 
demonstrated that maternal sensitization with allergen pro-
tected their offspring from the development of food-allergic 
responses to the same allergen. This protection was mediated 
by allergen-specific T reg cells in offspring. The interactions 
of maternal IgG-IC in breast milk and offspring FcRn are es-
sential for the development of allergen-specific 
T reg cells. 
We 
demonstrate that human breast milk containing OVA-IgG-IC 
induced oral tolerance in humanized FcRn mice, substanti-
ating the importance of the IgG-IC-FcRn axis in neonatal 
tolerance induction. Collectively, these data suggest that the 
IgG-IC-FcRn axis may provide a therapeutic target to in-
duce tolerance in early life to prevent food allergy in children.
rEsults
Maternal allergen sensitization protects 
offspring against food allergy
T
o assess whether maternal allergen-specific immune re-
sponses influence food allergic responses in offspring, we 
epicutaneously sensitized 6–8-wk-old BALB/c WT female 
mice with OVA or saline over 9 d before mating, and once 
weekly during pregnancy and breastfeeding. 6–8-wk-old off-
spring were epicutaneously sensitized with OVA or saline fol-
lowed by oral OVA challenge by gavage at day 9 (Fig. 1 A). 
Epicutaneous sensitization with OVA of offspring from sa-
line-exposed (unsensitized) mothers resulted in development 
of food-allergic reactions as indicated by an increase in serum 
OVA-specific IgE production. After oral OVA challenge, 
mice exhibited serum levels of IL-4, systemic anaphylaxis in-
dicated by a drop in core body temperature, serum levels of 
mouse mast cell protease-1 (mMCP1), frequencies and num-
bers of jejunal mast cells, and Il13 mRNA expression in the 
jejunum (Fig. 1, B–I). Saline-exposed offspring from unsen-
sitized mothers showed no detectable changes in these pa-
rameters after oral OVA challenge (Fig. 1, B–I). These results 
are consistent with our previous findings in mice epicutane-
ously sensitized over 7 wk (Bartnikas et al., 2013). In contrast 
to OVA-sensitized offspring of unsensitized mothers, these 
parameters of food-allergic responses were significantly de-
creased in OVA-sensitized offspring of OVA-sensitized moth-
ers (Fig. 1, B–I). T
o test whether the protection of offspring 
from food allergy elicited by maternal allergen sensitization is 
applicable to a clinically relevant food allergen, mothers were 
sensitized with 0.45 mg commercial peanut butter (100 µg 
protein) followed by epicutaneous sensitization (0.45 mg) and 
oral challenge (225 mg) of their offspring with peanut but-
ter. Offspring of unsensitized mothers exhibited food-allergic 
responses, including development of peanut-specific IgE, 
systemic anaphylaxis, serum mMCP1, and jejunal mast cell 
expansion. In contrast, these food-allergic responses were sig-
nificantly impaired in offspring of peanut-sensitized moth-
ers (Fig. S1). Collectively, these results suggest that maternal 
allergen sensitization results in protection of offspring from 
development of food-allergic response to epicutaneous sensi-
tization and oral challenge with the same allergens.
 93
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Figure 1. Maternal allergen sensitization protects offspring against food allergy. (A) Experimental protocol. (B) Serum OVA-IgE levels. (C) Serum IL-4 
levels. (D) Core body temperature change 30 min after challenge. (E) Serum mMCP1 levels after challenge. (F) Representative flow cytometric analysis of 
jejunal mast cells (c-kit+IgE+lineage−CD45+) from two independent experiments. Numbers indicate percentages. (G–I) Mast cell frequencies (G), numbers (H), 
and Il13 mRNA (I) in the jejunum. Il13 mRNA levels are expressed as fold induction relative to jejunum of saline (SAL)-exposed offspring of saline-exposed 
mothers. Groups of animals were compared using nonparametric one-way ANO 
VA. Data are mean ± SEM of two independent experiments (B–E and G–I). 
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001; ns, not significant.
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
94
Maternal allergen sensitization induces allergen-specific 
t reg cells in offspring
We next examined whether T reg cell responses are involved 
in the protection of offspring against food allergy after mater-
nal allergen sensitization. Three-week-old weaned BALB/c 
WT offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers exhibited an in-
crease in the frequencies and numbers of CD4+Foxp3+ T reg 
cells in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) as compared with 
weaned offspring of unsensitized mothers (Fig. 2, 
A–C). 
T
o test 
whether these 
T reg cells are allergen-specific, offspring MLN 
cells were labeled with proliferation dye, stimulated in vitro 
with OVA or peanut extract as an irrelevant allergen, and then 
examined for expansion and proliferation as assessed by fre-
quencies of CD4+Foxp3+ cells and dye dilution, respectively. 
In response to OVA stimulation, MLN cells from offspring of 
OVA-sensitized mothers exhibited higher levels of expansion 
(Fig. 2 D) and proliferation (Fig. 2, E and F) of CD4+Foxp3+ 
T reg cells as compared with MLN cells from offspring of 
unsensitized mothers. In contrast, MLN cells from offspring 
of OVA-sensitized mothers did not show expansion or prolif-
eration of CD4+Foxp3+ T reg cells in response to stimulation 
with peanut extract (Fig. 2, D–F). There was no significant 
increase in expansion or proliferation of CD4+Foxp3+ T reg 
cells in MLN cells from offspring of unsensitized mothers in 
response to stimulation with OVA or peanut extract (Fig. 2, 
D–F). These results suggest that CD4+Foxp3+ T reg cells in 
MLN of offspring from OVA-sensitized mothers expanded 
and proliferated specifically to OVA. We next tested the ca-
pacity of T reg cells from offspring of OVA-sensitized versus 
offspring of unsensitized mothers to suppress OVA-specific 
T cell proliferation in vitro. CD4+CD25+ T reg cells iso-
lated by magnetic beads from MLN of weaned BALB/c 
WT offspring were cocultured with CD4+CD25−DO11.10+ 
responder T cells labeled with proliferation dye in the pres-
ence of OVA323-339 peptide and irradiated WT splenocytes. 
Proliferation of DO11.10+ T cells assessed by dye dilution 
was significantly less in the presence of T reg cells from off-
spring of OVA-sensitized mothers as compared with T reg 
cells from offspring of unsensitized mothers (Fig. 2, G and 
H), indicating that OVA-specific T reg cells from offspring 
of OVA-sensitized mothers are capable of suppressing the 
OVA-specific T cell response in vitro. After epicutaneous 
sensitization with OVA of offspring, greater expansion of 
OVA-specific CD4+Foxp3+ 
T reg cells was observed in MLN 
of offspring from OVA-sensitized mothers as compared with 
those in similarly sensitized offspring of unsensitized mothers 
(Fig. 2 I). These results indicate that maternal allergen sensi-
tization elicits T reg cell responses in offspring that are spe-
cific to the same allergen.
Allergen-specific t reg cells in offspring are required for 
protection against food allergy
To examine the possibility that allergen-specific T reg cells 
in weaned offspring reduce disease susceptibility, we tested 
whether inducible depletion of T reg cells in offspring of 
OVA-sensitized mothers abolished the protection from food 
allergy. We used a genetic approach in which lineage-specific 
expression of the diphtheria toxin (DT) receptor (DTR) gene 
in BALB/c Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ mice allows selective Foxp3+ T 
reg cell depletion by DT treatment (Haribhai et al., 2011). 
4–6-wk-old Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ offspring of OVA-sensitized 
Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ mothers were treated with a single i.p. in-
jection of 50 µg/kg DT to eliminate T reg cells in offspring, 
including OVA-specific T reg cells. Control Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ 
littermates were injected with PBS. After DT treatment, 
offspring were rested for 2 wk before OVA sensitization 
for the recovery of Foxp3EGFP cells (Haribhai et al., 2011) 
to avoid global T reg cell deficiency (Fig. 3 A). In response 
to epicutaneous sensitization and oral challenge with OVA, 
DT
-treated Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ offspring of OVA-sensitized 
mothers exhibited an increase in disease susceptibility, as in-
dicated by higher levels of OVA-IgE, systemic anaphylaxis, 
serum mMCP1, and jejunal mast cell expansion as compared 
with PBS-treated Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ littermates (Fig. 3, B–F). 
These results support the key role of allergen-specific T reg 
cells induced by maternal allergen sensitization in induction 
of tolerance in offspring.
Maternal IgG–allergen immune complexes, but not free 
allergen, are transferred to weaned offspring via breast milk
Maternal allergen and Igs are transferred to offspring and 
shape neonatal immune responses (Renz et al., 2011). Given 
the development of allergen-specific T reg cells in weaned 
offspring of allergen-sensitized mothers before direct expo-
sure of offspring to allergen, we hypothesized that allergens 
are transferred from mothers to offspring before weaning and 
induce allergen-specific 
T reg cells. BALB/c 
WT female mice 
epicutaneously sensitized over 9 d with OVA, but not saline, 
showed an increase in serum OVA-specific IgG1, OVA-IgG2a, 
and OVA-IgE (Fig. 4 A), as previously reported (Nakajima et 
al., 2012; 
Venturelli et al., 2016). Similarly, OVA-Igs were de-
tectable in breast milk and offspring sera of OVA-sensitized 
mothers, but not of unsensitized mothers (Fig. 4, B and C). 
Unexpectedly, levels of free OVA in breast milk or offspring 
sera of OVA-sensitized mothers were undetectable or close 
to the lower detection limit (Fig. 4, B and C). These results 
led us to test whether allergen is transferred from moth-
ers to offspring as IgG-IC consisting of allergen and aller-
gen-specific Igs. Indeed, OVA-IgG1-IC and OVA-IgG2a-IC, 
but not OVA-IgE-IC, were detectable in breast milk from 
OVA-sensitized mothers but not in breast milk from unsensi-
tized mothers (Fig. 4 D and not depicted). Levels of TGF-β1 
were also higher in breast milk from OVA-sensitized moth-
ers than in breast milk from unsensitized mothers (Fig. 4 D). 
Consistently, offspring sera of OVA-sensitized mothers, but 
not of unsensitized mothers, exhibited OVA-IgG1-IC and 
OVA-IgG2a-IC (Fig. 4 E). OVA-IgA was virtually absent in 
sera and breast milk from OVA-sensitized mothers, and sera 
of offspring from OVA-sensitized mothers (not depicted). 
These results suggest that allergens are transferred from aller-
 95
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Figure 2. Allergen-specific t reg cells expand in offspring of allergen-sensitized mothers. (A–C) Flow cytometric analysis (A), frequencies (B), 
and numbers (C) of CD4+Foxp3+ cells in offspring MLN cells. (D) Analysis of OVA-specific Foxp3+ cells expanded from offspring MLN cells. (E and F) Flow 
cytometric analysis (E) and frequencies (F) of proliferation among CD4+Foxp3+ MLN cells labeled with CellTrace Violet cultured in vitro for 5 d. n = 4 (D 
and F). (G and H) Flow cytometric analysis (G) and percent suppression (H) of CellTrace Violet proliferation in DO11.10+ T responder cells cultured with 
OVA323-339 peptide in the absence or presence of T reg cells isolated from offspring MLN cells. (I) Frequencies of OVA-specific Foxp3+ cells expanded from 
offspring MLN cells after epicutaneous sensitization and oral challenge with OVA. Representative plots from two independent experiments are shown (A, 
E, and G). Numbers indicate percentages (A and E). Groups of animals were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test (B, C, H, and I) or nonparametric 
one-way ANO 
VA (D and F). Data are representative of two independent experiments (B–D, F, and H–I). Data are mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; 
ns, not significant. SAL, saline.
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
96
gen-sensitized mothers as IgG-IC rather than as free allergen 
to offspring via breast milk.
Breastfeeding by allergen-sensitized mothers protects 
offspring from food allergy
Our data show that the protection of offspring by maternal 
allergen sensitization is associated with the maternal IgG-IC 
transfer via breast milk and the induction of allergen-specific 
T reg cells in offspring. We hypothesized that maternal 
IgG-IC transferred through breast milk as allergen is a key 
factor in allergen-specific 
T reg cell induction in offspring. 
T
o 
this purpose, BALB/c WT mothers exposed to saline (unsen-
sitized) or sensitized with OVA were coordinately mated, and 
a part of offspring from unsensitized mothers were fostered 
immediately after birth and nursed by OVA-sensitized moth-
ers until weaning. The remaining offspring from unsensitized 
mothers were kept and nursed by unsensitized mothers. Off-
spring of OVA-sensitized mothers were kept in the same cage 
and nursed together with fostered offspring of unsensitized 
mothers (Fig. 5 A). Breastfeeding by OVA-sensitized mothers 
increased levels of serum OVA-IgG1-IC and OVA-IgG2a-IC 
as well as OVA-specific T reg cells in MLN of fostered off-
spring at weaning similar to offspring of OVA-sensitized 
mothers and higher than their littermates nursed by unsen-
sitized mothers (Fig. 5, B and C). In response to epicuta-
neous sensitization and oral challenge with OVA, fostered 
Figure 3. Allergen-specific t reg cells in offspring are required for protection against food allergy. (A) Experimental protocol. (B) Serum OVA-IgE 
levels. (C) Core body temperature change. (D) Serum mMCP1 levels. (E and F) Flow cytometric analysis of jejunal mast cell frequencies (E) and numbers (F). 
Groups of animals were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test (B–F). Data are representative of two independent experiments (B–F). Data are mean ± 
SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ns, not significant. SAL, saline.
 97
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
offspring and offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers were 
similarly protected from food-allergic responses, as levels of 
serum OVA-IgE, systemic anaphylaxis, serum mMCP1, and 
jejunal mast cell expansion were strongly impaired as com-
pared with OVA-sensitized offspring of unsensitized moth-
ers (Fig. 5, D–H). These results indicate that breastfeeding by 
allergen-sensitized mothers promotes allergen-specific T reg 
cells and protection from food allergy in offspring. As mater-
nal Igs are also transferred through the placenta (Renz et al., 
2011), we have tested whether in utero–transferred IgG-IC 
also participates in driving tolerance in offspring. T
o this pur-
pose, a part of offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers were 
fostered immediately after birth and nursed by unsensitized 
mothers (Fig. S2 A). Levels of maternal IgG-IC in fostered 
offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers were higher than those 
in offspring of unsensitized mothers and lower than in their 
Figure 4. Maternal 
IgG-allergen 
im-
mune complex, but not free allergen, are 
transferred to offspring via breast milk. 
(A) OVA-specific Igs in mother sera. (B and C) 
OVA-specific Igs and OVA in breast milk (B) and 
offspring sera (C). (D) OVA-IgG-ICs and TGF-β1 
in breast milk. (E) OVA-IgG-ICs in offspring 
sera. Groups of animals were compared using 
the Mann-Whitney U test. Data are mean ± 
SEM of two independent experiments (A–E). 
 
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 
0.0001; ns, not significant. SAL, saline.
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
98
littermates nursed by OVA-sensitized mothers (Fig. S2 B), in-
dicating transfer of maternal IgG-IC both in utero and via 
breast milk. This was associated with a trend toward expan-
sion of OVA-specific T reg cells in MLN of weaned fostered 
offspring that were significantly lower than their littermates 
nursed by OVA-sensitized mothers (Fig. S2 C). After epicu-
taneous sensitization and oral challenge with OVA, fostered 
offspring of OVA-sensitized mice showed a decrease in serum 
OVA-IgE levels and a trend toward lower systemic anaphy-
laxis, serum mMCP1, and jejunal mast cell expansion as com-
pared with OVA-sensitized offspring of unsensitized mothers 
(Fig. S2, D–H), although these differences did not reach statis-
tical significance. These results suggest that maternal IgG-IC 
transferred in utero to offspring may contribute to neonatal 
tolerance and that IgG-IC transferred during breastfeeding is 
necessary for optimal induction of tolerance in offspring of 
OVA-sensitized mothers.
IgG-Ic supplementation to mothers protects 
offspring from food allergy
We next sought to directly test the role of IgG-IC in in-
duction of neonatal tolerance by supplementing naive 
mothers with IgG-IC. We chose OVA-IgG1-IC based on 
the higher concentrations of maternal OVA-IgG1-IC rel-
ative to OVA-IgG2a-IC in breast milk and offspring sera 
from OVA-sensitized mothers (Fig. 4, D and E). In vitro–
formed OVA-IgG1-IC consisting mouse monoclonal anti- 
OVA-IgG1 antibodies and OVA (Baker et al., 2013) was 
given i.p. to naive BALB/c WT female mice once weekly for 
6 wk during pregnancy and breastfeeding (Fig. 6 A). Con-
trol BALB/c WT female mice were left untreated. Mater-
nal IC supplementation resulted in an increase in levels of 
serum OVA-IgG1-IC and OVA-specific T reg cells in MLN 
of offspring at weaning (Fig. 6, B and C). These were as-
sociated with protection of offspring from food-allergic re-
sponses after epicutaneous sensitization and oral challenge 
with OVA, as indicated by a decrease in levels of serum 
OVA-IgE, systemic anaphylaxis, serum mMCP1, and jeju-
nal mast cell expansion (Fig. 6, D–H). As expected, offspring 
of untreated mothers failed to show an increase in mater-
nal OVA-IgG1-IC, OVA-specific T reg cells, or protection 
from food-allergic responses (Fig. 6, B–H). T
o further dissect 
the role of maternal IC during breastfeeding in induction of 
tolerance in offspring, mothers were supplemented i.p. with 
OVA-IgG1-IC once weekly for 3 wk only during breast-
feeding (Fig. 6 I). Offspring of mothers supplemented with 
OVA-IgG1-IC during breastfeeding, but not offspring from 
untreated mothers, exhibited an increase in levels of serum 
OVA-IgG1-IC, OVA-specific 
T reg cells in MLN at weaning, 
and protection from food-allergic responses after epicutane-
ous sensitization and oral challenge with OVA (Fig. 6, J–P). 
To test whether IgG-IC mediates neonatal tolerance directly 
versus through the induction of allergen-specific T reg cells, 
we examined food-allergic responses in offspring after ma-
ternal IgG and IgG-IC had been cleared from circulation. 
Maternal OVA-Igs or OVA-IgG-ICs were undetectable in 
15-wk-old BALB/c WT offspring (not depicted). 15-wk-old 
offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers, but not of unsensitized 
mothers, showed an expansion of OVA-specific T reg cells in 
MLN (Fig. S3 A) and decreased food-allergic responses after 
epicutaneous sensitization and oral challenge with OVA (Fig. 
S3, B–F), suggesting that maternal allergen sensitization in-
duces long-lasting protection in offspring. Collectively, these 
results demonstrate that maternal allergen IgG-IC plays a 
critical role in establishing tolerance in offspring against food 
allergy through induction of allergen-specific T reg cells.
offspring Fcrn is required for protection from food allergy
As FcRn is involved in the retrieval of IgG-IC from the 
lumen into LP (Y
oshida et al., 2004, 2006), we examined the 
role of FcRn in induction of tolerance in offspring. BALB/c 
 
Fcgrt+/− females were OVA-sensitized and mated with 
BALB/c Fcgrt−/− males (Fig. 7 A). Fcgrt−/− females were 
not used as they predictably exhibit a shorter IgG half-life 
(Roopenian et al., 2003; Pyzik et al., 2015). Levels of serum 
OVA-IgG1-IC and MLN OVA-specific 
T reg cells in weaned 
Fcgrt+/− offspring were comparable to BALB/c 
WT offspring 
of OVA-sensitized WT mothers, whereas there was no in-
crease in these parameters in Fcgrt−/− littermates (Fig. 7, B and 
C). After epicutaneous sensitization and oral challenge with 
OVA, Fcgrt+/− offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers exhib-
ited tolerance, as indicated by a decrease in levels of OVA-IgE 
production, systemic anaphylaxis, and serum mMCP1, 
and jejunal mast cell expansion (Fig. 7, D–H), whereas 
OVA-sensitized Fcgrt−/− offspring of OVA-sensitized moth-
ers failed to show tolerance against food-allergic responses 
(Fig. 7, D–H). Collectively, these results suggest that offspring 
FcRn is essential in maternal IgG-IC transfer, differentiation 
of allergen-specific T reg cells, and induction of tolerance in 
offspring, confirming the requirement of maternal IgG-IC 
and offspring FcRn in disease protection.
Milk-borne allergen IgG-Ic induces allergen-specific t reg 
cells via Mln cd11c+ dcs
We hypothesized that maternal IgG-IC is processed and pre-
sented by CD11c+ DCs in offspring to promote the differ-
entiation of allergen-specific T reg cells. T
o test the capacity 
of CD11c+ DCs to present milk-borne IgG-IC and to in-
duce allergen-specific T reg cells, CD11c+ DCs were isolated 
from MLN of naive BALB/c WT mice and cocultured with 
CD4+ T cells from DO11.10+Foxp3EGFPRag2−/− mice that 
lack natural T reg cells in the presence or absence of breast 
milk from saline- or OVA-sensitized mothers for 4 d. Breast 
milk of OVA-sensitized mothers, but not breast milk of sa-
line-exposed mothers or PBS, increased the frequencies of 
OVA-specific Foxp3EGFP T reg cells (Fig. 8, A and B), sug-
gesting that CD11c+ DCs process and present milk-borne 
allergen IgG-IC and induce allergen-specific T reg cells. We 
next compared the capacity of CD11c+ DCs from MLN of 
offspring of saline- or OVA-sensitized mothers to induce 
 99
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
100
OVA-specific T reg cells in vitro without exogenous anti-
gen. CD11c+ DCs from offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers, 
but not from saline-exposed mothers, induced OVA-specific 
 
Foxp3EGFP T reg cells (Fig. 8, C and D), indicating that 
CD11c+ DCs from offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers al-
ready acquired allergen in vivo and induced allergen-specific 
T reg cells. To examine the ability of CD11c+ DCs to induce 
tolerance in vivo, MLN CD11c+ DCs were isolated from 
 
BALB/c WT offspring of saline- or OVA-sensitized WT 
mothers and adoptively transferred into naive BALB/c WT 
recipients together with DO11.10+Foxp3EGFPRag2−/−CD4+ 
T cells (Fig. 8 E). After sensitization and oral challenge 
with OVA, recipients of CD11c+ DCs from offspring of 
OVA-sensitized mothers, but not of CD11c+ DCs from 
offspring of saline-exposed mothers, exhibited a decrease 
in food-allergic responses (Fig. 8, F–J). Adoptive transfer of 
CD11c+ DCs from offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers re-
sulted in greater expansion of OVA-specific 
T reg cells in vivo, 
as assessed as Foxp3EGFP cells in MLN and jejunum (Fig. 8, K 
and L). 
These results indicate the critical role of CD11c+ DCs 
in offspring in processing maternally transferred IgG-IC and 
promoting T reg cell–mediated tolerance against food allergy.
Fcrn in cd11c+ dcs is critical for induction 
of tolerance in offspring
FcRn is expressed in DCs and macrophages throughout life 
in humans and mice (Zhu et al., 2001). FcRn in APCs me-
diates antigen presentation of IgG-IC more efficiently than 
soluble antigen alone (Qiao et al., 2008; Baker et al., 2011). 
Our results suggest that maternally transferred OVA-IgG-IC, 
but not free OVA, processed and presented by CD11c+ 
DCs likely provides the basis for the development of aller-
gen-specific T reg cell responses in offspring. We hypothe-
sized that FcRn in offspring DCs contributes to tolerance 
induction in offspring by facilitating IgG-IC presentation to 
promote the induction of allergen-specific T reg cells during 
this period of life. T
o this purpose, we examined the capacity 
of CD11c+ DCs from MLN of naive BALB/c Fcgrt−/− mice 
to induce OVA-specific T reg cells in vitro in the presence 
of breast milk from OVA-sensitized BALB/c WT mothers. 
Unlike WT CD11c+ DCs, Fcgrt−/− CD11c+ DCs failed to 
induce OVA-specific T reg cells in response to breast milk 
from OVA-sensitized mothers (Fig. 9 A). WT and Fcgrt−/− 
CD11c+ DCs were comparable in their capacity of inducing 
OVA-specific T reg cells after in vitro stimulation with ex-
ogenous OVA323-339 peptide and TGF-β1 (Fig. 9 A), indicat-
ing that the impaired capacity of Fcgrt−/− CD11c+ DCs in 
inducing OVA-specific T reg cells was not a result of their 
general failure to present allergens to CD4+ T cells. These re-
sults suggest that FcRn in CD11c+ DCs is required for ma-
ternal allergen presentation and induction of antigen-specific 
T reg cells. T
o further examine the role of FcRn in CD11c+ 
DCs in induction of tolerance in vivo, we used mice bear-
ing a floxed Fcgrt gene (Fcgrtfl/fl) crossed with CD11c-cre 
mice on C57BL/6 background to specifically delete FcRn 
in CD11c+ DCs (C57BL/6 ItgaxcreFcgrtfl/fl). Saline- or 
OVA-sensitized Fcgrtfl/fl females were mated with Itgaxcre 
Fcgrtfl/fl males (Fig. 9 B). Weaned ItgaxcreFcgrtfl/fl offspring 
of OVA-sensitized mothers exhibited a decrease in induc-
tion of OVA-specific T reg cells as compared with Fcgrtfl/fl 
littermates (Fig. 9 C). Consistently, ItgaxcreFcgrtfl/fl offspring 
of OVA-sensitized mothers failed to exhibit tolerance to food 
allergy, as ItgaxcreFcgrtfl/fl mice developed greater levels of 
OVA-IgE, systemic anaphylaxis, and jejunal mast cell expan-
sion than their Fcgrtfl/fl littermates in response to epicutane-
ous sensitization and oral challenge with OVA (Fig. 9, D–G).
IgG-Ic in human breast milk protects humanized 
Fcrn mice from food allergy
Food-specific IgG and food allergen–immune complexes are 
present in sera and breast milk of healthy subjects (Husby et 
al., 1985; Rumbo et al., 1998; Hirose et al., 2001; Bernard 
et al., 2014; Hochwallner et al., 2014; Schwarz et al., 2016). 
Elevated levels of allergen-specific IgG, especially IgG4, are 
associated with successful allergen-specific immunotherapy 
(Skripak et al., 2008; Caubet et al., 2012; James et al., 2012). 
The presence of OVA-specific IgG4 and OVA-IgG4-IC was 
assessed in breast milk samples from 16 nonatopic mothers 
by ELI 
SA. OVA-IgG4 was detectable in 10 (62.5%) milk 
samples with a median value among positive samples of 95.8 
ng/ml (Table S1). OVA-IgG4-IC was present in 8 subjects 
among 10 subjects that were positive for OVA-IgG4 (Table 
S1). OVA-IgE was undetectable in all samples. These results 
together with the findings in our mouse models suggest that 
maternal food-specific IgG in breast milk may promote the 
development of neonatal tolerance if transferred to neo-
nates together with food allergen. T
o examine the capacity 
of IgG-IC from human breast milk to promote induction of 
neonatal tolerance and to demonstrate a direct link between 
human FcRn and neonatal tolerance induction, we used 
BALB/c mice that constitutively express human FcRn and 
β2-microglobulin (β2M) and are deficient in mouse FcRn 
(hFCG 
RT
-hB2M-mFcgrt−/−) and thus have only the human 
form of the receptor (Roopenian et al., 2003; Y
oshida et al., 
2004). BALB/c hFCG 
RT
-hB2M-mFcgrt−/− mice were sup-
plemented by gavage 2 times a week for 2 wk with pooled 
Figure 5. Breastfeeding by allergen-sensitized mothers protects offspring from food allergy. (A) Experimental protocol. (B) Serum OVA-IgG-ICs 
in weaned offspring. (C) Analysis of OVA-specific Foxp3+ cells expanded from offspring MLN cells. (D) Serum OVA-IgE levels. (E) Core body temperature 
change. (F) Serum mMCP1 levels. (G and H) Flow cytometric analysis of jejunal mast cell frequencies (G) and numbers (H). Groups of animals were com-
pared using nonparametric one-way ANO 
VA. Data are mean ± SEM of two independent experiments (B–H). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ns, not 
significant. SAL, saline.
 101
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
102
human breast milk samples positive for OVA-IgG4-IC fol-
lowed by epicutaneous sensitization and oral challenge with 
egg white protein (Fig. 10 A). 
Treatment of humanized FcRn 
mice with OVA-IgG4-IC–containing breast milk resulted in 
oral tolerance, as indicated by an increase in allergen-specific 
T reg cells and a decrease in allergen-specific IgE, oral ana-
phylaxis, and jejunal mast cells (Fig. 10, B–F). The hypothesis 
that OVA-IgG4-IC mediated the observed protection in hu-
manized FcRn mice from food allergy was tested by treat-
ment of humanized FcRn mice with the same milk after IgG 
depletion. Removal of IgG from OVA-IgG4-IC–containing 
milk abrogated the differentiation of allergen-specific T reg 
cells as well as suppressive effects of milk on food-allergic re-
sponses (Fig. 10, B–F). Collectively, these results indicate that 
allergen-specific IgG-IC in breast milk drive allergen-specific 
T reg cells and that food-specific IgG antibodies exert an 
induction of tolerance against food allergy. These data further 
support the concept that the IgG-IC-FcRn axis contributes 
to neonatal tolerance induction and may extend to humans.
dIscussIon
In this study, we demonstrate that the interactions of maternal 
food allergen–specific IgG-IC and offspring FcRn in induc-
tion of allergen-specific T reg cell responses are fundamental 
to establishment of an effective, long-lasting neonatal toler-
ance to foods. Food allergen–specific IgG-IC is also observed 
in human breast milk from nonatopic mothers and sufficient 
to reduce disease susceptibility in humanized FcRn mice.
By using a physiological mouse model that shares fea-
tures of human food allergy, including a portal of exposure 
(the skin) that is important for disease development, and re-
sponse to oral challenge with IgE- and mast cell–mediated 
anaphylaxis, we demonstrated that maternal sensitization with 
food allergen induces T reg cells in offspring that are specific 
to the same allergen, which mediate the protection from food 
allergy. Allergen-specific T reg cells were induced by mater-
nal IgG-IC in breast milk, which was transferred to offspring 
in an FcRn-dependent manner, followed by FcRn-mediated 
antigen presentation by CD11c+ DCs in offspring. These 
findings outline a cascade of cellular and molecular events 
that underlie the induction of neonatal tolerance toward food 
allergens elicited by maternal immune responses.
BALB/c WT offspring of unsensitized mothers devel-
oped food-allergic responses after epicutaneous sensitization 
over 9 d and oral challenge with OVA, with increased levels 
of serum OVA-IgE, systemic anaphylaxis, serum mMCP1, 
and jejunal mast cell expansion. Our adjuvant-free model 
eliminates in mothers and offspring potentially confounding 
effects of adjuvants such as alum and cholera toxin (Oyoshi et 
al., 2014) that were used in previous studies examining ma-
ternal effects on offspring allergies (Leme et al., 2006; Matson 
et al., 2009; Mosconi et al., 2010). It is also highly versatile 
as it is operative in different backgrounds including BALB/c 
and C57BL/6. We demonstrate that maternal allergen sensi-
tization results in protection of offspring from development 
of food allergy, as the disease features were strongly attenu-
ated in offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers. This protection 
was long-lasting, as food-allergic responses were suppressed in 
15-wk-old offspring from OVA-sensitized mothers.
This protection of offspring against food allergy was 
associated with an increase in allergen-specific Foxp3+ 
T reg 
cells in offspring at weaning, as indicated by the capacities 
of these T reg cells to expand, proliferate, and suppress T 
cell proliferation in an allergen-specific manner. Although 
natural or type 1 T reg cells could also suppress food al-
lergy, the critical importance of allergen-specific T reg cells 
in offspring in mediating neonatal tolerance was evident in 
in vivo models, as depletion of allergen-specific T reg cells 
in Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ offspring of allergen-sensitized mothers 
abolished tolerance against food allergy.
The differentiation of allergen-specific T reg cells in 
offspring at weaning reflected the role of maternally trans-
ferred IgG-IC via breast milk. Maternal OVA-Igs were in-
creased in sera and breast milk from OVA-sensitized mothers, 
which were also observed in offspring sera of OVA-sensitized 
mothers. Although maternal OVA-IgE was detectable in off-
spring of OVA-sensitized mothers, oral OVA challenge of 
saline-exposed offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers did not 
result in systemic anaphylaxis, consistent with the observations 
in humans and in mice that the presence of allergen-specific 
IgE is not always associated with food allergy symptoms (Bart-
nikas et al., 2013; 
Valenta et al., 2015). Although mothers were 
constantly exposed to OVA from preconception through 
weaning, levels of free OVA in breast milk or sera of offspring 
from OVA-sensitized mothers were negligible, whereas sim-
ilar ELI 
SA protocols readily detected IgG-IC and OVA-Igs 
not bound to OVA in the same samples. Although it is possi-
ble that undetectable levels of OVA in breast milk could also 
be transferred to offspring, these results suggest that transfer of 
free antigen to the pups during breastfeeding period is likely 
minimal. Our results suggest that in utero–transferred IgG-IC 
may also participate in driving tolerance in offspring and that 
Figure 6. Ic supplementation to mothers protects offspring from food allergy. (A–H) IC supplementation during pregnancy and breastfeeding. 
Experimental protocol (A), serum OVA-IgG1-IC in weaned offspring (B), OVA-specific Foxp3+ cells expanded from offspring MLN cells (C), serum OVA-IgE 
levels (D), core body temperature change (E), serum mMCP1 levels (F), jejunal mast cell frequencies (G), and numbers (H). (I–P) IC supplementation during 
breastfeeding. Experimental protocol (I), serum OVA-IgG1-IC in weaned offspring (J), OVA-specific Foxp3+ cells expanded from offspring MLN cells (K), 
serum OVA-IgE levels (L), core body temperature change (M), serum mMCP1 levels (N), jejunal mast cell frequencies (O), and numbers (P). Groups of animals 
were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test. Data are mean ± SEM and representative of 2 independent experiments (B–H, J–P). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; 
***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.
 103
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Figure 7. offspring Fcrn is required for protection of offspring from food allergy. (A) Experimental protocol. (B) Serum OVA-IgG1-IC in weaned off-
spring. (C) Analysis of OVA-specific Foxp3+ cells expanded from offspring MLN cells. (D) Serum OVA-IgE levels. (E) Core body temperature change. (F) Serum 
mMCP1 levels. (G and H) Flow cytometric analysis of jejunal mast cell frequencies (G) and numbers (H). Groups of animals were compared using nonpara-
metric one-way ANO 
VA. Data are mean ± SEM of two independent experiments (B–H). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ns, not significant. SAL, saline.
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
104
Figure 8. Milk-borne IgG-Ic induces allergen-specific t reg cells via Mln cd11c+ dcs. (A and B) Flow cytometric analysis (A) and frequencies (B) 
of CD4+DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP+ T reg cells. MLN CD11c+ cells were isolated from naive WT mice and cultured with CD4+DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP- cells in the presence 
or absence of breast milk. (C and D) Flow cytometric analysis (C) and frequencies (D) of CD4+DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP+ T reg cells. MLN CD11c+ cells were isolated 
 105
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
IgG-IC transferred during breastfeeding is necessary for op-
timal induction of tolerance. This was further supported by 
the findings that breastfeeding by OVA-sensitized mothers 
was sufficient to increase IgG-IC levels and allergen-specific 
T reg cells, as well as protection against food allergy in fos-
tered offspring of unsensitized mothers, similar to offspring of 
OVA-sensitized mothers.
The direct contribution of maternal IgG-IC to toler-
ance induction was evident as maternal IC supplementation 
during pregnancy and breastfeeding promoted neonatal toler-
ance against food allergy. Maternal IgG-IC supplementation 
only during breastfeeding resulted in lower levels of IgG-IC 
in offspring as compared with maternal IgG-IC supplemen-
tation during pregnancy and breastfeeding, likely reflecting 
the total IgG-IC dose given to mothers and the contribu-
tion of in utero IgG-IC transfer. Although physiological dose 
requirements for IgG-IC to induce neonatal tolerance are 
unknown, maternal IgG-IC supplementation during breast-
feeding alone still provided resistance toward food allergy in 
offspring. This further supports the critical role of IgG-IC in 
induction of neonatal tolerance. 
The essential role of offspring 
FcRn in tolerance induction was shown in an in vivo model. 
BALB/c Fcgrt+/− offspring of OVA-sensitized Fcgrt+/− 
mothers showed comparable levels of maternal IgG-IC 
transfer, allergen-specific T reg cell induction, and protection 
against food allergy as in WT controls. Impaired formation of 
allergen-specific T reg cells and failure of tolerance induction 
in BALB/c Fcgrt−/− littermates of OVA-sensitized Fcgrt+/− 
mothers were associated with their inability to receive and 
respond to maternal IgG-IC, consistent with a previous study 
that offspring FcRn is required for maternal IgG-IC trans-
fer and protection against experimental asthma (Mosconi et 
al., 2010). A previous study evaluated mothers and offspring 
immunized through a nonphysiological route (i.p.) with an 
artificial adjuvant, alum, which induces allergic airway in-
flammation that is independent of IgE or mast cells (Wil-
liams and Galli, 2000). In this study, mothers were exposed to 
OVA aerosols after adoption of offspring, raising a possibility 
that mothers and offspring ingested OVA by licking their fur. 
Thus, their results of neonatal tolerance induction may have 
reflected exposure of mothers and offspring to OVA by both 
airway and oral routes. The capacity of IgG-IC to induce T 
reg cell–mediated tolerance and the role of FcRn in DCs 
were not directly addressed in the previous study. Further-
more, the mechanisms suggested using a mouse model of al-
lergic airway inflammation do not necessarily extend to the 
mechanisms applicable to a model of food allergy. Our model 
is likely to be more relevant to naturally occurring sensiti-
zation to food allergens in that it is adjuvant-free, uses skin 
as a route of exposure that is important for development of 
clinical food allergy, is applicable to a clinically relevant pea-
nut allergen, and assesses responses to oral challenge together 
with IgE- and mast cell–mediated anaphylaxis (Bartnikas et 
al., 2013; Galand et al., 2016).
The mechanism driving the differentiation of aller-
gen-specific T reg cells involved maternal antigen presenta-
tion by CD11c+ DCs in offspring. CD11c+ DCs from MLN 
of naive BALB/c WT mice supported induction of aller-
gen-specific T reg cells in the presence of breast milk from 
OVA-sensitized mothers in vitro. In addition, CD11c+ DCs 
from offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers induced aller-
gen-specific T reg cells in vitro without addition of exoge-
nous antigen, indicating that these cells acquired maternally 
transferred antigens in vivo, likely as IgG-IC, given the ab-
sence of free OVA in breast milk from OVA-sensitized moth-
ers. We further demonstrated that CD11c+ DCs from MLN 
in offspring promote differentiation of allergen-specific T 
reg cells that mediate tolerance in vivo. Adoptive transfer of 
CD11c+ DCs from offspring of OVA-sensitized mothers, but 
not CD11c+ DCs from offspring of unsensitized mothers, 
transferred tolerance in recipients.
In addition to mediating maternal IgG-IC transfer to 
offspring through intestinal epithelial cells as supported by 
our previous studies (Y
oshida et al., 2004), FcRn in CD11c+ 
DCs in offspring was also critical for maternal IgG-IC pro-
cessing and antigen presentation to induce allergen-specific 
T reg cells. Unlike WT CD11c+ DCs, Fcgrt−/− CD11c+ DCs 
were incapable of presenting OVA-IgG-IC in breast milk 
from OVA-sensitized mothers to induce allergen-specific T 
reg cells in vitro. These results are consistent with the dis-
tinctive role of FcRn in CD11c+ DCs in processing IgG-IC, 
rather than soluble antigen, to prime 
T cell responses (Qiao et 
al., 2008; Baker et al., 2011) and further support our concept 
that IgG-IC in breast milk provides the main basis of aller-
gen-specific T reg cell differentiation. The requisite role of 
FcRn in CD11c+ DCs in determining the tolerogenic envi-
ronment was further demonstrated by us in vivo in mice with 
CD11c+ cell–specific FcRn deficiency, which failed to in-
crease allergen-specific T reg cells and tolerance induction by 
maternal allergen sensitization. Previous studies have linked 
FcRn-dependent antigen processing to the induction of Th1 
responses via induction of IL-12 production by CD11c+ cells 
(Baker et al., 2013). Our studies here thus extend these ob-
servations by showing that FcRn in CD11c+ cells in response 
from offspring of SAL or OVA mothers and cultured with CD4+DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP- cells without exogenous allergens. (E–L) Adoptive transfer of MLN CD11c+ 
cells from offspring of SAL or OVA mothers. Experimental protocol (E), OVA-IgE (F), core body temperature change (G), serum mMCP1 levels (H), jejunal 
mast cell frequencies (I) and numbers (J), and flow cytometric analysis of CD4+DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP+ T reg cells in MLN (K) and jejunum (L) of recipients. 
Representative plots from two independent experiments shown (A and C). Numbers indicate percentages (A and C). Groups of animals were compared 
using nonparametric one-way ANO 
VA (B) and the Mann-Whitney U test (D and F–L). Data are mean ± SEM of two independent experiments (B and D) or 
representative of two independent experiments (F–L). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ns, not significant. SAL, saline.
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
106
Figure 9. Fcrn in cd11c+ dcs is critical for induction of tolerance in offspring. (A) Flow cytometric analysis of CD4+DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP+ T reg cells. 
MLN CD11c+ DCs were isolated from WT or Fcgrt−/− mice and cultured with CD4+DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP- cells with breast milk from OVA-sensitized WT mothers 
or with exogenous TGF-β1 and OVA323-339 peptide. (B) Experimental protocol. (C) Analysis of OVA-specific Foxp3+ cells expanded from weaned offspring MLN 
cells. (D) Serum OVA-IgE levels. (E) Core body temperature change. (F and G) Flow cytometric analysis of jejunal mast cell frequencies (F) and numbers (G). 
Groups of animals were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test (A, C–G). Data are mean ± SEM of two independent experiments (A) or 3 independent 
experiments (C–G). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001; ns, not significant. SAL, saline.
 107
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
to IgG-IC also regulates the induction of FoxP3+ T reg cells. 
Whether this is a result of the activities of FcRn in specific 
subsets of APCs and in a tissue- and/or age-dependent man-
ner remains to be addressed. Our study delineates for the first 
time the critical role of FcRn in DCs in promoting aller-
gen-specific T reg cell responses, which together provides 
a greater understanding of the role of FcRn in modulating 
protective immune regulation in food allergy. Our results thus 
provide a novel role of FcRn in mediating allergen-specific T 
reg cell responses in mediating neonatal tolerance, on the top 
of its known role in the maternal IgG transfer.
FcRn may thus control tolerance induction at many 
points of life. These include the role played by FcRn in con-
trolling the transport of IgG-IC across the placenta ante-
natally into the developing fetus (Leach et al., 1996). FcRn 
function in intestinal epithelial cells of the neonatal animal 
may be particularly important in the rodent during neonatal 
life when FcRn expression and function are robust (Gill et al., 
1999). Although never directly addressed, FcRn in intestinal 
epithelial cells may play a role in the antigen presentation 
functions of this cell type in the induction of tolerance (Kai-
serlian et al., 1989). These possibilities are of potential future 
interest through conditional deletion of Fcgrt in the intestinal 
epithelium, for example.
As IgG-IC processing also requires FcγR (Baker et 
al., 2011), the contribution of each FcγR to IgG-IC up-
take by CD11c+ DCs leading to the T reg cell induction is 
not clear and an important future area of study. One recent 
study demonstrated a critical role for FcγRIIb in mediating a 
protective effect of allergen-specific IgG against food allergy 
(Burton et al., 2017). Nevertheless, it may be hypothesized 
that after the internalization of IgG-IC by FcγRs, FcRn is 
the only intracellular receptor that is known to control the 
routing of IgG-IC to an antigen-processing pathway to prime 
Figure 10. IgG-Ic in human breast milk protects humanized Fcrn mice from food allergy. (A) Experimental protocol. (B) Analysis of allergen-specific 
Foxp3+ cells expanded from MLN cells. (C) Serum egg white-IgE levels. (D) Core body temperature change. (E and F) Flow cytometric analysis of jejunal mast 
cell frequencies (E) and numbers (F). Groups of animals were compared using a nonparametric one-way ANO 
VA. Data are mean ± SEM and representative 
of two independent experiments (B–F). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ns, not significant.
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
108
T cells (Qiao et al., 2008; Baker et al., 2011, 2013, 2014; Liu 
et al., 2011; Guilliams et al., 2014).
We demonstrate in the current study that food-specific 
IgG4 is detectable in breast milk from nonatopic mothers, 
consistent with the previous studies (Bernard et al., 2014; 
Rekima et al., 2017). Furthermore, OVA-IgG4-IC was com-
monly present in breast milk samples that were positive for 
OVA-IgG4. 
The importance of the milk-borne IgG-IC-FcRn 
axis in tolerance induction was strongly corroborated by the 
impaired food-allergic responses in humanized FcRn mice 
supplemented with breast milk from nonatopic mothers con-
taining OVA-IgG-IC, but not with IgG-depleted milk. These 
results further validate that the concept of inducing oral tol-
erance by the IgG-IC pathway is also effective when human 
breast milk IgG-IC is used, providing a particularly important 
piece of evidence for the potential clinical relevance of our 
observations in mice for humans.
Our study is in line with recent findings that mater-
nal exposure to food allergens decreases allergy in offspring 
in humans and in mice (Fusaro et al., 2007; López-Expósito 
et al., 2009; Mosconi et al., 2010; Verhasselt, 2010b; Bunya-
vanich et al., 2014; Frazier et al., 2014). Prior human studies 
examining the effect of maternal diets during pregnancy on 
peanut allergy have shown inconsistent results. A prospective 
US study showed no benefit of maternal and early childhood 
avoidance of milk, egg, or peanut in preventing food allergies 
(Zeiger et al., 1989). Our results provide experimental sup-
port for recent decisions to withdraw recommendations of 
allergen avoidance during pregnancy and breastfeeding, and 
support potential beneficial effects of maternal allergen ex-
posure to protect offspring from food allergy. A recent study 
suggesting that early food introduction might decrease the 
risk of food allergy development (Perkin et al., 2016) under-
scored the potential benefit of food allergen transfer through 
breast milk as this may be the first food exposure for the in-
fant. Our data indicate that both offspring of sensitized moth-
ers and offspring of unsensitized mothers supplemented with 
IgG-IC exhibited tolerance against food allergy, highlighting 
the critical role of maternal IgG-IC in tolerance induction 
in offspring regardless of the sensitization status of mothers 
in our mouse model. Our findings that food allergen–spe-
cific IgG-IC is present in human breast milk from nonatopic 
mothers and sufficient to reduce disease susceptibility in hu-
manized FcRn mice support that nonatopic mothers may 
induce oral tolerance through the IgG-IC pathway. Analysis 
of how the atopic status of mothers may influence tolerance 
induction in offspring in humans will be an important future 
question to be addressed.
In summary, this study has provided novel exper-
imental evidence supporting a critical role of maternal al-
lergen-specific immune responses in establishing effective 
tolerance that prevents food allergy in offspring, extending 
well beyond the previously known roles of maternal anti-
bodies and FcRn in providing passive immunity. Our exper-
imental approaches that combine cellular and in vivo animal 
investigations as well as human ex vivo samples demonstrate 
that the interactions of IgG-IC and FcRn are critical in the 
development of neonatal tolerance, namely FcRn-dependent 
transfer of maternal IgG-IC and FcRn-dependent IgG-IC 
processing and antigen presentation by CD11c+ DCs to in-
duce allergen-specific T reg cells in offspring (Fig. S4), thus 
identifying multiple roles for FcRn in neonatal tolerance. 
Our results also provide a rationale for measures that improve 
the development of allergen-specific T reg cells through ma-
ternal allergen exposure. This previously unrecognized tol-
erance pathway could suggest a potential for IgG-IC as an 
immunotherapy to improve oral tolerance and may lead to 
improved therapeutic strategies to induce tolerance in early 
life to prevent food allergy in children.
MAtErIAls And MEtHods
study participants
Nonatopic breastfeeding mothers were recruited as defined by 
no personal or family history of atopic diseases (food allergy, 
environmental allergy, eczema, asthma) in first-degree rela-
tives. These subjects had no other chronic diseases or mastitis 
during the preceding 4 wk. Informed consent was obtained 
from the subjects and the study was approved by the Boston 
Children’s Hospital Institutional Review Board. Milk samples 
were centrifuged (400 g, 15 min), fat was removed, and su-
pernatant was collected, frozen, and stored at −20°C until use.
Mice
BALB/c WT mice were purchased from Taconic. BALB/c 
Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ and BALB/c DO11.10+Rag2−/−Foxp3EGFP 
mice bred onto a BALB/c background for >10 genera-
tions were a gift from T. Chatila (Boston Children’s Hospital, 
Boston, MA). Fcgrt−/− (Roopenian et al., 2003) and hFCG 
RT
-hB2M-mFcgrt−/− (Roopenian et al., 2003; 
Y
oshida et al., 
2004) mice were bred onto a BALB/c background for more 
than 10 generations. C57BL/6 Fcgrtfl/fl mice were kindly 
provided by E.S. Ward (University of T
exas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX; Y
oshida et al., 2004; Montoyo et 
al., 2009). All mice were bred in the animal facility of Bos-
ton Children’s Hospital, kept in a specific pathogen-free en-
vironment, and fed an OVA-free diet. All procedures were 
performed in accordance with the Animal Care and Use 
Committee of Boston Children’s Hospital.
Allergen sensitization and anaphylaxis
Epicutaneous sensitization of mice was performed as previ-
ously described (Venturelli et al., 2016). In brief, the dorsal 
skin of anesthetized 6–8-wk-old female mice was shaved and 
tape-stripped six times with T
egaderm (Westnet Inc.). Then 
100 µg OVA (Grade V; Sigma) in 100 µl of normal saline, 
or placebo (100 µl of normal saline), was placed on a patch 
of sterile gauze (1 × 1 cm), which was secured to the dorsal 
skin with T
egaderm. Each mouse had a total of three 1-d ex-
posures to the patch separated by 2-d intervals over 9 d be-
fore mating. Female mice received epicutaneous sensitization 
 109
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
with OVA once weekly during pregnancy and breastfeeding. 
Mothers did not receive oral OVA challenge. 6–8-wk-old 
offspring were epicutaneously sensitized with OVA or saline 
over 9 d followed by a bolus oral challenge with 100 mg OVA 
at day 9 (Bartnikas et al., 2013). T
emperature changes were 
measured by using the DAS-6006 Smart Probe and transpon-
ders (Biomedic Data Systems) injected subcutaneously. Mice 
were euthanized 24 h after challenge to harvest tissues. For T 
reg cell depletion by DT, Foxp3EGF 
PDTR+ mice were treated 
i.p. with 50 µg/kg DT (List Biological Laboratory).
Fostering of offspring
Mothers sensitized with saline or OVA were coordinately 
mated, and offspring of saline- or OVA-exposed mothers 
were fostered and nursed by OVA- or saline-sensitized moth-
ers. Offspring of OVA- or saline-sensitized mothers were 
kept in the original cage and nursed by OVA- or saline-sen-
sitized mothers together with fostered offspring of saline- 
or OVA-exposed mothers.
Breast milk collection
Mouse breast milk was collected after i.p. injection of 
4 IU oxytocin (Sigma) 24 h after OVA sensitization 
of breastfeeding mothers.
Ic supplementation
OVA-IgG1-IC was formed as previously described (Baker et 
al., 2011). In brief, mouse monoclonal anti-OVA-IgG1 anti-
bodies purified using Affi-Gel Protein A MAPS II kit (Biorad) 
from hybridoma (clone 01–4), a kind gift of H. Karasuyama 
(T
okyo Medical and Dental University, T
okyo, Japan), was 
incubated at 1:2 molar ratio of anti-OVA-IgG1 to OVA at 
37°C for 30 min. OVA-IgG1-IC (100 µg) was given i.p. to 
BALB/c 
WT female mice once weekly for 6 wk during preg-
nancy and breastfeeding, or for 3 wk during breastfeeding.
Human breast milk supplementation
3–5-wk-old hFCG 
RT
-hB2M-mFcgrt−/− mice were treated 
by gavage twice a week for 2 wk with 300 µl pooled human 
breast milk samples containing OVA-IgG4-IC, the same 
breast milk samples depleted of IgG, or PBS. IgG depletion 
was performed with the Nab Protein G Spin kit (Thermo 
Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Mice 
were epicutaneously sensitized with 200 µg egg white ex-
tract (Greer) and orally challenged with 200 mg egg white 
protein (Nutriom LLC) as described above (Allergen sensiti-
zation and anaphylaxis).
ElI 
sA
Analysis of mMCP1, mouse IL-4, OVA-specific IgE, IgG1, 
and IgG2a were performed as described previously (Oyoshi 
et al., 2011; Bartnikas et al., 2013). Biotin-conjugated peanut 
extract or egg white extract (Greer) was used to detect pea-
nut- or egg white–specific IgE. TGF-β1 was measured per 
the manufacturer’s instructions (Affymetrix). For analysis of 
OVA-IgG1 and OVA-IgG2a immune complexes or free OVA, 
ELI 
SA plates were coated with goat anti-OVA polyclonal an-
tibody (MP Biomedicals), saturated nonspecific binding, and 
incubated with serum or breast milk, followed by incubation 
with biotin-conjugated anti–mouse IgG1 or IgG2a antibod-
ies (BD) or rabbit anti-OVA polyclonal antibody (Abcam). 
HRP-conjugated avidin (Affymetrix) was used for detection. 
As a reference standard, adjacent wells on the same plates were 
coated with OVA (grade 
V
, Sigma), and anti-OVA mouse IgG1 
(Sigma) or anti-OVA mouse IgG2a (Biolegend) were added. 
For analysis of human OVA-IgG4 or OVA-IgG4 immune 
complexes, ELI 
SA plates were coated with OVA or goat anti- 
OVA antibody and incubated with breast milk followed by 
biotin-conjugated anti–human IgG4 (BD Biosciences) with 
total human IgG4 as a reference standard.
cell cultures
Allergen-specific T cells were identified by allergen-induced 
ex vivo proliferation as previously described (Burton et al., 
2014b). In brief, MLN cells were labeled with CellTrace 
Vio-
let (Life T
echnologies) and cultured in complete RPMI 1640 
(Invitrogen) supplemented by 10% FCS, 0.05 mM 2-mer-
captoethanol, and penicillin/streptomycin with or without 
allergen (200 µg/ml OVA or peanut extract) for 5 d. Cells 
undergoing proliferation (dye dilution) were considered aller-
gen-specific, a conclusion supported by a lack of proliferation 
in the absence of allergen or in allergen-stimulated cells from 
unsensitized mice. For OVA-specific 
T reg cell differentiation, 
CD11c+ DCs were enriched from MLN of 3–5-wk-old WT 
or Fcgrt−/− mice by CD11c+ Microbeads (Miltenyi). Naive 
WT mice or offspring of epicutaneously sensitized mothers 
with saline or OVA 1 day after last maternal exposure (day 46; 
Fig. 1 A) were used. Naive CD4+ T cells were enriched from 
spleen of DO11.10+Rag2−/−Foxp3EGFP mice by a naive CD4+ 
T cell kit (Miltenyi). Naive CD4+ T cells (2.5 × 105) were 
cultured with CD11c+ DCs (0.5 × 105) in the presence or ab-
sence of 40× diluted breast milk, or 1 µM OVA323-339 peptide 
and 5 ng/ml recombinant human TGF-β1 (R&D Systems). 
After 3 d, allergen-specific induced T reg cells were analyzed 
by flow cytometry on the basis of EGFP fluorescence.
Adoptive transfer
CD11c+ DCs were enriched as above (Cell cultures) from 
MLN of offspring. CD11c+ DCs (2 × 105) and naive CD4+-
DO11.10+Foxp3EGFP- T cells (2 × 106) prepared as above 
(Cell cultures) were injected intravenously into naive recipi-
ents. After 5 d, recipients were epicutaneously sensitized over 
9 d, then orally challenged with OVA as above (Allergen sen-
sitization and anaphylaxis).
suppression assay
CD4+CD25+ 
T reg cells isolated by magnetic beads (Miltenyi) 
from MLN of BALB/c WT offspring were cocultured with 
naive CD4+ 
T cells isolated from DO11.10+Rag2−/−Foxp3EGFP 
mice (2.5 × 104 cells/well) labeled with CellTrace Violet at 
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
110
1:1 T reg/responder ratio in the presence of 1 µM OVA323-339 
peptide and irradiated splenocytes (5 × 104 cells/well). After 4 
d, cell proliferation was evaluated by dye dilution. 
The percent 
suppression was calculated using the following formula:
 
 
1 −  
( 
% of proliferated cells with T reg present 
 
 
_______________________________ 
 
 
% of proliferated cells without T reg present 
 
) × 100. 
Flow cytometry
T reg cells were stained with fluorochrome-conjugated an-
tibodies for Foxp3, CD3, CD4, and CD25 using the Foxp3 
staining kit (eBioscience). For lamina propria lymphocyte iso-
lation, a jejunum section of the small intestine was harvested, 
and the tissue was prepared as previously described (Galand 
et al., 2016). Single-cell suspensions were stained with fluoro-
chrome-conjugated mAbs for IgE, c-kit, CD3, CD11c, CD19, 
CD45, and NKp46 (purchased from BioLegend, BD Biosci-
ences, or eBioscience). Dead cells were routinely excluded 
from analysis by Fixable Viability Dye staining (eBioscience). 
Mouse mast cells were identified as live, CD45+lin−c-kit+IgE+ 
cells. Cells were analyzed on LSRFortessa (BD), and the data 
were analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star Inc.).
Quantitative Pcr
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed as described pre-
viously (Oyoshi et al., 2011).
statistical analysis
A Mann-Whitney U test (between two groups) or nonpara-
metric one-way ANO 
VA (between multiple groups) was 
used to compare the distribution of each outcome. All analy-
ses were performed with Prism software, version 6.0 (Graph-
Pad Software). A p-value of <0.05 was considered to indicate 
statistical significance.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows that maternal sensitization protects offspring 
from peanut allergy. Fig. S2 shows the contribution of in 
utero transferred maternal IgG-IC to induction of neona-
tal tolerance. Fig. S3 shows maternal sensitization induces 
long-lasting protection in offspring. Fig. S4 summarizes 
the mechanisms of neonatal tolerance via a maternal 
IgG-IC-FcRn axis. Table S1 summarizes the characteris-
tics of human breast milk.
AcknowlEdGMEnts
We thank Dr. Talal A. Chatila for his kind gifts of Foxp3EGFP/DTR+ and DO11.10+Rag2−/− 
Foxp3EGFP mice and scientific discussion. We thank Dr. Hans C. Oettgen for scientific 
advice and reading the manuscript, Ms. Kimberly H. Barbas for facilitating clinical 
sample collection, and Ms. Shelly Zing Chin Lum and Ms. Jacqueline Beaupre for 
technical assistance. 
This work was supported by the Food Allergy Research and Education (FARE), 
the HOPE APF 
ED/ARTrust Pilot Grant, the William F. Milton Fund, the Harvard Catalyst 
Clinical and Translational Research Center (NCA 
TS grant no. 8UL 1TR000170), and the 
Boston Children’s Hospital Pediatric Associates Award to M.K. Oyoshi and a National 
Institutes of Health grant (no. DK053056) and a Harvard Digestive Diseases Center 
grant (no. P30DK034854) to R.S. Blumberg.
R.S. Blumberg consults for and has received equity in Syntimmune Pharma-
ceuticals, which is developing therapies that target FcRn. The rest of the authors 
declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: A. Ohsaki, N. Venturelli, and M.K. Oyoshi designed and 
performed the experiments; T.M. Buccigrosso, S.K. Osganian, J. Lee, and M.K. Oyoshi 
collected clinical samples; R.S. Blumberg provided critical mice; and A. Ohsaki, 
 
R.S. Blumberg, and M.K. Oyoshi wrote the manuscript.
Submitted: 29 June 2017
Revised: 24 August 2017
Accepted: 28 September 2017
rEFErEncEs
Akdis, C.A., and M. Akdis. 2011. Mechanisms of allergen-specific 
immunotherapy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 127:18–27. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2010 
.11 
.030
Akilesh, S., T.B. Huber, H. Wu, G. Wang, B. Hartleben, J.B. Kopp, J.H. Miner, 
D.C. Roopenian, E.R. Unanue, and 
A.S. Shaw. 2008. Podocytes use FcRn 
to clear IgG from the glomerular basement membrane. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA. 105:967–972. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0711515105
Antohe, F
., L. Rădulescu, A. Gafencu, V
. Gheţie, and M. Simionescu. 
2001. Expression of functionally active FcRn and the differentiated 
bidirectional transport of IgG in human placental endothelial cells. Hum. 
Immunol. 62:93–105. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0198 
-8859(00)00244 
-5
Bai, 
Y
., L. 
Y
e, D.B. 
Tesar, H. Song, D. Zhao, P
.J. Björkman, D.C. Roopenian, and 
X. Zhu. 2011. Intracellular neutralization of viral infection in polarized 
epithelial cells by neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn)-mediated IgG transport. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108:18406–18411. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/
pnas 
.1115348108
Baker, K., S.W
. Qiao, 
T.T. Kuo, 
V
.G. Aveson, B. Platzer, J.T. Andersen, I. Sandlie, 
Z. Chen, C. de Haar, W
.I. Lencer, et al. 2011. Neonatal Fc receptor for 
IgG (FcRn) regulates cross-presentation of IgG immune complexes by 
CD8-CD11b+ dendritic cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108:9927–
9932. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1019037108
Baker, K., T. Rath, M.B. Flak, J.C. Arthur, Z. Chen, J.N. Glickman, I. Zlobec, 
E. Karamitopoulou, M.D. Stachler, R.D. Odze, et al. 2013. Neonatal 
Fc receptor expression in dendritic cells mediates protective immunity 
against colorectal cancer. Immunity. 39:1095–1107. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2013 
.11 
.003
Baker, K., T. Rath, M. Pyzik, and R.S. Blumberg. 2014. The Role of FcRn 
in Antigen Presentation. Front. Immunol. 5:408. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.3389 
/fimmu 
.2014 
.00408
Bartnikas, L.M., M.F
. Gurish, O.T. Burton, S. Leisten, E. Janssen, H.C. Oettgen, 
J. Beaupre, C.N. Lewis, K.F
. Austen, S. Schulte, et al. 2013. Epicutaneous 
sensitization results in IgE-dependent intestinal mast cell expansion and 
food-induced anaphylaxis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 131:451–460. https 
://
doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2012 
.11 
.032
Bernard, H., S. Ah-Leung, M.F
. Drumare, C. Feraudet-Tarisse, V
. Verhasselt, 
J.M. Wal, C. Créminon, and K. Adel-Patient. 2014. Peanut allergens are 
rapidly transferred in human breast milk and can prevent sensitization in 
mice. Allergy. 69:888–897. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/all 
.12411
Brambell, F
.W
. 1969. The transmission of immune globulins from the mother 
to the foetal and newborn young. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 28:35–41. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1079 
/PNS19690007
Brough, H.A., A. Simpson, K. Makinson, J. Hankinson, S. Brown, A. Douiri, 
D.C. Belgrave, M. Penagos, A.C. Stephens, W
.H. McLean, et al. 2014. 
Peanut allergy: effect of environmental peanut exposure in children with 
filaggrin loss-of-function mutations. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 134:867–
875. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2014 
.08 
.011
 111
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Brown, S.J., Y
. Asai, H.J. Cordell, L.E. Campbell, Y
. Zhao, H. Liao, K. 
Northstone, J. Henderson, R. Alizadehfar, M. Ben-Shoshan, et al. 2011. 
Loss-of-function variants in the filaggrin gene are a significant risk 
factor for peanut allergy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 127:661–667. https 
://
doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2011 
.01 
.031
Bunyavanich, S., S.L. Rifas-Shiman, T.A. Platts-Mills, L. Workman, J.E. 
Sordillo, C.A. Camargo Jr., M.W
. Gillman, D.R. Gold, and A.A. Litonjua. 
2014. Peanut, milk, and wheat intake during pregnancy is associated 
with reduced allergy and asthma in children. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 
133:1373–1382. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2013 
.11 
.040
Burton, O.T., S.L. Logsdon, J.S. Zhou, J. Medina-Tamayo, A. Abdel-Gadir, M. 
Noval Rivas, K.J. Koleoglou, T.A. Chatila, L.C. Schneider, R. Rachid, et 
al. 2014a. Oral immunotherapy induces IgG antibodies that act through 
FcgammaRIIb to suppress IgE-mediated hypersensitivity. J. Allergy Clin. 
Immunol. 134:1310–1317. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2014 
.05 
.042
Burton, O.T., M. Noval Rivas, J.S. Zhou, S.L. Logsdon, A.R. Darling, K.J. 
Koleoglou, A. Roers, H. Houshyar, M.A. Crackower, T.A. Chatila, and 
H.C. Oettgen. 2014b. Immunoglobulin E signal inhibition during 
allergen ingestion leads to reversal of established food allergy and 
induction of regulatory T cells. Immunity. 41:141–151. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2014 
.05 
.017
Burton, O.T., J.M. Tamayo, A.J. Stranks, K.J. Koleoglou, and H.C. Oettgen. 
2017. Allergen-specific IgG antibodies signaling via FcgammaRIIb 
promote food tolerance. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2017 
.03 
.045
Caubet, J.C., R. Bencharitiwong, E. Moshier, J.H. Godbold, H.A. Sampson, 
and A. Nowak-Węgrzyn. 2012. Significance of ovomucoid- and 
ovalbumin-specific IgE/IgG(4) ratios in egg allergy. J. Allergy Clin. 
Immunol. 129:739–747. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2011 
.11 
.053
Chatila, 
T.A. 2005. Role of regulatory 
T cells in human diseases. J. Allergy Clin. 
Immunol. 116:949–959. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2005 
.08 
.047
Chaudhury, C., S. Mehnaz, J.M. Robinson, W
.L. Hayton, D.K. Pearl, D.C. 
Roopenian, and C.L. Anderson. 2003. The major histocompatibility 
complex-related Fc receptor for IgG (FcRn) binds albumin and 
prolongs its lifespan. J. Exp. Med. 197:315–322. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20021829
Claypool, S.M., B.L. Dickinson, M. 
Y
oshida, W
.I. Lencer, and R.S. Blumberg. 
2002. Functional reconstitution of human FcRn in Madin-Darby canine 
kidney cells requires co-expressed human beta 2-microglobulin. J. Biol. 
Chem. 277:28038–28050. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M202367200
Curotto de Lafaille, M.A., N. Kutchukhidze, S. Shen, Y
. Ding, H. Y
ee, and 
J.J. Lafaille. 2008. Adaptive Foxp3+ regulatory T cell-dependent and 
-independent control of allergic inflammation. Immunity. 29:114–126. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2008 
.05 
.010
De Groot, A.S., and W
. Martin. 2009. Reducing risk, improving outcomes: 
bioengineering less immunogenic protein therapeutics. Clin. Immunol. 
131:189–201. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.clim 
.2009 
.01 
.009
De Groot, A.S., L. Moise, J.A. McMurry, E. Wambre, L. Van Overtvelt, P
. 
Moingeon, D.W
. Scott, and W
. Martin. 2008. Activation of natural 
regulatory T cells by IgG Fc-derived peptide “Tregitopes”. Blood. 
112:3303–3311. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2008 
-02 
-138073
Dickinson, B.L., K. Badizadegan, Z. Wu, J.C. Ahouse, X. Zhu, N.E. Simister, 
R.S. Blumberg, and W
.I. Lencer. 1999. Bidirectional FcRn-dependent 
IgG transport in a polarized human intestinal epithelial cell line. J. Clin. 
Invest. 104:903–911. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI6968
Dickinson, B.L., S.M. Claypool, J.A. D’Angelo, M.L. Aiken, N. Venu, E.H. 
Y
en, J.S. Wagner, J.A. Borawski, A.T. Pierce, R. Hershberg, et al. 2008. 
Ca2+-dependent calmodulin binding to FcRn affects immunoglobulin 
G transport in the transcytotic pathway. Mol. Biol. Cell. 19:414–423. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1091 
/mbc 
.E07 
-07 
-0658
Eigenmann, P
.A., S.H. Sicherer, T.A. Borkowski, B.A. Cohen, and H.A. 
Sampson. 1998. Prevalence of IgE-mediated food allergy among children 
with atopic dermatitis. Pediatrics. 101:E8. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1542 
/peds 
.101 
.3 
.e8
Frazier, A.L., C.A. Camargo Jr., S. Malspeis, W
.C. Willett, and M.C. Y
oung. 
2014. Prospective study of peripregnancy consumption of peanuts 
or tree nuts by mothers and the risk of peanut or tree nut allergy in 
their offspring. JAMA Pediatr. 168:156–162. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1001 
/
jamapediatrics 
.2013 
.4139
Fusaro, A.E., M. Maciel, J.R. Victor, C.R. Oliveira, A.J. Duarte, and M.N. 
Sato. 2002. Influence of maternal murine immunization with 
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus extract on the type I hypersensitivity 
response in offspring. Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol. 127:208–216. https 
://
doi 
.org 
/10 
.1159 
/000053865
Fusaro, A.E., C.A. Brito, J.R. Victor, P
.O. Rigato, A.L. Goldoni, A.J. Duarte, 
and M.N. Sato. 2007. Maternal-fetal interaction: preconception 
immunization in mice prevents neonatal sensitization induced by 
allergen exposure during pregnancy and breastfeeding. Immunology. 
122:107–115. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1365 
-2567 
.2007 
.02618 
.x
Galand, C., J.M. Leyva-Castillo, J. Y
oon, A. Han, M.S. Lee, A.N. McKenzie, 
M. Stassen, M.K. Oyoshi, F
.D. Finkelman, and R.S. Geha. 2016. IL-33 
promotes food anaphylaxis in epicutaneously sensitized mice by 
targeting mast cells. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 138:1356–1366. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2016 
.03 
.056
Gill, R.K., S. Mahmood, C.P
. Sodhi, J.P
. Nagpaul, and A. Mahmood. 1999. 
IgG binding and expression of its receptor in rat intestine during post-
natal development. Indian J. Biochem. Biophys. 36:252–257.
Gri, G., S. Piconese, B. Frossi, V
. Manfroi, S. Merluzzi, C. Tripodo, A. Viola, S. 
Odom, J. Rivera, M.P
. Colombo, and C.E. Pucillo. 2008. CD4+CD25+ 
regulatory T cells suppress mast cell degranulation and allergic responses 
through OX40-OX40L interaction. Immunity. 29:771–781. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2008 
.08 
.018
Guilliams, M., P
. Bruhns, Y
. Saeys, H. Hammad, and B.N. Lambrecht. 2014. 
The function of Fcγ receptors in dendritic cells and macrophages. Nat. 
Rev. Immunol. 14:94–108. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3582
Haribhai, D., J.B. Williams, S. Jia, D. Nickerson, E.G. Schmitt, B. Edwards, J. 
Ziegelbauer, M. 
Yassai, S.H. Li, L.M. Relland, et al. 2011. A requisite role 
for induced regulatory T cells in tolerance based on expanding antigen 
receptor diversity. Immunity. 35:109–122. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2011 
.03 
.029
Hill, D.J., R.G. Heine, C.S. Hosking, J. Brown, L. Thiele, K.J. Allen, J. Su, 
G. Varigos, and J.B. Carlin. 2007. IgE food sensitization in infants with 
eczema attending a dermatology department. J. Pediatr. 151:359–363. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jpeds 
.2007 
.04 
.070
Hirose, J., S. Ito, N. Hirata, S. Kido, N. Kitabatake, and H. Narita. 2001. 
Occurrence of the major food allergen, ovomucoid, in human breast 
milk as an immune complex. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 65:1438–1440. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1271 
/bbb 
.65 
.1438
Hochwallner, H., J. Alm, C. Lupinek, C. Johansson, A. Mie, A. Scheynius, and 
R. Valenta. 2014. Transmission of allergen-specific IgG and IgE from 
maternal blood into breast milk visualized with microarray technology. 
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 134:1213–1215. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2014 
.08 
.041
Husby, S., V
.A. Oxelius, B. Teisner, J.C. Jensenius, and S.E. Svehag. 1985. 
Humoral immunity to dietary antigens in healthy adults. Occurrence, 
isotype and IgG subclass distribution of serum antibodies to protein 
antigens. Int. Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol. 77:416–422. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1159 
/000233819
James, L.K., H. Bowen, R.A. Calvert, T.S. Dodev, M.H. Shamji, A.J. Beavil, 
J.M. McDonnell, S.R. Durham, and H.J. Gould. 2012. Allergen 
specificity of IgG(4)-expressing B cells in patients with grass pollen 
allergy undergoing immunotherapy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 130:663–
670. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2012 
.04 
.006
 Maternal immune complexes form neonatal tolerance | Ohsaki et al.
112
Jarrett, E., and E. Hall. 1979. Selective suppression of IgE antibody 
responsiveness by maternal influence. Nature. 280:145–147. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/280145a0
Kaiserlian, D., K. Vidal, and J.P
. Revillard. 1989. Murine enterocytes can 
present soluble antigen to specific class II-restricted CD4+ T cells. Eur. J. 
Immunol. 19:1513–1516. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.1830190827
Karlsson, M.R., J. Rugtveit, and P
. Brandtzaeg. 2004. Allergen-responsive 
CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in children who have outgrown cow’s 
milk allergy. J. Exp. Med. 199:1679–1688. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20032121
Lack, G., D. Fox, K. Northstone, and J. Golding. Avon Longitudinal Study 
of Parents and Children Study Team. 2003. Factors associated with the 
development of peanut allergy in childhood. N. Engl. J. Med. 348:977–
985. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMoa013536
Leach, J.L., D.D. Sedmak, J.M. Osborne, B. Rahill, M.D. Lairmore, and C.L. 
Anderson. 1996. Isolation from human placenta of the IgG transporter, 
FcRn, and localization to the syncytiotrophoblast: implications for ma-
ternal-fetal antibody transport. J. Immunol. 157:3317–3322.
Lei, 
T.C., and D.W
. Scott. 2005. Induction of tolerance to factor 
VIII inhibitors 
by gene therapy with immunodominant A2 and C2 domains presented 
by B cells as Ig fusion proteins. Blood. 105:4865–4870. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2004 
-11 
-4274
Leme, A.S., C. Hubeau, Y
. Xiang, A. Goldman, K. Hamada, Y
. Suzaki, and 
L. Kobzik. 2006. Role of breast milk in a mouse model of maternal 
transmission of asthma susceptibility. J. Immunol. 176:762–769. https 
://
doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.176 
.2 
.762
Li, Z., S. Palaniyandi, R. Zeng, W
. Tuo, D.C. Roopenian, and X. Zhu. 2011. 
Transfer of IgG in the female genital tract by MHC class I-related 
neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) confers protective immunity to vaginal 
infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108:4388–4393. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1012861108
Littman, D.R., and A.Y
. Rudensky. 2010. Th17 and regulatory T cells in 
mediating and restraining inflammation. Cell. 140:845–858. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2010 
.02 
.021
Liu, X., L. Lu, Z. 
Yang, S. Palaniyandi, R. Zeng, L.Y
. Gao, D.M. Mosser, D.C. 
Roopenian, and X. Zhu. 2011. 
The neonatal FcR-mediated presentation 
of immune-complexed antigen is associated with endosomal and 
phagosomal pH and antigen stability in macrophages and dendritic 
cells. J. Immunol. 186:4674–4686. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1003584
López-Expósito, I., Y
. Song, K.M. Järvinen, K. Srivastava, and X.M. Li. 2009. 
Maternal peanut exposure during pregnancy and lactation reduces 
peanut allergy risk in offspring. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 124:1039–1046. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2009 
.08 
.024
Matson, A.P
., R.S. Thrall, E. Rafti, and L. Puddington. 2009. Breastmilk from 
allergic mothers can protect offspring from allergic airway inflammation. 
Breastfeed. Med. 4:167–174. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/bfm 
.2008 
.0130
Metcalfe, D.D., R.D. Peavy, and A.M. Gilfillan. 2009. Mechanisms of mast 
cell signaling in anaphylaxis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 124:639–646, quiz 
:647–648. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2009 
.08 
.035
Montoyo, H.P
., C. Vaccaro, M. Hafner, R.J. Ober, W
. Mueller, and E.S. Ward. 
2009. Conditional deletion of the MHC class I-related receptor FcRn 
reveals the sites of IgG homeostasis in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
106:2788–2793. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0810796106
Mosconi, E., A. Rekima, B. Seitz-Polski, A. Kanda, S. Fleury, E. Tissandie, 
R. Monteiro, D.D. Dombrowicz, V
. Julia, N. Glaichenhaus, and V
. 
Verhasselt. 2010. Breast milk immune complexes are potent inducers 
of oral tolerance in neonates and prevent asthma development. Mucosal 
Immunol. 3:461–474. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/mi 
.2010 
.23
Mousallem, T., and A.W
. Burks. 2012. Immunology in the Clinic Review 
Series; focus on allergies: immunotherapy for food allergy. Clin. Exp. 
Immunol. 
167:26–31. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1365 
-2249 
.2011 
.04499 
.x
Nakajima, S., B.Z. Igyarto, 
T. Honda, G. Egawa, A. Otsuka, M. Hara-Chikuma, 
N. Watanabe, S.F
. Ziegler, M. T
omura, K. Inaba, et al. 2012. Langerhans 
cells are critical in epicutaneous sensitization with protein antigen via 
thymic stromal lymphopoietin receptor signaling. J. 
Allergy Clin. Immunol. 
129:1048–1055. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2012 
.01 
.063
Noval Rivas, M., O.T. Burton, P
. Wise, L.M. Charbonnier, P
. Georgiev, 
H.C. Oettgen, R. Rachid, and T.A. Chatila. 2015. Regulatory T cell 
reprogramming toward a 
Th2-cell-like lineage impairs oral tolerance and 
promotes food allergy. Immunity. 42:512–523. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2015 
.02 
.004
Ohkura, N., Y
. Kitagawa, and S. Sakaguchi. 2013. Development and 
maintenance of regulatory 
T cells. Immunity. 38:414–423. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2013 
.03 
.002
Oyoshi, M.K., A. Elkhal, J.E. Scott, M.A. Wurbel, J.L. Hornick, J.J. Campbell, 
and R.S. Geha. 2011. Epicutaneous challenge of orally immunized mice 
redirects antigen-specific gut-homing T cells to the skin. J. Clin. Invest. 
121:2210–2220. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI43586
Oyoshi, M.K., H.C. Oettgen, T.A. Chatila, R.S. Geha, and P
.J. Bryce. 2014. 
Food allergy: Insights into etiology, prevention, and treatment provided 
by murine models. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133:309–317. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2013 
.12 
.1045
Perkin, M.R., K. Logan, A. Tseng, B. Raji, S. Ayis, J. Peacock, H. Brough, T. 
Marrs, S. Radulovic, J. Craven, et al. EAT Study 
Team. 2016. Randomized 
Trial of Introduction of Allergenic Foods in Breast-Fed Infants. N. Engl. J. 
Med. 374:1733–1743. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMoa1514210
Pyzik, M., T. Rath, W
.I. Lencer, K. Baker, and R.S. Blumberg. 2015. FcRn: 
The Architect Behind the Immune and Nonimmune Functions of IgG 
and Albumin. J. Immunol. 194:4595–4603. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/
jimmunol 
.1403014
Qiao, S.W
., K. Kobayashi, F
.E. Johansen, L.M. Sollid, J.T. Andersen, E. Milford, 
D.C. Roopenian, W
.I. Lencer, and R.S. Blumberg. 2008. Dependence of 
antibody-mediated presentation of antigen on FcRn. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 105:9337–9342. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0801717105
Rath, T., K. Baker, J.A. Dumont, R.T. Peters, H. Jiang, S.W
. Qiao, W
.I. Lencer, 
G.F
. Pierce, and R.S. Blumberg. 2015. Fc-fusion proteins and FcRn: 
structural insights for longer-lasting and more effective therapeutics. 
Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 35:235–254. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.3109 
/07388551 
.2013 
.834293
Rekima, A., P
. Macchiaverni, M. Turfkruyer, S. Holvoet, L. Dupuis, N. Baiz, I. 
Annesi-Maesano, A. Mercenier, S. Nutten, and 
V
. 
Verhasselt. 2017. Long-
term reduction in food allergy susceptibility in mice by combining 
breastfeeding-induced tolerance and TGF-β-enriched formula after 
weaning. Clin. Exp. Allergy. 47:565–576. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/cea 
.12864
Renz, H., P
. Brandtzaeg, and M. Hornef. 2011. 
The impact of perinatal immune 
development on mucosal homeostasis and chronic inflammation. Nat. 
Rev. Immunol. 12:9–23. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3112
Roopenian, D.C., G.J. Christianson, T.J. Sproule, A.C. Brown, S. Akilesh, N. 
Jung, S. Petkova, L. Avanessian, E.Y
. Choi, D.J. Shaffer, et al. 2003. The 
MHC class I-like IgG receptor controls perinatal IgG transport, IgG 
homeostasis, and fate of IgG-Fc-coupled drugs. J. Immunol. 170:3528–
3533. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.170 
.7 
.3528
Rumbo, M., F
.G. Chirdo, M.C. Añón, and C.A. Fossati. 1998. Detection 
and characterization of antibodies specific to food antigens (gliadin, 
ovalbumin and beta-lactoglobulin) in human serum, saliva, colostrum 
and milk. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 112:453–458. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1046 
/j 
.1365 
-2249 
.1998 
.00587 
.x
Scadding, G.W
., M.H. Shamji, M.R. Jacobson, D.I. Lee, D. Wilson, M.T. 
Lima, L. Pitkin, C. Pilette, K. Nouri-Aria, and S.R. Durham. 2010. 
Sublingual grass pollen immunotherapy is associated with increases 
in sublingual Foxp3-expressing cells and elevated allergen-specific 
immunoglobulin G4, immunoglobulin A and serum inhibitory activity 
for immunoglobulin E-facilitated allergen binding to B cells. Clin. Exp. 
 113
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Allergy. 40:598–606. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1365 
-2222 
.2010 
.03462 
.x
Schroeder, H.W
. Jr., and L. Cavacini. 2010. Structure and function of 
immunoglobulins. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 125(2, Suppl 2):S41–S52. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2009 
.09 
.046
Schwarz, A., 
V
. Panetta, A. Cappella, S. Hofmaier, L. Hatzler, A. Rohrbach, O. 
Tsilochristou, C.P
. Bauer, U. Hoffmann, J. Forster, et al. 2016. IgG and 
IgG4 to 91 allergenic molecules in early childhood by route of exposure 
and current and future IgE sensitization: Results from the Multicentre 
Allergy Study birth cohort. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 138:1426–1433. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2016 
.01 
.057
Scott, D.W
., and A.S. De Groot. 2010. Can we prevent immunogenicity of 
human protein drugs? Ann. Rheum. Dis. 69(Suppl 1):i72–i76. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1136 
/ard 
.2009 
.117564
Shreffler, W
.G., N. Wanich, M. Moloney, A. Nowak-Wegrzyn, and H.A. 
Sampson. 2009. Association of allergen-specific regulatory T cells with 
the onset of clinical tolerance to milk protein. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 
123:43–52. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2008 
.09 
.051
Sicherer, S.H., and H.A. Sampson. 1999. Food hypersensitivity and atopic 
dermatitis: pathophysiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, and management. J. 
Allergy Clin. Immunol. 104:S114–S122. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0091 
-6749(99)70053 
-9
Sicherer, S.H., and H.A. Sampson. 2014. Food allergy: Epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133:291–
307. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2013 
.11 
.020
Sicherer, S.H., A.W
. Burks, and H.A. Sampson. 1998. Clinical features of 
acute allergic reactions to peanut and tree nuts in children. Pediatrics. 
102:e6. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1542 
/peds 
.102 
.1 
.e6
Sicherer, S.H., R.A. Wood, D. Stablein, R. Lindblad, A.W
. Burks, A.H. Liu, 
S.M. Jones, D.M. Fleischer, D.Y
. Leung, and H.A. Sampson. 2010. 
Maternal consumption of peanut during pregnancy is associated with 
peanut sensitization in atopic infants. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 126:1191–
1197. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2010 
.08 
.036
Simister, N.E., and K.E. Mostov. 1989. An Fc receptor structurally related 
to MHC class I antigens. Nature. 337:184–187. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/337184a0
Simister, N.E., C.M. Story, H.L. Chen, and J.S. Hunt. 1996. An IgG-
transporting Fc receptor expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast of human 
placenta. Eur. J. Immunol. 26:1527–1531. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.1830260718
Skripak, J.M., S.D. Nash, H. Rowley, N.H. Brereton, S. Oh, R.G. Hamilton, 
E.C. Matsui, A.W
. Burks, and R.A. Wood. 2008. A randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled study of milk oral immunotherapy for cow’s 
milk allergy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 122:1154–1160. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2008 
.09 
.030
Spiekermann, G.M., P
.W
. Finn, E.S. Ward, J. Dumont, B.L. Dickinson, R.S. 
Blumberg, and W
.I. Lencer. 2002. Receptor-mediated immunoglobulin 
G transport across mucosal barriers in adult life: functional expression of 
FcRn in the mammalian lung. J. Exp. Med. 196:303–310. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20020400
Syed, 
A., M.A. Garcia, S.C. Lyu, R. Bucayu, 
A. Kohli, S. Ishida, J.P
. Berglund, M. 
Tsai, H. Maecker, G. O’Riordan, et al. 2014. Peanut oral immunotherapy 
results in increased antigen-induced regulatory T-cell function and 
hypomethylation of forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3). J. Allergy Clin. 
Immunol. 133:500–510. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2013 
.12 
.1037
Till, S.J., J.N. Francis, K. Nouri-Aria, and S.R. Durham. 2004. Mechanisms 
of immunotherapy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 113:1025–1034. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2004 
.03 
.024
Uthoff, H., A. Spenner, W
. Reckelkamm, B. Ahrens, G. Wölk, R. Hackler, F
. 
Hardung, J. Schaefer, A. Scheffold, H. Renz, and U. Herz. 2003. Critical 
role of preconceptional immunization for protective and nonpathological 
specific immunity in murine neonates. J. Immunol. 171:3485–3492. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.171 
.7 
.3485
Valenta, R., H. Hochwallner, B. Linhart, and S. Pahr. 2015. Food allergies: 
the basics. Gastroenterology. 148:1120–1131. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1053 
/j 
.gastro 
.2015 
.02 
.006
van Wijk, F
., E.J. Wehrens, S. Nierkens, L. Boon, A. Kasran, R. Pieters, and 
L.M. Knippels. 2007. CD4+CD25+ T cells regulate the intensity of 
hypersensitivity responses to peanut, but are not decisive in the induction 
of oral sensitization. Clin. Exp. Allergy. 37:572–581. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1365 
-2222 
.2007 
.02681 
.x
Venturelli, N., 
W
.S. Lexmond, A. Ohsaki, S. Nurko, H. Karasuyama, E. Fiebiger, 
and M.K. Oyoshi. 2016. Allergic skin sensitization promotes eosinophilic 
esophagitis via the IL-33-basophil axis in mice. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 
138:1367–1380.e5. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2016 
.02 
.034
Verhasselt, V
. 2010a. Neonatal tolerance under breastfeeding influence. Curr. 
Opin. Immunol. 22:623–630. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.coi 
.2010 
.08 
.008
Verhasselt, V
. 2010b. Oral tolerance in neonates: from basics to potential 
prevention of allergic disease. Mucosal Immunol. 3:326–333. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/mi 
.2010 
.25
Wachholz, P
.A., and S.R. Durham. 2004. Mechanisms of immunotherapy: 
IgG revisited. Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 4:313–318. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1097 
/01 
.all 
.0000136753 
.35948 
.c0
Williams, C.M., and S.J. Galli. 2000. Mast cells can amplify airway reactivity 
and features of chronic inflammation in an asthma model in mice. J. Exp. 
Med. 192:455–462. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.192 
.3 
.455
Y
oshida, M., S.M. Claypool, J.S. Wagner, E. Mizoguchi, A. Mizoguchi, D.C. 
Roopenian, W
.I. Lencer, and R.S. Blumberg. 2004. Human neonatal Fc 
receptor mediates transport of IgG into luminal secretions for delivery 
of antigens to mucosal dendritic cells. Immunity. 20:769–783. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2004 
.05 
.007
Y
oshida, M., K. Kobayashi, T.T. Kuo, L. Bry, J.N. Glickman, S.M. Claypool, A. 
Kaser, T. Nagaishi, D.E. Higgins, E. Mizoguchi, et al. 2006. Neonatal Fc 
receptor for IgG regulates mucosal immune responses to luminal bacteria. 
J. Clin. Invest. 116:2142–2151. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI27821
Zeiger, R.S., S. Heller, M.H. Mellon, A.B. Forsythe, R.D. O’Connor, R.N. 
Hamburger, and M. Schatz. 1989. Effect of combined maternal and 
infant food-allergen avoidance on development of atopy in early infancy: 
a randomized study. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 84:72–89. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0091 
-6749(89)90181 
-4
Zhu, X., G. Meng, B.L. Dickinson, X. Li, E. Mizoguchi, L. Miao, Y
. Wang, 
C. Robert, B. Wu, P
.D. Smith, et al. 2001. MHC class I-related neonatal 
Fc receptor for IgG is functionally expressed in monocytes, intestinal 
macrophages, and dendritic cells. J. Immunol. 166:3266–3276. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.166 
.5 
.3266
