 Peripheral modifications of [Ψ[CH2NH]Tpg4]vancomycin
with added synergistic mechanisms of action
provide durable and potent antibiotics
Akinori Okanoa,b, Nicholas A. Isleya,b, and Dale L. Bogera,b,1
aDepartment of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037; and bThe Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, CA 92037
Contributed by Dale L. Boger, April 25, 2017 (sent for review March 13, 2017; reviewed by Steven L. Castle and Jeffrey N. Johnston)
Subsequent to binding pocket modifications designed to provide
dual D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding that directly overcome the mo-
lecular basis of vancomycin resistance, peripheral structural changes
have been explored to improve antimicrobial potency and provide
additional synergistic mechanisms of action. A C-terminal peripheral
modification, introducing a quaternary ammonium salt, is reported
and was found to provide a binding pocket-modified vancomycin
analog with a second mechanism of action that is independent of
D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding. This modification, which induces cell
wall permeability and is complementary to the glycopeptide inhibi-
tion of cell wall synthesis, was found to provide improvements
in antimicrobial potency (200-fold) against vancomycin-resistant
Enterococci (VRE). Furthermore, it is shown that this type of
C-terminal modification may be combined with a second peripheral
(4-chlorobiphenyl)methyl (CBP) addition to the vancomycin disaccha-
ride to provide even more potent antimicrobial agents [VRE minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) = 0.01–0.005 μg/mL] with activity that
can be attributed to three independent and synergistic mechanisms
of action, only one of which requires D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding.
Finally, it is shown that such peripherally and binding pocket-
modified vancomycin analogs display little propensity for acquired
resistance by VRE and that their durability against such challenges
as well as their antimicrobial potency follow now predictable trends
(three > two > one mechanisms of action). Such antibiotics are
expected to display durable antimicrobial activity not prone to rap-
idly acquired clinical resistance.
vancomycin | antibiotics | resistant bacterial infections
R
ecent years have seen a welcomed refocus on the need for new
antibiotics to address the persistent threat of bacterial re-
sistance (1–3). A number of actions have been advanced to address
the challenges posed by bacterial resistance now emerging faster
than new treatment options. These actions include providing new
financial incentives to counter the declining economic interests in
developing new antibiotics (4), revamping regulatory criteria for
new drug approvals (5), improving the rate of diagnostic charac-
terization of infecting organisms, enhancing nationwide resistance
surveillance, encouraging work targeting mechanisms of resistance,
and identifying new therapeutic targets for antibiotic discovery (6,
7). The suggested actions also champion antibiotic stewardship (8).
Although sounding attractive, the effort to restrict antibiotic use
seems counter to their importance, introduces guilt into even their
most legitimate of uses, challenges the prevailing practices of initial
empirical best guess therapy and prophylaxis deployment, and
produces additional disincentives to antibiotic development. Al-
though such initiatives highlight the pressing need for renewed
antibiotic discovery and the fundamental importance of antibiotics
in modern medicine (9), it has done little to define new approaches
that directly address the underlying problem of evolutionarily
driven and acquired resistance. The mechanisms of resistance are
ancient and increasingly accumulating in pathogenic bacteria,
which have now assimilated large elements of this bacterial resis-
tome (10, 11). An additional and perhaps even more important
question to ask is if new antibiotics can now be designed that
overcome the forces of evolution and selection responsible for
bacterial resistance, that are less prone or even impervious to re-
sistance development, that avoid many of the common mechanisms
of resistance, and that are more durable than ever before. As an
alternative to championing the restricted use of antibiotics or
conceding that bacteria will always outsmart us, can durable anti-
biotics be developed that are capable of continued or even more
widespread use? Herein, we describe one such effort to create
durable antibiotics by deliberate design that may directly counter
such evolutionary forces. We identified the glycopeptide antibiotics
as an antibiotic class already endowed with features that avoid
many mechanisms of resistance. After introduction of designed
structural changes that directly overcome the molecular basis of
their only prevalent mechanism of resistance, we have explored the
incorporation of peripheral structural modifications in the mole-
cules that provide them with additional and now multiple syner-
gistic mechanisms of action, thereby not only increasing their
potency but also, creating prototype durable antibiotics.
In recent disclosures, we have discussed attributes of the glyco-
peptide antibiotics (12, 13) that have contributed to their sustained
effectiveness in the clinic (14). Vancomycin (15), teicoplanin (16),
and three recently approved semisynthetic derivatives, oritavancin
(17), dalbavancin (18), and telavancin (19), are widely used to treat
refractory bacterial infections, including methicillin-resistant Staph-
ylococcus aureus (MRSA) (20). Vancomycin (1) (Fig. 1) (21) was
disclosed in 1956 (15) and introduced into the clinic in 1958. After
nearly 60 y of clinical use and even with the past use of glycopeptide
antibiotics for agricultural livestock (avoparcin), resistant pathogens
have only slowly emerged, and vancomycin remains an integral and
Significance
In a quest for antibiotics that may display durable clinical life-
times, analogs of the glycopeptide antibiotics, including van-
comycin, have been designed that not only directly overcome
the molecular basis of existing vancomycin resistance but also
contain two added peripheral modifications that endow them
with two additional independent mechanisms of actions not
found in the parent antibiotics. It is shown that such peripherally
and binding pocket-modified vancomycin analogs display little
propensity for acquired resistance by vancomycin-resistant En-
terococci and that both their antimicrobial potency and dura-
bility against such challenges follow trends (three > two > one
mechanisms of action) that are now predictable.
Author contributions: A.O., N.A.I., and D.L.B. designed research; A.O. and N.A.I. performed
research; A.O., N.A.I., and D.L.B. analyzed data; and A.O., N.A.I., and D.L.B. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: S.L.C., Brigham Young University; and J.N.J., Vanderbilt University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
See Commentary on page 6656.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: Boger@scripps.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1704125114/-/DCSupplemental.
E5052–E5061
|
PNAS
|
Published online May 30, 2017
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704125114
 increasingly important antibiotic today. Clinical resistance was ini-
tially observed with vancomycin-resistant Enterococci (VRE; 1987)
that was detected only after 30 y of clinical use (22) but now, also
includes vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA; 2002) (23). Treat-
ment options for the latter are limited and presently include anti-
biotics known to rapidly evoke resistance (24, 25). As a result, these
latter antibiotics have been designated as reserve antibiotics to be
deployed sparingly to preserve their effectiveness as drugs of last
resort against intractable infections. Just as significantly, some VRE
organisms, like MRSA, have also reached a stage where they are
now resistant to most other common antibiotic classes (26). As a
result and because they are already vancomycin-resistant, the CDC
has now placed VRE on its serious threat list (27). Most recently,
the WHO has released, for the first time, a list of drug-resistant
bacteria that pose the greatest threat to human health for which
new antibiotics are desperately needed. Both VRE (fourth) and
VRSA (fifth) appear on this ranked list (28).
The primary biological target for vancomycin and the glyco-
peptide antibiotics is bacterial cell wall precursors containing
D-Ala-D-Ala, binding to which results in inhibition of cell wall
maturation (29). This target is unique to bacteria and contributes to
the selectivity of the antibiotic class for bacteria vs. their mam-
malian hosts. It is also an atypical biological target, being a sub-
strate for an enzymatic reaction and a precursor to a structural
component of the bacterial cell wall. It is not a protein or nucleic
acid target subject to changes by a single genetic mutation that can
result in resistance. The primary mechanism of action of vanco-
mycin involves sequestration of this substrate (D-Ala-D-Ala) for a
late-stage enzyme-catalyzed (transpeptidase) reaction used for cell
wall cross-linking (13). Thus, the nature of the target (D-Ala-D-Ala)
and the antibiotic mechanism of action (sequestration of an en-
zyme substrate) are difficult for the organism to overcome by a
single genetic alteration. Vancomycin is also thought to inhibit the
preceding step in the cell wall biosynthesis, the transglycosylase-
catalyzed incorporation of lipid intermediate II into the poly-
saccharide backbone of the bacterial cell wall. In the case of van-
comycin, this inhibition also requires D-Ala-D-Ala binding (30–33).
However, it is not yet clear whether this occurs through direct
binding of the vancomycin disaccharide to the enzyme active site,
because cell wall binding contributes to its localization, or whether
this occurs by indirect enzyme inhibition. Because there may be two
or more mechanisms of action, including those yet unknown or
with a role that is not yet fully appreciated (34), full bacterial re-
sistance requires unlikely simultaneous changes that impact each.
Further contributing to the durability of vancomycin is the site of
action at the bacterial cell wall surface. Cell wall penetration or
import is not needed, and this feature allows vancomycin to avoid
the common resistance mechanisms mediated by expression levels
of proteins involved in transport, efflux, and metabolic deactivation
by cytosolic enzymes (35). Finally, it has been suggested that there
are genetic features that presently make the glycopeptide antibi-
otics less susceptible to vertical vs. horizontal gene transfer of re-
sistance (36). Regardless of the origins, it is most revealing that the
primary mechanism of clinical resistance to vancomycin (VanA and
VanB phenotypes) was transferred to pathogenic bacteria from
nonpathogenic organisms that produce vancomycin and use this
inducible resistance mechanism to protect themselves during van-
comycin production (37). Thus, pathogenic bacteria themselves
have not yet evolved effective resistance mechanisms to the gly-
copeptide antibiotics, even after nearly 60 y of widespread use (38).
This latter observation has suggested to us that solutions to VanA
and VanB resistance alone may provide antibiotics with durable
clinical lifetimes.
It is an intricate mechanism of resistance in which synthesis of
the bacterial cell wall precursors continues with installation of the
pendant N-terminal D-Ala-D-Ala. Resistant bacteria, like the pro-
ducer organisms, sense the presence of the antibiotic (39). Through
use of a two-component cell surface receptor sensing and in-
tracellular signaling system, the organisms initiate a late-stage
remodeling of their peptidoglycan termini from D-Ala-D-Ala to
D-Ala-D-Lac to avoid the action of the antibiotic (40). The binding
affinity of vancomycin for the altered ligand is reduced 1,000-fold
(41, 42), resulting in a corresponding 1,000-fold loss in antimicro-
bial activity. In a series of studies, we reported the first vancomycin
analogs that contain changes at a key single-atom site in its target
binding pocket (residue 4 carbonyl O → S, NH, H2), the latter two
of which were designed to directly address this underlying molec-
ular basis of resistance to vancomycin (Fig. 1) (43–50). These ra-
tionally designed binding pocket modifications reinstated binding
to the altered target D-Ala-D-Lac and maintained binding affinity
for the unaltered target D-Ala-D-Ala. Such dual target binding
compounds were found to reinstate antimicrobial activity against
vancomycin-resistant organisms that inducibly or constitutively use
D-Ala-D-Lac peptidoglycan precursors and remain active against
vancomycin-sensitive bacteria. Moreover, the in vitro antimicrobial
potencies of such compounds correlated directly with their abso-
lute dual binding affinities for model target ligands.
We subsequently found that peripheral functionalization of
the binding pocket modified vancomycin analogs, introducing
the oritavancin (4-chlorobiphenyl)methyl (CBP) group to the
pendant disaccharide and known to enhance antimicrobial po-
tency (17), producing more potent antibiotics (Fig. 2) (47, 48).
These analogs exhibited a remarkable spectrum of antimicrobial
activity [vancomycin-sensitive S. aureus (VSSA), MRSA, and
VanA and VanB VRE] with further improved (ca. 100-fold) and im-
pressive potencies against both vancomycin-sensitive and -resistant
bacteria [minimum inhibitory concentration (MICs) = 0.06–
0.005 and 0.5–0.06 μg/mL for 7 and 8, respectively]. With the
benefit of the examination of the residue 4 thioamide 6, which is
incapable of binding either D-Ala-D-Ala or D-Ala-D-Lac (MICs =
2–4 μg/mL), we were able to infer that the activity of such CBP-
modified analogs is derived from two synergistic mechanisms of
Fig. 1.
Vancomycin (1) and designed binding pocket-modified analogs.
Okano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 30, 2017
|
E5053
CHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 action, only one of which is dependent on D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-
Lac binding (48).
Herein and along with studies that further clarify this second
mechanism of action, an alternative peripheral modification that
endows the pocket-modified vancomycin analogs with another
different second mechanism of action is reported. This modification
also provides similarly impressive improvements in antimicrobial
potencies against vancomycin-resistant bacteria (VRE). Further-
more, we show that the two peripheral modifications may be
combined with the pocket-modified vancomycins to provide even
more potent antimicrobial agents with activity that can be attributed
to three independent and synergistic mechanisms of action, only
one of which requires D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding. Finally, it
is shown that such peripherally and binding pocket-modified van-
comycins display little propensity for acquired resistance through
serial exposure of VRE and that their durability against such
challenges as well as their potency follow trends (three > two > one
mechanisms of action) that are shown now to be predictable. Such
antibiotics are expected to display even more durable antimicrobial
activity than vancomycin or its semisynthetic analogs.
Results and Discussion
These studies were conducted with the methylene pocket-
modified vancomycin analog 4 ([Ψ[CH2NH]Tpg4]vancomycin) (48),
presently the most readily available of our synthetic analogs pre-
pared by total synthesis (50). Because it also exhibits the more
modest dual D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding affinity and antimi-
crobial activity against vancomycin-resistant organisms of the two
pocket-modified vancomycin analogs (4 vs. 3) (Fig. 1), the impact of
alternative or multiple peripheral modifications was anticipated to
be most easily quantitated. The alternative peripheral modification
examined was C-terminal amide functionalization with incorporation
of either a basic amine capable of protonation or a quaternary
ammonium salt. Such modifications have been shown to provide
improved antimicrobial activity against vancomycin-resistant or-
ganisms and were found to act by disrupting bacterial cell wall
membrane integrity, increasing cell permeability, and inducing
membrane depolarization (51). Although inspired by the non-
selective membrane disruption induced by quaternary ammonium
salts, the studies herein provide one such modification that ex-
hibits only a subset of such effects (membrane permeability) and
acts by a more specific mechanism not resulting in cell lysis. It is a
behavior not observed with the naturally occurring glycopeptide
antibiotics or their more typical analogs, but the mechanism is one
that may contribute to the activity of the semisynthetic drugs
dalbavancin and telavancin (52). In vancomycin-resistant organ-
isms, such modifications do not directly contribute to inhibition of
cell wall biosynthesis, do not improve D-Ala-D-Lac binding needed
to express such effects, and act independent of mechanisms de-
rived from transpeptidase or transglycosylase inhibition.
A select series of such vancomycin analogs was first prepared,
including 10 and 11 not previously examined. For simplicity, they
are referred to as C0 (9) (51), C1 (10), cyclic C5 (11), and C14 (12)
(51), denoting the terminal tertiary dimethylamine (9; C0) or the
quaternary ammonium salts bearing a methyl (10; C1), C5 cyclic
S. aureusb
E. faecalisd E. faeciume E. faecalisf
VanB
VanA
sensitive
Antimicrobial Activity, MICa ( g/mL)
0.03
2.5
2.5
0.03
5, X = O
2
4
4
2
6, X = S
0.03
0.005
0.005
0.06
7, X = NH
aMIC = Minimum inhibitory concentration. bATCC 25923. cATCC 43300. dBM 4166. 
eATCC BAA-2317. fATCC 51299. gnot determined.
S. aureusc
MRSA
0.03
2
0.06
0.5
0.13
0.06
0.5
8, X = H2
0.25
O
O
O
OH
CH2OH
Me
Me
HOHN
O
H
N
O
O
OH
Cl
N
H
O
NHMe
O
O
H
N
HO
N
H
OH
HO
NH
HO2C
H
OH
H
N
O
O
H
H
Cl
X
CONH2
Cl
OH
Fig. 2.
Pocket-modified vancomycins that contain an additional peripheral
CBP modification to the pendant disaccharide.
E. faecalisb
E. faeciumc
VanA
500
500
Antimicrobial Activity, MICa ( g/mL)
9, X = O (C0)
63
126
10, X = O (C1)
4
2
11, X = O (C5)
2
2
12, X = O (C14)
O
O
O
OH
OH
CH2OH
Me
Me
HO
NH2
O
H
N
O
O
OH
Cl
N
H
O
NHMe
O
O
H
N
HO
N
H
OH
HO
NH
H
OH
H
N
O
O
H
H
Cl
X
CONH2
aMIC = Minimum inhibitory concentration. bBM 4166. cATCC BAA-2317.
1
or
4
R(CH2)3NH2
HBTU, NMM
DMF/DMSO
H
N
O
R
9, X = O (64%)
R (C0) =
N
10, X = O (68%)
R (C1) =
N
+
11, X = O (61%)
R (C5) =
N
+
12, X = O (58%)
R (C14) = N C14H29
+
13, X = H2 (64%)
250
250
1, vancomycin
31
31
4, X = H2
0.16
0.16
13, X = H2 (C14)
Fig. 3.
Peripheral C-terminal modifications of vancomycin and the binding
pocket-modified vancomycin analog 4.
E5054
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704125114
Okano et al.
 (11; C5), or tetradecyl (12; C14) substituent (Fig. 3). Based on their
activity in antimicrobial assays against VanA VRE, the most potent
C-terminal modification found in 12 (C14) was incorporated into
the analogous C14 derivative 13 of the pocket-modified vanco-
mycin analog 4. This modification was accomplished in a single
step from the fully functionalized vancomycin 1 or 4 without need
for intermediate protection by coupling the C-terminal carboxylic
acid with the corresponding functionalized amines under condi-
tions modified from those previously described (53). These
C-terminal changes had a progressively pronounced impact on ac-
tivity against the VanA vancomycin-resistant organisms (VanA
VRE), where the quaternary ammonium salts incrementally in-
creased activity up to 100-fold (12 ≥ 11 > 10 > 9, 1) (Fig. 3).
Notably, all of the quaternary ammonium salts (C1, cyclic C5, and
C14) improved activity. For the pocket-modified vancomycin an-
alog, the most potent of these modifications produced a 200-fold
increase in potency against VanA VRE, reducing the MIC value
from the modest activity of 31 μg/mL for 4 to 0.16 μg/mL for 13.
This compound is >10-fold more potent than its comparison van-
comycin derivative 12 and >1,000-fold more potent than vanco-
mycin itself. Thus, an additional second peripheral modification of a
pocket-modified vancomycin analog substantially increased antimi-
crobial activity against the most stringent of the vancomycin-resistant
phenotypes (VanA VRE). As shown below, this improvement arises
through an independent second mechanism of action involving in-
duced membrane permeability. This second synergistic mechanism
of action incorporated into 4 is different from that observed with the
peripheral CBP modification found in 8.
More significantly, the impact of combining the two different
peripheral modifications was examined. This combination was ex-
plored first with CBP–vancomycin (5), coupling its C-terminal
carboxylic acid with the same series of functionalized amines that
contain the tertiary dimethylamine (14; C0) or C1 (15), cyclic C5
(16), and C14 (17) quaternary ammonium salts (Fig. 4). Based on
their assessment in VanA VRE antimicrobial assays, the most ef-
fective C-terminal modification found in 15 (C1) was incorporated
into the analogous C1 derivative 18 of the pocket-modified CBP–
vancomycin analog 8. Notably, their preparation also required a
single-amide bond coupling reaction and was conducted without
the need for protected intermediates. This second peripheral
modification of CBP–vancomycin did not display the same trends
observed with vancomycin itself, with most not altering the anti-
microbial activity of CBP–vancomycin against VanA VRE (Fig. 4).
The exception was 15, containing the C1 quaternary ammonium
salt, which alone displayed a 10-fold increase in activity against
VanA VRE, exhibiting exceptional activity for a compound in-
capable of binding D-Ala-D-Lac. In fact, it represents a compound
devoid of the original glycopeptide antibiotic mechanism of action
in the resistant organisms but possesses two other effective mech-
anisms of action independent of D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding.
The impact of these modifications improved the activity beyond
what either does alone and as shown below, results from inhibition
of bacterial cell wall biosynthesis by direct transglycosylase in-
hibition caused by the CBP modification and through induced
membrane permeability by the C1 quaternary ammonium salt.
Although unanticipated, the most effective C-terminal modification
is now C1 for the CBP derivatives. Subsequent studies show clearly
that it alone imparts membrane permeability not found with de-
rivatives lacking this particular C-terminal modification. For the
pocket-modified CBP–vancomycin analog capable of dual D-Ala-D-
Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding, this second additional peripheral modi-
fication with 18 produced a >10-fold increase in potency against
VanA VRE relative to 8, lowering the MIC value for 18 to 0.01–
0.005 μg/mL (Fig. 4). This vancomycin analog is >10-fold more
potent than the CBP derivative 8, >1,000-fold more potent than the
pocket analog 4, and a stunning >10,000-fold more potent than
vancomycin itself. It is also >25- to 100-fold more potent than its
comparison C1/CBP–vancomycin derivative 15 and >250-fold more
active than either CBP–vancomycin (5) or C14–vancomycin (12).
To clarify the contributing mechanisms responsible for the an-
timicrobial activity in vancomycin-resistant organisms (VanA
VRE), the key analogs were examined in a range of assays, two of
which defined the origin of their effects. One assay was used to
establish inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis, and the second
measured induced membrane permeability. The inhibition of bac-
terial cell wall synthesis was established in an assay that quantitates
the accumulation of the peptidoglycan precursor UDP-N-acetyl-
muramyl-depsipentapeptide (UDPMurNAc-pp; 19) resulting
from inhibited cell wall incorporation after antibiotic treatment.
This assessment was accomplished by following a protocol that
uses vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium with tetracycline
pretreatment (30 min at 37 °C) (30). This procedure was reduced
in scale and modified to enlist reverse-phase HPLC separation,
UV detection, and calibration curve determination of the amount
of isolated 19, permitting use with limited sample sizes (Fig. 5). A
larger-scale isolation and full characterization of 19 (SI Appendix)
provided the material needed to establish a linear calibration
curve (SI Appendix). The test compounds were incubated with
E. faecalisb
E. faeciumc
VanA
5
5
Antimicrobial Activity, MICa ( g/mL)
14, X = O (CBP/C0)
0.25
0.5
15, X = O (CBP/C1)
2
2
16, X = O (CBP/C5)
2
2
17, X = O (CBP/C14)
O
O
O
OH
OH
CH2OH
Me
Me
HONH
O
H
N
O
O
OH
Cl
N
H
O
NHMe
O
O
H
N
HO
N
H
OH
HO
NH
H
OH
H
N
O
O
H H
Cl
X
CONH2
aMIC = Minimum inhibitory concentration. bBM 4166. cATCC BAA-2317.
5
or
8
R(CH2)3NH2
HBTU, NMM
DMF/DMSO
H
N
O
R
14, X = O (55%)
R (C0) =
N
15, X = O (61%)
R (C1) =
N
+
16, X = O (61%)
R (C5) =
N
+
17, X = O (76%)
R (C14) = N C14H29
+
250
250
1, vancomycin
31
31
4, X = H2
0.13
0.06
8, X = H2 (CBP)
Cl
18, X = H2 (53%)
2.5
2.5
5, X = O (CBP)
0.01
0.005
18, X = H2 (CBP/C1)
µ
Fig. 4.
Combined CBP and C-terminal peripheral modifications to vanco-
mycin and the binding pocket-modified vancomycin analog 4.
Okano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 30, 2017
|
E5055
CHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 tetracycline-pretreated VanA VRE for 30 min (37 °C) before the
cultured bacteria were collected by centrifugation, washed, and
resuspended in pH 7.2 buffer (5 mM Hepes:5 mM glucose; 1:1).
The bacterial suspension was heated at 100 °C for 15 min to release
cytosolic 19. The entire supernatant was analyzed by semi-
preparative reverse-phase HPLC with a single injection, and the
amount of 19 was quantitated with use of the calibration curve. The
results of the evaluation of 5–18 in VanA vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus faecalis (BM 4166) and E. faecium (ATCC BAA-
2317) are presented in Fig. 6 and represent the same strains used
in the antimicrobial assays.
The effect of the compounds on cell membrane permeability
was examined by measuring cytoplasmic membrane uptake of
the fluorescent probe propidium iodide in the same VanA
vancomycin-resistant E. faecalis (BM 4166) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1)
and E. faecium (ATCC BAA-2317) strains. This fluorescent probe
only enters cells with permeabilized cell membranes and is de-
tected by the emission of fluorescence on intracellular nucleic acid
binding (54). Fresh midlog-phase VanA VRE in pH 7.2 buffer at
25 °C was preincubated with propidium iodide (10 μM) for 5 min
before the test compounds were added and monitored for the
fluorescence emission at 617 nm (excitation at 535 nm) over time,
both before (5 min) and after (15 min) compound addition. Rapid
and sustained increases in fluorescence intensity are observed
immediately on addition of test compounds that induce bacterial
cell membrane permeability.
Assessments of the compounds, identifying their contributing
mechanisms of action in vancomycin-resistant VRE, were con-
ducted with the two assays. The results are discussed below in sets
defining first the role of the pocket modification found in 4 and
then, the subsequent impact of the peripheral CBP modification
to the vancomycin disaccharide found in 5–8. This summary is
followed by the discussion of the results from the examination of
the peripheral quaternary ammonium salt modifications found in
9–13, including their effects on both unmodified and pocket-
modified vancomycin analogs. Finally, the effects of the two
combined peripheral modifications in 14–18 are detailed.
Consistent with its inactivity and like the thioamide 2, vanco-
mycin (1) does not effectively inhibit bacterial cell wall synthesis in
VanA VRE and does not result in the significant accumulation of
19 in the assay (Fig. 6). In contrast, the pocket-modified analog 4
designed for dual D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding inhibits bacte-
rial cell wall biosynthesis, resulting in the buildup of the precursor
19 in the assay at levels consistent with its relative model ligand
binding affinities and antimicrobial activity. As anticipated, none of
these compounds significantly impact membrane integrity, and
none result in cytoplasmic membrane permeability as measured by
propidium uptake (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). Thus, the antimicrobial
activity of 4 correlates directly with its expected impact on bacterial
cell wall biosynthesis, binding D-Ala-D-Lac and inhibiting cell wall
maturation. Incorporation of the peripheral CBP modification in 5
(ineffective binding to D-Ala-D-Lac) and 6 (ineffective binding to
either D-Ala-D-Ala or D-Ala-D-Lac) produced analogs with good
activity against VanA VRE that was found to correlate with their
ability to inhibit cell wall synthesis of VanA VRE, resulting in the
accumulation of 19 in the assay (Fig. 6). Neither compound impact
Fig. 5.
Reverse-phase HPLC analysis of peptidoglycan precursor UDPMurNAc-pp
(19) in VanA VRE (E. faecium ATCC BAA-2317).
Fig. 6.
Inhibition of bacterial cell synthesis in VanA VRE. Quantitated ac-
cumulation of the peptidoglycan precursor UDPMurNAc-pp (19) in cytosol by
vancomycin analogs (35 μg/mL).
E5056
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704125114
Okano et al.
 membrane permeability (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). Compounds 5 and
6 exhibit nearly equivalent antimicrobial activity against VanA
VRE, and both inhibit cell wall biosynthesis to a similar extent, but
6 is incapable of binding either D-Ala-D-Ala or D-Ala-D-Lac. Thus,
this inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis is not derived from
inhibition of transpeptidase-catalyzed cross-linking derived from
D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding but rather, likely arises from di-
rect inhibition of transglycosylase by the peripherally modified di-
saccharide. Previous studies of Kahne and coworkers (32, 33) and
others (30, 31, 55) have shown such direct inhibition of trans-
glycosylase by 5 and related CBP-bearing analogs. Finally, the potent
pocket-modified vancomycin analog 8, containing the peripheral
CBP modification, inhibits cell wall synthesis more effectively than 4,
lacking the CBP modification and more potently than either 5 or 6,
lacking a productive pocket modification. This behavior is the result
of the combined effects of the two independent mechanisms of ac-
tion, both of which impact cell wall biosynthesis but only one of
which depends on
D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding. We have
interpreted these observations to represent inhibition of both
transpeptidase-catalyzed cross-linking, requiring D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-
D-Lac binding, and the transglycosylase-catalyzed cell wall in-
corporation of Lipid II presumably by a direct enzyme interaction
that does not require D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding.
The examination of the analogs that contain the peripheral
C-terminal amides with quaternary ammonium salt modifications
(9–13) was similarly revealing and clear. Despite the progressive
increase in antimicrobial activity observed against VanA VRE with
9–12, little or no change in their ability to inhibit bacterial cell wall
synthesis was observed, and they remained, like vancomycin itself,
essentially inactive in this assay (Fig. 6). By contrast, the two van-
comycin derivatives 11 and 12 that were active against VanA VRE
produced pronounced, rapid cell membrane permeability imme-
diately on their addition, whereas the inactive (9) and less active
(10) variants did not when examined at 10 μM (Fig. 7). The less
active compound 10 exhibited this induced permeability when ex-
amined at a higher concentration (100 μM) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3).
Here, the antimicrobial activity against VanA VRE can be at-
tributed to a mechanism independent of cell wall biosynthesis and
independent of D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding. The antimicro-
bial activity correlates with disruption of the cell wall integrity as
measured by its increased permeability. The incorporation of the
most potent of these peripheral C-terminal modifications into the
pocket-modified analog 4 with 13 (C14) further enhanced
antimicrobial activity against VanA VRE 200-fold (Fig. 3).
This modification did not improve, diminish, or alter the in-
hibition of cell wall biosynthesis, where 4 and 13 were found to be
equally active (Fig. 6). However, it did provide an analog that,
unlike 4, produced pronounced cell membrane permeability
immediately on addition (Fig. 7). Thus, compound 13 represents
a pocket-modified vancomycin analog that displays potent and
further improved activity against VanA VRE derived from two
independent and synergic mechanisms of action. One mechanism
relies on the dual D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding like 4 and re-
sults in effective cell wall synthesis inhibition. The second mecha-
nism is independent of this ligand binding property and derived
from induced cell wall permeability. The two combined vancomy-
cin modifications and the accompanying two synergistic mecha-
nisms of action provide a vancomycin analog >1,000-fold more
active than vancomycin against the most stringent vancomycin-
resistant organisms, VanA VRE, displaying superb in vitro MICs
(0.16 μg/mL). It represents now the second such example, com-
plementing the observations made with 8 but with a different
second mechanism of action introduced by a second alternative
peripheral modification and generalizing the opportunities pro-
vided by such design principles.
The results of the examination of the analogs that incorporate the
two peripheral modifications (14–17) and their combination with
the pocket-modified vancomycin analog in 18 were even more re-
vealing. In addition to showing that this may be successfully
achieved, they highlight that it is not necessarily the most effective
individual variants of the two peripheral modifications that combine
to produce the desired effects but rather, that it is a combination
that allows expression of the two independent mechanisms. As
expected based on the CBP modification, 14–17 inhibit VanA VRE
bacterial cell wall synthesis, and their relative activities are reflected
in their functional activity in the antimicrobial assays (Fig. 6). The
C14 and cyclic C5 quaternary ammonium salts actually diminish the
inhibition of cell wall synthesis relative to CBP–vancomycin itself,
and C0 was equally active, whereas C1 may have improved activity
slightly (activity: 15 > 14 = 5 > 16 and 17). Even more revealing,
their examination in the cell wall permeability assay indicates that
only C1 combined with the CBP modification induced a pro-
nounced, rapid, and potent cell membrane permeability (Fig. 8). By
contrast, the combination of the peripheral CBP modification with
the C14 and C5 quaternary ammonium salts was not productive,
providing compounds that fail to express the activity. Compound 18,
which incorporates the redesigned pocket modification for dual
D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac binding (blocks cell wall synthesis by
ligand binding, including inhibition of transpeptidase-catalyzed
cross-linking), the CBP disaccharide modification (blocks cell wall
synthesis by direct transglycosylase inhibition without D-Ala-D-Ala/
D-Ala-D-Lac binding), and the C1 quaternary ammonium salt
C-terminal modification (induces membrane permeability), exhibi-
ted the most potent inhibition of cell wall synthesis in the assay of all
compounds assessed (Fig. 6) as well as the most pronounced and
potent induced cell membrane permeability of all compounds ex-
amined (Fig. 8). This behavior indicates that all three mechanisms
of action are productively contributing to the expression of the
antimicrobial activity of 18 against VanA VRE, resulting in its
potent VanA VRE antimicrobial activity (MIC = 0.01–0.005
μg/mL). This compound represents an analog of vancomycin
deliberately designed to overcome vancomycin resistance, which
incorporates three structural modifications that impart three
independent mechanisms of action. Only one mechanism depends
on reengineered dual D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-D-Lac ligand binding, and
each of three mechanisms contributes to the expression of the
antimicrobial activity.
These latter comparisons provided a direct correlation of the
results of the permeability assay with the functional expression of
antimicrobial activity where only C1 effectively expresses the
functional behaviors. For us, this observation provided compelling
evidence that the assay is an accurate readout of the correlated
Fig. 7.
Examination of cell wall permeability induced by compounds 9−13
(10 μM added at 5 min) in VanA VRE (E. faecium ATCC BAA-2317).
Okano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 30, 2017
|
E5057
CHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 functional behaviors and that the underlying mechanistic in-
terpretation of induced cell permeability is similarly accurate.
In addition, it is remarkable that this effect is specific for
C1 when combined with the CBP modification, suggesting that the
mechanism responsible for induction of membrane permeability
may involve specific interactions within the bacterial cell wall.
The results are summarized in Fig. 9 for the key analogs
alongside their antimicrobial activity. Within this series, CBP–
vancomycin (5) is representative of the potency and characteristics
of the clinically approved semisynthetic vancomycin analogs. For
VanA VRE, the progression through the series from 1 to 4 to 8 or
13 and finally, to 18 represents vancomycin analogs with zero (1),
one (4), two (8 and 13), and three (18) distinct and synergistic
mechanisms of action that progressively provide increasingly potent
antibacterial activity. This progressive improvement culminates in
18 (MICs = 0.005–0.01 μg/mL), with activity 25,000- to 50,000-fold
more potent than vancomycin against VanA VRE. Notably, com-
pound 18 is also 250- to 500-fold more potent than CBP–vanco-
mycin (5), which is representative of the semisynthetic vancomycin
analogs presently used in the clinic. Of special note, each structural
modification and mechanism of action independently expresses its
functional activity at the level of 2–30 μg/mL (1−15 μM) in both the
antimicrobial and mechanistic assays, but each provides synergistic
improvements in the functional antimicrobial activity when
combined.
The discussion above focused on the identification of the
contributing mechanisms of action and the demonstration that
each independently improves antimicrobial activity potency.
However, an additional and even more important feature of the
expression of multiple independent mechanisms of action is its
impact on the rate at which bacterial resistance may emerge. As
a result, CBP–vancomycin (5; one mechanism of action), the
peripherally C14-modified vancomycin analog (12; one mecha-
nism of action), the peripherally CBP-modified pocket analog
8 (two mechanisms of action), the peripherally C14-modified
pocket analog 13 (two mechanisms of action), and the pocket
analog 18 that contains the two complementary peripheral
C1 and CBP modifications (three mechanisms of action) were
examined for their susceptibility to acquired resistance on sub-
lethal (0.5× MIC) serial exposure to the same two VRE bacterial
strains, monitoring MICs daily (Fig. 10). Distinct from most re-
lated studies enlisting MRSA or other vancomycin-sensitive
bacterial strains, this study was conducted with the most strin-
gent (VanA vs. VanB) vancomycin-resistant strains for which the
mechanism of action associated with D-Ala-D-Ala binding is no
longer effective. Consequently, it is not counted among the
number of effective mechanisms of action imbedded in the
compound structure. Notably, the antibiotic susceptibility pro-
files of the VanA VREs used herein indicate that they are re-
sistant to a number of additional classes of antibiotics and on the
verge of being classified as multidrug-resistant VRE, indicating
that they have already assimilated a number of common re-
sistance mechanisms (SI Appendix). Because the changes for 18
were so small throughout a typical 25-d study, the examination
was extended to 50 d. These studies revealed that resistance to 5
and 12 emerged most rapidly and was pronounced (one mech-
anism). Changes in the potency of both 8 and 13 were much
slower and more muted (two mechanisms; only two- to fourfold
after 25 passages; 8 slower than 13). No change in susceptibility
to 18 was observed after 25 d (three mechanisms), and little
change in susceptibility to 18 was observed even after 50 daily
passages (only two- to fourfold change in the MICs of 0.01 and
0.005 μg/mL in the two strains). Moreover, the magnitude of the
changes in the MICs for the compounds acting by two or more
mechanisms is sufficiently small to indicate that none experience
a full loss of one of the contributing mechanisms. As such, each
mechanism is rendered more robust when combined with structural
Fig. 8.
Examination of cell wall permeability induced by compounds 14−18
(10 μM added at 5 min) in VanA VRE (E. faecium ATCC BAA-2317).
Fig. 9.
Summary of mechanisms of action of key vancomycin analogs and their individual and cumulative effect on VanA VRE antimicrobial activity.
E5058
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704125114
Okano et al.
 modifications that provide one or two additional mechanisms of
action. Thus, the durability of the antimicrobial activity in such
challenges and the effectiveness of each individual mechanism of
action as well as the compound potency were found to follow now
predictable trends (three > two > one mechanisms of action). Most
striking, resistance to daptomycin, linezolid, and tigecycline, each
of which is now a frontline single-target antibiotic, arises much
faster and is much more pronounced, highlighting the exceptional
durability of the antimicrobial activity detailed for 8, 13, and
especially 18. Finally, within the series examined, CBP–vanco-
mycin (5) is representative of the expected behavior of the
clinically approved semisynthetic vancomycin analogs.
The key compounds in the series were examined for in vitro
toxicity that might result from the combined mechanisms of ac-
tion, especially the introduction of structural modifications
(quaternary ammonium salt) that might impact host as well as
bacterial cell wall integrity. The compounds were examined for
RBC hemolytic activity resulting from membrane lysis. No
compound in the series, including 18, exhibited any hemolytic
activity, even at concentrations >1,000-fold above their MICs (SI
Appendix, Fig. S7). In addition, the mammalian cell toxicity of 5,
12, 13, 15, and 18 was established in cell growth inhibition assays
against two mammalian cell lines, NIH/3T3 (ATCC CRL-1658;
mouse embryonic fibroblast) and HepG2 (ATCC HB-8065; hu-
man liver cancer cell line). No growth inhibition (cytotoxic activity)
was observed up to 100 μM, the highest dose tested. They were also
found to be inactive (>100 μM; highest dose tested) against
HCT116 (human colon cancer cell line). Finally, no correlation
in activity with cLogP was found for the series of compounds
studied, and none of the compounds (5, 12, 13, 15, 17, and 18)
exhibited aggregation, higher-order complex formation, or micelle
formation at concentrations up to 100 μM in PBS buffer (25 °C),
indicating that such effects are not playing a role in the ex-
pression of the activity of the compounds. Compound 18 also
failed to produce bacterial cell membrane depolarization in the
same VanA vancomycin-resistant E. faecium (ATCC BAA-2317) as
measured by fluorescence of a released membrane imbedded dye
(DiSC35,3,3′-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine iodide) (SI Appendix, Fig.
S4) (56). Because the C1 introduction is such a small and
seemingly benign structural modification and because it induces
membrane permeability without membrane depolarization or
cell wall lysis, it suggests a more specific mechanism of action.
The mechanism by which 15 and 18 exert their effects on
membrane permeability is currently under investigation.
Conclusions
Several programs have disclosed the development of antibiotic
products that act by two mechanisms of action. These efforts have
included the optimization of a single pharmacophore to inde-
pendently bind two related targets (e.g., fluoroquinolones target-
ing both bacterial DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV); the design
of hybrids of two antimicrobial pharmacophores, including the
covalent linkage of two antibiotics; the use of combinations of
single-target antimicrobials to overcome or avoid resistance (e.g.,
combination drug treatment of multidrug-resistant TB); and the
design of antibiotics that display additional drug target binding
contacts to enhance the robustness of target engagement and
decrease resistance susceptibility (57). Herein, we described a
complementary approach, perhaps a subset of one of these ap-
proaches, to design durable antibiotics endowed with multiple
synergistic mechanisms of action. This effort has provided pro-
totype antibiotics with three independent mechanisms of action
Fig. 10.
Resistance acquisition on serial passaging of VanA VRE in the presence of 0.5× MIC levels of compound. One of two replicate experiments.
Okano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 30, 2017
|
E5059
CHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 targeting VRE, for which vancomycin is ineffective. Because VRE
is already vancomycin-resistant and because many have already
reached a point where they are no longer susceptible to most other
antibiotic classes, the CDC recently placed VRE on its serious
threat list, and the WHO placed it fourth on its list of drug-
resistant bacteria that pose the greatest threat to human health.
The glycopeptide antibiotics constitute an antibiotic class already
endowed with features that avoid many mechanisms of resistance
(14). With an understanding of the molecular basis of bacterial
resistance to the glycopeptide antibiotics, binding pocket modifi-
cations designed for dual ligand binding reinstated binding to the
altered target D-Ala-D-Lac and maintained binding affinity for the
unaltered target D-Ala-D-Ala. These modifications were found to
reinstate antimicrobial activity against vancomycin-resistant or-
ganisms that use the altered D-Ala-D-Lac peptidoglycan precursor
targets and remain active against vancomycin-sensitive bacteria
that use only D-Ala-D-Ala precursors. There is reason to expect
that these solutions to VanA and VanB VRE resistance alone may
provide antibiotics with durable clinical lifetimes, perhaps ap-
proaching those of vancomycin itself (>50 y). Subsequent to these
studies, we have explored the peripheral structural changes in the
molecules that provide them with additional and now multiple
synergistic mechanisms of action. Complementary to our initial
disclosure with a carbohydrate CBP modification that produced a
100-fold increase in antimicrobial activity (48), a second periph-
eral modification at the C terminus of the pocket-modified ana-
logs was detailed herein that enhances antimicrobial activity
(200-fold) against VanA VRE by another additional mechanism
of action (induced membrane permeability). These two peripheral
modifications and their synergistic mechanisms of action were
then combined with the pocket modification to provide a vanco-
mycin analog endowed with three independent mechanisms of
action, only one of which is dependent on D-Ala-D-Ala/D-Ala-
D-Lac binding. This combination not only further increased the
antimicrobial potency against VanA VRE (>6,000-fold) but
also, reduced the susceptibility to resistance. Thus, the dura-
bility of the antimicrobial activity in a resistance challenge and
the robustness of each individual mechanism of action as well
as the compound potency were shown to follow now predictable
trends (three > two > one mechanisms of action). Most strik-
ing, resistance to the frontline antibiotics daptomycin, linezolid,
and tigecycline, some of which are regarded as durable by to-
day’s standards, was found to arise much faster and more
pronounced in the same resistance challenge, highlighting the
exceptional durability of the antimicrobial activity detailed for
8, 13, and especially 18 (Fig. 11).
An important question that these results raise is presently
what to do with conventional semisynthetic vancomycin analogs
active against VanA VRE that incorporate a single peripheral
modification and act by a single mechanism of action that is
independent of D-Ala-D-Lac binding [e.g., CBP–vancomycin (5),
oritavancin, and C14–vancomycin (12)]. Should their use be
encouraged for VRE but at the risk of raising resistance to this
otherwise effective approach for other challenging bacterial in-
fections (e.g., MRSA)? The answer would seem to be to en-
courage their use for challenging vancomycin-sensitive bacterial
infections (e.g., VSSA and MRSA), where they are not only
more potent than vancomycin but also benefit from two in-
dependent mechanisms of action. Clinical resistance or loss in
sensitivity to either mechanism would likely be slow to emerge
and slower than for vancomycin itself. However, their use against
vancomycin-resistant bacteria (e.g., VRE and VRSA), where
they are less potent and where only a single and less durable
mechanism of action remains operative, likely would more rap-
idly raise resistance, not only compromising its future use but
also, potentially transferring that resistance to other organisms
(e.g., MRSA).
The approach used herein, which we suggest represents a case
of durable antibiotic discovery by design, relied on the total
synthesis of the candidate antibiotics (58–60) to obtain the pre-
viously inaccessible compounds. Although not highlighted in the
preceding discussion, the total synthesis of the starting pocket-
modified aglycon(s) (26 steps) (48), enzymatic installation of
the disaccharide (2 steps) (58), and subsequent addition of the
two peripheral modifications (2 steps) represent remarkable
accomplishments in their own right. Finally, the work herein
was conducted with the aminomethylene analog of vancomycin,
in which the residue 4 amide carbonyl was removed. A more
potent pocket-modified vancomycin analog is the residue
4 amidine (3 vs. 4), which exhibits antimicrobial activity against
both vancomycin-resistant and -sensitive bacteria equipotent
with the activity that vancomycin displays against vancomycin-
sensitive bacteria. Incorporation of such peripheral changes on
3 or 7, providing all three independent mechanisms of action,
would be expected to further improve on the already stunning
potency of 18 (ca. 30-fold) while displaying the outstanding
durability of 18.
Materials and Methods
Synthesis of Vancomycin Analogs. Full details of the synthesis, purification,
and characterization of all compounds reported herein, including copies of
the 1H NMR of all tested compounds, are provided in SI Appendix. All re-
agents were obtained from commercial sources unless noted otherwise.
Bacterial Cell Growth Inhibition Assays. Full details of the bacterial cell
growth inhibition assays with vancomycin-resistant E. faecalis (VanA VRE;
BM4166), E. faecium (VanA VRE; ATCC BAA-2317), and vancomycin-
resistant E. faecalis (VanB VRE; strain ATCC 51299) are provided in SI Ap-
pendix. Compounds were tested in duplicate (n = 2−18 times) at serially
diluted concentrations, and the MIC values reported represent the average
of 4−36 determinations.
Cell Wall Biosynthesis Inhibition Assay. Full details of the cell wall biosynthesis
assay are provided in SI Appendix. Values reported in Fig. 6 are the average
of four measurements (SD ± 10%).
Bacterial Cell Wall Permeability Assay. Full details of the permeability assay are
provided in SI Appendix. Results shown in Figs. 7–9 are one of two to four
replicate experiments, each performed at the same time.
Resistance Development Study. Full details of the study are provided in SI
Appendix. Results shown in Fig. 10 are one of two replicate experiments.
SI Appendix. Full experimental details and copies of 1H NMR spectra are
provided. The supplementary data associated with this article can be found
in SI Appendix.
Fig. 11.
Structure of 18, summary of activity, and mechanisms of action.
E5060
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704125114
Okano et al.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. A. Mehta [The Scripps Research
Institute (TSRI)] for guidance on conducting the cell wall biosynthesis assay
and the resistance development assay, Dr. G. Morgan (TSRI) for guidance on
the membrane permeability assay, I. Ahmad (TSRI) for guidance on the
membrane depolarization assay, Dr. A. Craney (TSRI) for bacterial culturing
guidance, and A. Radakovic for conducting the cell growth inhibition assays.
We acknowledge financial support from NIH Postdoctoral Fellowship F32
GM114948 (to N.A.I.) and NIH Grant CA041101 (to D.L.B.).
1. WHO (2014) Antimicrobial Resistance. Global Report on Surveillance 2014 (WHO,
Geneva).
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2013) Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the
United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta).
3. Laxminarayan R (2007) Antibiotic resistance: The unfolding crisis. Extending the Cure,
Policy Responses to the Growing Treat of Antibiotic Resistance, eds Laxminarayan R,
Malani A, Howard D, Smith DL (Resources for the Future, Washington, DC), pp 25–37.
4. Mullard A (2014) Momentum builds around new antibiotic business models. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 13:711–713.
5. Sinha MS, Kesselheim AS (2016) Regulatory incentives for antibiotic drug develop-
ment: A review of recent proposals. Bioorg Med Chem 24:6446–6451.
6. Brown ED, Wright GD (2016) Antibacterial drug discovery in the resistance era. Nature
529:336–343.
7. Wright GD (2015) Solving the antibiotic crisis. ACS Infect Dis 1:80–84.
8. Laxminarayan R (2014) Antibiotic effectiveness: Balancing conservation against in-
novation. Science 345:1299–1301.
9. Hamad B (2010) The antibiotics market. Nat Rev Drug Discov 9:675–676.
10. Wright GD, Poinar H (2012) Antibiotic resistance is ancient: Implications for drug
discovery. Trends Microbiol 20:157–159.
11. D’Costa VM, et al. (2011) Antibiotic resistance is ancient. Nature 477:457–461.
12. Nagarajan R, ed (1994) Glycopeptide Antibiotics (Marcel Dekker, New York).
13. Kahne D, Leimkuhler C, Lu W, Walsh C (2005) Glycopeptide and lipoglycopeptide
antibiotics. Chem Rev 105:425–448.
14. James RC, Pierce JG, Okano A, Xie J, Boger DL (2012) Redesign of glycopeptide an-
tibiotics: Back to the future. ACS Chem Biol 7:797–804.
15. McCormick MH, McGuire JM, Pittenger GE, Pittenger RC, Stark WM (1955–1956)
Vancomycin, a new antibiotic. I. Chemical and biologic properties. Antibiot Annu 3:
606–611.
16. Parenti F, Beretta G, Berti M, Arioli V (1978) Teichomycins, new antibiotics from Ac-
tinoplanes teichomyceticus Nov. Sp. I. Description of the producer strain, fermenta-
tion studies and biological properties. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 31:276–283.
17. Markham A (2014) Oritavancin: First global approval. Drugs 74:1823–1828.
18. Anderson VR, Keating GM (2008) Dalbavancin. Drugs 68:639–648.
19. Corey GR, Stryjewski ME, Weyenberg W, Yasothan U, Kirkpatrick P (2009) Telavancin.
Nat Rev Drug Discov 8:929–930.
20. Zhanel GG, et al. (2010) New lipoglycopeptides: A comparative review of dalbavancin,
oritavancin and telavancin. Drugs 70:859–886.
21. Harris CM, Kopecka H, Harris TM (1983) Vancomycin: Structure and transformation to
CDP-1. J Am Chem Soc 105:6915–6922.
22. Leclercq R, Derlot E, Duval J, Courvalin P (1988) Plasmid-mediated resistance to van-
comycin and teicoplanin in Enterococcus faecium. N Engl J Med 319:157–161.
23. Weigel LM, et al. (2003) Genetic analysis of a high-level vancomycin-resistant isolate
of Staphylococcus aureus. Science 302:1569–1571.
24. Brickner SJ, Barbachyn MR, Hutchinson DK, Manninen PR (2008) Linezolid (ZYVOX),
the first member of a completely new class of antibacterial agents for treatment of
serious gram-positive infections. J Med Chem 51:1981–1990.
25. Baltz RH, Miao V, Wrigley SK (2005) Natural products to drugs: Daptomycin and re-
lated lipopeptide antibiotics. Nat Prod Rep 22:717–741.
26. Arias CA, Murray BE (2012) The rise of the Enterococcus: Beyond vancomycin re-
sistance. Nat Rev Microbiol 10:266–278.
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2017) Available at https://www.cdc.gov/
drugresistance/biggest_threats.html. Accessed May 7, 2017.
28. Willyard C (2017) The drug-resistant bacteria that pose the greatest health threats.
Nature 543:15.
29. Perkins HR (1982) Vancomycin and related antibiotics. Pharmacol Ther 16:181–197.
30. Allen NE, Hobbs JN, Jr, Nicas TI (1996) Inhibition of peptidoglycan biosynthesis in
vancomycin-susceptible and -resistant bacteria by a semisynthetic glycopeptide anti-
biotic. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 40:2356–2362.
31. Goldman RC, Baizman ER, Longley CB, Branstrom AA (2000) Chlorobiphenyl-
desleucyl-vancomycin inhibits the transglycosylation process required for peptido-
glycan synthesis in bacteria in the absence of dipeptide binding. FEMS Microbiol Lett
183:209–214.
32. Ge M, et al. (1999) Vancomycin derivatives that inhibit peptidoglycan biosynthesis
without binding D-Ala-D-Ala. Science 284:507–511.
33. Chen L, et al. (2003) Vancomycin analogues active against vanA-resistant strains in-
hibit bacterial transglycosylase without binding substrate. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:
5658–5663.
34. Meeske AJ, et al. (2016) SEDS proteins are a widespread family of bacterial cell wall
polymerases. Nature 537:634–638.
35. Wright GD (2011) Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. Chem Commun
(Camb) 47:4055–4061.
36. Hegstad K, Mikalsen T, Coque TM, Werner G, Sundsfjord A (2010) Mobile genetic
elements and their contribution to the emergence of antimicrobial resistant En-
terococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium. Clin Microbiol Infect 16:541–554.
37. Marshall CG, Lessard IA, Park I, Wright GD (1998) Glycopeptide antibiotic resistance
genes in glycopeptide-producing organisms. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 42:
2215–2220.
38. Courvalin P (2006) Vancomycin resistance in gram-positive cocci. Clin Infect Dis 42:
S25–S34.
39. Hong HJ, Hutchings MI, Buttner MJ; Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council, UK (2008) Vancomycin resistance VanS/VanR two-component systems. Adv
Exp Med Biol 631:200–213.
40. Bugg TDH, et al. (1991) Molecular basis for vancomycin resistance in Enterococcus
faecium BM4147: Biosynthesis of a depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursor by vanco-
mycin resistance proteins VanH and VanA. Biochemistry 30:10408–10415.
41. Walsh CT (1993) Vancomycin resistance: Decoding the molecular logic. Science 261:
308–309.
42. McComas CC, Crowley BM, Boger DL (2003) Partitioning the loss in vancomycin
binding affinity for D-Ala-D-Lac into lost H-bond and repulsive lone pair contribu-
tions. J Am Chem Soc 125:9314–9315.
43. Crowley BM, Boger DL (2006) Total synthesis and evaluation of [Ψ[CH2NH]Tpg4]vancomycin
aglycon: Reengineering vancomycin for dual D-Ala-D-Ala and D-Ala-D-Lac binding. J Am
Chem Soc 128:2885–2892.
44. Xie J, Pierce JG, James RC, Okano A, Boger DL (2011) A redesigned vancomycin en-
gineered for dual D-Ala-D-ala And D-Ala-D-Lac binding exhibits potent antimicrobial
activity against vancomycin-resistant bacteria. J Am Chem Soc 133:13946–13949.
45. Xie J, et al. (2012) Total synthesis of [Ψ[C(═S)NH]Tpg4]vancomycin aglycon, [Ψ[C(═NH)NH]
Tpg4]vancomycin aglycon, and related key compounds: Reengineering vancomycin for
dual D-Ala-D-Ala and D-Ala-D-Lac binding. J Am Chem Soc 134:1284–1297.
46. Okano A, James RC, Pierce JG, Xie J, Boger DL (2012) Silver(I)-promoted conversion of
thioamides to amidines: Divergent synthesis of a key series of vancomycin aglycon
residue 4 amidines that clarify binding behavior to model ligands. J Am Chem Soc 134:
8790–8793.
47. Okano A, Nakayama A, Schammel AW, Boger DL (2014) Total synthesis of [Ψ[C(═NH)
NH]Tpg(4)]vancomycin and its (4-chlorobiphenyl)methyl derivative: Impact of pe-
ripheral modifications on vancomycin analogues redesigned for dual D-Ala-D-Ala and
D-Ala-D-Lac binding. J Am Chem Soc 136:13522–13525.
48. Okano A, et al. (2015) Total syntheses and initial evaluation of [Ψ[C(═S)NH]Tpg4]
vancomycin, [Ψ[C(═NH)NH]Tpg4]vancomycin, [Ψ[CH2NH]Tpg4]vancomycin, and their
(4-chlorobiphenyl)methyl derivatives: Synergistic binding pocket and peripheral
modifications for the glycopeptide antibiotics. J Am Chem Soc 137:3693–3704.
49. Boger DL (2001) Vancomycin, teicoplanin, and ramoplanin: Synthetic and mechanistic
studies. Med Res Rev 21:356–381.
50. Okano A, Isley NA, Boger DL (April 24, 2017) Total syntheses of vancomycin related
glycopeptide antibiotics and key analogues. Chem Rev, 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00820.
51. Yarlagadda V, Akkapeddi P, Manjunath GB, Haldar J (2014) Membrane active van-
comycin analogues: A strategy to combat bacterial resistance. J Med Chem 57:
4558–4568.
52. Higgins DL, et al. (2005) Telavancin, a multifunctional lipoglycopeptide, disrupts both
cell wall synthesis and cell membrane integrity in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 49:1127–1134.
53. Sundram UN, Griffin JH (1995) General and efficient method for the solution- and
solid-phase synthesis of vancomycin carboxamide derivatives. J Org Chem 60:
1102–1103.
54. Boulos L, Prévost M, Barbeau B, Coallier J, Desjardins R (1999) LIVE/DEAD BacLight:
Application of a new rapid staining method for direct enumeration of viable and
total bacteria in drinking water. J Microbiol Methods 37:77–86.
55. Allen NE, Nicas TI (2003) Mechanism of action of oritavancin and related glycopeptide
antibiotics. FEMS Microbiol Rev 26:511–532.
56. Te Winkel JD, Gray DA, Seistrup KH, Hamoen LW, Strahl H (2016) Analysis of
antimicrobial-triggered membrane depolarization using voltage sensitive dyes. Front
Cell Develop Biol 4:29.
57. Silver LL (2007) Multi-targeting by monotherapeutic antibacterials. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 6:41–55.
58. Nakayama A, et al. (2014) Enzymatic glycosylation of vancomycin aglycon: Comple-
tion of a total synthesis of vancomycin and N- and C-terminus substituent effects of
the aglycon substrate. Org Lett 16:3572–3575.
59. Boger DL, et al. (1999) Total synthesis of the vancomycin aglycon. J Am Chem Soc 121:
10004–10011.
60. Walker S, et al. (2005) Chemistry and biology of ramoplanin: A lipoglycodepsipeptide
with potent antibiotic activity. Chem Rev 105:449–476.
Okano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online May 30, 2017
|
E5061
CHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
