 Host and viral traits predict zoonotic spillover from mammals
Kevin J. Olival1, Parviez R. Hosseini1, Carlos Zambrana-Torrelio1, Noam Ross1, Tiffany L. 
Bogich1, and Peter Daszak1
1EcoHealth Alliance, 460 W. 34th Street, New York, NY, 10001, USA
Abstract
The majority of human emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) are zoonotic, with viruses originating 
in wild mammals of particular concern (e.g. HIV, Ebola, SARS)1–3. Understanding patterns of 
viral diversity in wildlife and determinants of successful cross-species transmission, or spillover, 
are therefore key goals for pandemic surveillance programs4. However, few analytical tools exist 
to identify which host species likely harbor the next human virus, or which viruses can cross 
species boundaries5–7. Here we conduct the most comprehensive analysis yet of mammalian host-
virus relationships and show that both the total number of viruses that infect a given species, and 
the proportion likely to be zoonotic are predictable. After controlling for research effort, the 
proportion of zoonotic viruses per species is predicted by phylogenetic relatedness to humans, host 
taxonomy, and human population within a species range – which may reflect human-wildlife 
contact. We demonstrate for the first time that bats harbor a significantly higher proportion of 
zoonotic viruses than all other mammalian orders. We identify the taxa and geographic regions 
with the largest estimated number of ‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing zoonoses’ and therefore of 
highest value for future surveillance. We then show that phylogenetic host breadth and other viral 
traits are significant predictors of zoonotic potential, providing a novel framework to assess if a 
newly discovered mammalian virus could infect people.
Viral zoonoses are a serious threat to public health and global security, and have caused the 
majority of recent pandemics in people4, yet our understanding of the factors driving viral 
diversity in mammals, viral host range, and cross-species transmission to humans remain 
nascent. Recent studies have described broad patterns of pathogen host range1,3 and various 
host or microbial factors that facilitate cross-species transmission5,7,8, or have focused on 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and 
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and request for materials should be addressed to K.J.O. (olival@ecohealthalliance.org) or P.D. 
(daszak@ecohealthalliance.org). 
Author contributions
K.J.O., T.L.B., and P.D. designed the study and supervised the collection of data. N.R., P.R.H. and K.J.O. designed the statistical 
approach, wrote the code, and generated figures. K.J.O. performed phylogenetic analyses. C.Z-T. performed spatial analyses. All 
authors were involved in writing the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Data availability statement
All datasets (host traits, viral traits, full list of host-virus associations and associated references, phylogenetic trees, and phylogenetic 
distance matrices) along with the R code and R package dependencies needed to fully replicate and evaluate these analyses are 
provided at http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.569079. The top-level README.txt file in the directory details the file structure and 
metadata provided.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 June 29; 546(7660): 646–650. doi:10.1038/nature22975.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 factors promoting pathogen and parasite sharing within specific mammalian taxonomic 
groups including primates9–11, bats12–14, and rodents12,15— but to date there has been no 
comprehensive, species-level analysis of viral sharing between humans and all mammals. 
Here we create then analyze a database of 2,805 mammal-virus associations, including 754 
mammal species (14% of global mammal diversity) from 15 orders and 586 unique viral 
species (every recognized virus found in mammals16) from 28 viral families (Methods). We 
use these data to test hypotheses on the determinants of viral richness and viral sharing with 
humans. We fit three inter-related models to elucidate specific components of the process of 
zoonotic spillover (Extended Data Fig. 1). First, we identify factors that influence total viral 
richness (i.e. ‘baseline’ number of unique viral species found in a given host, including those 
which may have the potential to infect humans). Second, we identify and rank the 
ecological, phylogenetic, and life-history traits that make some species more likely hosts of 
zoonoses than others. Third, recognizing that not all mammalian viruses will have the 
biological capacity to infect humans, we identify and rank viral traits that increase their 
likelihood of being zoonotic.
In examining the raw data, we found that observed viral richness within mammals varies at a 
host order and viral family level, and is highest for Bunya-, Flavi-, and Arenaviruses in 
rodents; Flavi-, Bunya-, and Rhabdoviruses in bats; and Herpesviruses in non-human 
primates (Extended Data Fig. 2). Of 586 mammalian viruses in our dataset, 263 (44.8%) 
have been detected in humans, 75 of which are exclusively human and 188 (71.5% of human 
viruses) zoonotic – defined operationally here as viruses detected at least once in humans 
and at least once in another mammal species (Methods). The proportion of zoonotic viruses 
is higher for RNA (159/382, 41.6%) than DNA (29/205, 14.1%) viruses. The observed 
number of viruses per wild host species was comparable when averaged across orders, but 
bats, primates, and rodents had a higher proportion of observed zoonotic viruses compared 
to other groups of mammals (Fig. 1). Species in other orders (e.g. Cingulata, Pilosa, 
Didelphimorphia, Eulipotyphla) also shared a majority of their observed viruses with 
humans, but data were limited in these less diverse and poorly-studied orders. Several 
domestic ungulate species (orders Cetartiodactyla and Perissodactyla) are outliers for their 
number of observed viruses, but these species have a relatively low proportion of zoonotic 
viruses (Fig. 1; Supplementary Discussion).
Previous analyses show that zoonotic disease emergence events and human pathogen species 
richness are spatially correlated with mammal and bird diversity2,17. However, these studies 
weight all species equally. In reality, the risk of zoonotic viral transmission, or spillover, 
likely varies among host species due to differences in underlying viral richness, opportunity 
for contact with humans, propensity to exhibit clinical signs that exacerbate viral 
shedding18, other ecological, behavioral and life-history differences5,12,15, and phylogenetic 
distance from humans10. We hypothesize that the number of viruses a given mammal species 
shares with humans decreases with phylogenetic distance from humans and increases with 
opportunity for human contact. We used generalized additive models (GAMs) to identify 
and rank host-specific predictors (ecological, life history, taxonomic, and phylogenetic traits, 
and a control for research effort) of the number of total and zoonotic viruses in mammals 
(Methods; Supplementary Table 1).
Olival et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The best-fit model for total viral richness per wild mammal species explained 49.2% of the 
total deviance, and included per species measures of disease-related research effort, 
phylogenetically-corrected body mass, geographic range, mammal sympatry, and taxonomy 
(order) (Fig. 2a–e). Not surprisingly, research effort had the strongest effect on the total 
number of viruses per host, explaining 31.9% of the total deviance for this model (Extended 
Data Table 1). The remaining 17.3% can be explained by biological factors, a value greater 
than or comparable to studies examining much narrower groups of mammal hosts10,12,15 
(Supplementary Discussion). Mammal sympatry was the second most important predictor of 
total viral richness (Fig. 2d). Our model selection consistently identified mammal sympatry 
calculated at a ≥20% area overlap over other thresholds explored (Methods), providing 
insight into the minimum geographic overlap needed to facilitate viral sharing between 
hosts. Host geographic range was also significantly associated with increasing total viral 
richness, although the strength of this effect was low (Fig. 2c). Several mammalian orders, 
Chiroptera (bats), Rodentia (rodents), Primates, Cetartiodactyla (even-toed ungulates), and 
Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates) listed here in order of relative deviance explained, had a 
significantly greater viral richness than predicted (Fig. 2e). This finding highlights these taxa 
as important targets for global viral discovery in wildlife4, and suggests that traits not 
captured in our analysis (e.g. immunological function, social structure, and other life-history 
variables) may underlie their capacity to harbor a greater number of viral species. Our 
models to predict total viral richness were comparable when excluding virus-host 
associations detected by serology, i.e. using the ‘stringent data’, and were robust when 
validated with random cross-validation tests (Extended Data Table 1; Supplementary Table 
2). However, we identified several regions that showed significant bias when cross validated 
by excluding mammals from zoogeographic areas, suggesting that there are location-specific 
factors that remain unexplained in our models (Methods; Supplementary Table 3).
Our best model to predict the number of zoonotic viruses per wild mammal species 
explained 82% of the deviance, and included phylogenetic distance from humans, a ratio of 
urban to rural human population across a species range, host order, whether or not a species 
is hunted, research effort, and total viral richness (Extended Data Table 1). A large fraction 
of the deviance explained is driven by the observed total viral richness per host – supporting 
the biological assumption that the number of viruses that infect humans scales positively 
with the size of the potential ‘zoonotic pool’19 in each reservoir host. Removing this 
contribution by including observed total viral richness per host as an offset, the model 
explains 33% of the total deviance in the proportion of viruses that are zoonotic (Methods), 
with 30% of total deviance explained by biological factors (Fig. 2f–i). Several mammalian 
orders had both a significant positive (bats) and negative (two ungulate orders) effect on the 
proportion of zoonotic viruses (Fig. 2i). A number of previous studies have proposed that 
bats are special among mammals in being reservoir hosts of a large number of recently 
emerging high profile zoonoses (e.g. SARS, Ebola virus, MERS)12,13,20. Our study, for the 
first time, tests this hypothesis in the context of all known mammalian viruses and hosts. 
While other mammalian orders have relatively high proportions of observed zoonoses and 
others have been poorly studied (Fig. 1a), our model results show that bats are host to a 
significantly higher proportion of zoonoses than other mammalian orders after controlling 
for reporting effort and the other predictor variables.
Olival et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We found that the proportion of zoonotic viruses per species increases with host 
phylogenetic proximity to humans, and that this relationship is significant even when we 
removed ‘reverse zoonoses’ primarily associated with transmission from humans to primates 
(Methods). This is the first time this relationship has been demonstrated using data for all 
mammals and specifically as a determinant of zoonotic spillover, and is supported by 
previous taxon-specific studies that have examined host relatedness and parasite/pathogen 
sharing in primates9,10, bats14, and plants21. The proportion of zoonotic viruses shows some 
upward drift for mammals that are very phylogenetically distant from humans (Fig. 2g) that 
may represent an artifact of preferentially screening marsupials for human viruses. While 
primate species largely drive the phylogenetic effect, our best-fit model excluded the effect 
of the order Primates as a discrete variable (Fig. 2i) – suggesting that continuous variation in 
phylogenetic distance across primate species is more important, and is significant even when 
all mammals are included. This finding highlights the need to uncover the mechanism by 
which phylogeny affects spillover risk, e.g. evolutionarily related species sharing host cell 
receptors and viral binding affinities22,23 and specific viral mutations that may expand host 
range in related mammal species24.
We tested several measures to estimate human-wildlife contact at a global scale for the 721 
wild mammals in our dataset, but only the ratio of urban to rural human population (all data 
model), the change in human population density, and the change in urban to rural population 
ratio from 1970–2005 across a species range (stringent data model) were included (Extended 
Data Table 1). The response curve for urban to rural population suggests that increasing 
urbanization raises the risk of zoonotic spillover (Fig. 2h), as does increasing human 
population density and the change in urban to rural population ratio over time. A single 
global metric of human-wildlife ecological contact did not emerge across models. However, 
the alternate inclusion of these related variables points to the importance of human-animal 
contact in defining per species spillover risk globally, and the need for controlled field 
experiments and human behavioral risk studies to uncover the mechanisms underlying this 
risk. Overall, the strength of the effect of phylogenetic distance was stronger than our 
proxies for animal-human contact in predicting proportion of zoonoses (30–44% stronger 
explanatory factor), but both remained significant after controlling for research effort 
(Extended Data Table 1).
The predominance of zoonoses of wildlife origin in emerging diseases has led to a series of 
programs to sample wildlife, discover novel viruses, and assess their zoonotic 
potential4,23,25–27. To inform their scale and scope we calculate the expected number of as-
yet undiscovered viruses and zoonoses per host species using our best-fit GAMs and a 
scenario of increased research effort (Methods, Supplementary Table 4). We then project 
these ‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing zoonoses’ geographically (Fig. 3, Extended Data Figs. 
3–8) to identify regions of the world where targeted, future surveillance to find new viruses 
and zoonoses will be most effective. In the process of translating our non-spatial, species-
level predictions to geographic space, we identified several regions where our model 
predictions of the number of total and zoonotic viruses were systematically biased (hatched 
regions – Fig. 3 and Extended Data Figs. 3–8; Methods). Local factors contributing to this 
bias may include geographic variation in the detection probability of human and/or wildlife 
viruses, indicating areas where additional research and capacity strengthening for viral 
Olival et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 detection are most needed. Our model predictions were not systematically biased or 
clustered across host phylogeny (Extended Data Fig. 9).
Geographic hotspots of ‘missing zoonoses’ vary by host taxonomic order, with foci for 
carnivores and even-toed ungulates in Eastern and Southern Africa, bats in South and 
Central America and parts of Asia, primates in specific tropical regions in Central America, 
Africa, and Southeast Asia; and rodents in pockets of North and South America and Central 
Africa. Areas where ‘missing zoonoses’ predictions were systematically biased varied by 
taxonomic order, but included large parts of Africa for the all mammal dataset (Fig. 3a, 
Extended Data Figs. 3–8f). In contrast, the distribution of bias in predicting the ‘missing 
viruses’ for all mammals was limited to patches of northeastern Asia, Greenland, Peninsular 
Malaysia, and scattered grid cells in Western Asia and Patagonia (Extended Data Fig. 3c). 
We also identify geographic regions with large numbers of mammal species currently 
lacking any information regarding their viral diversity (Extended Data Figs. 3i–8i). In 
combination, these maps can be used for cost effective allocation of future resources for 
viral discovery programs, such as the recently proposed “Global Virome Project”27.
Finally, a significant challenge to preventing future disease emergence is estimating the 
zoonotic potential of a newly-discovered viral species or strain based on viral traits4–6,28. 
The best model for determining whether or not a known virus (n=586 mammalian viruses) 
has been observed as zoonotic explained 27.2% of total deviance and included maximum 
phylogenetic host breadth (PHB – a virus-specific trait that measures the phylogenetic range 
of known hosts, excluding humans), research effort, whether or not a virus replicates in the 
cytoplasm, is vector-borne, or is enveloped, and average genome length (Fig. 4). Using the 
‘stringent’ dataset to define whether a virus is zoonotic resulted in a reduced model that 
excluded enveloped status and genome length (Extended Data Table 1). Our findings 
confirm a positive relationship between zoonotic potential and ability to replicate in the 
cytoplasm7, and that viruses with arthropod vectors may be able to infect a wider range of 
mammalian hosts5. Our phylogenetically-explicit measure of host breadth, PHB, can be used 
at various hierarchical taxonomic levels to quantify and rank viruses from specialist to 
generalist, and was the strongest predictor of zoonotic potential (12.4% of total deviance 
explained). This highlights the value of field programs to identify the natural host range of 
newly discovered pathogens in order to develop early proxies for their zoonotic potential4. 
Significant variation in PHB across viral families is suggestive of intrinsic differences in a 
virus’ ability to infect diverse hosts, and this relates to the proportion of observed zoonoses 
in each family (Fig. 4a).
We acknowledge several important caveats. First, our estimates of ‘missing viruses’ and 
‘missing zoonoses’ per species are based on the current maximum observed research effort 
from the literature, and these estimates should be viewed as relative, not absolute. The true 
size of the undiscovered mammalian virome will likely increase with new genetic tools for 
unbiased viral discovery and in depth studies that repeatedly sample wildlife populations 
over time25. Second, our ecological and biological predictor variables only explain a portion 
of the total variation in viral richness per host and zoonotic potential based on viral traits, 
although this is greater than that reported in comparable order-specific studies10,12. Third, 
while we control for research effort we cannot account for viruses or host associations that 
Olival et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 have completely evaded human detection to date, nor those identified but not published. 
Additional resources to support better data-sharing and on-the-ground viral surveillance in 
the species and regions we identify would help validate predictive models to identify 
zoonotic viral hotspots, and streamline costly efforts to develop measures to prevent their 
future emergence.
The analyses reported herein have broad potential to assist in expediting viral discovery 
programs for public health. Our host-specific analyses and estimates of ‘missing zoonoses’ 
allow us to identify which species and regions should be preferentially targeted to 
characterize the global mammalian virome. Our viral trait framework then allows 
prioritization of newly-discovered wildlife viruses for detailed characterization (e.g. by 
sequencing receptor binding domains, and conducting in vitro and in vivo infection 
experiments23) to assess their potential to threaten human health.
Methods
Database
To construct the mammal–virus association database we initially extracted all viruses listed 
as occurring in any mammal from the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 
database (ICTVdb), and further individually went through each virus listed in the ICTV 8th 
edition master list and searched the literature for mammalian hosts. All viral species names 
were synonymized to ICTV 8th edition, which was the global authority on viral taxonomy at 
the start of our data collection in 201016. From 2010–15 the authors and a team of research 
assistants and interns at EcoHealth Alliance compiled mammal species associations for each 
of 586 unique viruses published in the literature between 1940–2015 initially by using the 
virus name and synonyms as the search keywords in the major online reference databases 
(Web of Science, PubMed, and Google scholar) in addition to searching in books, reviews, 
and literature cited in sources we had already obtained. To narrow the search for hosts for 
well-researched viruses, we additionally included the terms “host(s)”, “reservoir”, 
“wildlife”, “animals”, “surveillance”, and other relevant terms to find publications related to 
host range. Associations were cross-checked for completeness with the Global Mammal 
Parasite Database for primate, carnivore and ungulate viruses, version as of Nov 2006 
(GMPD, www.mammalparasites.org)30 and other published reviews specific to bats and 
rodents12,31,32. We excluded all records without species-level host information, and those 
where we could not track down the primary references. Records of mammal-virus 
associations from experimental infection studies, zoological parks or captive breeding 
facilities, or cell culture discoveries were excluded. Host species were defined as domestic 
vs. wild following the list of domestic animal species from the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO)33, and we removed the black rat (Rattus rattus) and domestic mouse 
(Mus musculus) from the domesticated list as these two species make up their own “peri-
domestic” category. Host species were categorized as either occurring in human modified 
habitats or being hunted by humans – both estimates for human contact – according to the 
IUCN Red List species descriptions34.
To control for the fact that some detection methods are more reliable than others in 
identifying the pathogen of interest, we recorded the detection method used for each host-
Olival et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 virus association and scored these as 0, 1, or 2 according to the reliability of detection 
method used. Viral isolation and PCR detection with sequence confirmation were scored as a 
2 (= stringent data); and serological methods were scored as a 0 or 1, with viral or serum 
neutralization tests (=1), and enzyme-linked immuno assays (ELISA), antigen detection 
assays, and other serological assays scored as (=0). ‘Stringent data’ were analyzed 
separately to remove potential uncertainty due to cross-reactivity with related viruses. We 
exhaustively searched the literature to identify a ‘stringent’ detection for each mammal-virus 
pair, and only included the serological finding for that pair if no molecular or viral isolation 
studies were available. We partitioned data and conducted separate analyses for the entire 
dataset (0 +1 + 2 detection quality) and the ‘stringent’ data (score of 2) to reduce the noise 
from potential serological cross-reactivity. Full list of host-virus associations, detection 
methods, and associated references are provided in our data and code repository at http://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.569079.
Our operational definition of a zoonotic virus includes any virus that was detected in humans 
and at least one other mammalian host in at least one primary publication, and does not 
imply directionality. Our complete dataset of mammalian viral associations demonstrates 
evidence of past or current viral infection which we believe is a reasonable proxy for 
measuring spillover, and our ‘stringent’ dataset specifically is more robust to exclude species 
that may have been exposed to a given virus versus those that show some evidence for 
replication within the host species. Our bi-directional definition of spillover follows a 
proposal by the WHO that defines a zoonosis as “any disease or infection that is naturally 
transmissible from vertebrate animals to humans and vice-versa” (http://www.who.int/
zoonoses/en/) and excludes any human pathogens that recently evolved from nonhuman 
pathogens (e.g. HIV in primates), as per Woolhouse and Gowtage-Sequeria 20051.
In order to address influence of transmission from humans to wildlife in our models, we also 
ran our GAM model fitting and selection procedure (see below) on a subset of data that 
excluded any probable ‘reverse zoonotic’ viruses. We first searched our entire dataset and 
removed any clear instances of transmission from humans to primates, e.g. including records 
from zoological parks and wildlife rehabilitation centers (as previously noted). We then 
additionally removed several human viruses most commonly transmitted from humans back 
to non-human primates to create a subset of data without the most common ‘reverse 
zoonotic’ viruses (Adeno-associated virus-2; Human adenovirus D; Human herpesvirus 4; 
Human metapneumovirus; Human respiratory syncytial virus; Measles virus; Mumps 
virus)35,36. We present these additional analyses excluding ‘reverse zoonoses’ and associated 
code at http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.569079.
Total viral richness was calculated as the number of unique ICTV-recognized viruses found 
in a given host species, and zoonotic viral richness was defined as the number of unique 
ICTV-recognized viruses in a given host species that were also detected in humans in our 
database.
To assess research bias for both host and virus, we searched ISI Web of Knowledge, 
including Web of Science and Zoological Record, and PubMed for the number of research 
publications for a given host or pathogen. We recorded two values for the number of 
Olival et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 research papers for a host. The first was a simple search by scientific binomial in Zoological 
Abstracts where we recorded the number of papers published between 1940–2013 for each 
host species. We also recorded the number of disease-related publications for each species 
using the scientific binomial AND topic keyword: disease* OR virus* OR pathogen* OR 
parasit*. The * operator was used in our search criteria to capture all words that begin with 
each term, e.g. “parasit” (= “parasite”, “parasites”, and “parasitic”). These search criteria 
broadly included papers that examined disease or diseases, virus or viruses, pathogen or 
pathogens, parasite parasites, or parasitology, for each species. Only one measure of per host 
research effort was included at a time in model selection. As these metrics are highly 
correlated and the number of disease related citations per host outperformed the total 
number of publications per host in all but one model (all-data zoonoses), we decided to use 
disease-related publications as our per-species research effort measure for all models to 
improve interoperability. We also recorded the number of publications for each of 586 virus 
species using a keyword search by virus name in PubMed and Web of Science. Only one 
measure of per virus research effort was included at a time in model selection.
We used a phylogenetically-corrected measure of body mass (see details below under 
‘Phylogenetic Signal’) as our main life history predictor variable, because it was the only 
one for which a nearly complete data set existed for the species in our dataset. We used the 
body mass recorded in the PanTHERIA database37 for 709 species. For 3 species, we used 
the second choice option, body mass recorded in the AnAge database38. For 11 species, we 
used the third choice option of the extrapolated body mass recorded in PanTHERIA, which 
is based on body length or forearm length, depending on species. For 36 species, we used 
the average body mass for members of the genus that had a recorded body mass. We 
explored other life-history variables related to longevity39, reproductive success, and basal-
metabolic rate but these were ultimately excluded due to the high number of missing 
records.
Phylogenetic Signal
We address the issue of non-independence of host species traits due to shared ancestry40 in 
our analyses by first quantifying the phylogenetic signal for each variable in our model using 
Blomberg’s K41. Blomberg’s K measures phylogenetic signal in a given trait by quantifying 
trait variance relative to an expectation under a Brownian motion null model of evolution 
using a phylogenetic tree with varying branch lengths. Blomberg’s K-values are scaled from 
0 to infinity, with a value of 0 equal to no phylogenetic signal and values greater than 1 
equal to strong phylogenetic signal for closely related species that share more similar trait 
values. While there is no clearly defined K-value cut-off in which to apply phylogenetic 
comparative methods, non-significant value of <1, or more conservatively <0.5, are typical 
for traits that are phylogenetically independent. The only host variables we examined with 
significant K-values >0.5 were host body mass, and our direct measure of phylogenetic 
distance to humans. While there are several tools available to control for phylogeny in 
multivariate analyses, e.g. using phylogenetic generalized least square models (e.g. 
PGLS)42, there is currently no modeling approach to control for phylogeny using GAMs. 
More importantly, a wholesale effort to control for phylogeny across all variables in our 
analysis was not appropriate here, as we are explicitly testing the relative importance of 
Olival et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phylogenetic distance to humans vs. other host traits including measures of human-wildlife 
contact to predict the proportion of zoonotic viruses for a given host species. This left body 
mass as the only variable in our models, excluding our direct measures of phylogenetic 
distance, with a significant Blomberg K value that was greater than one. We controlled for 
the significant effect of shared evolutionary history using a phylogenetic eigenvector 
regression (PVR)43,44 on body mass. The PVR approach allowed us to remove phylogenetic 
signal for any phylogenetically non-independent variables and then include the corrected 
values back in our GAMs, while retaining predictor variables like phylogenetic distance to 
humans as unmodified. We calculated PVR for body mass using the R package ‘PVR’ and 
our custom-build maximum likelihood host phylogeny using cytochrome B sequences 
constrained to the order-level topology of the mammalian supertree29,45. Our new variable 
for body mass that controls for phylogenetic signal (PVRcytb_resid) removed most of the 
phylogenetic signal, with K= 3.5 unadjusted, and K<0.5 after PVR correction. Our new 
metric of body mass scales in the same way, with larger values equal to species with larger 
body mass. PVR body mass was included in our GAM model selection for the total viral 
richness and zoonotic virus models.
Host Phylogenetic Analysis and Phylogenetic Host Breadth
We used two different mammal phylogenetic trees in our analyses and used a model 
selection framework to determine which best explained our observed association with 
zoonotic viral richness. First the mammal supertree was pruned in R (package ape, function 
‘drop.tips’) to include only synonymous species for the 753 species in our database29,46. We 
synonymized all host species names between the mammal supertree and the host 
associations in our database using the IUCN Red List34. If the species was listed as ‘cattle’ it 
was assumed to be Bos taurus, all other records were excluded if there was ambiguity as to 
the scientific name for the host species. Second, a maximum likelihood cytB tree was 
generated using the constraint of a multifurcating tree with taxa constrained to their 
respective orders and the order-level topology matching that of the mammal supertree6, as 
per this Newick tree file: (MONOTREMATA,((DIDELPHIMORPHIA,
(DIPROTODONTIA,PERAMELEMORPHIA)),(PROBOSCIDEA,
((PILOSA,CINGULATA),((((RODENTIA,LAGOMORPHA),
(PRIMATES,SCANDENTIA)),
((((CETARTIODACTYLA,PERISSODACTYLA),CARNIVORA),CHIROPTERA),EULIP
OTYPHLA))))))). This generated a higher resolution species-level mammal tree using cytb 
data, with more reliable positioning of the higher-level taxonomic relationships than was 
obtained in exploratory phylogenetic analyses using cytb data alone. Genbank accession 
numbers and cytb sequence lengths for each species provided in in our data and code 
repository. Cytb gene fragments ranged from 143 to 1140bp, with >1000bp available for 
558/665 (84%) of the taxa. Data derived from the cytochrome b tree constrained to the 
topology of the mammal supertree was selected as the best option in all best-fit GAMs.
Sequences were aligned using MUSCLE with default setting in Geneious R6, and checked 
visually for errors47. The best maximum likelihood tree with and without the constraint tree 
were generated using RAxML-HPC2 on XSEDE via the CIPRES Science Gateway server 
v3.148 using a GTR model with parsimony seed, 1000 bootstrap replicates, and the 
Olival et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 following, specific parameters (raxmlHPC-HYBRID -s infile -n result -x 12345 -g 
constraint.tre -N 1000 -c 25 -p 12345 -f a -m GTRCAT).
Matrices of pairwise patristic distances between all species, including Homo sapiens, were 
calculated from the two phylogenies using the ‘cophenetic’ function in the R package ape46. 
Phylogenetic trees (Newick format for pruned Supertree and cytb tree) and matrices of 
phylogenetic distance from humans are provided in the data and code repository.
We calculated mean, median, max, min, IQR, and standard deviation (represented as generic 
function F in equation 1) of phylogenetic host breadth (PHB) from all known mammalian 
hosts for each virus using the pairwise patristic distances (di,j) for each mammal-mammal 
association for all hosts of a given virus excluding humans, where i indexes each mammal in 
the database, as does j, and J represents the total mammals in the database. We aggregated 
these PHB values using mean, median, or maximum values at a viral species, genus and 
viral family level to generate higher-level taxonomic variables of host breadth per viral 
group. Our measure is similar to those developed by previous studies to understand parasite 
host specificity49–51, but here we create a generalizable variable to measure viral host 
breadth that can be aggregated at different viral taxonomic levels.
(1)
To make Extended Data Figure 9, taxon names and terminal branches of cytb tree 
constrained to supertree were color-coded using residual from the best-fit zoonotic virus 
GAM (predicted-observed zoonotic viral richness) for wildlife species, and plotted using the 
plot.phylo function in the R package ape46. Symbols (circles) at terminal taxa additionally 
added to better visualize residual value colors were added using willeerd.nodelabels function 
(dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10855). All marine mammals, domestic animals, and other taxa 
with missing data were coded as grey for missing data.
Viral richness heatmap (Extended Data Figure 2) was generated using the R package 
pheatmap, and the ‘complete’ hierarchical clustering algorithm to sort cells across rows and 
columns by similar values of viral richness. All boxplots, histograms and all other figures 
generated in R v.3.3.052. R code for primary figure generation is provided in the code 
repository.
GAM Fitting and Selection
We fit a set of generalized additive models (GAMs) that included all of our selected 
potential variables explaining the number of total viruses or number of zoonoses in hosts, as 
well as whether viruses were zoonotic (for conceptual framework and summary of each 
GAM see Extended Data Figure 1; for full variable list and data sources see Supplementary 
Table 1). Our use of GAMs, an incorporation of smooth spline predictor functions into the 
generalized linear model (GLM) framework, allowed us to examine the functional form of 
our predictor variables (e.g. Fig 2 and 4). Categorical and binary variables (e.g. host order, 
IUCN status of hunted or not, and certain viral traits) were fit as random effects of each 
variable level. We used automated term selection by double penalty smoothing53 to 
Olival et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 eliminate variables from the models. This method removes variables with little to no 
predictive power and has been shown to be comparable or superior to comparing alternate 
models with and without variables. We did use the model comparison method in for the case 
of domestic animals, where the sample size was not sufficient for fitting all variables. In this 
case dropping variables by double penalty smoothing still allowed pruning the model list to 
eliminate redundant models. Where there were competing variables measuring the same 
mechanistic effect, we fit alternate GAMs using only one of each of these variables (as 
specified in below and in the Extended Data Figure 1). These included phylogenetic 
variables, citation counts from alternate databases, and different measures of human 
population/host overlap. For example, to capture host phylogeny we used phylogenetic 
distance based on either the mammal supertree20 or a purpose-built CytB constrained by the 
topology of the mammal supertree, but never both in the same model. For human population 
variables, we looked at either variables measuring overlap of species range with human-
occupied areas, or human population in those areas, as area- and population-based measures 
were highly co-linear. For citation variables, we looked at either all citations or the number 
of disease-related citations for each host species, not both, and similarly citations in either 
PubMed or Web of Knowledge. We used a binomial GAM to analyze the 586 mammalian 
viruses in our database and identify viral traits that may serve as predictors of zoonotic 
potential. Collinearity was not a major issue among variables included in the same model.
We inspected models within 2 AIC units of the model with the lowest AIC, and present the 
outputs of the best-fit and all other top models (<2 ΔAIC) in our data and code repository. In 
general, variable effects retained the same functional form and effect size across models 
within 2 ΔAIC – differences were limited to the adding or dropping of very weak, 
insignificant effects, or switching between highly correlated competing variables such as 
citation counts from different databases.
For our model of number of zoonoses per host, we used the total number of observed viruses 
per host as an offset, effectively fitting a model of expected number of zoonoses per host 
virus. We found this variable had a coefficient near to one when it was used as a linear 
predictor, indicating its appropriateness as an offset.
We repeated the model selection process for all models using the more ‘stringent’ set of data 
that used only virus identified in mammal hosts using viral isolation, PCR, or other methods 
of nucleic acid sequence confirmation, i.e. that excluded all associations detected via 
serology.
All models were fit using the MGCV package for R (version 1.8–12.). We used the model 
with the lowest AIC to predict the number of expected zoonotic viruses for each host 
species, using all the data from our database that had complete observations for the best 
model. Our top models consistently outperform the alternatives by wide margins, as 
measured by AIC. We used standard methods in the R package MGCV to calculate deviance 
explained, which is defined as (D_null – D_model)/D_null. In this formula, D_null is the 
deviance (−2*likelihood) of an intercept-only, (or, in the case of the zoonoses model, offset-
only), model, while D_model is the deviance of our best-fit model.
Olival et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Analyses were limited to terrestrial mammal species as defined by the IUCN Red List 
(marine mammals were excluded) and we ran separate analyses for wild and domestic 
animals. As domestic animals made up a much smaller data set (n=32 species) with a unique 
set of explanatory variables that differed from the wild species analyses, these models were 
fit separately. Domestic species results are also discussed separately (see Supplementary 
Discussion) as they are tangential to the primary findings.
Model cross-validation
We used k-fold cross-validation to evaluate goodness of fit for all models. The data was 
divided into 10 folds, selected randomly. For each fold, the model was re-fit based on the 
other 9 folds, and goodness of fit was assessed by conducting a nonparametric permutation 
test of comparing the predicted values vs. the real values for the kth fold, where a non-
significant result indicates that predictions are unbiased. Poisson models goodness-of-fit 
may be compared via a parametric Chi-squared permutation test on deviance values, but this 
test is inappropriate in the case of models with low mean values, as is our case for some of 
our GAMs54. The k-fold cross-validation confirmed the robustness of our model predictions 
for wild mammals, code and outputs from these tests for each best-fit GAM are provided in 
Supplementary Table 2.
In addition to randomly-selected k-fold cross-validation, we evaluated the robustness of our 
models via a non-random geographic cross-validation, code and summary document 
provided in our code and data repository. In order to meaningfully organize species in our 
dataset by geographic areas, we used the 34 zoogeographic regions for terrestrial mammals 
recently redefined by Holt et al.55. Using QGIS56, a mammal-specific zoogeographical 
shapefile provided by Holt’s group at the University of Copenhagen (http://
macroecology.ku.dk/resources/wallace) was intersected (using QGIS Vector > 
Geoprocessing Tools > Intersect) with a shapefile of IUCN’s host ranges for all mammals in 
our database. Areas of these intersections were then calculated using an equal-area 
projection (Mollweide), and each host was assigned to only the region that contained the 
greatest proportion of its range. We systematically removed all observations (species) from 
each given zoogeographical region, re-fit the model using all observations from outside the 
region, then performed a non-parametric permutation test comparing the predicted values to 
the observed values for that region. Non-significant results indicate that model predictions 
are unbiased. Significant results for a given zoogeographic region suggest that there are 
location-specific biases that remain unexplained. This systematic zoogeographic cross-
validation supported the overall robustness of our model predictions for several models, i.e. 
all-data zoonoses, all-data total viral richness, and stringent-data total viral richness models. 
For these models, even though a majority of zoogeographic regions were unbiased, we still 
identified several zoogeographic regions that showed significant bias. Our zoogeographic 
cross-validation was equivocal for the stringent-data zoonoses model, with 8 regions that 
showed evidence of bias and 7 regions which showed no evidence of bias (Supplementary 
Table 3).
The presence of biased regions in our zoogeographic cross-validation suggested the 
possibility that there is a systematic bias associated with geography not captured by the 
Olival et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 predictor variables in our models. To further investigate this, we added zoogeographical 
region as a categorical random effect to each of our best-fit models. For three of our best-fit 
GAMs (all-data total viruses, stringent-data total viruses, and stringent-data zoonoses) the 
addition of zoogeographical region as a categorical random effect decreased the model AIC 
and increased the total deviance explained by 3–5%. The all-data zoonoses model, which 
was used to create the series of maps in the main manuscript, does not improve with the 
inclusion of zoogeographical region. However, the improved predictive power of models 
using region-specific terms is offset by the increase in degrees of freedom (i.e. if we 
included 31 zoogeographic regions as separate terms) and, more importantly, a decreased 
interpretability of our models – especially when compared to the geographical variables we 
used, such as host area or species range overlap with human modified habitat. We opted not 
to include these random effects in our final GAMs in favor of keeping only variables 
interpretable in the context of our host trait-specific framework. Instead, we indicate areas of 
geographic bias directly on our spatially mapped outputs. (See “Calculating and visualizing 
‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing zoonoses’”, below.) Summaries of these models, along with 
changes in relative deviance explained for the other explanatory variables when 
zoogeographic region is added as a random effect, are provided in our code and data 
repository.
Spatial variables
For all the wildlife hosts we used the geographic range information obtained from the IUCN 
spatial database version 2015.2. Wildlife host species shapefiles needed to replicate analysis 
are now hosted on our Amazon S3 storage (https://s3.amazonaws.com/hp3-shapefiles/
Mammals_Terrestrial.zip)34. IUCN depict species’ range distributions as polygons based on 
the extent of occurrence (EOO), which is defined as the area contained within a minimum 
convex hull around species’ observations or records. This convex hull or polygon is further 
improved by including areas known to be suitable or by removing unsuitable or unoccupied 
areas based on expert knowledge. To accurately calculate the area in km2 of each host 
species we projected the polygons to an equal area projection (Mollweide).
We calculated various thresholds of mammal sympatry based on percentage of range overlap 
for each wild species in our database using IUCN shape files for all mammals globally. We 
define mammal sympatry as the number of mammalian species that overlap with the target 
species’ geographic range. We calculated mammal sympatry for each wild species in our 
database at six different thresholds based on the percentage area overlap with the target 
species geographic range, i.e. the number of other wild mammal species with any (>0%), 
≥20%, ≥40%, ≥50%, ≥80%, or 100% range overlap. The six different thresholds for 
mammal sympatry were included as competing terms in our model selection for the total 
viral richness models.
We derived and tested several global measures to estimate the level of human contact with 
each wild species in our database. To estimate the area of host geographic range covered by 
crops, pastures, rural and urban areas – as measures of global human contact with a given 
wildlife species – each species polygon was intersected (overlapped) with spatial data 
representing those land cover types. Additionally, we calculated the total number of people 
Olival et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 within each host geographic range using data from HYDE database57, and also separately 
totaled the number of people in rural and urban populations. We obtained data on the 
distribution of cropland, pastures, rural and urban areas (i.e., grazing land) also from the 
HYDE database57 for the years 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2005 with a spatial resolution of 
5' × 5', equivalent to 10km2 by 10km2. These datasets were created by combining 
information from satellite imagery and sub-national crop and pasture statistics57. In our 
GAMs, we used several transformations of these variables as competing proxies for human-
wildlife contact: the log-transformed area of host range that overlapped each type of human-
modified land cover, log-transformed human population in the host range, log-transformed 
human population density in the host range, and the log-ratio of urban and rural human 
populations in the host range. For each of these, we also included as a variable the change in 
value from 1970 to 2005. Human-wildlife contact variables that significantly covaried were 
excluded (set as competing terms) during the model selection process. The ratio of urban to 
rural human population was used to disentangle variables of human-wildlife contact that 
significantly covaried. For example, the total area of a species range that overlapped with 
urban and rural areas was highly correlated with the total geographic area variables we 
examined (e.g. total area, and area in crop, pasture, rural, and urban). The ratio of urban to 
rural population allowed us to separate these signals and best represent this proxy of per 
species human-wildlife contact. All spatial analyses were performed in R (3.3.2)52, using the 
following R libraries: raster58, rgdal59, and sp59.
Calculating and visualizing ‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing zoonoses’
We used each respective best-fit, all data GAM from the total viral richness and proportion 
zoonoses models to calculate the estimated number of viruses that would be observed if the 
research effort variable for each species was equal to that of the most-studied wild species in 
our database (Vulpes vulpes with 4,433 total publications and 1,477 disease-related 
publications). We used the prediction of the total virus richness GAM as the offset for the 
zoonoses GAM. We then calculated the ‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing zoonoses’ by 
subtracting the observed number of viruses and zoonoses from the predictions based on 
maximum research for each wild mammalian species.
We used geographic range maps from the IUCN spatial database (2015.2) to visualize the 
spatial distribution of observed host-virus associations, observed host-zoonoses association, 
these associations as predicted under maximum research, and the maximum predicted – 
observed viruses, or the ‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing zoonoses’ (e.g. Fig 3; Extended Data 
Figures 3–8; Supplementary Table 4). We also generated maps comparing species richness 
of all species in the IUCN database against those with viral associations in our database. For 
each species, the distribution range was converted to a grid system with cells 1/6 of a 
geographic degree (approximately 18 km × 18 km at the Equator line). Each grid cell was 
assigned a value of one to indicate presence. We repeated this process and assigned the 
observed and predicted-under-max-effort number of zoonotic viruses to their correspondent 
grid cells. Viral and host species richness maps, and both the ‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing 
zoonoses’ maps were calculated by overlying individual grids. Each richness map represents 
the sum of all values for a given grid cell. We repeated the process for all the host species in 
our database and created viral and species richness maps for the following orders: Carnivora, 
Olival et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cetartiodactyla, Chiroptera, Primates and Rodentia. These taxa were selected because they 
represent 681/736 (92.5%) of wild mammal species in our database.
In the process of translating our non-spatial, species-level predictions to geographic space 
(i.e. layered raster maps), we identified several geographic areas where our model 
predictions of the number of total and zoonotic viruses were systematically biased, i.e. p-
value <0.05 (Supplementary Table 3). In order to visualize the geographic biases of our non-
spatial model predictions in our maps (see above regarding zoogeographic cross-validation), 
we demarcate regions with significant bias with hatching. Hatched regions represent areas 
where model predictions of total or zoonotic viral richness deviate systematically for the 
collection of species in that grid cell. For each grid cell we calculated whether the bias 
exceeded that expected from a random sampling of hosts. This was accomplished by 
summing the residuals from 100,000 random draws of species in our dataset that was equal 
to the number of species present in that grid cell, then identifying grid cells where the 
observed bias was outside the middle 95% of the randomly drawn distribution. We 
calculated this for all mammals, and separately for each order across all grid cells. Areas 
with observed bias (outside of 95% of the randomly drawn distribution) are shown with 
hatched regions on each ‘missing virus’ and ‘missing zoonoses’ map.
Animal images used in figures
Animal silhouettes added to Figs 1 and 3 and Extended Data Figs 1 and 2 to visually 
represent each mammalian order were downloaded from PhyloPic (www.phylopic.org). 
Chiroptera, Cingulata, Diprotodontia, Lagomorpha, Peramelemorphia, and Primates were 
available for use under the Public Domain Dedication license. Carnivora and Rodentia (by 
Rebecca Groom), Didelphimorphia, Pilosa, and Probscidea (by Sarah Werning), 
Eulipotyphyla (by Claus Rebler), Certartiodactyla and Perissodactyla (by Jan A. Venter, 
Herbert H. T. Prins, David A. Balfour & Rob Slotow and vectorized by T. Michael Keesey) 
are provided under the creative commons license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
3.0/). We created the silhouette for Scandentia, and waive all rights.
Olival et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Conceptual model of zoonotic spillover, viral richness, and summary of 
models
a, Conceptual model of zoonotic spillover showing primary risk factors examined, color-
coded according to generalized additive models used. b, Conceptual model of observed, 
predicted, and actual viral richness in mammals. c, Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) 
used in our study to address specific components of a and b, color-coded by model. 
Variables listed with “or” under each GAM covaried and were provided as competing terms 
in model selection, and those in bold were included in the best-fit model using all host-virus 
Olival et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 associations. Significant variables from each best-fit GAM are noted with an *. Zoonotic 
viral spillover firstly depends on the underlying total viral richness in mammal populations 
and the ecological, taxonomic, and life-history traits that govern this diversity (GAM 1). 
Secondly, host and virus specific factors may facilitate viral spillover. We examine the 
relative importance of host phylogenetic distance to humans, ecological opportunity for 
contact, or other species-specific life-history and taxonomic traits (GAM 2), and identify 
viral traits associated with a higher likelihood of an observed virus being zoonotic (GAM 3). 
We estimate the total and zoonotic viral richness per host species using GAMs 1 and 2, and 
calculate the ‘missing viruses’ and ‘missing zoonoses’ under a scenario of increased 
research effort (b, Methods). Due to imperfect surveillance in both humans and wildlife and 
biases in viral detection, there may be uncertainty in the exact proportion of viruses that are 
zoonotic (b, light grey), and also between the actual, or true, viral richness (dotted lines) and 
the predicted maximum viral richness per host (dashed line).
Extended Data Figure 2. Heatmap of observed total viral richness by mammalian order and 
viral family
Data set includes 754 mammalian species and 586 unique ICTV recognized viral species. 
Heatmap aggregated by rows and columns to group taxa with similar levels of observed viral 
richness.
Olival et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Global distribution of viral and host species richness for all wild 
mammals
a, Observed total viral richness (for n=576 host spp.); b, predicted total viral richness given 
maximum research effort; c, ‘missing viruses’ or predicted – observed total viral richness; d, 
observed zoonotic viral richness (n=584); e, predicted zoonotic viral richness given 
maximum research effort; f, ‘missing zoonoses’ or predicted – observed zoonotic viral 
richness (same as included in Fig 3a); g, global mammal species richness (n=5290); h, 
mammal richness for species in database (n=753); i, mammal species with no described 
viruses in literature. Warmer colors (larger values) in panels c and f highlight areas predicted 
to be of greatest value for discovering novel viruses or novel viral zoonoses, respectively, in 
mammals. Red/pink colors in panel i highlight areas with poor viral surveillance in mammal 
species to date. Hatched regions represent areas where model predictions deviate 
systematically for the collection of species in that grid cell (see Methods).
Olival et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Global distribution of viral and host species richness for wild carnivores 
(Order Carnivora)
a, Observed total viral richness (for n=55 host spp.); b, predicted total viral richness given 
maximum research effort; c, ‘missing viruses’ or predicted – observed total viral richness; d, 
observed zoonotic viral richness (n=55); e, predicted zoonotic viral richness given maximum 
research effort; f, ‘missing zoonoses’ or predicted – observed zoonotic viral richness (same 
as included in Fig 3b); g, global host species richness for Carnivora (n=276); h, host species 
richness for Carnivora in database (n=79); i, Carnivora species with no described viruses in 
literature. Warmer colors (larger values) in panels c and f highlight areas predicted to be of 
greatest value for discovering novel viruses or novel viral zoonoses, respectively, in 
carnivores. Red/pink colors in panel i highlight areas with poor viral surveillance in 
carnivore species to date. Hatched regions represent areas where model predictions deviate 
systematically for the collection of species in that grid cell (see Methods).
Olival et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Global distribution of viral and host species richness for wild even-toed 
ungulates (Order Cetartiodactyla)
a, Observed total viral richness (for n=70 host spp.); b, predicted total viral richness given 
maximum research effort; c, ‘missing viruses’ or predicted – observed total viral richness; d, 
observed zoonotic viral richness (n=70); e, predicted zoonotic viral richness given maximum 
research effort; f, ‘missing zoonoses’ or predicted – observed zoonotic viral richness (same 
as included in Fig 3c); g, global host species richness for Cetartiodactyla (n=229); h, host 
species richness for Cetartiodactyla in database (n=105); i, Cetartiodactyla species with no 
described viruses in literature. Warmer colors (larger values) in panels c and f highlight areas 
predicted to be of greatest value for discovering novel viruses or novel viral zoonoses, 
respectively, in even-toed ungulates. Red/pink colors in panel i highlight areas with poor 
viral surveillance in even-toed ungulates species to date. Hatched regions represent areas 
where model predictions deviate systematically for the collection of species in that grid cell 
(see Methods).
Olival et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Global distribution of viral and host species richness for bats (Order 
Chiroptera)
a, Observed total viral richness (for n=156 host spp.); b, predicted total viral richness given 
maximum research effort; c, ‘missing viruses’ or predicted – observed total viral richness; d, 
observed zoonotic viral richness (n=157); e, predicted zoonotic viral richness given 
maximum research effort; f, ‘missing zoonoses’ or predicted – observed zoonotic viral 
richness (same as included in Fig 3d); g) global host species richness for Chiroptera 
(n=1117); h, host species richness for Chiroptera in database (n=192); i, Chiroptera species 
with no described viruses in literature. Warmer colors (larger values) in panels c and f 
highlight areas predicted to be of greatest value for discovering novel viruses or novel viral 
zoonoses, respectively, in bats. Red/pink colors in panel i highlight areas with poor viral 
surveillance in bat species to date. Hatched regions represent areas where model predictions 
deviate systematically for the collection of species in that grid cell (see Methods).
Olival et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Global distribution of viral and host species richness for primates 
(Order Primates)
a, Observed total viral richness (for n=71 host spp.); b, predicted total viral richness given 
maximum research effort; c, ‘missing viruses’ or predicted – observed total viral richness; d, 
observed zoonotic viral richness (n=73); e, predicted zoonotic viral richness given maximum 
research effort; f, ‘missing zoonoses’ or predicted – observed zoonotic viral richness (same 
as included in Fig 3e); g, global host species richness for Primates (n=400); h, host species 
richness for Primates in database (n=98); i, Primates species with no described viruses in 
literature. Warmer colors (larger values) in panels c and f highlight areas predicted to be of 
greatest value for discovering novel viruses or novel viral zoonoses, respectively, in 
primates. Red/pink colors in panel i highlight areas with poor viral surveillance in primate 
species to date. Hatched regions represent areas where model predictions deviate 
systematically for the collection of species in that grid cell (see Methods).
Olival et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Global distribution of viral and host species richness for rodents (Order 
Rodentia)
a, Observed total viral richness (for n = 178 host spp.); b, predicted total viral richness given 
maximum research effort; c, ‘missing viruses’ or predicted – observed total viral richness; d, 
observed zoonotic viral richness (n=183); e, predicted zoonotic viral richness given 
maximum research effort; f, ‘missing zoonoses’ or predicted – observed zoonotic viral 
richness (same as included in Fig 3f); g, global host species richness for Rodentia (n=2206); 
h, host species richness for Rodentia in database (n=221); i, Rodentia species with no 
described viruses in literature. Warmer colors (larger values) in panels c and f highlight areas 
predicted to be of greatest value for discovering novel viruses or novel viral zoonoses, 
respectively, in wild rodents. Red/pink colors in panel i highlight areas with poor viral 
surveillance in rodent species to date. Hatched regions represent areas where model 
predictions deviate systematically for the collection of species in that grid cell (see 
Methods).
Olival et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Order-level phylogenies showing residuals from zoonoses model
Subtrees from cytochrome b maximum likelihood phylogeny for 558 mammal species 
(constrained to order-level topology of mammal supertree) for a, bats; b, carnivores; c, even-
toed ungulates; d, rodents; and e, primates. Species included have at least 1 described virus 
association and available genetic data. Wildlife species names and terminal branches are 
color-coded by the residuals (predicted-observed) from the best-fit generalized additive 
model (GAM) to predict the number of zoonotic viruses using all data. Species with residual 
values between −1 and 1 (black) are accurately predicted within one virus. Warm colors 
represent species with positive residuals (orange >1 to 3; red >3). Cool colors represent 
species with negative residuals (green <−1 to −3; blue <−3). Marine mammals, domestic 
animals, and species with missing data and not included in the best-fit models are shown in 
grey.
Olival et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Table 1
Summary of best-fit generalized additive models 
(GAMs) for total and zoonotic viral richness per wild 
mammal species, and probability of a virus being 
zoonotic
Models were selected separately using the entire dataset and a ‘stringent’ dataset that 
excluded host-virus associations detected by serology. Variables are sorted by relative 
percent deviance explained with in each model.
Term
Value
Z
statistic
Chi-sq
statistic
P-value
Effective
Degrees of
Freedom
Total Dev.
Explained
Relative
Dev.
Explained
Total Viral Richness Model (all data, n=576 
species)
49.2%
  Intercept
0.52
7.43
<0.001
  Disease-related publications (log)
1846.57
<0.001
5.55
64.8%
  Mammal sympatry (>20% range 
overlap)
301.38
<0.001
5.16
10.1%
  Order CHIROPTERA
155.12
<0.001
1
9.9%
  Order RODENTIA
95.49
<0.001
1
4.8%
  Order PRIMATES
34.4
<0.001
0.94
2.5%
  Phylogenetically-corrected body mass
216.42
0.009
3.82
1.9%
  Order CETARTIODACTYLA
24.37
<0.001
0.94
1.8%
  Geographic range (log)
18.93
0.025
3.58
1.6%
  Order PERISSODACTYLA
9.95
0.001
1
1.4%
  Order EULIPOTYPHLA
5.87
0.009
0.85
1.1%
Total Viral Richness Model (stringent data, 
n=575 species)
35.8%
  Intercept
−0.47
−5.31
<0.001
  Disease-related publications (log)
923.02
<0.001
4.98
53.6%
  Order RODENTIA
129.28
<0.001
0.98
12.6%
  Order CHIROPTERA
109.23
<0.001
1
12.2%
  Order PRIMATES
85.12
<0.001
1
11.8%
  Mammal sympatry (>20% range 
overlap)
44.96
<0.001
4.69
3.9%
  Phylogenetically-corrected body mass
9.65
0.036
3.51
2.8%
  Geographic range (log)
11.14
0.079
2.66
1.5%
  Order CINGULATA
0.87
0.286
0.76
0.6%
  Order EULIPOTYPHLA
1.21
0.151
0.59
0.4%
  Order PERAMELEMORPHIA
0.74
0.307
0.7
0.4%
  Order SCANDENTIA
0.94
0.13
0.41
0.3%
Proportion Zoonoses Model (all data, n=584 
species)
82.0% (number of 
zoonoses) 33.0% 
(proportion, w/offset)
  Intercept
−0.34
−8.57
<0.001
  Order CETARTIODACTYLA
27
<0.001
0.88
36.3%
Olival et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Term
Value
Z
statistic
Chi-sq
statistic
P-value
Effective
Degrees of
Freedom
Total Dev.
Explained
Relative
Dev.
Explained
  Phylog. dist. from humans (log, cytb 
tree)
12.7
0.002
1.88
17.0%
  Urban to rural human population ratio 
in species range (log)
10.01
0.002
1.25
13.0%
  Disease-related publications (log)
5.81
0.017
1.2
7.7%
  Order CHIROPTERA
4.43
0.015
0.71
6.5%
  Order PERISSODACTYLA
3.28
0.039
0.76
6.4%
  Order SCANDENTIA
0.81
0.311
0.79
5.3%
  Order PERAMELEMORPHIA
0.76
0.323
0.78
4.8%
  Order DIPROTODONTIA
0.72
0.194
0.43
1.7%
  Hunted species, IUCN
0.75
0.167
0.36
1.3%
Proportion Zoonoses Model (stringent data, n=576 
species)
23.6%
  Intercept
−1.35
−22.66
<0.001
  Phylog. dist. from humans (log, cytb 
tree)
56.13
<0.001
2.36
34.5%
  Order CETARTIODACTYLA
22.93
<0.001
0.94
28.0%
  Urban to rural human population ratio 
change, 1970–2005
16.88
0.002
4.05
19.6%
  Order PERISSODACTYLA
0.86
0.308
0.83
5.0%
  Change in human population density 
in range, 1970–2005
3.16
0.132
1.47
4.3%
  Disease-related publications (log)
5.03
0.014
1.21
3.8%
  Order DIPROTODONTIA
2.39
0.066
0.71
2.8%
  Phylogenetically-corrected body mass
0.12
0.294
0.12
1.1%
  Order LAGOMORPHA
0.7
0.196
0.42
0.9%
  Order PRIMATES
0.62
0.097
0.28
0.1%
Viral Traits Model (all data, n=464 
viruses)
27.2%
  Intercept
−1.59
−5.69
<0.001
  Max phylogenetic host breadth w/out 
humans, (log, cytb tree)
44.91
<0.001
2.94
45.6%
  Number of publications (log)
35.83
<0.001
3.28
37.4%
  Cytoplasmic replication
10.96
<0.001
0.86
9.2%
  Vector-borne
4.9
0.014
0.75
4.6%
  Envelope
0.88
0.166
0.46
2.3%
  Average genome length (log)
0.12
0.266
0.09
0.9%
Viral Traits Model (stringent data, n=408 
viruses)
21.1%
  Intercept
−2.23
−7.51
<0.001
  Number of publications (log)
29.51
<0.001
2.64
53.1%
  Max phylogenetic host breadth w/out 
humans, (log, cytb tree)
15.75
<0.001
2.53
25.5%
  Cytoplasmic replication
10.33
0.001
0.88
17.5%
  Vector-borne
1.87
0.085
0.6
3.9%
Olival et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Emerging 
Pandemic Threats PREDICT program; and NIH NIAID awards R01AI079231 and R01AI110964. The authors 
thank C.N. Basaraba, J. Baxter, L. Brierley, E.A. Hagan, J. Levinson, E.H. Loh, L. Mendiola, N. Wale, and A.R. 
Willoughby for assistance with data collection, and B.M. Bolker, A.R. Ives, K.E. Jones, C.K. Johnson, A.M. 
Kilpatrick, J.A.K. Mazet, and M.E.J. Woolhouse for comments.
References
1. Woolhouse MEJ, Gowtage-Sequeria S. Host range and emerging and reemerging pathogens. Emerg. 
Infect. Dis. 2005; 11:1842–1847. [PubMed: 16485468] 
2. Jones KE, et al. Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature. 2008; 451:990–993. DOI: 
10.1038/nature06536 [PubMed: 18288193] 
3. Taylor LH, Latham SM, Woolhouse MEJ. Risk factors for human disease emergence. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences. 2001; 356:983–989.
4. Morse SS, et al. Prediction and prevention of the next pandemic zoonosis. Lancet. 2012; 380:1956–
1965. [PubMed: 23200504] 
5. Parrish CR, et al. Cross-species virus transmission and the emergence of new epidemic diseases. 
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews. 2008; 72:457–470. DOI: 10.1128/mmbr.00004-08 
[PubMed: 18772285] 
6. Lipsitch M, et al. Viral factors in influenza pandemic risk assessment. eLife. 2016; 5:e18491. 
[PubMed: 27834632] 
7. Pulliam JRC, Dushoff J. Ability to Replicate in the Cytoplasm Predicts Zoonotic Transmission of 
Livestock Viruses. Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2009; 199:565–568. DOI: 10.1086/596510 
[PubMed: 19281304] 
8. Woolhouse ME, Haydon DT, Antia R. Emerging pathogens: the epidemiology and evolution of 
species jumps. Trends in ecology & evolution. 2005; 20:238–244. DOI: 10.1016/j.tree.2005.02.009 
[PubMed: 16701375] 
9. Cooper N, Griffin R, Franz M, Omotayo M, Nunn CL. Phylogenetic host specificity and 
understanding parasite sharing in primates. Ecology Letters. 2012; 15:1370–1377. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1461-0248.2012.01858.x [PubMed: 22913776] 
10. Davies TJ, Pedersen AB. Phylogeny and geography predict pathogen community similarity in wild 
primates and humans. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences. 2008; 275:1695–
1701. DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2008.0284
11. Gomez JM, Nunn CL, Verdu M. Centrality in primate-parasite networks reveals the potential for 
the transmission of emerging infectious diseases to humans. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2013; 110:7738–7741. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1220716110 [PubMed: 23610389] 
12. Luis AD, et al. A comparison of bats and rodents as reservoirs of zoonotic viruses: are bats special? 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences. 2013; 280
13. Brierley L, Vonhof MJ, Olival KJ, Daszak P, Jones KE. Quantifying Global Drivers of Zoonotic 
Bat Viruses: A Process-Based Perspective. The American Naturalist. 2016; 187:E53–E64. DOI: 
10.1086/684391
14. Streicker DG, et al. Host Phylogeny Constrains Cross-Species Emergence and Establishment of 
Rabies Virus in Bats. Science. 2010; 329:676–679. DOI: 10.1126/science.1188836 [PubMed: 
20689015] 
15. Han BA, Schmidt JP, Bowden SE, Drake JM. Rodent reservoirs of future zoonotic diseases. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2015; 112:7039–7044. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1501598112
Olival et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Fauquet, C., Mayo, MA., Maniloff, J., Desselberger, U., Ball, LA. Virus taxonomy: Eighth Report 
of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. Elsevier Academic Press; 2005. 
17. Dunn RR, Davies TJ, Harris NC, Gavin MC. Global drivers of human pathogen richness and 
prevalence. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences. 2010; 277:2587–2595. DOI: 
10.1098/rspb.2010.0340
18. Levinson J, et al. Targeting surveillance for zoonotic virus discovery. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2013; 
19:743–747. DOI: 10.3201/eid1905.121042 [PubMed: 23647732] 
19. Morse, SS. Emerging Viruses. Morse, SS., editor. Oxford University Press; 1993. p. 10-28.
20. Zhou P, et al. Contraction of the type I IFN locus and unusual constitutive expression of IFN-alpha 
in bats. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2016; 
113:2696–2701. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1518240113 [PubMed: 26903655] 
21. Parker IM, et al. Phylogenetic structure and host abundance drive disease pressure in communities. 
Nature. 2015; 520:542–544. DOI: 10.1038/nature14372 [PubMed: 25903634] 
22. Longdon B, Brockhurst MA, Russell CA, Welch JJ, Jiggins FM. The evolution and genetics of 
virus host shifts. PLoS Pathogens. 2014; 10:e1004395. [PubMed: 25375777] 
23. Ge X-Y, et al. Isolation and characterization of a bat SARS-like coronavirus that uses the ACE2 
receptor. Nature. 2013; 503:535–538. DOI: 10.1038/nature12711 [PubMed: 24172901] 
24. Organtini LJ, Allison AB, Lukk T, Parrish CR, Hafenstein S. Global displacement of canine 
parvovirus by a host-adapted variant: A structural comparison between pandemic viruses with 
distinct host ranges. Journal of virology. 2014
25. Anthony SJ, et al. A strategy to estimate unknown viral diversity in mammals. mBio. 2013; 4
26. Drexler JF, et al. Bats host major mammalian paramyxoviruses. Nat Commun. 2012; 3:796. 
[PubMed: 22531181] 
27. Carroll D, et al. The Global Virome Project. Science. (In Review). 
28. Geoghegan JL, Senior AM, Di Giallonardo F, Holmes EC. Virological factors that increase the 
transmissibility of emerging human viruses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America. 2016
29. Fritz SA, Bininda-Emonds ORP, Purvis A. Geographical variation in predictors of mammalian 
extinction risk: big is bad, but only in the tropics. Ecology Letters. 2009; 12:538–549. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1461-0248.2009.01307.x [PubMed: 19392714] 
30. Nunn CL, Altizer SM. The global mammal parasite database: An online resource for infectious 
disease records in wild primates. Evolutionary Anthropology. 2005; 14:1–2. DOI: 10.1002/evan.
20041
31. Olival, KJ., Epstein, JH., Wang, LF., Field, HE., Daszak, P. New Directions in Conservation 
Medicine: Applied Cases of Ecological Health. Aguirre, AA.Ostfeld, RS., Daszak, P., editors. Vol. 
Ch. 14. Oxford University Press; 2012. p. 195-212.
32. Calisher CH, Childs JE, Field HE, Holmes KV, Schountz T. Bats: Important reservoir hosts of 
emerging viruses. Clinical Microbiology Reviews. 2006; 19:531–545. [PubMed: 16847084] 
33. Scherf, BD. World Watch List for Domestic Animal Diversity. 3. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations; 2000. 
34. IUCN. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2014.1. 2014. <http://
www.iucnredlist.org>
35. Epstein JH, Price JT. The significant but understudied impact of pathogen transmission from 
humans to animals. The Mount Sinai journal of medicine, New York. 2009; 76:448–455. DOI: 
10.1002/msj.20140
36. Messenger AM, Barnes AN, Gray GC. Reverse Zoonotic Disease Transmission 
(Zooanthroponosis): A Systematic Review of Seldom-Documented Human Biological Threats to 
Animals. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e89055. [PubMed: 24586500] 
37. Jones KE, et al. PanTHERIA: a species-level database of life history, ecology, and geography of 
extant and recently extinct mammals. Ecology (Washington DC). 2009; 90:2648–2648. DOI: 
10.1890/08-1494.1
Olival et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 38. de Magalhaes JP, Costa J. A database of vertebrate longevity records and their relation to other life-
history traits. Journal of Evolutionary Biology. 2009; 22:1770–1774. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1420-9101.2009.01783.x [PubMed: 19522730] 
39. Cooper N, Kamilar JM, Nunn CL. Host Longevity and Parasite Species Richness in Mammals. 
Plos One. 2012; 7
40. Felsenstein J. Phylogenies and the Comparative Method. The American Naturalist. 1985; 125:1–
15. DOI: 10.1086/284325
41. Blomberg SP, Garland T, Ives AR. Testing for phylogenetic signal in comparative data: behavioral 
traits are more labile. Evolution. 2003; 57:717–745. DOI: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2003.tb00285.x 
[PubMed: 12778543] 
42. Grafen A. The Phylogenetic Regression. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London B: Biological Sciences. 1989; 326:119–157. DOI: 10.1098/rstb.1989.0106 [PubMed: 
2575770] 
43. Diniz-Filho JAF, et al. On the selection of phylogenetic eigenvectors for ecological analyses. 
Ecography. 2012; 35:239–249. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0587.2011.06949.x
44. Diniz-Filho JAF, de Sant'Ana CER, Bini LM. An Eigenvector Method for Estimating Phylogenetic 
Inertia. Evolution. 1998; 52:1247–1262. DOI: 10.2307/2411294 [PubMed: 28565378] 
45. Bininda-Emonds ORP, et al. The delayed rise of present-day mammals. Nature. 2007; 446:507–
512. DOI: 10.1038/nature05634 [PubMed: 17392779] 
46. Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K. APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and Evolution in R language. 
Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:289–290. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg412 [PubMed: 14734327] 
47. Edgar RC. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput. 
Nucleic acids research. 2004; 32:1792–1797. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh340 [PubMed: 15034147] 
48. Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J. A rapid bootstrap algorithm for the RAxML web-servers. 
Systematic Biology. 2008; 75:758–771.
49. Cuthill JH, Charleston MA. A simple model explains the dynamics of preferential host switching 
among mammal RNA viruses. Evolution. 2013; 67:980–990. DOI: 10.1111/evo.12064 [PubMed: 
23550750] 
50. Poulin R, Krasnov BR, Mouillot D. Host specificity in phylogenetic and geographic space. Trends 
in Parasitology. 2011; 27:355–361. DOI: 10.1016/j.pt.2011.05.003 [PubMed: 21680245] 
51. Poulin R, Mouillot D. Parasite specialization from a phylogenetic perspective: a new index of host 
specificity. Parasitology. 2003; 126:473–480. DOI: 10.1017/s0031182003002993 [PubMed: 
12793652] 
52. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 
Vienna, Austria: 2015. 
53. Marra G, Wood SN. Practical variable selection for generalized additive models. Computational 
Statistics & Data Analysis. 2011; 55:2372–2387. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2011.02.004. 
54. Pawitan, Y. In all likelihood: statistical modelling and inference using likelihood. Oxford 
University Press; 2001. 
55. Holt BG, et al. An Update of Wallace’s Zoogeographic Regions of the World. Science. 2013; 
339:74–78. DOI: 10.1126/science.1228282 [PubMed: 23258408] 
56. QGIS Geographic Information System. Open Source Geospatial Foundation Project. 2016. http://
www.qgis.org/
57. Goldewijk KK, Beusen A, van Drecht G, de Vos M. The HYDE 3.1 spatially explicit database of 
human-induced global land-use change over the past 12,000 years. Global Ecology and 
Biogeography. 2011; 20:73–86. DOI: 10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00587.x
58. raster: Geographic Data Analysis and Modeling v. version 2.3–40. 2015
59. sp: Classes and Methods for Spatial Data v. R package version 1.2–1. 2015
Olival et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Observed viral richness in mammals
Boxplots of a, Proportion of zoonotic viruses, and b, total viral richness per species, 
aggregated by order. Data points represent wild (light grey, n=721) and domestic (dark red, 
n=32) mammal species; lines represent median, boxes interquartile range. Animal 
silhouettes from PhyloPic. Data based on 2805 host-virus associations.
Olival et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Host traits that predict total viral richness (top row) and proportion of zoonotic viruses 
(bottom row) per wild mammal species
Partial effect plots show the relative effect of each variable included in the best-fit 
Generalized Additive Model, given the effect of the other variables. Shaded circles represent 
partial residuals; shaded areas, 95% confidence intervals around mean partial effect. a–e, 
Best model for total viral richness includes: a, number of disease-related citations per host 
species (research effort, log); b, Phylogenetic Eigenvector Regression (PVR) of body mass 
(log); c, geographic range area of each species (log km2); d, number of sympatric mammal 
species overlapping with at least 20% area of target species range; and e, mammalian orders. 
f–i, Best model for proportion of zoonoses includes: f, research effort, log; g, phylogenetic 
distance from humans (cytochrome b tree constrained to the topology of the mammal 
supertree29); h, ratio of urban to rural human population within species range; and i, three 
mammalian orders. Bats are the only order with a significantly larger proportion of zoonotic 
viruses than would be predicted by the other variables in the all-data model. Three additional 
mammalian orders, and whether or not a species is hunted, improved the overall predictive 
power of the best zoonotic virus model but were non-significant, and are not shown (see 
Extended Data Table 1).
Olival et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Global distribution of the predicted number of ‘missing zoonoses’ by order
Warmer colors highlight areas predicted to be of greatest value for discovering novel 
zoonotic viruses. a, All wild mammals (n=584 spp. included in the best-fit model). b, 
Carnivores (Order Carnivora, n=55). c, Even-toed ungulates (Order Cetartiodactyla, n=70). 
d, bats (Order Chiroptera, n=157). e, Primates (Order Primates, n=73). f, Rodents (Order 
Rodentia, n=183). Hatched regions represent areas where model predictions deviate 
systematically for the assemblage of species in that grid cell (approximately 18 km × 18 km, 
see Methods). Animal silhouettes from PhyloPic.
Olival et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Traits that predict zoonotic potential of a virus
a, Boxplot of maximum phylogenetic host breadth per virus (PHB, see methods) for each of 
586 mammalian viruses, aggregated by 28 viral families. Individual points represent viral 
species, color-coded by zoonotic status. Boxplots colored and sorted by the proportion of 
zoonoses in each viral family. b–d, Partial effect plots for the best-fit Generalized Additive 
Model to predict a virus’ zoonotic potential. b, Maximum PHB. Viruses that infect more 
phylogenetically diverse hosts are more likely to be zoonotic. c, Research effort (log, 
number of PubMed citations per viral species). d, Whether or not a virus replicates in the 
cytoplasm or is vector-borne. Viral genome length and whether or not a virus is enveloped 
Olival et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 improved the overall predictive power but were non-significant, and are not shown (see 
Extended Data Table 1).
Olival et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
