 Journal of Parasitology
Journal of Parasitology
 
ANTI-TOXOPLASMA ACTIVITY OF ESTRAGOLE AND THYMOL IN MURINE
ANTI-TOXOPLASMA ACTIVITY OF ESTRAGOLE AND THYMOL IN MURINE
MODELS OF CONGENITAL AND NON-CONGENITAL TOXOPLASMOSIS
MODELS OF CONGENITAL AND NON-CONGENITAL TOXOPLASMOSIS
--Manuscript Draft--
 
Manuscript Number:
Manuscript Number:
15-848R2
Full Title:
Full Title:
ANTI-TOXOPLASMA ACTIVITY OF ESTRAGOLE AND THYMOL IN MURINE
MODELS OF CONGENITAL AND NON-CONGENITAL TOXOPLASMOSIS
Short Title:
Short Title:
ESTRAGOLE AND THYMOL ANTI-TOXOPLASMA ACTIVITY
Article Type:
Article Type:
Regular Article
Corresponding Author:
Corresponding Author:
Valter Ferreira Andrade-Neto, PhD
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte
Natal, Rio Grande do Norte BRAZIL
Corresponding Author Secondary
Corresponding Author Secondary
Information:
Information:
Corresponding Author's Institution:
Corresponding Author's Institution:
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte
Corresponding Author's Secondary
Corresponding Author's Secondary
Institution:
Institution:
First Author:
First Author:
Cláudio B Silva Oliveira, Master
First Author Secondary Information:
First Author Secondary Information:
Order of Authors:
Order of Authors:
Cláudio B Silva Oliveira, Master
Ywlliane S R Meurer, Master
Thales L Medeiros, Master
Adrian M Pohlit, PhD
Murilo V Silva
Tiago W P Mineo
Valter Ferreira Andrade-Neto, PhD
Order of Authors Secondary Information:
Order of Authors Secondary Information:
Abstract:
Abstract:
Toxoplasmosis is caused by Toxoplasma gondii an obligatory intracellular protozoan.
Normally benign, T. gondii infections can cause devastating disease in
immunosuppressed patients and through congenital infection of newborn babies. Few
prophylactic and therapeutic drugs are available to treat these infections. The goal of
the present study was to assess the anti-Toxoplasma effects in a congenital and non-
congenital model of toxoplasmosis (using ME49 strain), besides assessing
immunological changes, in vitro cytotoxicity and in vivo acute toxicity of commercial
estragole and thymol. The congenital experimental model was used with intermediate
stages of maternal infection. The serum levels of IgM, IgG, IL-10, IL-12 and IFN-γ were
quantified from infected and treated C57Bl/6 mice. Estragole and thymol respectively
exhibited low-to-moderate in vivo toxicity and cytotoxicity. Animals treated with estragol
showed high IFN-γ and strong Th1 response. Both compounds were active against T.
gondii ME49 strain. Furthermore, orally administered estragole in infected pregnant
mice improved the weight of offspring compared to untreated controls. Subcutaneous
administration of both compounds also increased the weight of mouse offspring born to
infected mothers compared to untreated controls. Estragole and thymol display
important anti-Toxoplasma activity. Further studies are needed to elucidate the
mechanism of action of these compounds.
Powered by Editorial Manager® and ProduXion Manager® from Aries Systems Corporation
  
 
1 
 
RH: OLIVEIRA ET AL. - ANTI-TOXOPLASMA ACTIVITY 
ANTI-TOXOPLASMA ACTIVITY OF ESTRAGOLE AND THYMOL IN MURINE 
MODELS OF CONGENITAL AND NON-CONGENITAL TOXOPLASMOSIS  
Claudio B. S. Oliveira*, Ywlliane S. R. Meurer*†, Thales L. Medeiros*, Adrian M. 
Pohlit‡, Murilo V. Silva§, Tiago W. P. Mineo§, and Valter F. Andrade-Neto* 
 *Laboratory of Malaria and Toxoplasmosis Biology/LABMAT, Department of 
Microbiology and Parasitology, Bioscience Center, Federal University of Rio Grande 
do Norte, Av. Salgado Filho, s/n, Lagoa Nova, Natal/RN, CEP 59000-000, Brazil.  
Correspondence should be sent to: aneto@cb.ufrn.br. 
ABSTRACT: Toxoplasmosis is caused by Toxoplasma gondii an obligatory 
intracellular protozoan. Normally benign, T. gondii infections can cause devastating 
disease in immunosuppressed patients and through congenital infection of newborn 
babies. Few prophylactic and therapeutic drugs are available to treat these 
infections. The goal of the present study was to assess the anti-Toxoplasma effects 
in a congenital and non-congenital model of toxoplasmosis (using ME49 strain), 
besides assessing immunological changes, in vitro cytotoxicity and in vivo acute 
toxicity of commercial estragole and thymol. The congenital experimental model was 
used with intermediate stages of maternal infection. The serum levels of IgM, IgG, IL-
10, IL-12 and IFN-γ were quantified from infected and treated C57Bl/6 mice. 
Estragole and thymol respectively exhibited low-to-moderate in vivo toxicity and 
cytotoxicity. Animals treated with estragol showed high IFN-γ and strong Th1 
response. Both compounds were active against T. gondii ME49 strain. Furthermore, 
orally administered estragole in infected pregnant mice improved the weight of 
offspring compared to untreated controls. Subcutaneous administration of both 
compounds also increased the weight of mouse offspring born to infected mothers 
Manuscript
Click here to download Manuscript 15-848R2 AP doc 2-2-
16.doc
  
 
2 
 
compared to untreated controls. Estragole and thymol display important anti-
Toxoplasma activity. Further studies are needed to elucidate the mechanism of 
action of these compounds. 
 
Toxoplasma gondii is a widespread intracellular protozoan parasite capable of 
infecting virtually any nucleated cells of warm-blooded hosts including humans 
(Schultz et al., 2014). As an opportunistic human pathogen, T. gondii causes a 
devastating disease in immunocompromised individuals, especially HIV/AIDS 
patients and congenitally infected neonates (Montoya and Liesenfeld, 2004). In the 
United States, its prevalence has been estimated to be 15.8% among people of 12-
49 yr of age (Jones et al., 2007). Most infected newborns have no symptoms at birth, 
but serious clinical manifestations can develop during childhood and early adulthood 
(Robert-Gangneux and Darde, 2012). Infection can occur congenitally or be acquired 
orally through contamination of food with oocysts released from cat feces and tissue 
cysts present in raw and undercooked meat. Finally, it can also be transmitted via 
the placenta, when acute maternal infection occurs during pregnancy (Değerli et al., 
2003; Carruthers and Suzuki, 2007). The risk of transmission during pregnancy is 
mostly restricted to new infections. The parasite reaches the fetus via the placenta, 
causing varying degrees of damage (Sonda and Hehl, 2006). When maternal 
infection occurs in the first trimester of pregnancy, the occurrence of vertical 
transmission is less probable than in the third quarter, but the severity of the disease 
in newborns is greater (Dubey and Jones, 2008; Costa-Silva and Pereira-Chioccola, 
2010). 
Even with extensive research into the biology and physiology of T. gondii 
antifolate combination therapy (e.g., pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine) is the first line 
of treatment and is poorly tolerated or causes several allergic reactions (Kaye, 
  
 
3 
 
2011). These limitations, combined with the fascinating properties of coccidian 
parasites (Cardoso et al., 2014), have accelerated interest in investigating the 
mechanisms governing the infection biology of these pathogens and making 
prospecting for new drug targets a critical goal (Kaye, 2011).  
Among the species used in traditional medicine in the northeastern region of 
Brazil are Croton zehntneri Pax and K. Hoffm. and Lippia sidoides Cham., popularly 
known as “canelinha” and “alecrim-pimenta”, respectively. These species have 
shown antibacterial action and against promastigotes and amastigotes of 
Leishmania amazonensis (Costa et al., 2008; Medeiros et al., 2011). The volatile oils 
(VOs) of these plants also exhibits antimalarial activity against Plasmodium berghei 
in mice and Plasmodium falciparum in vitro (Mota et al., 2012). These, parasites 
belong to the phylum Apicomplexa as do Toxoplasma spp. The main components of 
the VOs from Lippia sidoides and Croton zehntneri are, respectively, thymol and 
estragole that have in vitro antiplasmodial activity; however, anti-Toxoplasma activity 
has not been reported for these compounds. The aim of the present research is to 
investigate the anti-Toxoplasma activity in a congenital and non-congenital model of 
toxoplasmosis, using ME49 strain, besides assessing immunological changes, in 
vitro cytotoxicity and in vivo acute toxicity of commercial estragole and Thymol.  
This work is important for providing new treatment options for a disease with 
limited options and recognized toxicity. These molecules may eventually be 
incorporated in the therapeutic regimen of toxoplasmosis in the general population 
and in pregnant women, which appear as 1 important risk group due to the chance of 
miscarriages and birth defects. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Phytochemicals  
  
 
4 
 
Estragole and thymol were provided by Kaapi (São Paulo State, Brazil). Their 
identity and >99.9% purity were ascertained as previously described (Mota et al., 
2012). 
Animals  
Female C57BL/6 strain and outbred Swiss Webster mice (6-8 wk old and 20-
25 g weight) were used for toxicity and antiprotozoal assays.  Mice were housed with 
drinking water and regular mouse feed ad libitum. The number of experimental mice 
for each procedure was calculated based on previous studies (see below) (Oliveira 
et al., 2014). The animals were observed daily for mortality and morbidity. Surviving 
animals were euthanized for the quantification of the parasite burden in brain tissues.  
Cytotoxicity assay 
For the cytotoxicity assay, the method used was adapted from a previously 
described procedure (Oliveira et al., 2014). Established cell lines selected for in vitro 
analysis were human hepatoma cells (HepG2, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri), 
human cervical carcinoma cells (HeLa, Sigma-Aldrich) and peritoneal murine 
macrophages obtained from mice (Mus musculus).  Cells were seeded in 96-well flat 
bottom tissue culture plates in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM; GIBCO 
Inc., Grand Island, New York) supplemented with 40 mg/L of gentamicin and 10% 
fetal bovine serum (FBS; GIBCO Inc.). The cells were incubated in an atmosphere of 
5% CO2 at 37 C and were sub-cultured every 7 days.  
Estragole was dissolved (1.0%) in DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich) while thymol was 
dissolved in distilled water. The resulting solutions were serially diluted with fresh 
DMEM. Then, the dilute sample solutions were applied at final concentrations of 
78.3-5,000 µg/mL (7.83-500 µg/mL to peritoneal murine macrophages) to wells each 
containing 1×104 cells in 96-well microplates. The plates were incubated in a final 
  
 
5 
 
volume of 200.0 µL at 37 C for 24 hr. Control cells were incubated in the presence of 
1% DMSO in drug-free medium. The viability of the cells was determined with the 3-
(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) 
assay (Oliveira et al., 2014). Briefly, MTT (0.5 mg/mL) was dissolved in phosphate 
buffered saline (PBS) and filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane and then 100 
µL/well was added to a 96-well plate and incubated at 37 C for 3 hr. Formazan 
extraction was performed with DMSO (200 µL/well) at 25 C and absorbance was 
read at 570 nm on a UV-Vis spectrophotometer. 
Toxicity tests 
The acute toxicity assay was performed prior to the study in the congenital 
toxoplasmosis model. Compounds were oral (v.o.) administered with a single dose of 
the compounds (doses of 19.5 to 5,000 mg/kg [n = 6 animals]) or vehicle (DMSO 1% 
for the estragole or just distilled water to the thymol). Mice were monitored daily for 
symptoms of suffering and the survival and cumulative mortality during 30 days. 
Mice with apparent presence of clinical of pain (vocalization, guarding affected body 
parts, or self-mutilation) or signs indicative of death before the planned end of the 
experiment; for example: inability to reach water or food or when moribund state or 
death is expected prior to the next planned time of observation, for example: mice 
present convulsions, recumbency, or tremor, these were anesthetized with ketamine 
hydrochloride (Ketamina®, Agener União, União Química, São Paulo State, Brazil) 
and xylazine (Calmium®, Agener União) by intraperitoneally and after humanely 
killed by cervical dislocation. Surviving animals after 30 days were also anesthetized 
and then euthanized as described above. 
Anti-Toxoplasma activity in vivo of the compounds 
  
 
6 
 
ME49 strain of T. gondii was used. The mildly virulent ME49 strain of T. gondii 
(genotype II) was obtained from the brains of chronically infected Swiss Webster 
mice. Cysts were quantified in brain suspensions, and after standard dilution, each 
mouse was infected with cysts by gavage. For treatments, 200 µL of thymol, 
estragole or vehicle were dissolved as described below and administered by oral 
(v.o.) or subcutaneous (s.c.) routes. 
The effects of each compound were explored in ME49 strain-infected mice by 
gavage and s.c. administration. Mice were infected (n = 5) by gavage with 25 cysts. 
After 24 hr, treatments with a daily dose of estragole (100 mg/kg) or thymol (80 
mg/kg) or sulfadiazine (S group, 200 mg/kg) were performed for 6 days (Oliveira et 
al., 2014). The concentrations of the compounds were selected based on use by 
Mota et al. (2012) which were effective against the Plasmodium spp. Negative 
control groups were treated with saline solution. Mice mortality was monitored daily 
for 30 days or until all animals were dead or presenting clinical signs of pain or 
distress as described above. At the end of the observation period and in cases of 
pain or suffering, the animals were humanely euthanized as described above. 
Surviving animals were euthanized, and their brains removed and homogenized in 
PBS to search for tissue cysts. 
Congenital infection in vivo and offspring analysis 
Infection during pregnancy was used as a model of congenital infection. Virgin 
females Swiss Webster (n = 3) were placed with a male in a breeding box. The first 
day of pregnancy was identified by the presence of a vaginal plug or sperm in the 
vaginal smear of the female. After mating, the females were separated and 10 days 
post coitum females were orally infected (Costa et al., 2009) with ten ME49 strain 
cysts as previously described (Hermes et al., 2008). Starting 24 hr post infection, 
  
 
7 
 
pregnant females were orally (Epo) or subcutaneously (Esc) treated with estragole 
(100 mg/kg/day) or subcutaneously (Tsc) or orally (Tpo) treated with thymol (80 
mg/kg/day) for 6 consecutive days. Infected, non-treated pregnant females (I/NT) 
and non-infected, non-treated pregnant females (NI/NT) were used as control groups 
and receiving just the vehicle of the compounds. Females were separated before 
giving birth to offspring to avoid cross-fostering (i.e., each female provided alone for 
its offspring). The number of live pups was recorded, and these were monitored for 
30 days. The pups were weighed on the 1st and 30th day after birth. 
Cytokine measurements 
For cytokine measurements, 4 female C57BL/6 mice were infected or not and 
distributed in groups (n = 4/cage) according to the following treatment schemes: non-
infected and untreated (NI/NT); infected and untreated (I/NT); infected and treated 
with thymol, 80 mg/kg (I/T); infected and treated with estragole, 100 mg/kg (I/E) and 
infected and treated with sulfadiazine, 200 mg/kg (I/S). 
 
Interleukin (IL-12 and IL-10) levels in serum samples were quantified by the 
so-called sandwich enzyme-linked immuno-sorbent assay (ELISA) performed using 
the manufacturer’s instructions (BD Biosciences, San Jose, California) and 
comparison to a standard curve built with the respective recombinant murine 
cytokine. The cytokine detection limit was 15.6 pg/mL in both assays. A BDTM mouse 
Th1/Th2 cytokine cytometric bead array (CBA) kit (BD Biosciences) was used to 
quantitate interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) in serum previously obtained from C57BL/6 
strain mice using the manufacturer’s instructions. 
C57BL/6 strain mice were infected with 10 cysts. After 24 hr, infected mice 
were treated per gavage with a daily dose of estragole (100 mg/kg) or thymol (80 
mg/kg) during 6 consecutive days. The animals were observed daily for 60 days. On 
  
 
8 
 
days 7, 14, 28 and 60 post-infection, animals were anesthetized, and blood samples 
were collected from the orbital plexus. After all the punctions, the surviving animals 
were given a lethal dose of the anesthetic ketamin hydrochloride and xylazine. The 
samples were centrifuged, and the supernatant serum was stored for determination 
of cytokine levels and immunoglobulin M and/or G (IgM and/or IgG, respectively) 
antibodies. 
Anti-T. gondii IgM and IgG ELISA  
Serum anti-T. gondii IgG and IgM antibody concentrations were measured by 
ELISA (Alvarado-Esquivel et al., 2011). 96-flat-bottom-well microtiter plates (Greiner 
Bio-One GmbH, Frickenhausen, Germany) with wells containing T. gondii lysate 
antigen (TLA) in 50 mM pH 9.6 sodium carbonate buffer at a final concentration of 1 
μg/mL and volume of 100 µL were incubated overnight at 4 C. The plates were then 
washed 4 times with pH 7.4 PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 (PBS-T).  
The plates were blocked with 200 µL of 2% nonfat powdered milk solution 
(Molico-Nestlé®, São Paulo State, Brazil) for 1 hr at 37 C. Then 1/200 dilutions of 
serum samples in PBS (200 μL/well) were added to wells and incubated for 1 hr at 
37 C. After washing the plates 4 times with PBS-T, 100 μL of rabbit anti-mouse IgG 
or IgM-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (Sigma-Aldrich), diluted 1:10,000 (anti-IgG) or 
1:1,000 (anti-IgM) in PBS, respectively, were added to each well. After 1 hr at 37 C, 
plates were washed 5 times with PBS-T. Thereafter, plates were incubated for 10 
min at room temperature with 50 μL/well of conventional chromogenic substrate 
3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) (Invitrogen-Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, 
Maryland). The reaction was stopped by adding 30 μL/well of 4N H2SO4 and 
absorbance was read at 450 nm. 
Ethics Statement 
  
 
9 
 
This study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in 
the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the Brazilian Sanitary 
Vigilance Council put forward in resolution number 90/2004 and using Guidelines for 
Ethical Conduct in The Care and Use of Animals (CEUA) from the Federal University 
of Rio Grande do Norte (Permit Number: 46/2013). All surgery was performed under 
ketamin hydrochloride plus xylazin anesthesia, and all efforts were made to minimize 
suffering. 
Statistical analysis 
GraphPad 5.0 software was used for graphical design (GraphPad Software, 
La Jolla, California). Quantitative variables were summarized as means and 
standard errors. An intragroup comparison was performed between values before 
and after treatment using a paired t-test. One way ANOVA for multiple comparisons 
was carried out using GraphPad 5.0 software. Differences were considered 
significant when p < 0.05 and highly significant when p < 0.001. 
RESULTS 
Cytotoxicity assay 
The cytotoxicity assay was performed using HepG2 and HeLa cells lines and 
murine peritoneal macrophages to evaluate the effects of thymol and estragole on 
cell viability. Dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth was observed in general for 
both compounds. In general, thymol exhibited greater inhibition than estragole in all 
cell lines. For thymol, IC50 values were 218, 182 and 92.1 µg/mL against HepG2, 
HeLa, and peritoneal macrophages, respectively, and for estragole, these values 
were 2280; 2684 and 267 µg /mL, respectively (Fig. 1).  
In vivo toxicity and anti-Toxoplasma activity  
  
 
10 
 
Estragole and thymol exhibited low or moderate acute toxicity in vivo at single 
doses of up to 5.0 g/kg. Single doses of 0.312 and 1.25 g/kg of thymol and estragole, 
respectively, produced mainly ruffled fur. Death of some mice was observed just at 
single doses of 0.312 and 5.0 g/kg for thymol and estragole (Table I). 
Regarding the survival of mice infected with ME49 strain, the treatments 
showed differences in mortality among S and I/NT or Tpo groups. The Epo, Esc and 
Tsc groups exhibited similar survival when compared to NI/NT groups (Fig. 2). This 
result shows the anti-Toxoplasma activity of the Epo, Esc and Tsc therapeutic 
regimen in maintaining the survival of infected animals.  
Animals treated with thymol and estragole showed a tendency to decrease the 
number of brain cysts when analyzed 30 days after infection (Fig. 3). However, the 
difference was not statistically significant when compared to the I/NT group. The 
infected sulfadiazine treated (I/S) group showed a significant difference when 
compared to all other groups (Fig. 3). All animals exhibit cumulative change in body 
weight in the initial weeks of infection. Mice treated with thymol exhibited variations 
in body weight similar to those observed in the I/S group (Fig. 4) during 30 days post 
infection by the T. gondii ME49 strain.   
Effects of the compounds on congenital toxoplasmosis infection 
The effects of estragole and thymol in the congenital toxoplasmosis model 
were evaluated through analysis of the surviving offspring. All surviving pups were 
weighed on the 1st (Fig. 5A) and 30th day (Fig. 5b.) after birth. Offspring of the 
NI/NT group showed greater body weight than all other groups on day 1. Body 
weight of the offspring from the Esc group (1.51 ± 0.04 g, n = 27) had no statistical 
difference when compared to that of the pups of the Nl/NT group (1.68 ± 0.04 g, n = 
19) and was significantly high compared to that of the pups of the I/NT group (1.31 ± 
  
 
11 
 
0.03 g, n = 31, p <0.01). The body weight of the pups of the Epo (1.44 ± 0.02 g, n = 
14) and Tsc (1.19 ± 0.02 g, n = 14) groups exhibited averages similar to the average 
weight of the offspring of the I/NT group and significantly less than the body weight 
of the offspring of the NI/NT group (Fig. 5A). The females of the I/Tpo group did not 
generate offspring (Fig. 5A). The weight of pups 30 days after birth was significantly 
higher in those born to the Esc (14.9 ± 0.42 g, n = 27, p <0.01) and Tsc (16.86 ± 
0.64 g, n = 9) groups, compared to those born in the I/NT group (12.53 ± 0.55 g, n = 
26), and significantly different compared to pups from NI/NT group (22.86 ± 0.68 g, n 
= 12) (Fig. 5B). 
Cytokine measurements  
Serum of mice from  (is the bold necessary throughout the manuscript for 
these groups) S, Tpo, Epo and I/NT groups were assessed for detection of IL-10 and 
IL-12. Sulfadiazine treated mice (S group) exhibit lowest levels of detectable serum 
cytokines while I/NT mice exhibit a highest production of both cytokines. The Epo 
group demonstrated production of high levels of IL-12 (Fig. 6A), lowest levels of the 
IL-10 (Fig. 6B) and high levels of INF-γ (Fig. 7) thus resulting in a high IL-12/IL-10 
ratio (Fig. 6C). Thymol treatment (Tpo group) induced intermediate levels of IL-10 
and IL-12 in infected mice compared to the I/NT group (Fig. 6).  
Anti-T. gondii IgM and IgG ELISA 
Another perspective on immunological evaluation consisted of measuring the 
production of IgG and IgM antibodies in different infected groups (Tpo, Epo and S 
groups) (Alvarado-Esquivel et al., 2011). After infection, there was a significant 
increase in specific anti-T. gondii IgG in all groups (Fig. 8B). However, mice from the 
S group showed significantly lower IgG levels than those of the I/NT group at 14 and 
30 days after infection. IgM measurements increased between the 1st and 14th day 
  
 
12 
 
after infection in all groups, and remained at similar levels until the 60th day after 
infection (Fig. 8A). Significantly decrease in IgM concentration was observed on the 
14th day in the I/S group compared to the I/NT group. The Tpo group exhibited a 
significant increase in IgM concentration on the 14th day compared to the NI/NT 
group. 
DISCUSSION 
Previous results showed that thymol and estragole exhibit no cytotoxicity (IC50 
≥ 500 µg/mL after 24 hr against HeLa cells and macrophages) (Mota et al., 2012). 
The results of the present study showed that these compounds displayed no 
significant cytotoxicity towards the Hela, HepG2 or peritoneal macrophage cells after 
24 hr. Muller et al. (1994) showed that the estragole was not positive in a 
chromosomal aberration test with V79 cells or after direct treatment with rat liver mix 
or rat hepatocytes as source of metabolism. In this study, estragole was capable of 
inducing DNA repair in primary rat hepatocytes in vitro and in the liver in vivo in the 
UDS test (unscheduled DNA synthesis). Thymol cytotoxicity has been studied by 
Llana-Ruiz-Cabello et al. (2014) that demonstrated that no cytotoxic effects for 
thymol at any concentration and time of exposure. Although occurs ultrastructural 
changes evidenced cellular damage such as lipid degeneration, mitochondrial 
damage, and nuclear fragmentation, but only after to thymol exposure at the highest 
concentration assayed (Llana-Ruiz-Cabello et al., 2014). Thus, knowledge of the 
cytotoxicity provided a basis for further evaluations in animals. 
In vivo acute toxicity assays showed low or moderate toxicity. Estragole was 
found to have little toxicity as observed by Gori et al. (2012). Thus, the data 
presented here provide some rational evidence to support further studies. The 
results suggest that these compounds can be safely used in animal tests. 
  
 
13 
 
Anti-protozoan activity was detected against the ME49 strain, the animal 
survival rate and the cumulative change of body loss demonstrated antiprotozoal 
activity for thymol by the subcutaneous route and estragole by the oral and 
subcutaneous routes. Similarly, in a study on Artemisia annua tea infusions (Oliveira 
et al., 2009), a similar effect was observed when compared to the reference drug, 
sulfadiazine, in reducing morbidity and number of brain cysts. 
The ME49 strain is a good alternative usually to in vivo anti-Toxoplasma 
activity tests (Martins-Duarte et al., 2010). It is a less virulent strain that facilitates the 
chronic phase of infection (Costa-Silva and Pereira-Chioccola, 2010). This allows 
more time to assess different treatment schemes. It is an especially good model 
because it better simulates the course of T. gondii infection in the general human 
population.   
The effect of thymol, isolated from L. sidoides, has been demonstrated 
against the promastigote form of Leishmania amazonensis (Medeiros et al., 2011).  
Antiprotozoal activity also was observed against Trypanosoma cruzi (Santoro et al., 
2007; Escobar et al., 2010a). Previous studies demonstrated anti-Toxoplasma 
activity versus the PRU strain of T. gondii using a phenol-terpenoid (carvacrol) 
compound (Dahbi et al., 2010). However, there are no previously published reports 
regarding the effects of the others monoterpenes, such as thymol, against the ME49 
strain of T. gondii in a murine model. 
 
Estragole showed low toxicity and superior anti-Toxoplasma activity to thymol 
for both routes of administration suggesting that the administration route does not 
interfere in the biological activity. Other authors demonstrated effects of essential oil 
rich in estragole on the inhibition of the growth of the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi 
  
 
14 
 
(Escobar et al., 2010b). However, this is the first report on the biological activity of 
estragole in a murine model of infection with T. gondii. 
These compounds increase the survival of infected animals possibly also due 
to their anti-inflammatory activity that has been the subject of previous reports (Ponte 
et al., 2012; Riella et al., 2012). Thus, estragole may exert a dual effect to extend the 
life of animals. Also, thymol exhibits high antioxidant activity, which could protect the 
protozoans and prevent the action of oxidative stress caused by the host´s cellular 
immune response (McCarthy and Davis, 2003). However, thymol presents intriguing 
anti-Toxoplasma effects perhaps by acting on free radicals arising from tissue 
damage caused by the disease.  
Considering the immunomodulatory effects, cytokine IL-12 regulates nitric 
oxide synthesis through INF-γ (Pifer and Yarovinsky, 2011). In the Toxoplasma-host 
interaction, nitric oxide production is regulated by the partial inhibition of the 
synthesis of nitric oxide synthetase (Seabra et al., 2002). Potentially, cytokine 
modulation is highly important since nitric oxide is a part of the primary effectors in 
the immune system response against T. gondii (Brunet, 2001). 
Previous results obtained by this group demonstrated an immunomodulatory 
effect for estragole (data not shown). This compound induces the production of nitric 
oxide in macrophages. Herein, estragole treatment in infected mice induced high 
levels of Th1 response (higher IL-12 levels and lowest IL-10). This result is in 
agreement with an independent report (Liu et al., 2006). Estragole treated mice also 
had the highest INF-γ rate among the treated groups. This result is relevant 
considering that INF-γ is a fundamental part in organizing a strong Th1 response, 
highly effective against the parasite. This immune response, limit tachyzoite 
replication and drive the generation of specific T-cell responses (Munoz et al., 2011). 
  
 
15 
 
Notoriously, Toxoplasma has an immunomodulatory ability particularly important in 
research involving parasite-host interactions given that. The parasite is capable of 
modulating the immunological response of the host (Carruthers and Suzuki, 2007). 
Thymol and estragole do not reduce the production of antibodies IgM and IgG 
whereas a significant decrease was observed only in the sulfadiazine treatment as 
has been noted by others (Alvarado-Esquivel et al., 2011). Recently, T. gondii-
specific antibody was shown to prevent cellular invasion and to limit systemic 
dissemination of tachyzoites during early acute T. gondii infection. Thus, differents 
antibody classes appear to contribute to a protection against the infection (Munoz et 
al., 2011). Thereby, the alterations in levels of the antibodies in sulfadiazine 
treatment reveal a disadvantage of standard treatment, compared to other proposed 
treatments, especially in congenital toxoplasmosis. A possible explanation for 
sulfadiazine effects is related to the ability to induce hematological damage (Leport 
et al., 1988; Kaye, 2011). 
 
In the present study, the therapeutic efficacy of thymol and estragole 
compounds was performed on the congenital model of infection. In this case, the 
infection was in an intermediate stage of pregnancy. Subcutaneous estragole 
treatment resulted in increased weight in newborns when compared to untreated 
controls or oral estragole treatment. In the 30 days after birth, all animals present a 
significant gain in body weight except for orally administered treatments. These data 
suggest that the estragole treatment outcome decreases the fetal exposure to T. 
gondii or inflammatory damage of toxoplasmosis in offspring, perhaps by decreasing 
intrauterine fetal growth. This scheme of congenital infection demonstrates greater 
efficiency in reproducing what happens to human beings, and the results are similar 
to another study (Wang et al., 2011). The results show that animals treated with the 
  
 
16 
 
estragole improved their weight gain during development compared to the group of 
animals born to infected, untreated progenitor mice. This result deserves attention 
since many of the significant symptoms of congenital toxoplasmosis manifest during 
childhood of infected humans (Dubey and Jones, 2008; Shet, 2011). 
Based on acute toxicity tests, we conclude that thymol and estragole are safe 
for use in animals. These treatments affect the cellular and humoral immune 
response in mice infected with T. gondii and may increase the survival of these 
animals. We also observe an improvement in the living conditions of newborn and 
young pups of infected female mice. Moreover, further investigations are needed to 
evaluate the mechanism by which these compounds alter the parasite-host 
interaction and to assess the influence of these compounds on specific targets of the 
metabolic pathways of T gondii, as a perspective to develop new drugs for the 
treatment of toxoplasmosis.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the Staff of the Laboratory of Genetics/UFRN for technical support. 
We are deeply indebted to Prof. Ricardo Wagner Vítor (ICB/UFMG) by the generous 
donation of Toxoplasma gondii RH and ME49 strains. We are deeply indebted to 
Eduardo Mattoso of Kaapi (Campinas, São Paulo State, Brazil) by the generous 
donation of phytochemicals used in this study. 
LITERATURE CITED 
Alvarado-Esquivel, C., A. Niewiadomski, B. Schweickert, and O. Liesenfeld. 2011. 
Antiparasitic treatment suppresses production and avidity of Toxoplasma gondii-
specific antibodies in a murine model of acute infection. European Journal of 
Microbiology and Immunology 1: 249-255. 
  
 
17 
 
Brunet, 
L. 
R. 
2001. 
Nitric 
oxide 
in 
parasitic 
infections. 
International 
Immunopharmacology 1: 1457-1467. 
Cardoso, R., S. Nolasco, J. Goncalves, H. C. Cortes, A. Leitao, and H. Soares. 
2014. Besnoitia besnoiti and Toxoplasma gondii: Two apicomplexan strategies to 
manipulate the host cell centrosome and Golgi apparatus. Parasitology 141: 1436-
1454. 
Carruthers, V. B., and Y. Suzuki. 2007. Effects of Toxoplasma gondii infection on the 
brain. Schizophrenia Bulletin 33: 745-751. 
Costa, I. N., M. B. Angeloni, L. A. Santana, B. F. Barbosa, M. C. P. Silva, A. A. 
Rodrigues, C. Rostkowsa, P. M. Magalhães, J. D O. Pena, D. A. O. Silva, et al. 
2009. Azithromycin inhibits vertical transmission of Toxoplasma gondii in Calomys 
callosus (Rodentia: Cricetidae). Placenta 30: 884-890. 
Costa, J. G. M., F. F. G. Rodrigues, E. C. Angélico, C. K. B. Pereira, E. O. Souza, G. 
F. R. Caldas, M. R. Silva, N. K. A. Santos, M. L. Mota, and P. F. Santos. 2008. 
Composição química e avaliação da atividade antibacteriana e toxicidade do óleo 
essencial de Croton zehntneri (variedade estragol). The Brazilian Journal 
of Pharmacognosy 18: 583-586.  
Costa-Silva, T. A., and V. L. Pereira-Chioccola. 2010. Toxoplasma gondii acute 
infection: Estimation of humoral response and blood parasitism in mice AS/n inbred. 
Scientia Medica. 
Dahbi, A., B. Bellete, P. Flori, A. Hssaine, Y. Elhachimi, H. Raberin, A. Chait, R Tran 
Manh Sung, and J. Hafid. 2010. The effect of essential oils from Thymus 
broussonetii Boiss on transmission of Toxoplasma gondii cysts in mice. 
Parasitology Research 107: 55-58. 
  
 
18 
 
Değerli, K., A. A. Kilimcioğlu, Ö. Kurt, A. T. Tamay, and A. Özbilgin. 2003. Efficacy of 
azithromycin in a murine toxoplasmosis model, employing a Toxoplasma gondii 
strain from Turkey. Acta Tropica 88: 45-50. 
Dubey, J. P., and J. L. Jones. 2008. Toxoplasma gondii infection in humans and 
animals in the United States. International Journal for Parasitology 38: 1257-1278. 
Escobar, P., L. V. Herrera, S. M. Leal, C. Durán, and E. Stashenko. 2010a. 
Composición química y actividad anti-tripanosomal de aceites esenciales obtenidos 
de Tagetes (Fam. Asteraceae), recolectados en Colombia. Revista Salud UIS 41: 
280-286. 
Escobar, P., M. S. Leal, L. V. Herrera, J. R. Martinez, and E. Stashenko. 2010b. 
Chemical composition and antiprotozoal activities of Colombian Lippia spp essential 
oils and their major components. Memórias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 105: 184-190. 
Gori, L., E. Gallo, V. Mascherini, A. Mugelli, A. Vannacci, and F. Firenzuoli. 2012. 
Can Estragole in fennel seed decoctions really be considered a danger for human 
health? A fennel safety update. Journal of Evidence-based Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine 10: 10 pages. dx.doi.org/10.1155/2012/860542  
Hermes, G., J. W. Ajioka, K. A. Kelly, E. Mui, F. Roberts, K. Kasza, T. Mayr, M. J. 
Kirisits, R. Wollmann, D. J. P. Ferguson, et al. 2008. Neurological and behavioral 
abnormalities, ventricular dilatation, altered cellular functions, inflammation, and 
neuronal injury in brains of mice due to common, persistent, parasitic infection. 
Journal of Neuroinflammation 5: 48. 
Jones, J. L., D. Kruszon-Moran, K. Sanders-Lewis, and M. Wilson. 2007. 
Toxoplasma gondii infection in the United States, 1999–2004, decline from the prior 
decade. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 77: 405-410. 
  
 
19 
 
Kaye, A. 2011. Toxoplasmosis: Diagnosis, treatment, and prevention in congenitally 
exposed infants. Journal of Pediatric Health Care 25: 355-364. 
Leport, C., F. Raffi, S. Matheron, C. Katlama, B. Regnier, A. G. Saimot, C. Marche, 
C. Vedrenne, and J. L. Vilde. 1988. Treatment of central nervous system 
toxoplasmosis with pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine combination in 35 patients with the 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Efficacy of long-term continuous therapy. 
American Journal of Medicine 84: 94-100. 
Liu, C. H., Y. T. Fan, A. Dias, L. Esper, R. A. Corn, A. Bafica, F. S. Machado, and J. 
Aliberti. 2006. Cutting edge: Dendritic cells are essential for in vivo IL-12 production 
and development of resistance against Toxoplasma gondii infection in mice. Journal 
of Immunology 177: 31-35. 
Llana-Ruiz-Cabello, M., D. Gutiérrez-Praena, S. Pichardo, F. J. Moreno, J. M. 
Bermúdez, S. Aucejo, and A. M. Camean. 2014. Cytotoxicity and morphological 
effects induced by carvacrol and thymol on the human cell line Caco-2. 
Food and Chemical Toxicology 64: 281- 290. 
Martins-Duarte, E. S., L. Lemgruber, W. de Souza, and R. C. Vommaro. 2010. 
Toxoplasma gondii: Fluconazole and itraconazole activity against toxoplasmosis in a 
murine model. Experimental Parasitology 124: 466-469.  
McCarthy, S. M., and C. D. Davis. 2003. Prooxidant diet provides protection during 
murine infection with Toxoplasma gondii. Journal of Parasitology 89: 886-894. 
Medeiros, M., A. C. da Silva, A. M. Cito, A. R. Borges, S. G. de Lima, J. A. D. Lopes, 
and R. C. B. Q. Figueiredo. 2011. In vitro antileishmanial activity and cytotoxicity of 
essential oil from Lippia sidoides Cham. Parasitololgy International 60: 237-241.  
Montoya, J. G., and O. Liesenfeld. 2004. Toxoplasmosis. Lancet. 363: 1965-1976. 
  
 
20 
 
Mota, M.L., L. T. Lobo, J. M. Costa, L. S. Costa, H. A. Rocha, L. F. Rocha e Silva, A. 
M. Pohlit, and V. F. Andrade-Neto. 2012. In vitro and in vivo antimalarial activity of 
essential oils and chemical components from three medicinal plants found in 
northeastern Brazil. Planta Medica 78: 658-664. 
Muller, L., P. Kasper, K. Muller-Tegethoff, and T. Petr. 1994. The genotoxic potential 
in vitro and in vivo of the allyl benzene etheric oils estragole, basil oil and trans-
anethole.  Mutation Research Letters 325: 129-136.  
Munoz, M., O. Liesenfeld, and M. M. Heimesaat. 2011. Immunology of Toxoplasma 
gondii. Immunological Reviews 240: 269-285.  
Oliveira, C. B., Y. S. Meurer, M. G. Oliveira, W. M. Medeiros, F. O. Silva, A. C. F. 
Brito, D. L. Pontes, and V. F. Andrade-Neto. 2014. Comparative study on the 
antioxidant and anti-Toxoplasma activities of vanillin and its resorcinarene derivative. 
Molecules 19: 5898-5912. 
Oliveira, T. C., D. A. O. Silva, C. Rostkowska, S. R. Béla, E. A. V. Ferro, P. M. 
Magalhães, and J. R. Mineo. 2009. Toxoplasma gondii: Effects of Artemisia annua L. 
on susceptibility to infection in experimental models in vitro and in vivo. Experimental 
Parasitology 122: 233-241. 
Pifer, R., and F. Yarovinsky. 2011. Innate responses to Toxoplasma gondii in mice 
and humans. Trends in Parasitology 27: 388-393. 
Ponte, E. L., P. L. Sousa, M. V. Rocha, P. M. Soares, A. N. Coelho-de-Souza, J. H. 
Leal-Cardoso, and A. M. S. Assreuy. 2012. Comparative study of the anti-
edematogenic effects of anethole and estragole. Pharmacological Reports 64: 984-
990. 
Riella, K . R., R. R. Marinho, J. S. Santos, R. N. Pereira-Filho, J. C. Cardoso, R. L. 
C. Albuquerque-Junior, and S. M. Thomazzi. 2012. Anti-inflammatory and cicatrizing 
  
 
21 
 
activities of thymol, a monoterpene of the essential oil from Lippia gracilis, in 
rodents. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 143: 656-663.  
Robert-Gangneux, F., and M. L. Darde. 2012. Epidemiology of and diagnostic 
strategies for toxoplasmosis. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 25: 264-296. 
Santoro, G., M. Graças Cardoso, L. Guimarães, A. P. Salgado, R. S. Menna-Barreto, 
and M. J. Soares. 2007. Effect of oregano (Origanum vulgare L.) and thyme 
(Thymus vulgaris L.) essential oils on Trypanosoma cruzi (Protozoa: Kinetoplastida) 
growth and ultrastructure. Parasitology Research 100: 783-790.  
Seabra, S. H., W. de Souza, and R. A. da Matta. 2002. Toxoplasma gondii partially 
inhibits nitric oxide production of activated murine macrophages. Experimental 
Parasitology 100: 62-70. 
Schultz, T. L., C. P. Hencken, L. E. Woodard, G. H. Posner, R. H. Yolken, L. Jones-
Brando, and V. B. Carruthers. 2014. A thiazole derivative of artemisinin moderately 
reduces Toxoplasma gondii cyst burden in infected mice.  Journal of Parasitology 
100: 516-521. 
Shet, A. 2011. Congenital and perinatal infections: Throwing new light with an old 
torch. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 78: 88-95.  
Sonda, S., and A. B. Hehl 2006. Lipid biology of Apicomplexa: perspectives for new 
drug targets, particularly for Toxoplasma gondii. Trends in Parasitology 22: 41-47. 
Wang, T., M. Liu, X. J. Gao, Z. J. Zhao, X. G. Chen, and Z. R. Lun. 2011. 
Toxoplasma gondii: The effects of infection at different stages of pregnancy on the 
offspring of mice. Experimental Parasitology 127: 107-112. 
 
Figure 1. Influence of thymol (T) and estragol (E) on HepG2 (A), HeLa (B) and 
macrophage cell viability (C) after treatment for 24 hr. Results are expressed as 
  
 
22 
 
percentages based on non-treated controls. Three independent experiments were 
performed in triplicate. 
Figure 2. Survival rate of Swiss female mice after infection with the T. gondii ME49 
strain. I/NT = infected, non-treated group; S = Sulfadizine treatment group; Esc = 
estragole subcutaneous treatment group; Eo = estragole oral treatment group; Tsc = 
thymol subcutaneous treatment group; To = thymol oral treatment group). 
Figure 3. Number of brain cysts in C57BL/6 mice orally infected with 10 Toxoplasma 
gondii ME49 strain cysts. I/NT = infected, non-treated group; I/T = infected thymol 
treated group; I/E = infected estragole treated group; I/S = infected sulfadiazine 
treated group (# = ρ<0.05 compared to all others groups; * = ρ<0.05 compared to I/S 
group; ns= non significant compared to I/NT group). 
Figure 4. Percentage of cumulative body weight in C57BL/6 mice orally infected with 
10 Toxoplasma gondii ME49 strain cysts (■=infected, non-treated group; ▲=infected 
thymol treated group; ●= infected estragole treated group; ♦= infected sulfadiazine 
treated group). 
Figure 5.  Weight of pups from infected mothers with 10 Toxoplasma gondii ME49 
strain cysts and submitted to different treatments on days 1 (A) and 30 (B) after birth 
(NI/NT = non-infected, non-treated group; I/NT = infected, non-treated group; Esc = 
infected estragole subcutaneous treated group; Epo = infected estragole oral treated 
group; Tsc = infected thymol subcutaneous treated group) (# = significant compared 
to NI/NT group; * = significant compared to I/NT group; ns=non significant compared 
to I/NT group). 
Figure 6. Serum cytokine balance induced by the different treatments in C57BL/6 
mice infected with 10 Toxoplasma gondii ME49 strain cysts. Production of IL-10 (A) 
and IL-12 (B) and IL-12/IL-10 ratio (C) in C57BL/6 mice infected with 10 T. gondii 
  
 
23 
 
ME49 strain cysts (***=ρ<0.001 compared to NI/NT group; δ= ρ < 0.001 compared to 
I/NT group; ○= ρ < 0.01 compared to I/NT group; Φ= ρ < 0.05 compared to I/NT 
group). 
Figure 7. Serum interferon-γ induced by different treatments in C57BL/6 mice 
infected with 10 Toxoplasma gondii ME49 strain cysts. 
Figure 8. Serum immunoglobulin level induced by the different treatments 
(●=infected thymol treated group – I/T; □=infected estragole treated group – I/E; 
▲=infected, non-treated group – I/NT; ◊=infected sulfadiazine treated group – I/S). 
Production of Toxoplasma gondii specific IgM antibodies (A) and Toxoplasma gondii 
specific IgG antibodies (B) from infected C57BL/6 mice with 10 T. gondii ME49 strain 
cysts (*** = ρ < 0.001 compared to all others groups on the 15th day; ** = ρ < 0.01 
compared to all others groups on the 30th day; * = ρ < 0.05 compared to I/NT group 
on the 15th day; # = ρ < 0.05 compared to all others groups on the 15th day; ns = no 
significance compared to I/NT). 
 
†Memory Studies Laboratory, Physiology Department, Bioscience Center, Federal 
University of Rio Grande do Norte, Av. Salgado Filho, s/n, Lagoa Nova, Natal/RN, 
CEP 59000-000, Brazil  
‡Amazonian Active Principles Laboratory, Technology and Innovation Department, 
National Institute for Amazon Research (INPA), Av. Andre Araújo 2936, Petrópolis, 
Manaus/AM, CEP 69067-375, Brazil.  
§Laboratory of Immunoparasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal 
University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia/MG, CEP 38400-902, Brazil. 
 
 
 Figure 1
Click here to download Figure Ms Fig1 Oliveira CBS.tif 
 Figure 2
Click here to download Figure Ms Fig2 Oliveira CBS.tif 
 Figure 3
Click here to download Figure Ms Fig3 Oliveira CBS.tif 
 Figure 4
Click here to download Figure Fig 4 corrected 22 12 2015.tif 
 Figure 5
Click here to download Figure Ms Fig5 Oliveira CBS.tif 
 Figure 6
Click here to download Figure Ms Fig6 Oliveira CBS.tif 
 Figure 7
Click here to download Figure Ms Fig7 Oliveira CBS.tif 
 Figure 8
Click here to download Figure Fig 8 corrected 22 12 2015.tif 
  
Table I. Effects of acute toxicity in treated mice (n=6) with thymol, estragole or 
vehicle control in a single dose. 
Compounds 
(mg/kg) 
 
 
 
Days after 
administration 
 
Signs† 
 
Gender D/T*  
Thymol 
Vehicle 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
- 
Ns 
19.5 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
- 
Ns 
78.12 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
- 
Ns 
312.5 
 
Female 
1/6 
 
2 and 3 
Piloerection, 
tremors and 
death 
1250 
 
Female 
2/6 
 
2 - 4 
Piloerection, 
tremors and 
death 
5000 
 
Female 
6/6 
 
1 
Piloerection, 
tremors and 
death 
Estragole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vehicle 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
- 
Ns 
19.5 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
- 
Ns 
78.12 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
- 
Ns 
312.5 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
- 
Ns 
1250 
 
Female 
0/6 
 
2 - 4 
Piloerection 
5000 
 
Female 
4/6 
 
2 
Piloerection, 
tremors and 
death 
*D/T = Number of dead mice/treated mice. 
†Ns = no symptoms of toxicity during the observation period. 
 
Table 1
Click here to download Table Table I 28 jan 16.doc 
   
Copyright Form
Click here to access/download
Copyright Form
Copyright Form
JP_Copyright_Form-23 09 2015.pdf
   
Cover Letter
Click here to access/download
Cover Letter
Cover Letter
CoverLetter Parasitology 22 12 2015.doc
