 Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258 
DOI 10.1007/s10552-017-0869-z
ORIGINAL PAPER
Energy balance and obesity: what are the main drivers?
Isabelle Romieu1 · Laure Dossus1 · Simón Barquera2 · Hervé M. Blottière3 · Paul W. Franks4 · Marc Gunter1 · 
Nahla Hwalla5 · Stephen D. Hursting6 · Michael Leitzmann7 · Barrie Margetts8 · Chizuru Nishida9 · 
Nancy Potischman10 · Jacob Seidell11 · Magdalena Stepien1 · Youfa Wang12 · Klaas Westerterp13 · 
Pattanee Winichagoon14 · Martin Wiseman15 · Walter C. Willett16 · On behalf of the IARC working group on 
Energy Balance and Obesity
Received: 21 October 2016 / Accepted: 6 February 2017 / Published online: 17 February 2017 
© The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
undernutrition and overnutrition) are both related to poor 
quality diet and unbalanced energy intake. Dietary patterns 
consistent with a traditional Mediterranean diet and other 
measures of diet quality can contribute to long-term weight 
control. Limiting consumption of sugar-sweetened bever-
ages has a particularly important role in weight control. 
Genetic factors alone cannot explain the global epidemic 
of obesity. However, genetic, epigenetic factors and the 
microbiota could influence individual responses to diet and 
physical activity.
Abstract 
Purpose The aim of this paper is to review the evidence 
of the association between energy balance and obesity.
Methods In December 2015, the International Agency 
for Research on Cancer (IARC), Lyon, France convened a 
Working Group of international experts to review the evi-
dence regarding energy balance and obesity, with a focus 
on Low and Middle Income Countries (LMIC).
Results The global epidemic of obesity and the dou-
ble burden, in LMICs, of malnutrition (coexistence of 
 
* Isabelle Romieu 
 
romieu@iarc.fr
1 
Nutrition and Metabolism Section, International Agency 
for Research on Cancer, 150 cours Albert Thomas, 
69372 Lyon Cedex 08, France
2 
Centro de Investigación en Nutrición y Salud, Instituto 
Nacional de Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Mexico
3 
Micalis Institute, MGP MetagenoPolis, INRA, 
AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, 
France
4 
Genetic and Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Lund University 
Diabetes Centre, CRC, University hospital Malmö, Malmö, 
Sweden
5 
Faculty of Agricultural and Food Science, American 
University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
6 
Department of Nutrition and the Nutrition Research Institute, 
The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA
7 
Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, 
University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
8 
Faculty of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
9 
Nutrition Policy and Scientific Advice (NPU), Department 
of Nutrition for Health and Development (NHD), World 
Health Organization (WHO), Geneva, Switzerland
10 Office of the Associate Director, Applied Research Program, 
Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, USA
11 Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, Department 
of Health Sciences, University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands
12 Department of Epidemiology and Environmental Health, 
School of Public Health and Health Professions, Joint 
Appointments, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, 
USA
13 NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research 
in Metabolism, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands
14 Institute of Nutrition, Mahidol University Salaya, 
Nakhon Pathom, Thailand
15 World Cancer Research Fund International, London, UK
16 Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, USA
 248
 
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258
1 3
Conclusion Energy intake that exceeds energy expendi-
ture is the main driver of weight gain. The quality of the 
diet may exert its effect on energy balance through complex 
hormonal and neurological pathways that influence satiety 
and possibly through other mechanisms. The food environ-
ment, marketing of unhealthy foods and urbanization, and 
reduction in sedentary behaviors and physical activity play 
important roles. Most of the evidence comes from High 
Income Countries and more research is needed in LMICs.
Keywords Energy intake · Energy expenditure · Energy 
balance · Obesity · Satiety · Diet
Introduction
Obesity is defined as a state of excess adiposity that pre-
sents a risk to health such as increased risk of chronic dis-
eases including cancer [1–3] and is the consequence of 
sustained positive energy balance over time. Factors that 
influence energy balance can be considered as relating to 
the host (i.e., people), the environment (the set of exter-
nal factors to which people are exposed) and the vector 
(food and drink). These factors interact in a complex way 
to influence eating and drinking patterns as well as activity 
behaviors. While experienced at the individual level, their 
roots lie in policies and actions that determine the environ-
ment, which may be local, national or international [4]. 
Therefore, understanding the relation between energy bal-
ance and obesity is a challenge and a necessity to develop 
effective prevention programs and policies. The Interna-
tional Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) of the World 
Health Organization (WHO) convened a Working Group 
Meeting in December 2015 to review evidence regard-
ing energy balance and obesity, with a focus on Low and 
Middle Income Countries (LMIC), and to tackle the fol-
lowing scientific questions:
1. Are the drivers of the obesity epidemic related only to 
energy excess and/or do specific foods or nutrients play 
a major role in this epidemic?
2. What are the factors that modulate these associations?
3. Which types of data and/or studies will further improve 
our understanding?
Each expert summarized the evidence from the literature 
on a specific topic in a written document that was reviewed 
by the IARC secretariat before the meeting and shared with 
the other participants (see list of topics in Table 1). Each 
topic was then briefly presented during the meeting and 
extensively discussed in plenary session with the other par-
ticipants. A full report will be soon available on the IARC 
website. In this paper, we present a summary of the differ-
ent topics that we addressed during the workshop and its 
conclusions and recommendations.
Prevalence of overweight and obesity and double 
burden of malnutrition
Obesity is now well recognized as a disease in its own 
right and overweight accounts for about 37% of the global 
burden of disease (2013) [5]. Obesity rates have been con-
stantly increasing in the last thirty years with a worldwide 
prevalence that nearly doubled between 1980 and 2014 
[2]. In 2014, 39% of adults aged 18 years and older (38% 
of men and 40% of women) were overweight [2]. In most 
parts of the world, women are more likely to be obese than 
men [2]. The prevalence of overweight and obesity tends 
to increase generally with the income level of the countries 
Table 1  List of topics presented during the working group meeting
Background introduction on obesity worldwide
Double burden malnutrition/obesity in LMICs
Can energy intake and expenditure (energy balance) be measured accurately in epidemiologic studies? Is this important?
How are components of dietary intake/dietary composition / foods/nutrients / related to obesity and weight gain?
How are overall energy intake and expenditure related to obesity?
Physical activity, sedentary behavior, and obesity
What existing epidemiologic data could serve to better understand the relation of energy intake and expenditure to obesity and the obesity epi-
demic?
Cultural determinants of obesity in low- and middle-income Countries of the Eastern Mediterranean Region
Potential mechanisms in childhood obesity
The interplay of genes, lifestyle and obesity (Presenter unable to attend, only written document)
Gut microbiota and obesity
Molecular and metabolic mechanisms underlying the obesity-cancer link
What steps should be recommended and implemented to prevent and control the obesity epidemic?
Which new data are needed to explore the relations of diet and dietary patterns to obesity and weight gain?
 249
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258 
1 3
with the obesity prevalence in high-income and upper-mid-
dle-income countries being more than double that of low- 
income countries [2] (Fig. 1). In 2014, there were 41 mil-
lion overweight children under age 5 years in the world; 
about 10 million more than two decades ago [5, 6]. Recent 
data indicate that the prevalence of childhood obesity in 
some developed countries (e.g., some European countries 
and the US) has apparently reached a plateau [7–9]. How-
ever, the number of overweight children in Low and Middle 
Income Countries (LMICs) has more than doubled since 
1990, from 7.5 to 15.5 million [10]. In 2014, almost half of 
all overweight children under 5 lived in Asia and one quar-
ter lived in Africa [5, 6].
In many LMICs, obesity coexists with undernutrition 
(including energy, and macro and micronutrient deficien-
cies) leading to a “double burden of malnutrition” (DBMN) 
occurring across the life-course of individuals and coex-
isting in the same households and communities/countries 
[11]. There is a complex interplay between early under-
nutrition (in mothers before and during pregnancy, and in 
early childhood) and later overnutrition that exacerbates the 
risk of non-communicable diseases that are rising rapidly 
in LMICs [12, 13].
Rapid economic growth and urbanization in LMICs 
have resulted in changing traditional dietary patterns, with 
increasing consumption of highly processed foods and 
beverages containing less nutrient dense diets, replacing 
or supplementing traditional plant-based diets, and simul-
taneous increase in sedentary behaviors and reduction of 
physical activity across all ages [14–17]. Soft drinks (sodas, 
sugar-sweetened beverages, SSB) consumption volumes 
have been increasing in almost all countries [18]. Between 
1996 and 2002, sales of processed (packaged) foods grew 
by 28% in LMICS, compared with only 2.5% in HICs.
Determinants of energy balance: what 
the evidence tells us
With recognition that overweight and obesity are major 
risk factors for cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, 
and many other health conditions, the difference between 
energy intake and expenditure, frequently referred to as 
energy balance, has become of great interest because of its 
direct relation to long-term gain or loss of adipose tissue 
and alterations in metabolic pathways.
Measurements of adiposity
Several measures for overweight and obesity have been 
used in epidemiological studies [3]; however, it is impor-
tant to be aware that such measures are imperfect markers 
of the internal physiological processes that are the actual 
determinants of cancer development.
BMI (the quotient between weight in kilograms and 
height in meters squared) is the most commonly used body 
composition marker in epidemiologic studies due to its 
simplicity of assessment, high precision and accuracy, but 
Fig. 1  Prevalence of obesity, ages 18+, both sexes, 2014 (age-standardized estimates)—source: WHO
 250
 
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258
1 3
it does not differentiate between lean and adipose tissue, or 
fat distribution, which varies across individuals, ethnicities, 
and throughout the lifespan. Nevertheless, BMI compares 
remarkably well to gold standard methods [24]. Waist cir-
cumference (WC) and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) are useful 
to identify abdominal obesity but cannot clearly differen-
tiate between visceral and subcutaneous fat compartments 
[25, 26]. Other measures that can be used in medium- or 
large-scale studies include skinfold thickness and bioelec-
trical impedance analysis, although the latter appears to add 
little to measures based on weight and height [27]. More 
direct measures of body composition are available, such as 
air displacement plethysmography, underwater weighing 
(hydrodensitometry), dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, 
ultrasound, computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging [28, 29]. Although reproducible and valid [30], 
these measures of body composition are, due to high costs 
and lack of portability, limited to small-scale studies that 
require a high level of accuracy. Their use in large-scale 
epidemiologic studies tends to be as reference methods 
[31].
Energy intake and energy expenditure
Energy balance is the result of equilibrium between energy 
intake and energy expenditure. When energy intake exceeds 
expenditure, the excess energy is deposited as body tis-
sue [1]. During adulthood, the maintenance of stable body 
weight depends on the energy derived from food and drink 
(energy intake) being equal to total energy expenditure over 
time. To lose body weight, energy expenditure must exceed 
intake, and to gain weight, energy intake must exceed 
expenditure [32]. Very small deviations from energy bal-
ance, on the order of 1–2% of daily energy intake, can 
result in large long-term changes in body weight (~20 kg) 
[33].
Measuring dietary intake and energy expenditure is 
a challenge in epidemiology. Energy intake, in particu-
lar, besides sometimes considerable measurement error in 
its assessment, can be subject to selective biases, such as 
the tendency of overweight and obese people to underes-
timate their intake [27]. While some objective measures 
exist for assessing energy expenditure or physical activity 
[34], such tools are not available for energy intake. Thus, 
assessment of energy balance by calculating the difference 
between intake and expenditure is not practically useful in 
large scale population studies. When comparing four differ-
ent methods of dietary assessment, Willett and colleagues 
have shown that for all measures of total energy expendi-
ture or intake within person variability was high relative 
to the 1 or 2% difference between intake and expenditure 
that can be extremely important (personal communication). 
Over time the best practical marker of positive or negative 
energy balance is change in the body weight which is read-
ily measured with high precision even by self-report [27]. 
Since body weight change cannot distinguish between loss 
or gain of lean or fat mass, interpretation of weight change 
in an individual rests on assumptions about the nature of 
tissues lost or gained if body composition is not measured 
directly [35]. However, for most people, weight gain over a 
period of years during adulthood is largely driven by gain 
in fat mass.
In conclusion, body weight and change in weight pro-
vide precise indicators of long-term deviations in energy 
balance and are widely available for epidemiology studies. 
These simple and inexpensive measures of energy balance 
can be used both as exposure and outcome variables, tak-
ing into consideration their other determinants and con-
founding factors. Although not useful for assessing energy 
balance, which requires extreme accuracy and precision, 
measures of energy intake and physical activity will con-
tinue to play other important roles in epidemiologic studies 
and in monitoring population trends.
Understanding nutritional determinants of obesity
Many factors relating to foods and beverages have been 
shown to influence amounts consumed or energy balance 
over the short to medium term, such as energy density and 
portion size [36, 37], although the effect of energy density 
over the longer term is unclear.
Foods and dietary patterns
One factor that has been suggested as being obesogenic is 
a high energy density of foods (i.e., an energy content of 
more than about 225–275 kcal per 100 g) [38]. However, 
there are exceptions; for example, nuts and olive oil (both 
extremely energy dense) did not increase weight when 
added to a diet [39]. Fast foods are energy-dense micro-
nutrient-poor foods often high in saturated and trans fatty 
acids, processed starches and added sugars [40]. Thus, 
the extent that these foods are obesogenic may be related 
to their composition rather than to their energy density. 
Several observational studies indicated a higher risk of 
obesity and weight gain in consumers of fast foods than 
in the non-consumers [41–44]. A recent study from the 
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and 
Nutrition (EPIC) study reported that a high plasma level 
of industrial trans fatty acids, interpreted as biomarkers 
of dietary exposure to industrially processed foods, was 
associated with the risk of weight gain, particularly in 
women [45]. Evidence supporting an obesogenic effect of 
sugary drinks is strong, with high relevance to children, 
especially in low-income socioeconomic groups (con-
sumption of SSB is 93% higher in low-income children 
 251
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258 
1 3
than in high income children) [46] and LMICs (a 1% rise 
in soft drink consumption was associated with an addi-
tional 3.4 overweight adults per 100 and 2.3 obese adults 
per 100 in LMICs) [47]. A meta-analysis of 22 cohort 
studies showed that each increment of sugary drink a day 
was associated with a 0.05–0.06 unit increase in BMI in 
children and 0.12–0.22 kg increased weight gain in adults 
[48]. Another meta-analysis of 5 cohort studies indi-
cated a 55% (32–82%) higher risk of being overweight in 
children consuming sugary drinks daily [49]. Consump-
tion of sweets and desserts characterized by high sugar 
content and energy density has been associated with 
weight gain [38], as well as red and processed meat (37% 
increased risk of obesity for consumption of higher quan-
tities of red and processed meat) [50]. Conversely, higher 
consumption of legumes, wholegrain foods including 
cereals, non-starchy vegetables, and fruits (which have 
relatively low energy density) as well as nuts (with high 
energy density) have been associated with a lower risk of 
obesity and weight gain [38]. The content of fiber, satiat-
ing effect of fat, and low glycemic index in many of these 
foods may play an important role.
Results from three U.S. cohorts indicated that better 
diet quality, i.e., higher scores on alternate Mediterra-
nean Diet (MD) score, the Alternate Health Eating Index 
(HEI)-2010, and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hyper-
tension were associated with lower weight gain during 
adult life [51]. This was in agreement with the results 
obtained from European cohorts using similar indexes 
[52, 53]. A systematic review found, in 13 of 21 studies, 
a negative association between adherence to Mediterra-
nean diet (MD) and overweight/obesity or weight gain 
(i.e., 29% lower risk of being obese for men adhering to 
MD in a cohort study and up to 14 kg of weight lost after 
a 2-year MD intervention) [54].
Cohort studies conducted in LMICs would be valuable 
resources for understanding the impact of the nutrition 
and lifestyle transition on obesity. Some longitudinal stud-
ies have already been initiated in LMICs (as for instance 
the ones included in the Consortium of Health-Orientated 
Research in Transitioning Societies—COHORT [55], 
or the MTC cohort [56]). Building on these ongoing ini-
tiatives may prove informative and cost-efficient. Data 
from the Mexican Teacher cohort (MTC) have shown that 
women with a carbohydrates, sweet drinks and refined 
foods pattern were more at risk of having a larger silhouette 
and higher BMI, while a fruit and vegetable pattern was 
associated with a lower risk [57]. This emphasizes the need 
for public health interventions improving access to healthy 
diets, healthy food choices in the work place, and means of 
limiting consumption of beverages with a high sugar con-
tent and of highly processed foods, particularly those rich 
in refined starches.
Prevention of weight gain and/or maintenance of weight 
loss
Long-term experiments (>1 year) on prevention of 
weight gain suggest that the change in body fatness that 
occurs with modifying intakes seems to be mediated via 
changes in energy intakes, since isoenergetic exchange 
of sugars with other carbohydrates was not associated 
with weight change [49]. Evidence from randomized tri-
als conducted in children and adolescents indicates that 
consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, as com-
pared with non-calorically sweetened beverages, results 
in greater weight gain and increases in the body mass 
index; however, the evidence is limited to a small number 
of studies [58, 59]. The findings of these trials suggest 
that there is inadequate energy compensation (degree of 
reduction in intake of other foods or drinks), for energy 
delivered as sugar dissolved in water [58].
Understanding weight loss
In weight loss trials, low carbohydrate interventions led 
to significantly greater weight loss than did low-fat inter-
ventions when the intensity of intervention was similar 
[60]. In a 2-year trial, where obese subjects were ran-
domly assigned to low-fat restricted calorie, Mediter-
ranean restricted-calorie or low-carbohydrate-restricted 
calorie diet, weight loss was similar in the MD and low-
carb diet and significantly greater than in the low-fat diet. 
In their meta-analysis of 23 RCTs, Hu et al. [61] com-
pared the effects of low-fat (≤30% energy) vs. low-car-
bohydrate (≤45% energy) diet and found that both types 
of diets resulted in comparable reductions in weight and 
waist circumference. However, compared with partici-
pants on low-fat diets, persons on low-carbohydrate diets 
experienced a slightly but statistically significantly lower 
reduction in total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol but a greater increase in high-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol and a greater decrease in triglycerides. 
The impact of reducing fat or carbohydrate may depend 
at least as much on the overall composition of the diet 
as on the reduction in the specific macronutrient targeted.
Most of these studies were conducted in HICs. This 
emphasizes the importance of conducting studies in 
LMICs in particular long-term dietary intervention trials 
focusing on alternative dietary patterns with foods read-
ily available in these countries to propose viable changes 
in nutritional behaviors.
 252
 
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258
1 3
Factors that modulate the association between dietary 
intake and obesity
Physical activity
Long-term observational studies fairly consistently show 
an association between physical activity and weight main-
tenance, and a 2009 position paper from the American Col-
lege of Sports Medicine (ACSM) stated that 150–250 min 
per week of moderate intensity physical activity is effec-
tive to prevent weight gain [62]. The long-term effect of 
physical activity on weight loss has been less convincing 
and isolated aerobic exercise was not shown to be an effec-
tive weight loss therapy but may be effective in conjunction 
with diet [63]. Evidence suggests that diet combined with 
physical activity results in greater weight loss than diet 
alone and is more effective for increasing fat mass loss and 
preserving lean body mass and, therefore, it leads to a more 
desirable effect on overall body composition [64]. Weight 
maintenance after weight loss is improved with physical 
activity and >250 min of physical activity per week has 
been recommended [62]. Intervention studies have con-
sistently found no effect of resistance exercise on reducing 
body weight [62] or visceral adipose tissue [65]. However, 
resistance training appears to be more effective in increas-
ing lean body mass than aerobic training and the combi-
nation of aerobic and resistance training may be the most 
efficient exercise training modality for weight loss [66]. 
In recent years, physical activity research has expanded 
its focus to include the potentially detrimental effects of 
sedentary behavior on energy balance. Findings from the 
Nurses’ Health Study showed that time spent watching tel-
evision viewing was positively related to risk of obesity 
(each 2-h/d increment in TV watching was associated with 
a 23% increase in obesity) [67]. Sedentary behavior also 
represents an independent risk factor for obesity in children 
and adolescents [68]. In short-term studies, higher levels 
of physical activity have been shown to mitigate the effect 
of increasing energy density on weight gain, and it appears 
that at the low levels of physical activity typical of current 
high income populations, adequate suppression of appetite 
to maintain energy balance is compromised [69].
In conclusion, moderate intensity physical activity 
performed for 150–250 min per week appears to prevent 
weight gain and produces modest weight loss in adults. 
Greater amounts of moderate intensity physical activity 
(>250 min per week) are required for weight maintenance 
following weight loss. Resistance exercise does not appear 
to decrease body weight or body fat but it promotes gain 
of lean body mass, and the combination of resistance and 
aerobic exercise seems to be optimal for weight loss. Physi-
cal activity improves chronic disease risk factors independ-
ent of its impact on body weight regulation. Moreover, 
sedentary behavior represents an independent risk factor 
for the development of overweight and obesity.
Genetic and epigenetic factors
The patterns and distributions of obesity within and 
between ethnically diverse populations living in similar and 
contrasting environments suggest that some ethnic groups 
are more susceptible than others to obesity [70]. More than 
150 common genetic variants have been robustly asso-
ciated with measures of body composition [71], though 
the individual impact of each variant is small. There is 
now convincing epidemiological evidence of interactions 
between common variants in the FTO (Fat mass and obe-
sity-associated protein) gene and lifestyle with respect to 
obesity [72–74]. However, almost all these data are from 
cross-sectional studies, and temporal relationships are not 
clear. There are large studies supporting gene–lifestyle 
interactions at several other common loci, but the burden 
of evidence is far less for these loci than for FTO [75, 76]. 
However, the magnitude of the interaction effects reported 
for FTO (or other common variants) is insufficient to war-
rant the use of those data for clinical translation. Potentially 
reversible epigenetic changes in particular altered DNA 
methylation patterns could also serve as biomarkers of 
energy balance and mediators of gene–environment inter-
action in obesity [77]. Several ‘epigenome-wide associa-
tion studies’ have now been conducted and have identified 
a panel of gene loci where methylation levels significantly 
differ in obese and lean individuals [78, 79]. Such discover-
ies could provide novel insights into how energy balance 
and its determinants influence obesity development, inter-
action with diet and environmental factors and subsequent 
metabolic dysregulation.
In summary, there is an abundance of published evi-
dence, predominantly from cross-sectional epidemiological 
studies, that supports the notion that lifestyle and genetic 
factors interact to cause obesity. However, few studies have 
been adequately replicated, and functional validation and 
specifically designed intervention studies are rarely under-
taken, both of which are necessary to determine whether 
observations of gene–lifestyle interaction in obesity are 
causal and of clinical relevance.
Microbiota
In a healthy symbiotic state, the colonic microbiota inter-
acts with our food, in particular dietary fiber, allowing 
energy harvest from indigestible dietary compounds. It 
also interacts with cells, including immune cells, as well 
as with the metabolic and nervous systems; and protects 
against pathogens. Conversely, a dysbiotic state is often 
associated with diseases including not only inflammatory 
 253
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258 
1 3
bowel diseases (IBD), allergy, colorectal cancer and liver 
diseases, but also obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular 
diseases [80]. Dysbiosis may be defined as an imbalanced 
microbiota including loss of keystone species, reduced 
richness or diversity, increased pathogens or pathobi-
onts or modification or shift in metabolic capacities [81]. 
Dysbiosis in the intestinal microbiota has been associ-
ated with obesity [82]. A loss of bacterial gene richness 
is linked to more severe metabolic syndrome, and less 
sensitivity to weight loss following caloric restriction 
diet [83]. Dietary habits also seem to be associated with 
microbiota richness [84]. The proposed mechanisms by 
which gut microbiota dysbiosis and loss of richness can 
promote obesity and insulin resistance are diverse, often 
derived from mouse models, and still deserve more stud-
ies and validation in humans.
Determinants of childhood obesity
Many factors have contributed to the increase in the prev-
alence of obesity in children including unhealthy dietary 
patterns with high consumption of fast foods and highly 
processed food [85], of sugar sweetened beverages [86], 
lack of PA, an increase in sedentary behaviors (e.g., 
screen time) [87], and shorter sleep duration [88]. Other 
factors, such as changes in parenting and family factors, 
school factors, social norms, community food and PA 
environments that affect children’s eating and PA have 
also contributed [89, 90]. Experiences during early life 
(e.g., prenatal factors such as the in utero exposures expe-
rienced and postnatal factors such as infant and young 
child feeding) can have an important, long-term impact 
on future health, including obesity risk [91]. In particu-
lar, maternal gestational weight gain (GWG) [92], mater-
nal overweight prior to pregnancy, smoking during preg-
nancy, high or low infant birth weight, rapid weight gain 
during the first year of life [93–95], early obesity rebound 
[96], breastfeeding patterns [97] and early introduction 
of complementary food [98] have all been linked to later 
excess adiposity. Many of these are inter-related and work 
is ongoing to disentangle concurrent factors. In addition, 
high levels of stress during childhood and adolescence 
may change eating habits and augment consumption of 
highly palatable but nutrient-poor foods [99].
Multiple factors at the individual, family, school, society 
and global levels impact children’s energy-balance-related 
behaviors, and have contributed to the increases in child-
hood obesity worldwide. Although genetic factors may play 
a role in affecting individuals’ susceptibility of develop-
ing obesity, environmental factors should be the key tar-
gets of intervention efforts to fight the epidemic as they are 
modifiable.
Prevention of obesity
Numerous policy options to prevent obesity have been 
explored, and evidence is sufficient to conclude that many 
are cost effective. Given the multifactorial nature of obe-
sity, as in other complex public health problems, a com-
bination of interventions is more likely to generate bet-
ter results than focusing only on a single measure [100]. 
Gortmaker et al. [101] estimated the cost-effectiveness of 
seven interventions that are generally considered to be most 
promising. They modeled the reach, costs and savings for 
the US population 2015-25. Some of these interventions 
(excise tax on sugar-sweetened beverages, elimination of 
tax deduction for advertising unhealthy food to children 
and nutrition standards for food and beverages sold in 
schools outside of meals) not only prevent many cases of 
childhood obesity, but also potentially cost less to imple-
ment than they would save for society.
The global childhood obesity epidemic demands a pop-
ulation-based multisector, multi-disciplinary, and culturally 
relevant approach. Children need protection from exploita-
tive marketing and special efforts to support healthy eat-
ing, PA behaviors, and optimal body weight [102–104]. 
Adequate evidence has been accumulated that interven-
tions, especially school-based programs, can be effective in 
preventing childhood obesity [105]. Preventing obesity will 
require sustained efforts across all levels of government 
and civil society.
Although there are individual differences in susceptibil-
ity, obesity is by large a societal problem resulting from 
health related behaviors that are largely driven by environ-
mental upstream factors. Many options for policies to pre-
vent obesity are available and many of these are effective 
and cost-effective. Integrated management of the epidemic 
of obesity requires top-down government policies and bot-
tom-up community approaches and involvement of many 
sectors of society. Integrating evidence-based prevention 
and management of obesity is essential.
The obesity‑cancer link: what are the underlying 
mechanisms?
There is convincing evidence for a role of obesity as a 
causal factor for many types of cancer including colorec-
tum, endometrium, kidney, oesophagus, postmenopausal 
breast, gallbladder, pancreas, gastric cardia, liver, ovary, 
thyroid, meningioma, multiple myeloma, and advanced 
prostate cancers [19]. Recent progress on elucidating the 
mechanisms underlying the obesity-cancer connection sug-
gests that obesity exerts pleomorphic effects on pathways 
related to tumor development and progression and, thus, 
there are potential opportunities for primary to tertiary 
 254
 
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258
1 3
prevention of obesity-related cancers. We now know that 
obesity can impact well-established hallmarks of cancer 
(such as genomic instability, angiogenesis, tumor invasion 
and metastasis and immune surveillance) [20]. However, 
obesity-associated perturbations in systemic metabolism 
and inflammation, and the interactions of these perturba-
tions with cancer cell energetics, are emerging as the pri-
mary drivers of obesity-associated cancer development and 
progression. In both obesity and metabolic syndrome, alter-
ations occur in circulating levels of insulin and insulin-like 
growth factors, sex hormones, adipokines, inflammatory 
factors, several chemokines, lipid mediators and vascular 
associated factors [21–23].
Which types of data and /or studies will further 
improve our understanding?
Most research on obesity and cancer has focused on Cau-
casians in HICs. While many of the identified risk factors 
in HICs will have the same physiologic effects in LMICs, 
the determinants may be different, in addition to other 
environmental and genetic differences across populations. 
Novel risk factors or traditional diets may be identified in 
newly studied populations and regions. Diet is shaped by 
many factors such as traditions, knowledge about diet, food 
availability, food prices, cultural acceptance, and health 
conditions. Likewise, a variety of factors will influence 
daily physical activity and sedentary behaviors, including 
dwellings, urbanization, opportunities for safe transporta-
tion by bicycle riding and walking, recreational facilities, 
employment constraints and health conditions. Surveillance 
of current diet and health conditions and assessment of 
trends over time is of major importance in LMICS. Further 
resources and research capacity are of highest priority.
In addition to surveillance efforts, prospective studies 
able to document lifestyle and change of lifestyle over time 
are an important area of research. Several cohort studies 
conducted in HICs have shown an impact of healthy die-
tary patterns on obesity [106] and similar studies could be 
conducted in LMICs to identify dietary patterns related to 
weight gain and obesity in a variety of settings to evalu-
ate the major lifestyle, behavioral and policy influences in 
an effort to plan public health interventions appropriately. 
Intervention and implementation research in different coun-
tries/regions is needed to learn about social and physi-
ological changes and the sustainability of the changes, in 
particular among children and adolescents in both school-
based and non-school-based setting as well as research on 
the cost effectiveness of policies.
A major challenge is to capture life course exposures 
and identify windows of susceptibility. Early exposure 
to poor diet and sugar-sweetened beverages, sedentari-
ness, tobacco smoke and other environmental exposures 
can alter infants’ and children’s growth patterns and may 
result in altered metabolism, obesity, and risk of chronic 
disease in adulthood [107]. Cohort studies covering the 
whole life course, focusing on critical windows of expo-
sure and the time course of exposure to disease (birth 
cohorts, adolescent cohorts, and young adult cohorts), 
should be considered. Of particular interest are multi-
centered cohorts and inter-generational cohorts that 
would create resources to enable research on the inter-
play between genetics, lifestyle and the environment. For 
example in the Avon longitudinal study of parents and 
children (ALSPAC), increasing intake of energy-dense 
nutrient-poor foods during childhood (mostly free sugar) 
was associated with obesity development. Diets with 
higher energy density were associated with increased fat 
mass [108]. Most relevant to LMICs is the observation 
that children who were stunted in infancy and are sub-
sequently exposed to more calories, at puberty, are more 
likely to have higher fat mass at the same BMI compared 
with children who were not stunted [93, 94, 109]. Poor 
maternal prenatal dietary intakes of energy, protein and 
micronutrients have been associated with increased risk 
of adult obesity in offspring while a high protein diet 
during the first 2 years of life was also associated with 
increased obesity later in life [110]; conversely, exclu-
sive breastfeeding was associated with lower risk of 
obesity later in childhood, although this may not persist 
into adulthood [111]. Similar results from a cohort study 
conducted in Mexico show that children exclusively or 
predominantly breastfed for 3 months or more had lower 
adiposity at 4 years [112]. Further work on birth cohorts 
or other prospective studies in LMICs is likely to provide 
insights into the developmental causes of obesity and 
NCDs. Input from local research communities, health 
ministries and policy makers and appropriate funding or 
resource assignment are critical for the success of new 
efforts in LMICs.
There is clearly a need for capacity building and 
resources devoted to nutritional research in LMICs. 
The first step would be a comprehensive assessment of 
resources already in place, and the identification of gaps 
and priorities for moving forward. Repeated surveillance 
surveys are essential in LMICs for evaluation of current 
and future status of the population and addressing unde-
sirable trends with prevention and control programs. It 
is recognized that few prospective studies are currently 
underway in LMICs and resources will be needed to 
pursue this important area of research. Input from local 
research communities, health ministries and policy mak-
ers are critical for the success of new efforts in LMICs.
 255
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258 
1 3
Conclusions and recommendations
The global epidemic of obesity and the double burden of 
malnutrition are both related to poor quality diet; therefore, 
improvement in diet quality can address both phenomena.
The benefits of a healthy diet on adiposity are likely 
mediated by effects of dietary quality on energy intake, 
which is the main driver of weight gain. Energy balance is 
best assessed by changes in weight or in fat mass. Measures 
of energy intake and expenditure are not precise enough to 
capture small differences that are of individual and public 
health importance. The quality of the diet may exert its 
effect on energy balance through complex hormonal and 
neurological pathways that influence satiety and possibly 
through other mechanisms.
Dietary patterns characterized by higher intakes of fruits 
and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, nuts and seeds and 
unsaturated fat, and lower intakes of refined starch, red 
meat, trans and saturated fat, and sugar-sweetened foods 
and beverages, consistent with a traditional Mediterranean 
diet and other measures of dietary quality, can contribute to 
long-term weight control. Limiting consumption of sugar-
sweetened beverages has a particularly important role in 
weight control. In weight loss trials, existing evidence does 
not support the role of the reduction in the percentage of 
energy from fat on weight loss, though the reductions in 
fat may not have been low enough for the outcome and the 
effects of single macronutrients cannot be adequately cap-
tured without specifying replacement/comparison sources 
of energy.
Genetic factors cannot explain the global epidemic of 
obesity. It is possible that factors such as genetic, epige-
netic and the microbiota can influence individual responses 
to diet and physical activity. Very few gene–diet interac-
tions or diet-microbiota have been established in relation to 
obesity and effects on cancer risk.
Short-term studies have not provided clear benefit of 
physical activity for weight control, but meta-analysis 
of longer term trials indicates a modest benefit on body 
weight loss and maintenance. The combination of aerobic 
and resistance training seems to be optimal. Long-term epi-
demiologic studies also support modest benefits of physical 
activity on body weight. This includes benefits of walking 
and bicycle riding, which can be incorporated into daily life 
and be sustainable for the whole population. Physical activ-
ity also has important benefit on health outcomes inde-
pendent of its effect on body weight. In addition, long-term 
epidemiologic studies show that sedentary behavior (in 
particular TV viewing) is related to increased risk of obe-
sity, suggesting that limiting sedentary time has potential 
for prevention of weight gain.
The major drivers of the obesity epidemic are the food 
environment, marketing of unhealthy foods and beverages, 
urbanization, and probably reduction in physical activity. 
Existing evidence on the relations of diet, physical activ-
ity and socio-economic and cultural factors to body weight 
is largely from HICs. There is an important lack of data 
on diet, physical activity and adiposity in most parts of 
the world and this information should to be collected in 
a standardized manner when possible. In most environ-
ments, 24h recalls will be the more suitable method for 
dietary surveillance. Attention should be given to data in 
subgroups because mean values may obscure important 
disparities. In utero and early childhood, environment has 
important implications for lifetime adiposity. This offers 
important windows of opportunity for intervention. Obser-
vational data on determinants of body weight and interven-
tion trials across the life course to improve body weight are 
also required. To accomplish these goals, there is a need 
for resources to build capacity and conduct translational 
research.
Gaining control of the obesity epidemic will require the 
engagement of many sectors including education, health-
care, the media, worksites, agriculture, the food industry, 
urban planning, transportation, parks and recreation, and 
governments from local to national. This provides the 
opportunity for all individuals to participate in this effort, 
whether at home or in establishing high-level policy. We 
now have evidence that intensive multi-sector efforts can 
arrest and partially reverse the rise of obesity in particu-
lar among children. In conclusion, we are gaining under-
standing on the determinants of energy balance and obesity 
and some of these findings are being translated into public 
health policy changes. However, further research and more 
action from policy makers are needed.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a 
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made.
References
 1. Anderson AS, Key TJ, Norat T, Scoccianti C, Cecchini M, Ber-
rino F et al. European code against cancer 4th edition: obesity, 
body fatness and cancer. Cancer Epidemiol. 2015
 2. World 
Health 
Organization 
(2014) 
Global 
status 
report 
on 
noncommunicable 
diseases: 
World 
Health 
Organization, 
Geneva. 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstr
eam/10665/148114/1/9789241564854_eng.pdf?ua=1
 3. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer 
Research (2007) Food, nutrition, physical activity, and the pre-
vention of cancer: a global perspective. AICR, Washington DC
 4. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer 
Research (2009) Policy and action for cancer prevention. Food, 
nutrition, and physical activity: a global perspective
 256
 
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258
1 3
 5. Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, Thomson B, Graetz N, Mar-
gono C et al (2014) Global, regional, and national prevalence 
of overweight and obesity in children and adults during 1980–
2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 
Study 2013. Lancet 384(9945):766–781
 6. de Onis M, Blossner M, Borghi E (2010) Global prevalence 
and trends of overweight and obesity among preschool chil-
dren. Am J Clin Nutr 92(5):1257–1264
 7. Lobstein T, Jackson-Leach R, Moodie ML, Hall KD, Gort-
maker SL, Swinburn BA et al (2015) Child and adolescent 
obesity: part of a bigger picture. Lancet 385(9986):2510–2520
 8. Wabitsch M, Moss A, Kromeyer-Hauschild K (2014) Unex-
pected plateauing of childhood obesity rates in developed 
countries. BMC Med 12:17
 9. Wang YF, Baker JL, Hil JO, Dietz WH (2012) Controversies 
regarding reported trends: has the obesity epidemic leveled 
off in the United States? Adv Nutr 3(5):751–752
 10. United Nations Children’s Fund World Health Organization, 
The World Bank. Levels and trends in child malnutrition 
UNICEF–WHO–World Bank Group joint child malnutrition 
estimates: key findings of the 2015 edition 2015. http://www.
who.int/nutgrowthdb/jme_brochure2015.pdf?ua=1.
 11. Shrimpton R, Rokx C (2012) The double burden of malnutri-
tion : a review of global evidence. Health, Nutrition and Pop-
ulation (HNP) discussion paper. World Bank, Washington DC
 12. Darnton-Hill I, Nishida C, James WP (2004) A life course 
approach to diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic dis-
eases. Public Health Nutr 7(1a):101–121
 13. James P et al (2000). Ending malnutrition by 2020: an agenda 
for change in the Millennium. UN SCN, Geneva
 14. Moubarac JC, Martins AP, Claro RM, Levy RB, Cannon G, 
Monteiro CA (2013) Consumption of ultra-processed foods 
and likely impact on human health. Evidence from Canada. 
Public Health Nutr 16(12):2240–2248
 15. Monteiro CA, Levy RB, Claro RM, de Castro IR, Cannon G 
(2011) Increasing consumption of ultra-processed foods and 
likely impact on human health: evidence from Brazil. Public 
Health Nutr 14(1):5–13
 16. Baker P, Friel S (2014) Processed foods and the nutrition 
transition: evidence from Asia. Obes Rev 15(7):564–577
 17. Barquera S, Pedroza-Tobias A, Medina C (2016) Cardiovas-
cular diseases in mega-countries: the challenges of the nutri-
tion, physical activity and epidemiologic transitions, and the 
double burden of disease. Curr Opin Lipidol 27(4):329–344
 18. International Food Policy Research Institute (2015). Global 
nutrition report 2015: actions and accountability to advance 
nutrition and sustainable development. Washington, DC
 19. Lauby-Secretan B, Scoccianti C, Loomis D, Grosse Y, 
Bianchini F, Straif K et al (2016) Body fatness and can-
cer–viewpoint of the IARC Working Group. N Engl J Med 
375(8):794–798
 20. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA (2011) Hallmarks of cancer: the next 
generation. Cell 144(5):646–674
 21. Bonomini F, Rodella LF, Rezzani R (2015) Metabolic syn-
drome, aging and involvement of oxidative stress. Aging dis-
ease 6(2):109–120
 22. Hursting SD, Berger NA (2010) Energy balance, host-related 
factors, and cancer progression. J Clin Oncol 28(26):4058–4065
 23. Renehan AG, Roberts DL, Dive C (2008) Obesity and cancer: 
pathophysiological and biological mechanisms. Arch Physiol 
Biochem 114(1):71–83
 24. Sun Q, van Dam RM, Spiegelman D, Heymsfield SB, Willett 
WC, Hu FB (2010) Comparison of dual-energy X-ray absorp-
tiometric and anthropometric measures of adiposity in rela-
tion to adiposity-related biologic factors. Am J Epidemiol 
172(12):1442–1454
 25. World Health Organization (2011) Waist circumference and 
waist-hip ratio: a report of a WHO expert consultation
 26. van der Kooy K, Leenen R, Seidell JC, Deurenberg P, Droop A, 
Bakker CJ (1993) Waist-hip ratio is a poor predictor of changes 
in visceral fat. Am J Clin Nutr 57(3):327–333
 27. Willett W. Implications of total energy intake for epidemiologic 
analyses. Nutritional epidemiology. 3rd edn. Oxford University 
Press, New York, pp 260–286
 28. Heymsfield SB, Lohman TG, Wang Z, Going SB (2005) Human 
body composition. 2nd edn. Champaign
 29. McCrory MA, Gomez TD, Bernauer EM, Mole PA (1995) 
Evaluation of a new air displacement plethysmograph for 
measuring human body composition. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
27(12):1686–1691
 30. Glickman SG, Marn CS, Supiano MA, Dengel DR (2004) 
Validity and reliability of dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry for 
the assessment of abdominal adiposity. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
97(2):509–514
 31. Bandera EV, Maskarinec G, Romieu I, John EM (2015) Racial 
and ethnic disparities in the impact of obesity on breast cancer 
risk and survival: a global perspective. Adv Nutr 6(6):803–819
 32. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2011) Dietary ref-
erence values for energy. The Stationery Office, London
 33. Hall KD, Sacks G, Chandramohan D, Chow CC, Wang YC, 
Gortmaker SL et al (2011) Quantification of the effect of energy 
imbalance on bodyweight. Lancet 378(9793):826–837
 34. Healy GN, Wijndaele K, Dunstan DW, Shaw JE, Salmon J, 
Zimmet PZ et al (2008) Objectively measured sedentary time, 
physical activity, and metabolic risk: the Australian Diabe-
tes, Obesity and Lifestyle Study (AusDiab). Diabetes Care 
31(2):369–371
 35. Romero-Corral A, Somers VK, Sierra-Johnson J, Thomas RJ, 
Collazo-Clavell ML, Korinek J et al (2008) Accuracy of body 
mass index in diagnosing obesity in the adult general popula-
tion. Int J Obes (Lond) 32(6):959–966
 36. Ello-Martin JA, Ledikwe JH, Rolls BJ (2005) The influence of 
food portion size and energy density on energy intake: implica-
tions for weight management. Am J Clin Nutr 82(1 Suppl):236 
S–241 S
 37. Prentice AM (1998) Manipulation of dietary fat and energy 
density and subsequent effects on substrate flux and food intake. 
Am J Clin Nutr 67(3 Suppl):535 S–541 S
 38. Fogelholm M, Anderssen S, Gunnarsdottir I, Lahti-Koski M 
(2012) Dietary macronutrients and food consumption as deter-
minants of long-term weight change in adult populations: a sys-
tematic literature review. Food Nutr Res 56
 39. Salas-Salvado J, Bullo M, Babio N, Martinez-Gonzalez MA, 
Ibarrola-Jurado N, Basora J et al (2011) Reduction in the inci-
dence of type 2 diabetes with the Mediterranean diet: results of 
the PREDIMED-Reus nutrition intervention randomized trial. 
Diabetes Care 34(1):14–19
 40. Jaworowska A, Blackham T, Davies IG, Stevenson L (2013) 
Nutritional challenges and health implications of takeaway and 
fast food. Nutr Rev 71(5):310–318
 41. Schroder H, Fito M, Covas MI (2007) Association of fast food 
consumption with energy intake, diet quality, body mass index 
and the risk of obesity in a representative Mediterranean popu-
lation. Br J Nutr 98(6):1274–1280
 42. Pereira MA, Kartashov AI, Ebbeling CB, Van Horn L, Slattery 
ML, Jacobs DR Jr., et al (2005) Fast-food habits, weight gain, 
and insulin resistance (the CARDIA study): 15-year prospective 
analysis. Lancet 365(9453):36–42
 43. Alkerwi A, Crichton GE, Hebert JR (2014) Consumption of 
ready-made meals and increased risk of obesity: findings from 
the observation of cardiovascular risk factors in Luxembourg 
(ORISCAV-LUX) study. Br J Nutr 1–8
 257
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258 
1 3
 44. Kant AK, Whitley MI, Graubard BI (2015) Away from home 
meals: associations with biomarkers of chronic disease and 
dietary intake in American adults, NHANES 2005–2010. Int J 
Obes (Lond) 39(5):820–827
 45. Chajes V, Biessy C, Ferrari P, Romieu I, Freisling H, Huybre-
chts I et al (2015) Plasma elaidic acid level as biomarker of 
industrial trans fatty acids and risk of weight change: report 
from the EPIC study. PloS one 10(2):e0118206
 46. Han E, Powell LM (2013) Consumption patterns of sugar-
sweetened beverages in the United States. J Acad Nutr Dietetics 
113(1):43–53
 47. Basu S, McKee M, Galea G, Stuckler D (2013) Relationship of 
soft drink consumption to global overweight, obesity, and dia-
betes: a cross-national analysis of 75 countries. Am J Public 
Health 103(11):2071–2077
 48. Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC, Hu FB (2013) Sugar-sweetened 
beverages and weight gain in children and adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 98(4):1084–1102
 49. Te Morenga L, Mallard S, Mann J (2013) Dietary sugars and 
body weight: systematic review and meta-analyses of ran-
domised controlled trials and cohort studies. BMJ 346:e7492
 50. Rouhani MH, Salehi-Abargouei A, Surkan PJ, Azadbakht L 
(2014) Is there a relationship between red or processed meat 
intake and obesity? A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
observational studies. Obes Rev 15(9):740–748
 51. Fung TT, Pan A, Hou T, Chiuve SE, Tobias DK, Mozaffa-
rian D et al (2015) Long-term change in diet quality is asso-
ciated with body weight change in men and women. J Nutr 
145(8):1850–1856
 52. Romaguera D, Norat T, Vergnaud AC, Mouw T, May AM, 
Agudo A et al (2010) Mediterranean dietary patterns and pro-
spective weight change in participants of the EPIC-PANACEA 
project. Am J Clin Nutr 92(4):912–921
 53. Funtikova AN, Benitez-Arciniega AA, Gomez SF, Fito M, Elo-
sua R, Schroder H (2014) Mediterranean diet impact on changes 
in abdominal fat and 10-year incidence of abdominal obesity in 
a Spanish population. Br J Nutr 111(8):1481–1487
 54. Buckland G, Bach A, Serra-Majem L (2008) Obesity and the 
Mediterranean diet: a systematic review of observational and 
intervention studies. Obes Rev Off J Int Assoc Study Obes 
9(6):582–593
 55. Richter LM, Victora CG, Hallal PC, Adair LS, Bhargava SK, 
Fall CH et al (2012) Cohort profile: the consortium of health-
orientated research in transitioning societies. Int J Epidemiol 
41(3):621–626
 56. Lajous M, Ortiz-Panozo E, Monge A, Santoyo-Vistrain R, Gar-
cia-Anaya A, Yunes-Diaz E et al (2015) Cohort Profile: The 
Mexican Teachers’ Cohort (MTC). Int J Epidemiol
 57. Romieu I, Escamilla-Nunez MC, Sanchez-Zamorano LM, 
Lopez-Ridaura R, Torres-Mejia G, Yunes EM et al (2012) The 
association between body shape silhouette and dietary pattern 
among Mexican women. Public Health Nutr 15(1):116–125
 58. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2015) Carbohy-
drates and health. The Stationery Office, London
 59. Mirza NM, Palmer MG, Sinclair KB, McCarter R, He J, Ebbe-
ling CB et al (2013) Effects of a low glycemic load or a low-fat 
dietary intervention on body weight in obese Hispanic Ameri-
can children and adolescents: a randomized controlled trial. Am 
J Clin Nutr 97(2):276–285
 60. Tobias DK, Chen M, Manson JE, Ludwig DS, Willett W, Hu 
FB (2015) Effect of low-fat diet interventions versus other diet 
interventions on long-term weight change in adults: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes. Endocrinol 
3(12):968–979
 61. Hu T, Mills KT, Yao L, Demanelis K, Eloustaz M, Yancy 
WS Jr., et al (2012) Effects of low-carbohydrate diets versus 
low-fat diets on metabolic risk factors: a meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled clinical trials. Am J Epidemiol 176(Suppl 
7):S44–S54
 62. Donnelly JE, Blair SN, Jakicic JM, Manore MM, Rankin JW, 
Smith BK et al (2009) American College of Sports Medicine 
Position Stand. Appropriate physical activity intervention strat-
egies for weight loss and prevention of weight regain for adults. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc 41(2):459–471
 63. Thorogood A, Mottillo S, Shimony A, Filion KB, Joseph L, 
Genest J et al (2011) Isolated aerobic exercise and weight loss: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Am J Med 124(8):747–755
 64. Miller CT, Fraser SF, Levinger I, Straznicky NE, Dixon JB, 
Reynolds J et al (2013) The effects of exercise training in addi-
tion to energy restriction on functional capacities and body 
composition in obese adults during weight loss: a systematic 
review. PloS one 8(11):e81692
 65. Ismail I, Keating SE, Baker MK, Johnson NA (2012) A system-
atic review and meta-analysis of the effect of aerobic vs. resist-
ance exercise training on visceral fat. Obes Rev Off J Int Assoc 
Study Obesity 13(1):68–91
 66. Schwingshackl L, Dias S, Strasser B, Hoffmann G (2013) 
Impact of different training modalities on anthropometric 
and metabolic characteristics in overweight/obese subjects: 
a systematic review and network meta-analysis. PLoS One 
8(12):e82853
 67. Hu FB, Li TY, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Manson JE (2003) 
Television watching and other sedentary behaviors in relation 
to risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus in women. Jama 
289(14):1785–1791
 68. Liao Y, Liao J, Durand CP, Dunton GF (2014) Which type of 
sedentary behaviour intervention is more effective at reducing 
body mass index in children? A meta-analytic review. Obes Rev 
Off J Int Assoc Study Obesity 15(3):159–168
 69. Blundell JE, Gibbons C, Caudwell P, Finlayson G, Hopkins M 
(2015) Appetite control and energy balance: impact of exercise. 
ObesRev 16(Suppl 1):67–76
 70. Franks PW, Ravussin E, Hanson RL, Harper IT, Allison DB, 
Knowler WC et al (2005) Habitual physical activity in chil-
dren: the role of genes and the environment. Am J Clin Nutr 
82(4):901–908
 71. Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, Justice AE, Pers TH, Day 
FR et al (2015) Genetic studies of body mass index yield new 
insights for obesity biology. Nature 518(7538):197–206
 72. Ahmad S, Varga TV, Franks PW (2013) Gene x environment 
interactions in obesity: the state of the evidence. Hum Hered 
75(2–4):106–115
 73. Kilpelainen TO, Qi L, Brage S, Sharp SJ, Sonestedt E, Demer-
ath E et al (2011) Physical activity attenuates the influence of 
FTO variants on obesity risk: a meta-analysis of 218,166 adults 
and 19,268 children. PLoS Med 8(11):e1001116
 74. Qi Q, Chu AY, Kang JH, Jensen MK, Curhan GC, Pasquale LR 
et al (2012) Sugar-sweetened beverages and genetic risk of obe-
sity. N Engl J Med 367(15):1387–1396
 75. Franks PW, Christophi CA, Jablonski KA, Billings LK, Dela-
hanty LM, Horton ES et al (2014) Common variation at 
PPARGC1A/B and change in body composition and metabolic 
traits following preventive interventions: the Diabetes Preven-
tion Program. Diabetologia 57(3):485–490
 76. Nettleton JA, Follis JL, Ngwa JS, Smith CE, Ahmad S, Tanaka 
T et al (2015) Gene x dietary pattern interactions in obesity: 
analysis of up to 68,317 adults of European ancestry. Hum Mol 
Genet 24(16):4728–4738
 77. van Dijk SJ, Tellam RL, Morrison JL, Muhlhausler BS, Mol-
loy PL (2015) Recent developments on the role of epigenetics 
in obesity and metabolic disease. Clinical Epigenetics 7(1):66
 258
 
Cancer Causes Control (2017) 28:247–258
1 3
 78. Chambers JC, Loh M, Lehne B, Drong A, Kriebel J, Motta V 
et al. Epigenome-wide association of DNA methylation mark-
ers in peripheral blood from Indian Asians and Europeans with 
incident type 2 diabetes: a nested case–control study. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol 3(7):526–534
 79. Dick KJ, Nelson CP, Tsaprouni L, Sandling JK, Aïssi D, Wahl 
S et al. DNA methylation and body-mass index: a genome-wide 
analysis. Lancet. 383(9933):1990–1998
 80. Blottiere HM, de Vos WM, Ehrlich SD, Dore J (2013) Human 
intestinal metagenomics: state of the art and future. Curr Opin 
Microbiol 16(3):232–239
 81. Vangay P, Ward T, Gerber JS, Knights D (2015) Antibiot-
ics, pediatric dysbiosis, and disease. Cell Host Microbe 
17(5):553–564
 82. Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J, Prifti E, Hildebrand F, Falony 
G et al (2013) Richness of human gut microbiome correlates 
with metabolic markers. Nature 500(7464):541–546
 83. Dao MC, Everard A, Aron-Wisnewsky J, Sokolovska N, Prifti 
E, Verger EO et al (2016) Akkermansia muciniphila and 
improved metabolic health during a dietary intervention in obe-
sity: relationship with gut microbiome richness and ecology. 
Gut 65(3):426–436
 84. Kong LC, Holmes BA, Cotillard A, Habi-Rachedi F, Brazeilles 
R, Gougis S et al (2014) Dietary patterns differently associate 
with inflammation and gut microbiota in overweight and obese 
subjects. PLoS One 9(10):e109434
 85. Lobstein T, Baur L, Uauy R, TaskForce IIO (2004) Obesity in 
children and young people: a crisis in public health. Obes Rev 
5(Suppl 1):4–104
 86. Perez-Morales E, Bacardi-Gascon M, Jimenez-Cruz A (2013) 
Sugar-sweetened beverage intake before 6 years of age and 
weight or BMI status among older children; systematic review 
of prospective studies. Nutr Hosp 28(1):47–51
 87. Robinson TN (1999) Reducing children’s television view-
ing to prevent obesity: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 
282(16):1561–1567
 88. Fatima Y, Doi SAR, Mamun AA (2015) Longitudinal impact 
of sleep on overweight and obesity in children and adolescents: 
a systematic review and bias-adjusted meta-analysis. Obes Rev 
16(2):137–149
 89. Lobstein T, Jackson-Leach R, Moodie ML, Hall KD, Gort-
maker SL, Swinburn BA et al (2015) Child and adolescent obe-
sity: part of a bigger picture. Lancet
 90. WHO (2004) Global strategy on diet, physical activity and 
health—what are the causes? World Health Organization
 91. ISDOHaD. International Society for Developmental Origins of 
Health and Disease
 92. Tie HT, Xia YY, Zeng YS, Zhang Y, Dai CL, Guo JJ et al 
(2014) Risk of childhood overweight or obesity associated with 
excessive weight gain during pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Arch 
Gynecol Obstet 289(2):247–257
 93. Norris SA, Osmond C, Gigante D, Kuzawa CW, Ramakrishnan 
L, Lee NR et al (2012) Size at birth, weight gain in infancy and 
childhood, and adult diabetes risk in five low- or middle-income 
country birth cohorts. Diabetes Care 35(1):72–79
 94. Adair LS, Martorell R, Stein AD, Hallal PC, Sachdev HS, Prab-
hakaran D et al (2009) Size at birth, weight gain in infancy 
and childhood, and adult blood pressure in 5 low- and middle-
income-country cohorts: when does weight gain matter? Am J 
Clin Nutr 89(5):1383–1392
 95. de Beer M, Vrijkotte TG, Fall CH, van Eijsden M, Osmond C, 
Gemke RJ (2015) Associations of infant feeding and timing of 
linear growth and relative weight gain during early life with 
childhood body composition. Int J Obes (Lond) 39(4):586–592
 96. Papadimitriou A (2015) Timing of adiposity rebound and prev-
alence of obesity. J Pediatr 167(2):498
 97. Weng SF, Redsell SA, Swift JA, Yang M, Glazebrook CP 
(2012) Systematic review and meta-analyses of risk factors 
for childhood overweight identifiable during infancy. Arch Dis 
Child 97(12):1019–1026
 98. Pearce J, Taylor MA, Langley-Evans SC (2013) Timing of the 
introduction of complementary feeding and risk of childhood 
obesity: a systematic review. Int J Obesity 37(10):1295–1306
 99. Wilson SM, Sato AF (2014) Stress and paediatric obesity: what 
we know and where to go Stress. Health (London) 30(2):91–102
 
100. Cecchini M, Sassi F, Lauer JA, Lee YY, Guajardo-Barron 
V, Chisholm D. Tackling of unhealthy diets, physical inactiv-
ity, and obesity: health effects and cost-effectiveness. Lancet. 
376(9754):1775–1784
 
101. Gortmaker SL, Long MW, Resch SC, Ward ZJ, Cradock AL, 
Barrett JL et al (2015) Cost effectiveness of childhood obesity 
interventions: evidence and methods for CHOICES. Am J Prev 
Med 49(1):102–111
 
102. Pan American Health Organization (2011) Recommendations 
from a Pan American Health Organization Expert Consulta-
tion on the Marketing of Food and Non-Alcoholic Beverages to 
Children in the Americas. PAHO, Washington, D.C.
 
103. Jenkin G, Madhvani N, Signal L, Bowers S (2014) A systematic 
review of persuasive marketing techniques to promote food to 
children on television. Obes Rev 15(4):281–293
 
104. Hawkes C (2007) Regulating and litigating in the public interest: 
regulating food marketing to young people worldwide: trends 
and policy drivers. Am J Public Health 97(11):1962–1973
 
105. Wang YWY, Wilson RF, Bleich S, Cheskin L, Weston C, Show-
ell N, Fawole O, Lau B, Segal J (2013) Childhood obesity pre-
vention programs: comparative effectiveness review and meta-
analysis internet: agency for healthcare research and quality 
(US); 2013. Contract No.: 13-EHC081-EF
 
106. USDA Nutrition Evidence Library (NEL) (2014) Dietary pat-
terns systematic review
 
107. UK Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2011) The 
influence of maternal, fetal and child nutrition on development 
of chronic disease in later life
 
108. Emmett PM, Jones LR (2015) Diet, growth, and obesity devel-
opment throughout childhood in the Avon Longitudinal Study 
of Parents and Children. Nutr Rev 73(Suppl 3):175–206
 
109. Victora CG, Adair L, Fall C, Hallal PC, Martorell R, Richter 
L et al (2008) Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences 
for adult health and human capital. Lancet 371(9609):340–357
 
110. Yang Z, Huffman SL (2013) Nutrition in pregnancy and early 
childhood and associations with obesity in developing coun-
tries. Matern Child Nutr 9(Suppl 1):105–119
 
111. Michels KB, Willett WC, Graubard BI, Vaidya RL, Cantwell 
MM, Sansbury LB et al (2007) A longitudinal study of infant 
feeding and obesity throughout life course. Int J Obes (Lond) 
31(7):1078–1085
 
112. Ramirez-Silva I, Rivera JA, Trejo-Valdivia B, Martorell R, Stein 
AD, Romieu I et al (2015) Breastfeeding status at age 3 months 
is associated with adiposity and cardiometabolic markers at age 
4 years in Mexican children. J Nutr 145(6):1295–1302
