 Hypertension
Suzanne Oparil1, Maria Czarina Acelajado2, George L. Bakris3, Dan R. Berlowitz4,5, Renata 
Cífková6, Anna F. Dominiczak7, Guido Grassi8,9, Jens Jordan10, Neil R. Poulter11, Anthony 
Rodgers12, and Paul K. Whelton13
1Vascular Biology and Hypertension Program, Division of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of 
Medicine, School of Medicine, The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB), 1720 2nd 
Avenue South, Birmingham, Alabama, USA 35294-0007
2Athens-Limestone Hospital, Athens, Alabama, United States of America (U.S.A.)
3University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America (U.S.A.)
4Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Bedford Veteran Affairs 
Medical Center, Bedford, Massachusetts
5Schools of Medicine and Public Health, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, United States 
of America (U.S.A.)
6Center for Cardiovascular Prevention, Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine and 
Thomayer Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic
7Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Science, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom (U.K.)
8Clinica Medica, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
9IRCCS Multimedica, Sesto San Giovanni, Milan, Italy
Correspondence to: S.O. soparil@uabmc.edu.
Author contributions
Introduction (M.C.A. and S.O.); Epidemiology (A.R. and P.K.W.); Mechanisms/pathophysiology (G.B. and G.G.); Diagnosis, 
screening and prevention (A.F.D. and P.K.W.); Management (J.J. and R.C.); Quality of life (D.R.B.); Outlook (N.R.P.); Overview of 
Primer (S.O.).
Competing interests
G.B. served as Consultant for Janssen, Bayer, AbbVie, Vascular Dynamics, Relypsa and Merck; served/serves as Principal Investigator 
for FIDELIO trial (Bayer), Steering Committee member (CREDENCE)-Janssen, SONAR-AbbVie, and CALM-2-Vascular Dynamics. 
J.J. served as consultant for Novartis, Novo-Nordisc, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Sanofi, Orexigen, Riemser, Theravance, Vivus; and is 
cofounder of Eternygen GmbH. S.O. (in the previous 24 months) has received research grant support or reimbursement for travel to 
meetings or other, non-financial support from Actelion Clinical Research/George Clinical; AstraZeneca AB; Bayer; Lundbeck; 
Novartis; Novo Nordisk; Rox Medical; has consulted for Actelion/George Clinical, Lundbeck, Novo Nordisk and ROX Medical; 
served as Director/Principal Investigator, SPRINT University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Clinical Center Network (CCN); and 
sub-investigator UAB CCN clinical site; for which Takeda and Arbor Pharmaceuticals donated 5% of medication used. N.R.P. served 
as advisory board member (ad hoc) for Pfizer, Takeda, MSD, Servier, and Medtronic (companies producing blood pressure lowering 
agents/devices); received speaker honoraria from Servier, AstraZeneca, Napi Labs, and Menarini; received research funding from 
Servier, Pfizer and Menarini; and is the President of the International Society of Hypertension. George Health Enterprises, the social 
enterprise arm of The George Institute for Global Health, has applied for a patent in the area of low-dose combinations on which A.R. 
is listed as an inventor; and has received investment to develop fixed-dose combinations containing aspirin, statin and BP lowering 
drugs. AR is an investigator on grants for several trials of blood pressure lowering interventions. G.G. has received lectures fees from 
Merck and Astra Zeneca. M.C.A., R.C., A.F.D., D.R.B. and P.K.W. declare no competing interests.
How to cite this Primer
Publisher’s note
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Dis Primers. ; 4: 18014. doi:10.1038/nrdp.2018.14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10Institute of Aerospace Medicine, German Aerospace Center (DLR), University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany
11Imperial Clinical Trials Unit, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom (U.K.)
12The George Institute for Global Health, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
13Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, 
New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America (U.S.A.)
Abstract
Systemic arterial hypertension is the most important modifiable risk factor for all-cause morbidity 
and mortality worldwide and is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). 
Fewer than half of those with hypertension are aware of their condition, and many others are aware 
but not treated or inadequately treated, although successful treatment of hypertension reduces the 
global burden of disease and mortality. The aetiology of hypertension involves the complex 
interplay of environmental and pathophysiological factors that affect multiple systems, as well as 
genetic predisposition. Evaluation of patients with hypertension includes accurate standardized 
blood pressure (BP) measurement, assessing patients’ predicted risk of atherosclerotic CVD, 
evidence of target organ damage, detection of secondary causes of hypertension and presence of 
comorbidities, including CVD and kidney disease. Lifestyle changes, including dietary 
modifications and increased physical activity, are effective in lowering BP and preventing 
hypertension and its CVD sequelae. Pharmacological therapy is very effective in lowering BP and 
preventing CVD outcomes in most patients; first line antihypertensive medications include 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, dihydropyridine 
calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics.
INTRODUCTION
Systemic arterial hypertension (hereafter referred to as hypertension) is characterized by 
persistently high blood pressure (BP) in the systemic arteries. BP is commonly expressed as 
the ratio of the systolic BP (that is, the pressure that the blood exerts on the arterial walls 
when the heart contracts) and the diastolic BP (the pressure when the heart relaxes). The BP 
thresholds that define hypertension depend on the measurement method (Table 1). Several 
aetiologies can underlie hypertension. The majority (90–95%) of patients have a highly 
heterogeneous ‘essential’ or primary hypertension with a multifactorial gene-environment 
aetiology. A positive family history is a frequent occurrence in patients with hypertension, 
with the heritability (a measure of how much of the variation in a trait is due to variation in 
genetic factors) estimated between 35% and 50% in the majority of studies1,2. Genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) have identified ~120 loci that are associated with BP regulation 
and together explain 3.5% of the trait variance3,4,5. These findings are becoming 
increasingly important as we search for new pathways and new biomarkers to develop more-
modern ‘omics’-driven diagnostic and therapeutic modalities for hypertension in the era of 
precision medicine6.
Oparil et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Several rare, monogenic forms of hypertension have been described (for example, the Liddle 
syndrome, glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (a mineralocorticoid excess state) and 
mutations in PDE3A (which encodes cGMP-inhibited 3’,5’-cyclic phosphodiesterase A)), in 
which a single gene mutation fully explains the pathogenesis of hypertension and indicates 
the best treatment modality7,8,9. If hypertension is caused by another condition (for example, 
primary aldosteronism, pheochromocytoma (a neuroendocrine tumour of the adrenal glands 
or other neuroendocrine tissues) or renal artery stenosis), it is referred to as secondary 
hypertension.
Hypertension is the most common preventable risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD; 
including coronary heart disease, heart failure, stroke, myocardial infarction, atrial 
fibrillation and peripheral artery disease), chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cognitive 
impairment, and is the leading single contributor to all-cause death and disability 
worldwide10. The relationship between BP and the increased risk of CVD is graded and 
continuous, starting as low as 115/75 mmHg, well within what is considered to be the 
normotensive range. Successful prevention and treatment of hypertension are key in 
reducing disease burden and promoting longevity in the world’s population. In treating 
hyperteinsion, it is important to consider a person’s predicted atherosclerotic CVD 
(ASCVD) risk more than the level of BP alone, as persons with high CVD risk derive the 
greatest benefit from BP lowering treatment11.
This Primer will discuss the epidemiology and pathophysiology of primary hypertension, 
prevention strategies for slowing the progression of BP elevation, management strategies 
(including optimal BP targets) for lowering BP and preventing CVD outcomes in patients 
with established hypertension and the effects of antihypertensive treatment on quality of life; 
finally, we will explore knowledge gaps, future trends and the outlook for hypertension 
research and treatment over the next decade.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In pre-industrial societies, BP levels had narrow distributions with mean values that changed 
little with age and averaged around 115/75 mmHg12, a value that probably represents the 
normal (or ideal) BP for humans. However, in most contemporary societies, systolic BP 
levels rise steadily and continuously with age in both men and women. This ubiquitous 
finding could be explained because age is a proxy for the probability and duration of 
exposure to the numerous environmental factors that increase BP gradually over time, such 
as excessive sodium consumption, insufficient intake of dietary potassium, overweight and 
obesity, alcohol intake and physical inactivity. Other factors, such as genetic predisposition 
or adverse intrauterine environment (such as gestational hypertension or pre-eclampsia), 
have small but definite associations with high BP levels in adulthood13. Even modest rises in 
mean population BP lead to large increases in the absolute number of people with 
hypertension14.
As economic development progresses, hypertension initially affects those with a high 
socioeconomic status, but at later stages of economic development, the prevalence of 
hypertension and its consequences are greatest in those with lower socioeconomic status; 
Oparil et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 this phenomenon is seen both within and between countries. Further, the speed of change 
prevalence of hypertension since 2000 to 2010 has been much more rapid than in previous 
epidemiological transitions15.
Disease burden
Globally, 3.5 billion adults now have non-optimal systolic BP levels (that is, >110–115 
mmHg) and 874 million adults have systolic BP ≥140 mmHg. Thus, approximately one in 
four adults has hypertension16. Between 1990 and 2015 there was a 43% increase in the total 
global number of healthy life years lost to non-optimal BP, driven by population increase, 
population aging and a 10% increase in the age-standardized prevalence of hypertension16. 
The Global Burden of Disease study has shown that non-optimal BP continues to be the 
biggest single risk factor contributing to the global burden of disease and to global all-cause 
mortality, leading to 9.4 million deaths and 212 million lost healthy life years (8.5% of the 
global total) each year10.
CVD risk
Prospective observational studies have repeatedly demonstrated a strong, continuous positive 
relationship between BP and CVD, with no evidence of a threshold for risk throughout the 
usual range of BP observed in clinical practice17,18,19. The relationship between BP and 
CVD applies to both systolic BP and diastolic BP, but is somewhat more robust for systolic 
BP in adults19. It is noted in both sexes, at all ages throughout adulthood and for all major 
manifestations of CVD, including stroke (ischaemic and haemorroagic), coronary artery 
disease, heart failure, peripheral vascular disease and end stage renal disease (although there 
are variations in the strength of the associations and the slopes of the curves)17,18,19,20 
(Figure 1). The relationship is independent of other CVD risk factors, and level of BP has 
proven to be a major component of CVD risk in all prediction models21. Approximately 
two-thirds of all adults who have hypertension or receive treatment with BP lowering 
medication at 30 years of age have a ~40 % higher risk of experiencing a CVD event than 
their age-matched and sex-matched counterparts with a lower level of BP18. In addition, 
CVD events in individuals with hypertension tend to manifest about five years earlier than in 
individuals with a lower level of BP18.
In individuals of 40–69 years of age, a 20 mmHg rise of systolic BP or a 10 mmHg rise of 
diastolic BP regardless of baseline values is associated with more than a doubling of the risk 
for stroke or ischaemic heart disease mortality17, whereas a systolic BP reduction of 5 
mmHg can decrease stroke mortality by 14% and CVD mortality by 9%. At older ages (≥80 
years), the corresponding relative risk is slightly lower, but the absolute risk is far greater 
than earlier in life17. For example, a 20 mm Hg difference in systolic BP between 120 and 
140 mmHg is associated with an annual difference in absolute risk that is nearly ten times 
larger at ages 80–89 years than that at ages 50–59 years17.
Oparil et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MECHANISMS/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
BP regulation
BP is determined by several parameters of the cardiovascular system, including blood 
volume and cardiac output (the amount of blood pumped by the heart per minute) as well as 
the balance of arterial tone that is affected by both intravascular volume and neurohumoral 
systems (discussed in the following sections). The maintenance of physiological BP levels 
involves a complex interplay of various elements of an integrated neurohumoral system that 
includes the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), the role of natriuretic peptides 
and the endothelium, the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the immune system (Figure 
2). Malfunction or disruption of factors involved in BP control in any of these systems can 
directly or indirectly lead to increases in mean BP, BP variability or both, over time resulting 
in target organ damage (for example, left ventricular hypertrophy and CKD) and CVD 
outcomes22.
The pathophysiological mechanisms responsible for hypertension are complex and act on a 
genetic background. Primary hypertension involves multiple types of genes; some allelic 
variants of several genes are associated with an increased risk of developing primary 
hypertension and are linked in almost all cases to a positive family history (Box 1) This 
genetic predisposition, along with a host of environmental factors, such as high Na+ intake, 
poor sleep quality or sleep apnoea, excess alcohol intake and high mental stress, contribute 
to the development of hypertension22,23,24. Finally, the probability of developing 
hypertension increases with aging, owing to progressive stiffening of the arterial vasculature 
caused by, among other factors, slowly developing changes in vascular collagen and 
increases in atherosclerosis25,26,27. Immunological factors can also play a major part, 
especially on the background of infectious or rheumatological diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis. The mosaic theory of hypertension describes its multifaceted pathophysiology2829.
Sodium homeostasis regulation
Sodium (Na+) is a crucial regulator of blood volume: high serum Na+ concentration 
promotes fluid (water) retention, thereby increasing blood volume and BP. When dietary Na
+ increases in normotensive individuals, compensatory haemodynamic changes occur to 
maintain constant BP. These changes include reduction in renal and peripheral vascular 
resistance and increased production of nitric oxide (a vasodilator) from the endothelium. 
However, if the effect of nitric oxide is impaired or absent, an increase in BP occurs. 
Endothelial dysfunction is a risk factor for the development of salt sensitivity and 
subsequent hypertension. Salt sensitivity is defined as a marked elevation in BP following a 
Na+ load of ≥5 g and is characterized by an elevation of systolic BP of at least 10 mmHg 
within a few hours of ingestion. Salt sensitive individuals have underlying endothelial 
dysfunction due to genetic or environmental influences. In response to a high salt load these 
individuals generally manifest overproduction of transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), 
which increases the risk of fibrosis, and oxidative stress, and have limited bioavailable nitric 
oxide. Chronic high salt ingestion can result in endothelial dysfunction, even in salt-resistant 
individuals30, and also affects the gut microbiota, with resultant changes that contribute to 
increased salt sensitivity and the development of hypertension31. High salt intake also 
Oparil et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 appears to drive autoimmunity by inducing T helper 17 (TH17) cells31. High salt intake in 
mice has been shown to deplete Lactobacillus murinus in the gut microbiota. Treatment of 
mice with L. murinus prevented salt-induced exacerbation of salt-sensitive hypertension by 
modulating TH17 cells31. In line with these findings, a moderate high-salt challenge in a 
pilot study in humans reduced intestinal survival of Lactobacillus spp., increased the activity 
of TH17 cells and increased BP31. Thus, the gut microbiota appears to contribute to salt 
sensitivity of BP and the pathogenesis of hypertension.
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
The RAAS has wide-ranging effects on BP regulation, mediating Na+ retention, pressure 
natriuresis (that is, the mechanism whereby increases in renal perfusion pressure (the 
gradient between renal arterial and venous blood pressure) lead to decreased Na+ 
reabsorption and increased Na+ excretion), salt sensitivity, vasoconstriction, endothelial 
dysfunction and vascular injury, and plays an important part in the pathogenesis of 
hypertension22. The RAAS is present at the cellular level in many organs, but its most 
crucial role is to help regulate pressure-volume homeostasis in the kidney, where it 
maintains perfusion in volume depleted states (that is, when there is a reduction in 
extracellular fluid volume as a result of sodium and fluid loss) and is suppressed in volume 
expanded (fluid overload) conditions. Renin and its precursor pro-renin are synthesized and 
stored in the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney and are released in response to various 
stimuli (Figure 3). The main function of renin is to cleave angiotensinogen to form 
angiotensin I. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) cleaves angiotensin I to form 
angiotensin II, which is at the center of the pathogenetic role of the RAAS in hypertension 
(Figure 3)32..
Angiotensin II enhances Na+ reabsorption in the proximal tubule by increasing the activity 
of the sodium-hydrogen exchanger (NHE3), sodium-bicarbonate exchanger and sodium-
potassium ATPase, and by inducing aldosterone synthesis and release from the adrenal 
glomerulosa22. Angiotensin II is also associated with endothelial dysfunction and has pro-
fibrotic and pro-inflammatory effects, mediated in large part by increased oxidative stress, 
resulting in renal, cardiac and vascular injury. Angiotensin II is tightly linked to target organ 
damage in hypertension via these mechanisms22..
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) has emerged as an important modulator in the 
pathophysiology of hypertension, CVD and renal disease, owing to its role in metabolizing 
angiotensin II into angiotensin-(1–7)33. Ang-(1–7) induces systemic and regional 
vasodilation, diuresis and natriuresis, and exerts antiproliferative and antigrowth effects on 
vascular smooth muscle cells, cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts as well as glomerular and 
proximal tubular cells33. Ang-(1–7) also has cardiorenal protective effects that are mediated 
by the proto-oncogene Mas receptor through signalling pathways that include mitogen-
activated protein kinases (MAPK), PI3K-AKT, NADPH oxidase, TGF-β1, the EGF receptor, 
and NF-κB activity33,34,35.
Aldosterone plays a crucial part in hypertension: by binding to the mineralocorticoid 
receptor, it induces non-genomic effects (that is, without directly modifying gene 
expression) that include activation of the amiloride-sensitive sodium channel, commonly 
Oparil et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 known as the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) and result in the stimulation of renal Na+ 
reabsorption in the cortical collecting duct36. Aldosterone also has many non-epithelial 
effects that contribute to endothelial dysfunction, vasoconstriction and hypertension36,37. 
These include vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, vascular extracellular matrix 
deposition, vascular remodeling, fibrosis, and increased oxidative stress36,37.
Natriuretic Peptides
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) play an important part 
in salt sensitivity and hypertension. They have important natriuretic and vasodilator 
properties that allow maintenance of Na+ balance and BP during Na+ loading38,39. Upon 
administration of a Na+ load, atrial and ventricular stretch leads to release of ANP and BNP, 
respectively, which leads to systemic vasodilation and decreased plasma volume (owing to 
fluid shifts from the intravascular to the interstitial compartment) and results in BP 
lowering40. Natriuretic peptides increase glomerular filtration rate via an increase in efferent 
arteriolar tone in volume-expanded states and inhibit renal Na+ reabsorption through both 
direct and indirect effects. Direct effects include decreased activity of Na+-K+-ATPase and 
the sodium-glucose co-transporter in the proximal tubule and inhibition of the epithelial 
sodium channel in the distal nephron. Indirect effects include inhibition of renin and 
aldosterone release39.
Natriuretic peptide deficiency promotes hypertension. Corin is a serine protease that is 
largely expressed in the heart and converts the ANP and BNP precursors pro-ANP and pro-
BNP to their active forms. Corin deficiency has been associated with volume overload, heart 
failure and salt-sensitive hypertension41. Natriuretic peptide deficiency also predisposes to 
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Obesity is associated with natriuretic peptide 
deficiency, probably through upregulation of the natriuretic peptide scavenger receptor NPR-
C in adipose tissue42. Natriuretic peptides have therapeutic potential for the metabolic 
syndrome; the metabolic syndrome is a cluster of conditions (including high BP, high fasting 
glucose levels, abdominal obesity, high triglycerides and microalbuminuria) that occur 
together, increasing the risk of CVD and diabetes mellitus42.
The Endothelium
The endothelium is a major regulator of vascular tone and major contributor to salt 
sensitivity through NO. Endothelial cells produce a host of vasoactive substances, of which 
NO is the most important in BP regulation43,44. NO is continuously released by endothelial 
cells in response to flow-induced shear stress, leading to vascular smooth muscle relaxation 
through activation of guanylate cyclase and generation of intracellular cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate45. Interruption of NO production via inhibition of constitutively expressed 
endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) causes BP elevation and development of hypertension in 
animals and humans46. Studies to evaluate NO activity in humans have demonstrated 
decreased whole-body production of NO in patients with hypertension compared with 
normotensive controls46,47.
Endothelial cells also secrete a variety of other vasoregulatory substances, including 
vasodilators such as prostacyclin and endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factors, and 
Oparil et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vasoconstrictors such as endothelin 1 (ET-1), locally generated angiotensin II and the 
prostanoids thromboxane A2 and prostaglandin A2. ET-1 is a potent vasoconstrictor that 
activates ET-A receptors in vascular smooth muscle48. Other vasodilating substances, 
secreted by a variety of cells types, such as calcitonin gene related peptide, adrenomedullin 
and substance P act primarily through increases in NO release from endothelial cells49,50. 
The glucose-regulating gut hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) also has vasodilating 
properties51. The balance between these factors, along with NO and ET-1, determines the 
final effect of the endothelium on vascular tone52,48,53,51. Circulating ET-1 levels are not 
consistently increased in hypertension, but there is a trend toward increased sensitivity to the 
vasoconstrictor and hypertensive effects of ET-1 in individuals with hypertension53. ET-A 
receptor antagonists attenuate or abolish hypertension in a variety of experimental models 
and are effective in lowering BP in humans48,53.
Endothelial dysfunction plays a seminal part in the pathogenesis of hypertension. 
Normotensive offspring of parents with hypertension often have impaired endothelium-
dependent vasodilation, which implies a genetic component in the development of 
endothelial dysfunction47. Endothelial dysfunction in the setting of chronic hypertension is 
related to a combination of direct pressure-induced injury and increased oxidative stress. 
Several enzyme systems, including NADPH oxidase, xanthine oxidase and cyclooxygenase, 
as well as decreased activity of superoxide dismutase generate reactive oxygen species47,54. 
Excess superoxide anions bind to NO, decreasing NO bioavailability and generating the pro-
inflammatory oxidant, peroxynitrite. Decreased NO bioavailability is the central factor that 
links oxidative stress to endothelial dysfunction and hypertension47. Salt-sensitive 
individuals may be very sensitive to the hemodynamic stress of increased blood volume, 
leading to overproduction of TGF-beta, oxidative stress, and limiting bioavailable NO30. 
Angiotensin II, along with other factors, including cyclic vascular stretch as a result of BP 
changes, endothelin-1 (ET-1), uric acid, systemic inflammation, norepinephrine, free fatty 
acids, and tobacco smoking, enhances NADPH oxidase activity and plays a central part in 
the generation of oxidative stress in hypertension52.
Sympathetic Nervous System
Baroreceptors, mechanoreceptors that sense pressure changes of the circulatory system, are 
housed in various locations in the arterial tree, a key place being the carotid sinus, a dilated 
area at the base of the internal carotid artery just superior to bifurcation of the common 
carotid artery. When this artery is stretched by elevated BP, nerve bundles projecting from 
the baroreceptors in the carotid sinus send messages to the brain to reduce sympathetic 
outflow of nerve impulses or nerve traffic and, thereby, BP55,56,57. The SNS is generally 
more activated in persons with hypertension than in normotensive individuals.58,59 SNS 
activity is also greater in individual with obesity, in men than in women, in younger than in 
older persons, and in those with advanced kidney disease.6061 Many patients with 
hypertension are in a state of autonomic imbalance with increased sympathetic and 
decreased parasympathetic activity59,62. SNS hyperactivity is relevant to both the generation 
and maintenance of hypertension. Studies in humans have also identified markers (such as 
increased catecholamine spillover and sural nerve activity assessed by microneurography) of 
sympathetic overactivity in normotensive individuals with a family history of 
Oparil et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hypertension63. Among patients with hypertension, increasing severity of hypertension is 
associated with increasing levels of sympathetic activity measured by 
microneurography64,65. Plasma catecholamine levels, microneurographic recordings and 
systemic catecholamine spillover (the amount of catecholamines released from sympathetic 
nerves innervating blood vessels that enter the bloodstream) studies have given evidence of 
increased sympathetic activity in patients with hypertension who are obese, in those with the 
metabolic syndrome, and in those whose hypertension is complicated by heart failure or 
kidney disease65.
The importance of the SNS in the pathogenesis of hypertension has been defined in a variety 
of experimental models. Models of obesity-related hypertension demonstrate that increased 
renal sympathetic nerve activity and its attendant increase in renal sodium reabsorption are 
key factors in the maintenance of sustained hypertension62. In another animal model, rats 
that received daily infusions of phenylephrine for 8 weeks developed hypertension during 
the infusions; their BP normalized under a low salt diet after discontinuation of 
phenylephrine, but once re-challenged with a high salt diet, the animals became hypertensive 
again30. The degree of BP elevation on the high salt diet was directly related to the degree of 
renal tubulo-interstitial fibrosis and decrease in glomerular filtration rate, suggesting that 
catecholamine-induced hypertension causes renal interstitial injury and a salt-sensitive 
phenotype that persists even after sympathetic overactivity is no longer present. In addition, 
enhanced SNS activity results in alpha-1 adrenergic receptor mediated endothelial 
dysfunction, vasoconstriction, vascular smooth muscle proliferation and increased arterial 
stiffness, which contribute to the development and maintenance of hypertension66. Finally, 
there is evidence that sympathetic overactivity enhances salt-sensitivity owing to a reduction 
in activity of the WNK lysine deficient protein kinase 4 (WNK4) gene, which encodes a 
serine/threonine kinase that inhibits the thiazide-sensitive-Na-Cl co-transporter, resulting in 
increased distal tubular Na+ retention67. These mechanisms have been reviewed recently66.
Inflammation and the immune system
Inflammation makes an important contribution to the genesis of hypertension and related 
target organ damage. Inflammation is associated with increased vascular permeability and 
release of potent mediators, such as reactive oxygen species, NO, cytokines and 
metalloproteinases. Cytokines mediate the formation of neo-intima (a new or thickened layer 
of arterial intima), thereby decreasing the lumen diameter of resistance vessels (small 
arteries and arterioles highly innervated by autonomic nerves and the primary vessels 
involved in the regulation of BP), and promoting vascular fibrosis, leading to increased 
vascular resistance and stiffness. Cytokines also affect renal tubular function by increasing 
local synthesis of angiotensinogen and angiotensin II, as well as promoting sodium and 
volume retention in hypertension68. Matrix metalloproteinases stimulate the degradation of 
the extracellular matrix, allowing infiltration of immune cells through the vessel wall into 
the interstitium of the affected organs, promoting apoptosis and enhancing collagen 
synthesis and matrix deposition, leading to target organ damage68.
While animal data are clear about the relationship between inflammation and hypertension, 
the data in humans are limited. There are associations between C-reactive protein, TNF-
Oparil et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 alpha and various interleukins and hypertension, but no direct link68. GWASs have identified 
a single nucleotide polymorphism of SH2B3 (SNP rs3184504), which results in an amino 
acid substitution in SH2B adapter protein 3 (a protein involved in T cell receptor activation 
and signalling), that is associated with many autoimmune and cardiovascular disorders, 
including hypertension69. Further, drugs that are used to treat inflammation, such as non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and cyclosporine, raise rather than lower BP in 
hypertensive individuals, highlighting the complex nature of the relationship between 
inflammation and hypertension69.
Both innate and adaptive immune responses participate in the generation of reactive oxygen 
species and inflammatory changes in the kidneys, blood vessels and brain in 
hypertension68,70. Innate immune responses, especially those mediated by macrophages, 
have been linked to hypertension induced by angiotensin II, aldosterone and NO 
antagonism68,70. Reductions in macrophage infiltration of the kidney or the peri-adventitial 
space of the aorta and medium sized arteries lead to reductions in BP and salt-sensitivity68. 
Adaptive immune responses via T cells have also been linked to the genesis of hypertension 
and its target organ damage. T cells express AT1 receptors and mediate angiotensin II-
dependent hypertension,70 and it has been shown that depletion of mature lymphocytes 
ameliorated hypertension and kidney injury resulting from a high-salt diet in the Dahl SS 
rat71. Thus, a balance between proinflammatory T cell reactivity and inflammatory 
suppression induced by T regulatory cells determines the development of hypertension, as 
demonstrated by the amelioration of hypertension with the adoptive transfer of T regulatory 
cells in several animal models of hypertension68–70. Abnormalities in both pro-inflammatory 
T cells and regulatory T cells are implicated in hypertension-induced target organ damage, 
as they regulate the inflammatory processes in the kidney and vasculature that underlie 
hypertension-induced kidney disease68,70,71.
DIAGNOSIS, SCREENING AND PREVENTION
Diagnosis and screening
Essential or primary hypertension is usually asymptomatic; thus, in clinical practice all 
adults should have their BP measured at regular office visits. Hypertension is most 
commonly diagnosed based on repeated BP measurements in a clinical office setting. 
Accurate measurement and recording of BP is essential to categorize the level of BP, 
ascertain BP-related CVD risk and guide management. Since 2010, methods to measure out-
of-office BP have been increasingly introduced to guide diagnosis and treatment of 
hypertension7273. Table 1 These include home BP monitoring (HBPM) and ambulatory BP 
monitoring (ABPM). HBPM refers to the measurement of BP at regular intervals by an 
individual at their home or elsewhere outside the clinic setting. ABPM consists of measuring 
and recording the BP at regular intervals (usually every 20–30 minutes), typically for the 24-
hour period and while individuals go about their daily activities. The ability to measure out-
of-office BP has enabled the identification of distinct BP phenotypes, including white coat 
or isolated clinic hypertension and masked or isolated ambulatory hypertension74,75. White 
coat hypertension is characterised by elevated office BP but normal ABPM or HBPM 
Oparil et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 readings. By contrast, masked hypertension is characterised by normal office readings but 
elevated out –of-office readings ( ABPM and HBPM )74,75.
Diagnosis—The evaluation of a patient with hypertension requires more than the diagnosis 
of elevated BP. It should also include assessment of the CVD risk, target organ damage, and 
concomitant clinical conditions that may affect the BP or related target organ damage as 
well as recognition of features suggestive of secondary hypertension. Some of these 
investigations are routine tests necessary in all patients, but others only in specific patient 
groups identified by history, clinical examination, and routine tests. In rare inherited forms 
of hypertension, a single gene mutation explains the pathogenesis of hypertension7,8,9. 
(Figure 4) A small proportion of patients have a potentially reversible cause of hypertension, 
and a correct diagnosis might lead to a cure or a substantial improvement in BP control with 
a reduction of CVD risk. It is therefore appropriate to implement a simple screening for 
secondary hypertension in all patients. The screening is based on clinical history, physical 
examination and routine laboratory investigations (Box 2 and 3). Secondary hypertension 
should also be considered in cases of a sudden worsening of hypertension, poor BP response 
to drug treatment or severe target organ damage, which is out of proportion to the duration 
and severity of hypertension. In these cases, specific diagnostic tests are indicated (Table 2).
The medical history has to address the time of the first diagnosis of hypertension, current 
and past BP measurements and antihypertensive medications. A history of pregnancy-related 
hypertension is an important factor in the assessment of women with hypertension. 
Hypertension results in an increased risk of CVD complications, and chronic kidney disease 
(CKD). Thus, a careful medical history should be taken in all patients to allow for 
assessment of global CVD risk, with special emphasis on current and past smoking habits 
and evidence of dyslipidaemia and diabetes mellitus. CVD risk should be estimated using an 
established calculator (e.g. http://ASCVD-Risk-Estimator/). Adults at high risk for CVD 
have a high probability to benefit from antihypertensive drug therapy in addition to lifestyle 
change76.
The physical examination aims to establish the diagnosis of hypertension and screen for 
target organ damage and secondary causes (box 2). The patient should sit quietly for 5 
minutes before a BP reading is taken and BP cuff should be at heart level. An average of 2 to 
3 BP measurements obtained at 2 to 3 separate occasions provides an accurate basis for 
estimation of BP77,78. At least once, BP should be measured on both arms, and differences 
in SBP > 20 mmHg and/or in DBP >10mmHg should initiate investigations of vascular 
abnormalities77. Careful attention should be paid to choosing appropriately sized cuff, 
particularly for the increasing number of patients with obesity. Further, BP should be 
measured in both sitting and standing positions to rule out orthostatic hypotension (a sudden 
drop of the BP when a person stands up from a lying or sitting position). This is particularly 
important in elderly individuals.
All patients should undergo auscultation of the carotid arteries, heart and renal arteries. 
Detection of murmurs (sounds audible via the stethoscope) should lead to further 
investigations: carotid ultrasound, echocardiography and renal ultrasound, respectively. An 
irregular pulse frequently indicates atrial fibrillation, which should be confirmed by an 
Oparil et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electrocardiogram (EKG). Laboratory investigations are used to detect additional risk 
factors, to confirm or exclude secondary hypertension, to detect clinical or subclinical target 
organ damage and to estimate global CVD risk (box 3).
Screening—Despite overwhelming evidence that hypertension is a major treatable CVD 
risk factor, studies across the world show that a large proportion of individuals with 
hypertension are either unaware of their high BP or aware but not treated or inadequately 
treated79,15. Thus, there is a strong indication to screen middle-aged or younger persons in 
order to detect and treat more patients with hypertension. The most serious attempt by a 
healthcare system to improve the diagnostic aspects of hypertension has been done in the 
UK, based on pay-for-performance principle, that is, to give incentives to general 
practitioners (primary care physicians) for the appropriate diagnosis and treatment of 
chronic diseases, including hypertension. Early reports80,81 showed that this initiative was 
associated with an increased rate of BP monitoring and better BP control, but a later report 
suggested that this was not a sustained improvement82. It is possible that the initiative 
championed by the International Society of Hypertension and many national societies, 
which targeted entire populations by screening for hypertension in public places over the 
entire month of May 2017, might have better and more sustained results83.
Prevention
The association between BP and risk of CVD highlights the importance of treating 
hypertension, especially when severe. Further, it also underscores the importance of 
strategies to reduce BP-related CVD risk in those who have a higher than normal level of BP 
(average systolic BP 120–129 mmHg) but below the hypertension threshold. Reducing BP in 
adults with a high normal BP (referred to as elevated BP in the 2017 US guidelines) 
provides the potential to directly reduce CVD risk and to prevent or at least slow the age-
related tendency for individuals to develop hypertension.
In most countries there is a strong tendency for BP, especially systolic BP, and the 
prevalence of hypertension to increase progressively from childhood until late in life79. 
However, studies in isolated societies that have limited contact with the outside world84,85 
indicate that high BP is not an inevitable consequence of aging and that the rise in BP 
associated with local migration by members of isolated societies is related to changes in diet, 
decreased physical activity and consumption of alcohol84,86,87. These reports underscore the 
logic of efforts to prevent high BP in settings where an age-related increase in BP is 
common.
Lifestyle changes—A variety of nonpharmacological interventions have been shown to 
be effective in lowering BP and preventing hypertension. The most effective interventions 
are weight loss88,89,90, reduced Na+ intake88,89,90,91, increased potassium intake92,93, 
increased physical activity94, reduced consumption of alcohol95,96 and diets like the Dietary 
Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet97 that combine several elements which 
favorably affect BP98,99 (table 3). The DASH diet is especially successful when combined 
with other effective BP lowering interventions such as a reduced intake of dietary sodium91. 
Lifestyle change is the best way for the individual to implement these interventions. Even 
Oparil et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 small improvements in an individual’s lifestyle can be valuable. Government agency and 
professional society websites provide helpful tips for lifestyle change and monitoring of BP. 
Careful monitoring of BP is essential because the beneficial effects of lifestyle change are 
predicated on maintenance of the intervention100.
Two complementary strategies aimed at achieving a small population-wide reduction in BP 
or a larger reduction in those who are at higher risk to develop hypertension can be 
employed to implement hypertension prevention interventions98,99,101. Modeling studies 
suggest that a downward shift of as little as 2 mmHg in the population distribution of 
diastolic BP would result in a 17% reduction in the incidence of hypertension, a 14% 
reduction in the risk of stroke and transient ischemic attacks, and a 6% reduction in the risk 
of coronary heart disease102. Public health interventions focused on dietary improvements 
and increases in physical activity that are known to lower BP provide the basis for the 
population-wide strategy. Diet in the general population can be favorably influenced by 
means of public health education campaigns, food product labeling, and collaborations with 
food manufacturers to reduce the calorie and sodium content of their products, as well as 
with fast food companies and restaurants to reduce portion size and to promote healthier 
food preparation and promotion practices. Physical activity can be enhanced by making it 
easier for members of the community to engage in exercise on a routine basis.
Pharmacological interventions—Low-dose pharmacological therapy has also been 
shown to be effective in lowering BP and preventing hypertension in three randomized 
controlled trials conducted in adults with high normal BP103,104,105. The Brazilian multi-
center PREVER-Prevention Trial compared treatment with the low-dose long-acting 
thiazide-like diuretic chlorthalidone in combination with the potassium sparing agent 
amiloride with treatment with placebo105. Treatment with the low-dose chlorthalidone and 
amiloride combination resulted in both a decrement in BP and prevention of hypertension 
and a reduction in left ventricular mass. A drug intervention is easier to implement and 
maintain than a lifestyle change intervention but there is a natural reluctance to recommend 
a lifetime of pharmaceutical therapy for prevention of hypertension. Consideration of low-
dose pharmacotherapy should be restricted to those who are at high risk of developing 
hypertension despite energetic efforts to lower BP by means of one or more 
nonpharmacological interventions105.
MANAGEMENT
BP treatment thresholds and targets
Until 2015, most guidelines recommended a target BP < 140/90 mmHg for most patients 
and < 150/90 mmHg for elderly patients over 60 or 80 years of age (Table 4)77,106. However, 
after the publication of the Systolic blood PRessure Intervention Trial (SPRINT)107, target 
systolic BP values have been frequently debated. SPRINT was a randomized, open-label 
controlled trial that enrolled 9361 participants without diabetes mellitus but with increased 
CVD risk. Patients with a history of stroke were excluded. Participants were randomized to a 
standard systolic BP target < 140 mmHg or intensive systolic BP target < 120 mmHg. 
Intensive BP treatment in SPRINT resulted in a significantly greater (25%) reduction in the 
Oparil et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 primary endpoint (first occurrence of myocardial infarction, acute coronary syndrome, 
stroke, heart failure or death from cardiovascular causes), compared with standard treatment. 
Office BP measurement in SPRINT was performed with an automated device timed to start 
measurement after 5 minutes of rest in an effort to standardize measurements in the various 
clinics and minimize the white coat effect. Because large differences had been observed 
between automated office BP measurement and conventional auscultatory measurements 
(with the automated technique showing lower values)108, some groups have questioned the 
applicability of the SPRINT intensive systolic BP target of < 120 mmHg to ordinary office 
practice109. Both the appropriate method(s) of measuring office BP (automated versus 
manual; unattended versus attended) and the appropriate BP targets for antihypertensive 
treatment are currently topics of vigorous debate. In summary, newer guidelines published 
after the SPRINT trial generally have more aggressive goals, at least for individuals < 65 
years of age (Table 4).
Patient’s global CVD risk and comorbidities should be considered in determining the need 
for pharmacologic antihypertensive treatment. The 2017 US ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults110 recommend the use of 
antihypertensive medication in patients with pre-existing CVD and those without a CVD 
event but an estimated 10-year atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) risk of 10% 
or higher at BP levels ≥ 130/80 mmHg. In individuals without CVD and with 10-year 
ASCVD risk < 10%, antihypertensive medication should be initiated at BP ≥ 140/90 mmHg. 
(Figure 5).
Non-Pharmacological Management
Lifestyle advice is recommended for all patients with hypertension. The most effective 
interventions are the same as for prevention of hypertension. Targeted dietary approaches 
can reduce the systolic BP in individuals with hypertension. For example, reducing sodium 
intake (ideally to <2.3 g per day, or <1.5 g per day in those most susceptible to the effects of 
sodium on BP, but reduction by at least 1.0 g per day is desirable) can lower the systolic BP 
by 2–4 mmHg (Ref110,111,112). A similar reduction can be expected with increases in 
potassium intake to 3.5– 5.0 g per day92.
Reduced salt intake—For metabolic balance, the amount of salt consumed must be equal 
to that lost. Thus, under normal living conditions and physical activity levels, an intake of 5 
g salt/day is considered sufficient, in line with the WHO recommendation (< 5 g per day)113. 
By contrast, the currently estimated dietary intake of salt is about 9–12 g per day in most 
countries. The current recommendations of the American Heart Association114 and 
American Society of Hypertension115 are stricter than the European guidelines, 
recommending lowering salt intake to 3.8 g per day, whereas the 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines 
recommend 5–6 g of salt per day77.
Randomized controlled trials carried out in persons with hypertension have consistently 
shown that reduced sodium intake is associated with reduction of BP116. The most 
convincing evidence is provided by the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH-
Oparil et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sodium) trial91, in which the effects of three different sodium intakes were tested separately 
in combination with two diets: the DASH diet, rich in fruit, vegetables, low-fat dairy 
products and reduced in saturated fat and cholesterol, and a control diet consisting of what 
many people in the United States typically eat. Reduction of sodium intake by ~0.9 g per 
day induced a greater BP reduction when the starting sodium intake was <2.3 g per day, 
which corresponds to about 6 g of salt per day; thus it is slightly more than the currently 
recommended < 1,500 mg/day of sodium by the 2017 US hypertension guidelines. Of note, 
sodium reduction reduced BP in non-hypertensive individuals on both diets. Reduced 
sodium intake can also prevent hypertension (relative risk reduction of about 20% with or 
without concomitant weight loss)90, improve hypertension control117 and thus, possibly, 
reduce need for antihypertensive medication100. In the Intersalt study118, lower sodium 
intake was associated with a blunted age-related rise in systolic BP.
There is strong evidence to support population-wide recommendations to lower salt 
intake119,120. As more than 75% of dietary salt comes from processed foods (in western 
countries), any population strategy to reduce salt intake must involve food manufacturers 
and restaurants, in order to progressively reduce salt added to foods. So far, only three 
countries (Japan, Finland and the United Kingdom) have successfully reduced population 
salt intake121.
Increased potassium intake—Healthy individuals with normal kidney function usually 
have a potassium intake of 4.7 g/day; a higher intake is not associated with increased risk 
because potassium is readily excreted in persons who do not have CKD. Increased 
potassium intake is associated with reduced BP in individuals with low as well as high 
baseline potassium intake91,92. Of note, potassium reduces BP to a greater extent in blacks 
than in whites122. The effect of potassium on BP is dependent on salt intake. There is a 
greater BP reduction with increased potassium intake in the context of lower salt intake123. 
Thus, the best strategy is to increase potassium intake and reduce sodium intake at the same 
time. The preferred strategy to increase potassium intake is to increase consumption of fruits 
and vegetables that are rich in potassium rather than using supplements115. In individuals 
with impaired urinary potassium excretion, a potassium intake <4.7 g per day is 
recommended124.
Moderate alcohol consumption—Keeping alcohol intake ≤2 standard drinks (~3.5 
alcohol units) per day for men and ≤1 standard drink (~1.75 alcohol units) per day for 
women can also contribute to a 2–4 mmHg BP reduction. 95,96
Physical activity—Regular physical activity reduces BP in individuals with hypertension. 
Endurance training reduces BP more in persons with hypertension than in individuals with 
normal BP. A narrative review of 27 randomized clinical trials in individuals with 
hypertension showed that regular medium-intensity to high-intensity aerobic activity 
reduced BP by a mean of 11/5 mmHg125. Sessions lasting 40–60 minutes performed at least 
three times a week had the greatest effect on BP. Three randomized controlled trials of 
isometric exercise (strength training) showed a BP reduction of similar magnitude to that 
induced by aerobic exercise in individuals with hypertension125. A meta-analysis of 64 
controlled studies of the efficacy of dynamic resistance training as stand-alone 
Oparil et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 antihypertensive therapy showed BP reductions comparable with or greater than those with 
aerobic exercise training126. Greater BP reductions occurred in individuals with higher 
resting BP (approx. 6/5 mmHg for individuals with hypertension and 3/3 mmHg for 
individuals with pre-hypertension) and in non-white individuals126.
Weight Loss—Excess adiposity generally raises BP in susceptible individuals, and 
patients with hypertension who also have obesity require more antihypertensive medications 
to control their BP and are more likely to be treatment resistant127. In a recent meta-analysis, 
any reduction in body weight lowered systolic BP by on average 2.69 mmHg and in diastolic 
BP by on average 1.34 mmHg (Ref128). However, the response varies substantially between 
individuals. Lifestyle interventions, including hypocaloric diets and physical exercise, are 
commonly recommended for patients with obesity and hypertension, yet average weight loss 
is modest and most patients regain weight129 (box 4).
Antihypertensive Pharmacotherapy
Antihypertensive pharmacotherapy has evolved over several decades driven by development 
of various antihypertensive medication classes and large-scale outcomes trials proving their 
benefits on CVD morbidity and mortality130. Clinicians are now faced with a plethora of 
antihypertensive medications of different drug classes and a variety of fixed dose 
combinations. Typically, antihypertensive pharmacotherapy begins with first-line 
antihypertensive medications either in monotherapy or in combination131. Combination 
therapy may be preferable in patients with higher levels of pretreatment BP. First-line 
antihypertensive medications include ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers (also 
known as sartans), dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, and thiazide diuretics106. 
Beta-blockers are also indicated in patients with heart failure and reduced left ventricular 
ejection fraction or post myocardial infarction, and some guidelines recommend beta-
blockers as first line antihypertensive medications 77,132. The choice should be based on 
individual efficacy and tolerability. Ethnicity affects the response to antihypertensive 
medications, and it has been suggested that calcium channel blockers and diuretics may be 
the first choice in blacks106,133,134. Further, in specific clinical situations, for example 
hypertension in pregnant women, other medications such as alpha-methyldopa (an agonist of 
alpha adrenoreceptors in the central nervous system that inhibits the sympathetic nervous 
system) or labetalol (a beta adrenoreceptor blocker) are preferable, whereas some first line 
antihypertensives, for example ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers, are 
contraindicated because of increased risk for renal teratogenicity. Divided dosing of 
antihypertensive drugs tends to decrease adherence and should be avoided when possible135.
BP cannot be controlled with monotherapy in many patients, particularly those with severe 
hypertension. When combining antihypertensive medications, it is important to consider 
whether the drugs have additive effects on BP or adverse effects, and whether the patient has 
comorbidities that mandate particular drug choices77. ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II 
receptor blockers, thiazide diuretics and dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers are 
additive in lowering BP and can be combined as double or triple combination therapies. By 
contrast, combining ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers adds little BP 
lowering while increasing the risk for renal dysfunction and hyperkalemia (high blood 
Oparil et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 potassium levels, which can lead to cardiac arrhythmias). Similarly, combining RAAS 
inhibitors with beta-adrenoreceptor blockers adds little BP reduction, but this combination is 
indicated in patients following acute myocardial infarction or heart failure with reduced left 
ventricular ejection fraction for reasons beyond BP reduction.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor 
blockers.—Among medications that inhibit components of the RAAS, ACE inhibitors and 
angiotensin II receptor blockers are considered first line antihypertensives, whereas other 
antihypertensive medications targeting RAAS, including direct renin inhibitors and 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, are usually considered reserve medications because 
there is less clinical trial evidence supporting their use as first line antihypertensive therapy. 
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers have been tested extensively in large-
scale hypertension trials136. In patients with heart failure with reduced left ventricular 
ejection fraction or with diabetic nephropathy, both drug classes improved outcomes, 
making them particularly good choices in these populations. Both classes appear to be 
comparable in reducing CVD risk137. and also tend to improve glucose metabolism and, 
therefore, could be preferable in younger patients and in patients with conditions 
predisposing to type 2 diabetes mellitus, including obesity and the metabolic syndrome138. 
ACE inhibitors are generally well tolerated, but reductions in kidney function, hyperkalemia, 
cough, and – less commonly – angioedema (swelling caused by fluid accumulation) could 
occur with their use. The risk for angioedema, which can be life threatening, is substantially 
increased in blacks139 and modestly increased in patients treated with dipeptidyl peptidase-
IV inhibitors (used in the treatment of diabetes, examples of which include sitagliptin, 
vildagliptin, saxagliptin, and linagliptin)140. ACE inhibitors that can be dosed once daily are 
preferred. Angiotensin II receptor blockers can also elicit hyperkalemia and worsening of 
kidney function, but are not likely to cause cough or angioedema137.
Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers.—Dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blockers elicit vasodilation by blocking vascular smooth muscle L-type calcium channels. 
They are effective antihypertensive drugs with extensive experience in large clinical trials136. 
A practical advantage of this drug class is that it can be combined with all other first-line 
antihypertensives. Peripheral edema, which is explained by peripheral arterial vasodilation 
rather than worsening heart failure or kidney dysfunction, is a common side effect, 
particularly in individuals with obesity. Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, 
especially verapamil, also inhibit cardiac calcium channels, which can reduce heart rate and 
cardiac contractility141. Calcium channel blockers can induce or worsen constipation, 
especially in institutionalized older persons142. All calcium channel blockers modestly 
inhibit the drug metabolizing enzyme cytochrome P450 3A4, and, therefore, could elicit 
important drug-interactions143.
Thiazide-type and thiazide-like diuretics.—Thiazide-type diuretics (for example, 
hydrochlorothiazide) have a benzothiadiazine ring, whereas thiazide-like diuretics (for 
example, chlorthalidone, metolazone and indapamide) lack the benzothiadiazine structure. 
Both subclasses of thiazide diuretics inhibit Na+ and CI- co-transporters in renal tubules, 
thereby promoting natriuresis, and have been an important component of pharmacological 
Oparil et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hypertension management ever since the first trials showing morbidity benefits of 
antihypertensive therapy144. Over the years, diuretic doses have been substantially reduced 
to attain better risk-benefit profiles. Thiazide-type and thiazide-like diuretics can worsen 
glucose metabolism increasing the risk for new onset diabetes mellitus, but whether or not 
this metabolic action translates into long-term increases in CVD risk has been called into 
question145. Hydrochlorothiazide, the most commonly prescribed thiazide-type diuretic 
worldwide, may be less effective in mitigating CVD risk compared to chlorthalidone or 
indapamide146,147. Drug-related electrolyte disturbances, including hypokalemia and 
hyponatremia (low blood potassium and sodium levels, respectively), are particularly 
important adverse effects; hypokalemia can lead to cardiac arrhythmias and muscle 
weakness, and hyponatremia can cause confusion, seizures and coma. The risk for 
hypokalemia is reduced when thiazide-type and thiazide-like diuretics are combined with 
potassium supplements or potassium-sparing agents, such as ACE inhibitors, angiotensin 
receptor blockers, or potassium-sparing diuretics. Hyponatremia is a potentially life 
threatening adverse effect, particularly in elderly persons.
Beta-adrenoreceptor blockers.—Beta-adrenoreceptor blockers lower BP reducing 
cardiac output, heart rate, renin release and adrenergic control nervous system effects148. 
They improve outcomes following acute myocardial infarction and in patients with heart 
failure with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, but, in the absence of these 
comorbidities, beta-adrenoreceptor blockers are inferior to other first line antihypertensives 
in reducing CVD morbidity and mortality149. This effect has been attributed to lesser 
reductions in aortic BP150 and adverse effects on body weight151 and glucose metabolism 
with beta-adrenoreceptor blockade. Some of these disadvantages might be mitigated with 
newer vasodilator beta-adrenoreceptor blockers, such as nebivolol and carvedilol152. 
However, there are no large-scale antihypertensive trials demonstrating that this difference 
translates into better clinical outcomes. Beta-adrenoreceptor blockers may promote 
bronchial obstruction is patients with asthma and should not be combined with non-
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers such as verapamil that lower sinus node rate or 
atrioventricular conduction.
Newer pharmacological agents—Overall, the interest of the pharmaceutical industry in 
developing new antihypertensive medications has been limited in recent years. Moreover, 
most antihypertensive drugs are out of patent and, therefore, available as relatively 
inexpensive generics. Further, some of the currently approved drugs, such as angiotensin II 
receptor blockers, have placebo-like tolerability. Newer pharmacological agents approved 
for other indications, including combined angiotensin II receptor and neprilysin inhibitors153 
(for heart failure), soluble guanylyl cyclase modulating drugs154 (for erectile dysfunction), 
and sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors155 (for type 2 diabetes mellitus) may 
also be useful in treating hypertension. Other pharmacological agents, such as newer 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, aldosterone synthase inhibitors, activators of the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2/ angiotensin (1–7)/ MAS receptor axis, and natriuretic 
peptide receptor agonists, are in various stages of preclinical or clinical development156, 
often for indications other than hypertension. Drugs addressing novel pressor mechanisms 
could be useful in patients with treatment resistant hypertension, particularly those not 
Oparil et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 responding to or not tolerating mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. Moreover, drugs with 
actions in addition to BP reduction could prove clinically useful. For example, combined 
angiotensin II receptor blockade and neprilysin inhibition has been shown to ameliorate 
insulin resistance in patients with obesity and hypertension157 and decrease the progression 
to type 2 diabetes mellitus in patients with heart failure158.
Treatment Resistant Hypertension
Treatment resistant hypertension is commonly diagnosed when office BP is >140/90 mmHg 
despite treatment with three or more properly dosed antihypertensive drugs including a 
diuretic and secondary hypertension has been ruled out159. Poor treatment adherence is a 
common cause of apparent treatment resistant hypertension. The true prevalence of 
treatment resistant hypertension is unknown, but an estimated 12.8% of all individuals with 
hypertension in the United States and 15.3 % of those treated with antihypertensives fulfill 
the criteria for treatment resistant hypertension160. Adding a fourth or fifth drug could lead 
to satisfactory BP control in these patients. The PATHWAY trial rotated patients with 
treatment resistant hypertension through different add on drugs or placebo in a randomized 
fashion161. All patients received a standardized antihypertensive regimen comprising three 
drugs, including a diuretic. Compared with alpha-adrenoreceptor or beta-adrenoreceptor 
blockade, the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist spironolactone was the most effective 
fourth antihypertensive drug. In another study in patients whose BP was uncontrolled despite 
receiving three drugs, sequential addition of a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist 
followed by a loop diuretic (which acts at the ascending limb of the loop of Henle in the 
kidney) was more effective than adding an ACE inhibitor followed by a beta-adrenoreceptor 
blocker162. Overall, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonism is a reasonable choice in patients 
with difficult to control hypertension. Given the risk of inducing hyperkalemia163, serum 
potassium concentrations should be monitored.
Device-based Treatments—Device-based treatments have been primarily developed for 
patients with severe resistant hypertension whose BP cannot be controlled with 
antihypertensive drugs156. Catheter-based renal nerve ablation164,165, electrical carotid sinus 
stimulation166,167, modulation of baroreflex transduction with a dedicated carotid stent168, 
carotid body denervation169, and deep brain stimulation170 are thought to lower BP through 
SNS inhibition. Creation of a defined arteriovenous stent with a coupler device lowers BP by 
reducing peripheral vascular resistance171. These treatments are in various stages of clinical 
development, with the most extensive data available on renal nerve ablation and electrical 
carotid sinus stimulation. None has yet been proven efficacious in lowering BP in 
randomized sham-controlled clinical trials164,161,167, because either the primary endpoint 
was not achieved or no trials have been conducted. Finally, trials with hard clinical endpoints 
do not exist.
QUALITY OF LIFE
Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is a multi-dimensional concept that includes domains 
related to physical, mental, emotional, and social functioning; studies demonstrate that each 
additional disease, as well as the severity of these diseases, is associated with declines in 
Oparil et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HRQOL 172. Population-based studies have consistently shown that being diagnosed with 
hypertension is associated with worsening of HRQoL even after adjusting for other 
comorbidities173,174. Altered HRQoL in persons with hypertension has been attributed to a 
variety of factors, including the diagnosis, treatment, and effects of alterations (both 
elevations and reductions) in BP173.
Labeling someone as having hypertension can result in worsening of self-perceived health 
status175. This was well-demonstrated in a classic study of otherwise healthy Canadian 
steelworkers identified as having hypertension as part of a screening program. In the year 
following diagnosis, absenteeism from work owing to illness more than tripled in those 
made newly aware of their hypertension, whereas it increased only slightly in those 
previously aware of their hypertension176. This finding could not be explained by 
hypertension treatment or BP level and was believed to be a direct consequence of people 
adopting a “sick role.” These findings have been replicated in studies carried out in diverse 
settings and using different measures of physical and mental health175.
Antihypertensive medication use is associated with a variety of symptoms that could lower 
HRQoL177. Observational studies showed an association between the number of 
antihypertensive medications prescribed and worsening of the HRQoL178. Some classes of 
antihypertensive medications, (for example, ACE inhibitors) are better tolerated than others 
(for example, beta blockers and centrally acting agents, such as alpha-methyldopa) and 
result in significantly better scores on measures of general well-being179. Further, small 
differences in HRQoL have even been reported among medications of the same class, e.g., 
enalapril vs. captopril180. However, clinical trials with newer antihypertensive agents have 
generally indicated that they are extremely well-tolerated and can enhance the effects of 
non-pharmacological treatment on HRQoL177,181. In the Treatment of Mild Hypertension 
Study (TOMHS), combining lifestyle modifications with any of five different 
antihypertensive medication classes resulted in greater improvements in HRQoL than 
lifestyle modifications plus placebo181.
Treatment-related reductions in BP could have a negative effect on HRQoL, particularly in 
older and more frail patients at high risk of hypotension. Clinical trials performed in the 
1990s that evaluated patients with very high baseline BP, for example, the Systolic 
Hypertension in the Elderly Program Trial (SHEP) and the Systolic Hypertension in Europe 
Trial (Syst-Eur), generally found minimal effects of BP reductions on HRQoL182,183. Two 
more recent clinical trials have targeted lower BPs (intensive systolic BP target < 120 mmHg 
versus standard systolic BP target < 140 mmHg ), it had been postulated that this lower BP 
might be expected to cause cerebral hypoperfusion, resulting in falls, dizziness, and 
cognitive impairment184,185,107. In a substudy of the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk 
in Diabetes (ACCORD) study, HRQoL was evaluated in 1,028 participants randomized to 
either intensive or standard therapy. No differences in mental function were noted between 
treatment groups, but intensive therapy was associated with a small, not clinically 
significant, decrease in physical function185. In the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention 
Trial (SPRINT), targeting systolic BP <120 mmHg required 1 additional antihypertensive 
medication compared to standard treatment to target systolic BP < 140 mmHg and was 
generally safe and well tolerated107,186. Compared to standard treatment, intensive treatment 
Oparil et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 did not affect the perceived HRQOL of SPRINT participants, measured by patient reported 
outcomes of physical and mental health, self-reported satisfaction with care and medication 
adherence, even when stratifying on age and comorbidities186. Almost 90% of participants 
in both treatment groups reported satisfaction with their BP care, and more than 1/3 
described improvement in satisfaction over baseline levels.
Quality of life concerns remain an important aspect of hypertension management. SPRINT 
has demonstrated that with careful clinical management, lower BP can be targeted without 
concern of worsening physical and mental function. Clinicians must seek the optimal 
balance of reducing CVD morbidity and mortality while maximizing well-being for each 
individual patient.
OUTLOOK
Although there is regional variability in the outlook for hypertension over the next 5 to 10 
years, It is clear overall that the prevalence of hypertension and, therefore, the associated 
global burden attributable to hypertension, will increase187. Global population growth and 
aging will largely contribute to this increase – 1.5 billion people are expected to be affected 
by 2025 (Ref. 188) – which will be focused in low and middle income countries187. 
However, these adverse trends in disease burden will be variably offset by improvements in 
prevention, awareness and treatment. The size of improvements in each of these 3 areas will 
vary from non-existent (-hypertension prevention could even worsen in some parts of the 
world, as exposure to factors that promote raised BP increases) to substantially large and 
important elsewhere in the world.
Overall, prevention will probably contribute least to any improvement in BP-associated 
disease burden. This is because 80% of the world is in the process of developing, which 
hitherto has inevitably been associated with increased exposure to the main environmental 
determinants of raised BP such as excess intake of calories, alcohol and salt. Food and drink 
industries, governments and education systems would be required to cooperate in order to 
reverse this pattern
Implementation of preventive strategies has largely been limited to high income countries. 
Despite reasonably compelling evidence to the contrary111, recommendations that the 
general population should restrict salt intake have been questioned on the basis of largely 
suboptimal observational data189. Such confusion worsens an already very difficult public 
health challenge. Data show that only approximately half of people with hypertension are 
aware of their condition190, and the Lancet Commission on hypertension identified 
improving awareness of hypertension is a critical action needed to improve the current 
disease burden191,192. The global BP awareness campaign promoted by the International 
Society of Hypertension whereby World Hypertension Day was extended to become May 
Measurement Month (MMM) in 2017 could contribute substantially to improving rates of 
routine BP screening around the world83. Over 1.20 million adults (≥18 years) from >100 
countries were screened as part of MMM and the ensuing data allied to health-economic 
analyses will be used to persuade policy makers in each country that enhanced local BP 
screening and treatment facilities are wise financial investments.
Oparil et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Improving the efficacy of drug treatment also holds great promise for reducing hypertension-
associated disease burden. Rather than focusing on rare secondary causes of hypertension or 
the optimal management of treatment resistant hypertension193, the greatest effect could be 
achieved by the delivery and distribution of affordable, effective single-pill combinations of 
2 or 3 drugs to low-income and middle income countries where the burden of hypertension 
is considerable and where any such therapies are currently either largely unavailable or 
unaffordable.194. Unfortunately, optimal combinations of 2 antihypertensive agents have not 
been identified for the majority of the world’s hypertensive population: no such data are 
available for black, south Asian or east Asian patients195. However, the first in a series of 
trials in these ethnic groups is underway in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Meanwhile, single-pill formulations of the drug combinations most commonly 
recommended in current guidelines (calcium channel blocker plus a diuretic, calcium 
channel blocker plus a RAAS-blocker or diuretic plus a RAAS-blocker) are readily available 
and have low production costs. In addition, a 3-drug combination of a calcium channel 
blocker, a diuretic and a RAAS-blocker132 should also be produced for more severe 
hypertension, with low dose spironolactone available as a fourth-line agent161. Hence, 1 or 2 
tablets will be able to control BPs of all but a small proportion of patients with hypertension.
These formulations should be made available and affordable in all countries of the world.191 
Additional local obstacles to the distribution and delivery of these agents to patients with 
hypertension within each country will also have to be overcome – among which the lack of 
effective screening programmes is crucial191.
Antihypertensive medications are prescribed by different health professionals in different 
countries. However, even in high income countries, much of the “routine” uncomplicated 
hypertension management could, and probably should be carried out by nurse practitioners 
or other non-physician health workers. In more remote parts of the world, the use of e-
healthcare techniques196 should be increasingly used to facilitate task-shifting or task 
sharing by non-physician health-workers where doctors are unavailable197.
In summary, although there are many interesting unanswered scientific research questions in 
the field of hypertension (Box 5), perhaps the most pressing need to reduce the diseas 
burden is to evaluate the best way(s), at a local level, to screen routinely for raised BP and 
then to deliver the best, most affordable, evidence-based combination of antihypertensive 
agents. Meanwhile, efforts to drive public health policy towards encouraging more healthy 
diets and lifestyles from a BP and CVD viewpoint should be encouraged and basic scientific 
research that might allow precision medicine to be applied to patients with hypertension 
must also continue.
Acknowledgments
P.K.W. was supported by P20GM109036 (Tulane COBRE for Clinical and Translational Research in 
Cardiometabolic Diseases) from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences.
Oparil et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Luft FC Twins in Cardiovascular Genetic Research. Hypertension 37, 350–356 (2001). [PubMed: 
11230299] 
2. Fagard R et al. Heritability of Conventional and Ambulatory Blood Pressures : A Study in Twins. 
Hypertension 26, 919–924 (1995). [PubMed: 7490149] 
3. Surendran P et al. Trans-ancestry meta-analyses identify rare and common variants associated with 
blood pressure and hypertension. Nat. Genet 48, 1151–1161 (2016). [PubMed: 27618447] 
4. Ehret GB et al. The genetics of blood pressure regulation and its target organs from association 
studies in 342,415 individuals. Nat. Genet 48, 1171–1184 (2016). [PubMed: 27618452] 
5. Liu C et al. Meta-analysis identifies common and rare variants influencing blood pressure and 
overlapping with metabolic trait loci. Nat. Genet 48, 1162–1170 (2016). [PubMed: 27618448] 
6. Dominiczak A, Delles C & Padmanabhan S Genomics and Precision Medicine for Clinicians and 
Scientists in Hypertension. Hypertension 69, e10–e13 (2017). [PubMed: 28193712] 
7. Lifton RP, Gharavi AG & Geller DS Molecular Mechanisms of Human Hypertension. Cell 104, 
545–556 (2001). [PubMed: 11239411] 
8. Ehret GB & Caulfield MJ Genes for blood pressure: an opportunity to understand hypertension. Eur. 
Heart J 34, 951–961 (2013). [PubMed: 23303660] 
9. Maass PG et al. PDE3A mutations cause autosomal dominant hypertension with brachydactyly. Nat. 
Genet 47, 647–653 (2015). [PubMed: 25961942] 
10. Forouzanfar MH et al. Global, regional, and national comparative risk assessment of 79 
behavioural, environmental and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks, 1990–2015: 
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 388, 1659–1724 
(2016). [PubMed: 27733284] 
11. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration. Blood pressure-lowering treatment 
based on cardiovascular risk: a meta-analysis of individual patient data. Lancet 384, 591–598 
(2014). [PubMed: 25131978] 
12. Page LB, Damon A & Moellering RC Antecedents of cardiovascular disease in six Solomon 
Islands societies. Circulation 49, 1132–46 (1974). [PubMed: 4831656] 
13. Poulter NR, Prabhakaran D & Caulfield M Hypertension. Lancet 386, 801–812 (2015). [PubMed: 
25832858] 
14. Rose G & Day S The population mean predicts the number of deviant individuals. BMJ 301, 1031–
4 (1990). [PubMed: 2249053] 
15. Mills KT et al. Global Disparities of Hypertension Prevalence and Control: A Systematic Analysis 
of Population-based Studies from 90 Countries. Circulation 134, 441–450 (2016). [PubMed: 
27502908] 
16. Forouzanfar MH et al. Global Burden of Hypertension and Systolic Blood Pressure of at Least 110 
to 115 mm Hg, 1990–2015. JAMA 317, 165 (2017). [PubMed: 28097354] 
17. Lewington S et al. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-
analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet (London, 
England) 360, 1903–13 (2002).
18. Rapsomaniki E et al. Blood pressure and incidence of twelve cardiovascular diseases: lifetime 
risks, healthy life-years lost, and age-specific associations in 1·25 million people. Lancet 383, 
1899–1911 (2014). [PubMed: 24881994] 
19. Stamler J, Stamler R & Neaton JD Blood pressure, systolic and diastolic, and cardiovascular risks. 
US population data. Arch. Intern. Med 153, 598–615 (1993). [PubMed: 8439223] 
20. Klag MJ et al. Blood pressure and end-stage renal disease in men. N. Engl. J. Med 334, 13–8 
(1996). [PubMed: 7494564] 
21. Goff DC et al. 2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Assessment of Cardiovascular Risk. J. Am. Coll. 
Cardiol 63, 2935–2959 (2014). [PubMed: 24239921] 
22. Hall ME & Hall JE Pathogenesis of Hypertension. Hypertension: A Companion to Braunwald’s 
Heart Disease 33–51 (2018). doi:10.1016/b978-0-323-42973-3.00005-6
Oparil et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 23. Gangwisch JE A review of evidence for the link between sleep duration and hypertension. Am. J. 
Hypertens 27, 1235–42 (2014). [PubMed: 24778107] 
24. Palagini L et al. Sleep loss and hypertension: a systematic review. Curr. Pharm. Des 19, 2409–19 
(2013). [PubMed: 23173590] 
25. Mikael L. de R. et al. Vascular Aging and Arterial Stiffness. Arq. Bras. Cardiol 109, 253–258 
(2017). [PubMed: 28678931] 
26. Sindler AL et al. Nitrite supplementation reverses vascular endothelial dysfunction and large elastic 
artery stiffness with aging. Aging Cell 10, 429–37 (2011). [PubMed: 21276184] 
27. Steppan J, Barodka V, Berkowitz DE & Nyhan D Vascular stiffness and increased pulse pressure in 
the aging cardiovascular system. Cardiol. Res. Pract 2011, 263585 (2011). [PubMed: 21845218] 
28. PAGE IH PATHOGENESIS OF ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION. JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc 140, 
451 (1949).
29. Harrison DG The Mosaic Theory revisited: common molecular mechanisms coordinating diverse 
organ and cellular events in hypertension. J. Am. Soc. Hypertens 7, 68–74 (2013). [PubMed: 
23321405] 
30. Feng W, Dell’Italia LJ & Sanders PW Novel Paradigms of Salt and Hypertension. J. Am. Soc. 
Nephrol 28, 1362–1369 (2017). [PubMed: 28220030] 
31. Wilck N et al. Salt-responsive gut commensal modulates TH17 axis and disease. Nature 551, 585 
(2017). [PubMed: 29143823] 
32. Singh A & Williams GH Textbook of nephro-endocrinology
33. Varagic J, Ahmad S, Nagata S & Ferrario CM ACE2: angiotensin II/angiotensin-(1–7) balance in 
cardiac and renal injury. Curr. Hypertens. Rep 16, 420 (2014). [PubMed: 24510672] 
34. Ferrario CM ACE2: more of Ang-(1–7) or less Ang II? Curr. Opin. Nephrol. Hypertens 20, 1–6 
(2011). [PubMed: 21045683] 
35. Zimmerman D & Burns KD Angiotensin-(1–7) in kidney disease: a review of the controversies. 
Clin. Sci 123, 333–346 (2012). [PubMed: 22639821] 
36. Zhou ZH & Bubien JK Nongenomic regulation of ENaC by aldosterone. Am. J. Physiol. Cell 
Physiol 281, C1118–30 (2001). [PubMed: 11546647] 
37. McCurley A & Jaffe IZ Mineralocorticoid receptors in vascular function and disease. Mol. Cell. 
Endocrinol 350, 256–265 (2012). [PubMed: 21723914] 
38. Kerkelä R, Ulvila J & Magga J Natriuretic Peptides in the Regulation of Cardiovascular Physiology 
and Metabolic Events. J. Am. Heart Assoc 4, e002423 (2015). [PubMed: 26508744] 
39. Woodard GE & Rosado JA Chapter 3 Natriuretic Peptides in Vascular Physiology and Pathology. 
in International review of cell and molecular biology 268, 59–93 (2008). [PubMed: 18703404] 
40. Curry F-RE Atrial natriuretic peptide: an essential physiological regulator of transvascular fluid, 
protein transport, and plasma volume. J. Clin. Invest 115, 1458–1461 (2005). [PubMed: 15931381] 
41. Armaly Z, Assady S & Abassi Z Corin: a new player in the regulation of salt-water balance and 
blood pressure. Curr. Opin. Nephrol. Hypertens 22, 713–722 (2013). [PubMed: 24100222] 
42. Schlueter N et al. Metabolic actions of natriuretic peptides and therapeutic potential in the 
metabolic syndrome. Pharmacol. Ther 144, 12–27 (2014). [PubMed: 24780848] 
43. Khaddaj Mallat R, Mathew John C, Kendrick DJ & Braun AP The vascular endothelium: A 
regulator of arterial tone and interface for the immune system. Crit. Rev. Clin. Lab. Sci 54, 458–
470 (2017). [PubMed: 29084470] 
44. Sandoo A, van Zanten JJCSV, Metsios GS, Carroll D & Kitas GD The endothelium and its role in 
regulating vascular tone. Open Cardiovasc. Med. J 4, 302–12 (2010). [PubMed: 21339899] 
45. Spieker LE, Flammer AJ & Lüscher TF The Vascular Endothelium in Hypertension. The Vascular 
Endothelium II 249–283 doi:10.1007/3-540-36028-x_8
46. Ayub T, Khan SN, Ayub SG, Dar R & Andrabi KI Reduced nitrate level in individuals with 
hypertension and diabetes. J. Cardiovasc. Dis. Res 2, 172–176 (2011). [PubMed: 22022145] 
47. Panza JA, Casino PR, Badar DM & Quyyumi AA Effect of increased availability of endothelium-
derived nitric oxide precursor on endothelium-dependent vascular relaxation in normal subjects 
and in patients with essential hypertension. Circulation 87, 1475–1481 (1993). [PubMed: 
8491002] 
Oparil et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 48. Kohan DE & Barton M Endothelin and endothelin antagonists in chronic kidney disease. Kidney 
Int 86, 896–904 (2014). [PubMed: 24805108] 
49. Serrano-Ponz M et al. Temporal profiles of blood pressure, circulating nitric oxide, and 
adrenomedullin as predictors of clinical outcome in acute ischemic stroke patients. Mol. Med. Rep 
13, 3724–34 (2016). [PubMed: 27035412] 
50. Vendégh Z et al. Calcitonin gene-related peptide, substance P, nitric oxide and epinephrine 
modulate bone marrow micro circulation of the rabbit tibia and femur. Clin. Hemorheol. Microcirc 
45, 9–17 (2010). [PubMed: 20571225] 
51. Yu M et al. Antihypertensive effect of glucagon-like peptide 1 in Dahl salt-sensitive rats. J. 
Hypertens 21, 1125–1135 (2003). [PubMed: 12777949] 
52. Popolo A, Autore G, Pinto A & Marzocco S Oxidative stress in patients with cardiovascular 
disease and chronic renal failure. Free Radic. Res 47, 346–356 (2013). [PubMed: 23438723] 
53. Lazich I & Bakris GL Endothelin Antagonism in Patients with Resistant Hypertension and 
Hypertension Nephropathy. Contributions to Nephrology 223–234 (2011). doi:10.1159/000328988 
[PubMed: 21894002] 
54. Dharmashankar K & Widlansky ME Vascular Endothelial Function and Hypertension: Insights and 
Directions. Curr. Hypertens. Rep 12, 448–455 (2010). [PubMed: 20857237] 
55. HEYMANS C & DELAUNOIS AL Fundamental role of the tone and resistance to stretch of the 
carotid sinus arteries in the reflex regulation of blood pressure. Science 114, 546–7 (1951).
56. Pijacka W et al. Carotid sinus denervation ameliorates renovascular hypertension in adult Wistar 
rats. J. Physiol 594, 6255–6266 (2016). [PubMed: 27510951] 
57. de Leeuw PW et al. Sustained Reduction of Blood Pressure With Baroreceptor Activation 
TherapyNovelty and Significance. Hypertension 69, 836–843 (2017). [PubMed: 28320856] 
58. Grassi G et al. Excessive Sympathetic Activation in Heart Failure With Obesity and Metabolic 
Syndrome: Characteristics and Mechanisms. Hypertension 49, 535–541 (2007). [PubMed: 
17210829] 
59. Mancia G & Grassi G The Autonomic Nervous System and Hypertension. Circ. Res 114, 1804–
1814 (2014). [PubMed: 24855203] 
60. Augustyniak RA et al. Sympathetic nerves and the progression of chronic kidney disease during 
5/6 nephrectomy: Studies in sympathectomized rats. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol 37, 12–18 
(2010). [PubMed: 19566818] 
61. Augustyniak RA, Tuncel M, Zhang W, Toto RD & Victor RG Sympathetic overactivity as a cause 
of hypertension in chronic renal failure. J. Hypertens 20, 3–9 (2002). [PubMed: 11791019] 
62. DiBona GF Sympathetic Nervous System and Hypertension. Hypertension 61, 556–560 (2013). 
[PubMed: 23357181] 
63. Grassi G, Mark A & Esler M The Sympathetic Nervous System Alterations in Human 
Hypertension. Circ. Res 116, 976–990 (2015). [PubMed: 25767284] 
64. Grassi G, Cattaneo BM, Seravalle G, Lanfranchi A & Mancia G Baroreflex Control of Sympathetic 
Nerve Activity in Essential and Secondary Hypertension. Hypertension 31, 68–72 (1998). 
[PubMed: 9449393] 
65. Smith PA; Graham LN; Mackintosh AF; Stoker JB; Mary D Relationship between central 
sympathetic activity and stages of human hypertension. Am. J. Hypertens 17, 217–222 (2004). 
[PubMed: 15001194] 
66. Fujita T Mechanism of Salt-Sensitive Hypertension: Focus on Adrenal and Sympathetic Nervous 
Systems. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol 25, 1148–1155 (2014). [PubMed: 24578129] 
67. Mu S et al. Epigenetic modulation of the renal β-adrenergic–WNK4 pathway in salt-sensitive 
hypertension. Nat. Med 17, 573–580 (2011). [PubMed: 21499270] 
68. Harrison DG & Bernstein KE Inflammation and Immunity in Hypertension. Hypertension: A 
Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease 60–69 (2018). doi:10.1016/b978-0-323-42973-3.00007-
x
69. Devallière J & Charreau B The adaptor Lnk (SH2B3): An emerging regulator in vascular cells and 
a link between immune and inflammatory signaling. Biochem. Pharmacol 82, 1391–1402 (2011). 
[PubMed: 21723852] 
Oparil et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 70. Rodriguez-Iturbe B Autoimmunity in the Pathogenesis of Hypertension. Hypertens. (Dallas, Tex. 
1979) 67, 477–83 (2016).
71. Mattson DL et al. Genetic mutation of recombination activating gene 1 in Dahl salt-sensitive rats 
attenuates hypertension and renal damage. AJP Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol 304, R407–R414 
(2013).
72. Roush GC et al. Prognostic impact from clinic, daytime, and night-time systolic blood pressure in 
nine cohorts of 13 
844 patients with hypertension. J. Hypertens 32, 2332–2340 (2014). [PubMed: 
25333682] 
73. Stergiou GS et al. Methodology and technology for peripheral and central blood pressure and 
blood pressure variability measurement. J. Hypertens 34, 1665–1677 (2016). [PubMed: 27214089] 
74. Parati G et al. European Society of Hypertension Practice Guidelines for home blood pressure 
monitoring. J. Hum. Hypertens 24, 779–785 (2010). [PubMed: 20520631] 
75. O’Brien E et al. European Society of Hypertension Position Paper on Ambulatory Blood Pressure 
Monitoring. J. Hypertens 31, 1731–1768 (2013). [PubMed: 24029863] 
76. Muntner P & Whelton PK Using Predicted Cardiovascular Disease Risk in Conjunction With 
Blood Pressure to Guide Antihypertensive Medication Treatment. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 69, 2446–
2456 (2017). [PubMed: 28494981] 
77. Mancia G et al. 2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. J. 
Hypertens 31, 1281–1357 (2013). [PubMed: 23817082] 
78. Pickering TG Recommendations for Blood Pressure Measurement in Humans and Experimental 
Animals: Part 1: Blood Pressure Measurement in Humans: A Statement for Professionals From the 
Subcommittee of Professional and Public Education of the American Heart Association Cou. 
Circulation 111, 697–716 (2005). [PubMed: 15699287] 
79. Whelton PK The elusiveness of population-wide high blood pressure control. Annu. Rev. Public 
Health 36, 109–30 (2015). [PubMed: 25594330] 
80. Primatesta P & Poulter NR Improvement in hypertension management in England: results from the 
Health Survey for England 2003. J. Hypertens 24, 1187–1192 (2006). [PubMed: 16685220] 
81. Ashworth M, Medina J & Morgan M Effect of social deprivation on blood pressure monitoring and 
control in England: a survey of data from the quality and outcomes framework. BMJ 337, a2030–
a2030 (2008). [PubMed: 18957697] 
82. Serumaga B et al. Effect of pay for performance on the management and outcomes of hypertension 
in the United Kingdom: interrupted time series study. BMJ 342, d108–d108 (2011). [PubMed: 
21266440] 
83. Poulter NR & Lackland DT May Measurement Month: a global blood pressure screening 
campaign. Lancet 389, 1678–1680 (2017). [PubMed: 28463128] 
84. He J et al. Migration, blood pressure pattern, and hypertension: the Yi Migrant Study. Am. J. 
Epidemiol 134, 1085–101 (1991). [PubMed: 1746519] 
85. Poulter NR et al. The Kenyan Luo migration study: observations on the initiation of a rise in blood 
pressure. BMJ 300, 967–72 (1990). [PubMed: 2344502] 
86. Rosenthal T The effect of migration on hypertension and other cardiovascular risk factors: A 
review. J. Am. Soc. Hypertens 8, 171–191 (2014). [PubMed: 24524887] 
87. Klag MJ et al. The contribution of urinary cations to the blood pressure differences associated with 
migration. Am. J. Epidemiol 142, 295–303 (1995). [PubMed: 7631633] 
88. The effects of nonpharmacologic interventions on blood pressure of persons with high normal 
levels. Results of the Trials of Hypertension Prevention, Phase I. JAMA 267, 1213–20 (1992). 
[PubMed: 1586398] 
89. Whelton PK et al. Efficacy of nonpharmacologic interventions in adults with high-normal blood 
pressure: results from phase 1 of the Trials of Hypertension Prevention. Trials of Hypertension 
Prevention Collaborative Research Group. Am. J. Clin. Nutr 65, 652S–660S (1997). [PubMed: 
9022561] 
90. Effects of weight loss and sodium reduction intervention on blood pressure and hypertension 
incidence in overweight people with high-normal blood pressure. The Trials of Hypertension 
Prevention, phase II. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative Research Group. Arch. 
Intern. Med 157, 657–67 (1997). [PubMed: 9080920] 
Oparil et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 91. Sacks FM et al. Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Approaches to 
Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. N. Engl. J. Med 
344, 3–10 (2001). [PubMed: 11136953] 
92. Whelton PK et al. Effects of oral potassium on blood pressure. Meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled clinical trials. JAMA 277, 1624–32 (1997). [PubMed: 9168293] 
93. Aburto NJ et al. Effect of increased potassium intake on cardiovascular risk factors and disease: 
systematic review and meta-analyses. BMJ 346, f1378–f1378 (2013). [PubMed: 23558164] 
94. Whelton SP, Chin A, Xin X & He J Effect of aerobic exercise on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of 
randomized, controlled trials. Ann. Intern. Med 136, 493–503 (2002). [PubMed: 11926784] 
95. Xin X et al. Effects of alcohol reduction on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Hypertens. (Dallas, Tex. 1979) 38, 1112–7 (2001).
96. Roerecke M et al. The effect of a reduction in alcohol consumption on blood pressure: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Public Heal 2, e108–e120 (2017).
97. Appel LJ et al. A clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood pressure. DASH 
Collaborative Research Group. N. Engl. J. Med 336, 1117–24 (1997). [PubMed: 9099655] 
98. Whelton PK Hypertension curriculum review: epidemiology and the prevention of hypertension. J. 
Clin. Hypertens. (Greenwich) 6, 636–42 (2004). [PubMed: 15538097] 
99. Whelton PK et al. Primary prevention of hypertension: clinical and public health advisory from 
The National High Blood Pressure Education Program. JAMA 288, 1882–8 (2002). [PubMed: 
12377087] 
100. Whelton PK et al. Sodium Reduction and Weight Loss in the Treatment of Hypertension in Older 
Persons. JAMA 279, 839 (1998). [PubMed: 9515998] 
101. National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group report on primary prevention 
of hypertension. Arch. Intern. Med 153, 186–208 (1993). [PubMed: 8422207] 
102. Cook NR, Cohen J, Hebert PR, Taylor JO & Hennekens CH Implications of small reductions in 
diastolic blood pressure for primary prevention. Arch. Intern. Med 155, 701–9 (1995). [PubMed: 
7695458] 
103. Julius S et al. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N. 
Engl. J. Med 354, 1685–97 (2006). [PubMed: 16537662] 
104. Lüders S et al. The PHARAO study: prevention of hypertension with the angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients with high-normal blood pressure: a prospective, 
randomized, controlled prevention trial of the German Hypertension League. J. Hypertens 26, 
1487–96 (2008). [PubMed: 18551027] 
105. Fuchs SC et al. Effectiveness of Chlorthalidone Plus Amiloride for the Prevention of 
Hypertension: The PREVER‐Prevention Randomized Clinical Trial. J. Am. Heart Assoc 5, 
e004248 (2016). [PubMed: 27965209] 
106. James PA et al. 2014 Evidence-Based Guideline for the Management of High Blood Pressure in 
Adults. JAMA 311, 507 (2014). [PubMed: 24352797] 
107. SPRINT Research Group et al. A Randomized Trial of Intensive versus Standard Blood-Pressure 
Control. N. Engl. J. Med 373, 2103–2116 (2015). [PubMed: 26551272] 
108. Filipovský J et al. Automated compared to manual office blood pressure and to home blood 
pressure in hypertensive patients. Blood Press 25, 228–234 (2016). [PubMed: 26852625] 
109. Kjeldsen SE, Lund-Johansen P, Nilsson PM & Mancia G Unattended Blood Pressure 
Measurements in the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial. Hypertension 67, 808–812 
(2016). [PubMed: 27001295] 
110. Whelton PK et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA 
Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in 
Adults: Executive Summary. Hypertension HYP.0000000000000066 (2017). doi:10.1161/HYP.
0000000000000066
111. Aburto NJ et al. Effect of lower sodium intake on health: systematic review and meta-analyses. 
BMJ 346, f1326 (2013). [PubMed: 23558163] 
112. He FJ, Li J & Macgregor GA Effect of longer term modest salt reduction on blood pressure: 
Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ 346, f1325 (2013). 
[PubMed: 23558162] 
Oparil et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 113. WHO| Guideline Sodium intake for adults and children Sodium intake for adults and children
114. Appel LJ et al. Dietary Approaches to Prevent and Treat Hypertension: A Scientific Statement 
From the American Heart Association. Hypertension 47, 296–308 (2006). [PubMed: 16434724] 
115. Appel LJ ASH Position Paper: Dietary Approaches to Lower Blood Pressure. J. Clin. Hypertens 
11, 358–368 (2009).
116. He FJ & MacGregor GA Effect of modest salt reduction on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of 
randomized trials. Implications for public health. J. Hum. Hypertens 16, 761–770 (2002). 
[PubMed: 12444537] 
117. Langford HG Dietary therapy slows the return of hypertension after stopping prolonged 
medication. JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc 253, 657–664 (1985).
118. Intersalt: an international study of electrolyte excretion and blood pressure. Results for 24 hour 
urinary sodium and potassium excretion. Intersalt Cooperative Research Group. BMJ 297, 319–
328 (1988). [PubMed: 3416162] 
119. Bibbins-Domingo K et al. Projected Effect of Dietary Salt Reductions on Future Cardiovascular 
Disease. N. Engl. J. Med 362, 590–599 (2010). [PubMed: 20089957] 
120. Graudal NA, Hubeck-Graudal T & Jurgens G Effects of Low-Sodium Diet vs. High-Sodium Diet 
on Blood Pressure, Renin, Aldosterone, Catecholamines, Cholesterol, and Triglyceride 
(Cochrane Review). Am. J. Hypertens 25, 1–15 (2012). [PubMed: 22068710] 
121. He FJ & MacGregor GA Reducing Population Salt Intake-Time for Global Action. J. Clin. 
Hypertens 17, 10–13 (2014).
122. Cappuccio FP & MacGregor GA Does potassium supplementation lower blood pressure? A meta-
analysis of published trials. J. Hypertens 9, 465–473 (1991). [PubMed: 1649867] 
123. Chalmers J et al. Australian National Health and Medical Research Council dietary salt study in 
mild hypertension. J. Hypertens. Suppl 4, S629–37 (1986). [PubMed: 3475429] 
124. Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (K/DOQI). K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines on 
hypertension and antihypertensive agents in chronic kidney disease. Am. J. Kidney Dis 43, S1–
290 (2004). [PubMed: 15114537] 
125. Börjesson M, Onerup A, Lundqvist S & Dahlöf B Physical activity and exercise lower blood 
pressure in individuals with hypertension: narrative review of 27 RCTs. Br. J. Sports Med 50, 
356–361 (2016). [PubMed: 26787705] 
126. MacDonald HV et al. Dynamic Resistance Training as Stand‐Alone Antihypertensive Lifestyle 
Therapy: A Meta‐Analysis. J. Am. Heart Assoc 5, (2016).
127. Egan BM, Zhao Y, Axon RN, Brzezinski WA & Ferdinand KC Uncontrolled and Apparent 
Treatment Resistant Hypertension in the United States, 1988 to 2008. Circulation 124, 1046–
1058 (2011). [PubMed: 21824920] 
128. Zomer E et al. Interventions that cause weight loss and the impact on cardiovascular risk factors: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes. Rev 17, 1001–1011 (2016). [PubMed: 27324830] 
129. Stevens VJ Long-Term Weight Loss and Changes in Blood Pressure: Results of the Trials of 
Hypertension Prevention, Phase II. Ann. Intern. Med 134, 1 (2001). [PubMed: 11187414] 
130. Ettehad D et al. Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 387, 957–967 (2016). [PubMed: 26724178] 
131. Garjón J et al. First-line combination therapy versus first-line monotherapy for primary 
hypertension. in Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2017). doi:
10.1002/14651858.cd010316.pub2
132. Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance and guidelines | NICE. 
133. James WPT et al. Effect of Sibutramine on Cardiovascular Outcomes in Overweight and Obese 
Subjects. N. Engl. J. Med 363, 905–917 (2010). [PubMed: 20818901] 
134. Flack JM et al. Management of High Blood Pressure in Blacks: An Update of the International 
Society on Hypertension in Blacks Consensus Statement. Hypertension 56, 780–800 (2010). 
[PubMed: 20921433] 
135. Iskedjian M et al. Relationship between daily dose frequency and adherence to antihypertensive 
pharmacotherapy: Evidence from a meta-analysis. Clin. Ther 24, 302–316 (2002). [PubMed: 
11911560] 
Oparil et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 136. Effects of different blood-pressure-lowering regimens on major cardiovascular events: results of 
prospectively-designed overviews of randomised trials. Lancet 362, 1527–1535 (2003). 
[PubMed: 14615107] 
137. Yusuf S, et al. Telmisartan, Ramipril, or Both in Patients at High Risk for Vascular Events. N. 
Engl. J. Med 358, 1547–1559 (2008). [PubMed: 18378520] 
138. Bosch J et al. Effect of Ramipril on the Incidence of Diabetes. N. Engl. J. Med 355, 1551–1562 
(2006). [PubMed: 16980380] 
139. Brown NJ, Ray WA, Snowden M & Griffin MR Black Americans have an increased rate of 
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor-associated angioedema*. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther 60, 8–
13 (1996). [PubMed: 8689816] 
140. Brown NJ, Byiers S, Carr D, Maldonado M & Warner BA Dipeptidyl Peptidase-IV Inhibitor Use 
Associated With Increased Risk of ACE Inhibitor-Associated Angioedema. Hypertension 54, 
516–523 (2009). [PubMed: 19581505] 
141. Guazzi MD et al. Disparate unloading efficacy of the calcium channel blockers, verapamil and 
nifedipine, on the failing hypertensive left ventricle. Am. Heart J 108, 116–23 (1984). [PubMed: 
6375329] 
142. Harari D, Gurwitz JH, Avorn J, Choodnovskiy I & Minaker KL Correlates of regular laxative use 
by frail elderly persons. Am. J. Med 99, 513–8 (1995). [PubMed: 7485209] 
143. Bernard E, Goutelle S, Bertrand Y & Bleyzac N Pharmacokinetic Drug-Drug Interaction of 
Calcium Channel Blockers With Cyclosporine in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Children. 
Ann. Pharmacother 48, 1580–1584 (2014). [PubMed: 25280976] 
144. Effects of treatment on morbidity in hypertension. Results in patients with diastolic blood 
pressures averaging 115 through 129 mm Hg. JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc 202, 1028–1034 (1967).
145. Barzilay, JI; Long-Term Effects of Incident Diabetes Mellitus on Cardiovascular Outcomes in 
People Treated for Hypertension The ALLHAT Diabetes Extension Study. 
146. Roush GC, Holford TR & Guddati AK Chlorthalidone Compared With Hydrochlorothiazide in 
Reducing Cardiovascular Events: Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analyses. Hypertension 
59, 1110–1117 (2012). [PubMed: 22526259] 
147. Roush GC, Ernst ME, Kostis JB, Tandon S & Sica DA Head-to-Head Comparisons of 
Hydrochlorothiazide With Indapamide and Chlorthalidone: Antihypertensive and Metabolic 
Effects. Hypertension 65, 1041–1046 (2015). [PubMed: 25733245] 
148. Antman EM & Sabatine MS Cardiovascular therapeutics : a companion to Braunwald’s heart 
disease (Elsevier/Saunders, 2013).
149. Wiysonge CS, Bradley HA, Volmink J, Mayosi BM & Opie LH Beta-blockers for hypertension. 
in Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2017). doi:
10.1002/14651858.cd002003.pub5
150. Boutouyrie P, Achouba A, Trunet P & Laurent S Amlodipine-Valsartan Combination Decreases 
Central Systolic Blood Pressure More Effectively Than the Amlodipine-Atenolol Combination: 
The EXPLOR Study. Hypertension 55, 1314–1322 (2010). [PubMed: 20404219] 
151. Sharma AM, Pischon T, Hardt S, Kunz I & Luft FC Hypothesis: -Adrenergic Receptor Blockers 
and Weight Gain : A Systematic Analysis. Hypertension 37, 250–254 (2001). [PubMed: 
11230280] 
152. Bakris GL et al. Metabolic Effects of Carvedilol vs Metoprolol in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes 
Mellitus and Hypertension. JAMA 292, 2227 (2004). [PubMed: 15536109] 
153. Ruilope LM et al. Blood-pressure reduction with LCZ696, a novel dual-acting inhibitor of the 
angiotensin II receptor and neprilysin: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, active 
comparator study. Lancet 375, 1255–1266 (2010). [PubMed: 20236700] 
154. Ghofrani H-A et al. Riociguat for the Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension. N. Engl. J. 
Med 369, 330–340 (2013). [PubMed: 23883378] 
155. Zinman B et al. Empagliflozin, Cardiovascular Outcomes, and Mortality in Type 2 Diabetes. N. 
Engl. J. Med 373, 2117–2128 (2015). [PubMed: 26378978] 
156. Oparil S & Schmieder RE New Approaches in the Treatment of Hypertension. Circ. Res 116, 
1074–1095 (2015). [PubMed: 25767291] 
Oparil et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 157. Jordan J et al. Improved Insulin Sensitivity With Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibition in 
Individuals With Obesity and Hypertension. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther 101, 254–263 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27542885] 
158. Seferovic JP et al. Effect of sacubitril/valsartan versus enalapril on glycaemic control in patients 
with heart failure and diabetes: a post-hoc analysis from the PARADIGM-HF trial. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol 5, 333–340 (2017). [PubMed: 28330649] 
159. Calhoun DA et al. Resistant Hypertension: Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment: A Scientific 
Statement From the American Heart Association Professional Education Committee of the 
Council for High Blood Pressure Research. Hypertension 51, 1403–1419 (2008). [PubMed: 
18391085] 
160. Sim JJ et al. Characteristics of Resistant Hypertension in a Large, Ethnically Diverse 
Hypertension Population of an Integrated Health System. Mayo Clin. Proc 88, 1099–1107 
(2013). [PubMed: 24079679] 
161. Williams B et al. Spironolactone versus placebo, bisoprolol, and doxazosin to determine the 
optimal treatment for drug-resistant hypertension (PATHWAY-2): a randomised, double-blind, 
crossover trial. Lancet (London, England) 386, 2059–68 (2015).
162. Bobrie G et al. Sequential nephron blockade versus sequential renin–angiotensin system blockade 
in resistant hypertension. J. Hypertens 30, 1656–1664 (2012). [PubMed: 22728905] 
163. Juurlink DN et al. Rates of Hyperkalemia after Publication of the Randomized Aldactone 
Evaluation Study. N. Engl. J. Med 351, 543–551 (2004). [PubMed: 15295047] 
164. Krum H et al. Catheter-based renal sympathetic denervation for resistant hypertension: a 
multicentre safety and proof-of-principle cohort study. Lancet 373, 1275–1281 (2009). [PubMed: 
19332353] 
165. Bhatt DL et al. A Controlled Trial of Renal Denervation for Resistant Hypertension. N. Engl. J. 
Med 370, 1393–1401 (2014). [PubMed: 24678939] 
166. Heusser K et al. Carotid Baroreceptor Stimulation, Sympathetic Activity, Baroreflex Function, 
and Blood Pressure in Hypertensive Patients. Hypertension 55, 619–626 (2010). [PubMed: 
20101001] 
167. Bisognano JD et al. Baroreflex Activation Therapy Lowers Blood Pressure in Patients With 
Resistant Hypertension. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 58, 765–773 (2011). [PubMed: 21816315] 
168. Spiering W et al. LB02.05: Controlling and lowering blood pressure with the Mobiushd device: 
first in-man results (CALM-FIM study). J. Hypertens 33, e86 (2015).
169. Narkiewicz K et al. Unilateral Carotid Body Resection in Resistant Hypertension. JACC Basic to 
Transl. Sci 1, 313–324 (2016).
170. O’Callaghan EL et al. Chronic Deep Brain Stimulation Decreases Blood Pressure and 
Sympathetic Nerve Activity in a Drug- and Device-Resistant Hypertensive Patient. Hypertension 
69, 522–528 (2017). [PubMed: 28242717] 
171. Lobo MD et al. Central arteriovenous anastomosis for the treatment of patients with uncontrolled 
hypertension (the ROX CONTROL HTN study): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385, 
1634–1641 (2015). [PubMed: 25620016] 
172. Testa MA & Simonson DC Assessment of Quality-of-Life Outcomes. N. Engl. J. Med 334, 835–
840 (1996). [PubMed: 8596551] 
173. Trevisol DJ, Moreira LB, Kerkhoff A, Fuchs SC & Fuchs FD Health-related quality of life and 
hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. J. Hypertens 29, 
179–188 (2011). [PubMed: 21045726] 
174. Bardage C & Isacson DG Hypertension and health-related quality of life. an epidemiological 
study in Sweden. J. Clin. Epidemiol 54, 172–81 (2001). [PubMed: 11166533] 
175. Pickering TG Now we are sick: labeling and hypertension. J. Clin. Hypertens. (Greenwich) 8, 57–
60 (2006). [PubMed: 16407691] 
176. Haynes RB, Sackett DL, Taylor DW, Gibson ES & Johnson AL Increased Absenteeism from 
Work after Detection and Labeling of Hypertensive Patients. N. Engl. J. Med 299, 741–744 
(1978). [PubMed: 692548] 
177. Fogari R & Zoppi A Effect of antihypertensive agents on quality of life in the elderly. Drugs 
Aging 21, 377–93 (2004). [PubMed: 15084140] 
Oparil et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 178. Carris NW & Smith SM Quality of Life in Treatment-Resistant Hypertension. Curr. Hypertens. 
Rep 17, 61 (2015). [PubMed: 26115629] 
179. Croog SH et al. The Effects of Antihypertensive Therapy on the Quality of Life. N. Engl. J. Med 
314, 1657–1664 (1986). [PubMed: 3520318] 
180. Testa MA, Anderson RB, Nackley JF & Hollenberg NK Quality of Life and Antihypertensive 
Therapy in Men -- A Comparison of Captopril with Enalapril. N. Engl. J. Med 328, 907–913 
(1993). [PubMed: 8446137] 
181. Grimm RH et al. Relationships of quality-of-life measures to long-term lifestyle and drug 
treatment in the Treatment of Mild Hypertension Study. Arch. Intern. Med 157, 638–48 (1997). 
[PubMed: 9080918] 
182. Applegate WB Quality of life during antihypertensive treatment. Lessons from the Systolic 
Hypertension in the Elderly Program. Am. J. Hypertens 11, 57S–61S (1998). [PubMed: 
9546039] 
183. Fletcher AE et al. Quality of life on randomized treatment for isolated systolic hypertension: 
results from the Syst-Eur Trial. J. Hypertens 20, 2069–79 (2002). [PubMed: 12359987] 
184. Saper CB How low can you go? Ann. Neurol 78, 665–666 (2015). [PubMed: 26395548] 
185. O’Connor PJ et al. Effect of intensive versus standard blood pressure control on depression and 
health-related quality of life in type 2 diabetes: the ACCORD trial. Diabetes Care 35, 1479–81 
(2012). [PubMed: 22584134] 
186. Berlowitz D; Foy C; Kazis L; Bolin L; Conroy M et al. Effect of Intensive Blood-Pressure 
Treatment on Patient-Reported Outcomes. N. Engl. J. Med 377, 733–744 (2017). [PubMed: 
28834483] 
187. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. Worldwide trends in blood pressure from 1975 to 2015: a pooled 
analysis of 1479 population-based measurement studies with 19·1 million participants. Lancet 
389, 37–55 (2017). [PubMed: 27863813] 
188. Kearney PM et al. Global burden of hypertension: analysis of worldwide data. Lancet 365, 217–
223 (2005). [PubMed: 15652604] 
189. O’Donnell MJ, Mente A, Smyth A & Yusuf S Salt intake and cardiovascular disease: why are the 
data inconsistent? Eur. Heart J 34, 1034–1040 (2012). [PubMed: 23257945] 
190. Chow CK et al. Prevalence, Awareness, Treatment, and Control of Hypertension in Rural and 
Urban Communities in High-, Middle-, and Low-Income Countries. JAMA 310, 959 (2013). 
[PubMed: 24002282] 
191. Adler AJ et al. Reducing Cardiovascular Mortality Through Prevention and Management of 
Raised Blood Pressure. Glob. Heart 10, 111–122 (2015). [PubMed: 26213298] 
192. Olsen MH et al. A call to action and a lifecourse strategy to address the global burden of raised 
blood pressure on current and future generations: the Lancet Commission on hypertension. 
Lancet 388, 2665–2712 (2016). [PubMed: 27671667] 
193. Bhatt DL et al. A Controlled Trial of Renal Denervation for Resistant Hypertension. N. Engl. J. 
Med 370, 1393–1401 (2014). [PubMed: 24678939] 
194. Mendis S et al. The availability and affordability of selected essential medicines for chronic 
diseases in six low- and middle-income countries. Bull. World Health Organ 85, 279–288 (2007). 
[PubMed: 17546309] 
195. Park IU & Taylor AL Race and ethnicity in trials of antihypertensive therapy to prevent 
cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review. Ann. Fam. Med 5, 444–52 (2007). [PubMed: 
17893387] 
196. Anchala R et al. The Role of Decision Support System (DSS) in Prevention of Cardiovascular 
Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS One 7, e47064 (2012). [PubMed: 
23071713] 
197. WHO, PEPFAR U Task Shifting Global Recommendations and Guidelines
198. Ehret GB et al. Genetic variants in novel pathways influence blood pressure and cardiovascular 
disease risk. Nature 478, 103–109 (2011). [PubMed: 21909115] 
199. Potter LR, Yoder AR, Flora DR, Antos LK & Dickey DM Natriuretic Peptides: Their Structures, 
Receptors, Physiologic Functions and Therapeutic Applications. in cGMP: Generators, Effectors 
Oparil et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and Therapeutic Implications 341–366 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009). doi:
10.1007/978-3-540-68964-5_15
200. Dries DL Corin Gene Minor Allele Defined by 2 Missense Mutations Is Common in Blacks and 
Associated With High Blood Pressure and Hypertension. Circulation 112, 2403–2410 (2005). 
[PubMed: 16216958] 
201. Siebenhofer A et al. Long-term effects of weight-reducing drugs in people with hypertension. in 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2016). doi:
10.1002/14651858.cd007654.pub4
202. Ricci C et al. Long-Term Effects of Bariatric Surgery on Type II Diabetes, Hypertension and 
Hyperlipidemia: A Meta-Analysis and Meta-Regression Study with 5-Year Follow-Up. Obes. 
Surg 25, 397–405 (2014).
203. Sjöström CD, Lystig T & Lindroos AK Impact of weight change, secular trends and ageing on 
cardiovascular risk factors: 10-year experiences from the SOS study. Int. J. Obes 35, 1413–1420 
(2011).
204. Whelton PK Epidemiology and the Prevention of Hypertension. J. Clin. Hypertens 6, 636–642 
(2004).
205. Crowley SD et al. Angiotensin II causes hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy through its 
receptors in the kidney. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 103, 17985–17990 (2006). [PubMed: 17090678] 
206. Crowley SD et al. Distinct roles for the kidney and systemic tissues in blood pressure regulation 
by the renin-angiotensin system. J. Clin. Invest 115, 1092–1099 (2005). [PubMed: 15841186] 
207. Reich HN, Oudit GY, Penninger JM, Scholey JW & Herzenberg AM Decreased glomerular and 
tubular expression of ACE2 in patients with type 2 diabetes and kidney disease. Kidney Int 74, 
1610–6 (2008). [PubMed: 19034303] 
208. Liu L-S & Writing Group of 2010 Chinese Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension. 
[2010 Chinese guidelines for the management of hypertension]. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing 
Za Zhi 39, 579–615 (2011). [PubMed: 22088239] 
209. Weber MA et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension in the 
Community. J. Clin. Hypertens 16, 14–26 (2014).
210. Seedat YK, Rayner BL & Veriava Y South African hypertension practice guideline 2014 : review 
article. Cardiovasc. J. Afr 25, 288–294 (2014).
211. Shimamoto K et al. The Japanese Society of Hypertension Guidelines for the Management of 
Hypertension (JSH 2014). Hypertens. Res 37, 253–253 (2014). [PubMed: 24705419] 
212. Leung AA et al. Hypertension Canada’s 2016 Canadian Hypertension Education Program 
Guidelines for Blood Pressure Measurement, Diagnosis, Assessment of Risk, Prevention, and 
Treatment of Hypertension. Can. J. Cardiol 32, 569–588 (2016). [PubMed: 27118291] 
213. National Heart Foundation. Australia. Guideline for the diagnosis and management of 
hypertension in adults (2016).
214. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2017. Diabetes Care 40, 
1–142 (2017).
Oparil et al.
Page 32
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1.
Genetic predisposition to hypertension
A large GWAS of 2.5 million genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
>69,000 individuals of European ancestry from 29 studies demonstrated that most SNPs 
related to BP regulation and CVD risk involved natriuretic peptides198. SNPs in genes 
that encode precursors for ANP and BNP had been previously identified199, and two 
other loci were identified in this study, containing genes involved in natriuretic peptide 
and NO signalling pathways; both these pathways regulate cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate, which promotes vasodilation. A 2016 study identified 66 BP–associated 
loci, which were enriched for cis-regulatory elements in vascular endothelial cells, 
consistent with a role in BP control through modulation of vascular tone. This 
information prompted development of a genetic risk score to predict target organ 
damage4.
Gene deletion studies in rodent models have evaluated cardiac ANP and BNP as 
paracrine regulators of vascular regeneration. Deletion of the genes encoding ANP and 
BNP exaggerates cardiac fibrosis and increase adverse left ventricular (LV) 
remodelling38, and natriuretic peptide receptor A (NPRA) deficiency leads to increased 
BP, severe fibrosis and LV dysfunction. Further, deletion of the gene encoding the 
endothelial guanylyl cyclase-A (GC-A) receptor, a cell surface receptor for natriuretic 
peptides, leads to diminished vascular regeneration and angiogenesis in response to 
critical hind limb ischemia, as well as cardiac fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction.
Further, clinical studies have observed an association between certain corin gene 
polymorphisms and risk of pre-eclampsia and hypertension, particularly among African-
American but not Chinese populations200.
Oparil et al.
Page 33
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 2 –
Physical examination for secondary hypertension, organ damage and 
obesity
Signs suggestive of secondary hypertension
 ● Features of Cushing syndrome
 ● Neurofibromatosis (pheochromocytoma)
 ● Enlarged kidneys (polycystic kidney)
 ● Abdominal murmurs (renovascular hypertension)
 ● Precordial murmurs (aortic coarctation, aortic disease)
Signs of target organ damage
 ● Brain: motor or sensory deficit
 ● Retina: hypertensive retinopathy
 ● Heart: atrial fibrillation, arrhythmias, pulmonary congestion and peripheral oedema
 ● Peripheral arteries: absent, reduced or asymmetrical pulses and ischaemic skin lesions
 ● Carotid arteries: murmurs
Evidence of obesity
 ● BMI (body weight/height2) > 30
 ● Waist circumference* >102 cm in man and >88 cm in women
*values might need to be adjusted based on ethnicity or other factors.
BMI, body mass index
Oparil et al.
Page 34
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 3 –
Laboratory investigations in the diagnosis of hypertension
Routine tests
 ● Haemoglobin and haematocrit
 ● Fasting plasma glucose
 ● Serum total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
 ● Fasting serum triglycerides
 ● Serum potassium and sodium
 ● Serum uric acid
 ● Serum creatinine
 ● Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)
 ● Urine analysis including a test for microalbuminuria
 ● 12-lead EKG
Additional tests based on history, clinical examination and routine tests
 ● Haemoglobin A1c
 ● Quantitative proteinuria
 ● Out-of-office BP measurements*
 ● Echocardiogram
 ● Holter monitoring
 ● Carotid ultrasound
 ● Abdominal ultrasound
 ● Pulse wave velocity
 ● Ankle-brachial index
 ● Further specialist tests for secondary hypertension (renin, aldosterone, catecholamines and their 
metabolites etc)
*Ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) is recommended as the preferred method for measurement of “out-of-
office” BPs to confirm high BP and to diagnose masked hypertension. Careful measurement of home BPs is 
acceptable when ABPM is not feasible.
Oparil et al.
Page 35
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 4
Hypertension and obesity
Weight loss is recommended for individuals with obesity, and may be particularly 
important if these patients also have hypertension. Medications have been developed for 
the treatment of obesity, but their approval status differs between the United States and 
Europe: some drugs are only approved in the United States (for example, lorcaserin and 
topiramate/phentermine), whereas others are approved in Europe only. BP reductions in 
patients with hypertension have been reported for some weight loss medications201, but 
their specific pharmacological actions may attenuate the positive influences of weight 
loss on BP and CVD outcomes133. Bariatric surgery is very effective in reducing body 
weight, and the risk for arterial hypertension is substantially reduced up to five years 
following bariatric surgery202. However, large and sustained body weight reductions are 
needed to substantially reduce BP following bariatric surgery203 and there are no large 
clinical trials specifically testing the effects of weight loss medications or bariatric 
surgery on hypertension control.
Oparil et al.
Page 36
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 5
Outstanding Research Questions:
Measurement Issues
•
Is hypertension management improved by basing treatment strategies on 
serial unattended office BP measurements, out of office (home or ambulatory) 
BP measurements or central BP measurements?
•
How should BP be measured in patients with atrial fibrillation?
Treatment Issues
•
Should salt restriction at the population level continue to be recommended at 
current targets?
•
To what extent should age, estimated CVD risk and concomitant conditions 
influence treatment thresholds?
•
Should white-coat hypertension be treated?
•
If management strategy is to be influenced by central or out of office BP 
levels, what treatment thresholds and targets should be used?
•
Should reducing 24-hour and longer-term BP variability be a consideration in 
the selection of drug treatment for optimal CVD protection?
•
What combinations of antihypertensive agents give optimal CVD protection, 
stratified by age and ethnicity?
•
What is the optimal BP treatment target stratified by age, CVD risk and 
concomitant disease status?
•
What is the optimal management of treatment resistant hypertension that is 
resistant to 4 agents including spironolactone?
•
If treatment thresholds are to be driven by estimated CVD risk, at what level 
should antihypertensive drug treatment be initiated and what other CVD 
protective agents should be considered?
•
Is initiating drug therapy with 2 hypertensive agents more effective than 
initiating with monotherapy for optimal CVD prevention?
Oparil et al.
Page 37
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Association between systolic blood pressure and coronary heart disease mortality
Relationship of systolic BP to subsequent risk of coronary heart disease mortality in 
>340,000 US men 35–57 years of age at the beginning of the study followed-up for an 
average 11.6 years. A | Distribution of the incidence of coronary heart disease mortality, 
adjusted for age, race, total serum cholesterol level, cigarettes smoked per day, use of 
medication for diabetes, and income. Individuals with the highest BPs were at greatest risk 
for CVD mortality. B | Prevalence of coronary heart disease mortality; only a minority of the 
sample was exposed to the high risk associated with hypertension (≥140 mmHg for systolic 
BP, as per office BP measurement). However, a much larger number of them, who had BP in 
the non-hypertensive range, were exposed to the more modest but still important increases in 
CVD risk. C | Estimation of the percent of excess coronary heart disease deaths occurring in 
each category of systolic BP, using those with a systolic BP <110 mm Hg as the reference 
group. About two-thirds of the overall burden of BP-related CHD mortality occurred in men 
Oparil et al.
Page 38
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 who had a systolic BP ≥140 mmHg (25% of the sample). However, about two-thirds of the 
remaining disease burden could be attributed to the approximately 20% of adults who had a 
systolic BP in the high-normal range (systolic BP 130–139 mmHg)204. Data from Ref.19.
Oparil et al.
Page 39
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The main neuroendocrine systems involved in the regulation of blood pressure.
Neurohumoral, immune and organ systems involved in the maintenance of blood pressure. 
BP: Blood pressure, RAAS: renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
Oparil et al.
Page 40
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in the regulation of blood pressure
Decreased renal afferent perfusion pressure, reduced Na+ delivery to the macula densa (an 
area lining the wall of the distal convoluted tubule in correspondence of the glomerulus), 
activation of renal sympathetic nerves (via β1 adrenergic receptor stimulation) and a variety 
of vasodilators, including prostaglandin E2, stimulate the release of renin. Angiotensin II 
activates the AT1 receptor, triggering smooth muscle cell contraction, systemic 
vasoconstriction, increased renovascular resistance and decreased renal medullary blood 
flow, a mediator of salt sensitivity. Stimulation of the AT2 receptor has opposite effects, 
resulting in vasodilation, natriuresis and anti-proliferative actions. Cross-transplantation 
studies using wild-type mice and mice lacking the AT1 receptor have shown that both 
systemic and renal actions of angiotensin II are relevant to physiologic BP regulation, but 
that the detrimental effects of angiotensin II in hypertension are mediated mainly via the 
kidney205,206. ACE inhibitors and AT1 receptor antagonists have been shown to increase 
Ang-(1–7) levels in plasma and urine of normotensive animals and enhance renal ACE2 
activity33.. Studies in rodents and humans with non-diabetic kidney disease suggest that 
upregulation of ACE2 may delay progression of kidney disease207.
Oparil et al.
Page 41
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Pathways affected in single gene, Mendelian hypertension and hypotension syndromes
Some inherited diseases can affect the renal-angiotensin-aldosterone system pathways and, 
therefore, the blood pressure; hypertensive disorders are listed in red boxes and hypotensive 
disorders in green boxes. MR, mineralocorticoid receptor; GRA, glucocorticoid-remediable 
aldosteronism; PHA1, pseudohypoaldosteronism, type-1; AME, apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess; SLC12A1, solute carrier family 12 member 1; SLC12A3, solute carrier family 12 
member 3; CLCNKB, chloride channel protein ClC-Kb; KCNJ, inward rectifier potassium 
channel; ECaC, epithelial calcium channel; ENaC; epithelial Na channel; WNK1, Serine/
threonine-protein kinase WNK1; HSD11B1, corticosteroid 11-beta-dehydrogenase isozyme 
1; CYP21A2, steroid 21-hydroxylase; CYP17A1, steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase; 
CYP11B1, cytochrome P450 11B1, mitochondrial. Modified from Ref7
Oparil et al.
Page 42
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Algorithm for the management of hypertension
Reproduced from ref110.
Oparil et al.
Page 43
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oparil et al.
Page 44
Table 1 -
Definitions of hypertension based on the 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines
Category
Subtype
Systolic BP (mmHg)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
Office BP
NA
≥ 140
≥ 90
Ambulatory BP
Daytime (awake)
≥ 135
≥ 85
Night time (asleep)
≥ 120
≥ 70
24hr
≥ 130
≥ 80
Home BP
NA
≥ 135
≥ 85
For the diagnosis of hypertension, systolic BP, diastolic BP or both have to exceed the reported values.
NA, not applicable. Modified from Ref77.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oparil et al.
Page 45
Table 2 –
Diagnostics of secondary hypertension
Possible causes
Clinical indications
Diagnostics
Clinical history
Physical examination
Laboratory investigations
First-line test(s)
Additional confirmatory test(s)
Common causes
Renal parenchymal disease
● History of urinary tract 
infection or obstruction, 
haematuria (blood in the urine), 
analgesic abuse
● family history of polycystic 
kidney disease
Abdominal masses (in case 
of polycystic kidney 
disease)
● Presence of protein, 
erythrocytes, or leucocytes in the 
urine
● decreased GFR
Renal ultrasound
Detailed work-up for kidney disease
Renal artery stenosis
● Fibromuscular dysplasia: 
early onset hypertension 
(especially in women).
● Atherosclerotic stenosis: 
hypertension of abrupt onset, 
worsening or increasingly 
difficult to treat; flash 
pulmonary oedema
Abdominal bruit (abnormal 
sound)
● Difference of >1.5 cm in length 
between the two kidneys (renal 
ultrasound),
● rapid deterioration in renal 
function (spontaneous or in 
response to RAA blockers)
Renal Duplex 
Doppler 
ultrasonography
● Magnetic resonance angiography,
● spiral computed tomography
● intra-arterial digital subtraction 
angiography
Primary aldosteronism
● Muscle weakness
● family history of early onset 
hypertension and 
cerebrovascular events at <40 
years of age
Arrhythmias (in case of 
severe hypokalaemia)
● Hypokalaemia (spontaneous or 
diuretic-induced)
● incidental discovery of adrenal 
masses
Aldosterone–renin 
ratio under 
standardized 
conditions (corrected 
hypokalaemia and 
withdrawal of drugs 
affecting RAA 
system)
● Confirmatory tests (oral sodium 
loading, saline infusion, fludrocortisone 
suppression, or captopril test)
● adrenal CT scan
● adrenal vein sampling
Uncommon causes
Pheochromocytoma
● Paroxysmal hypertension or 
a crisis superimposed to 
sustained hypertension;
● headache, sweating, 
palpitations and pallor;
● positive family history of 
pheochromocytoma
Skin stigmata of 
neurofibromatosis (café-
au-lait spots, 
neurofibromas)
Incidental discovery of adrenal (or 
in some cases, extra-adrenal) 
masses
Measurement of 
urinary fractionated 
metanephrines or 
plasma-free 
metanephrines
● CT or MRI of the abdomen and 
pelvis;
● 123I-labelled meta-iodobenzyl-
guanidine scanning;
● genetic screening for pathogenic 
mutations
Cushing syndrome
● Rapid weight gain,
● polyuria (excessive 
production of urine),
● polydipsia (excessive thirst),
● psychological disturbances
Typical body habitus 
(central obesity, moon-
face, buffalo hump, red 
striae (stretch marks), 
hirsutism)
Hyperglycaemia
24-h urinary cortisol 
excretion
Dexamethasone-suppression test
CT, computed tomography; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; RAA, renin–angiotensin–aldosterone
Modified from Ref77.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oparil et al.
Page 46
Table 3.
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating plan
Food group
Servings*
Examples of a serving
Whole grains
6–8 per day
1 slice whole grain bread
Vegetables
4–5 per day
1 cup of raw leafy vegetables
Fruits
4–5 per day
1 medium sized fruit
Dairy products (low-fat or fat-free)
2–3 per day
1 cup of milk or yogurt
Fats and oils
2–3 per day
1 teaspoon of margarine or vegetable oil or
1 tablespoon of mayonnaise or
2 tablespoons of salad dressing
Lean meat, poultry, fish
2–3 per day
2 ounces of cooked meats, chicken or fish
Nuts, seeds and legumes
4–5 per week
1/3 cup (1.5 ounces) of nuts or
2 tablespoons of peanut butter or
2 tablespoons (0.5 ounce) of seeds or
½ cup of cooked peas or beans
Candy and added sugars
5 or less per week
1 tablespoon of sugar, jelly or jam or
1 cup of lemonade
*Recommended frequency of servings for a 2,000 calorie per day diet.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oparil et al.
Page 47
Table 4.
Blood pressure targets recommended by various guidelines
Guideline
Population
Goal BP (mmHg)
2010 Chinese Guidelines208
Adults < 65 years
< 140/90
Adults 65 years and older
<150/90 (<140/90 if 
tolerated)
Adults with diabetes, CHD or 
renal disease
<130/80
2013 ESH/ESC77
Non frail adults < 80 years
< 140/90
Adults > 80 years
< 150/90
Adults with diabetes
< 140/85
Adults with CKD without 
proteinuria
< 140/90
Adults with CKD with overt 
proteinuria
< 130/90
Adults with CHD
< 140/90
2013 ASH/ISH209
Adults 55–80 years
< 140/90
Young adults
< 130/80
Elderly > 80 years
< 150/90
2014 Hypertension guideline106 (formerly known as JNC 8)
Adults < 60 years
< 140/90
Adults ≥ 60 years
< 150/90
Adults with diabetes
< 140/90
Adults with CKD
< 140/90
2014 South African Guidelines210
Most adults
< 140/90
Adults > 80 years
SBP 140–150
2014 Japanese Guidelines211
Most adults
< 140/90
Late phase elderly patients
<150/90 (<140/90 if 
tolerated)
Adults with diabetes or CKD
< 130/80
Adults with CHD or CVD
< 140/90
CHEP 2016212
Adults < 80 years
< 140/90
Adults ≥ 80 years
< 150
High-risk adults ≥ 50 years
≤ 120*
2016 Australian guidelines213
Adults at high CV risk without 
diabetes mellitus, including CKD 
patients and those >75 years
< 120
Adults with diabetes in whom 
prevention of stroke is priority
< 120
ADA214
Adults with diabetes
< 140/90
Adults with diabetes and high risk 
for CVD
< 130/80
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA110
Adults with known CVD or 10-
year ASCVD event risk ≥ 10%
< 130/80
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oparil et al.
Page 48
Guideline
Population
Goal BP (mmHg)
Adults without additional markers 
of increased CVD risk
< 130/80
Older adults ≥ 65 years of age,
noninstitutionalized, ambulatory
< 130/80
Older adults ≥ 65 years of age, 
with comorbidities and limited life 
expectancy
Individualized goal 
based on clinical 
judgement and patient 
preference
The 2013 ASH/ISH guidelines were written to provide information for practitioners in low-income and middle-income countries as well as in 
developed countries.
*should be guided by automated office BP measurement. BP, blood pressure; ESH, European Society of Hypertension; ESC, European Society of 
Cardiology; CKD; chronic kidney disease; CHD, coronary heart disease; CHEP, Canadian Hypertension Education Program; ADA, American 
Diabetes Association; CVD, cardiovascular disease. ACC, American College Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; AAPA, American 
Academy of Physician Assistants; ABC,; ACPM, American College of Preventive Medicine; AGE; AGS, American Geriatric Society; APhA, 
American Public Health Association; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; ASH, American Society of Hypertension; ASPC, American 
Society of Preventive Cardiology; NMA, National Medical Association; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
