  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
 
DOI:
10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30261-9
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Oram, S., Khalifeh, H., & Howard, L. M. (2016). Violence against women and mental health. The Lancet
Psychiatry. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30261-9
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jun. 2019
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
1 
 
Violence against women and mental health 
 
Sian Oram PhD*; Lecturer in Women’s Mental Health; Section of Women's Mental Health; Institute 
of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience; Kings College London; De Crespigny Park; Denmark Hill; 
London SE5 8AF.   
 
* sian.oram@kcl.ac.uk; Tel: 020 7848 0708.  P031 David Goldberg Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience; Kings College London; De Crespigny Park; Denmark Hill; London SE5 
8AF. 
 
Hind Khalifeh PhD; Research Fellow in Women’s Mental Health; Section of Women's Mental Health; 
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience; Kings College London; De Crespigny Park; 
Denmark Hill; London SE5 8AF.   
 
Professor Louise M Howard PhD; Section of Women's Mental Health; Professor in Women’s Mental 
Health; Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience; Kings College London; De Crespigny Park; 
Denmark Hill; London SE5 8AF 
 
Contributors – SO and LMH conceived and developed the idea.  SO and HK conducted the review. SO 
and LMH drafted the manuscript and HK edited before all 3 authors approved the final version.   
 
Conflict of interest - LMH was a member of the WHO Guideline Development Group on Violence 
Against Women and NICE/SCIE Guideline Development Group on Domestic Violence and Abuse.  SO 
and HK declare no conflicts of interest.  
 
Funding source - LMH is funded through a NIHR Research Professorship in maternal mental health 
(NIHR-RP-R3-12-011) but there was no role of this funding source. 
 
 
 
 
 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
2 
 
Summary 
Violence against women is widely recognised to be a violation of human rights and a public health 
problem.  This article argues that violence against women is also a significant public mental health 
problem and that mental health professionals should be identifying, preventing, and responding to 
violence against women more effectively.  English-language primary studies and reviews reporting 
on mental health service responses to domestic violence and other forms of violence against women 
were identified by searching Medline, EMBASE, and PsycINFO.  Citation tracking and searches of the 
authors personal files were used to identify additional papers for inclusion. The commonest forms of 
violence against women are domestic abuse and sexual violence, and victimisation is associated with 
an increased risk of mental disorder. Despite clinical guidance on the role of mental health 
professionals in identifying violence against women and responding appropriately, poor 
identification persists and can lead to non-engagement with services and poor response to 
treatment. The review highlights that there has been little research in how to improve identification 
and treatment of victims and perpetrators in contact with mental health services but that mental 
health services could play a major role in primary and secondary prevention of violence against 
women.  
 
Introduction  
 
Violence against women (VAW) is a significant public health problem and a violation of human 
rights, impairing, in particular, women’s rights to life, to freedom from torture and other cruel, 
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, and to the highest attainable standards of physical 
and mental health.1, 2 International and national guidelines and position statements3-8 recognise that 
violence against women (VAW) is an important determinant of health for women and children and 
call for this significant public health issue to be identified and addressed by health services. In this 
review we demonstrate that VAW is also a public mental health problem. Mental health services 
internationally should therefore be identifying VAW, preventing further violence, and treating 
mental health consequences more effectively. Doing so requires mental health professionals to not 
only be aware of the impact of VAW on mental health and the effectiveness of potential treatments, 
but also to develop their understanding of the dynamics and complexities of abuse.  In particular, 
professionals must guard against the risks of victim-blaming and of disempowering women already 
disadvantaged by the social determinants of VAW and mental disorders such as poverty and gender 
inequity.3, 9 
 
The commonest forms of VAW are domestic violence and abuse (DVA), and sexual violence. Thirty 
five percent of women worldwide have experienced intimate partner violence or non-partner sexual 
violence. Although incidents of intimate partner violence are also experienced by men, women are 
more likely to have suffered repeated severe violence.10 Worldwide, 39% of murders of women are 
committed  by intimate partners or ex-partners (compared with 6% for male homicides), and higher 
rates are found in southeast Asia (59%).11 Non-partner sexual violence is also endemic and has been 
experienced by 7% of women worldwide.12 In England, the 2013/4 crime survey found that 2.2% 
(approximately 355000) of women aged 16-59 had experienced some form of sexual assault and 
8.5% (1.5 million) domestic abuse in the past year.13 When men are victims of interpersonal 
violence, this is more likely to be street or gang violence perpetrated by other men.14 However, the 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
3 
 
structural inequalities experienced by people with mental disorders, particularly those with severe 
mental illness, intersect with gender inequality, and men with mental disorders are at increased risk 
of domestic and sexual violence compared with men in the general population. Mental health 
services therefore need to be aware of the interpersonal violence experienced and perpetrated by 
women and men and provide gender sensitive services to address it. This paper focuses on how 
mental health services can address VAW but will also be relevant to how mental health services can 
help men suffering from domestic and sexual violence.  It aimed to review evidence on the 
relationship between VAW and mental health; the identification of and response to VAW by mental 
health services; and mental health interventions for victims and perpetrators of VAW.  Although 
VAW takes many forms (including domestic violence, sexual violence (including in conflict zones and 
as a weapon of war), forced and early marriage, "honour" crimes, female genital mutilation, and 
human trafficking), this review focuses on domestic and sexual violence as the most common forms 
of VAW worldwide, and presents emerging evidence on the mental health impacts of human 
trafficking and female genital mutilation.  
Box: Search strategy and selection criteria 
References for this review were identified by searching Medline, Embase, and PsycINFO for English-
language primary studies and reviews reporting on mental health service responses to domestic 
violence and other forms of violence against women.  Search terms for violence against women 
were adapted from terms published in Cochrane protocols by Dalsbo et al and Ramsay et al.15, 16  
Searches were conducted for the period 2009 to 12th January 2016, updating a previously published 
review.17  Citation tracking using Web of Science and Google Scholar and searches of our personal 
files were used to identify additional papers.  
 
Violence against women (VAW): definitions and concepts  
Domestic violence and abuse (DVA) 
Many countries provide a gender neutral definition of “domestic violence and abuse (DVA)”. For 
example, the UK Home Office states it is controlling, coercive or threatening behaviour, violence or 
abuse between people aged 16 or over, who are or have been intimate partners or family members, 
regardless of gender or sexuality" which includes, but is not limited to psychological, physical, sexual, 
financial and emotional abuse.18 Similarly, the US Department of Justice defines domestic violence as 
a "pattern of abusive behaviour in any relationship that is used by one partner to gain or maintain 
power and control over another intimate partner" (https://www.justice.gov/ovw/domestic-
violence). However, DVA is recognised to disproportionately affect women and an expression of 
power inequalities between men and women and, as such, to be a form of gender-based violence.19    
Some argue that there is evidence for distinctions between “situational violence”– DVA that is lower 
in frequency, less likely to escalate over time, and is more likely to be mutual, and “intimate 
terrorism” - DVA characterised by a coercive pattern of physical violence, intimidation and control.20-
22  
 
DVA research has often  focused  on incidents of physical violence, but this ignores the impact of 
repeated victimisation, sexual violence, emotional abuse, and controlling and coercive behaviour.23 
Women's experiences of high-frequency repeated DVA and other forms of violent victimisation have 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
4 
 
been further obscured by crime surveys, which typically cap repeated victimisation in reports.24 This 
highlights the need for a gendered perspective on analysis of violence.  
 
Sexual violence 
Although most DVA research has focused on physical violence, sexual violence may also be 
perpetrated by partners and research often fails to examine the relationship between the victim and 
perpetrator of sexual violence.23   Partner and non-partner sexual violence are defined separately by 
the World Health Organisation as “being physically forced to have sexual intercourse when you did 
not want to, having sexual intercourse because you were afraid of what your partner might do, 
and/or being forced to do something sexual that you found humiliating or degrading” and “when 
aged 15 years or over, being forced to perform any sexual act that you did not want to by someone 
other than your husband/partner”, respectively.10  Measuring the extent of sexual violence - which is 
often seen as shameful and stigmatising - presents a range of challenges.  Myths about sexual 
violence - including that women who use alcohol or drugs are asking to be raped, that women 
provoke rape by the way they dress or act, and that rape is a crime of passion - are prevalent 
worldwide, and act to stigmatise and blame victims and reduce the responsibility of perpetrators.    
In this context many victims choose not to report their experiences or may not define what 
happened to them as an act of sexual violence.25  
 
Other forms of VAW 
Sexual violence is common in the general population (see above) but is particularly highly prevalent 
in specific groups. For example, a study of survivors of human trafficking in contact with support 
services in England found that 95% women trafficked for sexual exploitation, 54% trafficked for 
domestic servitude, and 21% trafficked for labour exploitation reported having been forced to have 
sex while trafficked.26 27 Women make up over half of the estimated 20.9 million victims of human 
trafficking worldwide,28 where trafficking is defined as the recruitment and movement of people – 
most often by means such as deception, coercion, or the abuse of vulnerability – for the purposes of 
exploitation29,. Trafficked women are also likely to have experienced physical and sexual violence 
prior to trafficking and may remain vulnerable to victimisation after escape from exploitation;26, 27, 30 
similar findings have been found among female asylum seekers.31, 32 
 
Although families who practice FGM - procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external 
female genitalia or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reason33 – do not think 
of it as violence, FGM is internationally recognised as a form of VAW.  It differs from most forms of 
violence against women in that, in practicing communities, it is promoted as a valued social and 
cultural norm and conducted routinely on almost all girls.33  It is estimated that at least 200 million 
women and girls in 30 countries have been subjected to FGM, and that over 3 million girls are at risk 
of FGM annually.34  The practice is most common in the western, eastern, and north-eastern regions 
of Africa, in areas of the Middle East (including Iraq and Yemen) and of Asia (including Indonesia), 
but is also found in Europe, Australia, and North America.34   
 
Violence against women (VAW) and mental health 
Domestic violence and abuse (DVA) and mental health 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
5 
 
There is evidence, at least for some conditions, that a bidirectional causal relationship exists 
between mental disorder and DVA.  Longitudinal studies have demonstrated, for example, that  DVA 
increases the likelihood of depression among women with no previous history of symptoms and 
there is also an association between depression and subsequent DVA35; more than 10% of postnatal 
depression for example, may be potentially attributable to DVA.36 There has been limited 
longitudinal research into the relationship between DVA and other mental disorders, however, and 
more work is needed to disentangle the role of childhood abuse, which is associated with both 
mental disorder and DVA.37  
 
Nonetheless, systematic reviews of predominantly cross-sectional studies report consistent 
relationships between being a victim of DVA and mental disorders across the diagnostic spectrum 
for men and women, but as women are more likely to be victims, the population attributable 
fractions (assuming causality) are higher for women. One systematic review and meta-analysis 
reported  a three-fold increase in the likelihood of depressive disorders, four-fold increase in the 
likelihood of anxiety disorders and a seven-fold increase in the likelihood of post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) for women who have experienced DVA.23  Significant associations between IPV and 
symptoms of psychosis, substance misuse and eating disorders have also been reported.23, 38-40 Due 
to a lack of primary data, systematic reviews have been unable to assess the associations between 
diagnosed mental disorders and specific types of DVA (e.g. physical, sexual, psychological, and 
emotional abuse, and controlling and coercive behaviours).  However, a study by Pico-Alfonso et al. 
which compared three groups of women (non-abused, physically/psychologically abused, and 
psychologically abused) found that while both abused groups had a high incidence and severity of 
symptoms of depression, anxiety, PTSD, and suicidal ideation than did non-abused women there 
were no differences between the two abused groups.41  Similar findings have been reported 
elsewhere in respect of symptoms of depression, PTSD, and psychological distress 42-44 suggesting 
that psychological DVA can be as detrimental to mental health as physical DVA.41  Research 
considering the specific impact of coercive and controlling behaviours on mental health is limited, 
but in a study of court-involved abused women, Dutton et al showed that adverse mental health 
outcomes were independently with both coercive control and emotional abuse.45 Pico-Alfonso et al 
also reported a high degree of overlap between the types of abuse experienced: all the women who 
were subjected to physical violence also suffered from some form of psychological violence, with 
many also being sexually abused by their partners;41 research suggests that women who experience 
more than one form of abuse are at increased risk of mental disorder and co-morbidity.43, 44, 46   
 
The prevalence of DVA victimisation is particularly high in people in contact with secondary mental 
health services - a recent  survey of mental healthcare service users in London reported that 70% of 
women (and 50% of men) had been DVA victims as adults, with many (27% of women, 10% of men) 
experiencing recent and current DVA. .47 The prevalence of DVA in primary mental health care 
services such as primary care psychological therapy services in the UK (also known as IAPT – 
Improving Access to Psychological Therapy services) has not been investigated but in GP attenders a 
17% prevalence of physical violence in the past year from a current or former partner was found for 
women.48 
 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
6 
 
Some have highlighted that psychiatric symptoms, while fulfilling criteria for a mental disorder using 
current classifications, may be more usefully understood as understandable chronic anxiety about 
further abuse.49, 50   A recent meta-synthesis of fourteen studies reporting on mental health service 
users' experiences of disclosure and response to domestic violence highlighted the limitations of the 
biomedical model as a key theme: service users explained that a focus on diagnosing and treating 
psychiatric symptoms often prevented healthcare professionals recognizing abuse, while labels of 
mental illnesses act to minimize service users' experiences of abuse. 50 Researchers and domestic 
violence sector advocates have similarly argued that pathologising and medicalising such symptoms  
obscures their meaning and may not helpful in assisting victims to overcome symptoms and develop 
strategies to prevent further abuse 51, 52. Chronic experiences of abuse, particularly if abuse was also 
experienced in childhood and escape was not possible due to physical, psychological, family or 
societal factors, may result in “complex PTSD”, a disorder first proposed by Herman.53 Although not 
a category in DSMV (but may be included in ICD11), complex PTSD is considered a useful concept by 
many working with chronically traumatised victims.54  
 
There is some evidence that suggests that rates of physical and sexual IPV are lower in older women, 
but the prevalence of emotional and economic abuse and controlling behaviours are similar to those 
experienced by younger women, with similar rates of mental health problems.55 There is also 
preliminary evidence of an increased risk of DVA in women with dementia.56 The large literature on 
“carer abuse” may have ignored the possibility of historical abuse that started years before the 
onset of frailty and/or dementia.57 
 
Sexual violence and mental health 
Research also suggests an association between sexual violence and mental disorder, but generally 
does not distinguish between partner and non-partner violence.  Analysis of data from the cross-
sectional Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey, for example, suggests associations between sexual 
violence and drug and alcohol dependence, and estimated PAFs for women of between 6% and 16% 
for non-consensual sexual intercourse and between 13% and 24% for contact abuse for the mental 
disorders assessed, assuming a causal relationship (which is problematic in such cross-sectional 
data).58  Our recent review of recent sexual violence against women with severe mental illness (SMI) 
identified eight studies, with a median prevalence of 10% (IQR 6%-18%).59 Again people in contact 
with secondary care have a history of particularly high rates of sexual violence - the survey  
discussed above reported a 61% (40% for rape or attempted rape) prevalence of adulthood sexual 
violence against 129 female patients ) and prevalence of past-year sexual violence was 10%.47 More 
than half of those who had experienced rape or attempted rape reported having attempted suicide 
as a result of their experiences.  Perpetrators of sexual violence were most commonly acquaintances 
and strangers (77% of victims) with current or former partners reported for 47% of victims.   After 
adjusting for socio-demographic differences, the odds of sexual violence against women with SMI 
were six-fold higher for lifetime sexual violence (OR 6, CI 4-9) and threefold higher for past-year 
sexual violence (OR 3, CI 1-6) compared to women in the general population.47  Similar findings were 
reported in a survey of female psychiatric patients in the Netherlands (past-year sexual harassment 
OR 3.6 (CI2.7-4.8) compared to women in the general population).60 
 
Other forms of VAW and mental health 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
7 
 
Less is known about the relationship between other forms of VAW and mental health. A small 
number of studies suggest that high levels of symptoms including depressive, anxiety, and PTSD 
symptoms are found in women who have escaped their traffickers and are in contact with shelter 
services; psychotic disorders and substance use disorders are also found in trafficked people in 
contact with secondary mental health services.26, 27, 30  Mental health problems appear to endure 
into the medium- to long-term: a survey of Moldovan trafficked women found that  55% met DSM-IV 
criteria for mental disorder at an average of 6 months post-return to Moldova,61 while a survey of 
trafficked people in contact with shelter services in England found that 78% of women screened 
positive for depression, anxiety, or PTSD at an average of 16 months post-escape.26  Several studies 
report that the risk of mental health problems is increased by physical or sexual violence prior to and 
during trafficking; duration and severity of trafficking; and, after escape, unmet social needs and 
poor social support.61-63 Trafficked men also suffer violence prior to and during trafficking, studies 
suggest the prevalence is lower than among trafficked women (42% versus 77% for physical violence 
while trafficked and 4% versus 66% for sexual violence while trafficked) and that trafficked men are 
less likely to report having been injured while trafficked (33% versus 67%).26   
 
Although the physical health problems of FGM (including haemorrhage, urinary tract infection, 
dyspareunia, and obstetric complications) caused by FGM have been extensively documented,64 less 
is known about its mental health consequences.  Studies suggest, however, that women with FGM 
may be more likely to have a psychiatric diagnosis and to experience symptoms of anxiety, 
depression, somatisation, post-traumatic stress disorder, and low self-esteem65-67 and that 
psychopathology may be associated with type of FGM (with higher risk for infibulation), event 
recollection, avoidant coping style, migration, and employment status.66, 67 
 
Risk factors for being a victim of VAW 
 
The World Health Organisation uses an ecological model when considering risk factors for DVA.  Risk 
factors  operating at the level of the individual include young age,68-70 disability,71-73 poverty70, 74, 75 
(the increase in DVA since 2008 in England and Wales highlights the relationship between the 
economy and DV),24 witnessing DVA as a child, childhood abuse,70, 76, 77 and substance abuse.78 
Although individual-level risk factors for sexual violence are likely to vary according to the context of 
the abuse, sexual violence is more likely in the young, women  people with disability, poverty, sexual 
abuse in childhood, and substance abuse.14, 79 Many of these risk factors are also risk factors for 
mental disorders, which emphasises the social determinants of both mental disorders and violence 
against women, the complex pathways involved in being a victim of violence through the lifespan, 
and also highlights potential prevention strategies (see below). However, aetiological factors also 
occur at the level of the relationship (e.g. partner with depression, substance misuse, patriarchal 
attitudes, and/or a history of being a victim of childhood abuse), community characteristics (e.g. high 
population density, unemployment and social isolation), and larger societal factors including health, 
educational, economic and social policies, cultural norms, gender disadvantage and social 
inequalities.14, 80-82    
 
Perpetration of VAW by people with mental disorders 
 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
8 
 
Mental disorders are associated with an increased risk of perpetrating violence, and, internationally, 
mental health policy has a focus on assessment of risk of violence to others. However there have 
been few studies of the extent of the risk of DVA or sexual violence perpetration rather than violence 
in general, which has limited our knowledge on the prevalence and risk of perpetration of these 
types of abuse. However, a recent systematic review of predominantly cross-sectional psychiatric 
morbidity and population surveys found associations between all mental disorders and DVA 
perpetration in both men and women.83  Conclusions are limited though, as most studies measured 
isolated incidents of physical violence rather than repeated severe violence.  In addition, potential 
confounding and mediating factors were not examined  in the included studies, though from the 
United Nations Multi-Country Cross-Sectional Study on Men and Violence in Asia and the Pacific 
suggest that high levels of depressive symptoms may increase risk of perpetrating physical, sexual, 
and emotional domestic abuse even after adjustment for substance misuse, witnessing and 
experiencing violence as a child, and participation in violence outside the home.82 
 
The introduction of statutory domestic homicide reviews in England and confidential enquiries into 
homicides by people with mental illness has highlighted that domestic homicides are not 
infrequently perpetrated by male mental health service users. In one study, 14% of perpetrators of 
intimate partner homicide and 23% of perpetrators of adult family homicide in England and Wales 
had been in contact with mental health services in the year before the offence.84  For both types of 
homicide, men made up more than four-fifths of perpetrators.  Also in England and Wales, a study of 
homicide-suicides similarly found that current or former partners were the victims in two thirds of 
cases (although homicide-suicides make up a relatively small proportion of intimate partner 
homicides) and that 12% of perpetrators had been in contact with mental health services in the year 
before the offence.85 Victims of domestic homicide also often have a history of contact with mental 
health services as children or as adults.86, 87 Alcohol and substance misuse88 and persecutory 
delusions89, 90 are often reported to be mediators of violence in people with severe mental disorders: 
this has not been investigated in relation to DVA perpetrated by people with mental disorders and 
should be considered in future research. Similarly, although treatment with antipsychotics and mood 
stabilisers is associated with reduced violent crime,91 this has not been investigated in relation to 
DVA.  Similar mechanisms may be important in the relationship between DVA perpetration and 
mental disorders; future research should seek to investigate this. 
 
Evidence on the perpetration of sexual violence by people with mental disorders is similarly lacking, 
although a review of risk factors for sexual violence perpetration did not find evidence for an 
association between perpetration and psychological symptoms measured using screening 
instruments.92 Langstrom et al have reported on an increased relative risk of psychiatric 
hospitalization and severe mental illness in sexual offenders,93 and have hypothesised that 
psychiatric symptoms could trigger sexual offending.  Severe mental disorders may also be 
associated with potential risk factors for sexual violence perpetration (including aggression, poor 
social skills, and cognitive distortion), or mental disorders may be associated with  risk factors for 
sexual violence such as drug and alcohol misuse and sexual violence victimisation.93  
 
What can mental health professionals do? 
 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
9 
 
International guidelines, including from the World Health Organization (WHO) and National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), recommend that mental health professionals should  facilitate 
DVA disclosure as part of comprehensive clinical assessments, provide support and ensure safety, 
and treat physical and mental disorders in the context of any DVA (see Figure 1).3, 4 While there is 
debate about the role of universal screening for DVA in the health care system in generic services 
such as primary care or emergency departments,94  the prevalence of being a victim of violence is so 
high in mental health service users (as discussed above),  clinical guidelines recommend routine 
enquiry in mental health services. There is limited evidence on whether the introduction of routine 
enquiry improves outcomes, and outcomes will depend on the nature of the response to disclosure; 
guidelines therefore stress that routine enquiry should only be introduced when professionals have 
been appropriately trained, and have protocols in place on interventions, particularly referral to 
specialist DVA services and access to trauma-informed interventions. Given the high prevalence of 
DVA and sexual violence, mental health service providers must include support for staff who have 
been victims; many staff will find this work emotionally challenging if it resonates with their own 
experiences.  With these caveats, guidelines recommend that mental health professionals routinely 
ask about DVA and sexual violence experienced in childhood and adulthood as part of clinical 
assessment and ongoing care4, 5, 10. Routine enquiry needs to be carried out safely (i.e. in private with 
the use of a professional interpreter if needed rather than family members) and mental health 
professionals need to know how to respond before implementing routine enquiry.4 When working 
with survivors of sexual violence, human trafficking, and FGM, mental health professionals should 
similarly ensure women have opportunities to be seen without partners, family members, or 
acquaintances present; provide access to independent interpreters; respond sensitively, 
compassionately, and non-judgementally disclosure; reassure women that they are believed and not 
to blame for their experiences; and offer information and practical support that responds to 
women’s concerns and respects their autonomy.3, 95, 96 The 2014 Lancet series highlighted that the 
infrastructure of health systems and community services need to change in order to address 
violence against women (see Figure 1). However, a recent editorial in the American Journal of 
Psychiatry suggested that mental health professionals themselves have to address their strong 
psychological barriers to addressing DVA and sexual violence, which can lead to “pity and disdain” of 
the victim, and vilification of the abuser, and abdication of the roles of clinicians and researchers.97   
 
Figure 1:  Addressing violence against women – necessary elements at the level of health 
providers, services and systems.  
 
[uploaded separately] 
 
(Taken from Garcia-Moreno et al, 2014).98 
 
Identifying victims of VAW in mental health services 
Despite the high prevalence of DVA among mental health service users, a review in 2010 found that 
only 10-30% of DVA victims are identified by mental health professionals internationally.17 
Qualitative studies have reported several barriers to routine enquiry by professionals, including a 
lack of confidence and competence in facilitating and managing disclosures, lack of DVA knowledge 
and understanding (e.g. of the power dynamics of DVA relationships involving coercive control), and 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
10 
 
lack of clarity about the role of mental health professionals in addressing DVA.99, 100 A meta-synthesis 
of qualitative studies involving mental health service users found that DVA victims want mental 
health professionals to acknowledge and/or validate their disclosures of domestic violence in a non-
judgemental and compassionate manner.50 Some service users reported that their disclosures were 
not taken seriously and they felt blamed by professionals, which was unhelpful and associated with 
persistent symptoms (see also above). Lack of acknowledgement was felt to be compounded by 
limited opportunities for service users to discuss the DVA during consultations, which they felt 
focused exclusively on diagnosing and treating psychiatric symptoms, preventing them from 
recognizing the extent of abuse, receiving appropriate care, and minimizing their experiences. 
Responses that addressed their safety concerns were valued but service users were fearful that 
mental health professionals’ responses to the violence sometimes can place them at risk of further 
harm (e.g. if the perpetrator hears about the DVA disclosure), or dismissal by services if they do not 
leave the partner. Mental health professionals may fail to understand that choosing to remain in an 
abusive relationship may be based on a strategic risk: benefit analysis which includes financial 
concerns, concern that they will be seen as too ill to care for their children, short-term losses such as 
the family home and a father and network for the victim’s children, stigma, hope (not always 
unfounded) that the perpetrator will change,99, 101 and an awareness that the perpetrator may stalk 
the victim and cause more severe violence. Indeed women are at greatest risk of homicide in the 
months immediately following separation.102, 103  
 
Adulthood sexual violence is also under-detected in mental health services.  Studies conducted with 
female mental health service users in Brazil, Sweden and the UK report that between 12% and 43% 
of those who had suffered sexual violence had told a health professional about their experiences47, 
104, 105 In a Swedish study, sexual violence was less likely to be identified by mental health services 
than was either physical or emotional abuse.105 Female mental health service users in India who had 
experienced sexual coercion – 60% of whom reported having told no one about their experiences - 
explained that their reasons for non-disclosure included fears of being blamed and of further 
violence from the perpetrator, resignation, and believing that abuse happened to all women.106 
Research to explore barriers to identifying and responding to sexual violence within mental health 
settings is lacking, although  a small qualitative study conducted in Australia found staff reported 
personal discomfort with the issue and felt ill-equipped to respond to disclosures due to a lack of 
training and guidance, including with regards to containing distress and making referrals to sexual 
assault services.107 
 
There is little evidence on the extent to which either human trafficking or FGM is identified in mental 
health settings. although UK research has shown that trafficked people have come into contact with 
mental health services while being exploited,30, 108 providing mental health professionals with 
opportunities to identify, refer safely, and provide care while facilitating escape from the trafficking 
situation.  A survey of NHS staff working in areas in which five or more trafficked people had been 
identified by police in the previous year found that one in eight mental health professionals reported 
that they thought they may have encountered at least one victim of trafficking in their clinical 
practice, but they lacked knowledge and confidence in how to respond appropriately and safely.108 A 
cohort study, using clinical informatics, found that in half the cases (n=95), mental health 
professionals were the first healthcare professional to become aware that their patient was a 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
11 
 
potential victim of trafficking; 109 of the other  trafficked adults in this cohort had been identified as 
trafficking victims by others and were frequently referred by primary care and emergency 
departments, though maternity care was also an important route into mental healthcare for 
trafficked women. Compared with other adults in contact with the same mental health provider 
trafficked adults were more likely to be detained and had longer admissions.91  Trafficked people 
may find it difficult to disclose their experiences, due to fear, feelings of shame and guilt, and the 
impact of trauma on their recall of events. In addition trafficked people may not recognise that the 
abuse they are experiencing is  trafficking, and may not trust healthcare professionals due to their 
fear of retribution by the traffickers.95, 110  
 
Improving mental health service responses to violence against women (VAW) 
There is evidence internationally that guideline dissemination and training in isolation do not create 
consistent, sustainable improvements in identification and response to VAW111, 112 and research into 
strategies to improve the integration of DVA and other forms of VAW into the “core business” of 
mental health services is needed. There are trials of systemic interventions to improve identification 
and response to DVA in primary care, but a recent systematic review reported no trials in mental 
health settings and highlighted the need for more than training to improve identification.112 In non-
mental health settings, ongoing integrated training, support and advice (e.g. from DVA advocates) 
for health professionals in addressing DVA improves health professionals’facilitation of disclosure 
and improves professionals’ subsequent response.112, 113 However,  one study in maternity services 
reported potential and actual harm occurring after the introduction of routine enquiry, including 
breaches of confidentiality which could lead to the perpetrator finding out about the disclosure with 
consequent violence, and failure to document evidence, limiting women's ability to access civil and 
legal remedies.114  
 
A small pilot in community mental health teams in South London suggests that DVA advocates 
integrated within teams, in addition to dedicated time for training, improve rates of identification of 
DVA and outcomes for individual victims with fewer unmet needs and lower levels of abuse at 3 
months follow-up.100 Echoing findings that improving mental health service responses to DVA 
requires more than training, an audit conducted in New Zealand found that although the 
proportions of child and adulthood sexual and physical abuse included in formulations and 
treatment plans increased after the introduction of a trauma policy and training programme, actual 
interventions remained low.115    
 
Identification of perpetrators of VAW in mental health services 
There is limited evidence on the extent to which poor detection of perpetrators of DVA and sexual 
violence occurs in mental health services. However, a recent qualitative study with mental health 
professionals has highlighted the lack of enquiry about DVA perpetration specifically (with most 
professionals asking about violence in general and not asking about ex-partners, even though risk of 
lethal violence increases after separation),116 perceived inadequacy of current risk assessment (as 
generic risk assessments do not specifically refer to different types of DVA) and lack of clarity on 
information sharing.117 Homicide-suicides have also recently been reported to be commonly 
preceded by relationship breakdown and separation, with most perpetrators male (88%), most 
victims female (77 %); 62 % of perpetrators had mental health problems.85  
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
12 
 
 
In England, the National Confidential Inquiry into Homicides, and the Home Office, report a failure of 
mental health professionals to assess for DVA perpetration risk,86, 118 despite a clear responsibility of 
mental health services to identify potential IPV perpetrators within current risk assessment 
frameworks.  Although there has been less research on how to respond to mental health service 
users who disclose DVA perpetration, there is extensive guidance on how to address risk of violence, 
which includes consideration of safety of the victim. 
 
Interventions for victims of VAW 
There is a large evidence base on mental health interventions for all the mental disorders associated 
with violence against women, but little is known on how effective psychological or pharmacological 
interventions are for victims of violence where the violence has not been disclosed, or where the 
violence is not the focus of the intervention. A Cochrane review of 70 trials (4761 participants) of 
psychological interventions for PTSD found that there was some evidence (though from generally 
low quality trials) that trauma focussed CBT and eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing 
(EMDR) are superior to non-trauma focussed CBT between one to four months following 
treatment.119  
 
The evidence base on psychological interventions specifically designed for survivors of DVA is 
growing, and systematic reviews find that CBT based interventions and cognitive processing may be 
associated with improved PTSD and depressive symptoms in survivors no longer in abusive 
relationships.4, 120  Although a systematic review finds some support for the effectiveness of 
advocacy and CBT interventions in reducing physical and psychological DVA (too few studies were 
identified to assess effectiveness in reducing sexual DVA), few studies have examined whether 
interventions are helpful in reducing psychological symptoms among women still subject to abuse.121 
However, the few studies which integrate DVA advocacy and psychological interventions in women 
at risk of continuing abuse  report both improvements in depressive symptoms and reductions in 
abuse,122-124 including improvement in birth outcomes for women in the perinatal period.122, 124 It is 
not yet clear which modes of delivery are most effective and whether interventions can be delivered 
effectively to women with different levels of risk of abuse, including diverse and marginalised 
groups.4   
 
Evidence on psychological interventions for survivors of sexual violence is also inconsistent.  A 
systematic review of 20 studies found some evidence for the efficacy of EMDR and trauma-focused 
CBT (TF-CBT) for PTSD, depression, and other psychological problems commonly experienced by 
sexually assaulted women, again from low quality studies.125  However, the Cochrane review of 
treatment for PTSD found no differences between TF-CBT and other therapies that were not 
specifically trauma focused for women who had experienced sexual assault or abuse.119  Since the 
publication of these reviews, a cluster trial of an adapted group cognitive processing therapy 
intervention versus individual psychosocial support for Congolese survivors of sexual violence has 
demonstrated effectiveness in reducing symptoms of post-traumatic stress, depression, and anxiety 
in a low-income, conflict-affected setting.126  As with research on interventions for DVA, women with 
recent or ongoing experiences of sexual violence are excluded from the majority of intervention 
trials.   
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
13 
 
 
No research to evaluate interventions to support the psychological recovery of either trafficked 
women or women who have experienced FGM was identified in this or in previous reviews; 27, 127 
future research should test interventions in these survivor groups.  Until then, care should be 
provided in line with guidelines for working with victims of trauma.3   
 
Interventions for perpetrators of VAW 
Evidence is lacking on the effectiveness and appropriateness of DVA perpetrator programmes for 
people with mental disorders, and these programmes receive few referrals from mental health 
services.128 However, interventions for modifiable risk factors (such as medication for persecutory 
delusions, psychological interventions , and treatment of co-morbid alcohol and substance misuse) 
while ensuring safety of the potential victim, may be expected to improve health and reduce 
violence for DVA perpetrators in contact with mental health services whose VAW perpetration 
appears linked to these factors.  
 
 
Violence against women: a public mental health approach to prevention 
Mental health professionals have an important role in protecting women’s rights to be free from 
gender based violence, and can employ primary, secondary, and tertiary measures to reduce the risk 
of VAW.  As substance misuse, particularly excessive alcohol consumption, contributes to DVA and 
sexual violence, mental health professionals could argue for a reduction in hazardous levels of 
drinking as recently recommended by the Chief Medical Officer.129 Engagement in primary 
prevention could also involve mental health professionals raising awareness about the impact on 
mental health and intergenerational violence experienced by women and children and challenging 
cultural norms within mental health services as well as wider society.  Secondary prevention of VAW 
(i.e. reducing the impact and harms of VAW that has already occurred) will involve identifying and 
responding to domestic, sexual, and other forms of VAW  experienced  or perpetrated by mental 
health service users. Identification and treatment of perpetrators may prevent future violence and 
would also improve victims’ health:  risk assessment should include a focus on risk of DVA and sexual 
violence to ex-partners (as well as current partners) and family members. Safeguarding and 
supporting children exposed to and/or witnessing VAW could reduce the likelihood of these children 
becoming victims or perpetrators of VAW, reducing risk of VAW for future generations.  Mental 
health professionals can also contribute to the prevention of VAW at the tertiary level by advocating 
for funding for specialist services such as DVA advocates, sexual assault referral centres (SARCs), 
FGM clinics, and post-trafficking support.  Increasing access to mental health services is an important 
secondary and tertiary preventive measure: despite evidence that mental disorder increases the risk 
of DVA victimisation and perpetration, and that experiencing DVA increases risk of mental disorder, 
effective mental health treatments are not available for most people globally.130, 131  
 
Implications for future research  
States are obliged to prevent violence against women and to protect victims and should provide 
funding for research and services that is commensurate with the cost of violence against women to 
the health and wellbeing of women and of future generations.  The Istanbul Convention, for 
example, requires that States take the necessary legislative and other measures to ensure that 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
14 
 
victims of all forms of violence against women have access to healthcare, social and specialist 
support services; that services are adequately resourced; and that professionals are trained to assist 
victims to make appropriate referrals.2   Yet, and as highlighted in this review and elsewhere in this 
issue, and by the World Health Organization's (WHO) global plan of action to strengthen health 
system responses to violence against women and children,132 appropriate mental health research 
and service provision is lacking.133  As indicated in the review above, and by the National Institute of 
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) and WHO),3, 4 research into interventions for both victims and 
perpetrators of DVA and sexual violence are still needed; there have been only a few trials to date 
for victims of DVA or sexual violence with mental disorders, and no trials for mental disorders in 
victims of other forms of violence against women such as trafficking and FGM. Similarly there have 
been no trials of perpetrator programmes or other interventions for DVA perpetrators who have 
mental disorders and/or misuse substances. Research needs to be informed by more longitudinal 
studies into all forms of violence against women (rather than focusing solely on incidents of physical 
violence), including measures of impact of the violence, which could identify potential mechanisms 
that could be addressed by tailored interventions.  New cohort studies should include measures of 
the range of mental disorders and symptoms, in addition to depression. Research is also needed to 
establish how often "non-engagement" with mental health services, and poor treatment response, is 
due to perpetrators limiting access to health professionals and undermining treatment offered. To 
what extent is treatment failure or treatment resistance due to VAW that has not been identified? It 
is striking that DVA and other forms of violence are rarely measured or identified in trials of mental 
health interventions even though they is likely to be important moderators of response. We hope 
that in future, there will be better integration of violence against women in studies investigating the 
epidemiology of mental disorders and their treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
15 
 
References 
 
1. 
UN General Assembly. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women. 
United 
Nations, 
Treaty 
Series, 
vol 
1249, 
p13, 
available 
at 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/cescr.htm [accessed May 16 2016]; 1979. 
2. 
Council of Europe. The Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence 
Against 
Women 
and 
Domestic 
Violence. 
ISBN 
978-92-871-7990-6, 
available 
at: 
http://www.refworld.org/docid/548165c94.html [accessed 16 May 2016]; 2014. 
3. 
World Health Organization. Responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence 
against women: WHO clinical and policy guidelines. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 
4. 
NICE. Domestic violence and abuse: multi-agency working. London: National Institute for 
Health and Care Exellence; 2014. 
5. 
Stewart D, MacMillan H, Wathen CN. Intimate Partner Violence: . The Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry. 2013; 58(6): Insert 1-15. 
6. 
Stewart DE, Chandra P. Intimate partner violence and sexual violence against women: WPA 
curriculum.  Presidential work plan.  . http://www.wpanet.org/: World Psychiatric Association; 2016. 
7. 
Stewart DE, Chandra P. World Psychiatric Association Position Paper and International 
Competency-Based Curriculum for Mental Health Care Providers on Intimate Partner Violence and 
Sexual Violence against Women. http://www.wpanet.org/; 2016. 
8. 
World Health Assembly. WHO global plan of action to strengthen the role of the health 
system within a national multisectoral response to address interpersonal violence, in particular 
against women and girls, and against children (Document EB138/9). Geneva: World Health 
Organisation; 2016. 
9. 
Davies SC. Annual report of the Chief Medical Officer 2014.  The Health of the 51%: Women. 
London: Department of Health; 2015. 
10. 
Organization. WH. Global and regional estimates of violence against women: prevalence and 
health effects of intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual violence Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2013. 
11. 
Stöckl H, Devries K, Rotstein A, Abrahams N, Campbell J, Watts C, et al. The global 
prevalence of intimate partner homicide: a systematic review. The Lancet. 2013; 382(9895): 859-65. 
12. 
Abrahams N, Devries K, Watts C, Pallitto C, Petzold M, Shamu S, et al. Worldwide prevalence 
of non-partner sexual violence: a systematic review. The Lancet. 2014; 383(9929): 1648-54. 
13. 
Office for National Statistics. Focus on: Violent Crime and Sexual Offences, 2013/14. London: 
ONS; 2015. 
14. 
Krug E, Mercy J, Dahlberg L, Ziwi A. The World Report on Violence and Health. Lancet. 2002; 
360(9339): 1083-8. 
15. 
Dalsbo TK, Johme T. "Cognitive behavioural therapy for men who physically abuse their 
female partner (Protocol) ". Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2006. 
16. 
Ramsay J, Carter Y, Davidson L, Dunne D, Eldridge S, Feder G, et al. Advocacy interventions to 
reduce or eliminate violence and promote the physical and psychosocial well-being of women who 
experience intimate partner abuse. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2009; (3): Art. No.: 
CD005043. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005043.pub2. 
17. 
Howard LM, Trevillion K, Agnew-Davies R. Domestic violence and mental health. 
International Review of Psychiatry. 2010; 22(5): 525-34. 
18. 
Home Office. Information for local areas on the change to the definition of domestic 
violence. London: Home Office; 2013. 
19. 
Council of Europe. Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence 
against women and domestic violence. Strasbourg: Council of Europe; 2011. 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
16 
 
20. 
Graham-Kevan N, Archer J. Intimate Terrorism and Common Couple Violence: a test of 
Johnson's Predictions in Four British Samples Journal of Interpersonal Violence. 2003; 18(11): 1247-
70. 
21. 
Johnson MP. Patriarchal terrorism and common couple violence: Two forms of violence 
against women. Journal of Marriage and the Family. 1995; 57: 283-94. 
22. 
Kelly JB, Johnson MP. Differentiation among types of intimate partner violence: Research 
update and implications for interventions. Family Court Review. 2008; 46(3): 476-99. 
23. 
Trevillion K, Oram S, Feder G, Howard LM. Experiences of domestic violence and mental 
disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS one. 2012; 7(12): e51740. 
24. 
Walby S, Towers J, Francis B. Is violent crime increasing or decreasing? A new methodology 
to measure repeat attacks making visible the significance of gender and domestic relations. British 
Journal of Criminology. 2015; Online First (doi: 10.1093/bjc/azv131). 
25. 
Dartnall E, Jewkes R. Sexual violence against women: the scope of the problem. Best practice 
& research Clinical obstetrics & gynaecology. 2013; 27(1): 3-13. 
26. 
Oram S, Abas M, Bick D, Boyle A, French R, Jakobowitz S, et al. Human trafficking and health: 
a cross-sectional survey of male and female survivors in contact with services in England. American 
Journal of Public Health. 2016: Online First, e1–e6. doi:10.2105/AJPH.016.303095. 
27. 
Ottisova L, Hemmings S, Howard LM, Zimmerman C, Oram S. Prevalence and risk of violence 
and the mental, physical, and sexual health problems associated with human trafficking: an updated 
systematic 
review. 
Epidemiology 
and 
Psychiatric 
Sciences. 
2016; 
Online 
First: 
DOI: 
10.1017/S2045796016000135. 
28. 
International Labour Office. ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour: Results and Methodology. 
Geneva: International Labour Office; 2012. 
29. 
United Nations. Optional Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention Against 
Transnational Organized Crime, G.A. Res. 55/25(2000). 2000. 
30. 
Oram S, Khondoker M, Abas M, Broadbent M, Howard LM. Characteristics of trafficked 
adults and children with severe mental illness: a historical cohort study. The Lancet Psychiatry. 2015; 
2(12): 1084-91. 
31. 
Zimmerman C, Hossain M, Kiss L, Hoey J, Weneden K, Watts C. Asylum-seeking women, 
violence, and health: results from a pilot study in Scotland and Belgium. London: LSHTM and Scottish 
Refugee Council; 2009. 
32. 
Kalt A, Hossain M, Kiss L, Zimmerman C. Asylum seekers, violence and health: a systematic 
review of research in high-income host countries. American journal of public health. 2013; 103(3): 
e30-e42. 
33. 
World Health Organization. Female genital mutilation.  2016  [cited 21.04.2016]; Available 
from:  
34. 
UNICEF. Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting: A Global Concern.  2016  [cited 21.4.2016]; 
Available from:  
35. 
Devries KM, Mak JY, Bacchus LJ, Child JC, Falder G, Petzold M, et al. Intimate partner 
violence and incident depressive symptoms and suicide attempts: a systematic review of longitudinal 
studies. PLoS Med. 2013; 10(5): e1001439. 
36. 
Howard LM, Oram S, Galley H, Trevillion K, Feder G. Domestic violence and perinatal mental 
disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2013; 10(5): e1001452. 
37. 
Anderson F, Howard LM, Moran P, Dean K, Khalifeh H. The association between childhood 
maltreatment and adulthood domestic and sexual violence victimisation among people with severe 
mental illness. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. In Press. 
38. 
Oram S, Trevillion K, Feder G, Howard L. Prevalence of experiences of domestic violence 
among psychiatric patients: systematic review. The British Journal of Psychiatry. 2013; 202(2): 94-9. 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
17 
 
39. 
Bundock L, Howard LM, Trevillion K, Malcolm E, Feder G, Oram S. Prevalence and risk of 
experiences of intimate partner violence among people with eating disorders: A systematic review. 
Journal of psychiatric research. 2013; 47(9): 1134-42. 
40. 
Jonas S, Khalifeh H, Bebbington P, McManus S, Brugha T, Meltzer H, et al. Gender 
differences in intimate partner violence and psychiatric disorders in England: results from the 2007 
adult psychiatric morbidity survey. Epidemiology and psychiatric sciences. 2014; 23(02): 189-99. 
41. 
Pico-Alfonso MA, Garcia-Linares M, Celda-Navarro N, Blasco-Ros C, Echeburua E, Martinez 
M. The Impact of Physical, Psychological, and Sexual Intimate Male Partner Violence on Women's 
Mental Health: Depressive Symptoms, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, State Anxiety, and Suicide. 
Journal of Women's Health. 2006; 15(5): 599-611. 
42. 
Coker AL, Davis KE, Arias I, Desai S, Sanderson M, Brandt HM, et al. Physical and mental 
health effects of intimate partner violence for men and women. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine. 2002; 23(4): 260-8. 
43. 
Romito P, Turan JM, Marchi MD. The impact of current and past interpersonal violence on 
women's mental health. Social science and medicine. 2005; 60(8): 1717-28. 
44. 
Jones L, Hughes M, Unterstaller U. Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) in Victims of 
Domestic Violence. A Review of the Research. Trauma Violence & Abuse. 2001; 2(2): 99-119. 
45. 
Dutton MA, Goodman LA, Bennett L. Court-involved battered women's responses to 
violence: The role of psychological, physical, and sexual abuse. Violence and victims. 1999; 14(1): 89-
104. 
46. 
Echeburua E, Corral P, Amor PJ. Evaluation of psychological harm in the victims of violent 
crime. Psychology in Spain. 2003; 7: 10-8. 
47. 
Khalifeh H, Moran P, Borschmann R, Dean K, Hart C, Hogg J, et al. Domestic and sexual 
violence against patients with severe mental illness. Psychological medicine. 2015; 45(04): 875-86. 
48. 
Richardson J, Coid J, Petruckevitch A, Chung WS, Moorey S, Feder G. Identifying domestic 
violence: cross sectional study in primary care. Bmj. 2002; 324(7332): 274. 
49. 
Humphreys C, Thiara R. Mental Health and Domestic Violence: "I Call It Symptoms of Abuse". 
British Journal of Social Work. 2003; 33: 209-26. 
50. 
Trevillion K, Hughes B, Feder G, Borschmann R, Oram S, Howard LM. Disclosure of domestic 
violence in mental health settings: A qualitative meta-synthesis. International Review of Psychiatry. 
2014; 26(4): 430-44. 
51. 
Lavis V, Horrocks C, Kelly N, Barker V. Domestic violence and health care: Opening Pandora’s 
box-challenges and dilemmas. Feminism & Psychology. 2005; 15(4): 441-60. 
52. 
Warshaw C, Monagle J, Thomasma D. Domestic violence: changing theory, changing 
practice. Health care ethics: critical issues for the 21st century. 1998. 
53. 
Herman JL. Complex PTSD: A syndrome in survivors of prolonged and repeated trauma. 
Journal of traumatic stress. 1992; 5(3): 377-91. 
54. 
Greenberg N, Brooks S, Dunn R. Latest developments in post-traumatic stress disorder: 
diagnosis and treatment. British medical bulletin. 2015; 114(1): 147-55. 
55. 
Stöckl H, Penhale B. Intimate partner violence and its association with physical and mental 
health symptoms among older women in Germany. Journal of interpersonal violence. 2014: 
0886260514554427. 
56. 
Knight L, McCausland B, Page L, Trevillion K. A systematic review of the prevalence and odds 
of domestic abuse victimisation among people with dementia. International Review of Psychiatry. 
Under Review. 
57. 
McCausland B, Knight L, Page L, Trevillion K. A systematic review of the prevalence and odds 
of domestic abuse victimisation among people with dementia. International Review of Psychiatry. 
Under Review. 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
18 
 
58. 
Jonas S, Bebbington P, McManus S, Meltzer H, Jenkins R, Kuipers E, et al. Sexual abuse and 
psychiatric disorder in England: results from the 2007 Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey. 
Psychological medicine. 2011; 41(04): 709-19. 
59. 
Khalifeh H, Oram S, Osborn D, L.M. H, Johnson S. Prevalence, relative odds and risk factors 
for physical and sexual violence against adults with severe mental illness: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. International Journal of Psychiatry. In Press. 
60. 
Kamperman AM, Henrichs J, Bogaerts S, Lesaffre EM, Wierdsma AI, Ghauharali RR, et al. 
Criminal victimisation in people with severe mental illness: a multi-site prevalence and incidence 
survey in the Netherlands. PloS one. 2014; 9(3): e91029. 
61. 
Abas M, Ostrovschi NV, Prince M, Gorceag VI, Trigub C, Oram S. Risk factors for mental 
disorders in women survivors of human trafficking: a historical cohort study. BMC Psychiatry. 2013; 
13(1): 204. 
62. 
Hossain M, Zimmerman C, Abas M, Light M, Watts C. The relationship of trauma to mental 
disorders among trafficked and sexually exploited girls and women. Am J Public Health. 2010; 
100(12): 2442-9. 
63. 
Kiss L, Pocock N, Naisanguansri V, Soksreymom S, Dickson B, Thuy D, et al. Health of men, 
women, and children in post-trafficking services in Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam: an 
observational cross-sectional study. Lancet Global Health. 2015; 3(e157-64). 
64. 
Berg RC, Underland V, Odgaard-Jensen J, Fretheim A, Vist GE. Effects of female genital 
cutting on physical health outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ open. 2014; 4(11): 
e006316. 
65. 
Berg RC, Denison EM-L, Fretheim A. Psychological, social and sexual consequences of female 
genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C): a systematic review of quantitative studies. 2010. 
66. 
Vloeberghs E, van der Kwaak A, Knipscheer J, van den Muijsenbergh M. Coping and chronic 
psychosocial consequences of female genital mutilation in the Netherlands. Ethnicity & health. 2012; 
17(6): 677-95. 
67. 
Knipscheer J, Vloeberghs E, van der Kwaak A, van den Muijsenbergh M. Mental health 
problems associated with female genital mutilation. BJPsych Bull. 2015; 39(6): 273-7. 
68. 
Catalano S. Intimate partner violence in the United States. Washington: US Department of 
Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics; 2007. 
69. 
Kessler RC, Molnar BE, Feurer ID, Appelbaum M. Patterns and mental health predictors of 
domestic violence in the United States: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. International 
journal of law and psychiatry. 2001; 24(4): 487-508. 
70. 
Abramsky T, Watts CH, Garcia-Moreno C, Devries K, Kiss L, Ellsberg M, et al. What factors are 
associated with recent intimate partner violence? Findings from the WHO multi-country study on 
women's health and domestic violence. BMC public health. 2011; 11(1): 1. 
71. 
Khalifeh H, Howard LM, Osborn D, Moran P, Johnson S. Violence against people with 
disability in England and Wales: findings from a national cross-sectional survey. PloS one. 2013; 8(2): 
e55952. 
72. 
Brownridge DA. Partner violence against women with disabilities Prevalence, risk, and 
explanations. Violence against women. 2006; 12(9): 805-22. 
73. 
Smith DL. Disability, gender and intimate partner violence: Relationships from the behavioral 
risk factor surveillance system. Sexuality and Disability. 2008; 26(1): 15-28. 
74. 
Gass JD, Stein DJ, Williams DR, Seedat S. Gender Differences in Risk for Intimate Partner 
Violence among South African Adults. Journal of Interpersonal Violence. 2011; 26(14): 2764-89. 
75. 
Caballero GA, Castillo M, Ceballo R, Lozoff B, Ramirez C. Domestic violence and women's 
mental health in Chile. Psychology of Women Quarterly. 2004; 28(4): 298-308. 
76. 
Fergusson DM, Boden JM, Horwood LJ. Developmental antecedents of interpartner violence 
in a New Zealand birth cohort. Journal of Family Violence. 2008; 23(8): 737-53. 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
19 
 
77. 
Ehrensaft MK, Cohen P, Brown J, Smailes E, Chen H, Johnson JG. Intergenerational 
transmission of partner violence: a 20-year prospective study. Journal of consulting and clinical 
psychology. 2003; 71(4): 741. 
78. 
Devries KM, Child JC, Bacchus LJ, Mak J, Falder G, Graham K, et al. Intimate partner violence 
victimization and alcohol consumption in women: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Addiction. 
2014; 109(3): 379-91. 
79. 
Casteel C, Martin SL, Smith JB, Gurka KK, Kupper LL. National study of physical and sexual 
assault among women with disabilities. Injury Prevention. 2008; 14(2): 87-90. 
80. 
Garcia-Moreno 
C, 
Guedes 
A, 
Knerr 
W. 
Understanding 
domestic 
violence. 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/77432/1/WHO_RHR_12.36_eng.pdf (21.04.2016): World 
Health Organization; 2012. 
81. 
Heise LL. Violence against women an integrated, ecological framework. Violence against 
women. 1998; 4(3): 262-90. 
82. 
Fulu E, Jewkes R, Roselli T, Garcia-Moreno C. Prevalence of and factors associated with male 
perpetration of intimate partner violence: findings from the UN Multi-country Cross-sectional Study 
on Men and Violence in Asia and the Pacific. The Lancet Global Health. 2013; 1(4): e187-e207. 
83. 
Oram S, Trevillion K, Khalifeh H, Feder G, Howard L. Systematic review and meta-analysis of 
psychiatric disorder and the perpetration of partner violence. Epidemiology and psychiatric sciences. 
2014; 23(04): 361-76. 
84. 
Knight M, Tuffnell D, Kenyon S, Shakespeare J, Gray R, Kurinczuk JE, et al. Saving Lives, 
Improving Mothers’ Care - Surveillance of maternal deaths in the UK 2011-13 and lessons learned to 
inform maternity care from the UK and Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and 
Morbidity 2009-13. Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford; 2015. 
85. 
Flynn S, Gask L, Appleby L, Shaw J. Homicide-suicide and the role of  mental disorder: a 
national consecutive case-series. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2016; Online First 
doi:10.1007/s00127-016-1209-4. 
86. 
Home Office. Domestic Homicide Reviews: Common Themes Identified as Lessons to be 
Learned. London: Home Office; 2013. 
87. 
Oram S, Flynn SM, Shaw J, Appleby L, Howard LM. Mental illness and domestic homicide: a 
population-based descriptive study. Psychiatric services. 2013. 
88. 
Howard LM, Shaw J, Oram S, Khalifeh H, Flynn S. Violence and Mental Health. In: Davies SC, 
editor. Annual report of the Chief Medical Officer 2013  Public Mental Health Priorities - Investing in 
the Evidence. London: Department of Health; 2014. p. 227-38. 
89. 
Keers R, Ullrich S, DeStavola BL, Coid JW. Association of violence with emergence of 
persecutory delusions in untreated schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2014. 
90. 
Ullrich S, Keers R, Coid JW. Delusions, anger, and serious violence: new findings from the 
MacArthur Violence Risk Assessment Study. Schizophrenia bulletin. 2013: sbt126. 
91. 
Fazel S, Zetterqvist J, Larsson H, Långström N, Lichtenstein P. Antipsychotics, mood 
stabilisers, and risk of violent crime. The Lancet. 2014; 384(9949): 1206-14. 
92. 
Jewkes R. Rape perpetration: a review. Pretoria: Sexual Violence Research Initiative; 2012. 
93. 
Långström N, Grann M. Severe mental illness and risk of sexual offending in men: a case-
control study based on Swedish national registers. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007; 68(4): 588-96. 
94. 
Feder G, Ramsay J, Dunne D, Rose M, Arsene C, Norman R, et al. How far does screening 
women for domestic (partner) violence in different health-care settings meet criteria for a screening 
programme? Systematic reviews of nine UK, National Screening Committee critieria. Health 
Technology Assessment13(16)()(pp iii-113), 2009Date of Publication: March 2009. 2009; (16): iii-113. 
95. 
Hemmings S, Jakobowitz S, Abas M, Bick D, Howard LM, Stanley N, et al. Responding to the 
Health Needs of Survivors of Human Trafficking: A Systematic Review. Under Review. 
96. 
HM Government. Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation. London: 
Home Office; 2016. 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
20 
 
97. 
Chapman A, Monk C. Domestic violence awareness. American journal of psychiatry. 2015; 
172(10): 944-5. 
98. 
García-Moreno C, Hegarty K, d'Oliveira AFL, Koziol-McLain J, Colombini M, Feder G. The 
health-systems response to violence against women. The Lancet. 2015; 385(9977): 1567-79. 
99. 
Rose D, Trevillion K, Woodall A, Morgan C, Feder G, Howard L. Barriers and facilitators of 
disclosures of domestic violence by mental health service users: qualitative study. British Journal of 
Psychiatry. 2011; 198(3): 189-94. 
100. 
Trevillion K, Byford S, Cary M, Rose D, Oram S, Feder G, et al. Linking abuse and recovery 
through advocacy: an observational study. Epidemiology and psychiatric sciences. 2014; 23(01): 99-
113. 
101. 
Warshaw C, Brashler P, Gil J. Mental health consequences of intimate partner violence. 
Intimate partner violence: A health-based perspective. 2009: 147-71. 
102. 
Wilson M, Daly M. Spousal homicide risk and estrangement. Violence and victims. 1993; 
8(1): 3. 
103. 
Campbell JC, Webster D, Koziol-McLain J, Block C, Campbell D, Curry MA, et al. Risk factors 
for femicide in abusive relationships: Results from a multisite case control study. American journal of 
public health. 2003; 93(7): 1089-97. 
104. 
de Oliveira HN, Machado CJ, Guimarães MDC. Factors associated with self-report of sexual 
violence against men and women with mental disorders in Brazil. Social psychiatry and psychiatric 
epidemiology. 2012; 47(10): 1567-79. 
105. 
Örmon K, Sunnqvist C, Bahtsevani C, Levander MT. Disclosure of abuse among female 
patients within general psychiatric care-a cross sectional study. BMC psychiatry. 2016; 16(1): 1. 
106. 
Chandra P, Deepthivarma S, Carey M, Carey KB, Shalinianant M. A cry from the darkness: 
Women with severe mental illness in India reveal their experiences of sexual coercion. Psychiatry. 
2003; 66(323): 334. 
107. 
McLindon E, Harms L. Listening to mental health workers' experiences: Factors influencing 
their work with women who disclose sexual assault. International journal of mental health nursing. 
2011; 20(1): 2-11. 
108. 
Ross C, Dimitrova S, Howard LM, Dewey M, Zimmerman C, Oram S. Human trafficking and 
health: a cross-sectional survey of NHS professionals’ contact with victims of human trafficking. BMJ 
Open. 2015; 5: e008682. 
109. 
Domoney J, Howard LM, Abas M, Broadbent M, Oram S. Mental health service responses to 
human trafficking: a qualitative study of professionals’ experiences of providing care. BMC 
psychiatry. 2015; 15(1): 1. 
110. 
Oram S, Abas M, Bick D, Boyle A, Borschmann R, Dewey M, et al. Provider Responses 
Treatment and Care for Trafficked People: Final Report for the Department of Health Policy Research 
Programme. London: King's College London; 2015. 
111. 
Choi YJ, An S. Interventions to Improve Responses of Helping Professionals to Intimate 
Partner Violence A Quick Scoping Review. Research on Social Work Practice. 2016; 26(1): 101-27. 
112. 
Zaher E, Keogh K, Ratnapalan S. Effect of domestic violence training: systematic review of 
randomized controlled trials. Canadian Family Physician. 2014; 60(7): 618-24. 
113. 
Feder G, Agnew-Davies R, Baird K, Dunne D, Eldridge S, Griffiths C, et al. Identification and 
Referral to Improve Safety (IRIS) of women experiencing domestic violence with a primary care 
training and support programme: a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011; 11: 1-8. 
114. 
Bacchus L, Bewley S, Torres Vitolas C, Aston G, Jordan P, Murray SF. Evaluation of a domestic 
violence intervention in the maternity and sexual health services of a UK hospital. Reproductive 
Health Matters. 2010; 18(36): 147-57. 
115. 
Read J, Sampson M, Critchley C. Are mental health services getting better at responding to 
abuse, assault and neglect? Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 2016. 
 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
Lancet Psychiatry 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst 
 
21 
 
116. 
Campbell JC, Glass N, Sharps PW, Laughon K, Bloom T. Intimate partner homicide review and 
implications of research and policy. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse. 2007; 8(3): 246-69. 
117. 
Hemmings S, Trevillion K, Howard LM, Oram S. Mental health professionals’ experiences of 
identifying and responding to domestic violence perpetration by mental health service users: a 
qualitative study. Under Review. 
118. 
The National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental Illness. 
Annual Report 2014: England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. Manchester: University of 
Manchester; 2014. 
119. 
Bisson J, Roberts N, Andrew M, Cooper R, Lewis C. Psychological therapies for chronic post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in adults (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013; 
12: CD003388. 
120. 
Warshaw C, Sullivan CM, Rivera EA. A systematic review of trauma-focused interventions for 
domestic violence survivors: National Center on Domestic Violence, Trauma & Mental Health; 2013. 
121. 
Tirado-Muñoz J, Gilchrist G, Farré M, Hegarty K, Torrens M. The efficacy of cognitive 
behavioural therapy and advocacy interventions for women who have experienced intimate partner 
violence: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Annals of medicine. 2014; 46(8): 567-86. 
122. 
Kiely M, El-Mohandes AA, El-Khorazaty MN, Gantz MG. An integrated intervention to reduce 
intimate partner violence in pregnancy: a randomized trial. Obstetrics and gynecology. 2010; 115(2 
Pt 1): 273. 
123. 
Feder G, Ferrari G, Agnew-Davies R, Bailey J, Hollinghurst S, Howard LM, et al. Psychological 
advocacy towards healing (PATH): A randomized controlled trial of a psychological intervention in a 
domestic violence service setting. Annals of Internal Medicine. Under Review. 
124. 
Jahanfar S, Howard LM, Medley N. Interventions for preventing or reducing domestic 
violence against pregnant women. The Cochrane Library. 2014. 
125. 
Vickerman KA, Margolin G. Rape treatment outcome research: Empirical findings and state 
of the literature. Clinical psychology review. 2009; 29(5): 431-48. 
126. 
Bass JK, Annan J, McIvor Murray S, Kaysen D, Griffiths S, Cetinoglu T, et al. Controlled trial of 
psychotherapy for Congolese survivors of sexual violence. New England Journal of Medicine. 2013; 
368(23): 2182-91. 
127. 
Creighton S, Hodes D. Female genital mutilation (FGM). In: Davies SC, editor. Annual report 
of the Chief Medical Officer 2014  The Health of the 51%: Women. London: Department of Health; 
2015. 
128. 
Kelly L, Westmarland N. Domestic Violence Perpetrator Programmes: Steps Towards Change.  
Project Mirabel final report. London and Durham: Lodnon Metropolitan University and Durham 
University; 2015. 
129. 
Davies SC. Annual report of the Chief Medical Officer 2013.  Public Mental Health Priorities - 
Investing in the Evidence. London: Department of Health; 2014. 
130. 
Semrau M, Evans-Lacko S, Alem A, Ayuso-Mateos JL, Chisholm D, Gureje O, et al. 
Strengthening mental health systems in low-and middle-income countries: the Emerald programme. 
BMC medicine. 2015; 13(1): 1. 
131. 
Demyttenaere K, Bruffaerts R, Posada-Villa J, Gasquet I, Kovess V, Lepine J, et al. Prevalence, 
severity, and unmet need for treatment of mental disorders in the World Health Organization World 
Mental Health Surveys. Jama. 2004; 291(21): 2581-90. 
132. 
World Health Organisation. Draft global plan of action on violence: report by the Director 
General (A69/9). Geneva: World Health Organisation; 2016. 
133. 
Howard LM, Ehrlich AM, Gamlen F, Oram S. Gender neutral mental health research is sex 
and gender biased Lancet Psychiatry. 2016. 
 
 
