 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
1 
 
 
Development of Self-Esteem From Age 4 to 94 Years: 
A Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies 
 
Ulrich Orth, Ruth Yasemin Erol, and Eva C. Luciano 
University of Bern 
 
 
 
© American Psychological Association. This article has been accepted for 
publication but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination, and 
proofreading process. This article may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative 
version published in the journal. It is not the copy of record. Please cite this article 
as follows: 
 
Orth, U., Erol, R. Y., & Luciano, E. C. (2018). Development of self-esteem from 
age 4 to 94 years: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 
144, 1045-1080. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/bul0000161 
 
 
 
 
 
Author Note 
Ulrich Orth, Ruth Yasemin Erol, and Eva C. Luciano, Department of Psychology, 
University of Bern. 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Ulrich Orth, Department 
of Psychology, University of Bern, Fabrikstrasse 8, 3012 Bern, Switzerland. E-mail: 
ulrich.orth@psy.unibe.ch 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
2 
Abstract 
To investigate the normative trajectory of self-esteem across the life span, this meta-analysis 
synthesizes the available longitudinal data on mean-level change in self-esteem. The analyses 
were based on 331 independent samples, including data from 164,868 participants. As effect size 
measure, we used the standardized mean change d per year. The mean age associated with the 
effect sizes ranged from 4 to 94 years. Results showed that average levels of self-esteem 
increased from age 4 to 11 years (cumulative d = 0.34; cumulative ds are relative to age 4), 
remained stable from age 11 to 15, increased strongly until age 30 (cumulative d = 1.05), 
continued to increase until age 60 (cumulative d = 1.30), peaked at age 60 and remained constant 
until age 70, declined slightly until age 90 (cumulative d = 1.15), and declined more strongly 
until age 94 (cumulative d = 0.76). Moderator analyses were conducted for the full set of samples 
and for the subset of samples between ages 10 to 20 years. Although the measure of self-esteem 
accounted for differences in effect sizes, the moderator analyses suggested that the pattern of 
mean-level change held across gender, country, ethnicity, sample type, and birth cohort. The 
meta-analytic findings clarify previously unresolved issues about the nature and magnitude of 
self-esteem change in specific developmental periods (i.e., childhood, adolescence, and old age) 
and draw a much more precise picture of the life-span trajectory of self-esteem. 
Keywords: self-esteem, life-span development, mean-level change, longitudinal studies, 
meta-analysis 
Public Significance Statement 
 
This meta-analysis shows that people’s self-esteem changes in systematic ways over the life 
course. On average, self-esteem increases in early and middle childhood, remains constant (but 
does not decline) in adolescence, increases strongly in young adulthood, continues to increase in 
middle adulthood, peaks between age 60 and 70 years, and then declines in old age, with a 
sharper drop in very old age. The pattern of findings holds across gender, country, ethnicity, and 
birth cohort. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
3 
Development of Self-Esteem From Age 4 to 94 Years: 
A Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies 
Self-esteem is by no means an immutable characteristic of individuals. People experience 
changes in their self-esteem, both in terms of temporary boosts or drops in their feelings of self-
worth and in terms of long-term increases or declines in their general level of self-esteem. For 
example, successes at school, work conflicts, or harmonious family events may cause transient 
fluctuations in self-esteem (J. Crocker & Luhtanen, 2003; J. Crocker & Wolfe, 2001). Also, 
stressful life events, such as a criminal victimization, and life transitions, such as beginning a 
satisfying romantic relationship, may lead to sustained changes in self-esteem (Luciano & Orth, 
2017; Orth & Luciano, 2015). But does self-esteem follow a typical, normative pattern of change 
across the human life course? 
For a long time, the literature suggested that self-esteem does not show systematic change 
at any age (Wylie, 1979). However, over the past one or two decades research has challenged 
this notion (for an early cross-sectional study, see Robins, Trzesniewski, Tracy, Gosling, & 
Potter, 2002). Longitudinal studies have generally suggested that, on average, self-esteem 
increases from adolescence to middle adulthood, peaks at about age 50 to 60 years, and then 
decreases in old age (for reviews, see Orth & Robins, 2014, in press; Trzesniewski, Donnellan, & 
Robins, 2013). Thus, a growing body of evidence suggests that self-esteem follows a normative 
trajectory across the life span, as has been found for many other personality characteristics such 
as the Big Five personality traits (Lucas & Donnellan, 2011; Roberts, Walton, & Viechtbauer, 
2006; Soto, John, Gosling, & Potter, 2011) and people’s general sense of control (Specht, Egloff, 
& Schmukle, 2013). 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
4 
However, important questions about the pattern of self-esteem development are still 
unanswered because the evidence has been inconsistent for some age groups, and also because 
some of these issues can hardly be resolved by any single study but can better be addressed with 
meta-analytic methods (below, we discuss the unresolved issues in detail). In the present 
research, we therefore synthesize the available data on mean-level change in self-esteem across 
the life course, with the goal of drawing a precise picture of the normative self-esteem trajectory 
from childhood to old age. Moreover, we test for possible moderators of mean-level change in 
self-esteem. Mean-level change is defined as change in the average level of a construct between 
two repeated assessments (e.g., separated by one year) of the same sample. When mean-level 
change is mapped on age, it is also referred to as normative change. 
Understanding the life-span development of self-esteem is important because research 
suggests that self-esteem truly matters for people’s lives. Although researchers have debated 
whether self-esteem has any influence on important life outcomes (Baumeister, Campbell, 
Krueger, & Vohs, 2003; Krueger, Vohs, & Baumeister, 2008; Swann, Chang-Schneider, & 
McClarty, 2007, 2008), a growing body of evidence supports the notion that self-esteem does 
have consequences for people’s lives (for reviews, see Donnellan, Trzesniewski, & Robins, 
2011; Orth, 2017b; Orth & Robins, 2014). In particular, prospective studies suggest that self-
esteem influences people’s success and well-being in the domains of social relationships (M. D. 
Johnson & Galambos, 2014; Marshall, Parker, Ciarrochi, & Heaven, 2014; Mund, Finn, 
Hagemeyer, Zimmermann, & Neyer, 2015; Orth, Robins, & Widaman, 2012), school and 
education (Trzesniewski et al., 2006; von Soest, Wichstrom, & Kvalem, 2016), work (Kuster, 
Orth, & Meier, 2013; Orth et al., 2012; Trzesniewski et al., 2006; von Soest et al., 2016), 
physical health (Orth et al., 2012; Trzesniewski et al., 2006), and mental health (Orth, Robins, 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
5 
Meier, & Conger, 2016; Orth, Robins, & Roberts, 2008; Sowislo & Orth, 2013; Sowislo, Orth, & 
Meier, 2014; Steiger, Allemand, Robins, & Fend, 2014; Wouters et al., 2013; for a review, see 
Orth & Robins, 2013). Importantly, research in this field allows for relatively strong conclusions 
because many of the studies used large and representative samples, controlled for prior levels of 
the outcomes, and controlled for confounding factors such as gender, socioeconomic status, 
intelligence, and life events. 
Before reviewing the theoretical and empirical background on mean-level change in self-
esteem, we provide a definition of the construct. Self-esteem is defined as a person’s subjective 
evaluation of his or her worth as a person (e.g., Donnellan et al., 2011; MacDonald & Leary, 
2012). Thus, self-esteem is by definition a subjective construct and does not necessarily reflect 
objective characteristics of the person, or how the person is seen by others. It is therefore 
important to distinguish self-esteem from narcissism, as both constructs involve positive self-
evaluations (Brummelman, Thomaes, & Sedikides, 2016; Orth & Luciano, 2015). Self-esteem 
includes feelings of self-acceptance and a positive attitude toward the self, but does not 
necessarily imply that the individual feels superior to others (Rosenberg, 1965). In contrast, 
narcissism is characterized by feelings of grandiosity and superiority, self-centeredness, sense of 
entitlement, willingness to exploit others, and lack of empathy (Ackerman et al., 2011; Bosson et 
al., 2008; Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001). Thus, whereas narcissism is related to antisocial behavior 
and a negative view of others, high self-esteem is compatible with a prosocial, positive attitude 
towards others (Donnellan, Trzesniewski, Robins, Moffitt, & Caspi, 2005; Paulhus, Robins, 
Trzesniewski, & Tracy, 2004; Tracy, Cheng, Robins, & Trzesniewski, 2009). 
Theoretical Perspectives on Self-Esteem Development 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
6 
To date, no theories that focus on the life-span development of self-esteem have been 
proposed. In the following, we therefore review theoretical perspectives that address specific 
developmental periods (e.g., childhood and adolescence) and related constructs (e.g., broader 
personality traits). 
Susan Harter’s work (e.g., Harter, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c, 2012a) focuses on the 
development of self-esteem during childhood and adolescence. With regard to mean-level 
change, Harter identified several processes that might cause a decline in self-esteem from early 
childhood to middle childhood (i.e., from about age 4 to 8 years). Ironically, although children 
show important social-cognitive advances during this period, the very advances may compromise 
children’s self-esteem or, as Harter has put it, represent “liabilities” (Harter, 2006b, 2012a). For 
example, four-year old children are not yet able to distinguish between their actual and their ideal 
competences. When interviewed about their self-views, children of this age describe their ideal 
self rather than their actual self (Harter, 2006b). Later, when children learn to discriminate 
between their actual and ideal characteristics, this process leads to reduced positivity of self-
descriptions. Young children also lack the ability to use social comparison information in their 
self-evaluation (Ruble, Boggiano, Feldman, & Loebl, 1980). Again, when children overcome 
this cognitive limitation in middle childhood, it might lead to a decline in self-esteem (Harter, 
2006a). A third social-cognitive process is perspective taking. Whereas young children are not 
yet able to infer how the self is evaluated by significant others (e.g., parents and caregivers), by 
about age 8 children have considerably improved their social perspective-taking skills (Harter, 
2006a). Thus, beginning in middle childhood, children’s self-views are more strongly influenced 
by how others perceive them. Because not all persons with whom children regularly interact see 
them positively, many children will experience somewhat lower levels of self-esteem (Harter, 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
7 
2006a). According to Harter (2006c), self-esteem further declines at the transition to 
adolescence, a decline that may be accounted for by even stronger emphasis on social 
comparison, less personal attention by teachers, and pubertal changes. In middle adolescence, 
however, self-esteem begins to recover, a process that may be explained by increases in personal 
autonomy, sense of control, and greater possibilities in choosing friends, peer groups, and 
activities that match the individual’s personality (Harter, 2006c). 
With regard to adulthood, important background for understanding the development of 
self-esteem is provided by theory on personality development (for a review of theories in this 
field, see Specht et al., 2014). In particular, neo-socioanalytic theory allows deriving hypotheses 
about mean-level change in self-esteem (Roberts & Wood, 2006; see also Roberts, Wood, & 
Caspi, 2008). This theory suggests that adults typically develop in the direction of more mature 
personality traits, especially during young adulthood. The reason is that individuals assume many 
social roles (e.g., the roles of relationship partner, parent, employee, etc.) and that social roles 
involve social expectations about role-congruent behavior. For most social roles, these 
expectations include conscientiousness, agreeableness, and emotional stability (i.e., mature 
personality characteristics). Given that most individuals are committed to satisfying these 
expectations, many individuals gradually improve on these traits, a mechanism that has been 
called the social investment principle (Roberts & Wood, 2006; Roberts et al., 2008). Especially 
during young adulthood, individuals make the transition into many of these roles, by entering 
into working life, committing to a stable romantic relationship, having a first baby, and assuming 
additional social roles in the community (Hutteman, Hennecke, Orth, Reitz, & Specht, 2014). 
Given that mature personality traits are associated with higher self-esteem (Robins, Hendin, & 
Trzesniewski, 2001; Watson, Suls, & Haig, 2002) and given that self-esteem is itself a 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
8 
personality characteristic that improves functioning in social roles (Orth et al., 2012), neo-
socioanalytic theory suggests that young adults show a relatively strong normative increase in 
self-esteem. During middle adulthood, most people further invest in their social roles, for 
example by taking on managerial roles at work, maintaining a satisfying relationship with their 
spouse or partner, and by helping their children to become responsible and independent adults 
(Hutteman et al., 2014). Nevertheless, research on personality development suggests that the 
developmental pace in the direction of maturity fades (Lucas & Donnellan, 2011; Roberts et al., 
2006; Roberts et al., 2008; Terracciano, McCrae, Brant, & Costa, 2005), suggesting that the 
normative increase in self-esteem becomes smaller during middle adulthood. 
For old age, however, neo-socioanalytic theory suggests that self-esteem no longer 
increases, but instead decreases, because old age frequently involves loss of social roles due to 
retirement and, possibly, widowhood. Correspondingly, research on the Big Five personality 
traits has shown negative changes in some traits in old age, such as conscientiousness (Lucas & 
Donnellan, 2011; Marsh, Nagengast, & Morin, 2013; Specht, Egloff, & Schmukle, 2011). In 
addition to changes in social roles, aging often leads to negative changes in other possible 
sources of self-esteem, such as social relationships, socioeconomic status, cognitive abilities, and 
health (Baltes & Mayer, 1999; Wagner, Gerstorf, Hoppmann, & Luszcz, 2013).  
Research on subjective well-being may provide further relevant background for 
understanding the life-span development of self-esteem (Diener, Suh, Lucas, & Smith, 1999; 
Luhmann, 2017). For example, life satisfaction is stable, or tends to increase, during young and 
middle adulthood, but tends to decrease in old age (Baird, Lucas, & Donnellan, 2010; Gerstorf, 
Ram, Estabrook, et al., 2008; Gerstorf, Ram, Röcke, Lindenberger, & Smith, 2008; Mroczek & 
Spiro, 2005). With regard to positive affectivity, research generally suggests that it tends to 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
9 
increase, or remains stable, during adulthood, whereas negative affectivity decreases across large 
parts of adulthood and remains at a low level in old age (Carstensen, Pasupathi, Mayr, & 
Nesselroade, 2000; Charles, Reynolds, & Gatz, 2001; Helson & Soto, 2005; Mroczek & Kolarz, 
1998). Finally, depression, which is a key indicator of negative affect, decreases from young 
adulthood to midlife, but tends to increase in old age (Kasen, Cohen, Chen, & Castille, 2003; 
Kessler, Foster, Webster, & House, 1992; Mirowsky & Kim, 2007; J. Wallace & O'Hara, 1992). 
Overall, however, it should be noted that the available evidence on mean-level change in well-
being across the life span is relatively inconsistent (Luhmann, 2017). 
From a theoretical perspective, it is useful to note that other fields of research suggest that 
self-esteem can show systematic, gradual change over the life span. First, behavioral genetic 
research indicates that both genes and environment account for variance in self-esteem, but that 
the influence of environmental factors is slightly greater than the influence of genetic factors 
(Bleidorn, Hufer, Kandler, Hopwood, & Riemann, 2018; McGuire, Neiderhiser, Reiss, 
Hetherington, & Plomin, 1994; Neiss, Sedikides, & Stevenson, 2002; Neiss et al., 2005). Thus, if 
environmental factors change as a function of age, then these factors could cause normative 
mean-level change in self-esteem. Second, although research suggests that the rank-order 
stability of self-esteem increases with age, peaking in young or middle adulthood (Trzesniewski, 
Donnellan, & Robins, 2003), estimates of the long-term stability of individual differences are far 
from unity, clearly allowing for the possibility of self-esteem change over time (Anusic & 
Schimmack, 2016; Donnellan, Kenny, Trzesniewski, Lucas, & Conger, 2012; Kuster & Orth, 
2013; Wagner, Lüdtke, & Trautwein, 2016). Thus, even if self-esteem is relatively consistent 
across time and should be considered a personality trait, self-esteem change is possible. 
Mean-Level Change in Self-Esteem Across the Life Span 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
10 
Empirical Findings 
As noted above, cross-sectional studies were the first to indicate that self-esteem changes 
in systematic ways across the life span (McMullin & Cairney, 2004; Pullmann, Allik, & Realo, 
2009; Robins et al., 2002). For example, the pattern of age differences found by Robins et al. 
(2002) suggested that self-esteem decreases from childhood to adolescence, increases during 
young and middle adulthood, reaches a peak at age 65 years, and decreases into old age. 
However, given the cross-sectional nature of the data, these studies did not allow 
disentanglement of true developmental effects and cohort differences (Baltes, Cornelius, & 
Nesselroade, 1979). Thus, any observed pattern of cross-sectional age differences could be 
severely biased and convey a misleading picture of the developmental trajectory. In Robins et al. 
(2002), for example, participants who were in their 80s at the time of the study and who reported 
the lowest self-esteem scores of this sample may have had low self-esteem for their whole life 
because of, e.g., adverse parenting and economic conditions when they were young. 
To address these interpretational problems of cross-sectional studies, longitudinal data are 
needed. As yet, three longitudinal studies have modeled the life-span trajectory of self-esteem 
(Orth, Maes, & Schmitt, 2015; Orth et al., 2012; Orth, Trzesniewski, & Robins, 2010). 
Importantly, all three studies used cohort-sequential designs, which allow separation of 
intraindividual change from cohort effects (Baltes et al., 1979). The studies included large 
samples with broad age ranges (i.e., at the first wave of assessment, age ranged at least from 
young adulthood to old age) and participants had been assessed multiple times across up to 16 
years. Using latent growth modeling, the studies tested for competing models of the life-span 
trajectory, such as linear, quadratic, and cubic change (Duncan, Duncan, & Strycker, 2006; 
Preacher, Wichman, MacCallum, & Briggs, 2008). Taken together, the three studies suggested 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
11 
that self-esteem follows an inverted U-shape over the life span, with self-esteem increasing from 
adolescence to middle adulthood, peaking at about 50 to 60 years of age, and decreasing during 
old age. The increase from adolescence to middle adulthood corresponded to an effect size of 
about d = 0.30 to 0.50 (expressed as standardized mean change; Cohen, 1992). The decrease 
from middle adulthood to old age varied much more strongly across studies, with the effect size 
ranging from about d = −0.20 to −0.70. Overall, this pattern of the life-span trajectory is 
supported by longitudinal research on mean-level change during specific developmental periods, 
such as adolescence and young adulthood (Birkeland, Melkevik, Holsen, & Wold, 2012; Chung, 
Hutteman, van Aken, & Denissen, 2017; Chung et al., 2014; Erol & Orth, 2011; Galambos, 
Barker, & Krahn, 2006; Harris, Wetzel, Robins, Donnellan, & Trzesniewski, 2018; Kiviruusu, 
Huurre, Aro, Marttunen, & Haukkala, 2015; Wagner, Lüdtke, Jonkmann, & Trautwein, 2013; 
Zeiders, Umaña-Taylor, & Derlan, 2013) and old age (von Soest, Wagner, Hansen, & Gerstorf, 
2017; Wagner, Gerstorf, et al., 2013; Wagner, Hoppmann, Ram, & Gerstorf, 2015; Wagner, 
Lang, Neyer, & Wagner, 2014). 
Unresolved Issues 
Although the studies cited above provide a relatively consistent picture of the general 
pattern of self-esteem change across large parts of the life span, the evidence is unclear for 
middle childhood, early adolescence, and old age. 
As reviewed above, theory suggests that children experience decreases in their self-
esteem when they transition from early to middle childhood (i.e., from about age 4 to 8 years), 
due to cognitive advances such as in the ability to use social comparison information and in 
perspective-taking abilities (Harter, 2006c; Ruble et al., 1980; Stipek & Tannatt, 1984). 
Moreover, the literature suggests that preschool children often have inflated self-views, rating 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
12 
themselves much more positively than they rate other children, but that this bias declines with 
age (Robins et al., 2002; Stipek & Tannatt, 1984). Some empirical studies support the notion that 
children’s self-esteem declines in this age period (J. Eccles, Wigfield, Harold, & Blumenfeld, 
1993; Marsh, 1989; Marsh, Barnes, Cairns, & Tidman, 1984; Stipek & Tannatt, 1984). However, 
because most studies in this developmental period used measures of domain-specific self-
evaluations (e.g., evaluations of one’s academic abilities, social competence, and physical 
appearance) but did not assess global self-esteem, more evidence is needed regarding the nature 
of the self-esteem trajectory in middle childhood. 
Also, reviews of the literature suggest that self-esteem declines at the transition from 
childhood to early adolescence (i.e., at about age 11 to 13 years), with early adolescents 
experiencing a low point in self-esteem (Harter, 2006c; Robins et al., 2002). One possible cause 
of the self-esteem decline at this age is the educational transition from elementary school to 
middle school (although the precise timing, and even existence, of this transition varies across 
countries), with disruptions in the child’s social network and even greater emphasis on social 
comparison and competition than before (Blyth, Simmons, & Carlton-Ford, 1983; J. S. Eccles et 
al., 1989; Harter, 2006c; Simmons, Blyth, Van Cleave, & Bush, 1979; Wigfield, Eccles, Mac 
Iver, Reuman, & Midgley, 1991). Another possible cause of the decline are the many physical, 
emotional, and social changes associated with puberty (Simmons et al., 1979; Simmons & 
Rosenberg, 1975). However, some empirical studies did not find evidence of decreasing self-
esteem in this age group (Cole et al., 2001; Huang, 2010; Kuzucu, Bontempo, Hofer, Stallings, & 
Piccinin, 2014). Thus, it is unclear whether self-esteem decreases in early adolescence and 
reaches a low point, or whether it remains stable or even increases. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
13 
Old age is a third developmental period for which the evidence is unclear. Although 
many studies suggest that self-esteem declines after about age 65–70 years, the magnitude of 
change (i.e., the slope of the trajectory) differs strongly across studies. Whereas some studies 
found relatively large effect sizes in old age (Orth et al., 2012; Orth et al., 2010; Shaw, Liang, & 
Krause, 2010; von Soest et al., 2017), other studies indicated that self-esteem is stable in this age 
group (Wagner et al., 2014) or that there is at most a benign decrease (Coleman, Ivani-Chalian, 
& Robinson, 1993; Orth et al., 2015; Wagner, Gerstorf, et al., 2013; Wagner, Hoppmann, et al., 
2015). Thus, meta-analytic synthesis may help to more reliably test whether self-esteem declines 
in old age and, if there is a decline, to estimate the degree of the decline and the average age at 
which the decline begins. 
Moreover, even if the general uptrend of self-esteem from adolescence to middle 
adulthood has been replicated several times in longitudinal studies, the present meta-analysis will 
provide a more reliable picture of the precise shape of the trajectory across these developmental 
periods. An important strength of the meta-analytic method is the high statistical power and the 
estimation of effect sizes across a large number of samples. 
Moderators of Mean-Level Change in Self-Esteem 
Empirical Findings 
The research on mean-level change in self-esteem reviewed above has shown that people 
differ significantly in the individual trajectory they follow. Evidence for individual differences is 
provided, e.g., by the variances of growth factors in studies using latent growth modeling (Orth 
et al., 2010; Wagner, Gerstorf, et al., 2013; Young & Mroczek, 2003) as well as by research 
employing growth mixture modeling, suggesting that there may be distinct trajectories 
(Birkeland et al., 2012; Morin, Maiano, Marsh, Nagengast, & Janosz, 2013; Mund & Neyer, 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
14 
2016). The variability in patterns of self-esteem development raises the question as to which 
factors explain the individual trajectories. 
Many longitudinal studies have tested for gender differences in mean-level change of 
self-esteem. Some studies found that there is a small gender difference in favor of boys and men 
(Orth et al., 2010; von Soest et al., 2016; Wagner, Lüdtke, et al., 2013), whereas in other studies 
the gender difference was nonsignificant (Erol & Orth, 2011; Orth et al., 2015; Orth et al., 2012). 
Overall, these findings correspond to meta-analyses of cross-sectional data, which suggested that 
men and women differ only slightly in their average levels of self-esteem (Kling, Hyde, 
Showers, & Buswell, 1999; Major, Barr, Zubek, & Babey, 1999; Zuckerman, Li, & Hall, 2016). 
However, even if there is a small gender difference in the self-esteem trajectory, research 
suggests that gender is not a direct cause but that associated factors, such as differential treatment 
of men and women in educational and work contexts, account for the effect (Zuckerman et al., 
2016). 
Few studies tested for ethnic differences in the self-esteem trajectory, based on samples 
from the United States (Erol & Orth, 2011; Orth et al., 2010; Shaw et al., 2010). Overall, the 
evidence suggests that ethnicity might moderate the life-span trajectory. When compared to 
Americans of European descent, African Americans reported a stronger increase in adolescence 
and young adulthood, but also a stronger decrease in old age (Orth et al., 2010; Shaw et al., 
2010). Similarly, when compared to European Americans, Hispanic Americans experienced a 
stronger increase in adolescence and young adulthood, although starting at a lower level in 
adolescence (Erol & Orth, 2011). However, effect sizes of ethnic differences were typically 
small. Moreover, although in a large cross-sectional study ethnic groups (including White, Black, 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
15 
Hispanic, and Asians) differed in the level of self-esteem, the study suggested that the shape of 
the life-span trajectory replicated across ethnic groups (Robins et al., 2002). 
Research studies have examined additional factors that may moderate mean-level change 
in self-esteem, such as socioeconomic status, social relationships, and life events. However, 
since in the present meta-analysis these factors cannot be examined (because information on 
these characteristics is not available for the majority of studies and because measures of these 
characteristics are often not comparable across studies), here we only briefly summarize the 
findings (for reviews, see Orth, 2017b; Orth & Robins, in press; Trzesniewski et al., 2013). 
Research generally suggests that individuals with high socioeconomic status (as indicated by 
level of education, income, or occupational prestige) have higher self-esteem at each age than 
individuals with low socioeconomic status (the effect size is of small to medium size), but that 
the pattern of mean-level change holds across different levels of socioeconomic status (Orth et 
al., 2012; Orth et al., 2010; Wagner, Gerstorf, et al., 2013; Wagner et al., 2014). Moreover, the 
evidence suggests that, across the life course, social relationships influence self-esteem 
(Gruenenfelder-Steiger, Harris, & Fend, 2016; Harris et al., 2017; Orth, 2018; Srivastava & Beer, 
2005). For example, using propensity score matching, two longitudinal studies found that 
romantic relationship transitions such as beginning a relationship influenced people’s level of 
self-esteem (Luciano & Orth, 2017; Wagner, Becker, Lüdtke, & Trautwein, 2015). Finally, 
longitudinal studies suggest that stressful life events such as becoming unemployed or 
contracting a chronic disease have the potential to alter people’s self-esteem trajectory (Orth & 
Luciano, 2015; Pettit & Joiner, 2001; Tetzner, Becker, & Baumert, 2016). 
Unresolved Issues 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
16 
Despite the evidence reviewed above, there is a need to better understand the factors that 
account for individual differences in self-esteem development across the life span. For example, 
little evidence is available about the moderating effect of cultural context. Theory suggests that 
cultures may influence the typical level of self-esteem among their members (Heine, Lehman, 
Markus, & Kitayama, 1999; Markus & Kitayama, 1991). However, according to cross-sectional 
data, the general pattern of age differences in self-esteem holds across many countries (Bleidorn 
et al., 2016; Robins et al., 2002). Nevertheless, given the paucity of longitudinal research on self-
esteem development outside of Western countries, it is unknown whether individuals from 
different cultural contexts differ in the normative trajectory of self-esteem over the life span. 
Birth cohort is another important factor that might moderate self-esteem development. In 
other words, do members of different generations show the same life-span trajectory of self-
esteem? In fact, it is crucial to test for cohort differences in the life-span trajectory of any 
construct because if cohort differences are present, then insights from longitudinal studies must 
be qualified by noting the specific generation for which they are valid. Several studies suggest 
that members of more recent generations have higher self-esteem and experience steeper 
increases in self-esteem (Gentile, Twenge, & Campbell, 2010; Twenge & Campbell, 2001; 
Twenge, Carter, & Campbell, 2017). In fact, in Western countries, sociocultural changes during 
the past decades may have influenced young people’s self-esteem (Gentile et al., 2010). For 
example, self-esteem has become a more prominent topic in educational contexts and in the 
media, leading parents, caregivers, and teachers to focus more strongly on the promotion of 
children’s and adolescents’ self-esteem. Since these sociocultural changes also may have caused 
increases in young people’s level of narcissism (for the debate, see Trzesniewski & Donnellan, 
2010; Twenge & Campbell, 2010), Twenge (2006) has suggested that the cohorts born in the 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
17 
1970s to 1990s should be called “Generation Me.” With regard to self-esteem, however, the 
findings from several studies conflict with the notion that there have been generational increases 
(Erol & Orth, 2011; Hamamura & Septarini, 2017; Orth et al., 2015; Trzesniewski & Donnellan, 
2010). In particular, evidence from cohort-sequential longitudinal studies suggests that people’s 
average level and slope of the life-span trajectory have not significantly changed over the past 
generations (Orth et al., 2015; Orth et al., 2012; Orth et al., 2010; but see Twenge et al., 2017). 
The present meta-analysis may contribute to knowledge about moderating factors of 
mean-level change in self-esteem, by testing whether sample characteristics account for between-
study variability in effect sizes. In addition to country and birth cohort, we will test for the 
effects of gender, ethnicity, sample type, and measure of self-esteem. 
The Need for the Present Meta-Analysis 
Mean-level change in self-esteem has been summarized in a previous meta-analysis 
(Huang, 2010) that included data from 59 studies with 130 independent samples. Relatively few 
effect sizes were available for samples above age 22 years. Here, we briefly summarize the 
findings. There was a small increase in self-esteem in samples younger than 12 years, no 
significant change in samples aged 12–18, a stronger increase in samples aged 18–30, and no 
significant change after age 30. Moderator analyses were conducted only for the age group 12–
18 years, suggesting that effect sizes were moderated by birth year (with a negative effect on 
mean-level change) and measure of self-esteem, but not by gender. 
However, several methodological and substantive reasons strongly suggest that the 
present meta-analysis is needed to better understand self-esteem development across the life 
span. A first important reason is that the effect size measure used by Huang (2010) did not 
account for the time interval across which the effect was observed. More precisely, Huang 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
18 
(2010) meta-analyzed d values (Cohen, 1988), regardless of whether the amount of change was 
observed across, e.g., one year, two years, or 10 years. However, when the goal is to estimate the 
magnitude of change at a given age, meaningful effect size measures must take the length of the 
time interval into account (i.e., the interval between the two assessments for which the mean 
change d is computed). As an example, if one study yields d = 0.20 and another study d = 0.60, it 
is not meaningful to simply average these coefficients if the first effect was observed across a 
one-year interval and the second across a five-year interval. Thus, instead of using simple 
coefficients of mean-level change as effect size measure, we suggest that a change-to-time ratio 
should be used. Specifically, in the present meta-analysis we used a coefficient that captures 
standardized mean-level change per year (denoted as dyear). We note that using d values and 
testing whether the time interval moderates the effects is not an appropriate solution to this issue, 
even if in a given meta-analysis the moderator effect of time interval is nonsignificant. The 
reason is that the time interval is linked to the amount of change by definition. Thus, we argue 
that accounting for the time interval must be an integral part of the effect size measure. More 
detailed information on the effect size measure will be provided in the Method section. 
A second reason is that the meta-analysis by Huang (2010) used a restrictive set of 
inclusion criteria. For example, samples from outside the U.S. were excluded although testing for 
differences between countries is a key goal in research on self-esteem development. Moreover, 
samples that were based on participants from a single ethnic group (e.g., African Americans) 
were excluded; however, including these samples is necessary to gain information about the 
possible moderating effects of ethnicity. Also, even if the data indicate that ethnicity does not 
moderate the self-esteem trajectory, including samples from different ethnic groups strongly 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
19 
increases the number of samples and, consequently, the validity and precision of the overall 
findings. 
A third important reason is that since 2007—the most recent publication year of studies 
included in Huang’s (2010) meta-analytic dataset—a large number of new empirical studies on 
self-esteem development have accumulated that were not available for inclusion in Huang’s 
meta-analysis. For example, as reviewed above, longitudinal research on the life-span trajectory 
of self-esteem was not available before 2010. Moreover, many longitudinal studies focusing on 
specific developmental periods such as adolescence, young adulthood, and old age have 
appeared only after the publication of Huang’s meta-analysis. Over the past decade, self-esteem 
development has become an extensively studied topic in social-personality and developmental 
psychology, which is reflected by the fact that 70% of the articles considered for inclusion in the 
present meta-analysis were published in 2008 or later (for more information on the search for 
studies, see the Method section). 
The inclusion of a much larger number of samples (331 in the present research vs. 130 in 
Huang, 2010) has major implications for the analyses. In the present research, we were able to 
use much finer-grained age categories than was possible in Huang (2010). In particular, the 
present meta-analytic dataset allowed us to examine late childhood and adolescence at high 
temporal resolution (i.e., in 1-year age groups). This is an important advantage because, as 
reviewed above, inconsistent findings have plagued research on these developmental periods, 
leading researchers to debate whether self-esteem decreases, remains stable, or even increases in 
middle childhood and in the transition from childhood to adolescence. Moreover, the present 
meta-analysis allowed us to examine self-esteem change among older adults with much more 
power and precision than was possible in the previous meta-analysis. Whereas in Huang (2010), 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
20 
four effect sizes for samples 60 years and older were available, the present dataset included 41 
effect sizes for samples over age 60. Thus, the present research enables us to address the question 
of whether self-esteem remains stable in old age or whether, and to which degree, self-esteem 
declines in this age period. 
Also, the larger number of samples provided much larger statistical power in testing for 
moderators. Whereas in Huang (2010), moderator tests were possible only for the age group 12–
18 years, in the present research we test for moderators across the whole life span. Also, we will 
test for the moderating effects of sample characteristics that could not be tested by Huang (2010), 
such as country and ethnicity. The moderator tests are crucial for evaluating whether the meta-
analytic findings are robust and can be generalized across differences in gender, ethnicity, 
country, and birth cohort. Moreover, the larger number of samples significantly reduces the 
influence of any single study, increasing the validity and robustness of the overall findings. In 
sum, the larger number of samples in the present meta-analysis allowed us to address important 
unresolved issues in the field of self-esteem development and to draw a much more precise 
picture of the life-span trajectory of self-esteem. 
Summary of the Goals of the Present Research 
The first goal was to comprehensively synthesize the available longitudinal data on mean-
level change in self-esteem, to gain precise and robust insights into the normative pattern of the 
self-esteem trajectory from childhood to old age. At which ages does self-esteem typically 
increase or decline? More precisely, does self-esteem decline in middle childhood and early 
adolescence? What is the magnitude of the self-esteem increase during adulthood? Does self-
esteem decline in old age and, if so, how strong is the old-age decline? At which point of the life 
course does self-esteem reach its peak? The second goal was to test for moderators of mean-level 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
21 
change, allowing to evaluate the robustness of the findings. Specifically, we tested for the effects 
of gender, country, ethnicity, sample type, birth year, and measure of self-esteem. 
Method 
The present meta-analysis used anonymized data and therefore was exempt from 
approval by the Ethics Committee of the authors’ institution (University of Bern, Faculty of 
Human Sciences), in accordance with national law. 
Selection of Studies 
To search for relevant studies we used three strategies. First, English-language journal 
articles, books, book chapters, and dissertations were searched in the database PsycINFO. We 
used the following search terms: self-esteem, self-worth, self-concept, self-liking, self-respect, 
self-regard, self-acceptance, self-view*, and self-image*. The asterisk (i.e., the truncation 
symbol) allowed for the inclusion of alternate word endings of the search term (e.g., self-view* 
yielded entries containing the term “self-view” but also “self-views”). We restricted the search to 
empirical-quantitative and longitudinal studies, by using the limitation options “empirical study,” 
“quantitative study,” and “longitudinal study” in PsycINFO. This search yielded 1,651 
potentially relevant articles, including 125 dissertations. Second, we examined the references 
cited in four narrative reviews of research on self-esteem development (Orth, 2017b; Orth & 
Robins, 2014; Robins & Trzesniewski, 2005; Trzesniewski et al., 2013) and cited in three meta-
analyses using longitudinal data on self-esteem (Huang, 2010; Sowislo & Orth, 2013; 
Trzesniewski et al., 2003). This search resulted in 77 additional potentially relevant articles, 
including 13 dissertations. 
To decide on the eligibility of studies, all articles were assessed in full text by the second 
or third author of this meta-analysis.1 In addition, a random sample of 60 studies were rated by 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
22 
both the second and third author to obtain estimates of interrater agreement. The interrater 
agreement on inclusion or exclusion in the meta-analysis was high (κ = .95) and all diverging 
assessments were discussed until consensus was reached. 
We included dissertations in the meta-analysis because dissertations are a category of the 
“gray” literature, providing a promising way to examine publication bias (Ferguson & Brannick, 
2012; B. D. McLeod & Weisz, 2004). Although dissertations are publicly available and indexed 
in databases, Ferguson and Brannick (2012) argue that publication bias is less of an issue in 
dissertations because dissertations are typically submitted to dissertation committees regardless 
of whether the findings are statistically significant or not. Of course, dissertations are not free 
from selective reporting, but the argument—which is supported by empirical findings of 
Ferguson and Brannick (2012) as described below—is that selectivity bias is relatively small in 
dissertations. Moreover, because dissertations are indexed in databases, meta-analysts can 
conduct an exhaustive search of this type of study and avoid selection bias in sampling relevant 
dissertations. In contrast, Ferguson and Brannick (2012) argue that it is almost impossible to 
obtain a truly random, nonselective sample of unpublished manuscripts by making 
announcements to electronic mailing lists or writing to researchers working in the field. 
Consistent with this reasoning, Ferguson and Brannick (2012) reported that unpublished 
manuscripts typically yield effect sizes that are closer to effect sizes from peer-reviewed journal 
articles than effect sizes from dissertations. Thus, with regard to the strategy of soliciting 
unpublished studies, Ferguson and Brannick (2012) suggest that this strategy may even “result in 
a sample of studies that is more rather than less biased than the population of published studies” 
(p. 121, italics in the quote as in the original). 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
23 
Studies were included in the meta-analysis if the following criteria were fulfilled: (a) self-
esteem was assessed using an explicit measure of global self-esteem; (b) the study used a 
longitudinal study design (i.e., it included two or more assessments of the same sample); (c) the 
time lag between the first and last assessment was 6 months or longer (note that if a study 
included more than two assessments, each interval coded was at least 6 months or longer and 
intervals coded did not overlap); (d) the measure of self-esteem was identical across assessments 
(i.e., with regard to number of items, item wording, response scale, etc.); (e) the sample included 
at least 30 participants; (f) the sample was not a clinical sample; (g) the sample as a whole did 
not undergo a psychological or psychopharmacological intervention (i.e., the sample was not a 
treatment group of an intervention study; however, we used information from control groups if 
the control group did not undergo any alternative treatment); and (h) enough information was 
given to compute effect sizes. 
Moreover, studies were included only if (i) the sample was sufficiently homogeneous 
with regard to age, as operationalized by a cutoff value of SD = 5 years for age at Time 1. This 
inclusion criterion is needed to ensure that the study can provide a valid estimate of age-related 
change in self-esteem. If age variability in a sample is high, it is unclear whether the observed 
change in self-esteem can be validly related to the average age in the sample. In particular, if the 
age distribution of a sample covers developmental periods with distinct patterns of normative 
change in self-esteem, then the average change in self-esteem could be a misleading estimate of 
normative change at the average age of the sample. Thus, if all samples included in the meta-
analysis had no, or very small, variability of age, all effect sizes could be mapped with high 
precision on age. On the other hand, it is important to accept some degree of age variability in 
the samples for several reasons. If we used a strict exclusion criterion for age variability, we 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
24 
would ignore a large number of studies. However, many studies, particularly in adulthood, use 
samples that are heterogeneous in age. By excluding these studies we would significantly 
decrease the statistical power of the meta-analysis. Moreover, ignoring a large number of studies 
could lead to a selective meta-analytic sample because studies with more versus less age 
variability might also differ in other sample characteristics. Thus, there is a trade-off with regard 
to being strict versus liberal in including samples with age variability. Given that the literature 
does not suggest any cutoff value for age variability, we decided to use the value noted above 
(i.e., SD = 5 years). This value was derived rationally from examining the range of standard 
deviations in samples that seemed acceptable in terms of age variability. When describing the 
meta-analytic dataset in the Results section, we will examine the distribution of this sample 
characteristic. We expected that for most samples age variability was much smaller than the 
cutoff value. 
These procedures left 191 articles for analysis, providing effect sizes on 331 independent 
samples. 
Coding of Studies 
We coded the following data: year of publication, publication type, sample size, sample 
type, proportion of female participants, country in which sample was collected, ethnicity, year of 
Time 1 assessment, measure of self-esteem, mean age of participants at Time 1, standard 
deviation of age at Time 1, time lag between assessments, and effect size information. 
If studies provided information that allowed coding independent subsamples (e.g., female 
and male participants; U.S. sample versus Chinese sample), we coded subsamples rather than the 
full sample because this increases the precision of moderator analyses. If year of Time 1 
assessment was not reported in the article or in other publications or sources of information on 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
25 
the sample, we estimated it using the following formula: Year of Time 1 assessment = 
publication year − 3 years (assuming that studies were published on average 3 years after the 
completion of data collection) − interval between first and last assessment (i.e., duration of data 
collection). If studies did not report the mean age of participants but valid indicators of age were 
given, we used this information to estimate age. For example, if a study reported that participants 
were children in 5th grade, we estimated mean age of participants as 11 years (thus, the general 
rule was adding the value of 6 to the grade). To take another example, if a study examined a 
sample of undergraduate students but did not report the mean age, we estimated it to be 20 years 
(as done by, e.g., Starr & Davila, 2008). 
As reported above, studies were excluded if the standard deviation of Time 1 age was 
larger than 5 years (i.e., if the age variability in the sample was too large). Some studies did not 
report the standard deviation of age, although all other information needed for including the 
study was available. We included these studies if other information clearly suggested that the 
sample was sufficiently homogeneous with regard to age (e.g., if all participants were children in 
the same grade). Moreover, if a study included a sample with a broad age range (e.g., from 
young adulthood to old age) and the raw data were available, we coded the study separately for 
sufficiently homogeneous age groups. In these cases, we used the following procedure to create 
age groups: We rounded age to full years, started with the youngest age available in the sample, 
and computed consecutive 5-year age groups across the observed age range of the sample. 
Corresponding to the inclusion criteria, we computed effect sizes only for those age groups that 
included at least 30 participants. 
For studies that included more than two assessments, we coded all available assessments 
if the intervals between assessments were 6 months or longer. Later, in the meta-analytic 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
26 
computations, we ensured that each study provided only one effect size estimate per analysis. 
Thus, when a study provided more than one effect size for a given age period to be meta-
analyzed (e.g., age 20 to 25 years), we first averaged effect sizes within studies (by computing 
the mean) and then conducted the meta-analytic computations. If a study included more than two 
assessments, but the intervals between assessment were shorter than 6 months, we used those 
assessments that provided for consecutive (i.e., non-overlapping) intervals that were at least 6 
months long. For example, if a study included 5 assessments with 3-month-intervals, we used the 
first, third, and fifth assessment to compute effect sizes that were based on 6-month-intervals. 
For studies that provided more than one effect size (e.g., because two different measures of self-
esteem were used), we averaged the effect sizes within studies before the meta-analytic 
computations (by computing the mean) to ensure the statistical independence of effect sizes. 
As effect size measure, we used the standardized mean change d per year (denoted as 
dyear). We first computed the standardized mean change by subtracting the Time 1 mean in self-
esteem from the Time 2 mean in self-esteem and dividing this difference by the Time 1 standard 
deviation of self-esteem, following the procedures used in the meta-analysis on mean-level 
change in personality by Roberts et al. (2006; see also Morris & DeShon, 2002). Thus, 
computing standardized mean changes yielded d values (Cohen, 1988), with positive d values 
indicating an increase in self-esteem and negative d values indicating a decrease. Next, we set 
the standardized mean change in relation to the observed time interval, by dividing it by the 
length of the time lag between Time 1 and Time 2. Thus, the effect size measure used in the 
present meta-analysis is a change-to-time ratio, with the unit d per year. If information on the 
means and standard deviation of self-esteem was not given in the article, but d values of mean-
level change were reported, we used these to compute dyear.2 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
27 
The articles were coded by the second or third author of this meta-analysis, except for 
four articles that were coded by the first author. A random sample of 40 studies were coded by 
both the second and third author to obtain estimates of interrater agreement. The interrater 
agreement was high (κ ≥ .97 for categorical variables and r ≥ .97 for continuous variables), 
except for one variable (see below). All diverging assessments were discussed until consensus 
was reached. For the categories of sample type, as used in coding the studies, interrater 
agreement was much lower (κ = .73). Inspection of the crosstabulation showed that the 
disagreement resulted from overlap between two categories, specifically “community samples 
(convenience)” and “community samples (regionally representative);” regionally representative 
was defined as representative for a region such as a county or city. Given the overlap, we merged 
these two categories into one category (denoted as community sample), resulting in high 
agreement for the revised variable of sample type (κ = 1.00). The revised variable included the 
following categories: nationally representative, community, and college students. 
Meta-Analytic Procedure 
The meta-analytic computations were made with R (R Core Team, 2017), using the 
metafor package (Viechtbauer, 2010). In the effect size analyses, we used random-effects models 
(for estimating weighted mean effect sizes) and mixed-effects meta-regression models (for 
testing moderators), following recommendations by Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, and Rothstein 
(2009) and Raudenbush (2009). Between-study heterogeneity (i.e., τ2) was estimated with the 
DerSimonian–Laird method (DerSimonian & Laird, 1986; Viechtbauer, 2010). Following 
Borenstein et al. (2009), study weights are given by 
 
ω𝑖 = (
1
𝑣𝑖 + τ2), 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
28 
 
where ωi is the study weight for study i, vi is the within-study variance for study i, and τ2 is the 
estimate of between-study heterogeneity. When using standardized mean change as effect size, 
the within-study variance is given by 
 
𝑣𝑖 = 2(1 − 𝑟𝑖)
𝑛𝑖
+ 𝑑𝑖
2
2𝑛𝑖
, 
 
where di is the effect size in study i, ni is the sample size in study i, and ri is the correlation 
between pre- and post-scores in study i (Becker, 1988; Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). Because this 
correlation is frequently not reported in primary studies, we used an estimate of r, as suggested 
by the methodological literature (Borenstein et al., 2009; Lipsey & Wilson, 2001; Morris & 
DeShon, 2002). A previous meta-analysis estimated the mean test-retest correlation of self-
esteem as .50, based on data from 168 longitudinal studies (Trzesniewski et al., 2003). In the 
present research, we used this estimate in computing the sampling variance of the effect sizes. 
For the effect size analyses, we did not use the mean age at Time 1 as age variable but, 
instead, the mean age at the center of the time interval on which the effect size was based. For 
example, if a sample was assessed at age 20 years at Time 1 and age 24 years at Time 2, the age 
at the center of the interval on which the effect size was based was 22 years. Although the 
difference between the two age variables (i.e., age at Time 1 and age at the center of the interval) 
may be irrelevant for short intervals (e.g., one year), the difference is more relevant for long 
intervals (e.g., 10 years). Because mean-level change in self-esteem might change systematically 
across long intervals (e.g., the slope might become smaller or larger with age), the most 
meaningful age value related to the observed effect size is the center of the Time 1–Time 2 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
29 
interval rather than age at the beginning (Time 1) or end (Time 2) of the interval. Thus, we used 
the mean age at the center of the time interval for constructing age groups (for further 
information on age groups, see below) and it was possible that the beginning and the end of an 
interval fell into separate age groups. We note that it would be ideal if all relevant studies had 
used relatively short intervals between assessments such as one or two years, which would 
increase the precision with which effect sizes are mapped on age. However, some studies did use 
longer intervals and it was important to include them in the meta-analysis to comprehensively 
summarize all available data. If we excluded these studies, this would decrease the power of the 
meta-analysis and, moreover, this could lead to a selective meta-analytic dataset because studies 
with long versus short intervals might also differ in other sample characteristics. Specifically, in 
25% of the studies the Time 1–Time 2 interval was longer than 2 years and in 1% longer than 10 
years. Thus, a relevant number of studies used medium-sized intervals. However, the number of 
studies with very long intervals (i.e., longer than 10 years) was very small, suggesting that in this 
meta-analytic dataset, effect sizes can be mapped with sufficient precision on age. 
Results 
Description of Studies 
The meta-analytic dataset included 331 samples (Table 1 shows basic sample 
characteristics). Data were drawn from 175 journal articles, 15 dissertations, and 1 book chapter. 
These 191 articles were published between 1975 and 2016, with the median in 2009. Sample 
sizes ranged from 32 to 13,401 (M = 498.1, SD = 935.1, Mdn = 236.0). In sum, the samples 
included 164,868 participants. Eighty-six percent of the samples were community samples, 8% 
were samples of college students, and 6% were nationally representative. The mean proportion 
of female participants was 53% (range = 0% to 100%, SD = 34%, Mdn = 52%). Sixty-one 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
30 
percent of the samples were from the United States, 8% from Germany, 4% from Australia, 4% 
from Canada, 4% from the Netherlands, 4% from Switzerland, 3% from China, 2% from 
Belgium, 2% from Finland, 2% from the United Kingdom, and the remaining 6% from other 
countries. Taken together, most samples (96%) were from Western cultural contexts such as the 
United States, European countries, Australia, and Canada; the remaining samples (4%) were 
from East and Southeast Asian countries including China, Indonesia, Korea, and Taiwan; no 
African, South American, or Central American samples were included. With regard to ethnicity, 
56% of the samples were predominantly White/European (“predominantly” was defined as 80% 
and more), 4% predominantly Asian, 2% predominantly Black, 2% predominantly 
Hispanic/Latin American, 2% predominantly Native American, and 34% were other/mixed. 
Mean age at Time 1 ranged from 4.3 to 86.6 years (M = 21.9, SD = 16.9; note that some studies 
included 3 or more waves of data, and that we used the mean age at the center of time intervals 
for the effect size analyses, so the largest mean age examined was 93.7 years). Year of Time 1 
assessment ranged from 1966 to 2011 (M = 1995.2, SD = 9.6). We computed mean year of birth 
using the variables mean age at Time 1 and year of Time 1 assessment. Mean year of birth 
ranged from 1899 to 2002 (M = 1973.3, SD = 21.2). To assess self-esteem, 61% of the studies 
used the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965), 22% one of the scales by Harter (e.g., 
Harter, 2012b), 4% one of the scales by Marsh (e.g., Marsh, 1990), and 13% another measure 
(for overviews of measures of self-esteem, see Blascovich & Tomaka, 1991; Donnellan, 
Trzesniewski, & Robins, 2015). 
As reported in the Method section, one inclusion criterion for studies was that the sample 
was sufficiently homogeneous with regard to the age of participants (using a cutoff value of SD = 
5 years for age at Time 1). This criterion is needed to ensure that effect sizes can be mapped with 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
31 
sufficient precision on age. Across samples, the standard deviation of age was relatively small 
with a mean of 0.72 years. For 98% of the samples, the standard deviation was not larger than 2 
years; 1% of the values were between 2 and 3 years; and 1% were between 3 and 5 years. 
Supplemental Figure S1 shows a scatterplot of the standard deviation by mean age of the sample. 
Samples with larger standard deviations (i.e., more than 2 years) mostly included adults. Larger 
age variability might be more of a concern in child samples than in adult samples, because the 
precise age might have stronger implications in childhood than in adulthood. In sum, these 
findings suggest that age variability in the samples was not a concern in this meta-analysis. 
As also reported above, some studies provided effect sizes for more than one age. The 
reason is that some of the longitudinal studies included more than two waves of data, allowing to 
compute effect sizes for more than one interval. Specifically, the number of intervals ranged 
from 1 to 10 across studies. Because the goal of the meta-analysis was to comprehensively 
summarize all available data on mean-level change in self-esteem, it was important not to ignore 
information that multi-wave studies provided at later waves (i.e., Waves 3 and later). In 
particular, in studies using samples from middle adulthood and old age, later waves provided 
valuable information because the number of samples was lower for these developmental periods 
compared to adolescence and young adulthood. With regard to these multi-wave studies, the 
following two procedures should be noted. First, as described earlier, if a study included more 
than two assessments, each interval coded was at least 6 months or longer (as also required for 2-
wave studies) and intervals coded from the same study did not overlap. Second, we ensured that 
all meta-analytic computations were conducted with independent samples (i.e., no participant 
provided information for more than one effect size included in the same analysis). Therefore, for 
each of the analyses, we first averaged effect sizes within studies and then conducted the meta-
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
32 
analytic computations. For this reason, we had to use different datasets depending on the specific 
analysis. For example, in the moderator analyses for age 4–94 years, we used information from 
all 331 samples that provided effect sizes, by first averaging effect sizes within studies. In 
contrast, in the effect size analyses, which were conducted within age groups, we averaged effect 
sizes from multi-wave studies only within the specific age group. The data can be accessed at 
https://osf.io/zmn5h/?view_only=6eb18c9aebad42ce80a3274ef3d20f51. 
Preliminary Analyses 
The distribution of effect sizes suggested that there were two effect sizes with large 
positive values that qualified as potential outliers. When we examined these values formally 
using the “influence” command of the metafor package (Viechtbauer, 2010), the results 
suggested that the effect sizes were not influential, as indicated by their DFFITS values (i.e., 
difference between the predicted average effect for the study with vs. without including it in 
model fitting; Viechtbauer & Cheung, 2010) and τ2del values (i.e., decrease in the amount of 
heterogeneity when study is removed from the meta-analytic dataset; Viechtbauer & Cheung, 
2010). The sample sizes of the two studies were small (i.e., 38 and 56, respectively), congruent 
with the fact that outliers are more likely in small samples, but due to their small size the samples 
were not influential. The mean age in these samples was 48 and 13 years, respectively, which 
suggests that the potential outliers were not systematically related to age. We therefore retained 
the two studies in the meta-analytic dataset, consistent with methodological literature advising 
against routine deletion of studies with particularly large or small effect sizes (Viechtbauer & 
Cheung, 2010). 
Then, we assessed whether there was evidence of publication bias in the data. We 
expected that publication bias would not be a problem in this meta-analysis because many 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
33 
studies included did not focus on self-esteem development (i.e., they examined other research 
questions), but simply reported the relevant statistics (i.e., means and standard deviations of self-
esteem) together with statistics on a larger set of variables. We used three methods to test for 
publication bias. First, we examined the funnel graph, which displays the relation between effect 
size and the inverse standard error of the effect size (Sutton, 2009). The funnel graph exhibited a 
symmetrical shape typical of nonbiased meta-analytic datasets (Figure 1). Second, Egger’s 
regression test (Egger, Smith, Schneider, & Minder, 1997) was nonsignificant, z = 1.42, p = .156, 
suggesting that the funnel graph did not deviate significantly from a symmetrical shape (the test 
was conducted with metafor; Viechtbauer, 2010). Third, we compared effect sizes from 
dissertations (as a category of gray literature) with effect sizes from peer-reviewed journal 
articles. If dissertations yield effect sizes that differ significantly from journal articles, this is 
evidence of publication bias. All effect sizes from dissertations (k = 28) were based on samples 
from childhood to beginning adulthood; specifically, the mean age of the samples ranged from 7 
to 19 years. We therefore restricted the test to this age range (k = 193 for journal articles). The 
results of a mixed-effects meta-regression model indicated that effect sizes from dissertations 
and journal articles did not differ significantly, z = 1.40, p = .161. Thus, the three methods 
converged in suggesting that there was no evidence of publication bias. 
Effect Size Analyses 
To gain an overview of the effect size data, we first inspected a scatterplot of the relation 
between effect size and age (Figure 2). The figure shows that the variability of effect sizes was 
much larger in childhood and adolescence than in adulthood.3 Moreover, the scatterplot 
suggested that the majority of effect sizes were positive during childhood and adolescence 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
34 
(indicating an increase in self-esteem during these developmental periods) and that effect sizes 
gradually declined across adulthood and tended to be below zero in old age. 
As the goal of this meta-analysis was to map mean-level change in self-esteem on age, 
effect size analyses were conducted within age groups. For these analyses, we constructed 
multiple age groups across the observed age range (see Table 2). For the age range from 10 to 20 
years, the meta-analytic dataset included a large number of samples. Given the substantive 
importance of this developmental period, we constructed 1-year age groups. Because the 
numbers of studies were lower for other developmental stages, we constructed 2-year age groups 
from 4 to 10 years, 5-year age groups from 20 to 30 years, and 10-year age groups from 30 to 90 
years. The oldest age group included effect sizes ranging from age 90 to 94 years. 
Although the power of significance tests of mean-level change would be greater if we 
constructed broader age groups (which then would include a larger number of samples), it is 
important to emphasize that null-hypothesis significance testing of mean-level change was not a 
central goal in this meta-analysis (cf. Cumming, 2014; Fraley & Marks, 2007; Greenwald, 1975). 
As reviewed in the Introduction, prior research has provided sufficient evidence suggesting that 
self-esteem does change significantly across the life course. In the present research, the goal was 
rather to obtain estimates of age-dependent mean-level change and, thus, narrower age groups 
provide more precision with regard to age. We used the weighted mean effect size (i.e., the point 
estimate) as best estimate of mean-level change in the age group, regardless of whether the 
estimate differed significantly from zero or not. In Table 2, we report the null-hypothesis 
significance tests of mean effect sizes for reasons of completeness. 
Table 2 reports the meta-analytic findings for all age groups from 4 to 94 years. Most of 
the weighted mean effect sizes had a positive sign, except for two years in early adolescence and 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
35 
for the age groups of 70 years and older. The largest yearly mean-level change in self-esteem 
emerged for early childhood (age 4–6), age 10, and for the years from age 15 to 29 years (all 
with a positive sign), as well as for age 90 to 94 years (with a negative sign).4 
Figure 3 summarizes the findings by aggregating the point estimates of mean-level 
change across the observed age range from 4 to 94 years. The vertical axis shows cumulative d 
values (cumulative ds are relative to age 4; for a similar way to illustrate meta-analytic findings 
on mean-level change, see Roberts et al., 2006). For age groups that covered more than one year 
(e.g., age 4–6; age 20–25), the estimate of yearly change (i.e., dyear) was used for each year 
included in the age group. The figure shows that, on average, self-esteem increased during early 
and middle childhood (i.e., until age 11; cumulative d = 0.34). Between age 11 and 15 
(cumulative d = 0.34), self-esteem remained constant. Afterwards, self-esteem increased strongly 
until age 30 (cumulative d = 1.05; thus, self-esteem increased by d = 0.71 from age 15 to 30). 
Self-esteem increased slightly from age 30 to 60 (cumulative d = 1.30; the difference between 
age 30 and 60 corresponded to a small effect size of d = 0.25), peaking at age 60 years and 
remaining constant until age 70. Then, self-esteem declined slightly until age 90 (cumulative d = 
1.15), but more strongly from age 90 to 94 (cumulative d = 0.76). 
The findings on heterogeneity reported in Table 2 correspond well to the inconsistencies 
in findings reported in the literature on self-esteem development in middle childhood and 
adolescence. For these developmental periods, the I2 values (i.e., the ratio of total heterogeneity 
by total variability) were large. Nevertheless, at the same time, the total sample sizes were also 
large and the confidence intervals of the meta-analytic effect sizes were relatively small (at least 
from age 10), suggesting that the weighted mean effect sizes provide reliable estimates of mean-
level change in middle childhood and adolescence. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
36 
Moderator Analyses 
As noted above, the analyses on mean effect sizes showed that there was significant 
variation of effect sizes. We therefore tested whether sample characteristics moderated the effect 
sizes. The variables mean year of birth and proportion of female participants were continuous 
and were included as such in the moderator variables. For the categorical variables, we focused 
on specific contrasts due to low numbers of samples in some of the categories. For country, we 
contrasted samples from the United States (61%) with samples from other countries (39%). For 
ethnicity, we contrasted samples that were White/European (56%) with other samples (44%). For 
measure of self-esteem, we contrasted samples that were assessed with the Rosenberg scale 
(61%) with samples that were assessed with other measures (39%). Finally, for sample type, we 
focused on the contrast between nationally representative (6%) and other samples (94%), 
because representative samples provide more valid results compared with nonrepresentative 
samples. 
We first examined the full sample of studies covering the observed age range from 4 to 
94 years. Table 3 shows the intercorrelations among the effect size and moderators (see the 
values below the diagonal). Given that many of the intercorrelations were substantial, it is 
possible that the relations between the moderators and effect sizes are confounded if the 
moderator effects are not mutually controlled for each other. Consequently, it was important to 
use multiple regression analysis to gain information about the independent effects of moderators 
on effect sizes. Table 4 shows the results of the mixed-effects meta-regression models. In the 
moderator analyses, we also controlled for mean age of the sample. In these analyses, it was 
sufficient to control for the linear effect of age on effect size. Given that the effect size (i.e., 
yearly change in self-esteem) represents the slope of the trajectory, a linear age effect (e.g., a 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
37 
linear age-dependent decline of the slope) captures a quadratic trajectory, corresponding roughly 
to the shape of mean-level change shown in Figure 3.5 
Table 4 shows that, when all moderators were mutually controlled for in the regression 
analysis, linear age had the expected negative effect on yearly change in self-esteem. Moreover, 
the measure of self-esteem (i.e., Rosenberg scale vs. other measures) was positively related to 
effect size. However, no other variable had a significant effect on the effect sizes. Thus, the 
findings do not suggest that sample characteristics such as mean year of birth, gender, country, 
and ethnicity influence the average shape of the life-span trajectory of self-esteem. Moreover, 
effect sizes did not differ significantly between nationally representative and other samples, 
which strengthens the generalizability of the findings (of note, in the multiple regression 
analysis, the regression coefficient of sample type was close to zero). It should also be noted that 
the regression coefficient of year of birth was negative (albeit nonsignificant). Thus, if anything, 
more recent generations showed less positive slopes of self-esteem change compared to older 
generations, which is opposite to the predictions from the Generation Me hypothesis (Twenge, 
2006). 
Given that the majority of samples (i.e., 220 of 331 samples) had a mean age ranging 
from 10 to 20 years, we repeated the moderator analyses for this subsample of studies. Because 
these samples were relatively homogeneous with regard to age, these analyses may yield 
additional insights into the effects of moderators. In particular, holding age (relatively) constant 
may provide a more valid test of cohort effects on mean-level change (Baltes et al., 1979). Table 
3 (values above the diagonal) shows the intercorrelations among the effect size and moderators 
and Table 4 (values in the right half) shows the multiple regression coefficients of the 
moderators. Except for the age effect, which was nonsignificant for this set of studies, the 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
38 
findings were essentially the same as for the full set of studies. Measure of self-esteem was 
positively related to effect size. All other moderators did not show significant effects. Again, 
year of birth had a negative (albeit nonsignificant) effect on mean-level change in self-esteem, 
although the Generation Me hypothesis would predict a positive effect. 
Two of the predictors—more precisely, mean age and mean year of birth—showed a very 
large correlation in the full meta-analytic sample (−.92), which raises concerns related to 
multicollinearity. On the one hand, two variables that are so strongly correlated should typically 
not simultaneously be included in a multiple regression model. On the other hand, in this 
particular case, it is essential to mutually control the variables and to test their unique effects for 
substantive reasons. As reviewed in the Introduction, an important goal of research on self-
esteem development is to disentangle true developmental effects (i.e., as indicated by age) and 
cohort effects (i.e., as indicated by birth year). Thus, if only one of the variables is included in 
the model, then it is possible that its observed effect is significantly confounded for the very 
reason that age and birth year are substantially correlated. We therefore included both variables 
in the meta-regression models. However, given concerns about multicollinearity, we replicated 
the models by omitting one of the variables, specifically mean year of birth (Supplemental Table 
S1). The results showed that the pattern of findings was virtually unaltered, supporting the 
conclusions from the models including both variables. Moreover, we note that in the subset of 
samples with mean age ranging from 10 to 20 years, the correlation between age and birth year 
was much lower (−.34) than in the full meta-analytic dataset. The fact that the pattern of findings 
was similar in this subset of samples further reduces concerns about multicollinearity and 
strengthens confidence in the conclusions from the moderator analyses. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
39 
The central conclusion from the moderator analyses is that the findings on mean-level 
change in self-esteem do not significantly differ for samples from different birth cohorts, samples 
from different countries, samples with different compositions in terms of gender and ethnicity, 
and for different sample types. 
Discussion 
In this meta-analysis, we synthesized the available longitudinal data on mean-level 
change in self-esteem. The analyses were based on 331 independent samples, including data 
from 164,868 participants. The mean age associated with the effect sizes ranged from 4 to 94 
years. The results show that people’s self-esteem changes systematically across the life span. 
Average levels of self-esteem increased from age 4 to 11, remained stable from age 11 to 15, 
then increased strongly until age 30 and more slowly until age 60, peaked between age 60 and 70 
years, and declined after age 70. The cumulative mean-level change from early childhood to the 
peak at the end of middle adulthood corresponded to a very large effect size. Moderator analyses 
were conducted for the full set of samples and for the subset of samples between ages 10 and 20 
years. Although the measure of self-esteem accounted for differences in effect sizes, the 
moderator analyses suggested that the pattern of mean-level change held in samples from 
different birth cohorts and different countries, samples with different compositions in terms of 
gender and ethnicity, and for different sample types. 
Implications of the Findings 
Childhood. As noted in the Introduction, narrative reviews of the literature had suggested 
that average levels of self-esteem decrease in the transition from early to middle childhood (i.e., 
from about age 4 to 8 years; Harter, 2006c, 2012a), due to the effects of social-cognitive 
advances, such as the ability to distinguish between the actual and ideal self and the ability to use 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
40 
social comparison information (Harter, 2006c; Ruble et al., 1980; Stipek & Tannatt, 1984). 
These effects have been described as ironic because although children make progress in their 
social-cognitive development in this developmental period, these very advances were assumed to 
have negative side effects on children’s self-esteem. It should be noted, however, that in this age 
group most of the relevant studies did not use measures of global self-esteem but assessed self-
evaluations in specific domains such as academic abilities and peer relationships (J. Eccles et al., 
1993; Marsh, 1989; Marsh et al., 1984; Stipek & Tannatt, 1984). Thus, little evidence was 
available with regard to mean-level change in global self-esteem. 
The meta-analytic findings on the self-esteem trajectory in childhood are in strong 
contrast to the depictions included in narrative reviews, but suggested that there is a positive 
trajectory in children’s global self-esteem already in the transition from early to middle 
childhood (the cumulative d was 0.21 for the period from age 4 to 8 years). Which mechanisms 
could account for the increase in global self-esteem during childhood? One possible process 
might be gains in personal autonomy and in the general sense of mastery, a mechanism that has 
been discussed also with regard to increases in self-esteem in middle and late adolescence 
(Harter, 2006c). For example, in a longitudinal study of the self-esteem trajectory from age 14 to 
30 years, the normative increase in sense of mastery explained a large portion of the normative 
increase in participants’ self-esteem (Erol & Orth, 2011). Nevertheless, we note that future 
research on the self-esteem trajectory in childhood is needed, given that for age 4–8 years the 
present meta-analysis included data from only seven samples (fortunately, however, for age 8–10 
the number of samples was larger, with 13 samples). 
Adolescence. The meta-analytic findings on adolescence also deviate, at least partially, 
from the typical description in the literature. According to Harter (2006c), self-esteem declines at 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
41 
the transition from childhood to adolescence (at about 11–13 years) and begins to recover in 
middle adolescence (at about age 15 years). Thus, early adolescents might go through a low 
point in self-esteem (Harter, 2006c; Robins et al., 2002). In contrast, the present research 
indicates that self-esteem is, on average, constant from age 11 to 15 years. However, consistent 
with Harter’s (2006c) description, self-esteem began to increase strongly at age 15 years. Thus, 
although the upward trend in self-esteem, as seen in childhood, is interrupted during early and 
middle adolescence, the present findings suggest that this developmental period is not a time of 
“storm and stress” in adolescents’ self-concept (Arnett, 1999; Hollenstein & Lougheed, 2013; 
Molloy, Ram, & Gest, 2011). Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that the present research 
describes the normative trajectory and that there are, of course, individual differences in the 
trajectory. Thus, some adolescents may experience declines in their self-esteem due to pubertal 
changes, conflicts with parents, and mood disruptions in this developmental period. 
Adulthood. The shape of the self-esteem trajectory across adulthood identified in this 
meta-analysis corresponds well to the general shape of the trajectory found in previous studies, 
which suggested that self-esteem follows an inverted U-shape over the life course (note that 
these studies began only in adolescence or young adulthood; Orth et al., 2015; Orth et al., 2012; 
Orth et al., 2010). Clearly, however, effect sizes differed across prior studies. For example, in 
Orth et al. (2012), the increase from age 16 (i.e., the youngest age assessed in that study) to the 
peak at age 51 was relatively small with d = 0.29, whereas in other studies as well as in this 
meta-analysis the effect size was much larger (in this meta-analysis, the cumulative effect for the 
same age interval was d = 0.86). We therefore believe that this meta-analysis significantly 
advances the field, because it provides a much more precise picture of the life-span trajectory 
compared to any single primary study. The reason is that the meta-analytic method provides for 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
42 
much larger statistical power (by aggregating across a large number of samples) and also for 
greater robustness of the findings, because the peculiarities of primary studies typically cancel 
each other out. 
Old age. As noted in the Introduction, previous research had yielded inconsistent 
findings about the magnitude of the normative decline in self-esteem in old age and, moreover, 
about the age at which the decline begins (e.g., Orth et al., 2010; von Soest et al., 2017; Wagner, 
Gerstorf, et al., 2013). The meta-analytic findings suggest self-esteem does decline in old age. 
However, the rate of change was small until age 90 (the cumulative mean-level change from age 
70 to 90 corresponded to d = −0.15). Moreover, it should be noted that the decline started at a 
very high level of self-esteem. In fact, individuals reached their highest level of self-esteem at 
age 60–70 years. Thus, the present research suggests that many people are able to maintain a 
relatively high level of self-esteem even during old age. 
After age 90 years, however, self-esteem declined more strongly (from age 90 to 94, 
cumulative d = −0.39). Thus, this meta-analysis supports the notion that there is a terminal 
decline of self-esteem in very old age, with a much larger rate of decline (for terminal decline in 
life satisfaction, see Gerstorf, Ram, Estabrook, et al., 2008). This issue is important because if 
very old adults experience significant loss in self-esteem, these changes may impair their level of 
well-being and contribute to the emergence of depressive symptoms and disorders (Orth, Robins, 
Trzesniewski, Maes, & Schmitt, 2009; Sowislo & Orth, 2013). However, note that the estimate 
for the age group 90–94 years was based on only two studies, suggesting that more research is 
needed to gain more precise insights into the self-esteem trajectory in very old age. 
Birth cohort. The moderator analyses indicated that birth cohort did not explain 
variability in the effect sizes. Given that mean year of birth ranged from 1899 to 2002 across the 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
43 
samples included in this meta-analysis, the nonsignificant cohort effect indicates that the shape 
of the life-span trajectory has not changed over the generations born during the 20th century. Of 
course, samples that differed in their mean year of birth typically also differed in their mean age, 
providing effect sizes for different parts of the life span (although some of the samples from 
different generations provided information about the same age, because year of data collection 
also varied across samples). However, the moderator analyses yield valid insights into cohort 
effects for two reasons. First, the effect of birth year was controlled for the effect of age in the 
moderator analyses. Thus, the effect of birth year captured the unique cohort effect while holding 
age constant (and also while controlling for other variables such as ethnicity, which otherwise 
could have confounded the effect). Second, we repeated the moderator analyses in the subset of 
samples aged 10 to 20 years. Thus, in this analysis, age varied relatively little across samples, 
while birth year varied more strongly (for this subset of samples, birth year ranged from 1950 to 
2000, with M = 1982.1 and SD = 10.5 years). The fact that the second moderator analysis 
replicated the findings based on the full set of samples (yielding a nonsignificant cohort effect) 
corroborates the conclusion that there were no systematic cohort effects on mean-level change in 
self-esteem. 
Consequently, the meta-analytic findings do not support Twenge’s (2006) claim that the 
birth cohorts called Generation Me (i.e., cohorts born in the 1970s to 1990s) experience more 
positive, steeper increases in self-esteem. Moreover, we note that the sign of the cohort effect 
was negative in both moderator analyses (albeit nonsignificant), pointing in the direction of less 
positive mean-level change in samples from more recent generations. Thus, if anything, the 
pattern of findings was opposite to predictions about Generation Me. Obviously, the present 
findings do not speak to the debate about generational changes in other personality 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
44 
characteristics such as narcissism, which are not considered here (for the debate see, e.g., 
Trzesniewski, Donnellan, & Robins, 2008; Twenge, Konrath, Foster, Campbell, & Bushman, 
2008). 
The nonsignificant cohort effect is relevant also for methodological reasons, because the 
modeling of a coherent life-span trajectory based on estimates across different birth cohorts (as 
done in this meta-analysis; see Figure 3) is valid only if the cohorts included do not differ in 
significant ways in age-related mean-level change (i.e., the estimates for specific ages must not 
differ across cohorts). For example, if more recent generations experienced steeper increases in 
self-esteem during adolescence and young adulthood compared to older generations, these cohort 
differences would confound the overarching life-span trajectory, leading to wrong conclusions 
about the patterns of self-esteem development. Thus, the fact that in this meta-analysis cohort 
effects were nonsignificant supports the validity of conclusions about the shape of the life-span 
trajectory. 
It is important to note that this meta-analysis provides information only about cohort 
effects on mean-level change or, in other words, about cohort effects on the slope but not the 
overall level of the trajectory. Thus, other evidence is needed to evaluate the hypothesis that 
more recent generations show higher levels of self-esteem. As reviewed in the Introduction, 
cohort-sequential longitudinal studies are particularly suited to assessment of cohort differences 
in the level and slope of developmental trajectories (Baltes et al., 1979; Duncan et al., 2006). The 
evidence from several cohort-sequential studies with large samples overall suggests that there are 
no systematic cohort differences in average levels of self-esteem (Erol & Orth, 2011; Orth et al., 
2015; Orth et al., 2012; Orth et al., 2010), even if for one of these datasets cohort effects have 
been reported (Twenge et al., 2017). Moreover, studies with other research designs have also 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
45 
questioned the claim that more recent generations experience higher levels of self-esteem 
compared to older generations (Hamamura & Septarini, 2017; Trzesniewski & Donnellan, 2010). 
Specificity of the life-span trajectory of self-esteem. Given that self-esteem is 
substantially correlated with neuroticism, with cross-sectional correlations at about −.60 (Judge, 
Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2002; Robins, Tracy, Trzesniewski, Potter, & Gosling, 2001; Watson et 
al., 2002), it may be informative to compare the life-span trajectory of self-esteem with 
neuroticism (or, put differently, emotional stability, i.e., the positive pole of the neuroticism 
dimension). Many studies indicate that emotional stability increases across large parts of 
adulthood (Milojev & Sibley, 2017; Roberts et al., 2006; Terracciano et al., 2005; but see 
Allemand, Zimprich, & Hendriks, 2008; Lucas & Donnellan, 2011). Thus, this pattern 
corresponds to the uptrend in self-esteem during young and middle adulthood. However, the 
evidence suggests that emotional stability and self-esteem follow different trajectories in 
childhood and, possibly, old age. Whereas emotional stability tends to decline in the first decade 
of life (Soto, 2016; Wängqvist, Lamb, Frisén, & Hwang, 2015), the present research suggests 
that self-esteem increases from age 4 to 10 years. Also, the available evidence suggests that 
emotional stability further increases, or at least is relatively stable, during old age (Lucas & 
Donnellan, 2011; Milojev & Sibley, 2017; Roberts et al., 2006; Specht et al., 2011; Terracciano 
et al., 2005), whereas this meta-analysis suggests that self-esteem declines in old age, with a 
sharper drop in very old age. The divergent developmental patterns for self-esteem and 
neuroticism support that it is essential to distinguish between the constructs and to understand the 
specific trajectory of self-esteem across the life span. 
Limitations and Strengths 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
46 
As is true for each meta-analysis, it is important to evaluate whether there is evidence of 
publication bias in the data (Sutton, 2009). If publication bias were present, estimates of mean-
level change could be distorted, e.g., towards more positive effect sizes. However, we argue that 
the a priori likelihood of publication bias in the present data is low, given that the raw statistics 
that we used for computing the effect sizes were often not a central focus of the primary studies 
(i.e., they were included in tables with descriptive statistics on the measures used). Moreover, as 
reported in the Results section, the funnel graph of effect sizes exhibited an inconspicuous 
pattern. Also, Egger’s test of funnel graph asymmetry was nonsignificant (Egger et al., 1997). 
Finally, effect sizes did not differ significantly between articles in peer-reviewed journals and 
dissertations. Dissertations are a category of the gray literature recommended for estimating 
effect sizes in unpublished studies because they are indexed in databases and can be searched 
systematically (Ferguson & Brannick, 2012; B. D. McLeod & Weisz, 2004). Moreover, 
dissertations provide for a stricter test of publication bias compared to unpublished manuscripts, 
because dissertations typically yield effect sizes that differ more strongly from peer-reviewed 
journal articles than do effect sizes from unpublished manuscripts (Ferguson & Brannick, 2012). 
Thus, the empirical analyses strongly suggest that the present findings are not biased by selective 
publishing. 
Another potential threat to the validity of the present findings is selectivity in the samples 
used in primary studies. For example, if most primary studies used samples of participants with 
particularly high (or low) levels of well-being or particularly favorable (or adverse) 
environmental conditions, estimates of mean-level change in self-esteem could be biased. 
However, the present findings speak against this possibility, because effect sizes did not differ 
between nationally representative and other types of samples (our dataset included 21 nationally 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
47 
representative samples with a total of more than 25,000 individuals). Given that sample type was 
not a significant moderator, this suggests that the full meta-analytic sample of studies allows for 
valid insights into the normative pattern of mean-level change in self-esteem across the life span. 
With regard to ethnicity, we had to focus on the contrast between samples that were 
White/European versus other samples, due to the very low proportion of samples that consisted 
predominantly of Black, Asian, or Hispanic individuals. Thus, although the present meta-
analysis suggests that individuals who are European or of European descent show a trajectory 
that corresponds to the trajectory identified for the full set of samples, conclusions about the 
trajectory among other ethnic groups are based on an omnibus test and should be considered 
tentative. Given this limitation, researchers interested in the self-esteem trajectory among 
specific ethnic groups should consult relevant primary studies (Gray-Little & Hafdahl, 2000; 
Orth et al., 2010; Robins et al., 2002; Shaw et al., 2010). 
Few samples were from outside of Western cultural contexts (only 4% of the samples 
were from Asian countries and no samples were available for African, South American, or 
Central American countries). Although it would have been desirable to test whether the life-span 
trajectory of self-esteem holds outside of Western countries, this was not possible in this meta-
analysis. In future longitudinal studies, it would be highly interesting to test whether the 
trajectory identified in the present research replicates in non-Western samples (for cross-
sectional studies, see Bleidorn et al., 2016; Robins et al., 2002). Nevertheless, the moderator 
analyses support the conclusion that the trajectory holds across Western countries. 
The moderator analyses indicated that the measure of self-esteem explained variability in 
the effect sizes. Specifically, samples that were assessed with the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale 
(Rosenberg, 1965) showed greater effect sizes than samples that were assessed with other 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
48 
measures. This effect held for both the full set of samples and for the reduced set of samples 
aged 10 to 20 years. The reason for this effect is unclear. One possibility is that the Rosenberg 
scale shows greater reliability than the other measures of self-esteem and, if so, then the larger 
amount of measurement error in other measures could dampen estimates of mean change more 
strongly. Thus, future research could test whether differences in the reliability of self-esteem 
measures contribute to differences in estimates of mean-level change. Nevertheless, research 
suggests that not only the Rosenberg scale but also the Harter scales and Marsh scales—together, 
these scales were used in 87% of the samples included in the present meta-analysis—generally 
have good reliability (for a review, see Donnellan et al., 2015). Moreover, it may be useful to 
note a large body of research supports the validity of the Rosenberg, Harter, and Marsh scales 
(Donnellan et al., 2015). Also, these measures show other favorable psychometric properties 
such as measurement invariance across time (Marsh, Scalas, & Nagengast, 2010; Orth, Erol, 
Ledermann, & Grob, 2018; Orth, Robins, Widaman, & Conger, 2014), age (Orth et al., 2015; 
Whiteside-Mansell & Corwyn, 2003), gender (Byrne, 1988), and ethnicity and cultural contexts 
(Alessandri, Vecchione, Eisenberg, & Łaguna, 2015; Bodkin-Andrews, Ha, Craven, & Yeung, 
2010; Leung, Marsh, Craven, & Abduljabbar, 2016). For these reasons, we believe that the 
moderator effect of measure of self-esteem does not significantly threaten the validity of the 
overall findings of the meta-analysis. 
A limitation is that we did not test whether the weighted mean effect sizes differed 
significantly between age groups. The reason is that the age groups were not fully independent 
from each other, because some multi-wave studies (i.e., studies with three waves and more) 
provided effect sizes for more than one age group. However, it is important to emphasize that in 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
49 
the analyses within age groups, as well as in the moderator analyses, independence of samples 
was ensured. 
As reported in the Method section, when studies provided more than one effect size 
because two different measures of self-esteem were used or because for a given age group more 
than one time interval was available, we ensured that each sample provided only one effect size 
per analysis by averaging effect sizes within samples before the meta-analytic computations. It 
should be noted, however, that it would be statistically superior to use a multilevel meta-analytic 
approach to account for dependent effect size estimates. Also, we note that it is possible that the 
computation of the sampling variance of standardized mean change would need an adjustment 
when using dyear instead of d. Given that the meta-analytic literature seems to be mute on this 
issue, we used the equation for the sampling variance as described in Becker (1988) and Lipsey 
and Wilson (2001). A finding, for which the explanation is unclear, is that for age groups in 
middle adulthood and old age, the Q heterogeneity statistics were small when compared to their 
corresponding degrees of freedom (under homogeneity, the expected value for Q is df = k – 1; 
Borenstein et al., 2009). Nevertheless, it should be noted that prior research on self-esteem 
development in adulthood, at least until about age 70, reported relatively consistent findings, 
corresponding to the low degree of heterogeneity. 
The use of age groups allowed to estimate age-dependent change in self-esteem in a 
relatively precise way (i.e., we distinguished between 22 age groups). Although it is often 
preferable to examine age as a continuous variable, in the present context this would have 
required to test specific models of change across the life span (e.g., to test whether the trajectory 
can be captured by a linear, quadratic, or cubic model). In fact, the meta-analytic findings, as 
shown in Figure 3, correspond roughly—but not fully—to the quadratic life-span trajectory 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
50 
suggested by several longitudinal studies (Orth et al., 2015; Orth et al., 2012; Orth et al., 2010). 
Importantly, however, imposing a change model on the present meta-analytic data would not 
have allowed to estimate change in a fine-grained way in developmental periods such as early 
adolescence and old age. For example, it is likely that the discontinuous shape of the trajectory 
between age 11 and 15 years would not have been captured when modeling a coherent trajectory 
across the life span. Yet, as discussed above, the precise estimates for age groups in childhood, 
adolescence, and old age allowed for important conclusions with regard to previously unresolved 
issues in the field of self-esteem development. 
An important strength of this meta-analysis is the comprehensive coverage of the 
available data across the life span (i.e., from as young as age 4 years to 94 years). Also, we 
believe that the effect size measure used in the present research (i.e., the standardized mean 
change d per year, dyear, which is a change-to-time ratio) significantly contributes to the validity 
of the findings, compared to the simpler effect size measures (such as the simple d) used in prior 
meta-analyses of mean-level change in personality constructs. The reason is that the length of the 
time interval across which change is observed should be an integral part of the effect size 
measure. Based on age-specific estimates of dyear, the meta-analysis allowed drawing a precise 
picture of the normative trajectory from early childhood to old age, by showing cumulative d 
values across the life span. 
Conclusions 
Based on longitudinal data from 331 independent samples with more than 160,000 
individuals, this meta-analysis shows that people’s self-esteem changes in a systematic, 
normative way over the life span. The findings suggest that, on average, self-esteem increases in 
early and middle childhood, remains constant in adolescence, increases strongly in young 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
51 
adulthood, continues to increase in middle adulthood, peaks between age 60 and 70 years, and 
declines in old age and more strongly in very old age. The pattern of results did not differ 
significantly for samples from different birth cohorts and different countries, samples with 
different compositions in terms of gender and ethnicity, and for different sample types, 
suggesting that the findings are robust and generalizable within Western cultural contexts. With 
regard to childhood and early adolescence, the meta-analytic findings deviate from prior 
depictions found in the literature, which had been based on narrative reviews. Thus, the notion 
that self-esteem declines in middle childhood and reaches a low point in early adolescence 
should be revised. Moreover, although there is a normative decline in self-esteem after age 70, 
the meta-analysis indicates that the magnitude of decline is relatively benign until age 90, 
suggesting that many older adults are able to maintain a relatively high level of self-esteem. In 
very old age, however, self-esteem declines more strongly, suggesting that in this developmental 
stage individuals may be vulnerable due to declining self-esteem and that interventions aimed at 
improving self-esteem may be needed. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
52 
References 
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the meta-analysis. 
Ackerman, R. A., Witt, E. A., Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Robins, R. W., & Kashy, 
D. A. (2011). What does the Narcissistic Personality Inventory really measure? 
Assessment, 18, 67-87. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1073191110382845 
*Adachi, P. J. C., & Willoughby, T. (2014). It's not how much you play, but how much you 
enjoy the game: The longitudinal associations between adolescents' self-esteem and the 
frequency versus enjoyment of involvement in sports. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 
43, 137-145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-013-9988-3 
Alessandri, G., Vecchione, M., Eisenberg, N., & Łaguna, M. (2015). On the factor structure of 
the Rosenberg (1965) General Self-Esteem Scale. Psychological Assessment, 27, 621-
635. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pas0000073 
Allemand, M., Zimprich, D., & Hendriks, A. A. J. (2008). Age differences in five personality 
domains across the life span. Developmental Psychology, 44, 758-770. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.44.3.758 
*Antonishak, J. M. (2005). Predictors and sequelae of instability in adolescent peer groups. 
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 66(3-B), 
1752.  
Anusic, I., & Schimmack, U. (2016). Stability and change of personality traits, self-esteem, and 
well-being: Introducing the meta-analytic stability and change model of retest 
correlations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 110, 766-781. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000066 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
53 
Arnett, J. J. (1999). Adolescent storm and stress, reconsidered. American Psychologist, 54, 317-
326. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.54.5.317 
*Arunkumar, R., Midgley, C., & Urdan, T. (1999). Perceiving high or low home–school 
dissonance: Longitudinal effects on adolescent emotional and academic well-being. 
Journal of Research on Adolescence, 9, 441-466. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327795jra0904_4 
*Au, R. C. P., Watkins, D. A., & Hattie, J. A. C. (2010). Academic risk factors and deficits of 
learned hopelessness: A longitudinal study of Hong Kong secondary school students. 
Educational Psychology, 30, 125-138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01443410903476400 
*Bachman, J. G., & O'Malley, P. M. (1977). Self-esteem in young men: A longitudinal analysis 
of the impact of educational and occupational attainment. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 35, 365-380. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.35.6.365 
Baird, B. M., Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B. (2010). Life satisfaction across the lifespan: 
Findings from two nationally representative panel studies. Social Indicators Research, 
99, 183-203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11205-010-9584-9 
*Baldwin, S. A., & Hoffmann, J. P. (2002). The dynamics of self-esteem: A growth-curve 
analysis. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 31, 101-113. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1014065825598 
Baltes, P. B., Cornelius, S. W., & Nesselroade, J. R. (1979). Cohort effects in developmental 
psychology. In J. R. Nesselroade & P. B. Baltes (Eds.), Longitudinal research in the 
study of behavior and development (pp. 61-87). New York, NY: Academic Press.  
Baltes, P. B., & Mayer, K. U. (1999). The Berlin Aging Study: Aging from 70 to 100. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press.  
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
54 
*Bao, X., & Jin, K. (2015). The beneficial effect of Tai Chi on self-concept in adolescents. 
International Journal of Psychology, 50, 101-105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ijop.12066 
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J. I., & Vohs, K. D. (2003). Does high self-esteem 
cause better performance, interpersonal success, happiness, or healthier lifestyles? 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4, 1-44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1529-
1006.01431 
Becker, B. J. (1988). Synthesizing standardized mean-change measures. British Journal of 
Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 41, 257-278. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-
8317.1988.tb00901.x 
*Becker, M., Cortina, K. S., Tsai, Y. M., & Eccles, J. S. (2014). Sexual orientation, 
psychological well-being, and mental health: A longitudinal analysis from adolescence to 
young adulthood. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity, 1, 132-145. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000038 
*Birkeland, M. S., Melkevik, O., Holsen, I., & Wold, B. (2012). Trajectories of global self-
esteem development during adolescence. Journal of Adolescence, 35, 43-54. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2011.06.006 
Blascovich, J., & Tomaka, J. (1991). Measures of self-esteem. In J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & 
L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes (pp. 
115-160). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.  
*Blatny, M., Millova, K., Jelinek, M., & Osecka, T. (2015). Personality predictors of successful 
development: Toddler temperament and adolescent personality traits predict well-being 
and career stability in middle adulthood. Plos One, 10, e0126032. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0126032 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
55 
Bleidorn, W., Arslan, R. C., Denissen, J. J. A., Rentfrow, P. J., Gebauer, J. E., Potter, J., & 
Gosling, S. D. (2016). Age and gender differences in self-esteem: A cross-cultural 
window. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 396-410. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000078 
Bleidorn, W., Hufer, A., Kandler, C., Hopwood, C. J., & Riemann, R. (2018). A nuclear twin 
family study of self-esteem. European Journal of Personality, Advance online 
publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.2136 
Blyth, D. A., Simmons, R. G., & Carlton-Ford, S. (1983). The adjustment of early adolescents to 
school transitions. Journal of Early Adolescence, 3, 105-120. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/027243168331008 
Bodkin-Andrews, G. H., Ha, M. T., Craven, R. G., & Yeung, A. S. (2010). Factorial invariance 
testing and latent mean differences for the Self-Description Questionnaire II (Short 
Version) with indigenous and non-indigenous Australian secondary school students. 
International Journal of Testing, 9, 47-79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15305050903352065 
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J. P. T., & Rothstein, H. R. (2009). Introduction to meta-
analysis. Chichester, UK: Wiley.  
*Bosacki, S. L. (2015). Children's theory of mind, self-perceptions, and peer relations: A 
longitudinal study. Infant and Child Development, 24, 175-188. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/icd.1878 
Bosson, J. K., Lakey, C. E., Campbell, W. K., Zeigler-Hill, V., Jordan, C. H., & Kernis, M. H. 
(2008). Untangling the links between narcissism and self-esteem: A theoretical and 
empirical review. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 1415-1439. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2008.00089.x 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
56 
*Brenning, K., Soenens, B., Van Petegem, S., & Vansteenkiste, M. (2015). Perceived maternal 
autonomy support and early adolescent emotion regulation: A longitudinal study. Social 
Development, 24, 561-578. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/sode.12107 
*Brown, K. M., McMahon, R. P., Biro, F. M., Crawford, P., Schreiber, G. B., Similo, S. L., . . . 
Striegel-Moore, R. (1998). Changes in self-esteem in Black and White girls between the 
ages of 9 and 14 years. Journal of Adolescent Health, 23, 7-19. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1054-139X(97)00238-3 
*Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Nelemans, S. A., Orobio de Castro, B., Overbeek, G., & 
Bushman, B. J. (2015). Origins of narcissism in children. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 112, 3659-3662. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1420870112 
Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., & Sedikides, C. (2016). Separating narcissism from self-esteem. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 25, 8-13. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721415619737 
*Burke, P. J., & Harrod, M. M. (2005). Too much of a good thing? Social Psychology Quarterly, 
68, 359–374. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/019027250506800404 
*Burwell, R. A., & Shirk, S. R. (2006). Self processes in adolescent depression: The role of self-
worth contingencies. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 16, 479-490. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-7795.2006.00503.x 
Byrne, B. M. (1988). Measuring adolescent self-concept: Factorial validity and equivalency of 
the SDQ III across gender. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 23, 361-375. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327906mbr2303_5 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
57 
*Cairns, E., McWhirter, L., Duffy, U., & Barry, R. (1990). The stability of self-concept in late 
adolescence: Gender and situational effects. Personality and Individual Differences, 11, 
937-944. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0191-8869(90)90275-V 
*Cantin, S., & Boivin, M. (2004). Change and stability in children's social network and self-
perceptions during transition from elementary to junior high school. International 
Journal of Behavioral Development, 28, 561-570. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01650250444000289 
*Caprara, G. V., Alessandri, G., Barbaranelli, C., & Vecchione, M. (2013). The longitudinal 
relations between self-esteem and affective self-regulatory efficacy. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 47, 859-870. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2013.08.011 
Carstensen, L. L., Pasupathi, M., Mayr, U., & Nesselroade, J. R. (2000). Emotional experience in 
everyday life across the adult life span. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 
644-655. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.79.4.644 
Charles, S. T., Reynolds, C. A., & Gatz, M. (2001). Age-related differences and change in 
positive and negative affect over 23 years. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
80, 136-151. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.1.136 
*Chen, X., He, Y., & Li, D. (2004). Self-perceptions of social competence and self-worth in 
Chinese children: Relations with social and school performance. Social Development, 13, 
570-589. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9507.2004.00284.x 
Chung, J. M., Hutteman, R., van Aken, M. A. G., & Denissen, J. J. A. (2017). High, low, and in 
between: Self-esteem development from middle childhood to young adulthood. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 70, 122-133. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2017.07.001 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
58 
*Chung, J. M., Robins, R. W., Trzesniewski, K. H., Noftle, E. E., Roberts, B. W., & Widaman, 
K. F. (2014). Continuity and change in self-esteem during emerging adulthood. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 469-483. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0035135 
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 155-159. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.112.1.155 
*Colarossi, L. G., & Eccles, J. S. (2003). Differential effects of support providers on adolescents' 
mental health. Social Work Research, 27, 19-30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/swr/27.1.19 
Cole, D. A., Maxwell, S. E., Martin, J. M., Peeke, L. G., Seroczynski, A. D., Tram, J. M., . . . 
Maschman, T. (2001). The development of multiple domains of child and adolescent self-
concept: A cohort sequential longitudinal design. Child Development, 72, 1723-1746. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.00375 
Coleman, P. G., Ivani-Chalian, C., & Robinson, M. (1993). Self-esteem and its sources: Stability 
and change in later life. Ageing and Society, 13, 171-192. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0144686x00000842 
Crocker, J., & Luhtanen, R. K. (2003). Level of self-esteem and contingencies of self-worth: 
Unique effects on academic, social, and financial problems in college students. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 701-712. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167203029006003 
Crocker, J., & Wolfe, C. T. (2001). Contingencies of self-worth. Psychological Review, 108, 
593-623. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.108.3.593 
*Crocker, P. R. E., Sabiston, C. M., Kowalski, K. C., McDonough, M. H., & Kowalski, N. 
(2006). Longitudinal assessment of the relationship between physical self-concept and 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
59 
health-related behavior and emotion in adolescent girls. Journal of Applied Sport 
Psychology, 18, 185-200. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10413200600830257 
Cumming, G. (2014). The new statistics: Why and how. Psychological Science, 25, 7-29. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797613504966 
*Davison, K. K., Schmalz, D. L., Young, L. M., & Birch, L. L. (2008). Overweight girls who 
internalize fat stereotypes report low psychosocial well-being. Obesity, 16, S30-S38. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/oby.2008.451 
*Davison, K. K., Werder, J. L., Trost, S. G., Baker, B. L., & Birch, L. L. (2007). Why are early 
maturing girls less active? Links between pubertal development, psychological well-
being, and physical activity among girls at ages 11 and 13. Social Science and Medicine, 
64, 2391-2404. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2007.02.033 
*de Araujo, P., & Lagos, S. (2013). Self-esteem, education, and wages revisited. Journal of 
Economic Psychology, 34, 120-132. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2012.12.001 
*DeRosier, M. E. (2004). Building relationships and combating bullying: Effectiveness of a 
school-based social skills group intervention. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent 
Psychology, 33, 196-201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15374424JCCP3301_18 
DerSimonian, R., & Laird, N. (1986). Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Controlled Clinical Trials, 
7, 177-188. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0197-2456(86)90046-2 
Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective well-being: Three 
decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 276-302. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.125.2.276 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
60 
*Dohnt, H., & Tiggemann, M. (2006). The contribution of peer and media influences to the 
development of body satisfaction and self-esteem in young girls: A prospective study. 
Developmental Psychology, 42, 929-936. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.42.5.929 
Donnellan, M. B., Kenny, D. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., Lucas, R. E., & Conger, R. D. (2012). 
Using trait-state models to evaluate the longitudinal consistency of global self-esteem 
from adolescence to adulthood. Journal of Research in Personality, 46, 634-645. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2012.07.005 
*Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Conger, K. J., & Conger, R. D. (2007). A three-wave 
longitudinal study of self-evaluations during young adulthood. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 41, 453-472. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2006.06.004 
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Robins, R. W. (2011). Self-esteem: Enduring issues 
and controversies. In T. Chamorro-Premuzic, S. von Stumm, & A. Furnham (Eds.), The 
Wiley-Blackwell handbook of individual differences (pp. 718-746). Chichester, UK: 
Wiley-Blackwell. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781444343120.ch28 
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Robins, R. W. (2015). Measures of self-esteem. In G. 
J. Boyle, D. H. Saklofske, & G. Matthews (Eds.), Measures of personality and social 
psychological constructs (pp. 131-157). London, UK: Elsevier. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-386915-9.00006-1 
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Robins, R. W., Moffitt, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2005). Low 
self-esteem is related to aggression, antisocial behavior, and delinquency. Psychological 
Science, 16, 328-335. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2005.01535.x 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
61 
*Dorn, L. D., Susman, E. J., & Ponirakis, A. (2003). Pubertal timing and adolescent adjustment 
and behavior: Conclusions vary by rater. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 32, 157-167. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1022590818839 
*Duckworth, A. L., Tsukayama, E., & May, H. (2010). Establishing causality using longitudinal 
hierarchical linear modeling: An illustration predicting achievement from self-control. 
Social Psychological and Personality Science, 1, 311-317. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1948550609359707 
Duncan, T. E., Duncan, S. C., & Strycker, L. A. (2006). An introduction to latent variable 
growth curve modeling: Concepts, issues, and applications. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Eccles, J., Wigfield, A., Harold, R. D., & Blumenfeld, P. (1993). Age and gender differences in 
children's self- and task perceptions during elementary school. Child Development, 64, 
830-847. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.1993.tb02946.x 
Eccles, J. S., Wigfield, A., Flanagan, C. A., Miller, C., Reuman, D. A., & Yee, D. (1989). Self-
concepts, domain values, and self-esteem: Relations and changes at early adolescence. 
Journal of Personality, 57, 283-310. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
6494.1989.tb00484.x 
Egger, M., Smith, G. D., Schneider, M., & Minder, C. (1997). Bias in meta-analysis detected by 
a simple, graphical test. British Medical Journal, 315, 629-634. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.315.7109.629 
*Eisenberg, M. E., Neumark-Sztainer, D., Haines, J., & Wall, M. (2006). Weight-teasing and 
emotional well-being in adolescents: Longitudinal findings from Project EAT. Journal of 
Adolescent Health, 38, 675-683. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2005.07.002 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
62 
Erol, R. Y., & Orth, U. (2011). Self-esteem development from age 14 to 30 years: A longitudinal 
study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 607-619. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0024299 
*Erol, R. Y., & Orth, U. (2014). Development of self-esteem and relationship satisfaction in 
couples: Two longitudinal studies. Developmental Psychology, 50, 2291-2303. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037370 
*Falci, C. D. (2006). Gender and race trajectories of adolescent depressed mood: The dynamic 
role of social support, the self concept and stress exposure. Dissertation Abstracts 
International Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences, 67(7-A), 2757.  
*Fay, K. E. (2011). Weighing in on the issue: A longitudinal analysis of the individual and 
contextual factors that influence the developmental trajectories of eating disorders among 
adolescents. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 72(9-B), 5599.  
*Feldman, G. S. (1999). Self-efficacy and outcome expectancies in successful student 
development: A multi-ethnic study of the college transition. Dissertation Abstracts 
International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 60(6-B), 2939.  
*Fenzel, L. M. (2000). Prospective study of changes in global self-worth and strain during the 
transition to middle school. Journal of Early Adolescence, 20, 93-116. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272431600020001005 
Ferguson, C. J., & Brannick, M. T. (2012). Publication bias in psychological science: Prevalence, 
methods for identifying and controlling, and implications for the use of meta-analyses. 
Psychological Methods, 17, 120-128. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0024445 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
63 
*Flynn, M., Cicchetti, D., & Rogosch, F. (2014). The prospective contribution of childhood 
maltreatment to low self-worth, low relationship quality, and symptomatology across 
adolescence: A developmental-organizational perspective. Developmental Psychology, 
50, 2165-2175. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037162 
*Foynes, M. M., Smith, B. N., & Shipherd, J. C. (2015). Associations between race-based and 
sex-based discrimination, health, and functioning: A longitudinal study of Marines. 
Medical Care, 53, S128-S135. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MLR.0000000000000300 
Fraley, R. C., & Marks, M. J. (2007). The null hypothesis significance-testing debate and its 
implications for personality research. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger 
(Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 149-169). New 
York, NY: Guilford.  
*Fredricks, J. A., & Eccles, J. S. (2008). Participation in extracurricular activities in the middle 
school years: Are there developmental benefits for African American and European 
American youth? Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 37, 1029-1043. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-008-9309-4 
*Frijns, T., & Finkenauer, C. (2009). Longitudinal associations between keeping a secret and 
psychosocial adjustment in adolescence. International Journal of Behavioral 
Development, 33, 145-154. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0165025408098020 
*Galambos, N. L., Barker, E. T., & Krahn, H. J. (2006). Depression, self-esteem, and anger in 
emerging adulthood: Seven-year trajectories. Developmental Psychology, 42, 350-365. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.42.2.350 
*Galliher, R. V., Jones, M. D., & Dahl, A. (2011). Concurrent and longitudinal effects of ethnic 
identity and experiences of discrimination on psychosocial adjustment of Navajo 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
64 
adolescents. Developmental Psychology, 47, 509-526. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021061 
*Gayman, M. D., Lloyd, D. A., & Ueno, K. (2011). The history and timing of depression onset 
as predictors of young-adult self-esteem. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21, 691-
702. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-7795.2010.00702.x 
Gentile, B., Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2010). Birth cohort differences in self-esteem, 
1988-2008: A cross-temporal meta-analysis. Review of General Psychology, 14, 261-268. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0019919 
Gerstorf, D., Ram, N., Estabrook, R., Schupp, J., Wagner, G. G., & Lindenberger, U. (2008). 
Life satisfaction shows terminal decline in old age: Longitudinal evidence from the 
German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP). Developmental Psychology, 44, 1148-
1159. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.44.4.1148 
Gerstorf, D., Ram, N., Röcke, C., Lindenberger, U., & Smith, J. (2008). Decline in life 
satisfaction in old age: Longitudinal evidence for links to distance-to-death. Psychology 
and Aging, 23, 154-168. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.23.1.154 
*Gest, S. D., Domitrovich, C. E., & Welsh, J. A. (2005). Peer academic reputation in elementary 
school: Associations with changes in self-concept and academic skills. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 97, 337-346. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.97.3.337 
*Graham, D. J., Bauer, K. W., Friend, S., Barr-Anderson, D. J., & Neumark-Sztainer, D. (2014). 
Personal, behavioral, and socioenvironmental correlates of physical activity among 
adolescent girls: Cross-sectional and longitudinal associations. Journal of Physical 
Activity and Health, 11, 51-61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1123/jpah.2011-0239 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
65 
Gray-Little, B., & Hafdahl, A. R. (2000). Factors influencing racial comparisons of self-esteem: 
A quantitative review. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 26-54. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.126.1.26 
*Green, J., Liem, G. A. D., Martin, A. J., Colmar, S., Marsh, H. W., & McInerney, D. (2012). 
Academic motivation, self-concept, engagement, and performance in high school: Key 
processes from a longitudinal perspective. Journal of Adolescence, 35, 1111-1122. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2012.02.016 
*Greene, M. L., & Way, N. (2005). Self-esteem trajectories among ethnic minority adolescents: 
A growth curve analysis of the patterns and predictors of change. Journal of Research on 
Adolescence, 15, 151-178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-7795.2005.00090.x 
Greenwald, A. G. (1975). Consequences of prejudice against the null hypothesis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 82, 1-20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0076157 
Gruenenfelder-Steiger, A. E., Harris, M. A., & Fend, H. A. (2016). Subjective and objective peer 
approval evaluations and self-esteem development: A test of reciprocal, prospective, and 
long-term effects. Developmental Psychology, 52, 1563-1577. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/dev0000147 
*Gupta, T., Way, N., McGill, R. K., Hughes, D., Santos, C., Jia, Y., . . . Deng, H. (2013). 
Gender-typed behaviors in friendships and well-being: A cross-cultural study of Chinese 
and American boys. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 23, 57-68. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-7795.2012.00824.x 
Hamamura, T., & Septarini, B. G. (2017). Culture and self-esteem over time: A cross-temporal 
meta-analysis among Australians, 1978-2014. Social Psychological and Personality 
Science, 8, 904-909. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1948550617698205 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
66 
Harris, M. A., Donnellan, M. B., Guo, J., McAdams, D. P., Garnier-Villarreal, M., & 
Trzesniewski, K. H. (2017). Parental co-construction of 5- to 13-year-olds' global self-
esteem through reminiscing about past events. Child Development, 88, 1810-1822. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12944 
*Harris, M. A., Gruenenfelder-Steiger, A. E., Ferrer, E., Donnellan, M. B., Allemand, M., Fend, 
H., . . . Trzesniewski, K. H. (2015). Do parents foster self-esteem? Testing the 
prospective impact of parent closeness on adolescent self-esteem. Child Development, 86, 
995-1013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12356 
Harris, M. A., Wetzel, E., Robins, R. W., Donnellan, M. B., & Trzesniewski, K. H. (2018). The 
development of global and domain self-esteem from ages 10 to 16 for Mexican-origin 
youth. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 42, 4-16. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0165025416679744 
Harter, S. (2006a). The development of self-esteem. In M. H. Kernis (Ed.), Self-esteem issues 
and answers: A sourcebook of current perspectives (pp. 144-150). New York, NY: 
Psychology Press.  
Harter, S. (2006b). Developmental and individual difference perspectives on self-esteem. In D. 
K. Mroczek & T. D. Little (Eds.), Handbook of personality development (pp. 311-334). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Harter, S. (2006c). The self. In N. Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (6th ed.). 
Volume 3: Social, emotional, and personality development (pp. 505-570). Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley.  
Harter, S. (2012a). The construction of the self: Developmental and sociocultural foundations. 
New York, NY: Guilford.  
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
67 
Harter, S. (2012b). Self-Perception Profile for Children: Manual and questionnaires (Grades 3-
8). Denver, CO: University of Denver.  
*Heaven, P., & Ciarrochi, J. (2008). Parental styles, gender and the development of hope and 
self-esteem. European Journal of Personality, 22, 707-724. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.699 
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1999). Is there a universal need for 
positive self-regard? Psychological Review, 106, 766-794. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.106.4.766 
Helson, R., & Soto, C. J. (2005). Up and down in middle age: Monotonic and nonmonotonic 
changes in roles, status, and personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
89, 194-204. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.89.2.194 
*Hirsch, B. J., & Rapkin, B. D. (1987). The transition to junior high school: A longitudinal study 
of self-esteem, psychological symptomatology, school life, and social support. Child 
Development, 58, 1235-1243. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1130617 
*Hoge, D. R., Smit, E. K., & Hanson, S. L. (1990). School experiences predicting changes in 
self-esteem of sixth- and seventh-grade students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 
117-127. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.82.1.117 
*Hoglund, C. L. (1995). Longitudinal study of gender differences in global and domain-specific 
self-esteem in children. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences 
and Engineering, 56(5-B), 2898.  
Hollenstein, T., & Lougheed, J. P. (2013). Beyond storm and stress: Typicality, transactions, 
timing, and temperament to account for adolescent change. American Psychologist, 68, 
444-454. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0033586 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
68 
*Hope, E. C., Chavous, T. M., Jagers, R. J., & Sellers, R. M. (2013). Connecting self-esteem and 
achievement: Diversity in academic identification and disidentification patterns among 
Black college students. American Educational Research Journal, 50, 1122-1151. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0002831213500333 
Huang, C. (2010). Mean-level change in self-esteem from childhood through adulthood: Meta-
analysis of longitudinal studies. Review of General Psychology, 14, 251-260. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0020543 
*Hubbs-Tait, L., Osofsky, J. D., Hann, D. M., & Culp, A. M. (1994). Predicting behavior 
problems and social competence in children of adolescent mothers. Family Relations, 43, 
439-446. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/585376 
Hutteman, R., Hennecke, M., Orth, U., Reitz, A. K., & Specht, J. (2014). Developmental tasks as 
a framework to study personality development in adulthood and old age. European 
Journal of Personality, 28, 267-278. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.1959 
*Hutteman, R., Nestler, S., Wagner, J., Egloff, B., & Back, M. D. (2015). Wherever I may roam: 
Processes of self-esteem development from adolescence to emerging adulthood in the 
context of international student exchange. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
108, 767-783. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000015 
*Impett, E. A., Henson, J. M., Breines, J. G., Schooler, D., & Tolman, D. L. (2011). 
Embodiment feels better: Girls' body objectification and well-being across adolescence. 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 35, 46-58. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0361684310391641 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
69 
*Ireson, J., & Hallam, S. (2009). Academic self-concepts in adolescence: Relations with 
achievement and ability grouping in schools. Learning and Instruction, 19, 201-213. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2008.04.001 
*Jackson, L. M., Pratt, M. W., Hunsberger, B., & Pancer, S. M. (2005). Optimism as a mediator 
of the relation between perceived parental authoritativeness and adjustment among 
adolescents: Finding the sunny side of the street. Social Development, 14, 273-304 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9507.2005.00302.x 
Johnson, M. D., & Galambos, N. L. (2014). Paths to intimate relationship quality from parent-
adolescent relations and mental health. Journal of Marriage and Family, 76(145-160). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12074 
*Johnson, M. K. (2013). Parental financial assistance and young adults' relationships with 
parents and well-being. Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 713-733. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12029 
*Jou, Y. H. (2013). Family relationship quality and its psychological effects among Taiwanese 
adolescents. In C. C. Yi (Ed.), The psychological well-being of East Asian youth (pp. 69-
88). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.  
Judge, T. A., Erez, A., Bono, J. E., & Thoresen, C. J. (2002). Are measures of self-esteem, 
neuroticism, locus of control, and generalized self-efficacy indicators of a common core 
construct? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 693-710. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.83.3.693 
*Kahle, L. R., Kulka, R. A., & Klingel, D. M. (1980). Low adolescent self-esteem leads to 
multiple interpersonal problems: A test of social-adaptation theory. Journal of 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
70 
Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 496-502. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.39.3.496 
*Kakihara, F., Tilton-Weaver, L., Kerr, M., & Stattin, H. (2010). The relationship of parental 
control to youth adjustment: Do youths' feelings about their parents play a role? Journal 
of Youth and Adolescence, 39, 1442-1456. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-009-9479-8 
*Kaplan, H. B. (1975). The self-esteem motive and change in self-attitudes. Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease, 161, 265-275. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005053-197510000-
00006 
Kasen, S., Cohen, P., Chen, H., & Castille, D. (2003). Depression in adult women: Age changes 
and cohort effects. American Journal of Public Health, 93, 2061-2066. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.93.12.2061 
*Keel, P. K., Fulkerson, J. A., & Leon, G. R. (1997). Disordered eating precursors in pre- and 
early adolescent girls and boys. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 26, 203-216. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1024504615742 
Kessler, R. C., Foster, C., Webster, P. S., & House, J. S. (1992). The relationship between age 
and depressive symptoms in two national surveys. Psychology and Aging, 7, 119-126. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.7.1.119 
*Kim, J., & Cicchetti, D. (2009). Mean-level change and intraindividual variability in self-
esteem and depression among high-risk children. International Journal of Behavioral 
Development, 33, 202-214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0165025408098021 
*Kipp, L. E., & Weiss, M. R. (2015). Social predictors of psychological need satisfaction and 
well-being among female adolescent gymnasts: A longitudinal analysis. Sport, Exercise, 
and Performance Psychology, 4, 153-169. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/spy0000033 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
71 
*Kistner, J., David, C., & Rapper, K. (2007). Self-enhancement of peer acceptance: Implications 
for children's self-worth and interpersonal functioning. Social Development, 16, 24-44. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9507.2007.00370.x 
*Kiviruusu, O., Huurre, T., Aro, H., Marttunen, M., & Haukkala, A. (2015). Self-esteem growth 
trajectory from adolescence to mid-adulthood and its predictors in adolescence. Advances 
in Life Course Research, 23, 29-43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.alcr.2014.12.003 
*Klima, T., & Repetti, R. L. (2008). Children's peer relations and their psychological adjustment 
differences between close friendships and the larger peer group. Merrill-Palmer 
Quarterly, 54, 151-178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/mpq.2008.0016 
Kling, K. C., Hyde, J. S., Showers, C. J., & Buswell, B. N. (1999). Gender differences in self-
esteem: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 470-500. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.125.4.470 
Krueger, J. I., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F. (2008). Is the allure of self-esteem a mirage after 
all? American Psychologist, 63, 64-65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.63.1.64 
*Kuperminc, G. P., Blatt, S. J., Shahar, G., Henrich, C., & Leadbeater, B. J. (2004). Cultural 
equivalence and cultural variance in longitudinal associations of young adolescent self-
definition and interpersonal relatedness to psychological and school adjustment. Journal 
of Youth and Adolescence, 33, 13-30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1027378129042 
Kuster, F., & Orth, U. (2013). The long-term stability of self-esteem: Its time-dependent decay 
and nonzero asymptote. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 677-690. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167213480189 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
72 
*Kuster, F., Orth, U., & Meier, L. L. (2012). Rumination mediates the prospective effect of low 
self-esteem on depression: A five-wave longitudinal study. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 38, 747-759. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167212437250 
*Kuster, F., Orth, U., & Meier, L. L. (2013). High self-esteem prospectively predicts better work 
conditions and outcomes. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 668-675. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1948550613479806 
*Kuzucu, Y., Bontempo, D. E., Hofer, S. M., Stallings, M. C., & Piccinin, A. M. (2014). 
Developmental change and time-specific variation in global and specific aspects of self-
concept in adolescence and association with depressive symptoms. Journal of Early 
Adolescence, 34, 638-666. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272431613507498 
*LaGrange, B., Cole, D. A., Dallaire, D. H., Ciesla, J. A., Pineda, A. Q., Truss, A. E., & Folmer, 
A. (2008). Developmental changes in depressive cognitions: A longitudinal evaluation of 
the Cognitive Triad Inventory for Children. Psychological Assessment, 20, 217-226. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.20.3.217 
*Larsen, H., Overbeek, G., Vermulst, A. A., Granic, I., & Engels, R. C. M. E. (2010). Initiation 
and continuation of best friends and adolescents' alcohol consumption: Do self-esteem 
and self-control function as moderators? International Journal of Behavioral 
Development, 34, 406-416. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0165025409350363 
*Le Bars, H., Gernigon, C., & Ninot, G. (2009). Personal and contextual determinants of elite 
young athletes' persistence or dropping out over time. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine 
and Science in Sports, 19, 274-285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2008.00786.x 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
73 
*Lee, J. (2012). Dynamic growth models of academic achievement and self-esteem in South 
Korean adolescents. Social Behavior and Personality, 40, 1555-1568. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2224/sbp.2012.40.9.1555 
*Leeuwis, F. H., Koot, H. M., Creemers, D. H. M., & van Lier, P. A. C. (2015). Implicit and 
explicit self-esteem discrepancies, victimization and the development of late childhood 
internalizing problems. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 43, 909-919. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10802-014-9959-5 
*Lemmens, J. S., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2011). Psychosocial causes and consequences 
of pathological gaming. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 144-152. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.015 
Leung, K. C., Marsh, H. W., Craven, R. G., & Abduljabbar, A. S. (2016). Measurement 
invariance of the Self-Description Questionnaire II in a Chinese sample. European 
Journal of Psychological Assessment, 32, 128-139. http://dx.doi.org/10.1027/1015-
5759/a000242 
*Lin, K. C., Twisk, J. W. R., & Rong, J. R. (2011). Longitudinal interrelationships between 
frequent geographic relocation and personality development: Results from the 
Amsterdam Growth and Health Longitudinal Study. American Journal of 
Orthopsychiatry, 81, 285-292. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1939-0025.2011.01097.x 
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B. (2011). Personality development across the life span: 
Longitudinal analyses with a national sample from Germany. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 101, 847-861. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0024298 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
74 
Luciano, E. C., & Orth, U. (2017). Transitions in romantic relationships and development of self-
esteem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 112, 307-328. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000109 
Luhmann, M. (2017). The development of subjective well-being. In J. Specht (Ed.), Personality 
development across the lifespan (pp. 197-218). London, UK: Elsevier. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804674-6.00013-2 
*Luyckx, K., Klimstra, T. A., Duriez, B., Van Petegem, S., Beyers, W., Teppers, E., & Gossens, 
L. (2013). Personal identity processes and self-esteem: Temporal sequences in high 
school and college students. Journal of Research in Personality, 47, 159-170. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2012.10.005 
MacDonald, G., & Leary, M. R. (2012). Individual differences in self-esteem. In M. R. Leary & 
J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 354-377). New York, NY: 
Guilford.  
Major, B., Barr, L., Zubek, J., & Babey, S. H. (1999). Gender and self-esteem: A meta-analysis. 
In W. B. Swann, J. H. Langlois, & L. A. Gilbert (Eds.), Sexism and stereotypes in modern 
society: The gender science of Janet Taylor Spence (pp. 223-253). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.  
*Maldonado, L., Huang, Y., Chen, R., Kasen, S., Cohen, P., & Chen, H. (2013). Impact of early 
adolescent anxiety disorders on self-esteem development from adolescence to young 
adulthood. Journal of Adolescent Health, 53, 287-292. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.02.025 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
75 
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion, 
and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224-253. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-
295X.98.2.224 
Marsh, H. W. (1989). Age and sex effects in multiple dimensions of self-concept: 
Preadolescence to early adulthood. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 417-430. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.81.3.417 
Marsh, H. W. (1990). Self Description Questionnaire (SDQ) II: Manual. Campbelltown, New 
South Wales, Australia: University of Western Sydney, SELF Research Centre.  
Marsh, H. W., Barnes, J., Cairns, L., & Tidman, M. (1984). Self-Description Questionnaire: Age 
and sex effects in the structure and level of self-concept for preadolescent children. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 940-956. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-
0663.76.5.940 
*Marsh, H. W., Craven, R., & Debus, R. (1998). Structure, stability, and development of young 
children’s self-concepts: A multicohort-multioccasion study. Child Development, 69, 
1030-1053. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1132361 
*Marsh, H. W., Ellis, L. A., Parada, R. H., Richards, G., & Heubeck, B. G. (2005). A short 
version of the Self Description Questionnaire II: Operationalizing criteria for short-form 
evaluation with new applications of confirmatory factor analysis. Psychological 
Assessment, 17, 81-102. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.17.1.181 
Marsh, H. W., Nagengast, B., & Morin, A. J. S. (2013). Measurement invariance of Big-Five 
factors over the life span: ESEM tests of gender, age, plasticity, maturity, and la dolce 
vita effects. Developmental Psychology, 49, 1194-1218. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0026913 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
76 
Marsh, H. W., Scalas, L. F., & Nagengast, B. (2010). Longitudinal tests of competing factor 
structures for the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale: Traits, ephemeral artifacts, and stable 
response styles. Psychological Assessment, 22, 366-381. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0019225 
*Marshall, S. L., Parker, P. D., Ciarrochi, J., & Heaven, P. C. L. (2014). Is self-esteem a cause or 
consequence of social support? A 4-year longitudinal study. Child Development, 85, 
1275-1291. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12176 
*Martin, A. J., Mansour, M., Anderson, M., Gibson, R., Liem, G. A. D., & Sudmalis, D. (2013). 
The role of arts participation in students' academic and nonacademic outcomes: A 
longitudinal study of school, home, and community factors. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 105, 709-727. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0032795 
*Martins, N., & Harrison, K. (2012). Racial and gender differences in the relationship between 
children's television use and self-esteem: A longitudinal panel study. Communication 
Research, 39, 338-357. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0093650211401376 
*Mayzer, R. (2004). First alcohol use and the development of antisocial behavior problems from 
preschool through early adolescence. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: 
The Sciences and Engineering, 65(9-B), 4873.  
*McCabe, M. P., Ricciardelli, L. A., & Holt, K. (2005). A longitudinal study to explain strategies 
to change weight and muscles among normal weight and overweight children. Appetite, 
45, 225-234. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2005.07.009 
*McCarthy, J. D., & Hoge, D. R. (1982). Analysis of age effects in longitudinal studies of 
adolescent self-esteem. Developmental Psychology, 18, 372-379. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.18.3.372 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
77 
*McCarty, C. A., Stoep, A. V., & McCauley, E. (2007). Cognitive features associated with 
depressive symptoms in adolescence: Directionality and specificity. Journal of Clinical 
Child and Adolescent Psychology, 36, 147-158. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15374410701274926 
*McGrath, E. P., & Repetti, R. L. (2002). A longitudinal study of children’s depressive 
symptoms, self-perceptions, and cognitive distortions about the self. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 111, 77-87. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037//021-843x.111.1.77 
*McGuire, S., Manke, B., Saudino, K. J., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E. M., & Plomin, R. (1999). 
Perceived competence and self-worth during adolescence: A longitudinal behavioral 
genetic study. Child Development, 70, 1283-1296. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-
8624.00094 
McGuire, S., Neiderhiser, J. M., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E. M., & Plomin, R. (1994). Genetic 
and environmental influences on perceptions of self-worth and competence in 
adolescence: A study of twins, full siblings, and step-siblings. Child Development, 65, 
785-799. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.1994.tb00783.x 
*McKenzie, A. A. (2003). The role of primary prevention in immigrant children's development. 
Dissertation Abstracts International Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences, 64(10-
A), 3594.  
McLeod, B. D., & Weisz, J. R. (2004). Using dissertations to examine potential bias in child and 
adolescent clinical trials. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 235-251. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006x.72.2.235 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
78 
*McLeod, J. D., & Owens, T. J. (2004). Psychological well-being in the early life course: 
Variations by socioeconomic status, gender, and race/ethnicity. Social Psychology 
Quarterly, 67, 257-278. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/019027250406700303 
McMullin, J. A., & Cairney, J. (2004). Self-esteem and the intersection of age, class, and gender. 
Journal of Aging Studies, 18, 75-90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaging.2003.09.006 
*Mellanby, J., Zimdars, A., & Cortina-Borja, M. (2013). Sex differences in degree performance 
at the University of Oxford. Learning and Individual Differences, 26, 103-111. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2013.04.010 
Milojev, P., & Sibley, C. G. (2017). Normative personality trait development in adulthood: A 6-
year cohort-sequential growth model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 112, 
510-526. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000121 
Mirowsky, J., & Kim, J. (2007). Graphing age trajectories: Vector graphs, synthetic and virtual 
cohort projections, and cross-sectional profiles of depression. Sociological Methods and 
Research, 35, 497-541. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0049124106296015 
*Missotten, L. C., Luyckx, K., & Seiffge-Krenke, I. (2013). Family climate of adolescents with 
and without Type 1 diabetes: Longitudinal associations with psychosocial adaptation. 
Journal of Child and Family Studies, 22, 344-354. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10826-012-
9585-1 
*Modecki, K. L., Barber, B. L., & Vernon, L. (2013). Mapping developmental precursors of 
cyber-aggression: Trajectories of risk predict perpetration and victimization. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence, 42, 651-661. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-012-9887-z 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
79 
*Molloy, L. E., Ram, N., & Gest, S. D. (2011). The storm and stress (or calm) of early 
adolescent self-concepts: Within- and between-subjects variability. Developmental 
Psychology, 47, 1589-1607. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0025413 
Morf, C. C., & Rhodewalt, F. (2001). Unraveling the paradoxes of narcissism: A dynamic self-
regulatory processing model. Psychological Inquiry, 12, 177-196. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15327965pli1204_1 
*Morin, A. J. S., Maiano, C., Marsh, H. W., Janosz, M., & Nagengast, B. (2011). The 
longitudinal interplay of adolescents' self-esteem and body image: A conditional 
autoregressive latent trajectory analysis. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 46, 157-201. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00273171.2010.546731 
Morin, A. J. S., Maiano, C., Marsh, H. W., Nagengast, B., & Janosz, M. (2013). School life and 
adolescents’ self-esteem trajectories. Child Development, 84, 1967-1988. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12089 
Morris, S. B., & DeShon, R. P. (2002). Combining effect size estimates in meta-analysis with 
repeated measures and independent-groups designs. Psychological Methods, 7, 105-125. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.7.1.105 
Mroczek, D. K., & Kolarz, C. M. (1998). The effect of age on positive and negative affect: A 
developmental perspective on happiness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
75, 1333-1349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.5.1333 
Mroczek, D. K., & Spiro, A. (2005). Change in life satisfaction during adulthood: Findings from 
the Veterans Affairs Normative Aging Study. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 189-202. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.88.1.189 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
80 
*Mullins, E. R. (1997). Changes in young adolescents' self-perceptions across the transition from 
elementary to middle school. Dissertation Abstracts International Section A: Humanities 
and Social Sciences, 58(12-A), 4561.  
*Mund, M., Finn, C., Hagemeyer, B., Zimmermann, J., & Neyer, F. J. (2015). The dynamics of 
self-esteem in partner relationships. European Journal of Personality, 29, 235-249. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.1984 
Mund, M., & Neyer, F. J. (2016). Rising high or falling deep? Pathways of self-esteem in a 
representative German sample. European Journal of Personality, 30, 341-357. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.2063 
*Muusses, L. D., Finkenauer, C., Kerkhof, P., & Billedo, C. J. (2014). A longitudinal study of 
the association between compulsive Internet use and wellbeing. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 36, 21-28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.03.035 
Neiss, M. B., Sedikides, C., & Stevenson, J. (2002). Self-esteem: A behavioural genetic 
perspective. European Journal of Personality, 16, 351-367. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.456 
Neiss, M. B., Stevenson, J., Sedikides, C., Kumashiro, M., Finkel, E. J., & Rusbult, C. E. (2005). 
Executive self, self-esteem, and negative affectivity: Relations at the phenotypic and 
genotypic level. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 593-606. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.89.4.593 
*Nordin-Bates, S. M., Quested, E., Walker, I. J., & Redding, E. (2012). Climate change in the 
dance studio: Findings from the UK centres for advanced training. Sport, Exercise, and 
Performance Psychology, 1, 3-16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0025316 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
81 
*O'Dea, J. A. (2006). Self-concept, self-esteem and body weight in adolescent females: A three-
year longitudinal study. Journal of Health Psychology, 11, 599-611. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1359105306065020 
*O'Kane, D., Shevlin, M., Armour, C., & Adamson, G. (2010). Testing the effect of an 
educational intervention: An analysis of the longitudinal changes in academically related 
psychological variables for Step-Up students. Irish Journal of Psychology, 31, 1-10. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03033910.2010.10446318 
*O'Malley, P. M., & Bachman, J. G. (1983). Self-esteem: Change and stability between ages 13 
and 23. Developmental Psychology, 19, 257-268. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-
1649.19.2.257 
*Oates, G. L. S. C. (2004). The color of the undergraduate experience and the Black self-
concept: Evidence from longitudinal data. Social Psychology Quarterly, 67, 16-32. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/019027250406700104 
*Ohannessian, C. M., Lerner, R. M., von Eye, A., & Lerner, J. V. (1996). Direct and indirect 
relations between perceived parental acceptance, perceptions of the self, and emotional 
adjustment during early adolescence. Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal, 
25, 159-183. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1077727X960252004 
*Oppedal, B., Roysamb, E., & Sam, D. L. (2004). The effect of acculturation and social support 
on change in mental health among young immigrants. International Journal of 
Behavioral Development, 24, 481-494. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01650250444000126 
Orth, U. (2018). The family environment in early childhood has a long-term effect on self-
esteem: A longitudinal study from birth to age 27 years. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 114, 637-655. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000143 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
82 
Orth, U. (2017b). The lifespan development of self-esteem. In J. Specht (Ed.), Personality 
development across the lifespan (pp. 181-195). London, UK: Elsevier. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804674-6.00012-0 
Orth, U., Erol, R. Y., Ledermann, T., & Grob, A. (2018). Codevelopment of well-being and self-
esteem in romantic partners: Disentangling the effects of mutual influence and shared 
environment. Developmental Psychology, 54, 151-166. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/dev0000400 
*Orth, U., & Luciano, E. C. (2015). Self-esteem, narcissism, and stressful life events: Testing for 
selection and socialization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 109, 707-721. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000049 
*Orth, U., Maes, J., & Schmitt, M. (2015). Self-esteem development across the life span: A 
longitudinal study with a large sample from Germany. Developmental Psychology, 51, 
248-259. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0038481 
Orth, U., & Robins, R. W. (2013). Understanding the link between low self-esteem and 
depression. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22, 455-460. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721413492763 
Orth, U., & Robins, R. W. (2014). The development of self-esteem. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 23, 381-387. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721414547414 
Orth, U., & Robins, R. W. (in press). Development of self-esteem across the lifespan. In D. P. 
McAdams, R. L. Shiner, & J. L. Tackett (Eds.), Handbook of personality development. 
New York, NY: Guilford.  
Orth, U., Robins, R. W., Meier, L. L., & Conger, R. D. (2016). Refining the vulnerability model 
of low self-esteem and depression: Disentangling the effects of genuine self-esteem and 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
83 
narcissism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 110, 133-149. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000038 
*Orth, U., Robins, R. W., & Roberts, B. W. (2008). Low self-esteem prospectively predicts 
depression in adolescence and young adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 95, 695-708. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.95.3.695 
Orth, U., Robins, R. W., Trzesniewski, K. H., Maes, J., & Schmitt, M. (2009). Low self-esteem 
is a risk factor for depressive symptoms from young adulthood to old age. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 118, 472-478. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015922 
*Orth, U., Robins, R. W., & Widaman, K. F. (2012). Life-span development of self-esteem and 
its effects on important life outcomes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
102, 1271-1288. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0025558 
*Orth, U., Robins, R. W., Widaman, K. F., & Conger, R. D. (2014). Is low self-esteem a risk 
factor for depression? Findings from a longitudinal study of Mexican-origin youth. 
Developmental Psychology, 50, 622-633. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0033817 
*Orth, U., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Robins, R. W. (2010). Self-esteem development from young 
adulthood to old age: A cohort-sequential longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 98, 645-658. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0018769 
*Ostrowsky, M. K. (2006). Extending Khantzian's self-medication hypothesis: An examination 
of low self-esteem, depression, alcohol use, marijuana use, and violent behavior. 
Dissertation Abstracts International Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences, 68(2-A), 
739.  
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
84 
Paulhus, D. L., Robins, R. W., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Tracy, J. L. (2004). Two replicable 
suppressor situations in personality research. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 39, 303-
328. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327906mbr3902_7 
Pettit, J. W., & Joiner, T. E. (2001). Negative life events predict negative feedback seeking as a 
function of impact on self-esteem. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 25, 733-741. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1012919306708 
*Pinquart, M., Silbereisen, R. K., & Wiesner, M. (2004). Changes in discrepancies between 
desired and present states of developmental tasks in adolescence: A 4-process model. 
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 33, 467-477. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/B:JOYO.0000048062.81471.5b 
*Pomerantz, E. M., & Dong, W. (2006). Effects of mothers' perceptions of children's 
competence: The moderating role of mothers' theories of competence. Developmental 
Psychology, 42, 950-961. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.42.5.950 
*Pomerantz, E. M., & Rudolph, K. D. (2003). What ensues from emotional distress? 
Implications for competence estimation. Child Development, 74, 329-345. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.7402001 
*Poorthuis, A. M. G., Thomaes, S., van Aken, M. A. G., Denissen, J. J. A., & Orobio de Castro, 
B. (2014). Dashed hopes, dashed selves? A sociometer perspective on self-esteem change 
across the transition to secondary school. Social Development, 23, 770-783. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/sode.12075 
*Prawat, R. S., Jones, H., & Hampton, J. (1979). Longitudinal study of attitude development in 
pre-, early, and later adolescent samples. Journal of Educational Psychology, 71, 363-
369. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.71.3.363 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
85 
Preacher, K. J., Wichman, A. L., MacCallum, R. C., & Briggs, N. E. (2008). Latent growth curve 
modeling. Los Angeles: Sage.  
*Puckett, M. B. (2009). Rejection sensitivity and interpersonal relationship difficulties: 
Depression, loneliness, and self-esteem as mediating factors. Dissertation Abstracts 
International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 70(7-B), 4538.  
Pullmann, H., Allik, J., & Realo, A. (2009). Global self-esteem across the life span: A cross-
sectional comparison between representative and self-selected internet samples. 
Experimental Aging Research, 35, 20-44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03610730802544708 
R Core Team. (2017). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: 
R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from https://www.R-project.org.  
*Racicot, S., McGrath, J. J., Karp, I., & O'Loughlin, J. (2013). Predictors of nicotine dependence 
symptoms among never-smoking adolescents: A longitudinal analysis from the Nicotine 
Dependence in Teens Study. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 130, 38-44. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.10.006 
*Radin, S. M. (2005). The development of drinking in urban American Indian adolescents: A 
longitudinal examination of self-derogation theory. Dissertation Abstracts International: 
Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 66(12-B), 6933.  
*Raevuori, A., Dick, D. M., Keski-Rahkonen, A., Pulkkinen, L., Rose, R. J., Rissanen, A., . . . 
Silventoinen, K. (2007). Genetic and environmental factors affecting self-esteem from 
age 14 to 17: A longitudinal study of Finnish twins. Psychological Medicine, 37, 1625-
1633. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291707000840 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
86 
*Räikkönen, E., Kokko, K., & Rantanen, J. (2011). Timing of adult transitions: Antecedents and 
implications for psychological functioning. European Psychologist, 16, 314-323. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1027/1016-9040/a000050 
Raudenbush, S. W. (2009). Analyzing effect sizes: Random-effects models. In H. Cooper, L. V. 
Hedges, & J. C. Valentine (Eds.), The handbook of research synthesis and meta-analysis 
(pp. 295-315). New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.  
*Raustorp, A., Archer, T., Svensson, K., Perlinger, T., & Alricsson, M. (2009). Physical self-
esteem, a five year follow-up study on Swedish adolescents. International Journal of 
Adolescent Medicine and Health, 21, 497-507. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/IJAMH.2009.21.4.497 
*Reddy, R., Rhodes, J. E., & Mulhall, P. (2003). The influence of teacher support on student 
adjustment in the middle school years: A latent growth curve study. Development and 
Psychopathology, 15, 119-138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017.S0954579403000075 
*Reinert, D. F. (2005). Spirituality, self-representations, and attachment to parents: A 
longitudinal study of Roman Catholic college seminarians. Counseling and Values, 49, 
226-238. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-007X.2005.tb01025.x 
*Reitz, A. K., Motti-Stefanidi, F., & Asendorpf, J. B. (2016). Me, us, and them: Testing 
sociometer theory in a socially diverse real-life context. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 110, 908-920. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000073 
*Reitzes, D. C., & Mutran, E. J. (2006). Self and health: Factors that encourage self-esteem and 
functional health. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 61B, S44-S51. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geronb/61.1.S44 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
87 
*Repetto, P. B., Caldwell, C. H., & Zimmerman, M. A. (2004). Trajectories of depressive 
symptoms among high risk African-American adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 
35, 468-477. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2003.12.007 
*Reynolds, B. M. (2009). Pubertal timing and internalizing symptoms across the middle school 
years: Peer context influences in measurement and the search for mechanisms. 
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 71(4-B), 
2726.  
*Reynolds, B. M., & Juvonen, J. (2012). Pubertal timing fluctuations across middle school: 
implications for girls' psychological health. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 41, 677-
690. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-011-9687-x 
*Rhodes, J. E., Reddy, R., & Grossman, J. B. (2005). The protective influence of mentoring on 
adolescents' substance use: Direct and indirect pathways. Applied Developmental 
Science, 9, 31-47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s1532480xads0901_4 
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level change in 
personality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 1-25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.132.1.1 
Roberts, B. W., & Wood, D. (2006). Personality development in the context of the neo-
socioanalytic model of personality. In D. K. Mroczek & T. D. Little (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality development (pp. 11-39). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Roberts, B. W., Wood, D., & Caspi, A. (2008). The development of personality traits in 
adulthood. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 375-398). New York, NY: Guilford.  
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
88 
Robins, R. W., Hendin, H. M., & Trzesniewski, K. H. (2001). Measuring global self-esteem: 
Construct validation of a single-item measure and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 151-161. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167201272002  
Robins, R. W., Tracy, J. L., Trzesniewski, K., Potter, J., & Gosling, S. D. (2001). Personality 
correlates of self-esteem. Journal of Research in Personality, 35, 463-482. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jrpe.2001.2324 
Robins, R. W., & Trzesniewski, K. H. (2005). Self-esteem development across the lifespan. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14, 158-162. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00353.x 
Robins, R. W., Trzesniewski, K. H., Tracy, J. L., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2002). Global self-
esteem across the life span. Psychology and Aging, 17, 423-434. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.17.3.423 
*Rönnau-Böse, M., & Fröhlich-Gildhoff, K. (2009). The promotion of resilience: A person-
centered perspective of prevention in early childhood institutions. Person-Centered and 
Experiential Psychotherapies, 8, 299-318. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14779757.2009.9688495 
*Rosario, M., Schrimshaw, E. W., & Hunter, J. (2011). Different patterns of sexual identity 
development over time: Implications for the psychological adjustment of lesbian, gay, 
and bisexual youths. Journal of Sex Research, 48, 3-15. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00224490903331067 
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.  
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
89 
*Rosenfeld, L. B. (2004). A novel approach to the study of aggression: The importance of target 
specificity in behavior and social cognitions. Dissertation Abstracts International: 
Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 65(11-B), 6073.  
*Rotenberg, K. J., McDougall, P., Boulton, M. J., Vaillancourt, T., Fox, C., & Hymel, S. (2004). 
Cross-sectional and longitudinal relations among peer-reported trustworthiness, social 
relationships, and psychological adjustment in children and early adolescents from the 
United Kingdom and Canada. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 88, 46-67. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2004.01.005 
Ruble, D. N., Boggiano, A. K., Feldman, N. S., & Loebl, J. H. (1980). Developmental analysis of 
the role of social comparison in self-evaluation. Developmental Psychology, 16, 105-115. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.16.2.105 
*Rueger, S. Y., Malecki, C. K., & Demaray, M. K. (2010). Relationship between multiple 
sources of perceived social support and psychological and academic adjustment in early 
adolescence: Comparisons across gender. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 39, 47-61. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-008-9368-6 
*Sallquist, J., Eisenberg, N., French, D. C., Purwono, U., & Suryanti, T. A. (2010). Indonesian 
adolescents' spiritual and religious experiences and their longitudinal relations with 
socioemotional functioning. Developmental Psychology, 46, 699-716. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0018879 
*Schindler, H. S. (2010). The importance of parenting and financial contributions in promoting 
fathers' psychological health. Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 318-332. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2010.00702.x 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
90 
*Schneider, M., Dunton, G. F., & Cooper, D. M. (2008). Physical activity and physical self-
concept among sedentary adolescent females: An intervention study. Psychology of Sport 
and Exercise, 9, 1-14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2007.01.003 
*Seidman, E., Allen, L., Aber, J. L., Mitchell, C., & Feinman, J. (1994). The impact of school 
transitions in early adolescence on the self-system and perceived social context of poor 
urban youth. Child Development, 65, 507-522. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
8624.1994.tb00766.x 
*Seiffge-Krenke, I., & Gelhaar, T. (2008). Does successful attainment of developmental tasks 
lead to happiness and success in later developmental tasks? A test of Havighurst's (1948) 
theses. Journal of Adolescence, 31, 33-52. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2007.04.002 
*Settles, I. H., Jellison, W. A., & Pratt-Hyatt, J. S. (2009). Identification with multiple social 
groups: The moderating role of identity change over time among women-scientists. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 856-867. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2009.04.005 
*Shapka, J. D., & Keating, D. P. (2005). Structure and change in self-concept during 
adolescence. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 37, 83-96. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0087247 
Shaw, B. A., Liang, J., & Krause, N. (2010). Age and race differences in the trajectory of self-
esteem. Psychology and Aging, 25, 84-94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0018242 
*Shek, D. T. (2007). A longitudinal study of perceived parental psychological control and 
psychological well-being in Chinese adolescents in Hong Kong. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 63, 1-22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20331 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
91 
*Sher-Censor, E., Parke, R. D., & Coltrane, S. (2011). Parents' promotion of psychological 
autonomy, psychological control, and Mexican-American adolescents' adjustment. 
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 40, 620-632. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-010-
9552-3 
*Shim, S. S., Ryan, A. M., & Cassady, J. (2012). Changes in self-esteem across the first year in 
college: The role of achievement goals. Educational Psychology, 32, 149-167. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01443410.2011.627837 
*Shoshani, A., & Steinmetz, S. (2014). Positive psychology at school: A school-based 
intervention to promote adolescents' mental health and well-being. Journal of Happiness 
Studies, 15, 1289-1311. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10902-013-9476-1 
*Siffert, A., Schwarz, B., & Stutz, M. (2012). Marital conflict and early adolescents’ self-
evaluation: The role of parenting quality and early adolescents’ appraisals. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence, 41, 749-763. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-011-9703-1 
Simmons, R. G., Blyth, D. A., Van Cleave, E. F., & Bush, D. M. (1979). Entry into early 
adolescence: The impact of school structure, puberty, and early dating on self-esteem. 
American Sociological Review, 44, 948-967. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2094719 
Simmons, R. G., & Rosenberg, F. (1975). Sex, sex roles, and self-image. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 4, 229-258. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01537165 
*Simpkins, S. D., Eccles, J. S., & Becnel, J. N. (2008). The mediational role of adolescents' 
friends in relations between activity breadth and adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 
44, 1081-1094. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.44.4.1081 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
92 
*Slonim-Nevo, V., Mirsky, J., Rubinstein, L., & Nauck, B. (2009). The impact of familial and 
environmental factors on the adjustment of immigrants: A longitudinal study. Journal of 
Family Issues, 30, 92-123. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0192513x08324575 
*Slutzky, C. B., & Simpkins, S. D. (2009). The link between children's sport participation and 
self-esteem: Exploring the mediating role of sport self-concept. Psychology of Sport and 
Exercise, 10, 381-389. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2008.09.006 
*Smetana, J. G., Campione-Barr, N., & Daddis, C. (2004). Longitudinal development of family 
decision making: Defining healthy behavioral autonomy for middle-class African 
American adolescents. Child Development, 75, 1418-1434. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00749.x 
Soto, C. J. (2016). The Little Six personality dimensions from early childhood to early 
adulthood: Mean-level age and gender differences in parents' reports. Journal of 
Personality, 84, 409-422. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12168 
Soto, C. J., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2011). Age differences in personality traits 
from 10 to 65: Big Five domains and facets in a large cross-sectional sample. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 330-348. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021717 
Sowislo, J. F., & Orth, U. (2013). Does low self-esteem predict depression and anxiety? A meta-
analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 213-240. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0028931 
Sowislo, J. F., Orth, U., & Meier, L. L. (2014). What constitutes vulnerable self-esteem? 
Comparing the prospective effects of low, unstable, and contingent self-esteem on 
depressive symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 123, 737-753. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037770 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
93 
Specht, J., Bleidorn, W., Denissen, J. J. A., Hennecke, M., Hutteman, R., Kandler, C., . . . 
Zimmermann, J. (2014). What drives adult personality development? A comparison of 
theoretical perspectives and empirical evidence. European Journal of Personality, 28, 
216-230. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.1966 
Specht, J., Egloff, B., & Schmukle, S. C. (2011). Stability and change of personality across the 
life course: The impact of age and major life events on mean-level and rank-order 
stability of the Big Five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 862-882. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0024950 
Specht, J., Egloff, B., & Schmukle, S. C. (2013). Everything under control? The effects of age, 
gender, and education on trajectories of perceived control in a nationally representative 
German sample. Developmental Psychology, 49, 353-364. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0028243 
*Spray, C. M., Warburton, V. E., & Stebbings, J. (2013). Change in physical self-perceptions 
across the transition to secondary school: Relationships with perceived teacher-
emphasised achievement goals in physical education. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 
14, 662-669. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2013.05.001 
Srivastava, S., & Beer, J. S. (2005). How self-evaluations relate to being liked by others: 
Integrating sociometer and attachment perspectives. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 89, 966-977. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.89.6.966 
Starr, L. R., & Davila, J. (2008). Excessive reassurance seeking, depression, and interpersonal 
rejection: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 762-775. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0013866 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
94 
*Steiger, A. E., Allemand, M., Robins, R. W., & Fend, H. A. (2014). Low and decreasing self-
esteem during adolescence predict adult depression two decades later. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 325-338. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0035133 
*Steiger, A. E., Fend, H. A., & Allemand, M. (2015). Testing the vulnerability and scar models 
of self-esteem and depressive symptoms from adolescence to middle adulthood and 
across generations. Developmental Psychology, 51, 236-247. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0038478 
*Steinfield, C., Ellison, N. B., & Lampe, C. (2008). Social capital, self-esteem, and use of online 
social network sites: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Applied Developmental 
Psychology, 29, 434-445. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2008.07.002 
*Steinhausen, H. C., Gavez, S., & Winkler Metzke, C. (2005). Psychosocial correlates, outcome, 
and stability of abnormal adolescent eating behavior in community samples of young 
people. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37, 119-126. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20077 
Stipek, D. J., & Tannatt, L. M. (1984). Children's judgments of their own and their peers' 
academic competence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 75-84. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.76.1.75 
Sutton, A. J. (2009). Publication bias. In H. Cooper, L. V. Hedges, & J. C. Valentine (Eds.), The 
handbook of research synthesis and meta-analysis (pp. 435-452). New York, NY: Russell 
Sage Foundation.  
Swann, W. B., Chang-Schneider, C., & McClarty, K. L. (2007). Do people's self-views matter? 
American Psychologist, 62, 84-94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.2.84 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
95 
Swann, W. B., Chang-Schneider, C., & McClarty, K. L. (2008). Yes, cavalier attitudes can have 
pernicious consequences. American Psychologist, 63, 65-66. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.63.1.65 
*Syed, M., & Azmitia, M. (2009). Longitudinal trajectories of ethnic identity during the college 
years. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 19, 601-624. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-7795.2009.00609.x 
Terracciano, A., McCrae, R. R., Brant, L. J., & Costa, P. T. (2005). Hierarchical linear modeling 
analyses of the NEO-PI-R scales in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. 
Psychology and Aging, 20, 493-506. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.20.3.493 
Tetzner, J., Becker, M., & Baumert, J. (2016). Still doing fine? The interplay of negative life 
events and self-esteem during young adulthood. European Journal of Personality, 30, 
358-373. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.2066 
*Tiggemann, M. (2005). Body dissatisfaction and adolescent self-esteem: Prospective findings. 
Body Image, 2, 129-135. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2005.03.006 
Tracy, J. L., Cheng, J. T., Robins, R. W., & Trzesniewski, K. H. (2009). Authentic and hubristic 
pride: The affective core of self-esteem and narcissism. Self and Identity, 8, 196-213. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15298860802505053 
Trzesniewski, K. H., & Donnellan, M. B. (2010). Rethinking “Generation Me”: A study of 
cohort effects from 1976-2006. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 58-75. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691609356789 
*Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., Moffitt, T. E., Robins, R. W., Poulton, R., & Caspi, A. 
(2006). Low self-esteem during adolescence predicts poor health, criminal behavior, and 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
96 
limited economic prospects during adulthood. Developmental Psychology, 42, 381-390. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.42.2.381 
Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., & Robins, R. W. (2003). Stability of self-esteem across 
the life span. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 205-220. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.1.205 
Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., & Robins, R. W. (2008). Is "Generation Me" really more 
narcissistic than previous generations? Journal of Personality, 76, 903-917. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.2008.00508.x 
Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., & Robins, R. W. (2013). Development of self-esteem. In 
V. Zeigler-Hill (Ed.), Self-esteem (pp. 60-79). London, UK: Psychology Press.  
*Turner, H. A., Finkelhor, D., & Ormrod, R. (2010). The effects of adolescent victimization on 
self-concept and depressive symptoms. Child Maltreatment, 15, 76-90. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1077559509349444 
Twenge, J. M. (2006). Generation Me: Why today’s young Americans are more confident, 
assertive, entitled – and more miserable than ever before. New York, NY: Free Press.  
Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2001). Age and birth cohort differences in self-esteem: A 
cross-temporal meta-analysis. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5, 321-344. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15327957PSPR0504_3 
Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2010). Birth cohort differences in the Monitoring the Future 
Dataset and elsewhere: Further evidence for Generation Me—Commentary on 
Trzesniewski & Donnellan (2010). Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 81-88. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691609357015 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
97 
Twenge, J. M., Carter, N. T., & Campbell, W. K. (2017). Age, time period, and birth cohort 
differences in self-esteem: Reexamining a cohort-sequential longitudinal study. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 112, e9-e17. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000122 
Twenge, J. M., Konrath, S., Foster, J. D., Campbell, W. K., & Bushman, B. J. (2008). Egos 
inflating over time: A cross-temporal meta-analysis of the Narcissistic Personality 
Inventory. Journal of Personality, 76, 875-901. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
6494.2008.00507.x 
*Udell, W., Sandfort, T., Reitz, E., Bos, H., & Dekovic, M. (2010). The relationship between 
early sexual debut and psychosocial outcomes: A longitudinal study of Dutch 
adolescents. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 1133-1145. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-009-9590-7 
*Umaña-Taylor, A. J., Gonzales-Backen, M. A., & Guimond, A. B. (2009). Latino adolescents’ 
ethnic identity: Is there a developmental progression and does growth in ethnic identity 
predict growth in self-esteem? Child Development, 80, 391-405. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01267.x 
*Updegraff, K. A., Perez-Brena, N. J., Umaña-Taylor, A. J., Jahromi, L. B., & Harvey-Mendoza, 
E. C. (2013). Mothers' trajectories of depressive symptoms across Mexican-origin 
adolescent daughters' transition to parenthood. Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 376-
386. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0032909 
*van Tuijl, L. A., de Jong, P. J., Sportel, B. E., de Hullu, E., & Nauta, M. H. (2014). Implicit and 
explicit self-esteem and their reciprocal relationship with symptoms of depression and 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
98 
social anxiety: A longitudinal study in adolescents. Journal of Behavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry, 45, 113-121. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2013.09.007 
*Vanhalst, J., Luyckx, K., Scholte, R. H., Engels, R. C., & Goossens, L. (2013). Low self-esteem 
as a risk factor for loneliness in adolescence: Perceived - but not actual - social 
acceptance as an underlying mechanism. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 41, 
1067-1081. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10802-013-9751-y 
*Vasalampi, K., Salmela-Aro, K., & Nurmi, J. E. (2010). Education-related goal appraisals and 
self-esteem during the transition to secondary education: A longitudinal study. 
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 34, 481-490. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0165025409359888 
Viechtbauer, W. (2010). Conducting meta-analyses in R with the metafor package. Journal of 
Statistical Software, 36, 1-48. http://dx.doi.org/10.18637/jss.v036.i03 
Viechtbauer, W., & Cheung, M. W. L. (2010). Outlier and influence diagnostics for meta-
analysis. Research Synthesis Methods, 1, 112-125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.11 
von Soest, T., Wagner, J., Hansen, T., & Gerstorf, D. (2017). Self-esteem across the second half 
of life: The role of socioeconomic status, physical health, social relationships, and 
personality factors. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Advance online 
publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000123 
von Soest, T., Wichstrom, L., & Kvalem, I. L. (2016). The development of global and domain-
specific self-esteem from age 13 to 31. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
110, 592-608. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000060 
Wagner, J., Becker, M., Lüdtke, O., & Trautwein, U. (2015). The first partnership experience 
and personality development: A propensity score matching study in young adulthood. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
99 
Social Psychological and Personality Science, 6, 455-463. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1948550614566092 
Wagner, J., Gerstorf, D., Hoppmann, C., & Luszcz, M. A. (2013). The nature and correlates of 
self-esteem trajectories in late life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 
139-153. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0032279 
Wagner, J., Hoppmann, C., Ram, N., & Gerstorf, D. (2015). Self-esteem is relatively stable late 
in life: The role of resources in the health, self-regulation, and social domains. 
Developmental Psychology, 51, 136-149. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0038338 
Wagner, J., Lang, F. R., Neyer, F. J., & Wagner, G. G. (2014). Self-esteem across adulthood: 
The role of resources. European Journal of Ageing, 11, 109-119. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10433-013-0299-z 
*Wagner, J., Lüdtke, O., Jonkmann, K., & Trautwein, U. (2013). Cherish yourself: Longitudinal 
patterns and conditions of self-esteem change in the transition to young adulthood. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 148-163. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029680 
Wagner, J., Lüdtke, O., & Trautwein, U. (2016). Self-esteem is mostly stable across young 
adulthood: Evidence from latent STARTS models. Journal of Personality, 84, 523-535. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12178 
Wallace, J., & O'Hara, M. W. (1992). Increases in depressive symptomatology in the rural 
elderly: Results from a cross-sectional and longitudinal study. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 101, 398-404. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-843X.101.3.398 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
100 
*Wallace, J. R., Cunningham, T. F., & Del Monte, V. (1984). Change and stability in self-esteem 
between late childhood and early adolescence. Journal of Early Adolescence, 4, 253-257. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272431684043009 
Wängqvist, M., Lamb, M. E., Frisén, A., & Hwang, C. P. (2015). Child and adolescent predictors 
of personality in early adulthood. Child Development, 86, 1253-1261. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12362 
*Wargo, J. B. (1999). The influence of grade school characteristics and transition expectations 
on junior high school adjustment. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The 
Sciences and Engineering, 60(8-B), 4257.  
Watson, D., Suls, J., & Haig, J. (2002). Global self-esteem in relation to structural models of 
personality and affectivity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 185-197. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.83.1.185 
*Weed, K., Keogh, D., & Borkowski, J. (2006). Stability of resilience in children of adolescent 
mothers. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 27, 60-77. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2005.12.007 
*Westaby, J. D., & Lee, B. C. (2003). Antecedents of injury among youth in agricultural 
settings: A longitudinal examination of safety consciousness, dangerous risk taking, and 
safety knowledge. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 227-240. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-4375(03)00030-6 
*Whitesell, N. R., Mitchell, C. M., Spicer, P., & The Voices of Indian Teens Project Team. 
(2009). A longitudinal study of self-esteem, cultural identity, and academic success 
among American Indian adolescents. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 
15, 38-50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0013456 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
101 
Whiteside-Mansell, L., & Corwyn, R. F. (2003). Mean and covariance structures analyses: An 
examination of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale among adolescents and adults. 
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 63, 163-173. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013164402239323 
Wigfield, A., Eccles, J. S., Mac Iver, D., Reuman, D. A., & Midgley, C. (1991). Transitions 
during early adolescence: Changes in children's domain-specific self-perceptions and 
general self-esteem across the transition to junior high school. Developmental 
Psychology, 27, 552-565. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.27.4.552 
*Williams, C., Daley, D., Burnside, E., & Hammond-Rowley, S. (2010). Can trait emotional 
intelligence and objective measures of emotional ability predict psychopathology across 
the transition to secondary school? Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 161-165. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2009.09.014 
*Wong, D. S., Cheng, C. H., Ngan, R. M., & Ma, S. K. (2011). Program effectiveness of a 
restorative whole-school approach for tackling school bullying in Hong Kong. 
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 55, 846-862. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0306624X10374638 
*Wouters, S., Duriez, B., Luyckx, K., Klimstra, T., Colpin, H., Soenens, B., & Verschueren, K. 
(2013). Depressive symptoms in university freshmen: Longitudinal relations with 
contingent self-esteem and level of self-esteem. Journal of Research in Personality, 47, 
356-363. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2013.03.001 
*Wu, J., Watkins, D., & Hattie, J. (2010). Self-concept clarity: A longitudinal study of Hong 
Kong adolescents. Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 277-282. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2009.10.011 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
102 
Wylie, R. C. (1979). The self-concept. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.  
*Yang, H. J. (1997). A prospective longitudinal study of consistency and change in parental 
influence on children’s academic achievement. Dissertation Abstracts International: 
Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 58(11-B), 6262.  
*Yeh, H. C., & Lempers, J. D. (2004). Perceived sibling relationships and adolescent 
development. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 33, 133-147. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/B:JOYO.0000013425.86424.0f 
*Young, J. F., & Mroczek, D. K. (2003). Predicting intraindividual self-concept trajectories 
during adolescence. Journal of Adolescence, 26, 586-600. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-1971(03)00058-7 
*Zalta, A. K., & Keel, P. K. (2006). Peer influence on bulimic symptoms in college students. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115, 185-189. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-
843X.115.1.185 
Zeiders, K. H., Umaña-Taylor, A. J., & Derlan, C. L. (2013). Trajectories of depressive 
symptoms and self-esteem in Latino youths: Examining the role of gender and perceived 
discrimination. Developmental Psychology, 49, 951-963. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0028866 
*Zimmerman, M. A., Copeland, L. A., Shope, J. T., & Dielman, T. E. (1997). A longitudinal 
study of self-esteem: Implications for adolescent development. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 26, 117-141. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1024596313925 
*Zimmermann, F., Schütte, K., Taskinen, P., & Köller, O. (2013). Reciprocal effects between 
adolescent externalizing problems and measures of achievement. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 105, 747-761. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0032793 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
103 
Zuckerman, M., Li, C., & Hall, J. A. (2016). When men and women differ in self-esteem and 
when they don't: A meta-analysis. Journal of Research in Personality, 64, 34-51. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2016.07.007 
*Zuckerman, M., & O'Loughlin, R. E. (2009). Narcissism and well-being: A longitudinal 
perspective. European Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 957-972. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.594 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
104 
Footnotes 
1 At the time of coding, the qualifications of the coders were as follows: The second 
author had a Ph.D. in psychology and the third author had a Master’s degree in psychology. 
2 Using raw mean change as effect size measure, instead of standardized mean change, 
was not an option in this meta-analysis. As reported below, the studies used a number of 
different measures of self-esteem and only standardized effect sizes can be meaningfully 
compared across measures. Moreover, even within the subset of studies using the Rosenberg 
scale (i.e., the majority of studies, see below), a standardized effect size measure was needed 
because many studies did not use the full 10-item Rosenberg scale but an abbreviated version 
(the most common abbreviated versions included 3, 6, and 7 items). Given that item means differ 
between items, it is not possible to compare the scale means across different abbreviated versions 
and the full version of the Rosenberg scale. Moreover, although most studies with the Rosenberg 
scale used a 4-point response scale, some studies used other response scales such as dichotomous 
scales and 5-point response scales. Again, it is not possible to compare the scale means across 
the different response scales used for the Rosenberg scale. For these reasons, it was essential to 
use a standardized effect size measure for the analyses, even for studies using the Rosenberg 
scale. 
3 Although effect sizes varied more strongly in childhood and adolescent samples, these 
samples were not generally smaller than adult samples (see Supplemental Figure S2). 
4 As reported earlier, mean-level change in self-esteem has been examined in a previous 
meta-analysis (Huang, 2010). To assess whether the available evidence on mean-level change in 
self-esteem has changed since 2007—the most recent publication year included in Huang’s 
(2010) meta-analytic dataset—we contrasted studies published 2007 and earlier (k = 128) versus 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
105 
2008 and later (k = 203), using mixed-effects meta-regression analysis. The results indicated that 
effect sizes did not differ between these two sets of studies (estimate = .002, p = .874). Thus, the 
fact that the findings of the present meta-analysis differ from Huang (2010) should not be 
attributed to differences in the evidence available before and after 2007, but rather to the 
methodological improvements of the present meta-analysis compared to Huang (2010) as 
discussed in the Introduction. 
5 Nevertheless, we also tested for the effect of quadratic age, which could capture 
curvature in the life-span trajectory that deviates from the linear decline of the slope (e.g., the 
relatively strong decline in old age). Age was centered for these analyses. However, when we 
added quadratic age to the analysis, neither linear nor quadratic age were significant. 
 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
106 
Table 1 
Descriptive Information on the Studies Included in the Meta-Analysis 
 
 
Study 
 
Sample 
size 
Mean 
age at 
Time 1 
SD of 
age at 
Time 1 
 
Year of 
Time 1 
 
 
Female 
 
Sample 
type 
 
 
Country 
 
 
Ethnicity 
Measure 
of self-
esteem 
Adachi & Willoughby (2014) 
1,492 
9.83 
acc. 
2007 
.51 
Community 
Canada 
 
Rosenb. 
Antonishak (2005) 
170 
13.36 
0.66 
1998 
.53 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Arunkumar et al. (1999) 
475 
11.00 
acc. 
1995 
.48 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Au et al. (2010) 
741 
14.50 
acc. 
2006 
 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Rosenb. 
Bachman & O’Malley (1977) 
1,608 
16.00 
acc. 
1966 
.00 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Baldwin & Hoffmann (2002) 
108 
11.00 
acc. 
1990 
.51 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Bao & Jin (2015), control group 
80 
14.65 
0.64 
2009 
.54 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Other 
Becker et al. (2014) 
2,451 
16.00 
acc. 
1988 
.53 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
Birkelund et al. (2012) 
943 
14.30 
acc. 
1991 
 
Community 
Norway 
White 
Rosenb. 
Blatny et al. (2015) 
83 
39.70 
acc. 
2001 
.58 
Community 
Czech Rep. 
White 
Rosenb. 
Bosacki (2015) 
91 
6.17 
acc. 
2003 
.57 
Community 
Canada 
 
Harter 
Brenning et al. (2015) 
311 
12.04 
1.41 
2011 
.54 
Community 
Belgium 
White 
Harter 
Brown et al. (1998), Black subsample 
472 
9.00 
acc. 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Black 
Harter 
Brown et al. (1998), White subsample 
558 
9.00 
acc. 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Brummelman et al. (2015) 
565 
9.56 
0.93 
2010 
.54 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Harter 
Burke & Harrod (2005) 
616 
25.00 
acc. 
1991 
.50 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Burwell & Shirk (2006) 
110 
13.62 
0.52 
2002 
.58 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Cairns et al. (1990) 
2,562 
17.00 
acc. 
1984 
.53 
Community 
Ireland 
 
Harter 
Cantin & Boivin (2004) 
142 
12.50 
0.43 
1999 
.53 
Community 
Canada 
 
Harter 
Caprara et al. (2013), female subsample 
109 
16.00 
acc. 
2000 
1.00 
Community 
Italy 
White 
Rosenb. 
Caprara et al. (2013), male subsample 
97 
16.00 
acc. 
2000 
.00 
Community 
Italy 
White 
Rosenb. 
Chen et al. (2004), female subsample 
258 
12.40 
0.67 
1998 
1.00 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Harter 
Chen et al. (2004), male subsample 
248 
12.40 
0.67 
1998 
.00 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Harter 
Chung et al. (2014) 
295 
18.00 
acc. 
1992 
.60 
College 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Colarossi & Eccles (2003), female subsample 
125 
17.00 
acc. 
1995 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Colarossi & Eccles (2003), male subsample 
92 
17.00 
acc. 
1995 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Crocker et al. (2006) 
501 
14.50 
acc. 
1998 
1.00 
Community 
Canada 
 
Harter 
Davison et al. (2007) 
178 
11.38 
0.28 
2001 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Davison et al. (2008) 
163 
9.34 
0.30 
2000 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
de Araujo & Lagos (2013) 
3,363 
19.72 
1.80 
1980 
.50 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
DeRosier (2004), control group 
194 
8.60 
acc. 
2000 
.49 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
DeRosier (2004), nonidentified group 
663 
8.60 
acc. 
2000 
.49 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Dohnt & Tiggemann (2006) 
97 
6.91 
1.23 
2002 
1.00 
Community 
Australia 
White 
Harter 
Donnellan et al. (2007) 
409 
23.26 
0.47 
1999 
.58 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Dorn et al. (2003), female subsample 
52 
12.00 
1.60 
1980 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Other 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
107 
Dorn et al. (2003), male subsample 
56 
12.70 
1.30 
1980 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Other 
Duckworth et al. (2010) 
138 
10.52 
0.37 
2003 
.54 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Eisenberg et al. (2006), female subsample, high school 
440 
12.70 
0.74 
1998 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Eisenberg et al. (2006), female subsample, young adults 
946 
15.80 
0.81 
1998 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Eisenberg et al. (2006), male subsample, high school 
366 
12.80 
0.76 
1998 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Eisenberg et al. (2006), male subsample, young adults 
764 
15.90 
0.78 
1998 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 16–20 
177 
19.00 
1.02 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 21–25 
749 
23.26 
1.36 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 26–30 
1,030 
28.06 
1.43 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 31–35 
913 
32.96 
1.39 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 36–40 
831 
37.94 
1.44 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 41–45 
447 
42.98 
1.39 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 46–50 
369 
48.02 
1.42 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 51–55 
305 
52.94 
1.35 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 56–60 
307 
58.13 
1.40 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 61–65 
327 
63.00 
1.41 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 66–70 
257 
67.83 
1.47 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, female subsample, age 71–75 
145 
72.92 
1.37 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 21–25 
523 
23.50 
1.29 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 26–30 
899 
28.10 
1.41 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 31–35 
928 
33.02 
1.41 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 36–40 
825 
38.03 
1.44 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 41–45 
537 
42.92 
1.40 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 46–50 
409 
47.95 
1.43 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 51–55 
359 
53.02 
1.42 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 56–60 
302 
58.02 
1.45 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 61–65 
357 
63.07 
1.37 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 66–70 
290 
67.90 
1.40 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 71–75 
206 
72.99 
1.34 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Erol & Orth (2014), Study 2, male subsample, age 76–80 
117 
77.57 
1.37 
1987 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Falci (2006) 
780 
15.00 
acc. 
1988 
 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Fay (2011) 
363 
14.94 
1.09 
2006 
.59 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Feldman (1999), Asian/female subsample 
110 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
1.00 
College 
USA 
Asian 
Rosenb. 
Feldman (1999), Asian/male subsample 
120 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
.00 
College 
USA 
Asian 
Rosenb. 
Feldman (1999), Black/female subsample 
161 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
1.00 
College 
USA 
Black 
Rosenb. 
Feldman (1999), Black/male subsample 
126 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
.00 
College 
USA 
Black 
Rosenb. 
Feldman (1999), Latino/female subsample 
78 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
1.00 
College 
USA 
Hispanic 
Rosenb. 
Feldman (1999), Latino/male subsample 
93 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
.00 
College 
USA 
Hispanic 
Rosenb. 
Feldman (1999), White/female subsample 
136 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
1.00 
College 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Feldman (1999), White/male subsample 
131 
18.00 
acc. 
1991 
.00 
College 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
108 
Fenzel (2000) 
116 
10.80 
acc. 
1996 
.56 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Flynn et al. (2014) 
228 
14.00 
acc. 
2009 
.41 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Foynes et al. (2015), female subsample 
230 
19.32 
2.00 
1997 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Foynes et al. (2015), male subsample 
214 
19.32 
2.00 
1997 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Fredricks & Eccles (2008) 
1,482 
12.27 
acc. 
1991 
.51 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Frijns & Finkenauer (2009) 
278 
15.60 
0.99 
2001 
.57 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Rosenb. 
Galambos et al. (2006), female subsample 
432 
18.00 
acc. 
1984 
1.00 
Community 
Canada 
White 
Rosenb. 
Galambos et al. (2006), male subsample 
488 
18.00 
acc. 
1984 
.00 
Community 
Canada 
White 
Rosenb. 
Galliher et al. (2011), female subsample 
68 
15.24 
0.99 
2006 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Native 
Rosenb. 
Galliher et al. (2011), male subsample 
65 
15.24 
0.99 
2006 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Native 
Rosenb. 
Gayman et al. (2011) 
1,542 
20.00 
0.94 
1998 
.45 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Gest et al. (2005) 
400 
10.00 
acc. 
2001 
.56 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Graham et al. (2014) 
356 
15.80 
1.20 
2007 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
Green et al. (2012) 
1,866 
13.86 
1.28 
2007 
.39 
Community 
Australia 
White 
Marsh 
Greene & Way (2005) 
135 
14.33 
0.76 
1996 
.53 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Gupta et al. (2013), Chinese sample 
368 
12.20 
0.54 
2006 
.00 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Rosenb. 
Gupta et al. (2013), US sample 
446 
11.37 
0.58 
2005 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Harris et al. (2015), Study 1 
982 
12.00 
acc. 
1979 
 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Harris et al. (2015), Study 2 
451 
13.00 
acc. 
1989 
 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Heaven & Ciarrochi (2008), female subsample 
437 
12.30 
0.49 
2003 
1.00 
Community 
Australia 
 
Rosenb. 
Heaven & Ciarrochi (2008), male subsample 
445 
12.30 
0.49 
2003 
.00 
Community 
Australia 
 
Rosenb. 
Hirsch & Rapkin (1987) 
159 
12.00 
acc. 
1983 
.52 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Hoge et al. (1990) 
322 
12.00 
acc. 
1983 
.55 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Hoglund (1995) 
41 
10.00 
acc. 
1987 
.53 
Community 
USA 
White 
Other 
Hope et al. (2013) 
324 
18.00 
0.31 
2009 
.74 
College 
USA 
Black 
Rosenb. 
Hubbs-Tait et al. (1994) 
44 
17.70 
1.08 
1987 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
Hutteman et al. (2015) 
876 
16.00 
0.51 
2010 
.77 
Community 
Germany 
 
Other 
Impett et al. (2011), Study 1 
183 
14.00 
acc. 
1998 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Impett et al. (2011), Study 2 
133 
14.00 
acc. 
2001 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Ireson & Hallam (2009) 
1,687 
13.50 
acc. 
2004 
 
Community 
UK 
White 
Marsh 
Jackson et al. (2005), Study 1, female subsample 
234 
19.00 
acc. 
1993 
1.00 
College 
Canada 
White 
Rosenb. 
Jackson et al. (2005), Study 1, male subsample 
117 
19.00 
acc. 
1993 
.00 
College 
Canada 
White 
Rosenb. 
Jackson et al. (2005), Study 2 
938 
17.50 
acc. 
1997 
.60 
Community 
Canada 
White 
Rosenb. 
Johnson (2013) 
13,401 
15.79 
1.91 
1995 
 
National 
USA 
Other 
Other 
Jou (2013) 
1,822 
18.00 
acc. 
2005 
.49 
Community 
Taiwan 
Asian 
Rosenb. 
Kahle et al. (1980) 
121 
16.00 
acc. 
1974 
.00 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
Kakihara et al. (2010) 
930 
15.28 
0.98 
2004 
.47 
Community 
Sweden 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kaplan (1975) 
3,127 
13.00 
acc. 
1971 
 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Keel et al. (1997), female subsample 
80 
11.50 
acc. 
1993 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Keel et al. (1997), male subsample 
85 
11.50 
acc. 
1993 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
109 
Kim & Cicchetti (2009), nonmaltreated group 
109 
8.50 
1.44 
2003 
.36 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Coopers. 
Kipp & Weiss (2015) 
174 
13.50 
2.00 
2009 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Kistner et al. (2007) 
670 
9.43 
0.99 
2003 
.55 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Kiviruusu et al. (2015), female subsample 
1,067 
15.90 
0.30 
1983 
1.00 
Community 
Finland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kiviruusu et al. (2015), male subsample 
1,105 
15.90 
0.30 
1983 
.00 
Community 
Finland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Klima & Repetti (2008) 
247 
9.50 
acc. 
2003 
.47 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Kuperminc et al. (2004), Black subsample 
96 
12.50 
acc. 
1993 
.56 
Community 
USA 
Black 
Harter 
Kuperminc et al. (2004), Latino subsample 
122 
12.50 
acc. 
1993 
.51 
Community 
USA 
Hispanic 
Harter 
Kuperminc et al. (2004), White subsample 
230 
12.50 
acc. 
1993 
.47 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Kuster et al. (2012), age 21–25 
173 
23.48 
1.26 
2009 
.54 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2012), age 26–30 
205 
27.70 
1.41 
2009 
.51 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2012), age 31–35 
77 
32.49 
1.41 
2009 
.47 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2012), age 36–40 
36 
38.25 
1.46 
2009 
.39 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2012), age 41–45 
45 
42.73 
1.51 
2009 
.58 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2012), age 46–50 
38 
47.90 
1.52 
2009 
.44 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2012), age 51–55 
35 
53.14 
1.54 
2009 
.51 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2013), Dataset 2, age 27–31 
135 
29.23 
1.35 
1989 
.55 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2013), Dataset 2, age 32–36 
203 
33.92 
2.36 
1989 
.51 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuster et al. (2013), Dataset 2, age 37–41 
203 
38.78 
1.29 
1989 
.43 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Kuzucu et al. (2014) 
404 
9.00 
acc. 
1975 
.46 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
LaGrange et al. (2008), Cohort 1 
187 
8.45 
0.65 
2003 
.56 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
LaGrange et al. (2008), Cohort 2 
169 
9.56 
0.67 
2003 
.56 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
LaGrange et al. (2008), Cohort 3 
171 
11.35 
0.56 
2003 
.56 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Larsen et al. (2010) 
433 
12.25 
0.47 
2000 
.55 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Rosenb. 
Le Bars et al. (2009), Study 2 
82 
16.70 
1.10 
2004 
.45 
Community 
France 
White 
Other 
Lee (2012) 
3,449 
13.78 
0.42 
2003 
.50 
Community 
Korea 
Asian 
Other 
Leeuwis et al. (2015), female subsample 
173 
11.20 
0.40 
2011 
1.00 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Harter 
Leeuwis et al. (2015), male subsample 
157 
11.20 
0.40 
2011 
.00 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Harter 
Lemmens et al. (2011) 
543 
13.90 
1.40 
2008 
.49 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Rosenb. 
Lin et al. (2012) 
152 
21.00 
acc. 
1985 
.57 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Other 
Luyckx et al. (2013), Study 2 
565 
18.66 
0.66 
2002 
.85 
College 
Belgium 
White 
Rosenb. 
Maldonado et al. (2013) 
756 
13.76 
2.58 
1983 
.49 
Community 
USA 
White 
Other 
Marsh et al. (1998), kindergarten 
127 
5.40 
0.40 
1994 
 
Community 
Australia 
 
Marsh 
Marsh et al. (1998), Grade 1 
139 
6.30 
0.40 
1994 
 
Community 
Australia 
 
Marsh 
Marsh et al. (1998), Grade 2 
130 
7.40 
0.50 
1994 
 
Community 
Australia 
 
Marsh 
Marsh et al. (2005), Study 3 
3,731 
15.00 
acc. 
2000 
 
Community 
Australia 
 
Marsh 
Marshall et al. (2014) 
778 
15.41 
0.53 
2006 
.49 
Community 
Australia 
White 
Rosenb. 
Martin et al. (2013) 
643 
12.61 
1.77 
2010 
.55 
Community 
Australia 
Other 
Marsh 
Martins & Harrison (2012) 
396 
8.74 
1.01 
2008 
.52 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
Mayzer (2004) 
220 
7.00 
acc. 
1994 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
110 
McCabe et al. (2005) 
412 
9.28 
acc. 
1998 
.52 
Community 
Australia 
Other 
Marsh 
McCarthy & Hoge (1982), Grade 7–8 
546 
13.50 
acc. 
1976 
.45 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
McCarthy & Hoge (1982), Grade 9–10 
775 
15.50 
acc. 
1976 
.45 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
McCarthy & Hoge (1982), Grade 11–12 
478 
17.50 
acc. 
1976 
.45 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
McCarty et al. (2007) 
331 
12.00 
0.41 
2001 
.47 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
McGrath & Repetti (2002) 
244 
9.50 
acc. 
1997 
.47 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
McGuire et al. (1999) 
496 
12.90 
2.00 
1989 
.51 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
McKenzie (2003), control group 
58 
7.00 
acc. 
1996 
.75 
Community 
Canada 
Other 
Marsh 
McLeod & Owens (2004) 
547 
10.50 
acc. 
1986 
.51 
National 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Mellanby et al. (2013), female subsample 
356 
18.00 
acc. 
2000 
1.00 
College 
UK 
White 
Rosenb. 
Mellanby et al. (2013), male subsample 
340 
18.00 
acc. 
2000 
.00 
College 
UK 
White 
Rosenb. 
Missotten et al. (2012), control group 
119 
13.90 
1.28 
1995 
.56 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Other 
Modecki et al. (2013) 
1,364 
13.00 
0.34 
2007 
.55 
Community 
Australia 
White 
Other 
Molloy et al. (2011) 
152 
9.00 
acc. 
2001 
.46 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Morin et al. (2011) 
1,001 
12.62 
0.63 
2000 
.46 
Community 
Canada 
White 
Rosenb. 
Mullins (1997), female subsample 
131 
11.00 
acc. 
1992 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Mullins (1997), male subsample 
120 
11.00 
acc. 
1992 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Mund et al. (2015), Study 1 
186 
26.82 
3.01 
1995 
.66 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Marsh 
Muusses et al. (2014) 
398 
30.64 
4.57 
2005 
.50 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Rosenb. 
Nordin-Bates et al. (2012) 
326 
14.41 
2.10 
2008 
.76 
Community 
UK 
White 
Rosenb. 
O’Dea (2006) 
80 
12.80 
0.60 
2001 
1.00 
Community 
Australia 
White 
Harter 
O’Kane et al. (2010), control group 
97 
16.50 
0.50 
2004 
.64 
Community 
Ireland 
White 
Rosenb. 
O’Malley & Bachman (1983), class of 1976, 1st sample 
113 
18.00 
acc. 
1976 
 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
O’Malley & Bachman (1983), class of 1976, 2nd sample 
129 
18.00 
acc. 
1976 
 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
O’Malley & Bachman (1983), class of 1977, 1st sample 
127 
18.00 
acc. 
1977 
 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
O’Malley & Bachman (1983), class of 1977, 2nd sample 
130 
18.00 
acc. 
1977 
 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
O’Malley & Bachman (1983), class of 1978, 1st sample 
132 
18.00 
acc. 
1978 
 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
O’Malley & Bachman (1983), class of 1978, 2nd sample 
142 
18.00 
acc. 
1978 
 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
O’Malley & Bachman (1983), class of 1979 
148 
18.00 
acc. 
1979 
 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
Oates (2004) 
607 
18.00 
acc. 
1971 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Black 
Rosenb. 
Ohannessian et al. (1996), female subsample 
103 
12.20 
0.68 
1990 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Ohannessian et al. (1996), male subsample 
101 
12.20 
0.68 
1990 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Oppedal et al. (2004), female subsample 
63 
13.00 
acc. 
2000 
1.00 
Community 
Norway 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Oppedal et al. (2004), male subsample 
74 
13.00 
acc. 
2000 
.00 
Community 
Norway 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth & Luciano (2015), Study 1 
328 
21.17 
1.93 
2010 
.50 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth & Luciano (2015), Study 2, age 18–22 
85 
20.61 
1.31 
2011 
.61 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth & Luciano (2015), Study 2, age 23–27 
121 
24.94 
1.34 
2011 
.56 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth & Luciano (2015), Study 2, age 28–32 
71 
29.70 
1.53 
2011 
.37 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth & Luciano (2015), Study 2, age 33–37 
37 
34.92 
1.36 
2011 
.46 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2008), Study 1 
2,094 
15.50 
0.50 
1994 
.50 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
111 
Orth et al. (2010), age 25–29 
317 
27.10 
1.23 
1986 
.55 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 30–34 
376 
31.91 
1.42 
1986 
.56 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 35–39 
336 
36.80 
1.42 
1986 
.60 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 40–44 
268 
41.92 
1.43 
1986 
.62 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 45–49 
212 
46.89 
1.36 
1986 
.56 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 50–54 
176 
51.90 
1.42 
1986 
.57 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 55–59 
221 
57.19 
1.45 
1986 
.66 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 60–64 
436 
62.03 
1.39 
1986 
.61 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 65–69 
438 
66.94 
1.46 
1986 
.65 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 70–74 
311 
71.88 
1.43 
1986 
.72 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 75–79 
265 
76.75 
1.49 
1986 
.69 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 80–84 
134 
81.72 
1.44 
1986 
.71 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2010), age 85–89 
51 
86.63 
1.41 
1986 
.59 
National 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 11–15 
82 
16.79 
0.82 
1988 
.58 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 16–20 
80 
21.00 
1.27 
1988 
.62 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 31–35 
323 
33.86 
1.00 
1988 
.60 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 36–40 
292 
37.55 
1.36 
1988 
.53 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 41–45 
89 
42.01 
1.13 
1988 
.46 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 51–55 
81 
53.95 
1.11 
1988 
.84 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 56–60 
213 
58.05 
1.46 
1988 
.61 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 61–65 
151 
62.76 
1.37 
1988 
.50 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 66–70 
78 
67.56 
1.34 
1988 
.42 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 76–80 
71 
78.16 
1.24 
1988 
.68 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2012), age 81–85 
49 
82.54 
1.38 
1988 
.48 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2014) 
672 
10.40 
0.60 
2006 
.50 
Community 
USA 
Hispanic 
Marsh 
Orth et al. (2015), age 14–18 
51 
16.96 
1.15 
1996 
.65 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 19–23 
103 
20.88 
1.48 
1996 
.56 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 24–28 
204 
26.08 
1.42 
1996 
.48 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 29–33 
227 
31.13 
1.46 
1996 
.47 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 34–38 
214 
35.90 
1.39 
1996 
.50 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 39–43 
230 
41.17 
1.40 
1996 
.49 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 44–48 
236 
45.93 
1.37 
1996 
.42 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 49–53 
233 
51.12 
1.42 
1996 
.38 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 54–58 
294 
56.00 
1.37 
1996 
.31 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 59–63 
266 
60.72 
1.41 
1996 
.37 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 64–68 
199 
65.83 
1.35 
1996 
.20 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 69–73 
153 
70.79 
1.42 
1996 
.32 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Orth et al. (2015), age 74–78 
66 
75.32 
1.34 
1996 
.35 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Ostrowsky (2006), female subsample 
696 
14.50 
acc. 
1989 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Ostrowsky (2006), male subsample 
710 
14.50 
acc. 
1989 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
112 
Pinquart et al. (2004) 
980 
13.70 
1.60 
1983 
.50 
National 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Pomerantz & Dong (2006) 
126 
10.03 
0.83 
1997 
.44 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Pomerantz & Rudolph (2003), female subsample 
466 
10.25 
acc. 
1997 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Pomerantz & Rudolph (2003), male subsample 
466 
10.25 
acc. 
1997 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Poorthuis et al. (2014) 
306 
12.20 
0.44 
2010 
.53 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Harter 
Prawat et al. (1979), female subsample, preadolescents 
56 
10.40 
1.30 
1976 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Coopers. 
Prawat et al. (1979), female subsample, early adolescents 
73 
13.70 
1.00 
1976 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Coopers. 
Prawat et al. (1979), female subsample, later adolescents 
70 
16.40 
1.00 
1976 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Coopers. 
Prawat et al. (1979), male subsample, preadolescents 
56 
10.40 
1.30 
1976 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Coopers. 
Prawat et al. (1979), male subsample, early adolescents 
67 
13.70 
1.00 
1976 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Coopers. 
Prawat et al. (1979), male subsample, later adolescents 
60 
16.40 
1.00 
1976 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Coopers. 
Puckett (2009), female subsample 
215 
13.95 
0.36 
2005 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Puckett (2009), male subsample 
156 
13.95 
0.36 
2005 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Racicot et al. (2013) 
847 
12.70 
0.50 
1999 
.50 
Community 
Canada 
 
Rosenb. 
Radin (2005), younger cohort 
290 
11.67 
0.69 
1988 
.50 
Community 
USA 
Native 
Harter 
Radin (2005), older cohort 
283 
13.69 
0.72 
1990 
.50 
Community 
USA 
Native 
Harter 
Raevuori et al. (2007), female subsample 
2,062 
14.00 
acc. 
1997 
1.00 
Community 
Finland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Raevuori et al. (2007), male subsample 
2,070 
14.00 
acc. 
1997 
.00 
Community 
Finland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Räikkönen et al. (2011) 
282 
36.00 
0.25 
1995 
.47 
Community 
Finland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Raustorp et al. (2009), female subsample 
36 
12.70 
acc. 
2000 
1.00 
Community 
Sweden 
White 
Other 
Raustorp et al. (2009), male subsample 
41 
12.70 
acc. 
2000 
.00 
Community 
Sweden 
White 
Other 
Reddy et al. (2003), female subsample 
1,237 
12.00 
acc. 
1995 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Other 
Reddy et al. (2003), male subsample 
1,227 
12.00 
acc. 
1995 
.00 
Community 
USA 
White 
Other 
Reinert (2005) 
75 
22.10 
4.00 
2001 
.00 
College 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Reitz et al. (2016) 
1,057 
12.70 
0.66 
2005 
.47 
Community 
Greece 
White 
Rosenb. 
Reitzes & Mutran (2006) 
737 
60.54 
1.85 
1992 
.52 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Repetto et al. (2004) 
579 
14.61 
0.68 
1998 
.53 
Community 
USA 
Black 
Other 
Reynolds (2009), Study 1 
1,038 
11.60 
acc. 
1998 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Reynolds & Juvonen (2012) 
1,038 
11.60 
acc. 
2000 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Rhodes et al. (2005), control group 
581 
12.33 
acc. 
2000 
.35 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Rönnau-Böse & Fröhlich-Gildhoff (2009), control group 
102 
4.30 
1.00 
2006 
.47 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Other 
Rosario et al. (2011) 
156 
18.30 
1.65 
1993 
.49 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Rosenfeld (2004), female subsample 
181 
13.70 
acc. 
2002 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Rosenfeld (2004), male subsample 
159 
13.70 
acc. 
2002 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Rotenberg et al. (2004), Study 1 
505 
9.75 
0.64 
2000 
.53 
Community 
UK 
 
Harter 
Rueger et al. (2010), female subsample 
325 
13.50 
acc. 
2006 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
Rueger et al. (2010), male subsample 
311 
13.50 
acc. 
2006 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Other 
Sallquist et al. (2010) 
205 
13.47 
0.69 
2004 
.55 
Community 
Indonesia 
Asian 
Harter 
Schindler (2010) 
538 
36.85 
acc. 
1997 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Schneider et al. (2008), control group 
59 
15.02 
0.77 
2004 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
 
Marsh 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
113 
Seidman et al. (1994) 
580 
11.40 
0.93 
1988 
.54 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Seiffge-Krenke & Gelhaar (2008), female subsample 
80 
13.90 
1.40 
1996 
1.00 
National 
Germany 
White 
Other 
Seiffge-Krenke & Gelhaar (2008), male subsample 
66 
13.90 
1.40 
1996 
.00 
National 
Germany 
White 
Other 
Settles et al. (2009) 
128 
22.20 
2.55 
2004 
1.00 
College 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Shapka & Keating (2005) 
518 
15.50 
acc. 
2000 
.49 
Community 
Canada 
 
Harter 
Shek (2007), female subsample 
1,670 
12.65 
0.88 
2003 
1.00 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Rosenb. 
Shek (2007), male subsample 
1,331 
12.65 
0.88 
2003 
.00 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Rosenb. 
Sher-Censor et al. (2011) 
134 
10.83 
0.63 
2006 
.55 
Community 
USA 
Hispanic 
Harter 
Shim et al. (2012) 
311 
18.00 
acc. 
2001 
.54 
College 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Shoshani & Steinmetz (2014) 
501 
13.75 
0.66 
2010 
.51 
Community 
Israel 
White 
Rosenb. 
Siffert et al. (2012) 
176 
10.61 
0.40 
2008 
.51 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Harter 
Simpkins et al. (2008) 
925 
14.55 
1.31 
1994 
.51 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Slonim-Nevo et al. (2010), Israeli sample, adolescents 
61 
15.97 
1.20 
2001 
.51 
Community 
Israel 
White 
Rosenb. 
Slonim-Nevo et al. (2013), German sample, adolescents 
134 
14.16 
2.00 
2001 
.57 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Slutzky & Simpkins (2009) 
987 
9.55 
1.31 
1989 
.51 
Community 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Smetana et al. (2004), adolescent sample 
76 
13.43 
1.39 
1997 
.50 
Community 
USA 
Black 
Harter 
Spray et al. (2013) 
491 
11.29 
0.30 
2009 
.51 
Community 
UK 
White 
Marsh 
Steiger et al. (2014) 
1,527 
12.00 
acc. 
1979 
.51 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Steiger et al. (2015) 
1,359 
16.71 
0.73 
1983 
.51 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Other 
Steinfield et al. (2008) 
92 
20.10 
1.36 
2006 
.74 
College 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Steinhausen et al. (2005), control group 
64 
14.80 
1.03 
1994 
.77 
Community 
Switzerland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Syed & Azmitia (2009) 
175 
18.02 
0.43 
2003 
.62 
College 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Tiggemann (2005) 
242 
14.00 
0.94 
2000 
1.00 
Community 
Australia 
White 
Rosenb. 
Trzesniewski et al. (2006) 
812 
11.00 
acc. 
1983 
.49 
Community 
New Zeal. 
White 
Rosenb. 
Turner et al. (2010) 
523 
14.50 
acc. 
2003 
.53 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Udell et al. (2010), female subsample 
258 
13.31 
0.51 
2002 
1.00 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Harter 
Udell et al. (2010), male subsample 
212 
13.31 
0.51 
2002 
.00 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Harter 
Umaña-Taylor et al. (2009), female subsample 
160 
15.23 
0.77 
2003 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Hispanic 
Rosenb. 
Umaña-Taylor et al. (2009), male subsample 
163 
15.39 
0.74 
2003 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Hispanic 
Rosenb. 
Updegraff et al. (2013), adolescent sample 
204 
16.24 
0.99 
2007 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Hispanic 
Rosenb. 
van Tuijl et al. (2014) 
1,641 
13.14 
0.75 
2006 
.53 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Rosenb. 
Vanhalst et al. (2013), Study 1, female subsample 
201 
15.22 
0.60 
2002 
1.00 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Rosenb. 
Vanhalst et al. (2013), Study 1, male subsample 
227 
15.22 
0.60 
2002 
.00 
Community Netherlands 
White 
Rosenb. 
Vanhalst et al. (2013), Study 2, female subsample 
331 
14.95 
0.94 
2007 
1.00 
Community 
Belgium 
White 
Rosenb. 
Vanhalst et al. (2013), Study 2, male subsample 
195 
14.95 
0.94 
2007 
.00 
Community 
Belgium 
White 
Rosenb. 
Vasalampi et al. (2010) 
606 
16.00 
0.34 
2004 
.48 
Community 
Finland 
White 
Rosenb. 
Wagner et al. (2013) 
4,471 
19.60 
0.85 
2002 
.55 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Marsh 
Wallace et al. (1984), female subsample 
38 
9.40 
acc. 
1973 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
 
Coopers. 
Wallace et al. (1984), male subsample 
32 
9.40 
acc. 
1973 
.00 
Community 
USA 
 
Coopers. 
Wargo (1999), female subsample 
75 
12.00 
acc. 
1995 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
114 
Wargo (1999), male subsample 
46 
12.00 
acc. 
1995 
.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Harter 
Weed et al. (2006) 
106 
22.10 
1.27 
1995 
1.00 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Coopers. 
Westaby & Lee (2003) 
3,081 
16.50 
acc. 
1999 
.33 
Community 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
Whitesell et al. (2009) 
1,611 
14.00 
acc. 
1993 
.50 
Community 
USA 
Native 
Rosenb. 
Williams et al. (2010) 
274 
10.50 
acc. 
2006 
.51 
Community 
UK 
White 
Other 
Wong et al. (2011), control group 
196 
13.00 
acc. 
2004 
 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Other 
Wouters et al. (2013), female subsample 
381 
18.41 
1.43 
2009 
1.00 
College 
Belgium 
White 
Rosenb. 
Wouters et al. (2013), male subsample 
73 
18.41 
1.43 
2009 
.00 
College 
Belgium 
White 
Rosenb. 
Wu et al. (2010) 
1,044 
15.00 
1.70 
2006 
.48 
Community 
China 
Asian 
Other 
Yang (1997) 
398 
12.42 
acc. 
1989 
.50 
Community 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Yeh & Lempers (2004) 
374 
12.37 
0.51 
1999 
.50 
Community 
USA 
White 
Rosenb. 
Young & Mroczek (2003) 
261 
15.50 
acc. 
1999 
.45 
College 
USA 
White 
Harter 
Zalta & Keel (2006) 
114 
19.80 
0.90 
2003 
.47 
College 
USA 
Other 
Rosenb. 
Zimmerman et al. (1997) 
1,160 
12.00 
acc. 
1990 
.50 
Community 
USA 
White 
Coopers. 
Zimmermann et al. (2013) 
1,045 
11.00 
acc. 
2006 
.50 
Community 
Germany 
White 
Rosenb. 
Zuckerman & O’Loughlin (2009) 
176 
20.00 
acc. 
2002 
.72 
College 
USA 
 
Rosenb. 
Note. Mean age and standard deviation of age are given in years. As described in the Method section, some studies did not report the standard deviation of age, 
but other information clearly suggested that the sample was sufficiently homogeneous with regard to age (e.g., all participants were children in the same grade). 
For these studies, the standard deviation is denoted acceptable (“acc.”). The column “Female” shows the proportion of female participants. Rosenb. = Rosenberg; 
Coopers. = Coopersmith. 
 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
115 
Table 2 
Estimates of Yearly Mean-Level Change in Self-Esteem for Age Groups From 4 to 94 Years 
Age group 
 
 
Weighted mean 
 
Heterogeneity 
 (years) 
k 
N 
effect size (dyear) 
95% CI 
Q 
τ2 
I2 
4–6 
2 
229 
0.072 
[−.058, .202] 
0.5 
0.000 
0.0 
6–8 
5 
515 
0.035 
[−.123, .193] 
12.7* 
0.022 
68.6 
8–10 
13 
5,002 
0.016 
[−.120, .152] 
270.7* 
0.059 
95.6 
10–11 
21 
7,952 
0.079* 
[.024, .134] 
107.2* 
0.012 
81.3 
11–12 
29 
11,284 
0.011 
[−.036, .058] 
157.0* 
0.012 
82.2 
12–13 
45 
19,482 
−0.004 
[−.041, .034] 
255.2* 
0.011 
82.8 
13–14 
50 
29,441 
0.005 
[−.034, .044] 
492.2* 
0.016 
90.1 
14–15 
45 
30,856 
−0.002 
[−.041, .037] 
441.1* 
0.014 
90.0 
15–16 
47 
31,729 
0.049* 
[.020, .078] 
263.0* 
0.007 
82.5 
16–17 
43 
23,369 
0.056* 
[.021, .091] 
236.8* 
0.009 
82.3 
17–18 
24 
14,373 
0.059* 
[.019, .098] 
90.5* 
0.006 
74.6 
18–19 
26 
25,426 
0.062* 
[.020, .104] 
174.9* 
0.008 
85.7 
19–20 
33 
11,912 
0.088* 
[.059, .117] 
57.4* 
0.002 
44.3 
20–25 
35 
21,275 
0.044* 
[.021, .067] 
64.0* 
0.002 
46.8 
25–30 
16 
8,812 
0.036* 
[.010, .061] 
18.9 
0.001 
20.8 
30–40 
27 
15,745 
0.012 
[−.004, .027] 
22.6 
0.000 
0.0 
40–50 
19 
7,212 
0.011 
[−.014, .035] 
19.5 
0.000 
7.7 
50–60 
16 
4,248 
0.002 
[−.028, .032] 
2.3 
0.000 
0.0 
60–70 
17 
4,953 
0.000 
[−.028, .028] 
3.7 
0.000 
0.0 
70–80 
15 
3,551 
−0.006 
[−.039, .027] 
2.3 
0.000 
0.0 
80–90 
7 
998 
−0.009 
[−.071, .053] 
2.1 
0.000 
0.0 
90–94 
2 
185 
−0.097 
[−.242, .047] 
0.2 
0.000 
0.0 
Note. Computations were made with random-effects models. k = number of samples; N = total 
number of participants in the k samples; dyear = standardized mean change d per year; CI = 
confidence interval; Q = statistic used in heterogeneity test; τ2 = estimated amount of total 
heterogeneity; I2 = ratio of total heterogeneity by total variability (given in percent). 
* p < .05. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
116 
Table 3 
Intercorrelations Among Effect Size and Sample Characteristics 
Variable 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
1. dyear 
— 
.11 
−.14* 
−.01 
.00 
.08 
−.05 
.16* 
2. Mean agea 
−.06 
— 
−.34* 
.00 
.09 
−.15* 
−.06 
.50* 
3. Mean year of birth 
.05 
−.92* 
— 
.07 
−.18* 
−.33* 
.01 
−.04 
4. Female (proportion) 
−.04 
−.04 
.06 
— 
−.06 
.01 
.01 
−.06 
5. Sample typeb 
−.04 
.32* 
−.36* 
.02 
— 
−.03 
.00 
.01 
6. Countryc 
−.06 
.12* 
−.28* 
.02 
.13* 
— 
−.35* 
−.23* 
7. Ethnicityd 
−.01 
.20* 
−.16* 
−.02 
−.23* 
−.33* 
— 
.01 
8. Measure of self-esteeme 
.14* 
.47* 
−.39* 
−.07 
.13* 
−.09 
.12* 
— 
Note. Correlations for samples with mean age from 4 to 94 years (i.e., the full observed range of 
mean age; k = 311) are presented below the diagonal, and correlations for samples with mean age 
from 10 to 20 years (k = 204) are presented above the diagonal. Due to missing values, in these 
analyses the number of samples was reduced from 331 to 311 (for mean age from 4 to 94 years) 
and from 220 to 204 (for mean age from 10 to 20 years). dyear = standardized mean change d per 
year. 
a Mean age of sample at the center of the observed time interval. 
b 1 = nationally representative, 0 = other. 
c 1 = United States, 0 = other. 
d 1 = White/European, 0 = other. 
e 1 = Rosenberg scale, 0 = other. 
* p < .05. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
117 
Table 4 
Mixed-Effects Meta-Regression Models for Sample Characteristics Predicting Yearly Mean-
Level Change (dyear) in Self-Esteem 
 
Samples with mean age from 4 
to 94 years (k = 311) 
 
Samples with mean age from 
10 to 20 years (k = 204) 
Moderator 
Estimate 
SE 
p 
 
Estimate 
SE 
p 
Mean agea 
−.0025* 
.0010 
.018 
 
.0011 
.0041 
.786 
Mean year of birth 
−.0013 
.0009 
.142 
 
−.0014 
.0010 
.185 
Female (proportion) 
.0000 
.0002 
.907 
 
.0001 
.0002 
.643 
Sample typeb 
−.0019 
.0287 
.946 
 
.0053 
.0481 
.913 
Countryc 
−.0221 
.0159 
.165 
 
.0088 
.0200 
.660 
Ethnicityd 
−.0077 
.0149 
.606 
 
−.0066 
.0180 
.712 
Measure of self-esteeme 
.0513* 
.0149 
.001 
 
.0408* 
.0192 
.033 
Note. Regression coefficients are unstandardized. Due to missing values, in these analyses the 
number of samples was reduced from 331 to 311 (for mean age from 4 to 94 years) and from 220 
to 204 (for mean age from 10 to 20 years). For mean age from 4 to 94 years: Qmodel = 18.0 (df = 
7, p = .012); Qresidual = 1336.9 (df = 303, p < .001); τ2 = 0.008; I2 = 77.3%. For mean age from 10 
to 20 years: Qmodel = 11.4 (df = 7, p = .121); Qresidual = 1009.1 (df = 196, p < .001); τ2 = 0.009; I2 = 
80.6%. dyear = standardized mean change d per year; k = number of samples; SE = standard error; 
τ2 = estimated amount of total heterogeneity; I2 = ratio of total heterogeneity by total variability. 
a Mean age of sample at the center of the observed time interval. 
b 1 = nationally representative, 0 = other. 
c 1 = United States, 0 = other. 
d 1 = White/European, 0 = other. 
e 1 = Rosenberg scale, 0 = other. 
* p < .05. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
118 
 
Figure 1. Funnel graph displaying the relation between the inverse standard error and effect size 
(i.e., standardized mean change d per year, dyear). 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
119 
 
Figure 2. Scatterplot displaying the relation between effect size (i.e., standardized mean change 
d per year, dyear) and age (i.e., mean age of sample at the center of the observed time interval). 
The figure also shows the locally weighted smoothing (LOESS) curve across age. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-ESTEEM 
120 
Figure 3. Mean-level change of self-esteem from age 4 to 94 years. The figure shows cumulative 
d values relative to age 4 years. 
