 HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 06 September 2018
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00748
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
1
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
Edited by:
Jack Tsao,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
United States
Reviewed by:
Michael Henri Ossipov,
inVentiv Health Clinical, United States
Silmar Teixeira,
Federal University of Piauí, Brazil
Jamila Andoh,
Zentralinstitut für Seelische
Gesundheit (ZI), Germany
*Correspondence:
Max Ortiz-Catalan
maxo@chalmers.se
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neuroprosthetics,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neurology
Received: 01 April 2018
Accepted: 17 August 2018
Published: 06 September 2018
Citation:
Ortiz-Catalan M (2018) The Stochastic
Entanglement and Phantom Motor
Execution Hypotheses: A Theoretical
Framework for the Origin and
Treatment of Phantom Limb Pain.
Front. Neurol. 9:748.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00748
The Stochastic Entanglement and
Phantom Motor Execution
Hypotheses: A Theoretical
Framework for the Origin and
Treatment of Phantom Limb Pain
Max Ortiz-Catalan 1,2*
1 Biomechatronics and Neurorehabilitation Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2 Integrum AB, Mölndal, Sweden
Phantom limb pain (PLP) is a debilitating condition common after amputation that can
considerably hinder patients’ quality of life. Several treatments have reported promising
results in alleviating PLP
. However, clinical evaluations are usually performed in small
cohorts and rigorous clinical trials are scarce. In addition, the underlying mechanisms
by which novel interventions alleviate PLP are often unclear, potentially because the
condition itself is poorly understood. This article presents a theoretical framework of
PLP that can be used as groundwork for hypotheses of novel treatments. Current
hypotheses on the origins of PLP are discussed in relation to available clinical findings.
Stochastic entanglement of the pain neurosignature, or connectome, with impaired
sensorimotor circuitry is proposed as an alternative hypothesis for the genesis of PLP
,
and the implications and predictions this hypothesis entails are examined. In addition, I
present a hypothesis for the working mechanism of Phantom Motor Execution (PME) as
a treatment of PLP
, along with its relation to the aforementioned stochastic entanglement
hypothesis, which deals with PLP’s incipience. PME aims to reactivate the original
central and peripheral circuitry involved in motor control of the missing limb, along
with increasing dexterity of stump muscles. The PME hypothesis entails that training
of phantom movements induces gradual neural changes similar to those of perfecting a
motor skill, and these purposefully induced neural changes disentangle pain processing
circuitry by competitive plasticity. This is a testable hypothesis that can be examined
by brain imaging and behavioral studies on subjects undergoing PME treatment. The
proposed stochastic entanglement hypothesis of PLP can be generalized to neuropathic
pain due to sensorimotor impairment, and can be used to design suitable therapeutic
treatments.
Keywords: phantom limb pain, neuropathic pain, Phantom Motor Execution, virtual reality, myoelectric pattern
recognition, stochastic entanglement
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
INTRODUCTION
Pain is an integral part of our sensory repertoire and a necessary
alarm system that, when functioning normally, protects our body
from harm. Unfortunately, faults in the neurological system can
result in malign pain that persists despite the absence of tissue
damage, namely neuropathic pain. Neuropathic pain serves no
apparent biological purpose and can considerably hinder the
quality of life of those it afflicts. Phantom limb pain (PLP)
is one of such neuropathic pains arising from the loss of an
extremity. PLP is the most common problem faced by amputees
(1), and it can appear independently of the cause of amputation
(2). It can begin soon after amputation and does not often
diminish over time (3), thus becoming a chronic condition
resistant to treatment. Amputees with PLP are less likely to use
a prosthesis resulting in further disability (4). PLP worsens with
situational stress (5), and most amputees report intrusion of
PLP during sleep, as intense pain episodes can wake sufferers
multiple times throughout the night (6). This feeds into a vicious
cycle since disrupted sleep has been found to reduced pain
tolerance (7). Pain itself is a multidimensional experience. Stress
and depression affect perception of PLP, but do not appear to
cause it (8). In addition, neuropathic pain is less understood
than nociceptive pain, which causes further complications as
humans are known to be less empathic to those suffering
from poorly understood conditions (9). Cervero provides a
comprehensive description of known pains accounting for the
sensory, emotional, and cognitive components of the pain
experience (10).
This article presents known hypotheses on PLP in relation
to current clinical findings and the challenges they present
to the theoretical frameworks upon which PLP treatments
are based. Here, I propose an alternative hypothesis for the
genesis of PLP that accounts for discrepancies in previous ideas
on the origin of PLP, namely, the stochastic entanglement of
pain with susceptible sensorimotor circuitry. The implications
of and predictions made by this hypothesis are discussed in
relation to clinical and neuroscientific literature. In addition, a
second hypothesis is here presented for the working mechanisms
of a novel treatment that has shown promising results in
patients with chronic intractable PLP, namely Phantom Motor
Execution (PME) (11). Current hypotheses and treatments of
PLP are addressed first, foregrounding a theoretical framework
for the stochastic entanglement hypothesis of PLP, and potential
working mechanism of PME.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Multiple and, at-times, conflicting definitions of PLP exist. The
International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) defined
PLP and stump pain during its global year against neuropathic
pain (2014–2015) as follows:
Phantom limb pain is pain perceived as arising from the missing
limb
Stump pain is pain perceived in the stump or residual limb
These definitions focus on the source of perceived pain, but
encompass at least two different mechanisms for pain perception,
namely, nociception, and neuropathic pain. I gesture to this
distinction by referencing nociceptive and neuropathic PLP as
follows:
Neuropathic Phantom Limb Pain is pain perceived as arising
from the missing limb due to sources other than stimulation of
nociceptive fibers that used to innervate the missing limb.
Nociceptive Phantom Limb Pain is pain perceived as arising
from the missing limb deterministically
by stimulation of
nociceptive fibers.
The word “deterministically” implies that pain perception can
be linked to given stimuli. Nociceptive pain in this case
often corresponds to neuroma pain. Excitation of the neuroma
produces afferent discharges in nociceptive fibers, which results
in painful sensations perceived in the phantom limb, as said
fibers previously innervated the missing limb. Bacteria could also
stimulate nociceptive fibers (12), and thus elicit distally referred
painful sensations in the phantom. Similarly, a viral infection
can trigger PLP years after amputation, and then recede with the
treatment of the infection (13). In such a case, efforts to alleviate
PLP using cognitive therapies while disregarding the infection
would be inappropriate and rather futile.
PLP is a complex condition that requires careful evaluation
(14). Treatments for nociceptive and neuropathic pain differ,
and rightly so, owing to the differences in their underlying
mechanisms. A distinction between the underlying origins of
pain, in addition to its location, is thus critical to help clinicians
and researchers attend to the different sources of referred painful
sensations (15). In addition, distinct pains are studied separately
in scientific inquiry, and although a holistic approach to pain
is normally recommended, clarity on the underlying causes of
painful sensations perceived in the missing limb can better serve
physicians in their treatment, thus improving care. Terms such as
neuroma pain are already used clinically to describe nociceptive
PLP, differentiating it from neuropathic PLP (16, 17). In the
spirit of clarity, the term phantom limb pain is reserved for
non-nociceptive pain hereafter under the following definition:
Phantom limb pain is pain perceived as arising from the missing
limb due to sources other than stimulation of nociceptive neurons
that used to innervate the missing limb.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK ON
PHANTOM LIMB PAIN
Different theories of pain exist, but as of yet no single theory
can account for all of pain’s complexity (18). Melzack’s ideation
of a pain neurosignature provided a conceptual framework
referring to the particular patterns of brain activity related to
pain perception (19). Under his neuromatrix theory of pain,
Melzack proposed that the multidimensionality of a painful
experience resides in a widely distributed neural network, and it
is the activation pattern in said network that culminates in the
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
2
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
perception of pain. This implies that pain perception requires
more than noxious sensory input; rather, it necessitates that such
input activates the pain neurosignature. Furthermore, sensory
input is not the only way to activate said pain neurosignature,
as in the case of neuropathic pain. More recently, the idea of
pain neurosignature has been further refined as the dynamic
pain connectome, describing the “spatiotemporal signature of
brain network communication that represents the integration of
all aspects of pain” (20). Kucyi and Davis proposed this concept
in effort to account for fluctuations in pain perception due to
attention (20).
It is worthy of notice that circuitry in the spinal cord
and peripheral nerves feed into the behavior of such a pain
neurosignature (or connectome), and plasticity at this level might
contribute to PLP (14, 21). More importantly, it is yet unclear
how said pain neurosignature entangles with non-nociceptive
circuitry resulting in its activation, despite the absence of tissue
damage or of a limb itself. These gaps are not satisfactorily
addressed, if at all, by the following most prominent ideas of the
genesis of PLP.
Current Ideas on the Origins of Phantom
Limb Pain
Peripheral Nociception
Stimulation of nociceptive fibers produces distally referred
painful sensations, similar to the way stimulation of afferent
fibers once connected to lost mechanoreceptors produce distally
referred tactile sensations (22). PLP was initially thought to
be related to ectopic nociceptive activation at the neuroma
(Figure 1B), and therefore initial treatments targeted the
dissection or prevention of neuroma formation, unfortunately
demonstrating limited success with relieving PLP (23). Peripheral
nociception accounts for referred sensation originating at the
neuroma, and thus is more appropriately called neuroma pain,
rather than PLP. As previously noted, infections can also trigger
nociceptive fibers (12, 13), and these can be dealt with using the
appropriate antimicrobial agents.
Pre-amputation Pain Precludes PLP (“Pain Memory”)
Observational bias along with an intuitive understanding of
memory led to the popular belief that pre-amputation pain
often translates to PLP post-amputation (Figure 1C). Although
this relationship has been reported (24), recent studies have
found no correlation between pre-amputation pain and PLP
(3, 25–27). This led Nikolajsen and Jensen to conclude that
PLP is hardly preventable pre-operatively (26). As with many
discussions on pain, some scientists would argue that this matter
remains unsettled. Nevertheless, adequate pain management
prior to amputation is recommended, firstly because unnecessary
suffering must be prevented, and secondly because sustained pain
should be avoided in the case that it is indeed a source driving
maladaptive plasticity.
Sensory-Motor Incongruence
In 1999, Harris proposed that neuropathic pain might be
caused by incongruence between motor intention, awareness
of movement, and visual feedback (28). He made the intuitive
analogy with motion sickness as caused by incongruent input
from the visual and vestibular systems. In the case of PLP,
the absence of a limb results in missing proprioceptive and
visual feedback when the subject intends to move the lost limb
(Figure 1D). Despite recognizing the role of proprioception,
Harris placed notable importance on the therapeutic effect of
visual feedback, suggesting that treatments prioritizing it would
have higher chances of successfully relieving PLP.
Cortical Reorganization
Flor et al. have provided considerable evidence on the
correlation between PLP and reorganization of primary sensory
and motor cortices (29–32), particularly on the activation
of an area originally corresponding to the missing limb
by neighboring body parts (“invasion” became a synonym
of cortical reorganization, Figure 1H). They proposed that
shifts in cortical representation could represent a potential
neurophysiological basis for PLP (29). A causal relationship
was then suggested after observing that reduction of PLP
was accompanied by a normalization of cortical representation
(reduced invasion), albeit in a small number of patients (33).
In addition, somatosensory cortical reorganization has been
observed in other conditions such as complex regional pain
syndrome (CRPS) (34), and carpal tunnel syndrome (35).
Reduced cortical reorganization (invasion) along with decreased
PLP (36, 37) or CRPS (38) has been observed after motor or
sensory training. Nevertheless and despite numerous studies,
scientific evidence supporting the relationship between PLP and
cortical reorganization, observed by functional brain imagining,
was considered limited in a systematic review by Jutzler et al. (39).
Reduced Functional Connectivity
In recent years, Makin et al. have challenged the correlation
between PLP and cortical reorganization (40, 41). They found
that subjects with PLP had preserved cortical representations
(Figure 1I), as opposed to cortical reorganization (Figure 1H).
In addition, they found a correlation between reduced inter-
hemispheric functional connectivity and PLP (40). The apparent
discrepancy between cortical reorganization and preservation
has been resolved by Raffin et al. who examined the cortical
representation of the missing limb and both neighboring body
parts (42). They concluded that activation of the missing limb
and adjacent body parts can overlap, and thus invasion and
preservation can coexist (Figure 1J). This finding preserves the
relevance of the term “cortical reorganization” in describing
functional changes in the sensory and motor cortices. The
secondary finding from Makin et al. regarding the correlation
between reduced functional connectivity and PLP, seems to be
supported by behavioral observations of PLP accompanying
reduced bimanual coupling (43, 44). Therefore, the idea of
reduced functional connectivity as neural correlate of PLP is
worthy of further consideration.
Time to Deafferentation
The speed at which deafferentation and motor impairment
occurs might be more relevant to the genesis of PLP than
the maladaptive neural changes themselves (e.g., cortical
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
3
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
FIGURE 1 | Hypotheses on the genesis of phantom limb pain. Simplified schematic of motor (“M”) and somatosensory (“SMS”) signals in a healthy able-bodied, and a
person post-amputation. The red arrow resulting in pain perception represents the entire pain neurosignature along with nociceptive fibers where relevant (A–F). For
instance, in a healthy subject, the red signal represents nociceptive afferents firing when stimulated (“E”), as well the neurosignature that results in pain perception (A).
The hypotheses of PLP are illustrated in function of changes in efferent and afferent pathways (A–F), as well as their processing circuitry, such as sensorimotor cortical
representations (G–F).
reorganization and reduced functional connectivity) (Figure 1E).
This idea was supported by Simmel, who found no presence of
phantom limbs in 18 subjects who experienced slow, progressive
loss of an extremity (45). However in 1976, Price examined 42
patients with leprosy and concluded that speed at which their
extremities were lost, or the loss itself, did not influence the
presence or absence of phantom limbs; rather, sensorimotor
impairment was enough (46). For reasons unclear, this study
by Price is often cited incorrectly to support the argument that
gradual deafferentation does not result in the appearance of
phantom limbs, and by consequence PLP.
THE STOCHASTIC ENTANGLEMENT
HYPOTHESIS FOR THE NEUROGENESIS
OF PLP
Explanatory Challenges of the Current
Ideas on the Origins of PLP
The findings and ideas by committed scientists around the
world in the past decades, prominently by Melzack et al., Flor
et al., Ramachandran et al., and others, have sparked great
interest in PLP, inspiring new treatments and approaches to
its study. As knowledge about the condition grows, some of
those ideas are validated, dismissed, or complemented by new
findings. It is worthy of mentioning that even when dismissed,
hypotheses on PLP have enriched our understanding of the
condition. This manuscript presents arguments supporting or
challenging current ideas on the genesis of PLP based on clinical
observations.
The concepts of cortical reorganization and functional
connectivity have in common the appearance of maladaptive
changes due to the loss of sensory input and motor control.
Whereas both of these hypotheses had focused on brain circuits,
maladaptive plasticity in the spinal cord could also be responsible
for maintaining PLP (14, 21). Hereafter, I refer to the ensemble
of these changes as maladaptive neural changes, which includes
both brain and spinal circuitry.
The
sensory-motor
incongruence
hypothesis
has
the
downside of untestability, as it can hardly be isolated from the
loss of sensory input and the neglect of motor output, both of
which could drive maladaptive neural changes. Strictly speaking,
one would have to restore both near-natural control and sensory
feedback in order to truly resolve sensory-motor incongruence.
This in turn would restore the original cortical maps and increase
inter-hemispheric communication, hence resolving PLP due to
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
4
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
these primary consequences rather than due to sensory-motor
congruence in and of itself.
One could argue that sensory-motor incongruence also exists
at the root of pain after motor impairment, as is the case
in spinal cord injuries. Spinal cord injury patients preserve
their biological limbs, but sensory input and motor output is
limited or nonexistent. Pain driven by a process of sensory-
motor incongruence would require that the subject intends to
produce movements without an appropriate sensory response.
However, patients with motor impairment quickly learn that
motor intention is futile and stop trying, and without movement,
there is no sensory incongruence. Therefore, the appearance of
referred pain years after injury or amputation, once “learned
paralysis” has been established, does not correspond with the
neurogenesis of pain this hypothesis suggests.
PLP can appear immediately after amputation or several years
later (24, 47, 48). This temporal variation poses an additional
challenge
for
the
sensory-motor
incongruence
hypothesis.
Immediate appearance of PLP would indicate that a remarkably
short time is required for the sensory-motor mismatch to
induce pain, which in principle could be reproduced, and
thus verified, in acute laboratory experiments. On the other
hand, PLP onset years after amputation would indicate that
establishing sensory-motor incongruence is a relatively slow
process, which contradicts the previous case (appearance of PLP
immediately after amputation). A long period between PLP onset
and amputation also undermines the time to deafferentation
hypothesis.
Stochastic Entanglement of Pain and
Somatosensory-Motor Circuitry
The aforementioned explanatory shortcomings aside, the major
gap in the sensory-motor incongruence, cortical reorganization,
and reduced connectivity hypotheses is the actual linkage of
pain perception with the observed neurophysiological responses
after amputation. Here, I argue that, after amputation or
sensorimotor impairment, the related motor and somatosensory
circuitry (cortical and sub-cortical) falls into a susceptible state
of perturbation and wiring to other networks or neurosignatures,
such as that of pain perception. In a chaotic network state of
somatosensory and motor deprivation, stochastic entanglement
can occur between networks of sensorimotor processing and
pain perception (Figure 1F), which otherwise would be activated
together exclusively due to noxious stimuli.
Current ideas on the genesis of PLP do not account for
patients who do not develop it. All amputees experience sensory-
motor incongruence, but not all develop PLP. Furthermore,
not all PLP sufferers demonstrate cortical reorganization, and,
conversely, not all patients with cortical reorganization develop
PLP. Chaos theory has shed light on the behavior of complex
dynamic systems, where small variations in initial conditions
can yield different outcomes (49). The human brain is a
complex dynamic system, probably the most complex system
we have ever attempted to study. It is inherently noisy, but
such noise arguably gives rise to its remarkable stability (50).
However, a major traumatic event, such an amputation, could
yield instabilities in which stochastic firing in close proximity
networks (coinciding temporally and spatially), could link these
networks together. Emotional and cognitive responses to such
previously inconceivable perception could then enforce said link
(51, 52). The stochastic nature of this process would account
for the observed vicissitudes of PLP: its incidence, its degrees of
intensity and repertoire of qualities, and its temporal onset after
amputation. In addition, since stochastic entanglement can take
place at both cortical and sub-cortical levels, it can account for
the resulting alterations in the brain and spinal cord.
The experience of pain is embodied, meaning that it is always
perceived in a location of the body mapped in the somatosensory
cortex, which also processes other sensory percepts and it
is closely linked to motor control. Therefore, circuitry for
sensorimotor processing and pain perception is already linked
as observed in nociceptive pain, but this relation remains
selective to noxious stimuli in healthy subjects. This is despite
their possibly sharing of neural resources. Furthermore, most
neurons receive input from several other neurons, but have
preferential activation for a subset of them. In the stochastic
entanglement hypothesis, the aforementioned selectivity and
preferred activation of the pain neurosignature is modified due
to stochastically synchronized firing between the sensorimotor
and pain networks. Spurious synchronized activations of neurons
belonging to these networks would normally be inconsequential,
but malignly established given the altered stated of sensorimotor
deprivation after limb loss.
Purposely performed training of a certain skill gradually
induces brain changes that do not lead to pain, as in the
case of increased auditory cortical representation in musicians
(53). More specifically to motor cortex, string players have
shown an enlarged representation of the left hand digits
proportional to the time they began playing (54). In amputees,
sensory discrimination training has shown to enlarge the stump
somatosensory representation while also reducing PLP (55).
These examples contrast the known correlation of PLP with
uncontrolled and unpurposeful cortical reorganization (29–32). I
argue that the presence of such brain changes is not as important
as the chaotic state in which they occur, because this is what can
potentially allow the entanglement with the pain neurosignature
or connectome.
Treatments and Predictions Resulting From
the Stochastic Entanglement Hypothesis
Restoration of motor control and sensory feedback is the
ideal treatment for PLP as suggested by all plasticity-based
hypotheses. Strictly speaking, sensory-motor incongruence can
only be resolved by the aforementioned two-fold restoration
(sensory and motor). Similarly, the ideal solution based on
cortical reorganization would be to reverse it by restoring
motor and sensory maps. However, the possibility exists that
by restoring either motor or sensory impairment, one can still
normalize cortical changes to a certain extent. This is because
activity of the sensory and motor cortices is highly interlinked,
to the point that findings on the active role of the sensory
cortex in motor control have called for reevaluation of the
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
5
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
functional organization of cortical maps (56). The stochastic
entanglement hypothesis proposed here suggests that in addition
to the aforementioned solutions, purposeful enlargement of the
stump representation in the cortex could also alleviate PLP. In
other words, cortical reorganization without resultant PLP is
possible under the hypothesis of stochastic entanglement, given
that such reorganization happens in a gradual and functionally
driven (purposeful) manner. Since stochastic entanglement
can be conceived as a function of Hebb’s law, “neurons that
fire together, wire together”, PLP relief could be achieved by
the same law’s inverse “neurons that fire apart, wire apart.”
Once sensorimotor and pain circuitry have entangled, one
could disentangle them by repeatedly activating one without
activating the other, thus weakening their connection. Repetitive
recruitment (native or repurposed) of the affected sensorimotor
circuitry is thus an avenue for treatment of PLP based on the
stochastic entanglement hypothesis.
Literature citing neuroplasticity-based hypotheses of PLP
repeatedly emphasizes the need for anthropomorphic visual
feedback to alleviate PLP (57, 58). Harris predicted that
treatments prioritizing visual feedback would result in higher
pain relief based on the concept of sensory-motor incongruence
(28). The concept of stochastic entanglement implies that
treatments focusing on motor and somatosensory feedback,
rather than visual feedback, would be more effective. Moreover,
stochastic entanglement predicts that treatments focusing on
physiologically appropriate motor control and somatosensory
feedback can be effective regardless of visual feedback (note
the conditional of “physiologically appropriate”). For instance,
a blind amputee fitted with a highly integrated bionic limb
controlled naturally, and receiving physiologically appropriate
somatosensory feedback, would not suffer from PLP. Regarding
non-invasive
therapies
using
visual
feedback,
stochastic
entanglement predicts that pain reduction would be independent
of the level of anthropomorphic visual representation presented
to the subject.
Upper limb amputees have been found to be more prone
to suffer from PLP than lower limb amputees (47, 59). This
observation could be explained by the difference in the amount
of neural resources left susceptible to stochastic entanglement
after amputation, as well as by the proportional degree of
cortical reorganization and reduction of inter-hemispheric
communication, but cannot be explained by sensory-motor
incongruence. This observed difference regarding PLP incidence
suggests a way to prevent the condition in the first place;
namely, avoiding the neglect of the lost limb circuitry to
reduce the probability of entanglement and maladaptive brain
changes (cortical reorganization and reduced inter-hemispheric
communication). Plasticity-based treatments described hereafter
can be used to achieve this.
CURRENT TREATMENT FOR PLP
Factors that modulate PLP are desirable targets for the
development of therapies. Anecdotal accounts from patients
suggest that changes in atmospheric pressure, temperature,
or humidity influence the intensity of their PLP. However,
scientific investigations have yet to confirm such observations.
The scientific literature currently provides inconclusive evidence
on amputation-induced functional and morphological changes in
the brain that are also markers of PLP (29, 32, 39–42, 60–64), and
therefore, causal or modulatory factors are far from reaching an
established consensus.
Over 60 therapies for PLP have been proposed in the literature
(23), but limited randomized control trials have been performed
to provide high-quality evidence on their efficacy (65). Placebo
effects are varied and often disregarded, even though they can
account for more than the commonly cited 30% improvement
(66). This is particularly important since treatments for PLP often
report short-term relief of up to 30% (67). The following is a non-
exhaustive summary of common treatments of PLP and their
relation to the previously presented theoretical framework.
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacological approaches mostly address pain as a symptom,
and therefore are limited to managing it, rather than curing it.
Lidocaine has been found to reduced stump pain but not PLP
(68, 69), supporting the aforementioned distinction between the
underlying mechanism of these two different pains. Whereas
pharmacological approaches have been largely successful at
alleviating acute nociceptive pain, pharmacotherapy is currently
considered unsatisfactory for chronic neuropathic pain (70). In
addition, a major drawback of pharmacotherapy is the potential
risk of addiction. To this end, Penfield strongly stated: “It is a
major professional sin to allow a patient to become a drug addict
if there is another solution” [preface to (71)]. This sentiment
about reducing chronic pain at the cost of quality of life by
utilizing opioids continues at the present (72).
Surgical Interventions
Re-amputation and neurectomy (resection of the neuroma)
constituted some of the initial efforts to treat PLP, albeit
unsuccessfully over the long-term (71). In the 1970s, non-
surgical methods for the treatment of PLP were considered
more effective than surgical ones (23). Recent development
of surgical techniques such as target muscle reinnervation
[TMR (16)] and regenerative peripheral nerves interfaces [RPNIs
(17)] have shown promising results in reducing neuroma pain
(73). However, evidence regarding the ability of these surgical
techniques to relieve PLP is limited. Patients treated with TMR
continue to report PLP (74), and no long-term data are yet
available on the effect of RPNIs on PLP (17). It is worth
reiterating that neuroma pain and PLP have different origins
(nociceptive and neuropathic pain, respectively).
A neuroma can be mechanically stimulated by palpation,
wearing a socket prosthesis, and contraction of stump muscles.
If such actions predictably result in painful sensations, the source
of the problem is likely a neuroma, and the peripheral nociception
hypothesis accounts for such referred pain in the phantom. This
also applies when the excitation is by chemical means or by
infection (12, 13). Healthcare professionals are advised to first
identify whether the source of PLP is a neuroma and, if so,
provide treatment accordingly. For instance, TMR and RPNIs
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
6
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
have been argued as relatively safe and effective surgical solutions
for neuroma pain, which could be performed prophylactically
to prevent neuroma formation at the time of amputation and
potentially in cases of refractory neuromas in non-amputees
(16, 17).
Artificial Limb Replacement (Prosthetics)
Restoration of motor function and sensory feedback via limb
transplantation, regeneration, or prostheses would not only
restore function, but would also alleviate PLP according to the
aforementioned plasticity-based hypotheses. Limb regeneration
is currently out of reach, and limb transplantation is limited.
However, a new generation of highly integrated limb osseo-
neuroprostheses that interface to bone, nerves, and muscles (75)
could resolve PLP as they operate in daily life using direct sensory
neural feedback (76). Preliminary findings from my research
group in four subjects implanted with such technology indicate
the absence of PLP (follow-ups from one to up to 5 years,
unpublished data). However, controlled long-term studies are
needed to provide high-quality scientific evidence concerning
osseo-neuroprostheses’ ability to ameliorate PLP.
Restoration of both motor and sensory function would be
ideal. However, extensive use of simpler functional prosthesis,
with no somatosensory feedback, is known to correlate with
lower incidence of PLP (31). Based on this finding, Lotze
et al. argued that extensive use of myoelectric prostheses
prevents cortical reorganization, and thus prevents PLP. One
must consider that muscles normally used for conventional
myoelectric control are not the same as those used to produce the
biological actuation. For example, in a transhumeral amputation,
the biceps and triceps muscles are used to control the prosthetic
hand, rather than intrinsic or even extrinsic hand muscles.
Therefore, the cortical representation of the hand is not activated
to control the prosthetic hand, at least not in its native
functional organization, and therefore it is uncertain how control
substitution would prevent cortical reorganization. Similarly, the
inverse correlation between PLP and prosthetic use cannot be
attributed entirely to resolving sensory-motor incongruence, as
there is no intention of congruent phantom movement per se, but
instead, control substitution. On the other hand, this common
but unintuitive method of prosthetic control requires learning a
new skill, for which the idle processing resources of the missing
limb are likely recruited, thus potentially protecting them from
a susceptible chaotic state in which they could entangle with the
pain connectome (stochastic entanglement).
A degree of motor execution is certainly present in the PLP-
prosthesis relation, as purely cosmetic prostheses do not seem to
reduce PLP despite their anthropomorphic appearance (31). This
suggests that motor control with its intrinsic feedback might be
sufficient in most cases. In this regard, it is worthwhile to note
that muscle contraction, even without joint actuation, produces
non-negligible sensory feedback for contraction strength and
muscle length. This proprioceptive feedback is used regularly by
prosthetic users to fine-tune the intended strength of muscular
contraction, which often translates to speed of prosthetic
movement (proportional control). Prosthetic users rely on
such intrinsic feedback while learning conventional myoelectric
control. For example, using electrodes implanted on muscles
(75), my research group was able to capture single motor
action potentials and drive a prosthetic hand faster than the
patient could perceive endogenous feedback from muscular
effort. As a result, our patient reported the ability to actuate
the prosthesis just by “thinking” about the movement. This
perception arose arguably due to the lack of muscular feedback
(the muscular effort component of proprioception), and was
not appreciated by the patient, who preferred to feel muscular
contraction in order to achieve better prosthetic control. The
gain of his myoelectric amplifiers was therefore reduced, so a
higher muscular contraction would be required to activate the
prosthesis.
Patients treated with TMR who utilize a functional prosthesis,
and yet still report PLP (74), pose a challenge to all plasticity-
based theories. TMR allows the intuitive control of prosthetic
limbs by using muscles at the stump as biological amplifiers of
nerve signals that originally actuated the missing limb. In other
words, subjects who undergo TMR utilize the original neural
circuitry of the missing limb to control a prosthetic one. In a
similar way, Targeted Sensory Reinnervation (TSR) can produce
transfer sensations from the missing limb to the stump (77).
Patients treated with targeted motor and sensory reinnervation
have shown normalized primary motor and somatosensory
cortices, and yet, there are reported cases of PLP (78). Sensory-
motor incongruence and cortical reorganization are resolved in
these patients, and purposeful use of the affected circuitry should
disentangle it from the pain connectome as predicted by the
stochastic entanglement hypothesis, yet PLP remains. A potential
explanation could be the mismatch on neural reutilization. TMR
uses hyper-reinnervation, meaning that a thick nerve is coapted
to a considerably thinner one, thus only a fraction of the
axons reinnervate the target. Furthermore, TMR in the upper
limb typically allows for the control of up to three degrees of
freedom, as opposed to the 27 available in an intact hand. This
means that only a limited portion of the neural circuitry is
back in use, and thus the degree of neural resources utilization
might not be enough to disassociate from the pain circuitry.
PME of the unrestored degrees of freedom (for example, wrist
flexion/extension or finger control), would increase the plasticity
required to potentially disassociate pain circuitry and thus
alleviate PLP.
Plasticity-Based Interventions
Motor Imagery
Mental imagery of phantom movement has been reported to
reduce PLP along with cortical reorganization (62). However,
outcomes of controlled clinical trials concluded that motor
imagery is ineffective (79, 80), and thus discouraged by its own
(81). Nevertheless, motor imagery may still have a therapeutic
role to play. In cases in which kinesiophobia is concurrent with
PLP, motor imagery could be used as an initial treatment stage
so other motor therapies can follow. Motor imagery is used
currently in such a way as part of Graded Motor Imagery (GMI),
a therapy model that consists in lateralization (right/left limb
identification), motor imagery, and mirror therapy. This order
of increasing task complexity is fundamental for the therapy’s
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
7
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
success (82). GMI has shown successful results in PLP and
CRPS (83), although negative findings have been reported as well
(84). Similarly graded approaches have been proposed, such as
employing progressive muscle relaxation, motor imagery, and
phantom exercises (85).
Mirror Therapy
Mirror therapy is arguably the most common and cost-effective
therapy for PLP and CRPS in clinical use. Introduced by
Ramachandran and Rogers-Ramachandran (57), mirror therapy
entails placing a mirror in eyesight of the missing limb, in
order to reflect the movements of a contralateral and still
available limb, while the subject is asked to perform parallel
movements with both limbs. Originally using a mirror box,
physical constrains could be eliminated with mirror glasses (86)
or virtual reality (87). Reduced PLP along with normalization
of cortical organization have been observed after mirror therapy
(36). Although mirror therapy has shown successful results in
controlled clinical trials on PLP (79) and CRPS (80), it has been
argued that evidence supporting its success is insufficient (88)
and largely anecdotal (58).
Mirror therapy was devised with the aim to provide
anthropomorphic visual feedback (89), and visual feedback has
been argued as the main reason for its therapeutic effect (58).
Controlled clinical trials present conflicting evidence in this
regard. Whereas Chan et al. found that no improvement was
gained with a covered mirror (79), Brodie et al. found that visual
feedback was not necessary for pain relief (90). These conflicting
findings can be explained by the cortical reorganization and
stochastic entanglement hypotheses, in which pain relief can be
achieved by motor execution alone and not hindered by visual
feedback. In contrast, sensory-motor incongruence is resolved
only partially in mirror therapy as proprioceptive feedback is
missing, and without visual feedback, no relief as reported by
Brodie et al. (90) should be possible according to the sensory-
motor incongruence hypothesis.
Sensory Stimulation and Discrimination
As noted previously, restoration of somatotopically appropriate
sensory feedback alone could also be an effective therapy
based on plasticity-based theories of PLP, excluding sensory-
motor incongruence. In some patients, stimulation of the stump
or face can produce referred sensations in the missing limb
(phantom map). Simultaneous stroking of the phantom map and
contralateral hand, while providing visual feedback by a mirror,
has been reported to reduce PLP for short periods of time (91).
Similar reduction of PLP has been observed when stimulating
phantom maps located in the cheeks, while using virtual reality
(VR) to provide a visual representation of the missing limb (92).
However, phantom maps are often disorganized, incomplete,
and relatively uncommon (30, 32). An alternative to produce
somatosensory perception is the stimulation of afferent fibers,
which requires the implantation of electrodes. In this regard,
peripheral nerve stimulation has been reported to reduce PLP in a
limited number of subjects (93–95). However, no long-term effect
has been reported, and to date, no controlled randomized trials
on direct nerve stimulation as a treatment for PLP have been
performed.
Flor et al. propose a therapeutic approach in which patients
learn to discriminate sensory stimuli at the stump (37). They
showed that training on spatial or frequency discrimination
increased acuity in the stimulated area and reduced PLP.
Their subjects showed reversal of cortical invasion from the
lip representation (lateral neighboring area), but did not study
the stump representation where the stimulation took place.
The possibility of relieving PLP by increasing sensory acuity
at neighboring body parts was corroborated by Huse et al.
(55). They showed enlargement of both neighboring body
parts representations, arguably because both were stimulated.
Enlarging cortical representation of the stump, by using control
and sensory substitution, might be the cause behind the
reduction of PLP when the idea of sensory discrimination
was used to complement conventional myoelectric control (96).
Whereas somatosensory appropriate stimulation engages the
representation of the missing limb promoting preservation
(reverse cortical reorganization), sensory discrimination at the
stump enlarges the stump representation (purposeful cortical
reorganization). Relief of PLP in the former but not the latter case
agrees with the hypothesis of cortical reorganization, and both
cases can be explained by disassociation based on the hypothesis
of stochastic entangling.
Phantom Motor Execution-PME
Phantom motor execution (PME) entails producing phantom
movements by recruiting the appropriate central and peripheral
circuits, ultimately resulting in muscular activation at the stump
(11). Mirror therapy could be used to facilitate PME. However,
whether the subject engages in actual motor execution remains
uncertain as motor output is not measured in any way. For
instance, a subject could completely disregard movement in the
lost limb and perform a full treatment focusing on the visual
feedback provided by the contralateral limb only. In contrast,
myoelectric decoding of motor volition at the stump ensures
that movement execution is actually taking place. Muscular
contraction is the ultimate physiological response to motor
execution, and by extracting phantom motor intention from
remaining muscular activity at the stump, one can ensure that the
related central and peripheral circuitry is activated. The resulting
phantom movement can then provide feedback to the user vis-
à-vis by virtual or augmented reality, while taking advantage of
serious gaming to maintain subject engagement throughout the
therapy (97). This is the treatment modality considered for PME
through this manuscript, namely myoelectric pattern recognition
(MPR), virtual and augmented reality (VR-AR), and serious
gaming (SG) (11, 97, 98), Figure 2.
WORKING HYPOTHESIS ON THE
MECHANISMS OF PHANTOM MOTOR
EXECUTION (PME)
I hypothesize that PME relieves pain by
the following
mechanisms:
• Purposeful cortical reorganization. PME treatment requires
subjects to execute phantom movements as naturally as
possible. “Natural movement” is explained as analogous to
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
8
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
FIGURE 2 | Phantom motor execution (PME) using myoelectric pattern recognition (MPR), virtual and augmented reality (VR/AG), and serious gaming (SG). A
conventional treatment session of PME consists of identifying viable muscles at the stump, preferably as distally as possible, and placing skin surface electrodes on
these muscles (A). Targeted placement of electrodes is recommended but not necessary. In addition, a fiduciary marker is placed in sight of the webcam (A). The
subject is then instructed to follow the movements of a virtual limb, executing them as naturally as possible, while myoelectric activity is recorded. Algorithms used the
collected information to train decoders to infer future intention of movement. Once the system has been trained, the subject can practice the execution of phantom
limb movements in augmented (B) and virtual reality (C, D) environments with anthropomorphic (B, C) and non-anthropomorphic (D) visual feedback. Subjects
provided written informed consent for the publication of these images.
moving an able limb. Subjects are encouraged to perform
bilateral movements, at least during the first few sessions,
to aid in the understanding and performance of a natural
movement. Regardless of their level of education, subjects are
informed about the cortical reorganization findings and the
stochastic entanglement hypothesis to stress the importance
of “natural movements.” Subjects are told that the success of
the therapy relies on them executing phantom movements as
naturally as possible, as this would purposefully reengage the
idle neural circuitry and potentially disentangle it from pain.
Two effects are hypothesized to be at play at the cortical level
during PME:
1. Utilization of the original motor area corresponding to the
missing limb would normalize it at the border with the face
representation.
2. Improved motor control of the stump musculature would
enlarge its cortical representation into the missing limb
area, as those neural resources are underutilized owing to
the amputation.
In summary, the stump representation will invade, and likely
overlap with, the original representation of the missing limb,
whereas the opposite (lateral) border of cortical representation
would be preserved owing to the reutilization of the missing limb
circuitry.
• Increased functional connectivity. As previously noted, a
correlation between reduced inter-hemispheric functional
connectivity and PLP has been reported (40). It has been found
that motor imagery does not result in spatial coupling, but
rather, actual motor execution is required in order to achieve
it (43). Therefore, by actually executing phantom movement,
patients are likely to increase inter-hemispheric functional
connectivity.
• Undoing phantom paralysis. Impaired phantom movement
has been repeatedly found to be correlated with PLP (42, 99,
100). The majority of the subjects treated with PME reported
to be unable to move their phantom limb at the first session.
This became obvious when subjects were asked to produce
phantom movements, to which they objected describing a
paralyzed phantom. Subjects were persuaded to try to execute
movements nevertheless, and eventually gained volition over
their phantom limbs (11, 97, 98). At follow-ups, subjects
commonly reported that the acquired skill to move their
phantom seemed to help them to control pain episodes when
this occurred outside the therapy session. This observation
supports the aforementioned finding correlating phantom
paralysis and PLP (42, 99, 100). This finding is mutually
exclusive with sensory-motor incongruence as a potential
cause of PLP. Observations by my research group on subjects
treated with PME suggest that phantom movement without
visual feedback seems to aid patients relieving their PLP, as
opposed to exacerbating it as predicted by the sensory-motor
incongruence hypothesis.
• Competitive plasticity. Neural processing resources in the
brain are finite, meaning only a finite number of tasks can
be processed at a given time. Neural networks occupied in a
particular task are less likely to engage in the processing of
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
9
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
another normally unrelated task. Conversely, neural networks
deprived of their main function can engage in processing
other less desirable tasks, such as pain perception. The
challenge of producing myoelectric patterns different enough
to control several distal movements engages a non-negligible
amount of neural resources, potentially preventing them from
contributing to pain processing. In summary, PME recruits
susceptible neural resources, preventing their engagement in
pain processing (competitive plasticity).
The PME hypothesis presented here can be tested by brain
imaging (purposeful cortical reorganization and increased inter-
hemispheric communication), and behavioral studies (phantom
limb movement). My research group is beginning to test this
hypothesis as part of a large international, double blinded,
controlled clinical trial (101).
Based on the above mechanism hypothesized at play in
PME, one can theorize that although visual feedback is required
to reach the dexterity needed for competitive plasticity to be
relevant, visual feedback does not need to be anthropomorphic.
This prediction can be tested in a controlled trial in which visual
feedback provided to the subject is either anthropomorphic or
non-anthropomorphic, while keeping all the other aspects of
PME constant.
The aforementioned mechanism for PLP treatment can
also be used to prevent its development in the first place.
PME soon after amputation could maintain inter-hemispheric
communication,
native
cortical
organization
(or
induced
purposeful reorganization), and phantom limb movement. This
would reduce the amount of susceptible neural circuitry, and
thus reduce the probability of stochastic entanglement with pain.
This prediction can also be tested by a controlled trial where
PME is provided soon after amputation. The incidence of PLP in
this group could be then compared to its natural occurrence, or
as a result of providing another active treatment.
Clinical Findings on PME by MPR, VR/AR,
and SG
PME using MPR, VR/AR, and SG was first evaluated in a
patient with chronic intractable PLP in 2013 (97). At 72 years
old, the subject was a male upper limb amputee who had
suffered PLP for 48 years despite trying several medical and
non-medical treatments. The patient reported a complex profile
of PLP over time that motivated the development of a new
comprehensive measure of pain considering intensity, time, and
frequency, namely the weighted pain distribution (WPD). WPD
has been found to correlate to conventional pain metrics, such
as the numeric rating scale and the pain rating index (11). The
subject reported a complete lack of phantom movement control,
and perceived a static fist, described as strongly and stressfully
clenched. He also reported low quality of sleep as high-intensity
pain episodes would often awaken him during the night. PLP was
gradually reduced to sporadic and short-duration pain episodes
throughout 18 weekly sessions of treatment. In addition, PLP
intrusion in sleep disappeared, and both the subject and his
family reported this as a major benefit. The subject gained control
over phantom limb movements, which he believes helped him to
control the sporadic episodes of PLP. The patient was provided
with a PME system (MPR, VR/AR, and SG) to use at home, and
the treatment benefits have remained for over 5 years.
The above initial findings motivated a multi-center clinical
trial on a similar patient population of chronic intractable PLP
sufferers (11). Sixteen upper limb amputees with PLP for an
average of 10 years, who tried all available treatment options
at their clinics, were enrolled in four clinics and received 12
treatment sessions of PME. Pain was measured prior to each
session in order to avoid misleading peaks of relief immediately
after treatment. The subjects reported a gradual reduction of pain
on the course of the treatment, which was measured at about
50% at the last treatment session. More than half of the patients
reported a pain reduction of at least two points in the numeric
rating scale (NRS). Pain reduction of 50%, or two points in NSR,
is considered clinically relevant (102). Intrusion of PLP in sleep
and activities of daily living was also reduced to about 50%, and
half of the patients using medications reduced their intake by
about 50%. These improvements were still observable 6 months
after treatment, which is of paramount importance for the clinical
relevance of treatments for chronic conditions (11).
Despite the considerations taken in the aforementioned
clinical trial to avoid sources of bias, no control group was
included and therefore confounding effects cannot be fully
discarded (i.e., placebos). PME is currently under evaluation in
an international (seven countries), double blind, randomized,
controlled clinical trial (101). Both upper and lower limb
amputees are enrolled in this multinational study. Preliminary
results observed in lower limb PLP confirmed the feasibility of
the approach in this patient population (98, 103).
PME in the proposed setup requires a conventional personal
computer with a webcam, electromyography related electronics,
and therapy guiding software formed by signal processing and
machine learning algorithms, virtual and augmented reality
environments, and games. This makes the technology portable
and suitable for home use. Preliminary observations by my
research group in four patients using such a system in their own
at home indicate that outcomes comparable to those of a clinical
environment can be attained (unpublished data).
Ramachandran et al. have reported that the perception of a
phantom limb can disappear after mirror therapy, along with
the pain that afflicted it (57, 89). Some patients aware of the
possibility of such “phantom amputation” are hesitant to engage
in treatments such as mirror therapy, as they do not desire their
phantom to disappear. My research group and collaborators have
not yet encountered said phantom limb disappearance after PME
in over 30 subjects treated worldwide with follow-ups up to
5 years. On the contrary, gained movement skills over a vivid
phantom limb has been the norm.
Advantages of PME by MPR, VR/AR, and
SG
Owing to the lack of standardization, mirror therapy allows
patients to repeat the same movements inattentively. Simple and
repetitive motor actions are insufficient to drive brain plasticity,
particularly functional reorganization of cortical maps (104). It
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
10
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
has been observed that sensory stimulation, without focusing on
discrimination, does not result in a reduction of neuropathic
pain (105). Brain plasticity requires mindful training. PME
promoted by MPR forces patients to concentrate on producing
distinct patterns of muscular activity, which remains challenging
throughout the therapy by increasing the complexity of phantom
movements (11, 97, 98). This increased dexterity and awareness
of the stump musculature is hypothesized to drive “purposeful
cortical reorganization.”
Purposeful cortical reorganization is ideally achieved by
engaging both sensory and motor circuitry, but potentially also
by engaging either independently, as noted before. PME is
analogous to sensory discrimination in regards of the possibility
to expand cortical representation of the stump (55), and the
combination of both approaches would be potentially beneficial.
Regarding engagement of the native missing limb circuitry,
motor execution is practically advantageous over sensory
feedback as subjects can engage in complex phantom movements,
but eliciting rich sensations arising from the phantom limb would
require the implantation of high-resolution neural interfaces, or
the presence of phantom maps [naturally occurred or created by
TSR (77)]. In other words, motor execution can still recruit the
missing limb circuitry, as this is the result of a top-down, rather
than a bottom-up process as in the case of sensory perception
(the “bottom” part being biological sensors no longer available).
Given the known involvement of the sensory cortex in motor
control (56), PME execution appears as a more cost-effective
solution in cases where restoration of both sensory and motor
function is not feasible.
Intended movements of lost joints can be decoded using
MPR despite the fact that available muscles at the stump
did not originally actuate such joints. My research group has
demonstrated that muscles above the elbow can be used to
infer hand movements in transhumeral amputees (11, 75, 97),
as well as that muscles above the knee can be used to decode
foot movements in transfemoral amputees (98, 103). This is
possible largely due to the synergistic activation of limb muscles
during movement, and as such, decoding can be done in able-
bodied subjects (98). In addition, MPR can gain access to motor
information that previously reached the lost limb in case severed
nerves naturally reinnervated stump muscles by peripheral
sprouting (106). Conversely, information of distal movements
remains inaccessible to motion tracking technologies. For
instance, infrared sensors, or inertial measurement units, provide
information of the position of the stump in space, and how
remaining joints move around it, but they cannot inform about
the intended action in the missing joints. Therapies employing
such technologies cannot ensure the engagement of the affected
motor circuitry, and therefore they are bound to provide limited
pain relief when only focused on delivery of visual feedback
(see section Theoretical framework on Phantom Limb Pain). A
randomized controlled clinical trial on mirror therapy found that
using augmented reality, instead of a conventional mirror, had no
effect in pain relief (107). This result can be explained by the fact
that the contralateral limb, rather than the affected limb, was used
as the source of control and therefore PME was not guaranteed.
PME using MPR ensures the activation of motor circuitry down
to the stump, which in addition to addressing maladaptive
plasticity down to the spinal cord, can also temporally normalize
the stump temperature due to muscular contractions (Figure 3).
The stump and phantom limb could be further neglected if
a plasticity-based therapy relies on the contralateral limb. Using
instrumented gloves, or any technology worn or requiring the
contralateral limb (Figure 4), makes the approach equivalent to
mirror therapy from the mechanistic viewpoint. In addition, such
an approach restricts its application to unilateral amputees with
a functional remaining limb, albeit that it has been suggested
that a third-person’s limb might be used to overcome this
problem (108). Overall, technologies that disregard the missing
limb would result in a more complex and expensive setup than
using a conventional mirror, although not necessarily more
effective beyond the placebo effect brought about by sophisticated
technology (expectation).
Limitations of PME by MPR, VR/AR, and SG
PME could be hindered by neuropathies that prevent the subject
from producing motor control, such as motor extinction (109).
Some neuropathies at the cortical level could be overcome
by using direct current transcranial stimulation (tDCS) (110),
or transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) (111), to facilitate
motor execution (112). Pan et al. showed that amputees under
tDCS increased their ability to produce different patterns of
myoelectric activity related to phantom movements (112), and
therefore tDCS during PME therapy might accelerate PLP relief.
A contraindication of PME is the presence of stump pain or
neuromas that become stimulated during muscular contractions.
This is because stump contractions would be painful, and
thus the PME treatment session would be painful as well.
However, patient and physician should decide the level of stump
pain at which PME becomes inappropriate. In a single-case
study, a transradial amputee was treated with PME despite
suffering considerable stump pain. This was owing to the subject’s
insistence on trying PME after exhausting all other clinical
alternatives. The subject considered that his level of pain was high
and constant, and therefore a small increase during the therapy
was irrelevant. After 13 weekly sessions of 2 h of PME, PLP was
reduced from 9 to 3 NRS, and stump pain was reduced from 10 to
3 NRS. The reduction of stump pain was unexpected but arguably
related to the overall perception of both pains (113). Owing to
this single positive outcome, clinicians should be cautious when
considering patients with significant stump pain as candidates for
PME treatment.
The obvious limitation of using MPR is the need of volitional
control over stump muscles. Although limited musculature is
required, there must be present at least portion of biceps and
triceps brachii muscles in the upper limbs, or quadriceps and
hamstrings muscles in the lower limbs. MPR is not ideal in
subjects with shoulder or hip disarticulation unless they undergo
a surgical intervention such as TMR. Similar limitations apply to
subjects with excessive soft tissue, and those who suffered nerve
injuries such brachial plexus avulsion. In case of uncertainty,
an evaluation using MPR is recommended to determine if
myoelectric activity can be recorded and whether it is usable for
MPR.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
11
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
FIGURE 3 | Infrared thermography before and after a PME treatment session. Images by a thermographic camera of the stump of a transhumeral amputee, before
(left) and after (right) a session of Phantom Motor Execution (PME) using Myoelectric Pattern Recognition (PMR), Virtual, and Augmented Reality (VR/AR), and
Serious Gaming (SG).
FIGURE 4 | Treatments for PLP based on motor control. Comparison between plasticity-based treatments using motor imagery or execution of phantom limb
movements. Mirror therapy and virtual mirror therapy fundamentally differ only in the source of visual feedback (analog or digital). Virtual mirror therapy illustrates the
cases where a functional contralateral limb is the source of control for the virtual limb, as in mirror therapy. Phantom motor execution is illustrated as used with
myoelectric pattern recognition and augmented reality. Virtual and augmented reality, as well as serious gaming, can be implemented in both virtual mirror therapy and
phantom motor execution.
THE LURE OF VR AND OTHER EMERGING
TECHNOLOGIES
Developing sophisticated technologies for the treatment of a
given condition requires time, effort, and financing. In addition,
there is an opportunity cost once a given approach has been
selected, and such cost might be considerable if technologies
are chosen with an under-informed basis. A word of caution is
therefore pertinent on the matter, as novel therapies found in the
literature often provide unclear mechanistic bases.
Several approaches to relieve PLP using VR had been reported
in the literature (114), and visual feedback is often cited as
the main reason for pain relief (57, 58). However, there is
limited evidence supporting the high importance so far given
to anthropomorphic visual feedback. Although alterations to
the visual representations of a limb have been reported to
modify pain perception (115, 116), a recent systematic review by
Boesch et al. found limited evidence to support the argument
that bodily illusions can alter pain (117). Furthermore, in
the cases where PLP is maintained by maladaptive changes
at the spinal cord, visual input is unlikely to affect such
circuitry and therefore be directly responsible for PLP relief.
One can make the case that visualization of healthy limbs
alone is clearly not sufficient to relinquish PLP, as sufferers
observe healthy limbs in their daily life, and yet PLP prevails.
Similarly, mirror therapy would be successful in all cases if
only anthropomorphic visual feedback would be required to
relinquish pain. If the main reason for using digital VR is to
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
12
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
provide a realistic limb representation, one should consider
utilizing a mirror instead. The similarity and fluidity of
movement in mirror image is a good as it could be, at a fraction
of the cost.
Head-mounted displays (HMD) are often argued as preferable
due to the higher immersion provided by a first-person
perspective, but again, limited support exists for the idea that
immersion, or a first-person perspective, mediate neuropathic
pain beyond serving as a distraction. The use of more
sophisticated technologies, such as HMDs, can increase the
therapy’s appeal and although this is important, it does not
necessarily increase the therapy’s efficacy beyond creating an
initial incentive for patients to use it. In this regard, it is worth
noticing that pain itself is already a strong incentive to adhere to
therapy.
Realistic virtual environments are often sought to promote
embodiment, which is believed to help in the relief of pain.
This line of thought has two problems. Firstly, embodiment is
mainly comprised of agency and ownership. Agency is not related
to the virtual representation, but to the perceived control over
such representation. This leaves only the ownership component
of embodiment to visual feedback. However, visual feedback
alone does not induce ownership, but requires synchronized and
somatotopically congruent tactile feedback as well. That is, a
visual stimulation of the virtual index finger must correspond
in time and location to a tactile perception in the index finger.
This presents a problem in amputees, as distally referred tactile
sensation can only be achieved non-invasively with the presence
of a phantom map [naturally occurred or created by TSR (77)],
or invasively via direct nerve stimulation. Secondly, even if
ownership can be achieved, there is not yet strong scientific
evidence to support the idea that embodiment mediates PLP.
Embodiment of limb prostheses has not been correlated to
absence of PLP (118), nor has perceived ownership of a rubber
hand (as in the rubber hand illusion) demonstrated pain relief
(119). The analgesic effects of embodiment, or that of a realistic
visual representation of the missing limb, are poorly supported
by scientific evidence as of today, and thus should not be used
as the sole argument to support novel PLP treatments. Further
research on the mediation of pain by the aforementioned aspects
is required for these to become scientifically sound targets for
pain treatment. Lastly, VR is commonly misunderstood as a
therapy in and of itself, rather than a tool that is used for
the design of interventions. This is an important distinction
because the success of any given therapy is less dependent
on the technology employed, than on how such technology is
applied.
CONCLUSION
This article presented a theoretical framework for Phantom
limb pain (PLP) and two working hypotheses for its origin
and treatment, respectively. Implications, predictions, and
experiments to test the validity these ideas were described.
Ongoing experiments will further support or challenge the
ideas of stochastic entanglement and phantom motor execution
presented here. PLP is a complex condition that requires careful
evaluation. Distinction between nociceptive and neuropathic
sources of the referred painful sensations is necessary for
prescription of suitable treatments. Similarly, novel treatments
must consider current clinical and neuroscientific finings to
improve their chance of success. In this regard, controlled
randomized trials and long-term follow-ups are necessary to
identify truly effective therapies.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and
approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This work was funded by the Stiftelsen Promobilia (15103),
VINNOVA
(Medtech4Health
2016-02290),
European
Pain
Federation—Grünenthal—Research Grant (E-G-G 358041552),
and the European Commission (H2020 DeTOP and FLAG-ERA
GRAFIN projects).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Eefje van der Kaaden and Sigrún Víkingsdóttir
for their contributions in preparing Figures 1, 3, respectively.
REFERENCES
1. Pezzin LI, Dillingham TR, MacKenzie EJ. Rehabilitation and the long-
term
outcomes
of
persons
with
trauma-related
amputations.
Arch
Phys
Med
Rehabil.
(2000)
81:292–300.
doi:
10.1016/S0003-9993(00)
90074-1
2. Clark
RL,
Bowling
FL,
Jepson
F,
Rajbhandari
S.
Phantom
limb
pain after amputation in diabetic patients does not differ from that
after
amputation
in
nondiabetic
patients.
Pain
(2013)
154:729–32.
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2013.01.009
3. Richardson C, Crawford K, Milnes K, Bouch E, Kulkarni J. A clinical
evaluation of postamputation phenomena including phantom limb pain
after lower limb amputation in dysvascular patients. Pain Manag Nurs.
(2015) 16:561–9. doi: 10.1016/j.pmn.2014.10.006
4. Dolezal J, Vernick S, Khan N, Lutz D, Tyndall C. Factors associated with use
and nonuse of an AK prosthesis in a rural, southern, geriatric population. Int
J Rehabil Heal. (1998) 4:245–251.
5. Arena JG, Sherman R a., Bruno GM, Smith JD. The relationship between
situational stress and phantom limb pain: cross-lagged correlational
data from six month pain logs. J Psychosom Res. (1990) 34:71–7.
doi: 10.1016/0022-3999(90)90009-S
6. Kern
U,
Busch
V,
Rockland
M,
Kohl
M,
Birklein
F.
Prävalenz
und
risikofaktoren
von
phantomschmerzen
und
phantomwahrnehmungen in deutschland. Der Schmerz. (2009) 23:479–88.
doi: 10.1007/s00482-009-0786-5
7. Sivertsen B, Lallukka T, Petrie KJ, Steingrímsdóttir ÓA, Stubhaug A,
Nielsen CS. Sleep and pain sensitivity in adults. Pain (2015) 156:1433–9.
doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000131
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
13
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
8. Sherman RA. Stump and phantom limb pain. Neurol Clin. (1989) 7:249–64.
9. Ruddere L De, Goubert L, Stevens M, Amanda AC, Crombez G. Discounting
pain in the absence of medical evidence is explained by negative evaluation
of the patient. Pain (2013) 154:669–76. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.12.018
10. Cervero F. Understanding Pain: Exploring the Perception of Pain. Cambridge:
MIT Press (2012).
11. Ortiz-Catalan
M,
Guð*mundsdóttir
RA,
Kristoffersen
MB,
Zepeda-
Echavarria A, Caine-Winterberger K, Kulbacka-Ortiz K, et al. Phantom
motor execution facilitated by machine learning and augmented reality as
treatment for phantom limb pain: a single group, clinical trial in patients
with chronic intractable phantom limb pain. Lancet (2016) 388:2885–94.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31598-7
12. Chiu IM, Heesters BA, Ghasemlou N, Von Hehn CA, Zhao F, Tran J, et al.
Bacteria activate sensory neurons that modulate pain and inflammation.
Nature (2013) 501:52–7. doi: 10.1038/nature12479
13. Wilson PR, Person JR, Su DW, Wang JK. Herpes zoster reactivation of
phantom limb pain. Mayo Clin Proc. (1978) 53:336–8.
14. Weinstein SM. Phantom limb pain and related disorders. Neurol Clin. (1998)
16:919–35. doi: 10.1016/S0733-8619(05)70105-5
15. Griffin SC, Tsao JW. A mechanism-based classification of phantom limb
pain. Pain (2014) 155:2236–42. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2014.05.016
16. Souza
JM,
Cheesborough
JE,
Ko
JH,
Cho
MS,
Kuiken
TA,
Dumanian GA. Targeted muscle reinnervation: a novel approach to
postamputation neuroma pain. Clin Orthop Relat Res. (2014) 472:2984–90.
doi: 10.1007/s11999-014-3528-7
17. Woo SL, Kung TA, Brown DL, Leonard JA, Kelly BM, Cederna
PS.
Regenerative
peripheral
nerve
interfaces
for
the
treatment
of
postamputation neuroma pain. Plast Reconstr Surg. (2016) 4:e1038.
doi: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000001038
18. Moayedi M, Davis KD. Theories of pain: from specificity to gate control. J
Neurophysiol. (2013) 109:5–12. doi: 10.1152/jn.00457.2012
19. Melzack R. Pain and the neuromatrix in the brain. J Dent Educ. (2001)
65:1378–1382.
20. Kucyi A, Davis KD. The dynamic pain connectome. Trends Neurosci. (2015)
38:86–95. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2014.11.006
21. Vaso A, Adahan H, Gjika A, Zahaj S, Zhurda T, Vyshka G, et al. Peripheral
nervous system origin of phantom limb pain. Pain (2014) 155:1384–91.
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2014.04.018
22. Pasluosta C, Kiele P, Stieglitz T. Paradigms for restoration of somatosensory
feedback via stimulation of the peripheral nervous system. J Clin
Neurophysiol. (2018) 129:851–62. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.12.027
23. Sherman RA, Sherman CJ, Gall NG. A survey of current phantom
limb
pain
treatment
in
the
United
States.
Pain
(1980)
8:85–99.
doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(80)90092-5
24. Jensen TS, Krebs B, Nielsen J, Rasmussen P. Phantom limb, phantom
pain and stump pain in amputees during the first 6 months following
limb amputation. Pain (1983) 17:243–56. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(83)
90097-0
25. Dijkstra PU, Geertzen JHB, Stewart R, van der Schans CP. Phantom pain
and risk factors: a multivariate analysis. J Pain Symptom Manag. (2002)
24:578–85. doi: 10.1016/S0885-3924(02)00538-9
26. Nikolajsen L, Jensen TS. Phantom limb pain. Br J Anaesth. (2001) 87:107–16.
doi: 10.1093/bja/87.1.107
27. Nikolajsen L, Jensen TS. Phantom limb pain. Curr Rev Pain (2000) 4:166–70.
28. Harris AJ. Cortical Origin of Pathological Pain. Lancet (1999) 354:1464–6.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(99)05003-5
29. Flor H, Elbert T, Knecht S, Wienbruch C, Pantev C, Birbaumer N, et al.
Phantom-limb pain as a perceptual correlate of cortical reorganization
following arm amputation. Nature (1995) 375:482–4. doi: 10.1038/375482a0
30. Knecht S, Henningsen H, Höhling C, Elbert T, Flor H, Pantev C,
Taub E. Plasticity of plasticity? Changes in the pattern of perceptual
correlates of reorganization after amputation. Brain (1998) 121:717–24.
doi: 10.1093/brain/121.4.717
31. Lotze M, Grodd W, Birbaumer N, Erb M, Huse E, Flor H. Does use of a
myoelectric prosthesis prevent cortical reorganization and phantom limb
pain? Nat Neurosci. (1999) 2:501–2. doi: 10.1038/9145
32. Grüsser SM, Winter C, Mühlnickel W, Denke C, Karl A, Villringer
K,
et
al.
The
relationship
of
perceptual
phenomena
and
cortical
reorganization in upper extremity amputees. Neuroscience (2001) 102:263–
72. doi: 10.1016/S0306-4522(00)00491-7
33. Birbaumer N, Lutzenberger W, Montoya P, Larbig W, Unertl K, Töpfner S,
et al. Effects of regional anesthesia on phantom limb pain are mirrored in
changes in cortical reorganization. J Neurosci. (1997) 17:5503–8.
34. Maihöfner C, Handwerker HO, Neundorfer B, Birklein F. Patterns of
cortical reorganization in complex regional pain syndrome. Neurology (2003)
61:1707–15. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000098939.02752.8E
35. Maeda Y, Kettner N, Holden J, Lee J, Kim J, Cina S, et al. Functional deficits
in carpal tunnel syndrome reflect reorganization of primary somatosensory
cortex. Brain (2014) 137(Pt 6):1741–52. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu096
36. Foell J, Bekrater-Bodmann R, Diers M, Flor H. Mirror therapy for phantom
limb pain: brain changes and the role of body representation. Eur J Pain
(2014) 18:729–39. doi: 10.1002/j.1532-2149.2013.00433.x
37. Flor H, Denke C, Schaefer M, Grüsser S. Effect of sensory discrimination
training on cortical reorganisation and phantom limb pain. Lancet (2001)
357:1763–4. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)04890-X
38. Pleger B, Tegenthoff M, Ragert P, Förster A-F, Dinse HR, Schwenkreis P, et al.
Sensorimotor returning in complex regional pain syndrome parallels pain
reduction. Ann Neurol. (2005) 57:425–9. doi: 10.1002/ana.20394
39. Jutzeler CR, Curt A, Kramer JLK. Relationship between chronic pain
and brain reorganization after deafferentation: a systematic review
of
functional
MRI
findings.
NeuroImage
Clin.
(2015)
9:599–606.
doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2015.09.018
40. Makin TR, Scholz J, Filippini N, Henderson Slater D, Tracey I, Johansen-Berg
H. Phantom pain is associated with preserved structure and function in the
former hand area. Nat Commun. (2013) 4:1570. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2571
41. Makin TR, Scholz J, Henderson Slater D, Johansen-Berg H, Tracey
I.
Reassessing
cortical
reorganization
in
the
primary
sensorimotor
cortex
following
arm
amputation.
Brain
(2015)
138:2140–6.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awv161
42. Raffin E, Richard N, Giraux P, Reilly KT. Primary motor cortex
changes after amputation correlate with phantom limb pain and the
ability to move the phantom limb. Neuroimage (2016) 130:134–44.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.01.063
43. Franz E a, Ramachandran VS. Bimanual coupling in amputees with phantom
limbs. Nat Neurosci. (1998) 1:443–4. doi: 10.1038/2161
44. Osumi M, Sumitani M, Wake N, Sano Y, Ichinose A, Kumagaya
SI, et al. Structured movement representations of a phantom limb
associated with phantom limb pain. Neurosci Lett. (2015) 605:7–11.
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.08.009
45. SIMMEL ML. Phantoms in patients with leprosy and in elderly digital
amputees. Am J Psychol. (1956) 69:529–545.
46. Price DB. Phantom limb phenomenon in patients with leprosy. J
Nerv Ment Dis. (1976) 163:108–16. doi: 10.1097/00005053-197608000-
00005
47. Zamany P, Modirian E, Soroush M, Masoumi M, Hoseeini M. Phantom
limb sensation (PLS) and phantom limb pain (PLP) among young landmine
amputees. Iran J Child Neurol. (2016) 10:42–47.
48. Melzack R, Israel R, Lacroix R, Schultz G. Phantom limbs in people with
congenital limb deficiency or amputation in early childhood. Brain (1997)
120:1603–20.
49. Goldberger AL. Non-linear dynamics for clinicians: chaos theory, fractals,
and complexity at the bedside. Lancet (1996) 347:1312–4.
50. Deco
G,
Rolls
ET,
Romo
R.
Stochastic
dynamics
as
a
principle
of
brain
function.
Prog
Neurobiol.
(2009)
88:1–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.01.006
51. Villemure C, Bushnell MC. Cognitive modulation of pain: How do
attention and emotion influence pain processing? Pain (2002) 95:195–9.
doi: 10.1016/S0304-3959(02)00007-6
52. LaBar KS, Cabeza R. Cognitive neuroscience of emotional memory. Nat Rev
Neurosci. (2006) 7:54–64. doi: 10.1038/nrn1825
53. Pantev C, Oostenveld R, Engelien A, Ross B, Roberts LE, Hoke M. Increased
auditory cortical representation in musicians. Nature (1998) 392:811–4.
doi: 10.1038/33918
54. Elbert T, Pantev C, Wienbruch C, Rockstroh B, Taub E. Increased cortical
representation of the fingers of the left hand in string players. Science (1995)
270:305–7. doi: 10.1126/science.270.5234.305
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
14
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
55. Huse E, Preissl H, Larbig W, Birbaumer N. Phantom limb pain. Lancet
(2001) 358:1015. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(01)06144-X
56. Matyas F, Sreenivasan V, Marbach F, Wacongne C, Barsy B, Mateo
C, et al. Motor control by sensory cortex. Science (2010) 330:1240–3.
doi: 10.1126/science.1195797
57. Ramachandra V, Rogers-Ramachandra D. Synaesthesia in phantom limbs
induced with mirrors. Proc R Soc Lond B (1996) 263:377–86.
58. Moseley LG, Gallace A, Spence C. Is mirror therapy all it is cracked
up to be? Current evidence and future directions. Pain (2008) 138:7–10.
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2008.06.026
59. Shukla
GD,
Sahu
SC,
Tripathi
RP,
Gupta
DK.
Phantom
limb:
a
phenomenological
study.
Br
J
Psychiatry
(1982)
141:54–58.
doi: 10.1192/bjp.141.1.54
60. Preißler S, Thielemann D, Dietrich C, Hofmann GO, Miltner WHR,
Weiss
T.
Preliminary
evidence
for
training-induced
changes
of
morphology and phantom limb pain. Front Hum Neurosci. (2017) 11:319.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00319
61. Preißler S, Feiler J, Dietrich C, Hofmann GO, Miltner WHR, Weiss
T. Gray matter changes following limb amputation with high and
low intensities of phantom limb pain. Cereb Cortex (2013) 23:1038–48.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs063
62. MacIver K, Lloyd DM, Kelly S, Roberts N, Nurmikko T. Phantom limb pain,
cortical reorganization and the therapeutic effect of mental imagery. Brain
(2008) 131:2181–91. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn124
63. Flor H, Nikolajsen L, Staehelin Jensen T. Phantom limb pain: a case
of maladaptive CNS plasticity? Nat Rev Neurosci. (2006) 7:873–81.
doi: 10.1038/nrn1991
64. Diers M, Christmann C, Koeppe C, Ruf M, Flor H. Mirrored , imagined
and executed movements differentially activate sensorimotor cortex in
amputees with and without phantom limb pain. Pain (2010) 149:296–304.
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2010.02.020
65. Batsford
S,
Ryan
C,
Martin
D.
Non-pharmacological
conservative
therapy for phantom limb pain: a systematic review of randomised
controlled
trials.
Physiother
Theory
Pract.
(2017)
33:173–83.
doi: 10.1080/09593985.2017.1288283
66. Turner JA, Deyo RA, Loeser JD, Korff M, Fordyce WE. The importance of
placebo effects in pain treatment and research. JAMA (1994) 71:1609–14.
67. Flor H. Phantom-limb pain: characteristics, causes, and treatment. Lancet
Neurol. (2002) 1:182–9.
68. Nyström B, Hagbarth KE. Microelectrode recordings from transected nerves
in amputees with phantom limb pain. Neurosci Lett. (1981) 27:211–6.
69. Wu
CL,
Tella
P,
Staats
PS,
Vaslav
R,
Kazim
DA,
Wesselmann
U, et al. Analgesic effects of intravenous lidocaine and morphine
on
postamputation
pain.
Anesthesiology
(2002)
96:841–8.
doi: 10.1097/00000542-200204000-00010
70. Finnerup
NB,
Attal
N,
Haroutounian
S,
McNicol
E,
Baron
R,
Dworkin RH, et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol. (2015) 14:162–73.
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70251-0
71. White JC, Sweet WH. Pain and the Neurosurgeon: a 40-Year Experience.
Springfield: Charles C Thomas (1970).
72. Sullivan MD, Ballantyne JC. Must we reduce pain intensity to treat chronic
pain? Pain (2016) 157:65–9. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000336
73. Ives GC, Kung TA, Nghiem BT, Ursu DC, Brown DL, Cederna PS, et al.
Current state of the surgical treatment of terminal neuromas. Neurosurgery
(2017) 83:354–64. doi: 10.1093/neuros/nyx500
74. Kuiken T, Feuser A, Barlow A. Targeted Muscle Reinnervation. Taylor:
Francis (2013). doi: 10.1201/b15079
75. Ortiz-Catalan
M,
Håkansson
B,
Brånemark
R.
An
osseointegrated
human-machine
gateway
for
long-term
sensory
feedback
and
motor control of artificial limbs. Sci Transl Med. (2014) 6:257re6.
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008933
76. Ortiz-Catalan M, Mastinu E, Brånemark R, Håkansson B. Direct Neural
Sensory Feedback and Control via Osseointegration. In: XVI World Congress
of the International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics (ISPO), Cape Town
(2017).
77. Kuiken TA, Marasco PD, Lock BA, Harden RN, Dewald JPA. Redirection
of cutaneous sensation from the hand to the chest skin of human amputees
with targeted reinnervation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2007) 104:20061–6.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0706525104
78. Serino A, Akselrod M, Salomon R, Martuzzi R, Blefari ML, Canzoneri E,
et al. Upper limb cortical maps in amputees with targeted muscle and sensory
reinnervation. Brain (2017) 140:2993–3011. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx242
79. Chan BL, Witt R, Charrow AP, Magee A, Howard R, Pasquina PF, et al.
Mirror therapy for phantom limb pain. N Engl J Med. (2007) 357:2206–7.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMc071927
80. Cacchio A, De Blasis E, Necozione S, Orio F di, Santilli V. Mirror therapy for
chronic complex regional pain syndrome type 1 and stroke. N Engl J Med.
(2009) 361:634–6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc0902799
81. Bowering KJ, Connell NEO, Tabor A, Catley MJ, Leake HB, Moseley
GL, et al. The effects of graded motor imagery and its components on
chronic pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Pain (2013) 14:3–13.
doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2012.09.007
82. Moseley GL. Is successful rehabilitation of complex regional pain syndrome
due to sustained attention to the affected limb? A randomised clinical trial.
Pain (2005) 114:54–61. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2004.11.024
83. Moseley
GL.
Graded
motor
imagery
for
pathologic
pain:
a
randomized
controlled
trial.
Neurology
(2006)
67:2129–34.
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000249112.56935.32
84. Johnson S, Hall J, Barnett S, Draper M, Derbyshire G, Haynes L, et al.
Using graded motor imagery for complex regional pain syndrome in
clinical practice: failure to improve pain. Eur J Pain (2012) 16:550–61.
doi: 10.1002/j.1532-2149.2011.00064.x
85. Brunelli S, Morone G, Iosa M, Ciotti C, De Giorgi R, Foti C,
et al. Efficacy of progressive muscle relaxation, mental imagery, and
phantom exercise training on phantom limb: a randomized controlled
trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. (2015) 96:181–7. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2014.
09.035
86. Milde C, Rance M, Kirsch P, Trojan J, Fuchs X, Foell J, et al. Do mirror
glasses have the same effect on brain activity as a mirror box? Evidence from
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study with healthy subjects. PLoS
ONE (2015) 10:e0127694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127694
87. Dunn J, Yeo E, Moghaddampour P, Chau B, Humbert S. Virtual and
augmented reality in the treatment of phantom limb pain: a literature review.
NeuroRehabilitation (2017) 40:595–601. doi: 10.3233/NRE-171447
88. Barbin J, Seetha V, Casillas JM, Paysant J, Pérennou D. The effects
of mirror therapy on pain and motor control of phantom limb in
amputees: a systematic review. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. (2016) 59:270–5.
doi: 10.1016/j.rehab.2016.04.001
89. Ramachandran VS, Blakeslee S. Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries
of the Human Mind. New York, NY: William Morrow (1998).
90. Brodie EE, Whyte A, Niven CA. Analgesia through the looking-glass? A
randomized controlled trial investigating the effect of viewing a “virtual”
limb upon phantom limb pain, sensation and movement. Eur J Pain (2007)
11:428–36. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpain.2006.06.002
91. Schmalzl L, Ragnö C, Ehrsson HH. An alternative to traditional mirror
therapy. Clin J Pain (2013) 29:e10–8. doi: 10.1097/AJP.0b013e3182850573
92. Ichinose A, Sano Y, Osumi M, Sumitani M, Kumagaya SI, Kuniyoshi Y.
Somatosensory feedback to the cheek during virtual visual feedback therapy
enhances pain alleviation for phantom arms. Neurorehabil Neural Repair
(2017) 31:717–25. doi: 10.1177/1545968317718268
93. Tan DW, Schiefer MA, Keith MW, Anderson JR, Tyler J, Tyler DJ. A neural
interface provides long-term stable natural touch perception. Sci Transl Med.
(2014) 6:257ra138. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008669
94. Rossini PM, Micera S, Benvenuto A, Carpaneto J, Cavallo G, Citi
L, et al. Double nerve intraneural interface implant on a human
amputee for robotic hand control. Clin Neurophysiol. (2010) 121:777–83.
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2010.01.001
95. Horch K, Meek S, Taylor TG, Hutchinson DT. Object discrimination with
an artificial hand using electrical stimulation of peripheral tactile and
proprioceptive pathways with intrafascicular electrodes. IEEE Trans Neural
Syst Rehabil Eng. (2011) 19:483–9. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2011.2162635
96. Dietrich C, Walter-Walsh K, Preissler S, Hofmann GO, Witte OW,
Miltner WHRR, et al. Sensory feedback prosthesis reduces phantom
limb pain: proof of a principle. Neurosci Lett. (2012) 507:97–100.
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.068
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
15
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
 Ortiz-Catalan
Stochastic Entanglement and Phantom Motor Execution
97. Ortiz-Catalan M, Sander N, Kristoffersen MB, Håkansson B, Brånemark
R. Treatment of phantom limb pain (PLP) based on augmented
reality and gaming controlled by myoelectric pattern recognition : a
case study of a chronic PLP patient. Front Neurosci. (2014) 8:24.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00024
98. Lendaro E, Mastinu E, Håkansson B, Ortiz-Catalan M. Real-time
classification
of
non-weight
bearing
lower-limb
movements
using
EMG to facilitate phantom motor execution: engineering and case
study application on phantom limb pain. Front Neurol. (2017) 8:1–12.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2017.00470
99. Gagné M, Reilly KT, Hétu S, Mercier C. Motor control over the phantom
limb in above-elbow amputees and its relationship with phantom limb pain.
Neuroscience (2009) 162:78–86. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.04.061
100. Kikkert S, Mezue M, Henderson D, Johansen-berg H, Tracey I, Makin
TR. Motor correlates of phantom limb pain. Cortex (2017) 95:29–36.
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.07.015
101. Lendaro E, Hermansson L, Burger H, Van der Sluis CK, McGuire BE,
Pilch M, et al. Phantom motor execution as a treatment for phantom limb
pain: protocol of an international, double-blind, randomised controlled
clinical trial. BMJ Open (2018) 8:e021039. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-
021039
102. Farrar JT, Young JP, LaMoreaux L, Werth JL, Poole RM. Clinical importance
of changes in chronic pain intensity measured on an 11-point numerical pain
rating scale. Pain (2001) 94:149–58. doi: 10.1016/S0304-3959(01)00349-9
103. Lendaro E, Ortiz-Catalan M. Classification of non-weight bearing lower limb
movements: towards a potential treatment for phantom limb pain based on
myoelectric pattern recognition. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. (2016)
2016:5457–60. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591961
104. Plautz
EJ,
Milliken
GW,
Nudo
RJ.
Effects
of
repetitive
motor
training
on
movement
representations
in
adult
squirrel
monkeys:
role of use versus learning. Neurobiol Learn Mem. (2000) 74:27–55.
doi: 10.1006/nlme.1999.3934
105. Moseley GL, Zalucki NM, Wiech K. Tactile discrimination , but not
tactile stimulation alone, reduces chronic limb pain. Pain (2008) 137:600–8.
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2007.10.021
106. Qi HX, Phillips WS, Kaas JH. Connections of neurons in the lumbar
ventral
horn
of
spinal
cord
are
altered
after
long-standing
limb
loss in a macaque monkey. Somatosens Mot Res. (2004) 21:229–39.
doi: 10.1080/08990220400012588
107. Rothgangel A, Braun S, Winkens B, Beurskens A, Smeets R. Traditional
and augmented reality mirror therapy for patients with chronic phantom
limb pain (PACT study): results of a three-group, multicentre single-
blind randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. (2018)1:26921551878594.
doi: 10.1177/0269215518785948
108. Oouchida Y, Izumi S-I. Imitation movement reduces the phantom limb
pain caused by the abnormality of body schema. In: ICME International
Conference on Complex Medical Engineering (CME) (Kobe: IEEE). (2012).
p. 53–5. doi: 10.1109/ICCME.2012.6275709
109. McCabe C. Mirror visual feedback therapy. a practical approach. J Hand
Ther. (2011) 24:170–9. doi: 10.1016/j.jht.2010.08.003
110. Bolognini N, Spandri V, Ferraro F, Salmaggi A, Molinari ACL, Fregni F,
et al. Immediate and sustained effects of 5-day transcranial direct current
stimulation of the motor cortex in phantom limb pain. J Pain (2015)
16:657–65. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2015.03.013
111. Ahmed MA, Mohamed SA, Sayed D. Long-term antalgic effects of
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of motor cortex and serum beta-
endorphin in patients with phantom pain. Neurol Res. (2011) 33:953–8.
doi: 10.1179/1743132811Y.0000000045
112. Pan L, Zhang D, Sheng X, Zhu X. Improving myoelectric control for
amputees through transcranial direct current stimulation. IEEE Trans
Biomed Eng. (2015) 62:1927–36. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2015.2407491
113. Ortiz-Catalan
M,
Gudmundsdottir
RA,
Kristoffersen
MB,
Zepeda-
Echavarria A, Brånemark R. Promotion of motor execution via myoelectric
pattern recognition and augmented/virtual reality as a treatment of
phantom limb pain. In: 9th Congress of the European Pain Federation (EFIC),
Vienna (2015).
114. Perry BN, Mercier C, Pettifer SR, Cole J, Tsao JW. Virtual reality therapies
for phantom limb pain. Eur J Pain (2014) 18:897–9. doi: 10.1002/ejp.559
115. Preston
C,
Newport
R.
Analgesic
effects
of
multisensory
illusions
in
osteoarthritis.
Rheumatology
(2011)
50:2314–5.
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ker104
116. Senkowski D, Heinz A. Chronic pain and distorted body image :
implications for multisensory feedback interventions. (2016) 69:252–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.08.009
117. Boesch E, Bellan V, Moseley GL, Stanton TR. The effect of bodily illusions on
clinical pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain (2016) 157:516–29.
doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000423
118. Giummarra MJ, Georgiou-Karistianis N, Nicholls MER, Gibson SJ, Chou M,
Bradshaw JL. Corporeal awareness and proprioceptive sense of the phantom.
Br J Psychol. (2010) 101:791–808. doi: 10.1348/000712610X492558
119. Mohan R, Jensen KB, Petkova VI, Dey A, Barnsley N, Ingvar M, et al.
No pain relief with the rubber hand illusion. PLoS ONE (2012) 7:e52400.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052400
Conflict of Interest Statement: MO-C was partially funded by Integrum AB, a
for-profit organization that might commercialize a device for PLP treatment based
on the concepts described in this article. MO-C has made the core technology for
such device freely available as open source (machine learning, virtual reality, and
electronics).
Copyright © 2018 Ortiz-Catalan. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
16
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 748
