 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 15
HEALTH AND MEDICINE
Microphysiological 3D model of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) from human iPS-derived muscle cells 
and optogenetic motor neurons
Tatsuya Osaki1, Sebastien G. M. Uzel1,2,3, Roger D. Kamm1,4,5*
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a progressive neurodegenerative disease involving loss of motor neurons (MNs) 
and muscle atrophy, still has no effective treatment, despite much research effort. To provide a platform for testing 
drug candidates and investigating the pathogenesis of ALS, we developed an ALS-on-a-chip technology (i.e., an 
ALS motor unit) using three-dimensional skeletal muscle bundles along with induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)–
derived and light-sensitive channelrhodopsin-2–induced MN spheroids from a patient with sporadic ALS. Each 
tissue was cultured in a different compartment of a microfluidic device. Axon outgrowth formed neuromuscular 
junctions on the muscle fiber bundles. Light was used to activate muscle contraction, which was measured on the 
basis of pillar deflections. Compared to a non-ALS motor unit, the ALS motor unit generated fewer muscle con-
tractions, there was MN degradation, and apoptosis increased in the muscle. Furthermore, the muscle contrac-
tions were recovered by single treatments and cotreatment with rapamycin (a mechanistic target of rapamycin 
inhibitor) and bosutinib (an Src/c-Abl inhibitor). This recovery was associated with up-regulation of autophagy 
and degradation of TAR DNA binding protein–43 in the MNs. Moreover, administering the drugs via an endothe-
lial cell barrier decreased the expression of P-glycoprotein (an efflux pump that transports bosutinib) in the endo-
thelial cells, indicating that rapamycin and bosutinib cotreatment has considerable potential for ALS treatment. 
This ALS-on-a-chip and optogenetics technology could help to elucidate the pathogenesis of ALS and to screen 
for drug candidates.
INTRODUCTION
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig’s 
disease, is a neurodegenerative disease in which motor neuron (MN) 
loss in both the spinal cord and motor cortex causes progressive 
paralysis, muscle atrophy, and death (1, 2). The U.S. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention estimates that 12,000 to 15,000 
people in the United States have ALS (3). Familial ALS (10% of all 
patients with ALS) is typically associated with mutations in the gene 
encoding superoxide dismutase (SOD1). The pathogenesis of spo-
radic ALS (90% of all patients with ALS) remains unclear, but some 
evidence regarding the pathogenesis has been accumulating over 
the previous decade (4). So far, only riluzole and edaravone have 
been approved (in 1995 and 2017, respectively) by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration as symptomatic therapy for ALS. Howev-
er, existing drugs lack effectiveness and only a limited number of 
drug candidates have been evaluated for the treatment of ALS. 
Transgenic mice with SOD1 mutations (which exhibit ALS pheno-
types) have been widely used for investigating the mechanism un-
derlying ALS and for drug screening.
Clinical studies (5, 6) and two-dimensional (2D) culture models 
(7) based on induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)–derived MNs with 
several mutations [SOD1, TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43), 
and chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72)] from patients 
with ALS (8) have contributed to our understanding of the mecha-
nism underlying ALS. The 2D culture models have also been used 
for drug screening. Regarding TDP-43, accumulation of this pro-
tein in patients with ALS has been shown to cause neurotoxicity, 
triggering the development of ALS phenotypes both in vivo and 
in vitro (9). Regarding SOD1, in vitro research has shown that 
iPSC- 
derived MNs with SOD1A4V mutations have specific relevant 
phenotypes, i.e., significant loss of islet1-positive cells, reduced neu-
ronal soma size, and increased apoptosis (10). Moreover, regarding 
C9orf72, recent in vivo studies have shown that a mutation in this 
gene (involving an intronic hexanucleotide repeat expansion) is as-
sociated with the development of familial and sporadic ALS (11, 12). 
However, in contrast, the SOD1 mutation causes neurite swelling 
and degeneration, but it is not involved in neural cell death in vitro 
(13). Approximately 40% of patients with familial ALS and 8 to 
10% of patients with sporadic ALS have a C9orf72 mutation (11, 12). 
However, no significant neurotoxins of human pluripotent stem 
cell– 
derived MNs with a C9orf72 mutation were identified using 
an in vitro model, despite the high susceptibility of the MNs to 
glutamate- 
mediated excitability (14, 15). These traditional in vitro 
culture methods have led to important findings related to the devel-
opment of ALS, but the lack of an in vitro screening model that 
mimics in vivo function has severely limited the scope of drug 
development.
Organ-on-a-chip technology has recently been introduced to 
mimic physiological in vivo conditions in 2D (16) and 3D (17) con-
ditions by coculturing MNs with skeletal muscle cells, thereby pro-
ducing a model of a motor unit with neuromuscular junctions 
(NMJs). In particular, these 3D culture platforms can be used to 
evaluate and quantify MN phenotypes such as MN cell death, syn-
apse formation, and neurodegeneration, as well as muscle contrac-
tion and atrophy. These in vitro models have been important for 
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
500 Technology Square, Room NE47-321, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 2Wyss Insti-
tute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 
02138, USA. 3John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 4Department of Biological Engineering, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 500 Technology Square, Room NE47-321, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 5BioSystems and Micromechanics (BioSyM) IRG, Singapore- 
MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, Singapore, Singapore.
*Corresponding author. Email: rdkamm@mit.edu
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 15
investigating the physiopathological interactions between MNs and 
skeletal muscle cells in ALS.
Our group previously developed an optogenetic 3D mouse mo-
tor unit model in a microfluidic device that mimics many physio-
logical conditions (18). In the current study, we produced a robust 
3D ALS motor unit model using iPSC-derived MNs from a patient 
with sporadic ALS (iALS-MNs) along with iPSC-derived 3D muscle 
fiber bundles. Optogenetics technology based on transfection of a 
light-sensitive ion channel gene, channelrhodopsin-2, into iALS-
MNs and control cells [embryonic stem (ES) derived] facilitated 
spatiotemporal control of neural activity and muscle contractions.
Herein, we first established a physiological model of the human 
motor unit using non–ALS patient–derived MNs and iPSC-derived 
skeletal muscle cells. To demonstrate the model’s robustness as an 
accurate physiological model that could generate NMJs, we mea-
sured muscle contraction force and the synchronicity of Ca2+ tran-
sients and muscle contraction after chemically induced stimulation 
of the MNs. Second, excess glutamic acid was added to the human 
motor unit model. This induced excitotoxicity that mimicked the 
pathological conditions of ALS, consistent with the glutamate hy-
pothesis of ALS. Third, we established an ALS motor unit model by 
using iALS-MN spheroids and iPSC-derived skeletal muscle cells 
and tested MN viability and muscle contraction using optical stim-
ulation. Last, we demonstrated the potential uses of our ALS motor 
unit model and investigated drug screening and the autophagy- 
related efficacy mechanism by applying ALS drug candidates via an 
endothelial cell (EC) barrier.
RESULTS
Muscle performance and characterization of MN spheroids 
in microfluidic devices
A 3D muscle fiber bundle was fabricated in a microfluidic device 
(Fig. 1, A and B) by injecting iPSC-derived skeletal myoblasts into 
one compartment of the device with a collagen/Matrigel mixture 
(Fig. 1C). The cells spontaneously formed muscle fiber bundles 
around the pillar structures (Figs. 1D and 2A and movie S1) that were 
close to the glass bottom, but not attached (Fig. 1F and movie S2). 
Pillar structures help free muscle movement and improve image 
quality, and muscle contraction forces can be measured by the pillar 
movement. By day 14, most cells expressed myogenin, which is a 
muscle-specific basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor and a 
mature myocyte marker (Fig. 2B). The fusion index showed that 
differentiation in the 3D condition in the microfluidic device accel-
erated compared with a 2D monolayer culture (Fig. 2C and fig. S1). 
After around day 21, the skeletal muscle exhibited regular well- 
patterned sarcomeric structures along with mature myotube differ-
entiation (Fig. 2D). Furthermore, the mRNA expression levels of 
myogenin and four and a half LIM domain protein 1 (FHL1) also 
increased by day 21, but MyoD mRNA decreased, suggesting that 
the 3D muscle fiber bundles became mature muscle strips by day 21 
(Fig. 2, E and F).
To test the functionality of the 3D muscle fiber bundle, we mea-
sured muscle contractile force after electrical stimulation at different 
frequencies (0.5, 1, 2, and 4 Hz) (Fig. 2G). Active muscle contrac-
tion was readily observed, with a maximum muscle force at 0.5 Hz 
of approximately 2 N (0.25 mN/mm2). Muscle formation and con-
traction (based on iPSC-derived skeletal muscle cells) were com-
pared to those results from mouse myoblast C2C12 cells, which are 
often used for the in vitro study of muscle fibers (fig. S2, A and B) 
(18, 19). The C2C12 cells also formed thin 3D muscle fiber bundles, 
attaching to the pillar structures by day 14. However, after 28 days 
of culture, the C2C12 muscle structures collapsed and detached 
from the pillar structures. In contrast, the muscle fiber based on the 
iPSC-derived skeletal muscle cells maintained their structure and 
remained attached. In addition, the muscle force generated by con-
traction of electrically stimulated iPSC-derived muscle fiber bun-
dles was higher than that associated with the C2C12 cells (fig. S2B).
Meanwhile, MN spheroids were generated to accelerate MN dif-
ferentiation from human embryonic stem cell (hESC)–derived neural 
stem cells (NSCs). The formation of NSC spheroids and the differ-
entiation protocol have been described previously (Fig. 1E) (20). 
After 14 days of differentiation, the HB9 gene (a typical MN marker) 
was expressed in the MN spheroids and increased by day 28 
(Fig. 2H). A heat map of mRNA expression showed that Nestin, 
E-cadherin, SOX1, and PAX6 (an NSC marker) decreased, while 
OLIG2, neurogenin2 (NGN2), NeuroD1 (an MN progenitor marker), 
HB9, islet1, ChAT (an MN marker), neurofilament heavy chain 
(SMI-32), Synapsin I, and vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT) 
(a mature MN marker) increased over time up to day 42 (Fig. 2I). In 
addition, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, a glial cell marker) 
also slightly increased, whereas oligodendrocyte-specific protein 
(OSP) and SOX10 (an oligodendrocyte marker) did not change sig-
nificantly. HIF-1 (a hypoxia marker) slightly increased and Ki67 
(a cell cycle marker) decreased by day 42 (Fig. 2J). These results in-
dicate that MN spheroid culturing induced hypoxia to some extent, 
especially in the core (Fig. 2K) because the diameter of MN sphe-
roids is >400 m, in excess of the diffusion distance of oxygen (21). 
However, the outer layer of the spheroids remains healthy and can 
differentiate into mature MNs. In support of this, when NSC-MN 
spheroids were reseeded to a laminin-coated dish, well-connected 
neuronal networks can be established on days 25 and 45 (Fig. 2L).
Fabrication of a 3D motor unit model and NMJs in 
microfluidic devices
After formation of the 3D muscle fiber and differentiation to pro-
duce a mature myotube, predifferentiated MN spheroids were in-
jected into the left compartment of the microfluidic devices with 
collagen gel (Figs. 1, B to D, and 3A). For coculturing of the two 
types of tissues (MN spheroids and muscle fibers), MN mainte-
nance medium was kept in the left medium reservoir (close to the 
MN spheroids) and skeletal myocyte differentiation medium (SkDM) 
was kept in the right medium reservoir (close to the muscle fibers).
Motor neurite elongation in collagen gel (toward the muscle fi-
ber bundle) was observed by day 4 (Fig. 3B). By day 7, many neu-
rites had reached the 3D muscle fiber bundle (Fig. 3C). Furthermore, 
thick neural fiber bundles were observed close to the muscle fiber 
bundle by 14 days in culture (Fig. 3D). Immunostaining of choline 
acetyltransferase (ChAT), islet1, and -actinin indicated the matu-
ration of the elongated MNs and mature 3D muscle fibers in the 
coculture condition (Fig. 3, E and 3G). Moreover, cells expressing 
GFAP (astrocytes) were identified, consistent with the polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) results (Figs. 2I and 3F). Confocal imaging 
revealed neurite terminal attachment and NMJ formation by day 4 
(Fig. 3H). Thick MN fibers reached close to the muscle bundle and 
thin neurites then spread out and attached to various myotubes by 
day 14. Immunostaining of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) 
indicated NMJ formation where the muscle fiber and neurite terminals 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 15
overlapped, as early as day 7, and the number of nAChR clusters in-
creased through day 14 (Fig. 3I). Before formation of the NMJ (day 0), 
spontaneous muscle contraction occurs infrequently (less than 0.05 Hz) 
with high variation. After NMJ formation (day 7), the frequency of 
spontaneous muscle contraction increased (0.1 to 0.3 Hz) (Fig. 3K). 
Also, muscle contraction force slightly increased compared with that 
before formation of the NMJ (day 0, Fig. 3L). To test whether mus-
cle contraction could be triggered by MN activity, we used glutamic 
acid with or without -bungarotoxin (BTX), an nAChR antago-
nist (Fig. 3M). No muscle contraction was observed on day 4, but 
muscle contraction was observed on day 7 and muscle force in-
creased by day 14 (Fig. 3M and movie S3). In the presence of BTX, 
muscle contraction was completely inhibited on days 7 and 14. This 
inhibition indicated that muscle contraction was triggered by MN 
activity, not by spontaneous muscle fiber movement.
To define the relationship between activity of Ca2+ and muscle 
contraction, we conducted Ca2+ imaging of the muscle fiber [fig. 
S3A (ii)], while displacement maps indicated the spatial distribu-
tion of muscle contraction [red circle; fig. S3A (ii)]. Ca2+ imaging 
showed the spatial synchronicity of the calcium transients and local 
muscle contraction [red circles; fig. S3, A (ii and iii) and B]. Muscle 
contractions occurred at regular intervals, approximately every 0.5 s 
[fig. S3C (ii)]. In contrast, the time between calcium transients in 
the muscle fiber was more random [fig. S3C (i)]. The mean frequency 
of muscle contraction was slightly lower than the mean Ca2+ oscilla-
tion (fig. S3D). Almost all the muscle contractions were synchronized 
Fig. 1. Compartmentalized design of a human motor unit on a chip microfluidic device. (A) The micro fabricated motor unit mimic device uses polydimethylsiloxane 
(PDMS) microchannels to form four identical sites on a single chip, each composed of a muscle fiber bundle attaching pillar structures and culture MN spheroids. Each site 
has two medium reservoirs, two gel injection ports, and three compartments. (B) Photos of the microfluidic device. Each device had three distinct culture regions: for MN 
spheroids (left), muscle tissues (right), and neurite elongation (middle). The distance between two pillars is 1500 m. (C) iPS-derived skeletal myoblasts were injected into 
the right compartment with the collagen/Matrigel mixture from gel injection port 1. Within 1 day, a skeletal muscle fiber bundle was formed on pillar structures. After 
13 days of differentiation, an MN spheroid with collagen gel was injected into the left compartment from gel injection port 2. Neural outgrowth occurs by 14 days, result-
ing in the formation of a human motor unit along with NMJ. (D) An MN spheroid and a skeletal muscle fiber bundle in a microfluidic chip on day 0 (D0). A differentiated 
MN spheroid and a muscle fiber bundle were embedded in collagen gel. Scale bars, 200 m. (E) Preparation and differentiation of skeletal muscle cell and MN cells. 
hESC-derived NSC spheroids were formed and differentiated into mature MNs by treatment with appropriate growth factors. Meanwhile, hiPS-derived skeletal muscle 
fiber bundles were formed in the microfluidic device and differentiated into mature myotubes. Then, an MN spheroid was injected for coculture of the two tissues. Time-
line A indicates 0 d = initial day of coculture; timeline B indicates 0 d = initial day of generating neurospheorid; and timeline C indicates 0 d = initial day of seeding skeletal 
muscle cells into the device. KSR, knockout serum replacement; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; SHH, sonic hedgehog; bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; BDNF, 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor; GDNF, glial cell–derived neurotrophic factor. (F) Muscle contraction force driven by electrical stimulation and chemical stimulation via 
MN is estimated by pillar displacement.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 15
to Ca2+ activity in the muscle fiber bundle (criteria: 100 ms, black 
box; fig. S3E).
Excitotoxicity induced by excess glutamic acid treatment to 
mimic ALS pathogenesis
Glutamate (glutamic acid) is widely recognized as one of the major 
factors contributing to ALS pathogenesis (22). Prolonged excitation 
caused by excess glutamate is known to harm neurons (23). Nor-
mally, glutamic acid is cleared from neurons via several pathways 
[e.g., neuron-neuron and neuron-astrocyte junctions (24)]; however, 
patients with ALS are unable to remove glutamate and therefore 
suffer from MN excitotoxicity because of their low threshold of ac-
tivation, resulting in neuron death. The prevention of MN excito-
toxicity is thought to be the mechanism of action of riluzole, one of 
the symptomatic ALS treatments.
To mimic this, we added a high concentration of glutamic acid 
to an established 3D motor unit model. After 7 days of coculture, 
glutamic acid was added to the motor unit model culture for an ad-
ditional 7 days, and muscle contraction force was observed (Fig. 4A). 
As described above, robust NMJs were formed and thick MN fibers 
were observed by day 14 (Fig. 4B). In contrast, in the presence of 
excess glutamic acid, no thick MN fibers (MN fascicles) were formed 
(Fig. 4D); only thin MN fibers and neurite segmentation were ob-
served (Fig. 4C). Quantitative measurement of muscle contraction 
revealed that, in the absence of excess glutamic acid, muscle contrac-
tion forces increased over time (Fig. 4E). In contrast, muscle contraction 
Fig. 2. Characterization of an iPS-derived skeletal muscle fiber bundle and an MN spheroid. (A) Fabricated skeletal muscle fiber bundle approximately 1500 m in 
length attaching the pillars at D7 and D21. Scale bars, 200 m. (B) The population of myogenin-positive cells on muscle fiber bundle. n = 5. (C) Fusion index for skeletal 
muscle cells in a 3D micro device and a 2D monolayer. n = 8. (D) Regular pattern of a sarcomere structure stained by sarcomeric -actinin and F-actin. Scale bars, 50 m. 
DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. (E) Gene expression change of MyoD, myogenin, and FHL1 (F) at D7, D14, and D21 against D0 or D7. n = 5. GAPDH, glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate dehydrogenase. N.D., not determined. (G) Muscle contraction powered by electrical stimulation at different frequencies (0.5 to 4 Hz). (H) Formation of an 
NSC spheroid and differentiation characterized by the immunostaining of HB9 and 3D reconstruction stained by Tuj1. Scale bars, 200 m. (I) mRNA expression level of an 
MN spheroid at D14, D28, and D42. MNP, motor neuron progenitor. (J) Determination of necrotic cell death and cell cycle determined by HIF-1 expression and Ki67. N.S., 
not significant. (K) Histological immunostaining of PDK1 and DAPI. The MN spheroid is divided into three regions inside the spheroid: (i) normoxia region, (ii) hypoxia 
region, and (iii) necrotic death region. Scale bars, 200 m. (L) NSC-MN spheroid culture (green, Tuj1; red, islet1) on a laminin-coated dish. After the formation of NSC 
spheroids on D20 and D40, the sphe 
roids were seeded into a laminin-coated dish and cultured for an additional 5 days to visualize neurite elongation. Thick nerve fiber 
can be seen connecting two MN spheroids on D45. Scale bars, 200 m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, Student’s t test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Error bars ± SD.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 15
Fig. 3. Neural outgrowth and formation of a human motor unit along with NMJ. (A) Injection of an MN spheroid into the left compartment of the microfluidic device 
with collagen gel on D0. (B) MNs started neural outgrowth toward the muscle fiber bundle on D4. (C) After 7 days of coculture, many axons reached the muscle fiber 
bundle and end feet of neurons attached to myotubes, resulting in the formation of NMJs. (D) By D4 of coculture, thick neural fibers were observed. Soma of MNs also 
migrated from the original position. (E) Characterization of mature MNs stained by ChAT and islet1 (F) and a mature myotube (G) after D14. Scale bars, 100 m (A to 
G). (H) Localization of nAChR on the muscle fiber bundle on D7 and D14. Scale bars, 10 m. (I) The number of clusters of nAChRs on single muscle fiber bundles increased 
over time. n = 4. (J) Muscle contraction force estimation by pillar displacement on D14 of coculture. (K) Frequency of spontaneous muscle contraction and spontaneous 
muscle contraction force (L) on D0 (before NMJ formation, without NMJ) and D7 (after NMJ formation, with NMJ) without glutamic acid stimulation. n = 6. (M) Measure-
ment of muscle contraction force by adding glutamic acid on D4, D7, and D14. **P < 0.05; *P < 0.01, Student’s t test and one-way ANOVA. Error bars ± SD.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 15
forces relatively decreased in the presence of excess glutamic acid. 
Furthermore, the muscle contraction frequency also dropped in the 
presence of excess glutamic acid compared with control (Fig. 4F). 
The mean contraction force and frequency were different in the two 
groups, especially on day 14 (Fig. 4, E and F, and fig. S4, A and B).
Excess glutamic acid treatment up to day 14 mainly caused a 
neurotoxic effect but no observable myotoxicity; note that while no 
significant difference was observed with electrical stimulation at 
day 14, a significant loss of function can be seen with chemical stimu-
lation (Fig. 4G). Prolonged treatment with excess glutamic acid (up to 
21 days) led to neurite regression and muscle atrophy, judging from 
the morphology (fig. S4C). As a result, no muscle contraction was 
observed at 21 days by either mode of activation. This might have 
been caused by excessive muscle activation and overtraining of the 
stimulated MNs, as well as rapid depletion of nutrients in the cul-
ture medium during days 14 to 21. These results suggest that long-
term excess glutamic acid causes MN dysfunction and neuronal cell 
death along with thick neurite regression and decreased muscle 
contraction force in the 3D microfluidic devices. In addition, the 
3D motor unit model was treated with tetrodotoxin (TTX) (fig. S4, 
D and E), which completely prevented muscle contraction. After 
rinsing away the TTX, muscle contraction partially recovered. This 
demonstrates that the 3D motor unit model can be used not only 
for investigating excitotoxicity (such as that associated with ALS 
and other MN diseases) but also for carrying out exogenous neuro-
toxicity studies using various chemical compounds.
3D ALS motor unit model in a microfluidic device
To create an ALS patient–specific motor unit model, we used iPSC- 
derived NSCs from a patient with sporadic ALS (iALS-MN; Fig. 5, 
A and 5B). After differentiation into MNs, there was a significant 
decrease in the percentage of islet1-positive cells compared with 
hESC-derived MNs (Fig. 5C). In addition, mRNA expression of 
TDP-43 was higher than that in the hESC-derived MNs (Fig. 5D), 
whereas the mRNA expression of neurofilament light (NEFL) chain 
and neurofilament medium (NEFM) chain significantly decreased. 
There were marked differences in neurite length after the differen-
tiation to MNs in 2D culture (fig. S7, A and B). In addition, TDP-43, 
which is normally only found in the nucleus, aggregated in both the 
cytoplasm and nucleus in the iALS-MNs (Fig. 5E and fig. S5C).
On the basis of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyp-
ing and whole-exome sequencing, the iPSC-MNs from the patient 
with ALS in this study had a heterozygous G298S TDP43 mutation 
and no M337V or Q343R TDP43 mutations, or A4V or G93A SOD1 
mutations (fig. S6, A to C). This result (regarding the heterozygous 
G298S mutation) is consistent with typical genetic features of MNs 
from patients with ALS carrying TDP-43 in previous studies (9, 10). 
In addition, whole-genome sequencing found various SNP mutations 
Fig. 4. Excitotoxicity of the 3D human motor unit model induced by excess glutamic acid treatment. (A) Time scale of glutamic acid treatment. After formation of 
the motor unit with NMJ by D7, glutamic acid (5 mM) treatment was started alongside the control. Muscle contraction was measured on D7, D10, and D14 by applying 
glutamic acid (0.1 mM). (B and C) Representative images of the 3D human motor unit on D14 with and without continuous treatment of glutamic acid. Glutamic acid 
treatment caused loss of thick neural fibers. Scale bars, 100 m. (D) Number of motor neural fascicles with glutamic acid treatment at D14 is less than that of control. n = 2. 
(E) The average force of muscle contraction with treatment slightly decreased on D10 and significantly decreased after D14 although contraction force of control consis-
tently increased over time. n = 2. (F) Average frequency of muscle contractions also decreased with treatment over time. Average contraction force fell from ~1.3 to 0.5 N, 
and frequency was also reduced from 1.8 to 0.7 Hz. n = 2. (G) Difference of muscle contraction force between chemical and electrical stimulation. Electrical stimulation 
produced higher muscle contractility compared to treatment of glutamic acid via MN activity. n = 2. Error bars ± SD.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 15
Fig. 5. ALS patient–derived motor unit and drug treatment. (A and B) Morphology and immunostaining of SMI-32 (red) and DAPI (blue) of ALS patient–derived iPS 
MNs on D35 after differentiation. The expression of neurofilament heavy chain indicates maturation of MNs. Scale bars, 100 m. (C) Percentage of islet1-positive cells of 
iALS-MN is lower than that of control (ESC-derived MNs) (counting 100 cells, n = 5). (D) TDP-43 expression is higher than that of control, whereas expression of NEFL and 
NEFM is lower than that of control. n = 3. Scale bars, 20 m. a.u., arbitrary units. (E) Immunostaining of TDP-43 (red) indicates abnormal aggregation and inclusion in iALS-MN 
G298S compared with control (hES-MN). (F) Transfection of channelrhodopsin-2[H134R] in ALS patient–derived NSCs. Scale bars, 20 m. (G) Representative images of 
iALS-MN spheroids on D14 and D28. Scale bars, 200 m. (H) Comparison of mRNA expression on D45 related to MN differentiation between iALS-MN spheroids and 
ESC-derived MN spheroids revealed that no significant changes were observed in OLIG2, HB9, and GFAP. In contrast, the decrease in islet1, ChAT, SMI-32, and Synapsin I 
indicated an immature function of neural activity. n = 8. (I) Representative images of the ALS motor unit and control D14 of coculture stained by Tuj1 (green), F-actin 
(purple), and DAPI (blue). Fewer thick neural fibers and less NMJ formation were seen on the ALS motor unit model compared with the ES-derived motor unit. Scale bars, 
100 m. (J) Average neurite elongation speed in the ALS motor unit was slower than that in control. (K) Treatment of potential drugs (bosutinib and rapamycin) to the 
ALS motor unit model. n = 4. Muscle contraction of the ALS motor unit was weaker than that of the ES-derived motor unit without drug treatment on D7 and D14. No 
significant effect of the drug treatments on D7. However, significant neuroprotection by treatments can be seen on D14. (L and M) After D14 of culture in the microfluidic 
system with the MN spheroid, muscle fiber was live stained for caspase3/7 and then stained for -actinin and DAPI. In the normal motor unit (ESC-derived MN and iPS- 
derived skeletal muscle), few caspase3/7-positive cells can be observed. The number of caspase3/7-positive cells increased in the ALS motor unit (iALS-MN and iPS- 
derived skeletal muscle). Treatment with rapamycin and rapamycin/bosutinib significantly decreased the number of caspase3/7-positive cells, indicating that the treatment 
of drug reversed muscle apoptosis. n = 2. Scale bars, 100 m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, Student’s t test and two-way ANOVA. Error bars ± SD.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 15
such as C9orf72, TBK1, OPTIN, FUS, ALS2, ATG family, BECN1, 
ULK1, and ULK2, which are associated with ALS pathogenesis and 
autophagy (tables S2 to S4).
Since the iPSC-MNs and control cells were transfected with the 
channelrhodopsin-2[H134R] gene, neural activity and muscle contrac-
tion could individually be stimulated in the absence of glutamic acid 
(Fig. 5F). Using the optogenetically induced iALS-NSCs, we created 
iALS-MN spheroids, with hESC-derived MN spheroids as the control 
(Fig. 5G). Quantitative PCR analysis showed no significant differ-
ences in the expression of Olig2, HB9, or GFAP, although the expres-
sion of islet1, ChAT, SMI-32, and Synapsin I decreased after 45 days 
of differentiation (Fig. 5H). These results suggest that differentiation 
Fig. 6. Muscle contraction by optical stimulation with rapamycin and bosutinib and expression of autophagy. (A to C) Muscle contraction force by optical stimula-
tion without drugs and with rapamycin and cotreatment of rapamycin and bosutinib. Red arrows indicate the absence of muscle contraction with light stimulation. Blue 
dashed lines indicate times of light stimulation. (D) Successful rate of muscle contraction by light stimulation in three cases. The ALS motor unit often misses muscle con-
traction (~56%), whereas drug treatments returned the success rate of muscle to nearly normal; n = 6. ALS, ALS+Rap, ALS+Rap/+bosutinib ; n = 4. (E) To measure gene expression 
after coculture in the device, two tissues were collected separately and then total RNA was purified. (F) Gene expression change of the MN spheroid after D14 of culture. 
ATG5, ATG7, ATG16L2, BECN1, ULK1, ULK2, and LC3 regulating autophagy increased by the addition of rapamycin and bosutinib, while expression of TDP-43 decreased. 
n = 4. (G) Changes in gene expression related to the myogenesis and apoptosis of muscle tissue after D14 of culture with drug treatment. n = 4. (H) TDP-43 turnover in 
MN in the microfluidic devices after 14 days of culture. In the presence of drugs, the aggregation of TDP-43 was somewhat suppressed. Scale bars, 20 m. *P < 0.05; **P < 
0.01, two-way ANOVA. Error bars ± SD.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 15
efficiency does not differ significantly between iALS-MNs and 
hESC-MNs but iALS-MNs lack gene profiles related to neurofila-
ment formation, acetylcholine synthesis, and synapse formation. In 
particular, the low expression of ChAT (fig. S7B) severely impairs 
motor unit function because ChAT regulates the interaction between 
MNs and muscle cells via NMJs (25). In addition, immunostaining 
showed that GFAP-positive cells (astrocytes) were found in the 
iALS-MN spheroids at the same level as in the hESC-MN spheroids 
(fig. S5E). The percentage of HB9-positive cells was the same be-
tween the hESC-MN spheroids and the iALS-MN spheroids, but the 
proliferation rates and spheroid diameters were different (fig. S7A).
To establish the ALS motor unit, we injected heterogeneous 
iALS-MN spheroids into the microfluidic devices with 3D muscle 
fiber bundles (Fig. 5I). Although neurite elongation in the iALS-MNs 
was slightly slower compared with the control (Fig. 5J and fig. S5F), we 
obtained ALS motor units with NMJs in at least 7 days. After 14 days 
of coculture (42 days after differentiation), thick nerve fibers were 
observed in the collagen gel (Fig. 5I). However, fewer thick fibers 
were observed compared with the hESC-derived motor unit (fig. S5G). 
This morphological difference was reflected in the phenotype, neu-
rite length, and elongation speed of the iALS-MNs (Fig. 5, I and J, 
and fig. S8, H and I).
To study MN neuroprotection, we treated the ALS and control 
models with bosutinib (an ALS drug candidate that inhibits the 
Src/c-Abl pathway) and rapamycin [an ALS drug candidate that in-
hibits the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and 
induces autophagy activation by targeting proteins such as TDP-43 
(26)]. On day 7, there was little difference in the optical stimulation– 
induced muscle contraction force between the ALS and control 
models with [~1.1 N (0.13 mN/mm2)] or without treatment [~1.2 
to 1.3 N (0.15 to 0.17 mN/mm2); Fig. 5K]. However, treatment 
with rapamycin or cotreatment with bosutinib and rapamycin signifi-
cantly prevented the reduced muscle contraction force by day 14, 
along with neuroprotection (Fig. 5K). In the presence of these drugs, 
the number of caspase3/7-positive cells [associated with muscle 
atrophy (27)] in the muscle fiber bundle decreased compared with 
the condition without drugs (Fig. 5, L and M). Although further 
tests are necessary to confirm, this muscle atrophy could be due 
to a decrease in the secretion of ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) 
(fig. S9A) or increased inflammatory cytokine concentrations via 
up-regulation of nuclear factor B (NF-B) signaling. These re-
sults suggest that, with the tested drugs, the ALS patient–derived 
motor unit model exhibits less reduction in muscle force and less 
MN neurotoxicity.
Furthermore, these drugs also affected the response of muscle 
contraction induced by 1-Hz optical stimulation. In the ALS motor 
unit model, muscle contraction sometimes failed to occur after light 
stimulation (~32.3%, n = 180) (Fig. 6, A and D, and movie S4). After 
treatment with rapamycin or cotreatment with rapamycin and bo-
sutinib, these missed contractions were suppressed down to ~16.1 
and ~9.6% (n = 180; Fig. 6, B to D, and movies S5 and S6). Consis-
tently, the expression of ATG5, ATG7, ATG16L2, BECN1, ULK1, 
ULK2, and LC3 genes was significantly increased in the presence 
of rapamycin and bosutinib (Fig. 6, E and F). This activation of 
autophagy helped the degradation of TDP-43 and its segments (e.g., 
TDP-25 and TDP-35) to induce neuroprotection (Fig. 6H). Fur-
thermore, the expression of MYHI, MYHII, and MYLII genes (myo-
genesis markers) was also increased, and the expression of caspase 
genes tended to decrease. In contrast, no significant difference in 
MyoD expression was observed, although it is known that rapamy-
cin (an mTOR inhibitor) down-regulates myogenesis (Fig. 6G).
Drug treatment via an EC barrier
To use this model for translational medicine research, pharmaco-
logical drug efficiency is essential. In particular, drug penetration 
via EC barriers (such as the blood-brain barrier and blood–spinal 
cord barrier) should be considered when investigating drugs to 
treat central nervous system (CNS) diseases. To mimic this process, 
iPSC-derived ECs (iECs) were seeded in the left medium reservoir 
on a collagen gel layer to create an EC layer (fig. S10, A and B). The 
iECs differentiated toward a brain-specific EC phenotype after reti-
noic acid (RA) was added (28); they were then cocultured with 
iALS-MN spheroids in the microfluidic device, resulting in the for-
mation of a tight iEC monolayer expressing ZO-1, occludin, and 
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) (fig. S10C). The low permeability was con-
firmed by adding 40-kDa dextran into the left medium reservoir 
with and without an iEC layer (fig. S10D). To culture three types of 
cells simultaneously, we modified the culture medium composition 
(fig. S10A). By coculturing with ECs and adding endothelial medium, 
muscle contraction force slightly decreased (fig. S10F, no drug con-
dition, with EC), but no changes were observed in MN or muscle 
viability compared to the nonendothelial barrier protocol. However, 
in terms of MN phenotypes, we observed slightly thinner neural fi-
bers at day 14 (fig. S10B).
Rapamycin or bosutinib treatment via the iEC layer decreased 
muscle contraction force [~1.5 N (0.2 mN/mm2)] compared with 
configurations without the iEC layer [~0.5 N (0.06 mN/mm2); fig. 
S10, F and G]. Cotreatment with rapamycin and bosutinib signifi-
cantly increased muscle contraction force and synchronicity com-
pared with either single agent treatment, though the force decreased 
slightly in the cotreatment plus iEC layer condition in comparison 
with the cotreatment without an iEC monolayer. The bosutinib con-
centration can be regulated by the P-gp efflux transporter in vivo 
(29). In our model, P-gp expression in the iEC monolayer was de-
creased by treatment with rapamycin and cotreatment with rapamy-
cin and bosutinib (fig. S10E), inhibiting the transport of bosutinib 
from the basal to the apical side of the iEC layer in the cotreatment 
condition. Although further investigation is necessary, these results 
suggest the usefulness of an EC barrier as a novel means of investi-
gating the role of vascular permeability in neuroprotection efficacy 
and muscle contraction (fig. S10, F and G).
DISCUSSION
We developed a 3D human motor unit model in a microfluidic de-
vice by coculturing MN spheroids and 3D muscle fiber bundles. 
Muscle contraction could be induced by MN activity (after NMJ 
formation) and chemical and optical stimulation (Figs. 3M and 5). 
We previously showed that a mouse motor unit model could be cre-
ated using mouse ESC-derived MNs and C2C12 cells in different 
microfluidic systems (18). However, important species differences 
between mice and humans likely contribute to the failure in clinical 
trials of drug candidates that have been identified via screening us-
ing an ALS mouse model (30). This highlights the importance of 
using cells that are derived from a human source. In addition, we 
improved the microfluidic device architecture to allow higher- 
throughput screening of single or combination therapies. There-
fore, our model represents an important advance in the simulation 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 15
of human physiological and pathological conditions associated with 
motor units and NMJs, which is useful for investigating the mecha-
nisms underlying ALS and for drug screening.
Motor unit dysfunction is involved in many diseases besides ALS, 
such as myasthenia gravis, muscular dystrophy, spinal and bulbar 
muscular atrophy, and spinal muscular atrophy (31). In our study, 
we generated heterogeneous MN spheroids with MNs and astro-
cytes. We considered this heterogeneity to be important in the study 
of ALS pathogenesis because recent findings have implicated reactive 
astrocytes in ALS pathogenesis and MN degeneration (32). We be-
lieve that an MN organoid that includes MNs and astrocytes (rather 
than pure MNs) is suitable to act as a model for investigating ALS.
To mimic the pathological conditions of motor units of patients 
with ALS, we treated the 3D human motor unit with excess glutamic 
acid. The treatment caused MN excitotoxicity along with the regres-
sion of thick neurite fibers, resulting in a weak muscle contraction 
force (Fig. 4, C and E). Furthermore, long-term MN excitotoxicity 
(after exposure to glutamic acid for 14 days) also causes muscle 
atrophy due to continuous muscle contraction and muscle fatigue 
(fig. S4C). In patients with ALS, astrocytes play an important role in 
glutamic acid uptake to maintain the inappropriate concentration 
of glutamic acid between the presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons, 
and decreased expression of the excitatory amino acid transporter 
2 (EAAT2) might be associated with ALS (33). Although MN excito-
toxicity was observed in our motor unit model, when astrocytes 
were cocultured with MNs and skeletal muscle cells, the glutamate 
concentration threshold increased (34). This suggests that glial cells 
might be needed in the culture model. In addition, TTX treatment 
led to temporal inhibition of neural activity and muscle contraction 
(fig. S4, D and E) as previously demonstrated in an in vitro 3D NMJ 
model (35) using other neurotoxins such as curare [another nAChR 
inhibitor (17)]. This chemically induced model can be used for test-
ing motor unit neurotoxins and induced disease models such as ac-
quired neuromyotonia.
Last, we demonstrated the formation of an ALS motor unit model 
using iPSC-derived MNs from a patient with sporadic ALS carrying 
the TDP-43 gene mutation with an abnormal inclusion of TDP-43 
(Fig. 5, A, B, and E) and short neurite elongation (fig. S5, A and B). 
TDP-43 is a nuclear protein that regulates transcription and mRNA 
splicing (36), and it is a major component of ubiquitinated protein 
aggregations found in patients with sporadic ALS and patients with 
SOD1-negative familial ALS (37). Therefore, many researchers have 
focused on TDP-43 degradation in patients with ALS and MNs in 
vitro. The PCR results also indicated lower expression of NEFL and 
NEFM in the iALS-MNs (Fig. 5D). Although the iALS-MN sphe-
roids had similar morphology to the hESC-derived MN spheroids 
(in terms of formation and growth), we found lower expression of 
islet1, ChAT, SMI-32, and Synapsin I. Accumulating results have 
implicated specific phenotypes in iALS-MNs, involving reduced 
neuronal soma size, increased apoptosis, and progressive loss of 
synaptic activity (38). In addition to this finding, GFAP expression 
was the same as that in the control MNs, as measured by PCR (Fig. 5H) 
and immunostaining (fig. S5E). In the process of motor unit and NMJ 
formation, we found that the iALS-MN neurite elongation speed in 
collagen gel was slow compared with the normal motor unit model in 
the microfluidic devices (Fig. 5J and fig. S5F). This can be explained 
by low expression of factors related to neurofilament growth and signifi-
cant loss of islet1-positive cells involving the mutation of NEFH(SMI-32), 
as demonstrated by previous findings (10, 38).
Moreover, the most remarkable finding was that the muscle con-
traction force in the ALS motor unit was reduced relative to the 
normal motor unit, and there was an increase in the number of 
caspase3/7-positive cells, indicative of apoptosis and muscle atro-
phy (Fig. 5, L and M). These results indicate that coculturing ALS 
patient–derived MNs with a normal (non-ALS) skeletal muscle fi-
ber leads to myotoxicity. This is likely caused by neurotoxins and 
excitotoxicity during long-term culture. Another factor could be the 
significant loss of secretion of CNTF from MNs that down-regulates 
muscle protection (fig. S9A) because CNTF receptor is also expressed 
in skeletal muscle cells (39). In addition, a heterozygous E478G mis-
sense mutation associated with OPTN (table S2) is known to acti-
vate the NF-B pathway (40, 41) because OPTN plays a critical role 
for NF-B suppressive activity, resulting in neurotoxicity with in-
flammation. In our model, the expression of NF-B in iALS-MNs 
after coculture with muscle tissues was significantly up-regulated 
compared with ES-MNs (fig. S9B). This activates downstream pathways 
and up-regulates secretion of cytokines such as the tumor necrosis 
factor– (TNF-), interleukin family proteins, and cyclooxygenase-2. 
In our model, TNF- up-regulation might also contribute to muscle 
weakness along with apoptosis and protein degradation in skeletal 
muscle cells as drug application down-regulated the NF-B expres-
sion (Fig. 6F). Therefore, we concluded that we successfully estab-
lished a pathological ALS motor unit model in a high- 
throughput 
microfluidic device.
In the continuing search for new drug candidates to treat ALS, 
inhibition of the Src/c-Abl pathway has been recently found to im-
prove neuroprotection, and this is now a target of potential drug 
candidates, for example, bosutinib and masitinib (26). In particular, 
bosutinib (which is approved for chronic myelogenous leukemia) 
showed representative neuroprotection along with the activation of 
autophagy. It is being tested in a phase 1 clinical trial (NCT02921477). 
Moreover, rapamycin is being tested in a phase 2 clinical trial 
(NCT03359538). To test these drug candidates in vitro using our 
model, we treated the ALS motor unit with bosutinib and rapamy-
cin to observe the expected neuroprotection effect. Both treatments 
improved neuronal survival and increased muscle contraction force 
(induced by MN activity), which might have been due to a reduc-
tion in cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregation, NF-B expression, or skele-
tal muscle cell apoptosis in muscle fiber bundles (42). Treatment 
with rapamycin (an mTOR inhibitor) not only improved MN neuro-
protection but also indirectly up-regulated muscle contraction and 
suppressed miscommunication between MNs and muscle tissue, 
although it is known that inhibition of the Akt/mTOR pathway can 
enhance muscle atrophy (43). These results provide support for this 
potential strategy of treating ALS with bosutinib combined with 
rapamycin, which induces autophagy, to avoid abnormal aggrega-
tion of proteins such as TDP-43.
Any drug proposed to treat ALS would need to penetrate the 
blood-brain barrier and blood–spinal cord barrier. In general, rapa-
mycin (~914 Da) is limited in its ability to penetrate the blood-brain 
barrier in vivo. Rapamycin treatment across an iEC layer did not 
improve muscle contraction in our model. A single treatment of 
bosutinib (~530 Da) via an iEC layer also decreased the efficiency of 
bosutinib compared with administering bosutinib without an iEC 
layer. We hypothesize that bosutinib partially leaked through the 
iEC barrier via the paracellular pathway, but a low concentration of 
bosutinib was maintained in the basal niche because of the function 
of the EC efflux pump (an adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 15
transporter) in our system. However, cotreatment with rapamycin 
and bosutinib via the EC barrier improved the efficacy of the treat-
ment (fig. S10, F and G) possibly because rapamycin decreases the 
expression of the P-gp transporter, the efflux pump that transports 
bosutinib out of the CNS (fig. S10E). In the literature, it has also 
been shown that a P-gp inhibitor can increase the concentration of 
a P-gp substrate (such as paclitaxel) in the brain in vivo (44). These 
results indicate the potential of cotreatment with an mTOR inhibi-
tor, a P-gp inhibitor, and an Src/c-Abl pathway inhibitor for ALS. 
Therefore, our 3D ALS motor unit model with drug delivery across 
an EC barrier can be especially useful when evaluating neuroprotec-
tion and screening drug candidates. Our in vitro model could poten-
tially become a robust ALS-on-a-chip technology with MN networks 
and muscle tissues as well as an EC barrier.
To improve our model, several modifications are available in 
terms of MN enhancement and the addition of other cell types. ALS 
is an age-dependent disease, and MNs require considerable differ-
entiation time for neurogenesis, maturation, and clinical onset of 
ALS in an in vitro culture. A recent study proposed an artificial ac-
celeration method, in which MNs are genetically manipulated to 
express progerin to simulate premature aging (45). Alternatively, 
direct differentiation into MNs from patient-derived somatic cells is 
possible by ensuring transgenic expression of transcription factors 
that induce MN differentiation (46) and by inducing microRNAs 
(47). In addition, inhibition of the Notch pathway has been shown 
to accelerate MN differentiation by delaying the cell cycle transition 
from G1 to S phase (48). These technologies could allow us to create 
a more mature 3D ALS model in the immediate future.
In addition to the improvement of MN characterization and dif-
ferentiation, the inclusion of other types of cells such as Schwann 
cells and microvascular networks could be considered to obtain a 
more robust motor unit. During the developmental process and to 
maintain homeostasis, Schwann cells regulate MN nerve fiber 
myelination, improve axonal outgrowth, and have therapeutic po-
tential for spinal cord injury in vivo (49) and even in vitro (50). 
Moreover, perfusable microvascular networks involving ECs in the 
microfluidic device would be required for long-term maintenance 
of our ALS motor unit model. They would improve the supply of 
oxygen and nutrients to the tissues and better mimic the delivery of 
drug to the CNS. We have previously described a coculture model 
with MN spheroids and perfusable vascular networks in microfluidic 
devices that resulted in improved neural networks and culture me-
dium perfusion to improve MN activity (20). Furthermore, vascular 
networks not only are physiologically relevant but also play a critical 
role in the pathogenesis of ALS, which is accompanied by vascular 
dysfunction and impaired blood-tissue barrier function (51, 52).
Furthermore, in this study, we used normal human-derived skele-
tal muscle tissues. If we instead use patient-derived skeletal muscle 
cells (53) and/or ECs, we believe that our model could be applied 
not only to neuropathy (such as that associated with ALS and spinal 
muscular atrophy) but also to myopathy (such as that associated 
with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and myasthenia gravis) by form-
ing patient-derived muscle fiber bundles to investigate interactions 
between muscle atrophy and MN activity and for the purpose of drug 
testing. Last, because Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and 
epilepsy have been associated with muscle strength (54, 55), cocul-
ture with iPSC-derived cortical neurons from these patients would 
facilitate investigations of the relationship between these pathologies 
and muscle strength.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design
The objective of this study was to create a robust ALS motor unit in 
a microfluidic device for drug screening. Coculture with MN sphe-
roids from ESC and ALS patient–derived iPSC and 3D skeletal mus-
cle tissues demonstrated the formation of NMJs and can provide 
quantitative data (muscle contraction force) by automated image 
analysis using Python to test neural activity indirectly via muscle 
contraction for drug screening. The use of human iPSC-derived 
NSCs from a patient with ALS was approved by the respective de-
partments at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All methods 
with human primate materials, cells, hESCs and iPSCs, and toxin 
were performed in accordance with National Academy of Sciences 
Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research with the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee on Assessment 
of Biohazards and Embryonic Stem Cell Research Oversight.
Microfluidic device fabrication
The mold fabrication process was similar to that previously reported 
(18). Briefly, device structures were designed using Solidworks 
(Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corporation), and the patterns 
were transferred onto a transparency mask using high-resolution 
printing (FineLine Imaging). Silicon wafers were then fabricated by 
photolithography using typical SU-8 photoresist techniques. All the 
mold surfaces were treated with (tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl)- 
1-trichlorosilane for at least 2 hours. For the main microfluidic sec-
tion, PDMS and curing reagents (Ellsworth Adhesives) were mixed 
in a 10:1 ratio, poured into the SU-8 mold, and cured at 80°C for at 
least 6 hours. The pillar head was then attached to the base of the 
pillar. The pillar head consisted of 250 m by 250 m squares of 
25-m-thin PDMS (obtained by spin coating onto a 10-cm petri 
dish lid for 30 s at 5000 rpm). The pillar heads were manually posi-
tioned over the pillar and glued with uncured PDMS. Using this 
PDMS mold, a negative mold was fabricated using Smooth-Cast 
300, and PDMS was then poured into the mold and cured for 
6 hours. Devices were then cut off the mold and trimmed to the 
appropriate size, and gel filling ports, a vacuum port, and medium 
ports/reservoirs were formed with 1-, 2-, and 6-mm-diameter biopsy 
punches, respectively. The devices were then sterilized by wet auto-
claving, followed by dry autoclaving. After drying completely, no. 1 
glass was bonded using oxygen plasma.
Cell culture, differentiation, and MN spheroid formation of 
ALS-iPSC– and hESC-derived cells
Motor neurons
hESC (H9, WA09)–derived NSCs (Gibco) and ALS-iPSC–derived 
NSCs (from the peripheral blood of a 55-year-old Caucasian woman 
with sporadic ALS, iXCells Biotechnologies) were maintained on 
Geltrex LDEV-Free Reduced Growth Factor Basement Membrane 
Matrix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in StemPro NSC SFM medium 
supplemented with 2 mM GlutaMAX-I supplement (Gibco), human 
recombinant bFGF (20 ng/ml), epidermal growth factor (20 ng/ml), 
and 2% StemPro neural supplement. Neuro spheroids were formed 
using a spindle-shaped bottom 96-well plate (PrimeSurface 96M) 
for 24 hours by seeding the hESC-derived NSCs and ALS-iPSC– 
derived NSCs at a density of 1.0 × 104 cells per well. The differentia-
tion protocol was previously described in the literature (56). Briefly, 
after 24 hours of seeding, the culture medium was replaced with 100 l 
per well of StemPro hESC medium supplemented with RA (50 M), 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
12 of 15
sonic hedgehog (200 ng/ml), bFGF (8 ng/ml), and activin A (10 ng/ml) 
for cell fate determination via caudalization and ventralization (MN 
differentiation medium). Then, culture medium was changed to 
100 l per well of MN differentiation medium excluding activin A. 
After culturing for 20 days, the culture medium was replaced again 
using 100 l per well of StemPro hESC medium supplemented with 
RA (50 M), BDNF (10 ng/ml), and GDNF (10 ng/ml) for matura-
tion of MNs and cultured for 7 to 8 more days (MN medium). To 
remove the neural progenitor cells and NSCs from the spheroids, 
CultureOne Supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was treated be-
fore 24 hours of injection into the devices. The culture medium was 
then switched to MN medium without RA for an additional 14 days 
in the left medium reservoir of the microfluidic devices. Karyotype, 
donor, and reprogramming information of iPSCs used in this study 
is available at the following links: parental iPSCs of iCell skeletal 
myoblast and iCell ECs (https://hpscreg.eu/cell-line/CDIi001-A), 
parental ES cells of NSC (https://hpscreg.eu/cell-line/WAe009-A), 
and parental iPSCs of ALS-NSCs [www.ixcellsbiotech.com/image/
data/Human%20iPSC%20(ALS)/Human%20iPS%20Cell%20
Line%20(ALS).pdf]. G-band karyotyping analysis of parental ALS- 
iPSCs (performed by Cell Line Genetics) is shown in fig. S6D.
iPSC-derived skeletal muscle cells
Human iPSC-derived skeletal myoblasts (iCell Skeletal Myoblasts, 
Cellular Dynamics Technology) were maintained on fibronectin coat-
ing (10 g/ml) in minimum essential medium– (MEM-) supple-
mented with 8-bromo-cyclic AMP (1 mM), CHIR99021 (2 M), 
dorsomorphin (1 M), and 5% knockout serum replacement (SkMM). 
For differentiation into mature myocytes in the microfluidic devices, 
24 hours after cell seeding with SkMM, 200 l of culture medium 
was injected into the right medium reservoir with Dulbecco’s modi-
fied Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 2% horse serum, hu-
man recombinant IGF-1 (50 ng/ml), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin 
(SkDM). After several days, the injected culture medium invaded the 
left medium reservoir owing to the formation of muscle fiber bundle 
and capillary action. Then, SkDM was also injected to both the right 
and left medium reservoir (200 l of each) up to 14 days of culture.
iPSC-derived ECs
Human iECs (iCell ECs, Cellular Dynamics Technology) were main-
tained on fibronectin coating (50 g/ml) with a VascuLife VEGF 
Endothelial Cells Medium Complete Kit (Lifeline Cell Technology) 
and iCell growth supplement.
Mouse myoblasts
Mouse C2C12 myoblasts (American Type Culture Collection) were 
cultured to <70% confluency in growth medium consisting of 
DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) and 1% penicillin/ 
streptomycin. None of the cells were used beyond a passage number 
of 20. All cells were kept in incubators at 37°C and 5% CO2.
Transfection of the channelrhodopsin-2 gene into hESC- and 
iPSC-derived NSCs from a patient with ALS
hESC-derived NSCs and iPSC-derived NSCs from a patient with 
sporadic ALS were infected with an AAV-CAG-ChR2H134R-tdTomato- 
WPRE plasmid to express a mutated variant of the light-sensitive ion 
channel, channelrhodopsin-2H134R. AAV-CAG-hChR2H134R-tdTomato 
was a gift from K. Svoboda (Addgene plasmid no. 28017) (57). Adeno- 
associated virus (AAV) particles were also provided by Addgene. 
Both types of NSCs were plated in laminin-coated six-well plates at 
a density of 5.0 × 105 cells per well and cultured for 2 days. The cells 
were then incubated for 24 hours with AAV particles containing the 
plasmid and maintenance culture medium. The cells were cultured 
for 4 days, expanded for another 3 days, and sorted by fluorescence- 
activated cell sorting (BD Biosciences, FACSAria II) with strong 
expression of tdTomato. The transfection efficiency of hESC- 
derived NSCs and ALS-iPSC–derived NSCs was 77 and 68%, respec-
t 
ively. The channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2)–NSCs were then replated in 
laminin- 
coated six-well plates. To create neurospheres, both ChR2-
NSCs were dissolved using Accutase to obtain single cells.
Formation of 3D motor units
To avoid single-cell attachment to the glass bottom, the microfluidic 
device was incubated with 4% Pluronic F-127 (Sigma) in the incu-
bator for 1 hour, rinsed with distilled water, and dried. Human iPSC- 
skeletal muscle cells were injected into the right compartment of the 
microfluidic device with a mixture of porcine skin type I collagen gel 
(Nitta Gelatin, 2.4 mg/ml) and 10% Matrigel (BD Biosciences) via gel 
injection port no. 1 (Fig. 1, A and B). A 3D muscle fiber bundle was 
formed within 24 hours, with both sides of the muscle attached to the 
pillar structures. The muscle fiber bundle was then cultured and dif-
ferentiated using 2% horse serum and IGF-1. After 13 days of differ-
entiation, predifferentiated MN spheroids (normal and ALS) were 
injected into the left compartment (Fig. 1B) via gel injection port no. 2 
with collagen without Matrigel. For the cocultured MN spheroids and 
skeletal muscle fiber bundles in microfluidic devices, StemPro hESC me-
dium supplemented with RA (50 M), BDNF (10 ng/ml), and GDNF 
(10 ng/ml) was poured into the left medium reservoir (close to the MN 
spheroids), and DMEM, 10% horse serum, human recombinant IGF-1 
(50 ng/ml), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin were poured into the right 
medium reservoir (close to the skeletal muscle fiber bundles). Two 
types of culture medium maintained segregating at least for 6 hours. 
To study the effects of drug application, bosutinib (100 M) and rapa-
mycin (200 nM) were applied to recover the ALS-derived motor unit 
muscle contraction force at day 4 with MN medium, and then muscle 
contraction was tested at day 7. The muscle apoptosis assay, PCR, 
and immunostaining of TDP-43 were performed at day 14.
Formation of iEC layer and drug exposure
To test drug application via an EC layer, type I collagen gel was poured 
into the left medium reservoir after injection of iALS- 
derived MN 
spheroids. The iECs (iCell ECs) were then seeded into the left well on 
the collagen gel (5.0 × 105 cells/ml). To accelerate differentiation into 
brain-specific ECs, RA (20 M) was added (fig. S10A). After 7 days 
of coculture, drugs were applied to the left medium reservoir.
Electrical and chemical stimulation
Electrical stimulation was delivered via platinum electrodes positioned 
3 mm away from each other across the neuromuscular tissue. They 
were controlled by an Arduino circuit delivering 12-V square inputs. 
To activate the MNs, they were stimulated by adding glutamic acid 
(0.1 mM) to the culture medium. For the excitotoxicity experiment, 
excess glutamic acid (5 mM) was added to the culture medium for 
7 days. Before the measurement of the muscle contraction force, this 
high concentration of glutamic acid was rinsed away with phosphate- 
buffered saline (PBS) and then replaced with a low concentration of 
glutamic acid (0.1 mM). For simulation of a neurotoxin added to a 
human NMJ model, TTX (final concentration, 1 M) was added to 
the culture medium and the muscle contraction force was measured. 
Then, the TTX was rinsed away with PBS and replaced with a low 
concentration of glutamic acid (0.1 mM).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
13 of 15
Image acquisition and analysis
Epifluorescence and confocal images were acquired using a Zeiss 
Axiovert 200 microscope and an Olympus FV-1000 confocal micro-
scope, respectively. 3D reconstruction and analysis of confocal images 
were performed with IMARIS software (Bitplane). Muscle contraction 
measurement was performed in a stage-top incubator (INUBG2TF- 
WSKM-SET, Tokai Hit) on Axiovert 200, and image sequences were 
captured using AxioVision. Automated tracking of the local defor-
mation of the skeletal muscle cells and deflection of the pillars upon 
light excitation were carried out using ImageJ and Python script with 
 
an OpenCV package (fig. S8, A and B). Formulas for calculating mus-
cle contraction force from pillar displacements are provided in fig. S8. 
The presence of gel did not affect the calculation of muscle contrac-
tion force as shown previously (18). Image analysis regarding the 
muscle width and axon outgrowth was conducted using ImageJ. 
Fusion index for skeletal muscle cells is defined as the number of 
myogenin-expressing myotubes with greater than two nuclei divided 
by the total number of nuclei. To quantify nAChR clusters, quantita-
tive fluorescence imaging was performed using an open-source soft-
ware package in CellProfiler (Broad Institute). The automated image 
cytometry system identifies and measures objects’ size, shape, pixel 
intensity, and topology, and the resulting data are corrected using a 
background-subtraction algorithm. nAChR clusters in CellProfiler 
were defined using agrin-treated myotubes [Alexa 488– 
conjugated 
anti-agrin antibody (ab85174), Abcam]. Before the measurement, 
skeletal myotubes were prestained by Alexa 488–conjugated anti- 
agrin antibody in culture medium (1:100) for 1 hour at 37°C in the 
device. Agrin, normally secreted by MNs, stabilizes and aggregates 
nAChRs into distinguishable cluster regions (>65% intensity), whereas 
outside these regions, nAChRs largely exist in dispersed microclusters 
(<65% intensity) denoted by lower-intensity pixels. In this manner, 
nAChR area was calculated for individual muscle fiber bundles.
Measurement of MN activity with Ca2+ oscillation imaging
To capture neural activity and synapse formation, both types of cells 
in the microfluidic devices were rinsed three times with PBS (without 
Ca2+ and Mg2+), recording medium [20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1- 
piperazineethanesulfonic acid (Hepes), 115 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 
0.8 mM MgCl2, 1.8 mM CaCl2, and 13.8 mM glucose] was added with 
Fluo-8 AM (5 M, 488 nm), and the mixture was incubated for 1 hour 
at 37°C. After loading Fluo-8 AM, the loading medium was replaced 
with the recording medium. Time-lapse movies were acquired for 
10 min (resolution, 680 × 512 pixels; exposure time, 10 ms) using a 
fluorescent microscope (Axiovert 200, Zeiss).
Immunocytochemistry
Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 20 min and 
then permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100  for 5 min. After block-
ing with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 2 hours, the cells were 
incubated for 2 hours at room temperature with a primary antibody. 
A secondary antibody was then administered for 2 hours at room tem-
perature. The primary antibodies were mouse anti-neuron–specific 
III tubulin (Tuj1, 1:100), mouse anti-human ChAT (1:200), rabbit 
anti-human islet1 (1:100), rat anti-human -actinin (1:500), rat anti- 
human GFAP (1:200), rabbit anti-human P-gp (1:500), mouse anti- 
human ZO-1, and mouse anti-human occludin (1:500). The secondary 
antibodies were Alexa Fluor 555 anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) (H+L) (1:500), Alexa Fluor 405 anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (1:500), 
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (1:500), Alexa Fluor 488 
goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (1:500), and Alexa Fluor 647 goat anti-rat 
IgG (H+L). F-actin was stained with Alexa Fluor 488 or 647 phalloidin 
(Cytoskeleton Inc., Denver, CO, USA) and DAPI for 20 min at room 
temperature, followed by three rinses with Dulbecco’s phosphate- 
buffered saline with Ca2+ and Mg2+ (DPBS++). To stain the nAChR 
clusters, the neuromuscular motor units were incubated with BTX- 
conjugated Alexa Fluor 647 (2 mg/ml, Molecular Probes) for 1 hour at 
37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. The constructs were then rinsed with 
PBS, fixed for 1 hour with 4% PFA in PBS, permeabilized with 0.1% 
Triton X-100 in PBS for 15 min, and blocked with 2% BSA in PBS over-
night. To detect cells in an apoptosis stage (caspase activity) in the 
muscle fiber bundles, they were incubated with CellEvent Caspase-3/7 
Green Detection Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, 
USA) for 30 min. All cells and samples were observed using a phase- 
contrast microscope (Axiovert 200, Zeiss, Germany) and a confocal 
laser scanning microscope (FV-1000, Olympus, Japan).
Real-time reverse transcription PCR
To measure the biological activity of the MN spheroids and muscle 
differentiation, total RNA was isolated from tissues with TRIzol 
reagent (Life Science, Waltham, MA, USA). Reverse transcription 
(RT) was performed using a SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit 
(Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). The primer sequences are shown 
in table S1. RT-PCR was performed with a 7900HT Fast Real-Time 
PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) using SYBR 
Premix Ex Taq (Takara, Kusatsu, Japan). The mRNA level of GAPDH 
(a housekeeping gene) was set to 100% and used as the internal stan-
dard in all experiments. The RT-PCR experiment was repeated at 
least three times for cDNA prepared from at least three batches.
SNP genotyping
Genomic DNA from iPSC-derived NSCs from the patient with ALS 
and the control (hESC-derived NSCs) was extracted using a Pure-
Link Genomic DNA Mini Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). PCR-based 
genotyping was performed with rhAmp SNP Genotyping Master Mix 
and rhAmp Reporter Mix (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, 
IA, USA) using a 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied 
Biosystems). Three types of TDP-43 mutation were analyzed [M337V 
(dbSNP: rs80356730), Q343R (dbSNP: rs80356731), and G298S 
(dbSNP: rs4884357)]. Two SOD1 mutations were analyzed [A4V 
(dbSNP: rs121912442) and G93A (dbSNP: rs121912438)]. Five sam-
ples (experimental replicates) were used for PCR measurement.
Whole-exome sequencing
Genomic DNA from iPSC-derived NSCs from the patient with ALS 
and the control (hESC-derived NSCs) was extracted using a PureLink 
Genomic DNA Mini Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Whole- 
exome 
sequencing was done in the Broad Genomics Platform at the Broad 
Institute using Standard Exome v5 Sequencing Methods, and whole- 
exome libraries were constructed and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 
4000 sequencer with the use of 151-bp (base pair) paired- 
end reads. 
Library construction was performed as previously described (58) with 
some slight modifications. Cluster amplification of the templates was 
performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina) using 
the Illumina cBot. Flowcells were sequenced on HiSeq 4000 Sequencing- 
by-Synthesis Kits and then analyzed using RTA2.7.3. Bam file was 
sorted and exome variants were extracted using a SeqMule automated 
pipeline (59) (Bowtie, GATK, SAMtools, SOAPsnp, and Freebayes). 
Variant data were visualized using Integrative Genomic Viewer.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
14 of 15
Western blotting
For immunoblotting, cells were lysed in Cell Lysis Buffer (Cell Sig-
naling Technology), and 10 g of protein was subjected to SDS–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis [using 4 to 12% (w/v) gradient 
gels (Life Technologies, NuPAGE Novex, Bis-Tris)], transferred to 
nitrocellulose membranes, and assayed by immunoblotting. The 
primary antibodies were mouse anti-actin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
-actin loading control, 1:5000) and mouse anti-myosin heavy chain 
(R&D Systems, 1:2000). The secondary antibody was horseradish 
peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibody (Cell Sig-
naling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA). An HRP substrate was 
used for chemiluminescent analysis (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Statistical analysis
The reported values correspond to the means of a minimum of three 
independent experiments. Data are presented as means ± SD. Com-
parisons were performed using one-way ANOVA with post hoc pair-
wise comparisons using the Tukey-Kramer method. P values <0.05 
and <0.01 were taken to represent statistically significant results and 
highly statistically significant results, respectively. The tests were per-
formed using JMP Pro software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/10/eaat5847/DC1
Fig. S1. Characterization and differentiation of iPS-derived skeletal myoblasts in a  
monolayer culture.
Fig. S2. Comparison between a mouse muscle fiber bundle of C2C12 and a human muscle 
fiber bundle of iPS-derived skeletal muscle cells.
Fig. S3. Muscle contraction and synchronization by chemical stimulation.
Fig. S4. Glutamic acid treatment and electrical stimulation and TTX treatment to the motor unit model.
Fig. S5. Characterization of iPS-derived MN from a sporadic ALS donor.
Fig. S6. Genotyping of ALS-iPS–derived MN and ES-derived MN.
Fig. S7. Morphogenesis of MN spheroids derived from a patient with ALS in 2D culture.
Fig. S8. Automated detection of pillar displacement, estimating muscle contraction.
Fig. S9. Significant loss of CNTF secretion in iALS-MN accelerated apoptosis of muscle cells.
Fig. S10. Drug application through the iEC barrier.
Table S1. Primer sequences for real-time RT-PCR.
Table S2. SNP mutation (whole-exome sequencing), ALS pathogenesis related.
Table S3. SNP mutation (whole-exome sequencing), ATG family.
Table S4. SNP mutation (whole-exome sequencing), autophagy related.
Movie S1. Image stacks of muscle fiber bundle stained with -actinin (green) and DAPI (blue).
Movie S2. 3D construction of muscle fiber bundle based on iPSC-derived skeletal muscle cells.
Movie S3. Representative movie of muscle contraction after stimulation with glutamic acid on day 14.
Movie S4. Muscle contraction of the ALS motor unit after 1-Hz optical stimulation without drug.
Movie S5. Muscle contraction of the ALS motor unit after 1-Hz optical stimulation  
with rapamycin.
Movie S6. Muscle contraction of the ALS motor unit after 1-Hz optical stimulation with 
rapamycin and bosutinib.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. S.-C. Ling, M. Polymenidou, D. W. Cleveland, Converging mechanisms in ALS and FTD: 
Disrupted RNA and protein homeostasis. Neuron 79, 416–438 (2013).
 2. O. Hardiman, L. H. van den Berg, M. C. Kiernan, Clinical diagnosis and management of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 7, 639–649 (2011).
 3. P. Mehta, W. Kaye, L. Bryan, T. Larson, T. Copeland, J. Wu, O. Muravov, K. Horton, 
Prevalence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis—United States, 2012–2013. MMWR Surveill. 
Summ. 65, 1–12 (2016).
 4. A. E. Renton, A. Chiò, B. J. Traynor, State of play in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis genetics. 
Nat. Neurosci. 17, 17–23 (2014).
 5. J. M. Shefner, M. E. Cudkowicz, D. Schoenfeld, T. Conrad, J. Taft, M. Chilton, L. Urbinelli, 
M. Qureshi, H. Zhang, A. Pestronk, J. Caress, P. Donofrio, E. Sorenson, W. Bradley, 
C. Lomen-Hoerth, E. Pioro, K. Rezania, M. Ross, R. Pascuzzi, T. Heiman-Patterson, 
R. Tandan, H. Mitsumoto, J. Rothstein, T. Smith-Palmer, D. MacDonald, D. Burke; NEALS 
Consortium, A clinical trial of creatine in ALS. Neurology 63, 1656–1661 (2004).
 6. G. Siciliano, C. Carlesi, L. Pasquali, S. Piazza, S. Pietracupa, F. Fornai, S. Ruggieri, L. Murri, 
Clinical trials for neuroprotection in ALS. CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets 9, 305–313 (2010).
 7. K. Takahashi, K. Tanabe, M. Ohnuki, M. Narita, T. Ichisaka, K. Tomoda, S. Yamanaka, 
Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell 
131, 861–872 (2007).
 8. J. T. Dimos, K. T. Rodolfa, K. K. Niakan, L. M. Weisenthal, H. Mitsumoto, W. Chung, 
G. F. Croft, G. Saphier, R. Leibel, R. Goland, H. Wichterle, C. E. Henderson, K. Eggan, 
Induced pluripotent stem cells generated from patients with ALS can be differentiated 
into motor neurons. Science 321, 1218–1221 (2008).
 9. N. Egawa, S. Kitaoka, K. Tsukita, M. Naitoh, K. Takahashi, T. Yamamoto, F. Adachi, 
T. Kondo, K. Okita, I. Asaka, T. Aoi, A. Watanabe, Y. Yamada, A. Morizane, J. Takahashi, 
T. Ayaki, H. Ito, K. Yoshikawa, S. Yamawaki, S. Suzuki, D. Watanabe, H. Hioki, T. Kaneko, 
K. Makioka, K. Okamoto, H. Takuma, A. Tamaoka, K. Hasegawa, T. Nonaka, M. Hasegawa, 
A. Kawata, M. Yoshida, T. Nakahata, R. Takahashi, M. C. N. Marchetto, F. H. Gage, 
S. Yamanaka, H. Inoue, Drug screening for ALS using patient-specific induced pluripotent 
stem cells. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 145ra104 (2012).
 10. E. Kiskinis, J. Sandoe, L. A. Williams, G. L. Boulting, R. Moccia, B. J. Wainger, S. Han, T. Peng, 
S. Thams, S. Mikkilineni, C. Mellin, F. T. Merkle, B. N. Davis-Dusenbery, M. Ziller, D. Oakley, 
J. Ichida, S. Dicostanza, N. Atwater, M. L. Maeder, M. J. Goodwin, J. Nemesh, 
R. E. Handsaker, D. Paull, S. Noggle, S. A. McCarroll, J. K. Joung, C. J. Woolf, R. H. Brown, 
K. Eggan, Pathways disrupted in human ALS motor neurons identified through genetic 
correction of mutant SOD1. Cell Stem Cell 14, 781–795 (2014).
 11. M. DeJesus-Hernandez, I. R. Mackenzie, B. F. Boeve, A. L. Boxer, M. Baker, N. J. Rutherford, 
A. M. Nicholson, N. A. Finch, H. F. Gilmer, J. Adamson, N. Kouri, A. Wojtas, P. Sengdy, 
G.-Y. R. Hsiung, A. Karydas, W. W. Seeley, K. A. Josephs, G. Coppola, D. H. Geschwind, 
Z. K. Wszolek, H. Feldman, D. Knopman, R. Petersen, B. L. Miller, D. Dickson, K. Boylan, 
N. Graff-Radford, R. Rademakers, Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in 
non-coding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS. Neuron 72, 
245–256 (2011).
 12. A. E. Renton, E. Majounie, A. Waite, J. Simón-Sánchez, S. Rollinson, J. R. Gibbs, 
J. C. Schymick, H. Laaksovirta, J. C. van Swieten, L. Myllykangas, H. Kalimo, A. Paetau, 
Y. Abramzon, A. M. Remes, A. Kaganovich, S. W. Scholz, J. Duckworth, J. Ding, 
D. W. Harmer, D. G. Hernandez, J. O. Johnson, K. Mok, M. Ryten, D. Trabzuni, R. J. Guerreiro, 
R. W. Orrell, J. Neal, A. Murray, J. Pearson, I. E. Jansen, D. Sondervan, H. Seelaar, D. Blake, 
K. Young, N. Halliwell, J. Callister, G. Toulson, A. Richardson, A. Gerhard, J. Snowden, 
D. Mann, D. Neary, M. A. Nalls, T. Peuralinna, L. Jansson, V.-M. Isoviita, A.-L. Kaivorinne, 
M. Hölttä-Vuori, E. Ikonen, R. Sulkava, M. Benatar, J. Wuu, A. Chiò, G. Restagno, 
G. Borghero, M. Sabatelli; ITALSGEN Consortium, D. Heckerman, E. Rogaeva, L. Zinman, 
J. Rothstein, M. Sendtner, C. Drepper, E. E. Eichler, C. Alkan, Z. Abdullaev, S. D. Pack, 
A. Dutra, E. Pak, J. Hardy, A. Singleton, N. M. Williams, P. Heutink, S. Pickering-Brown, 
H. R. Morris, P. J. Tienari, B. J. Traynor, A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is 
the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron 72, 257–268 (2011).
 13. H. Chen, K. Qian, Z. Du, J. Cao, A. Petersen, H. Liu, L. W. Blackbourn IV, C. T.-L. Huang, A. Errigo, 
Y. Yin, J. Lu, M. Ayala, S.-C. Zhang, Modeling ALS with iPSCs reveals that mutant SOD1 
misregulates neurofilament balance in motor neurons. Cell Stem Cell 14, 796–809 (2014).
 14. D. Sareen, J. G. O’Rourke, P. Meera, A. K. M. G. Muhammad, S. Grant, M. Simpkinson, 
S. Bell, S. Carmona, L. Ornelas, A. Sahabian, T. Gendron, L. Petrucelli, M. Baughn, J. Ravits, 
M. B. Harms, F. Rigo, C. F. Bennett, T. S. Otis, C. N. Svendsen, R. H. Baloh, Targeting RNA 
foci in iPSC-derived motor neurons from ALS patients with a C9ORF72 repeat expansion. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 208ra149 (2013).
 15. C. J. Donnelly, P.-W. Zhang, J. T. Pham, A. R. Heusler, N. A. Mistry, S. Vidensky, E. L. Daley, 
E. M. Poth, B. Hoover, D. M. Fines, N. Maragakis, P. J. Tienari, L. Petrucelli, B. J. Traynor, 
J. Wang, F. Rigo, C. F. Bennett, S. Blackshaw, R. Sattler, J. D. Rothstein, RNA toxicity from 
the ALS/FTD C9ORF72 expansion is mitigated by antisense intervention. Neuron 80, 
415–428 (2013).
 16. K. A. Southam, A. E. King, C. A. Blizzard, G. H. McCormack, T. C. Dickson, Microfluidic 
primary culture model of the lower motor neuron–neuromuscular junction circuit.  
J. Neurosci. Methods 218, 164–169 (2013).
 17. Y. Morimoto, M. Kato-Negishi, H. Onoe, S. Takeuchi, Three-dimensional neuron–muscle 
constructs with neuromuscular junctions. Biomaterials 34, 9413–9419 (2013).
 18. S. G. M. Uzel, R. J. Platt, V. Subramanian, T. M. Pearl, C. J. Rowlands, V. Chan, L. A. Boyer, 
P. T. C. So, R. D. Kamm, Microfluidic device for the formation of optically excitable, 
three-dimensional, compartmentalized motor units. Sci. Adv. 2, e1501429 (2016).
 19. R. Raman, C. Cvetkovic, S. G. M. Uzel, R. J. Platt, P. Sengupta, R. D. Kamm, R. Bashir, 
Optogenetic skeletal muscle-powered adaptive biological machines. Proc. Natl. Acad.  
Sci. U.S.A. 113, 3497–3502 (2016).
 20. T. Osaki, V. Sivathanu, R. D. Kamm, Engineered 3D vascular and neuronal networks in a 
microfluidic platform. Sci. Rep. 8, 5168 (2018).
 21. K. Groebe, W. Mueller-Klieser, On the relation between size of necrosis and diameter of 
tumor spheroids. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 34, 395–401 (1996).
 22. H. Blasco, S. Mavel, P. Corcia, P. H. Gordon, The glutamate hypothesis in ALS: 
Pathophysiology and drug development. Curr. Med. Chem. 21, 3551–3575 (2014).
 23. A. Plaitakis, Glutamate dysfunction and selective motor neuron degeneration 
inamyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A hypothesis. Ann. Neurol. 28, 3–8 (1990).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Osaki et al.,  Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5847     10 October 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
15 of 15
 24. G. Seifert, K. Schilling, C. Steinhäuser, Astrocyte dysfunction in neurological disorders:  
A molecular perspective. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 194–206 (2006).
 25. T. Misgeld, R. W. Burgess, R. M. Lewis, J. M. Cunningham, J. W. Lichtman, J. R. Sanes,  
Roles of neurotransmitter in synapse formation: Development of neuromuscular 
junctions lacking choline acetyltransferase. Neuron 36, 635–648 (2002).
 26. K. Imamura, Y. Izumi, A. Watanabe, K. Tsukita, K. Woltjen, T. Yamamoto, A. Hotta, 
T. Kondo, S. Kitaoka, A. Ohta, A. Tanaka, D. Watanabe, M. Morita, H. Takuma, A. Tamaoka, 
T. Kunath, S. Wray, H. Furuya, T. Era, K. Makioka, K. Okamoto, T. Fujisawa, H. Nishitoh, 
K. Homma, H. Ichijo, J.-P. Julien, N. Obata, M. Hosokawa, H. Akiyama, S. Kaneko, T. Ayaki, 
H. Ito, R. Kaji, R. Takahashi, S. Yamanaka, H. Inoue, The Src/c-Abl pathway is a potential 
therapeutic target in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf3962 (2017).
 27. E. E. Dupont-Versteegden, Apoptosis in skeletal muscle and its relevance to atrophy. 
World J. Gastroenterol. 12, 7463–7466 (2006).
 28. E. S. Lippmann, A. Al-Ahmad, S. M. Azarin, S. P. Palecek, E. V. Shusta, A retinoic 
acid-enhanced, multicellular human blood–brain barrier model derived from stem cell 
sources. Sci. Rep. 4, 4160 (2014).
 29. S. Redaelli, P. Perini, M. Ceccon, R. Piazza, R. Rigolio, M. Mauri, F. Boschelli, A. Giannoudis, 
C. Gambacorti-Passerini, In vitro and in vivo identification of ABCB1 as an efflux 
transporter of bosutinib. J. Hematol. Oncol. 8, 81 (2015).
 30. H. Inoue, S. Yamanaka, The use of induced pluripotent stem cells in drug development. 
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 89, 655–661 (2011).
 31. S. Nageshwaran, L. M. Davies, I. Rafi, A. Radunović, Motor neurone disease. BMJ 349, 
g4052 (2014).
 32. P. Tripathi, N. Rodriguez-Muela, J. R. Klim, A. S. de Boer, S. Agrawal, J. Sandoe, C. S. Lopes, 
K. S. Ogliari, L. A. Williams, M. Shear, L. L. Rubin, K. Eggan, Q. Zhou, Reactive astrocytes 
promote ALS-like degeneration and intracellular protein aggregation in human motor 
neurons by disrupting autophagy through TGF-1. Stem Cell Rep. 9, 667–680 (2017).
 33. K. Yamanaka, S. J. Chun, S. Boillee, N. Fujimori-Tonou, H. Yamashita, D. H. Gutmann, 
R. Takahashi, H. Misawa, D. W. Cleveland, Astrocytes as determinants of disease 
progression in inherited amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 251–253 (2008).
 34. B. Madji Hounoum, P. Vourc’h, R. Felix, P. Corcia, F. Patin, M. Guéguinou,  
M. Potier-Cartereau, C. Vandier, C. Raoul, C. R. Andres, S. Mavel, H. Blasco, NSC-34 motor 
neuron-like cells are unsuitable as experimental model for glutamate-mediated 
excitotoxicity. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 10, 118 (2016).
 35. M. Kato-Negishi, H. Onoe, A. Ito, S. Takeuchi, Rod-shaped neural units for aligned 3D 
neural network connection. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 6, 1700143 (2017).
 36. S. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Song, W. Le, Autophagy dysregulation in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis. Brain Pathol. 22, 110–116 (2012).
 37. T. Arai, M. Hasegawa, H. Akiyama, K. Ikeda, T. Nonaka, H. Mori, D. Mann, K. Tsuchiya, 
M. Yoshida, Y. Hashizume, T. Oda, TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive 
tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 351, 602–611 (2006).
 38. A.-C. Devlin, K. Burr, S. Borooah, J. D. Foster, E. M. Cleary, I. Geti, L. Vallier, C. E. Shaw, 
S. Chandran, G. B. Miles, Human iPSC-derived motoneurons harbouring TARDBP or C9ORF72 
ALS mutations are dysfunctional despite maintaining viability. Nat. Commun. 6, 5999 (2015).
 39. K. Hiatt, D. Lewis, M. Shew, K. Bijangi-Vishehsaraei, S. Halum, Ciliary neurotrophic factor 
(CNTF) promotes skeletal muscle progenitor cell (MPC) viability via the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase–Akt pathway. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 8, 963–968 (2014).
 40. H. Maruyama, H. Morino, H. Ito, Y. Izumi, H. Kato, Y. Watanabe, Y. Kinoshita, M. Kamada, 
H. Nodera, H. Suzuki, O. Komure, S. Matsuura, K. Kobatake, N. Morimoto, K. Abe, N. Suzuki, 
M. Aoki, A. Kawata, T. Hirai, T. Kato, K. Ogasawara, A. Hirano, T. Takumi, H. Kusaka, 
K. Hagiwara, R. Kaji, H. Kawakami, Mutations of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis. Nature 465, 223–226 (2010).
 41. S. Nakazawa, D. Oikawa, R. Ishii, T. Ayaki, H. Takahashi, H. Takeda, R. Ishitani, K. Kamei, 
I. Takeyoshi, H. Kawakami, K. Iwai, I. Hatada, T. Sawasaki, H. Ito, O. Nureki, F. Tokunaga, 
Linear ubiquitination is involved in the pathogenesis of optineurin-associated 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat. Commun. 7, 12547 (2016).
 42. A. Caccamo, S. Majumder, J. J. Deng, Y. Bai, F. B. Thornton, S. Oddo, Rapamycin rescues 
TDP-43 mislocalization and the associated low molecular mass neurofilament instability. 
J. Biol. Chem. 284, 27416–27424 (2009).
 43. S. C. Bodine, T. N. Stitt, M. Gonzalez, W. O. Kline, G. L. Stover, R. Bauerlein, E. Zlotchenko, 
A. Scrimgeour, J. C. Lawrence, D. J. Glass, G. D. Yancopoulos, Akt/mTOR pathway is a 
crucial regulator of skeletal muscle hypertrophy and can prevent muscle atrophy in vivo. 
Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 1014–1019 (2001).
 44. K. Novak, Breaking down barriers. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2, 890 (2002).
 45. J. D. Miller, Y. M. Ganat, S. Kishinevsky, R. L. Bowman, B. Liu, E. Y. Tu, P. Mandal, E. Vera, 
J. W. Shim, S. Kriks, T. Taldone, N. Fusaki, M. J. Tomishima, D. Krainc, T. A. Milner, 
D. J. Rossi, L. Studer, Human iPSC-based modeling of late-onset disease via  
progerin-induced aging. Cell Stem Cell 13, 691–705 (2013).
 46. E. Y. Son, J. K. Ichida, B. J. Wainger, J. S. Toma, V. F. Rafuse, C. J. Woolf, K. Eggan, 
Conversion of mouse and human fibroblasts into functional spinal motor neurons.  
Cell Stem Cell 9, 205–218 (2011).
 47. D. G. Abernathy, W. K. Kim, M. J. McCoy, A. M. Lake, R. Ouwenga, S. W. Lee, X. Xing, D. Li, 
H. J. Lee, R. O. Heuckeroth, J. D. Dougherty, T. Wang, A. S. Yoo, MicroRNAs induce a 
permissive chromatin environment that enables neuronal subtype-specific 
reprogramming of adult human fibroblasts. Cell Stem Cell 21, 332–348.e9 (2017).
 48. Y. Maury, J. Côme, R. A. Piskorowski, N. Salah-Mohellibi, V. Chevaleyre, M. Peschanski, 
C. Martinat, S. Nedelec, Combinatorial analysis of developmental cues efficiently converts 
human pluripotent stem cells into multiple neuronal subtypes. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 89–96 
(2015).
 49. D. D. Pearse, A. R. Sanchez, F. C. Pereira, C. M. Andrade, R. Puzis, Y. Pressman, K. Golden, 
B. M. Kitay, B. Blits, P. M. Wood, M. B. Bunge, Transplantation of Schwann cells and/or 
olfactory ensheathing glia into the contused spinal cord: Survival, migration,  
axon association, and functional recovery. Glia 55, 976–1000 (2007).
 50. D. D. Pearse, F. C. Pereira, A. E. Marcillo, M. L. Bates, Y. A. Berrocal, M. T. Filbin, M. B. Bunge, 
cAMP and Schwann cells promote axonal growth and functional recovery after spinal 
cord injury. Nat. Med. 10, 610–616 (2004).
 51. S. Garbuzova-Davis, D. G. Hernandez-Ontiveros, M. C. O. Rodrigues, E. Haller, 
A. Frisina-Deyo, S. Mirtyl, S. Sallot, S. Saporta, C. V. Borlongan, P. R. Sanberg, Impaired 
blood–brain/spinal cord barrier in ALS patients. Brain Res. 1469, 114–128 (2012).
 52. E. A. Winkler, J. D. Sengillo, A. P. Sagare, Z. Zhao, Q. Ma, E. Zuniga, Y. Wang, Z. Zhong, 
J. S. Sullivan, J. H. Griffin, D. W. Cleveland, B. V. Zlokovic, Blood–spinal cord barrier 
disruption contributes to early motor-neuron degeneration in ALS-model mice.  
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, E1035–E1042 (2014).
 53. R. Darabi, R. W. Arpke, S. Irion, J. T. Dimos, M. Grskovic, M. Kyba, R. C. R. Perlingeiro, 
Human ES- and iPS-derived myogenic progenitors restore DYSTROPHIN and improve 
contractility upon transplantation in dystrophic mice. Cell Stem Cell 10, 610–619 (2012).
 54. P. A. Boyle, A. S. Buchman, R. S. Wilson, S. E. Leurgans, D. A. Bennett, Association of 
muscle strength with the risk of Alzheimer disease and the rate of cognitive decline  
in community-dwelling older persons. Arch. Neurol. 66, 1339–1344 (2009).
 55. R. Cano-de-la-Cuerda, M. Pérez-de-Heredia, J. C. Miangolarra-Page, E. Muñoz-Hellín, 
C. Fernández-de-las-Peñas, Is there muscular weakness in Parkinson’s disease?  
Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 89, 70–76 (2010).
 56. B. S. Jha, M. Rao, N. Malik, Motor neuron differentiation from pluripotent stem cells and 
other intermediate proliferative precursors that can be discriminated by lineage specific 
reporters. Stem Cell Rev. 11, 194–204 (2015).
 57. T. Mao, D. Kusefoglu, B. M. Hooks, D. Huber, L. Petreanu, K. Svoboda, Long-range 
neuronal circuits underlying the interaction between sensory and motor cortex. Neuron 
72, 111–123 (2011).
 58. S. Fisher, A. Barry, J. Abreu, B. Minie, J. Nolan, T. M. Delorey, G. Young, T. J. Fennell, 
A. Allen, L. Ambrogio, A. M. Berlin, B. Blumenstiel, K. Cibulskis, D. Friedrich, R. Johnson, 
F. Juhn, B. Reilly, R. Shammas, J. Stalker, S. M. Sykes, J. Thompson, J. Walsh, A. Zimmer, 
Z. Zwirko, S. Gabriel, R. Nicol, C. Nusbaum, A scalable, fully automated process for 
construction of sequence-ready human exome targeted capture libraries. Genome Biol. 
12, R1 (2011).
 59. Y. Guo, X. Ding, Y. Shen, G. J. Lyon, K. Wang, SeqMule: Automated pipeline for analysis of 
human exome/genome sequencing data. Sci. Rep. 5, 14283 (2015).
Acknowledgments: AAV-CAG-hChR2H134R-tdTomato was a gift from K. Svoboda (Addgene 
plasmid no. 28017). Funding: T.O. was supported by an overseas research fellowship  
(from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science). T.O., S.G.M.U., and R.D.K. also 
acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation for a Science and Technology 
Center on Emergent Behaviors of Integrated Cellular Systems (CBET-0939511). Author 
contributions: T.O., S.G.M.U., and R.D.K. conceived and designed the study. T.O. conducted 
the experiments and analyzed the data. S.G.M.U. designed the microfluidic device.  
T.O., S.G.M.U., and R.D.K. wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: R.D.K. and S.G.M.U. are 
inventors on a pending patent application related to this work filed by MIT (no. 2017-
0355945, filed 13 June 2017, published 14 December 2017). The authors declare no other 
competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data used to reach the 
conclusions in this paper are present in the paper and the Supplementary Materials. 
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors. The AAV-CAG-
hChR2-H134R-tdTomato can be provided by K. Svoboda pending scientific review and a 
completed material transfer agreement. Requests for the AAV-CAG-hChR2-H134R-tdTomato 
should be submitted to K. Svoboda through Addgene.
Submitted 14 March 2018
Accepted 5 September 2018
Published 10 October 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aat5847
Citation: T. Osaki, S. G. M. Uzel, R. D. Kamm, Microphysiological 3D model of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) from human iPS-derived muscle cells and optogenetic motor neurons. Sci. Adv. 4, 
eaat5847 (2018).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 muscle cells and optogenetic motor neurons
Microphysiological 3D model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) from human iPS-derived
Tatsuya Osaki, Sebastien G. M. Uzel and Roger D. Kamm
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aat5847
 (10), eaat5847.
4
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/10/eaat5847
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/10/05/4.10.eaat5847.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/10/eaat5847#BIBL
This article cites 59 articles, 9 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
