 Article
Neural Network Underlying Intermanual Skill
Transfer in Humans
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Unimanual training also enhances performance in the
untrained hand (cross-education)
d Real-time manipulation of visual feedback enhances
magnitude of cross-education
d Yoking movement of untrained to trained hand further
increases cross-education
d Functional connectivity with SPL during training predicts
cross-education
Authors
Ori Ossmy, Roy Mukamel
Correspondence
rmukamel@tau.ac.il
In Brief
Physical practice is important when
learning a new motor skill. Ossmy and
Mukamel demonstrate a training scheme
in the absence of voluntary physical
training and establish a link between
neural activity during training and
subsequent learning. Their results may
have practical implications for
rehabilitation of patients with upper-
extremity hemiparesis.
Ossmy & Mukamel, 2016, Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900
December 13, 2016 ª 2016 The Authors.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.11.009
 Cell Reports
Article
Neural Network Underlying
Intermanual Skill Transfer in Humans
Ori Ossmy1 and Roy Mukamel1,2,*
1Sagol School of Neuroscience and School of Psychological Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel
2Lead Contact
*Correspondence: rmukamel@tau.ac.il
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.11.009
SUMMARY
Physical practice with one hand results in perfor-
mance gains of the other (un-practiced) hand, yet
the role of sensory feedback and underlying neuro-
physiology is unclear. Healthy subjects learned se-
quences of finger movements by physical training
with their right hand while receiving real-time move-
ment-based visual feedback via 3D virtual reality de-
vices as if their immobile left hand was training. This
manipulation resulted in significantly enhanced per-
formance gain with the immobile hand, which was
further increased when left-hand fingers were yoked
to passively follow right-hand voluntary movements.
Neuroimaging data show that, during training with
manipulated visual feedback, activity in the left and
right superior parietal lobule and their degree of
coupling with motor and visual cortex, respectively,
correlate with subsequent left-hand performance
gain. These results point to a neural network sub-
serving short-term motor skill learning and may
have implications for developing new approaches
for learning and rehabilitation in patients with unilat-
eral motor deficits.
INTRODUCTION
It is common wisdom that ‘‘practice makes perfect’’; however,
what constitutes an optimal practice regime when learning a
new skill is not clear. In the domain of motor skills, for example,
when learning to dribble a basketball, physical training with the
relevant effector obviously plays a crucial role. Nonetheless,
research over the past decades has recognized that sensory
feedback and mental imagery play a significant role in the
learning process (Nyberg et al., 2006; Sigrist et al., 2013; Wolpert
et al., 2011). In the case of vision, it has been shown that even in
the absence of physical training, mere observation of someone
else performing a motor task is sufficient to introduce significant
gains in subsequent performance of the observer (Bird et al.,
2005; Cross et al., 2009; Kelly et al., 2003; Mattar and Gribble,
2005; Nojima et al., 2015; Vogt and Thomaschke, 2007; Ossmy
and Mukamel, 2016). Furthermore, passive limb movement has
also been shown to facilitate learning (Beets et al., 2012; Darainy
et al., 2013; Vahdat et al., 2014; Wong et al., 2012). Finally, phys-
ical training with one hand is known to result in significant per-
formance gains in the opposite (untrained) hand—a phenome-
non termed intermanual transfer or cross-education (Ruddy
and Carson, 2013). Intermanual transfer has been reported as
early as 1894, showing that unilateral strength training of a single
limb increases the strength of the contralateral (untrained) ho-
mologous muscle group (Scripture et al., 1894). Since then,
this effect has been demonstrated across multiple motor tasks
(Anguera et al., 2007; Brass et al., 2001; Camus et al., 2009; Car-
roll et al., 2006; Criscimagna-Hemminger et al., 2003; Farthing
et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2010; Malfait and Ostry, 2004; Perez
and Cohen, 2008; Perez et al., 2007; Sainburg and Wang,
2002) and is suggested to occur through plastic changes in the
brain that are not confined to the specific neural networks
controlling the physically trained effector (e.g., plastic changes
also in motor cortex ipsilateral to the active hand [Duque et al.,
2008; Hortoba
´ gyi et al., 2003; Muellbacher et al., 2000; Obaya-
shi, 2004]). Enhancing the behavioral effect of intermanual trans-
fer and elucidating its underlying neural mechanism has impor-
tant implications for rehabilitation of patients with unimanual
deficits (Hendy et al., 2012; Ramachandran and Altschuler,
2009) in which direct training of the affected hand is difficult.
Given that visual input, physical training, and passive move-
ment play a significant role in performance and intermanual
transfer of motor skills, research in recent years examined the
behavioral and neural consequences of training with manipu-
lated visual feedback (Halsband and Lange, 2006). In particular,
unimanual training with mirrored visual feedback (as if the oppo-
site, passive hand, is training) has been shown to enhance trans-
fer to the opposite hand and increase excitability of primary
motor cortex (M1) ipsilateral to the physically trained hand (Garry
et al., 2005; Hamzei et al., 2012; Nojima et al., 2012). Nonethe-
less, much less is known at the whole-brain network level and
how inter-regional coupling during such training correlates with
subsequent behavioral changes in performance. Additionally,
at the behavioral level, the interaction between manipulated
visual feedback and passive movement during training is
unknown.
In the present study, we examined intermanual transfer using a
novel setup employing 3D virtual reality (VR) devices to control
visual feedback of finger movements during unimanual training
of healthy adults (experiment 1). By using a novel device, we
also examined whether the addition of passive finger movement
of the non-physically training hand further enhances the
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016 ª 2016 The Authors.
2891
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 intermanual transfer effect (experiment 2). Finally, we used
whole-brain functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
probe the relevant brain regions engaged during such training
and examined their degree of inter-regional coupling with
respect to subsequent behavioral changes in performance of
individual subjects (experiment 3).
RESULTS
A total of 53 subjects participated in one of three different exper-
iments in which they trained to execute rapid sequences of finger
movements. Throughout the entire study, subjects could not
see their real hands and visual feedback of two virtual hands
was provided by the VR setup. Each experimental condition
comprised a pre-training performance evaluation stage, a
training stage, and a post-training performance evaluation stage.
In the evaluation stages, subjects were instructed to perform a
unimanual five-digit movement sequence repeatedly as accu-
rately and rapidly as possible (Karni et al., 1998). Performance
level was calculated for each hand separately as the number of
times within a fixed time window that the subject performed a
complete five-digit sequence with no errors. In the training stage,
subjects were instructed to perform the same sequence of finger
movements at self-pace while sensory feedback was manipu-
lated according to the different experimental conditions (detailed
below). An index of performance gains (G) was calculated based
on the difference in performance level between the post-training
and pre-training evaluation stages for each subject and training
condition (see Experimental Procedures).
Visual Manipulation
We used specialized VR devices, including motion sensitive
gloves, to detect subject’s real hand movements and translate
them by customized software to movement of virtual hands
presented on the screen. This setup allowed us to decouple
the online visual feedback of virtual-hand movements from the
subject’s real hand movements during the training stage. In
each experimental condition, the subject trained on a specific
sequence of finger movements (see Figure 1). Training manner
varied across four different experimental conditions (see Table 1
and Experimental Procedures): (1) congruent visual feedback—
subjects physically trained with their right hand while receiving
congruent online visual feedback of right-virtual-hand move-
ment (condition RH-RH); (2) incongruent visual feedback—sub-
jects physically trained with their right hand while receiving online
corresponding visual feedback of left-virtual-hand movement
(condition RH-LH; see Movie S1); (3) no visual feedback—sub-
jects physically trained with their right hand while no visual feed-
back was provided (condition RH-None); (4) observation only—
subjects passively observed the virtual left hand performing
the sequence, while both their real hands were immobile (condi-
tion None-LH).
The average number of self-paced full-sequence movements
performed by the subjects during training was 106.4 ± 3.8
(mean ± SEM across subjects and training types) and was
not significantly different across the different training types
(repeated-measures ANOVA [rmANOVA], minimal p = 0.53
across subjects). The lack of real hand movement (i.e., left-
hand movement in conditions 1–3, and both hands in condition 4)
was verified with the motion detection gloves (see Experimental
Procedures). This suggests that differences in performance
gains across experimental conditions is unlikely due to differ-
ences in the amount of movements across training conditions
or subliminal hand movements.
Physical training with the right hand (conditions 1–3) yielded
significant performance gains in the left (non-practicing) hand
Figure 1. Experiment 1
(A) Schematic illustration of one experimental
condition. A unique sequence of five digits was
presented together with a sketch of the mapped
fingers (instructions). Subjects performed the
sequence as accurately and rapidly as possible
using their right hand (RH) and their left hand (LH)
separately for initial evaluation of performance.
Next, subjects were trained under a specific
training type and finally repeated the evaluation
test again.
(B) Subjects wore a headset and motion sensitive
gloves and received visual feedback of virtual
hands. The VR devices allowed visual manipula-
tion of online visual feedback. A camera mounted
on the headset allowed embedding the virtual
hands
and
subject’s
view
inside
a
natural
environment.
(C) Experiment 1 results. Physical training with the
right hand while receiving online visual feedback
as if the left hand is moving (RH-LH) resulted in
highest left-hand performance gains relative to all
other training conditions. Error bars indicate SEM
across subjects. For condition acronyms, see
Table 1.
2892
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
 while passive training by left-hand observation (condition 4)
yielded performance gains that were not significantly different
than zero (p = 0.7; unequal variance t test; see Figure 1C and
Table S1). Interestingly, we found that training in the incongruent
visual feedback condition (RH-LH) resulted in the strongest inter-
manual transfer. Left-hand performance gain in this condition
was significantly higher than gains obtained following training
with congruent (RH-RH) visual feedback (p < 0.05; two tailed
paired t test) and training without visual feedback (RH-None;
p < 0.05; two-tailed paired t test; see Figure 1C). Additionally,
performance gain in the incongruent visual feedback condition
(RH-LH) was higher than the sum of performance gains obtained
during right-hand training without visual feedback (RH-None)
and training by left-hand observation (None-LH) conditions
separately (p < 0.01). This implies that performance gains in
the left hand are non-linearly enhanced when right-hand training
is supplemented with left-hand visual feedback that is controlled
by the subject.
Passive Movement
In experiment 1, we demonstrated that intermanual transfer of a
motor skill can be enhanced by providing subject-controlled
incongruent visual feedback during training. In experiment 2,
we examined whether passive left-hand movement can further
enhance this transfer effect. To this end, throughout all training
periods, subjects’ hands were placed inside a custom-built
device that controls left-hand finger movement (Figure 2A and
Experimental Procedures). The device allows subjects to freely
perform right-hand finger movements (flexion/extension), while
corresponding left-hand finger movement is yoked to right-
hand finger movements (Movie S2). Voluntary left-hand move-
ment is impossible. Thus, for example, voluntary right-hand
index finger flexion/extension results in an immediate passive
flexion/extension of the left-hand index finger by the device. A
new set of subjects (n = 18) completed five experimental training
conditions: RH-LH and RH-None (similar to experiment 1) and
another three experimental conditions (RH-RH-PM, RH-LH-
PM, and RH-None-PM), in which right-hand active finger move-
ment resulted in yoked passive movement of the corresponding
left-hand finger through the device. Thus, condition RH-LH-PM
corresponds to right-hand physical training with incongruent
visual feedback (similar to condition RH-LH from experiment 1)
with the addition of passive movement (PM) of the left hand. In
this setup, subjects performed 89.7 ± 8.6 full-sequence move-
ments on average during training (mean across subjects and
training types). Number of movements performed during training
was not significantly different across the different training types
(rmANOVA; minimal p = 0.61 across subjects). The average num-
ber of movements performed in this setup is smaller than that of
experiment 1 probably due to the use of the device which made
subject movements slower (Table S2). Importantly, since our
performance gain index (G) depends also on total number of
movements performed, G index comparisons were only per-
formed across conditions within a given experiment and not
across experiments.
Our results from experiment 1 demonstrate that, during right-
hand physical training, the addition of congruent right-virtual-
hand visual feedback did not significantly improve left-hand per-
formance gains (experiment 1, RH-RH versus RH-None). In the
current experiment, we find that in the absence of visual feed-
back the addition of left-hand passive movement does not signif-
icantly improve left-hand performance gains either (RH-None-
PM versus RH-None; p = 0.41; see Figure 2B and Table S2).
Furthermore, we found that the addition of both congruent
right-virtual-hand visual feedback and passive left-hand move-
ment together do not introduce significantly different gains in
left-hand performance (RH-RH-PM versus RH-None; p = 0.38).
However, this was not true in the case of incongruent visual
feedback. The addition of incongruent visual feedback during
right-hand training significantly improved left-hand performance
gains (RH-LH > RH-None; p = 3 3 10–4), thus replicating the re-
sults from experiment 1. As mentioned above, the addition of
passive movement (either with or without congruent visual feed-
back) did not result in significant left-hand performance gains.
Importantly, the addition of passive movement to the incon-
gruent condition (RH-LH-PM) led to the highest left-hand perfor-
mance gains (see Figure 2B), which was significantly higher
compared to all other training types (F(4,85) = 6.23, p < 0.001;
rmANOVA). Performance gain obtained in the RH-LH-PM
training condition was even higher than that obtained in the
Table 1. Training Conditions Used across the Three Experiments
Training Type
Real-Hand Movement
Visual Feedback
Left Hand
Right Hand
Left Virtual Hand
Right Virtual Hand
RH-RH
no movement
active sequence generation
no movement
yoked to real right hand
RH-LH
no movement
active sequence generation
yoked to right-hand movement
no movement
RH-none
no movement
active sequence generation
no virtual hand
no virtual hand
None-RH
no movement
no movement
no movement
simulating sequence execution
None-LH
no movement
no movement
simulating sequence execution
no movement
RH-RH-PM
yoked to right hand
active sequence generation
yoked to left-hand passive movement
yoked to real right hand
RH-LH-PM
yoked to right hand
active sequence generation
yoked to real right hand
no movement
RH-none-PM
yoked to right hand
active sequence generation
no movement
no movement
Acronym notation corresponds to (physical training)-(visual feedback)-(passive movement). RH, right hand; LH, left hand; PM, passive left-hand
movement by the device (experiment 2). Thus, condition RH-RH corresponds to training condition in which subjects physically trained with their right
hand and received online visual feedback of right-virtual-hand movement. RH-none-PM corresponds with right-hand physical training, without visual
feedback, and with left-hand passive movement.
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
2893
 RH-LH training condition (RH-LH-PM > RH-LH, p = 0.003). As
mentioned above, and similar to experiment 1, such differences
in performance gains across training conditions cannot be ex-
plained by differences in the number of self-paced movements
or subliminal movement of the untrained hand (see Experimental
Procedures).
Neuroimaging: Individual Region Analysis
Weexploredputativebrainregionsunderlyingtheenhancedinter-
manual transfer effects we obtained in the previous behavioral
studies. To this end, we acquired whole-brain fMRI data from an
additional set of subjects (n = 18) who completed five different
training conditions (similar to experiment 1; see Figure 1A). Since
the passive-hand movement device used in experiment 2 is not
MR compatible, it could not be used in the current experiment.
Subjects underwent the following experimental conditions: RH-
RH, RH-LH, RH-None, None-LH, and None-RH (the last two con-
ditions are training by observation only, in which subjects
passively observed the virtual left or right hand perform the
sequence, respectively; see Ossmy and Mukamel, 2016 for
further details). Subjects performed a total number of 126 ± 11.6
full-sequence movements during each training type (averaged
across subjects and training types), which was not significantly
different across training conditions (minimal p = 0.34 across
subjects; rmANOVA). Similar to experiment 1, training condition
RH-LH was significantly more effective than all other training
conditions with respect to transfer of performance gains to the
untrained left hand (p < 0.05; rmANOVA) (see Figure 3A and Table
S3). Furthermore, the combination of right-hand physical training
with left-hand observation (RH-LH) was better than each training
type separately (RH-None, and None-LH) and better than the sum
of both of them (p = 0.03; one-tailed paired t test). Conversely, the
combinationof right-handphysical training with right-handobser-
vation (RH-RH)didnotyieldsignificantlydifferentleft-handperfor-
mance gains than each training type separately (RH-None, and
None-RH; F(2,51) = 0.25, p = 0.77; rmANOVA). This suggests
that the congruency of visual feedback during physical training
with the right hand plays an important role in intermanual transfer.
At the neural level, we first detected relevant brain regions
engaged during training with incongruent feedback. To this
end, we performed a general linear model (GLM) analysis on
the fMRI data obtained during the training stage by using the
contrast: RH-LH > RH-None (see Figure 3B). This analysis re-
vealed a network of four regions including right superior parietal
lobule (R-SPL), left superior parietal lobule (L-SPL), and bilateral
occipito-temporal visual regions (R-Visual and L-Visual). Activity
in these regions during training was then examined with respect
to corresponding behavioral changes in left-hand performance
(see Experimental Procedures). We found that, of the four re-
gions of interest (ROIs), only activity in left and right SPL corre-
lated with the performance gain value across individual subjects
(see Figure 3C; r = 0.68 and r = 0.62, respectively; p < 0.05
corrected for number of ROIs). Activity, in the right or left visual
regions was not significant (r = 0.41, p = 0.09 and r = 0.37,
p = 0.13, respectively). These results demonstrate that fMRI ac-
tivity level in both SPL during training with incongruent visual
feedback is a good predictor for subsequent left-hand perfor-
mance gains across individual subjects.
We also performed a similar analysis using data from the
congruent training condition (RH-RH > RH-None; Figure 4A
and Experimental Procedures). This analysis revealed three
ROIs (left and right visual cortex, and right SPL); however, the
correlation between the fMRI activity level in these regions during
RH-RH training with the corresponding left-hand performance
gains was not significant (uncorrected minimal p = 0.12 across
regions was in R-SPL; see Figure 4B; R-Visual: r = 0.26,
p = 0.29; L-Visual: r = 0.24, p = 0.33). This supports the notion
that the correlation between activity level in both SPL during
training and subsequent left-hand performance gains is specific
to the incongruent training condition. Furthermore, The fact that
the R-SPL ROI was obtained whenever visual feedback was
added (whether congruent or not) while L-SPL only following
the addition of incongruent visual feedback points to functional
differences between the two regions with respect to visuomotor
adaptation (Mutha et al., 2011).
Neuroimaging: Transfer-Related Network
To further examine the neural correlates of the transfer effect, we
performed a functional connectivity analysis (see Experimental
Procedures). This method is particularly useful in examining
the network level (rather than individual ROIs examined so far)
and is based on the dynamics of the signal (rather than the aver-
aged activation of the ROIs collapsed over time). First, we used
the activity in L-SPL during RH-LH training as seed. This analysis
revealed a network of brain regions that exhibit significant func-
tional connectivity with the L-SPL during training (see Figure 5A).
Next, we examined whether across subjects the strength of the
functional connectivity between activity in the L-SPL seed region
Figure 2. Experiment 2
(A) The custom-built device was added to the
virtual reality setup in order to produce passive
left-hand finger movement that is yoked to right-
hand voluntary finger movement during training.
The online manipulation of virtual hands remained
similar to experiment 1 (see Figure 1).
(B) The highest left-hand performance gain was
obtained when incongruent visual feedback was
combined with passive left-hand movement (RH-
LH-PM).
This
improvement
was
significantly
higher than condition RH-LH, which was the most
effective training type in experiment 1. Error bars
indicate SEM across subjects.
2894
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
 and activity of individual voxels obtained in the functional con-
nectivity map correlates with their subsequent behavioral
changes (see Experimental Procedures). We found that, in a
patch of 29 voxels located in the left primary motor cortex (left
M1), the connectivity level with L-SPL across individual subjects
significantly correlates with subjects’ subsequent performance
gain in the left hand (q(FDR) < 0.05; see Figure 5B). This shows
that subjects exhibiting stronger functional connectivity (cross-
talk) between L-SPL and L-M1 during incongruent training also
exhibited higher subsequent performance gains in the left hand.
We also performed a similar analysis as above, this time using
activity in R-SPL as seed. The functional connectivity map using
R-SPL as seed region revealed similar regions to the ones ob-
tained when using L-SPL as seed (86% overlap; see Figure 5B).
Interestingly, we found that in a patch of 129 voxels in right
occipital gyrus (R-OcG), the strength of the correlation between
individual voxel time course and the signal in the R-SPL seed
region during RH-LH training co-varied across subjects with
their subsequent degree of performance gain in the left hand
(q[FDR] < 0.05; see Experimental Procedures). This shows that
subjects exhibiting stronger functional connectivity (cross-talk)
between R-SPL and R-Visual during incongruent training also
exhibited higher subsequent performance gains in the left hand
(see Figure 5B). Taken together, this suggests an SPL-based
mechanism that plays a significant role in the integration of input
received from both the visual and motor cortex during training
with incongruent visual feedback. We therefore define the
R-SPL, R-OCG, L-SPL, and L-M1 ROIs as transfer-related
network for further analysis.
Following the functional connectivity analysis, we examined
the relationship between the transfer-related network and re-
gions that are active during right/left-hand movement. To this
end, for each subject we performed a GLM analysis on the
pre-training evaluation data (in which visual feedback was
provided) using two contrasts: Pre_Trainingright_hand > rest
Figure 3. Experiment 3
(A) Behavioral results obtained inside the scanner
from the new set of subjects replicated the results
from experiment 1. Highest performance gains
in the left hand were obtained during RH-LH
training (p < 0.05). Error bars indicate SEM across
subjects.
(B) Regions with enhanced fMRI signal during
training with incongruent visual feedback. Multi-
subject random effects GLM contrast RH-LH >
RH-None (n = 18; q(FDR) < 0.05). Right SPL, left
SPL and bilateral visual regions were obtained.
(C) The activity in the left SPL (left panel; beta
values of the contrast RH-LH > rest during training;
see text) and right SPL (right panel) correlated
significantly with subsequent left-hand perfor-
mance gains. Each circle represents one subject.
and Pre_Trainingleft_hand > rest (see Fig-
ure 6A and Experimental Procedures).
This analysis yielded 16 regions involved
in performance of the finger sequence
task. Importantly, in all 18 subjects, the
transfer-related network (defined independently based on the
group-level correlation with behavior) was located inside these
activation regions. Next, subjects were split into two equal
groups (median split) according to left-hand performance gains:
high learners (subjects with the highest left-hand performance
gain following RH-LH training) and low learners. We performed
a functional dissimilarity analysis in which functional distances
between all 16 regions during RH-LH training were visualized
in two dimensions using multi-dimensional scaling for the two
groups separately (Figure 6B; see Experimental Procedures).
The total functional distance of transfer-related regions (i.e.,
sum of all distances between transfer-related ROIs) was signifi-
cantly lower in high versus low learners (p < 0.05; equal variance t
test). Furthermore, the connectivity level between these regions
exhibited a significant inverse correlation with subsequent
behavioral changes in left-hand performance (Figure 6C; p <
0.05). In other words, subjects with smaller functional distance
within the transfer-related network during incongruent training
had higher subsequent left-hand performance gain. A similar
analysis on these ROIs using signal time courses during training
with congruent visual feedback (RH-RH) did not yield significant
difference between the two groups (p = 0.23; equal variance
t test). These results demonstrate that connectivity between vi-
suomotor regions that were identified based on the evaluation
stage play a significant role in improved intermanual transfer dur-
ing training with incongruent visual feedback.
DISCUSSION
Our findings demonstrate the power of sensory feedback on in-
termanual transfer during short-term motor training. Training by
passive observation, in which visual input is not controlled by
the subject, has been shown to result in increased performance
gains in the same hand (Bird and Heyes, 2005; Mattar and
Gribble, 2005). Additionally, physical training with one hand
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
2895
 has been shown to increase performance gains in the opposite
hand (Ruddy and Carson, 2013; Sainburg and Wang, 2002).
Here, we show that in the context of intermanual transfer, the
combination of physical practice with one hand coupled with
incongruent visual feedback that is controlled by the subject
yields optimal results in the non-trained hand. Training by obser-
vation alone resulted in significantly lower left-hand performance
gains irrespective of the identity of the passively observed hand
(RH-LH versus None-LH in experiment 1 and versus None-LH
and None-RH in experiment 3). Interestingly, physical training
with congruent visual feedback (RH-RH) also resulted in lower
left-hand performance gains than physical training with incon-
gruent visual feedback (RH-LH; experiments 1 and 3). These re-
sults are in line with previous studies which used mirror feedback
to demonstrate improved performance of a simple skill in an
immobile hand of healthy subjects (Nojima et al., 2012) and
accelerated recovery of motor function in an affected hand of
stroke patients (Ramachandran and Altschuler, 2009; S€
utbeyaz
et al., 2007). We extend the research of mirror feedback to the
context of motor learning and demonstrate how voluntary con-
trol of incongruent visual input during short-term training can
enhance intermanual transfer.
Our novel experimental setup allowed us to further show that
the addition of passive movement (experiment 2) yields even
further transfer gains in the incongruent visual feedback condi-
tion (RH-LH-PM). This is consistent with the concept that propri-
oceptive training improves motor learning in the passively moved
effector (Darainy et al., 2013; Vahdat et al., 2014; Wong et al.,
2012). It could be argued that, in conditions involving passive
left-hand movement, subjects actually performed voluntary
bimanual movements. While this cannot be completely ruled
out, this alternative explanation is highly unlikely due to several
reasons: first, when no visual feedback is provided, we found
no significant effect for the addition of passive movement (RH-
None versus RH-None-PM); second, there is a slight (non-
perceived) delay induced by the device between right-hand
movement and yoked left-hand movement (see Experimental
Procedures); third, subjective reports of the subjects did not
support the feeling of voluntary bimanual movement. Taken
together, these results support the notion that passive move-
ment enhances intermanual transfer, such enhancement is sen-
sitive to the type of visual feedback, and most useful in the case
of incongruent visual feedback.
Our results are limited to a relatively simple motor task and
short-term training. Our training duration is compatible with
respect to similar short-term learning studies reported in the liter-
ature (Gabitov et al., 2015; Mattar and Gribble, 2005). However,
in short-term motor learning, there is a potential for bias from an
unspecific arousal effect in the incongruent condition. Therefore,
it is possible that across longer training periods, subjects will
habituate to the incongruent visual feedback and our reported
effects will subside. Therefore, future research is required to
examine our effects across multiple training sessions spanning
longer time periods (e.g., days or weeks), and their generalization
to more complex movements.
Exploiting the current novel approach has the potential for
enhancing motor acquisition in clinical patients who exhibit
mild to moderate upper extremity hemiparesis. Although in hem-
iparetic patients direct training of the affected hand has well es-
tablished effects on rehabilitation (such as constraint-induced
movement therapy [Taub et al., 1999; Wolf et al., 2006]), this
type of training is very challenging especially in cases where
the basic movement capability of the patient is limited (Hoare
et al., 2007). We propose to bypass this challenge by combining
the VR setup described here with physical training of the non-
affected hand. Further studies will be needed to evaluate the
effectiveness of such a strategy with respect to direct training
of the affected hand.
Finally, we examined possible neural networks underlying the
mechanism of enhanced intermanual transfer during training
with incongruent visual feedback. We show that subsequent
behavioral outcome of such training is reflected by activity in
the SPL during training. This is in agreement with studies
showing that the parietal cortex and its connection to visual re-
gions are engaged during visuomotor practice (Cross et al.,
2009; Culham et al., 2003; Gallivan and Culham, 2015; Kr€
uger
et al., 2014; Sakai et al., 2002). We did not detect the ipsilateral
primary motor cortex as a correlate to the level of intermanual
transfer (Anguera et al., 2007; Farthing et al., 2007; Lee et al.,
2010; Perez and Cohen, 2008). A possible explanation might
be due to the fact that most physiological studies examining
intermanual transfer did not manipulate visual input. We
further show that the inter-regional coupling within a network
comprising L-SPL and L-M1, and R-SPL and R-visual regions
during such training can explain individual differences in subse-
quent left-hand performance gains. To conclude, our results
suggest that, at least when motor skills are concerned, contrary
to the popular idiom, my left hand actually does know what my
right hand is doing, and this knowledge is likely mediated
through information conveyed by the SPL.
Figure
4. Regions
with
Enhanced
fMRI
Signal during Training with Congruent Vi-
sual Feedback
(A) Multi-subject random effects GLM contrast RH-
RH > RH-None (n = 18; q(FDR) < 0.05). Right SPL
and bilateral visual regions exhibited significantly
stronger signal in the RH-RH condition. The left
SPL was the only region obtained in the RH-LH >
RH-None contrast that was not obtained in the
current contrast (see Experimental Procedures).
(B) Activity in right SPL was not significantly
correlated
with
subsequent
left-hand
perfor-
mance gains (p = 0.11).
2896
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Subjects in all three experiments were healthy and right handed (according to
the Edinburgh handedness questionnaire), with normal vision and no reported
cognitive deficits or neurological problems. Subjects were naive to the pur-
pose of the study. All the experiments were conducted in accordance with
the protocol approved by the Ethics Committee of Tel-Aviv University.
Experiment 1
Eighteen healthy subjects (six females, mean age: 26.3, range: 23–31 years)
participated in this study after providing informed consent and were compen-
sated for their participation either by course credit or money (35 New Israeli
Shekel [NIS] per hour).
Subjects completed four sessions during which they learned four different
sequences of finger movements. Subjects performed the motor task sitting
in a chair with their hands forward and palms facing up. Subjects could not
see their real hands. Visual feedback of virtual hands was provided through
a VR headset used for 3D gaming (Oculus VR, Oculus Rift) (see Figure 1B).
Subjects wore motion-sensing MR-compatible gloves (5DT Data Glove Ultra)
that allow online monitoring of individual finger flexure in each hand. We also
used a head-mounted specialized 3D camera (PLAYSTATION Eye digital cam-
era device) to provide online visual feedback of the real environment. The vir-
tual hands were embedded in a specific location in space and were presented
only when subjects looked down toward their real hands (see Movie S1).
In the beginning of each session (Figure 1A), subjects were presented with an
instructions slide that depicted two hand illustrations (right/left) with numbered
fingers and a five-number sequence underneath, representing the sequence
of finger movements to be learned. The instructions slide (12 s) was followed
by a pre-training evaluation stage in which baseline performance level of each
hand was separately assessed. During the evaluation, subjects performed the
required sequence with one hand repeatedly as fast and as accurate as possible
for 30 s (hand order right/left was counter-balanced across all sessions). At this
stage, online visual feedback consisted of a display of two virtual hands whose
finger movements were yoked in real-time to the subjects’ actual finger move-
ments. In the following training stage, subjects trained under one of the four
following training conditions: RH-RH, RH-LH, RH-None, None-LH (see Table 1;
order of training conditions was counter-balanced across subjects). When visual
feedback was provided, it included both hands and finger movement was yoked
according to the corresponding experimental condition. Following the pre-
training evaluation stage, a ‘‘Start Training’’ slide (9 s) cued the subjects to the
upcoming training stage in which they performed the sequence of finger move-
ments repeatedly in a self-paced manner. Each training block lasted 15 s fol-
lowed by 9 s of a yellow blank screen which served as cue for resting period.
The training stage consisted of 20 such training blocks. After the training stage,
subjects’ performance level was re-evaluated as previously in each hand.
Experiment 2
Eighteen healthy subjects (six females, mean age: 25.4, range: 19–36 years)
participated in this study and were compensated for their participation (40
NIS per hr). None of the subjects participated in experiment 1.
Subjects completed five sessions in which their task was to learn sequences
of finger movements (similar to experiment 1). The experiment setup was iden-
tical to experiment 1, with the addition of a specialized motion control apparatus
(Rehabit-Tec System; see Figure 2A, Movie S2, and Supplemental Information).
Thus, when the hands are strapped to the device and the device is turned on,
voluntary right-hand finger movement results in passive yoking of the corre-
sponding left-hand fingers with a slight delay of 191 ms (averaged across
fingers). When the device is turned off, right-hand fingers are free to move but
left-hand fingers are immobile, and their voluntary movement is impossible.
In each session, subjects trained in one of the following conditions: RH-RH-
PM, RH-LH-PM, RH-None-PM, RH-LH, RH-None (see Table 1). During all
trainingconditions,subjectsplacedtheirhandsinsidethedevice(seeFigure2A).
In conditions that did not include passive movements (RH-LH and RH-None),
the device was switched off to allow right-hand finger movement while keeping
the left hand immobile. Evaluation stages were conducted with palms down
outside of the device. The training stages contained ten blocks. Each block
lasted 50 s followed by 10 s of rest. Otherwise, theexperimentaldesign and sub-
jects’ instructions remained similar to experiment 1 (see Figure 1A).
Experiment 3
Eighteen healthy subjects (ten females, mean age: 27.4, range: 22–34 years)
participated in this study after providing informed consent. Subjects were re-
cruited according to the standard safety criteria for fMRI studies. One subject
also participated in experiment 2. The study conformed to the guidelines of the
protocol approved by the Helsinki committee at the Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical
Center. Subjects participated in the experiment either for course credit or
money (55 NIS per hr).
During fMRI scans, subjects completed five experimental conditions (five
consecutive runs) in which they performed tasks similar to the ones described
in experiment 1. We recorded the subjects’ finger movements using the
MR compatible gloves (same gloves used in experiments 1 and 2) to allow
providing online visual feedback of virtual hands presented on a screen. The
virtual hands were presented with black background on a screen mounted
in front of the subject’s eyes in the scanner and viewed through a tilted mirror.
Subjects lied supine with their arms to the side of their body and palms facing
up. Subjects could not see their real hands during the scans.
Experimental design was identical to experiment 1, with the following training
conditions: RH-LH, RH-RH, RH-None, None-LH, and None-RH (see Table 1).
Behavioral Analysis
We used the data from the motion detection gloves to verify that the subjects
did not move their fingers during the observational training conditions (None-
LH in experiments 1 and 3; None-RH in experiment 3). For further details, see
Supplemental Information.
For each subject, we also compared the total amount of self-paced move-
ments performed during training across the different conditions. We used the
data from the gloves’ sensors, to calculate the amount of movements in each
training block (20 blocks in experiments 1 and 3, ten blocks in experiment 2).
In all subjects, we found no significant difference between the amount of move-
ments performed during the different training conditions (one-way ANOVA on
Figure 5. Network Level Analysis
(A)
Multi-subject
functional
connectivity
map
(n = 18; random effects-q(FDR) < 0.05) using the
voxels in left SPL as seed (voxels that correlated
with behavior; see Figure 3B) during the RH-LH
training stage. The map represents the correlation
between activity in the L-SPL seed region and all
other voxels. In a patch of 29 voxels located in the
left primary motor cortex (left M1; purple voxels),
the connectivity level with L-SPL across subjects
during RH-LH training significantly correlated
with their subsequent left-hand performance gain
(q(FDR) < 0.05).
(B) Similar to (A), using the right SPL as seed region (voxels that correlated with behavior; see Figure 3B) during RH-LH training. Across subjects, in a patch of 129
voxels in the right visual area (right occipital gyrus; purple voxels) the degree of connectivity with R-SPL correlated with left-hand performance gains following
RH-LH training (q(FDR) < 0.05).
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
2897
 the different training conditions in each experiment; lowest p across all subjects:
p = 0.53, p = 0.61, p = 0.34 for experiments 1, 2, and 3, respectively).
Performance Evaluation
In all evaluation stages, we calculated subject’s performance (P) by counting
the number of correctly performed complete 5-digit sequences within 30 s.
Subject’s performance gain following training was calculated using the for-
mula below:
G = ppost training � ppre training
ppost training + ppre training
;
where Ppost_training/Ppre_training corresponds to the subject’s performance in the
post/pretrainingevaluationstage.Therefore,apositiveGindexreflectsimprove-
ment in performance. We calculate the left-hand performance gain index for
Figure 6. Visuomotor Network Analysis
(A) Random effect multi-subject activation map
(n = 18) displaying significant regions obtained from
the GLM contrasts RH-RH > rest and LH-LH > rest
during the pre-training evaluation. Regions re-
vealed in this contrast include the right and left pre-
motorcortex(R-PMc/L-PMc),primarymotorcortex
(R-/L-M1), visual cortex (R-Visual/L-Visual), post-
central gyrus (R-PoG/L-PoG), superior parietal
lobule (R-SPL/L-SPL), supplementary motor area
(R-SMA/L-SMA), and subcortical regions (R-Thal-
amus/L-Thalamus/R-Striatum/L-Striatum).
(B) Functional distances (between all 16 visuo-
motor ROIs) in two-dimensional space for good
learners (left panel) and bad learners (right panel;
see text). The total functional distance within
the transfer network (L-SPL, R-SPL, R-visual, and
L-M1) is significantly smaller in the high learners
than the low learners during training with incon-
gruent visual feedback (p < 0.05).
(C) Correlation between functional distance of
transfer network during RH-LH training and sub-
sequent left-hand performance gains. Subjects
exhibiting smaller functional distances during
incongruent
RH-LH
training
exhibited
higher
subsequent left-hand performance gains (r =
�0.51, p < 0.05). The scatterplot represents
summed distance between all ROIs in the transfer
network for each subject.
each subject, and each experimental condition, al-
lowing us to compare improvement under different
motor trainings conditions in each experiment.
fMRI Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
Foreach subject, blood-oxygenation-level-depen-
dent (BOLD) contrast was obtained using standard
protocols described in detail in the Supplemental
Information. The acquired data from all subjects
underwent preprocessing using the BrainVoyager
QX software (version 2.6, Brain Innovation; http://
www.brainvoyager.com), as further described in
the Supplemental Information.
ROI Analysis
Regions of interest (ROIs; see Figure 3B) were
defined at the individual subject level using a gen-
eral linear model (GLM) contrast to reveal brain re-
gions active during training with congruent and
incongruent visual feedback. Next, we examined
the correlation between fMRI activity levels across subjects during RH-LH
training (Figure 3) or RH-RH training (Figure 4) relative to rest with their corre-
sponding left-hand G value. For further details, see Supplemental Information.
Functional Connectivity Analysis
To examine what brain regions are functionally connected with left or right SPL
during RH-LH training, we conducted whole-brain functional connectivity
analysis using the activity in left SPL or right SPL as seed regions. Connectivity
strength of each voxel in the resulting map with the relevant seed region was
examined with respect to left-hand behavioral performance gains (for further
details, see Supplemental Information).
Visuomotor Network Analysis
Visuomotor-related regions were defined at the individual subject level by GLM
contrasts to reveal brain regions active during the pre-training evaluations
2898
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
 collapsed across all sessions of each hand (see multi-subject map in Fig-
ure 6A). For further details, see Supplemental Information.
Functional Dissimilarity Analysis
For each subject, we calculated functional distances between the BOLD acti-
vation of each pair of visuomotor regions. We then examined these distances
in high and low learners. To visualize the distances between all ROIs, we used
classical multidimensional scaling (MDS; Figure 6B; [Borg and Groenen,
2005]). For further details, see Supplemental Information.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
three tables, and two movies and can be found with this article online at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.11.009.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
R.M. and O.O. developed the study concept and designed the experiment;
O.O. programmed and collected data; O.O carried out data analysis under su-
pervision from R.M.; O.O. and R.M. wrote the paper and approved the final
version.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the I-CORE Program of the Planning and Budget-
ing Committee and the Israel Science Foundation (grant no. 51/11), The Israel
Science Foundation (grants no. 1771/13 and 2043/13), and Human Frontiers
Science Project (HFSP) Career Development Award (CDA00078/2011-C)
(R.M.); the Yosef Sagol Scholarship for Neuroscience Research, the Israeli
Presidential Honorary Scholarship for Neuroscience Research, and the Sagol
School of Neuroscience fellowship (O.O.). The funders had no role in study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of
the manuscript. The authors thank E. Kagan and A. Hakim for help with data
acquisition, O. Levy for providing access to the passive movement device,
and R. Gilron and A. Shuster for fruitful comments on the manuscript.
Received: January 27, 2016
Revised: July 7, 2016
Accepted: October 28, 2016
Published: December 13, 2016
REFERENCES
Anguera, J.A., Russell, C.A., Noll, D.C., and Seidler, R.D. (2007). Neural corre-
lates associated with intermanual transfer of sensorimotor adaptation. Brain
Res. 1185, 136–151.
Beets, I.A., Mace
´ , M., Meesen, R.L., Cuypers, K., Levin, O., and Swinnen, S.P.
(2012). Active versus passive training of a complex bimanual task: Is prescrip-
tive proprioceptive information sufficient for inducing motor learning? PLoS
ONE 7, e37687.
Bird, G., and Heyes, C. (2005). Effector-dependent learning by observation
of a finger movement sequence. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform.
31, 262–275.
Bird, G., Osman, M., Saggerson, A., and Heyes, C. (2005). Sequence learning
by action, observation and action observation. Br. J. Psychol. 96, 371–388.
Borg, I., and Groenen, P.J. (2005). Modern Multidimensional Scaling: Theory
and Applications (Springer Science & Business Media).
Brass, M., Bekkering, H., and Prinz, W. (2001). Movement observation affects
movement execution in a simple response task. Acta Psychol. (Amst.) 106,
3–22.
Camus, M., Ragert, P., Vandermeeren, Y., and Cohen, L.G. (2009). Mecha-
nisms controlling motor output to a transfer hand after learning a sequential
pinch force skill with the opposite hand. Clin. Neurophysiol. 120, 1859–1865.
Carroll, T.J., Herbert, R.D., Munn, J., Lee, M., and Gandevia, S.C. (2006).
Contralateral effects of unilateral strength training: Evidence and possible
mechanisms. J. Appl. Physiol. 101, 1514–1522.
Criscimagna-Hemminger, S.E., Donchin, O., Gazzaniga, M.S., and Shadmehr,
R. (2003). Learned dynamics of reaching movements generalize from domi-
nant to nondominant arm. J. Neurophysiol. 89, 168–176.
Cross, E.S., Kraemer, D.J., Hamilton, A.F.C., Kelley, W.M., and Grafton, S.T.
(2009). Sensitivity of the action observation network to physical and observa-
tional learning. Cereb. Cortex 19, 315–326.
Culham, J.C., Danckert, S.L., DeSouza, J.F., Gati, J.S., Menon, R.S., and
Goodale, M.A. (2003). Visually guided grasping produces fMRI activation in
dorsal but not ventral stream brain areas. Exp. Brain Res. 153, 180–189.
Darainy, M., Vahdat, S., and Ostry, D.J. (2013). Perceptual learning in senso-
rimotor adaptation. J. Neurophysiol. 110, 2152–2162.
Duque, J., Mazzocchio, R., Stefan, K., Hummel, F., Olivier, E., and Cohen, L.G.
(2008). Memory formation in the motor cortex ipsilateral to a training hand.
Cereb. Cortex 18, 1395–1406.
Farthing, J.P., Borowsky, R., Chilibeck, P.D., Binsted, G., and Sarty, G.E.
(2007). Neuro-physiological adaptations associated with cross-education of
strength. Brain Topogr. 20, 77–88.
Gabitov, E., Manor, D., and Karni, A. (2015). Patterns of modulation in the ac-
tivity and connectivity of motor cortex during the repeated generation of move-
ment sequences. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 736–751.
Gallivan, J.P., and Culham, J.C. (2015). Neural coding within human brain
areas involved in actions. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 33, 141–149.
Garry, M.I., Loftus, A., and Summers, J.J. (2005). Mirror, mirror on the wall:
Viewing a mirror reflection of unilateral hand movements facilitates ipsilateral
M1 excitability. Exp. Brain Res. 163, 118–122.
Halsband, U., and Lange, R.K. (2006). Motor learning in man: A review of func-
tional and clinical studies. J. Physiol. Paris 99, 414–424.
Hamzei, F., La
¨ ppchen, C.H., Glauche, V., Mader, I., Rijntjes, M., and Weiller, C.
(2012). Functional plasticity induced by mirror training: The mirror as the
element connecting both hands to one hemisphere. Neurorehabil. Neural
Repair 26, 484–496.
Hendy, A.M., Spittle, M., and Kidgell, D.J. (2012). Cross education and immo-
bilisation: Mechanisms and implications for injury rehabilitation. J. Sci. Med.
Sport 15, 94–101.
Hoare, B.J., Wasiak, J., Imms, C., and Carey, L. (2007). Constraint-induced
movement therapy in the treatment of the upper limb in children with hemiple-
gic cerebral palsy. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2, CD004149.
Hortoba
´ gyi, T., Taylor, J.L., Petersen, N.T., Russell, G., and Gandevia, S.C.
(2003). Changes in segmental and motor cortical output with contralateral
muscle contractions and altered sensory inputs in humans. J. Neurophysiol.
90, 2451–2459.
Karni, A., Meyer, G., Rey-Hipolito, C., Jezzard, P., Adams, M.M., Turner, R.,
and Ungerleider, L.G. (1998). The acquisition of skilled motor performance:
Fast and slow experience-driven changes in primary motor cortex. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 861–868.
Kelly, S.W., Burton, A.M., Riedel, B., and Lynch, E. (2003). Sequence learning
by action and observation: Evidence for separate mechanisms. Br. J. Psychol.
94, 355–372.
Kr€
uger, B., Bischoff, M., Blecker, C., Langhanns, C., Kindermann, S., Sauerb-
ier, I., Reiser, M., Stark, R., Munzert, J., and Pilgramm, S. (2014). Parietal and
premotor cortices: Activation reflects imitation accuracy during observation,
delayed imitation and concurrent imitation. Neuroimage 100, 39–50.
Lee, M., Hinder, M.R., Gandevia, S.C., and Carroll, T.J. (2010). The ipsilateral
motor cortex contributes to cross-limb transfer of performance gains after bal-
listic motor practice. J. Physiol. 588, 201–212.
Malfait, N., and Ostry, D.J. (2004). Is interlimb transfer of force-field adaptation
a cognitive response to the sudden introduction of load? J. Neurosci. 24,
8084–8089.
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
2899
 Mattar, A.A., and Gribble, P.L. (2005). Motor learning by observing. Neuron 46,
153–160.
Muellbacher, W., Facchini, S., Boroojerdi, B., and Hallett, M. (2000). Changes
in motor cortex excitability during ipsilateral hand muscle activation in humans.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 111, 344–349.
Mutha, P.K., Sainburg, R.L., and Haaland, K.Y. (2011). Left parietal regions are
critical for adaptive visuomotor control. J. Neurosci. 31, 6972–6981.
Nojima, I., Mima, T., Koganemaru, S., Thabit, M.N., Fukuyama, H., and Kawa-
mata, T. (2012). Human motor plasticity induced by mirror visual feedback.
J. Neurosci. 32, 1293–1300.
Nojima, I., Koganemaru, S., Kawamata, T., Fukuyama, H., and Mima, T. (2015).
Action observation with kinesthetic illusion can produce human motor plas-
ticity. Eur. J. Neurosci. 41, 1614–1623.
Nyberg, L., Eriksson, J., Larsson, A., and Marklund, P. (2006). Learning by do-
ing versus learning by thinking: An fMRI study of motor and mental training.
Neuropsychologia 44, 711–717.
Obayashi, S. (2004). Possible mechanism for transfer of motor skill learning:
Implication of the cerebellum. Cerebellum 3, 204–211.
Ossmy, O., and Mukamel, R. (2016). Activity in superior parietal cortex during
training by observation predicts asymmetric learning levels across hands. Sci.
Rep. 6.
Perez, M.A., and Cohen, L.G. (2008). Mechanisms underlying functional
changes
in the
primary
motor
cortex
ipsilateral
to
an
active
hand.
J. Neurosci. 28, 5631–5640.
Perez, M.A., Tanaka, S., Wise, S.P., Sadato, N., Tanabe, H.C., Willingham,
D.T., and Cohen, L.G. (2007). Neural substrates of intermanual transfer of a
newly acquired motor skill. Curr. Biol. 17, 1896–1902.
Ramachandran, V.S., and Altschuler, E.L. (2009). The use of visual feedback, in
particular mirror visual feedback, in restoring brain function. Brain 132, 1693–
1710.
Ruddy, K.L., and Carson, R.G. (2013). Neural pathways mediating cross edu-
cation of motor function. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 397.
Sainburg, R.L., and Wang, J. (2002). Interlimb transfer of visuomotor rotations:
Independence of direction and final position information. Exp. Brain Res. 145,
437–447.
Sakai, K., Ramnani, N., and Passingham, R.E. (2002). Learning of sequences
of finger movements and timing: Frontal lobe and action-oriented representa-
tion. J. Neurophysiol. 88, 2035–2046.
Scripture, E., Smith, T.L., and Brown, E.M. (1894). On the education of
muscular control and power. Stud Yale Psychol Lab 2, 114–119.
Sigrist, R., Rauter, G., Riener, R., and Wolf, P. (2013). Augmented visual, audi-
tory, haptic, and multimodal feedback in motor learning: A review. Psychon.
Bull. Rev. 20, 21–53.
S€
utbeyaz, S., Yavuzer, G., Sezer, N., and Koseoglu, B.F. (2007). Mirror therapy
enhances lower-extremity motor recovery and motor functioning after stroke:
A randomized controlled trial. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 88, 555–559.
Taub, E., Uswatte, G., and Pidikiti, R. (1999). Constraint-Induced Movement
Therapy: A new family of techniques with broad application to physical reha-
bilitation–a clinical review. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 36, 237–251.
Vahdat, S., Darainy, M., and Ostry, D.J. (2014). Structure of plasticity in human
sensory and motor networks due to perceptual learning. J. Neurosci. 34, 2451–
2463.
Vogt, S., and Thomaschke, R. (2007). From visuo-motor interactions to imita-
tion learning: Behavioural and brain imaging studies. J. Sports Sci. 25,
497–517.
Wolf, S.L., Winstein, C.J., Miller, J.P., Taub, E., Uswatte, G., Morris, D.,
Giuliani, C., Light, K.E., and Nichols-Larsen, D.; EXCITE Investigators (2006).
Effect of constraint-induced movement therapy on upper extremity function
3 to 9 months after stroke: The EXCITE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 296,
2095–2104.
Wolpert, D.M., Diedrichsen, J., and Flanagan, J.R. (2011). Principles of senso-
rimotor learning. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 739–751.
Wong, J.D., Kistemaker, D.A., Chin, A., and Gribble, P.L. (2012). Can proprio-
ceptive training improve motor learning? J. Neurophysiol. 108, 3313–3321.
2900
Cell Reports 17, 2891–2900, December 13, 2016
