 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 8 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Introduction
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) results from the chronic autoimmune- 
mediated destruction of insulin-producing β cells within pan-
creatic islets (1, 2). There is a wealth of knowledge regarding the 
disease pathogenesis and natural history of T1D, such that it can 
be predicted by assessment of serum islet autoantibodies years 
before symptom onset (3). With a predictable nature and increas-
ing incidence (4), a number of immune therapies have been test-
ed in well-controlled clinical trials seeking to prevent or slow the 
loss or decline of β cells, including therapies targeting CD2 or CD3 
on T cells (5–8), CD20 on B cells (9), CD80/CD86 on antigen- 
presenting cells (APCs) (10), and inflammatory cytokines (IL-1 
and IL-1 receptor) (11), as well as antigen-specific therapies (12–
15). Unfortunately, these therapies have shown limited clinical 
benefit to date. To improve outcomes, therapies directed toward 
the molecular targets specifically involved in T1D are needed.
In many autoimmune disorders, genes within the HLA complex 
confer disease risk (16). Alleles of the polymorphic class II genes DQ 
and DR (and to a lesser extent DP) are the most important determi-
nants of disease risk. These genes encode MHC proteins located on 
the B cells, DCs, and macrophages that present processed antigens 
to CD4 T cells. MHC class II, peptide, and the T cell receptor (TCR) 
form a trimolecular complex involving the presentation of self-pep-
tides that shape autoreactive T cell responses in autoimmunity. Strong 
HLA disease associations exist for narcolepsy, which only develops in 
individuals with HLA-DQ6 (DQB1*06:02) (17); celiac disease is pre-
dominantly restricted to DQ2 and, to a lesser extent, DQ8 (18); DR3 
is present in 90% of patients with neuromyelitis optica (19); multi-
ple sclerosis is strongly associated with DR15 (20); and specific DR4 
subtypes are present in rheumatoid arthritis (21, 22).
For T1D, the HLA-DQ8 allele (DQA1*03:01-DQB1*03:02) is 
present in 50% to 60% of all patients and provides an odds ratio 
for disease development of 6.5 to 11 (23–25). This is in stark con-
trast to HLA-DQ6 (DQB1*06:02), which confers dominant pro-
tection, with an odds ratio of 0.03 (25). The dichotomy of risk 
between the 2 alleles highlights the importance of MHC class II 
antigen presentation in T1D development. Importantly, T cells 
restricted to proinsulin peptides presented by DQ8 have recently 
 
been identified in inflamed pancreatic islets from recent-onset 
T1D organ donors (26, 27), implicating DQ8-restricted T cells in 
the pathogenesis of T1D. This evidence renders DQ8 an attractive 
therapeutic target for modifying the autoimmune response, and 
we hypothesized that blocking DQ8 antigen presentation would 
represent a pathway for treating T1D.
Previously, we used molecular docking to screen a large 
chemical library of drug-like small molecules to predict those 
capable of occupying 1 of 4 structural pockets (P1, P4, P6, and P9) 
in the NOD mouse MHC class II–I-Ag7–peptide–binding groove 
(28). The NOD mouse is a spontaneous model of autoimmune 
diabetes and shares similarities with human disease including 
MHC class II genes conferring disease risk, development of insu-
lin autoantibodies, and T cell infiltration into pancreatic islets 
(29). Several compounds identified by in silico molecular docking 
were able to block insulin peptide binding to I-Ag7 and subsequent 
T cell activation in vitro (28).
Major histocompatibility (MHC) class II molecules are strongly associated with many autoimmune disorders. In type 1 
diabetes (T1D), the DQ8 molecule is common, confers significant disease risk, and is involved in disease pathogenesis. We 
hypothesized that blocking DQ8 antigen presentation would provide therapeutic benefit by preventing recognition of self-
peptides by pathogenic T cells. We used the crystal structure of DQ8 to select drug-like small molecules predicted to bind 
structural pockets in the MHC antigen–binding cleft. A limited number of the predicted compounds inhibited DQ8 antigen 
presentation in vitro, with 1 compound preventing insulin autoantibody production and delaying diabetes onset in an animal 
model of spontaneous autoimmune diabetes. An existing drug with a similar structure, methyldopa, specifically blocked 
DQ8 in patients with recent-onset T1D and reduced inflammatory T cell responses to insulin, highlighting the relevance of 
blocking disease-specific MHC class II antigen presentation to treat autoimmunity.
Methyldopa blocks MHC class II binding to disease-
specific antigens in autoimmune diabetes
David A. Ostrov,1 Aimon Alkanani,2 Kristen A. McDaniel,2 Stephanie Case,2 Erin E. Baschal,2 Laura Pyle,2,3 Sam Ellis,2,4  
Bernadette Pöllinger,5 Katherine J. Seidl,5 Viral N. Shah,2 Satish K. Garg,2 Mark A. Atkinson,1 Peter A. Gottlieb,2 and Aaron W. Michels2
1Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA. 2Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA. 3Department of Biostatistics and Informatics, University of Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, Colorado, USA. 4Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University 
of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA. 5Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
Authorship note: PAG and AWM contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: AWM and DAO are inventors on a patent titled “Compounds that 
modulate autoimmunity and methods of using the same,
” licensed to ImmunoMolecular 
Therapeutics (US patent number 9,629,848). AWM and PAG are scientific cofounders of 
ImmunoMolecular Therapeutics and own shares in the company. KJS and BP are former 
employees of Novartis.
Submitted: October 9, 2017; Accepted: February 8, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(5):1888–1902. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI97739.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 8 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
molecular docking were based on the crystal structure of insu-
lin B:11-23 bound to DQ8 (Supplemental Figure 1; supplemental 
material available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI97739DS1), which showed that the majority of intramolecular 
hydrogen bond interactions between peptide and HLA occurred 
between the P1, P4, P6, and P9 side chains (30). We rationalized 
that drug binding to DQ8 in the sites critical for peptide binding 
would block antigen presentation and therefore used molecular 
docking to screen the P1, P4, P6, and P9 sites using a library con-
sisting of 139,735 small molecules (Figure 1A). Each compound in 
the repository was docked in 1,000 orientations within a single 
pocket and scored on the basis of the sum of attractive and repul-
sive intermolecular forces to estimate the predicted free energy of 
binding (ΔG). None of the top-40 scoring compounds overlapped 
among P1, P4, P6, and P9 (the chemical structures, ΔG, and in silico 
rank are listed in Supplemental Tables 1–4 for each pocket), indicat-
ing distinct chemical composition and geometry among structural 
pockets in the DQ8-binding cleft.
Screening lead-candidate small molecules with a bioassay. For 
each site, the top-scoring compounds were tested for their ability to 
alter an insulin/DQ8-specific T cell response in vitro. To establish 
In this study, we extended this approach for the purpose of 
inhibiting DQ8 antigen presentation. The crystal structure of DQ8 
was used for molecular docking to select small molecules, which 
were then tested with in vitro bioassays and in preclinical animal 
models. By screening known drugs, we discovered that methyldo-
pa, a clinically well-established antihypertensive drug, specifically 
blocked DQ8 and subsequent T cell responses. Methyldopa was 
used in an open-label clinical trial to treat patients with recent- 
onset T1D, who had the DQ8 allele and residual β cell function. 
Treatment resulted in the specific inhibition of DQ8 presentation 
by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and a reduction 
in primary antigen–specific T cell responses to insulin. The con-
cept of blocking specific MHC class II antigen presentation has 
significant relevance for T1D and other autoimmune diseases 
strongly associated with HLA alleles.
Results
Molecular docking to select HLA-DQ8–binding small molecules. An 
in silico screening approach was used to rank small molecules 
 
predicted to bind structural pockets in the DQ8 peptide–binding 
 
groove. The sites within the antigen-binding cleft selected for 
Figure 1. In silico screening of a small-molecule library by molecular docking to structural pockets within the HLA-DQ8 peptide–binding groove 
and in vitro screening of the top-scoring compounds. (A) Molecular model of the DQ8 peptide binding cleft, with pockets 1, 4, 6, and 9 depicted 
by colored spheres. Using a supercomputer, 139,735 repository compounds were docked into each pocket in 1,000 different orientations and scored 
on the basis of the free energy of binding (ΔG). (B) The top-scoring compounds were screened with an in vitro bioassay, which used an immortal-
ized T cell that responds to an insulin epitope presented by DQ8. The TCR α/β genes from an insulin B:9-23–restricted T cell clone were retrovirally 
transduced into a T cell line devoid of endogenous TCR to create a TCR transductant, named clone 5. Clone 5 was cultured with insulin peptide plus 
a small molecule in the presence of DQ8-Tg murine splenocytes. After overnight culture, secreted IL-2 was measured in the cell culture supernatant 
with a highly sensitive ELISA. In the heatmap, “No antigen” represents the response without in vitro–added peptide, and “Peptide” represents the 
response to peptide without an in vitro–added small molecule. Numbers 1–39 depict the tested compounds, and the compounds were different for 
each pocket. The insulin B:9-23 peptide was used to screen pockets 1 and 9 (p1 and p9), while insulin B:13-23 was used to screen pockets 4 and 6 (p4 
and p6), which resulted in a greater baseline IL-2 response. Supplemental Tables 1–4 list the corresponding chemical structures, ΔG estimates from 
molecular docking, and rank based on the overall free energy score.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Overall, these data indicate that therapeutic blocking of MHC 
class II antigen presentation in a spontaneous model of autoim-
mune diabetes prevents disease onset, blocks critical interactions 
between T and B cells, lessens tissue-specific destruction, and 
maintains glucose tolerance when administered in later stages of 
diabetes development.
Screening FDA-approved drugs that bind HLA-DQ8. Since in 
vitro and preclinical NOD studies suggested that small-molecule 
binding pockets within the DQ8 antigen–binding cleft could be 
identified by molecular docking, we screened 1,207 FDA-approved 
small-molecule drugs predicted to occupy the P6 pocket in an 
attempt to repurpose an existing drug. Of the top-39 scoring drugs 
(Supplemental Table 5), 10 of 39 (25.6%) blocked clone 5 (Supple-
mental Figure 4). One of these, methyldopa (Aldomet; Figure 3A) 
inhibited T cell responsiveness in vitro. Methyldopa is a clinically 
well-established oral drug used for over 50 years to treat hyperten-
sion in both children and adults (33), which provides an opportunity 
to repurpose methyldopa for immune-mediated treatment of T1D.
Methyldopa directly binds HLA-DQ8 and blocks antigen presen-
tation in vitro. Methyldopa blocked in vitro DQ8–restricted T cell 
responses to both clone 5 (Figure 3B) and 489 (Figure 3C) in a 
dose-dependent manner, with IC50 values in the low micromolar 
range. We observed no in vitro cell cytotoxicity, and methyldopa 
was specific for inhibiting DQ8-restricted T cell responses, while 
not changing a DR4-restricted T cell response (Figure 3D). DQ8 
and DR4 are in close linkage disequilibrium on chromosome 6, and 
both class II molecules were present on the APCs used for these 
studies. We next tested methyldopa against a panel of 4 TCRs 
restricted to the same deamidated α-gliadin peptide presented 
by DQ8 (34); only the TCR sequence was different between these 
transductants. Despite different levels of stimulation in response 
to peptide alone, methyldopa inhibited all 4 of the TCRs to vary-
ing degrees (Supplemental Figure 5). Methyldopa did not block a 
DQ8-restricted T cell response to a viral peptide (HA102-118), up to 
concentrations as high as 200 μM (Figure 3E). These data demon-
strate that methyldopa inhibits antigen presentation by DQ8 in a 
peptide sequence–specific manner that may be related to the pep-
tide affinity for DQ8 and/or the peptide sequence.
To confirm that methyldopa directly interacts with DQ8 and 
to assess drug-target biochemical interactions in vitro, we used 
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). ITC directly measures 
changes in temperature that occur during fluid-phase protein- 
ligand interaction (forming or breaking noncovalent interactions) 
and measures binding affinity as well as enthalpy and entropy. 
Figure 3F shows the heat released as methyldopa was titrated 
into DQ8 protein over time and the fitted binding curve. Given 
that methyldopa is a small molecule (MW <500 kDa), there was 
very low but favorable enthalpy (negative ΔH), which was derived 
from changes in interatomic interactions such as hydrogen bond-
ing and van der Waals and electrostatic interactions. However, 
entropy of the reaction (removal of solvent molecules from the 
binding interface) was very favorable (positive ΔS), leading to a 
ΔG and KD of 26.2 ± 4.2 μM, similar to those reported for TCRs 
interacting with peptide-MHC complexes (35).
Using the crystal structure of DQ8, we modeled methyldopa 
interaction with amino acid residues of the DQ8 α and β chains 
within the antigen-binding cleft (Figure 3G). Two hydrogen 
a robust and reproducible T cell bioassay, the TCR α/β genes of an 
insulin/DQ8-restricted T cell clone (named clone 5) (31) were retro-
virally expressed on an immortalized T cell devoid of endogenous 
TCR expression, thus creating a TCR transductant that secreted 
 
IL-2 when stimulated with insulin B:9-23 presented by DQ8. The 
use of an immortalized T cell transductant allowed us to screen hun-
dreds of small molecules and further evaluate “hits” for specificity. 
Our screening of the top-scoring compounds indicated that some 
molecules blocked T cell responses, specifically 109 of the 142 tested 
 
compounds, and 2 of these had an increased response above the pep-
tide alone — 1 showing an increased response without the peptide 
(Supplemental Table 4) and the other requiring the peptide (Supple-
mental Table 1). The high frequency of active compounds predicted 
to bind P4 and P6 (34 of 34 for P4 and 33 of 34 for P6) (Figure 1B) 
was in stark contrast to our previous efforts for murine I-Ag7, in which 
only 5 of the 160 tested compounds blocked an insulin-specific T cell 
response (P < 0.001, comparing DQ8 versus I-Ag7 inhibitory com-
pounds using a Fisher’s exact test). Our evaluation of the chemical 
structures of compounds targeting P4 and P6 indicated that a tetraa-
za core chemical structure existed for the compounds selected by 
 
the P6 structural pocket (tetraazatricylclododecane [TATD]; Figure 
2A) in 12 of the 34 compounds (Supplemental Table 3). We synthe-
sized this compound at high purity and measured the concentration 
 
required to block clone 5 and another TCR transductant (TCR 489) 
restricted to a deamidated α-gliadin peptide presented by DQ8 (T 
cell clone from a patient with celiac disease) (32). TATD inhibited 
both TCRs, with nanomolar IC50 values and lower IC50 values for 
insulin compared with the posttranslationally modified α-gliadin 
epitope (Figure 2B), which has a high binding affinity for DQ8 upon 
 
deamidation (Q→E). To exclude off-target effects of a TATD- 
inhibited T cell response, TATD was incubated with recombinant 
 
α-gliadin/DQ8 protein and free α-gliadin peptide in conditions 
 
allowing for peptide exchange, washed, and then used to stimulate 
the 489 TCR (Figure 2C). These data demonstrated that TATD 
directly interacted with the peptide-DQ8 complex. Furthermore, 
TATD did not cause cell cytotoxicity (Supplemental Figure 2A) or 
inhibit an anti-CD3–stimulated T cell response (Supplemental Fig-
ure 2B) at micromolar concentrations.
Preclinical studies in the NOD mouse. To evaluate whether block-
ing MHC class II antigen presentation prevents autoimmune dia-
betes, TATD was administered to NOD mice. TATD cross-reacted 
with NOD I-Ag7, as an isomer was previously identified to block 
peptide binding and T cell activation (28). In vivo administration 
early in the NOD disease course delayed the onset of diabetes and 
prevented disease in half of the treated mice (Figure 2D). Since 
CD4+ T cells undergo cognate interactions with B cells, which can 
result in antibody production, we measured insulin autoantibod-
ies in these mice. TATD treatment prevented insulin autoantibody 
production throughout the lives of the treated mice (Figure 2E). 
Treatment of the NOD mice later in the disease course resulted 
in the maintenance of normal blood glucose levels compared with 
PBS treatment and had effects similar to those seen in NOD mice 
treated with an anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody, which was used 
as a positive control (Figure 2F and Supplemental Figure 3). Addi-
tionally, TATD treatment resulted in preserved glucose tolerance 
(Figure 2G) and less invasive islet immune cell infiltration com-
pared with that seen in PBS-treated mice (Figure 2, H and I).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Figure 2. TATD blocks DQ8-restricted T cell responses and prevents diabetes in NOD mice. (A) Chemical structure of TATD. (B) TATD blocked an in vitro 
DQ8–restricted T cell response to insulin B:13-23 (Clone 5) and deamidated α-gliadin228-240 (489 TCR). Data represent the mean ± SEM and are representative 
of 3 independent experiments. No antigen addition to the culture resulted in IL-2 levels below 3 pg/ml. (C) TATD was cultured with recombinant α-gliadin/
DQ8 protein and free peptide in conditions to allow peptide exchange. After washing, the recombinant protein was used to stimulate 489, and IL-2 secretion 
was measured. Data are from triplicate wells and are representative of 3 independent experiments. 489 in culture without protein resulted in IL-2 levels 
below 3 pg/ml. (D) Female NOD mice were treated from 4 to 12 weeks of age with 20 mg/kg TATD (n = 10) or PBS (n = 13) by intraperitoneal injection daily for 
5 days each week. P = 0.006, by log-rank test. (E) Peak serum insulin autoantibody (IAA) levels were measured using a fluid-phase RIA during the 40-week 
prevention study. **P = 0.003, by Mann-Whitney U test. The dotted line at 0.01 indicates a positive value. (F) Blood glucose levels during the late preven-
tion study, in which female NOD mice were treated with 30 mg/kg TATD orally each day (n = 9), 50 μg anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody intraperitoneally for 
5 consecutive days (n = 10), or PBS (n = 10) beginning at 12 weeks of age and ending at 25 weeks. Data represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, by ANOVA for 
comparison of TATD versus PBS. (G) Intraperitoneal GTT following cessation of the study treatments; each dot represents an individual mouse. ***P < 0.01, 
by 2-tailed, unpaired t test. (H) Representative H&E-stained pancreatic sections from PBS- and TATD-treated mice; insulin staining is shown in brown. Origi-
nal magnification, ×15. (I) Insulitis scoring from at least 100 separate islets from TATD-treated (n = 3) and PBS-treated (n = 5) mice.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
itor the effect of methyldopa on DQ8 presentation (Figure 4A). 
Tg DQ8 mice were treated orally with vehicle or methyldopa at 
human-equivalent doses, and then their ex vivo splenocytes were 
used as APCs to stimulate clone 5 and 489 with in vitro–added 
peptide. The effects of methyldopa on blocking DQ8 antigen pre-
sentation in Tg mice were dose dependent, (Supplemental Figure 
7), and the drug had to be administered multiple times each day, 
as the plasma t1/2 is 2 hours. When methyldopa was administered 
multiple times a day, we observed a greater than 50% reduc-
tion in T cell responses (Figure 4B), while no changes in splenic 
CD11b+ or CD11c+ cell percentages or numbers were detected 
(Figure 4, C and D). Additionally, there were no changes in cell- 
surface DQ8 expression on these APCs (Figure 4E), indicating that 
 
methyldopa remains bound to DQ8 and inhibits TCR recognition 
of a peptide-DQ8 complex ex vivo.
Methyldopa is metabolized in the liver to α-methylnorepi-
nephrine, which is responsible for lowering blood pressure by ago-
nizing central α2 adrenergic receptors (36). The metabolite did not 
inhibit DQ8 antigen presentation in vitro or in vivo (Supplemen-
tal Figure 8), demonstrating that intact methyldopa is needed to 
interact with DQ8.
Methyldopa specifically blocks DQ8 antigen presentation in 
patients with recent-onset T1D. We translated these preclinical 
findings to human T1D in a single-arm, open-label, phase Ib 
dose-escalation study. We evaluated methyldopa treatment in 
20 DQ8-positive T1D participants, aged 18–46 years, who had 
had diabetes for less than 2 years and who continued to produce 
endogenous insulin (Table 2 and Supplemental Table 7). All par-
ticipants received methyldopa tablets orally at 3 different dosages 
titrated over a 6-week period to prevent hypotension and allow for 
assessment of the ability of the different doses to block antigen 
presentation (Supplemental Figure 9). Methyldopa was well toler-
ated, and no serious adverse events were noted.
The primary endpoint was the change from baseline DQ8 
antigen presentation by PBMCs after 6 weeks of methyldopa treat-
ment. As with the assay used to measure DQ8 antigen presentation 
in Tg mice, we used primary PBMCs as APCs to present peptide to a 
cognate TCR transductant and measured secreted IL-2 after over-
night culture (Figure 5, A–C). We found that DQ8 T cell responses 
from 489 were inhibited during the treatment period and returned 
to baseline 6 weeks after stopping therapy (Figure 5D). We noted a 
statistically significant inhibition of these T cell responses with low, 
moderate, and high doses of methyldopa. Clone 5 responses were 
also blocked out to 1 week after stopping therapy (Figure 5E). DQ8 
presentation was inhibited by 40% compared with baseline levels 
for 17 of the 20 patients who responded to treatment (see Supple-
mental Figure 10 for individual responses); 1 nonresponder did not 
have detectable plasma methyldopa levels (Supplemental Figure 
11), and 2 nonresponders were DQ8 homozygotes. There appeared 
to be a DQ8 dose effect, given that higher drug doses were required 
to block a response in homozygotes (n = 4) compared with that 
observed in heterozygotes (Supplemental Figure 12).
As a control, we measured DR4 antigen presentation, as it is 
present on APCs with DQ8. DR4 presentation was not significantly 
affected in the study participants (P = NS; Figure 5F). In addition, 
we found that DQ2 (DQB1*02:01) antigen presentation was not 
altered in participants with this MHC class II molecule (Figure 5G). 
bonds are predicted between methyldopa and DQ8 amino acid 
side chains. We tested the structurally related compounds and 
found that the modeled hydrogen bonds were indeed important 
for inhibiting a TCR response, as removal of a hydroxyl group 
on the benzene ring or removal of the carboxylic acid abrogated 
 
the response (Table 1 and Supplemental Table 6). Further insights 
from the structure activity relationships indicate that a hydroxyl 
group on the benzene ring is a hydrogen bond donor to DQα62 
asparagine and that the carboxylic acid is a hydrogen bond 
 
acceptor for DQβ30 tyrosine.
Next, to determine whether methyldopa acts on the cell sur-
face of APCs to displace peptides or intracellularly block pep-
tide loading onto DQ8, we glutaraldehyde fixed DQ8 APCs to 
 
inhibit intracellular antigen processing. Methyldopa inhibited 
 
T cell activation with fixed APCs to a degree similar to that seen 
with unfixed cells, indicating that the main mechanism involves 
the displacement of cell-surface peptides (Supplemental Figure 
6, A and B). It is hypothesized that self-antigens have a lower 
affinity for MHC molecules than do foreign antigens, and we 
therefore designed experiments to test whether methyldopa 
more effectively blocks lower-affinity peptides. First, we tested 
 
the 489 TCR with the WT α-gliadin peptide and the peptide 
with deamidation (Q→E) at P1 (p1E), P9 (p9E), or both (p1E/
p9E). Deamidation facilitates anchoring of the peptide to DQ8, 
 
thereby increasing the T cell response to the α-gliadin–DQ8 
complex. As expected, there was a hierarchy of responses: p1E/
p9E > p9E > p1E > WT (Supplemental Figure 6C). We then per-
formed the same peptide titration experiment with methyldopa 
at a fixed concentration. Methyldopa blocked peptide presenta-
tion of lower-affinity peptide-DQ8 complexes to a greater extent 
than it did for higher-affinity peptide-DQ8 complexes (Supple-
mental Figure 6D). These data are consistent with our observa-
tion that methyldopa was not able to block the T cell response to 
a high-affinity influenza peptide presented by DQ8 (Figure 3E).
Together, these data identify a mechanism by which meth-
yldopa binds directly within the DQ8 antigen–binding cleft on 
the cell surface to inhibit the presentation of peptides to T cells. 
Methyldopa was able to block peptides that bound DQ8 with lower 
affinity (i.e., insulin B:9-23) to a greater extent than it did peptides 
with a higher DQ8 affinity.
Methyldopa blocks DQ8 antigen presentation in vivo. We eval-
uated the in vivo effects of methyldopa using DQ8-Tg mice, as 
methyldopa does not block NOD I-Ag7–restricted T cell respons-
es. Using these Tg mice, we developed a biomarker assay to mon-
Table 1. Methyldopa structure activity relationships
CompoundA
Clone 5 IC50 (insulin/DQ8)
489 IC50 (α-gliadin/DQ8)
α-methyldopa
3.4 μM
17.7 μM
α-methylphenylalanine
No inhibition
No inhibition
α-methyltyrosine
No inhibition
No inhibition
3-O-methyl methyldopa
No inhibition
No inhibition
α-methyldopa ethyl ester
5.8 μM
7.8 μM
α-methylnorepinephrine
No Inhibition
No inhibition
ACompound structures are depicted in Supplemental Table 6.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Figure 3. Methyldopa blocks DQ8 antigen presentation in vitro. (A) Methyldopa chemical structure. Methyldopa blocked an in vitro DQ8–restricted T cell 
response by (B) clone 5 to insulin B:13-23 and (C) TCR 489 to deamidated α-gliadin presented by DQ8. The negative controls (no antigen added to culture) 
resulted in IL-2 levels below 3 pg/ml. (D) Methyldopa specifically inhibited 489, a DQ8-restricted T cell response, while not altering C7CH17, a DR4- 
restricted T cell response to the HA peptide HA306-318. Cells from an EBV-transformed B cell line homozygous for DQ8 and DR4 were used as APCs in this 
experiment, such that each APC had DQ8 and DR4 on the cell surface. (E) Methyldopa did not inhibit a DQ8-restricted T cell response to the influenza 
peptide HA102-118. (B–E) Data represent the mean ± SEM and are representative of 3 independent experiments. (F) Representative isothermal titration 
calorimetric data for titration of methyldopa into DQ8 protein. Top: Heat released as a function of time from 2-μl injections of 4 mM methyldopa titrated 
into the sample cell containing 4 μM DQ8 protein at 25oC. Bottom: Fitted binding curve along with the measured thermodynamic parameters and the 
calculated KD from 3 independent experiments, reported as the mean ± SEM. (G) Molecular docking model of methyldopa in the DQ8 antigen–binding 
cleft shows potential H bonds between a methyldopa hydroxyl group and DQα62 asparagine (DQα N62) on the DQα-helix and between the methyldopa 
carboxylic acid and DQβ30 tyrosine (DQβ Y30) on the floor of the cleft.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Flow cytometric analysis of PBMCs indicated similar numbers 
of APCs (B cells, myeloid DCs, and plasmacytoid DCs), with no 
change in the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of DQ or DR on 
the cell surface throughout the study (Supplemental Figure 13).
Together, these results indicate that methyldopa treatment 
specifically inhibits DQ8 antigen presentation throughout treat-
ment with the drug and that function returns to normal upon with-
drawal of therapy.
Methyldopa reduces the insulin-specific CD4+ T cell response 
in the peripheral circulation. To measure primary T cell respons-
es, as opposed to the antigen presentation described above, we 
performed indirect enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) 
assays on cryopreserved samples using an insulin B:9-23 (B22E) 
mimotope, which is presented by DQ8 (37, 38). Seven study sub-
jects showed a response to the mimotope at baseline, and their 
responses decreased upon completion of the study (Figure 6A). 
This was not the case for whole tetanus toxin (Figure 6B) or DR4 
epitopes within the protein (Figure 6, C and D) (39). Addition-
ally, we have shown that the tested insulin epitope activates 
human CD4+ T cells isolated from the inflamed islets of T1D 
organ donors (26), highlighting the importance of blocking this 
reactivity in T1D patients.
Methyldopa treatment results in good glycemic control and main-
tains β cell function over a 3-month period. Participants had good 
glycemic control at the study’s conclusion, with hemoglobin A1c 
levels averaging 6.5% (Figure 7A), with no change in total insu-
lin doses (Figure 7B). At 3 months, the C-peptide 2-hour AUC 
measurement following a mixed-meal tolerance test (MMTT), a 
measure of residual endogenous insulin production, was similar 
to baseline levels (Figure 7C). From natural history studies, it is 
appreciated that there is a steady decline in the C-peptide AUC 
after diagnosis, and age-matched historical controls would be 
expected to have approximately 30% loss 1 year after diagnosis 
(40). Although our study was a short term one, these results sug-
gest that methyldopa treatment may limit β cell destruction and 
preserve function; however, trials with a longer duration and pla-
cebo arm are needed to fully evaluate metabolic efficacy.
Discussion
Preventing pathogenic TCR activation by self-antigen–MHC 
class II complexes may provide a novel means for preventing and 
potentially reversing T1D and other autoimmune conditions. In 
this report, we used a rational structure-based approach to eval-
uate the druggability of pockets in the antigen-binding cleft of 
the T1D risk HLA-DQ8 molecule. Our goal was to identify drug 
 
candidates that occupy specific structural pockets and inhibit anti-
gen presentation to T cells. Using the crystal structure of DQ8 as 
the basis for selection of candidate small molecules from a large 
chemical library, we show that DQ8 is remarkably amenable to 
drugs targeting pockets along the antigen-binding cleft, especially 
the P4 and P6 pockets. We then screened FDA-approved drugs pre-
dicted to bind the P6 pocket, in an attempt to repurpose an exist-
ing drug. We tested drugs in vitro as well as in vivo in humans to 
show that methyldopa specifically and durably blocked DQ8 anti-
gen presentation. Moreover, methyldopa reduced inflammatory 
insulin-specific T cell responses when administered to patients 
with recent-onset T1D in a proof-of-concept trial. Longer-term 
placebo-controlled trials are warranted to evaluate methyldopa 
for potentially preserving residual β cell function in individuals at 
risk and in patents with new-onset T1D.
In our clinical trial involving the treatment of patients with 
recent-onset T1D with methyldopa, we observed a 40% reduction 
in DQ8 antigen presentation when using PBMCs as APCs (Figure 
5D). Presumably, methyldopa is sequestered within DQ8 on DCs, 
B cells, and monocytes that are capable of presenting in vitro– 
added peptide to our engineered TCR transductants. Our data 
indicate that this is plausible, as methyldopa directly bound 
 
isolated DQ8 protein (Figure 3F) and interacted with cell-surface 
DQ8 as opposed to intracellular peptide loading. In fact, the pro-
cesses of PBMC isolation and freezing, thawing, and washing cells 
did reduce the amount of inhibition measured with this assay (Fig-
ure 5A) and probably resulted in a loss of DQ8-sequestered meth-
yldopa, indicating that a 40% reduction may be an underrepre-
sentation of what occurs directly in vivo. Despite this limitation, 
DQ8 was blocked during the methyldopa treatment period and 
returned to baseline levels upon withdrawal of therapy. This pat-
tern of drug treatment effect was not present for DR4, which was 
present on APCs with DQ8. Additionally, DQ2 presentation was 
not blocked with methyldopa treatment. These data demonstrate 
the specificity of methyldopa between MHC class II molecules 
and within DQ types. It is important to note that other MHC class 
II molecules, i.e., DR4, DR3, DQ2, and DQ8-trans (composed of 
the DQ2 α and DQ8 β chains), can present diabetes-relevant pep-
tides (41). As there is epitope spreading that occurs during T1D 
Table 2. Clinical characteristics of study subjects receiving 
methyldopa (n = 20)
Age, years
  Median
22
  Mean (SD)
24.8 (7.6)
  Range
18–43
T1D duration, days
  Median
90
  Mean (SD)
133 (143.3)
  Range
21–566
Sex, number (%)
  Male
13 (65)
  Female
7 (35)
Race/ethnicity, number (%)
  White
17 (85)
  African American
2 (10)
  Hispanic
1 (5)
Islet antibody–positive,A number (%)
  One
7 (35)
  Two
5 (25)
  Three
8 (40)
  Four
0 (0)
HLA-DQ genotype, number (%)
  One DQ8 allele
16 (80)
  Two DQ8 alleles
4 (20)
AInsulin autoantibodies were only included if measured within 21 days of 
starting exogenous insulin.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
blood from patients with recent-onset T1D. These insulin-specific 
T cells were antigen experienced and predominantly an effector 
memory or central memory phenotype (44). Future studies will be 
needed to determine whether these insulin-specific T cells become 
anergic or are deleted with methyldopa treatment.
In addition to small-molecule drugs that occupy structural 
pockets in disease-related HLA molecules, there are alternate 
therapies to inhibit HLA-specific antigen presentation includ-
ing antibodies targeting specific HLA molecules or peptide-HLA 
complexes. Although serotype-specific anti-HLA antibodies are 
available, their lack of specificity toward single HLA molecules 
would likely result in more off-target effects compared with those 
of an allele-specific agent. Moreover, it is difficult to generate 
allele-specific antibodies, as key polymorphisms that distinguish 
closely related molecules encode amino acid differences at sites 
within the antigen-binding cleft that are inaccessible to antibodies. 
Monoclonal antibodies against specific peptide/MHC molecules 
pathogenesis, the timing of the therapeutic intervention using 
methyldopa to block DQ8 in the disease course is an important 
consideration, because those at earlier stages of the disease could 
potentially have greater clinical benefit.
Another observation from our data is that the methyldopa IC50 
values for inhibition of T cell responses to insulin and α-gliadin 
were in the low micromolar range (3–50 μM). We used a separate 
technique to assess biochemical interactions (ITC) and obtained 
very similar results, with an average KD of 26 μM. Of particular 
interest is the fact that these values were in the reported range of 
affinities for TCRs binding to peptide-MHC complexes, as mea-
sured by surface plasmon resonance and ITC (35, 42, 43). Despite 
these somewhat low-affinity interactions of methyldopa with DQ8, 
primary autoantigen–specific T cell responses decreased in a subset 
of patients responding to an insulin B chain mimotope (Figure 6A). 
Using fluorescence tetramers, Fife and colleagues recently deter-
mined the phenotype of these T cells directly ex vivo in peripheral 
Figure 4. Methyldopa blocks DQ8 antigen presentation in vivo. (A) Diagram of the assay used to monitor the potency of methyldopa to block DQ8 in Tg 
mice. (B) Adult DQ8-Tg mice were gavaged with vehicle or 200 mg/kg methyldopa 3 times per day for 4 days (n = 4/group). Ex vivo splenocytes were used 
as APCs to present different concentrations of the insulin B:13-23 peptide or a deamidated α-gliadin peptide to clone 5 or 489, respectively. No methyldopa 
was added to the in vitro culture. A dose of 200 mg/kg is equivalent to 1,000 mg 3 times per day in a human weighing 60 kg. Data represent the mean ± 
SEM and are representative of 3 independent experiments. (C) Percentages and (D) numbers of CD11b+ and CD11c+ cells in the spleens of treated mice. (E) 
MFI of DQ8 cell-surface staining on each cell population. Each dot represents an individual mouse.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
present in Americans of European descent at a frequency of approx-
imately 10% (51), methyldopa has been administered to large num-
bers of individuals expressing DQ8 and is considered safe.
In conclusion, we describe what we believe to be a novel 
approach to identifying immunomodulatory small molecules 
targeted to DQ8. As many autoimmune diseases are associated 
 
with specific HLA alleles and high-resolution crystal structures 
exist for many of these MHC class II molecules, strategies for 
the rapid selection HLA allele–specific compounds and for 
testing their activity in experimental systems can be imple-
mented. The ability to identify HLA allele–specific drugs has 
broad applicability for treating autoimmune diseases and other 
HLA-associated conditions.
Methods
Molecular modeling and docking. We used the crystal structure of 
HLA-DQ8 complexed to insulin B:11-23 (Protein Data Bank code 
1JK8; https:/
/www.rcsb.org/structure/1JK8) as the basis for molec-
ular docking (52). To prepare the site for docking, all water mole-
cules were removed, and protonation of DQ8 residues was done with 
SYBYL software (Tripos, Certara) (53). We explored the molecular 
surface of the structure using sets of spheres to describe potential 
binding pockets. The sites selected for molecular docking were 
defined using the SPHGEN program (54), which generates a grid of 
points that reflect the shape of the selected site, and filtered through 
CLUSTER (54). The CLUSTER program groups the selected spheres 
to define the points that are used by DOCK, version 5.1.0 (54), to 
match potential ligand atoms with spheres. Intermolecular AMBER 
energy scoring (van der Waals plus columbic), contact scoring, and 
bump filtering were implemented in the DOCK program algorithm. 
Atomic coordinates for 139,735 small molecules in the NIH Devel-
opmental Therapeutics Program repository of drug-like compounds 
were positioned in each structural pocket in 1,000 different orienta-
tions and scored on the basis of predicted polar (hydrogen bond) and 
nonpolar (van der Waals) interactions. The most favorable orienta-
tion and scores (contact and electrostatic) were calculated. PyMOL 
(https:/
/pymol.org/2/) was used to generate graphic images.
Generation of TCR transductants. TCR transductants were gener-
ated as previously described using retroviral transduction of the 5KC 
murine T cell hybridoma cell line lacking endogenous TCR expression 
(55). The sequences for the α/β TCR clones were either obtained as 
gifts from investigators (clone 5 from Bart Roep, Leiden University, 
Leiden, Netherlands; 489 from Ludvig Sollid, Oslo University, Oslo, 
Norway; and DQ8-flu from Bill Kwok, Benaroya Research Institute, 
have been generated (45, 46) but are only specific for single epi-
topes, while immune responses to many different self-antigens 
are present in an autoimmune disease. Small-molecule drugs have 
not been widely utilized to target HLA molecules, as ligands for 
 
conventional polymorphic HLA molecules have primarily been 
described as peptides. Until recently, small molecules were not 
thought to bind in the antigen-binding cleft. The antiretroviral 
drug abacavir was shown by x-ray crystallography to directly inter-
act with a structural pocket (F pocket, P9, or PΩ) in the peptide- 
binding cleft of HLA-B*57:01 (47, 48). These data, along with the 
results presented here, suggest that specific pockets within MHC 
class I and II antigen–binding grooves have chemical and geomet-
ric features amenable to binding small molecules.
The use of small-molecule drugs to target MHC II antigen 
presentation presents several concerns. First, negative effects on 
immune function may result from a hole in the immune repertoire 
created when a specific MHC class II molecule is blocked. How-
ever, detrimental effects on immune function are not expected, as 
other class II molecules exist to provide normal adaptive immune 
responses. For methyldopa, DQ8-restricted T cell responses to 
lower-affinity self-antigens were inhibited, while T cell responses 
to a higher-affinity viral pathogen remained unaltered. Addition-
ally, DR4 and DQ2 responses remained intact, and it is also likely 
that DP functioned normally.
Second, drugs may trigger unwanted immune responses 
(hypersensitivity) by binding specific HLA molecules and creat-
ing neoantigen epitopes. Adverse drug reactions can be severe, 
but are rare (1–2/1,000,000 for Stevens-Johnson syndrome and 
 
0.4–1.2/1,000,000 each year for toxic epidermal necrolysis) and 
have been identified only after treating large numbers of patients 
with the offending drug (49). Moreover, the modest affinity of 
methyldopa for DQ8 (KD of ~26 μM) was significantly lower than 
that of abacavir, a drug that caused hypersensitivity in a HLA- 
associated manner and bound a self-peptide and HLA-B*57:01 
with an estimated KD of 0.2 nM (50). These data suggest that 
methyldopa is not likely to bind DQ8 with sufficient affinity to 
alter the repertoire of peptides or the consequent presentation of 
neoantigens that trigger hypersensitivity.
One advantage of “repurposing” existing drugs is that 
well-characterized safety profiles indicate potential complications 
and off-target effects. The safety profile of methyldopa, which is on 
the World Health Organization’s list of essential medicines, is based 
on over 50 years of clinical use, and the drug is indicated for the 
treatment of pregnancy-induced hypertension. Since HLA-DQ8 is 
Figure 5. Methyldopa treatment specifically blocks DQ8 antigen presentation in recent-onset T1D patients with the DQ8 allele. (A) Diagram of the assay 
used to monitor specific MHC class II antigen presentation. PBMCs from participants were isolated and frozen after each study visit. These primary PBMCs 
were then thawed and used as APCs to stimulate engineered T cells (TCR transductants) that respond to a specific peptide presented by a given MHC class II 
molecule (DQ8, DR4, or DQ2). Secreted IL-2 from each TCR transductant was measured using a highly sensitive ELISA. (B) Individual study subject response 
for 489 (DQ8-restricted) and (C) C7CH17 (DR4-restricted). Data represent the mean ± SEM from triplicate wells at each time point during the study. Colors 
represent the durations on and off the drug. Participants underwent dose titration, with a low dose (500 mg 2 times/day), moderate dose (500 mg 3 times/
day), and high dose (2–3 grams over the course of the day), and then went off the drug. “No antigen” indicates that there was no antigen added in vitro in 
the assay. (D) Summative data on study participants (n = 20) showing their responses to 489 and (E) clone 5, both of which were DQ8 restricted. *P = 0.001, 
**P < 0.001, ***P = 0.02, and #P < 0.01, using a longitudinal mixed-effects model that compared the least-squares mean at each time point with baseline. 
(F) Data from study participants with DR4 subtypes (n = 18) able to present and stimulate the HA306-318–restricted TCR transductant C7CH17. (G) Response to 
a DQ2 TCR transductant (233 responding to α-gliadin62-73) for the study duration in subjects with a DQ2 allele (n = 7). The negative control (no antigen added 
to culture) resulted in IL-2 levels below 2 pg/ml for each subject and for individual TCR transductants. Data in D–G are depicted as the least-squares mean ± 
SEM for the study cohort; individual responses are shown in Supplemental Figure 10.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
PBS for a final concentration of 0.1% DMSO in each well. Each small 
molecule was screened at a concentration of 100 μM. The clone 5 TCR 
transductant was cultured with peptide, with or without a small mole-
cule, in the presence of murine DQ8-Tg splenic cells. DQ8-Tg splenic 
 
cells were dispersed to single cells, followed by red blood cell lysis, and 
then 2 × 105 splenoctyes were cultured with peptide for 4 hours in a 
96-well, U-bottomed plate followed by the addition of 2 × 105 clone 5 
cells for overnight culture. Murine IL-2 secreted by the 5KC cells was 
measured using a highly sensitive ELISA (V-PLEX IL-2 Kit; Meso Scale 
Diagnostics), followed by detection using a MESO QuickPlex SQ120 
instrument. Pocket 1 and pocket 9 small molecules were screened using 
clone 5 in the presence of insulin B:9-23 (100 μg/ml), while pocket 4 
and pocket 6 compounds were screened using insulin B:13-23 (100 μg/
ml), which provides a greater amount of IL-2 secretion than does B:9-23.
Peptides, protein, and small molecules. The peptides used for TCR 
stimulation assays were obtained from Genemed Synthesis at a 
 
greater than 95% purity. Recombinant α-gliadin/DQ8 protein con-
taining the deamidated peptide sequence QQYPSGEGSFQPSQENPQ 
 
was expressed in S2 Drosophila cells and purified as previously 
described (55). TATD (1,3,6,8-tetraaza-tricyclo[4.4.1.13,8]dodecane) 
Seattle, Washington, USA) or from published literature (clones 13, 22, 
and 38, which are DQ8 restricted; clone 233, which is DQ2 restricted; 
and C7CH17, which is DR4 restricted) (31, 32, 34, 56). Supplemental 
Table 9 lists each TCR transductant, its corresponding peptide, and 
its MHC class II restriction. Briefly, to create a TCR transductant, a 
single TCR sequence (α and β chains linked by the PTV1.2A sequence) 
was cloned into murine stem cell virus–based (MSCV-based) retrovi-
ral vectors carrying the GFP (pMIGII) or pMSCV puro retroviral vec-
tor (Clontech), followed by production of replication-incompetent 
retroviruses encoding TCR sequences. 5KC cells transduced with ret-
roviruses were then selected either by flow cytometric cell sorting of 
GFP-positive cells or with puromycin according to the selection genes 
carried by the retroviral vectors; TCR expression was confirmed by 
staining with anti-mouse TCR β antibody (BD Biosciences; clone H57-
597). The 5KC cells were also transduced to express native human 
CD4, which was confirmed by flow cytometric staining with anti-CD4 
antibody (BioLegend; clone RPA-T4).
In vitro screening of small molecules. Small molecules for screening 
were obtained from the NIH’s Developmental Therapeutics Program 
(DTP) repository in vialed sets, dissolved in DMSO, and diluted in 
Figure 6. Methyldopa treatment reduces primary antigen–specific T cells restricted to HLA-DQ8 but not those presented by DR4. Cryopreserved PBMCs 
were thawed, cultured in the presence or absence of protein/peptide for 48 hours, washed, and then transferred to an IFN-γ monoclonal antibody–coated 
plate for overnight culture, followed by development and enumeration of ELISPOTs. IFN-γ ELISPOT results from study subjects for (A) an insulin B chain 
mimotope, B:9-23 (B22E), known to be presented by DQ8, (B) whole tetanus toxin (TT) protein, (C) an epitope of TT consisting of amino acids 506-525 
known to be presented by DR4, and (D) another DR4-restricted TT epitope, amino acids 922-941. Seven study subjects responded to the insulin B chain 
mimotope at baseline and were further evaluated for responses to TT protein and epitopes. Each data point represents the total number of spots for a 
given condition from triplicate wells, minus the total number of spots without antigen (background) for an individual. Symbols represent the same individ-
ual tested for each condition. *P = 0.016, by Wilcoxon matched-pairs, signed-rank test; P = NS for TT, TT506-525, and TT922-941. Supplemental Table 8 provides 
ELISPOT counts at baseline and 3 months for each individual and condition, including no antigen as a negative control and whole TT as a positive control.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
DRB1*04:01) were used as APCs (57). For these assays, EBV- 
transformed B cells (105 cells) were cultured with cognate peptide 
for 4 hours, followed by addition of 105 TCR transductant cells for 
overnight culture and the measurement of secreted IL-2. For experi-
ments done with the DQ8-flu TCR, previously produced M12C3 cells 
(murine B cell line) expressing HLA-DQ8 were used as APCs (5 × 104) 
(26), cultured with 10 μg/ml influenza peptide for 4 hours, followed by 
the addition of TCR transductant cells (105 cells) for overnight culture 
and measurement of secreted IL-2. To assess the effects of intracellu-
lar uptake of methyldopa, APC fixation experiments were conducted. 
M12C3 DQ8 cells were glutaraldehyde fixed. To fix cells, these APCs 
(5 × 106 cells/ml) were incubated with 0.05% glutaraldehyde for 30 
seconds, followed by quenching the reaction with 0.2 M glycine. Fixed 
APCs (5 × 104) were cultured with 10 μM deamidated α-gliadin peptide 
and methyldopa for 24 hours, and then 489 TCR transductant cells 
(105 cells) were added for overnight culture, followed by the measure-
ment of secreted IL-2.
ITC. ITC experiments were performed using a MicroCal iTC200 
Calorimeter (GE Healthcare) at 25°C. DQ8 protein was dialyzed in 
citrate-phosphate buffer (pH 5.0) and loaded into the calorimeter cell 
at a concentration of 4 μM. Methyldopa was dissolved in the same 
citrate-phosphate buffer at a concentration of 4 mM, and the pH was 
adjusted to 5.0. The injection volumes of methyldopa were 2 μl every 
4 minutes over a total of 80 minutes. The first data point was removed 
from analysis because of dilution across the injection needle tip. Binding 
isotherms were generated using Origin Software (MicroCal, OriginLab) 
with a single-site binding model by nonlinear regression. For baseline 
correction, methyldopa was titrated into buffer prior to each exper-
iment and subtracted from each data set. KD values were calculated 
 
as the reciprocal of the measured binding affinity, and free energy of 
binding was calculated using the following equation: ΔG = ΔH – TΔS, 
where H = enthalpy, T = temperature in kelvin, and S = entropy.
Animals. Mice were bred and housed under specific pathogen–free 
conditions at the University of Colorado Denver Center for Compara-
tive Medicine. Female NOD mice were purchased from The Jackson 
Laboratory and used for the early and late TATD intervention studies. 
was synthesized at greater than 95% purity and characterized by 
 
1H NMR and 13C NMR (The Chemistry Research Solutions). Meth-
yldopa was purchased at greater than 98% purity from Sigma- 
Aldrich (catalog 857416); the metabolite α-methylnorepinephrine was 
obtained from Toronto Research Chemicals (catalog D454000); and 
compounds structurally related to methyldopa were purchased from 
Sigma-Aldrich. DQ8 protein used for ITC was isolated and purified 
by affinity chromatography using a DQ monoclonal antibody (clone 
SPV-L3) and an EBV-transformed B cell line derived from a DQ8 
homozygote (57).
Characterization of TATD in vitro. TATD was dissolved in PBS and 
stored in low-binding Eppendorf tubes (Costar; catalog 3207). Dose 
titrations were performed in a manner similar to that for the small- 
molecule screening assays: 2 × 105 DQ8-Tg splenocytes were culture 
with cognate peptide (100 μg/ml B:13-23 for clone 5 and 1 μM deam-
idated α-gliadin for TATD) for 4 hours, followed by the addition of 2 
× 105 TCR transductant cells for overnight culture and measurement 
of secreted IL-2. Cell viability was measured with the CellTiter-Glo 
Luminescent assay (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Experiments with recombinant deamidated α-gliadin/
DQ8 protein were performed by incubating 0.01 μg protein in 100 μl 
buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate at pH 8.0) with 1 μM deamidated 
 
α-gliadin peptide plus TATD concentrations for 24 hours at 50°C to 
allow peptide exchange. Following the initial incubation, the contents 
were transferred to a 96-well, high-binding plate (Costar; catalog 
9018) and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. The plate was 
washed twice with 0.05% Tween-20 in PBS to remove any unbound 
protein, peptide, and TATD. Then, 489 cells (105 cells) were incubated 
with the protein overnight at 37° with 5% CO2, and the supernatant 
was assayed for secreted IL-2.
Characterization of methyldopa in vitro. Methyldopa was dissolved 
in dilute HCl and the pH adjusted to 7.0 prior to each in vitro assay, as 
air oxidation was visible over the ensuing days. Dose titrations with 
TCR transductants were performed in a manner identical to titrations 
done with TATD. To assess in vitro specificity, EBV-transformed B 
cells from a DQ8/DR4 homozygote (DQA1*03:01-DQB1*03:02-
Figure 7. Measures of glycemic control and β cell function among study participants. Individual responses showed (A) an improvement in hemoglobin 
A1c, a measure of average blood glucose over the preceding 3 months, from baseline to study completion. *P = 0.008, by Wilcoxon matched-pairs, signed-
rank test. (B) The amounts of exogenous insulin used per kilogram of body weight were similar from the beginning to the end of the study. (C) Mainte-
nance of β cell function, as measured by the C-peptide 2-hour AUC following a MMTT compared with baseline levels. C-peptide is a measure of endogenous 
insulin secretion, as both are secreted at a 1:1 molar ratio. Individuals ingested a liquid meal (Boost) with a fixed amount of protein, fat, and carbohydrate 
in the fasting state, followed by the timed measurements of serum C-peptide at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes to compute the AUC. Each data point 
represents a single individual, with a line connecting the same study participant; n = 20 subjects in A–C, with the mean ± SD reported for the entire cohort 
at the start of study and upon study completion.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 0 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
genotyping. Islet autoantibodies against insulin, GAD65, IA-2, and 
ZnT8 were measured from the serum by fluid-phase RIA as previously 
 
described (59). HLA-DRB1, DQA1, and DQB1 alleles were typed 
using oligonucleotide probes as previously described (60).
Tolerability and safety of methyldopa. Methyldopa (Aldomet; 500-
mg tablets) was obtained from Mylan Pharmaceuticals (lots 3038543 
and 3062517). The study subjects self-administered doses throughout 
the open-label study. All participants tolerated the low dose (500 mg 
2 times/day) and moderate dose (500 mg 3 times/day), while 18 of 20 
tolerated the high dose (2–3 grams self-administered over the course 
of a day). For the 2 individuals who did not tolerate the high dose, 
the moderate dose was continued during the treatment phase of the 
study. Methyldopa has a well-known safety profile, and in our trial we 
observed: (a) no lowering of systolic or diastolic blood pressure; (b) no 
elevation of liver function tests (aspartate aminotransferase [AST] or 
alanine aminotransferase [ALT]); and (c) no anemia. There were no 
serious adverse events related to study drug administration.
Immunologic assessments. For the measurement of specific MHC 
class II presentation, cryopreserved PBMCs were thawed and 2 × 105 
cells cultured with peptide (200 μg/ml B:13-23 for clone 5; 10 μM 
deamidated α-gliadin for 489; 100 μM α-II-gliadin for 233; or 1 μg/ml 
HA306-318 for C7CH17) in 96-well, U-bottomed plates for 4 hours at 37° 
with 5% CO2. After 4 hours, the corresponding TCR transductant (105 
cells) was added and incubated overnight at 37° with 5% CO2. Each 
condition was tested in triplicate wells, including 1 with no antigen 
and anti-CD3 antibody (eBioscience; clone 2C11), which was a posi-
tive control for the TCR transductant. PBMCs from each study visit 
for a single participant were included on the same 96-well plate for 
each TCR transductant (i.e., PBMCs from each of the 6 visits were on a 
single plate for clone 5) to avoid batch effects between study visits and 
participants. Following overnight culture, the plate was centrifuged at 
500 g for 5 minutes, and the supernatant was removed and frozen at 
–80° until measurement of IL-2 in the supernatant with a highly sensi-
tive ELISA (Meso Scale Diagnostics).
ELISPOT assays. ELISPOT assays were conducted as previously 
described using human IFN-γ ELISPOT kits (U-CyTech Biosciences) 
(61). Briefly, cryopreserved PBMCs were thawed, and 106 cells were 
cultured in 250 μl serum-free AIM-V Medium (Invitrogen, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) with 10 μg/ml peptide. Cells were supplemented with 
an additional 250 μl medium after 24 hours and harvested 24 hours lat-
er. After washing, the cells were resuspended in 300 μl medium and 
transferred in three 100-μl aliquots onto 96-well, clear polystyrene 
culture plates coated with an IFN-γ capture monoclonal antibody and 
subsequently treated with 1× blocking solution (U-CyTech Bioscienc-
es). Seventeen hours later, the cells were removed by decanting and 
the wells washed. Spots were then formed by sequential incubations 
with the biotinylated second-site anti–IFN-γ, gold-labeled goat anti- 
biotin, and a precipitating silver substrate. Spots were enumerated with 
a BIOREADER 4000 Pro X (BIOSYS GmbH). Wells with no antigen 
served as a negative control, and tetanus toxoid vaccine was used as a 
positive control in each assay.
Flow cytometry. Freshly isolated PBMCs were stained with 
cell-surface markers for the following panels: B cells (CD19, HLA-
DR, HLA-DQ); myeloid DCs 1 (CD11c, CD1c [BDCA-1], HLA-DR, 
HLA-DQ, CD4/CD8); myeloid DCs 2 (CD11c, CD141 [BDCA-3], 
HLA-DQ, HLA-DQ, CD4/CD8); and plasmacytoid DCs (CD11c, 
CD303 [BDCA-2], CD304 [BDCA-4], CD123, HLA-DR, HLA-DQ). 
The late prevention study (therapy beginning at 12 weeks of age) was 
conducted at Novartis Research Facilities in Basel, Switzerland. TATD 
was dissolved in PBS for intraperitoneal administration and in sterile 
water for oral gavage. An anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (eBiosci-
ence; clone 2C11) was administered by intraperitoneal injection at 50 
μg daily for 5 consecutive days in the late prevention study.
DQ8-Tg mice (containing a human DQ8/CD4 transgene, murine 
IA-null on a NOD Rag-KO background) were obtained from The Jack-
son Laboratory (catalog 006022) and bred at the University of Colo-
rado Denver. Spleens from these mice were used to obtain splenocytes 
to present peptides to TCR transductants in in vitro T cell stimula-
tion assays and for in vivo testing of methyldopa and metabolites. 
DQ8-Tg mice were used on a Rag-KO background, such that T and B 
cells would not be present to secrete IL-2. For the methyldopa in vivo 
studies, methyldopa powder was dissolved in dilute HCl prior to each 
administration, and control mice received dilute HCl (vehicle).
Assessment of murine diabetes, insulin antibodies, and glucose toler-
ance. Blood glucose was measured weekly with a ReliOn Blood Glu-
cose Monitoring System (Solartek), and mice were considered diabetic 
after having 2 consecutive blood glucose values above 250 mg/dl (13.9 
mmol/l). Insulin antibodies were measured with a fluid-phase RIA at 4 
weeks of age and then every 4 weeks thereafter as previously described 
(58). Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests (GTTs) were performed 
following an overnight fast, and D-glucose (2 g/kg body weight) in 
200 μl PBS was administered by intraperitoneal injection. Blood glu-
cose values were obtained at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes using a 
ReliOn meter, and the 2-hour glucose AUC was calculated.
Histological analysis. Parafin-embedded pancreatic sections were 
H&E stained, followed by insulin staining. Islets were identified by glu-
cagon staining and graded for insulitis by an individual blinded to the 
experimental design. A minimum of 100 islets per cohort (PBS or TATD) 
were scored for islet infiltration as follows: 0, no infiltration; 1, peri- 
insulitis; 2, islets with lymphocyte infiltration in less than 50% of the 
area; 3, islets with lymphocyte infiltration in more than 50% of the area.
Study patients and assessments. Subjects for the phase Ib dose- 
escalation study were recruited from clinics of the Barbara Davis Cen-
ter for Diabetes. Eligibility criteria included: (a) age between 18 and 
45 years; (b) diagnosis of T1D, according to American Diabetes Asso-
ciation criteria, within the previous 2 years; (c) positive for at least one 
T1D-related autoantibody (insulin autoantibodies were only consid-
ered positive if measured within 3 weeks of starting exogenous insulin 
therapy); (d) positive for at least one DQ8 allele (DQB*03:02); and (e) 
a random serum C-peptide level of greater than 0.1 nmol/l, which is a 
measure of residual β cell function.
Visits and clinical assessments were performed at baseline and 
in weeks 1, 3, 6, 7, and 12, for a total of 6 visits. Blood samples were 
obtained at each visit for immunologic assessments. PBMCs were 
isolated from heparinized blood using Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare); 
freshly isolated PBMCs were used for flow cytometric panels to ana-
lyze peripheral blood B cells and DCs, while the remainder were 
cryopreserved in FBS with 10% DMSO. Physical examination and 
metabolic samples (glycated hemoglobin [HbA1c] and MMTTs) were 
obtained at baseline and in week 12. Pill counts were performed at the 
visits in weeks 1, 3, and 6 to assess drug compliance. Adverse events 
and insulin use (basal and bolus) were recorded at each study visit.
Measurement of serum islet autoantibodies and HLA genotyping. 
Peripheral blood was obtained for islet autoantibody assays and HLA 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 0 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Study approval. The animal studies were conducted under pro-
tocols approved by the University of Colorado Denver and Novartis 
Animal Care and Use Committees. The clinical investigation in this 
study was conducted in accordance with Declaration of Helsinki 
principles, with study approval provided by the Colorado Multi-
ple Institutional Review Board. The clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.
gov Identifier NCT01883804) was investigational new drug (IND) 
exempt by the FDA (PIND 118119). Written informed consent was 
obtained after the nature and possible consequences of the study 
were explained to each participant.
Author contributions
DAO, MAA, PAG, and AWM designed the studies and wrote the 
manuscript. AA, KAM, SC, EEB, BP, and KJS performed experi-
ments and reviewed the manuscript. LP conducted independent 
statistical analyses of the study data. SE, VNS, SKG, PAG, and 
AWM designed, obtained regulatory approval for, and conducted 
the phase Ib clinical trial. AWM is the guarantor of this work, had 
full access to all the data in the study, and assumes responsibility 
for the data integrity and accuracy of analysis.
Acknowledgments
We thank the late George S. Eisenbarth (1942–2012) for helpful 
scientific discussions, inspiration, and encouragement. We also 
thank the National Cancer Institute (NCI), Division of Cancer 
Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD), DTP for providing the small 
molecules used for screening in the study, and Lori Sussel and 
Edwin Liu at the University of Colorado for critical editing of the 
manuscript. This work was supported by NIH grants (DK095995, 
DK108868, DK110845, DK032083, DK104223, and AI110503); 
the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (17-2010-744 and 
2014-143-C-R); the Children’s Diabetes Foundation; the Barbara 
Davis Center Translational Research Unit; and the Colorado Clin-
ical and Translational Science Institute (TR001082).
Address correspondence to: Aaron Michels, Barbara Davis Center 
for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado School of Medi-
cine, 1775 Aurora Court A-140, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. 
Phone: 303.724.1923; Email: Aaron.michels@ucdenver.edu.
The specific antibody clones and suppliers are listed in Supple-
mental Table 10; isotype controls were used for CD11c and CD123. 
Analysis was done using a BD LSR-II, and data were analyzed using 
FlowJo Software, version 9.
Metabolic assessments. At 0 and 3 months, HbA1c was measured 
using a DCA 2000 Analyzer (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics). A 
MMTT (360 ml of Boost) was administered and serum C-peptide 
measured at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes using an ELISA assay 
(ALPCO), and the 2 hour C-peptide AUC was calculated.
Plasma methyldopa levels. Methyldopa concentrations were mea-
sured in a 100-μl cryopreserved sample (1:1 plasma/PBS) collected at 
each study visit. Samples were thawed and underwent protein precip-
itation with 25 μl of 10% perchloric acid in Milli-Q water, followed by 
centrifugation at 13,300 g for 15 minutes. The supernatants were ana-
lyzed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry. Positive 
ion electrospray ionization mass spectra were obtained with an MDS 
Sciex 3200 Q-TRAP triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Applied 
Biosystems) with a turbo ion spray source interfaced with an Agilent 
1200 Series Binary Pump SL HPLC system. Samples were chromato-
graphed using a Sunfire C8, 5-μm, 4.6 × 50 mm column (Waters Cor-
poration) protected by a C18 guard cartridge (4.0 × 2.0 mm; Phenome-
nex). Methyldopa standard curves were prepared in human plasma 
 
diluted 1:1, spiked with 5 μl of the appropriate standard concentration 
with PBS, and were linear over a range of 5 to 5,000 ng/ml. The linearity 
of the standard curves was greater than r2 = 0.99, using 1/x2 weighting.
Statistics. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS 
Institute) and GraphPad Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software), including cal-
culations for IC50 values from dose titrations with TATD and methyldopa. 
The statistical tests, including the log-rank test, Mann-Whitney U test, 
ANOVA, unpaired t test, Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test, used 
for each experiment are indicated in the corresponding figure legends. 
P values of less than 0.05 were considered significant. For MHC class 
II–specific antigen presentation in study subjects, longitudinal mixed- 
effects models adjusted for the baseline value were used to examine 
changes over time. Residual plots were examined in order to evaluate the 
fit of the models. P values compare the differences of least-squares means 
between 2 time points. For safety outcomes (blood pressure, liver func-
tion tests, and hemoglobin), mixed-effects models were used to compare 
mean values on and off treatment, without an adjustment for baseline.
 1. Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS, Michels AW. Type 1 
diabetes. Lancet. 2014;383(9911):69–82.
 2. Bluestone JA, Herold K, Eisenbarth G. Genetics, 
pathogenesis and clinical interventions in type 1 
diabetes. Nature. 2010;464(7293):1293–1300.
 3. Ziegler AG, et al. Seroconversion to multiple islet 
autoantibodies and risk of progression to diabe-
tes in children. JAMA. 2013;309(23):2473–2479.
 4. Mayer-Davis EJ, et al. Incidence Trends of Type 1 
and Type 2 Diabetes among Youths, 2002-2012. 
N Engl J Med. 2017;376(15):1419–1429.
 5. Rigby MR, et al. Alefacept provides sustained 
clinical and immunological effects in new- 
onset type 1 diabetes patients. J Clin Invest. 
2015;125(8):3285–3296.
 6. Sherry N, et al. Teplizumab for treatment of type 
1 diabetes (Protégé study): 1-year results from 
a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 
2011;378(9790):487–497.
 
7. Keymeulen B, et al. Insulin needs after CD3-anti-
body therapy in new-onset type 1 diabetes.  
N Engl J Med. 2005;352(25):2598–2608.
 8. Herold KC, et al. Anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody 
in new-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J 
Med. 2002;346(22):1692–1698.
 9. Pescovitz MD, et al. Rituximab, B-lymphocyte 
depletion, and preservation of beta-cell function. 
N Engl J Med. 2009;361(22):2143–2152.
 10. Orban T, et al. Co-stimulation modulation with 
abatacept in patients with recent- 
onset type 1 diabetes: a randomised, double- 
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 
2011;378(9789):412–419.
 11. Moran A, et al. Interleukin-1 antagonism in type 
1 diabetes of recent onset: two multicentre, ran-
domised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. 
Lancet. 2013;381(9881):1905–1915.
 12. Wherrett DK, et al. Antigen-based therapy with 
glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) vaccine 
in patients with recent-onset type 1 diabe-
tes: a randomised double-blind trial. Lancet. 
2011;378(9788):319–327.
 13. Näntö-Salonen K, et al. Nasal insulin to prevent 
type 1 diabetes in children with HLA genotypes 
and autoantibodies conferring increased risk of 
disease: a double-blind, randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2008;372(9651):1746–1755.
 14. Skyler JS, et al. Effects of oral insulin in relatives 
of patients with type 1 diabetes: The Diabetes  
Prevention Trial — Type 1. Diabetes Care. 
2005;28(5):1068–1076.
 15. Diabetes Prevention Trial--Type 1 Diabetes Study 
Group. Effects of insulin in relatives of patients 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 
2002;346(22):1685–1691.
 16. Tsai S, Santamaria P. MHC class II polymor-
phisms, autoreactive T-cells, and autoimmunity. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 0 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Front Immunol. 2013;4:321.
 17. Inoko H, Ando A, Tsuji K, Matsuki K, Juji T, 
Honda Y. HLA-DQ beta chain DNA restriction 
fragments can differentiate between healthy and 
narcoleptic individuals with HLA-DR2. Immuno-
genetics. 1986;23(2):126–128.
 18. Green PH, Cellier C. Celiac disease. N Engl J Med. 
2007;357(17):1731–1743.
 19. Bukhari W, Barnett MH, Prain K, Broadley SA. 
Molecular pathogenesis of neuromyelitis optica. 
Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13(10):12970–12993.
 20. Moutsianas L, et al. Class II HLA interactions 
modulate genetic risk for multiple sclerosis. Nat 
Genet. 2015;47(10):1107–1113.
 21. Viatte S, Plant D, Raychaudhuri S. Genetics and 
epigenetics of rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol. 2013;9(3):141–153.
 22. Raychaudhuri S, et al. Five amino acids in three 
HLA proteins explain most of the association 
between MHC and seropositive rheumatoid 
arthritis. Nat Genet. 2012;44(3):291–296.
 23. Hu X, et al. Additive and interaction effects at 
three amino acid positions in HLA-DQ and HLA-
DR molecules drive type 1 diabetes risk. Nat 
Genet. 2015;47(8):898–905.
 24. Concannon P, Rich SS, Nepom GT. Genet-
ics of type 1A diabetes. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360(16):1646–1654.
 25. Erlich H, et al. HLA DR-DQ haplotypes and geno-
types and type 1 diabetes risk: analysis of the type 
1 diabetes genetics consortium families. Diabetes. 
2008;57(4):1084–1092.
 26. Michels AW, et al. Islet-Derived CD4 T Cells 
Targeting Proinsulin in Human Autoimmune 
Diabetes. Diabetes. 2017;66(3):722–734.
 27. Pathiraja V, et al. Proinsulin-specific, HLA-DQ8, 
and HLA-DQ8-transdimer-restricted CD4+ T 
cells infiltrate islets in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 
2015;64(1):172–182.
 28. Michels AW, et al. Structure-based selection 
of small molecules to alter allele-specific 
MHC class II antigen presentation. J Immunol. 
2011;187(11):5921–5930.
 29. Chaparro RJ, Dilorenzo TP. An update on the use of 
NOD mice to study autoimmune (Type 1) diabetes. 
Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2010;6(6):939–955.
 30. Lee KH, Wucherpfennig KW, Wiley DC. Struc-
ture of a human insulin peptide-HLA-DQ8 
complex and susceptibility to type 1 diabetes. Nat 
Immunol. 2001;2(6):501–507.
 31. Eerligh P, et al. Functional consequences of 
HLA-DQ8 homozygosity versus heterozygosity 
for islet autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes. Genes 
Immun. 2011;12(6):415–427.
 32. Tollefsen S, et al. HLA-DQ2 and -DQ8 signatures 
of gluten T cell epitopes in celiac disease. J Clin 
Invest. 2006;116(8):2226–2236.
 33. Mah GT, Tejani AM, Musini VM. Methyldopa for 
primary hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2009;(4):CD003893.
 34. Broughton SE, et al. Biased T cell receptor usage 
directed against human leukocyte antigen 
DQ8-restricted gliadin peptides is associated with 
celiac disease. Immunity. 2012;37(4):611–621.
 35. Davis MM, et al. Ligand recognition by alpha 
beta T cell receptors. Annu Rev Immunol. 
1998;16:523–544.
 36. Sjoerdsma A, Vendsalu A, Engelman K. Studies 
on the metabolism and mechanism of action of 
methyldopa. Circulation. 1963;28:492–502.
 37. Nakayama M, et al. Regulatory vs. inflammatory 
cytokine T cell responses to mutated insulin pep-
tides in healthy and type 1 diabetic subjects. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112(14):4429–4434.
 38. Yang J, et al. Autoreactive T cells specific for insulin 
B:11-23 recognize a low-affinity peptide register in 
human subjects with autoimmune diabetes. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(41):14840–14845.
 39. James EA, Bui J, Berger D, Huston L, Roti M, 
Kwok WW. Tetramer-guided epitope mapping 
reveals broad, individualized repertoires of tet-
anus toxin-specific CD4+ T cells and suggests 
HLA-based differences in epitope recognition. 
Int Immunol. 2007;19(11):1291–1301.
 40. Greenbaum CJ, et al. Fall in C-peptide during 
first 2 years from diagnosis: evidence of at 
least two distinct phases from composite 
Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet data. Diabetes. 
2012;61(8):2066–2073.
 41. Roep BO, Peakman M. Antigen targets of type 1 
diabetes autoimmunity. Cold Spring Harb Perspect 
Med. 2012;2(4):a007781.
 42. Krogsgaard M, et al. Evidence that structural 
rearrangements and/or flexibility during TCR 
binding can contribute to T cell activation. Mol 
Cell. 2003;12(6):1367–1378.
 43. Willcox BE, et al. TCR binding to peptide-MHC 
stabilizes a flexible recognition interface. Immu-
nity. 1999;10(3):357–365.
 44. Spanier JA, et al. Increased effector mem-
ory insulin-specific CD4+T cells correlate 
with insulin autoantibodies in patients 
with recent-onset type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 
2017;66(12):3051–3060.
 45. Zhang L, et al. Monoclonal antibody blocking the 
recognition of an insulin peptide-MHC complex 
modulates type 1 diabetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 U S A. 2014;111(7):2656–2661.
 46. Dahan R, et al. Antigen-specific immunomodu-
lation for type 1 diabetes by novel recombinant 
antibodies directed against diabetes-associates 
auto-reactive T cell epitope. J Autoimmun. 
2013;47:83–93.
 47. Ostrov DA, et al. Drug hypersensitivity caused by 
alteration of the MHC-presented self-peptide  
repertoire. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012;109(25):9959–9964.
 48. Illing PT, et al. Immune self-reactivity triggered 
by drug-modified HLA-peptide repertoire. 
Nature. 2012;486(7404):554–558.
 49. White KD, Chung WH, Hung SI, Mallal S, Phillips 
EJ. Evolving models of the immunopathogenesis 
of T cell-mediated drug allergy: The role of host, 
pathogens, and drug response. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2015;136(2):219–34; quiz 235.
 50. Pompeu YA, Stewart JD, Mallal S, Phillips E, 
Peters B, Ostrov DA. The structural basis of 
HLA-associated drug hypersensitivity syn-
dromes. Immunol Rev. 2012;250(1):158–166.
 51. Klitz W, et al. New HLA haplotype frequency 
reference standards: high-resolution and large 
sample typing of HLA DR-DQ haplotypes in a 
sample of European Americans. Tissue Antigens. 
2003;62(4):296–307.
 52. Kitchen DB, Decornez H, Furr JR, Bajorath J. 
Docking and scoring in virtual screening for drug 
discovery: methods and applications. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov. 2004;3(11):935–949.
 53. Ferrara P, Gohlke H, Price DJ, Klebe G, 
Brooks CL. Assessing scoring functions for 
protein-ligand interactions. J Med Chem. 
2004;47(12):3032–3047.
 54. Ewing TJ, Makino S, Skillman AG, Kuntz ID. 
DOCK 4.0: search strategies for automated 
molecular docking of flexible molecule databases. 
J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2001;15(5):411–428.
 55. Liu E, et al. Exploring T cell reactivity to gliadin 
in young children with newly diagnosed celiac 
disease. Autoimmune Dis. 2014;2014:927190.
 56. Hennecke J, Wiley DC. Structure of a complex 
of the human alpha/beta T cell receptor (TCR) 
HA1.7, influenza hemagglutinin peptide, and 
major histocompatibility complex class II mol-
ecule, HLA-DR4 (DRA*0101 and DRB1*0401): 
insight into TCR cross-restriction and alloreac-
tivity. J Exp Med. 2002;195(5):571–581.
 57. Sidney J, et al. Measurement of MHC/peptide 
interactions by gel filtration or monoclonal anti-
body capture. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2013;Chap-
ter 18:Unit 18.3.
 58. Yu L, Eisenbarth G, Bonifacio E, Thomas J, Atkin-
son M, Wasserfall C. The second murine auto-
antibody workshop: remarkable interlaboratory 
concordance for radiobinding assays to identify 
insulin autoantibodies in nonobese diabetic 
mice. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003;1005:1–12.
 59. Yu L, et al. Antiislet autoantibodies usually devel-
op sequentially rather than simultaneously. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 1996;81(12):4264–4267.
 60. Rewers A, et al. Ethnic differences in the 
associations between the HLA-DRB1*04 sub-
types and type 1 diabetes. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2003;1005:301–309.
 61. Nagata M, Kotani R, Moriyama H, Yokono K, 
Roep BO, Peakman M. Detection of autoreactive 
T cells in type 1 diabetes using coded autoanti-
gens and an immunoglobulin-free cytokine ELIS-
POT assay: report from the fourth immunology 
of diabetes society T cell workshop. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci. 2004;1037:10–15.
