 An Immunogenic Personal Neoantigen Vaccine for Melanoma 
Patients
Patrick A. Ott1,2,5,*, Zhuting Hu1,*, Derin B. Keskin1,3,5, Sachet A. Shukla1,3, Jing Sun1, 
David J. Bozym1, Wandi Zhang1, Adrienne Luoma12, Anita Giobbie-Hurder10, Lauren 
Peter8,9, Christina Chen1, Oriol Olive1, Todd A. Carter3, Shuqiang Li3, David J. Lieb3, 
Thomas Eisenhaure3, Evisa Gjini15, Jonathan Stevens13, William J. Lane13, Indu Javeri14, 
Kaliappanadar Nellaiappan14, Andreas Salazar6, Heather Daley1, Michael Seaman8, 
Elizabeth I. Buchbinder1,2,5, Charles H. Yoon5,7, Maegan Harden3, Niall Lennon3, Stacey 
Gabriel3, Scott J. Rodig13,15, Dan H. Barouch5,8,9, Jon C. Aster5,13, Gad Getz3,4,5, Kai 
Wucherpfennig5,12, Donna Neuberg10, Jerome Ritz1,2,5, Eric S. Lander3,5, Edward F. 
Fritsch1,3,11, Nir Hacohen3,4,5, and Catherine J. Wu1,2,3,5
1Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA
2Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA, USA
5Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
6Oncovir, Inc., Washington, DC, USA
7Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
8Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, 
USA
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
#Correspondence should be addressed to: Catherine J. Wu, MD, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Dana 520, 44 Binney Street, Boston 
MA 02115, cwu@partners.org.
*These authors contributed equally to this work
11Current address: Neon Therapeutics, Inc. Cambridge, MA, USA
Author Contributions
P.A.O. was the Principal Investigator and IND holder. C.J.W., N.H., P.A.O. and E.F.F. directed the overall study design. Z.H. designed 
and performed experimental and data analysis together with D.B.K., D.J.B., W.Z., L.P., C.C., S.L. and D.J.L.; S.A.S., T.A.C., J.S., J.S. 
and W.J.L. and E.F.F. analyzed sequencing data and selected neoantigen targets; D.H.B. and M.S enabled sample collection and 
immune monitoring; H.D. and J.R. directed vaccine preparation; A.L. and K.W. designed and generated tetramers; A.G.H. and D.N. 
designed and performed statistical analyses; T.E., A.S., I.J. and K.N. helped design the vaccine formulation; O.O. coordinated clinical 
research; P.A.O., E.I.B. and C.H.Y. provided patient samples; J.C.A., E.G. and S.J.R performed pathology review; M.H., N.L., S.G. 
and G.G. helped devise the computational pipeline; N.H., C.J.W., E.F.F., T.A.C and E.S.L. developed the overall program strategy. 
P.A.O., Z.H., E.F.F., N.H. and C.J.W. wrote the manuscript; all authors discussed and interpreted results.
Competing Financial Interests (Online only)
E.F.F is a founder and employee of Neon Therapeutics; N.H. and C.J.W. are founders of Neon Therapeutics and members of its 
scientific advisory board. P.A.O. has advised Neon Therapeutics. E.S.L. is a founder of Neon Therapeutics and a member of the Board 
of Directors. K.N. and I.J. are employees of CuriRx. Patent applications have been filed on aspects of the described work entitled as 
follows: Compositions and Methods for Personalized Neoplasia Vaccines (N.H., E.F.F., and C.J.W.), Methods for Identifying Tumor 
Specific Neo-Antigens (N.H. and C.J.W.), Formulations for Neoplasia Vaccines (E.F.F., K.N., and I.J.) and Combination Therapy for 
Neoantigen Vaccine (N.H., C.J.W., and E.F.F). S.J.R. receives research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, MedImmune and is on the 
scientific advisory board for Perkin Elmer Inc. The remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 July 13; 547(7662): 217–221. doi:10.1038/nature22991.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Boston, MA, USA
10Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
12Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, 
USA
13Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
14CuriRx, Inc., Wilmington, MA, USA
15Center for Immuno-Oncology (CIO), Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA
Abstract
Effective anti-tumor immunity in humans has been associated with the presence of T cells directed 
at cancer neoantigens1, which are T cell epitopes with tumor-specific expression arising from non-
silent somatic mutations. They are highly immunogenic because they are not expressed in normal 
tissues and hence bypass central thymic tolerance. Although neoantigens were long-envisioned as 
optimal targets for an anti-tumor immune response2, their systematic discovery and evaluation 
only became feasible with the recent availability of massively-parallel sequencing for detection of 
all coding mutations within tumors, and of machine learning approaches to reliably predict those 
mutated peptides with high-affinity binding of autologous HLA molecules. We hypothesized that 
vaccination with neoantigens can both expand pre-existing neoantigen-specific T cell populations 
and induce a broader repertoire of new T cell specificities in cancer patients, tipping the intra-
tumoral balance in favor of enhanced tumor control. Here we demonstrate the feasibility, safety 
and immunogenicity of a vaccine that targets up to 20 predicted personal tumor neoantigens. 
Vaccine-induced polyfunctional CD4+ and CD8+ T cells targeted 58 (60%) and 15 (16%), 
respectively, of the 97 unique neoantigens used across patients. These T cells discriminated 
mutated from wildtype antigens, and in some cases, directly recognized autologous tumor. Of 6 
vaccinated patients, 4 had no recurrence at 25 months post-vaccination, while 2 with progressive 
disease were subsequently treated with anti-PD-1 therapy and experienced complete tumor 
regression, with expansion of the repertoire of neoantigen-specific T cells. These data provide a 
strong rationale for further development of this approach, alone and in combination with 
checkpoint therapies.
Keywords
Neoantigen; melanoma; vaccine; checkpoint; personal; personalized; pICLC; epitope; HLA
To generate a vaccine that targets personal neoantigens, we conducted whole-exome 
sequencing of matched tumor and normal cell DNA from individual patients, identified 
somatic mutations, orthogonally validated and assessed the expression of mutated alleles by 
RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) of the tumor, predicted which mutated peptides were likely to 
bind autologous HLA-A or HLA-B proteins of the patient, and synthesized clinical-grade 
long peptides3 targeting up to 20 neoantigens per patient, admixed with the TLR3 agonist 
Ott et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 poly-ICLC4 (Hiltonol®) (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Information 1–3). We evaluated this 
vaccine in a phase I study in patients with previously untreated high-risk melanoma (stage 
IIIB/C and IVM1a/b) following surgical resection with curative intent (Extended Data 
Tables 1, Supplementary Information 4a).
Of the 10 patients enrolled, 8 demonstrated the high mutation rate expected for melanoma, 
carried expected melanoma-associated mutations (i.e. in BRAF, NRAS and others) and 
predominantly C→T transitions (consistent with UV exposure), and expressed multiple 
melanoma markers (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c). For these 8 patients, 13–20 immunizing long 
peptides (IMP) per patient (with lengths of 15–30 amino acids) were synthesized and 
grouped into 4 separate immunizing pools (Supplementary Information 5). Six patients 
initiated vaccination (median time of 18 weeks from surgery to vaccine administration) and 
each completed the full series of 5 priming and 2 booster vaccinations. Treatment-related 
adverse events consisted of mild flu-like symptoms, injection site reactions, rash and fatigue 
(Supplementary Information 4b).
At a median follow-up of 25 months (range 20–32), 4 of 6 patients, who entered the study 
with stage IIIB/C disease, remain without disease recurrence. Two patients entered with 
previously untreated stage IVM1b disease (lung metastases); both had disease progression 
evident on restaging scans obtained after the last vaccination. Subsequently, both patients 
underwent treatment with the anti-PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab and both achieved 
complete radiographic responses (CR) after 4 doses (CR rate of pembrolizumab as first-line 
treatment for metastatic melanoma previously reported as 6.1%5), which are ongoing (Fig. 
1b, Extended Data Fig. 1d).
Overlapping 15–16mer assay peptides (‘ASP’) spanning the entirety of each IMP and 9–
10mer peptides corresponding to each predicted class I epitope (‘EPT’) were prepared and 
pooled to match the corresponding IMP pool (Fig. 2a). When measured by ex vivo IFN-γ 
ELISPOT, we observed reactivity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to a 
median of 3 of 4 pools of overlapping ASP (p < 0.005), suggesting the generation of potent 
responses against multiple predicted epitopes (Fig. 2b). Ex vivo responses to these peptide 
pools were undetectable before vaccination but were already evident at the time of earliest 
sampling, and were sustained over time. By intracellular cytokine staining (ICS), the 
majority of ex vivo IFN-γ-positive PBMC responses against peptide pools were generated 
by CD4+ T cells (Fig. 2c; Extended Data Fig. 2a). While neoantigen-reactive CD8+ T cell 
responses were not observed by IFN-γ ELISPOT nor ICS directly ex vivo, 8 of 17 (47%) 
pools of EPT across the 6 patients (at least one EPT pool/patient) stimulated detectable IFN-
γ secretion after a single round of in vitro expansion (‘pre-stimulation’) with the peptides 
(Fig. 2d; Extended Data Fig. 3a–b). Responses against these EPT pools were absent in pre-
stimulated samples collected prior to vaccination, indicating the generation of new 
circulating CD8+ T cell responses following vaccination (Extended Data Fig. 3b). For all 
patients, >30% of neoantigen-reactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were polyfunctional as 
evidenced by secretion of 2–3 inflammatory cytokines (IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2) (Extended 
Data Fig. 2b–d, 3c–d).
Ott et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To identify which predicted epitopes within the peptide pools stimulated the T cell 
responses, we deconvoluted all pools by either ex vivo or pre-stimulation ELISPOT assays 
(Extended Data Fig. 4a–b, 5). Of 173 9–10mer EPT tested, derived from 91 IMP, CD8+ T 
cells were reactive against EPT from 15 (16%) immunizing peptides (2–4 immunogenic 
peptides per patient) (Extended Data Fig. 5; Supplementary Information 5). For CD4+ T cell 
responses, we tested 297 ASP across 6 patients, corresponding to 97 IMP, and detected 
responses against ASP from 19 IMP ex vivo, and an additional 39 IMP after one round of 
pre-stimulation, for a total of 58 (60%) IMP (Extended Data Fig. 5; Supplementary 
Information 6).
Thirty-four T cell lines with reactivity against each of the ex vivo CD4+-defined and pre-
stimulated CD8+ targets were evaluated for sensitivity and specificity by incubation with 
CD4+/CD8+-depleted PBMC loaded exogenously with mutated or, for single amino acid 
changes, wildtype peptides over a range of concentrations. In 24 (86%) of 28 T cell lines 
with reactivity against a mutated peptide, we confirmed preferential reactivity of the mutated 
compared to the corresponding wildtype peptide (Fig. 3a; Extended Data Fig. 4c). For 
several predicted epitopes, reactive T cell populations were observed at peptide 
concentrations as low as ~10 pM (e.g. CD4+ T cell response against mutated RUSC2 
[Patient 1]; CD8+ T cell response against mutated COL22A1 [Patient 5]), potentially 
enabling recognition of tumor cells presenting few peptide:MHC complexes6. These data 
demonstrate the high level of specificity for neoantigens over corresponding wildtype 
antigens. Of the 6 T cell lines directed against epitopes predicted to arise from novel open 
reading frames (neoORFs), several were found highly avid for these epitopes (e.g. CD4+ T 
cell responses against the CASP5 neoORF [Patient 1]). Neoantigen-reactive CD4+ 
(Extended Data Fig. 6a) and CD8+ T cells (Fig. 3b) were not detected in samples prior to 
vaccination, even after one round of pre-stimulation. Notably, 10% of IMP elicited both 
CD8+ and CD4+ T cell responses.
We used multiple approaches to confirm that the detected T cell responses were directed 
against endogenously processed and presented neoantigens. First, we observed recognition 
by neoantigen-reactive CD4+ (14 of 19 [73%]) and CD8+ (15 of 15 [100%]) T cell lines of 
autologous antigen presenting cells (APCs) expressing tandem minigenes encoding a series 
of 25-mer peptides (and hence requiring processing for presentation; Methods) spanning the 
predicted mutated sites, but not of APCs expressing minigenes encoding corresponding 
wildtype peptides (Fig. 3c; Extended Data Fig. 6b). Two of 15 CD8+ T cell lines with clear 
differential reactivity to mutated vs wildtype peptide-encoding minigenes were unable to 
discriminate between cells loaded with mutated versus wildtype peptides (Fig. 3a; to VPS16 
[Patient 3] and FAM200A [Patient 5]), suggesting that endogenous processing, but not 
exogenous loading, differs for the mutated and cognate wildtype peptides. For the CD8+ T 
cell lines, all mutated minigene responses were uniformly blocked by an anti-HLA class I 
blocking antibody (Extended Data Fig. 6b). For the CD4+ T cell lines, 10 of 19 (52%) were 
blocked by an anti-HLA-DR blocking antibody; the remainder are presumably restricted by 
other class II alleles. We observed evidence of cytolytic capacity of these T cell lines since 
elevated CD107αβ expression was detected following exposure to APCs presenting the 
mutated minigenes for both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells (Extended Data Fig. 6c).
Ott et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Neoantigen-specific T cells were also tested for reactivity against autologous melanoma cell 
lines. Flow cytometric analysis of the tumor lines demonstrated variable levels of HLA class 
I and II expression (Extended Data Fig. 7a). None of the neoantigen-specific T cells 
recognized cultured tumor cell lines from Patients 1, 3, 4, and 5. For Patients 2 and 6, we 
detected recognition of autologous tumor by multiple neoantigen-reactive CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells (Fig. 3d–e). Additionally, CD4+ T cells from Patient 5 were reactive against autologous 
dendritic cells exposed to irradiated autologous melanoma cells, demonstrating that tumor-
expressed melanoma neoepitopes can be naturally presented by patient APCs (Fig. 3f). Of 
note, immunohistochemical evaluation of HLA class I and II expression of the originally 
surgically resected metastatic tumors, available for 5 of 6 patients, demonstrated detectable 
class I expression in 4 of 5 tumors (Patients 2, 4, 5, 6) (Extended Data Fig. 7b–c), and hence, 
these tumors have the potential to be recognized by neoantigen-specific T cells in vivo.
To analyze the frequency and phenotype of vaccine-induced CD4+ T cells, we generated 
HLA class II tetramers that detect neoantigen-reactive CD4+ cells. The tetramers detected T 
cells against RUSC2 (Patient 1) and ARHGAP29 (Patient 4) directly ex vivo at week 16, 
representing ~0.03–0.06% of all circulating CD4+ cells, with persistence of ARHGAP29-
reactive cells at week 24 (Fig. 4a–b, Extended Data Fig. 8c–d, Extended Data Table 2). To 
characterize the functional state of these cells, we sorted CD4+ T cells prior to vaccination 
and tetramer-positive CD4+ T cells after vaccination in both patients, and compared their 
gene expression profiles using single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq). Clustering of T 
cells showed robust separation of pre- and post-vaccination cells (Fig. 4b; Extended Data 
Fig. 8d), with hundreds of genes changing their expression after vaccination. These major 
shifts in gene expression reflect a transition from naïve to effector and memory functions, 
including silencing of genes that promote naïve T cell homeostatic survival (e.g., IL7R 
[Patient 4]) and fate (e.g., FOXP1 [Patient 1]), and upregulation of genes involved in Th1 
fate (e.g., TBX21/T-bet [Patient 4]) and energy metabolism that is critical for cell 
proliferation and growth (e.g., glucose and glutamine transporters and MTOR in Patient 4) 
(Supplementary Information 7). While SATB1, a recently described epigenetic repressor of 
PD-17, was downregulated in both patients, PD-1 itself was only upregulated in Patient 4, 
suggesting additional mechanisms regulating PD-1.
For Patients 2 and 6, who both achieved a CR after treatment with pembrolizumab, we tested 
samples collected after 9–12 months of pembrolizumab treatment for reactivity against ASP 
and EPT by IFN-γ ELISPOT. Indeed, CD4+ T cell responses against 25 of 49 ASP (with 4 
novel responses) and CD8+ T cell responses against 2 of 18 EPT for Patient 2 were detected 
(Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 8a). Similarly, for Patient 6, CD4+ T cell responses were 
detected against 15 of 61 ASP (with 2 novel responses) and CD8+ T cell responses against 4 
of 32 EPT (with 2 novel responses). Thus, we observe persistence of the vaccine-induced 
neoantigen responses over time and broadening of the repertoire of neoantigen-specific T 
cells following checkpoint blockade therapy.
Our study provides proof-of-principle that a personal vaccine can be produced and 
administered to a patient to generate highly specific immune responses against that 
individual’s tumor. Given the importance of both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells in mediating 
tumor cell killing,8,9 the vaccine, by utilizing long peptides, was designed to activate both 
Ott et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 types of T cells. Both CD8+ and CD4+ T cell responses against a substantial proportion of 
IMP were detected (summarized in Extended Data Fig. 8b). Notably, 20% of IMP induced 
ex vivo CD4+ T cell responses, comparable to the magnitude of responses seen for viral E6 
and E7 long peptide therapeutic vaccines in patients with vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia3. 
Importantly, the proportion of tumor neoantigens inducing a T cell response following 
vaccination was substantially higher compared to the rates (~1% ex vivo for CD8+ or CD4+ 
T cells) observed in patients who responded clinically to non-antigen-directed 
immunotherapy, such as checkpoint blockade or TIL therapy10–13. Thus, in agreement with 
a reported study showing responses to a DC-based neoantigen vaccine14, our results 
demonstrate that a personal neoantigen vaccine broadens the repertoire of neoantigen-
specific T cells substantially beyond what is induced by existing immunotherapeutics.
Despite the selection of neoantigens based on predicted presentation by HLA class I, the 
proportion of neoantigens stimulating class II responses was higher than for class I 
responses (~60% vs. 20%). Nevertheless, this outcome is consistent with recent reports in 
cancer mouse models demonstrating predominantly CD4+ responses upon vaccination with 
neoepitopes predicted by class I binding algorithms15,16. A combination of structural 
(precise N- and C-termini for class I epitopes vs promiscuous binding properties of peptides 
to MHC class II proteins17–19), cellular (scarcity of MHC class I cross-presenting CLEC9A+ 
dendritic cells cells20), and other factors likely explain the predominance of CD4+ T cell 
responses. Recent studies have highlighted a role for neoantigen-specific CD4+ T cell 
responses in direct tumor clearance8,9,15. Hence, in addition to the licensing of dendritic 
cells and the activation and maintenance of a tumor-directed CD8+ T cell response21, CD4+ 
T cells can exert direct anti-tumor effects independent of CD8+ T cells21–23.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that a personal neoantigen vaccine is safe, feasible and 
capable of eliciting strong T cell responses in a clinical setting unconfounded by prior or 
intercurrent therapy. The use of a personal neoantigen vaccine is anticipated to help 
overcome two major barriers to effective cancer therapy: tumor heterogeneity and selective 
targeting of tumor relative to healthy tissues. Based on the observed induction of de novo T 
cell clones that detect multiple individual-specific neoantigens and recognize endogenously 
processed antigens and autologous tumors cells, our vaccine is likely to target a diversity of 
malignant clones per patient, thus addressing tumor heterogeneity as well as minimizing the 
chance of tumor escape by loss of antigen. Future neoantigen vaccine trials will take 
advantage of improved methods for predicting antigen presentation to increase the fraction 
of neoantigens inducing tumor-reactive T cells24 and will test for synergy with checkpoint 
blockade and other immunotherapeutics.
Methods
Study design
Patients with high-risk melanoma were provided informed consent and enrolled between 
April 2014 and October 2015 to a single center, phase I clinical trial approved by the Dana-
Farber/Harvard Cancer Center Institutional Review Board (IRB) (NCT01970358). This 
study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Key eligibility criteria 
were clinically or radiographically evident, pathologically confirmed stage IIIB/C and 
Ott et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IVM1a/b melanoma deemed amenable to complete surgical resection and an ECOG 
performance status of 0 or 1. Other requirements included absolute lymphocyte count of ≥ 
800/mcL, absolute neutrophil count of ≥ 1,500/mcL, hemoglobin ≥ 10g/dL, platelet count ≥ 
100,000/mcL, aminotransferases ≤ 2×upper limit of the normal range, total serum bilirubin ≤ 
1×upper limit of the normal range and serum creatinine ≤ 1.5×upper limit of the normal 
range. Patients with uveal or mucosal melanoma, prior immune modulating or other cancer 
directed therapies (except for IFN-α given as systemic adjuvant therapy for a prior 
melanoma or melanoma recurrence), active autoimmune disease or an immunosuppressive 
condition were excluded.
The primary endpoints of the study were safety and feasibility; secondary endpoints were 
induction of tumor- and neoantigen-specific cellular immune responses and the number of 
patients alive at 2 years after melanoma resection. A personalized neoantigen-targeting 
vaccine consisting of long peptides combined into 4 distinct immunizing peptide pools with 
0.3mg of each peptide admixed with 0.5mg poly-ICLC per pool in a volume of 1ml was 
generated as described below, and was administered subcutaneously (SC) on days 1, 4, 8, 15, 
and 22 (priming phase) and weeks 12 and 20 (booster phase). Each of the 4 neoantigen 
vaccine pools per patient was assigned to one of four “non-rotating” extremities (or the left 
or right midriff as an alternate anatomical location) for each injection.
Clinical assessments
The safety of study treatment was assessed based on the occurrence of adverse events, which 
were categorized and graded according to National Cancer Institute Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE, version 4.0). During the treatment phase, safety 
assessments were performed on the day of vaccination and one week after each vaccination. 
During the follow up phase, safety assessments were conducted every 3 months. 
Surveillance scans (computer tomography or combined position emission tomography/
computer tomography) were performed every 6 months; standard RECIST 1.1 criteria were 
used for assessment of disease recurrence.
Patient samples
Heparinized blood and serum samples were obtained from study subjects on IRB-approved 
protocols at the DFCI. Patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated 
by Ficoll/Hypaque density-gradient centrifugation (GE healthcare) and cryopreserved with 
10% dimethylsulfoxide in FBS (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells and serum from patients were stored 
in vapor-phase liquid nitrogen until the time of analysis. HLA class I and class II molecular 
typings were determined by PCR-rSSO (reverse sequence specific oligonucleotide probe), 
with ambiguities resolved by PCR-SSP (sequence specific primer) techniques (One Lambda 
Inc.).
Patient tumor samples were obtained immediately following surgery. A portion of the 
sample was removed for formalin fixation and paraffin embedding (FFPE). The remainder of 
the tissue was carefully minced manually, suspended in a solution of collagenase D 
(200unit/mL) and DNAse I (20unit/ml) (Roche Life Sciences), transferred to a sealable 
plastic bag and incubated with regular agitation in a Seward Stomacher Lab Blender for 30 – 
Ott et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 60min. After digestion, any remaining clumps were removed and the single cell suspension 
was recovered, washed and immediately frozen in aliquots and stored in vapor-phase liquid 
nitrogen. For Patients 1, 2, 3 5, 7, 9, and 10, the frozen tumor cell suspensions were used for 
whole-exome (WES) and RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq). For Patients 4, 6, 8 and 10 WES and 
RNA-Seq were performed on scrolls from the FFPE tissue (Supplementary Information 
1a,b).
Generation of personal neoantigen vaccines
Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES)—CLIA-certified WES was conducted by the 
Clinical Research Sequencing Platform, Broad Institute; CLIA #:22D2055652. Library 
construction from surgical melanoma specimens and matched germline DNA of all 10 
patients was performed as previously described25. Genomic DNA was sheared, end repaired, 
ligated with barcoded Illumina sequencing adapters, amplified, and size selected. For 
Patients 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 9, whole exome capture was performed using the Agilent 
SureSelect Human All Exon 44Mb v2.0 bait set (Agilent Technologies)26. For Patients 5, 6, 
8, and 10, WES was performed using the Illumina Nextera Rapid Capture Exome v1.2 bait 
set. The Illumina exome specifically targets approximately 37.7Mb of mainly exonic regions 
made up of all targets from the Agilent exome design (Agilent SureSelect All Exon V2), all 
coding regions of Gencode V11 genes, and all coding regions of RefSeq gene and 
KnownGene tracks from the UCSC genome browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu). Resulting 
libraries were then qPCR quantified, pooled, and sequenced with 76 base paired-end reads 
using HiSeq 2000 or 2500 sequencers (Illumina). Pooled libraries were normalized to 2nM 
and denatured using 0.2 N NaOH prior to sequencing. Data were analyzed using the Broad 
Picard Pipeline which includes de-multiplexing, duplicate marking, and data aggregation.
RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq)—For RNA sequencing library construction, RNA was 
extracted from frozen cell suspensions (Patients 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, and 10) or FFPE samples 
(Patients 4, 5, 6, 8 and 10) using Qiagen RNeasy Mini kit or Qiagen FFPE RNeasy kit, 
respectively. RNA-Seq libraries were prepared using Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA 
Library Prep Kit (for cell suspensions) or Illumina’s TruSeq RNA Access Library Prep Kit 
(for FFPE samples). Total RNA was quantified using the Quant-iT™ RiboGreen® RNA 
Assay Kit and normalized to 5ng/µl. For Patients 1, 2, 3, 7 and 9, each sample was 
transferred into library preparation which was an automated variant of the Illumina 
TruSeq™ Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation Kit. This method preserves strand 
orientation of the RNA transcript. It uses oligo dT beads to select mRNA from the total RNA 
sample. It is followed by heat fragmentation and cDNA synthesis from the RNA template. 
The resultant 500bp cDNA then goes through library preparation (end repair, base ‘A’ 
addition, adapter ligation, and enrichment) using Broad designed indexed adapters 
substituted in for multiplexing. For Patient 4, the mRNA enrichment step was omitted prior 
to library preparation. The resulting libraries were quantified with qPCR using the KAPA 
Library Quantification Kit for Illumina Sequencing Platforms and then pooled equimolarly. 
For Illumina Sequencing, pooled libraries were normalized to 2nM and denatured using 0.1 
N NaOH prior to sequencing. Flowcell cluster amplification and sequencing were performed 
according to the manufacturer’s protocols using either the HiSeq 2000 or HiSeq 2500. Each 
Ott et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 run was a 101bp paired-end with an eight-base index barcode read. Data was analyzed using 
the Broad Picard Pipeline which includes de-multiplexing and data aggregation.
For Patients 5, 6, 8 and 10, a RNA transcriptome capture method was used. Using Illumina’s 
TruSeq RNA Access Library Prep kit, a stranded cDNA library was prepared from isolated 
RNA which was then hybridized to a set of DNA oligonucleotide probes to enrich the library 
for mRNA transcript fragments. The transcriptome capture targets 21,415 genes, 
representing 98.3% of the RefSeq exome (and is the same bait set as the Rapid Capture 
Exome). Flowcell cluster amplification and sequencing were performed according to the 
manufacturer’s protocols using either the HiSeq 2000 or HiSeq 2500. Each run is a 76bp 
paired-end with an eight-base index barcode read. Data was analyzed using the Broad Picard 
Pipeline which includes de-multiplexing and data aggregation.
DNA quality control—Standard Broad Institute protocols as previously described27,28 
were used for DNA quality control. The identities of all tumor and normal DNA samples 
were confirmed by mass spectrometric fingerprint genotyping of 95 common SNPs by 
Fluidigm Genotyping (Fluidigm). Sample contamination from foreign DNA was assessed 
using ContEst29.
Somatic mutation calling—Analyses of whole-exome sequencing data of tumor and 
matched PBMCs (as source of normal germline DNA) from the patients were used to 
identify the specific coding-sequence mutations, including single-, di- or tri-nucleotide 
variants leading to single amino acid missense mutations and small insertions/deletions. 
Output from Illumina software was processed by the “Picard” data processing pipeline to 
yield BAM files containing aligned reads (bwa version 0.5.9, to the NCBI Human Reference 
Genome Build hg19) with well-calibrated quality scores27,30. Somatic alterations were 
identified using a set of tools within the “Firehose” pipeline (www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/
cga). Somatic single nucleotide variations (sSNVs) were detected using MuTect (Firehose 
version v13112); somatic small insertions and deletions were detected using Indelocator27 
and Strelka31. All indels were manually reviewed in integrated genome viewer (IGV)32. All 
somatic mutations, insertions and deletions were annotated using Oncotator33. The 
ABSOLUTE algorithm (v1.1) was used to calculate the purity and ploidy of the samples. 
RNA-Seq data was processed using the PRADA software34. Comparisons of gene 
expression were conducted against data from GTEx (Analysis V6, dbGaP Accession 
phs000424.v6.p1, doi: 10.1038/ng.2653) and TCGA ([Broad Institute TCGA Genome Data 
Analysis Center (2016): Firehose stddata__2016_01_28 run. Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard. doi:10.7908/C11G0KM9]).
Identification of target epitopes for peptide design—NetMHCpan v2.4 was used to 
identify mutation-containing epitopes that are predicted to bind to the individual patients’ 
MHC class I molecules19,35,36. Thirty peptides of 15–30 amino acids length (“long 
peptides”) from up to 30 independent mutations were selected and prioritized for peptide 
preparation. Epitopes were chosen for inclusion based on a pre-defined set of criteria in the 
following rank order:
1.
NeoORFs which included predicted binding epitopes
Ott et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.
High predicted affinity (< 150 nM) sSNVs due to anchor residue changes
3.
High affinity (<150 nM) sSNVs due to mutations in positions other than anchor 
residues
4.
NeoORFs with no predicted binding epitopes
5.
Lower affinity (<150 – 500 nM) versions of (2) and (3)
Mutations in oncogenes were given highest priority within each ranked group; otherwise 
epitopes were ranked by predicted mutated peptide affinity. Only sSNVs that demonstrated 
expression of the mutated allele were used. Additionally, a variety of possible biochemical 
properties (hydrophobicity, presence of multiple cysteines) which may have affected the 
synthesizability or solubility of the long peptide were considered.
Synthesis of long peptides, pooling and final vaccine preparation—GMP 
peptides were synthesized and purified (CS Bio) using standard solid-phase synthetic 
peptide chemistry and Reverse Phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography (RP-
HPLC). Up to twenty peptides were formulated in an aqueous solution containing ≤4% 
DMSO in isotonic dextrose and mixed into up to 4 pools (3–5 peptides per pool, with a final 
dose of 0.3mg of each peptide per vaccine). On the day of vaccine administration, each 
peptide pool was admixed with 0.5mg poly-ICLC (Hiltonol®; Oncovir Inc.) by syringe-to-
syringe transfer at the DFCI Clinical Pharmacy.
Melanoma cell line generation
Fresh tumor cell suspensions or thawed cryopreserved cells were washed and cultured in 
tissue culture plates containing OptiMEM GlutaMax media (Gibco,Thermofisher) 
supplemented with fetal bovine serum (5%), sodium pyruvate (1mM), penicillin and 
streptomycin (100units/ml), gentamycin (50µg/ml), insulin (5µg/ml) and epidermal growth 
factor (5ng/ml; Sigma-Aldrich). Cell cultures were dissociated and passaged using versene 
(Gibco,Thermofisher). The expanding cell lines were tested mycoplasma free and verified as 
melanoma through immunohistochemical stains using antibodies against the melanoma 
markers HMB45, MITF, MART-1, Melan-A, and S100 that were performed in the Dana-
Farber/Harvard Cancer Center Specialized Histopathology Core Laboratory.
Immunohistochemical evaluation of primary melanoma cells
Dual immunohistochemical staining of the antigen presentation components: HLA class I 
(Abcam, EMR8-5, 1:6000) and HLA class II (Dako, CR3/43 M0775, 1:750) with the 
melanoma marker SOX10 (EP 268, Cell Marque, 1:1500) was performed using an 
automated staining system (Bond III, Leica Biosystems) according to the manufacturer's 
protocol, as previously described37. Semi-quantitative scoring was performed for the 
intensity of positive staining of melanoma cell membranes for the marker of interest (0, 
negative; 1, weak; 2, moderate; 3, strong) and for the percentage of positive staining 
malignant cells (0–100%). A cumulative “H score” was obtained by multiplying intensity 
score (0–3) by the percentage of malignant cells with positive staining (0%–100%; with any 
intensity of positive staining). Stained slides were first reviewed and scored independently 
Ott et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by two individuals and subsequently reviewed together with a final, consensus score 
tabulated as previously described37.
Generation and detection of patient neoantigen-specific T cells
PBMCs were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with L-glutamine, nonessential 
amino acids, HEPES, β-mercaptoethanol, sodium pyruvate, penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco), 
and 10% AB-positive heat-inactivated human serum (Gemini Bioproduct). For in vitro 
expansion (‘pre-stimulation’) of antigen-specific T cells, PBMCs were stimulated in 24-well 
cell culture plates at 5×106 cells per well with individual (2µg/ml) or pooled peptides (each 
at 2µg/ml) in the presence of IL-7 (20 ng/ml; R&D Systems). On day 3, low-dose IL-2 
(20U/ml; Amgen) was added. Half-medium change and supplementation of cytokines were 
performed every 3 days, as described previously38. After 10–21 days, T cell (referred to as 
‘T cell lines’) specificity was tested against peptide, minigenes or autologous tumor by 
interferon (IFN)-γ ELISPOT or CD107αβ degranulation assay in RPMI-1640 medium 
supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin and 10% FBS (complete RPMI). For 
deconvolution of CD8+ T cell responses, CD8+ T cells were enriched with CD8+ T cell 
Isolation Kit beads (Miltenyi Biotec) prior to plating for ELISPOT.
Antigen formats for immune monitoring
Assay (ASP) and predicted class I epitope peptides (EPT) were synthesized and lyophilized 
(from either JPT Peptide Technologies; or RS Synthesis) (>80% purity). ASP were 15–16 aa 
and overlapped by at least 11 aa, covering the IMP sequence. EPT were 9–10 aa. Peptides 
for generation of class II tetramers were synthesized to >90% purity (21st Century 
Biochemicals). Minigenes were constructed39 such that: (i) for non-synonymous mutations, 
they encoded the mutated amino acid and surrounding upstream and downstream native 
amino acids for a total length of ~25 amino acids; (ii) for frame-shift mutations, they 
encoded the entire corresponding immunizing peptide. Multiple minigenes (3–7 per 
plasmid) for a given patient were arranged in tandem without additional linker sequences 
and synthesized as a gBlock (Integrated DNA Technologies). Each tandem minigene 
construct was inserted into a pcDNA3.1 vector using available EcoRI and BamHI cut sites. 
RNA was generated by in vitro transcription (IVT) of the tandem minigene plasmids using 
the mMESSAGE mMACHINE Ultra Kit (Thermo Fisher). 20µg of the IVT RNA was 
introduced into autologous positively-selected CD19+ B cells (CD19 Microbeads, Miltenyi 
Biotec) by nucleofection using V-buffer and the X-001 program (Amaxa Cell Line 
Nucleofector Kit V, Lonza). The B cells were used within 24h of transfection. Transfection 
efficiency was typically 70–85%, based on 24h GFP expression following nucleofection 
with control IVT RNA generated using a pcDNA3.1-GFP plasmid. Tandem constructs 
containing the wildtype versions of the minigenes with non-synonymous mutations were 
also similarly designed.
In some experiments, antigen-specific T cells were tested against autologous melanoma 
cells. In other experiments, autologous irradiated melanoma cells were co-cultured with 
autologous dendritic cells (DC). Immunomagnetically isolated CD14+ cells (Human CD14 
MicroBeads; Miltenyi Biotec) were cultured in complete RPMI containing 120ng/ml GM-
CSF and 70ng/ml IL-4 at 3×106 cells/well in 6 well plate. Media was exchanged on days 3 
Ott et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and 5. For feeding of melanoma cells to autologous DCs, melanoma cells were irradiated 
with 150Gy and cultured in serum-free RPMI overnight. DCs were cultured with/without 
melanoma cells in complete RPMI (0.25×106 DC and 0.25×106 melanoma) in a 48-well 
plate for 5h at 37°C, followed by addition of 30µg/ml poly-inosinic-poly-cytidylic acid 
(Sigma-Aldrich) to induce DC maturation. After overnight culture, DCs were harvested and 
used as antigen-presenting cells on ELISPOT assays.
IFN-γ enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay
IFN-γ ELISPOT assays were performed using 96-well MultiScreen Filter Plates (Millipore), 
coated with 2µg/ml anti-human IFN-γ mAb overnight (1-D1K, Mabtech). Plates were 
washed with PBS and blocked with complete RPMI before use. For pre-stimulated T cells, 
5×103 T cells and 1×104 CD8+ T cells for detection of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, 
respectively, were co-cultured with 1×104 autologous CD4+ and CD8+ T cell-depleted 
PBMC, 8×104 B cells, 1×104 autologous tumor, or 5×103 autologous DCs, unless otherwise 
stated (Figure 3e: 2×104 CD8+ T cells plated; Figure 4c: 1×104 T cells plated). APCs were 
pulsed with peptides (2–10µg/ml) or peptides were directly added to the ELISPOT wells 
with APCs and incubated with T cells overnight in complete RPMI at 37°C. For ex vivo 
ELISPOT, 2×105 PBMC were plated with 2µg/ml peptide and incubated overnight. Plates 
were rinsed with PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 and then 1µg/ml anti-human IFN-γ mAb 
(7-B6-1-Biotin, Mabtech) was added, followed by Streptavidin-ALP (Mabtech). After 
rinsing, SIGMA FAST 5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate/Nitro blue tetrazolium 
(Sigma-Aldrich) was used to develop the immunospots, and spots were imaged and 
enumerated (Cellular Technology Ltd). For some experiments, APCs were cultured on the 
ELISPOT plate with HLA blocking antibodies (10µg/ml; pan anti-DR [clone: L243] or anti-
HLA I [clone: W6/32]) for 1–2h in advance of the addition of peptides and T cells to the 
wells. Ex vivo responses were scored positive if >55 spot forming cells (SFC) were detected 
and were at least 1.5 standard deviations (SD) over the DMSO control (> 3SD over 
background for Patients 5 and 6). For Figure 2b, for each patient, the numbers of SFC were 
regressed on assay, time, and the interaction of assay and time using repeated measures 
models with an unstructured covariance. P-values (t-test) for the comparisons of each pool 
against the mock were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to maintain an 
overall alpha of 0.05 at each time within patient.
Intracellular cytokine staining and CD107αβ
αβ degranulation assay
For ex vivo intracellular cytokine detection, PBMCs were stimulated with 5µg/ml peptide or 
50ng/ml PMA (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1µg/ml ionomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) in complete RPMI 
with 10µg/ml brefeldin A (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C overnight. For detection of cytokines 
from pre-stimulated CD8+ T cells, 2×106 T cells were re-stimulated with 1×106 T cell-
depleted PBMCs pulsed with 5µg/ml peptide in complete RPMI with 10µg/ml brefeldin A at 
37°C for overnight. Subsequently, cells were stained with antibodies against surface markers 
for 20min at 4°C, followed by fixation with 1% formaldehyde at 4°C for 20min, and then 
stained with antibodies against cytokines in 0.5% saponin solution at 4°C for 1h to 
overnight. Anti-CD4 antibody (conjugated with PerCP-Cy5.5, clone OKT-4, eBioscience), 
CD8 (PE-Cy7, SK1, eBioscience), CD3 (APCCy7, HIT3a, Biolegend), CD14 (BV510, 
M5E2, Biolegend), CD19 (BV510, HIB19, Biolegend), IFN-γ (APC, 4S.B3, Biolegend), 
Ott et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TNF-α (BV421, Mab11, Biolegend) and IL-2 (PE, MQ1-17H12, Biolegend) were used. 
CD107αβ degranulation assay was performed by culturing 5×105 T cells and 1.5×105 target 
minigene-expressing B cells with Alexa Fluor647-conjugated CD107α (H4A3) and 
CD107β (H4B4) antibodies (BD Biosciences) in complete RPMI for 6h at 37°C. Cells were 
stained with anti-CD4, CD8 and CD69 (Pacific Blue, FN50, Biolegend) antibodies for 
30min at room temperature, followed by fixation with 4% formaldehyde. Flow cytometry 
analysis was performed on a BD FACSCanto II HTS instrument.
Generation of HLA-DR tetramers loaded with defined neoantigen peptides
DR1/CLIP or and DR4/CLIP complexes were expressed in stably transfected CHO cells as 
previously described40. The DRα and β chain extracellular domains carried Jun and Fos 
dimerization domains; a C-terminal BirA site was attached to the DRα chain to enable site-
specific biotinylation. The peptide binding site was occupied by a CLIP peptide that was 
linked through a thrombin-cleavable linker to the N-terminus of the mature DRβ chain. DR/
CLIP complexes were purified from CHO cell supernatants by affinity chromatography 
using mAb L243 (American Type Culture Collection). Purified DR molecules were 
biotinylated with a 1:20 molar ratio of BirA:DR as described40. Prior to peptide loading, DR 
complexes were treated with thrombin for 2h to release the CLIP peptide. Peptide-exchange 
reactions were carried out with a 15-fold molar excess of dansyl-labeled peptides (21st 
Century Biochemicals) in a buffer containing 50mM sodium citrate, 1% octylglucoside, 
100mM NaCl, and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail overnight at 30 °C. DR/peptide complexes 
were separated from unbound peptide using a Superose 12 HPLC gel filtration column 
(Amersham). DR molecules loaded with defined neoantigen peptides were then isolated 
using an anti-dansyl affinity column. Complexes were eluted from the column using 50mM 
CAPS, pH 11.5 and neutralized with 1M phosphate, pH 6.0. Biotinylated DR/peptide 
monomers were buffer exchanged with PBS, concentrated to >1mg/mL, and frozen in 
aliquots at −80°C. Fluorophore-labeled streptavidin (either PE or APC) was added to 
biotinylated DR/peptide monomers at a 1:4 molar ratio in four separate additions over 40min 
at room temperature.
Tetramer labeling of CD4+ T cells
Patient PBMCs that were CD4-enriched using CD4+ T cell Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) 
were stained with both APC- and PE-labeled tetramers at 20µg/mL in RPMI containing 10% 
FBS, 10 mM HEPES, 2mM glutamine and 50U/mL Pen/Strep for 1h at room temperature. 
DR/CLIP tetramers were used as negative controls. The cell density during staining was 10–
20×106 cells/mL. Unbound tetramer was removed using two washes with flow staining 
buffer (PBS +2%FBS). Cells were then stained with Live/Dead Aqua (Invitrogen) for 15min 
at room temperature, following by staining with anti-CD4 (Alexa Fluor700, OKT4, 
Biolegend), anti-CD3 (BV421, UCHT1, Biolegend), and anti-CD14/CD19 (BV510) for 
20min at 4°C. Cells were washed once with PBS and analyzed on a BD Aria cell sorter.
Single cell trancriptome data generation and analysis
Single cell transcriptomes of CD4+ T cells prior to vaccination and of class II tetramer-
positive CD4+ T cells post-vaccination were generated using the CEL-Seq2 protocol with 
the following modifications: single cells were sorted into 0.6µL of 1% NP-40 buffer in a 
Ott et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 384-well plate, into which 0.6µL of barcoded reverse transcriptase reaction (RT) primers and 
a mixture of dNTPs were added. The plate was incubated at 65°C for 5min, and then moved 
immediately to ice. Reverse transcription, the 2nd strand synthesis reaction and the in vitro 
transcription reaction were carried out as previously described41. Amplified RNA (aRNA) 
was fragmented at 80°C for 3min and cleaned up with RNAClean XP beads. aRNA was 
converted to cDNA using random priming, and then Illumina adaptor sequences were added 
by PCR. Paired-end sequencing was performed on the Hiseq 2500 in High Output Run 
Mode. Raw universal molecular identifier (UMI) data was first filtered to remove all UMIs 
that had less than 10 corresponding reads. All cells that had at least 200 genes with non-zero 
UMI counts and < 25% of UMIs originating from mitochondrial genes were retained for 
downstream analysis. All genes that were not detected in at least 3 cells were excluded. 
Linear (principal components) and non-linear (t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding 
or t-SNE) dimensionality reduction was performed with the Seurat package42. The SCDE 
package43 was used to identify differentially expressed gene.
Data availability statement
DNA and RNA sequencing data are available through dbGaP (currently applying for an 
accession number).
Ott et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Mutational landscape of patient melanoma and radiographic evidence 
of complete response following anti-PD-1 therapy for Patients 2 and 6
a, Numbers of mutations and predicted epitopes/ patient tumor. Red solid lines—patients 
with vaccines generated and vaccinations completed (n=6); red dotted—vaccines generated 
but vaccinations not initiated (n=2); grey— insufficient mutation number for vaccine 
generation (n=2) b, Expression (measured and normalized as transcripts per million base 
pairs [TPM] from the RNA-Seq data) of known melanoma-associated genes in the tumor 
specimens for all 10 patients entered to the trial (circles) compared to normal tissue (blue 
Ott et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 box, [GTEx data]) and melanoma from TCGA (red box; see [Methods for analysis]). c, The 
overall mutational landscape of the 8 patient melanoma samples for which immunizing 
peptides were generated (# mutations/Mb [top]; distribution of nucleotide changes 
[bottom]), and the presence of mutations in genes previously identified as significant in 
melanoma TCGA samples (n=290) by the MutSig2CV algorithm ([middle] doi:10.7908/
C1J67GCG; genes ordered based on significance of recurrence reported per TCGA, 
Supplementary Information 2). d, Patient 2, left panel: Positron emission tomography 
computed tomography (PET/CT) scans obtained 8 weeks after the last booster vaccine 
demonstrate new intensely fludeoxyglucose F 18 (FDG)-avid right hilar lymphadenopathy 
measuring ~2.1cm (Maximal Standardized Uptake Value: 20.3 [yellow arrow]). Right panel: 
PET/CT obtained 12 weeks later, after 4 doses of pembrolizumab at 2mg/kg given every 3 
weeks, revealing complete interval resolution of the right hilar lymphadenopathy consistent 
with a complete response. Patient 6, left panels: CT scans of the chest obtained 1 week after 
the last booster vaccine demonstrate multiple soft tissue nodules along the left lateral and 
posterolateral chest wall (left upper panel, yellow arrow indicates a 2.1×1.8 soft tissue 
nodule as an example) and a left lower lobe pulmonary nodule (left lower panel, yellow 
arrow). Right panels: CT scans obtained 16.5 weeks later, after 4 doses of pembrolizumab at 
2mg/kg given every 3 weeks, revealing complete interval resolution of all lesions consistent 
with a complete response. On the upper panels, note that the liver is partially visualized on 
the pre-treatment scan (left upper panel) as a result of expirational state and not visualized 
on the post-treatment scan (right upper panel) as a result of inspirational state. The cross 
sections visualizing the soft tissue metastases in the left chest wall versus their resolution 
after treatment correspond. Pt: patient.
Ott et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Polyfunctional neoantigen-specific CD4+ T cell responses are induced 
by vaccination in all 6 patients
Frequencies of CD4+ T cells secreting cytokines in response to pools of 15–16mer assay 
peptides (ASP), as measured by intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) after stimulation of 
PBMCs ex vivo with ASP pools. a, IFN-γ-producing CD4+ T cells detected by flow 
cytometry pre-vaccination and at week 16 post-vaccination for all 6 vaccinated patients. 
FACS plots were pre-gated on CD4+ T cells. Red - frequencies of ASP pool reactive IFN-γ+ 
cells as a proportion of all CD4+ T cells. b, Frequencies of IFN-γ, TNF-α and IL-2 
producing cells within CD4+ T cells in response to ASP pools tested in samples collected 
Ott et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pre-vaccination (blue) and at week 16 post-vaccination (red). c, Pie charts of the total CD4+ 
T cell responses positive for one, two or three cytokines. Bar graphs are shown of absolute 
frequencies of ASP pool reactive CD4+ T cells producing one, two, or three cytokines. d, 
Median percent cytokine production across 6 patients by CD4+ T cells ex vivo against ASP 
peptide pools.
Extended Data Figure 3. Polyfunctional neoantigen-specific CD8+ T cell responses are induced 
by vaccination in all 6 patients
Frequencies of CD8+ T cells secreting cytokines in response to pools of 9–10mer predicted 
class I epitope peptides (EPT) after a single round of pre-stimulation. PBMCs were cultured 
Ott et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with EPT pools for 10–21 days followed by ICS. a, IFN-γ-producing CD8+ T cells detected 
by flow cytometry pre-vaccination and at week 16 post-vaccination for all 6 vaccinated 
patients. FACS plots were pre-gated on CD8+ T cells. Percentages shown in red are 
frequencies of EPT pool reactive IFN-γ+ cells as a proportion of all CD8+ T cells. b, IFN-γ 
responses of CD8+ T cells against EPT pools after one round of pre-stimulation measured by 
ICS pre-vaccination and at 16 weeks post-vaccination. c, Bar graphs show absolute 
frequencies of EPT pool reactive CD8+ T cells producing one, two, or three cytokines. Pie 
charts summarize the fractions of the total CD8+ T cell response that are positive for one, 
two or three cytokines. d, Median percent cytokine production across 6 patients by CD8+ T 
cells following one round of pre-stimulation against EPT peptide pools.
Ott et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Deconvolution of peptide pools to identify neoantigen-specific T cell 
responses ex vivo against individual 15–16mer ASP
Deconvolution of T cell reactivity against individual ASP by ex vivo IFN-γ ELISPOT using 
the week 16 post-vaccination PBMCs, tested in duplicate wells per peptide (bars: SEM). 
Responses were scored positive (‘*’) if >55 SFC (spot forming cell) were detected and were 
at least 1.5 standard deviations (SD) over the DMSO control (> 3 SD over background for 
Pt. 5 and 6). a, Patient 3 deconvolution. Inset: examples of positive IMP/ASP sequences; 
red- ASP stimulating reactivity, boxed- the mutated aa. b, Deconvolution for all other 
patients. c, IFN-γ ELISPOT response of Patient 3 CIT-specific CD8+ T cell line from week 
16 (7×104 CD8+ T cells/well) against mutated (Mut) versus corresponding wildtype (WT) 
Ott et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 peptide across a range of concentrations (10pg/ml–10µg/ml) pulsed on 1×104 T cell-
depleted PBMCs (hereafter referred to as APCs)/well, tested in triplicate.
Extended Data Figure 5. Mapping of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses to individual ASP and 
EPT to the immunizing peptides (IMP) for all 6 patients
ASP and EPT covering the immunizing peptides are shown for the IMP that induced T cell 
responses. T cells from week 16 PBMCs were tested. Red bold and shading – to indicate 
mutated amino acid; absent in those IMPs arising from neoORFs. Blue underline – for class 
I epitopes, predicted epitopes (IC50< 300nM) based on NetMHCpan36,44; for class II 
epitopes, predicted epitopes <10 percentile based on the IEDB-recommended consensus 
Ott et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 approach combining NN-align, SMM-align, and CombLib if allele predictions are available, 
otherwise NetMHCIIpan (Supplementary Information 6)44. Red font– peptides that 
generated an ex vivo CD4+ T cell responses; blue font– peptides that generated T cell 
response after 1 round of pre-stimulation with peptides, Triangle– ASP or EPT-specific T 
cells that also recognized a corresponding mutated minigene; *– T cell responses against 
minigenes that were blocked by pan anti- HLA-DR or anti-HLA class I blocking antibodies 
for CD4+ or CD8+ T cells, respectively.
Ott et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. IFN-γ response of pre- and post-vaccination PBMC against individual 
ASP; IFN-γ response and CD107αβ
αβ degranulation by neoantigen-specific T cell response against 
expressed minigenes
PBMCs from week 16 post-vaccination were pre-stimulated with ASP and EPT for 
measuring CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, respectively. a, Detection of IFN-γ responses 
by ELISPOT of CD4+ T cells against individual ASP after one round of pre-stimulation with 
ASP pools in matched pre- and 16 weeks post-vaccination samples for Patients 1–6 (1×104 
APCs and 1×104 T cells/well), tested in duplicate or triplicate wells per peptide (bars: SEM). 
b, Autologous B cells were nucleofected with in vitro translated RNA generated from Mut 
or WT minigenes (‘MG’). T cell lines were cultured with Mut or WT minigene nucleofected 
B cells, Mut minigene nucleofected B cells with anti-HLA class I or anti-HLA DR 
antibodies, non-nucleofected B cells with DMSO in IFN-γ ELISPOT (8×104 B cells/well 
were plated with 5×103 T cells/well and 1×104 CD8+ T cells/well for CD4+ and CD8+ T cell 
response detection, respectively), tested in duplicate or triplicate wells per each condition 
(bars: SEM). c, T cell lines were cultured with Mut minigene nucleofected B cells or non-
nucleofected B cells followed by CD107αβ degranulation assay. Representative FACS plot 
of Patient 3 CD107αβ degranulation assay for VPS16-specific CD8+ T cell lines (top) and 
other neoantigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell lines (bottom) from week 16 against 
autologous B cells nucleofected or not with mutated minigenes. FACS plot were pre-gated 
on CD8+ T cells.
Ott et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Surface expression of HLA class I and class II on patient melanoma cell 
lines and originally resected tumor
a, Flow cytometric staining of autologous melanoma cell lines generated from primary 
tumor samples with anti-class I and class II or isotype antibodies. b, Dual chromogenic 
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of excised FFPE tumors (see Methods for details). 
Representative images of positive staining for HLA class I (Pt. 4 and 2) and HLA class II 
(Pt. 6) and negative staining for class II (Pt. 2). Red- melanoma transcription factor SOX10, 
brown- HLA class I or class II. c, Summary of IHC results of 5 patients with available FFPE 
tissue. Semi-quantitative scoring was performed for the intensity of positive staining of 
melanoma cell membranes for class I or II (0, negative; 1, weak; 2, moderate; 3, strong) and 
for the percentage of positive staining malignant cells (0–100%). A cumulative H score was 
obtained by multiplying intensity score by the percentage of malignant cells with positive 
staining.
Ott et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Repertoire of neoantigen-specific T cell responses persists and broadens 
following PD-1 blockade; summary of all CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses against neoantigens 
across the 6 patients
a, Persistent or new responses to mutated peptides following PD-1 blockade 
(Pembrolizumab) are shown. PBMCs from Patients 2 and 6 (pre-vaccination, week 16 post-
vaccination or 11.5 months [Patient 2] or 8.5 months [Patient 6] after initiation of 
pembrolizumab therapy) were pre-stimulated for 21 days with ASP or EPT pools, and 
reactivity against individual ASP and EPT were then tested by IFN-γ ELISPOT. 1×104 
APCs/well were plated with 1×104 T cell lines/well and 1×104 CD8+ T cell lines/well for 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell response detection, respectively, tested in duplicate or triplicate wells 
Ott et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 per peptide (bars indicate SEM). Each line represents IFN-γ response against a single ASP 
or EPT tested per immunizing peptide. (#) for each gene – total number of ASP or EPT 
tested per immunizing peptide. b, The rings, from outer to inner, show: (1) predicted affinity 
of peptide for HLA. Heat map scaled from darkest (lowest IC50 [nM], or highest affinity) to 
lightest (highest IC50 [nM], or lowest affinity); (2) level of transcript expression of the 
tumor, scaled from darkest (highest number of transcripts per million reads [TPM] ) mapped 
to lightest (lowest TPM); (3) reactivity to peptide-pulsed autologous APCs; (4) reactivity to 
B cells nucleofected with minigenes; (5) reactivity to cultured autologous melanoma cells. c, 
d, Ex vivo class II tetramer staining of Patient 1 CD4+ T cells. Visualization of 
transcriptomes of single CD4+ T cells pre-vaccination and tetramer-positive CD4+ cells 
post-vaccination by tSNE.
Extended Data Table 1
Patient characteristics
Patient ID
Age
Gender
Primary site
Site of 
resected 
disease
Stage
Previous
Treatment
Recurrence 
after
NeoVax Y/N 
(Wks)
1
26
M
Back
Axillary LN
IIIC (T3bN3M0)
IFNα
N
2
68
F
Back
Lung
IVM1b (T4aN0M1b)
None
Y(*6, †28)
3
51
F
Left Calf
Skin - in 
transit
IIIC (T3bN2cM0)
None
N
4
56
M
Back
Axillary LN
IIIC (T4bN2bM0)
None
N
5
58
F
Left Arm
Skin
IIIC(T2aN2cM0)
None
N
6
61
M
Chest
Lung
IVM1b (T2aN0M1b)
IFNα
Y (*7, †20)
7
28
F
Unknown
Cervical LN
IIIB (TxN1bM0)
None
N/A
8
63
M
Back
Skin - 
Satellite 
Nodule
IIIB (T3aN2cM0)
None
N/A
9
71
M
Shoulder
Axillary LN
IIIB (T2aN1bM0)
IFNα
N/A
10
34
M
Right Foot
Femoral LN
IIIC (T4aN3M0)
None
N/A
M: male; F: female; LN: lymph node; N/A: not applicable; IFNα: Interferon alpha.
*Weeks from vaccination initiation to recurrence on vaccine
†Weeks from vaccination initiation to further progression after vaccine. Shaded: vaccinated patients.
Extended Data Table 2
Class II tetramer information
Patient
Gene
Peptide sequence for tetramer
HLA allele
Predicted class II
epitope sequence
Predicted
percentile rank*
1
RUSC2
SVGDFSQEFSPIQEAQQD(K-dansyl)-amide
HLA- DRB1*04:01
SVGDFSQEFSPIQEA
2.16
HLA-DRB1*04:01
DFSQEFSPIQEAQQD
5.77
4
ARHGAP29
PGKIHLFEAEFTQVAKKE(K-dansyl)-amide
HLA-DRB1*01:01
LPGKIHLFEAEFTQV
24.59
HLA-DRB1“01:01
IHLFEAEFTQVAKKE
28.84
*Consensus method in IEDB
Ott et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank J. Russell and the DFCI Center for Immuno-Oncology (CIO) staff, M. Copersino (Regulatory 
Affairs), B. Meyers, C. Harvey, and S. Bartel (Clinical Pharmacy), A. Lako (CIO), M. Bowden (Center for 
Molecular Oncologic Pathology), O. Sturtevant, H. Negre, SY Kim, MA Kelley (Cell Manipulation Core Facility), 
the Pasquarello Tissue Bank (all at DFCI), T. Bowman (DFHCC Specialized Histopathology Core Laboratory), and 
the Broad Institute’s Biological Samples, Genetic Analysis, and Genome Sequencing Platforms, S. Hodi, G. 
Dranoff, M. Rajasagi, U. Burkhardt, S. Sarkizova, J. Fan and P. Bachireddy for discussions, J. Petricciani and M. 
Krane for regulatory advice, B. McDonough (CSBio) and S.Thorne (CuriRx) for peptide development.
This research was made possible by a generous gift from the Blavatnik Family Foundation, and was supported by 
grants from the Broad Institute SPARC program and the National Institutes of Health (NCI-1RO1CA155010-02, 
NHLBI-5R01HL103532-03; NCI-SPORE-2P50CA101942-11A1 [to DBK]; NCI-R50 RCA211482A [to SS]), from 
the Francis and Adele Kittredge Family Immuno-Oncology and Melanoma Research Fund (to PAO), the Faircloth 
Family Research Fund (to PAO) and the DFCI Center for Cancer Immunotherapy Research fellowship (to ZH). 
C.J.W. is a Scholar of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.
References
1. Schumacher TN, Schreiber RD. Neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy. Science. 2015; 348:69–74. 
DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa4971 [PubMed: 25838375] 
2. Hacohen N, Fritsch EF, Carter TA, Lander ES, Wu CJ. Getting personal with neoantigen-based 
therapeutic cancer vaccines. Cancer immunology research. 2013; 1:11–15. DOI: 
10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0022 [PubMed: 24777245] 
3. Kenter GG, et al. Vaccination against HPV-16 oncoproteins for vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. The 
New England journal of medicine. 2009; 361:1838–1847. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810097 
[PubMed: 19890126] 
4. Caskey M, et al. Synthetic double-stranded RNA induces innate immune responses similar to a live 
viral vaccine in humans. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2011; 208:2357–2366. DOI: 
10.1084/jem.20111171 [PubMed: 22065672] 
5. Robert C, et al. Pembrolizumab versus Ipilimumab in Advanced Melanoma. The New England 
journal of medicine. 2015; 372:2521–2532. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1503093 [PubMed: 25891173] 
6. Sykulev Y, Joo M, Vturina I, Tsomides TJ, Eisen HN. Evidence that a single peptide-MHC complex 
on a target cell can elicit a cytolytic T cell response. Immunity. 1996; 4:565–571. [PubMed: 
8673703] 
7. Stephen TL, et al. SATB1 Expression Governs Epigenetic Repression of PD-1 in Tumor-Reactive T 
Cells. Immunity. 2017; 46:51–64. DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.12.015 [PubMed: 28099864] 
8. Tran E, et al. Cancer immunotherapy based on mutation-specific CD4+ T cells in a patient with 
epithelial cancer. Science. 2014; 344:641–645. DOI: 10.1126/science.1251102 [PubMed: 
24812403] 
9. Schumacher T, et al. A vaccine targeting mutant IDH1 induces antitumour immunity. Nature. 2014; 
512:324–327. DOI: 10.1038/nature13387 [PubMed: 25043048] 
10. van Rooij N, et al. Tumor exome analysis reveals neoantigen-specific T-cell reactivity in an 
ipilimumab-responsive melanoma. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013; 31:e439–442. DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.7521 [PubMed: 
24043743] 
11. Rizvi NA, et al. Cancer immunology. Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 
blockade in non-small cell lung cancer. Science. 2015; 348:124–128. DOI: 10.1126/
science.aaa1348 [PubMed: 25765070] 
12. Linnemann C, et al. High-throughput epitope discovery reveals frequent recognition of neo-
antigens by CD4+ T cells in human melanoma. Nat Med. 2015; 21:81–85. DOI: 10.1038/nm.3773 
[PubMed: 25531942] 
Ott et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 13. Prickett TD, et al. Durable Complete Response from Metastatic Melanoma after Transfer of 
Autologous T Cells Recognizing 10 Mutated Tumor Antigens. Cancer immunology research. 
2016; 4:669–678. DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0215 [PubMed: 27312342] 
14. Carreno BM, et al. Cancer immunotherapy. A dendritic cell vaccine increases the breadth and 
diversity of melanoma neoantigen-specific T cells. Science. 2015; 348:803–808. DOI: 10.1126/
science.aaa3828 [PubMed: 25837513] 
15. Kreiter S, et al. Mutant MHC class II epitopes drive therapeutic immune responses to cancer. 
Nature. 2015; 520:692–696. DOI: 10.1038/nature14426 [PubMed: 25901682] 
16. Martin SD, et al. Low Mutation Burden in Ovarian Cancer May Limit the Utility of Neoantigen-
Targeted Vaccines. PloS one. 2016; 11:e0155189. [PubMed: 27192170] 
17. Stern LJ, et al. Crystal structure of the human class II MHC protein HLA-DR1 complexed with an 
influenza virus peptide. Nature. 1994; 368:215–221. DOI: 10.1038/368215a0 [PubMed: 8145819] 
18. Rossjohn J, et al. T cell antigen receptor recognition of antigen-presenting molecules. Annual 
review of immunology. 2015; 33:169–200. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032414-112334
19. Falk K, Rotzschke O, Stevanovic S, Jung G, Rammensee HG. Allele-specific motifs revealed by 
sequencing of self-peptides eluted from MHC molecules. Nature. 1991; 351:290–296. DOI: 
10.1038/351290a0 [PubMed: 1709722] 
20. Mildner A, Jung S. Development and function of dendritic cell subsets. Immunity. 2014; 40:642–
656. DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.04.016 [PubMed: 24837101] 
21. Spitzer MH, et al. Systemic Immunity Is Required for Effective Cancer Immunotherapy. Cell. 
2017; 168:487–502 e415. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.022 [PubMed: 28111070] 
22. Haabeth OA, et al. Idiotype-specific CD4(+) T cells eradicate disseminated myeloma. Leukemia. 
2016; 30:1216–1220. DOI: 10.1038/leu.2015.278 [PubMed: 26449664] 
23. Hirschhorn-Cymerman D, et al. Induction of tumoricidal function in CD4+ T cells is associated 
with concomitant memory and terminally differentiated phenotype. The Journal of experimental 
medicine. 2012; 209:2113–2126. DOI: 10.1084/jem.20120532 [PubMed: 23008334] 
24. Abelin JG, et al. Mass Spectrometry Profiling of HLA-Associated Peptidomes in Mono-allelic 
Cells Enables More Accurate Epitope Prediction. Immunity. 2017; 46:315–326. DOI: 10.1016/
j.immuni.2017.02.007 [PubMed: 28228285] 
25. Fisher S, et al. A scalable, fully automated process for construction of sequence-ready human 
exome targeted capture libraries. Genome biology. 2011; 12:R1. [PubMed: 21205303] 
26. Gnirke A, et al. Solution hybrid selection with ultra-long oligonucleotides for massively parallel 
targeted sequencing. Nature biotechnology. 2009; 27:182–189. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.1523
27. Chapman MA, et al. Initial genome sequencing and analysis of multiple myeloma. Nature. 2011; 
471:467–472. DOI: 10.1038/nature09837 [PubMed: 21430775] 
28. Berger MF, et al. The genomic complexity of primary human prostate cancer. Nature. 2011; 
470:214–220. DOI: 10.1038/nature09744 [PubMed: 21307934] 
29. Cibulskis K, et al. ContEst: estimating cross-contamination of human samples in next-generation 
sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:2601–2602. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr446 
[PubMed: 21803805] 
30. DePristo MA, et al. A framework for variation discovery and genotyping using next-generation 
DNA sequencing data. Nature genetics. 2011; 43:491–498. DOI: 10.1038/ng.806 [PubMed: 
21478889] 
31. Saunders CT, et al. Strelka: accurate somatic small-variant calling from sequenced tumor-normal 
sample pairs. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:1811–1817. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts271 
[PubMed: 22581179] 
32. Robinson JT, et al. Integrative genomics viewer. Nature biotechnology. 2011; 29:24–26. DOI: 
10.1038/nbt.1754
33. Ramos AH, et al. Oncotator: cancer variant annotation tool. Human mutation. 2015; 36:E2423–
2429. DOI: 10.1002/humu.22771 [PubMed: 25703262] 
34. Torres-Garcia W, et al. PRADA: pipeline for RNA sequencing data analysis. Bioinformatics. 2014; 
30:2224–2226. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu169 [PubMed: 24695405] 
Ott et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Hoof I, et al. NetMHCpan, a method for MHC class I binding prediction beyond humans. 
Immunogenetics. 2009; 61:1–13. DOI: 10.1007/s00251-008-0341-z [PubMed: 19002680] 
36. Lundegaard C, Lund O, Nielsen M. Prediction of epitopes using neural network based methods. 
Journal of immunological methods. 2011; 374:26–34. DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2010.10.011 [PubMed: 
21047511] 
37. Roemer MG, et al. Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma with Reduced beta2M/MHC Class I Expression 
Is Associated with Inferior Outcome Independent of 9p24.1 Status. Cancer immunology research. 
2016; 4:910–916. DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-16-0201 [PubMed: 27737878] 
38. Cai A, et al. Mutated BCR-ABL generates immunogenic T-cell epitopes in CML patients. Clinical 
cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2012; 
18:5761–5772. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-1182 [PubMed: 22912393] 
39. Lu YC, et al. Efficient identification of mutated cancer antigens recognized by T cells associated 
with durable tumor regressions. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American 
Association for Cancer Research. 2014; 20:3401–3410. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0433 
[PubMed: 24987109] 
40. Day CL, et al. Ex vivo analysis of human memory CD4 T cells specific for hepatitis C virus using 
MHC class II tetramers. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2003; 112:831–842. DOI: 10.1172/
JCI18509 [PubMed: 12975468] 
41. Hashimshony T, et al. CEL-Seq2: sensitive highly-multiplexed single-cell RNA-Seq. Genome 
biology. 2016; 17:77. [PubMed: 27121950] 
42. Satija R, Farrell JA, Gennert D, Schier AF, Regev A. Spatial reconstruction of single-cell gene 
expression data. Nature biotechnology. 2015; 33:495–502. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3192
43. Kharchenko PV, Silberstein L, Scadden DT. Bayesian approach to single-cell differential 
expression analysis. Nature methods. 2014; 11:740–742. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.2967 [PubMed: 
24836921] 
44. Lundegaard C, et al. NetMHC-3.0: accurate web accessible predictions of human, mouse and 
monkey MHC class I affinities for peptides of length 8–11. Nucleic acids research. 2008; 
36:W509–512. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn202 [PubMed: 18463140] 
Ott et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Generation of a personal, multi-peptide neoantigen vaccine for patients with high-risk 
melanoma
a, Somatic mutations were identified by WES of melanoma and germline DNA and their 
expression confirmed by tumor RNA-sequencing. Immunizing peptides were selected based 
on HLA binding predictions (Methods). Each patient received up to 20 long peptides in 4 
pools. b, Clinical event timeline for 6 vaccinated patients from surgery until time of data 
cutoff (36 months from study initiation).
Ott et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Vaccination induces strong multi-functional CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses in high-
risk melanoma patients
a, Schema of immunizing (IMP), assay (ASP) and epitope (EPT) peptides. Mutated amino 
acid (aa) shaded. b, Ex vivo IFN-γ ELISPOT of PBMC, with duplicate or triplicate wells/
timepoint (bars: SEM; Methods for statistical analysis) c, Ex vivo intracellular cytokine 
staining (ICS) of Patient 3 PBMC pre- and post-vaccination, pre-gated on CD3+ T cells. d, 
Patient 1 CD8+ T cell responses after one round of pre-stimulation with EPT peptide pools.
Ott et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Vaccine-induced T cells discriminate mutated from wildtype antigens and detect 
endogenously processed and presented peptides
a, IFN-γ secretion by neoantigen-reactive T cell lines against mutated and wildtype 
peptides, focusing on neoantigens generating ex vivo CD4+ and pre-stimulated CD8+ T cell 
responses (bars: SEM). b, ICS of CD8+ T cell lines stimulated with EPT peptides pre- and 
post-vaccination. c, IFN-γ secretion by Patient 3 neoantigen-specific T cell lines against 
minigene (MG)-nucleofected B cells, with/without anti-HLA class I or DR antibodies. d, e, 
IFN-γ secretion by Patient 6 and Patient 2 neoantigen-specific T cell lines against 
autologous tumor. f, IFN-γ secretion by Patient 5 neoantigen-specific CD4+ T cells against 
Ott et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 autologous dendritic cells co-cultured with irradiated autologous melanoma. All T cell lines 
originated from week 16 PBMC; ELISPOT experiments were performed in duplicate or 
triplicate wells/condition.
Ott et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Vaccine-induced T cells demonstrate broad shifts in their transcriptional programs; the 
repertoire of neoantigen-specific T cells persists and broadens following PD-1 blockade
a, b, Ex vivo class II tetramer staining of Patient 4 CD4+ T cells. Visualization of 
transcriptomes of single CD4+ T cells pre-vaccination and tetramer-positive CD4+ cells 
post-vaccination by tSNE. c, Summary of neoantigen-specific T cell responses after 
vaccination and after PD-1 blockade for Patients 2 and 6. Example IFN-γ ELISPOT results 
are shown for week 16 post-vaccination and post-PD-1 CD4+ T cells against mut-CDK13, -
JPH1, and –ADM2d for Patient 2. For complete response kinetics, see Extended Data Fig. 
8a.
Ott et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
