 Accepted Manuscript
Efficacy of Sterile Fecal Filtrate Transfer for Treating Patients With Clostridium
difficile Infection
Stephan J. Ott, Georg H. Waetzig, Ateequr Rehman, Jacqueline Moltzau-Anderson,
Richa Bharti, Juris A. Grasis, Liam Cassidy, Andreas Tholey, Helmut Fickenscher,
Dirk Seegert, Philip Rosenstiel, Stefan Schreiber
PII:
S0016-5085(16)35354-9
DOI:
10.1053/j.gastro.2016.11.010
Reference:
YGAST 60818
To appear in:
Gastroenterology
Accepted Date: 11 November 2016
Please cite this article as: Ott SJ, Waetzig GH, Rehman A, Moltzau-Anderson J, Bharti R, Grasis JA,
Cassidy L, Tholey A, Fickenscher H, Seegert D, Rosenstiel P, Schreiber S, Efficacy of Sterile Fecal
Filtrate Transfer for Treating Patients With Clostridium difficile Infection, Gastroenterology (2016), doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2016.11.010.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Title: 
Efficacy of Sterile Fecal Filtrate Transfer for Treating Patients With Clostridium difficile 
Infection 
 
Short title: 
Fecal Filtrate Transfer for CDI 
 
Authors: 
Stephan J. Ott1*, Georg H. Waetzig2*, Ateequr Rehman3*, Jacqueline Moltzau-
Anderson3,4, Richa Bharti3, Juris A. Grasis5, Liam Cassidy6, Andreas Tholey6, Helmut 
Fickenscher7, Dirk Seegert2, Philip Rosenstiel3#, and Stefan Schreiber1,3# 
 
Author names in bold designate shared *first and #last authorship. 
 
1Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, Kiel, Germany; 
2CONARIS Research Institute AG, Kiel, Germany; 3Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, 
University of Kiel, Germany; 4Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plön, 
Germany;  5Department of Biology, San Diego State University, San Diego, USA; 6Institute 
of Experimental Medicine and 7Institute for Infection Medicine, University of Kiel and 
University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, Kiel, Germany. 
 
Funding: 
This study received funding by the German Excellence Cluster “Inflammation at Interfaces” 
(S.J.O, A.T., H.F., P.R. and S.S.) and material support by CONARIS Research Institute AG.  
 
Abbreviations: 
C. difficile, Clostridium difficile; CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; EIA, enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay; FFT, fecal filtrate transfer; FMT, fecal microbiota transplantation; 
GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; LC-MS, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry; rDNA, 
ribosomal DNA; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. 
 
Correspondence: 
Prof. Dr. Stefan Schreiber, Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Kiel and 
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Schittenhelmstrasse 12, 24105 Kiel, Germany. E-
mail: s.schreiber@mucosa.de; fax: +49 431 597-1842. 
 
Disclosures: 
G.H.W. and D.S. are employed by CONARIS Research Institute AG. S.S. is a shareholder of 
CONARIS, has been consultant to Allergosan, Danone and Nestlé, and has received 
lectureship compensation from Allergosan. S.S. and S.O. have lectured for Allergosan. The 
other authors declare no conflicts of interest relevant to the study presented here. 
 
Author contributions: 
S.J.O., G.H.W., P.R. and S.S. designed the study; G.H.W. and D.S. invented the treatment 
technology; S.J.O. treated patients; A.R., J.M.A., R.B., J.A.G. and P.R. performed microbiota 
and virus analyses; L.C. and A.T. performed proteome analyses; H.F. performed sterility 
analyses; G.H.W., P.R. and S.S. drafted the manuscript; all other authors critically revised the 
manuscript for important intellectual content. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 2 – 
Abstract 
 
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a highly effective 
therapy for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). However, transferring undefined 
living bacteria entails uncontrollable risks for infectious and metabolic or malignant diseases, 
particularly in immunocompromised patients. We investigated whether sterile fecal filtrates 
(containing bacterial debris, proteins, antimicrobial compounds, metabolic products and 
oligonucleotides/DNA), rather than intact microorganisms, are effective in patients with CDI. 
METHODS: We performed a clinical case series to investigate the effects of fecal filtrate 
transfer (FFT) in 5 patients with symptomatic chronic-relapsing CDI at the Department of 
Internal Medicine I at the University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (Kiel, Germany). Patients 
were followed for at least 6 months and up to 33 months. Stool was collected from 5 donors 
selected by the patients, and fully characterized according to FMT standards. Stool was 
sterile-filtered to remove small particles and bacteria; the filtrate was transferred to patients in 
a single administration via nasojejunal tube. Fecal samples were collected from patients 
before and 1 week and 6 weeks after FFT. Microbiome, virome, and proteome profiles of 
donors and patients were compared. 
RESULTS: In all 5 patients, FFT restored normal stool habits and eliminated symptoms of 
CDI for a minimum period of 6 months. Proteome analyses of selected FFT filtrates revealed 
no obvious protein candidates associated with therapeutic efficacy. 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing detected diverse bacterial DNA signatures in the filtrates. Analysis of virus-like 
particles from a filtrate found to reduce symptoms of CDI revealed a complex signature of 
bacteriophages. Bacterial phylogeny and virome profile analyses of fecal samples from 
recipients indicated longitudinal changes in microbial and viral community structures after 
FFT. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 3 – 
CONCLUSIONS: A preliminary investigation of 5 patients with CDI shows that transfer of 
sterile filtrates from donor stool (FFT), rather than fecal microbiota, can be sufficient to 
restore normal stool habits and eliminate symptoms. This finding indicates that bacterial 
components, metabolites or bacteriophages mediate many of the effects of FMT, and that FFT 
might be an alternative approach, particularly for immunocompromised patients. 
KEY WORDS: fecal transplant; intestinal microbiome; feces; microbe. 
 
Short summary 
Transferring fecal microbiota from healthy donors frequently cures patients with Clostridium 
difficile infection. As sterile fecal filtrates can also be effective, non-living bacterial or viral 
components could be the active agents. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 4 – 
Introduction 
 
FMT is a highly effective therapy of recurrent CDI with consistent disease resolution rates of 
85–90% after one treatment and up to 100% after a second treatment, using either fresh or 
cryopreserved stool from healthy, well-characterized donors.1-17 The paradigm of FMT is to 
improve intestinal dysbiosis by transferring stool preparations containing a stable, viable, 
diverse and normal microbial community from a healthy donor or from defined intestinal 
bacterial strains. 
Despite the superb efficacy and the good short-term safety profile of FMT, it bears 
major problems of standardization and is accompanied by potentially incalculable long-term 
risks, many of which are inherent to the transfer of living microorganisms.6,18,19 Standardized 
recruiting of well-characterized healthy stool donor populations and the use of microbe-
conserving freezing procedures for stool preparations is used to overcome the problem of 
availability and some of the safety issues.1,4,7,9,12-14,16,20 Although FMT has also been shown to 
be safe and efficacious in immunocompromised patients,21,22 it would still be highly desirable 
to reduce the risk of adverse events in patients with limited eligibility for FMT.1,14,21 
Moreover, even the most rigorous and costly donor screening procedures,1,4,20 or defined 
panels of bacteria, cannot exclude the risk of transferring unknown pathogens or undetectable 
functional characteristics within the living microorganisms to the recipient, including bacterial 
or viral risk factors for metabolic diseases, cancer, atopy or autoimmunity.4,6,18-20,23-26 
The original concept of FMT is based on two main premises, namely (1) that patients 
with dysbiosis have either completely lost their healthy microbiota or that their microbiota is 
unable to regain its normal functionality, and (2) that these diverse pathological states of the 
intestinal microbiota can be corrected by transferring a stable, viable, diverse and healthy 
microbial community contained in stool preparations or defined bacterial groups from healthy 
donors. Classic FMT techniques therefore all aim at maintaining as much of the microbial 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 5 – 
diversity and natural composition of the donor microbiota as possible, and techniques 
employing defined sets of bacteria have the goal to transfer both the necessary and the 
sufficient microbial players. Interestingly, the results from recent clinical investigations, 
which successfully used different FMT-related techniques for the treatment of CDI, now 
allow to determine the intersection of the underlying therapeutic principles. A recent study 
has clearly demonstrated the long-term coexistence of donor and host microbiota after FMT; 
however, whether a more efficient transfer (i.e., higher similarity between donor and host) 
correlates with clinical success of FMT is currently unclear.27 
In FMT using freshly prepared stool or cryopreserved stool containing living microbiota 
from either single or pooled donor feces,1-17 the therapeutically active agent(s) could 
theoretically just as well be elements of the virome, other components of the fecal water or 
even products of the donor’s human cells. However, the similar success rates of therapies 
using defined panels of fecal bacteria – e.g., rectal bacteriotherapy28 or the microbiota 
suspension RBX266029 – or a selection of bacterial spores, such as the nontoxinogenic 
Clostridium difficile strain M330, strongly suggest that the active agents are contained in the 
bacterial fraction, which, e.g., may include specific structures, antimicrobial compounds 
and/or metabolites produced by the transferred or “seeded” bacteria or may also be integrated 
bacteriophages (prophages) that may be activated and released under certain conditions.31 
With FMT, considerable amounts of stool water containing dead bacteria, their debris 
and their metabolites are transferred in addition to the living microbiota.31 Given the diversity 
of effective therapies for CDI as outlined above, we examined whether the ingredients of fecal 
water alone (e.g., bacterial debris, proteins, antimicrobial compounds, metabolic products or 
oligonucleotides/DNA) had any clinical efficacy in patients with CDI. For this purpose, 
conventionally produced FMT preparations were additionally sterile-filtered to enable sterile 
fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) from healthy donors to five patients for the therapy of chronic-
relapsing CDI-associated symptomatology. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 6 – 
Methods 
 
Study Design 
This is an open label case series performed at the Department of Internal Medicine I of the 
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein in Kiel, Germany. The application of FFT for the 
treatment of chronic-relapsing CDI-associated symptomatology received full and 
unconditional approval by the institutional review board (medical governance commission) of 
the University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein. All participants provided written informed 
consent. 
 
Study Population 
Donors and patients were screened according to comprehensive guidelines.1 According to 
German guidelines and corresponding SOPs of our hospital, the following test plan was 
realized. All patients were tested for three diagnostic characteristics of C. difficile infection: 
(1) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (EIA) for C. difficile-specific glutamate 
dehydrogenase (GDH; Techlab C. Diff Quik Chek Complete; Techlab, Blacksburg, VA, 
USA), (2) C. difficile toxin EIA (Techlab C. Diff Quik Chek Complete) and (3) detection of 
toxin-producing C. difficile by culture. Any two positive results of these tests were considered 
a definitive diagnosis of C. difficile infection. Patients were followed up clinically for a period 
of at least 6 months for no recurrence of symptoms; the first patient is symptom-free since 
January 2014. The patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1. 
 
Stool Preparation 
Fresh donor stool was collected and stored in an airtight container at 4°C until processing. As 
a general rule, stool was processed no later than 2 h after collection, and the transplantation to 
the recipient was performed no later than 6 h after stool donation. In a dedicated biosafety 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 7 – 
cabinet, approximately 50 g of fecal material was weighed and transferred to a standard 
commercial blender (Moulinex Multi Moulinette 400 W; SEB, Écully, France). Subsequently, 
500 ml of sterile normal saline (0.9% sodium chloride) were added, and the stool was 
homogenized for approximately 1 min at the highest blending level. The resulting slurry was 
then distributed into 10 50-ml centrifugation tubes (Sarstedt; Nümbrecht, Germany) and 
centrifuged for 10 min at approximately 1,800 x g to pellet large particles. The resulting 
supernatant was transferred to a beaker and filtered three times through disposable cellulose 
paper filters (pore size: 5–10 µm) placed in a stainless-steel sieve. For the conventional FMT 
treatment of patient 2, the resulting pre-filtered slurry containing the fecal microbiota was 
then applied by nasojejunal tube as described below. 
 
Preparation of FFT Filtrates 
For preparation of the FFT filtrate, the pre-filtered stool slurry was further filtered using a 
custom-built air pressure filtration system (PALL; Dreieich, Germany) including a 5.7 L (6 
bar) UCON pressure unit (UCON; Hausach, Germany) and a WIKA 1/2’’ TC inline 
diaphragm seal (–/+6 bar, S/N; WIKA; Klingenberg, Germany) at a pressure of 1.5–2 bar and 
with the following filtration steps: 
1. 
small particle removal using two consecutive depth filters: Seitz K 700 P 60 D 
(retention rating: 6.0–15.0 µm; PALL) plus Seitz KS 50 P 60 D (retention rating: 
0.4–0.8 µm; PALL); 
2. 
microbiota depletion using a SUPOR EKV Filter Mini Kleenpak 0.2 µm unit 
(PALL). 
The resulting FFT filtrate was a light brown, clear liquid with a subjectively less 
unpleasant and intensive odor in comparison with the pre-filtered, microbiota-rich slurry used 
in conventional stool preparations for FMT. 
In order to validate the depletion of the donor’s gut microbiota from the FFT filtrates, 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 8 – 
samples of the filtrates and of the original materials were subjected to bacterial culture. In 
brief, the filtrates and donor stools were transported to the accredited clinical microbiology 
laboratory of the University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein in Kiel (Germany) under anaerobic 
conditions. Here, filtrates and donor stool samples (dissolved in sterile saline) were streaked 
onto sterile blood agar plates (Columbia agar with 5% sheep blood: casein peptone 12.0 g, 
meat peptone 5.0 g, sodium chloride 5.0 g, beef extract 3.0 g, yeast extract 3.0 g, corn starch 
1.0 g, sheep blood 5%, agar 13.5 g, and demineralized water ad 1000 ml; catalogue number 
PB5008A; Remel, Lenexa, USA) and cultured in parallel under anaerobic and aerobic 
conditions at 37°C for up to 48 h. Donor stool was used as a positive control. From FFT 
filtrates, bacterial growth could not be observed, whereas the corresponding stool cultures 
yielded abundant colony numbers under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. 
 
Administration of FFT Filtrates 
Before FFT administration, 1,000 ml of Klean-Prep® intestinal lavage solution (Norgine; 
Marburg, Germany) were administered to the patients via a nasojejunal tube inserted by 
gastroscopy using an Olympus fiberoptic system and controlled by an APPLIX Smart/Vision 
system (Fresenius KABI; Bad Homburg, Germany). Subsequently, the FFT filtrate was 
transferred to a plastic bag (APPLIX HydroBag; Fresenius KABI) and administered via the 
same nasojejunal tube within approximately 30 min. 
 
Microbiota and Virus Analyses of Fecal Samples and FFT Filtrates 
Genomic DNA was extracted from fecal samples using the PowerSoil® DNA Isolation Kit 
(MO BIO; Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions32 with some 
modifications as described previously.32 
The 16S rRNA gene variable regions V433 or V3-V434 were amplified in duplicate 
reactions using 2 µl of fecal genomic DNA. The amplified products were run on agarose gels 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 9 – 
to assess the amplicon size and amplification performance. Amplicon quantities were 
normalized using the SequalPrep™ kit (Life Technologies). Equal amounts of PCR products 
were pooled in a single tube and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq platform using 2 x 250 bp 
(for V4 regions) and 2 x 300 bp (for V3-V4 regions) sequencing kits (Illumina; San Diego, 
CA, USA). 
Sequencing reads were primarily processed for quality control using the software 
Mothur.35 Forward and reverse reads were assembled to form contigs (herein sequences). 
Sequences with any ambiguous base or more than six homopolymers as well as sequences not 
perfectly matching with 16S-specific primers and/or barcode indices were removed from 
downstream analysis. This initial quality control enabled us to remove spurious sequencing 
artifacts. The remaining sequences were aligned to the Mothur-curated Silva reference 
alignment (release 123) and eliminated, if not aligned to a specific 16S variable region. The 
sequences remaining after this step were screened for chimeric origin by employing the 
Uchime algorithm36, and chimeras were removed. Finally, sequences were assigned to 
taxonomical hierarchy using Greengenes reference training sets (13_8_99 release) with an 
80% confidence threshold. This reference training data set contains approximately 10% 
species level classification. Sequences classified as eukaryotic, chloroplastic, mitochondrial or 
unknown origin were also removed from analysis. Sequences restricted to bacterial origins 
only were clustered into phylotypes (label=1) using Greengenes reference taxonomy. 
Phylogenetic nominations of phylotypes were determined by using the complete taxonomy 
file as generated above. Principle coordinate analysis (PcoA) was performed by PAST 
software37 version 3.10 on distance matrices based on presence/absence or the relative 
abundances of bacterial phylotypes in fecal microbiota. Bacterial estimated richness (Chao 1) 
and diversity (non-parametric Shannon index) was calculated on subsamples using shared 
phylotypes (4708 sequences per sample) to adjust the sampling depth. Sub-sampling and 
diversity estimation were performed using Mothur.35 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 10 – 
Virus-like particle purification and DNA extraction were performed for patients 4 and 5, 
their donors and the FFT filtrates as described previously,38 with some modifications. The 
detailed methods are included as Supplementary Appendix 1. Only the preparations from the 
samples of patient 4 fulfilled all quality criteria and could be adequately analysed. 
 
LC-MS-based Proteome Analysis of FFT Filtrates 
Samples of the FFT filtrates used to treat patient 4 (one sample) and patient 5 (two separate 
FFT filtrates prepared on different days; only the first was used for treating patient 5) were 
stored at –80°C. In brief, the resulting three samples were processed for liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis after solid phase extraction, stack gel 
sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) or one-dimensional 
SDS-PAGE followed by tryptic (in-gel) digestion. The detailed methods are included as 
Supplementary Appendix 2. 
 
Results 
 
Case Histories and Outcomes 
Patient 1 was a 59-year-old Caucasian female who presented with three episodes of recurrent 
CDI over a 6-month period (confirmed by positive testing for C. difficile glutamate 
dehydrogenase and C. difficile toxins A and B). The patient’s first episode of CDI had 
occurred after sigmoid resection due to life-threatening recurrent diverticulitis with severe 
bleeding, which had required therapy with ciprofloxacin and metronidazole (Table 1). At 
initial diagnosis, the patient suffered from pseudomembraneous colitis. After comprehensive 
screening,1 the patient was treated with sterile FFT filtrate from stool of the patient’s son. The 
patient could be discharged on the next day and was symptom-free after three days. C. 
difficile remained undetectable (culture, toxin) four weeks post procedure. The patient had no 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 11 – 
further diarrhea, regained her normal weight and has remained symptom-free to date (two 
years and five months at the completion of the study on 30th June 2016; Table 1). 
Patient 2 was a 73-year-old Caucasian female who had suffered for years from recurrent 
foetid diarrhea and abdominal pain which developed after a CDI treated with antibiotics 
(Table 1). Although symptoms recurred, laboratory tests for C. difficile toxins A and B or 
other pathogens performed during previous outside appointments remained negative. 
However, the symptoms responded to antibiotic therapy with metronidazole and vancomycin, 
suggesting an active role of C. difficile in the pathogenesis of recurrent diarrhea in this patient. 
The further history comprised a gastrectomy with postoperative chemotherapy seven years 
ago and one episode of acute diverticulitis requiring antibiotic intervention one year before 
CDI. Three months after symptomatic recurrence, conventional FMT was performed (jejunal 
infusion of stool from the patient’s husband) after comprehensive screening.1 FMT resulted in 
a moderate rise in body temperature (up to 38°C) for approximately 2 h after FMT and in one 
episode of watery diarrhea for two days after FMT. The patient reported significant reduction 
of symptoms including normalisation of stool frequency and consistency (≤2 formed stools 
per day). Diarrhea and abdominal pain recurred after two weeks, and three months after FMT, 
the patient presented with similar symptoms as before. Tests for C. difficile GDH were 
positive, while results for toxin detection were inconclusive and culture failed; a PCR was not 
performed. The patient’s husband was also used as a donor for FFT, which was well tolerated. 
Neither a change in body temperature nor diarrhea were observed, and the patient could be 
discharged the next day. The patient was symptom-free after three days and has been 
symptom-free since (two years at the completion of the study; Table 1). 
Patient 3 was a 72-year-old Caucasian male hospitalized because of acute C. difficile-
associated diarrhea, which was his second relapse of CDI (Table 1). The history was 
significant for a chronic therapy with cyclosporine after kidney transplant since 24 years with 
a series of severe infections, including a septicemia due to an earlier CDI three years before 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 12 – 
the present episode. Comorbidities included severe coronary heart disease with multiple stent 
implants, syndrome X and current nicotine abuse. The current CDI episode required 
hospitalization due to extensive diarrhea and fever leading to loss of kidney function 
(glomerular filtration rate: 48 ml/min). Therapy with vancomycin, rifaximin and 
Saccharomyces boulardii failed, as documented by repeated detection of C. difficile glutamate 
dehydrogenase and toxin A and B in stools. Due to the history of infectious complications, 
FFT was preferred over conventional FMT to avoid any infection risk through the transfer of 
living microbiota. After comprehensive screening,1 the patient was treated with an FFT 
filtrate from the patient’s sister. FFT was well tolerated without fever or any other side 
effects. The patient was discharged from hospital on the day after FFT treatment, was 
symptom-free after three days and has remained so until today (two years at the completion of 
the study; Table 1). 
Patient 4 was a 49-year-old Caucasian male presenting with the third episode of acute 
C. difficile infection with severe diarrhea and dehydration (Table 1). The patient was 
immunosuppressed due to chronic HIV infection and received antiviral therapy. After 
treatment with cefuroxime and clindamycin for Staphylococcus aureus infection after bone 
surgery in July 2015, the patient developed severe diarrhea. The diagnosis of C. difficile 
infection was established by positive tests as described above. Under antibiotic therapy with 
metronidazole, symptoms of C. difficile infection ceased. Within a few weeks after initial 
treatment, however, symptoms re-occurred with positive test results for C. difficile infection. 
A course of vancomycin stopped the symptoms, but C. difficile infection recurred again after 
about 3 weeks. A second course of vancomycin over 10 days improved the clinical symptoms. 
Following vancomycin, a therapy with FFT filtrate (from the patient’s sister) was performed 
in December 2015. The FFT therapy was well tolerated without side effects. The patient was 
discharged on the next day, became symptom-free after two days and has remained so to date 
(six months at the completion of the study; Table 1). 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 13 – 
Patient 5 was a 75-year-old Caucasian female with the diagnosis of colon cancer of the 
sigmoid (May 2015), which was removed surgically (Table 1). A few days after surgery, the 
patient developed sutural dehiscence with local infection. The patient was treated with diverse 
antibiotics for this local infection before severe diarrhea occurred and C. difficile infection 
was detected by the tests described above. She received several courses of metronidazole and 
vancomycin, the last time prior to FFT therapy. We performed FFT therapy in December 
2015 using fecal material from a non-related donor as a prophylaxis against further episodes 
of C. difficile infection. The patient showed no side effects, could be discharged on the next 
day, was symptom-free after four days and has remained so until today (six months at the 
completion of the study; Table 1). 
 
Fecal Bacterial and Viral Profile Analysis in Donors and Patients 
After the surprising treatment success with patient 1, 16S rRNA gene-based microbiota 
analyses were performed for the subsequent four patients using amplicon sequencing. When 
comparing samples from before, one week after and six weeks after FFT treatment, we found 
that FFT led to substantial bacterial community shifts in all patients (Figures 1–4; 
Supplemental Figures 1 and 2). Beta-diversity analyses (Supplemental Figure 3) demonstrated 
that in none of the cases the shifts represented a close “phenocopy” of the donor fecal 
microbiota community, as has been reported previously also for instances of normal FMT.39,40 
In many cases, the abundance shifts of bacterial phylotypes were already present at week 1 
and remained stable until week 6 [particularly in patient 3 (Figure 2 and Supplemental Figure 
1B) and patient 4 (Figure 3 and Supplemental Figure 2A)]. Formal Jaccard- (shared 
phylotypes) and Bray-Curtis- (phylotype abundance) based β-diversity analyses confirmed 
major distance shifts between time points (Supplemental Figure 3). Detailed investigation of 
the most strongly decreasing or increasing bacterial phylotypes revealed complex dynamic 
shifts, with the extent and direction of some phylotype changes also being substantially 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 14 – 
different between week 1 and week 6 [e.g., cyanobacteria and Bifidobacterium in patient 2 
(Supplemental Figure 1A), or several changes in Bacteroidetes, particularly Bacteroides 
eggerthii, in patient 5 (Supplemental Figure 2B)]. 
It is important to keep in mind that, in contrast to conventional FMT, transferring sterile 
FFT filtrates cannot be expected to establish a microbiota similar to that of the donor in the 
receiving patient. Accordingly, conventional comparisons of the stool microbiomes of donor 
and patient before and after treatment as shown in Figures 1–4 may not appropriately reflect 
the relevant changes, but merely demonstrate a shift of α-diversity in the recipient after FFT 
treatment (Figure 5). Increases in the Chao 1 richness estimate (patient 5) and Shannon 
diversity index (patients 3 and 4) 6 weeks after FFT and an interim dip after week 1 during 
microbiota re-establishment in patient 4 (Chao 1) and patient 5 (Shannon) suggested shifts of 
diversity, but not universally in the same direction in all patients. With regard to microbial 
DNA as a potential stimulus for re-establishing the recipient’s microbiome, the FFT filtrate 
contained significant amounts of bacterial DNA, which reflected at least in part the bacterial 
diversity from fecal DNA, as shown in Supplementary Figure 4 for the filtrate used in patient 
4. 
After the successful treatment of patients 1–3, we decided to also analyse viruses and 
the proteome (see below) contained in the FFT filtrates used to treat patients 4 and 5 in order 
to get an impression of the types and diversity of the transferred bacteriophages. We 
hypothesized that bacteriophages in the filtrate could also represent the mechanism of action 
of FFT, as the intersection of therapeutically effective FMT and FMT-like therapies reduces 
the candidates for viral efficacy factors to temperate phages (see Discussion). Only for patient 
4, a complete set of samples with sufficient quality for virus analyses could be obtained 
(Figure 6). All samples were dominated by a rich variety of Lactococcus bacteriophages. 
Figure 6 shows that the phageome of the patient was substantially altered in response to FFT 
and tended to resemble the donor phageome after six weeks. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 15 – 
 
Proteome Analysis of FFT Filtrates 
The proteome contained in the FFT filtrates used to treat patients 4 and 5 was analysed in 
order to identify protein candidates that may be responsible, in part, for the therapeutic 
efficacy of FFT. From the donor feces for patient 5, two separate FFT filtrates were prepared 
on different days in order to get a better impression of the reproducibility of the FFT filtrate’s 
protein content. 
The total numbers of proteins (or their degradation products) identified in the FFT 
filtrates using the stacked gel approach were 366 (filtrate for patient 4), 300 (filtrate for 
patient 5) and 267 (second preparation of FFT filtrate from stool of the donor for patient 5). 
The majority of proteins identified in all three samples were of human origin (304, 259 and 
245, respectively). Furthermore, a number of bacterial and fungal proteins were identified (62, 
41 and 22, respectively). The solid phase extraction approach yielded 10 additional proteins (3 
of human, 7 of bacterial or fungal origin). Gel-based analysis (SDS-Coomassie, data not 
shown) and assessment of the peptide spectral matches as well as of the precursor ion signals 
demonstrated significantly higher signals of all human matches compared to their bacterial 
and fungal counterparts. From the observed differences, we estimate the amount of human 
protein in the filtrates to be >90%. The total number of proteins identified in the three samples 
was 496, with an overlap of approximately 50% between the FFT filtrates of the two different 
donors and approximately 70% between the two replicates from the donor for patient 5. The 
major components of the FFT filtrate proteome were human enzymes like intestinal-type 
alkaline phosphatase, chymotrypsin-like elastases and alpha amylases. Only 11 bacterial hits 
were present in all three FFT filtrates investigated, consisting of metabolic enzymes and redox 
proteins without obvious microbiome-modifying properties, such as glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate 
dehydrogenase, 
phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase, 
glutaredoxin-1 
or 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 16 – 
thioredoxin-1 (Supplementary Table 1). Complete lists of the identified proteins are presented 
in Supplementary Tables 2–4. 
 
Discussion 
 
This open label series strongly suggests that FFT should be evaluated in a controlled setting in 
comparison with standard FMT. Source materials for such trials could be well-characterized 
standard donors, donor banks, artificial stool from bioreactors41,42 or defined bacteria.28-30,43 A 
key advantage of FFT is the avoidance of all risks inherent to the transfer of living 
microorganisms. Further advantages include the potential for standardization and for the 
development of a robust, inexpensive and patient-friendly formulation (i.e., capsules filled 
with freeze-dried FFT preparations without the need to conserve living bacteria or spores). 
When contemplating the intersection of successful therapies related to FMT (classic FMT, 
spores and FFT), it appears plausible that the active agent(s) of any FMT therapy are not 
living bacteria, but rather bacterial components, antimicrobial compounds of bacterial origin 
(e.g., bacteriocins) or bacteriophages contributing to the normal intestinal microenvironment. 
These could be common to all successful FMT therapies and even rather unspecific regarding 
the bacterial strain(s) used for therapies.  
Another important observation is the fast resolution of post-infectious clinical 
symptoms. Remaining diarrhea is a common clinical problem post CDI and also post FMT in 
CDI patients. In a significant percentage of patients, microbial tests to detect recurrent 
infection or re-infection are negative or inconclusive, pointing to post-infectious irritable 
bowel syndrome.44 Both FMT and FFT appear to clear CDI, but also resolve the diarrhea, as 
particularly illustrated by patient 2. This may suggest that such diarrhea is related to 
remaining distortions of microbiome composition acting on the human host’s mucosa and 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 17 – 
may point to a mechanistic interaction of FMT/FFT with epithelial function and/or motility 
that goes beyond the microcidal effects of the procedure. 
An interesting shift of the microbial community structures of patients 3 and 4 was 
observed. In both of these patients, expansion of the relative abundances of Proteobacteria, 
mostly attributable to Escherichia spp., was a prominent component of the microbiome, 
which disappeared within one week after FFT. In all four patients investigated (Supplemental 
Figures 1 and 2), FFT was associated with a reduction of E. coli and, in all but patient 2, also 
with a reduction of unclassified Enterobacteriaceae. This could suggest a potential for FFT to 
be applicable to other diseases with Enterobacteriaceae-driven dysbiosis such as 
inflammatory bowel diseases. 
From our pilot study, we cannot clearly define the exact mechanism of action. In 
particular, it cannot be decided whether the observed taxonomic shifts in the microbiota 
promoted the clearance of C. difficile or rather reflect resolution of disease with 
reestablishment of a health-associated microbiome after transfer of the active agent(s) from 
the donor. Two likely explanations include bacterial cell wall components or DNA fragments, 
which could stimulate host responses via pattern recognition receptors.45,46 This may in turn 
lead to an alteration of the ecological niches needed for outgrowth of existing beneficial 
bacteria or even successful novel colonization. Our findings lend a new interpretation to the 
results of a recent randomized, controlled, double-blind clinical trial for FMT in CDI, which 
reported the frequently observed ~90% efficacy of FMT, but also demonstrated that 
autologous stool transplantation was effective in >60% of patients.47 The mechanism of 
efficacy of this procedure could be similar to that of FFT. 
Another plausible explanation is the transfer of bacteriophages, which may act on the 
community dynamics of gut microbiota, thereby leading to a resolution of the initial 
dysbiosis.31,48 In principle, this may be achieved by transfer of virus particles (i.e., 
bacteriophages sensu stricto) or by transfer of specific bacteria harboring temperate phages in 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 18 – 
their genome, which may become active in a distinct microenvironment or condition. Two 
strong arguments for the latter hypothesis are provided by the therapeutic efficacy of bacterial 
cultures and spores (see above) and by our exemplary data showing that bacteriophages were 
detected in an FFT filtrate, which largely reflected the composition of the stool phageome of 
the donor. Moreover, some of these phages, which were previously absent, were still 
detectable in the recipient six weeks after therapy. 
Future clinical studies and systematic microbiome and virome analyses should 
investigate whether FFT is also efficacious using filtrates of defined bacteria,28-30,43 in 
particular in lyophilized formulations for oral administration. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 19 – 
Figure Legends 
 
Figure 1. Relative abundances at genus (A) or phylum level (B) in the fecal microbiota 
profiled by 16S rRNA detection through next-generation sequencing before (day 0) and after 
(week 1 or week 6) fecal filtrate transfer treatment in patient 2 and in her donor (day 0 only). 
Bacterial genera or phyla showing less than 5% cumulative abundance in all analyzed samples 
or not classified at the family level are represented as ‘others’. 
 
Figure 2. Relative abundances at genus (A) or phylum level (B) in the fecal microbiota 
profiled by 16S rRNA detection through next-generation sequencing before (day 0) and after 
(week 1 or week 6) fecal filtrate transfer treatment in patient 3 and in his donor (day 0 only). 
Bacterial genera or phyla showing less than 5% cumulative abundance in all analyzed samples 
or not classified at the family level are represented as ‘others’. 
 
Figure 3. Relative abundances at genus (A) or phylum level (B) in the fecal microbiota 
profiled by 16S rRNA detection through next-generation sequencing before (day 0) and after 
(week 1 or week 6) fecal filtrate transfer treatment in patient 4 and in his donor (day 0 only). 
Bacterial genera or phyla showing less than 5% cumulative abundance in all analyzed samples 
or not classified at the family level are represented as ‘others’. 
 
Figure 4. Relative abundances at genus (A) or phylum level (B) in the fecal microbiota 
profiled by 16S rRNA detection through next-generation sequencing before (day 0) and after 
(week 1 or week 6) fecal filtrate transfer treatment in patient 5 and in her donor (day 0 only). 
Bacterial genera or phyla showing less than 5% cumulative abundance in all analyzed samples 
or not classified at the family level are represented as ‘others’. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 20 – 
Figure 5. Bacterial diversity after fecal filtrate transfer treatment as determined by Chao 1 
richness estimation (A) and by the non-parametric (NP) Shannon index of diversity (B). The 
respective donor is connected to the patient graph by a dotted line. 
 
Figure 6. Virome analysis of the donor, filtrate and patient sample sets for patient 4. Samples 
from donor stool (day 0), the resulting fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) filtrate and patient stool 
samples before FFT treatment (day 0) as well as one or six weeks (wk) after treatment were 
compared for bacteriophage diversity. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 21 – 
References 
 
1. 
Bakken JS, Borody T, Brandt LJ, et al. Treating Clostridium difficile infection with 
fecal microbiota transplantation. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011; 9:1044-1049. 
2. 
Gough E, Shaikh H, Manges AR. Systematic review of intestinal microbiota 
transplantation (fecal bacteriotherapy) for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. 
Clin Infect Dis 2011; 53:994-1002. 
3. 
Borody TJ, Khoruts A. Fecal microbiota transplantation and emerging applications. 
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012; 9:88-96. 
4. 
Hamilton MJ, Weingarden AR, Sadowsky MJ, et al. Standardized frozen preparation 
for transplantation of fecal microbiota for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. Am 
J Gastroenterol 2012; 107:761-767. 
5. 
van Nood E, Vrieze A, Nieuwdorp M, et al. Duodenal infusion of donor feces for 
recurrent Clostridium difficile. N Engl J Med 2013; 368:407-415. 
6. 
Kassam Z, Lee CH, Yuan Y, et al. Fecal microbiota transplantation for Clostridium 
difficile infection: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2013; 
108:500-508. 
7. 
Youngster I, Russell GH, Pindar C, et al. Oral, capsulized, frozen fecal microbiota 
transplantation for relapsing Clostridium difficile infection. JAMA 2014; 312:1772-
1778. 
8. 
Allen-Vercoe E, Reid G, Viner N, et al. A Canadian Working Group report on fecal 
microbial therapy: microbial ecosystems therapeutics. Can J Gastroenterol 2012; 
26:457-462. 
9. 
Drekonja D, Reich J, Gezahegn S, et al. Fecal Microbiota Transplantation for 
Clostridium difficile Infection: A Systematic Review. Ann Intern Med 2015; 162:630-
638. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 22 – 
10. 
Cammarota G, Masucci L, Ianiro G, et al. Randomised clinical trial: faecal microbiota 
transplantation by colonoscopy vs. vancomycin for the treatment of recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 41:835-843. 
11. 
Fischer M, Sipe BW, Rogers NA, et al. Faecal microbiota transplantation plus selected 
use of vancomycin for severe-complicated Clostridium difficile infection: description 
of a protocol with high success rate. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 42:470-476. 
12. 
Satokari R, Mattila E, Kainulainen V, et al. Simple faecal preparation and efficacy of 
frozen inoculum in faecal microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridium difficile 
infection--an observational cohort study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 41:46-53. 
13. 
Costello SP, Conlon MA, Vuaran MS, et al. Faecal microbiota transplant for recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infection using long-term frozen stool is effective: clinical 
efficacy and bacterial viability data. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 42:1011-1018. 
14. 
Kelly CR, Kahn S, Kashyap P, et al. Update on Fecal Microbiota Transplantation 
2015: Indications, Methodologies, Mechanisms, and Outlook. Gastroenterology 2015; 
149:223-237. 
15. 
Agrawal M, Aroniadis OC, Brandt LJ, et al. The Long-term Efficacy and Safety of 
Fecal Microbiota Transplant for Recurrent, Severe, and Complicated Clostridium 
difficile Infection in 146 Elderly Individuals. J Clin Gastroenterol 2016; 50:403-407. 
16. 
Lee CH, Steiner T, Petrof EO, et al. Frozen vs Fresh Fecal Microbiota Transplantation 
and Clinical Resolution of Diarrhea in Patients With Recurrent Clostridium difficile 
Infection: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2016; 315:142-149. 
17. 
Khoruts A, Sadowsky MJ. Understanding the mechanisms of faecal microbiota 
transplantation. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016; 13:508-516. 
18. 
Smits LP, Bouter KE, de Vos WM, et al. Therapeutic potential of fecal microbiota 
transplantation. Gastroenterology 2013; 145:946-953. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 23 – 
19. 
Petrof EO, Khoruts A. From stool transplants to next-generation microbiota 
therapeutics. Gastroenterology 2014; 146:1573-1582. 
20. 
Paramsothy S, Borody TJ, Lin E, et al. Donor Recruitment for Fecal Microbiota 
Transplantation. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2015; 21:1600-1606. 
21. 
Kelly CR, Ihunnah C, Fischer M, et al. Fecal microbiota transplant for treatment of 
Clostridium difficile infection in immunocompromised patients. Am J Gastroenterol 
2014; 109:1065-1071. 
22. 
Mandalia A, Ward A, Tauxe W, et al. Fecal transplant is as effective and safe in 
immunocompromised as non-immunocompromised patients for Clostridium difficile. 
Int J Colorectal Dis 2016; 31:1059-1060. 
23. 
Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, et al. Gut microbiota from twins discordant for obesity 
modulate metabolism in mice. Science 2013; 341:1241214. 
24. 
Wang X, Yang Y, Huycke MM. Commensal bacteria drive endogenous transformation 
and tumour stem cell marker expression through a bystander effect. Gut 2015; 64:459-
468. 
25. 
Alang N, Kelly CR. Weight gain after fecal microbiota transplantation. Open Forum 
Infect Dis 2015; 2:10.1093/ofid/ofv1005. 
26. 
Norman JM, Handley SA, Baldridge MT, et al. Disease-specific alterations in the 
enteric virome in inflammatory bowel disease. Cell 2015; 160:447-460. 
27. 
Li SS, Zhu A, Benes V, et al. Durable coexistence of donor and recipient strains after 
fecal microbiota transplantation. Science 2016; 352:586-589. 
28. 
Tvede M, Tinggaard M, Helms M. Rectal bacteriotherapy for recurrent Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhoea: results from a case series of 55 patients in Denmark 
2000-2012. Clin Microbiol Infect 2015; 21:48-53. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 24 – 
29. 
Orenstein R, Dubberke E, Hardi R, et al. Safety and Durability of RBX2660 
(Microbiota Suspension) for Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infection: Results of the 
PUNCH CD Study. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:596-602. 
30. 
Gerding DN, Meyer T, Lee C, et al. Administration of spores of nontoxigenic 
Clostridium difficile strain M3 for prevention of recurrent C. difficile infection: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015; 313:1719-1727. 
31. 
Bojanova DP, Bordenstein SR. Fecal Transplants: What Is Being Transferred? PLoS 
Biol 2016; 14:e1002503. 
32. 
Rehman A, Sina C, Gavrilova O, et al. Nod2 is essential for temporal development of 
intestinal microbial communities. Gut 2011; 60:1354-1362. 
33. 
Fadrosh DW, Ma B, Gajer P, et al. An improved dual-indexing approach for 
multiplexed 16S rRNA gene sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq platform. Microbiome 
2014; 2:6. 
34. 
Caporaso JG, Lauber CL, Walters WA, et al. Ultra-high-throughput microbial 
community analysis on the Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. ISME J 2012; 
6:1621-1624. 
35. 
Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, et al. Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-
independent, community-supported software for describing and comparing microbial 
communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009; 75:7537-7541. 
36. 
Edgar RC, Haas BJ, Clemente JC, et al. UCHIME improves sensitivity and speed of 
chimera detection. Bioinformatics 2011; 27:2194-2200. 
37. 
Hammer O, Harper DAT, Ryan PD. Past: Paleontological Statistics Software Package 
for Education and Data Analysis. Palaeontologia Electronica 2001; 4:art. 4: 9 pp. 
38. 
Reyes A, Haynes M, Hanson N, et al. Viruses in the faecal microbiota of monozygotic 
twins and their mothers. Nature 2010; 466:334-338. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 25 – 
39. 
Seekatz AM, Aas J, Gessert CE, et al. Recovery of the gut microbiome following fecal 
microbiota transplantation. MBio 2014; 5:e00893-00814. 
40. 
Fuentes S, van Nood E, Tims S, et al. Reset of a critically disturbed microbial 
ecosystem: faecal transplant in recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. ISME J 2014; 
8:1621-1633. 
41. 
Rehman A, Heinsen FA, Koenen ME, et al. Effects of probiotics and antibiotics on the 
intestinal homeostasis in a computer controlled model of the large intestine. BMC 
Microbiol 2012; 12:47. 
42. 
Petrof EO, Gloor GB, Vanner SJ, et al. Stool substitute transplant therapy for the 
eradication of Clostridium difficile infection: 'RePOOPulating' the gut. Microbiome 
2013; 1:3. 
43. 
Goldenberg JZ, Ma SS, Saxton JD, et al. Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 
5:CD006095. 
44. 
Wadhwa A, Al Nahhas MF, Dierkhising RA, et al. High risk of post-infectious 
irritable bowel syndrome in patients with Clostridium difficile infection. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 2016; 44:576-582. 
45. 
Rachmilewitz D, Katakura K, Karmeli F, et al. Toll-like receptor 9 signaling mediates 
the anti-inflammatory effects of probiotics in murine experimental colitis. 
Gastroenterology 2004; 126:520-528. 
46. 
Rachmilewitz D, Karmeli F, Takabayashi K, et al. Immunostimulatory DNA 
ameliorates experimental and spontaneous murine colitis. Gastroenterology 2002; 
122:1428-1441. 
47. 
Kelly CR, Khoruts A, Staley C, et al. Effect of Fecal Microbiota Transplantation on 
Recurrence in Multiply Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infection: A Randomized 
Trial. Ann Intern Med 2016; 165:609-616. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT) 
 
– 26 – 
48. 
Chehoud C, Dryga A, Hwang Y, et al. Transfer of Viral Communities between Human 
Individuals during Fecal Microbiota Transplantation. MBio 2016; 7:e00322. 
 
Author names in bold designate shared co-first authorship. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Table 1 
Table 1. Baseline Characteristics and Treatment Results of the Patients 
 
 
 
Patient 1 
Patient 2 
Patient 3 
Patient 4 
Patient 5 
Age (y) 
59 
73 
72 
49 
75 
Sex 
Female 
Female 
Male 
Male 
Female 
Prior CDI episodes 
3 
1 
2 
2 
>2 
Anamnesis prior to CDI 
Life-threatening 
recurrent 
diverticulitis, sigma 
resection 
Gastric carcinoma, 
gastrectomy, 
diverticulitis 
Immunosuppressed 
since kidney 
transplant in 1990, 
multimorbid 
Immunosuppressed,
HIV infection under 
antiviral therapy, 
multimorbid 
Colon cancer with 
colon surgery 
Reported antibiotic use before CDI 
Ciprofloxacin, 
metronidazole 
Diverse antibiotics 
Diverse antibiotics 
Cefuroxime, 
clindamycin 
Diverse antibiotics 
Additional relevant diagnoses 
Pseudomembranous 
colitis 
None 
Loss of kidney 
function 
HIV infection, 
epilepsy 
Chronic heart failure, 
coronary heart 
disease 
Antibiotic(s) used for CDI therapy 
Metronidazole, 
Vancomycin 
Metronidazole, 
Vancomycin 
Vancomycin, 
Metronidazole, 
Rifaximin 
Metronidazole, 
Vancomycin 
Metronidazole, 
Vancomycin 
Type of CDI (refractory or 
recurrent) 
Recurrent 
Atypical (currently 
not detectable) 
Recurrent 
Recurrent 
Recurrent 
Additional relevant medications or 
treatments  
None 
FMT (donor: 
husband, 
28.03.2014), 
recurrent symptoms 
Ciclosporin, 
perenterol 
(Saccharomyces 
boulardii) 
None 
None 
Donor 
Son 
Husband 
Sister 
Sister 
Non-related donor 
Date of FFT treatment 
23 January 2014 
20 June 2014 
01 July 2014 
11 December 2015 
22 December 2015 
Diarrhea resolution after FFT 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Days to discharge from hospital 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Days to symptom-free status 
3 
3 
3 
2 
4 
Symptom-free until 30 June 2016 
(end of study) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 1 – 
Supplementary Appendix 1. Methods for Virome Analyses. 
 
Sample Processing 
Virus-like particle purification and DNA extraction were performed as described 
previously,1 with some modifications. Fecal samples were resuspended in 0.5 mL SM 
buffer and centrifuged four times at 2,500 x g for 10 min, with the resulting 
supernatant passed sequentially through a 0.45-µm and a 0.22-µm pore diameter 
filter (Whatman/GE Healthcare; Munich, Germany). Each sample was treated twice 
with 0.2 volumes of chloroform and centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 10 min at 4°
C. The 
aqueous phase was treated with 1 U of DNase I and 70 µL of 10 X DNase buffer 
(Sigma-Aldrich; Taufkirchen, Germany) for 2 h at room temperature the first time, and 
overnight at room temperature the second time. Enzyme activity was inactivated by 
incubation at 65°
C for 10 min. 
To extract viral DNA, 0.1 volumes of 2 M Tris-Cl/0.2 M EDTA, 1 volume of 
formamide, 1 µL of glycogen, and 10 µl of a 0.5 M EDTA solution were added per 1 
mL of sample. The sample was subsequently washed with 2 volumes of ethanol and 
centrifuged for 20 min at 13,800 x g at room temperature. The resulting pellet was 
then washed twice with 70% ethanol and resuspended in TE buffer followed by 10% 
SDS and 20 mg/mL solution of Proteinase K (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at 37°
C, after 
which 5 M NaCl and 10% cetyltrimethylammonium bromide/0.7 M NaCl were added. 
Samples were then mixed with an equal volume of chloroform and centrifuged at 
13,800 x g for 10 min at room temperature. To the resulting supernatant, an equal 
volume of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) was added, and the mixture 
was centrifuged at 13,800 x g for 10 min. The aqueous phase was recovered, an 
equal volume of chloroform was added and the resulting mixture was centrifuged 
again at 13,800 x g for 10 min, prior to adding 1 µL of glycogen with 0.7 volumes of 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 2 – 
isopropanol and precipitating overnight at 4°
C. The  next morning, samples were 
centrifuged at 13,800 x g for 30 min at 4°
C, washed with 1 mL of 70% ethanol , air-
dried, and resuspended in 50 µL of nuclease-free water. 
 
Library Construction 
Libraries were generated using the TrueSeq Nano DNA kit (Illumina) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. After quantification, normalized pools of all samples were 
sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq using the 2 x 150bp sequencing kit (Illumina). 
 
Quality control and Metagenomic assembly 
Truseq adaptors and low quality reads (length<55) were filtered from the Illumina 
paired-end reads (2x150 base) using Trimmomatic v. 0.33.2 These pre-processed 
paired-end reads were assembled using SPAdes v. 3.7.0 assembler, by 
implementing “meta” function with wide k-mer range (21 to 77).3 
 
Taxonomic assignment 
The assembled contigs were classified at various taxonomical levels using the kmer 
based approach as described previously.4 In brief, reads were subdivided into 
complete sets of 31 bp length-overlapping sequences (k-mers). Subsequently, these 
k-mers were compared against a large database (40,000 whole microbial genomes in 
the One Codex reference database) that contains information on known k-mers 
unique to specific taxonomic groups such as different bacterial clades or viruses. 
After comparison, each contig was assigned to a closely matched specific clade. 
Each sample was then summarized as a group of signature sequences depicting the 
presence of specific groups of organisms.4 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 3 – 
References 
1. 
Reyes A, Haynes M, Hanson N, et al. Viruses in the faecal microbiota of 
monozygotic twins and their mothers. Nature 2010; 466:334-338. 
2. 
Bolger AM, Lohse M, Usadel B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina 
sequence data. Bioinformatics 2014; 30:2114-2120. 
3. 
Nurk S, Bankevich A, Antipov D, et al. Assembling single-cell genomes and 
mini-metagenomes from chimeric MDA products. J Comput Biol 2013; 20:714-
737. 
4. 
Minot SS, Krumm N, Greenfield NB. One Codex: A Sensitive and Accurate 
Data Platform for Genomic Microbial Identification. bioRxiv 2015; doi: 
10.1101/027607. 
Author names in bold designate shared co-first authorship. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 4 – 
Supplementary Appendix 2. Methods for Proteome Analyses. 
 
Sample Processing and Protein Digestion 
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
A protein assay (Bradford assay) was performed using 10 µL of each of the three 
FFT filtrate samples; the results from this test were below the limit of detection for the 
assay. 
 
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) Stack Gel 
Aliquots of each sample (125 µL) were partially lyophilised and re-suspended up to a 
volume of approximately 55 µL in Milli-Q water. From each sample, 45 µL was 
transferred to a 500 µL centrifuge tube and 15 µL of Laemmli loading buffer was 
added; the remainder, approx. 10–15 µL, was used for solid phase extraction (SPE). 
The samples were heated at 95°
C for 5 min and then loaded (20 µL in triplicate) onto 
a 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel with a 4% stacking gel. Constant voltage (40 V) was 
applied to migrate the dye front into the stacking gel (15 min). Subsequently, the 
voltage was increased to 100 V for a further 15 min. The gel was then processed 
(fixed, washed, stained with Coomassie brilliant blue, and destained) and visualized. 
The triplicate protein-containing fractions of the gel were excised for each sample. 
This resulted in the collection of nine gel pieces of approximately 10 mm x 8 mm in 
size. 
 
One-dimensional (1D) SDS-PAGE 
The remaining 15 µL from each of the original samples was mixed with 5 µL of 
Laemmli loading buffer and heated at 95°
C for 5 min  before being loaded onto a 12% 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 5 – 
SDS polyacrylamide gel with a 4% stacking gel. Constant voltage (40 V) was applied 
to migrate the dye front into the stacking gel (15 min). Subsequently, the voltage was 
increased to 100 V for a further 80 min. The gel was then processed (fixed, washed, 
stained with Coomassie brilliant blue, and destained) and visualized to assess the 
protein content of the samples. Four clearly visible protein bands from the FFT filtrate 
used for patient 4 and two faint bands from the duplicate FFT filtrates for patient 5 
were excised. 
 
Solid Phase Extraction (SPE) 
Peptides and small proteins from the remainder of resuspended samples (approx. 
10–15 µL), were cleaned with a solution of 5% methanol + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid 
(TFA) on a Sep-Pak 1cc (50 mg) C18 solid phase extraction cartridge, before being 
eluted with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (ACN), evaporated to dryness, 
and re-suspended in loading buffer (3% ACN + 0.1% TFA) for MS analysis. 
 
In-Gel Digestion 
The individual gel pieces from both the 1D SDS-PAGE and SDS-PAGE stack gel 
approach were processed via a standard in-gel digestion protocol. Briefly, the gel 
pieces were diced into small fragments (approx. 1–2 mm3), destained and 
dehydrated. The samples were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 56°
C, 60 min in 50 mM 
triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, pH 8) then alkylated (55 mM 
iodoacetamide, room temperature, 30 min in 50 mM TEAB) and subjected to 
overnight trypsin digestion at 37°
C in 50 mM TEAB b uffer, pH 8, with 100 ng of 
sequencing-grade Trypsin. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel pieces 
with increasing concentrations of ACN (60%, 100%) and pooled with the supernatant 
from the overnight digestion, dried down via speed-vac, and re-suspended in high 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 6 – 
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) for 
MS analysis. 
 
LC-MS 
 
Procedures for Liquid Chromatography 
Chromatographic separation was performed on a Dionex U3000 ultra-high 
performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Thermo Scientific Dionex; 
Idstein, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 analytical column (2 µm, 
75 µm x 500 mm) coupled online to a mass spectrometer. The solvents used were: 
Buffer A (0.05% formic acid (FA)), Buffer B (80% ACN + 0.04% FA). The separation 
was performed over a programmed 86-min run. Initial chromatographic conditions 
were 4% B for 2 min followed by a linear gradient from 4% to 40% B over 60 min 
before a 6-min increase to 90% B and 3 min at 90% B. Subsequently, an inter-run 
equilibration of the column was achieved by 12 min at 4% B. A flow rate of 300 
nL/min was used, and 3 µL of sample was injected per run. Injection repeats were 
performed for the stack gel based samples. 
 
Procedures for Mass Spectrometry 
Acquisition runs were performed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer 
(Thermo Fisher; Bremen, Germany) coupled online to a UHPLC. Ionization was 
performed with 1.5 kV spray voltage applied on a non-coated PicoTip emitter (10 µm 
tip size, New Objective, Woburn, MA) and source temperature set to 250°
C. MS data 
were acquired from 1 to 80 min with MS full scans between 300 and 2,000 m/z at a 
resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 [automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6; 
maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms]. For each sample, independent LC-MS 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 7 – 
experiments were performed with the following MS/MS settings: (i) the ten most 
intense precursors with charge states ≥2+ were subjected to fragmentation with 
higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) [Fourier transform mass spectrometer 
(FTMS); normalised collision energy (NCE) of 27.5%; isolation width of 3 m/z; 
resolution, 17,500 at m/z 400; AGC target of 1e5 and maximum IT of 100 ms), 
Dynamic exclusion for 20 s was applied with lockmass correction (445.120025 m/z). 
 
Database Searching and Statistical Validation 
MS data were searched against a protein fasta database that contained all 
canonical human proteins, all bacterial taxonomy canonical reviewed proteins, all 
fungal canonical reviewed proteins, and the cRAP list of common laboratory 
contaminants. All protein fasta databases were downloaded from UniProtKB (access 
date: 15.02.2016). Database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer 
1.4.0.288 using the search algorithm SequestHT (both from Thermo Fisher). For in-
gel digested samples, enzyme settings were trypsin (full) with a maximum of 2 
missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine thiol groups was set as a static 
modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. For the 
three SPE searches, no enzyme was specified, and oxidation of methionine was set 
as a variable modification. For all searches, precursor mass tolerance was 7 ppm 
and fragment mass tolerances were 0.02 Da. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) 
validation was performed by Percolator (default values). Protein and peptide lists 
were exported as text files using only high confident matches with a false discovery 
rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01, minimum one unique peptide per protein. 
In classical fecal metaproteomics studies, databases derived from metagenomic 
studies including predicted proteins are often used for protein identification.5 
Additionally, steps to enrich bacterial fractions are commonly employed in order to 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Appendices 
  – 8 – 
reduce the dominance of host/food proteins, which then allows for the identification of 
bacterial proteins.6 Due to the total protein amounts and high complexity (in terms of 
numbers of detectable bacterial proteins), the use of databases derived from 
metagenoice studies, including predicted proteins, is clearly justified to allow deeper 
coverage of the bacterial (meta)proteome. In our study, we analyzed the free 
(extracellular) proteins from within the filtered aqueous extract; this, a priori, prevents 
the enrichment of bacterial proteins. As the protein concentration in the extract was 
very low with the exception of the few higher abundant proteins (see above), the 
obtained mass spectra were generally of low quality. Using a strict identification 
pipeline, the majority of the signals acquired with sufficient intensities that provided 
interpretable MS/MS spectra could be assigned to protein identities using the 
annotated non-redundant database encompassing more than 282,000 bacterial, 
20,000 human, and 28,000 fungal protein sequences. The identified proteins were 
mapped against previously validated proteins, thus providing the highest possible 
confidence in their identification when applying strict criteria (at least two independent 
peptides with one unique one) as performed herein. 
 
References 
5. 
Xiong W, Giannone RJ, Morowitz MJ, et al. Development of an enhanced 
metaproteomic approach for deepening the microbiome characterization of the 
human infant gut. J Proteome Res 2015; 14:133-141. 
6. 
Wu J, Zhu J, Yin H, et al. Development of an Integrated Pipeline for Profiling 
Microbial Proteins from Mouse Fecal Samples by LC-MS/MS. J Proteome Res 
2016. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 1 – 
Supplementary Table 1. Bacterial Proteins Present in Fecal Filtrates for Patients 4 and 5 
 
Accession no. 
Description 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P68688 
Glutaredoxin-1 OS=Escherichia coli (strain K12) GN=grxA PE=1 SV=1 - 
[GLRX1_ECOLI] 
37,65 
3 
3 
7 
9,7 
P0CN75 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Cryptococcus neoformans 
var. neoformans serotype D (strain B-3501A) GN=GPD PE=3 SV=1 - 
[G3P_CRYNB] 
6,78 
1 
2 
5 
36,3 
P0C0G7 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Streptococcus pyogenes 
serotype M1 GN=gap PE=3 SV=2 - [G3P_STRP1] 
6,85 
1 
2 
3 
35,9 
Q5L7N5 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain 
ATCC 25285 / DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_BACFN] 
37,38 
5 
19 
77 
59,0 
C4Z0Q6 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium eligens (strain 
ATCC 27750 / VPI C15-48) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBE2] 
27,53 
4 
12 
46 
59,0 
C4ZBL1 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium rectale (strain 
ATCC 33656 / VPI 0990) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBR3] 
28,28 
2 
12 
35 
59,0 
A6LFQ4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Parabacteroides distasonis 
(strain ATCC 8503 / DSM 20701 / NCTC 11152) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PARD8] 
48,60 
9 
22 
73 
58,9 
B2RHV8 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis 
(strain ATCC 33277 / DSM 20709 / JCM 12257) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PORG3] 
22,06 
2 
11 
44 
59,4 
P0AA29 
Thioredoxin-1 OS=Salmonella typhi GN=trxA PE=3 SV=2 - [THIO_SALTI] 
47,71 
4 
4 
26 
11,8 
A6KXL2 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / 
DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=tpiA PE=3 SV=1 - [TPIS_BACV8] 
68,13 
8 
10 
40 
26,9 
Q8A9J2 
Uronate isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / 
DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=uxaC PE=3 SV=2 - 
[UXAC_BACTN] 
18,38 
2 
7 
21 
54,3 
 
NOTE. Only proteins present in the fecal filtrate for patient 4 and in both duplicates of the fecal filtrate for patient 5 are shown. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 2 – 
Supplementary Table 2. All Proteins Detected in the Fecal Filtrate for Patient 4 
 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P61604 
10 kDa heat shock protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPE1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CH10_HUMAN] 
38,24 
4 
4 
9 
10,9 
P31946 
14-3-3 protein beta/alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAB PE=1 SV=3 - 
[1433B_HUMAN] 
18,70 
1 
5 
16 
28,1 
P62258 
14-3-3 protein epsilon OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAE PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433E_HUMAN] 
25,49 
4 
6 
17 
29,2 
Q04917 
14-3-3 protein eta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAH PE=1 SV=4 - 
[1433F_HUMAN] 
17,48 
1 
5 
17 
28,2 
P61981 
14-3-3 protein gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAG PE=1 SV=2 - 
[1433G_HUMAN] 
23,48 
2 
6 
18 
28,3 
P31947 
14-3-3 protein sigma OS=Homo sapiens GN=SFN PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433S_HUMAN] 
48,79 
7 
12 
38 
27,8 
P27348 
14-3-3 protein theta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAQ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433T_HUMAN] 
24,49 
2 
6 
18 
27,7 
P63104 
14-3-3 protein zeta/delta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAZ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433Z_HUMAN] 
24,49 
2 
6 
19 
27,7 
Q8A287 
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate-independent phosphoglycerate mutase 
OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 
10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=gpmI PE=3 SV=1 - [GPMI_BACTN] 
4,96 
2 
3 
4 
55,6 
A6L050 
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate-independent phosphoglycerate mutase 
OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) 
GN=gpmI PE=3 SV=1 - [GPMI_BACV8] 
14,29 
6 
7 
14 
55,8 
P62277 
40S ribosomal protein S13 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS13 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS13_HUMAN] 
11,26 
2 
2 
5 
17,2 
P62263 
40S ribosomal protein S14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS14 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS14_HUMAN] 
17,22 
3 
3 
7 
16,3 
P62244 
40S ribosomal protein S15a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS15A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS15A_HUMAN] 
12,31 
2 
2 
3 
14,8 
P62249 
40S ribosomal protein S16 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS16 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS16_HUMAN] 
11,64 
2 
2 
2 
16,4 
P62269 
40S ribosomal protein S18 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS18 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS18_HUMAN] 
24,34 
4 
4 
12 
17,7 
P15880 
40S ribosomal protein S2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS2_HUMAN] 
12,63 
4 
4 
8 
31,3 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 3 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P60866 
40S ribosomal protein S20 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS20 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS20_HUMAN] 
25,21 
3 
3 
5 
13,4 
P63220 
40S ribosomal protein S21 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS21 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS21_HUMAN] 
22,89 
2 
2 
3 
9,1 
P62851 
40S ribosomal protein S25 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS25 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS25_HUMAN] 
15,20 
2 
2 
9 
13,7 
P62854 
40S ribosomal protein S26 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS26 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS26_HUMAN] 
19,13 
2 
2 
2 
13,0 
P23396 
40S ribosomal protein S3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS3_HUMAN] 
28,40 
7 
7 
18 
26,7 
P61247 
40S ribosomal protein S3a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS3A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS3A_HUMAN] 
13,64 
4 
4 
4 
29,9 
P62701 
40S ribosomal protein S4, X isoform OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS4X PE=1 
SV=2 - [RS4X_HUMAN] 
20,91 
7 
7 
12 
29,6 
P46782 
40S ribosomal protein S5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS5 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RS5_HUMAN] 
20,10 
4 
4 
6 
22,9 
P62753 
40S ribosomal protein S6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS6 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS6_HUMAN] 
8,03 
2 
2 
4 
28,7 
P62081 
40S ribosomal protein S7 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS7 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS7_HUMAN] 
14,95 
3 
3 
6 
22,1 
P62241 
40S ribosomal protein S8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS8 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS8_HUMAN] 
7,69 
2 
2 
2 
24,2 
P46781 
40S ribosomal protein S9 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS9 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS9_HUMAN] 
22,68 
6 
6 
10 
22,6 
P08865 
40S ribosomal protein SA OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPSA PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RSSA_HUMAN] 
27,12 
5 
5 
12 
32,8 
Q5LH68 
4-O-beta-D-mannosyl-D-glucose phosphorylase OS=Bacteroides fragilis 
(strain ATCC 25285 / DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=BF0772 
PE=1 SV=1 - [MGP_BACFN] 
7,18 
2 
2 
2 
43,9 
P49189 
4-trimethylaminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=ALDH9A1 PE=1 SV=3 - [AL9A1_HUMAN] 
3,64 
2 
2 
2 
53,8 
P10809 
60 kDa heat shock protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPD1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CH60_HUMAN] 
8,03 
5 
5 
9 
61,0 
P27635 
60S ribosomal protein L10 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL10 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RL10_HUMAN] 
9,35 
2 
2 
2 
24,6 
P30050 
60S ribosomal protein L12 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL12 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL12_HUMAN] 
15,15 
2 
2 
5 
17,8 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 4 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P26373 
60S ribosomal protein L13 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL13 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RL13_HUMAN] 
9,95 
2 
2 
2 
24,2 
P50914 
60S ribosomal protein L14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL14 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RL14_HUMAN] 
10,70 
2 
2 
4 
23,4 
P61313 
60S ribosomal protein L15 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL15 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL15_HUMAN] 
18,14 
4 
4 
10 
24,1 
P18621 
60S ribosomal protein L17 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL17 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL17_HUMAN] 
14,13 
2 
2 
3 
21,4 
Q07020 
60S ribosomal protein L18 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL18 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL18_HUMAN] 
12,77 
2 
2 
3 
21,6 
Q02543 
60S ribosomal protein L18a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL18A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL18A_HUMAN] 
11,36 
2 
2 
4 
20,7 
P83731 
60S ribosomal protein L24 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL24 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL24_HUMAN] 
10,83 
2 
2 
3 
17,8 
P61254 
60S ribosomal protein L26 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL26 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL26_HUMAN] 
15,86 
3 
3 
5 
17,2 
P39023 
60S ribosomal protein L3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL3_HUMAN] 
8,93 
4 
4 
7 
46,1 
P62888 
60S ribosomal protein L30 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL30 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL30_HUMAN] 
17,39 
2 
2 
2 
12,8 
P49207 
60S ribosomal protein L34 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL34 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL34_HUMAN] 
12,82 
2 
2 
3 
13,3 
P83881 
60S ribosomal protein L36a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL36A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL36A_HUMAN] 
17,92 
2 
2 
3 
12,4 
P36578 
60S ribosomal protein L4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL4 PE=1 SV=5 - 
[RL4_HUMAN] 
5,15 
2 
2 
3 
47,7 
P46777 
60S ribosomal protein L5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL5 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL5_HUMAN] 
8,75 
2 
2 
3 
34,3 
Q02878 
60S ribosomal protein L6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL6 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL6_HUMAN] 
14,24 
4 
4 
7 
32,7 
P18124 
60S ribosomal protein L7 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL7 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL7_HUMAN] 
8,87 
2 
2 
4 
29,2 
P62917 
60S ribosomal protein L8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL8 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL8_HUMAN] 
10,51 
2 
2 
8 
28,0 
P11021 
78 kDa glucose-regulated protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA5 PE=1 
SV=2 - [GRP78_HUMAN] 
21,25 
9 
10 
19 
72,3 
A6KXS0 
Acetate kinase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 1447 / 
4,52 
2 
2 
3 
42,8 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 5 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
NCTC 11154) GN=ackA PE=3 SV=1 - [ACKA_BACV8] 
Q92484 
Acid sphingomyelinase-like phosphodiesterase 3a OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=SMPDL3A PE=1 SV=2 - [ASM3A_HUMAN] 
10,60 
4 
4 
8 
51,2 
Q92485 
Acid sphingomyelinase-like phosphodiesterase 3b OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=SMPDL3B PE=2 SV=2 - [ASM3B_HUMAN] 
16,26 
5 
5 
13 
50,8 
Q99798 
Aconitate hydratase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACO2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [ACON_HUMAN] 
3,59 
2 
2 
2 
85,4 
P60709 
Actin, cytoplasmic 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACTB PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ACTB_HUMAN] 
43,47 
10 
18 
95 
41,7 
Q6P587 
Acylpyruvase FAHD1, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=FAHD1 PE=1 
SV=2 - [FAHD1_HUMAN] 
13,39 
2 
2 
8 
24,8 
P00813 
Adenosine deaminase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ADA PE=1 SV=3 - 
[ADA_HUMAN] 
6,61 
2 
2 
2 
40,7 
P23526 
Adenosylhomocysteinase OS=Homo sapiens GN=AHCY PE=1 SV=4 - 
[SAHH_HUMAN] 
10,19 
4 
4 
6 
47,7 
A6L1X1 
Adenylosuccinate synthetase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / 
DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=purA PE=3 SV=1 - [PURA_BACV8] 
10,17 
4 
4 
5 
46,8 
P05141 
ADP/ATP translocase 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SLC25A5 PE=1 SV=7 - 
[ADT2_HUMAN] 
13,42 
1 
4 
10 
32,8 
P12236 
ADP/ATP translocase 3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SLC25A6 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[ADT3_HUMAN] 
13,42 
1 
4 
9 
32,8 
P05091 
Aldehyde dehydrogenase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ALDH2 
PE=1 SV=2 - [ALDH2_HUMAN] 
5,22 
2 
2 
2 
56,3 
P02763 
Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ORM1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[A1AG1_HUMAN] 
19,40 
4 
4 
13 
23,5 
P01011 
Alpha-1-antichymotrypsin OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINA3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AACT_HUMAN] 
31,44 
14 
14 
51 
47,6 
P01009 
Alpha-1-antitrypsin OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINA1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[A1AT_HUMAN] 
53,83 
31 
31 
219 
46,7 
P01023 
Alpha-2-macroglobulin OS=Homo sapiens GN=A2M PE=1 SV=3 - 
[A2MG_HUMAN] 
2,10 
3 
3 
3 
163,2 
P04745 
Alpha-amylase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY1A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AMY1_HUMAN] 
60,47 
2 
23 
118 
57,7 
P19961 
Alpha-amylase 2B OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY2B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[AMY2B_HUMAN] 
61,06 
2 
24 
116 
57,7 
P02511 
Alpha-crystallin B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=CRYAB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CRYAB_HUMAN] 
22,29 
4 
4 
9 
20,1 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 6 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P06733 
Alpha-enolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENO1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ENOA_HUMAN] 
14,98 
5 
5 
9 
47,1 
A6L4U5 
Altronate oxidoreductase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 
1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=uxaB PE=3 SV=1 - [UXAB_BACV8] 
5,64 
2 
2 
3 
53,9 
Q03154 
Aminoacylase-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACY1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ACY1_HUMAN] 
12,99 
4 
4 
9 
45,9 
P15144 
Aminopeptidase N OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANPEP PE=1 SV=4 - 
[AMPN_HUMAN] 
38,57 
38 
38 
151 
109,5 
P12821 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACE PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ACE_HUMAN] 
23,58 
27 
27 
145 
149,6 
P04083 
Annexin A1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANXA1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ANXA1_HUMAN] 
6,36 
2 
2 
8 
38,7 
P07355 
Annexin A2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANXA2 PE=1 SV=2 - [ANXA2_HUMAN] 
13,57 
4 
4 
8 
38,6 
B1YMR6 
ATP synthase subunit alpha OS=Exiguobacterium sibiricum (strain DSM 
17290 / JCM 13490 / 255-15) GN=atpA PE=3 SV=1 - [ATPA_EXIS2] 
4,98 
1 
2 
2 
54,6 
P25705 
ATP synthase subunit alpha, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ATP5A1 
PE=1 SV=1 - [ATPA_HUMAN] 
10,13 
4 
5 
7 
59,7 
P06576 
ATP synthase subunit beta, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ATP5B 
PE=1 SV=3 - [ATPB_HUMAN] 
17,58 
7 
7 
11 
56,5 
O00148 
ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX39A OS=Homo sapiens GN=DDX39A 
PE=1 SV=2 - [DX39A_HUMAN] 
3,98 
2 
2 
3 
49,1 
Q562R1 
Beta-actin-like protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACTBL2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ACTBL_HUMAN] 
21,28 
2 
10 
27 
42,0 
P07814 
Bifunctional glutamate/proline--tRNA ligase OS=Homo sapiens GN=EPRS 
PE=1 SV=5 - [SYEP_HUMAN] 
1,26 
2 
2 
3 
170,5 
Q9Y6X5 
Bis(5'-adenosyl)-triphosphatase ENPP4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENPP4 
PE=1 SV=3 - [ENPP4_HUMAN] 
6,62 
2 
3 
9 
51,6 
Q13867 
Bleomycin hydrolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=BLMH PE=1 SV=1 - 
[BLMH_HUMAN] 
6,81 
2 
2 
4 
52,5 
P12830 
Cadherin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDH1 PE=1 SV=3 - [CADH1_HUMAN] 
9,75 
6 
6 
23 
97,4 
Q12864 
Cadherin-17 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDH17 PE=2 SV=3 - [CAD17_HUMAN] 
26,32 
15 
15 
45 
92,2 
Q9BYE9 
Cadherin-related family member 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDHR2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [CDHR2_HUMAN] 
14,43 
15 
15 
51 
141,5 
Q9HBB8 
Cadherin-related family member 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDHR5 PE=1 
SV=3 - [CDHR5_HUMAN] 
14,08 
8 
8 
43 
88,2 
A8K7I4 
Calcium-activated chloride channel regulator 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CLCA1 PE=1 SV=3 - [CLCA1_HUMAN] 
35,45 
33 
33 
146 
100,2 
P15085 
Carboxypeptidase A1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPA1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
50,36 
18 
20 
118 
47,1 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 7 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[CBPA1_HUMAN] 
P48052 
Carboxypeptidase A2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPA2 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[CBPA2_HUMAN] 
13,60 
4 
4 
6 
47,0 
P15086 
Carboxypeptidase B OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPB1 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[CBPB1_HUMAN] 
59,23 
22 
24 
251 
47,3 
Q8IVL8 
Carboxypeptidase O OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPO PE=2 SV=1 - 
[CBPO_HUMAN] 
16,31 
4 
4 
7 
42,5 
Q9Y646 
Carboxypeptidase Q OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPQ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[CBPQ_HUMAN] 
4,03 
2 
2 
6 
51,9 
P13688 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM1 PE=1 SV=2 - [CEAM1_HUMAN] 
12,74 
3 
4 
21 
57,5 
P06731 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 5 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM5 PE=1 SV=3 - [CEAM5_HUMAN] 
18,38 
7 
9 
45 
76,7 
P40199 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 6 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM6 PE=1 SV=3 - [CEAM6_HUMAN] 
24,42 
4 
5 
15 
37,2 
P31997 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 8 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM8 PE=1 SV=2 - [CEAM8_HUMAN] 
8,31 
1 
2 
13 
38,1 
P48729 
Casein kinase I isoform alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=CSNK1A1 PE=1 SV=2 
- [KC1A_HUMAN] 
5,64 
2 
2 
3 
38,9 
P49674 
Casein kinase I isoform epsilon OS=Homo sapiens GN=CSNK1E PE=1 SV=1 
- [KC1E_HUMAN] 
18,03 
7 
7 
12 
47,3 
P25774 
Cathepsin S OS=Homo sapiens GN=CTSS PE=1 SV=3 - [CATS_HUMAN] 
14,50 
4 
4 
5 
37,5 
A7IC65 
Chaperone protein DnaK OS=Xanthobacter autotrophicus (strain ATCC BAA-
1158 / Py2) GN=dnaK PE=3 SV=1 - [DNAK_XANP2] 
5,23 
1 
3 
8 
67,6 
Q99895 
Chymotrypsin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=CTRC PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CTRC_HUMAN] 
66,04 
17 
17 
104 
29,5 
P08217 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 2A OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA2A PE=1 SV=1 - [CEL2A_HUMAN] 
86,62 
13 
18 
1107 
28,9 
P08218 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 2B OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA2B PE=2 SV=2 - [CEL2B_HUMAN] 
27,88 
1 
6 
120 
28,8 
P09093 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 3A OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA3A PE=1 SV=3 - [CEL3A_HUMAN] 
56,67 
11 
15 
178 
29,5 
P08861 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 3B OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA3B PE=1 SV=3 - [CEL3B_HUMAN] 
65,56 
11 
15 
181 
29,2 
P17538 
Chymotrypsinogen B OS=Homo sapiens GN=CTRB1 PE=2 SV=1 - 
[CTRB1_HUMAN] 
29,28 
4 
4 
6 
27,9 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 8 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q00610 
Clathrin heavy chain 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CLTC PE=1 SV=5 - 
[CLH1_HUMAN] 
2,33 
4 
4 
7 
191,5 
Q9Y281 
Cofilin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CFL2 PE=1 SV=1 - [COF2_HUMAN] 
11,45 
2 
2 
9 
18,7 
Q86UP6 
CUB and zona pellucida-like domain-containing protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CUZD1 PE=2 SV=1 - [CUZD1_HUMAN] 
30,15 
11 
11 
38 
68,1 
P06493 
Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDK1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[CDK1_HUMAN] 
7,07 
2 
2 
3 
34,1 
P28838 
Cytosol aminopeptidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=LAP3 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[AMPL_HUMAN] 
28,52 
13 
13 
25 
56,1 
O43175 
D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens GN=PHGDH PE=1 
SV=4 - [SERA_HUMAN] 
4,88 
2 
2 
3 
56,6 
Q9UGM3 
Deleted in malignant brain tumors 1 protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=DMBT1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [DMBT1_HUMAN] 
17,70 
7 
7 
20 
260,6 
P24855 
Deoxyribonuclease-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DNASE1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[DNAS1_HUMAN] 
32,62 
6 
6 
19 
31,4 
P81605 
Dermcidin OS=Homo sapiens GN=DCD PE=1 SV=2 - [DCD_HUMAN] 
22,73 
2 
2 
2 
11,3 
Q86SJ6 
Desmoglein-4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSG4 PE=1 SV=1 - [DSG4_HUMAN] 
4,62 
4 
4 
7 
113,8 
P15924 
Desmoplakin OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSP PE=1 SV=3 - [DESP_HUMAN] 
16,09 
42 
42 
85 
331,6 
P09622 
Dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=DLD 
PE=1 SV=2 - [DLDH_HUMAN] 
9,43 
4 
4 
9 
54,1 
Q16555 
Dihydropyrimidinase-related protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPYSL2 PE=1 
SV=1 - [DPYL2_HUMAN] 
4,72 
1 
2 
2 
62,3 
Q14195 
Dihydropyrimidinase-related protein 3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPYSL3 PE=1 
SV=1 - [DPYL3_HUMAN] 
4,56 
1 
2 
3 
61,9 
Q01459 
Di-N-acetylchitobiase OS=Homo sapiens GN=CTBS PE=1 SV=1 - 
[DIAC_HUMAN] 
15,84 
5 
5 
6 
43,7 
P16444 
Dipeptidase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPEP1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[DPEP1_HUMAN] 
31,63 
8 
8 
19 
45,6 
P27487 
Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPP4 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[DPP4_HUMAN] 
47,52 
40 
40 
215 
88,2 
O95147 
Dual specificity protein phosphatase 14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DUSP14 
PE=1 SV=1 - [DUS14_HUMAN] 
44,44 
6 
6 
14 
22,2 
P63167 
Dynein light chain 1, cytoplasmic OS=Homo sapiens GN=DYNLL1 PE=1 
SV=1 - [DYL1_HUMAN] 
25,84 
2 
2 
4 
10,4 
O14638 
Ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase family member 3 
OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENPP3 PE=1 SV=2 - [ENPP3_HUMAN] 
4,23 
3 
3 
4 
100,1 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 9 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q6UWV6 
Ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase family member 7 
OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENPP7 PE=1 SV=3 - [ENPP7_HUMAN] 
32,31 
10 
11 
41 
51,5 
P68104 
Elongation factor 1-alpha 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF1A1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[EF1A1_HUMAN] 
35,28 
14 
14 
51 
50,1 
P26641 
Elongation factor 1-gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF1G PE=1 SV=3 - 
[EF1G_HUMAN] 
6,64 
3 
3 
4 
50,1 
P13639 
Elongation factor 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF2 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[EF2_HUMAN] 
19,11 
12 
12 
21 
95,3 
P14625 
Endoplasmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90B1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ENPL_HUMAN] 
8,72 
6 
7 
13 
92,4 
B6YQN5 
Enolase OS=Azobacteroides pseudotrichonymphae genomovar. CFP2 
GN=eno PE=3 SV=1 - [ENO_AZOPC] 
5,84 
1 
2 
2 
46,5 
Q89Z05 
Enolase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / DSM 2079 / 
NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=eno PE=3 SV=1 - [ENO_BACTN] 
3,76 
1 
2 
3 
46,1 
Q89KV6 
Enolase OS=Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens (strain JCM 10833 / IAM 13628 / 
NBRC 14792 / USDA 110) GN=eno PE=3 SV=1 - [ENO_BRADU] 
4,68 
1 
2 
2 
45,1 
C0Z6L3 
Enolase OS=Brevibacillus brevis (strain 47 / JCM 6285 / NBRC 100599) 
GN=eno PE=3 SV=1 - [ENO_BREBN] 
4,91 
1 
2 
2 
45,9 
P98073 
Enteropeptidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TMPRSS15 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[ENTK_HUMAN] 
32,97 
22 
22 
99 
112,9 
P60842 
Eukaryotic initiation factor 4A-I OS=Homo sapiens GN=EIF4A1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[IF4A1_HUMAN] 
14,29 
5 
5 
12 
46,1 
Q13347 
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit I OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=EIF3I PE=1 SV=1 - [EIF3I_HUMAN] 
5,54 
2 
2 
4 
36,5 
Q9GZV4 
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=EIF5A2 
PE=1 SV=3 - [IF5A2_HUMAN] 
12,42 
2 
2 
4 
16,8 
P15311 
Ezrin OS=Homo sapiens GN=EZR PE=1 SV=4 - [EZRI_HUMAN] 
7,17 
5 
5 
11 
69,4 
P02794 
Ferritin heavy chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=FTH1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[FRIH_HUMAN] 
9,29 
2 
2 
2 
21,2 
Q5D862 
Filaggrin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLG2 PE=1 SV=1 - [FILA2_HUMAN] 
2,55 
2 
2 
3 
247,9 
P21333 
Filamin-A OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLNA PE=1 SV=4 - [FLNA_HUMAN] 
2,38 
4 
6 
14 
280,6 
Q14315 
Filamin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLNC PE=1 SV=3 - [FLNC_HUMAN] 
7,08 
14 
16 
40 
290,8 
P17931 
Galectin-3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=LGALS3 PE=1 SV=5 - [LEG3_HUMAN] 
16,00 
3 
3 
8 
26,1 
Q08380 
Galectin-3-binding protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=LGALS3BP PE=1 SV=1 - 
[LG3BP_HUMAN] 
13,50 
6 
6 
7 
65,3 
Q96QA5 
Gasdermin-A OS=Homo sapiens GN=GSDMA PE=1 SV=4 - 
6,97 
3 
3 
4 
49,3 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 10 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[GSDMA_HUMAN] 
G8JZS4 
Glucan 1,4-alpha-glucosidase SusB OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain 
ATCC 29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=susB PE=1 
SV=1 - [SUSB_BACTN] 
2,85 
2 
2 
4 
84,3 
Q04609 
Glutamate carboxypeptidase 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=FOLH1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[FOLH1_HUMAN] 
19,60 
10 
10 
16 
84,3 
P94598 
Glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 
29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=gdhA PE=3 SV=2 - 
[DHE3_BACTN] 
16,67 
5 
6 
15 
49,0 
Q07075 
Glutamyl aminopeptidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENPEP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[AMPE_HUMAN] 
12,02 
10 
10 
15 
109,2 
P68688 
Glutaredoxin-1 OS=Escherichia coli (strain K12) GN=grxA PE=1 SV=1 - 
[GLRX1_ECOLI] 
37,65 
3 
3 
7 
9,7 
Q5HHP5 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1 OS=Staphylococcus aureus 
(strain COL) GN=gapA1 PE=3 SV=1 - [G3P1_STAAC] 
5,95 
2 
2 
13 
36,3 
O43026 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2 OS=Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe (strain 972 / ATCC 24843) GN=gpd3 PE=1 SV=1 - [G3P2_SCHPO] 
11,94 
2 
3 
12 
35,7 
Q757I2 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Ashbya gossypii (strain 
ATCC 10895 / CBS 109.51 / FGSC 9923 / NRRL Y-1056) GN=GPD PE=3 
SV=2 - [G3P_ASHGO] 
3,32 
2 
2 
6 
35,5 
Q59199 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain 
YCH46) GN=gap PE=3 SV=2 - [G3P_BACFR] 
6,61 
1 
2 
3 
35,6 
Q89AK1 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Buchnera aphidicola 
subsp. Baizongia pistaciae (strain Bp) GN=gapA PE=3 SV=1 - [G3P_BUCBP] 
7,51 
1 
2 
3 
36,8 
P0CN75 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Cryptococcus neoformans 
var. neoformans serotype D (strain B-3501A) GN=GPD PE=3 SV=1 - 
[G3P_CRYNB] 
6,78 
1 
2 
5 
36,3 
B7LQ20 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Escherichia fergusonii 
(strain ATCC 35469 / DSM 13698 / CDC 0568-73) GN=gapA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[G3P_ESCF3] 
9,37 
1 
3 
4 
35,5 
P04406 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=GAPDH PE=1 SV=3 - [G3P_HUMAN] 
29,85 
6 
7 
14 
36,0 
P0C0G7 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Streptococcus pyogenes 
serotype M1 GN=gap PE=3 SV=2 - [G3P_STRP1] 
6,85 
1 
2 
3 
35,9 
Q6FR65 
GTP-binding nuclear protein GSP1/Ran OS=Candida glabrata (strain ATCC 
2001 / CBS 138 / JCM 3761 / NBRC 0622 / NRRL Y-65) GN=GSP1 PE=3 
SV=1 - [GSP1_CANGA] 
9,81 
2 
2 
9 
24,3 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 11 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P63244 
Guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit beta-2-like 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=GNB2L1 PE=1 SV=3 - [GBLP_HUMAN] 
18,93 
6 
6 
11 
35,1 
Q5B2V1 
Heat shock 70 kDa protein OS=Emericella nidulans (strain FGSC A4 / ATCC 
38163 / CBS 112.46 / NRRL 194 / M139) GN=hsp70 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HSP70_EMENI] 
6,99 
1 
4 
14 
69,9 
P11142 
Heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA8 PE=1 
SV=1 - [HSP7C_HUMAN] 
28,95 
6 
16 
46 
70,9 
P04792 
Heat shock protein beta-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPB1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[HSPB1_HUMAN] 
13,66 
4 
4 
6 
22,8 
P07900 
Heat shock protein HSP 90-alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90AA1 PE=1 
SV=5 - [HS90A_HUMAN] 
14,75 
5 
10 
22 
84,6 
P08238 
Heat shock protein HSP 90-beta OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90AB1 PE=1 
SV=4 - [HS90B_HUMAN] 
18,65 
6 
12 
34 
83,2 
P41797 
Heat shock protein SSA1 OS=Candida albicans (strain SC5314 / ATCC MYA-
2876) GN=SSA1 PE=1 SV=2 - [HSP71_CANAL] 
11,59 
1 
5 
19 
70,3 
P54652 
Heat shock-related 70 kDa protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA2 PE=1 
SV=1 - [HSP72_HUMAN] 
21,28 
2 
10 
37 
70,0 
Q6MZM0 
Hephaestin-like protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HEPHL1 PE=2 SV=2 - 
[HPHL1_HUMAN] 
3,19 
2 
2 
5 
131,5 
P09651 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA1 PE=1 SV=5 - [ROA1_HUMAN] 
15,05 
5 
5 
7 
38,7 
Q14103 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D0 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPD PE=1 SV=1 - [HNRPD_HUMAN] 
6,20 
2 
2 
2 
38,4 
P31943 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPH1 PE=1 SV=4 - [HNRH1_HUMAN] 
13,36 
4 
4 
8 
49,2 
P61978 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPK PE=1 SV=1 - [HNRPK_HUMAN] 
9,94 
4 
4 
7 
50,9 
P52272 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein M OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPM PE=1 SV=3 - [HNRPM_HUMAN] 
2,33 
2 
2 
2 
77,5 
O60506 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein Q OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=SYNCRIP PE=1 SV=2 - [HNRPQ_HUMAN] 
3,21 
2 
2 
3 
69,6 
P22626 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins A2/B1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA2B1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ROA2_HUMAN] 
15,86 
4 
4 
10 
37,4 
P09429 
High mobility group protein B1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HMGB1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[HMGB1_HUMAN] 
7,91 
1 
2 
2 
24,9 
P26583 
High mobility group protein B2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HMGB2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[HMGB2_HUMAN] 
11,96 
1 
2 
2 
24,0 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 12 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P07305 
Histone H1.0 OS=Homo sapiens GN=H1F0 PE=1 SV=3 - [H10_HUMAN] 
9,28 
2 
2 
2 
20,9 
P16403 
Histone H1.2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H1C PE=1 SV=2 - 
[H12_HUMAN] 
17,84 
7 
7 
26 
21,4 
P16401 
Histone H1.5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[H15_HUMAN] 
12,39 
4 
4 
14 
22,6 
P04908 
Histone H2A type 1-B/E OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H2AB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[H2A1B_HUMAN] 
52,31 
2 
4 
26 
14,1 
Q16777 
Histone H2A type 2-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST2H2AC PE=1 SV=4 - 
[H2A2C_HUMAN] 
58,14 
3 
5 
26 
14,0 
P06899 
Histone H2B type 1-J OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H2BJ PE=1 SV=3 - 
[H2B1J_HUMAN] 
35,71 
2 
5 
43 
13,9 
O60814 
Histone H2B type 1-K OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H2BK PE=1 SV=3 - 
[H2B1K_HUMAN] 
35,71 
2 
5 
58 
13,9 
P68431 
Histone H3.1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H3A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[H31_HUMAN] 
43,38 
4 
4 
22 
15,4 
P62805 
Histone H4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H4A PE=1 SV=2 - [H4_HUMAN] 
54,37 
10 
10 
58 
11,4 
Q86YZ3 
Hornerin OS=Homo sapiens GN=HRNR PE=1 SV=2 - [HORN_HUMAN] 
5,16 
3 
3 
7 
282,2 
P01876 
Ig alpha-1 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHA1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[IGHA1_HUMAN] 
70,25 
7 
19 
172 
37,6 
P01877 
Ig alpha-2 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHA2 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[IGHA2_HUMAN] 
64,71 
5 
17 
161 
36,5 
P01857 
Ig gamma-1 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHG1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[IGHG1_HUMAN] 
13,03 
3 
3 
10 
36,1 
P01859 
Ig gamma-2 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHG2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[IGHG2_HUMAN] 
7,98 
2 
2 
9 
35,9 
P01764 
Ig heavy chain V-III region 23 OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHV3-23 PE=1 SV=2 
- [HV303_HUMAN] 
18,80 
1 
2 
5 
12,6 
P01766 
Ig heavy chain V-III region BRO OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HV305_HUMAN] 
25,00 
2 
2 
11 
13,2 
P01781 
Ig heavy chain V-III region GAL OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HV320_HUMAN] 
17,24 
2 
2 
5 
12,7 
P01765 
Ig heavy chain V-III region TIL OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HV304_HUMAN] 
26,09 
1 
2 
11 
12,3 
P01834 
Ig kappa chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGKC PE=1 SV=1 - 
[IGKC_HUMAN] 
85,85 
8 
8 
137 
11,6 
P01593 
Ig kappa chain V-I region AG OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
31,48 
2 
2 
10 
12,0 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 13 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[KV101_HUMAN] 
P01598 
Ig kappa chain V-I region EU OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KV106_HUMAN] 
26,85 
2 
2 
6 
11,8 
P06310 
Ig kappa chain V-II region RPMI 6410 OS=Homo sapiens PE=4 SV=1 - 
[KV206_HUMAN] 
15,04 
1 
2 
4 
14,7 
P01617 
Ig kappa chain V-II region TEW OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KV204_HUMAN] 
38,94 
2 
3 
11 
12,3 
P04207 
Ig kappa chain V-III region CLL OS=Homo sapiens PE=4 SV=2 - 
[KV308_HUMAN] 
19,38 
2 
2 
2 
14,3 
P01623 
Ig kappa chain V-III region WOL OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KV305_HUMAN] 
50,46 
4 
4 
13 
11,7 
P06312 
Ig kappa chain V-IV region (Fragment) OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGKV4-1 
PE=4 SV=1 - [KV401_HUMAN] 
29,75 
1 
3 
13 
13,4 
P01625 
Ig kappa chain V-IV region Len OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=2 - 
[KV402_HUMAN] 
36,84 
1 
3 
21 
12,6 
P80748 
Ig lambda chain V-III region LOI OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[LV302_HUMAN] 
21,62 
2 
2 
2 
11,9 
P01714 
Ig lambda chain V-III region SH OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[LV301_HUMAN] 
34,26 
3 
3 
4 
11,4 
P0CG05 
Ig lambda-2 chain C regions OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGLC2 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[LAC2_HUMAN] 
81,13 
3 
6 
52 
11,3 
P01871 
Ig mu chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHM PE=1 SV=3 - 
[IGHM_HUMAN] 
33,19 
13 
13 
61 
49,3 
Q9Y6R7 
IgGFc-binding protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=FCGBP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[FCGBP_HUMAN] 
39,63 
88 
88 
425 
571,6 
P01591 
Immunoglobulin J chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=JCHAIN PE=1 SV=4 - 
[IGJ_HUMAN] 
23,90 
4 
4 
15 
18,1 
B9A064 
Immunoglobulin lambda-like polypeptide 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGLL5 
PE=2 SV=2 - [IGLL5_HUMAN] 
35,98 
2 
5 
28 
23,0 
Q8WWA0 
Intelectin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ITLN1 PE=1 SV=1 - [ITLN1_HUMAN] 
32,91 
6 
9 
24 
34,9 
Q8WWU7 
Intelectin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ITLN2 PE=2 SV=1 - [ITLN2_HUMAN] 
16,62 
2 
5 
16 
36,2 
P09923 
Intestinal-type alkaline phosphatase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ALPI PE=1 
SV=2 - [PPBI_HUMAN] 
57,01 
24 
24 
264 
56,8 
P14923 
Junction plakoglobin OS=Homo sapiens GN=JUP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PLAK_HUMAN] 
44,43 
25 
25 
65 
81,7 
P06870 
Kallikrein-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KLK1 PE=1 SV=2 - [KLK1_HUMAN] 
21,37 
4 
4 
16 
28,9 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 14 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q15323 
Keratin, type I cuticular Ha1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT31 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K1H1_HUMAN] 
40,63 
1 
24 
576 
47,2 
Q14532 
Keratin, type I cuticular Ha2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT32 PE=2 SV=3 - 
[K1H2_HUMAN] 
17,86 
2 
8 
132 
50,3 
O76009 
Keratin, type I cuticular Ha3-I OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT33A PE=2 SV=2 - 
[KT33A_HUMAN] 
35,64 
1 
20 
472 
45,9 
Q14525 
Keratin, type I cuticular Ha3-II OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT33B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[KT33B_HUMAN] 
28,71 
2 
17 
438 
46,2 
O76013 
Keratin, type I cuticular Ha6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT36 PE=2 SV=1 - 
[KRT36_HUMAN] 
18,84 
2 
12 
153 
52,2 
P13645 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 10 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT10 PE=1 SV=6 - 
[K1C10_HUMAN] 
57,53 
22 
29 
101 
58,8 
P02533 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT14 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[K1C14_HUMAN] 
21,82 
4 
11 
30 
51,5 
P08779 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 16 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT16 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[K1C16_HUMAN] 
20,93 
3 
10 
25 
51,2 
Q6A163 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 39 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT39 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K1C39_HUMAN] 
6,92 
3 
3 
5 
55,6 
Q6A162 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 40 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT40 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K1C40_HUMAN] 
6,26 
1 
4 
100 
48,1 
P78386 
Keratin, type II cuticular Hb5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT85 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KRT85_HUMAN] 
52,86 
6 
44 
824 
55,8 
O43790 
Keratin, type II cuticular Hb6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT86 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KRT86_HUMAN] 
53,70 
6 
40 
729 
53,5 
P04264 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT1 PE=1 SV=6 - 
[K2C1_HUMAN] 
60,71 
33 
38 
167 
66,0 
P35908 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 2 epidermal OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [K22E_HUMAN] 
60,09 
24 
31 
78 
65,4 
P13647 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT5 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K2C5_HUMAN] 
20,85 
5 
15 
38 
62,3 
P02538 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 6A OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT6A PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K2C6A_HUMAN] 
22,34 
3 
14 
38 
60,0 
P08729 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 7 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT7 PE=1 SV=5 - 
[K2C7_HUMAN] 
12,37 
2 
9 
37 
51,4 
Q86Y46 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 73 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT73 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[K2C73_HUMAN] 
5,37 
2 
3 
8 
58,9 
O95678 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 75 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT75 PE=1 SV=2 - 
9,62 
2 
7 
54 
59,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 15 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[K2C75_HUMAN] 
Q6KB66 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 80 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT80 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K2C80_HUMAN] 
8,63 
2 
3 
7 
50,5 
Q8IUC1 
Keratin-associated protein 11-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRTAP11-1 PE=2 
SV=1 - [KR111_HUMAN] 
7,36 
2 
2 
19 
17,1 
P09848 
Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=LCT PE=1 SV=3 - 
[LPH_HUMAN] 
4,88 
8 
8 
13 
218,4 
A6L2R5 
L-arabinose isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 
1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=araA PE=3 SV=1 - [ARAA_BACV8] 
9,63 
4 
4 
13 
57,2 
Q8TF66 
Leucine-rich repeat-containing protein 15 OS=Homo sapiens GN=LRRC15 
PE=2 SV=2 - [LRC15_HUMAN] 
8,09 
5 
5 
17 
64,3 
P30740 
Leukocyte elastase inhibitor OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ILEU_HUMAN] 
37,99 
13 
13 
27 
42,7 
Q5LIN8 
L-fucose isomerase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain ATCC 25285 / DSM 2151 
/ JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=fucI PE=3 SV=1 - [FUCI_BACFN] 
11,19 
1 
5 
7 
65,3 
A6L048 
L-fucose isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 1447 
/ NCTC 11154) GN=fucI PE=3 SV=1 - [FUCI_BACV8] 
10,83 
2 
6 
10 
65,6 
P05451 
Lithostathine-1-alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=REG1A PE=1 SV=3 - 
[REG1A_HUMAN] 
56,02 
10 
10 
88 
18,7 
P00338 
L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=LDHA PE=1 SV=2 - 
[LDHA_HUMAN] 
6,33 
1 
2 
10 
36,7 
P07195 
L-lactate dehydrogenase B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=LDHB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[LDHB_HUMAN] 
6,29 
1 
2 
9 
36,6 
Q8A1A2 
L-rhamnose isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 
29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=rhaA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[RHAA_BACTN] 
10,05 
4 
4 
6 
47,5 
P11279 
Lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=LAMP1 PE=1 SV=3 - [LAMP1_HUMAN] 
4,08 
2 
2 
4 
44,9 
P13473 
Lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein 2 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=LAMP2 PE=1 SV=2 - [LAMP2_HUMAN] 
4,88 
2 
2 
8 
44,9 
P61626 
Lysozyme C OS=Homo sapiens GN=LYZ PE=1 SV=1 - [LYSC_HUMAN] 
22,30 
3 
3 
4 
16,5 
Q64P62 
Malate dehydrogenase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain YCH46) GN=mdh 
PE=3 SV=1 - [MDH_BACFR] 
22,68 
4 
5 
14 
32,7 
A6L903 
Malate dehydrogenase OS=Parabacteroides distasonis (strain ATCC 8503 / 
DSM 20701 / NCTC 11152) GN=mdh PE=3 SV=1 - [MDH_PARD8] 
21,09 
3 
4 
11 
32,8 
P40926 
Malate dehydrogenase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=MDH2 PE=1 
14,20 
4 
4 
9 
35,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 16 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
SV=3 - [MDHM_HUMAN] 
O43451 
Maltase-glucoamylase, intestinal OS=Homo sapiens GN=MGAM PE=1 SV=5 
- [MGA_HUMAN] 
31,93 
49 
53 
300 
209,7 
Q16819 
Meprin A subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=MEP1A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[MEP1A_HUMAN] 
16,35 
9 
9 
26 
84,4 
Q16820 
Meprin A subunit beta OS=Homo sapiens GN=MEP1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[MEP1B_HUMAN] 
12,27 
7 
7 
10 
79,5 
Q02817 
Mucin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MUC2 PE=1 SV=2 - [MUC2_HUMAN] 
4,96 
24 
24 
101 
540,0 
Q6W4X9 
Mucin-6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MUC6 PE=1 SV=3 - [MUC6_HUMAN] 
1,23 
2 
2 
4 
256,9 
P60660 
Myosin light polypeptide 6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYL6 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[MYL6_HUMAN] 
15,89 
2 
2 
2 
16,9 
P35579 
Myosin-9 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYH9 PE=1 SV=4 - [MYH9_HUMAN] 
2,45 
5 
5 
9 
226,4 
P20933 
N(4)-(beta-N-acetylglucosaminyl)-L-asparaginase OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=AGA PE=1 SV=2 - [ASPG_HUMAN] 
6,65 
2 
2 
7 
37,2 
Q9UQQ1 
N-acetylated-alpha-linked acidic dipeptidase-like protein OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=NAALADL1 PE=1 SV=2 - [NALDL_HUMAN] 
27,30 
15 
15 
33 
80,5 
P31026 
NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Corynebacterium glutamicum 
(strain ATCC 13032 / DSM 20300 / JCM 1318 / LMG 3730 / NCIMB 10025) 
GN=gdh PE=3 SV=2 - [DHE4_CORGL] 
8,05 
1 
4 
18 
49,0 
P00370 
NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Escherichia coli (strain K12) 
GN=gdhA PE=1 SV=1 - [DHE4_ECOLI] 
13,65 
1 
5 
13 
48,6 
P55990 
NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Helicobacter pylori (strain 
ATCC 700392 / 26695) GN=gdhA PE=3 SV=1 - [DHE4_HELPY] 
4,69 
2 
2 
4 
49,3 
P00369 
NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Neurospora crassa (strain 
ATCC 24698 / 74-OR23-1A / CBS 708.71 / DSM 1257 / FGSC 987) GN=gdh 
PE=1 SV=3 - [DHE4_NEUCR] 
11,67 
1 
5 
17 
48,8 
P15111 
NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Salmonella typhimurium (strain 
LT2 / SGSC1412 / ATCC 700720) GN=gdhA PE=3 SV=2 - [DHE4_SALTY] 
13,65 
1 
5 
17 
48,5 
P94316 
NAD-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain 
YCH46) GN=gdhB PE=2 SV=2 - [DHE2_BACFR] 
31,91 
7 
12 
29 
48,4 
B2RKJ1 
NAD-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis (strain 
ATCC 33277 / DSM 20709 / JCM 12257) GN=gdh PE=3 SV=1 - 
[DHE2_PORG3] 
11,46 
1 
5 
11 
49,2 
P08473 
Neprilysin OS=Homo sapiens GN=MME PE=1 SV=2 - [NEP_HUMAN] 
8,93 
6 
6 
11 
85,5 
Q09666 
Neuroblast differentiation-associated protein AHNAK OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=AHNAK PE=1 SV=2 - [AHNK_HUMAN] 
4,01 
3 
3 
13 
628,7 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 17 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q9NR71 
Neutral ceramidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ASAH2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ASAH2_HUMAN] 
6,54 
4 
4 
5 
85,5 
P80188 
Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin OS=Homo sapiens GN=LCN2 
PE=1 SV=2 - [NGAL_HUMAN] 
63,64 
11 
11 
40 
22,6 
Q15274 
Nicotinate-nucleotide pyrophosphorylase [carboxylating] OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=QPRT PE=1 SV=3 - [NADC_HUMAN] 
11,78 
3 
3 
5 
30,8 
P19338 
Nucleolin OS=Homo sapiens GN=NCL PE=1 SV=3 - [NUCL_HUMAN] 
4,08 
3 
3 
4 
76,6 
P04746 
Pancreatic alpha-amylase OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY2A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AMYP_HUMAN] 
67,32 
4 
25 
139 
57,7 
P55259 
Pancreatic secretory granule membrane major glycoprotein GP2 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=GP2 PE=2 SV=3 - [GP2_HUMAN] 
11,55 
5 
5 
17 
59,4 
P16233 
Pancreatic triacylglycerol lipase OS=Homo sapiens GN=PNLIP PE=1 SV=1 - 
[LIPP_HUMAN] 
7,31 
3 
3 
6 
51,1 
O95497 
Pantetheinase OS=Homo sapiens GN=VNN1 PE=1 SV=2 - [VNN1_HUMAN] 
4,68 
2 
2 
4 
57,0 
Q06830 
Peroxiredoxin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRDX1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PRDX1_HUMAN] 
24,12 
4 
5 
9 
22,1 
P32119 
Peroxiredoxin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRDX2 PE=1 SV=5 - 
[PRDX2_HUMAN] 
14,65 
1 
2 
2 
21,9 
P30041 
Peroxiredoxin-6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRDX6 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PRDX6_HUMAN] 
6,70 
2 
2 
2 
25,0 
A6VKV4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Actinobacillus succinogenes 
(strain ATCC 55618 / 130Z) GN=pckA PE=1 SV=1 - [PCKA_ACTSZ] 
11,15 
2 
5 
12 
59,1 
Q5L7N5 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain 
ATCC 25285 / DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_BACFN] 
37,38 
5 
19 
77 
59,0 
Q8A414 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron 
(strain ATCC 29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=pckA 
PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_BACTN] 
31,78 
3 
13 
54 
59,1 
C4Z0Q6 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium eligens (strain 
ATCC 27750 / VPI C15-48) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBE2] 
27,53 
4 
12 
46 
59,0 
C4ZBL1 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium rectale (strain 
ATCC 33656 / VPI 0990) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBR3] 
28,28 
2 
12 
35 
59,0 
A6LFQ4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Parabacteroides distasonis 
(strain ATCC 8503 / DSM 20701 / NCTC 11152) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PARD8] 
48,60 
9 
22 
73 
58,9 
B2RHV8 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis 
22,06 
2 
11 
44 
59,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 18 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
(strain ATCC 33277 / DSM 20709 / JCM 12257) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PORG3] 
B4F025 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Proteus mirabilis (strain 
HI4320) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_PROMH] 
14,47 
3 
6 
13 
59,3 
P00558 
Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PGK1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PGK1_HUMAN] 
10,07 
3 
3 
5 
44,6 
P04054 
Phospholipase A2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PLA2G1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PA21B_HUMAN] 
39,86 
5 
5 
23 
16,3 
Q8IV08 
Phospholipase D3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PLD3 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PLD3_HUMAN] 
4,08 
2 
2 
4 
54,7 
B6YRK7 
Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole-succinocarboxamide synthase 
OS=Azobacteroides pseudotrichonymphae genomovar. CFP2 GN=purC 
PE=3 SV=1 - [PUR7_AZOPC] 
7,12 
1 
2 
2 
37,6 
Q5LH03 
Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole-succinocarboxamide synthase 
OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain ATCC 25285 / DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / 
NCTC 9343) GN=purC PE=3 SV=1 - [PUR7_BACFN] 
8,92 
1 
2 
2 
35,5 
Q5LDN9 
Phosphoserine aminotransferase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain ATCC 
25285 / DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=serC PE=3 SV=1 - 
[SERC_BACFN] 
20,56 
2 
7 
17 
39,2 
Q8A8L4 
Phosphoserine aminotransferase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain 
ATCC 29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=serC PE=3 
SV=1 - [SERC_BACTN] 
20,85 
2 
7 
19 
39,4 
Q13835 
Plakophilin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PKP1 PE=1 SV=2 - [PKP1_HUMAN] 
8,43 
6 
6 
11 
82,8 
Q9Y446 
Plakophilin-3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PKP3 PE=1 SV=1 - [PKP3_HUMAN] 
7,53 
6 
6 
10 
87,0 
Q15149 
Plectin OS=Homo sapiens GN=PLEC PE=1 SV=3 - [PLEC_HUMAN] 
0,60 
3 
3 
3 
531,5 
Q15365 
Poly(rC)-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PCBP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[PCBP1_HUMAN] 
5,62 
1 
2 
4 
37,5 
Q15366 
Poly(rC)-binding protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PCBP2 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PCBP2_HUMAN] 
6,58 
1 
2 
3 
38,6 
P11940 
Polyadenylate-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PABPC1 PE=1 SV=2 
- [PABP1_HUMAN] 
13,36 
7 
7 
11 
70,6 
P01833 
Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor OS=Homo sapiens GN=PIGR PE=1 
SV=4 - [PIGR_HUMAN] 
42,28 
26 
26 
110 
83,2 
P0CG48 
Polyubiquitin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=UBC PE=1 SV=3 - [UBC_HUMAN] 
49,93 
3 
3 
30 
77,0 
P02545 
Prelamin-A/C OS=Homo sapiens GN=LMNA PE=1 SV=1 - [LMNA_HUMAN] 
15,66 
10 
10 
27 
74,1 
P17844 
Probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DDX5 
6,35 
4 
4 
6 
69,1 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 19 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
PE=1 SV=1 - [DDX5_HUMAN] 
Q2M2H8 
Probable maltase-glucoamylase 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MGAM2 PE=2 
SV=3 - [MGAL_HUMAN] 
1,87 
1 
4 
29 
277,8 
Q99623 
Prohibitin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PHB2 PE=1 SV=2 - [PHB2_HUMAN] 
5,69 
2 
2 
2 
33,3 
P30101 
Protein disulfide-isomerase A3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PDIA3 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[PDIA3_HUMAN] 
8,51 
4 
4 
5 
56,7 
P07237 
Protein disulfide-isomerase OS=Homo sapiens GN=P4HB PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PDIA1_HUMAN] 
8,46 
5 
5 
6 
57,1 
P05109 
Protein S100-A8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=S100A8 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[S10A8_HUMAN] 
23,66 
2 
2 
5 
10,8 
A6NCN2 
Putative keratin-87 protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT87P PE=5 SV=4 - 
[KR87P_HUMAN] 
54,51 
2 
25 
259 
29,1 
Q8IZP2 
Putative protein FAM10A4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ST13P4 PE=5 SV=1 - 
[ST134_HUMAN] 
8,33 
2 
2 
4 
27,4 
P14618 
Pyruvate kinase PKM OS=Homo sapiens GN=PKM PE=1 SV=4 - 
[KPYM_HUMAN] 
16,20 
9 
9 
27 
57,9 
P61224 
Ras-related protein Rap-1b OS=Homo sapiens GN=RAP1B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RAP1B_HUMAN] 
11,41 
2 
2 
2 
20,8 
O00584 
Ribonuclease T2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RNASET2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RNT2_HUMAN] 
9,77 
2 
2 
3 
29,5 
Q13228 
Selenium-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SELENBP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[SBP1_HUMAN] 
60,81 
25 
25 
101 
52,4 
A6L5K3 
Serine hydroxymethyltransferase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 
8482 / DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=glyA PE=3 SV=1 - [GLYA_BACV8] 
7,28 
1 
3 
9 
46,8 
B2RGR2 
Serine hydroxymethyltransferase OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis (strain ATCC 
33277 / DSM 20709 / JCM 12257) GN=glyA PE=3 SV=1 - [GLYA_PORG3] 
7,75 
1 
3 
8 
46,6 
P29508 
Serpin B3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB3 PE=1 SV=2 - [SPB3_HUMAN] 
4,36 
2 
2 
3 
44,5 
P36952 
Serpin B5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB5 PE=1 SV=2 - [SPB5_HUMAN] 
7,73 
3 
3 
4 
42,1 
P35237 
Serpin B6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB6 PE=1 SV=3 - [SPB6_HUMAN] 
63,30 
21 
21 
109 
42,6 
P02768 
Serum albumin OS=Homo sapiens GN=ALB PE=1 SV=2 - [ALBU_HUMAN] 
26,93 
15 
15 
42 
69,3 
Q9HAT2 
Sialate O-acetylesterase OS=Homo sapiens GN=SIAE PE=1 SV=1 - 
[SIAE_HUMAN] 
11,09 
5 
5 
8 
58,3 
P23246 
Splicing factor, proline- and glutamine-rich OS=Homo sapiens GN=SFPQ 
PE=1 SV=2 - [SFPQ_HUMAN] 
7,21 
4 
4 
8 
76,1 
P16949 
Stathmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=STMN1 PE=1 SV=3 - [STMN1_HUMAN] 
12,75 
2 
2 
3 
17,3 
P38646 
Stress-70 protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA9 PE=1 SV=2 
7,22 
3 
4 
8 
73,6 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 20 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
- [GRP75_HUMAN] 
P14410 
Sucrase-isomaltase, intestinal OS=Homo sapiens GN=SI PE=1 SV=6 - 
[SUIS_HUMAN] 
17,13 
25 
27 
54 
209,3 
P53638 
Superoxide dismutase [Fe] OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain YCH46) GN=sodB 
PE=3 SV=2 - [SODF_BACFR] 
11,40 
2 
2 
7 
21,8 
P17987 
T-complex protein 1 subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=TCP1 PE=1 SV=1 
- [TCPA_HUMAN] 
4,86 
3 
3 
3 
60,3 
P50991 
T-complex protein 1 subunit delta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT4 PE=1 SV=4 
- [TCPD_HUMAN] 
3,34 
2 
2 
4 
57,9 
P50990 
T-complex protein 1 subunit theta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT8 PE=1 SV=4 
- [TCPQ_HUMAN] 
3,65 
2 
2 
3 
59,6 
P0AA29 
Thioredoxin-1 OS=Salmonella typhi GN=trxA PE=3 SV=2 - [THIO_SALTI] 
47,71 
4 
4 
26 
11,8 
Q8WZ42 
Titin OS=Homo sapiens GN=TTN PE=1 SV=4 - [TITIN_HUMAN] 
0,84 
24 
24 
62 
3813,7 
Q01995 
Transgelin OS=Homo sapiens GN=TAGLN PE=1 SV=4 - [TAGL_HUMAN] 
9,45 
2 
2 
2 
22,6 
P55072 
Transitional endoplasmic reticulum ATPase OS=Homo sapiens GN=VCP 
PE=1 SV=4 - [TERA_HUMAN] 
3,23 
3 
3 
3 
89,3 
P02766 
Transthyretin OS=Homo sapiens GN=TTR PE=1 SV=1 - [TTHY_HUMAN] 
69,39 
9 
9 
27 
15,9 
Q5L923 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain ATCC 25285 / 
DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=tpiA PE=3 SV=1 - [TPIS_BACFN] 
33,47 
2 
5 
25 
26,6 
Q8A0U2 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 
29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=tpiA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[TPIS_BACTN] 
32,54 
4 
7 
30 
26,8 
A6KXL2 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / 
DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=tpiA PE=3 SV=1 - [TPIS_BACV8] 
68,13 
8 
10 
40 
26,9 
P60174 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPI1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TPIS_HUMAN] 
10,49 
3 
3 
5 
30,8 
P67936 
Tropomyosin alpha-4 chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPM4 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TPM4_HUMAN] 
14,11 
4 
4 
7 
28,5 
P07477 
Trypsin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRSS1 PE=1 SV=1 - [TRY1_HUMAN] 
28,34 
4 
5 
14 
26,5 
P07478 
Trypsin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRSS2 PE=1 SV=1 - [TRY2_HUMAN] 
31,98 
6 
7 
33 
26,5 
P68363 
Tubulin alpha-1B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBA1B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBA1B_HUMAN] 
45,45 
4 
14 
40 
50,1 
P68366 
Tubulin alpha-4A chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBA4A PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBA4A_HUMAN] 
39,06 
2 
12 
28 
49,9 
P07437 
Tubulin beta chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TBB5_HUMAN] 
47,75 
1 
15 
63 
49,6 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 21 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q13885 
Tubulin beta-2A chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB2A PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBB2A_HUMAN] 
59,33 
5 
19 
65 
49,9 
P68371 
Tubulin beta-4B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB4B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBB4B_HUMAN] 
55,06 
3 
18 
64 
49,8 
Q96DC9 
Ubiquitin thioesterase OTUB2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=OTUB2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[OTUB2_HUMAN] 
12,39 
3 
3 
4 
27,2 
P22314 
Ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=UBA1 
PE=1 SV=3 - [UBA1_HUMAN] 
2,08 
2 
2 
2 
117,8 
Q8A9J2 
Uronate isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / 
DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=uxaC PE=3 SV=2 - 
[UXAC_BACTN] 
18,38 
2 
7 
21 
54,3 
A6L4U4 
Uronate isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 1447 
/ NCTC 11154) GN=uxaC PE=3 SV=1 - [UXAC_BACV8] 
18,38 
2 
7 
19 
54,3 
P08670 
Vimentin OS=Homo sapiens GN=VIM PE=1 SV=4 - [VIME_HUMAN] 
19,31 
8 
11 
32 
53,6 
P12955 
Xaa-Pro dipeptidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=PEPD PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PEPD_HUMAN] 
15,42 
6 
6 
11 
54,5 
Q8A9M2 
Xylose isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / 
DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=xylA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[XYLA_BACTN] 
31,74 
4 
11 
28 
48,9 
A6L792 
Xylose isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 1447 / 
NCTC 11154) GN=xylA PE=3 SV=1 - [XYLA_BACV8] 
37,21 
7 
14 
35 
49,0 
P25311 
Zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein OS=Homo sapiens GN=AZGP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ZA2G_HUMAN] 
47,65 
11 
11 
25 
34,2 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 22 – 
Supplementary Table 3. All Proteins Detected in the Fecal Filtrate for Patient 5 
 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P61604 
10 kDa heat shock protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPE1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CH10_HUMAN] 
26,47 
3 
3 
11 
10,9 
P31946 
14-3-3 protein beta/alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAB PE=1 SV=3 - 
[1433B_HUMAN] 
26,02 
2 
6 
10 
28,1 
P62258 
14-3-3 protein epsilon OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAE PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433E_HUMAN] 
11,76 
2 
3 
10 
29,2 
Q04917 
14-3-3 protein eta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAH PE=1 SV=4 - 
[1433F_HUMAN] 
16,26 
2 
4 
10 
28,2 
P61981 
14-3-3 protein gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAG PE=1 SV=2 - 
[1433G_HUMAN] 
22,67 
2 
5 
11 
28,3 
P27348 
14-3-3 protein theta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAQ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433T_HUMAN] 
19,59 
2 
5 
14 
27,7 
P63104 
14-3-3 protein zeta/delta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAZ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433Z_HUMAN] 
13,88 
2 
3 
16 
27,7 
A6L050 
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate-independent phosphoglycerate mutase 
OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) 
GN=gpmI PE=3 SV=1 - [GPMI_BACV8] 
3,97 
2 
2 
7 
55,8 
Q13200 
26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 2 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=PSMD2 PE=1 SV=3 - [PSMD2_HUMAN] 
2,97 
2 
2 
3 
100,1 
P62280 
40S ribosomal protein S11 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS11 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS11_HUMAN] 
13,29 
2 
2 
9 
18,4 
P62277 
40S ribosomal protein S13 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS13 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS13_HUMAN] 
11,26 
2 
2 
5 
17,2 
P62263 
40S ribosomal protein S14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS14 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS14_HUMAN] 
17,88 
4 
4 
14 
16,3 
P62244 
40S ribosomal protein S15a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS15A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS15A_HUMAN] 
12,31 
2 
2 
4 
14,8 
P62269 
40S ribosomal protein S18 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS18 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS18_HUMAN] 
32,89 
6 
6 
18 
17,7 
P39019 
40S ribosomal protein S19 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS19 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS19_HUMAN] 
13,10 
2 
2 
6 
16,1 
P15880 
40S ribosomal protein S2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS2_HUMAN] 
10,24 
3 
3 
10 
31,3 
P60866 
40S ribosomal protein S20 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS20 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS20_HUMAN] 
25,21 
3 
3 
5 
13,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 23 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P62851 
40S ribosomal protein S25 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS25 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS25_HUMAN] 
13,60 
2 
2 
9 
13,7 
P23396 
40S ribosomal protein S3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS3_HUMAN] 
27,98 
7 
7 
15 
26,7 
P61247 
40S ribosomal protein S3a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS3A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS3A_HUMAN] 
13,26 
4 
4 
9 
29,9 
P62701 
40S ribosomal protein S4, X isoform OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS4X PE=1 
SV=2 - [RS4X_HUMAN] 
8,37 
3 
3 
4 
29,6 
O14277 
40S ribosomal protein S5-A OS=Schizosaccharomyces pombe (strain 972 / 
ATCC 24843) GN=rps5 PE=3 SV=1 - [RS5A_SCHPO] 
8,87 
2 
2 
5 
22,2 
P62753 
40S ribosomal protein S6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS6 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS6_HUMAN] 
14,86 
3 
3 
15 
28,7 
P62081 
40S ribosomal protein S7 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS7 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS7_HUMAN] 
8,76 
2 
2 
3 
22,1 
P62241 
40S ribosomal protein S8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS8 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS8_HUMAN] 
9,62 
2 
2 
9 
24,2 
P08865 
40S ribosomal protein SA OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPSA PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RSSA_HUMAN] 
10,85 
3 
3 
14 
32,8 
P49189 
4-trimethylaminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=ALDH9A1 PE=1 SV=3 - [AL9A1_HUMAN] 
3,64 
2 
2 
6 
53,8 
P10809 
60 kDa heat shock protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPD1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CH60_HUMAN] 
9,25 
6 
6 
17 
61,0 
P26373 
60S ribosomal protein L13 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL13 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RL13_HUMAN] 
9,00 
2 
2 
7 
24,2 
P61313 
60S ribosomal protein L15 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL15 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL15_HUMAN] 
11,27 
3 
3 
10 
24,1 
P18621 
60S ribosomal protein L17 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL17 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL17_HUMAN] 
14,13 
2 
2 
8 
21,4 
Q07020 
60S ribosomal protein L18 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL18 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL18_HUMAN] 
18,09 
3 
3 
12 
21,6 
P35268 
60S ribosomal protein L22 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL22 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL22_HUMAN] 
18,75 
2 
2 
8 
14,8 
P83731 
60S ribosomal protein L24 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL24 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL24_HUMAN] 
13,38 
2 
2 
4 
17,8 
P61254 
60S ribosomal protein L26 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL26 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL26_HUMAN] 
12,41 
3 
3 
6 
17,2 
P46779 
60S ribosomal protein L28 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL28 PE=1 SV=3 - 
15,33 
3 
3 
6 
15,7 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 24 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[RL28_HUMAN] 
P39023 
60S ribosomal protein L3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL3_HUMAN] 
8,44 
4 
4 
14 
46,1 
P49207 
60S ribosomal protein L34 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL34 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL34_HUMAN] 
13,68 
2 
2 
5 
13,3 
P83881 
60S ribosomal protein L36a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL36A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL36A_HUMAN] 
17,92 
2 
2 
9 
12,4 
Q02878 
60S ribosomal protein L6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL6 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL6_HUMAN] 
6,25 
3 
3 
16 
32,7 
P18124 
60S ribosomal protein L7 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL7 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL7_HUMAN] 
4,84 
2 
2 
5 
29,2 
P62917 
60S ribosomal protein L8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL8 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL8_HUMAN] 
10,51 
2 
2 
11 
28,0 
P11021 
78 kDa glucose-regulated protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA5 PE=1 
SV=2 - [GRP78_HUMAN] 
14,07 
7 
8 
37 
72,3 
Q92485 
Acid sphingomyelinase-like phosphodiesterase 3b OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=SMPDL3B PE=2 SV=2 - [ASM3B_HUMAN] 
4,84 
2 
2 
4 
50,8 
Q99798 
Aconitate hydratase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACO2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [ACON_HUMAN] 
3,59 
2 
2 
4 
85,4 
Q9UVX4 
Actin OS=Coprinopsis cinerea (strain Okayama-7 / 130 / ATCC MYA-4618 / 
FGSC 9003) GN=ACT1 PE=3 SV=1 - [ACT_COPC7] 
28,53 
1 
8 
79 
41,6 
P60709 
Actin, cytoplasmic 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACTB PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ACTB_HUMAN] 
41,33 
8 
15 
129 
41,7 
A1BEZ2 
Adenosylhomocysteinase OS=Chlorobium phaeobacteroides (strain DSM 
266) GN=ahcY PE=3 SV=1 - [SAHH_CHLPD] 
6,37 
1 
4 
12 
52,4 
P23526 
Adenosylhomocysteinase OS=Homo sapiens GN=AHCY PE=1 SV=4 - 
[SAHH_HUMAN] 
5,09 
1 
3 
9 
47,7 
B0UM37 
Adenosylhomocysteinase OS=Methylobacterium sp. (strain 4-46) GN=ahcY 
PE=3 SV=1 - [SAHH_METS4] 
7,69 
1 
4 
15 
51,1 
A6L1X1 
Adenylosuccinate synthetase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / 
DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=purA PE=3 SV=1 - [PURA_BACV8] 
6,15 
2 
2 
5 
46,8 
Q01518 
Adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CAP1 PE=1 
SV=5 - [CAP1_HUMAN] 
4,21 
2 
2 
7 
51,9 
P12235 
ADP/ATP translocase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SLC25A4 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[ADT1_HUMAN] 
6,38 
1 
2 
9 
33,0 
P05141 
ADP/ATP translocase 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SLC25A5 PE=1 SV=7 - 
[ADT2_HUMAN] 
6,38 
1 
2 
7 
32,8 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 25 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P84085 
ADP-ribosylation factor 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ARF5 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ARF5_HUMAN] 
11,67 
2 
2 
3 
20,5 
P01011 
Alpha-1-antichymotrypsin OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINA3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AACT_HUMAN] 
11,11 
3 
3 
6 
47,6 
P01009 
Alpha-1-antitrypsin OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINA1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[A1AT_HUMAN] 
50,00 
22 
22 
120 
46,7 
P01023 
Alpha-2-macroglobulin OS=Homo sapiens GN=A2M PE=1 SV=3 - 
[A2MG_HUMAN] 
3,66 
5 
5 
12 
163,2 
P12814 
Alpha-actinin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACTN1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ACTN1_HUMAN] 
2,35 
2 
2 
5 
103,0 
O43707 
Alpha-actinin-4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACTN4 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ACTN4_HUMAN] 
2,31 
2 
2 
4 
104,8 
P04745 
Alpha-amylase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY1A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AMY1_HUMAN] 
68,10 
1 
32 
426 
57,7 
P19961 
Alpha-amylase 2B OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY2B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[AMY2B_HUMAN] 
72,41 
3 
34 
433 
57,7 
P06733 
Alpha-enolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENO1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ENOA_HUMAN] 
5,76 
3 
3 
11 
47,1 
Q03154 
Aminoacylase-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACY1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ACY1_HUMAN] 
10,29 
3 
3 
5 
45,9 
P15144 
Aminopeptidase N OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANPEP PE=1 SV=4 - 
[AMPN_HUMAN] 
24,92 
28 
28 
110 
109,5 
P12821 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACE PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ACE_HUMAN] 
1,84 
2 
2 
3 
149,6 
P04083 
Annexin A1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANXA1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ANXA1_HUMAN] 
6,36 
2 
2 
15 
38,7 
P07355 
Annexin A2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANXA2 PE=1 SV=2 - [ANXA2_HUMAN] 
27,43 
8 
8 
36 
38,6 
P05090 
Apolipoprotein D OS=Homo sapiens GN=APOD PE=1 SV=1 - 
[APOD_HUMAN] 
15,34 
2 
2 
3 
21,3 
P05089 
Arginase-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ARG1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ARGI1_HUMAN] 
7,14 
3 
3 
5 
34,7 
P25705 
ATP synthase subunit alpha, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ATP5A1 
PE=1 SV=1 - [ATPA_HUMAN] 
8,14 
4 
4 
8 
59,7 
P06576 
ATP synthase subunit beta, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ATP5B 
PE=1 SV=3 - [ATPB_HUMAN] 
9,26 
4 
4 
18 
56,5 
A6ZP47 
ATP-dependent RNA helicase DED1 OS=Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain 
YJM789) GN=DED1 PE=3 SV=1 - [DED1_YEAS7] 
3,31 
2 
2 
4 
65,5 
P07814 
Bifunctional glutamate/proline--tRNA ligase OS=Homo sapiens GN=EPRS 
PE=1 SV=5 - [SYEP_HUMAN] 
1,06 
2 
2 
2 
170,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 26 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P12830 
Cadherin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDH1 PE=1 SV=3 - [CADH1_HUMAN] 
4,20 
2 
2 
3 
97,4 
Q9BYE9 
Cadherin-related family member 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDHR2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [CDHR2_HUMAN] 
6,03 
6 
6 
13 
141,5 
Q9HBB8 
Cadherin-related family member 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDHR5 PE=1 
SV=3 - [CDHR5_HUMAN] 
4,50 
2 
2 
5 
88,2 
A8K7I4 
Calcium-activated chloride channel regulator 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CLCA1 PE=1 SV=3 - [CLCA1_HUMAN] 
16,74 
14 
14 
28 
100,2 
P27797 
Calreticulin OS=Homo sapiens GN=CALR PE=1 SV=1 - [CALR_HUMAN] 
5,04 
2 
2 
4 
48,1 
P15085 
Carboxypeptidase A1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPA1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CBPA1_HUMAN] 
17,18 
5 
6 
16 
47,1 
P15086 
Carboxypeptidase B OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPB1 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[CBPB1_HUMAN] 
51,80 
17 
18 
64 
47,3 
Q9Y646 
Carboxypeptidase Q OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPQ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[CBPQ_HUMAN] 
4,03 
2 
2 
4 
51,9 
P13688 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM1 PE=1 SV=2 - [CEAM1_HUMAN] 
9,89 
3 
4 
10 
57,5 
P06731 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 5 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM5 PE=1 SV=3 - [CEAM5_HUMAN] 
9,40 
4 
5 
13 
76,7 
P31944 
Caspase-14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CASP14 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CASPE_HUMAN] 
12,81 
4 
4 
10 
27,7 
Q9UBR2 
Cathepsin Z OS=Homo sapiens GN=CTSZ PE=1 SV=1 - [CATZ_HUMAN] 
7,26 
2 
2 
5 
33,8 
P60953 
Cell division control protein 42 homolog OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDC42 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CDC42_HUMAN] 
10,99 
1 
2 
7 
21,2 
A7IC65 
Chaperone protein DnaK OS=Xanthobacter autotrophicus (strain ATCC BAA-
1158 / Py2) GN=dnaK PE=3 SV=1 - [DNAK_XANP2] 
5,23 
1 
3 
7 
67,6 
Q99895 
Chymotrypsin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=CTRC PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CTRC_HUMAN] 
23,13 
5 
5 
14 
29,5 
P08217 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 2A OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA2A PE=1 SV=1 - [CEL2A_HUMAN] 
53,16 
10 
10 
131 
28,9 
P09093 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 3A OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA3A PE=1 SV=3 - [CEL3A_HUMAN] 
55,56 
8 
10 
40 
29,5 
P08861 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 3B OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA3B PE=1 SV=3 - [CEL3B_HUMAN] 
47,78 
6 
8 
35 
29,2 
Q9Y281 
Cofilin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CFL2 PE=1 SV=1 - [COF2_HUMAN] 
23,49 
3 
3 
13 
18,7 
Q15517 
Corneodesmosin OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDSN PE=1 SV=3 - 
[CDSN_HUMAN] 
4,35 
2 
2 
2 
51,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 27 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q86UP6 
CUB and zona pellucida-like domain-containing protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CUZD1 PE=2 SV=1 - [CUZD1_HUMAN] 
10,05 
3 
3 
4 
68,1 
P06493 
Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDK1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[CDK1_HUMAN] 
7,07 
2 
2 
3 
34,1 
P28838 
Cytosol aminopeptidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=LAP3 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[AMPL_HUMAN] 
4,62 
2 
2 
5 
56,1 
O43175 
D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens GN=PHGDH PE=1 
SV=4 - [SERA_HUMAN] 
4,88 
2 
2 
9 
56,6 
Q9UGM3 
Deleted in malignant brain tumors 1 protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=DMBT1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [DMBT1_HUMAN] 
16,29 
4 
4 
11 
260,6 
P24855 
Deoxyribonuclease-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DNASE1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[DNAS1_HUMAN] 
16,31 
3 
3 
8 
31,4 
P81605 
Dermcidin OS=Homo sapiens GN=DCD PE=1 SV=2 - [DCD_HUMAN] 
34,55 
5 
5 
20 
11,3 
Q08554 
Desmocollin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSC1 PE=1 SV=2 - [DSC1_HUMAN] 
2,91 
2 
2 
5 
99,9 
Q02413 
Desmoglein-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSG1 PE=1 SV=2 - [DSG1_HUMAN] 
15,54 
10 
10 
29 
113,7 
P15924 
Desmoplakin OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSP PE=1 SV=3 - [DESP_HUMAN] 
2,58 
6 
6 
11 
331,6 
Q16555 
Dihydropyrimidinase-related protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPYSL2 PE=1 
SV=1 - [DPYL2_HUMAN] 
4,72 
1 
2 
6 
62,3 
Q14195 
Dihydropyrimidinase-related protein 3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPYSL3 PE=1 
SV=1 - [DPYL3_HUMAN] 
6,49 
2 
3 
10 
61,9 
P27487 
Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPP4 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[DPP4_HUMAN] 
33,16 
22 
22 
52 
88,2 
P68104 
Elongation factor 1-alpha 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF1A1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[EF1A1_HUMAN] 
25,32 
8 
8 
46 
50,1 
P26641 
Elongation factor 1-gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF1G PE=1 SV=3 - 
[EF1G_HUMAN] 
9,84 
3 
3 
5 
50,1 
P13639 
Elongation factor 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF2 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[EF2_HUMAN] 
14,57 
10 
10 
27 
95,3 
A9KRZ4 
Elongation factor Tu OS=Clostridium phytofermentans (strain ATCC 700394 / 
DSM 18823 / ISDg) GN=tuf PE=3 SV=1 - [EFTU_CLOPH] 
6,30 
1 
2 
3 
43,8 
A5FIJ9 
Elongation factor Tu OS=Flavobacterium johnsoniae (strain ATCC 17061 / 
DSM 2064 / UW101) GN=tuf PE=3 SV=1 - [EFTU_FLAJ1] 
5,82 
1 
2 
3 
43,0 
P14625 
Endoplasmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90B1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ENPL_HUMAN] 
8,09 
7 
7 
19 
92,4 
B2RLL7 
Enolase OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis (strain ATCC 33277 / DSM 20709 / 
JCM 12257) GN=eno PE=3 SV=1 - [ENO_PORG3] 
6,59 
2 
2 
3 
45,8 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 28 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P98073 
Enteropeptidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TMPRSS15 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[ENTK_HUMAN] 
6,08 
4 
4 
10 
112,9 
P60842 
Eukaryotic initiation factor 4A-I OS=Homo sapiens GN=EIF4A1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[IF4A1_HUMAN] 
12,07 
4 
4 
9 
46,1 
Q13347 
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit I OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=EIF3I PE=1 SV=1 - [EIF3I_HUMAN] 
5,54 
2 
2 
3 
36,5 
Q9Y262 
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit L OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=EIF3L PE=1 SV=1 - [EIF3L_HUMAN] 
3,37 
2 
2 
7 
66,7 
P15311 
Ezrin OS=Homo sapiens GN=EZR PE=1 SV=4 - [EZRI_HUMAN] 
6,48 
2 
4 
11 
69,4 
Q96AE4 
Far upstream element-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=FUBP1 
PE=1 SV=3 - [FUBP1_HUMAN] 
3,57 
2 
2 
6 
67,5 
Q92945 
Far upstream element-binding protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KHSRP 
PE=1 SV=4 - [FUBP2_HUMAN] 
3,66 
2 
2 
2 
73,1 
Q5D862 
Filaggrin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLG2 PE=1 SV=1 - [FILA2_HUMAN] 
1,92 
3 
3 
5 
247,9 
P21333 
Filamin-A OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLNA PE=1 SV=4 - [FLNA_HUMAN] 
5,97 
13 
14 
33 
280,6 
Q14315 
Filamin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLNC PE=1 SV=3 - [FLNC_HUMAN] 
9,14 
19 
20 
47 
290,8 
Q5L9E3 
Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain ATCC 25285 
/ DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=pgi PE=3 SV=1 - 
[G6PI_BACFN] 
6,97 
3 
3 
5 
48,7 
P94598 
Glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 
29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=gdhA PE=3 SV=2 - 
[DHE3_BACTN] 
3,60 
2 
2 
2 
49,0 
Q07075 
Glutamyl aminopeptidase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENPEP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[AMPE_HUMAN] 
5,02 
4 
4 
4 
109,2 
P68688 
Glutaredoxin-1 OS=Escherichia coli (strain K12) GN=grxA PE=1 SV=1 - 
[GLRX1_ECOLI] 
37,65 
4 
4 
17 
9,7 
P49433 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1 OS=Synechocystis sp. (strain 
PCC 6803 / Kazusa) GN=gap1 PE=3 SV=1 - [G3P1_SYNY3] 
9,44 
2 
2 
4 
36,1 
O43026 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2 OS=Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe (strain 972 / ATCC 24843) GN=gpd3 PE=1 SV=1 - [G3P2_SCHPO] 
11,94 
2 
3 
16 
35,7 
O52631 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Clostridium acetobutylicum 
(strain ATCC 824 / DSM 792 / JCM 1419 / LMG 5710 / VKM B-1787) GN=gap 
PE=1 SV=1 - [G3P_CLOAB] 
3,89 
2 
2 
3 
35,8 
P0CN75 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Cryptococcus neoformans 
var. neoformans serotype D (strain B-3501A) GN=GPD PE=3 SV=1 - 
[G3P_CRYNB] 
6,78 
1 
2 
6 
36,3 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 29 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P04406 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=GAPDH PE=1 SV=3 - [G3P_HUMAN] 
12,84 
3 
3 
8 
36,0 
P0C0G7 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Streptococcus pyogenes 
serotype M1 GN=gap PE=3 SV=2 - [G3P_STRP1] 
5,95 
1 
2 
3 
35,9 
Q6FR65 
GTP-binding nuclear protein GSP1/Ran OS=Candida glabrata (strain ATCC 
2001 / CBS 138 / JCM 3761 / NBRC 0622 / NRRL Y-65) GN=GSP1 PE=3 
SV=1 - [GSP1_CANGA] 
13,55 
3 
3 
20 
24,3 
P63244 
Guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit beta-2-like 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=GNB2L1 PE=1 SV=3 - [GBLP_HUMAN] 
6,94 
2 
2 
6 
35,1 
P34932 
Heat shock 70 kDa protein 4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA4 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[HSP74_HUMAN] 
2,98 
2 
2 
2 
94,3 
Q5B2V1 
Heat shock 70 kDa protein OS=Emericella nidulans (strain FGSC A4 / ATCC 
38163 / CBS 112.46 / NRRL 194 / M139) GN=hsp70 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HSP70_EMENI] 
6,99 
1 
5 
25 
69,9 
P11142 
Heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA8 PE=1 
SV=1 - [HSP7C_HUMAN] 
27,86 
9 
15 
86 
70,9 
P04792 
Heat shock protein beta-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPB1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[HSPB1_HUMAN] 
17,07 
3 
3 
8 
22,8 
P07900 
Heat shock protein HSP 90-alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90AA1 PE=1 
SV=5 - [HS90A_HUMAN] 
15,57 
3 
10 
45 
84,6 
P08238 
Heat shock protein HSP 90-beta OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90AB1 PE=1 
SV=4 - [HS90B_HUMAN] 
18,23 
5 
12 
72 
83,2 
P41797 
Heat shock protein SSA1 OS=Candida albicans (strain SC5314 / ATCC MYA-
2876) GN=SSA1 PE=1 SV=2 - [HSP71_CANAL] 
11,59 
1 
6 
20 
70,3 
Q99729 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A/B OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPAB PE=1 SV=2 - [ROAA_HUMAN] 
6,93 
1 
2 
7 
36,2 
P09651 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA1 PE=1 SV=5 - [ROA1_HUMAN] 
9,95 
3 
3 
9 
38,7 
P51991 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A3 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA3 PE=1 SV=2 - [ROA3_HUMAN] 
8,47 
2 
2 
4 
39,6 
Q14103 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D0 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPD PE=1 SV=1 - [HNRPD_HUMAN] 
6,76 
1 
2 
7 
38,4 
P61978 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPK PE=1 SV=1 - [HNRPK_HUMAN] 
14,25 
6 
6 
21 
50,9 
P14866 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L OS=Homo sapiens GN=HNRNPL 
PE=1 SV=2 - [HNRPL_HUMAN] 
2,89 
2 
2 
5 
64,1 
Q00839 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U OS=Homo sapiens 
6,55 
5 
5 
10 
90,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 30 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
GN=HNRNPU PE=1 SV=6 - [HNRPU_HUMAN] 
P22626 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins A2/B1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA2B1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ROA2_HUMAN] 
12,18 
4 
4 
16 
37,4 
P09429 
High mobility group protein B1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HMGB1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[HMGB1_HUMAN] 
7,91 
2 
2 
5 
24,9 
P16403 
Histone H1.2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H1C PE=1 SV=2 - 
[H12_HUMAN] 
15,96 
5 
5 
28 
21,4 
P16401 
Histone H1.5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[H15_HUMAN] 
12,39 
4 
4 
17 
22,6 
P0CN98 
Histone H2A OS=Cryptococcus neoformans var. neoformans serotype D 
(strain JEC21 / ATCC MYA-565) GN=HTA1 PE=3 SV=1 - [H2A_CRYNJ] 
29,01 
2 
2 
14 
13,9 
O60814 
Histone H2B type 1-K OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H2BK PE=1 SV=3 - 
[H2B1K_HUMAN] 
23,81 
4 
4 
47 
13,9 
P09988 
Histone H3.1/H3.2 OS=Schizosaccharomyces pombe (strain 972 / ATCC 
24843) GN=hht1 PE=1 SV=2 - [H31_SCHPO] 
19,85 
3 
3 
13 
15,3 
P62805 
Histone H4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H4A PE=1 SV=2 - [H4_HUMAN] 
51,46 
5 
5 
26 
11,4 
Q86YZ3 
Hornerin OS=Homo sapiens GN=HRNR PE=1 SV=2 - [HORN_HUMAN] 
9,16 
8 
8 
20 
282,2 
P01876 
Ig alpha-1 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHA1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[IGHA1_HUMAN] 
57,79 
5 
15 
79 
37,6 
P01877 
Ig alpha-2 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHA2 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[IGHA2_HUMAN] 
54,41 
3 
13 
69 
36,5 
P01766 
Ig heavy chain V-III region BRO OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HV305_HUMAN] 
25,00 
2 
2 
9 
13,2 
P01834 
Ig kappa chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGKC PE=1 SV=1 - 
[IGKC_HUMAN] 
86,79 
8 
8 
51 
11,6 
P01617 
Ig kappa chain V-II region TEW OS=Homo sapiens PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KV204_HUMAN] 
32,74 
2 
2 
4 
12,3 
P0CG05 
Ig lambda-2 chain C regions OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGLC2 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[LAC2_HUMAN] 
49,06 
5 
5 
11 
11,3 
Q9Y6R7 
IgGFc-binding protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=FCGBP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[FCGBP_HUMAN] 
12,84 
28 
28 
75 
571,6 
P09923 
Intestinal-type alkaline phosphatase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ALPI PE=1 
SV=2 - [PPBI_HUMAN] 
35,42 
15 
15 
64 
56,8 
P14923 
Junction plakoglobin OS=Homo sapiens GN=JUP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PLAK_HUMAN] 
8,72 
5 
5 
9 
81,7 
P06870 
Kallikrein-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KLK1 PE=1 SV=2 - [KLK1_HUMAN] 
13,74 
3 
3 
15 
28,9 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 31 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P13645 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 10 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT10 PE=1 SV=6 - 
[K1C10_HUMAN] 
55,48 
31 
36 
195 
58,8 
P02533 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT14 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[K1C14_HUMAN] 
48,94 
7 
21 
71 
51,5 
P08779 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 16 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT16 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[K1C16_HUMAN] 
41,01 
6 
17 
58 
51,2 
Q04695 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 17 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT17 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K1C17_HUMAN] 
19,44 
2 
9 
32 
48,1 
P35527 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 9 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT9 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K1C9_HUMAN] 
57,30 
28 
28 
191 
62,0 
P78386 
Keratin, type II cuticular Hb5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT85 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KRT85_HUMAN] 
16,17 
3 
9 
58 
55,8 
P04264 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT1 PE=1 SV=6 - 
[K2C1_HUMAN] 
64,44 
40 
45 
280 
66,0 
Q7Z794 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 1b OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT77 PE=2 SV=3 - 
[K2C1B_HUMAN] 
15,57 
5 
8 
28 
61,9 
P35908 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 2 epidermal OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [K22E_HUMAN] 
71,99 
32 
41 
167 
65,4 
P13647 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT5 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K2C5_HUMAN] 
33,90 
13 
24 
82 
62,3 
P02538 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 6A OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT6A PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K2C6A_HUMAN] 
37,77 
1 
22 
83 
60,0 
P48668 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 6C OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT6C PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K2C6C_HUMAN] 
38,65 
1 
23 
84 
60,0 
Q7RTS7 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 74 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT74 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K2C74_HUMAN] 
5,67 
1 
4 
14 
57,8 
Q8N1N4 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 78 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT78 PE=2 SV=2 - 
[K2C78_HUMAN] 
5,38 
1 
3 
6 
56,8 
Q6KB66 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 80 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT80 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K2C80_HUMAN] 
4,65 
1 
2 
7 
50,5 
Q5T749 
Keratinocyte proline-rich protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=KPRP PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KPRP_HUMAN] 
7,94 
3 
3 
5 
64,1 
P09848 
Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=LCT PE=1 SV=3 - 
[LPH_HUMAN] 
3,79 
5 
5 
8 
218,4 
P02788 
Lactotransferrin OS=Homo sapiens GN=LTF PE=1 SV=6 - [TRFL_HUMAN] 
5,35 
3 
3 
5 
78,1 
P20700 
Lamin-B1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=LMNB1 PE=1 SV=2 - [LMNB1_HUMAN] 
3,41 
1 
2 
3 
66,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 32 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q8AAW1 
L-arabinose isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 
29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=araA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[ARAA_BACTN] 
6,09 
2 
2 
6 
57,1 
Q9BS40 
Latexin OS=Homo sapiens GN=LXN PE=1 SV=2 - [LXN_HUMAN] 
12,16 
2 
2 
4 
25,7 
P05451 
Lithostathine-1-alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=REG1A PE=1 SV=3 - 
[REG1A_HUMAN] 
15,66 
3 
3 
11 
18,7 
P00338 
L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=LDHA PE=1 SV=2 - 
[LDHA_HUMAN] 
6,33 
1 
2 
17 
36,7 
P07195 
L-lactate dehydrogenase B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=LDHB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[LDHB_HUMAN] 
6,29 
1 
2 
15 
36,6 
P11279 
Lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=LAMP1 PE=1 SV=3 - [LAMP1_HUMAN] 
4,80 
2 
2 
3 
44,9 
P61626 
Lysozyme C OS=Homo sapiens GN=LYZ PE=1 SV=1 - [LYSC_HUMAN] 
20,27 
3 
3 
8 
16,5 
P40926 
Malate dehydrogenase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=MDH2 PE=1 
SV=3 - [MDHM_HUMAN] 
14,20 
4 
4 
17 
35,5 
O43451 
Maltase-glucoamylase, intestinal OS=Homo sapiens GN=MGAM PE=1 SV=5 
- [MGA_HUMAN] 
16,48 
24 
25 
80 
209,7 
Q16819 
Meprin A subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=MEP1A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[MEP1A_HUMAN] 
6,30 
4 
4 
9 
84,4 
Q16820 
Meprin A subunit beta OS=Homo sapiens GN=MEP1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[MEP1B_HUMAN] 
7,85 
4 
4 
11 
79,5 
P26038 
Moesin OS=Homo sapiens GN=MSN PE=1 SV=3 - [MOES_HUMAN] 
7,45 
3 
5 
13 
67,8 
Q02817 
Mucin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MUC2 PE=1 SV=2 - [MUC2_HUMAN] 
0,79 
4 
4 
6 
540,0 
P60660 
Myosin light polypeptide 6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYL6 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[MYL6_HUMAN] 
27,15 
4 
4 
11 
16,9 
P19105 
Myosin regulatory light chain 12A OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYL12A PE=1 
SV=2 - [ML12A_HUMAN] 
17,54 
3 
3 
4 
19,8 
P35579 
Myosin-9 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYH9 PE=1 SV=4 - [MYH9_HUMAN] 
3,57 
7 
7 
25 
226,4 
Q9UQQ1 
N-acetylated-alpha-linked acidic dipeptidase-like protein OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=NAALADL1 PE=1 SV=2 - [NALDL_HUMAN] 
2,57 
2 
2 
3 
80,5 
P15586 
N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase OS=Homo sapiens GN=GNS PE=1 SV=3 - 
[GNS_HUMAN] 
5,98 
3 
3 
8 
62,0 
P31026 
NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Corynebacterium glutamicum 
(strain ATCC 13032 / DSM 20300 / JCM 1318 / LMG 3730 / NCIMB 10025) 
GN=gdh PE=3 SV=2 - [DHE4_CORGL] 
6,04 
3 
3 
10 
49,0 
P94316 
NAD-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain 
5,39 
1 
3 
8 
48,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 33 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
YCH46) GN=gdhB PE=2 SV=2 - [DHE2_BACFR] 
B2RKJ1 
NAD-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis (strain 
ATCC 33277 / DSM 20709 / JCM 12257) GN=gdh PE=3 SV=1 - 
[DHE2_PORG3] 
5,39 
1 
3 
6 
49,2 
Q13765 
Nascent polypeptide-associated complex subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=NACA PE=1 SV=1 - [NACA_HUMAN] 
13,49 
2 
2 
10 
23,4 
Q09666 
Neuroblast differentiation-associated protein AHNAK OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=AHNAK PE=1 SV=2 - [AHNK_HUMAN] 
1,83 
2 
2 
13 
628,7 
P80188 
Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin OS=Homo sapiens GN=LCN2 
PE=1 SV=2 - [NGAL_HUMAN] 
20,20 
4 
4 
12 
22,6 
P19338 
Nucleolin OS=Homo sapiens GN=NCL PE=1 SV=3 - [NUCL_HUMAN] 
4,08 
3 
3 
4 
76,6 
P06748 
Nucleophosmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=NPM1 PE=1 SV=2 - [NPM_HUMAN] 
3,74 
2 
2 
12 
32,6 
P15531 
Nucleoside diphosphate kinase A OS=Homo sapiens GN=NME1 PE=1 SV=1 
- [NDKA_HUMAN] 
20,39 
2 
2 
6 
17,1 
P04746 
Pancreatic alpha-amylase OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY2A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AMYP_HUMAN] 
72,41 
4 
34 
454 
57,7 
P55259 
Pancreatic secretory granule membrane major glycoprotein GP2 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=GP2 PE=2 SV=3 - [GP2_HUMAN] 
5,59 
3 
3 
22 
59,4 
O95497 
Pantetheinase OS=Homo sapiens GN=VNN1 PE=1 SV=2 - [VNN1_HUMAN] 
4,48 
2 
2 
6 
57,0 
Q06830 
Peroxiredoxin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRDX1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PRDX1_HUMAN] 
24,12 
4 
5 
15 
22,1 
Q13162 
Peroxiredoxin-4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRDX4 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PRDX4_HUMAN] 
7,01 
1 
2 
3 
30,5 
Q5L7N5 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain 
ATCC 25285 / DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_BACFN] 
17,76 
2 
10 
35 
59,0 
A1VZR5 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Campylobacter jejuni subsp. 
jejuni serotype O:23/36 (strain 81-176) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_CAMJJ] 
6,30 
1 
3 
13 
59,0 
Q47VD0 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Colwellia psychrerythraea 
(strain 34H / ATCC BAA-681) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_COLP3] 
4,85 
1 
3 
13 
59,3 
C5BGS4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Edwardsiella ictaluri (strain 
93-146) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EDWI9] 
9,09 
2 
5 
24 
59,2 
C4Z0Q6 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium eligens (strain 
ATCC 27750 / VPI C15-48) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBE2] 
25,09 
4 
13 
54 
59,0 
C4ZBL1 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium rectale (strain 
35,58 
8 
17 
51 
59,0 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 34 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
ATCC 33656 / VPI 0990) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBR3] 
A6LFQ4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Parabacteroides distasonis 
(strain ATCC 8503 / DSM 20701 / NCTC 11152) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PARD8] 
27,10 
7 
16 
73 
58,9 
Q9CKR4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Pasteurella multocida (strain 
Pm70) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_PASMU] 
11,15 
2 
7 
18 
58,8 
B2RHV8 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis 
(strain ATCC 33277 / DSM 20709 / JCM 12257) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PORG3] 
8,97 
1 
6 
22 
59,4 
P00558 
Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PGK1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PGK1_HUMAN] 
4,32 
2 
2 
2 
44,6 
P04054 
Phospholipase A2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PLA2G1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PA21B_HUMAN] 
31,08 
3 
3 
5 
16,3 
Q15149 
Plectin OS=Homo sapiens GN=PLEC PE=1 SV=3 - [PLEC_HUMAN] 
2,71 
11 
11 
30 
531,5 
Q15365 
Poly(rC)-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PCBP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[PCBP1_HUMAN] 
8,71 
3 
3 
10 
37,5 
P11940 
Polyadenylate-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PABPC1 PE=1 SV=2 
- [PABP1_HUMAN] 
2,99 
2 
2 
2 
70,6 
P01833 
Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor OS=Homo sapiens GN=PIGR PE=1 
SV=4 - [PIGR_HUMAN] 
16,75 
10 
10 
22 
83,2 
P0CG48 
Polyubiquitin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=UBC PE=1 SV=3 - [UBC_HUMAN] 
52,55 
4 
4 
59 
77,0 
P02545 
Prelamin-A/C OS=Homo sapiens GN=LMNA PE=1 SV=1 - [LMNA_HUMAN] 
18,07 
10 
11 
37 
74,1 
Q92841 
Probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX17 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=DDX17 PE=1 SV=2 - [DDX17_HUMAN] 
4,94 
1 
3 
10 
80,2 
P17844 
Probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DDX5 
PE=1 SV=1 - [DDX5_HUMAN] 
5,37 
1 
3 
6 
69,1 
Q99623 
Prohibitin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PHB2 PE=1 SV=2 - [PHB2_HUMAN] 
16,39 
4 
4 
9 
33,3 
P12273 
Prolactin-inducible protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=PIP PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PIP_HUMAN] 
34,93 
4 
4 
6 
16,6 
P12004 
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen OS=Homo sapiens GN=PCNA PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PCNA_HUMAN] 
12,26 
3 
3 
4 
28,8 
Q9UQ80 
Proliferation-associated protein 2G4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PA2G4 PE=1 
SV=3 - [PA2G4_HUMAN] 
7,11 
3 
3 
4 
43,8 
P25788 
Proteasome subunit alpha type-3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PSMA3 PE=1 
SV=2 - [PSA3_HUMAN] 
8,24 
2 
2 
9 
28,4 
P60900 
Proteasome subunit alpha type-6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PSMA6 PE=1 
17,48 
4 
4 
9 
27,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 35 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
SV=1 - [PSA6_HUMAN] 
P30101 
Protein disulfide-isomerase A3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PDIA3 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[PDIA3_HUMAN] 
10,69 
6 
6 
18 
56,7 
P13667 
Protein disulfide-isomerase A4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PDIA4 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[PDIA4_HUMAN] 
4,19 
2 
2 
3 
72,9 
P07237 
Protein disulfide-isomerase OS=Homo sapiens GN=P4HB PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PDIA1_HUMAN] 
7,48 
3 
3 
8 
57,1 
Q01105 
Protein SET OS=Homo sapiens GN=SET PE=1 SV=3 - [SET_HUMAN] 
7,93 
2 
2 
10 
33,5 
Q08188 
Protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase E OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=TGM3 PE=1 SV=4 - [TGM3_HUMAN] 
5,19 
2 
2 
3 
76,6 
A6NCN2 
Putative keratin-87 protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT87P PE=5 SV=4 - 
[KR87P_HUMAN] 
14,51 
1 
2 
3 
29,1 
Q8IZP2 
Putative protein FAM10A4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ST13P4 PE=5 SV=1 - 
[ST134_HUMAN] 
8,33 
2 
2 
7 
27,4 
P14618 
Pyruvate kinase PKM OS=Homo sapiens GN=PKM PE=1 SV=4 - 
[KPYM_HUMAN] 
21,66 
12 
12 
54 
57,9 
P15153 
Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RAC2 
PE=1 SV=1 - [RAC2_HUMAN] 
10,94 
1 
2 
7 
21,4 
P61224 
Ras-related protein Rap-1b OS=Homo sapiens GN=RAP1B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RAP1B_HUMAN] 
11,41 
2 
2 
3 
20,8 
P62070 
Ras-related protein R-Ras2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RRAS2 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RRAS2_HUMAN] 
11,27 
2 
2 
2 
23,4 
P08134 
Rho-related GTP-binding protein RhoC OS=Homo sapiens GN=RHOC PE=1 
SV=1 - [RHOC_HUMAN] 
9,84 
2 
2 
3 
22,0 
Q13228 
Selenium-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SELENBP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[SBP1_HUMAN] 
33,47 
13 
13 
30 
52,4 
P04279 
Semenogelin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SEMG1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[SEMG1_HUMAN] 
6,71 
2 
2 
2 
52,1 
Q07955 
Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SRSF1 PE=1 
SV=2 - [SRSF1_HUMAN] 
16,53 
4 
4 
11 
27,7 
Q13247 
Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SRSF6 PE=1 
SV=2 - [SRSF6_HUMAN] 
5,23 
2 
2 
5 
39,6 
P29508 
Serpin B3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB3 PE=1 SV=2 - [SPB3_HUMAN] 
12,56 
4 
4 
10 
44,5 
P35237 
Serpin B6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB6 PE=1 SV=3 - [SPB6_HUMAN] 
30,59 
9 
9 
26 
42,6 
P02768 
Serum albumin OS=Homo sapiens GN=ALB PE=1 SV=2 - [ALBU_HUMAN] 
43,84 
20 
25 
108 
69,3 
P62316 
Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein Sm D2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SNRPD2 
16,95 
2 
2 
7 
13,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 36 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
PE=1 SV=1 - [SMD2_HUMAN] 
P05023 
Sodium/potassium-transporting ATPase subunit alpha-1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=ATP1A1 PE=1 SV=1 - [AT1A1_HUMAN] 
2,74 
2 
2 
7 
112,8 
Q9UMY4 
Sorting nexin-12 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SNX12 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[SNX12_HUMAN] 
8,14 
2 
2 
4 
19,7 
Q13813 
Spectrin alpha chain, non-erythrocytic 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SPTAN1 
PE=1 SV=3 - [SPTN1_HUMAN] 
0,85 
2 
2 
3 
284,4 
P23246 
Splicing factor, proline- and glutamine-rich OS=Homo sapiens GN=SFPQ 
PE=1 SV=2 - [SFPQ_HUMAN] 
4,81 
3 
3 
6 
76,1 
P16949 
Stathmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=STMN1 PE=1 SV=3 - [STMN1_HUMAN] 
12,75 
2 
2 
9 
17,3 
P38646 
Stress-70 protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA9 PE=1 SV=2 
- [GRP75_HUMAN] 
3,39 
1 
2 
7 
73,6 
P14410 
Sucrase-isomaltase, intestinal OS=Homo sapiens GN=SI PE=1 SV=6 - 
[SUIS_HUMAN] 
17,35 
25 
26 
66 
209,3 
P17987 
T-complex protein 1 subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=TCP1 PE=1 SV=1 
- [TCPA_HUMAN] 
8,81 
5 
5 
7 
60,3 
P50991 
T-complex protein 1 subunit delta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT4 PE=1 SV=4 
- [TCPD_HUMAN] 
9,28 
5 
5 
9 
57,9 
Q99832 
T-complex protein 1 subunit eta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT7 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TCPH_HUMAN] 
6,08 
3 
3 
6 
59,3 
P49368 
T-complex protein 1 subunit gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT3 PE=1 
SV=4 - [TCPG_HUMAN] 
3,67 
2 
2 
3 
60,5 
P50990 
T-complex protein 1 subunit theta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT8 PE=1 SV=4 
- [TCPQ_HUMAN] 
10,22 
5 
5 
9 
59,6 
P40227 
T-complex protein 1 subunit zeta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT6A PE=1 SV=3 
- [TCPZ_HUMAN] 
3,58 
2 
2 
2 
58,0 
P0AA29 
Thioredoxin-1 OS=Salmonella typhi GN=trxA PE=3 SV=2 - [THIO_SALTI] 
47,71 
4 
4 
32 
11,8 
Q8WZ42 
Titin OS=Homo sapiens GN=TTN PE=1 SV=4 - [TITIN_HUMAN] 
0,37 
10 
10 
34 
3813,7 
P37837 
Transaldolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TALDO1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TALDO_HUMAN] 
5,04 
2 
2 
5 
37,5 
P37802 
Transgelin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=TAGLN2 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TAGL2_HUMAN] 
11,06 
2 
2 
8 
22,4 
P29401 
Transketolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TKT PE=1 SV=3 - [TKT_HUMAN] 
4,33 
3 
3 
6 
67,8 
P02766 
Transthyretin OS=Homo sapiens GN=TTR PE=1 SV=1 - [TTHY_HUMAN] 
18,37 
3 
3 
9 
15,9 
A6KXL2 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / 
DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=tpiA PE=3 SV=1 - [TPIS_BACV8] 
23,51 
4 
4 
8 
26,9 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 37 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
A4G646 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Herminiimonas arsenicoxydans GN=tpiA 
PE=3 SV=1 - [TPIS_HERAR] 
3,23 
2 
2 
2 
26,3 
P60174 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPI1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TPIS_HUMAN] 
8,04 
2 
2 
10 
30,8 
P06753 
Tropomyosin alpha-3 chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPM3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TPM3_HUMAN] 
9,12 
1 
2 
13 
32,9 
P67936 
Tropomyosin alpha-4 chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPM4 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TPM4_HUMAN] 
8,47 
1 
2 
13 
28,5 
P07478 
Trypsin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRSS2 PE=1 SV=1 - [TRY2_HUMAN] 
16,19 
3 
3 
20 
26,5 
Q9BQE3 
Tubulin alpha-1C chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBA1C PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBA1C_HUMAN] 
7,35 
3 
3 
21 
49,9 
P07437 
Tubulin beta chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TBB5_HUMAN] 
12,39 
1 
5 
71 
49,6 
Q9BVA1 
Tubulin beta-2B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB2B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBB2B_HUMAN] 
9,66 
1 
4 
54 
49,9 
P68371 
Tubulin beta-4B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB4B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBB4B_HUMAN] 
12,36 
1 
5 
70 
49,8 
P54577 
Tyrosine--tRNA ligase, cytoplasmic OS=Homo sapiens GN=YARS PE=1 
SV=4 - [SYYC_HUMAN] 
5,30 
3 
3 
5 
59,1 
P22314 
Ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=UBA1 
PE=1 SV=3 - [UBA1_HUMAN] 
3,31 
3 
3 
9 
117,8 
Q8A9J2 
Uronate isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / 
DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=uxaC PE=3 SV=2 - 
[UXAC_BACTN] 
7,48 
3 
3 
7 
54,3 
P08670 
Vimentin OS=Homo sapiens GN=VIM PE=1 SV=4 - [VIME_HUMAN] 
22,96 
12 
13 
63 
53,6 
P18206 
Vinculin OS=Homo sapiens GN=VCL PE=1 SV=4 - [VINC_HUMAN] 
5,47 
6 
6 
13 
123,7 
P25311 
Zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein OS=Homo sapiens GN=AZGP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ZA2G_HUMAN] 
31,54 
10 
10 
32 
34,2 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 38 – 
Supplementary Table 4. All Proteins Detected in the Replicate of the Fecal Filtrate for Patient 5 
 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P61604 
10 kDa heat shock protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPE1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CH10_HUMAN] 
19,61 
2 
2 
9 
10,9 
P31946 
14-3-3 protein beta/alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAB PE=1 SV=3 - 
[1433B_HUMAN] 
19,51 
2 
5 
11 
28,1 
P62258 
14-3-3 protein epsilon OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAE PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433E_HUMAN] 
11,76 
2 
3 
10 
29,2 
Q04917 
14-3-3 protein eta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAH PE=1 SV=4 - 
[1433F_HUMAN] 
16,26 
2 
4 
10 
28,2 
P61981 
14-3-3 protein gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAG PE=1 SV=2 - 
[1433G_HUMAN] 
16,60 
3 
5 
13 
28,3 
P31947 
14-3-3 protein sigma OS=Homo sapiens GN=SFN PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433S_HUMAN] 
22,98 
3 
5 
10 
27,8 
P27348 
14-3-3 protein theta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAQ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433T_HUMAN] 
19,59 
2 
5 
15 
27,7 
P63104 
14-3-3 protein zeta/delta OS=Homo sapiens GN=YWHAZ PE=1 SV=1 - 
[1433Z_HUMAN] 
13,88 
2 
3 
15 
27,7 
Q13200 
26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 2 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=PSMD2 PE=1 SV=3 - [PSMD2_HUMAN] 
2,97 
2 
2 
4 
100,1 
O43242 
26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 3 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=PSMD3 PE=1 SV=2 - [PSMD3_HUMAN] 
3,37 
2 
2 
3 
60,9 
P62280 
40S ribosomal protein S11 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS11 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS11_HUMAN] 
13,29 
3 
3 
9 
18,4 
P62277 
40S ribosomal protein S13 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS13 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS13_HUMAN] 
11,26 
2 
2 
9 
17,2 
P62263 
40S ribosomal protein S14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS14 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS14_HUMAN] 
17,88 
4 
4 
14 
16,3 
P62244 
40S ribosomal protein S15a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS15A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS15A_HUMAN] 
12,31 
2 
2 
6 
14,8 
P62269 
40S ribosomal protein S18 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS18 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RS18_HUMAN] 
32,24 
5 
5 
17 
17,7 
P39019 
40S ribosomal protein S19 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS19 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS19_HUMAN] 
13,10 
2 
2 
2 
16,1 
P15880 
40S ribosomal protein S2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS2_HUMAN] 
6,48 
2 
2 
6 
31,3 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 39 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P60866 
40S ribosomal protein S20 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS20 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS20_HUMAN] 
15,13 
2 
2 
5 
13,4 
P23396 
40S ribosomal protein S3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS3_HUMAN] 
19,34 
4 
4 
16 
26,7 
P61247 
40S ribosomal protein S3a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS3A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS3A_HUMAN] 
12,88 
4 
4 
13 
29,9 
P62701 
40S ribosomal protein S4, X isoform OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS4X PE=1 
SV=2 - [RS4X_HUMAN] 
6,08 
2 
2 
4 
29,6 
P46782 
40S ribosomal protein S5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS5 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RS5_HUMAN] 
12,75 
3 
3 
9 
22,9 
P62753 
40S ribosomal protein S6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS6 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RS6_HUMAN] 
14,86 
3 
3 
16 
28,7 
P62241 
40S ribosomal protein S8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPS8 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RS8_HUMAN] 
9,62 
2 
2 
5 
24,2 
P08865 
40S ribosomal protein SA OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPSA PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RSSA_HUMAN] 
10,85 
3 
3 
19 
32,8 
P10809 
60 kDa heat shock protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPD1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CH60_HUMAN] 
6,63 
4 
4 
16 
61,0 
P62906 
60S ribosomal protein L10a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL10A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL10A_HUMAN] 
7,37 
2 
2 
3 
24,8 
P30050 
60S ribosomal protein L12 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL12 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL12_HUMAN] 
14,55 
2 
2 
5 
17,8 
P26373 
60S ribosomal protein L13 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL13 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[RL13_HUMAN] 
9,00 
2 
2 
5 
24,2 
P61313 
60S ribosomal protein L15 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL15 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL15_HUMAN] 
7,84 
2 
2 
10 
24,1 
Q07020 
60S ribosomal protein L18 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL18 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL18_HUMAN] 
18,09 
3 
3 
11 
21,6 
P35268 
60S ribosomal protein L22 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL22 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL22_HUMAN] 
18,75 
2 
2 
6 
14,8 
P46779 
60S ribosomal protein L28 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL28 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL28_HUMAN] 
15,33 
3 
3 
5 
15,7 
P39023 
60S ribosomal protein L3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL3_HUMAN] 
6,70 
3 
3 
8 
46,1 
P49207 
60S ribosomal protein L34 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL34 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL34_HUMAN] 
13,68 
2 
2 
3 
13,3 
P83881 
60S ribosomal protein L36a OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL36A PE=1 SV=2 - 
17,92 
2 
2 
8 
12,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 40 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[RL36A_HUMAN] 
Q02878 
60S ribosomal protein L6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL6 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RL6_HUMAN] 
9,38 
4 
4 
12 
32,7 
P18124 
60S ribosomal protein L7 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL7 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[RL7_HUMAN] 
8,06 
3 
3 
3 
29,2 
P62917 
60S ribosomal protein L8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RPL8 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[RL8_HUMAN] 
10,51 
2 
2 
10 
28,0 
P11021 
78 kDa glucose-regulated protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA5 PE=1 
SV=2 - [GRP78_HUMAN] 
16,67 
8 
9 
29 
72,3 
Q99798 
Aconitate hydratase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACO2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [ACON_HUMAN] 
4,74 
3 
3 
7 
85,4 
P60709 
Actin, cytoplasmic 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACTB PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ACTB_HUMAN] 
49,07 
17 
17 
143 
41,7 
A1BEZ2 
Adenosylhomocysteinase OS=Chlorobium phaeobacteroides (strain DSM 
266) GN=ahcY PE=3 SV=1 - [SAHH_CHLPD] 
6,37 
1 
3 
7 
52,4 
P23526 
Adenosylhomocysteinase OS=Homo sapiens GN=AHCY PE=1 SV=4 - 
[SAHH_HUMAN] 
5,09 
1 
2 
4 
47,7 
B0UM37 
Adenosylhomocysteinase OS=Methylobacterium sp. (strain 4-46) GN=ahcY 
PE=3 SV=1 - [SAHH_METS4] 
7,69 
1 
3 
7 
51,1 
P12235 
ADP/ATP translocase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SLC25A4 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[ADT1_HUMAN] 
6,38 
1 
2 
7 
33,0 
P05141 
ADP/ATP translocase 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SLC25A5 PE=1 SV=7 - 
[ADT2_HUMAN] 
6,38 
1 
2 
8 
32,8 
P84085 
ADP-ribosylation factor 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ARF5 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ARF5_HUMAN] 
11,67 
2 
2 
2 
20,5 
P01011 
Alpha-1-antichymotrypsin OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINA3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AACT_HUMAN] 
10,87 
3 
3 
4 
47,6 
P01009 
Alpha-1-antitrypsin OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINA1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[A1AT_HUMAN] 
41,63 
16 
16 
40 
46,7 
P01023 
Alpha-2-macroglobulin OS=Homo sapiens GN=A2M PE=1 SV=3 - 
[A2MG_HUMAN] 
7,12 
9 
9 
23 
163,2 
O43707 
Alpha-actinin-4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ACTN4 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ACTN4_HUMAN] 
2,31 
2 
2 
6 
104,8 
P04745 
Alpha-amylase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY1A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AMY1_HUMAN] 
63,01 
1 
31 
237 
57,7 
P19961 
Alpha-amylase 2B OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY2B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[AMY2B_HUMAN] 
67,32 
3 
33 
240 
57,7 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 41 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P06733 
Alpha-enolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ENO1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ENOA_HUMAN] 
26,04 
8 
9 
22 
47,1 
P15144 
Aminopeptidase N OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANPEP PE=1 SV=4 - 
[AMPN_HUMAN] 
23,99 
26 
26 
52 
109,5 
P04083 
Annexin A1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANXA1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ANXA1_HUMAN] 
11,85 
3 
3 
18 
38,7 
P07355 
Annexin A2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ANXA2 PE=1 SV=2 - [ANXA2_HUMAN] 
30,09 
9 
9 
35 
38,6 
P05090 
Apolipoprotein D OS=Homo sapiens GN=APOD PE=1 SV=1 - 
[APOD_HUMAN] 
15,34 
2 
2 
2 
21,3 
P05089 
Arginase-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ARG1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ARGI1_HUMAN] 
7,14 
2 
2 
3 
34,7 
P25705 
ATP synthase subunit alpha, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ATP5A1 
PE=1 SV=1 - [ATPA_HUMAN] 
8,14 
4 
4 
7 
59,7 
P06576 
ATP synthase subunit beta, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=ATP5B 
PE=1 SV=3 - [ATPB_HUMAN] 
9,26 
4 
4 
19 
56,5 
O00148 
ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX39A OS=Homo sapiens GN=DDX39A 
PE=1 SV=2 - [DX39A_HUMAN] 
3,51 
2 
2 
3 
49,1 
Q9BYE9 
Cadherin-related family member 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDHR2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [CDHR2_HUMAN] 
1,76 
2 
2 
4 
141,5 
A8K7I4 
Calcium-activated chloride channel regulator 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CLCA1 PE=1 SV=3 - [CLCA1_HUMAN] 
3,17 
3 
3 
4 
100,2 
P15085 
Carboxypeptidase A1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPA1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CBPA1_HUMAN] 
10,98 
3 
4 
6 
47,1 
P15086 
Carboxypeptidase B OS=Homo sapiens GN=CPB1 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[CBPB1_HUMAN] 
33,57 
10 
11 
16 
47,3 
P13688 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM1 PE=1 SV=2 - [CEAM1_HUMAN] 
5,70 
1 
2 
3 
57,5 
P06731 
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 5 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=CEACAM5 PE=1 SV=3 - [CEAM5_HUMAN] 
3,13 
1 
2 
3 
76,7 
P31944 
Caspase-14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CASP14 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CASPE_HUMAN] 
9,09 
3 
3 
7 
27,7 
P60953 
Cell division control protein 42 homolog OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDC42 
PE=1 SV=2 - [CDC42_HUMAN] 
10,99 
1 
2 
5 
21,2 
Q99895 
Chymotrypsin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=CTRC PE=1 SV=2 - 
[CTRC_HUMAN] 
8,21 
2 
2 
3 
29,5 
P08217 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 2A OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA2A PE=1 SV=1 - [CEL2A_HUMAN] 
53,16 
10 
10 
54 
28,9 
P09093 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 3A OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA3A PE=1 SV=3 - [CEL3A_HUMAN] 
25,56 
3 
5 
13 
29,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 42 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P08861 
Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 3B OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=CELA3B PE=1 SV=3 - [CEL3B_HUMAN] 
14,07 
1 
3 
10 
29,2 
P23528 
Cofilin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CFL1 PE=1 SV=3 - [COF1_HUMAN] 
11,45 
2 
2 
13 
18,5 
P01024 
Complement C3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=C3 PE=1 SV=2 - [CO3_HUMAN] 
5,95 
7 
7 
12 
187,0 
P06493 
Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=CDK1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[CDK1_HUMAN] 
7,07 
2 
2 
6 
34,1 
Q14204 
Cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DYNC1H1 PE=1 
SV=5 - [DYHC1_HUMAN] 
0,41 
2 
2 
3 
532,1 
O43175 
D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens GN=PHGDH PE=1 
SV=4 - [SERA_HUMAN] 
6,94 
3 
3 
10 
56,6 
Q9UGM3 
Deleted in malignant brain tumors 1 protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=DMBT1 
PE=1 SV=2 - [DMBT1_HUMAN] 
10,69 
2 
2 
6 
260,6 
P24855 
Deoxyribonuclease-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DNASE1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[DNAS1_HUMAN] 
16,31 
3 
3 
5 
31,4 
P81605 
Dermcidin OS=Homo sapiens GN=DCD PE=1 SV=2 - [DCD_HUMAN] 
34,55 
5 
5 
13 
11,3 
Q08554 
Desmocollin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSC1 PE=1 SV=2 - [DSC1_HUMAN] 
5,37 
4 
4 
6 
99,9 
Q14574 
Desmocollin-3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSC3 PE=1 SV=3 - [DSC3_HUMAN] 
2,57 
2 
2 
2 
99,9 
Q02413 
Desmoglein-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSG1 PE=1 SV=2 - [DSG1_HUMAN] 
16,59 
11 
11 
22 
113,7 
P15924 
Desmoplakin OS=Homo sapiens GN=DSP PE=1 SV=3 - [DESP_HUMAN] 
5,50 
14 
14 
18 
331,6 
Q16555 
Dihydropyrimidinase-related protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPYSL2 PE=1 
SV=1 - [DPYL2_HUMAN] 
4,72 
1 
2 
7 
62,3 
Q14195 
Dihydropyrimidinase-related protein 3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPYSL3 PE=1 
SV=1 - [DPYL3_HUMAN] 
6,49 
2 
3 
13 
61,9 
P27487 
Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DPP4 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[DPP4_HUMAN] 
21,93 
16 
16 
27 
88,2 
P68104 
Elongation factor 1-alpha 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF1A1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[EF1A1_HUMAN] 
21,21 
6 
6 
45 
50,1 
P26641 
Elongation factor 1-gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF1G PE=1 SV=3 - 
[EF1G_HUMAN] 
4,58 
2 
2 
3 
50,1 
P13639 
Elongation factor 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=EEF2 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[EF2_HUMAN] 
12,24 
9 
9 
27 
95,3 
P14625 
Endoplasmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90B1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[ENPL_HUMAN] 
9,59 
9 
9 
21 
92,4 
Q31G68 
Enolase OS=Thiomicrospira crunogena (strain XCL-2) GN=eno PE=3 SV=1 - 
[ENO_THICR] 
3,29 
1 
2 
7 
45,8 
P60842 
Eukaryotic initiation factor 4A-I OS=Homo sapiens GN=EIF4A1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
10,59 
3 
3 
10 
46,1 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 43 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[IF4A1_HUMAN] 
Q13347 
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit I OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=EIF3I PE=1 SV=1 - [EIF3I_HUMAN] 
5,54 
2 
2 
7 
36,5 
P15311 
Ezrin OS=Homo sapiens GN=EZR PE=1 SV=4 - [EZRI_HUMAN] 
4,44 
1 
3 
14 
69,4 
Q96AE4 
Far upstream element-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=FUBP1 
PE=1 SV=3 - [FUBP1_HUMAN] 
3,57 
2 
2 
5 
67,5 
P02679 
Fibrinogen gamma chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=FGG PE=1 SV=3 - 
[FIBG_HUMAN] 
3,97 
2 
2 
3 
51,5 
P02751 
Fibronectin OS=Homo sapiens GN=FN1 PE=1 SV=4 - [FINC_HUMAN] 
0,75 
2 
2 
3 
262,5 
P21333 
Filamin-A OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLNA PE=1 SV=4 - [FLNA_HUMAN] 
5,25 
11 
13 
33 
280,6 
Q14315 
Filamin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=FLNC PE=1 SV=3 - [FLNC_HUMAN] 
6,64 
15 
17 
38 
290,8 
P68688 
Glutaredoxin-1 OS=Escherichia coli (strain K12) GN=grxA PE=1 SV=1 - 
[GLRX1_ECOLI] 
37,65 
4 
4 
10 
9,7 
O43026 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2 OS=Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe (strain 972 / ATCC 24843) GN=gpd3 PE=1 SV=1 - [G3P2_SCHPO] 
7,46 
1 
2 
9 
35,7 
P0CN75 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Cryptococcus neoformans 
var. neoformans serotype D (strain B-3501A) GN=GPD PE=3 SV=1 - 
[G3P_CRYNB] 
6,78 
1 
2 
3 
36,3 
P04406 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=GAPDH PE=1 SV=3 - [G3P_HUMAN] 
17,91 
4 
4 
8 
36,0 
P0C0G7 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase OS=Streptococcus pyogenes 
serotype M1 GN=gap PE=3 SV=2 - [G3P_STRP1] 
6,85 
1 
2 
2 
35,9 
Q6FR65 
GTP-binding nuclear protein GSP1/Ran OS=Candida glabrata (strain ATCC 
2001 / CBS 138 / JCM 3761 / NBRC 0622 / NRRL Y-65) GN=GSP1 PE=3 
SV=1 - [GSP1_CANGA] 
9,81 
2 
2 
17 
24,3 
P63244 
Guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit beta-2-like 1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=GNB2L1 PE=1 SV=3 - [GBLP_HUMAN] 
4,10 
2 
2 
9 
35,1 
P00738 
Haptoglobin OS=Homo sapiens GN=HP PE=1 SV=1 - [HPT_HUMAN] 
22,41 
7 
7 
10 
45,2 
Q5B2V1 
Heat shock 70 kDa protein OS=Emericella nidulans (strain FGSC A4 / ATCC 
38163 / CBS 112.46 / NRRL 194 / M139) GN=hsp70 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HSP70_EMENI] 
6,99 
1 
4 
20 
69,9 
P11142 
Heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA8 PE=1 
SV=1 - [HSP7C_HUMAN] 
29,72 
10 
15 
83 
70,9 
Q92598 
Heat shock protein 105 kDa OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPH1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[HS105_HUMAN] 
2,10 
2 
2 
2 
96,8 
P04792 
Heat shock protein beta-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPB1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
25,85 
4 
4 
10 
22,8 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 44 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[HSPB1_HUMAN] 
P07900 
Heat shock protein HSP 90-alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90AA1 PE=1 
SV=5 - [HS90A_HUMAN] 
15,44 
4 
10 
37 
84,6 
P08238 
Heat shock protein HSP 90-beta OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSP90AB1 PE=1 
SV=4 - [HS90B_HUMAN] 
17,40 
5 
11 
60 
83,2 
P41797 
Heat shock protein SSA1 OS=Candida albicans (strain SC5314 / ATCC MYA-
2876) GN=SSA1 PE=1 SV=2 - [HSP71_CANAL] 
11,59 
1 
5 
16 
70,3 
P09651 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA1 PE=1 SV=5 - [ROA1_HUMAN] 
12,10 
3 
3 
11 
38,7 
P51991 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A3 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA3 PE=1 SV=2 - [ROA3_HUMAN] 
8,47 
2 
2 
4 
39,6 
P61978 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPK PE=1 SV=1 - [HNRPK_HUMAN] 
14,25 
6 
6 
21 
50,9 
P14866 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L OS=Homo sapiens GN=HNRNPL 
PE=1 SV=2 - [HNRPL_HUMAN] 
2,89 
2 
2 
8 
64,1 
Q00839 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPU PE=1 SV=6 - [HNRPU_HUMAN] 
5,33 
4 
4 
9 
90,5 
P22626 
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins A2/B1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=HNRNPA2B1 PE=1 SV=2 - [ROA2_HUMAN] 
12,18 
3 
3 
14 
37,4 
P09429 
High mobility group protein B1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HMGB1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[HMGB1_HUMAN] 
7,91 
1 
2 
10 
24,9 
P26583 
High mobility group protein B2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HMGB2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[HMGB2_HUMAN] 
10,53 
1 
2 
7 
24,0 
P16403 
Histone H1.2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H1C PE=1 SV=2 - 
[H12_HUMAN] 
15,49 
4 
4 
27 
21,4 
P16401 
Histone H1.5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[H15_HUMAN] 
12,39 
4 
4 
19 
22,6 
P0C0S5 
Histone H2A.Z OS=Homo sapiens GN=H2AFZ PE=1 SV=2 - [H2AZ_HUMAN] 
14,84 
2 
2 
17 
13,5 
O60814 
Histone H2B type 1-K OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H2BK PE=1 SV=3 - 
[H2B1K_HUMAN] 
23,81 
4 
4 
47 
13,9 
A5DWE2 
Histone H3.1/H3.2 OS=Lodderomyces elongisporus (strain ATCC 11503 / 
CBS 2605 / JCM 1781 / NBRC 1676 / NRRL YB-4239) GN=HHT1 PE=3 
SV=1 - [H31_LODEL] 
13,24 
2 
2 
12 
15,3 
P62805 
Histone H4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=HIST1H4A PE=1 SV=2 - [H4_HUMAN] 
31,07 
3 
3 
22 
11,4 
Q86YZ3 
Hornerin OS=Homo sapiens GN=HRNR PE=1 SV=2 - [HORN_HUMAN] 
6,35 
7 
7 
13 
282,2 
P01876 
Ig alpha-1 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHA1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
36,26 
3 
9 
32 
37,6 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 45 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
[IGHA1_HUMAN] 
P01877 
Ig alpha-2 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHA2 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[IGHA2_HUMAN] 
31,47 
1 
7 
23 
36,5 
P01857 
Ig gamma-1 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHG1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[IGHG1_HUMAN] 
29,70 
5 
6 
19 
36,1 
P01859 
Ig gamma-2 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHG2 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[IGHG2_HUMAN] 
24,85 
3 
6 
13 
35,9 
P01860 
Ig gamma-3 chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGHG3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[IGHG3_HUMAN] 
18,04 
1 
4 
11 
41,3 
P01834 
Ig kappa chain C region OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGKC PE=1 SV=1 - 
[IGKC_HUMAN] 
80,19 
6 
6 
24 
11,6 
P0CG05 
Ig lambda-2 chain C regions OS=Homo sapiens GN=IGLC2 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[LAC2_HUMAN] 
49,06 
5 
5 
11 
11,3 
Q9Y6R7 
IgGFc-binding protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=FCGBP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[FCGBP_HUMAN] 
3,81 
7 
7 
10 
571,6 
Q14974 
Importin subunit beta-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KPNB1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[IMB1_HUMAN] 
2,63 
2 
2 
3 
97,1 
P09923 
Intestinal-type alkaline phosphatase OS=Homo sapiens GN=ALPI PE=1 
SV=2 - [PPBI_HUMAN] 
34,66 
14 
14 
28 
56,8 
P14923 
Junction plakoglobin OS=Homo sapiens GN=JUP PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PLAK_HUMAN] 
11,81 
7 
7 
13 
81,7 
P06870 
Kallikrein-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KLK1 PE=1 SV=2 - [KLK1_HUMAN] 
10,31 
2 
2 
4 
28,9 
O76013 
Keratin, type I cuticular Ha6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT36 PE=2 SV=1 - 
[KRT36_HUMAN] 
3,85 
1 
2 
3 
52,2 
P13645 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 10 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT10 PE=1 SV=6 - 
[K1C10_HUMAN] 
51,88 
30 
34 
136 
58,8 
P02533 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 14 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT14 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[K1C14_HUMAN] 
52,33 
8 
23 
63 
51,5 
P08779 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 16 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT16 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[K1C16_HUMAN] 
55,18 
13 
25 
72 
51,2 
Q04695 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 17 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT17 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K1C17_HUMAN] 
32,41 
6 
13 
26 
48,1 
P35527 
Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 9 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT9 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K1C9_HUMAN] 
56,50 
29 
29 
140 
62,0 
O43790 
Keratin, type II cuticular Hb6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT86 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KRT86_HUMAN] 
19,96 
2 
11 
32 
53,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 46 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P04264 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT1 PE=1 SV=6 - 
[K2C1_HUMAN] 
64,60 
41 
47 
209 
66,0 
Q7Z794 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 1b OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT77 PE=2 SV=3 - 
[K2C1B_HUMAN] 
12,46 
4 
7 
21 
61,9 
P35908 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 2 epidermal OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT2 PE=1 
SV=2 - [K22E_HUMAN] 
69,33 
29 
41 
134 
65,4 
Q01546 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 2 oral OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT76 PE=1 SV=2 
- [K22O_HUMAN] 
13,79 
1 
12 
34 
65,8 
P13647 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT5 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K2C5_HUMAN] 
33,22 
15 
27 
82 
62,3 
P02538 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 6A OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT6A PE=1 SV=3 - 
[K2C6A_HUMAN] 
42,02 
5 
26 
83 
60,0 
P04259 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 6B OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT6B PE=1 SV=5 - 
[K2C6B_HUMAN] 
38,65 
3 
25 
86 
60,0 
Q7RTS7 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 74 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT74 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K2C74_HUMAN] 
5,67 
1 
4 
14 
57,8 
Q8N1N4 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 78 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT78 PE=2 SV=2 - 
[K2C78_HUMAN] 
11,15 
3 
6 
13 
56,8 
Q6KB66 
Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 80 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT80 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[K2C80_HUMAN] 
9,29 
3 
4 
6 
50,5 
Q8IUC1 
Keratin-associated protein 11-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRTAP11-1 PE=2 
SV=1 - [KR111_HUMAN] 
7,36 
2 
2 
8 
17,1 
Q5T749 
Keratinocyte proline-rich protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=KPRP PE=1 SV=1 - 
[KPRP_HUMAN] 
9,50 
4 
4 
6 
64,1 
P09848 
Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=LCT PE=1 SV=3 - 
[LPH_HUMAN] 
1,30 
2 
2 
3 
218,4 
P02788 
Lactotransferrin OS=Homo sapiens GN=LTF PE=1 SV=6 - [TRFL_HUMAN] 
20,14 
10 
10 
14 
78,1 
P20700 
Lamin-B1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=LMNB1 PE=1 SV=2 - [LMNB1_HUMAN] 
5,29 
2 
3 
4 
66,4 
Q8AAW1 
L-arabinose isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 
29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=araA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[ARAA_BACTN] 
6,09 
2 
2 
3 
57,1 
P00338 
L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=LDHA PE=1 SV=2 - 
[LDHA_HUMAN] 
9,34 
2 
3 
21 
36,7 
P07195 
L-lactate dehydrogenase B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=LDHB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[LDHB_HUMAN] 
6,29 
1 
2 
19 
36,6 
P61626 
Lysozyme C OS=Homo sapiens GN=LYZ PE=1 SV=1 - [LYSC_HUMAN] 
20,27 
3 
3 
4 
16,5 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 47 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P40925 
Malate dehydrogenase, cytoplasmic OS=Homo sapiens GN=MDH1 PE=1 
SV=4 - [MDHC_HUMAN] 
7,49 
2 
2 
3 
36,4 
P40926 
Malate dehydrogenase, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=MDH2 PE=1 
SV=3 - [MDHM_HUMAN] 
14,20 
4 
4 
16 
35,5 
O43451 
Maltase-glucoamylase, intestinal OS=Homo sapiens GN=MGAM PE=1 SV=5 
- [MGA_HUMAN] 
9,37 
15 
15 
30 
209,7 
Q16819 
Meprin A subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=MEP1A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[MEP1A_HUMAN] 
4,42 
3 
3 
6 
84,4 
Q16820 
Meprin A subunit beta OS=Homo sapiens GN=MEP1B PE=1 SV=3 - 
[MEP1B_HUMAN] 
6,56 
3 
3 
3 
79,5 
P26038 
Moesin OS=Homo sapiens GN=MSN PE=1 SV=3 - [MOES_HUMAN] 
6,24 
2 
4 
14 
67,8 
P60660 
Myosin light polypeptide 6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYL6 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[MYL6_HUMAN] 
27,15 
4 
4 
12 
16,9 
P19105 
Myosin regulatory light chain 12A OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYL12A PE=1 
SV=2 - [ML12A_HUMAN] 
11,11 
2 
2 
5 
19,8 
P35579 
Myosin-9 OS=Homo sapiens GN=MYH9 PE=1 SV=4 - [MYH9_HUMAN] 
5,56 
13 
13 
29 
226,4 
P15586 
N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase OS=Homo sapiens GN=GNS PE=1 SV=3 - 
[GNS_HUMAN] 
3,80 
2 
2 
3 
62,0 
P15111 
NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase OS=Salmonella typhimurium (strain 
LT2 / SGSC1412 / ATCC 700720) GN=gdhA PE=3 SV=2 - [DHE4_SALTY] 
4,47 
2 
2 
4 
48,5 
Q13765 
Nascent polypeptide-associated complex subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=NACA PE=1 SV=1 - [NACA_HUMAN] 
13,49 
2 
2 
7 
23,4 
P19338 
Nucleolin OS=Homo sapiens GN=NCL PE=1 SV=3 - [NUCL_HUMAN] 
5,21 
4 
4 
10 
76,6 
P06748 
Nucleophosmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=NPM1 PE=1 SV=2 - [NPM_HUMAN] 
3,74 
2 
2 
10 
32,6 
P15531 
Nucleoside diphosphate kinase A OS=Homo sapiens GN=NME1 PE=1 SV=1 
- [NDKA_HUMAN] 
20,39 
2 
2 
6 
17,1 
P04746 
Pancreatic alpha-amylase OS=Homo sapiens GN=AMY2A PE=1 SV=2 - 
[AMYP_HUMAN] 
69,08 
4 
34 
252 
57,7 
P55259 
Pancreatic secretory granule membrane major glycoprotein GP2 OS=Homo 
sapiens GN=GP2 PE=2 SV=3 - [GP2_HUMAN] 
5,59 
3 
3 
11 
59,4 
O95497 
Pantetheinase OS=Homo sapiens GN=VNN1 PE=1 SV=2 - [VNN1_HUMAN] 
4,48 
2 
2 
2 
57,0 
Q06830 
Peroxiredoxin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRDX1 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PRDX1_HUMAN] 
29,15 
6 
6 
17 
22,1 
Q5L7N5 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Bacteroides fragilis (strain 
ATCC 25285 / DSM 2151 / JCM 11019 / NCTC 9343) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_BACFN] 
16,07 
1 
7 
15 
59,0 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 48 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
C5BGS4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Edwardsiella ictaluri (strain 
93-146) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EDWI9] 
9,09 
2 
5 
14 
59,2 
C4Z0Q6 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium eligens (strain 
ATCC 27750 / VPI C15-48) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBE2] 
26,03 
4 
12 
28 
59,0 
C4ZBL1 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Eubacterium rectale (strain 
ATCC 33656 / VPI 0990) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - [PCKA_EUBR3] 
33,90 
6 
13 
22 
59,0 
A6LFQ4 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Parabacteroides distasonis 
(strain ATCC 8503 / DSM 20701 / NCTC 11152) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PARD8] 
22,80 
4 
11 
35 
58,9 
B2RHV8 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP] OS=Porphyromonas gingivalis 
(strain ATCC 33277 / DSM 20709 / JCM 12257) GN=pckA PE=3 SV=1 - 
[PCKA_PORG3] 
12,34 
4 
8 
17 
59,4 
P00558 
Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PGK1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PGK1_HUMAN] 
6,00 
2 
2 
2 
44,6 
Q15149 
Plectin OS=Homo sapiens GN=PLEC PE=1 SV=3 - [PLEC_HUMAN] 
2,20 
10 
10 
28 
531,5 
Q15365 
Poly(rC)-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PCBP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[PCBP1_HUMAN] 
8,71 
2 
3 
12 
37,5 
Q15366 
Poly(rC)-binding protein 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PCBP2 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PCBP2_HUMAN] 
6,03 
1 
2 
7 
38,6 
P11940 
Polyadenylate-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PABPC1 PE=1 SV=2 
- [PABP1_HUMAN] 
4,56 
3 
3 
3 
70,6 
P01833 
Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor OS=Homo sapiens GN=PIGR PE=1 
SV=4 - [PIGR_HUMAN] 
6,15 
3 
3 
6 
83,2 
P0CG48 
Polyubiquitin-C OS=Homo sapiens GN=UBC PE=1 SV=3 - [UBC_HUMAN] 
61,75 
4 
4 
57 
77,0 
P02545 
Prelamin-A/C OS=Homo sapiens GN=LMNA PE=1 SV=1 - [LMNA_HUMAN] 
18,07 
10 
11 
36 
74,1 
Q92841 
Probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX17 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=DDX17 PE=1 SV=2 - [DDX17_HUMAN] 
4,66 
1 
3 
6 
80,2 
P17844 
Probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=DDX5 
PE=1 SV=1 - [DDX5_HUMAN] 
4,56 
1 
3 
6 
69,1 
P35232 
Prohibitin OS=Homo sapiens GN=PHB PE=1 SV=1 - [PHB_HUMAN] 
7,35 
2 
2 
4 
29,8 
Q99623 
Prohibitin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PHB2 PE=1 SV=2 - [PHB2_HUMAN] 
9,70 
3 
3 
9 
33,3 
P12004 
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen OS=Homo sapiens GN=PCNA PE=1 SV=1 - 
[PCNA_HUMAN] 
17,24 
4 
4 
7 
28,8 
Q9UQ80 
Proliferation-associated protein 2G4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PA2G4 PE=1 
SV=3 - [PA2G4_HUMAN] 
5,08 
2 
2 
2 
43,8 
P25788 
Proteasome subunit alpha type-3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PSMA3 PE=1 
8,24 
2 
2 
11 
28,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 49 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
SV=2 - [PSA3_HUMAN] 
P28066 
Proteasome subunit alpha type-5 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PSMA5 PE=1 
SV=3 - [PSA5_HUMAN] 
9,54 
2 
2 
7 
26,4 
P60900 
Proteasome subunit alpha type-6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PSMA6 PE=1 
SV=1 - [PSA6_HUMAN] 
21,95 
5 
5 
11 
27,4 
P28072 
Proteasome subunit beta type-6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PSMB6 PE=1 SV=4 
- [PSB6_HUMAN] 
8,79 
2 
2 
3 
25,3 
P30101 
Protein disulfide-isomerase A3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PDIA3 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[PDIA3_HUMAN] 
10,69 
6 
6 
15 
56,7 
P13667 
Protein disulfide-isomerase A4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PDIA4 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[PDIA4_HUMAN] 
4,34 
2 
2 
3 
72,9 
P07237 
Protein disulfide-isomerase OS=Homo sapiens GN=P4HB PE=1 SV=3 - 
[PDIA1_HUMAN] 
7,48 
3 
3 
6 
57,1 
P31151 
Protein S100-A7 OS=Homo sapiens GN=S100A7 PE=1 SV=4 - 
[S10A7_HUMAN] 
21,78 
2 
2 
5 
11,5 
P05109 
Protein S100-A8 OS=Homo sapiens GN=S100A8 PE=1 SV=1 - 
[S10A8_HUMAN] 
23,66 
2 
2 
5 
10,8 
Q01105 
Protein SET OS=Homo sapiens GN=SET PE=1 SV=3 - [SET_HUMAN] 
7,93 
2 
2 
8 
33,5 
Q08188 
Protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase E OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=TGM3 PE=1 SV=4 - [TGM3_HUMAN] 
8,95 
4 
4 
7 
76,6 
A6NCN2 
Putative keratin-87 protein OS=Homo sapiens GN=KRT87P PE=5 SV=4 - 
[KR87P_HUMAN] 
11,37 
1 
2 
2 
29,1 
Q8IZP2 
Putative protein FAM10A4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=ST13P4 PE=5 SV=1 - 
[ST134_HUMAN] 
8,33 
2 
2 
7 
27,4 
P14618 
Pyruvate kinase PKM OS=Homo sapiens GN=PKM PE=1 SV=4 - 
[KPYM_HUMAN] 
18,64 
10 
10 
57 
57,9 
P15153 
Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=RAC2 
PE=1 SV=1 - [RAC2_HUMAN] 
15,10 
2 
3 
6 
21,4 
P62491 
Ras-related protein Rab-11A OS=Homo sapiens GN=RAB11A PE=1 SV=3 - 
[RB11A_HUMAN] 
8,80 
2 
2 
4 
24,4 
P08134 
Rho-related GTP-binding protein RhoC OS=Homo sapiens GN=RHOC PE=1 
SV=1 - [RHOC_HUMAN] 
9,84 
2 
2 
6 
22,0 
Q13228 
Selenium-binding protein 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SELENBP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[SBP1_HUMAN] 
12,29 
4 
4 
6 
52,4 
Q07955 
Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SRSF1 PE=1 
SV=2 - [SRSF1_HUMAN] 
16,53 
4 
4 
9 
27,7 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 50 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
Q01130 
Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SRSF2 PE=1 
SV=4 - [SRSF2_HUMAN] 
11,31 
2 
2 
9 
25,5 
Q13247 
Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SRSF6 PE=1 
SV=2 - [SRSF6_HUMAN] 
5,23 
2 
2 
6 
39,6 
P29508 
Serpin B3 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB3 PE=1 SV=2 - [SPB3_HUMAN] 
18,46 
5 
6 
10 
44,5 
P48594 
Serpin B4 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB4 PE=1 SV=2 - [SPB4_HUMAN] 
8,21 
2 
3 
4 
44,8 
P35237 
Serpin B6 OS=Homo sapiens GN=SERPINB6 PE=1 SV=3 - [SPB6_HUMAN] 
16,22 
5 
5 
5 
42,6 
P02768 
Serum albumin OS=Homo sapiens GN=ALB PE=1 SV=2 - [ALBU_HUMAN] 
72,74 
52 
58 
315 
69,3 
P05023 
Sodium/potassium-transporting ATPase subunit alpha-1 OS=Homo sapiens 
GN=ATP1A1 PE=1 SV=1 - [AT1A1_HUMAN] 
3,62 
3 
3 
9 
112,8 
P23246 
Splicing factor, proline- and glutamine-rich OS=Homo sapiens GN=SFPQ 
PE=1 SV=2 - [SFPQ_HUMAN] 
4,81 
3 
3 
8 
76,1 
P16949 
Stathmin OS=Homo sapiens GN=STMN1 PE=1 SV=3 - [STMN1_HUMAN] 
12,75 
2 
2 
5 
17,3 
P38646 
Stress-70 protein, mitochondrial OS=Homo sapiens GN=HSPA9 PE=1 SV=2 
- [GRP75_HUMAN] 
7,22 
4 
4 
13 
73,6 
P14410 
Sucrase-isomaltase, intestinal OS=Homo sapiens GN=SI PE=1 SV=6 - 
[SUIS_HUMAN] 
11,66 
17 
17 
28 
209,3 
Q6UWP8 
Suprabasin OS=Homo sapiens GN=SBSN PE=1 SV=2 - [SBSN_HUMAN] 
9,15 
2 
2 
2 
60,5 
Q9Y490 
Talin-1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=TLN1 PE=1 SV=3 - [TLN1_HUMAN] 
1,46 
3 
3 
3 
269,6 
P17987 
T-complex protein 1 subunit alpha OS=Homo sapiens GN=TCP1 PE=1 SV=1 
- [TCPA_HUMAN] 
5,22 
3 
3 
3 
60,3 
P50991 
T-complex protein 1 subunit delta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT4 PE=1 SV=4 
- [TCPD_HUMAN] 
4,82 
3 
3 
7 
57,9 
Q99832 
T-complex protein 1 subunit eta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT7 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TCPH_HUMAN] 
4,42 
2 
2 
3 
59,3 
P49368 
T-complex protein 1 subunit gamma OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT3 PE=1 
SV=4 - [TCPG_HUMAN] 
3,49 
2 
2 
3 
60,5 
P50990 
T-complex protein 1 subunit theta OS=Homo sapiens GN=CCT8 PE=1 SV=4 
- [TCPQ_HUMAN] 
5,84 
3 
3 
3 
59,6 
P0AA29 
Thioredoxin-1 OS=Salmonella typhi GN=trxA PE=3 SV=2 - [THIO_SALTI] 
52,29 
5 
5 
18 
11,8 
Q8WZ42 
Titin OS=Homo sapiens GN=TTN PE=1 SV=4 - [TITIN_HUMAN] 
0,18 
5 
5 
9 
3813,7 
P37837 
Transaldolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TALDO1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TALDO_HUMAN] 
5,04 
2 
2 
3 
37,5 
P37802 
Transgelin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=TAGLN2 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TAGL2_HUMAN] 
11,06 
2 
2 
7 
22,4 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Tables 
 
         – 51 – 
Accession no. 
Description 
% 
Coverage 
Unique 
Peptides 
Total 
Peptides 
Peptide 
spectrum 
matches 
MW 
[kDa] 
P29401 
Transketolase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TKT PE=1 SV=3 - [TKT_HUMAN] 
2,89 
2 
2 
5 
67,8 
P02766 
Transthyretin OS=Homo sapiens GN=TTR PE=1 SV=1 - [TTHY_HUMAN] 
18,37 
3 
3 
4 
15,9 
A6KXL2 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Bacteroides vulgatus (strain ATCC 8482 / 
DSM 1447 / NCTC 11154) GN=tpiA PE=3 SV=1 - [TPIS_BACV8] 
13,55 
2 
2 
2 
26,9 
P60174 
Triosephosphate isomerase OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPI1 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TPIS_HUMAN] 
22,03 
5 
5 
13 
30,8 
P06753 
Tropomyosin alpha-3 chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPM3 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TPM3_HUMAN] 
14,04 
1 
3 
10 
32,9 
P67936 
Tropomyosin alpha-4 chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TPM4 PE=1 SV=3 - 
[TPM4_HUMAN] 
16,94 
2 
4 
12 
28,5 
P07478 
Trypsin-2 OS=Homo sapiens GN=PRSS2 PE=1 SV=1 - [TRY2_HUMAN] 
16,19 
3 
3 
9 
26,5 
Q9BQE3 
Tubulin alpha-1C chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBA1C PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBA1C_HUMAN] 
11,80 
4 
4 
19 
49,9 
P07437 
Tubulin beta chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB PE=1 SV=2 - 
[TBB5_HUMAN] 
18,24 
1 
7 
78 
49,6 
P68371 
Tubulin beta-4B chain OS=Homo sapiens GN=TUBB4B PE=1 SV=1 - 
[TBB4B_HUMAN] 
21,57 
2 
8 
76 
49,8 
P54577 
Tyrosine--tRNA ligase, cytoplasmic OS=Homo sapiens GN=YARS PE=1 
SV=4 - [SYYC_HUMAN] 
7,39 
4 
4 
6 
59,1 
P22314 
Ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme 1 OS=Homo sapiens GN=UBA1 
PE=1 SV=3 - [UBA1_HUMAN] 
4,35 
4 
4 
8 
117,8 
Q8A9J2 
Uronate isomerase OS=Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / 
DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) GN=uxaC PE=3 SV=2 - 
[UXAC_BACTN] 
4,70 
2 
2 
2 
54,3 
P08670 
Vimentin OS=Homo sapiens GN=VIM PE=1 SV=4 - [VIME_HUMAN] 
24,03 
12 
13 
61 
53,6 
P18206 
Vinculin OS=Homo sapiens GN=VCL PE=1 SV=4 - [VINC_HUMAN] 
5,03 
5 
5 
10 
123,7 
P25311 
Zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein OS=Homo sapiens GN=AZGP1 PE=1 SV=2 - 
[ZA2G_HUMAN] 
31,21 
8 
8 
12 
34,2 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Fecal filtrate transfer (FFT): Supplementary Figure Legends 
  – 1 – 
Supplementary Figure Legends 
 
Supplementary Figure 1. Relative alteration of fecal bacterial composition after fecal 
filtrate transfer (FFT) treatment in patient 2 (A) and patient 3 (B). The figure represents 
the 10 most strongly decreasing (red font) or increasing (blue font) bacterial phylotypes 
after six weeks compared to their abundance before FFT treatment. Values for samples 
taken one week after FFT treatment were included for comparison (grey bars). Bacterial 
phylotypes also detected in the feces of the donor are marked by asterisks (*). 
 
Supplementary Figure 2. Relative alteration of fecal bacterial composition after fecal 
filtrate transfer (FFT) treatment in patient 4 (A) and patient 5 (B). The figure represents 
the 10 most strongly decreasing (red font) or increasing (blue font) bacterial phylotypes 
after six weeks compared to their abundance before FFT treatment. Values for samples 
taken one week after FFT treatment were included for comparison (grey bars). Bacterial 
phylotypes also detected in the feces of the donor are marked by asterisks (*). 
 
Supplementary Figure 3: Principal coordinate analysis of the bacterial community 
membership and structure using Jaccard (A) and Bray-Curtis (B) distances, 
respectively. Distances between symbols on the plot denote relative dissimilarities in 
bacterial community membership and structure in the patient samples before (day 0) 
and after fecal filtrate transfer (week 1 or week 6) and to the respective donor samples. 
 
Supplementary Figure 4. Relative distribution of dominant microbial 16S rRNA gene 
signatures in stool and filtrate samples from the donor for patient 5. Only bacterial 
phylotypes having at least 1% cumulative abundance in both samples are shown. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
