 Self-harm is a serious and growing problem, particularly among
young people. Self-harm refers to any act with a non-fatal
outcome in which an individual initiates a behaviour (such as
self-cutting) or ingests a substance with the intention of causing
harm to themselves.1 People who self-harm, especially when
young, are a vulnerable but largely hidden population, who do
not often come into contact with services and for whom a
presentation to accident and emergency (A&E) represents a key
opportunity for engagement and possible suicide prevention.2
This opportunity is frequently missed.3 A systematic review of the
perceptions of people who present at A&E following an act of
self-harm shows that they generally report poor experiences of care.4
Despite publication of National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) guidance on general hospital management of
self-harm,5 dissatisfaction remains widespread. Patients continue
to complain that professionals lack understanding, do not treat
them with care and respect, and fail to communicate with them
effectively or to involve them in their care. Correspondingly, staff
working in A&E report negative attitudes towards people who
self-harm, including feelings of irritation, anger and frustration.6,7
Existing research relates to adults or mixed adult/adolescent
populations. The views of young people who self-harm are very
difficult to access and their fears about presenting to healthcare
services, including A&E, are not well understood. We re-examined
an existing qualitative data-set that contained spontaneous peer-
to-peer talk among a group of young people who self-harm and
sheds a clear light on their perceptions of A&E services, their
experiences of A&E care and their views on what constitutes a
positive clinical encounter.
Method
Secondary analysis refers to the use of existing data, either by
members of the original research team or by other researchers,
to answer new questions or extend the focus of the primary
research. Although there is a long tradition of sharing and re-using
quantitative data-sets, the practice is less well established within
qualitative research, possibly due to the importance attached to
first-hand
knowledge
of
the
contexts
in
which
data
are
constructed, as well as concerns about confidentiality.8 If these
challenges are overcome, re-using qualitative data can be highly
profitable, as they are time-consuming and expensive to collect
and typically range over topics that were not anticipated at
the outset. It is particularly advantageous in research with
marginalised groups, whose views may be difficult to elicit in
the first place.8,9
The data presented here are drawn from an experimental
online discussion forum which was open 24 h a day for 14 weeks
during the summer of 2009. The forum was set up to bring
together junior health professionals and young people who self-
harm and observe their verbal behaviour and discourse. The
aim of the primary study was to see whether an anonymous online
environment could break down some of the reported barriers to
communication between these two groups, enabling them to talk
on equal terms and share learning about self-harm and its
management. Young people aged 16–25 with experience of self-
harm (n = 77) were recruited from existing online self-harm
forums. Recently and nearly qualified professionals in relevant
286
Needs and fears of young people presenting
at accident and emergency department
following an act of self-harm: secondary analysis
of qualitative data
Christabel Owens, Lorraine Hansford, Siobhan Sharkey and Tamsin Ford
Background
Presentation at an accident and emergency (A&E)
department is a key opportunity to engage with a young
person who self-harms. The needs of this vulnerable group
and their fears about presenting to healthcare services,
including A&E, are poorly understood.
Aims
To examine young people’s perceptions of A&E treatment
following self-harm and their views on what constitutes a
positive clinical encounter.
Method
Secondary analysis of qualitative data from an experimental
online discussion forum. Threads selected for secondary
analysis represent the views of 31 young people aged 16–25
with experience of self-harm.
Results
Participants reported avoiding A&E whenever possible, based
on their own and others’ previous poor experiences. When
forced to seek emergency care, they did so with feelings of
shame and unworthiness. These feelings were reinforced
when they received what they perceived as punitive treatment
from A&E staff, perpetuating a cycle of shame, avoidance and
further self-harm. Positive encounters were those in which
they received ‘treatment as usual’, i.e. non-discriminatory
care, delivered with kindness, which had the potential to
challenge negative self-evaluation and break the cycle.
Conclusions
The clinical needs of young people who self-harm continue
to demand urgent attention. Further hypothesis testing and
trials of different models of care delivery for this vulnerable
group are warranted.
Declaration of interest
None.
Copyright and usage
B The Royal College of Psychiatrists 2016. This is an open
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2016)
208, 286–291. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.113.141242
 mental healthcare disciplines (n = 18) were recruited to take part
in the study, but most did not actively participate in the forum.
In their absence, the young people engaged in lively discussion,
supported one another through emotional crises and built a
vibrant online community of their own. Full details and results
of the primary study are available elsewhere.10–14 Three of the
present authors (C.O., S.S. and T.F.) were members of the original
research team. The primary study received ethical approval from
Southampton & South West Hampshire NHS Research Ethics
Committee A, and the present analysis falls within the scope of
the original consent.
The forum generated thousands of posted contributions and
provided a wealth of insight into the lived worlds of young people
who self-harm. Much of the young people’s talk revolved around
real-world encounters with health professionals in different
settings: A&E, primary care, secondary mental health, and the
voluntary and private sectors. The present study focused on
the young people’s experiences of seeking treatment in A&E for
self-inflicted injuries, including self-poisoning.
The forum was structured in such a way that posted material
fell into three broad categories: discussion/debate; ‘crisis’ posts or
requests for emotional support to deal with personal difficulties;
and ‘random stuff’, which included off-topic chat and games.
Twenty-nine (out of 87) threads initiated by young people in
the discussion/debate category dealt specifically with aspects of
clinical care, under titles such as: ‘+ve/–ve A&E experiences’ and
‘The best/worst things a pro [healthcare professional] can say to
you’. A further six (out of 114) ‘crisis’ threads included discussion
of clinical encounters in A&E. We used an in-built search tool to
search the archived forum for any remaining references to A&E
visits,
using a range of search terms, including accident,
emergency, A&E, hospital, casualty, nurse, doctor, wound, stitch
and overdose.
The data thus identified were subjected to inductive thematic
analysis.15 Three authors (L.H., C.O. and S.S.) read and familiarised
themselves with all the textual material and noted down points of
interest. They met several times to compare notes and agree on a
set of initial codes, which were used to sort units of data into
meaningful categories. Coding and subsequent retrieval were
facilitated by NVivo software (www.qsrinternational.com/products_
nvivo.aspx). Thematic mapping techniques, as described by
Braun & Clarke,15 were used at later team meetings to identify
candidate themes and consider their relationships to one another,
their ability to represent the whole data-set and their usefulness.
Material relevant to each theme was then scrutinised closely,
organised into a coherent and internally consistent account, and
finally embedded within an overall narrative.
Results
Of 77 young people who registered to take part in the forum, the
views of 31 are represented in the threads selected for secondary
analysis. Characteristics of the full cohort and the subsample are
described in Table 1. Four main themes are presented here, which
correspond to stages on the young person’s journey into and
through A&E, namely: influences on the decision to attend or
avoid; feelings on arrival; perceptions of treatment and care, and
consequences of perceived negative treatment.
Influences on the decision to attend or avoid
It was clear from the young people’s talk that they were in the
habit of treating their own self-inflicted injuries whenever possible
and were adept at doing so. Attendance at A&E was regarded as a
last resort and was limited to those occasions on which injuries
were too severe to manage at home (for example, if bleeding could
not be controlled), failed to heal or developed complications.
Their own previous bad experiences of A&E care and those
recounted by friends were the main reason for putting off a visit
for as long as possible:
‘I’ve self-harmed badly today and now feel ashamed about it . . . I took some pills and
jumped off a ledge roughly 15 feet up onto tarmac . . . I’m so stupid . . . I think I may
have broken something but I really don’t wanna go to hospital as they were really
judgemental and impatient the last time I went and I feel rubbish enough as it is.’
(ID 90)
‘I’ve never been to A+E. I’ve been scared away by all the horror stories that I’ve heard,
so consequently I have some nasty scars from wounds that could probably have used
stitches.’ (ID 61)
The first participant was eventually persuaded by a close friend to
go to A&E, where it was confirmed that several bones had been
broken. The decision to attend was frequently prompted by lay
or, very occasionally, professional referral, as here:
‘I’ve been to A&E this afternoon after being pestered by my practice nurse for the last
2 weeks with her concerns over a wound.’ (ID 34)
Attendance may have been involuntary, for example, if the young
person was unconscious following an overdose.
Feelings on arrival
The predominant emotions expressed in the young people’s stories
of their self-harm episodes were shame and self-loathing. The
sense of shame was sometimes associated with a perceived ‘failure’
to have done what they set out to do, namely to take their own life.
These feelings accompanied them to hospital, so that they arrived
feeling worthless and undeserving of treatment:
‘I’m usually in a state where I believe I’m worthless, having failed to have the courage
to go through with it properly and not feeling worthy of living.’ (ID 59)
They also talked about feeling highly vulnerable, fearful and
desperate to be shown a little kindness. Many self-harmed in secret
and were unable or unwilling to ask their families for support,
leading to feelings of acute isolation:
‘I’ve been told I have to have an operation on it in the morning. They wanted to keep
me in overnight but agreed I could come home if I go back at 7.30 in the morning. I feel
287
Needs and fears of young people who self-harm
Table 1
Characteristics of participants
Characteristic
Whole cohort
of young people
in primary
study (n = 77)
n (%)
Young people
included in
secondary
analysis (n = 31)
n (%)a
Mean age, years
19.3
19.5
Female
73 (95)
30 (97)
White ethnic origin
74 (96)
30 (97)
Last time self-harmed
In last 7 days
34 (44)
17 (55)
In last month
20 (26)
7 (23)
1–6 months
17 (22)
4 (13)
7–12 months
2 (3)
1 (3)
1–4 years
4 (5)
2 (6)
5 or more years
–
–
Method of self-harm (not mutually exclusive)
Cutting
77 (100)
31 (100)
Not eating
50 (65)
22 (71)
Overdosing
48 (62)
16 (51)
Burning
44 (57)
14 (45)
Biting
35 (45)
13 (42)
Misusing alcohol/drugs
35 (45)
14 (45)
Binge eating
34 (44)
13 (42)
Other (e.g. head banging, hair
pulling, bruising, broken bones)
40 (52)
18 (58)
a. Percentage of subsample.
 Owens et al
so scared and alone as none of my family know, which is why I couldn’t stay there
overnight . . . My aunty is having a BBQ tonight and I really don’t feel strong enough
to put on the front, but I have no reason for not going. Aaaahhhhh, self-harm ruins
everything!!!’ (ID 91)
This excerpt illustrates the extent to which the young people were
troubled by their own behaviour and hated the way in which it
complicated their lives, bringing them into conflict with their
families and necessitating subterfuge.
Deception also characterised their visits to A&E. Lying about
the origin of the injury was one of several strategies they had
for managing the stress and shame of having to ask for help for
a self-inflicted wound:
‘I’ve had an awful week and ended up shattering my wrist against a wall . . . I had to lie
to the hospital so they didn’t think I’m stupid.’ (ID48)
Perceptions of treatment and care
The discussion threads contained numerous stories of perceived
poor treatment and negative attitudes on the part of A&E staff:
‘Some nurses . . . just look at you with utter disgust like you’re some monster.’ (ID 24)
‘I was treated from start to finish as if I was pathetic and not worthy of treatment.’
(ID 90)
Some participants complained of unfair discrimination and of
having been denied usual care, including pain relief, on account
of having caused their own injuries. One young person spent
several hours debating with fellow forum participants whether
or not to get a wound looked at and, having finally summoned
the courage to do so, reported:
‘They refused to treat me!! . . . basically ’cos it’s self-harm . . . I feel like giving up.
What’s the point if no-one even wants to try and help.’ (ID41)
The group engaged in extensive discussion of those who endanger
their health in other ways, and commented that, although people
who self-harm are no more irresponsible and no less deserving of
medical care, they nonetheless seem to be penalised more harshly
for their behaviours. There was concern that discrimination could
make it difficult for them to get treatment for genuinely accidental
injuries:
‘Last year I [accidentally] sliced my thumb open right down to the bone . . . I was
almost refused treatment because of the cuts on my arms. It’s really irritating! . . .
They don’t refuse to treat people who do risky sports and receive a lot of injuries
through them.’ (ID 53)
‘Yeah . . . a doctor doesn’t refuse to treat someone who has liver problems through
drinking or a smoker with bronchitus [sic].’ (ID 80)
Others reported that, although they had received basic medical
attention, they felt they had been been treated as a persona non
grata. One complained of having been ‘stuck in an out-of-the-
way cubicle and ignored’
, which gave her the opportunity to
continue self-harming. Others considered that they had been
denied information, excluded from decision-making or were
talked about as if they were not present:
‘Some doctors seem to think there is a relationship between self-harm and not being
able to hear, so they don’t bother addressing you but just talk to anyone who happens
to be with you . . . [They] say things like, ‘‘when did she do this?’’ as if the person who
did it isn’t capable of answering.’ (ID80)
They described feeling belittled by hospital staff, being told that
that they were ‘selfish’, ‘inconsiderate’
, ‘as bad as people who make
hoax ambulance calls’ and that they were ‘wasting time that could
be used on real patients’
, which only served to reinforce their
negative self-image and make them feel worse than when they
went in. These adverse consequences are expanded on in the next
section.
There were also stories of positive encounters with A&E staff.
Behaviours that were particularly valued by the young people
were those that demonstrated sensitivity and a genuine desire to
understand the functions of self-harm:
‘I allowed a student nurse to observe and she was really kind and asked me why I self-
harm because she said she didn’t really understand it, and it was really nice . . . to be
able to actually help someone learn about it.’ (ID 24)
Other examples of good practice, as judged by the young people,
included: asking before taking blood ‘because the process is
triggering for some people’; not requiring them to roll up sleeves
when having blood pressure taken ‘because she was sensitive to the
fact that I probably didn’t want to have scars showing’; asking
whether the patient was comfortable with a doctor of the opposite
sex; chatting with them in a relaxed way about about ‘random
stuff’ as well as about their emotional well-being, and refraining
from ‘asking the same old psych questions 100 times . . . ‘‘Are
you crazy?’’ ‘‘Are you trying to kill yourself?’’ Blah, blah, blah’.
Several young people complained that they had been allowed
to leave hospital without being offered a psychiatric assessment;
others, like the one just cited, who had been assessed many times
over, made it clear that they found the process tedious and futile,
since it rarely resulted in any treatment or follow-up being offered.
Participants who had had both good and bad experiences
concluded that A&E was simply ‘a lottery’, and that the level of
care depended entirely on who was on duty at the time. It was
clear that people were seen as more important than processes in
determining whether their hospital experience was positive or
negative. Some of the young people demonstrated a keen
awareness of the pressures under which A&E staff were working
and tried to make allowances for their negative behaviours on
the grounds that practitioners are ‘only human’ and have their
own emotional issues to deal with:
‘I think A&E departments can be very understaffed (I know my local A&E is) so the staff
get very stressed and overworked and are prone to vent their frustration on patients
sometimes.’ (ID 61)
‘I can understand their frustration at having to stitch someone up knowing that there
is a possiblityof them returning the next day with a new injury or after re-opening the
stitches . . . They are only human and have bad days just like anyone else.’ (ID91)
Consequences of perceived negative treatment
The consequences of perceived negative attitudes and behaviours
were threefold: reinforcing the feelings of shame and worthlessness
with which the young people arrived; avoidance of future help-
seeking, and adverse health outcomes, both mental and physical.
‘You feel so low after self-harming and being treated with contempt or anger or
people walking on eggshells just makes it worse. If people would simply treat us in
a business-like manner, with a touch of sympathy perhaps, it would help. I know it’s
frustrating treating a self-harmer, but taking the frustration out on us tends to push us
further from the idea of getting support.’ (ID 59)
‘I will not go up there anymore, mainly because I feel like such a time waster, and
I hate all the questions they ask you . . . I just want to get back home, hide under
the duvet and die of shame . . . I’ve ended up with numerous infections however from
not getting wounds treated.’ (ID34)
Some young people talked about being more likely to self-harm
after leaving A&E because of the way it made them feel, and
one described feeling like going home and ‘finishing the job’, i.e.
making another, more determined attempt to take her own life.
They also felt powerless to complain about poor treatment, being
all too aware of wasting resources that could be used on ‘more
deserving’ patients:
‘When you’re that low you think you deserve bad treatment and are not able to
complain.’ (ID 59)
Discussion
Decisions to seek treatment at A&E for self-inflicted injury are not
taken lightly. Most self-harm is self-treated, and feelings of shame
and unworthiness prevent young people from seeking medical
help. Those negative emotions are reinforced when they encounter
what they perceive to be punitive or stigmatising behaviours and a
288
 Needs and fears of young people who self-harm
lack of empathy on the part of A&E staff, keeping them trapped in
a negative cycle of shame, avoidance and further self-harm,
whereas perceived positive treatment may offer hope of release
from the cycle, as represented in Fig. 1.
It is nearly 35 years since publication of Jeffery’s seminal paper
on the ways in which A&E staff classified certain groups of
patients as ‘rubbish’.16 ‘Rubbish’ included those who had self-
harmed, whom A&E staff judged as having broken the unwritten
rules
of
engagement
with
health
services
and
as
seeking
illegitimate access to the sick role, and whom they therefore
singled out for hostile and punitive treatment. The belief that
certain A&E attenders represent ‘rubbish’ appears to be still alive
and well, but in the minds of patients themselves. The young
people who took part in our discussion forum evaluated
themselves as ‘rubbish’ on arrival at A&E, and the slightest word
or gesture on the part of a receptionist, nurse or doctor was likely
to be interpreted as confirmation of that self-assessment, leaving
them feeling even more worthless than when they went in and
trapped in a negative spiral.
Hunter et al noted that psychosocial assessment following self-
harm ‘had the power to reinforce or challenge hopelessness and
negative self-evaluations’
, as well as to encourage or discourage
engagement with services.17 Our findings suggest that the same
may be true of the visit to A&E as a whole. The fact that young
people who have self-harmed arrive at A&E feeling like ‘rubbish’
may predispose them to perceive staff attitudes and behaviours
as hostile and punitive, even when staff do not intend them as
such. The young person who complained that she was treated as
if she was ‘pathetic and not worthy of treatment’ may unwittingly
have been describing her own assessment of herself. This negative
view of self, together with the general emotional turmoil that
those who have self-harmed bring to the situation, means that
they are likely to interpret being asked to wait ‘in an out of
the way cubicle’ as being shunned or stigmatised, even when
no such slight is intended. Indeed, staff may believe that they
are being considerate by affording the young person privacy, as
recommended by NICE guidance.5 This underlines the acute
need for open communication and involvement at all stages of
treatment.4,17
A visit to A&E for a self-inflicted injury or overdose is a
complex human encounter, with both manifest and hidden
elements. The person presents with a manifest physical health
need, e.g. a cut that requires stitching, but, unlike the victim of
an accident, they arrive feeling contemptible, distrustful and
defensive, and they arouse difficult emotional reactions and
defended practice in those treating them. If those negative
emotions are not brought into the open and addressed, the
encounter is likely to go wrong, with adverse consequences for
both parties. In a study of psychiatric nurses’ interactions with
patients who are suicidal, Tzeng et al found that nurses who were
unable to appreciate patients’ inner worlds distanced themselves,
labelled patients as ‘attention seekers’
, ‘time wasters’ or ‘nuisances’,
and avoided contact with them. The patients then perceived
nurses as uncaring, and both parties felt hurt and devalued by
the encounter, but when nurses were willing to embrace patients’
experiences and learn from them, ‘they changed not only their
attitudes but also the nurse–patient relationship . . . from mutual
hostility to ‘‘win–win’’ outcomes’.18 This message is echoed by
Ballatt & Campling, who call for the notion of ‘kinship’ to be
placed at the centre of healthcare.19 Related etymologically to
kindness, kinship draws attention to the shared humanity and
interconnection
between
clinicians
and
patients.
Without
recognition of kinship, care and compassion can easily be replaced
by contempt.
Chapman & Martin report that A&E staff find those
presenting with self-inflicted injuries ‘harder work’ than acutely
ill patients, and ‘very time consuming’
.7 Our findings may offer
some comfort to A&E staff. Although they point to a need for
clinicians to be alert to the hidden aspects of the encounter, it is
clear that the young people in our study recognised the pressures
on A&E staff and did not expect any special treatment. On the
contrary, a positive clinical encounter, in their view, was one in
which they received ‘treatment as usual’, i.e. the same level of
physical care that would be offered to any other patient, delivered
with the same level of openness, warmth and respect. Like any
patient who finds themselves in A&E, they desired a measure of
‘sympathy’, which involves nothing more complex than an
acknowledgement of their fragile emotional state, and reassurance
289
Self-harm
episode
Feelings of shame
and self-loathing
Default position:
avoidance of A&E
Inability to manage injuries at home,
wound complications or lay referral
Attandance
at A&E
Perceived negative treatment
(punitive and stigmatising)
Perceived positive treatment
(‘treatment as usual’ with kindness)
Resolution
of distress
Reduces shame and
self-loathing; promotes
positive engagement
with services and offers
prospect of freedom
from negative cycle
»
…
»
…
»
…
�
Reinforces negative
self-evaluation and
perpetuates cycle of
self-harm, shame
and avoidance of
services
G
G
Fig. 1
Cycle of self-harm, shame and avoidance.
A&E, accident and emergency (department).
 Owens et al
that they are not viewed as time wasters or attention seekers. They
also greatly appreciate any opportunity to help educate health
professionals about self-harm.
Strengths and limitations of the study
These findings reinforce those from studies of adults and mixed
populations regarding patients’ experiences of care. However,
our data offer direct insight into the lifeworlds of young people
who self-harm, whose voices often go unheard. This group is very
hard to reach using traditional research methods, especially when
recruitment is via A&E departments, where response rates as low
as 6% have been reported.17 The young person who described
wanting to ‘go home, hide under the duvet and die of shame’ after
being treated in A&E is unlikely to have responded to an
invitation by a member of A&E staff to take part in research,
suggesting that alternative recruitment methods may need to be
developed for this group. The nature of our primary study was
different from standard interview or focus group studies, insofar
as it explicitly offered young people who self-harm an opportunity
to
enter
into
a
collaborative
relationship
with
healthcare
professionals, based on a presumption of psychological equality,
and to contribute to professional education about self-harm and
its management.10
A further strength of this data-set is that the participants were
not specifically asked about their experiences of A&E. These data
were unsolicited, but were produced spontaneously during the
course of online discussion in participant-led threads, which
continued over successive days and weeks, thus reflecting the
importance of this issue for them.
Unfortunately, the non-participation of healthcare professionals
in the discussion forum means that we cannot compare their
perspectives with those of the young people. The discussion might
have proceeded along different lines had the health professionals
been present, as was originally envisaged.
The disinhibiting nature of online environments and the fact
that the young people were chatting among themselves rather than
participating in a formal interview may have encouraged them to
exaggerate and tell ‘tall tales’ of uncaring treatment. However, the
fact that their perceptions tally with those reported elsewhere,
both by service users4,17 and by A&E staff,6 suggests that they
are a true reflection of the way in which the young people
experienced A&E care.
Implications for research and service development
As Fig. 1 indicates, we hypothesise that positive encounters in
A&E have the potential to reduce shame and challenge negative
self-evaluation, encourage future help-seeking and thus contribute
in the longer term to resolution of distress. This could be tested
empirically.
Front-line A&E staff are often very junior and may lack
knowledge about self-harm and how to respond to it. A brief
training programme, emphasising the feelings of shame, self-disgust
and worthlessness experienced by people who self-harm might
increase understanding, reduce frustration and prompt more
compassionate responses. Opportunities should be created for
those who self-harm to contribute to training programmes, as this
has the potential to enhance their self-esteem. This too requires
empirical testing.
Trials of different models of care for those who have self-harmed
may also be warranted. In a study of homeless people presenting at
an emergency department, another group that are commonly
viewed by staff as ‘difficult’, half were randomised to receive
special attention by a volunteer, who gave them food, chatted with
them and listened attentively to their concerns.20 The findings
suggested that this led to improved patient satisfaction and a
reduction in the number of return visits, thus refuting the
widely-held belief that improving patient experience will lead to
increased demand and cause healthcare systems, and those who
work in them, to collapse under the strain. This study of
‘compassionate’ as compared with conventional care may warrant
replication with those who present with self-inflicted injuries.
Careful attention would need to be given to outcomes, in order
to tease out whether a reduction in the number of repeat visits
to
A&E
signified
further
disenchantment
and
avoidance
(consistent with the present findings) or an improvement in
health and well-being; after all, a visit to A&E may represent a life
saved.21 There is still insufficient evidence regarding ‘caring
effects’22 and the benefits (as opposed to the presumed risks) of
empathy.23
‘Inappropriate attendance’ at A&E departments has long been
a subject of debate, and some authors have questioned whether it
is the service or the patient that is ‘inappropriate’.24,25 A busy
emergency department that is designed to deal with acute illness
and physical trauma may not be the right place to engage with
those in emotional turmoil. A carefully conceived ‘sanctuary’,
where they could receive support from peers or volunteers and
calm themselves while waiting for treatment of injuries and/or
assessment by the psychiatric team, might take some of the
pressure off A&E staff, as well as helping to change attitudes. Such
safe havens are already available for groups whose emotional
turmoil is regarded as legitimate, such as parents who experience
stillbirth.
The clinical needs and fears of those who, at whatever age and
for whatever reason, are driven to self-harm continue to demand
urgent attention.
Christabel Owens, PhD, Lorraine Hansford, MSc, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, UK; Siobhan Sharkey, PhD, RMN, Plymouth University Peninsula
School of Medicine & Dentistry, Plymouth, UK; Tamsin Ford, PhD, MRCPsych,
University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, UK
Correspondence: Christabel Owens, University of Exeter Medical
School, College House, St Luke’s Campus, Heavitree Road, Exeter EX1 2LU, UK.
Email: c.v.owens@exeter.ac.uk
First received 1 Nov 2013, final revision 13 Jan 2015, accepted 15 Jan 2015
Acknowledgements
Thanks must again be given to all the primary study participants, who gave so much time
and energy and allowed us access to their private worlds. We also acknowledge the other
members of the primary study team. C.O. and S.S. were supported for part of the time
spent on this paper by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) CLAHRC for the
South West Peninsula. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
References
1
Madge N, Hewitt A, Hawton K, Wilde Ed, Corcoran P, Fekete S, et al.
Deliberate self-harm within an international community sample of young
people: comparative findings from the Child & Adolescent Self-harm in
Europe (CASE) study. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2008; 49: 667–77.
2
Royal College of Psychiatrists. Self-harm, Suicide and Risk: Helping People
Who Self-harm. Final Report of a Working Group (College Report CR158).
Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2010.
3
Ougrin D. Commentary: self-harm in adolescents: the best predictor of death
by suicide? Reflections on Hawton et al (2012). J Child Psychol Psychiatry
2012; 53: 1220–1.
4
Taylor TL, Hawton K, Fortune S, Kapur N. Attitudes towards clinical services
among people who self-harm: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry 2009; 194:
104–10.
5
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Self-harm: The Short-
term Physical and Psychological Management and Secondary Prevention of
290
 Needs and fears of young people who self-harm
Self-harm in Primary and Secondary Care. Clinical Guideline 16. Department
of Health, 2004.
6
Saunders K, Hawton K, Fortune S, Farrell S. Attitudes and knowledge of
clinical staff regarding people who self-harm: a systematic review. J Affect
Disord 2012; 139: 205–16.
7
Chapman R, Martin C. Perceptions of Australian emergency staff towards
patients presenting with deliberate self-poisoning: a qualitative perspective.
Int Emerg Nurs 2014; 22: 140–5.
8
Heaton J. Reworking Qualitative Data. Sage, 2004.
9
Smith E. Using Secondary Data in Educational and Social Research.
Open University Press, 2006.
10 Owens C, Sharkey S, Smithson J, Hewis E, Emmens T, Ford T, et al.
Building an online community to promote communication and collaborative
learning between health professionals and young people who self-harm: an
exploratory study. Health Expect 2015; 18: 81–94.
11 Smithson J, Sharkey S, Hewis E, Jones R, Emmens T, Ford T, et al.
Problem presentation and responses on an online forum for young people
who self-harm. Discourse Stud 2011; 13: 487–501.
12 Smithson J, Sharkey S, Hewis E, Jones R, Emmens T, Ford T, et al.
Membership and boundary maintenance on an online self-harm forum.
Qual Health Res 2011; 21: 1567–75.
13 Sharkey S, Jones R, Smithson J, Hewis E, Emmens T, Ford T, et al.
Ethical practice in Internet research involving vulnerable people: lessons
from a self-harm discussion forum study (SharpTalk). J Med Ethics 2011; 37:
752–8.
14 Sharkey S, Smithson J, Hewis E, Jones R, Ford T, Owens C. Supportive
interchanges and face-work as ‘protective talk’ in an online self-harm
support forum. Commun Med 2012; 9: 71–82.
15 Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol
2006; 3: 77–101.
16 Jeffery R. Normal rubbish: deviant patients in casualty departments. Sociol
Health Illn 1979; 1: 90–107.
17 Hunter C, Chantler K, Kapur N, Cooper J. Service user perspectives on
psychosocial assessment following self-harm and its impact on further
help-seeking: a qualitative study. J Affect Disord 2013; 145: 315–23.
18 Tzeng W-C, Yang C-I, Tzeng N-S, Ma H-S, Chen L. The inner door: toward
an understanding of suicidal patients. J Clin Nursing 2010; 19: 1396–404.
19 Ballatt J, Campling P. Intelligent Kindness: Reforming the Culture of
Healthcare. RCPsych Publications, 2011.
20 Redelmeier D, Molin J, Tibshirani R. A randomised trial of compassionate care
for the homeless in an emergency department. Lancet 1995; 345: 1131–4.
21 Owens C. Interventions for self-harm: are we measuring outcomes in the
most appropriate way? Br J Psychiatry 2010; 197: 502–3.
22 Tudor Hart J, Dieppe P. Caring effects. Lancet 1996; 347: 1606–8.
23 Filip C. The importance of remaining empathic. Mcgill J Med 2009; 12: 134–6.
24 Breen B, McCann M. Healthcare providers attitudes and perceptions of
‘inappropriate attendance’ in the Emergency Department. Int Emerg Nurs
2013; 21: 180–5.
25 Steel J. Inappropriate – the patient or the service? Accid Emerg Nurs 1995; 3:
146–9.
291
An 18th-century view of demonomania. 2: Vampirism – introduction
Fiona Subotsky
Martinus Martini’s 1782 dissertation on demonomania includes a considerable section on vampirism, on which topic more of his
own original thought is evident, although the stories themselves are the usual ones found in other sources. For vampirism as a
variety of insanity Martini is somewhat muddled as to whom should be diagnosed – the alleged vampire, the victims or the
believers. I present here some of his observations in my own translation of the Latin. He begins:
I shall describe how to understand the madness of those who persuade themselves that the ghosts of dead men or the
recently dead themselves go out at night from the tomb and leap on the sleeping, whom they drag to death by draining their
blood.
As for the name, he notes that:
There is a certain species of bat in Brazil which at night opens the veins of sleeping men and animals, and sucks the blood. It
is called the Vampire Bat by Linnaeus . . . This name seems to take its origin from the Slavonic language, from the word ‘ulpir’,
or ‘vampir’, which signifies bloodsucker.
Martini recounts several vampire stories, which he acknowledges are largely taken from Augustin Calmet, a French Benedictine
prior and theologian, whose Treaty on the Apparitions of Spirits and Vampires, or ghosts of Hungary, Moravia, & c., was published
in 1751 and is still used as a major reference for vampire lore.
‘Vampirism – Stories’ and ‘Vampirism – Explanation’ will be published in subsequent issues of the BJPsych.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2016)
208, 291. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.115.163311a
psychiatry
in history
