 Schizophrenia and the neurodevelopmental continuum:
evidence from genomics
Michael J. Owen, Michael C. O’Donovan
Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
The idea that disturbances occurring early in brain development contribute to the pathogenesis of schizophrenia, often referred to as the neu-
rodevelopmental hypothesis, has become widely accepted. Despite this, the disorder is viewed as being distinct nosologically, and by implica-
tion pathophysiologically and clinically, from syndromes such as autism spectrum disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
and intellectual disability, which typically present in childhood and are grouped together as “neurodevelopmental disorders”. An alternative
view is that neurodevelopmental disorders, including schizophrenia, rather than being etiologically discrete entities, are better conceptualized
as lying on an etiological and neurodevelopmental continuum, with the major clinical syndromes reflecting the severity, timing and predomi-
nant pattern of abnormal brain development and resulting functional abnormalities. It has also been suggested that, within the neurodeve-
lopmental continuum, severe mental illnesses occupy a gradient of decreasing neurodevelopmental impairment as follows: intellectual dis-
ability, autism spectrum disorders, ADHD, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Recent genomic studies have identified large numbers of specific
risk DNA changes and offer a direct and robust test of the predictions of the neurodevelopmental continuum model and gradient hypothesis.
These findings are reviewed in detail. They not only support the view that schizophrenia is a disorder whose origins lie in disturbances of brain
development, but also that it shares genetic risk and pathogenic mechanisms with the early onset neurodevelopmental disorders (intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorders and ADHD). They also support the idea that these disorders lie on a gradient of severity, implying that
they differ to some extent quantitatively as well as qualitatively. These findings have important implications for nosology, clinical practice and
research.
Key words: Schizophrenia, neurodevelopment, autism, ADHD, intellectual disability, bipolar disorder, genomics, copy number variants
(World Psychiatry 2017;16:227–235)
The neurodevelopmental hypothesis has been the domi-
nant framework within which research on schizophrenia has
been conducted since the influential papers of Weinberger1
and Murray and Lewis2 thirty years ago.
The crucial conceptual advance was the proposal that the
emergence of schizophrenia in adolescence or early adulthood
could be explained by the interaction between an early “le-
sion” to the developing brain, arising from genetic and envi-
ronmental factors, and normal developmental processes.
According to this view, as the brain develops and takes on new
and more complex functions, the impact of early neurodeve-
lopmental pathology can become apparent.
The idea that schizophrenia might have its origins in distur-
bances of early neurodevelopment was not new, and both
Kraepelin and Bleuler were aware that the developmental his-
tories of those with schizophrenia could be abnormal3. How-
ever, the neurodevelopmental hypothesis brought together
findings implicating early environmental exposures, such as
obstetric injury, with those from clinical and basic neurosci-
ence implicating cognitive impairment and cortical dysfunc-
tion, and evidence for “premorbid” developmental deviance.
Crucially, it provided a framework to explain how early devel-
opmental abnormalities might be manifest as psychosis in late
adolescence and early adulthood when schizophrenia typically
presents, and explained the failure to identify neurodegenera-
tive, traumatic or neurotoxic mechanisms in post mortem
studies1.
THE NEURODEVELOPMENTAL CONTINUUM
While the neurodevelopmental hypothesis has been hugely
influential within the confines of schizophrenia research, its
broader implications for nosology, diagnosis, management,
research and prevention remain largely overlooked4.
Despite general acceptance that schizophrenia has a sub-
stantial neurodevelopmental basis, the disorder remains wide-
ly regarded as being distinct nosologically, and by implication
pathophysiologically and clinically, from syndromes such as
autism spectrum disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disor-
der (ADHD) and intellectual disability, which typically present in
childhood and are grouped together as “neurodevelopmental
disorders”5.
This separation overlooks several key observations4,6-9.
First, there are many clinical and other phenotypic similarities
between schizophrenia and childhood neurodevelopmental
syndromes7,9. These have tended to be overlooked because of
the prominence given to psychotic symptoms in schizophre-
nia by researchers and clinicians. This focus on symptoms that
typically present after childhood has drawn attention from the
fact that schizophrenia shares with childhood neurodevelop-
mental disorders impairments of cognition, which are often
present before psychotic breakdown, a greater frequency in
males, and associations with varying degrees of developmental
delay, neurological soft signs and motor abnormalities. Sec-
ond, there are no clear diagnostic boundaries between these
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
227
SPECIAL ARTICLE
 disorders, and there is a significant comorbidity between them
that is obscured by the use of diagnostic hierarchies or exclu-
sions, developmental change in predominant symptom type,
and service configurations4. Third, a number of environmental
risk factors, particularly those impacting on early brain develop-
ment, are shared across these disorders4,9. Finally, and most tell-
ingly, evidence began to emerge about ten years ago, particularly
from studies of rare copy number variants, that childhood neuro-
developmental disorders such as intellectual disability, autism
spectrum disorders and ADHD share specific genetic risk alleles
with each other and with schizophrenia4,6.
Consideration of these issues led us to reappraise the neu-
rodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia and propose a
new model, the neurodevelopmental continuum4,6, in which
neurodevelopmental disorders, including schizophrenia, are
seen as representing the diverse range of outcomes that follow
from disrupted or deviant brain development. This model was
based on the emerging evidence for shared genetic and envi-
ronmental risk factors and predicts that there are also likely to
be overlapping pathogenic mechanisms.
Thus, childhood neurodevelopmental disorders (such as
intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders and ADHD)
and adult psychiatric disorders (including both schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder), rather than being etiologically discrete
entities, could better be conceptualized as lying on an etiologi-
cal and neurodevelopmental continuum or spectrum, with the
major clinical syndromes reflecting the severity, timing and
predominant pattern of abnormal brain development and
resulting functional abnormalities, as well as the modifying
effects of other genetic and environmental factors4,6.
This approach accepts that current diagnostic systems have
some utility in defining groups of cases that are more closely
related than by chance, but it regards current categorical diag-
noses as arbitrary divisions of what is essentially a continuous
etiological, pathogenic, developmental and clinical landscape.
The implications of this for research and practice are substan-
tial4,8.
The notion of a spectrum or continuum in childhood neu-
rodevelopmental disorders was not a new one10,11, but we
expanded this further across the hitherto deep nosological
divide between childhood neurodevelopmental disorders and
psychiatric disorders that present in adulthood, such as
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Subsequently, others have
made a similar suggestion12.
THE NEURODEVELOPMENTAL GRADIENT
We have also proposed a more refined, and testable, concep-
tualization: the neurodevelopmental gradient hypothesis. This
suggests that, within the neurodevelopmental continuum,
severe mental illnesses occupy a gradient of decreasing neuro-
developmental impairment as follows: intellectual disability,
autism spectrum disorders, ADHD, schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder4,6,8. The severity of neurodevelopmental impairment is
indexed by a number of features. These include typical age at
onset (congenital for intellectual disability, early childhood for
autism spectrum disorders, adolescence for schizophrenia) as
well as the severity of associated cognitive impairment and the
persistence of functional impairment (see Figure 1).
Like all models, that of a neurodevelopmental gradient is
certainly an oversimplification. Neurodevelopmental disorders
clearly differ along a number of additional clinical dimensions,
and presumably there are mechanistic differences as well, but
it posits that the degree of neurodevelopmental impairment is
currently the most recognizable of these features. It makes
clear predictions about the relative importance across the neu-
rodevelopmental spectrum of the most damaging classes of
rare mutations, such as large copy number variants and rare
coding variants. It also makes predictions about the relative
extent of brain dysfunction (number of structures and circuits
affected) in the various clinical syndromes and the relation-
ships and likely similarities between disorders according to
their relative position on the gradient.
In recent years, there has been increasing evidence from
family studies for shared, as well as independent, genetic risk
between different adult psychiatric disorders, and between
adult disorders and childhood neurodevelopmental disor-
ders7,13-16. There has also been an accumulation of evidence
that schizophrenia shares environmental risk factors with
childhood neurodevelopmental disorders, particularly those
likely to index early neurodevelopmental impairment17-21. At
the same time, there has been a profusion of large, increasingly
well-powered genomic studies of childhood neurodevelop-
mental disorders, particularly autism spectrum disorders and
intellectual disability, and of adult psychiatric disorders, in par-
ticular schizophrenia.
In contrast to the environmental exposures, which generally
are risk indicators rather than factors known to be causal, the
identification of large numbers of specific risk DNA changes
offers a direct and robust test of the predictions of the contin-
uum model and gradient hypothesis, and for this reason it is
considered in detail in this paper.
GENETICS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
Genetic risk for schizophrenia is conferred by both rare and
common alleles distributed across the genome22. The largest
published analysis of genome-wide association study data (up
to 36,989 cases and 113,075 controls including replication
data) identified a total of 108 conservatively defined loci that
contain common risk alleles, and which met genome-wide
significance23.
These robustly implicated loci access only a small fraction
of the total number of common alleles involved in conferring
risk to schizophrenia, and studies of the en masse effects of
common variants have suggested that between a half to a third
of the genetic risk of schizophrenia is indexed by common
228
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
 alleles genotyped by current genome-wide association study
arrays24,25. Recent estimates suggest that there may be many
thousands of common risk alleles for schizophrenia, with
71-100% of 1 Mb regions containing a schizophrenia locus26.
In addition to common alleles, each of which confers only a
small increase in individual risk (odds ratio, OR< 1.2), a relatively
small number of copy number variants are associated with sub-
stantial increases in individual risk, with ORs of 1.5 to >5027,28. A
recent meta-analysis of previously implicated candidate copy
number variants robustly identified eleven specific variants as
schizophrenia risk factors28. These schizophrenia-associated
copy number variants are extremely rare, being found in 1 in 200
to 1 in several thousand people with the disorder, and have
required large sample sizes to confidently implicate them28.
The genome-wide burden of >500kb copy number variants
has been shown to be significantly increased in schizophrenia
compared with controls even after excluding known risk loci29,
suggesting the existence of further schizophrenia risk variants.
More recently, a genome-wide investigation applying a cen-
tralized analysis pipeline to a schizophrenia cohort of 21,094
cases and 20,227 controls30 reported a global enrichment of
copy number variants burden in cases, which persisted after
excluding loci implicated in previous studies. Genome-wide
significant evidence was obtained for eight loci, and suggestive
support was found for eight additional candidate susceptibility
and protective loci.
Most of the specific copy number variants definitively as-
sociated with schizophrenia impact on multiple genes. The
exception to this is deletions of NRXN128,31, the gene that en-
codes the presynaptic cell adhesion protein neurexin1. In or-
der to infer the biological mechanism(s) through which mul-
tigenic copy number variants contribute to disease, research-
ers have sought to determine whether the genes impacted by
schizophrenia-related variants are enriched for functionally
related sets of genes. This is often termed pathway analysis.
Studies using this approach have yielded remarkably consis-
tent findings. Schizophrenia-related variants are enriched for
synaptic genes30,32-36, and particularly those encoding members
of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor and neuronal activity regu-
lated cytoskeleton-associated protein complexes, both of which
are known to be important for glutamatergic signaling and syn-
aptic plasticity30,34,36. A recent large case-control study showed
that case copy number variants are also enriched for genes
involved in GABAergic neurotransmission36.
Finally, recent large-scale work using new generation se-
quencing approaches, predominantly exome sequencing to
date, has shown that rare coding variants that change the DNA
sequence at one or a few nucleotides are enriched in specific
gene pathways, particularly those involved in synaptic func-
tion, including many of those implicated in studies of copy
number variants37-39, and that ultra-rare, gene-disruptive and
putatively protein damaging variants are more abundant in
schizophrenia than among controls39. Finally, loss-of-function
rare coding variants in a gene that encodes the histone meth-
yltransferase SETD1A have been shown to be associated with
schizophrenia40. This is the first gene to be implicated in
Psychopathology
Intellectual disability, ASD, ADHD, Schizophrenia, SAD, Bipolar disorder 
Cogni�ve impairment 
Other impairments (e.g., motor, sensory)
Copy number variants
Damaging point muta�ons
High………………………..Neurodevelopmental impairment………………………....Low
Figure 1 The neurodevelopmental continuum. This shows the different domains of outcome of neurodevelopmental impairment. It also shows
the hypothesized relationship between the severity of neurodevelopmental impairment and psychiatric syndromes and degree of associated
cognitive impairment. The relative impact of copy number variants and damaging point mutations is also shown. ASD – autism spectrum dis-
orders, ADHD – attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, SAD – schizoaffective disorder
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
229
 schizophrenia by exome sequencing at Bonferroni corrected
genome-wide levels of statistical significance and, when com-
bined with previous common variant evidence41, points to
chromatin remodelling, specifically histone H3K4 methyla-
tion, as an important mechanism in the pathogenesis of schiz-
ophrenia.
COMPARATIVE GENETIC ARCHITECTURE OF
SCHIZOPHRENIA AND OTHER
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS
Copy number variants
A major impetus for the continuum model and gradient
hypothesis came from the observation that specific rare copy
number variants that are significantly associated with schizo-
phrenia are also associated with a range of other neurodevelop-
mental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorders, ADHD
and intellectual disability31,42,43.
Although there have been no unbiased population studies
conducted to date, it is apparent that the severity of the neuro-
developmental outcome associated with such copy number var-
iants is highly variable, with phenotypes ranging from mild cog-
nitive impairment in some individuals44,45 through to schizo-
phrenia, autism, ADHD or intellectual disability in others42,46.
Moreover, the evidence suggests that this reflects true pleiotropy
rather than heterogeneity resulting from the multigenic nature
of most copy number variants47.
Support for the neurodevelopmental gradient hypothesis
has come from a number of observations. First, Girirajan et
al48 showed that, in children, the burden of large copy number
variants is positively correlated with the severity of childhood
neurodevelopmental disorders, being greater in intellectual
disability than in autism spectrum disorders, and greater in
autism spectrum disorders with intellectual disability than in
those without. Second, Kirov et al46 found that the burden of
large rare copy number variants implicated in neurodevelop-
mental disorders is greater in cases with developmental delay,
autism or congenital malformations than in schizophrenia.
For most variants, penetrance for the early onset developmen-
tal disorders was greater than for schizophrenia; importantly,
this was not only true for variants robustly identified first in
the childhood disorders, but also for variants identified ini-
tially in schizophrenia, thus minimizing bias.
Furthermore, studies of patients with autism spectrum disor-
ders, intellectual disability and congenital neurodevelopmental
disorders referred to clinical genetics clinics for chromosomal
microarray analysis have highlighted ninety loci enriched for
copy number variants in these disorders, albeit not all are de-
finitively implicated. Emphasizing the overlap between these
disorders and schizophrenia, every schizophrenia-associated
variant is in this set of ninety childhood neurodevelopmental
disorder copy number variants. Moreover, in a recent study of
over 20,000 cases of schizophrenia, even after excluding known
schizophrenia loci, copy number variations associated with
intellectual disability were en masse significantly enriched in
patients in schizophrenia49, supporting the view that many
additional intellectual disability-related variants also confer
risk to schizophrenia, but at reduced penetrance.
The evidence suggests that large copy number variants are
less strongly associated with bipolar disorder than schizophre-
nia50 and, where direct comparisons have been made, large
rare variants were indeed found to be significantly less com-
mon in bipolar disorder than schizophrenia51-54. These find-
ings do not exclude the involvement of copy number variants
at specific loci in susceptibility to bipolar disorder53: actually,
there is strong evidence that duplications of 16p11.2 that are
associated with schizophrenia are also associated with bipolar
disorder53. However, it is now clear that relatively large copy
number variants contributing to childhood neurodevelopmen-
tal disorders, and to impaired cognition in non-clinical popu-
lations, contribute less to susceptibility for bipolar disorder
than they do for schizophrenia. This is in keeping with the
generally higher level of cognitive function and less persistent
impairment seen in bipolar disorder, and supports the view
that this disorder lies between schizophrenia and controls on
the neurodevelopmental gradient (see Figure 1).
The neurodevelopmental gradient hypothesis further pre-
dicts that, among bipolar cases, those with cognitive impair-
ments or earlier onsets would show a higher burden of large
copy number variants. There is already some evidence, albeit
not definitive, to support this55,56.
Neurodevelopmental disorders, including schizophrenia, are
associated with reduced fecundity57. Mutations that confer very
high risk for those disorders should, therefore, be rare in the
population due to strong negative selection, and the frequency
in the population should, hypothetically, be a function of that
selection pressure versus the rate of replacement by de novo
mutation. Such a postulated relationship between selection pres-
sure and de novo mutation rate has recently been empirically
demonstrated for neurodevelopmental disorder-associated copy
number variants46. Assuming neurodevelopmental impairment
to be a major driver of loss of fecundity, this leads to the predic-
tion that the relative contribution of de novo mutations to differ-
ent neurodevelopmental disorders should correlate with their
position on the proposed neurodevelopmental gradient.
Unfortunately, precise comparisons of the de novo mutation
rate between diagnoses are difficult, because there have been
no direct tests based on identical arrays, mutation size cut-
offs, and epidemiologically ascertained samples fully repre-
sentative of each diagnosis. However, the findings to date are
broadly in line with the predictions of the neurodevelopmental
gradient hypothesis. For example, it has been reported58 that
the frequency of large (>100kb) de novo mutations in bipolar
disorder (2.2%) is intermediate between schizophrenia (4.3%)
and controls (1.5%). A recent large study of autism59 found a
de novo mutation rate of 5.2% in cases and 1.6% in unaffected
siblings. Finally, a recent large study of intellectual disability
reported a de novo rate of 11.5% for rare mutations60.
230
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
 Rare coding variants
As we have seen, specific mutations conferring high indi-
vidual risk to neurodevelopmental disorders are likely to be
rare, and large samples will be required to implicate them in
case-control studies. However, as is the case for copy number
variants, in people with neurodevelopmental disorders, very
high risk rare coding variants are likely to be enriched among
mutations occurring de novo.
A higher than expected burden of mutations predicted to be
functionally deleterious, loss of function and missense de novo
mutations predicted by algorithms to be damaging, is clearly
seen in intellectual disability and autism spectrum disor-
ders40,59,61. The de novo burden in schizophrenia is much less
pronounced, but it is nevertheless clearly present with respect
to loss of function mutations40, especially in genes that are
highly constrained by natural selection and in which loss of
function mutations are more likely to be damaging62. When
the relative enrichment of de novo mutations is compared
across disorders, the rates are higher in intellectual disability
than autism spectrum disorders, and higher in autism spec-
trum disorders than schizophrenia37,40,61,62, in line with the
predictions of the gradient hypothesis.
Moreover, there is evidence that schizophrenia patients with
intellectual disability have a greater enrichment of rare damag-
ing variants in highly constrained genes and developmental
disorder genes, but that a weaker but significant enrichment
exists throughout the larger schizophrenia population62. Also,
even amongst those with schizophrenia who do not have intel-
lectual disability, the rate of de novo loss of function mutations
is higher in those with poorer educational attainment37. These
findings are consistent with those in autism spectrum disor-
ders, in which the burden of de novo mutations is positively
correlated with the degree of cognitive impairment63.
We can also explore whether the same genes, or sets of func-
tionally related genes, tend to be implicated across neurodeve-
lopmental disorders, and this would appear to be the case.
Genes affected by loss of functioning de novo mutations in
schizophrenia are enriched for those affected by this same class
of mutation in people with autism spectrum disorders and
intellectual disability37. Genes and mutation sites were most
highly conserved in intellectual disability, then autism spec-
trum disorders, with those in schizophrenia least conserved.
When loss of function mutations in highly constrained genes
are considered, a similar pattern is seen, with enrichment in
schizophrenia concentrated in known autism spectrum disor-
der and intellectual disability genes62. At an even finer level of
resolution, the same loss of function mutation in SETD1A gene
that contributes high risk for schizophrenia also does so for
severe intellectual disability and developmental delay40.
Finally, there is also evidence that the burden of rare varia-
tion found in schizophrenia, autism and intellectual disability
is concentrated in functionally related sets of genes, particu-
larly those involved in synaptic function and histone remodel-
ling and other neurodevelopmental gene sets37,62,64,65. These
findings all converge on the conclusion that at least some of
the risk to schizophrenia conferred by rare mutations of large
effect is shared with childhood neurodevelopmental disorders
and impacts on synaptic development and function. They also
support the prediction of the neurodevelopmental gradient
hypothesis that the burden of such mutations is greatest in
intellectual disability, then in autism spectrum disorders and
then in schizophrenia.
Bipolar disorder has been much less extensively studied by
exome sequencing. Consistent with the picture that is more
clearly emerging from studies of intellectual disability, autism
spectrum disorders and schizophrenia, one small study found
an excess of de novo loss of function and protein altering var-
iants in mutation intolerant genes, and an association with
early onset66, while a second study found that damaging var-
iants were enriched for genes previously found to contain de
novo mutations in autism and schizophrenia67.
Common variants
The evidence for shared genetic risk across psychiatric disor-
ders arising from common alleles detected by genome-wide
association studies is strong. This was first demonstrated by the
International Schizophrenia Consortium24 using a polygenic
risk score approach. A highly robust evidence for genetic over-
lap between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder was found.
Subsequent work has shown that common alleles that confer
risk for schizophrenia also do so for major depressive disorder
and to a lesser extent autism spectrum disorders, ADHD, ano-
rexia nervosa and obsessive-compulsive disorder47,68.
A note of caution should be sounded here, in that the sam-
ple sizes subjected to genome-wide association studies for a
number of these disorders, including autism spectrum disor-
ders and ADHD, are relatively small compared to those studied
in schizophrenia, and the estimates of shared risk may well
change as larger samples are studied69.
At the level of individual loci, there is evidence that those
implicated in schizophrenia genome-wide association studies
are enriched for genes in which de novo non-synonymous
mutations have been observed in schizophrenia, autism spec-
trum disorders and intellectual disability, pointing to shared
biological mechanisms across the common and rare variant
signals and between disorders23. There is also emerging evi-
dence that some of the genes and gene pathways implicated
by common variants overlap with those enriched for rare
variants in autism spectrum disorders and intellectual dis-
ability70.
That there is at least a partial convergence of the common
and rare variant signals is also supported by the observation
that carriers of pathogenic copy number variants who develop
schizophrenia have a higher load of common risk variants
than carriers who do not71, suggesting that the outcome of
rare variants is to some extent determined by the complement
of common risk alleles present in the carrier and supporting
the liability threshold model of schizophrenia.
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
231
 A number of studies have used a polygenic risk score or simi-
lar approaches to show overlap in common genetic variation
between schizophrenia and developmental outcomes in the
general population, and have shown that alleles which increase
risk for schizophrenia also associate with, for example, poorer
cognitive function and impaired social and communication dif-
ficulties, similar to those seen in people with autism spectrum
disorders72-74. While the overlaps are not large, neither are they
trivial (genetic correlations between 0.18 and 0.37) and support
the involvement of alleles that increase risk for schizophrenia in
a wider set of developmental traits.
PLEIOTROPY, PSYCHOPATHOLOGY AND
COGNITION
We have seen that a large amount of recent genomic data point
to shared genetic risk across childhood neurodevelopmental and
adult psychiatric disorders. But do the findings allow us to be
more specific about the relationship between shared risk and
variable outcome? The term “pleiotropy” is used to describe
the phenomenon of an individual gene influencing two or more
distinct traits47. Genetic pleiotropy is said to occur when the al-
tered function of a gene influences multiple traits, whereas alle-
lic pleiotropy, a subtype of genetic pleiotropy, occurs when the
same gene variant influences multiple traits. It should also be
noted that “pseudo-pleiotropy” can arise as a result of impreci-
sion in gene mapping, whereby two phenotypes are influenced
by different genes in close proximity, but it can also arise from
poor study design, or associations that are due to chance or
publication bias47.
The evidence in relation to pleiotropy in psychiatric disor-
ders has been reviewed in detail elsewhere47. It suggests that,
in the majority of instances, the pleiotropy observed between
different psychiatric diagnoses and between psychiatric disor-
ders and cognitive impairment is a true allelic pleiotropy
rather than a pseudo-pleiotropy47. The data from rare variants
(copy number variations and rare coding variants) are also
largely inconsistent with the view that the findings reflect
mediated pleiotropy, in which an allele influences two traits,
but its effects on one are secondary to more direct effects on
the other47. In other words, the findings suggest that intellec-
tual disability, autism spectrum disorders, ADHD and schizo-
phrenia represent direct outcomes of the same rare pathogenic
mutations. Moreover, the risk of psychiatric disorders does not
appear to be mediated by cognitive impairment, which itself
seems to be an additional pleiotropic outcome of the same
genetic risk47.
However, the concept of pleiotropy requires a phenotype to
be linked directly to a particular gene or mutation, and this is
not an easy test to perform for psychiatric disorders, for a
number of reasons. First, these are highly polygenic disorders,
and the relationship between risk alleles and specific pheno-
typic outcomes is complex and combinatorial. One clear
example of this is that an individual’s burden of common risk
alleles can influence psychiatric outcome in copy number var-
iants carriers71. Second, despite our use of categorical diagno-
ses, the boundaries between disorders are not clear-cut, and
comorbidity frequently occurs.
While more work is needed, considering all these elements
together leads to the conclusion that what we perceive as
pleiotropic manifestations of a particular mutation, such as a
copy number variant, likely represent the net effects of an
individual’s polygenic and environmental background on mul-
tiple traits representing various domains of brain function47.
Thus, psychiatric, cognitive and motor phenotypes tend to co-
occur in clinical populations because they share underlying
etiological and pathogenic mechanisms, but the mix of out-
comes in any individual case will reflect that individual’s par-
ticular genetic complement and environmental history.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
Findings from genomic studies have implicated large, rare
copy number variants in conferring risk to schizophrenia and
shown that the same variants also confer risk to intellectual dis-
ability, autism spectrum disorders and ADHD. Similarly, there
is emerging evidence that rare coding variants also confer
risk of schizophrenia and for overlap between the genes im-
pacted by damaging variants found in schizophrenia and
those seen in autism spectrum disorders and intellectual dis-
ability.
The enrichment of large, rare copy number variants is high-
est in intellectual disability, then autism spectrum disorders,
then schizophrenia, then bipolar disorder. There is also evi-
dence that the enrichment of damaging rare coding variants is
greatest in intellectual disability, then autism spectrum disor-
ders and then schizophrenia, with insufficient data to date for
ADHD and bipolar disorder.
The enrichment of rare mutations appears to be correlated
with the degree of cognitive impairment both across and
within diagnostic groups, but pathogenic copy number var-
iants and rare coding variants are found in autism spectrum
disorders and schizophrenia in the absence of gross cognitive
impairment, and pathogenic copy number variants are present
in individuals with subtle impairments of cognition but who
do not have a psychiatric diagnosis.
There is also evidence for shared common allele genetic
risk across schizophrenia and other neurodevelopmental dis-
orders, and evidence that this overlaps with the genes and
pathways implicated by rare variant studies. Indeed, the fact
that, regardless of the specific diagnoses, rare de novo and
damaging rare coding variants tend to implicate broadly simi-
lar processes (synaptic plasticity, chromatin modifiers and tar-
gets of fragile X mental retardation protein) suggests that
individual mutations are likely to influence the same patho-
genic mechanisms across disorders.
232
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
 These findings not only support the view that schizophrenia
is a disorder whose origins lie in disturbances of brain devel-
opment, but also that it shares genetic risk and pathogenic
mechanisms with the early onset neurodevelopmental disor-
ders (intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders and
ADHD). They also support the view that these disorders lie on
a gradient of severity, implying that they differ to some extent
quantitatively as well as qualitatively.
There are a number of important implications of these find-
ings for nosology, research and clinical practice. First, they
suggest that we should widen the nosological concept of neu-
rodevelopmental disorders to include the functional psycho-
ses. Further work will be required to establish the extent to
which genomic data support the inclusion of bipolar disorder
and ADHD as well as other neurodevelopmental disorders,
such as dyslexia and coordination disorder, not discussed in
this paper. But there is compelling genomic evidence for the
existence of a group of neurodevelopmental disorders that
includes what are generally considered to be adult onset disor-
ders and that is associated with pleiotropic effects on cognitive
impairment. The pleiotropic nature of the relationship between
psychopathology and cognition predicts that the severity of cog-
nitive impairment in individuals with psychopathology who
meet diagnostic criteria for one of these disorders will be variable
and sometimes subtle and may possibly only be detected by
comparison with parental cognitive function12,75.
As far as research is concerned, the neurodevelopmental
continuum underscores the need for new and flexible ap-
proaches to patient stratification8,76. First, it suggests that
such approaches, rather than being categorical, will need to be
multidimensional, accessing multiple different domains of
brain function. Second, it indicates that etiological and mech-
anistic research should not be constrained by current diagnos-
tic or age-related silos. In particular, there needs to be much
greater communication and integration between the commu-
nities researching childhood neurodevelopmental disorders
such as ADHD and autism spectrum disorders and those
studying adult psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder. Third, the pleiotropic effects of genetic
risk factors have clear implications for mechanistic research
using endophenotypes in human studies or animal models:
researchers should be cautious when attempting to chart
causal pathways that mediate the effects of genetic risk on
clinical phenotypes8,47.
Fourth, the range of outcomes of rare mutations such as
copy number variants and some rare coding variants suggests
that the brain is to some extent able to compensate for the dis-
ruptive effects of such mutations, and this, together with the
identification of protective mutations30,77, suggests that some
of the biology may be tractable. A focus on what factors influ-
ence outcome in specific mutation carriers might be a fruitful
area for future research71. Indeed, it is possible that a compo-
nent of the common variant signal in schizophrenia detected
by polygenic risk score and similar approaches relates to mech-
anisms that mitigate the consequences of neurodevelopmental
disruption by damaging mutations or early environmental expo-
sures.
Finally, the findings reviewed above have implications for
understanding the potential role of psychosocial risk fac-
tors, a number of which have been implicated in schizo-
phrenia9. One possibility is that the presence of pre-existing
neurodevelopmental impairment increases susceptibility to
these risk factors. Another is that there is a degree of etiological
heterogeneity, and that both psychosocial and neurodevelop-
mental risk factors can result in similar syndromic outcomes.
However, it is also possible that associations with psychosocial
risk factors reflect confounding, pleiotropy or reverse causation
rather than true causation, and we must await the application
of study designs that allow these possibilities to be distin-
guished9.
There are also implications of the neurodevelopmental con-
tinuum for clinical practice. There should be a high expecta-
tion of comorbidity, and greater emphasis on developmental
history and on multi-domain assessment (psychopathological,
cognitive, sensorimotor). Clinicians should increasingly take a
developmental life-course approach ensuring that patients are
effectively managed across the transition from childhood to
adulthood, and developmental change over time should be
expected and anticipated. The various agencies that currently
assess and manage childhood neurodevelopmental and adult
psychiatric disorders will need to build up shared language,
classification and methods of assessment.
It will be challenging to treat underlying neurodevelopmen-
tal mechanisms, and therapeutic approaches, at least in the
short and medium term, might need to focus upon symptom-
atic management of the particular domains (psychopathologi-
cal, cognitive, sensorimotor) affected in an individual. For the
medium and long term, recent genomic findings offer many
opportunities for mechanistic research78. Moreover, there is
evidence from genomics for tractable biology, and the high
degree of pleiotropy suggests that therapeutic approaches
might be successful across current diagnostic boundaries47.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by Medical Research Council centre grant MR/L010305/
1 and program grant G0800509.
REFERENCES
1.
Weinberger DR. Implications of normal brain development for the patho-
genesis of schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1987;44:660-9.
2.
Murray RM, Lewis SW. Is schizophrenia a neurodevelopmental disorder?
BMJ (Clin Res Ed) 1988;296:63.
3.
Weinberger DR, Levitt P
. Neurodevelopmental origins of schizophrenia. In:
Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (eds). Schizophrenia, 3rd ed. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2011:393-412.
4.
Owen MJ, O’Donovan MC, Thapar A et al. Neurodevelopmental hypothe-
sis of schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry 2011;198:173-5.
5.
Rutter M, Moffitt TE, Caspi A. Gene-environment interplay and psychopa-
thology: multiple varieties but real effects. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2006;
47:226-61.
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
233
 6.
Craddock N, Owen MJ. The Kraepelinian dichotomy - Going, going. . . but
still not gone. Br J Psychiatry 2010;196:92-5.
7.
Doherty JL, Owen MJ. Genomic insights into the overlap between psychi-
atric disorders: implications for research and clinical practice. Genome
Med 2014;6:29.
8.
Owen MJ. New approaches to psychiatric diagnostic classification. Neuron
2014;84:564-71.
9.
Owen MJ, Sawa A, Mortensen PB. Schizophrenia. Lancet 2016;388:86-
97.
10. Lilienfeld AM, Pasamanick B, Rogers M. Relationship between pregnancy
experience and the development of certain neuropsychiatric disorders in
childhood. Am J Publ Health Nations Health 1955;45:637-43.
11. Capute AJ, Palmer FB. A pediatric overview of the spectrum of develop-
mental disabilities. J Dev Behav Pediatr 1980;1:66-9.
12. Moreno-De-Luca A, Myers SM, Challman TD et al. Developmental brain
dysfunction: revival and expansion of old concepts based on new genetic
evidence. Lancet Neurol 2013;12:406-14.
13. Lichtenstein P
, Yip BH, Bj€
ork C et al. Common genetic determinants of
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in Swedish families: a population-
based study. Lancet 2009;373:234-9.
14. Sullivan PF
, Magnusson C, Reichenberg A et al. Family history of schizo-
phrenia and bipolar disorder as risk factors for autism. Arch Gen Psychia-
try 2012;69:1099-103.
15. Sanchez-Gistau V, Romero S, Moreno D et al. Psychiatric disorders in child
and adolescent offspring of patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disor-
der: a controlled study. Schizophr Res 2015;168:197-203.
16. Chou I-J, Kuo C-F
, Huang Y-S et al. Familial aggregation and heritability of
schizophrenia and co-aggregation of psychiatric illnesses in affected fami-
lies. Schizophr Bull 2016;460:744-7.
17. Thapar A, Cooper M, Eyre O et al. Practitioner review: what have we learnt
about the causes of ADHD? J Child Psychol Psychiatry Allied Discip 2013;
54:3-16.
18. Mandy W, Lai M-C. Annual research review: the role of the environment
in the developmental psychopathology of autism spectrum condition.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2016;57:271-92.
19. Nosarti C, Reichenberg A, Murray RM et al. Preterm birth and psychiatric
disorders in young adult life. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012;69:610-7.
20. Abel KM, Wicks S, Susser ES et al. Birth weight, schizophrenia, and adult
mental disorder: is risk confined to the smallest babies? Arch Gen Psychia-
try 2010;67:923-30.
21. Mathewson KJ, Chow CHT, Dobson K et al. Mental health of extremely low
birth weight survivors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychol
Bull 2017;143:347-83.
22. Sullivan PF
, Daly MJ, O’Donovan M. Genetic architectures of psychiatric
disorders: the emerging picture and its implications. Nat Rev Genet 2012;
13:537-51.
23. Ripke S, Neale BM, Corvin A et al. Biological insights from 108 schizophre-
nia-associated genetic loci. Nature 2014;511:421-7.
24. Purcell SM, Wray NR, Stone JL et al. Common polygenic variation con-
tributes to risk of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Nature 2009;10:
8192-2.
25. Ripke S, O’Dushlaine C, Chambert K et al. Genome-wide association analy-
sis identifies 13 new risk loci for schizophrenia. Nat Genet 2013;45:1150-9.
26. Loh P-R, Bhatia G, Gusev A et al. Contrasting genetic architectures of
schizophrenia and other complex diseases using fast variance-components
analysis. Nat Genet 2015;47:1385-92.
27. Malhotra D, Sebat J. CNVs: harbingers of a rare variant revolution in psy-
chiatric genetics. Cell 2012;148:1223-41.
28. Rees E, Walters JTR, Georgieva L et al. Analysis of copy number variations
at 15 schizophrenia-associated loci. Br J Psychiatry 2014;204:108-14.
29. Rees E, Walters JTR, Chambert KD et al. CNV analysis in a large schizo-
phrenia sample implicates deletions at 16p12.1 and SLC1A1 and duplica-
tions at 1p36.33 and CGNL1. Hum Mol Genet 2014;23:1669-76.
30. Marshall CR, Howrigan DP
, Merico D et al. Contribution of copy number
variants to schizophrenia from a genome-wide study of 41,321 subjects.
Nat Genet 2016;49:27-35.
31. Kirov G, Gumus D, Chen W et al. Comparative genome hybridization sug-
gests a role for NRXN1 and APBA2 in schizophrenia. Hum Mol Genet
2008;17:458-65.
32. Walsh T, McClellan JM, McCarthy SE et al. Rare structural variants disrupt
multiple genes in neurodevelopmental pathways in schizophrenia. Sci-
ence 2008;320:539-43.
33. Glessner JT, Reilly MP
, Kim CE et al. Strong synaptic transmission impact
by copy number variations in schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;
107:10584-9.
34. Kirov G, Pocklington AJ, Holmans P et al. De novo CNV analysis implicates
specific abnormalities of postsynaptic signalling complexes in the patho-
genesis of schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry 2012;17:142-53.
35. Szatkiewicz JP
, O’Dushlaine C, Chen G et al. Copy number variation in
schizophrenia in Sweden. Mol Psychiatry 2014;19:762-73.
36. Pocklington AJ, Rees E, Walters JTR et al. Novel findings from CNVs impli-
cate inhibitory and excitatory signaling complexes in schizophrenia. Neu-
ron 2015;86:1203-14.
37. Fromer M, Pocklington AJ, Kavanagh DH et al. De novo mutations in
schizophrenia implicate synaptic networks. Nature 2014;506:179-84.
38. Purcell SM, Moran JL, Fromer M et al. A polygenic burden of rare disrup-
tive mutations in schizophrenia. Nature 2014;506:185-90.
39. Genovese G, Fromer M, Stahl EA et al. Increased burden of ultra-rare pro-
tein-altering variants among 4,877 individuals with schizophrenia. Nat
Neurosci 2016;19:1433-41.
40. Singh T, Kurki MI, Curtis D et al. Rare loss-of-function variants in SETD1A
are associated with schizophrenia and developmental disorders. Nat Neu-
rosci 2016;19:571-7.
41. O’Dushlaine C, Rossin L, Lee PH et al. Psychiatric genome-wide associa-
tion study analyses implicate neuronal, immune and histone pathways.
Nat Neurosci 2015;18:199-209.
42. Sebat J, Levy DL, McCarthy SE. Rare structural variants in schizophrenia:
one disorder, multiple mutations; one mutation, multiple disorders.
Trends Genet 2009;25:528-35.
43. Williams NM, Zaharieva I, Martin A et al. Rare chromosomal deletions and
duplications in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a genome-wide
analysis. Lancet 2010;376:1401-8.
44. Stefansson H, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Steinberg S et al. CNVs conferring risk
of autism or schizophrenia affect cognition in controls. Nature 2013;505:
361-6.
45. Kendall KM, Rees E, Escott-Price V et al. Cognitive performance among
carriers of pathogenic copy number variants: analysis of 152,000 UK bio-
bank subjects. Biol Psychiatry 2017;82:103-10.
46. Kirov G, Rees E, Walters JTR et al. The penetrance of copy number varia-
tions for schizophrenia and developmental delay. Biol Psychiatry 2014;75:
378-85.
47. O’Donovan MC, Owen MJ. The implications of the shared genetics of psy-
chiatric disorders. Nat Med 2016;22:1214-9.
48. Girirajan S, Brkanac Z, Coe BP et al. Relative burden of large CNVs on a
range of neurodevelopmental phenotypes. PLoS Genet 2011;7:e1002334.
49. Rees E, Kendall K, Pardi~
nas AF et al. Analysis of intellectual disability copy
number variants for association with schizophrenia. JAMA Psychiatry
2016;73:963-9.
50. Craddock N, Sklar P
. Genetics of bipolar disorder. Lancet 2013;381:1654-
62.
51. Grozeva D. Rare copy number variants: a point of rarity in genetic risk
for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010;67:
318-27.
52. Bergen SE, O’Dushlaine CT, Ripke S et al. Genome-wide association study
in a Swedish population yields support for greater CNV and MHC involve-
ment in schizophrenia compared with bipolar disorder. Mol Psychiatry
2012;17:880-6.
53. Green EK, Rees E, Walters JTR et al. Copy number variation in bipolar dis-
order. Mol Psychiatry 2016;21:89-93.
54. Grozeva D, Kirov G, Conrad DF et al. Reduced burden of very large and
rare CNVs in bipolar affective disorder. Bipolar Disord 2013;15:893-8.
55. Priebe L, Degenhardt FA, Herms S et al. Genome-wide survey implicates
the influence of copy number variants (CNVs) in the development of
early-onset bipolar disorder. Mol Psychiatry 2012;17:421-32.
56. Malhotra D, McCarthy S, Michaelson JJ et al. High frequencies of de novo
CNVs in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Neuron 2011;72:951-63.
57. Power RA, Kyaga S, Uher R et al. Fecundity of patients with schizophrenia,
autism, bipolar disorder, depression, anorexia nervosa, or substance abuse
vs their unaffected siblings. JAMA Psychiatry 2013;70:22-30.
58. Georgieva L, Rees E, Moran JL et al. De novo CNVs in bipolar affective dis-
order and schizophrenia. Hum Mol Genet 2014;23:6677-83.
59. Sanders SJ, He X, Willsey AJ et al. Insights into autism spectrum disorder
genomic architecture and biology from 71 risk loci. Neuron 2015;87:1215-
33.
234
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
 60. Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Hehir-Kwa JY, van Bon BWM et al. Clinical signifi-
cance of de novo and inherited copy-number variation. Hum Mutat 2013;
34:1679-87.
61. McRae JF
, Clayton S, Fitzgerald TW et al. Prevalence and architecture of de
novo mutations in developmental disorders. Nature 2017;542:433-8.
62. Singh T, Walters JTR, Johnstone M et al. Rare schizophrenia risk variants
are enriched in genes shared with neurodevelopmental disorders. bioRxiv
2016:69344.
63. Robinson EB, St Pourcain B, Anttila V et al. Genetic risk for autism spec-
trum disorders and neuropsychiatric variation in the general population.
Nat Genet 2016;48:552-5.
64. Rauch A, Wieczorek D, Graf E et al. Range of genetic mutations associated
with severe non-syndromic sporadic intellectual disability: an exome
sequencing study. Lancet 2012;380:1674-82.
65. De Rubeis S, He X, Goldberg AP et al. Synaptic, transcriptional and chro-
matin genes disrupted in autism. Nature 2014;515:209-15.
66. Kataoka M, Matoba N, Sawada T et al. Exome sequencing for bipolar disor-
der points to roles of de novo loss-of-function and protein-altering muta-
tions. Mol Psychiatry 2016;21:885-93.
67. Goes FS, Pirooznia M, Parla JS et al. Exome sequencing of familial bipolar
disorder. JAMA Psychiatry 2016;73:590-7.
68. Anttila V, Bulik-Sullivan B, Finucane HK et al. Analysis of shared heritabil-
ity in common disorders of the brain. bioRxiv 2016:48991.
69. O’Donovan MC. What have we learned from the Psychiatric Genomics
Consortium. World Psychiatry 2015;14:291-3.
70. Pardi~
nas AF
, Holmans P
, Pocklington AJ et al. Common schizophrenia
alleles are enriched in mutation-intolerant genes and maintained by back-
ground selection. bioRxiv 2016:68593.
71. Tansey KE, Rees E, Linden DE et al. Common alleles contribute to schizo-
phrenia in CNV carriers. Mol Psychiatry 2016;21:1085-9.
72. Hubbard L, Tansey KE, Rai D et al. Evidence of common genetic overlap
between schizophrenia and cognition. Schizophr Bull 2016;42:832-42.
73. Riglin L, Collishaw S, Richards A et al. Schizophrenia risk alleles and neu-
rodevelopmental outcomes in childhood: a population-based cohort
study. Lancet Psychiatry 2017;4:57-62.
74. St Pourcain B, Robinson EB, Anttila V et al. ASD and schizophrenia show
distinct developmental profiles in common genetic overlap with population-
based social communication difficulties. Mol Psychiatry (in press).
75. D’Angelo D, Lebon S, Chen Q et al. Defining the effect of the 16p11.2
duplication on cognition, behavior, and medical comorbidities. JAMA Psy-
chiatry 2016;73:20-30.
76. Owen MJ, Doherty JL. What can we learn from the high rates of schizo-
phrenia in people with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome? World Psychiatry 2016;
15:23-5.
77. Rees E, Kirov G, Sanders A et al. Evidence that duplications of 22q11.2 pro-
tect against schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry 2014;19:37-40.
78. McCarroll SA, Hyman SE, Han Y et al. Progress in the genetics of polygenic
brain disorders: significant new challenges for neurobiology. Neuron 2013;
80:578-87.
DOI:10.1002/wps.20440
World Psychiatry 16:3 - October 2017
235
